Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Spark ignition transitions in premixed turbulent combustion

Shenqyang (Steven) Shy

Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Central University, Taoyuan City, Taiwan

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
Turbulent premixed spark ignition
Minimum ignition energy (MIE)
Monotonic MIE transition
Non-monotonic MIE transition
Turbulence facilitated ignition
Lean-burn premixed turbulent combustion

Recent discoveries and developments on the dynamic process of premixed turbulent spark ignition are reviewed.
The focus here is on the variation of turbulent minimum ignition energies (MIET) against laminar MIE (MIEL)
over  a  wide  range  of  r.m.s.  turbulence  fluctuation  velocity  (uʹ)  alongside  effects  of  the  spark  gap  between
electrodes, Lewis number, and some other parameters on MIE. Two distinguishable spark ignition transitions are
discussed. (1) A monotonic MIE transition, where MIEL sets the lower bound, marks a critical uʹc between linear
and exponential increase in MIET with uʹ increased. (2) A non-monotonic MIE transition, where the lower bound is
to be set by a MIET at some uʹc, stems from a great influence of Lewis number and spark gap despite turbulence.
At sufficiently large Lewis number >> 1 and small spark gap (typically less than 1 mm), turbulence facilitated
ignition (TFI), where MIET < MIEL, occurs; then MIET increases rapidly at larger uʹ > uʹc because turbulence re-
asserts its dominating role. Both phenomena are explained by the coupling effects of differential diffusion, heat
losses  to  electrodes,  and  turbulence  on  the  spark  kernel.  In  particular,  the  ratio  of  small-scale  turbulence
diffusivity  to  reaction  zone  thermal  diffusivity,  a  reaction  zone  P ́eclet  number,  captures  the  similarity  of
monotonic MIE transition, regardless of different ignition sources (conventional electrodes versus laser), turbulent
flows, pressure, and fuel types. Furthermore, TFI does and/or does not occur when conventional spark is replaced
by  nanosecond-repetitively-pulsed-discharge  and/or  laser  spark.  The  latter  is  attributed  to  the  third  lobe  for-
mation of laser kernel with some negative curvature segments that enhance reaction rate through differential
diffusion, where MIEL  < MIET  (no TFI). Finally, the implications of MIE transitions relevant to lean-burn spark
ignition engines are briefly mentioned, and future studies are suggested.

1. Introduction

1.1. Background

Keeping pace with a rapid increase in population and the desire for
improving the quality of life, our human race has used up tremendous
amounts  of  natural  resources.  In  particular,  the  global  demand  for
transportation  fuels  and  electricity  as  the  major  forms  of  applicable
energy in our modern society continues to grow in relation to the ad-
vances of the gross national product [1]. The excessive consumption of
energy and natural resources can eventually cause catastrophic impact
on  Earth  [2].  We  are  facing  many  serious  problems  on  environment
deterioration  and  energy  security  issues  today.  Delay  of  action  will
jeopardize the ability of future generations to meet their needs. Hence,
our modern society urgently needs economically feasible technologies in
large-scale that can be used to significantly increase energy efficiency
[3], effectively decrease CO2 emissions [4], and possibly meet the 2050
net-zero carbon emission goal by United Nations [5].

Among  a  few  large-scale  technologies, one  promising  candidate  is
the  lean-burn  premixed  turbulent  combustion  for the  development  of
high-efficiency and low-emission internal combustion (IC) engines and
gas turbines for transportation and power generation using low-carbon
or  zero-carbon  renewable  fuels  such  as  electro-fuels  (e-fuels)  (e.g.,
Refs. [6,7]) or recyclable metal fuels for clean and compact zero-carbon
power [8]. E-fuels, as developing new green alternative fuels, are the
fuels produced by electricity from renewable energy sources, water and
CO2 from the air [6], which could be important for the net-zero carbon
emission coalition policy by United Nations in 2050 [5]. Unlike fossil
fuels, the application of e-fuels will not release additional CO2 because
they should be climate neutral for their entire life cycle assessment [6,
7]. Although the cost of e-fuels is currently high, e-fuels can be directly
used in today’s internal combustion (IC) engines to power vehicles, ships
and  airplanes  [6,7].  Besides,  all  existing  transport,  distribution  and
fuel/gas  infrastructures  can  continue  to  be  used  [6,7].  As  such,  the
fundamental knowledge of turbulent premixed spark ignition, as will be
reviewed in this paper, should be very useful and may be relevant to IC
engines using either e-fuels or conventional fuels.

E-mail address: sshy@ncu.edu.tw.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101099
Received 8 November 2022; Received in revised form 15 May 2023; Accepted 16 May 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)101099Availableonline9June20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

S.S. Shy

Nomenclature

(cid:0) 1 K

Acronyms and abbreviations
one dimensional
1D
two dimensional
2D
three dimensional
3D
kernel surface area (mm2)
A
turbulent kernel surface area (mm2)
AT*
capacitance (μF)
C
(cid:0) 1)
Cp
specific heat coefficient (J kg
conventional-single-spark-discharge
CSSD
electrode spark gap (mm)
dgap
dq
quenching distance (mm)
dtip
diameter with the needle end (mm)
dth
the electrode thickness (mm)
d<R>/dt
turbulent flame speed (m/s)
direct numerical simulation
DNS
Ed,min
the minimum discharge energy (mJ)
Eig
ignition energy (mJ)
Eloss
energy loss (mJ)
Estored
energy stored (mJ)
Esupplied  energy supplied (mJ)
F
f
fL
fRC
Go
GQ
HLc
HLT
hL
IC
IE
I(t)
Ka
Kac
k
k*

(cid:0) 1K

(cid:0) 1)

(cid:0) 1)

(cid:0) 1)

flammability factor ((cid:0) )
fan frequency (Hz)
focal length (mm)
inward reactant flow recirculation frequency (Hz)
successful ignition ((cid:0) )
global quench ((cid:0) )
conduction heat loss (W)
turbulent kernel heat loss per unit time (W)
(cid:0) 2K
effective heat transfer coefficient (W m
internal combustion ((cid:0) )
ignition energy (mJ)
the current as a function of time (mA)
turbulent Karlovitz number ((cid:0) )
critical turbulent Karlovitz number ((cid:0) )
(cid:0) 1K
effective thermal conductivity (W m
effective thermal conductivity of burned products (W
m
Laser Doppler Anemometry
Lewis number ((cid:0) )
critical Lewis number ((cid:0) )
integral length scale of turbulence (mm)
laser spark ignition
laser tomography
minimum ignition energy (mJ)
laminar minimum ignition energy (mJ)
laminar MIE for self-sustained flame propagation (mJ)
turbulent minimum ignition energy (mJ)
nanosecond-repetitively-pulsed-discharge
unsuccessful ignition
number of pulse
open-circuit-voltage
pressure (atm)
reaction zone P ́eclet number
modified reaction zone P ́eclet number
kernel ignition probability ((cid:0) )
ignition probability ((cid:0) )
flame ignition probability ((cid:0) )
Prandtl number
pulse repetition frequency
primary reference fuel (95% iso-octane + 5% n-heptane)
ignition energy
dimensionless reaction zone thickness
curvature radii (mm)

LDA
Le
Le*
LI
LSI
LT
MIE
MIEL
MIE0
L
MIET
NRPD
No-Go
Np
OCV
p
PeRZ
Pe*
Pker
Pig
Pign
Pr
PRF
PRF95
Q
R
R*

Rc
Rmin
ReT
Rz
RZ
RΩ
rf
rk
SCIE
SI
SIP
ST
SL
s

sb
s0
l
T
̂T
TFI
T0
TR
TP
Tad
tsp
U
Uign
U
u’
uʹc

′

u
V
V(t)
vk
w

critical flame radius (mm)
flame radius at a minimum d<R>/dt (mm)
turbulent Reynolds number ((cid:0) )
flame ball radius (mm)
reaction zone
loading resistance (Ω)
flame radius (mm)
averaged radius of the kernel surface area (mm)
synergistic coherence ignition enhancement
spark ignition
Cross-ministerial Strategic Innovation Promotion Program
turbulent burning velocity (m s
laminar burning velocity (m s
turbulent strain rate (s
Kolmogorov turbulence
downstream flame speed (m s
laminar burning velocity at zero stretch rate (m s
non-dimensional temperature (K)

(cid:0) 1); s ~ [u’3/(LIν)]0.5 for

(cid:0) 1)
(cid:0) 1)

(cid:0) 1)

(cid:0) 1)

(cid:0) 1)

dimensional instantaneous flame temperature (K)
Turbulence Facilitated Ignition ((cid:0) )
reactant flame temperature
unburned reactant temperature (K)
burned product temperature (K)
adiabatic flame temperature (K)
energy deposition duration time (μs)
mean axial velocities (m s
discharge voltage (kV)
dimensionless flame propagation velocity
r.m.s. turbulent fluctuating velocity (m s
critical value of r.m.s. turbulent fluctuating velocity (m
(cid:0) 1)
s
a spatial average of uʹ (m s
breakdown voltage (kV)
the voltage as a function of time (kV)
Kolmogorov eddy velocity (m s
wrinkled factor ((cid:0) )

(cid:0) 1)

(cid:0) 1)

(cid:0) 1)

Greek letters
δF
δRZ
δВRZ
τk
τp
τp,c
φ
ν
α
ω

ηk
λ
ε
Γ
ΓМІЕ

flame thickness (mm)
reaction zone thickness (mm)
broken reaction zone size (mm)
Kolmogorov eddy turnover time (s)
pulse duration time (μs)
critical spark duration time (μs)
equivalence ratio ((cid:0) )
(cid:0) 1)
kinematic viscosity (m2 s
(cid:0) 1)
thermal diffusivity (m2 s
characteristic reaction rate (s
flames
Kolmogorov length scales (mm)
Taylor microscale (mm)
turbulent dissipation rate (m2 s
MIET/MIEL
normalized MIE

(cid:0) 3)

(cid:0) 1); ω ~ SL

2/α for premixed

Superscripts
0
i
p

zero-stretch rate
successful ignition (Fig. 23)
self-sustained flame propagation (Fig. 23)

Subscripts
ad
BRZ
c
F

adiabatic
broken reaction zone
critical
flame

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1010992

S.S. Shy

L
min
max
P

laminar
minimum
maximum
product

R
RZ
T
tot

reactant
reaction zone
turbulent
total

A five-year large-scale industry-government-academia collaboration
research  project  in  Japan  (The  Cross-ministerial  Strategic  Innovation
Promotion Program, SIP [9]) from 2014 to 2018 deserves to mention.
The SIP Innovative Combustion Technology program aimed to achieve a
very high thermal efficiency of over 50% in future passenger car engines
[10]. In comparison, typical thermal efficiencies of current road legal
spark ignition (SI) gasoline engines are around 30% [11]. Notice that an
increase of thermal efficiency in engines, even for just 1% increase, will
still have an important benefit for economics and environmental pro-
tection [12]. As a matter of fact, in recent 2–3 years, electric cars have
been  growing really  fast [13], and  such trend  continues to move  for-
ward. Is it really the end of IC engines and petroleum in transport? The
answer is probably not, as e-fuels and/or recyclable metal fuels can be
directly used in IC engines. Besides, a dead battery dilemma has become
a challenging problem for our modern society. With millions of electric
vehicles set to hit the road, better battery recycling methods are urgently
needed [14]. Indeed, the longevity problem of car batteries and their
recycle and  disposal challenges could eventually limit the  continuous
growth of electric vehicles worldwide [15]. Furthermore, based on some
credible  projections,  Kalghatgi  [16]  predicted  that  even  by  2040  the
major
from
energy  worldwide  may
high-thermal-efficiency auto, marine, and aviation engines powered by
petrol  despite  the  global  trend  towards  electrification.  Unfortunately,
the oil price is often unstable due to regional politics and wars, recently
bouncing up and down from about US$70 to US$140 per barrel (e.g., the
Ukraine  war  in  2022),  which  can  trigger  energy  crisis  and  inflation
pressure,  possibly  causing  the  unwanted  economic  crisis  globally.
Therefore, it is still important to further improve complex ignition and
combustion  processes  in  modern  IC  engines  through  scientific  un-
derstandings,  which  are  still  not  fully  understood.  For  instance,  the
challenging problem of misfire frequently occurring in SI engines under
highly  turbulent  lean-burn  conditions  must  be  resolved  (e.g.,  Refs.
[17–20]).  Hence,  this  review  focuses  mainly  on  recent  fundamental
discoveries and understandings of dynamic processes in premixed spark
ignition of various flammable mixtures initiated by electric sparks under
intensive turbulence conditions which may be relevant to lean-burn SI
engines. We hasten to note that practical ignition technologies especially
for those used in super lean-burn engines (e.g., Refs. [9,10,17,18]) are
quite complex which are beyond the scope of this review article.

transport

come

still

The  use  of  an  electric  spark  ignition  for  combustion  initiation  at
predetermined location and timing dates back more than one hundred
and sixty years ago since the invention of IC engines around 1,860, and it
is still widely used in most combustion devices today. Note that spark or
forced ignition in either premixed or non-premixed turbulent combus-
tion is statistical in nature with inherent perturbations in the breakdown
energy, the subsequent discharge, and the location of the spark channel.
These  perturbations  can  result  in  either  successful  ignition  (Go)  or
failure ignition (No-Go) even when the same discharged ignition energy
(Eig) is applied. Mastorakos [21] has carefully reviewed non-premixed
turbulent  flame  ignition;  he  mentioned  three  kinds  of  the  spark  igni-
tion  probability,  namely  a  flammability  factor  (F),  a  kernel  ignition
probability (Pker), and a flame ignition probability (Pign). F is the prob-
ability of finding nominally flammable fluid at a point, first put forward
by Birch et al. [22,23]. Pker is the probability of initiating a kernel, it is

not necessarily equal to F, and it is larger than Pign which is the proba-
bility  of  initiating  a  flame  in  the  whole  combustor.  However,  to  the
author’s knowledge, a comprehensive review on spark ignition of pre-
mixed  turbulent  flames  especially  for  recent  discoveries  of  minimum
ignition energy (MIE) transitions under intensive turbulence conditions
is still not available. Here it should be instructive to first define a suc-
cessful  ignition  event  for  premixed  spark  ignition  that  affects  the
determination  of  the  ignition  probability  (Pig  = Pign).  For  premixed
spherical flame initiation, as an example, a successful ignition event in a
combustible  mixture  should  fulfill  all  three  evolution  stages from  the
successful breakdown of discharged spark and the formation of initial
flame kernel to the self-sustained expanding flame propagation. In other
words, when there is no self-sustained expanding flame, then the igni-
tion event belongs to failure ignition (e.g., Refs. [24,25]). Further, for
premixed  spherical  flame  initiation,  Pig  is  very  close  to  Pker,  when  a
flame critical radius (Rc) can be reached, as to be discussed later.

The simplest way of igniting premixed combustible mixtures is to use
an electrode-spark. Traditionally, MIE is defined as a critical amount of
Eig above which ignition is possible for a specific mixture [26–28]. MIE
is an important parameter for initiating combustion, which is crucial not
only for ignition studies but also for stable operations of various com-
bustion devices and for the risk assessment of accidental explosion in
industrial and aviation safety. Therefore, MIE is a topic of wide interest
in combustion and safety research as evidenced by a large volume of
analytical  (e.g.,  Refs.  [29–47]),  experimental  (e.g.,  Refs.  [24,25,
48–71]), and computational (e.g., Refs. [72–77] among others) litera-
ture  that  has  emerged  in  the  past  several  decades.  These  analytical,
experimental, and computational studies have investigated not only MIE
itself but also the effects of various parameters on MIE, most of them in
quiescent condition and some with mean flow and turbulence consid-
erations. These various parameters of interest can be categorized by four
groups:  (1)  the  electrical  breakdown  characteristics  (e.g.,  type  of
discharge, discharged voltage/current and pulse duration time), (2) the
electrode characteristics (e.g., material, geometry, size and gap width),
(3) the flow characteristics (e.g., type of flow, turbulent velocity/length
scales, pressure and temperature), and (4) the mixture characteristics (e.
g., equivalence ratio, type of fuel). In order to reproduce an electrode
spark ignition experiment by different groups, detailed information on
the  aforesaid  parameters  as  well  as  the  discharged  Eig  should  be
provided.

In  reality,  MIE  is  a  probabilistic  variable,  not  a  threshold  value,
which can be only determined statistically by repeating many ignition
experiments under the same conditions (see Refs. [61,78] and references
therein). Several different percentages of Pig  have been used to deter-
mine  the  statistical  values  of  MIE  for  successful  ignition.  In  the  com-
bustion community, the most commonly-used Pig  for MIE is 50% (e.g.,
Refs. [24,25,52,56,60,61,63,64,77,78] among many others) due to the
nature of statistics. The other values of Pig have also been adopted, such
as 1% ignitability for MIE measurements of propane-air mixtures [79],
10% ignitability for studying the influence of turbulent flow conditions
on the ignition of flammable methane and propane mixtures [80], and
80% ignitability for some C1 to C7 hydrocarbons [48]. In some situa-
tions, for examples, in dangerous powder factories and storages as well
as in safety-related explosions, MIE information based on 1% or 10%

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1010993

S.S. Shy

ignitability is more valuable than that using 50% or 80% ignitability.
However,  the  statistical  methods  used  to  determine  MIE  were  often
different by different research groups; their descriptions were somewhat
insufficient and/or unclear to allow the reproduction of experiment by
others. For instance, some researchers identified ignition and no ignition
by a reduced number of repeated experiments at each condition, usually
5–10  repeated  runs.  If  a  single  outcome,  either  successful  or  failed
ignition, was observed for these repeated runs, then no further experi-
ments  were  performed.  If  mixed  outcomes  were  observed,  then  addi-
tional runs (usually 5–10 runs) were conducted. If more than half of the
total repeated runs (e.g., 6 out of 10 or 11 out of 20) were successful
ignition,  the  condition  was  labeled  as  “ignition”;  otherwise,  it  was
labeled  as  “no  ignition”.  Thus,  to  determine  MIE  at  50%  ignitability
accurately,  this  paper  reviews  two  statistical  methods,
i.e.  a
midpoint-50%  approximation  method  [61]  and  a  logistic  regression
method [78,81], as discussed later.

1.2. Progress and challenges on premixed turbulent spark ignition (SI)
studies

Significant progress on our understandings of dynamic processes of
turbulent spark ignition of flammable pre-mixtures has been made in the
last  two  decades  based  on  a  variety  of  fundamental  combustion  re-
searches. In particular, detailed measurements of laminar and turbulent
MIE  (MIEL  and  MIET)  of  various  gaseous  and  pre-vaporized  gasoline
surrogate  fuels  over  wide  ranges  of  the  turbulent  intensity  (uʹ/SL)  in
near-isotropic turbulence with negligible mean velocities, the electrode
spark gap (dgap), the equivalence ratio (φ), the effective Lewis number
(Le), pressure (p), and other parameters were conducted to investigate
the underlying physics of these effects on MIEL and MIET. uʹ is the r.m.s.
turbulent fluctuating velocity, SL is the laminar burning velocity, and Le
is defined as the ratio of thermal diffusivity and mass diffusivity with the
mass diffusivity being that of the deficient reactant and the abundant
inert.  In  this  review,  we  shall  focus  on  two  extreme  phenomena  of
premixed turbulent spark ignition (e.g., Refs. [70,71]). For the reader
who is not familiar with two extreme phenomena, a sketch to highlight
two spark ignition transitions is presented in Fig. 1. The first extreme
phenomenon  is  a  monotonic  MIE  transition  (black  lines  in  Fig.  1)  at
moderate/large dgap, of which the positive slopes of MIET/MIEL  versus

uʹ/SL  curves vary from gradually to exponentially when uʹ/SL  exceeds
some critical values (uʹc/SL) depending on φ, p, Le, and more. The second
extreme  phenomenon  is  a  non-monotonic  MIE  transition  (red  lines  in
Fig. 1) occurring at sufficiently large Le » 1 and at sufficiently small dgap
(typically less than 1 mm), of which the slopes of MIET/MIEL versus uʹ/SL
curves change their signs from “negative”  where MIET  < MIEL  (Turbu-
lence  Facilitated  Ignition,  TFI)  when  uʹ/SL  < uʹc/SL  to  “positive”  where
MIET/MIEL  increases  rapidly  when  uʹ/SL  > uʹc/SL  because  turbulence
re-asserts its dominating role.

The monotonic MIE transition was first reported between two distinct
modes  on  spark  ignition  in  near-isotropic  turbulence  of  methane-air
mixtures with Le ~1 depending on a critical turbulent Karlovitz num-
ber (Kac) [24,60,61], where Kac ≈ 8–26 depending on φ with the min-
(cid:0) 0.5 is
imum Kac ≈ 8 occurring near φ = 1 [61]. Here Ka = (uʹ/SL)2(ReT)
the ratio of a turbulent strain rate (s) to a characteristic reaction rate (ω)
(please see the Nomenclature). It should be noted that local kinematic
and thermal diffusivities (ν and α) around the ignition flame kernel are
estimated at a mean temperature of (TR + TP)/2 as that used in Refs. [43,
61], not TR  as used in Refs. [24,60], where ν  ~ α  for gases. TR  is the
unburned  reactant  temperature  and  TP  ≈ Tad  is  the  adiabatic  flame
temperature.  In  the  pre-transition  when  Ka  < Kac,  MIET  increases
gradually with increasing Ka, flame kernel formation is similar to that of
laminar spark ignition, and 2D laser tomography images of subsequent
outwardly-propagating turbulent flames show sharp fronts (thin reac-
tion zone) [61]. On the other hand, in the post-transition when Ka > Kac,
MIET  increases abruptly with increasing Ka, flame kernel is disrupted,
turbulent  flames  reveal
and  subsequent  randomly-propagating
distributed-like fronts with islands and/or broken flame kernels [61,64,
67].

Independently,  the  monotonic  MIE  transition  was  also  found  by
Cardin et al. [82,83] using laser-induced spark ignition (LSI) of very lean
methane-air  mixtures  with  Le  ~  1  in  wind  tunnel  decaying  homoge-
neous isotropic turbulence, showing roughly the same Kac ≈ 10 for the
monotonic  MIE  transition.  Furthermore,  three-dimensional  direct  nu-
merical simulations (DNS) have been used to investigate the early stages
of  premixed  flame  kernel  development  of  localized  forced  ignition  of
homogenous  mixtures  (e.g.,  Refs.  [59,84–87]  among  others).  The
detrimental effects  of turbulence  intensity  on  ignition  have  been  pre-
dicted by DNS (e.g., Refs. [84,87]), suggesting an increase of MIET with
increasing  uʹ.  Recently,  Chakraborty  and  co-workers  [77]  performed
three-dimensional simple chemistry DNS of localized forced ignition of
homogeneous stoichiometric methane-air mixtures under decaying ho-
mogeneous  isotropic  turbulence.  Their  DNS  results  [77]  successfully
predicted the trend of monotonic MIE transition found by experiments
using  conventional  electrode
[24,60,61]  and
laser-induced spark ignition [82,83].

ignition

spark

Another surprising phenomenon, TFI, was first found by Wu et al.
[88]  who  reported  that  turbulence  could  facilitate  ignition  through
differential diffusion for Le » 1 flames. Such finding was in contradiction
to the commonly-held view that turbulence should render ignition more
difficult. Later on, Shy et al. [70,71,89] substantiated the existence of
TFI  via  statistical  measurements  of  MIEL  and  MIET  for  various
pre-mixtures with Le »  1 over a wide range of uʹ, where MIET  < MIEL
when uʹ was smaller than a critical uʹc. Shy and co-workers discovered an
additional restriction for the occurrence of TFI, i.e. at sufficiently small
dgap. In other words, when dgap is not sufficiently small, there is no TFI
even for Le »  1 pre-mixtures. These intricate interactions of premixed
turbulent  spark  ignition,  monotonic  versus  non-monotonic  MIE  transi-
tion,  are  attributed  to  the  coupling  effects  among  heat  losses  to  elec-
trodes (the effect of dgap), differential diffusion (the effect of Le), and
turbulent dissipation (the effect of uʹ), which will be elaborated in Sec-
tions 3 and 4, respectively.

How exactly the phenomena of monotonic and non-monotonic MIE
transitions  would  vary  with  a  change  of  ignition  source  by  replacing
conventional  spark  to  either  laser-induced  spark  (LIS)  or  nanosecond
repetitively pulsed discharge (NRPD) in premixed turbulent combustion

Fig. 1. Sketches of monotonic and non-monotonic MIE transitions.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1010994

S.S. Shy

under the same experimental conditions will be also reviewed in this
paper. Understanding of such fundamental question should be of help to
make  better  spark ignition  strategies for  super lean-burn  gasoline  en-
gines with highly tumble flows. Currently, most gasoline engines applied
rather small spark plug gaps typically ranging from 0.6 mm to 0.9 mm
(e.g., Refs. [17–20]). Since lean gasoline/air mixtures have sufficiently
large Le ~3, TFI could occur at small dgap  (typically less than 1 mm).
Further,  as  demonstrated  by  Iida  and  co-workers  [17–20],  successful
ignition in super lean-burn spark ignition engines with highly tumble
flows must require extraordinarily high values of Eig and/or MIET.

Challenges still remain. For examples, the monotonic MIE transition
in stationary (non-decaying) homogeneous isotropic turbulence has not
yet  been  simulated  by  DNS  and/or  numerical  modelling.  Numerical
simulations  of  the  phenomenon  of  non-monotonic  MIE  transition  in
either decaying or stationary homogeneous isotropic turbulence are still
not  available.  Our  knowledge  of  chemical  kinetics  in  premixed  spark
ignition under high pressure and high turbulence intensity conditions is
rather insufficient, deserving further studies.

1.3. Scope

This review cannot attempt to cover all available papers, since the
number of works devoted to premixed spark ignition and combustion is
quite large. Therefore, we shall limit our scope to survey the latest ad-
vances  on  the  dynamic  process  of  premixed  turbulent  spark  ignition,
especially  on  the  variation  of  MIET/MIEL  over  a  wide  range  of  uʹ/SL
alongside effects of dgap, Le, p, and some other parameters on MIE. Two
spark  ignition  transitions  are  to  be  discussed:  (1)  A  monotonic  MIE
transition  and  (2) a  non-monotonic MIE transition  (see  the sketches  in
Fig. 1). The latter shows a surprising phenomenon of TFI, i.e. MIET  <
MIEL if the mixture’s Le is sufficiently larger than unity and dgap is suf-
ficiently  small  (typically  less  than  1  mm)  under  modest  turbulence
conditions. Then turbulence re-asserts its dominating role, where values
of  MIET  increase  rapidly  again  at  sufficiently  large  uʹ.  Both  ignition
transitions are mainly explained by the coupling effects of Le, dgap, and
uʹ.  We  will  also  review  some  relevant  results  obtained  from  laminar
premixed  ignition  and  combustion  that  may  be  used  to  interpret  the
complicated behaviors of premixed turbulent ignition transitions.

Some  basics  and  the  statistical  nature  of  electric  spark  ignition,
including  the  electric  spark  breakdown  and  Eig,  the  definition  and
measurement of MIE, and various experimental configurations for the
monotonic  MIE  transition  studies  alongside  the  spark  ignition  process
and several influencing factors on MIE, will be reviewed in Section 2.
Section 3 reports the consensus of monotonic MIE transition regardless of
different  ignition  sources,  turbulent  flows,  fuel  types.  Further,  the
centrally-ignited kernel development and its subsequent self-sustained
flame  propagation  in  laminar,  turbulent-flamelet,  and  distributed-like
regimes  are  discussed  to  explain  the  occurrence  of  monotonic  MIE
transition in terms of turbulent Karlovitz and Lewis numbers. Following
that  a  physical  model  based  on  the  ratio  of  small-scale  turbulence
diffusivity to reaction zone thermal diffusivity, a reaction zone P ́eclet
number that captures the similarity of monotonic MIE transition, is dis-
cussed. Further, a monotonic ignition probability transition of turbulent
spherical flame initiation using NRPD, similar to that of the monotonic
MIE transition [61], is also reviewed.

In Section 4, the phenomenon of TFI and the effect of dgap on TFI will
be  reviewed  before  presenting  the  non-monotonic  MIE  transition  in
premixed  turbulent  combustion.  A  comparison  between  conventional
spark versus NRPD for the phenomenon of TFI [90,91] will be discussed.
Moreover,  we  will  demonstrate  that  TFI  does  not  occur  when
electrode-spark  is  replaced  by  laser-spark  based  on  a  very  recent
laser-induced premixed turbulent spark ignition study [92]. Finally, the
implications of MIE transitions in the demand for extraordinary high Eig
in  super  lean-burn  spark  ignition  engines  are  briefly  mentioned,  and
future studies are suggested.

2. Basics and statistical nature of the electric spark ignition

The earlier works of Lefebvre and co-workers [29,49,51,93–97] were
probably  the  first  to  investigate  the  influence  of  flow  parameters
including  turbulence  on  spark  ignition,  MIE,  quenching  distance  and
flame  quench  by  using  various  flowing  hydrocarbon/air  mixtures  at
sub-atmospheric pressures in a rectangular flow tunnel at high veloc-
ities. Although Lefebvre and co-workers did not investigate the statis-
tical nature of spark ignition (ignition probability) and MIE transitions
at that time, they did describe an important flame structure change after
ignition based on a three-region model of turbulent flames varying from
a smooth wrinkling flame front and a micro roughness of the flame front
to a broken flame front with islands of burned gases being shed [49].
Such turbulent flame front changes as described by Ballal &  Lefebvre
will be discussed  and substantiated by high-speed  schlieren and laser
tomography images later in the subsection 3.3.

MIE identification itself is a complex and difficult task, as it can be
influenced  by  many  factors.  These  influenced  factors  include  such  as
electrical  geometries  [27,52,55,64]  &  materials  [53],  discharging
modes  [50,53,57],  gap  widths  [24,52,53,55,60,61],  pulse  duration
times (e.g., Refs. [50,52,55,57,98]), mixture properties (e.g., Refs. [49,
50,52,53,55]),  pressure  or  temperature effect  (e.g.,  Refs.  [49,50,99]),
the humidity effect (e.g., Refs. [98,100,101]), the flow effect (e.g., Refs.
[49,52,57,102] among many others). For clarity, we shall restrict our
focus  on  some  limited  factors  that  are  essential  to  understand  the
aforesaid MIE transition phenomena, as described below.

2.1. Electric spark breakdown and discharged ignition energy (Eig)

The electric spark breakdown is stochastic in nature, since successful
and/or  failure  ignition  can  co-exist  even  when  applying  the  same  Eig
under  exactly  the  same  conditions  (e.g.,  Refs.  [24,56,60,61,64,67,
69–71,78]). As a typical example from Bane et al. [81], an overlapping
region was marked by gray in Fig. 2 to demonstrate the co-exsitence of
successful  ignition  (solid  symbols)  and  no  ignition  (empty  symbols)
based on the result of 12 spark ignition tests in a quiescent kerosene/air
◦
mixture at 60
C and 1 atm. Further, the energy stored in the capacitor,
2  CV2, can vary from shot to shot even under the same exper-
Estored = 1
imental conditions because the breakdown voltage V can vary, where C
is the capacitance. Thus, it is necessary to measure Eig  in situ directly
from the spark electrodes.

Using a commercial automobile ignition coil, typical time recording
traces of voltage and current discharged by one shot of a pair of canti-
levered electrodes with sharp ends are presented in Fig. 3 (unpublished
information  from  the  author’s  lab).  These  voltages  and  current

Fig. 2. Data points from the 12 spark ignition tests performed in kerosene/air
◦
at 60
C and 1 atm. The overlapping region, including successful ignition (solid
symbols)  and  no  ignition  (empty  symbols),  was  marked  in  gray.  Reproduced
from Ref. [81], with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1010995

S.S. Shy

waveforms  on  the  anode  and  the  cathode  of  the  spark-electrode  are
measured directly by two high-voltage precision probes and a Pearson
current monitor and recorded in an oscilloscope. The initial spike of the
voltage trace is due to the onset of high voltage output to the circuit,
following by the concurrent voltages [V1(t) and V2(t)] and current I(t)
waveforms with some oscillations at which Eig can be estimated from the
time t1 to t2 (Fig. 3). In Fig. 3, a residual voltage oscillation can be seen
after t2, resulting in a relatively large uncertainty of Eig due to the onset
spikes and oscillations.

For measuring Eig  of high accuracy, considerable efforts have been
made by Peng et al. [64] in order to generate near-square voltage and
current waveforms with a precise pulse duration time (τp) varying from
1 μs to 1 ms. As a typical example, near-square voltage/current wave-
forms directly measured across the two electrodes with sharp ends using
a  high-voltage  discharging  power  source  were  shown  in  Fig.  4  [69],
where  the  ignition  circuit  (right  top)  was  connected  to  a  precision
high-voltage  pulse  generator  with  a  maximum  open-circuit-voltage
(OCV) of 25 kV, the loading resistance (RΩ) was linked to the ground,
and an embryonic spark kernel at dgap = 2 mm with a vague shock wave
was shown on the right bottom schlieren image. The loading resistors in
series can be used to vary and control the discharged value of Eig. The
larger the value of RΩ  is, the smaller the value of Eig  is at a given con-
dition. For the case in Fig. 4, an OCV of 15 kV, τp = 100 μs and RΩ = 5 kΩ
were applied. As seen, Eig of high accuracy can be obtained by directly
integrating the product  of the discharged current I(t) and the voltage

Fig.  3. Typical  voltage  and  current  waveforms  discharged  from  a  car  igni-
tion coil.

Fig.  4. The  determination  of  Eig  via  direct  measurements  of  the  discharged
current waveform I(t) and the voltage difference between positive and negative
electrodes [V1(t) – V2(t)]. RΩ  in the ignition circuit was the controlled loading
resistance. The schlieren image showed the initial discharged spark across the
electrodes, where a vague shock wave was observed. Reproduced from Fig. 1 of
Jiang et al. [69], with permission from Elsevier.

difference [V1(t) – V2(t)] across the gap between electrodes within τp = t2
– t1, as indicated in Fig. 4 (the green line), where Eig  = 33.49 mJ. For
smaller  values  of  Eig  (<5  mJ),  a  current  spike  perturbation  in  the
beginning of the breakdown can be frequently observed due to large RΩ
applied. Such current spike perturbation may be eliminated by using a
small damping resistance of 100 Ω just ahead of the positive electrode
and re-positioning the Pearson current monitor in-between the negative
electrode and the ground (Fig. 2 of [69]). Further details to obtain Eig of
high accuracy can be found in Ref. [69].

In  general,  the  required  open-circuit-voltage  (OCV)  for  the  spark
breakdown  increases  with  increasing  pressure  [64].  From  Fig.  3  of
Ref. [64], the limitation domains of the spark discharge energy versus
the loading resistance at different p varying from 1 atm to 5 atm when
using the high-voltage pulse generator with fixed dgap = 2.5 mm and τp
= 100 μs were shown. In it, at p = 1 atm, the required OCV to discharge
Eig was equal to or greater than 10 kV, having a wide range of Eig from
0.1  mJ  to  about  200  mJ;  when  OCV  <10  kV,  the  ignition  spark  was
difficult to discharge [64]. Also, large noise signals (large uncertainties)
were usually encountered for discharging small values of Eig (<0.1 mJ)
when very high resistances were used. Furthermore, when p = 3 atm
and/or 5 atm, the corresponding OCVs should be equal to or greater than
13 KV and/or 15 KV, detailed in Ref. [64]. In short, the accurate mini-
mum discharge energies (Ed,min) were limited to be 0.1 mJ at p = 1 atm,
0.21 mJ at p = 3 atm, and 0.47 mJ at p = 5 atm (see Fig. 3 of Ref. [64]).
For other ignition systems, such as nanosecond repetitively pulsed dis-
charges and laser-induced sparks, the reader is directed to Refs. [90,91]
for NRPD and Ref. [92] for LIS among many others, as to be discussed
later.

2.2. Minimum ignition energy (MIE): Definition and measurement

The concept of MIE has historically served as the fundamental basis
for studying ignition hazards of combustible fuels [27–34]. As stated by
Bane [78], the traditional viewpoint was that fuels had specific ignition
energy thresholds corresponding to MIE and ignition sources with en-
ergy smaller than such threshold values were not able to have successful
ignition of these fuels. The pioneering work on the determination of MIE
threshold  values  was  based  on  the  energy  stored  in  a  capacitor  at  a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1010996

S.S. Shy

propagation at later times. Contrarily, although the same spark kernels
at 0.08 ms were formed for the “No Go” cases (Figs. 5b and 6b), these
laminar and turbulent flame kernels were weak and unable to further
develop,  leading  to  flame  global  quench.  As  seen  in  Fig.  5(b),  the
laminar flame kernel became vague at 2.16 ms and it was completely
quenched at 6.40 ms. Similarly, in Fig. 6(b), the turbulent flame kernel
at t = 0.76 ms was drifted slightly away from the center of the electrodes
by turbulence, it grew slowly from t = 2.00 ms to t = 4.28 ms with small
expanding flame speed, and it became vague at t = 5.60 ms following by
flame global quench at t = 9.36 ms. Clearly, MIE is a probabilistic var-
iable,  not  a  threshold  value,  as  substantiated  and  demonstrated  by
Figs. 5 and 6. Hereinafter, MIE means Eig  at 50% ignitability (MIE ≡
Eig,50%) in this review unless otherwise stated.

Two statistical methods for the determination of MIE at 50% ignit-
ability are  reviewed,  a  midpoint  approximation  method  [61] and  the
logistic regression method [25,78], as displayed in Figs. 7(a) and 7(b),
using the same lean methane/air mixture at φ = 0.7 and at 3 atm under
quiescent  condition  in  a  dual-chamber  fan-stirred  cruciform  burner
[64]. The midpoint approximation method is to first determine Eig at 0%
and/or 100% ignitability (Eig,0% and/or Eig,100%), which can be obtained
by  discharging  for  at  least  5  times  while  slowly  increasing  and/or
decreasing Eig  until the very first successful ignition (Eig,100%) and/or
misfire (Eig,0%) occurs. When the Eig,0%  and Eig,100% are approximately
identified, three middle Eig points are subject to measurement (Fig. 7a).
At least 10 identical runs are conducted to determine the ignitability of
the  first  midpoint  that  is  then  used  to  decide  which  direction  the
following  two  measurements  should  be  taken.  For  instance,  if  the
ignitability of this midpoint is larger than 50%, then the next midpoint is
selected just between the former midpoint and the Eig,0%. Likewise, the
location and ignitability of the third Eig midpoint are determined. Using
these measured values of ignitability at three mid-points together with
Eig,0%  and Eig,100%, the Eig,50%  can be thus interpolated by a spline-fit
line, as indicated in Fig. 7(a). The same trend of the profiles of ignit-
ability with the Eig at other values of φ under either laminar or turbulent
conditions was also found, detailed in Ref. [61].

As to the logistic regression method, the first step is very similar to
the midpoint method described above. That is to identify roughly Eig,0%
and Eig,100%. Then a set of ignition tests with sufficient sample numbers
having various Eig within the range between Eig,0% and Eig,100% must be
conducted to obtain a cumulative probability distribution for the igni-
tion  probability  versus  the  stimulus  level  (Eig).  When  the  cumulative
probability distribution is obtained and then percentiles and confidence
intervals can be calculated to determine MIE (Eig,50%), as shown in Fig. 7
(b). Further information in obtaining the cumulative probability distri-
bution can be found in Ref. [78]. Though sufficient data samples about
20–30  runs  must  be  taken  for  both  statistical  methods,  the  logistic
regression method is found to be more robust than the midpoint method
in the sense that the former requires less data samples than the later.

2.3. Three different experimental setups for MIE transition studies

Three different experimental setups used for MIE transition studies of
premixed turbulent spark ignition are reviewed, including a pipe flow
system, a wind tunnel facility, and a dual-chamber fan-stirred explosion
facility. Other burners such as Bunsen-type jet flows and standard bomb
experiments,  which  are  mainly  used  to  investigate  turbulent  burning
velociites but not for MIE transition studies, are excluded. For standard
bomb experiments, the interesting readers can find information from the
literature  (e.g.,  Bradley  and  co-workers  [54,105],  Chaumeix  and
co-workers [106], Roberts and co-workers [107], among others).

(1)  A pipe flow system using the conventional spark electrodes at 1

atm

Horstmann  et  al.  [80]  investigated  the  electric  spark  ignition  of
methane/air and propane/air mixtures under turbulent conditions in a

◦

Fig.  5. Schlieren  images  of  centrally-ignited  laminar  iso-octane/air  flames
using the same Eig ≈ 8.2 mJ under exactly the same experimental conditions (φ
= 0.8, 100
C, 1 atm). (a) “Go”: spark → kernel → self-sustained flame prop-
agation. (b) “No Go”: spark → flame kernel → complete quench. Field of view:
63  × 63  mm2.  Reproduced  from  Fig.  4  of  Jiang  et  al.  [69],  with  permission
from Elsevier.

Fig. 6. Same arrangement as Fig. 5, but for the turbulent case at u’ ≈ 1.85 m/s
(a) “Go”: spark → wrinkled kernel → turbulent flame propagation. (b) “No Go”:
spark  →  wrinkled  kernel  →  weak  turbulent  flame  →  complete  quench.  Both
cases  applied  the  same  Eig  ≈ 24.1  mJ  under  exactly  the  same  experimental
conditions. Field of view: 63 × 63 mm2. Reproduced from Fig. 5 of Jiang et al.
[69], with permission from Elsevier.

known voltage that was discharged through a given dgap, as done at the
Bureau of Mines in the 1940s [27]. MIE data for many different fuels and
mixture  compositions  were  obtained  and  these  data  were  extensively
cited in the literature and ignition handbooks [103,104]. Further details
on  the  introduction  of  historical  spark  ignition  energy  measurements
can be found in Ref. [78].

Using lean iso-octane as a fuel for spherical flame initiation, Jiang
et al. [69] have demonstrated the coexistence of “Go” and “No Go” when
using the same Eig within an overlapping energy band for both laminar
and turbulent cases, as shown in Figs. 5 and 6.

The “go” cases in Figs. 5(a) and 6(a) showed sequential developing
stages  for  successful  ignition  from the  discharged  spark  kernel  at  t  =
0.08 ms and the formation of laminar and turbulent flame kernels at t =
0.76  ms  to  subsequent  laminar  and  turbulent  self-sustained  flame

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1010997

S.S. Shy

Fig. 7. Examples of two statistical methods for determination of Eig at 50% ignitability [64]. (a) The midpoint method [61]. (b) The logistic regression method [70].
Reproduced from Peng et al. [64], with permission from Elsevier.

generate a decaying homogeneous and isotropic turbulence with a wide
range of uʹ. Note that uʹ was a spatial average of uʹ between spark and
kernel  at  1  ms  after  the  laser  breakdown,  as  indicated  in  Fig.  9.  In
particular, high values of uʹ  can be generated by using the multiscale
injection  grid  (MuSIG)  developed  by  Mazellier  et  al.  [108].  Most
importantly, Cardin et al. [82,83] found that the monotonic MIE tran-
sition also exists for LSI in decaying homogeneous wind tunnel turbu-
lence,  supporting  the  findings  of  Shy  et  al.  [24,60,61].  Both
conventional electric spark ignition studies in near isotropic turbulence
[24,60,61]  and  laser-induced  spark  ignition  studies  in  decaying  ho-
mogenous turbulence [82,83] showed the two modes of turbulent spark
ignition. Specifically, the increasing slopes of MIET with uʹ change from
gradually  to  exponentially  when  uʹ  exceeds  some  critical  value  (uʹc),
regardless of different ignition sources and different flow configurations
applied.

(3)  A  dual-chamber  high-pressure,  high-temperature  fan-stirred

cruciform burner

A major portion of the results discussed in this review were obtained
from centrally-ignited, outwardly-propagating spherical flames using a
pair of cantilevered electrodes in single and/or double chambers unless
otherwise  specified.  Since  the  design  of  single-chamber  cruciform
burner and dual-chamber inner cruciform burner is essentially the same,
we only discuss the latter upon here. A large dual-chamber high-pres-
sure, high-temperature fan-stirred explosion facility, as shown in Fig. 10
[109],  was  applied  to  measure  MIE  transition  as  well  as  turbulent
burning velocities (ST) of centrally-ignited, outwardly-propagating tur-
elevated
bulent
constant-pressure/temperature  conditions  for  various  gaseous  and
pre-vaporized  fuels  (e.g.,  hydrogen,  methane,  propane,  n-butane,
iso-octane, gasoline surrogate). The drawing of Fig. 10 by Solidworks
was  purposely  arranged  to  show  internal  views  on  a  large  inner  3D
cruciform  burner  which  was  resided  in  a  huge  pill-like  pressure-con-
trolled outer vessel. The inner 3D cruciform burner was constructed by a
large  horizontally-positioned  cylindrical  steel  pipe  together  with  four
smaller
and
pipes
symmetrically-welded around its central part to form a cruciform shape
when viewed from all three directions. The inside intersecting domain

perpendicularly-aligned

cylindrical

premixed

normal

flames

under

steel

and

Fig. 8. Left: A simplified sketch of a pipe flow system [80]. Right: A cartoon for
successful ignition.

pipe flow system with strong mean axial velocities up to U = 40 m/s
using grids to increase uʹ at 1 atm. Fig. 8 is a simplified sketch of such
setup (left), only showing the test section with three different grids in the
long pipe at various positions to vary uʹ alongside the LDA measurement
around the ignition source area via a pair of electrodes. By using three
different grids, they reported that a maximum value of uʹ = 6 m/s or 13
m/s  for  a  100  mm  or  50  mm  hole  diameter  can  be  obtained  [80].  A
cartoon  on  the  right  part  of  Fig.  8  is  plotted  to  show  how  successful
ignition  in  such  pipe  flow  may  look  like,  including  three  stages  from
spark formation and kernel development to flame propagation. In short,
the most important finding in Ref. [80] was that the mean convective
part of the flow (U up to 40 m/s) exerts little influence on MIE, while
turbulent fluctuations (the effect of uʹ) has the greatest influence on the
ignition process and/or MIE that reveals a very similar monotonic MIE
transition described in the Introduction, as to be discussed in detail later.

(2)  A wind tunnel facility using the laser spark ignition (LSI) at 1 atm

As shown in Fig. 9, Cardin et al. [82] applied a single-shot LSI in a
wind tunnel facility to measure MIET  as a function of uʹ  for lean pre-
mixed  methane/air  flames  over  a  range  of  equivalence  ratio  varying
from  φ  = 0.55–0.75  under  atmospheric  conditions.  They  applied
different  grids  which  were  placed  on  the  converging  nozzle  exit  to

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1010998

S.S. Shy

Fig. 9. A wind tunnel facility. Reproduced from Cardin et al. [82], with permission from Elsevier.

′

from these pipes had a near-spherical diameter of about 300 mm. Two
identical but counter-rotating fans together with perforated plates were
equipped at the two ends of the large horizontally-positioned pipe of the
burner to generate a sizable near-isotropic turbulence flow field (150 ×
150 × 150 mm3) over a wide range of constant u
varying from 0 to 8.42
m/s in all three directions with negligible mean velocities. The turbu-
lence properties of near-isotropic turbulence in the dual-chamber facil-
ity at elevated pressures was essentially the same as an earlier version of
the single-chamber cruciform burner operated under atmospheric con-
ditions within experimental uncertainties, as substantiated by Liu et al.
′
[110].  Two  important  turbulent  parameters,  u
and  LI  (the  integral
length scale of turbulence) as a function of the fan-rotating frequency (f),
were measured by extensive LDV measurements in the central uniform
′ ≈ 0.0462f in unit of m/s and LI ≈ 10.7f0.34 in
region of interest, where u
unit  of  mm  [111–113].  These  near-isotropic  turbulence  properties,
including velocities, length  scales, energy spectra, and  high order  ve-
locity structure functions, were further measured and confirmed by PIV
measurements  and  wavelet  transformation  analyses,  detailed  in  Refs.
[114,115].

As can be seen from Fig. 10, four large pressure-released valves were
symmetrically installed on the vertical cylindrical pipe of the cruciform
bomb,  allowing  spark  ignition,  kernel  formation  and  self-sustained
flame propagation to develop under near-constant pressure condition.
For  experiments  at  high  temperatures,  three  heating  devices  were
applied.  (1)  A  surface  heating  system  consisted  of  20  surface  heaters

having a total of 17 kW which were carefully installed and fixed around
the  outer  surfaces  of  these  three  perpendicularly-aligned  cylindrical
pipes and four pressure release pipes to heat up the 3D cruciform bomb.
This heat conduction surface heating method took a long time, at least 4
h, to reach the wanted high temperature condition of gases inside the
cruciform burner. Also, it had a drawback due to hot wall surface effects,
resulting in a non-uniform temperature distribution in the experimen-
tation  domain  (near-isotropic  turbulence  region)  with  a  decreasing
temperature  gradient.  (2)  To  improve  the  drawback  in  (1),  a  novel
heating device, a pair of perforated plate heater, was designed by Jiang
et al. [109]. Each of the two perforate plates with 36% blockage ratio
was carefully welded by a very long narrow serpentine heating strip of a
cross sectional area of 2.5 × 2.5 mm2 without blocking any of these 10
mm holes (please see the enlarged perforated plate with heating wires
on the left of Fig. 10). When the two counter-rotating fans were turned
on, the two perforated plate heaters of 2.4 kW can be used to uniformly
heat up the mixtures inside the bomb through a much more efficiently
turbulent  heat  convection,  while  retaining  the  same  turbulence  char-
acteristics  and  keeping  the  temperature  variation  in  the  domain  of
experimentation  less  than  1
C  [69,71,109,116].  (3)  A  secondary  air
heater was used to further speed up the heating procedure (not required
for  achieving  uniform  temperature  gradient).  In  short,  the  aforesaid
heating devices in and out the 3D cruciform bomb and the dual-chamber
design with four large pressure-released valves allowed us to investigate
electric  spark  ignition  dynamics  and  flame  propagation  of  various

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1010999

S.S. Shy

Fig. 10. The dual-chamber constant-pressure fan-stirred 3D cruciform bomb together with various heating devices for high-pressure, high-temperature premixed
turbulent combustion studies. Reproduced from Jiang et al. [109], with permission from Elsevier.

gaseous  and
high-Reynolds-number environment, relevant to SI engine conditions.

in  high-temperature,  high-pressure,

liquid

fuels

2.4. Spark ignition process and some influencing factors

The ignition spark based on a standard spark plug can be divided into
three  phases,  i.e.  breakdown,  arc,  and  glow  phases  [50].  These  three
phases source their energy from different parts of the ignition system,
namely the capacitive discharge and the inductive discharge. The dif-
ference among these three phases is mainly due to the physical processes
of  emitting  electrons.  First,  ahead  of  the  breakdown,  initial  electrons
form the avalanches whose number of charge carrier increases further
until the critical number of electrons of about 106  to 108  is exceeded.
Second,  the  energy  deposition  of  the  arc  discharge  is  driven  by  the
so-called thermionic field emission of electrons, where the electrons are
emitted by the high temperature of the cathode and field emission [117,
118]. Third, the energy deposition of the glow discharge is dominated by
collision processes in the gas. It is relatively independent of the collision
processes  at  the  cathode.  Electrons  are  generated  mainly  by  inelastic
particle collisions in the gas. The field accelerates the electrons in the
gas. If the kinetic energy is high enough, the electrons are able to ionize
the atoms and molecules in the gas [117,118].

Spark  ignition  process  is  complex.  A  successful  premixed  spark
ignition event is defined only when the following three evolution stages
are  completed.  (1)  Spark  breakdown,  plasma  formation,  heating  and
equilibration in a small region on the order of 10–100 ns time scales for
electrical sparks or a few nanoseconds for non-resonant laser sparks; (2)
the  relaxation  of  internal  plasma  energy,  shock  wave  generation  and
propagation over a few microseconds, and (3) the initial kernel forma-
tion, inward subsonic flows, local propagation of chemical reactions and
self-sustainable  propagating  flame  on  the  order  of  millisecond  time
scales [119].

As noted by McNeill [119], the energy removal by the emitted shock

wave is more efficient for both electric and laser sparks than the diffu-
sion out of the ignition kernel, so that the spark ignition MIEs exceed the
thermal  MIE  based  on  chemical  kinetics  for  the  local  heating  of  the
kernel region [119]. Here the discharge mode of electric sparks is the arc
discharge, not the glow discharge. The latter is not preferred because the
energy is concentrated in a very small region close to the cathode and
the  loss  of  heat  to  the  cathode  is  very  high  [53,118].  However,  the
thermal loss can be largely reduced by choosing electrode materials of
low thermal conductivity and low boiling temperature [49,50,52,53,57,
120].

Indeed, MIE can be influenced by many factors. For instance, it is
well known that values of MIEL  increase rapidly when dgap  is smaller
than  the  quenching  distance  (dq)  that  may  be  related  to  the  critical
radius  of  the  developing  kernel  for  successful  flame  initiation  in  the
classic thermal-diffusion theory (e.g., Refs. [27,29–35]). MIEL also var-
ies with the pulse duration time. There may exist an optimal τp for the
lowest  MIEL  that  depends  on  the  mixture  strength,  the  electrode  ge-
ometry  and  material,  and  the  quenching  effect  of  the  electrodes  e.g.,
Refs. [27,51,52,55,121]. These factors can interfere each other, making
definite conclusions on the optimal τp very difficult to obtain. As such,
we shall restrict our focus on the factors that are essential to explain the
extreme phenomena of MIE transitions and TFI as well as their implica-
tion to super lean burn gasoline engines, as discussed below.

(1)  Initial kernel size versus ignition energy

In  a  theoretical  study  on  the  calculation  of  MIEL,  Li ̃n ́an  and  co-
3 , where the reaction zone (RZ)
workers [46] predicted that MIEL  ~ δRZ
thickness δRZ  may be comparable to the initial kernel size. To test the
goodness of such a relation, ignition experiments of methane/air mix-
tures in quiescence under atmospheric conditions were carried out in the
cruciform burner using a pair of cantilevered electrodes with sharp ends
[24,60,61]. Note that MIEL ≈ 4 mJ for the methane/air mixture at φ =

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109910

S.S. Shy

Fig. 11. The initial kernel volume at t = 0.2 ms as a function of Eig.

1.2 (see Fig. 4 of [61]). As shown in Fig. 11, the initial kernel volumes
measured at t = 0.2 ms after the discharge are plotted against Eig within
a range of Eig = 5–71 mJ using a pair of stainless-steel rods of 2-mm in
diameter with a needle end of dtip = 0.1 mm at a fixed dgap = 2.6 mm and
at a fixed τp = 0.1 ms (see the two inserted images with the discharged
spark channels in air at Eig  = 4.26 mJ and 21.8 mJ [60]). Moreover,
three instantaneous images with the same view field of 20 × 20 mm2
taken at t = 0.2 ms are used to show the actual initial kernel sizes at Eig
= 5 mJ (≈ 1.25 MIEL), 21 mJ (≈ 5.25 MIEL) and 71 mJ (≈ 20.5 MIEL) in
Fig. 11. The initial kernel volume at t = 0.2 ms is estimated from these
k, where rk  ≈
instantaneous images by assuming a sphere volume of 4
√
3
is the averaged radius of the oval-like kernel surface area (A) at t
= 0.2 ms. It is found that the initial kernel volume is linearly propor-
3  is a very good
tional to the increase of Eig, suggesting that MIEL  ~ δRZ
3
approximation  where  δRZ
is  assumed  to  be  comparable  to  the  initial
spark kernel volume for the single-shot mode between two electrodes.

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
A/π

πr3

(2)  Effect of electrode thickness and spark gap on MIEL

Fig. 12. The ratio between the energy loss (heat conduction to the electrodes)
and the electrical energy supplied at three different dgap  for the stoichiometric
CH4/air mixture at 1 atm. Reproduced from Fig. 21 of Kravchik et al. [58], with
permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 13. Laminar minimum ignition energy as a function of dgap  for methane/
air mixtures over a range of φ. Reproduced from Fig. 4 of Shy et al. [61], with
permission from Elsevier.

Using the same electrode arrangement as that in Fig. 11 (e.g., dtip =
0.1 mm, dgap = 2.6 mm, τp = 100 μs), Shy et al. [61] measured the effect
of  electrode  thickness  (dth)  on  MIEL.  As  can  be  seen  form  Fig.  3  of
Ref. [61], MIEL was essentially the same for both dth = 1 mm and 2 mm
where MIEL = Eig(50%) ≈ 2 mJ for the methane/air mixture at φ = 0.6.
But, as expected, MIEL increased as dth ≥ 3 mm. At dth = 5 mm, the value
of Eig(50%) can be as high as 20 mJ, showing a significant increase of heat
losses to the thick electrodes [61].

Concerning the effect of dgap, Heywood and co-workers [58] applied
a constant Eig  = 2.8 mJ at a fixed τp  = 100 μs to estimate the ratio of
energy loss to energy supplied using three different values of dgap = 0.5,
1.0 and 2.0 mm. As shown in Fig. 12, they found that about 90% of the
ignition energy supplied was lost at the case of dgap = 0.5 mm, resulting
in a quench of the initial kernel (No Go). At dgap = 1.0 mm and 2.0 mm
cases,  successful  ignition  (Go)  was  observed,  where  the  ratio  of  Elos-
s/Esupplied was decreased by increasing dgap [58].

Furthermore, using the same electrodes as used in Fig. 11, Shy et al.
[61] measured the effect of dgap  on MIEL  for CH4/air mixtures over a
wide range of φ varying from 0.6 to 1.3; their results were presented in
Fig. 13. At φ  = 0.6, the smallest value of MIEL  = Eig(50%)  = 2.14 mJ
occurred  at  dgap  = 2.6  mm  in  line  with  the  quenching  distance  of
methane at φ = 0.6 reported by Lewis & von Elbe [27]. For the other five
values of φ in Fig. 13, smallest values of MIEL  and their corresponding
values of dgap  were: (MIEL,min, dgap) = (0.727 mJ, 2.5 mm) at φ = 0.7;
(0.37 mJ, 2.3 mm) at φ = 0.8; (0.42 mJ, 2.1 mm) at φ = 1.0; (0.93 mJ,
2.3 mm) at φ = 1.2; (6.34 mJ, 2.6 mm) at φ = 1.3, respectively. Note that
these MIEL,min  data at various values of φ as presented in Fig. 13 were
found to be in good agreement with previous data [27] using the same
methane-air mixtures. The existence of a lowest MIE at a critical gap
closely  matching  to  the  quenching  distances  of  methane/air  mixtures
(Fig. 13), in line with that reported by Lewis & von Elbe [27], is due to
the  competition  between  heat  release  by  chemical  reaction  from  the
deposited ignition energy and heat losses to the electrodes and the un-
burned gas. Besides, the spark-induced vortex gas motion that can in-
fluence the mass and heat diffusion inside the spark kernel also plays a
role; too strong vortex gas motion could deteriorate ignition. The heat
release must be greater than heat losses in order to generate the needed
radicals in the spark that are sufficient for successful ignition; otherwise,
it belongs to failure ignition. When the same MIE at a critical dq is used
for  the  case of  smaller  dgap  (<dq),  a  decrease of  radicals  in the  spark
occurs  due  to  the  larger  conductive  heat  losses  to  the  electrodes;  the
temperature  of  the  kernel  could  decrease  quickly  and  failure  ignition
could occur unless the higher MIE is provided. When using the lowest

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109911

S.S. Shy

duration times (τp < τp,c and/or τp > τp,c). The former with τp < τp,c will
have a more steeper temperature gradient of the spark kernel that can
increase  heat  losses  to  the  electrodes  and  the  ambient  unburned  gas;
there is also a stronger spark-induced vortex gas motion that could in-
fluence the mass and heat diffusion to decrease the needed radicals in
the spark. As a result, the temperature of the kernel decreases quickly
that can result in failure ignition unless the higher MIE is used. The latter
with τp > τp,c will have a less steeper temperature gradient of the spark
kernel that can reduce the generation of radicals which is not sufficient
for successful ignition unless the higher MIE is used.

As to the effect of electrode geometry on the early developing stage
of laminar spark ignition, Bane et al. [66] investigated three different
geometries,  i.e.  cylindrical,  conical,  and  flanged  electrodes,  by  using
high-speed  schlieren  visualization  and  2D  numerical  simulations  of
spark ignition in a 15% hydrogen-air mixture (φ ≈ 0.51). Although Bane
et al. [66] did not measure MIEL, they found that the temperature and
the  rate  of  cooling  of  the  hot  kernel  and  mixing  region  were  largely
influenced  by  the  electrode  geometry.  The  high  confinement  by  the
flanged electrodes can result in a hotter gas kernel with a supposedly
lowest MIEL, while the highest MIEL  may  be required by the thin cy-
lindrical electrodes due to the high rate of gas cooling. This is because
the  conical  electrodes  with sharp  ends have  less  conductive  heat loss
than the thin cylindrical electrodes with flat ends during the same spark
duration. Hence, detailed information on the electrode geometry and the
spark  duration  time  as  well  as  various  parameters  discussed  in  the
Introduction  must  be  provided  in  order  to  let  the  reproduction  of  an
electrode  spark  ignition  experiment  by  different  groups  become
possible.

(3)  Coupling  effects  of  differential  diffusion  and  dgap  for  laminar

spark ignition

In  a  2-D  numerical  simulation  of  laminar  spark  ignition  process,
Kono and co-workers [40] found that the inward reactant flow velocity
and the temperature distribution of initial kernels were very different
between dgap  = 1.0 mm and dgap  = 2.0 mm leading to different initial
kernel  geometries,  as  presented  in  Figs.  15(a)  and  15(b)  at  the  same
instant time of 100 μs. Due to the symmetry, Fig. 15 only showed the half
domain of the initial kernel. At dgap = 1.0 mm, the initial kernel can be
divided into two parts: the torus with an oval shape outside the electrode
with large positive curvature toward the reactants and the central part
inside the electrode gap with high temperature (Fig. 15a). At dgap = 2.0
mm (Fig. 15b), the initial kernel was a flat torus with negligible positive
curvature across the r direction toward the reactants. This is because the
electrode gap is large enough to let the inward flow reach its center. The

Fig.  14. Effect  of  spark  duration  on  minimum  ignition  energy  for  gap  width
nearly  equal  to  quenching  distance.  Reproduced  from  Fig.  3  of  Kono  et  al.
[121], with permission from Elsevier.

MIE at a critical dq  for the case of larger dgap  (>dq), the corresponding
ignition energy density is reduced during the same duration that could
limit the generation of radicals making successful ignition more difficult
to achieve unless the higher MIE is used.

Other  factors,  such  as  the  spark  duration  time  and  the  electrode
geometry,  can  also  influence  the  quantitative  value  of  MIEL.  For
instance, Kono et al. [121] showed the effect of spark duration time (τp)
on MIEL  for dgap  nearly equal to the quenching distance in attempt to
find the optimum condition for ignition of lean propane/air mixtures in
quiescence  in  a  small  cylindrical  combustion  chamber  under  atmo-
spheric conditions. In Ref. [121], two identical thin electrodes of 0.3 mm
diameter tungsten wire ending in a 30o  half angle cone were used. As
seen  from  Fig.  14,  values  of  MIEL  first  decreased  with  increasing  τp,
reached their lowest values at τp  ≈ 50 μs, and then increased in pro-
portion to the increase of τp. Why is there a minimum MIE at a critical
spark duration time (τp,c)? Why does MIE increase at longer spark du-
rations? The lowest MIE at τp,c  is basically due to the competition be-
tween  heat  release  by  chemical  reaction  from  the  deposited  ignition
energy and heat losses to the electrodes and the unburned gas via the
spark-induced  vortex  gas  motion.  Let  us  consider  a  situation  that  the
same  lowest  MIE  at  τp,c  is  applied  for  shorter  and/or  longer  spark

Fig. 15. Temperature and velocity distribution at two different spark gaps. (a) Torus or oval-like shape at dgap = 1.0 mm. (b) Cylindrical-like shape at dgap = 2.0 mm.
Reproduced from Figs. 6 and 7 of Ishii et al. [40], with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109912

S.S. Shy

Fig. 16. High-speed schlieren images of the initial spark kernels at t = 0.04 ms, which are used to determine values of positive curvature (1/R*). Reproduced from
Fig. 4 of Shy et al. [70], with permission from Elsevier.

high temperature region of such flat initial kernel was formed outside
the electrodes, and the conductive heat losses to the electrodes at dgap =
2.0 mm were much smaller than that at dgap  = 1 mm, in line with the
result found by Heywood and co-workers [58] (see Fig. 12).

The effects of differential diffusion can be very well demonstrated by
comparing  laminar  spark  ignition  kernel  geometries  with  different
magnitudes of positive curvature and values of MIEL between very lean
(φ  = 0.18)  and  very  rich  (φ  = 5.1)  hydrogen/air  mixtures  with  very
small Le ≈ 0.3 and very large Le ≈ 2.3 over a wide range of dgap  [70].
These corresponding high-speed schlieren images of embryonic kernels
in quiescence taken at t = 0.04 ms (the first available images using a
frame rate of 25,000 frames/s) are presented in Fig. 16(a) with Le ≈ 2.3
>> 1 and 16(b) with Le ≈ 0.3 << 1, each case having three different
values of dgap  (= 0.58 mm, 2 mm, and 6.5 mm). All images have the
same view field of 18 mm × 18 mm. Also indicated in Figs. 16(a) and 16
(b) are the associated values of MIEL = Eig(50%). As seen from Figs. 16(a)
and 16(b), the embryonic kernel shapes at both φ = 5.1 and φ = 0.18 can
change from an elliptic geometry with very large positive curvatures at
small dgap = 0.58 mm to a cylindrical-like geometry with much smaller
positive curvature at large dgap = 2 mm and 6.5 mm. The dashed circles
in Figs. 16(a) and 16(b) have been used to estimate the curvature radii
(R*) of the initial kernels at various dgap (one side only due to symme-
try). These values of R* at Le ≈ 2.3 (Le ≈ 0.3), as indicated on Fig. 16(a)
(Fig. 16b), increased drastically from 0.91 mm (0.84 mm) at dgap = 0.58
mm and 2.60 mm (2.57 mm) at dgap = 2 mm–22.3 mm (35.4 mm) at dgap
= 6.5 mm. The corresponding values of the curvature (~1/R*), as pre-
sented in Figs. 16(c) and 16(d), have shown that the positive curvature
decreased rapidly with increasing dgap  in both Le ≈ 2.3 and Le ≈ 0.3
cases. For comparison, each of both cases at three different dgap (= 0.58
mm, 2 mm, 6.5 mm) has applied near-constant Eig, i.e. Eig ≈ 268 mJ for
Le ≈ 2.3 (Fig. 16c) and Eig  ≈ 10–13 mJ for Le ≈ 0.3 (Fig. 16d). Much
smaller values of Eig at dgap = 0.58 mm and 2 mm have been also used to
test  whether  the  magnitude  of  the  initial  kernel’s  positive  curvature
would vary with a change of Eig; little change was found as can be seen
from Fig. 16(c). As a result, it can be concluded that successful ignition
of the H2/air mixture at φ = 5.1 with Le ≈ 2.3 >> 1 at small dgap = 0.58
mm is very difficult to achieve, where the required MIEL must be as high

as 255.5 mJ. On the other hand, it is very easy to ignite the very lean
H2/air mixture (φ = 0.18) with Le ≈ 0.3 << 1 at the same small dgap =
0.58 mm, where MIEL  is only 1.06 mJ. Such a huge difference in the
magnitude of MIEL is because the large positive curvature of the initial
kernel  at  small  dgap  = 0.58 mm  drastically  weakens  (strengthens)  re-
action  rate  through  differential  diffusion  when  Le  is  much  larger
(smaller) than unity. For the Le ≈ 2.3 >> 1 case, as dgap increases from
0.58 mm to 2 mm, MIEL drops enormously from 255.5 mJ to only 0.52
mJ. Note that successful ignition is extremely easy to achieve at large
dgap = 6.5 mm when Le ≈ 2.3 (Fig. 16a) as well as at dgap = 2 mm and 6.5
mm when Le ≈ 0.3 (Fig. 16b), since Eig = 0.2 mJ has 100% ignitability,
indicating that values of MIEL in these cases are much less than 0.2 mJ.
A question arises. Can the effect of differential diffusion alone cause
such a huge value of MIEL = 255.5 mJ that is required for the case of Le
≈ 2.3 when using small dgap = 0.58 mm (Fig. 16a)? It was noted by Shy
et al. [70] that heat losses to electrodes also play a role. To investigate
the effect of heat losses to electrodes on MIEL for the Le ≈ 2.3 case, Shy
et al. [70] applied a pair of very thin electrodes of 0.25-mm in diameter
having  much  smaller  heat  losses  than  2-mm  electrodes.  The  corre-
sponding high-speed schlieren images of the embryonic kernel at five
different dgap in quiescence can be seen from Fig. 5 of Ref. [70]; all these
instantaneous images were taken at t = 0.05 ms and values of Eig used
were slightly larger than values of MIEL except for the case of dgap = 6.5
mm that applied Eig  ≈ 0.2 mJ. Again, values of MIEL  decreased drasti-
cally with increasing dgap varying from MIEL  = 61.5 mJ at dgap  = 0.58
mm [70] to MIEL < 0.2 mJ at dgap = 6.5 mm (Eig = 0.2 mJ with 100%
ignitability at dgap = 6.5 mm). In line with the numerical results shown
in  Fig.  15  [40],  the  embryonic  kernel  geometries  can  change  from  a
spherical shape at dgap = 0.58 mm and an elliptic shape at dgap = 1 mm
to a rod-like shape at dgap = 2, 3, 6.5 mm (see Fig. 5 of Ref. [70]). Similar
to  Fig.  16,  values  of  the  curvature  (~1/R*)  decreased  rapidly  with
increasing dgap, having R* = 0.87 mm at dgap = 0.58 mm and R* = 13.7
mm at dgap = 6.5 mm (see Fig. 5 of Ref. [70]). At the same dgap = 0.58
mm for the Le ≈ 2.3 case, MIEL = 61.5 mJ using 0.25-mm electrodes that
is  much  smaller  than  MIEL  = 255.5  mJ  using  2-mm  electrodes.  This
substantiates that heat losses to electrodes somewhat play a role on the
value of MIEL. As such, it requires a significantly high Eig and/or MIEL

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109913

S.S. Shy

for successful ignition at small dgap = 0.58 mm in order to overcome heat
losses to electrodes (secondary) and incipient extinction owing to the
decrease of reaction rate by large positive curvature stretch due to the
weakening effect of differential diffusion for the Le >> 1 mixture (pri-
mary) in quiescence.

(4)  Critical flame radius

Previous  experimental studies  (e.g., Refs. [27,34,56,122])  and nu-
merical simulations (e.g., Refs. [42,62,123–126]) have described some
critical  length  scales  for  initiation  of  self-sustained  propagation  of
spherical  flames,  including  such  as  the  quenching  distance  (dq)  [27,
127],  the  flame  thickness  (δF)  [34],  the  flame  ball  radius  (Rz)  [32]
and/or the critical flame radius Rc [42,62,122]. Here the flame ball is for
standard spherically expanding flame, not for microgravity flame balls
[128]. In the classical thermal-diffusion theory, MIEL  was predicted to
3  [33,34,46]. However, Zeldovich et al.
3  [29] or δF
be proportional to dq
3  based on an adiabatic  spherical flame
[32]  predicted that MIEL  ~ Rz
with  the  consideration  of  preferential  diffusion.  Deshaies  and  Joulin
[31] described theoretically that the adiabatic flame ball is inherently
unstable. Further, Kelley et al. [122] and Chen et al. [62] have shown
the importance of Rc  for a self-sustained spherical flame propagation.
Taken from Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 4(b) of Kelly et al. [122], the re-organized
Fig. 17 displays the downstream flame speed (sb  = d<R>/dt) at each
flame radius (rf  = R) determined by numerical differentiation for very
rich and very lean H2/air mixtures: (a) φ = 5.1 with Le ≈ 2.3 >> 1 and
(b) φ = 0.18 with Le ≈ 0.3 << 1. Note that it is common to determine
flame speed as earlier as possible from the formation and expansion of
the  kernel  at  small  t  (or  rf)  all  the  way  to  the  self-sustained  laminar
spherical flame at later time (large rf), as shown in Fig. 17. Although
Kelly et al. [122] did not measure MIEL, they did investigate the effect of
Eig  on  d<R>/dt  and  Rc  by  adjusting  the  discharge  voltages  to  set
different  levels  of  Eig,  as  indicated  by  the  numerals  “1–6”  from  the
smallest Eig at “1” to the largest Eig at “6” (see Fig. 17(a)). For the case of
Le  ≈ 2.3  >> 1,  it  was  found  that  the  effect  of  Eig  only  influenced
d<R>/dt  in  the  early  development  stage  (the  larger  Eig,  the  higher
d<R>/dt).  Also,  no  self-sustained  spherical  flame  propagation  was
observed when Eig was too small (experiments 1 and 2). For successful
ignition with self-sustained spherical flame propagation in Fig. 17(a),
the flame speed d<R>/dt first decreased rapidly, it then reversed and
increased after passing through a minimum d<R>/dt at a flame radius
of Rmin, and it continued to increase to a certain critical flame radius (Rc)
at which all values of d<R>/dt under different levels of Eig (experiments
3–6) merged together onto the same laminar flame speed when R ≥ Rc ≈
11 mm. As shown in Fig. 17(a), values of Rmin  decreased slightly with
increasing  Eig,  but  values  of  Rc  remained  a  constant  which  was  not

Fig. 18. Change of the critical flame radius and the flame radius with  Lewis
number. Reproduced from Chen et al. [62], with permission from Elsevier.

influenced by different levels of Eig. As to the case of Le ≈ 0.3 << 1
(Fig. 17b), although the same effect of Eig was found as that in the case of
Le ≈ 2.3, the development of the flame kernel was quite different where
values of d<R>/dt first decreased monotonically and then leveled off to
approach the same laminar flame speed when R ≥ Rc ≈ 9 mm. Similar
results were also found by Nguyen [129] and Nguyen & Shy [130] using
measured Eig or MIEL of high accuracy. It is thus concluded that when R
≥ Rc,  flame  speeds  are  not  influenced  by  Eig  for  laminar  premixed
spherical flames.

Fig. 18 is reproduced from Fig. 4 of a numerical study by Chen et al.
[62]. In it, Rz  and/or Rc  as controlling length scales of spherical flame
initiation were plotted against the Lewis number, where both Rz and Rc
were  normalized  by  δF.  There  are  three  regimes  of  Rc  and/or  Rz  in
Fig.  18,  depending  on  Le.  In  the  regime  I  for  Le  ≤ 1,  Rc  = Rz  ≤ 1
(non-normalized values of Rc = Rz ≤ δF). In the regime II when 1 < Le <
Le* (Le* ≈ 1.36 [62]), the non-normalized values of Rc  = Rz  > δF. In
regime III with Le > Le*, δF < Rc < Rz. Such decrement between Rc and Rz
increased with the increase of Le (> 1.36). These results suggested that
Rc increases with Le, Rc << δF when Le << 1, and Rc >> δF when Le >> 1
[62], which may be used to explain experimental results [62] found in
3.
Refs. [70,89]; both results suggest that MIEL ~ Rc

Fig. 17. Flame speed versus flame radius: (a) rich H2/air mixture (φ  = 5.1, Le ≈ 2.3 >> 1) and (b) lean H2/air mixture (φ  = 0.18, Le ≈ 0.3 << 1), which are
reproduced from Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 4(b) of Kelly et al. [122], with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109914

S.S. Shy

increase”  was used in Fig. 19 to distinguish it from “MIE exponential
increase”. In the pre-transition, MIE increased gradually with uʹ/SL from
2.14 mJ  to only  10.15 mJ when  uʹ/SL  increased  from 0 to 23,  where
MIET  ~  (uʹ/SL)0.7.  In  this  pre-transition  regime,  the  wrinkled  flame
kernel  remained  unbroken  and  it  developed  into  turbulent  spherical
flame  with  thin  RZ  for  successful  ignition  events.  As  to  the
post-transition when uʹ/SL > 24, MIET increased exponentially with uʹ/SL
where MIET  ~ (uʹ/SL)7. In such post-transition regime, broken kernels
can  be  clearly  observed,  which  developed  into  randomly-propagating
distributed-like flames for successful ignition events, as will be shown
later.

Later on, Shy et al. [60,61] obtained the other five data sets of MIE
versus uʹ/SL for CH4/air mixtures at φ = 0.7, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.3 to complete
the self-similarity analysis of the monotonic MIE transition phenomenon.
These results are reproduced in Fig. 20. In it, when uʹ/SL is greater than
some critical values (uʹ/SL)c depending on φ, the increasing slopes of MIE
or  Eig(50%)  change  from  gradually  to  exponentially,  showing  similar
monotonic MIE transition phenomenon. However, it is difficult to see the
effect of φ from Fig. 20 directly; the effect of φ will be discussed in detail
later.

Similar monotonic MIE transition results were also found in different
turbulent  flows,  fuel  types,  and  ignition  sources.  For  instance,  Horst-
mann et al. [80] found the same trend of the monotonic MIE transition
for both methane/air and propane/air mixtures in a turbulent pipe flow
with strong mean velocities (see Fig. 8), although they did not mention
MIE transition. Fig. 21 is a re-plotted figure using the experimental data
extracted from Figs. 10 and 11 of Ref. [80], in which 6% vol. and 12%
vol. methane concentrations were applied (equivalent to methane/air
mixtures at φ = 0.6 and φ = 1.3). In Ref. [80], each datum point was
confirmed by ten attempts to ignite the mixture. If at least one successful
ignition occurred, it was rated “ignition” and the data were indicated by
filled symbols (10% ignitability); if no successful ignition occurred for
all  ten  attempts,  then  it  belonged  to  “no  ignition”  and  the  data  were
represented  by  open  symbols  (Fig.  21).  As  can  be  seen  from  Fig.  21,
values  of  MIET  increased  drastically  when  uʹ  was  greater  than  some
critical values, showing the profound effect of uʹ  on MIET. To the au-
thor’s knowledge, the most important finding of Horstmann et al. [80]
was that the strong mean convective velocity of the pipe flow had little
influence of on values of MIET  even when U was up to 40 m/s. Since
Horstmann et al. [80] did not specify the spark ignition duration time,
whether such finding could be held for larger ignition durations is still

Fig.  19. Minimum  ignition  energy  plotted  against  normalized  turbulent  in-
tensities for a premixed methane/air mixture at φ  = 0.6 in near-isotropic tur-
bulence.  The  single  triangle  symbol  denotes  the  MIEL  value  for  stagnant
premixture. Reprinted from Fig. 5 of Ref. [24], with permission from Elsevier.

3. A monotonic MIE transition in premixed turbulent
combustion

3.1. Consensus of monotonic MIE transition

At 31st Combustion Symposium, Shy and co-workers [24] reported
their first monotonic MIE transition result using the CH4/air mixture at φ
= 0.6 in the centrally-ignited, fan-stirred cruciform burner capable of
generating intense isotropic turbulence with negligible mean velocities
(see the inner cruciform burner in Fig. 10), where a pair of stainless-steel
electrodes with sharp ends at a fixed dgap = 2.6 mm (~dq; see Fig. 13)
were used. They found a transition on values of MIE due to different
modes  of  premixed  turbulent  combustion  (see  Fig.  19  below).  MIE  is
proportional to (u’/SL)n. The power exponent n = 0.7 (near unity) and n
= 7 in the left and right parts of MIE transition. Thus, “MIE near-linear

Fig. 20. Minimum ignition energies as a function of the normalized turbulent
intensity  at  various  values  of  φ  ranging  from  0.6  to  1.3  for  the  methane/air
mixture. Reproduced from Fig. 6 of Ref. [61], with permission from Elsevier.

Fig.  21. Minimum  ignition  energies  of  12  vol%  and  6  vol%  methane/air
mixtures plotted against uʹ. Replotted from Figs. 10 and 11 of Ref. [80].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109915

S.S. Shy

Fig. 22. MIE as a function of uʹ (methane/air mixtures) for φ = 0.55, 0.58, 0.60 (left) and φ = 0.63, 0.65, 0.70, 0.75 (right). White or open symbols: before transition.
Black or filled symbols: after transition. Reproduced from Fig. 7 of Ref. [82], with permission from Elsevier.

an open issue.

Furthermore,  Renou  and  co-workers  [82,83]  confirmed  that  the
monotonic MIE transition also occurred in laser spark ignition of very
lean  methane-air  mixtures  in  a  wind  tunnel  decaying  homogeneous
isotropic  turbulence  (see  Fig.  9).  They  observed  a  clear  transition  on
values of MIET that was when values of uʹ were greater than some critical
values depending on φ, values of MIET increased rapidly. Their data are
reproduced in Fig. 22. In short, these monotonic MIE transition results
found  by  different  research  groups  [61,80,82]  suggest  that  the  phe-
nomenon  of  MIE  transition  due  to  different  magnitudes  of  turbulence
intensity  is  a  universal  phenomenon,  regardless  of  different  ignition
sources (conventional electrode versus laser), different turbulent flows
(fan-stirred isotropic turbulence versus turbulent pipe flow or decaying
homogenous wind-tunnel turbulence), and different fuel types (methane
versus  propane  and/or  other  fuels  such  as  iso-octane  [69],  hydrogen
[70], primary reference fuel [71]).

Moreover, Turquand d’Auzay et al. [77] numerically simulated the
forced ignition of a homogeneous stoichiometric methane/air mixture
(uʹ/SL)  using
under  a  wide
three-dimensional  Direct  Numerical  Simulation  (DNS).  Similar  mono-
tonic  MIE  transition  results  were  also  found  by  DNS,  as  presented  in
Fig. 22 (Fig. 4 of Ref. [77]), revealing two different regimes. The first

intensities

range  of

turbulent

Fig. 23. Normalized MIE for successful ignition (Γi
followed  by  self-sustained  flame  propagation  (Γp
Reproduced from Fig. 4 of Ref. [77], with permission from Elsevier.

MIE) and successful ignition
MIE)  as  a  function  of  uʹ/s0
l .

regime  was  a  slow  increase  of  MIET  with  turbulent  intensity  for  low
values of uʹ/SL, while the second regime was a drastic increase of MIET
when  values  of  uʹ/SL  were  greater  than  some  critical  values  where
(uʹ/SL)c  ≈ 12–14.  In  Fig. 23,  s0
l  was  the  same  as  the  laminar  burning
velocity at zero stretch rate (= SL) and ΓMIE  = IE/ MIE0
L  where IE was the
ignition energy and MIE0
L  was the laminar MIE for self-sustained flame
propagation.  Since  numerical  simulations  were  confined  in  a  limited
domain, Turquand d’Auzay et al. [77] defined two different ΓMIE. (1)
Γi
MIE  was the normalized MIE to ensure at least a successful formation of
flame kernel where the maximum temperature surpassed the adiabatic
flame  temperature  during  or  after  the  energy  deposition  period
regardless of subsequent flame behavior. If the maximum temperature
did not reach the adiabatic flame temperature, this belonged to failure
ignition. (2) Γp
MIE was the normalized MIE including (1) and following by
a self-sustained flame propagation when the kernel left the computation
domain; otherwise, it was considered failed or quenched. It is interesting
in noting that the numerical critical values of (uʹ/SL)c  ≈ 12–14 for the
monotonic  MIE  transition  are  in  line  with  the  experimental  value  of
(uʹ/SL)c ≈ 16 found by Shy et al. [61] for the methane/air mixture at φ =
1 (see Fig. 20). Further, at large uʹ/SL = 27, they numerically observed
multiple  broken  kernel  structures  with  local  quench  (see  Fig.  2  of
Ref. [77]), which was similar to that found in MIE transition experiments
by Shy et al. [61,64], as discussed below.

3.2. Centrally-ignited flame kernel development in different modes of
premixed turbulent combustion

The  occurrence  of  the  monotonic  MIE  transition  is  attributed  to
different modes of premixed turbulent combustion based on the initial
kernel development in different regimes. As seen from Fig. 24 (Fig. 9 of
Ref.  [61]),  the  time  evolutions  of  centrally-ignited  spark  kernels  for
successful ignition in three different regimes by using the methane/air
mixture at φ = 1.2 and at dgap = 2.3 mm and τp = 100 μs were used to
demonstrate  laminar,  turbulent-flamelet,  and  istributed-like  flame
kernel development in the early stage. Soon after the pulse discharge,
the  initial  rod-like  kernel  (similar to  the image  on  the  second row  of
Fig.  16b  at  dgap  = 2  mm)  inside  the  electrode’s  gap  develops  into  a
laminar torus kernel. Such torus kernel development up to 1 ms is nearly
almost the same for both laminar and turbulent-flamelet cases. In the
laminar  case,  the  laminar  torus  kernel  can  remain  its  symmetry  and
develop into an outwardly-propagating spherical flame in the later stage
after  about  5  ms.  In  the  turbulent-flamelet  case,  the  original  laminar

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109916

S.S. Shy

Fig. 24. A close look at flame kernel formation and development in the laminar, flamelet, and distributed regimes having a small view filed with a spatial resolution
of 35 μm (18 mm/512 pixels) smaller than the laminar flame thickness, where the same rich methane-air mixtures at φ = 1.2 are used. Reproduced from Fig. 9 of
Ref. [61], with permission from Elsevier.

torus kernel will soon lose its symmetry and develop into an expanding
turbulent flame. Note that sharp fronts can be observed at the edges of
these  growing  flames  in  both  laminar  and  turbulent-flamelet  cases
(Fig. 24). But the picture is totally different in the distributed-like regime
when isotropic turbulence is sufficiently intense. As can be substantiated
by Fig. 24(c) for the distributed-like kernel development, the early flame
kernel is non-symmetric and irregular at about 0.4 ms, it will be soon
disrupted into small island pieces by intense turbulence at about 0.8 ms,
into
and
randomly-propagating  distributed-like  flames  with  many  small  struc-
tures at t ≥ 4 ms.

islands  will  be

then  developing

these  broken

′
/SL:  u

′
/SL ≈ 40 at 0.1 Mpa and/or u

′
/SL  = 0  (the  laminar  regime),  u

The  break-up  structure  of  distributed-like  turbulent  flames  can  be
only observed by images with a larger view field, as presented in Fig. 25
(same as Fig. 6 of Ref. [64]), including two different pressures: (a) p =
0.1  Mpa  and  (b)  p  = 0.3  Mpa.  Each  pressure  case  at  three  different
′
/SL  ≈ 10  (the
magnitudes  of  u
′
/SL ≈ 75
turbulent-flamelet regime), and u
at 0.3 Mpa (the distributed-like or broken RZ regime). Here the focus is
on the case of distributed-like or broken RZ regime in the third columns
of Figs. 25(a) and 25(b). Soon after the spark ignition, intense turbu-
lence  can disrupt the  initial  kernels  into  pieces  that can  develop into
distributed-like flames at t = 1.0 ms (please see a13 and b13 images). The
subscripts  “1  and  3”  indicate  “the  first  row  and  the  third  column”  of
Figs. 25(a) and 25(b). Let us take a close look at a23-a63 images from t =
1.5 ms to t = 3.5 ms in Fig. 25(a) at p = 0.1 Mpa, the break-up process of
broken flame kernels (islands) can be clearly observed, as marked by the
alphabets  A  and  B.  The  two  islands  (A  and  B)  are  propagating  and
expanding  away  from  each  other,  but  the  B  island  is  quenched  by

turbulence at a later time (see the a63  image at 3.5 ms). Similarly, the
island formation also occurs at p = 0.3 Mpa, as can be clearly seen from
these b23-b63 images in Fig. 25(b). These broken flame kernels (islands)
are marked by the alphabets A, B, and C at different times. The island A
is quenched by intense turbulence (see b33 and b43 images in Fig. 25b at
2.0 ms and 2.5 ms), while the expanding islands B and C are still inside
the field of view at the same instant time under the same intense tur-
bulence. At 3.0 ms, the island C is quenched too, but the island B remains
its  expansion  to  randomly-propagating,  distributed-like  flames.  The
finding of broken flames with island formation and local quench based
on  a  point  ignition  source  interacting  with  a  sufficiently  intense
near-isotropic turbulence may be important, because it could be used to
see what distributed-like flames look like and thus indirectly support the
existence of distributed or broken RZ regime in the phase diagram of
premixed  turbulent  combustion  that  have  long  been  anticipated  by
Damk ̈ohler [131] and Peters [43]. Again, these disrupted small flame
kernels suppressed by intense isotropic turbulence is quite vulnerable to
be globally quenched. This explains why sufficiently high values of MIET
must be needed in order to overcome the strong suppression by intense
turbulence  for  the  survival  of  some  broken  flame  kernels  leading  to
successful ignition. Therefore, the dramatic increase of MIET when uʹ/SL
> (uʹ/SL)c,  the  aforesaid  monotonic  MIE  transition,  is  attributed  to
different modes of premixed turbulent combustion transferring from the
turbulent-flamelet regime to the distributed-like or broken RZ regime, at
least for premixed turbulent spherical flame initiation.

Recently,  the  kernel  break-up  process  with  island  formation  and
local  quench  by  intense  turbulence  was  numerically  simulated  by
Chakraborty and co-workers [77] via DNS, as shown on Fig. 26, where T

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109917

S.S. Shy

Fig. 25. Schlieren time sequential images for flame kernel development under normal and elevated pressure conditions, each including three different levels of
turbulent intensities from laminar and turbulent-flamelet regimes to distributed-like regime. All images have the same larger view field (35 × 35 mm2) in order to see
better some broken reaction zone structures during flame kernel development in the very intense isotropic turbulent case. Reproduced from Fig. 6 of Ref. [64], with
permission from Elsevier.

̂
was the non-dimensional temperature, defined as T = (
T  –  T0)/(Tad  –
T0). ̂T, T0 and Tad represented the dimensional instantaneous, reactants
and  stoichiometric  adiabatic  flame  temperatures,  respectively.  In
Fig. 26, there were three columns with increasing initial values of uʹ/so
l
(= uʹ/SL) varying from 6 (left) and 18 (central) to 27 (right), each case at
six normalized times t/tsp = 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5 and 3 from top to bottom
where tsp was the energy deposition duration time. The size difference of
the T = 0.1 iso-surface at t/tsp  = 0.5 between uʹ/so
= 27
l
cases suggested that the energy requirement must be sufficiently large at
uʹ/so
= 27  for  a  successful  ignition  in  the  post-transition  regime.
l
Furthermore,  at  the  initial  uʹ/so
= 27  case,  the  flame  kernel  became
l
finger-like  shapes  at  t/tsp  = 1,  1.5  and  2.0, and  several  broken flame
kernel structures were observed at t/tsp = 2.5 and 3.0 (the last two im-
ages  in  the third  column of  Fig. 24).  These  DNS  broken  flame kernel
structures in Fig. 26 are reminiscent to experimental results of broken
flame kernels (islands) as shown on Fig. 25.

= 6 and uʹ/so
l

3.3. Centrally-ignited premixed flame development and propagation in
laminar, turbulent-flamelet, and distributed-like regimes

Using a sufficiently large view field of 100 × 100 mm2, the centrally-
ignited,  fully-developed  expanding  flames  in  three  different  regimes
have also been displayed by Shy et al. [61], as shown on Fig. 27, where
(a) laminar (uʹ/SL = 0; Ka = 0), (b) turbulent-flamelet (uʹ/SL ≈ 5.5; Ka ≈
2.5), and (c) distributed-like with uʹ/SL  ≈ 32.5 > (uʹ/SL)c  ≈ 28 for the
methane/air  mixture at  φ  = 0.7  (see  Fig. 20) and  Ka  ≈ 29.  For  both
laminar and turbulent-flamelet cases (Figs. 27a and 27b), each case has
three instantaneous direct flame images taken at 4 ms, 12 ms and 16 ms
after the spark discharge alongside one corresponding 2D-cut laser to-
mography (LT) image at 16 ms for comparison, displaying laminar and
turbulent spherical expanding flames. As to the case of distributed-like
combustion  (Fig.  27c),  four  instantaneous  images  together  with  four
corresponding LT images taken at the same instants varying from 4 ms to
16 ms are used to demonstrate randomly-propagating distributed-like
flames. All images are superimposed by the x-y coordinates having their

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109918

S.S. Shy

Fig. 26. Iso-surfaces of T = 0.1 (blue), T = 0.3 (green), T = 0.5 (orange) and T = 1 (red) with the energy deposition region indicated by the translucent red sphere
obtained for Γ = Γi
= 6, 18, 27 at (top to bottom) t/tsp = 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3. Reproduced from Fig. 1 of Ref. [77], with permission
from Elsevier.

MIE and (left to right) initial uʹ/ s0
l

origin at the electrode gap center.

To compare the internal structures of these flames in three different
regimes,  Shy  et  al.  [61]  analyzed three  sets  of  1D raw  light  intensity
distribution along the x axis starting from the center of the spark elec-
trode  to  the  right  for  these  three  corresponding  2D  LT  flame  fronts
(please  see  the  last  column  images  at  the  same  instant  of  16  ms  in
Fig. 27). As shown in Fig. 28, both (a) laminar and (b) turbulent-flamelet
spherical  flames  have  sharp  fronts.  When  uʹ/SL  > (uʹ/SL)c  for  the
monotonic MIE transition, the distributed-like combustion with broad-
ened  fronts  (c)  can  be  observed  in  Fig.  28.  These  aforesaid  premixed
spherical flame structure changes from laminar and turbulent-flamelet
to distributed-like, are very similar to that described by Lefebvre and
co-workers using a three-region model of turbulent flames [49]. How-
ever,  broken  RZs  in  fully-developed  distributed  flames  can  be  truly
confirmed by quantitative measurements of radical species inside these
randomly-propagating broadened fronts. To the author’s knowledge, it
is extremely difficult, if possible, to measure species concentrations of
randomly-propagating  broadened  flames  in  fan-stirred  combustion
chambers using laser-induced fluorescence techniques.

Although it is not completely certain what connections are between

the  aforesaid  monotonic  MIE  transition  and  the  bending  of  turbulent
burning  velocities  (ST)  as  well  as  global  quench  (GQ)  limitations  for
centrally-ignited,  outwardly-propagating  premixed  spherical  flames
interacting  with  intense  near-isotropic  turbulence,  some  thought  and
argument are given below.

The representative of the bending effect and flame GQ phenomena
was  the  earlier  works  by  Bradley  and  co-workers  who  conducted
extensive measurements and analyses using the Leeds fan-stirred bomb
(e.g., Refs. [105,132–135]). They investigated how fast we can burn for
premixed turbulent expanding flames before the occurrence of flame GQ
for a variety of fuels [132]. The Leeds results showed a drastic bending
effect of ST/SL  curves with increasing uʹ/SL  and  eventually the occur-
rence of flame GQ at sufficiently large uʹ/SL, which can be briefly sum-
marized by the following four points. (1) An abrupt increase in values of
ST/SL with increasing uʹ/SL was observed for small and modest values of
uʹ/SL  up to about 3. (2) Such abrupt increase of ST/SL  was diminished
with further increasing uʹ/SL and leveled off at larger values of uʹ/SL up
to about 10–15 depending on several parameters such as Lewis and/or
Markstein  numbers.  (3)  A  decrease  in  values  of  ST/SL  with  further
increasing uʹ/SL was found, showing the strong bending effect. (4) Flame

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109919

S.S. Shy

Fig. 27. Three typical sets of 100 × 100 mm2 instantaneous images from 4 ms to 16 ms showing the time evolutions of centrally-ignited premixed flame propagation
in three different combustion regimes: (a) laminar, (b) turbulent-flamelet, and (c) distributed-like alongside corresponding 2D-cut laser tomography images under the
same experimental conditions. Ten 10-mm ticks along each x and y axis with the origin at the center are superimposed on all images. Reproduced from Fig. 10 of
Ref. [61], with permission from Elsevier.

GQ  can  occur  when  uʹ/SL  was  sufficiently  large,  at  which  all  flame
islands or broken segments were extinguished by intense near-isotropic
turbulence  with  negligible  mean  velocities.  Note  that  very  similar
bending curves of ST/SL versus uʹ/SL as those in points (1)–(3) have also
been  confirmed  by  Shy  and  co-workers  [136,137]  based  on  ST  mea-
surements of downwardly-propagating premixed methane/air and pro-
pane/air flames in near-isotropic turbulence over very wide ranges of φ
and uʹ/SL using the fan-stirred cruciform burner. Furthermore, Shy et al.
[138] showed a strong inhibiting influence of radiative heat losses on
the  turbulent  burning  velocities  of  CO2-diluted  and  N2-diluted  CH4
flames,  with  increasing  uʹ/SL.  The  critical  Karlovitz  number  for
quenching of N2-diluted CH4 flames with low radiative heat losses was
found to be much higher than CO2-diluted CH4 flames with higher los-
ses;  both  flames  were  compared  at  the  same  SL  and  φ.  For  flame  GQ
limitations (point 4), the reader can find more information from previ-
ous  works  by  Shy  and  co-workers  [139,140].  Prior  to  flame  GQ,
distributed flame structures with islands and/or pockets can be observed
[139].  Moreover,  GQ  limitations of  premixed  ammonia/air flames  by

turbulence in a fan-stirred combustion chamber were recently reported
by Ichimura et al. [141]. They found that premixed ammonia/air flames
are very vulnerable to be globally quenched by turbulence due to their
very low reactivity, i.e. small SL  ≈ 7 cm/s and thick laminar δF ≈ 2.85
mm at φ  = 1. This suggests that it may be much easier to see broken
reaction  zones  or  distributed  flame  structures  in  turbulent  premixed
ammonia/air  flames  prior  to  global  quench.  Besides,  Ichimura  et  al.
[141] also found that premixed flames with negative Markstein numbers
are much harder to be globally quenched by turbulence than flames with
positive  Markstein  numbers,  same  as  the  findings  by  Bradley  and
co-workers [133,135]. Clearly, turbulence cannot increase burning rates
incessantly.  For  centrally-ignited,  outwardly-expanding turbulent  pre-
mixed flames, local flame extinction due to the increase of the turbu-
lence intensity can slow down the increase of ST and it can even make a
decrease of ST, eventually causing the occurrence of flame GQ by suf-
ficiently intense near-isotropic turbulence. From the above review and
discussion, it is anticipated that the underlying physics in the monotonic
MIE transition and the occurrence of the bending of the ST curve and the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109920

S.S. Shy

mixture  within  the  main  burner,  the  temperature  of  the  resulting
mixture  will  be  high,  the  effect  of  the  enhanced  temperature  can  in-
crease burning  velocity to  overcome the  deleterious  effect  of  mixture
dilution by burned gas and then enhance the combustion [135,144]. The
temperature increases of the original mixtures increase the SL values of
the  mixture  to  a  greater  extent  than  the  dilutions  with  burned  gas
decrease them [135,144]. If the original Ka values are based on the more
realistic  higher  values  of  SL,  then  the  noticeably  lower  uʹ/SL  and  Ka
values  will  be  obtained  [135].  For  more  information  on  the  general
principle  of  how  main  flame  quenching  is  ameliorated,  the  reader  is
directed to Ref. [135].

3.4. Effects of turbulent Karlovitz number and Lewis number on
monotonic MIE transition

The same MIE data as presented in Fig. 20 for CH4/air mixtures at
various φ (= 0.6–1.3) were re-plotted against Ka and shown in Fig. 29

Fig. 28. Three light intensity distributions along the x-axis marked on each of
three corresponding LT images at the same 16 ms of Fig. 27 in three different
regimes. Reproduced from Fig. 11 of Ref. [61], with permission from Elsevier.

global extinction of the turbulent premixed flame are probably the same.
However, we hasten to note that the situation is different with highly
turbulent premixed Bunsen jet flames, supported by a pilot flame (the
Michigan Hi-Pilot Bunsen burner), where the occurrence of the bending
of ST/SL  curves only takes place at very large values of uʹ/SL  > 40–50.
The  ST/SL  curves  continue  to  increase  at  a  slow-down  (bending)  rate
with increasing uʹ/SL up to 163 without any sign of flame global quench
(e.g., Wabel et al. [142], Driscoll et al. [143]). The main Bunsen burner
entry  values  of  the  turbulent  Karlovitz  number  are  very  high,  much
higher  than  the  critical  Ka  values  measured  by  the  Leeds  fan-stirred
bomb  at  which  all  centrally-ignited,  outwardly-expanding  flames
would be quenched. Note that Bradley et al. [135] explained such dis-
crepancies by demonstrating how entrainment of pilot flame hot gases
can prevent extinction of highly turbulent premixed Bunsen jet flames.
Just  as  a  fuel  jet  flame  is  sustained  through  the  entrainment  of  sur-
rounding air, such a main turbulent premixed Bunsen jet flame is sus-
tained  by  entrainment  of  pilot  flame  gases  [135].  When  the  burned
flame gases of the pilot flame entrained and mixed with the unburned

Fig.  30. Values  of  Kac  versus  Le  for  various  fuels.  Also  plotted  was  the  laser
spark  data  for  comparison.  Reproduced  from  Fig.  6(b)  of  Ref.  [71],  with
permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 29. (a) Same MIE data as in Fig. 20 for methane/air mixtures at various values of φ ranging from 0.6 to 1.3, but plotted against a turbulent Karlovitz number.
Reproduced from Figs. 7 and 8 of Ref. [61], with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109921

S.S. Shy

(a). The monotonic MIE transition occurs when Ka > Kac. When Ka <
Kac, values of MIE increase modestly with Ka. But when Ka > Kac, values
of MIE increase abruptly. As shown in Fig. 29(b) depending on φ, values
of Kac can vary from 8 to 26 with the minimum Kac ≈ 8 occurring near φ
= 1 toward the rich side and the maximum Kac ≈ 26 occurring at φ =
0.6. Although values of Kac at different φ are very scattering, the spark
initiation  and  its  early  kernel  formation  and  development  before  and
after the monotonic MIE transition are very similar. It is thus interesting
in  exploring  whether  these  premixed  turbulent  spark  ignition  results
presented in Fig. 29 are self-similar. As discussed below.

The same monotonic MIE transition phenomenon was also observed
under elevated pressure conditions for lean methane/air mixture with
Le  ≈ 0.97–1  (see  Refs.  [64,67])  and  for  different  gaseous  and
pre-vaporized liquid fuels, such as for very lean and very rich H2 at φ =
0.18 and 5.1 with Le ≈ 0.3 and 2.3 [70], for lean i-C8H18 at φ = 0.8 at
373K with Le ≈ 2.98 [69], and lean PRF95 (95% i-C8H18 + 5% n-C7H16)
at φ = 0.8 at 373K with Le ≈ 2.95 [71]. These results using different fuels
with different values of Le varying from 0.3 to about 3 show that values
of Kac for the monotonic MIE transition strongly depend on Le. In short,
Kac  decreases drastically with increasing Le to a negative power expo-
(cid:0) 2, as shown in Fig. 30. Also plotted in
nent of about 2, i.e. Kac  ~ Le
Fig. 30 for comparison is the laser-induced spark data (i.e. Kac ~10 at Le
≈ 0.97 for lean methane/air mixtures at φ = 0.55–0.75 [82,83]).

In the regime (or Borghi) diagram, the Peters predication line of Ka
= 100 separating thin and broken RZ regimes is an order of magnitude
larger than Kac  ~ 10 for the monotonic MIE transition found by both
conventional and laser spark ignition. This is probably because Peters’s
predication  is  for  an  already-established  fully-developed  flame  front
with a larger pool of radicals behind the flame. However, the monotonic
MIE transition occurring so early for a spark ignition kernel is somewhat
unexpected. Perhaps, more importantly for turbulent premixed spher-
ical  flames,  Kac  can  decrease  significantly  with  increasing  Le  (see
Fig.  30).  Specifically,  Kac  ≈ 40  at  Le  ≈ 0.3  using  the  hydrogen/air
mixture at φ = 0.18, Kac ≈ 8–26 at Le ~1 for methane/air mixtures at φ
= 0.6–1.3 with the minimum Kac ≈ 8 occurring at φ = 1, and Kac ≈ 1.3
at Le ≈ 2.3 and 2.98 respectively for the H2/air mixture at φ = 5.1 and
the  iso-octane/air  mixture  or  the  primary  reference  fuel  (PRF95)/air
mixture at φ = 0.8. Since the early stage of developing flame kernel has a
torus-like geometry with positive stretch which enhances and weakens
reaction rate of Le < 1 and Le > 1 flames through differential diffusion,
this may  explain why Kac  decreases drastically with increasing Le. In
other  words,  it  requires  a  much  higher  Kac  ≈ 40  having  sufficiently
intense  near-isotropic  turbulence  in  order  to  disrupt  and  broken  the
torus-like kernel with enhanced reaction rate when Le ≈ 0.3 << 1 than
that when Le ≈ 2.3 and 2.98 >> 1 which only requires Kac  ≈ 1.3 for
disrupting  the  weakened  reaction  rate  of  the  torus-like  kernel.  These
spark ignition results imply that the canonical thin/broken RZ regime
boundary may also depend on Le, which are in line with the fact that Le
> 1 flames are more vulnerable to be globally quenched by sufficiently
intense near-isotropic turbulence than Le < 1 flames as previously found
by Bradley & co-workers [132,135] and Shy & co-workers [139,140].

3.5. Self-similarity of premixed turbulent spark ignition at normal and
elevated pressures

Premixed turbulent spark ignition of the monotonic MIE transition is
a  self-similar  phenomenon  as  demonstrated  by  Shy  et  al.  [61]  who
proposed a physical model based on the competition between turbulent
and molecular diffusivities in and out the initial kernel or the RZ kernel
to explain such self-similarity. In short, the RZ kernel was approximated
by a hot sphere at the adiabatic flame temperature (Tad) with a diameter
of  δRZ  having  a  molecular  diffusivity  of  αRZ  ~  SLδRZ.  In  the
post-transition  when  Ka  > Kac,  small-scale  eddies  with  Kolmogorov
length scales (ηK) comparable to or smaller than δRZ  generated by suf-
ficiently intense isotropic turbulence should be the first ones exerting an
impact  on  the  RZ  kernel  that  may  result  in  the  RZ  disruption  (island

Fig. 31. Comparison of a physical model (solid line) with methane/air MIET/
MIEL  experimental data from Figs. 20 and 29 (symbols) in terms of a reaction
zone  P ́eclet  number,  showing  a  self-similarity  of  the  regular  MIE  transition.
Reproduced from Fig. 12 of Ref. [61], with permission from Elsevier.

formation) during its later development. Such disruption makes some
kernel islands vulnerable to be quenched by intense turbulence. As such,
the  required  MIET  must  be  sufficiently  high  to  ensure  the  survival  of
remaining kernel islands for achieving possible successful ignition. This
explains why MIET increases exponentially when Ka > Kac. On the other
hand, when Ka < Kac  in the pre-transition, Kolmogorov eddies should
have  a  modest  influence  on  the  molecular  diffusion  mechanism  that
occurs at the surface area of the RZ kernel, leading to a modest increase
of MIET  with increasing Ka. For Kolmogorov turbulence, the turbulent
diffusivity around the RZ kernel can be estimated by vKλ ≈ uʹηK, where
the Kolmogorov eddy velocity vK and the Taylor microscale λ (≈ uʹτK) is
often  regarded  as  the  distance  that  a  Kolmogorov  eddy  would  travel
during  its  turnover  time  (τK)  [145,146].  Therefore,  Shy  et  al.  [61]
defined a RZ P ́eclet number, PeRZ  ≡ vKλ/αRZ  = uʹηK/SLδRZ, to show the
self-similarity of the monotonic MIE transition. Fig. 31 contains the same
data from Figs. 20 and 29(a), but plotted against PeRZ. As can be seen
from  Fig.  31,  nearly  all  scattering  turbulent  MIE  data  normalized  by
their  corresponding  laminar  values  (see  the  inset  in  Fig.  31)  can  be
collapsed onto a single curve, showing the self-similarity of premixed
turbulent spark ignition with a critical value of PeRZ occurring at about
4.5.  When  PeRZ  > (PeRZ)c  ≈ 4.5,  values  of  MIET/MIEL  ≡ Γ  increases
abruptly except for the case of φ = 0.6 near the lean flammability limit of
methane where (PeRZ)c ≈ 3.8.

For laminar kernels, the conduction heat loss per unit time can be
approximated by HLC = ALhLΔT. The laminar kernel surface area AL ~
2 , the effective heat transfer coefficient for laminar ignition hL ~ k/δRZ
δRZ
where k the effective thermal conductivity of burned products, and ΔT
= TP – TR (the subscripts P and R for products and reactants). Thus, HLC
~ δRZkΔT. On the same token, the turbulent kernel heat loss per unit
time (HLT)1 may be approximated by AT*hTΔT in the pre-transition. The
′
turbulent kernel surface area AT* = wAF, where w ~ u
/SL, a wrinkled
factor indicating the wrinkling extent of the kernel surface area (AF  ~
2 ) due to turbulence. This is because of the nature of premixed flame
δRZ
having  the  Arrhenius  reaction  rate  of  which  chemical  reactions  are
concentrated in the thin reaction zone. As such, the influence of turbu-
lence on heat losses from the wrinkled kernel is assumed to be controlled
′
by an increase in the area of the wrinkled kernel surface. As u
/SL  in-
creases, ηK decreases, δRZ increases with increasing MIET, and δRZ should
be soon comparable to ηK. To the first order approximation, AT* ~ (u
/
2. As to the effective heat transfer coefficient for turbulent ignition,
SL)ηK

′

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109922

S.S. Shy

′
/SL). Hence, Γ1 = MIET/MIEL ≈ 1
hT ~ k/ηK and thus (HLT)1 ~ ηKkΔT(u
+ (HLT)1/HLC  ≈ 1 + (ηK/δRZ)(u
/SL) ≈ 1 + c1PeRZ  based on the above
energy and heat balance consideration. This explains why Γ1  increases
linearly  with  PeRZ  before  the  transition,  where  the  coefficient  c1  = 1
estimated from the data of Fig. 29.

′

In the post-transition, the RZ kernel can be disrupted by sufficiently
intense turbulence where ηK could be smaller than δRZ, resulting in many
small broken RZs (see the third column images from Figs. 25 and 26).
Local quench of some broken RZs through large volumetric heat losses
can be observed. As such, the size of each small broken RZ (δBRZ) should
be comparable to ηK. If the total turbulent heat losses (HLT)2  were the
sum of the heat loss from each small broken RZ with the same heat loss
mechanism as that of pre-transition kernels, we should have (HLT)2 ~ n
(HLT)1 where n the effective number of small broken RZs. Because MIE
3 , it was proposed that n ~ (δRZ/ηK)3 in order to count the effect of
~ δRZ
volumetric heat losses due to the kernel disruption. Further, if the size of
the RZ (δRZ) before the disruption were one order larger than δBRZ (≈ηK),
then δRZ ~ λ. Since λ is about one order larger than ηK for Kolmogorov
(cid:0) 3/4  for  Kolmogorov  tur-
turbulence,  n  ~  (λ/ηK)3.  Further,  ηK/LI  ≈ ReT
′ηK/α)(LI/ηK)
bulence [147], α ≈ αRZ, and thus ReTPr = (u
3/4. Assuming that the Prandtl number Pr ≈ 1 for gases and λ/LI
≈ PeRZReT
1/4 ≈ λ/ηK, n
≈ ReT
4  – c3). Using PeRZ ≈ 4.5 at
≈ PeRZ
4  –
the transition point from Fig. 29 where Γ1 = Γ2: 1 + PeRZ = 1 + c2(PeRZ
c3). The coefficient constant c3 ≈ 406 if c2 = 1. Such model as indicated
in  Fig.  29  agrees  well  with  experimental  data,  which  can  be  used  to
4  after the monotonic
explain why Γ2  increases exponentially with PeRZ
MIE transition. It is worth noting that Maruta and Nakamura [148,149]
have tried to use the aforesaid physical model based on the reaction zone
P ́eclet number (PeRZ) for the monotonic MIE transition to make a com-
parison  with  super  lean-burn  SI  gasoline  engine  test  data,  where  a
reasonably good agreement was reported.

(cid:0) 1/2 for Kolmogorov turbulence [147]. Thus, PeRZ ≈ ReT
3 , and Γ2 ≈ 1 + (HLT)2/HLC ≈ 1 + c2(PeRZ

LI/ν)(ν/α) = (u

′

Based  on  the  aforementioned  discussion  on  the  self-similarity  of
premixed turbulent spark ignition, the best parameter to describe the
influence of turbulence on the flame kernel formation and the critical
MIET/MIEL should be the reaction zone P ́eclet number, not the turbulent
Karlovitz  number  or  Damk ̈ohler  number.  The  reason  is  that  the  key
factor in determining whether a flame kernel will successfully form or
not should be the energy balance between the heat input and the heat
loss. Therefore, the mechanism of flame kernel formation depends on
the  diffusivity  ratio  between  turbulence  and  chemical  reaction  rather
than their corresponding response time ratio.

For  the  pressure  effect  on  MIE,  it  has  long  been  found  that  MIEL
decreases with increasing pressure (p) from 0.2 atm to 1 atm for ethane/
air  and  propane/air  mixtures  at  various  percentages  or  at  different
equivalence  ratios  over  a  wide range  of  oxygen percent  from  21%  to
100% (please see the textbook of Lewis & von Elbe (Figs. 169 and 170 in
Ref.  [27]).  Peng  et  al.  [64]  investigated  the  effect  of  pressure  on  the
monotonic MIE transition by applying the lean methane/air mixture at φ
= 0.7 using a fixed dgap = 2.5 mm of pin-to-pin stainless-steel electrodes
′
with sharp ends over a wide range of u
/SL varying from 0 to about 80 in
the  high-pressure  dual-chamber  explosion  facility  (see  Fig.  10).  They
′
found that the increasing slopes of Γ (= MIET/MIEL) curves versus u
/SL
transform sharply from linearly to exponentially at different values of
/SL)c ≈ 60 at 3 atm, where the measured
(u
values of MIEL = 0.73 mJ (1 atm) and 0.23 mJ (3 atm). Similar mono-
tonic  MIE  transition  results  on  Γ  versus  PeRZ  curves  were  observed  by
Peng et al. (Fig. 9 of [64]) except that the corresponding value (PeRZ)c for
the transition increased with increasing p where (PeRZ)c ≈ 4.5 at 1 atm
and  (PeRZ)c  ≈ 6.2  at  3 atm, respectively.  Peng et  al. [64]  proposed a
′
/αRΖ*  where  αRΖ*  =
pressure  correction  on  PeRZ,  in  which  Pe*  = ηKu
(cid:0) 1  because  the  density  ρ  ~  p  and  the  effective  thermal
k*/(ρCp)  ~  p
conductivity of burned products k* and the specific heat coefficient Cp
are independent of p. For fully-developed Kolmogorov turbulence, ηK ~
(cid:0) 3/4, where the
(ν3/ε)1/4  [147] and thus ηK  ~ [(μ/ρ)3(u
′
dynamic viscosity μ, u
, and LI are independent of p [110]. They obtained

/SL)c ≈ 22 at 1 atm and (u

(cid:0) 1]1/4  ~ p

′3/LI)

′

′

Fig.  32. Normalized  turbulent  MIE  data  as  a  function  of  a  modified  P ́eclet
(cid:0) 1/4,  with  pressure  correction,  in  which  these  two
number,  Pe*  = PeRZ(p/p0)
datum curves at 1 atm (gray triangle symbol) and 3 atm (black circle symbol)
can be collapsed into one single datum curve, where p0 = 1 atm. A model is also
plotted for comparison (please see the two insets), where a1 = 0.36, a2 = 1, and
b2 = 437. Reproduced from Fig. 10 of Ref. [64], with permission from Elsevier.

(cid:0) 1/4, where po = 1 atm. Using such a modified RZ
that Pe* = PeRZ(p/po)
P ́eclet number Pe*, the aforesaid two different sets of Γ (= MIET/MIEL)
data at 1 atm and 3 atm with different values of (PeRZ)c can be merged
onto the single data curve, showing the monotonic MIE transition at 1
atm  and  3  atm  (see  Fig.  32;  same  as  Fig.  10  of  Ref.  [64]).  Similar
self-similarity results on the monotonic MIE transition at elevated pres-
sure conditions (1, 3, 5 atm) were also found by using the modified Pe*
(cid:0) 1/4 with pressure correction, as can been seen from Fig. 6
= PeRZ(p/po)
of Ref. [67].

4. Turbulence facilitated ignition and a non-monotonic MIE
transition

4.1. Turbulence facilitated ignition (TFI)

TFI means ignition of a combustible mixture by a high-energy kernel
being more difficult in quiescence than in turbulence for mixture whose
thermal  diffusivity  sufficiently  exceeds  its  mass  diffusivity,  as  first
observed by Wu et al. [88] and later substantiated by Shy et al. [89]
through their quantitative measurements of MIEL  and MIET. Such sur-
prising finding, TFI owing to the effect of differential diffusion when Le
>> 1,  is  just  contrary  to  the  common  notion  that  turbulence  should
render ignition more difficult. Understanding of what, why, and how TFI
could  occur  is  important  to  enhance  our  knowledge  in  premixed  tur-
bulent spark ignition dynamics that depend on complicated interactions
among  differential  diffusion,  heat  losses  to  electrodes,  and  turbulent
dissipation.

Wu et al. [88] undertook a well-controlled experimental approach to
investigate effects of Le and turbulence on an ignition kernel using a pair
of  cantilevered  Tungsten  electrodes  of  0.25  mm  diameter  centered
axially in a constant-pressure fan-stirred combustion vessel, detailed in
Ref.  [150],  where  four  orthogonally  positioned  fans  were  used  to

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109923

S.S. Shy

Fig. 33. Ignition test results plotted against urms and Uign or mixture reactivity, represented by rich and lean H2/air mixtures: (a) at φ = 5.1 with Le ≈ 2.3, (b) φ =
0.12 with Le ≈ 0.3 and (c) φ = 0.12–0.2 with Le ≈ 0.3 for fixed Uign = 160 V; the stoichiometric H2/O2 ratio or the amount of inert gas: (d) 8% vol. O2/(O2 + He) with
Le ≈ 1.9, I 10.3% vol. O2/(O2 + CO2) with Le ≈ 0.7, (f) 10%–13% vol. O2/(O2 + CO2) with Le ≈ 0.7 for fixed Uign = 160 V, (g) 5% vol. O2/(O2 + Ar) with Le ≈ 1 and
(h) 4%–5% vol. O2/(O2 + Ar) with Le ≈ 0.8–1 for fixed Uign = 160 V; lean and rich n-C4H10/air mixtures: (i) at φ = 0.7 with Le ≈ 2.1, (j) at φ = 2.2 with Le ≈ 0.9 and
(k) at φ = 2–2.5 with Le ≈ 0.9 for fixed Uign = 160 V. Initial pressure and temperature for all tests: 1 atm and 298 K. The spark gap distance dgap = 0.58 mm for case
(a), 0.30 mm for cases (b)–(h), and 0.80 mm for cases (i)–(k). Three outcomes: Failed ignition (red crosses), successful ignition (green dots), and ignition facilitated by
turbulence (green dots with blue borders). Reproduced from Fig. 3 of Ref. [88], with permission from Elsevier.

generate  near-isotropic  turbulence.  They  applied  a  33  μF  capacitor
through an automotive ignition coil with a 134:1 turn ratio to discharge
the spark with a range of Eig by varying the discharge voltage (Uign) from
2 ) and C the capacitance. They
50 V to 170 V, of which Eig = 1/2 (CUign
selected H2/O2 mixtures with He, CO2 or Ar as a diluent for most of the
investigation to cover a wide range of Le varying from 0.3 to 2.3. Lean
(rich) n-butane/air mixtures with Le ≈ 2.1 (Le ≈ 0.9) were also applied
to substantiate the TFI phenomenon and concept [88]. These ignition
results of Ref. [88] are reproduced in Figs. 33(a–k). First, in Fig. 33(a),
the ignition boundary for the H2/air mixture at φ = 5.1 with Le ≈ 2.3
using a small dgap  = 0.58 mm was mapped in terms of the r.m.s. tur-
′
bulence  fluctuation  velocity  (urms  or  u
)  and  Uign;  the  minimum  Uign
′ = 2.9  m/s  was  65  V  that  was
required  for  successful  ignition  at  u
significantly decreased from Uign  = 100 V required for successful igni-
tion in quiescence, showing TFI. Second, no TFI can be found for lean
′
H2/air mixtures at φ = 0.12 over wild ranges of Uign = 60–160 V and u
= 0–5.4  m/s  (Fig.  33b)  and  at  φ  = 0.12–0.2  for  fixed  Uign  = 100  V
(Fig. 33c) with Le ≈ 0.3 « 1, where dgap = 0.3 mm was used. Such TFI (no
TFI) phenomena were attributed to the effect of differential diffusion, as
the reaction rate of an initial flame kernel with Le >> 1 (Le << 1) was

decreased (increased) by positive stretch in quiescence. Since turbulence
can  wrinkle  the  flame  kernel  resulting  in  both  locally  positive  and
negative curvatures, the burning rate of the wrinkled flame segments
with negative curvature can be enhanced for the Le >> 1 case (Fig. 33a),
moving them away from incipient extinction to serve as local ignition
sources for successful ignition. This may explain why a mixture with Le
>> 1 (e.g., H2/air mixture at φ = 5.1 with Le ≈ 2.3 in Fig. 33a) can be
ignited in turbulence with an ignition energy that was not sufficient to
ignite the same mixture in quiescence. Wu et al. [88] also ruled out the
possibility that the controlling ignition chemistry could be different for
fuel-rich and fuel-lean mixtures in turbulence which might influence the
observed TFI phenomena. To do that, they manipulated the values of Le
by varying the inert bath gas from N2  to (He, Ar, CO2), with the fue-
l/oxygen ratio fixed such that the controlling lean versus rich chemistry
was unaffected. When using the same small dgap = 0.3 mm for cases in
Figs. 33(d)-33(h), it can be seen that TFI only occurred at Le ≈ 1.9 >> 1
(Fig. 33d using H2/O2/He at φ = 1.0 with O2/(O2 + He) vol% = 8.0%),
while turbulence renders ignition more difficult for cases at Le ≈ 0.7–1.0
(Figs. 33e–h) where heavier inert bath gases (CO2 and Ar) were applied.
Therefore,  the  aforesaid  TFI  phenomenon  was  not  influenced  by  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109924

S.S. Shy

Fig. 34. (a) MIE comparison between laminar and intense turbulence cases over a wide range of dgap for the H2/air mixture at φ = 5.1 with Le ≈ 2.3 using the same
0.25-mm electrodes as that used in Ref. [88]. (b) Effect of φ and uʹ on MIE over a range of dgap for both lean and rich H2/air mixtures at φ = 0.18 and 5.1 with Le ≈ 0.3
« 1 and Le ≈ 2.3 » 1. Reproduced from Fig. 1 of Ref. [89], with permission from Elsevier.

possibly different chemical kinetics for fuel-lean and fuel-rich conditions
in turbulence.

Wu et al. [88] further tested the TFI phenomenon and concept using
n-butane as the fuel at φ = 0.7 with Le ≈ 2.1 in Fig. 33(i), φ = 2.2 with Le
≈ 0.9 in Fig. 33(j), and φ = 2.2–2.5 with Le ≈ 0.9 for fixed Uign = 160 V
in Fig. 33(k). The results confirmed that TFI only occurred for the lean
n-C4H10  case with Le >> 1, regardless of different fuels (H2, n-C4H10),
equivalence ratios, and inert gases (N2, H2, CO2, Ar) applied. To this end,
an  important question  should  be  asked whether  TFI  depends  on  dgap,
since  the  work  of  Wu  et  al.  [88]  applied  very  small  dgap  (= 0.3  mm
and/or 0.58 mm) and they did not consider the effect of dgap on TFI. As a
matter of fact, the occurrence of TFI strongly depends on dgap, as dis-
cussed below.

4.2. Effect of inter-electrode gap on TFI

The effect of inter-electrode gap on TFI was investigated by Shy et al.
[70,89], and their results are reproduced in Fig. 34. In it, both MIEL at uʹ
= 0 and MIET at uʹ = 5.4 m/s as a function of dgap were measured, where
the same hydrogen/air mixture at φ = 5.1 with Le ≈ 2.3 and the same
thin 0.25-mm Tungsten electrodes as that used by Wu et al. [88] were
applied. A drastic fall of MIEL with increasing dgap  was observed when
dgap  < 4  mm  ≈ dq  (the  quenching  distance  of  H2/air  at  φ  = 5.1,  see
Table 9 of Ref. [27] and Fig. 12 of Ref. [151]); MIEL = 61.5 mJ at dgap =
0.58 mm >> MIEL = 0.8 mJ at dgap = 3 mm, showing the strong effect of
dgap on MIEL. MIEL is much less than 0.2 mJ within 4 mm ≤ dgap ≤ 6.5
mm because 100% ignitability was found when using Eig = 0.2 mJ (see
the marked square symbols in Fig. 34a). The drastic decrease of MIEL at
Le ≈ 2.3 with increasing dgap  as found in Fig. 34(a) is in line with the
effect  of  Rc  [120,152]  or  dq  [27,151]  on  MIEL,  as  discussed  in  the

Fig. 35. Time evolutions of high-speed schlieren kernel development for the H2/air mixture at φ = 5.1 with large Le ≈ 2.3. (a) Quiescence (uʹ = 0). (b) Intensive
turbulence (uʹ = 5.4 m/s). Both cases applied the same small dgap = 0.58 mm, showing TFI where MIEL = 255.5 mJ » MIET = 36.8 mJ at uʹ = 5.4 m/s. Reproduced
from Fig. 6 of Ref. [70], with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109925

S.S. Shy

subsection 2.4. At uʹ = 5.4 m/s when dgap = 0.58 mm, MIET = 26.0 mJ
<< MIEL = 61.5 mJ, showing TFI. These MIEL and MIET results at dgap =
0.58 mm in Ref. [89] substantiated previous results of [88] for Le >> 1
mixtures that turbulence can facilitate ignition. Note that MIEL and MIET
curves  in  Fig.  34(a)  can  cross  over  each  other  when  dgap  ≥ 2  mm.
Furthermore, MIET  = 6.3 mJ >> MIEL  = 0.8 mJ at dgap  = 3 mm and
MIET = 3.05 mJ >> MIEL (< 0.2 mJ) at dgap = 5.2 mm.

To compare the result of Le >> 1 in Fig. 34(a) with that of Le << 1
(lean H2/air mixture at φ = 0.8) as well as to test the thickness effect of
the electrodes, Shy et al. [89] also applied a pair of thick Tungsten (98%
Tungsten  + 2%  Thorium  Dioxide)  electrodes  of  2  mm  diameter  with
sharp ends to measure values of MIEL and MIET. As shown in Fig. 34(b),
successful ignition was very easy to achieve at the case of φ = 0.18 with
Le ≈ 0.3, where MIEL = 1.11 mJ (1.06 mJ) at dgap = 0.3 mm (0.58 mm)
that were much smaller than values of MIET at uʹ = 5.4 m/s where MIET
= 14 mJ (1.42 mJ) at dgap = 0.3 mm (0.58 mm). As already mentioned in
3 is less sensitive to the
Fig. 18, when Le << 1 due to Rc << dq, MIEL ~ Rc
effect of dgap << dq [62]. This may be used to explain why TFI cannot be
found at the Le = 0.3 case even when dgap = 0.3 mm << dq, in line with
the qualitative results found by Wu et al. (no TFI for Le < 1 and Le ~ 1
[88]). Based on MIE results in Fig. 34(b) for Le ≈ 2.3 >> 1, it was found
that TFI is still restricted at small dgap = 0.58 mm with MIEL = 255.5 mJ
<< MIET = 36.8 mJ at uʹ = 5.4 m/s. More importantly, no TFI at dgap = 2
mm, where MIEL  = 0.52 mJ << MIET  = 17.3 mJ at uʹ = 5.4 m/s (see
Fig. 34b). The possible reason for ignition facilitated in intense turbu-
lence for the Le >> 1 mixture may, as first argued in Ref. [88], be that
the flame segments intensified by the negative stretch move away from
incipient extinction and serve as local ignition sources. Moreover, the
effect  of  the  electrode  thickness  (dth)  can  be  also  seen  from  Fig.  34,
where  MIEL  = 61.5  mJ  (255.5  mJ)  when  dth  = 0.25  mm  (2  mm),
respectively. Hence, the electrode’s thickness has a strong influence on
MIEL through heat losses to electrodes at small dgap = 0.58 mm.

The above argument was further substantiated by Shy et al. [70] who
applied high-speed schlieren imaging to record time evolutions of the
embryonic  kernel  for  the  very  rich  hydrogen/air  mixture  with  suffi-
ciently large Le ≈ 2.3 >> 1 under quiescence and intensive turbulent
conditions using the same small dgap  = 0.58 mm, as shown on Fig. 35.
These schlieren images and the purposely-plotted cartons on the right of

Fig. 35 reproduced from Ref. [70] were used to show the kernel in the
laminar case at small dgap  = 0.58 mm having large positive curvature
which  can  significantly  weakens  reaction  rate  through  differential
diffusion. This is why a huge MIEL = 255.5 mJ is required at small dgap =
0.58 mm for achieving 50% ignitability when using the very rich H2/air
case  at  φ  = 5.1  with  Le  ≈ 2.3.  On  the  other  hand,  the  wrinkled  ker-
nel/flame in the case of intense turbulence at the same small dgap = 0.58
mm  has  both  negative  and  positive  curvatures  (see  the  cartoon  in
Fig.  35).  The  segments  with  negative  curvature  stretch  can  enhance
reaction rate through differential diffusion for Le >> 1 which may act as
local ignition sources making successful ignition easier to occur than in
the laminar case. Since the state of incipient extinction may be a direct
result of dgap << Rc, the findings of Shy et al. [70,89] confirmed that TFI
occurs only when two restrictions are satisfied: (1) at sufficiently large
Le >> 1 and (2) at sufficiently small dgap (typically less than 1 mm).

◦

In order to provide even further substantiation of the TFI phenom-
enon observed in gaseous fuels with Le >> 1 (e.g., lean n-butane at φ =
0.7 in Fig. 33(i) [88] and rich hydrogen at φ = 5.1 [88,89]) and to see
whether TFI could be applicable to liquid automobile fuels, Shy et al.
[71] measured MIEL and MIET of a pre-vaporized primary reference fuel
(PRF95: 95% iso-octane and 5% n-heptane) at φ  = 0.8 and at 100
C
with Le ≈ 2.95 >> 1, where small and large dgap varying from 0.8 mm to
2.0 mm in the dual-chamber, constant-pressure/temperature, fan stirred
cruciform explosion facility (see Fig. 10) were used. As shown in Fig. 36,
similar crossover results between MIEL and MIET curves as a function of
(cid:0) 3 ; this can be attributed to the
dgap  were found. In Fig. 36, MIEL  ~ dgap
coupling effects of heat losses to electrodes and differential diffusion.
Specifically, at small dgap = 0.8 mm and 1 mm, sufficiently large values
of Eig must be required in quiescence to overcome large heat and radical
losses to electrodes leading to a ball-like initial kernel at about 100 μs
with  large  positive  curvature  that  can  weaken  reaction  rate  through
differential diffusion for Le >> 1 flame. This explains why large values
of MIEL = 30.1 mJ (24.9 mJ) at dgap = 0.8 mm (1 mm) were required for
50% successful ignition (Fig. 36). As dgap further increased, heat losses to
electrodes are considerably reduced, where the initial kernels at dgap =
1.5 mm and 2.0 mm at about 100 μs had a rod-like geometry with small
or negligible positive curvature having little influence on reaction rate
due to differential diffusion for Le » 1 flame. This is why much smaller
values of MIEL  = 3.80 mJ  (2.05 mJ) at dgap  = 1.5  mm (2.0  mm) are
obtained, as can be seen from Fig. 36. As to the turbulent case at uʹ =
(cid:0) 0.3  (Fig. 36), indicating a much less sensitivity of
2.76 m/s, MIET  ~ dgap

Fig. 36. The crossover of MIEL and MIET curves at various dgap for the lean pre-
vaporized PRF95/air mixture, where TFI only occurs at sufficiently small dgap <
1 mm and at sufficiently large Le » 1. Reproduced from Fig. 3 of Ref. [71], with
permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 37. Evolution of the reaction front (defined with temperature iso-surface
of  700  K)  in  quiescent  (left,  Uin  = 0  m/s)  and  flowing  (right,  Uin  = 3  m/s)
H2/air mixtures at φ = 5.1, Le ≈ 2.3, and dgap = 0.64 mm. The color represents
the magnitude of curvature. The photos in the right column are from Fig. 6 in
Ref.  [70]  (see  also  Fig.  35).  Reproduced  from  Fig.  8  of  Ref.  [153],  with
permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109926

S.S. Shy

MIET with a change of dgap as compared to that in the laminar case. In
short, at dgap = 0.8 mm, MIET = 26.8 mJ at uʹ = 2.76 m/s < MIEL = 30.1
mJ (Fig. 36), showing TFI through differential diffusion. At dgap  = 1.0
mm, near the crossover point, MIET = 24.4 mJ at uʹ = 2.76 m/s which is
only slightly less than MIEL = 24.9 mJ at uʹ = 0, indicating a competing
balance  among  heat  losses  to  electrodes,  differential  diffusion,  and
turbulent dissipation for such PRF95/air mixture at φ = 0.8 and 373 K
with Le ≈ 2.95 >> 1. Moreover, at larger dgap  = 1.5 mm and 2.0 mm,
turbulence dissipation at uʹ = 2.76 m/s re-claims its dominating role on
MIE where MIET  >> MIEL  and the effects of differential diffusion and
heat losses to electrodes become minor or even negligible.

Just recently, Chen et al. numerically simulated the TFI phenomenon
through considering small/large dgap and imposed flow in the simulation
domain of forced ignition in hydrogen/air mixtures [153]. They found
that the flow-facilitated ignition or TFI can be observed for the H2/air
mixture at φ = 5.1 with Le ≈ 2.3 >> 1 when using small dgap = 0.64 mm,
but no TFI when using large dgap = 3.84 mm, in support of experimental
findings by Shy et al. [70]. Also, numerical results in Ref. [153] showed
that the existence of electrodes not only can induce heat loss but also can
affect the shape and global curvature/stretch of the ignition kernel. Both
experimental results [70] and numerical simulations [153] confirmed a
fact that TFI only occurs at sufficiently small dgap (typically smaller than
1  mm)  and  in  mixtures  with  sufficiently  large  Le  >> 1.  As  shown  in
Fig. 37, the time evolutions of simulated reaction fronts were defined at
the temperature iso-surface of 700 K in quiescent (left, Uin = 0 m/s) and
flowing (right, Uin = 3 m/s) H2/air mixtures at φ = 5.1, Le ≈ 2.3, dgap =
0.64 mm, and Eig = 1.24 mJ, where the color represented the magnitude
of  curvature  and  the  photos  in  the  right  column  were  from  Fig.  6  of
Ref. [70]. Based on a comparison between quiescence and an imposed
flow normal to the electrodes (see Fig. 37), Chen et al. [153] found that
the imposed flow can blow the flame kernel away from the cold elec-
trodes and such ignition kernel movement can greatly reduce both heat
losses to the electrodes and flame curvature/stretch, thereby enhancing
the ignition.

4.3. A non-monotonic MIE transition in premixed turbulent combustion

A non-monotonic MIE transition is termed when there is a decrease of
MIET  with  increasing  uʹ  where  MIET  < MIEL  until  MIET  reaches  its
minimum value at some critical value (uʹc); then MIET increases rapidly
when uʹ > uʹc. A typical case for such non-monotonic MIE transition was
demonstrated by Fig. 38(a), where the hydrogen/air mixture at φ = 5.1
with Le ≈ 2.3 >> 1 was used and all MIE data were obtained at a fixed

pulse duration time τp = 500 μs via a pair of stainless-steel electrodes of
2 mm diameter at small dgap = 0.58 mm with sharp ends [70]. In Fig. 38
(a) at small dgap  = 0.58 mm, a clear-cut TFI was found where MIEL  =
255.5 mJ >> MIET, a smiling curve was seen with the lowest value of
MIET = 36.8 mJ occurring at uʹ = 5.4 m/s, and then a rapid increase of
MIET was observed when uʹ > 5.4 m/s. At the largest available uʹ ≈ 8.4
m/s  using  the  maximum  fan  frequency  fmax  = 182  Hz  in  the  dual
chamber explosion facility (see Fig. 10), MIET = 50.3 mJ. Also plotted in
Fig.  38(a)  was  an  anticipated  line  based  on  an  assumption  that  the
smiling curve could be nearly symmetric. Similar results of Eig versus uʹ
having much higher ignition probabilities (> 50%) were also reported
by Saha et al. [154]. They applied the lean n-C4H10/air mixture with Le
≈ 2.2 (φ = 0.7) at a fixed small dgap = 0.8 mm and the H2/O2/N2 mixture
with Le ≈ 2.2 (φ = 4.8) at a rather small dgap  = 0.5 mm to reveal the
competing  roles  of  turbulence  and  differential  diffusion  in  facilitated
ignition (TFI). However, Saha et al. [154] did not investigated the effect
of  dgap  and  their  definition  of  MIE  (much  greater  than  50%)  was
different to that defined by Shy et al. [70]. Hence, a quantitative com-
parison between two studies [70,154] cannot be made.

Fig. 38(b) revealed again an important fact that the effect of dgap is
crucial to the premixed turbulent spark ignition problem, because the
scenario changes from the non-monotonic MIE transition at small dgap =
0.58 mm to the monotonic MIE transition at large dgap = 2 mm. Note that
τp = 10 μs was used for uʹ = 0–4.2 m/s and τp = 50 μs for uʹ ≥ 4.8 m/s in
Fig. 38(b). A much smaller value of MIEL = 0.52 mJ at dgap = 2 mm was
found, only 0.2% of MIEL = 255.5 mJ at dgap = 0.58 mm. Such a huge
difference in values of MIEL = 0.52 mJ (255.5 mJ) at dgap = 2 mm (0.58
mm)  is  a  result  of  the  competition  between  differential  diffusion  and
heat losses to electrodes. As shown in Fig. 38(b), the increasing slopes of
MIET with uʹ varied from gradually to exponentially when uʹ > uʹc = 4.2
m/s, showing the monotonic MIE transition for the very rich hydrogen/
air mixture at φ = 5.1 with Le ≈ 2.3 >> 1.

There  is no  TFI for  the very  lean hydrogen/air mixture (φ  = 0.18
where Le ≈ 0.3 << 1) even when using a very small dgap = 0.3 mm, as
can be seen from Fig. 2(a) of Ref. [80]. At Le ≈ 0.3, MIET increases with
′
at small dgap = 0.3 mm (0.58 mm), where MIEL = 1.11 mJ
increasing u
′ = 4.2 m/s, and MIET
′ = 0, MIET = 6.23 mJ (1.2 mJ) at u
(1.06 mJ) at u
′ = 5.4 m/s (see Fig. 2(a) of ref. [70]). But when
= 14 mJ (1.42 mJ) at u
dgap  = 1 mm and 2 mm, successful ignition of the Le ≈ 0.3 mixture is
extremely easy to achieve because the smallest Eig = 0.2 mJ has 100%
(= 0–5.4 m/s), suggesting that corresponding
ignitability regardless of u
values of MIEL and MIET are all smaller than 0.2 mJ when dgap = 1–2 mm
for the case of Le ≈ 0.3 (see Fig. 2(a) of ref. [70]).

′

Fig. 38. MIE versus u’ for the hydrogen/air case of Le ≈ 2.3 (φ = 5.1) at two different spark gaps: (a) dgap = 0.58 mm with a fixed pulse duration time of τp = 500 μs;
(b) dgap  = 2 mm with τp  = 10–50 μs. Reproduced from Fig. 3 of Ref. [70], with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109927

S.S. Shy

Fig. 39. Minimum ignition energy (MIE) as a function of the r.m.s. turbulent fluctuating velocity (uʹ) for the PRF95/air mixture at φ = 0.8 and 373 K with Le ≈ 2.95:
(a) Small dgap = 0.8 mm, showing a non-monotonic MIE transition; (b) large dgap = 2 mm, showing a regular MIE transition. Reproduced from Fig. 4 of Ref. [71], with
permission from Elsevier.

′

The monotonic MIE transition occurs at dgap  = 0.3 mm for the very
lean hydrogen/air mixture of Le ≈ 0.3 << 1 (see Fig. 2b of Ref. [70]), as
c ≈ 3.5 m/s. In
presented in Fig. 38(b), where the transition occurs at u
the pre-transition, values of MIE only increase slightly from 1.11 mJ at
′ = 3.5 m/s (Fig. 38b). This is again because the
′ = 0–1.30 mJ at u
u
initial  kernel shape at dgap  = 0.3 mm is a ball-like geometry with all
positive curvature that can enhance reaction rate through differential
diffusion for Le << 1; here the effect of Le plays a major role and the
effect of turbulent dissipation is a secondary factor in the pre-transition
c ≈ 3.5 m/s. In the post-transition, values of MIET increase
when u
′ = 5.4 m/s;
exponentially from 6.23 mJ at u
such  drastic  increase  of  MIET  indicates  that  the  effect  of  turbulent
dissipation  dominates  and  the  effect  of  differential  diffusion  becomes

′ = 4.2 m/s to 14 mJ at u

′ ≤ u

′

negligible (Fig. 38b).

Spark ignition of a lean gasoline surrogate with certain compositions
in  intense  isotropic  turbulence  is  useful  to  provide  the  first  level  of
approximation  for  fundamental  understandings  of  ignition  and  com-
bustion characteristics that may be relevant to super lean-burn gasoline
engines  with  highly  tumble  turbulence  [10,155].  This  motivated  Shy
and  co-workers  [71]  to  measure  MIE  transitions  of  a  lean  primary
reference fuel (PRF95; 95% iso-octane + 5% n-heptane) and air mixture
at φ = 0.8 and at 373 K with Le ≈ 2.95 >> 1, as shown in Fig. 39. At
small dgap = 0.8 mm (Fig. 39a), the non-monotonic MIE transition with
TFI can be also observed for the pre-vaporized PRF95/air mixture with
white  circle,  cross,  and  black  circle  symbols  representing  successful
ignition (100% ignitability), failure ignition (0% ignitability), and Eig at

at four different PRFs using a constant Etot ≈ 23 mJ via a fixed train of 11 pulses. Right: There are three schlieren
Fig. 40. Left: The NRPD’s Pig plotted against u
′ = 0, 0.5, and 0.9 m/s having a small view field of 16 ×
kernel development image sets in quiescence and turbulence conditions at PRF = 60 kHz at three different u
16 mm2 for the first three rows. Images at the last row with a large view field of 60 × 60 mm2. Reproduced from Fig. 5 of Ref. [90], with permission from Elsevier.

′

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109928

S.S. Shy

50% ignitability (≡ MIE), respectively. As seen, values of MIE decreased
′ = 0 and MIET = 18.0 mJ at
′
from MIEL = 30.1 mJ at u
with increasing u
′ = 1.85 m/s,
′ ≈ 0.92 m/s to the lowest value of MIET = 13.9 mJ at u
u
′(cid:0) 0.37  having a negative power exponent
showing TFI where MIET  ~ u
c = 1.85 m/s, MIET increased rapidly where
constant. But when u
′2.38 (Fig. 39b). It should be noted again that intense turbulence
MIET ~ u
can disrupt the kernel, increase significantly turbulent convection heat
losses, and cause local flame extinction. This is why MIET = 57.8 mJ at
′ = 3.23 m/s and MIET = 68.4 mJ at u
′ = 3.7 m/s; both values of MIET at
u
′ = 3.23  m/s  and  3.7  m/s  are  much  greater  than  MIEL  = 30.1  mJ
u
(Fig. 39a).

′
′ > u

At large dgap = 2 mm, the scenario transforms back to the monotonic
MIE transition, as shown in Fig. 39(b). Clearly, no TFI at dgap = 2 mm for
the lean PRF95/air mixture with Le ≈ 2.95 >> 1, where MIET >> MIEL
′
= 2.05 mJ at any given values of u
. This is because of the rod-like initial
kernel at dgap = 2 mm having negligible positive curvature that has little
′ <
influence of differential diffusion on MIE. In the pre-transition when u
′4.55 in the post-transition
′0.17, whereas MIET ~ u
u
when u
c. The result in Fig. 39(b) is in line with previous monotonic
MIE transition results discussed in Section 3.

c ≈ 2.3 m/s, MIET ~ u
′
′ > u

′

4.4. TFI in nanosecond repetitively pulsed discharges of turbulent
spherical flame initiation

The  nanosecond-repetitively-pulsed-discharge  (NRPD)  is  one  of
nonequilibrium plasma-assisted discharges, which has been recognized
as an important and promising energy deposition technique for ignition
enhancement and flame stabilization in many combustion devices (e.g.,
scramjets, pulse detonation engines, aviation and automobile engines),
as reviewed by Starikovskiy & Aleksandrov [156], Ju & Sun [157], and
very recently by Lacoste [158] at 39th Combustion Symposium. It is thus
interesting  to  introduce  recent  studies  [90,91]  on  how  exactly  the
aforesaid TFI phenomenon would be varied with a change of the ignition
source when the conventional-single-spark-discharge (CSSD) is replaced
by the NRPD using the same electrodes.

′ = 0.5 m/s > Pig,L = 34% at u

At  38th  Combustion  Symposium,  Nguyen  et  al.  [90]  reported  a
comparison of TFI between CSSD and NRPD using the same cantilevered
stainless-steel  electrodes  at  a  fixed  dgap  = 0.8  mm  in  the  same
randomly-stirred n-butane/air mixture at φ = 0.7 with Le ≈ 2.2 >> 1
(see Fig. 40). First, the inset in Fig. 40 was for the CSSD case at τp = 500
μs  having  near-square  waveforms  of  voltage  and  current  discharges,
demonstrating  the  non-monotonic  decrease  and  increase  of  MIE  with
′ = 0.9 m/s
′
where MIEL  = 22.7 mJ > MIET  = 19 mJ at u
increasing u
(TFI). Second, TFI can also occur in NRPD experiments when the pulsed
repetitive frequency (PRF) was sufficiently high. Specifically, at PRF =
′ = 0,
60 kHz (see Fig. 37), Pig,T = 37% at u
showing TFI. In Fig. 40, each value of Pig,L and Pig,T was determined by
60 cumulatively repeated trials under the same experimental conditions
using a fixed train of 11 pulses with Etot ≈ 23 mJ (≈ MIEL = 22.7 mJ) for
both laminar and turbulent cases [90]. Third, at the same PRF = 60 kHz
′ > 0.5 m/s, Pig,T decreased drastically with increasing u
when u
, where
′ = 2.1 m/s which were
Pig,T = 20% at u
much smaller than Pig,L = 34%. Fourth, other important results were also
reported in Ref. [90], such as Pig = 0 at PRF = 5 kHz even when using
5000 pulses (Etot  ≈ 11 J) and no TFI at PRFs = 10 and 20 kHz where
′
(< Pig,L). Note
values of Pig,T decreased monotonically with increasing u
that Pig is inversely proportional to MIE; the higher Pig, the lower MIE.
Applying the same methodology as used in Ref. [90], Shy et al. [91]
further investigated the role of dgap and its coupling effects with PRF and
u
on  enhancement  and  deterioration  of  NRPD  ignition  dynamics.  In
Ref. [91], three Pig,L and Pig,T datasets at dgap = 0.6 mm, 0.8 mm and 2.0
′ = 0–2.8 m/s than that
mm over wider ranges of PRF = 1–90 kHz and u
in  Fig.  40  were  reported.  For  the  laminar  case,  values  of  Pig,L  were
plotted against PRF at three different dgap, all using the same 11 pulses
with Etot ≈ 23 mJ, where Pig,L = 100% at all PRFs ranging from 10 kHz to
90 kHz at large dgap = 2.0 mm except at PRFs = 1 kHz and 5 kHz where

′ = 0.9 m/s and Pig,T = 2% at u

′

′

Pig,L = 0% and 60% (see Fig. 4 of Ref. [91]). Note that Etot  ≈ 23 mJ is
much greater than MIEL = 3.37 mJ measured at dgap = 2.0 mm with 50%
ignitability when using CSSD [91]. At small dgap = 0.6 mm and 0.8 mm,
a synergistic coherence ignition enhancement (SCIE) regime with very
high Pig,L = 80–90% at specific PRFs was found (see Fig. 4 of Ref. [91]).
Such SCIE regime shifted from PRFs = 20–40 kHz at dgap = 0.8 mm to
higher  PRFs  = 40–60  kHz  at  smaller  dgap  = 0.6  mm  [91].  This  was
attributed to the coherence between PRF and an inward reactant flow
recirculation  frequency  (fRC)  inside  the  initially  developing  torus-like
kernel  induced  by  the  discharges,  similar  to  that  found  by  Castela
et  al.  [159].  In  Ref.  [159],  the  authors  performed  a  3-D  DNS  and
experimental study for the effect of the recirculating flow pattern inside
a reactive kernel induced by the gradient difference between pressure
and density (baroclinic torque) from NRPD in a quiescent methane-air
mixture.  They  found  that  when  PRF  ~  fRC,  the  cumulative  effect  of
successive NRPD with a significant increase of Pig was most profound at
some  certain  PRFs,  typically  around  5–40  kHz  depending  on  such  as
flow  conditions,  number  of  pulse  (Np),  and  Etot.  Such  cumulatively
synergistic  effect  was  also  observed  by  other  studies  using  lean  pro-
pane/air  mixtures  in  quiescence  in  a  constant-volume  combustion
chamber (e.g., Refs. [160–163]). When PRF < fRC and/or PRF > fRC, the
deterioration of Pig,L was observed [91]. Further, when PRFs = 1–5 kHz
at dgap  = 0.8 mm and PRFs = 1–10 kHz at dgap  = 0.6 mm, successful
ignition was not possible, where Pig,L = 0 even using 5000 pulses (Etot ≈
11 J), as can be seen from Fig. 4 of Ref. [91]. However, the aforemen-
tioned SCIE findings for the central ignition configuration in the closed
combustion chamber having fixed reactants with near-isotropic turbu-
lence and negligible mean velocities are different to a previous result of
a pipe flow with strong mean velocity [164]. In Ref. [164], higher PRFs
are beneficial for ignition, because the fresh reactants continue to flow
through the electrodes in the pipe allowing each nanosecond repetition
pulse  to  generate  more  excited  molecules  and  radicals  that  can  be
transported  downstream  by  strong  mean  flow  to  merge  and  form  an
accumulated large flame kernel and resulting in an increase of Pig with
increasing PRF.

As shown in Fig. 41(a), the case of dgap = 0.6 mm demonstrated three
points. (1) Pig,L = 0 and Pig,T  = 0 when PRF = 1–10 kHz, regardless of
′
Etot, Np, and u
. (2) The non-monotonic increase and decrease of Pig,L and
Pig,T (ignition enhancement and deterioration) with increasing PRF can
′
be  observed  for  all  five  u
cases  with  peak  values  of  Pig,L  and  Pig,T
occurring at either PRF = 40 kHz or 60 kHz. (3) At PRFs = 60 kHz and
′ =
80 kHz, a clear-cut TFI can be clearly seen, where values of Pig,T at u
0.5 m/s (weak turbulence) were noticeably greater than Pig,L where dgap
= 0.6 mm. As to the case of dgap = 0.8 mm (Fig. 41(b)), similar results
were  found.  But  for  the  case  of  dgap  = 2.0  mm  (Fig.  41(c)),  Pig,T
′
at any given PRFs ranging from 5 kHz to 60
decreased with increasing u
kHz,  the  ignition  enhancement  and  deterioration  were  observed  for
′ ≥ 1.4 m/s with peak values of Pig,T occurring mostly at PRF
values of u
= 40 kHz, and most importantly, no TFI was found. Again, these curves
of  Pig,T  versus  PRF  in  Fig.  41  were  highly  non-monotonic  with  peaks
around PRF = 40 kHz; too high or too low PRFs were detrimental.

4.5. Could TFI occur in laser-induced spark ignition?

A recent experimental study by Chen and Shy [84] reported that TFI
does not occur in laser-induced spark ignition (LSI) when using three
different  focal  lenses  of  70  mm,  150  mm,  and  200  mm,  as  discussed
below.

In the combustion community, most laser ignition studies applied the
non-resonant  LSI  via  nanosecond  Nd:YAG  lasers  operating  with  a
fundamental wavelength of 1064 nm or its second harmonic at 532 nm
[165–167].  LSI  has  many  advantages  over  CSSD  because  of  its
non-intrusive feature and better control on the timing and positions of
ignition in gas reciprocating engines that can reduce heat losses to the
walls and shorten the transition of the flame kernel to a self-sustained
propagating flame [165–167]. Similar to CSSD, LSI also involves three

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109929

S.S. Shy

ignition  development  stages  [119,167].  (1)  The  plasma  formation,
heating,  and  thermalization  in  a  small  volume  on  the  order  of  nano-
second time scales; the created plasma heats and ionizes the targeted gas
mixture  with  expansion  over  time  [168–170].  (2)  The  hydrodynamic
energy  transfer  from  the  plasma  (e.g.,  shock  wave  generation  and
propagation) on the order of microsecond time scales. (3) Subsonic flows
and local propagation of chemical reactions (combustion ignition and
flame initiation) on the order of millisecond time scales.

′
′ = 2.8 m/s > u

′
is greater than some critical value of u

Chen & Shy [92] applied three different focal lengths of fL = 70 mm,
150  mm  and  200  mm  for  laser  breakdown  in  the  lean  n-butane/air
mixture  at  φ  = 0.7  with  Le  ≈ 2.2  >> 1  using  the  same  fan-stirred
cruciform burner as that used in Refs. [24,60,61]. They found that no
′
TFI in LSI because not only MIET > MIEL at any given u
but also MIET »
′
c ≈ 2 m/s, showing
MIEL when u
the monotonic MIE transition for all three different fL  cases (please see
Fig. 8 in Ref. [92]). As shown in Fig. 42 as a typical example for tur-
bulent LSI kernel and flame development in the post-transition using fL
c ≈ 2 m/s, where Eig ≈ 25 mJ having a
= 150 mm at u
value of Pig,T = 32%. The first image of Fig. 42 showed a spherical shock
wave  generated  by  hydrodynamic  flows  inside  the  initially  spherical
laser  breakdown  plasma.  The  shock  wave  propagated  outwardly  and
rapidly out of the view field of 42 × 42 mm2 in just a few microseconds.
An  arrow  superimposed  on  the  second  image  at  0.1  ms  was  used  to
indicate the laser beam direction, of which the laser spark first expanded
perpendicularly to the incident laser path with two non-symmetrically
toroidal  rings  at  the  front  and  rear  edges  of  the  laser  plasma  kernel,
same as that described by Bradley et al. (see Fig. 43 reproduced from
Fig. 6 of [166]). A much more persistent baroclinic vortex generation
can be seen from Fig. 43 at the rear side of the plasma kernel to let the
hot gas at the rear toroidal ring accelerate toward the incident laser. As
such,  an  extruding  third  lobe  against  the  laser  direction  was  formed;
please  also  see  the  images  on  the  first  row  of  Fig.  42.  The  reader  is
directed to Ref. [166] for detailed information on the mechanism of the
third  lobe  formation  based  on  a  Taylor  instability  generated  by  the
rarefaction wave. Here it is interesting in noting that the kernel geom-
etry at t = 0.3 ms (the third image in Fig. 42) was like a jellyfish con-
sisting of the third lobe and an intensive rear toroidal ring. The latter
was induced by the usage of high Eig = 25 mJ [92]. At t = 0.5 ms (the
fourth image in Fig. 42), turbulent wrinkling inside the rear toroidal ring
can be seen. When t ≥ 2 ms, the turbulent flame kernel developed into a
highly-wrinkled,  self-sustained  turbulent  expanding  flame  with  some
vague finger-like structures at the edges (Fig. 42). The key question is
why there is no TFI in LSI at least for three different focal lengths of 70
mm, 150 mm and 200 mm studied in Ref. [92]. This is attributed to the
deformation  of  laser kernel  by  a  third  lobe  generated  by  the  toroidal
rings  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the  laser  having  both  negative  and
positive curvature segments (see Figs. 42 and 43). Note that the negative
curvature  segments  can  enhance  reaction  rate  through  differential
diffusion that prevents the occurrence of TFI in LSI.

5. Summary and highlights for future studies

Spark ignition is statistical in nature with inherent perturbations in
the breakdown energy, the subsequent discharge, and the location of the
spark channel that can result in either successful or failure ignition even
when the same discharged ignition energy within the overlapping region
is applied. Thus, it is important to define first what a successful ignition
event  is  in  premixed  spark  ignition  studies;  that  is  to  complete  three
evolution stages from the successful breakdown of discharged spark and
the formation of flame kernel to the self-sustained flame propagation.
Without establishing the final stage of self-sustained flame propagation,
either when flame kernel cannot reach its critical flame radius or when
flame is globally quenched by turbulence, the ignition event belongs to
failure ignition. Then the determination of Eig  at 50% ignition proba-
bility (Eig,50% = MIE) can be obtained by using statistical methods (e.g.,
the  logistic  regression  and  the  mid-point  methods  as  reviewed  in  the

Fig. 41. The ignition probability as a function of PRF under laminar and tur-
bulent conditions at three different inter-electrode gaps, all using the same Etot
≈ 23 mJ (11 pulses). (a) dgap = 0.6 mm, (b) dgap = 0.8 mm, (c) dgap = 2.0 mm,
′
each dgap including five different u
ranging from 0 to 2.8 m/s. Reproduced from
Fig. 8 of Ref. [91], with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109930

S.S. Shy

Fig. 42. Turbulent LSI kernel and flame development using fL = 150 mm at u
from Elsevier.

′ = 2.8 m/s and Eig ≈ 25 mJ. Reproduced from Fig. 9(b) of Ref. [92], with permission

Fig. 43. (a) Relative position of shock and rarefaction waves and initiating plasma kernel. (b) Kernel just after action of rarefaction wave. Closeness of shading on (a)
is indicative of possible temperature distribution. Reproduced from Fig. 6 of Ref. [166], with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109931

S.S. Shy

subsection 2.2). In this final section, the summary of two extreme spark
ignition  transitions,  i.e.  monotonic  and  non-monotonic  MIE  transitions,
depending on the coupling effects of heat losses to electrodes (the effect
of dgap), differential diffusion (the effect of Le), and turbulent dissipation
(the effect of uʹ), is given, and future studies are highlighted.

5.1. Monotonic MIE transition

A  monotonic  MIE  transition  is  found  for  premixed  turbulent  spark
ignition  at  modest  and/or  large  dgap,  where  the  increasing  slopes  of
MIET/MIEL  with uʹ/SL  or Ka can change from linearly to exponentially
when uʹ/SL or Ka exceeds some critical values (uʹc/SL or Kac) depending
of φ and Le (see Figs. 20, 29 and 30). For a concise appreciation of the
monotonic MIE transition results, three important points are selected and
listed below.

(1)  The monotonic MIE transition should be a universal phenomenon,
because it exists in different ignition sources (conventional spark,
nanosecond  repetitively  pulsed  discharge,  laser-induce  spark),
different  flow  configurations  (fan-stirred  near-isotropic  turbu-
lence with negligible mean velocities, turbulent pipe flow [80]
and  wind-tunnel  turbulent  flow  [82,83]  with  large  mean  axial
velocities), different fuel types (H2, CH4, C3H8, C4H10, i-C8H18,
Primary  Reference  Fuel),  different  pressure  and  temperature
conditions.  Moreover,  similar  monotonic  MIE  transition  results
have recently been simulated by DNS for a forced ignition of the
stoichiometric methane/air mixture in a decaying homogeneous
turbulence (see Fig. 23).

(2) The monotonic MIE transition is self-similar for premixed turbu-
lent spherical flame initiation under normal and elevated pres-
sure  conditions.  A  physical  model  based  on  the  competition
between small-scale turbulence and molecular diffusivities in and
out  the  initial  kernel  or  reaction  zone,  namely a  reaction  zone
(cid:0) 1/4,
P ́eclet  number  with  pressure  correction,  Pe*  = PeRZ(p/po)
can capture the self-similarity of monotonic MIE transition (please
see  Figs.  31  and  32).  In  the  pre-transition,  MIET/MIEL  ~  Pe*,
while MIET/MIEL ~ Pe*4 in the post-transition.

(3)  For premixed turbulent spherical flame initiation, the occurrence
of  monotonic  MIE  transition  is  attributed  to  different  modes  of
premixed  turbulent  combustion  based  on  the  initial  kernel
development and its subsequent flame propagation in different
regimes.  In  the  pre-transition  when  uʹ/SL  < uʹc/SL,  the  initial
laminar-like torus kernel soon loses its symmetry and develops
into an expanding turbulent flame with sharp front (turbulent-
flamelet regime; see Figs. 27 and 28). In the post-transition uʹ/SL
> uʹc/SL, the early flame kernel is non-symmetric and irregular, it
is soon broken into small islands by intense turbulence, and these
broken  islands  are  then  developing  into  randomly-propagating
distributed-like  flames  with  broadening  fronts  where  local
quench  can  be  observed
see
Figs. 24–28).

(distributed-like

regime;

5.2. Non-monotonic MIE transition (TFI)

At small dgap (typically <1 mm), a surprising phenomenon, namely
Turbulence Facilitation Ignition (TFI), can occur in the pre-transition of
non-monotonic MIE transition for Le >> 1 flames through differential
diffusion, where MIET  < MIEL. This is in contradiction to the common
notion that turbulence should render ignition more difficult. For clarity,
the non-monotonic MIE transition results are concisely organized by the
following three points.

dgap, TFI occurs, where MIET  < MIEL, when uʹ ≤ uʹc. Then MIET
increases rapidly again at larger uʹ (> uʹc), because turbulence re-
asserts its dominating role.

(2)  The occurrence of TFI is crucially influenced by the initial kernel
geometries. At small dgap, heat losses to electrodes are large, a
high  Eig  is  thus  required  for  successful  ignition,  and  the  corre-
sponding embryonic kernel has a ball-like shape with large pos-
itive  curvature  that  weakens  reaction  rate  through  differential
diffusion for mixtures with Le >> 1, resulting in TFI. There is no
TFI when Le < 1 or Le ~ 1 at any dgap studied in literature using
the central ignition configuration in the fan-stirred closed com-
bustion chamber. Also, there is no TFI at modest and/or large dgap
(~ 2 mm or above) even when Le is sufficiently larger than unity
(e.g., lean PRF95 with Le ≈ 3 >> 1). This is because heat losses to
electrodes decrease considerably as dgap  ≥ 2 mm, resulting in a
significant  decrease  of  MIEL,  where  the  corresponding  initial
kernel shape is a rod-like with small or negligible positive cur-
vature (see Figs. 15 and 16) that has little influence on reaction
rate through differential diffusion.

(3)  For  nanosecond-pulsed-repetitively-discharges  using  lean  n-
butane  as  a  fuel  with  Le  ≈ 2.2  >> 1,  TFI  exists  under  more
restricted conditions: at sufficiently small dgap = 0.6 mm and 0.8
mm < 1 mm (same as that for CSSD), at a weak uʹ = 0.5 m/s, and
at sufficiently high PRF ≥60 kHz (please see Fig. 40). But it seems
that TFI does not exist in laser-induced spark ignition using the
same randomly-stirred lean n-butane/air mixture with Le ≈ 2.2 at
least for three different focal lengths of 70 mm, 150 mm and 200
mm studied in Ref. [92]. This is attributed to the formation of a
third lobe of the laser kernel in its early development with some
negative curvature segments that enhance reaction rate through
differential  diffusion,  in  which  the  monotonic  MIE  transition  is
found.

5.3. Possible application and highlights for future studies

Concerning  the  application,  Maruta  &  Nakamura  [148,149]  have
tried  to  bridge  a  possible  link  between  the  aforesaid  monotonic  MIE
transition results presented in Section 3 and numerous engine test data
obtained  from  the  joint  industry-academic  research  on  homogeneous
lean burn SI engines (Japan SIP Project [9,10]). For instance, Iida and
co-workers  [19]  applied  20  automobile  inductive  ignition  coils,  two
coils in a series as one unit and 10 units of coils in parallel, to make a
huge  Eig  up  to  800  mJ  at  one  discharge  for  successful  ignition  in  a
single-cylinder high-compression-ratio gasoline engine [171] which was
operated at super lean-burn condition (φ = 0.48 with Le ≈ 3 >> 1) with
highly tumble flows using a small dgap = 0.9 mm. Although a reasonably
good agreement between fundamental and engine results was reported
by  Maruta  &  Nakamura  (please  see  Refs.  [148,149]  and  references
therein),  it  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  review  to  include  and  discuss
these
since
high-thermal-efficiency super lean-burn SI engines apply strong tumble
flows  associated  with  considerably  high  uʹ,  it  is  thus  interested  in
knowing which dgap, small or large (0.8 mm or 2 mm), is better to use for
an  ignition  enhancement  in  super  lean-burn  SI  gasoline  engines.  The
answer may be obtained by comparing MIE results between Figs. 39(a)
and  39(b)  in  the  post-transition regime  where  uʹ  ≥ 2.8  m/s > uʹc.  As
shown in Fig. 5 of Ref. [71], the ratio of MIE0.8/MIE2.0 ≡ Θ = 1.64 > 1 in
the post-transition regime, where the subscripts 0.8 and 2.0 represented
dgap = 0.8 mm and dgap = 2.0 mm. This implies that successful ignition in
lean-burn  spark  ignition  engines  is  easier  to  achieve  at  modest/large
dgap = 2.0 mm than at small dgap = 0.8 mm.

Nevertheless,

complicated

results.

engine

(1) For conventional electrode sparks, the non-monotonic MIE tran-
sition stems from a great influence of Le and dgap  despite turbu-
lence,  where  the  lowest  bound  is  set  by  a  MIET  at  some  uʹc.
Specifically, at sufficiently large Le » 1 and at sufficiently small

This  paper  reviews  recent  discoveries  and  developments  of  spark
ignition dynamics in premixed turbulent combustion, with a focus on
monotonic  and  non-monotonic  MIE  transitions  with  TFI.  For  future
works, all three different ignition systems (i.e. CSSD, NRPD and LSI) are
promising energy deposition techniques, which may be important to the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109932

S.S. Shy

development  of  optimal  ignition  strategy  in  lean-burn  SI  engines,
deserving  further  studies  especially  when  e-fuels  are  considered.  It  is
expected that e-fuels can be directly used in today’s internal combustion
engines including SI engines to power vehicles, ships and airplanes. As
such, whether the results of monotonic and non-monotonic MIE transi-
tions as reviewed in this paper could be applicable to SI engines using e-
fuels are an important task in the future. Although the monotonic MIE
transition has been recently simulated by DNS in a decaying homoge-
neous turbulence [77], both monotonic and non-monotonic MIE transi-
tions  are  not  yet  simulated  in  non-decaying  homogeneous  isotropic
turbulence which are challenging problems for numerical simulations.
Also, the actual limitation domain of the occurrence of TFI in terms of
critical  values  of  Le  and  dgap  is  still  an  open  issue.  Moreover,  it  is
interesting  to  know  whether  the  effect  of  Soret  diffusion,  as  recently
reported by a numerical study [172], would be varied with a change of
the initial kernel geometry from spherical at small dgap to cylindrical at
modest/large dgap  under the same heated condition. Finally, measure-
ment, modelling, and simulation studies on dynamics and chemical ki-
netics of premixed turbulent spark ignition and flame propagation are
still  needed  for  future  lean-burn  SI  engines  using  either  conventional
fuels or e-fuels.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgements

The  author  would  like  to  thank  Prof.  Kaoru  Maruta  for  his  intro-
duction of the work of monotonic MIE transition to the Japan Combus-
tion  Society.  Many  thanks  are  to  my  former  and  current  graduate
students, in particular to Dr. Chien-Chia Liu for his valuable comments
and  Dr.  Yi-Rong  Chen  for  his  hard  works  on  MIE  measurements  and
analyses. Finally, the continuous financial support from the Ministry of
Science and Technology (now National Science and Technology Coun-
cil), Taiwan is greatly appreciated by acknowledging two recent grants
(MOST 109-2221-E-008-088-MY3 and 111-2221-E-008-053-MY3).

References

[1] World energy outlook. Paris, France: International Energy Agency; 2022.
[2] The 26th UN climate change conference of the parties. Glasgow, UK: COP26); 31

October - 13 November 2021.

[3] Chu S, Majumdar A. Opportunities and challenges for a sustainable energy future.

Nature 2012;488:294–303.

[4] Global energy review. 2021. https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/d003

1107-401d-4a2f-a48b-9eed19457335/GlobalEnergyReview2021.pdf.

[5] Net-zero coalition. United Nations; 2023. https://www.un.org/en/climatechange

/net-zero-coalition.

[6] Brynolf S, Hansson J, Anderson JE, Skov IR, Wallington TJ, Grahn M,

Korberg AD, Malmgren E, Taljegard M. Review of electrofuel feasibility -
prospects for road, ocean, and air transport. Prog Energy 2022;4:042007. https://
doi.org/10.1088/2516-1083/ac8097.

[7] Ababneh H, Hameed BH. Electrofuels as emerging new green alternative fuel: a

review of recent literature. Energy Convers Manag 2022;254:115213. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2022.115213.

[8] Bergthorson JM. Recyclable metal fuels for clean and compact zero-carbon

power. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;68:169–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
[9] SIP Innovative Combustion Technology, Japan (https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/

panhu/sip_english/10-13.pdf).

[10] SIP Innovative Combustion Technology (in Japanese) (https://www.jst.go.jp/sip

/k01.html).

[11] Johnson T, Joshi A. Review of vehicle engine efficiency and emissions. SAE Int J

Engines 2018;11:1307–30.

[12] Reitz RD. Directions in internal combustion engine research. Combust Flame

2013;160:1–8.

[13] Crabtree G. The coming electric vehicle transformation. Science 2019;336:422–4.
[14] Morse I. A dead battery dilemma. Science 2021;372:780–3.
[15] Dahllof L, Romare M, Wu A. Mapping of lithium-ion batteries for vehicles: a study
of their fate in the Nordic countries. Copenhagen: The Nordic Council of
Ministers/Publication Unit; 2019.

[16] Kalghatgi G. Is it really the end of internal combustion engines and petroleum in

transport? Appl Energy 2018;225:965–74.

[17] Jung D, Sasaki K, Iida N. Effects of increased spark discharge energy and

enhanced in-cylinder turbulence level on lean limits and cycle-to-cycle variations
of combustion for SI engine operation. Appl Energy 2017;205:1467–77.
[18] Jung D, Iida N. An investigation of multiple spark discharge using multi-coil

ignition system for improving thermal efficiency of lean SI engine operation. Appl
Energy 2018;212:322–32.

[19] Tsuboi S, Miyokawa S, Matsuda M, Yokomori T, Iida N. Influence of spark
discharge characteristics on ignition and combustion process and the lean
operation limit in a spark ignition engine. Appl Energy 2019;250:617–32.
[20] Nagasawa T, Okura Y, Yamada R, Sato S, Kosaka H, Yokomori T, Iida N. Thermal

efficiency improvement of super-lean burn spark ignition engine by stratified
water insulation on piston top surface. Int J Engine Res 2021;22:1421–39.
[21] Mastorakos E. Ignition of turbulent non-premixed flames. Prog Energy Combust

Sci 2009;35(1):57–97.

[22] Birch AD, Brown DR, Dodson MG, Thomas JR. Studies of flammability in

turbulent flows using laser Raman spectroscopy. Proc Combust Inst 1978;17:
307–14.

[23] Birch AD, Brown DR, Dodson MG, Thomas JR. Turbulent concentration field of a

methane jet. J Fluid Mech 1978;88:431–49.

[24] Huang CC, Shy SS, Liu CC, Yan YY. A transition on minimum ignition energy for

lean turbulent methane combustion in flamelet and distributed regimes. Proc
Combust Inst 2007;31:1401–9.

[25] Bane SPM, Shepherd JE, Kwon E, Day AC. Statistical analysis of electrostatic

spark ignition of lean H2/O2/Ar mixtures. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2011;36:
2344–50.

[26] Loeb LB. Fundamental processes of electrical discharge in gases. New York: John

Wiley and Sons; 1939.

[27] Lewis B, von Elbe G. Combustion, flames and explosions of gases. third ed.

Orlando: Academic Press; 1987. p. 356–60.

[28] Fisher FA. Some notes on sparks and ignition of fuels. Washington: Tech Memo

NASA/TM-2000-210077; 2000.

[29] Ballal DR, Lefebvre AH. A general model of spark ignition for gaseous and liquid

fuel-air mixtures. Symp Int Combust 1981;18:1737–46.

[30] Joulin G, Mitani T. Linear stability analysis of two-reactant flames. Combust

Flame 1981;40:235–46.

[31] Deshaies B, Joulin G. On the initiation of a spherical flame kernel. Combust Sci

Technol 1984;37:99–116.

[32] Zeldovich IB, Barenblatt GI, Librovich VB, Makhviladze GM. Mathematical theory
of combustion and explosions. New York, NY: United States: Consultants Bureau;
1985.

[33] Williams FA. Combustion theory: the fundamental theory of chemically reacting
flow systems. second ed. Benjamin Cummings, California: Westview Press; 1994.
[34] Champion M, Deshaies B, Joulin G, Kinoshita K. Spherical flame initiation: theory
versus experiments for lean propane-air mixtures. Combust Flame 1986;65:
319–37.

[35] Glassman I, Yetter RA, Glumac NG. Ignition. Combustion. fifth ed. Boston:

Academic Press; 2015. p. 363–91.

[36] Tromans PS, Furzeland RM. An analysis of Lewis number and flow effects on the

ignition of premixed gases. Symp Int Combust 1988;21:1891–7.

[37] Maas U, Warnatz J. Ignition processes in hydrogen-oxygen mixtures. Combust

Flame 1988;74:53–69.

[38] Ko Y, Anderson RW, Arpaci VS. Spark ignition of propane-air mixtures near the
minimum ignition energy: Part II. A model development. Combust Flame 1991;
83:88–105.

[39] Boudier P, Henriot S, Poinsot T, Baritaud T. A model for turbulent flame ignition
and propagation in spark ignition engines. Symp Int Combust 1992;24:503–10.

[40] Ishii K, Tsukamoto T, Ujiie Y, Kono M. Analysis of ignition mechanism of

combustible mixtures by composite sparks. Combust Flame 1992;91:153–64.
[41] Sloane T, Ronney P. A comparison of ignition phenomena modelled with detailed

and simplified kinetics. Combust Sci Technol 1993;88:1–13.

[42] He L. Critical conditions for spherical flame initiation in mixtures with high Lewis

numbers. Combust Theor Model 2000;4:159–72.

[43] Peters N. Turbulent combustion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2004.
[44] Thiele M, Warnatz J, Dreizler A, Lindenmaier S, Schießl R, Maas U, et al. Spark
ignited hydrogen/air mixtures: two dimensional detailed modeling and laser
based diagnostics. Combust Flame 2002;128:74–87.

[45] Law CK. Combustion physics. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2006.
[46] Kurdyumov V, Blasco J, Sanchez AL, Li ̃n ́an A. On the calculation of the minimum

ignition energy. Combust Flame 2004;136:394–7.

[47] Chen Z, Ju Y. Theoretical analysis of the evolution from ignition kernel to flame

ball and planar flame. Combust Theor Model 2007;11(3):427–53.

[48]] Moorhouse J, Williams A, Maddison TE. An investigation of the minimum
ignition energies of some C1 to C7 hydrocarbons. Combust Flame 1974;23:
203–13.

[49] Ballal DR, Lefebvre AH. The influence of flow parameters on minimum ignition

energy and quenching distance. Symp Int Combust 1975;15:1473–81.
[50] Maly R, Vogel M. Initiation and propagation of flame fronts in lean CH4-air

mixtures by the three modes of the ignition spark. Symp Int Combust 1979;17:
821–31.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109933

S.S. Shy

[51] Ballal DR, Lefebvre AH. Ignition and flame quenching of flowing heterogeneous

fuel-air mixtures. Combust Flame 1979;35:155–68.

[52] Kono M, Hatori K, Iinuma K. Investigation on ignition ability of composite sparks

in flowing mixtures. Symp Int Combust 1984;20:133–40.

[53] Ziegler GFW, Wagner EP, Maly RR. Ignition of lean methane-air mixtures by high
pressure glow and ARC discharges. Symp Int Combust 1984;20:1817–24.

[54] Bradley D, Lung FKK. Spark ignition and the early stages of turbulent flame

propagation. Combust Flame 1987;69:71–93.

[55] Kono M, Niu K, Tsukamoto T, Ujiie Y. Mechanism of flame kernel formation
produced by short duration sparks. Symp Int Combust 1988;22:1643–9.
[56] Ko Y, Anderson RW, Arpaci VS. Spark ignition of propane-air mixtures near the
minimum ignition energy: Part I. An experimental study. Combust Flame 1991;
83:75–87.

[57] Ishii K, Aoki O, Ujiie Y, Kono M. Investigation of ignition by composite sparks

under high turbulence intensity conditions. Symp Int Combust 1992;24:1793–8.
[58] Kravchik T, Sher E, Heywood JB. From spark ignition to flame initiation. Combust

Sci Technol 1995;108:1–30.

[83] Cardin C, Renou B, Cabot G, Boukhalfa A. Experimental analysis of laser-induced
spark ignition of lean turbulent premixed flames. CR Mecanique 2013;341:
191–200.

[84] Poinsot T, Candel S, Trouve A. Applications of direct numerical simulation to
premixed turbulent combustion. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1996;21(6):531–76.

[85] Thiele M, Warnatz J, Maas U. Geometrical study of spark ignition in two

dimensions. Combust Theor Model 2000;4(4):413–34.

[86] Klein M, Chakraborty N, Cant S. Effects of turbulence on self-sustained

combustion in premixed flame kernels: a direct numerical dimulation (DNS)
study. Flow. Turbul Combust 2008;81(4):583–607.

[87] Patel D, Chakraborty N. Effects of energy deposition characteristics on localised
forced ignition of homogeneous mixtures. Int J Spray Combust Dyn 2015;7(2):
151–74.

[88] Wu F, Saha A, Chaudhuri S, Law CK. Facilitated ignition in turbulence through

differential diffusion. Phys Rev Lett 2014;113:024503.

[89] Shy SS, Nguyen MT, Huang SY, Liu CC. Is turbulent facilitated ignition through
differential diffusion independent of spark gap? Combust Flame 2017;185:1–3.

[59] Kaminski CF, Hult J, Alden M, Lindenmaier S, Dreizler A, Maas U, et al. Spark

[90] Nguyen MT, Shy SS, Chen YR, Lin BL, Huang SY, Liu CC. Conventional spark

ignition of turbulent methane/air mixtures revealed by time-resolved planar
laser-induced fluorescence and direct numerical simulations. Proc Combust Inst
2000;28:399–405.

[60] Shy SS, Shih WT, Liu CC. More on minimum ignition energy transition for lean

premixed turbulent methane combustion in flamelet and distributed regimes.
Combust Sci Technol 2008;180:1735–47.

[61] Shy SS, Liu CC, Shih WT. Ignition transition in turbulent premixed combustion.

Combust Flame 2010;157:341–50.

[62] Chen Z, Burke MP, Ju Y. On the critical flame radius and minimum ignition

energy for spherical flame initiation. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:1219–26.
[63] Coronel S, Mevel R, Bane SPM, Shepherd JE. Experimental study of minimum
ignition energy of lean H2-N2O mixtures. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:895–902.
[64]] Peng MW, Shy SS, Shiu YW, Liu CC. High pressure ignition kernel development

and minimum ignition energy measurements in different regimes of premixed
turbulent combustion. Combust Flame 2013;160:1755–66.

versus nanosecond repetitively pulsed discharge for a turbulence facilitated
ignition phenomenon. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:2801–8.

[91] Shy SS, Chen YR, Lin BL, Maznoy A. Ignition enhancement and deterioration by
nanosecond repetitively pulsed discharges in a randomly-stirred lean n-butane/
air mixture at various inter-electrode gaps. Combust Flame 2021;231(1–9):
111506.

[92] Chen YR, Shy SS. Can the phenomenon of turbulence facilitated ignition through
differential diffusion occur in laser-induced spark ignition? Combust Flame 2022;
242:112165.

[93] Rao HNS, Lefebvre AH. Ignition of kerosine fuel sprays in a flowing air stream.

Combust Sci Technol 1973;8:95–100.

[94] Rao KVL, Lefebvre AH. Minimum ignition energies in flowing kerosine-air

mixtures. Combust Flame 1976;27:1–20.

[95] Ballal DR, Lefebvre AH. Ignition of liquid fuel sprays at subatmospheric pressures.

Combust Flame 1978;31:115–26.

[65] Wahner A, Gramse G, Langer T, Beyer M. Determination of the minimum ignition

[96] Ballal DR, Lefebvre AH. Ignition and flame quenching of quiescent fuel mists.

energy on the basis of a statistical approach. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2013;26:
1655–60.

[66] Bane SPM, Ziegler JL, Shepherd JE. Investigation of the effect of electrode

geometry on spark ignition. Combust Flame 2015;162:462–9.

[67] Shy SS, Shiu YW, Jiang LJ, Liu CC, Minaev S. Measurement and scaling of
minimum ignition energy transition for spark ignition in intense isotropic
turbulence from 1 to 5 atm. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:1785–91.

[68] Saito N, Minamoto Y, Yenerdag B, Shimura M, Tanahashi M. Effects of turbulence
on ignition of methane–air and n-heptane–air fully premixed mixtures. Combust
Sci Technol 2017;190:452–70.

[69] Jiang LJ, Shy SS, Nguyen MT, Huang SY, Yu DW. Spark ignition probability and
minimum ignition energy transition of lean iso-octane/air mixture in premixed
turbulent combustion. Combust Flame 2018;187:87–95.

[70] Shy SS, Nguyen MT, Huang SY. Effects of electrode spark gap, differential
diffusion, and turbulent dissipation on two distinct phenomena: turbulent
facilitated ignition versus minimum ignition energy transition. Combust Flame
2019;205:371–7.

[71] Shy SS, Liao YC, Chen YR, Huang SY. Two ignition transition modes at small and
large distances between electrodes of a lean primary reference automobile fuel/
air mixture at 373K with Lewis number >> 1. Combust Flame 2021;225:340–8.
[72] Kim HJ, Chung SH, Sohn CH. Numerical calculation of minimum ignition energy

for hydrogen and methane fuels. KSME Int J 2004;18:838–46.

[73] Chakraborty N, Mastorakos E, Cant RS. Effects of turbulence on spark ignition in

inhomogeneous mixtures: a direct numerical simulation (DNS) study. Combust
Sci Technol 2007;179:293–317.

[74] Han J, Yamashita H, Hayashi N. Numerical study on the spark ignition

characteristics of a methane-air mixture using detailed chemical kinetics: effect of
equivalence ratio, electrode gap distance, and electrode radius on MIE, quenching
distance, and ignition delay. Combust Flame 2010;157:1414–21.
[75] Han J, Yamashita H, Hayashi N. Numerical study on the spark ignition

characteristics of hydrogen-air mixture using detailed chemical kinetics. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2011;36:9286–97.

[76] Sereshchenko E, Fursenko R, Minaev S, Shy S. Numerical simulations of premixed
flame ignition in turbulent flow. Combust Sci Technol 2014;186:1552–61.
[77] Turquand d’Auzay C, Papapostolou V, Ahmed SF, Chakraborty N. On the

minimum ignition energy and its transition in the localised forced ignition of
turbulent homogeneous mixtures. Combust Flame 2019;201:104–17.
[78] Bane SPM. Spark ignition: experimental and numerical investigation with

Proc Roy Soc Lond A 1978;364:277–94.

[97] Freeman G, Lefebvre AH. Spontaneous ignition characteristics of gaseous

hydrocarbon-air mixtures. Combust Flame 1984;58:153–62.

[98] Ono R, Nifuku M, Fujiwara S, Horiguchi S, Oda T. Minimum ignition energy of
hydrogen-air mixture: effects of humidity and spark duration. J Electrost 2007;
65:87–93.

[99] Cui G, Zeng W, Li Z, Fu Y, Li H, Chen J. Experimental study of minimum ignition

energy of methane/air mixtures at elevated temperatures and pressures. Fuel
2016;175:257–63.

[100] Zhang Q, Tan R, Huan Y, Liang H. Effects of humidity on minimum ignition

energy of gaseous epoxypropane/air mixtures. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2012;25:
982–8.

[101] Zhang W, Gou X, Chen Z. Effects of water vapor dilution on the minimum ignition
energy of methane, n-butane and n-decane at normal and reduced pressures. Fuel
2017;187:111–6.

[102] Baum M, Point T. Effects of mean flow on premixed flame ignition. Combust Sci

Technol 1995;106:19–39.

[103] Magison EC. Electrical equipment in hazardous locations. In: Instrument society
of America. fourth ed. Research Triangle Park, NC, USA: International Society of
Automation; 1998.

[104] Babrauskas V. Ignition handbook: principles and applications to fire safety

engineering, fire investigation, risk management and forensic science. Issaquah,
WA, USA: Fire Science Publishers; 2003.

[105] Abdel-Gayed RG, Bradley D, Lawes DB. Turbulent burning velocities: a general
correlation in terms of straining rates. Proc R Soc London, A 1987;414:389–413.
[106] Goulier J, Comandini A, Halter F, Chaumeix N. Experimental study on turbulent

expanding flames of lean hydrogen/air mixtures. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:
2823–32.

[107] Wang S, Elbaz AM, Wang Z, Roberts WL. The effect of oxygen content on the
turbulent flame speed of ammonia/oxygen/nitrogen expanding flames under
elevated pressures. Combust Flame 2021;232:111521.

[108] Mazellier N, Danaila L, Renou B. Multi-scale energy injection: a new tool to
generate intense homogeneous and isotropic turbulence for premixed
combustion. J Turbul 2010;11:N43.

[109] Jiang LJ, Shy SS, Li WY, Huang HM, Nguyen MT. High-temperature, high-

pressure burning velocities of expanding turbulent premixed flames and their
comparison with Bunsen-type flames. Combust Flame 2016;172:173–82.
[110] Liu CC, Shy SS, Chen HC, Peng MW. On interaction of centrally-ignited,

application to aviation safety [PhD dissertation]. California: California Institute of
Technology; 2010. http://thesis.library.caltech.edu/5868/1/thesis_SBane.pdf.

outwardly-propagating premixed flames with fully-developed isotropic
turbulence at elevated pressure. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:1293–9.

[79] Eckhoff RK, Ngo M, Olsen W. On the minimum ignition energy (MIE) for

propane/air. J Hazard Mater 2010;175:293–7.

[111] Shy SS, I WK, Lin ML. A new cruciform burner and its turbulence measurements
for premixed turbulent combustion study. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2000;20:105–14.

[80] Horstmann T, Leuckel W, Maurer B, Maas U. Influence of turbulent flow

[112] Shy SS, Lin WJ, Wei JC. An experimental correlation of turbulent burning

conditions on the ignition of flammable gas/air mixtures. Process Saf Prog 2001;
20:215–24.

velocities for premixed turbulent methane-air combustion. Proc R Soc Lond A:
Math Phys Eng Sci 2000;456:1997–2019.

[81] Bane SPM, Ziegler JL, Boettcher PA, Coronel SA, Shepherd JE. Experimental

[113] Shy SS, Lin WJ, Peng KZ. High-intensity turbulent premixed combustion: general

investigation of spark ignition energy in kerosene, hexane, and hydrogen. J Loss
Prev Process Ind 2013;26:290–4.

correlations of turbulent burning velocities in a new cruciform burner. Proc
Combust Inst 2000;28:561–8.

[82] Cardin C, Renou B, Cabot G, Boukhalfa AM. Experimental analysis of laser-
induced spark ignition of lean turbulent premixed flames: new insight into
ignition transition. Combust Flame 2013;160:1414–27.

[114] Yang TS, Shy SS. A gas-phase near-isotropic turbulence and its wavelet analysis
for studying fine-scale intermittency. In: Smits AJ, editor. IUTAM Symposium on
Reynolds number scaling in turbulent flow. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109934

S.S. Shy

Academic Publishers; 2003. p. 249–52. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-
0997-3_43.

[115] Yang TS, Shy SS. Two-way interaction between solid particles and homogeneous
air turbulence: particle settling rate and turbulence modification measurements.
J Fluid Mech 2005;526:171–216.

[116] Nguyen MT, Yu DW, Shy SS. General correlations of high pressure turbulent

burning velocities with the consideration of Lewis number effect. Proc Combust
Inst 2019;37:2391–8.

[117] Loeb L. Basic processes of gaseous electronics. second ed. Berkley: University of

California Press; 1961.

[118] Meek J, Craggs J. Electrical breakdown of gases. New York: John Wiley & Sons;

1978.

[119] McNeill DH. Minimum ignition energy for laser spark ignition. Proc Combust Inst

2005;30:2913–20.

[120] Ballal DR, Lefebvre AH. The influence of spark discharge characteristics on

minimum ignition energy in flowing gases. Combust Flame 1975;24:99–108.
[121] Kono M, Kumagai S, Sakai T. The optimum condition for ignition of gases by

composite sparks. Symp Int Combust 1977;16:757–66.

[150] Chaudhuri S, Wu F, Zhu D, Law CK. Flame speed and self-similar propagation of
expanding turbulent premixed flames. Phys Rev Lett 2012;108:044503.
[151] Drell I.L., Belles F.E. Survey of hydrogen combustion properties. NACA Research

Memorandum E57D24: 1957. Report No. 1383:10-14.

[152] Chen Z, Burke MP, Ju Y. Effects of Lewis number and ignition energy on the

determination of laminar flame speed using propagating spherical flames. Proc
Combust Inst 2009;32:1253–60.

[153] Chen X, Xie S, Bottler H, Scholtissek A, Han W, Yu D, Hasse C, Chen Z. Effects of
electrodes and imposed flow on forced ignition in laminar premixed hydrogen/air
mixtures with large Lewis number. Proc Combust Inst 2022;39. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2022.07.217.

[154] Saha A, Yang S, Law CK. On the competing roles of turbulence and differential

diffusion in facilitated ignition. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:2383–90.
[155] Achieving Thermal Efficiency of Over 50% in Passenger Car Engines. https://

www.jst.go.jp/EN/achievements/research/bt2019-04.html.

[156] Starikovskiy A, Aleksandrov N. Plasma-assisted ignition and combustion. Prog

Energy Combust Sci 2013;39:61–110.

[157] Ju Y, Sun W. Plasma assisted combustion: dynamics and chemistry. Prog Energy

[122] Kelley AP, Jomaas G, Law CK. Critical radius for sustained propagation of spark-

Combust Sci 2015;48:21–83.

ignited spherical flames. Combust Flame 2009;156:1006–13.

[158] Lacoste DA. Flames with plasmas. Proc Combust Inst 2022;39. https://doi.org/

[123] Maas U, Warnatz J. Ignition processes in hydrogen-oxygen mixtures. Combust

10.1016/j.proci.2022.06.025.

Flame 1988;74:53–69.

[124] Frendi A, Sibulkin M. Dependence of minimum ignition energy on ignition

parameters. Combust Sci Technol 1990;73:395–413.

[125] Sloane T, Ronney PD. A comparison of ignition phenomena modelled with
detailed and simplified kinetics. Combust Sci Technol 1993;88:1–13.

[126] Kim HJ, Chung SH, Sohn CH. Numerical calculation of minimum ignition energy

for hydrogen and methane fuels. KSME Int J 2004;18:838–46.

[127] Lefebvre AH. In: Gas turbine combustion. second ed. London: Taylor and Francis;

1998.

[128] Ronney PD, Wu MS, Pearlman HG. Experimental study of flame balls in space:

preliminary results from STS-83. AIAA J 1998;36:1361–8.

[129] Nguyen MT. A comparative study of conventional spark ignition and nanosecond

repetitively pulsed discharge in premixed turbulent combustion. In: Doctoral
dissertation. Taiwan: National Central University; Dec. 2019.

[130] Nguyen MT, Shy SS. A transition of ignition kernel delay time at the early stages

of lean premixed n-butane/air turbulent spherical flame propagation. Appl Sci
2022;12(8):3914. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12083914.

[131] Damkohler G. The effect of turbulence on the flame velocity in gas mixtures.

Z Elektrchem 1940;46:601–52. English translation NACA Tech. Mem. 1112, 1947.

[132] Bradley D. How fast can we burn? Proc Combust Inst 1992;24:247–62.
[133] Bradley D, Lawes M, Liu K, Woolley R. The quenching of premixed turbulent

flames of iso-octane, methane and hydrogen at high pressures. Proc Combust Inst
2007;31:1393–400.

[159] Castela M, Stepanyan S, Fiorina B, Coussement A, et al. A 3-D DNS and

experimental study of the effect of the recirculating flow pattern inside a reactive
kernel produced by nanosecond plasma discharges in a methane-air mixture. Proc
Combust Inst 2017;36:4095–103.

[160] Pancheshnyi SV, Lacoste DA, Bourdon A, Laux CO. Ignition of propane–air

mixtures by a repetitively pulsed nanosecond discharge. IEEE Trans Plasma Sci
2006;34:2478–87.

[161] Xu DA, Lacoste DA, Laux CO. Ignition of quiescent lean propane–air mixtures at
high pressure by nanosecond repetitively pulsed discharges. Plasma Chem Plasma
Process 2016;36:309–27.

[162] Lovascio S, Ombrello T, Hayashi J, Stepanyan S, et al. Effects of pulsation

frequency and energy deposition on ignition using nanosecond repetitively pulsed
discharges. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:4079–86.

[163] Lovascio S, Hayashi J, Stepanyan S, Stancu GD, Laux CO. Cumulative effect of

successive nanosecond repetitively pulsed discharges on the ignition of lean
mixtures. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:5553–60.

[164] Lefkowitz JK, Ombrello T. An exploration of inter-pulse coupling in nanosecond

pulsed high frequency discharge ignition. Combust Flame 2017;180:136–47.

[165] Ronney PD. Laser versus conventional ignition of flames. Opt Eng 1994;33:

510–21.

[166] Bradley D, Sheppard CGW, Suardjaja IM, Woolley R. Fundamentals of high-
energy spark ignition with lasers. Combust Flame 2004;138:55–77.

[167] Phuoc TX. Laser-induced spark ignition fundamental and applications. Opt Laser

[134] Bradley D, Lawes M, Liu K, Mansour MS. Measurements and correlations of

Eng 2006;44:351–97.

turbulent burning velocities over wide ranges of fuels and elevated pressures.
Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:1519–26.

[135] Bradley D, Shehata M, Lawes M, Ahmed P. Flame extinctions: critical stretch rates

and sizes. Combust Flame 2020;212:459–68.

[136] Shy SS, Lin WJ, Peng KZ. High-intensity turbulent premixed combustion: general

correlations of turbulent burning velocities in a new cruciform burner. Proc
Combust Inst 2000;28:561–8.

[137] Shy SS, Lin WJ, Wei JC. An experimental correlation of turbulent burning

velocities for premixed turbulent methane-air combustion. Proc Roy Soc Lond A
2000;456:1997–2019.

[138] Shy SS, Yang SI, Lin WJ, Su RC. Turbulent burning velocities of premixed CH4/
diluent/air flames in intense isotropic turbulence with consideration of radiate
losses. Combust Flame 2005;143:106–18.

[139] Yang SI, Shy SS. Global quenching of premixed CH4/air flames: effects of

turbulent straining, equivalence ratio, and radiative heat loss. Proc Combust Inst
2002;29:1841–7.

[140] Liu CC, Shy SS, Dong YC, Peng MW. More on global quenching of premixed CH4/

diluent/air flames by intense near-isotropic turbulence. Combust Sci Technol
2012;184:1916–33.

[141] Ichimura R, Hadi K, Hashimoto N, Hayakawa A, Kobayashi H, Fujita O. Extinction
limits of an ammonia/air flame propagating in a turbulent field. Fuel 2019;246:
178–86.

[142] Wabel TM, Skiba AW, Driscoll JF. Turbulent burning velocity measurements:
extended to extreme levels of turbulence. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:1801–8.

[143] Driscoll JF, Chen JH, Skiba AW, Carter CD, Hawkes ER, Wang H. Premixed flames
subjected to extreme turbulence: some questions and recent answers. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2020;76:100802.

[144] Sidey J, Mastorakos E, Gordon R. Simulations of autoignition and laminar

premixed flames in methane/air mixtures diluted with hot products. Combust Sci
Technol 2014;186:453–65.

[145] Hinze JO. Turbulence. second ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1975.
[146] Frisch U. Turbulence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1995.
[147] Tennekes H, Lumley JL. A first course in turbulence. Cambridge: MIT Press; 1972.
[148] Maruta K, Nakamura H. Super lean-burn combustion in SI engines and

fundamental combustion research. J Combust Soc Japan 2016;58(183):9–19 [in
Japanese)].

[149] Maruta K, Nakamura H. On the transition from ignition to flame propagation in

super lean burn SI engine. J SAE Japan 2018;72:2–9.

[168] Beduneau JL, Ikeda Y. Spatial characterization of laser-induced sparks in air.

J Quant Spectrosc Radiat Transf 2004;84:123–39.

[169] Bindhu C, Harilal S, Tillack M, Najmabadi F, Gaeris A. Energy absorption and
propagation in laser-created sparks. Appl Spectrosc 2004;58:719–26.

[170] Harilal S, Skrodzki P, Miloshevsky A, Brumfield B, Phillips M, Miloshevsky G. On-
and off-axis spectral emission features from laser-produced gas breakdown
plasmas. Phys Plasmas 2017;24:063304.

[171] Jung D, Sasaki K, Sugata K, Matsuda M, Yokomori T, Iida N. Combined effects of
spark discharge pattern and tumble level on cycle-to-cycle variations of
combustion at lean limits of SI engine operation. SAE Technical Paper 2017-01-
0677, https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-01-0677; 2017.

[172] Liang W, Law CK, Chen Z. Ignition of hydrogen/air mixtures by a heated kernel:

role of Soret diffusion. Combust Flame 2018;197:416–22.

Shenqyang (Steven) Shy is currently a Distinguished Professor in the Department of Me-
chanical Engineering at National Central University in Tao-yuan City, Taiwan. He earned
his Ph.D. from the Aeronautics and Astronautics Department of the University of Wash-
ington, Seattle, U.S.A. in 1990. He held a postdoctoral appointment in the Department of
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at Princeton University for one and a half years
and a position as Associated Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at
National Central University before assuming his Professorship at NCU in 1997. Prof. Shy
was the Director of the Center for Energy Research in the College of Engineering at Na-
tional Central University from 2003 to 2014. He served as an Associate Editor and Editorial
Board Member of Proceedings of the Combustion Institute during 2008–2013 for six years.
Prof.  Shy  was  the  former  Taiwan  Section  Chair  of  The  Combustion  Institute  during
2010–2014.  He  was  elected  as  a  Fellow  of  The  Combustion  Institute  (2019  Class).
Currently,  Prof.  Shy  serves  as  an  Editorial  Board  Member  of  Combustion  and  Flame,
starting from 2023.01.01 to 2028.12.31 for a six-year term. He was the recipient of the
Outstanding Research Award (2022) from the National Science and Technology Council,
Taiwan.

Professor Shy has extensive research experience in various research fields. Currently,
he  focuses  on  two  research  fields.  (1)  High-pressure,  high-temperature  lean  premixed
turbulent  combustion  relevant  to  gas  turbine  conditions,  including  gaseous  and  liquid
fuels, from ignition and flame propagation to flame global quenching, with an emphasis on
hydrogen and/or ammonia combustion. (2) Pressurized ammonia solid oxide fuel cells and
their  integration  with  micro  gas  turbines  for  hybrid  power  generation.  His  research  is
conducted in both the Combustion Physics Laboratory and the Energy and Environment
Laboratory at National Central University.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10109935
