Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Bubble evolution and transport in PEM water electrolysis: Mechanism,
impact, and management

Shu Yuan a, Congfan Zhao a, Xiyang Cai a, Lu An a, Shuiyun Shen a, Xiaohui Yan a,**,
Junliang Zhang a,b,*
a Institute of Fuel Cells, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, 200240, PR China
b MOE Key Laboratory of Power Machinery and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, PR China

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Proton exchange membrane water electrolysis
Hydrogen production
Bubbles
Gas evolution reactions
Oxygen evolution reactions

Proton  exchange  membrane water  electrolysis (PEMWE),  as a  promising technology  for hydrogen production
from renewable energy sources, has great potential for industrial application. Gas bubbles are known to influence
the  PEMWE  cell  performance  significantly,  but  a  full  picture  of  bubble  behaviors  and  their  impacts  on  cell
performance has been lacking. In this review, we first discuss the most recent advances toward understanding the
bubble evolution and transport processes as well as the mechanisms of how bubbles impact the PEMWE. Then the
state-of-the-art  bubble  management  methods  to  mitigate  bubble-induced  performance  losses are  summarized.
Due  to  the  similarity  between  PEMWE  and  anion  exchange  membrane  water  electrolysis  (AEMWE),  we  also
extend  related  discussions  for  AEMWE.  Lastly,  we  present  principles  of  bubble  management,  followed  by  an
outlook of scientific questions and suggestions for future research priorities.

1. Introduction

The  increasing  demand  for  energy  consumption  and  the  need  for
carbon-emission  reduction  worldwide  are  the  main  momentums  for
developing  renewable  energies.  In  the  past  decades,  the  booming
development  of  hydro,  wind,  solar,  and  tide  energy  has  shown  their
great potential to replace the fossil energy. However, most of these en-
ergy sources are known to be locally shackled because of geographical
dislocations between energy-producing and energy-consuming regions
and are difficult to integrate into the grid because of intermittent elec-
tricity production [1,2]. Therefore, an efficient energy carrier for stor-
age and transport is highly needed. Hydrogen has been regarded as an
ideal  energy  carrier  in  future  energy  society  for  its  advantages  of
zero-emission  and  high  energy  density.  The  International  Renewable
Energy  Agency  forecasts  that  hydrogen  and  its  derivatives  will
contribute to 12% of final energy consumption by 2050 [3]. Thanks to
the development of various fuel cells and hydrogen internal combustion
engine techniques, we can see a promising future of hydrogen as a daily
fuel for powering vast applications [4–9]. For the source of hydrogen,
the  decreasing  price  of  renewable  electricity  provides  an  excellent

chance for massive hydrogen production from water electrolysis, which
makes the locally shackled renewable energy storable and transportable
[10].

The main water electrolysis techniques include alkaline water elec-
trolysis  (AWE),  proton  exchange  membrane  water  electrolysis
(PEMWE), and solid oxide electrolysis (SOEC) [11]. Some excellent re-
views  have  detailedly  introduced  differences  between  these  water
electrolysis  techniques  [11–15].  Among  these  techniques,  PEMWE
shows  unique  advantages  over  other  electrolytic  water  technologies.
First, PEMWE can operate at a higher current density compared to AWE
and SOEC [16]. During the operation, its excellent dynamic performance
allows PEMWE to have high load flexibility (down to 0% and also sup-
port  overload  operation)  [11].  Compared  to  PEMWE,  the  limited  dy-
namic  performance  of  AWE  and  SOEC  are  less  suitable  for  transient
operation.  Second,  PEMWE  has  a  much  faster  cold  start  (seconds  to
minutes) than AWE (minutes to hours) and SOEC [14]. In addition, the
cross-permeability in the PEM electrolysis cell is very low, and it pro-
duces  hydrogen  with  a  purity higher  than the  AEW, which  is  usually
greater than 99.99% after drying [17]. The compact module design of
PEMWE also supports high pressure operation and can even work under

* Corresponding author. Institute of Fuel Cells, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, 200240, PR

China.
** Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: yanxiaohui@sjtu.edu.cn (X. Yan), junliang.zhang@sjtu.edu.cn (J. Zhang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101075
Received 17 August 2022; Received in revised form 27 December 2022; Accepted 9 January 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)101075Availableonline18January20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

S. Yuan et al.

differential pressure conditions of 350 bar [18]. Taken together, these
advantages  make  PEMWE  more  suitable  for  working  with  renewable
energy sources, which are usually dynamic and intermittent.

Although promising, the high cost due to the use of precious metal
catalysts and poor practical performance at high current densities hinder
the commercialization of PEMWE [19–21]. As shown in Fig. 1, a typical
PEMWE  cell  consists  of  several  main  components  as  follows.  A
catalyst-coated  membrane  (CCM)  where  hydrogen  evolution  reaction
(HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) take place, locates in the
middle of the cell and is composed of a cathode catalyst layer (CL), an
anode CL and a PEM. Right next to the CCM, liquid and gas transport
through two pieces of porous transport layers (PTL) [22–24]. Because
most  of  the  water-gas  transport  occurs  in  the  anode  in  a  typical
anode-circulation  operation,  some  literature  also  denotes  the  anode
porous transport layer as the liquid-gas diffusion layer (LGDL) and the
cathode porous transport layer as the gas diffusion layer (GDL) [25–27].
The  CCM  and  PTL  are  tightly  clamped  by  flow  fields  and  end-plates,
where  flow  fields  are  responsible  for  water  distribution  and  gas
drainage,  and  end-plates  ensure  that  the  components  are  tightly
assembled  to  prevent  leakage.  Alternatively,  some  PEMWE  cells  may
employ catalyst-coated PTLs (PTE) instead of CCM, which is similar to
gas diffusion electrodes in fuel cells (GDE) [28–31]. The self-supported
electrode where the catalyst is grown directly on the surface of PTL can
also be considered as a type of PTE [32].

Current research has been focusing on reducing the cost of PEMWE
through developing new catalysts and electrode materials but often ig-
nores  the  impacts  of  electrolysis  products,  and  gas  bubbles,  on  cell
performance during practical operations. Although bubbles can facili-
tate local convection to some extent, they have an overall negative effect
on the reaction [28,33–37]. The situation becomes more complex within
a PEMWE cell, where both bubble evolution and bubble transport pro-
cesses take place. While the former occurs on the catalytic surface, the
latter involves multistep through various components.

The bubble evolution and transport processes occurring inside the
practical  PEMWE  cell  and  their  impacts  on  cell  performance  are
currently understudied. In recent reports, it has been found that the high
bubble coverage, slow bubble detachment, insufficient bubble genera-
tion sites, as well as gas accumulation issues in PEMWE cells lead to a
series  of  negative  impacts,  including  high  mass  transport  loss,  low
catalyst  utilization  and  unstable  cell  performance  (Fig.  1).  Therefore,

rational bubble management is highly desired. Almost all main PEMWE
cell components affect the trip of bubbles from generation to removal
which is somewhat similar to the water management in PEM fuel cells
and the entire process in turn greatly influences the cell performance
[38,39]. The modification of the relevant components can lead to dra-
matic performance improvements. For example, a new electrode design
aiming  to  achieve  rational  bubble  management  improves  the  anode
catalyst utilization, which is 24 times that of conventional design and
achieve  an  ultra-low  catalyst  loading  [40];  a  porous  transport  layer
(PTL)  design  that  resolves  the  gas  accumulation  issue  can reduce  the
mass  transport  overpotential  by  up  to  76.7%  [41].  These  reports
demonstrate the importance of bubble management, which warrants a
complete understanding of bubble behaviors in the PEMWE cell. Many
similar  bubble  management  designs  can  also  be  found  in  the  recent
anion  exchange  membrane  water  electrolysis  (AEMWE)  reports  and
significantly improve the electrolyzer performance. Since AEMWE has
almost the same MEA and cell structure as PEMWE, except that each
component uses a different material and a different liquid feed mode,
some discussion on bubbles in PEMWE can be extended to AEMWE.

This  article  focuses  on  the  evolution,  transport,  impact,  and  man-
agement of bubbles in PEMWE cells. For the entire process from bubble
generation  to  removal,  we  start  with  a  comprehensive  review  of  the
bubble evolution process, i.e., nucleation, growth, detachment; and the
bubble transport process, i.e., all the processes bubble experienced after
detaching  from  the  catalyst  surface  that  occurs  in  different  parts  of
PEMWE  cell  and  at  their  interfaces.  We  then  discuss  the  influence  of
both bubble evolution and transport on PEMWE, followed by reviewing
the most recent advances in bubble management strategies, including
components  design  (catalyst  layer,  porous  transport  layer,  flow  field,
and new cell architecture design) and active management approaches.
Additionally, the related discussion has also been extended to AEMWE
to be a more general guide to MEA-type water electrolyzers. Finally, the
remaining challenges are presented and discussed and the directions for
future  research  work  toward  designing  and  developing  high-
performance PEMWE are proposed.

Fig. 1. The structure of a typical proton exchange water electrolysis cell and the bubble issues within it.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010752

S. Yuan et al.

2. Bubble evolution

2.1. Overview

In PEMWE, hydrogen is evolved from the proton in the cathode and
oxygen is evolved from the water molecules in the anode. According to
this electrolysis mechanism, water as the reactant is usually supplied on
the  anode  side.  Therefore,  the  bubbles  evolution  process  is  mainly
happened on the OER side, while most hydrogen gas can directly flow
out  from  the  cell  without  forming  bubbles.  Therefore,  in  the  case  of
PEMWE, the relevant discussion is focused on oxygen bubbles.

Three  main  stages  are  involved  in  the  bubble  evolution  process
during  water  electrolysis.  With  the  continuous  generation  of  oxygen
from the catalytic surface, bubbles experience nucleation, growth, and
detachment processes and then leave the CL (Fig. 2). This section revisits
the bubble dynamic and discusses the factors that affect the evolution
processes.

2.2. Nucleation

The  nucleation  of  bubbles  in  water  electrolysis  is  driven  by  the
continuous increase of the dissolved gas concentration near the catalytic
surface  Cgas.  During  the  operation  of  the  water  electrolyzer,  the  OER
release gas molecules in the liquid phase and cause Cgas to be higher than
its  saturation  concentration  Csat.  According  to  Henry’s  law,  the  gas
saturation concentration Csat is proportional to its partial pressure P:

Csat = PKH(T)

(1)

In  this  equation,  KH  is  Henry’s  solubility  which  is  temperature-
dependent and gas-liquid pair dependent. When Cgas  > Csat, the gas in
the liquid phase is supersaturated. The gas supersaturation ζ is defined
as:

ζ =

Cgas (cid:0) Csat
Csat

(2)

With the increasing of ζ, nucleation of bubbles occurs at certain sites
at some point (Fig. 2a). A higher supersaturation level implies a higher
tendency for bubble nucleation.

The nucleation of bubbles is usually described by classical nucleation
theory (CNT) [42,43]. The free energy for bubble formation is defined as
the  sum of surface energy for forming a gas(cid:0) liquid interface and the
volume energy for forming a bulk gas phase. The peak energy barrier
△Gcrit  for  bubble  nucleation  implies  the  nucleation  of  bubbles  takes
place when a critical size rcrit  of the gas bubble is reached. Supersatu-
ration drives the bubbles to cross the critical point. For homogeneous
nucleation,  the  critical  supersaturation  predicted  by  CNT  for  bubble
(cid:0) 1) [44]. For heteroge-
nucleation is ~1400 (based on γ  = 0.071 N m
neous nucleation, which is more common in real-world scenarios, the
critical  supersaturation  observed  for  the  nucleation  of  O2  bubbles

(~130) is much lower than in the homogeneous case [45]. In PEM water
electrolysis, which  is a heterogeneous  nucleation scenario, △Gcrit  de-
pends not only on the interaction of the liquid phase and gas phase but
also on the interaction between the solid phase and gas phase. The CL
surface provides favored nucleation sites and has a reduction effect on
the △Gcrit. The CL’s morphology and surface contact angle in this het-
erogeneous  nucleation  system  greatly  influence  this  reduction  effect
[42].

The  sites  of  bubble  evolution  and  gas  evolution  reaction  can  be
decoupled. Although bubbles usually nucleate where the OER is most
active,  it  is  clear  from  the  nucleation  conditions  that  bubbles  do  not
necessarily  nucleate  precisely  at  the  site  where  OER  occurs.  For
example, Pe ̃nas et al. designed a ring microelectrode and they found that
the  bubbles  form  at  the  center  of  the  ring  microelectrode  where  no
catalysts exist (Fig. 3a) [46]. The dissolved gas molecules gather in the
hydrophobic  microcavity  and  form  the  first  bubble  nuclei  just  a  few
seconds after the reaction begins. The bubble is kept out of reach of the
ring electrode during the subsequent bubble growth. This separation of
the bubble evolution site and the gas evolution reaction site eliminates
the direct coverage of the catalytic surface by bubbles and significantly
reduces  the  overpotential  fluctuations  of  the  gas  evolution  reaction
during  the  bubble  evolution  process  [47,48].  Similar  separation  phe-
nomenon of the bubble evolution site and the gas evolution reaction site,
as  well  as  chronopotentiometric  fluctuation  reduction  has  also  been
observed in the electrolyzer with superaerophobic array electrodes [49].
In PEMWE cells, the bubble nucleation sites are influenced by the
three-phase interface properties. In the case where the reaction surface
is submerged in water, the activity of the catalytic site is mainly influ-
enced by the proton-electron transport properties, and bubbles appear
around where OER is most active. For the effect of electron transfer, it
has been confirmed that bubbles are preferentially generated near the
surface with better conductivity on the same CL (Fig. 3b1–2) [50]. The
effect of proton conductivity on bubble formation has not been reported
in the literature. However, it can be speculated that its effect on bubble
generation  sites  is  similar  to  that  of  electron  conduction.  It  is  also
noteworthy that in PEMWE, perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) ionomer has
the ability to transport water in addition to proton conduction. There-
fore, the locations covered by ionomer are theoretically still active for
OER, but the separation of the OER site and the bubble evolution site
may  occur. To  date, there are few reports  in the literature discussing
how  the  ionomer-covered  surface  specifically  affects  the  bubble  dy-
namics  and  electrochemical  response.  Since  the  percentage  of  such
ionomer-covered surfaces in CL is non-negligible, it is necessary to un-
derstand the role of ionomer in bubble evolution.

2.3. Growth

The bubbles grow when the dissolved gas concentration immediately
near  a  bubble’s  interface  (Cb)  is  lower  than  the  dissolved  gas

Fig. 2. Bubble evolution process at the CL of PEMWE (taking the anode as an example): (a) nucleation; (b) growth; (c) detachment.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010753

S. Yuan et al.

Fig.  3. (a)  A  hydrogen  bubble  nucleate  and  grow
from  the  mid  of  a  ring  electrode.  The  red  line  in-
dicates  the  position  of  the  Pt  ring  electrode.  Repro-
duced  with  permission  from  Pe ̃nas  et  al.  [46].
Copyright  2019,  IOP  Publishing.  (b1)  Bubble  evolu-
tion observed through perforated PTL. (b2) Effect of
conductive (tungsten) and non-conductive (polymer)
fibers  between  PTL  and  CL  on  bubble  evolution.
Reproduced  with  permission  from  Mo  et  al.  [50].
Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.

concentration near the catalytic surface Cgas [51]. Cb  can be calculated
by the Laplace-Young equation and Henry’s law [33].

Cb = KHPi = KH

)

+ P0

(

2γ
r

(3)

In this equation, the gas pressure within the bubble with radius r is
denoted by Pi, while the surface tension is denoted by γ. Although the
nucleation process of bubbles can partially reduce Cgas  (almost impos-
sible to reduce to equilibrium level), when HER and OER continually
increase Cgas, Cgas is higher than Cb [42]. This concentration difference
drives the flux of dissolved gas from the liquid phase to bubbles (Fig. 2b)
[51]. The growing rate of the bubbles is mainly dependent on the su-
persaturation level ζ [42]. At the same time, the ζ at the same current
density is affected by many factors, such as geometry and the wettability
of the catalyst layer [25,33]. The porous transport layer and flow field
may also influence ζ by affecting the bubble removal rate from CL.

Three bubble growth stages are involved in water electrolysis [33,34,
42,51,52].  In  the  first  stage,  the  internal  and  surface  tension  forces
dominate  the  bubble  growth.  The  growth  rate  of  the  bubble  can  be
described by a time-dependent bubble radius r(t) = A⋅t, where A is the
growth coefficient and t is the time. In the second stage, the growth rate
of  the  bubble  is  controlled  by  the  flux  rate  of  dissolved  gas  from the
liquid phase to the bubble, and r(t) = A⋅t1/2. The last stage is governed
by the electrochemical reaction rate or so-called direct injection of gas
into the bubble and r(t) = A⋅t1/3. For water electrolysis, the growth of
bubble radius usually negatively impacts the overall hydrogen and ox-
ygen production performance due to the coverage effect on the active
area and slower bubble detachment [53].

2.4. Detachment

Detachment  takes  place  when  upward  forces  overcome  the  down-
ward forces (Fig. 2c). In a most simple model given by Fritz’s formula
[54],  where  buoyant  force  is  considered  as  the  only  upward  force  to
balance  the  adhesion  force,  the  detachment  radius  of  bubbles  can  be
obtained by [55].

)1

3

(

3γrc
2ρg

rd =

(4)

where rc is the radius of contact area between a bubble and solid surface,
γ is the surface tension, g is the gravitational constant and ρ is the liquid
density. The case of water electrolysis is much more complicated. The
electrostatic interactions between charged bubble and electrode surface
and the Marangoni force also influence the bubble detachment behavior
[42,56]. The detailed discussion and modeling of this case are reviewed
in Taqieddin’s work [57]. According to the models, in addition to the
current density of electrolysis, the surface morphology and contact angle
of  the  electrodes  also  affect  the  bubble  detachment  radius  and  rate.
Many aerophobic electrode designs have demonstrated that increasing
the  bubble  contact  angle  can  substantially  reduce  the  bubble  detach-
ment size and increase the detachment rate [58].

The bubble detachment is not a complete unpinning process from the
catalytic  surface  (Fig.  2c).  The  detachment  of  a  bubble  starts  with
creating a neck between the bubble and the substrate. With more un-
balanced  forces,  the  neck  keeps  narrowing  until  it  disappears.  After-
ward, the bubble detaches from the catalytic surface and sinks into the
liquid phase [55,59]. The remaining small gas pocket on the substrate
facilitates  another  bubble  growth  and  detachment  cycle  in  the  same
place [33].

2.5. Multiple bubbles evolution during the practical electrolysis process

The  above  parts  focus  on  individual  bubble  behavior  to  show  the
mechanism of bubble evolution. While during the practical electrolysis
process,  multiple  bubbles  evolution  processes  occur  simultaneously.
Understanding the multiple bubbles evolution process during practical
electrolysis is very important for bubble management. It may be more
meaningful to compare parameters such as bubble density, bubble size
distribution, average bubble detachment period and bubble coverage of
the sample at the same current density than those investigated in the
evolution  of  individual  bubbles  to  perform  optimization  of  bubble
management.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010754

S. Yuan et al.

In an open electrolysis system (like the three-electrode cell), char-
acterizing  the  behavior  of  bubbles  is  relatively  simple.  Using  a  high-
speed  camera,  it  is  possible  to  qualitatively  investigate  the  multiple
bubbles evolution behavior during the electrolysis (Fig. 4a). Combined
with the electrochemical data, the electrochemical response of different
bubble evolution characteristics (such as growth behavior, and detach-
ment behavior) can be compared and confirmed [60]. As Fig. 4a shows,
it is clear that electrodes with denser and smaller bubbles show lower
overpotential  and  overpotential  fluctuation.  Methods  to  analyze  the
changes  in  overpotential  and  cell  performance  by  characterizing  the
changes in bubble behavior have been used in many reports [50,61–64].
Further,  with  the  help  of  techniques  like  particle  image  velocimetry,
particle  tracking  velocimetry  and  simulation,  the  bubble  size,  2D/3D
velocity and bubble-electrolyte two-phase flow behavior can be inves-
tigated and compared quantitatively (Fig. 4b and c) [65–67].

In PEMWE, as a closed system, the characterization of bubble evo-
lution is much more difficult. The bubbles originate from the CL, and
their outflow pathway from the cell is influenced by the structure and
physical characteristics of both PTL and flow field [68]. It is commonly
believed that bubbles mainly evolved at the three-phase interface in the
CL  [28,50,69].  However,  due  to  the  limitation  of  visualization  tech-
niques, the detailed bubble evolution behavior at CL and CL-PTL inter-
face is still unclear [50,70–72]. In order to investigate the characteristics
of bubble evolution, it is desirable to observe the behavior of bubbles at
the CL-PTL interface and even inside the CL, but the direct observation
of  bubbles  is  substantially  limited  due  to  compact  cell  structure.  A
common approach to observing the bubbles inside the cell is to use a
transparent flow field plate [71,73,74]. But the bubbles observed in this
method are the bubbles that flow from the PTL rather than those bubbles
directly generated from the CL. Although it is possible to demonstrate
some  characteristics  of  bubbles  employing  a  perforated  PTL  and  a
transparent  flow  field,  it  is  difficult  to  decouple  the  effect  of  the  CL
characteristics and the characteristics of PTL [50,75]. Techniques such
as X-ray computed tomography and in operando in-plane neutron im-
aging are able to penetrate the cell to obtain the gas distribution as well
as the changes in gas distribution to observe the gas transport processes,
but their resolution is not sufficient to investigate the evolution behavior
of the bubbles [76–80]. To understand the behavior of bubble evolution,
some indirect electrochemical methods have been developed. Based on
the fact that the current fluctuation during constant voltage operation of
the electrolyzer mainly originated from bubble evolution at a specific
frequency range, frequency analysis can be a method to understand the
multiple  bubbles  evolution  behaviors
in  practical  electrolyzers
(Fig.  4d1)  [81,82].  The  different  frequency  ranges  represent  the
different  bubble  states  at  the  CL-PTL  interface  [83].  The  frequency
characteristics in the current fluctuations can be extracted by the Fourier
transform. By integrating the Fourier transform results of current data
for three frequency ranges, bubbles can be divided into three types: 0.03
Hz < f<1 Hz, 1 Hz < f<10 Hz, 10 Hz < f<50 Hz. Most bubbles are at
10–50Hz,  this  type  of  bubble  can  be  roughly  attributed  to
nucleation-driven, and its share is usually increasing with current den-
sity increase, which is similar to the bubble evolution in the open sys-
tem.  The  low-frequency  fluctuation  is  derived  from  the  huge  bubbles
that are confined by PTL channel which detach from the CL with at a
much lower frequency. As shown in Fig. 4d2, by performing a frequency
analysis of the fluctuations in the current, the percentage of bubbles in
different frequency ranges at different current densities can be roughly
analyzed.

2.6. Bubble evolution in AEMWE

The bubble evolution process in AEMWE is highly similar to that in
PEMWE. However, in addition to the OER, the bubbles produced by HER
also need to be considered. In AEMWE, water is firstly involved in HER
and produces H2 and OH
. The generated OH- diffuses through the AEM
to the anode side for OER, producing O2 (Fig. 5a). In AEMWE, the mode

(cid:0)

of  supplying  electrolyte  to  both  cathode  and  anode  and  the  mode  of
supplying  electrolyte  to  anode  alone  are  commonly  used  [84–88].
Therefore, both hydrogen bubble evolution and oxygen bubble evolu-
tion are involved in AEMWE. The relevant discussion of oxygen bubbles
can be drawn from the PEMWE. The subsequent discussion will focus on
the  cathode,  which  is  associated  with  hydrogen  bubbles.  For  the
nucleation,  the  reported  supersaturation  for  H2  bubbles  nucleation  is
about 310, which is higher than the oxygen bubble (~130) [45,89]. For
the growth and detachment, the produced hydrogen molecules are twice
as oxygen at the same electrolysis current density (Fig. 5b). This may
bring  a  higher  growth  rate  and  higher  detachment  frequency.  Corre-
spondingly, the evolution period is significantly reduced compared to
the OER, and more bubbles are generated, which can be clearly observed
in the electrolyzed water in the open system (Fig. 5c) [61].

Another major difference in bubble evolution between AEMWE and
PEMWE is the catalyst materials. In PEMWE, the most common catalyst
in the cathode is PGMs and the catalyst in the anode is Ir, IrOx and RuOx.
In contrast, the choice of catalysts is much broader in AEMWE. Usually,
transition metal-based materials are used in AEMWE for both anode and
cathode  [88].  There  are  also  studies  that  will  use  the  same  catalyst
configuration  as  PEMWE  for  the  AEMWE  experiments  [90].  For
CCM-type  CL,  the  use  of  different  catalysts  on  the  one  hand  leads  to
different  CL  surface  properties,  which  may  lead  to  different  bubble
evolution features at the same current density [91]. On the other hand,
the flexibility of the catalyst in AEMWE makes it easier to control the
bubble evolution by changing the catalyst as well as the CL structure
[92,93]. In addition, self-supported PTE design is widely employed in
many AEMWE studies [32,94,95]. The evolution of bubbles and their
transport behavior in the self-supported PTEs are more complicated than
in the CCM type CL. Since AEMWE is usually fed with liquid alkaline
electrolytes instead of pure water to both provide reactant and enhance
(cid:0)
the conductivity of the OH
, most of the self-supported PTE surface is
active during electrolysis [88,96]. Therefore, the bubble is able to grow
anywhere  in  the  self-supported  PTE,  and  its  growth  and  detachment
process  is  constrained  by  the  porous  structure.  Meanwhile,  while  the
bubble  in  the  upper  position  of  the  PTE  is  still  growing,  the  bubble
transported from the below region may have also reached this position
and  influenced  the  growing  bubble.  This  leads  to  a  hybrid  of  bubble
evolution and transport processes. Iwata et al. observed and summarized
three modes of bubble evolution in PTE by changing the wettability of
porous  nickel  foams  (Fig.  5d):  internal  growth  and  departure  mode,
wicking mode, and gas-filled mode [60]. For the internal growth and
departure mode, both bubble nucleation and detachment occur on the
surface  and  inside  the  porous  foam,  and  the  diameter  of  the  bubble
leaving is smaller than the pore diameter. When the bubble detachment
diameter increases and becomes comparable to the pore size, frequent
bubble  coalescence  occurs  within  the  porous  structure.  It  makes  the
bubbles removal from the internal pores significantly suppressed, and at
this time, it enters the wicking mode. In the gas-filled mode, the bubble
evolution process is fully coupled with the transport process, and the
growth of the large bubbles observed on the surface is affected both by
diffusion  and  by  the  coalescence  of  the  bubbles  transported  up  from
below.

The difference in PTL also affects the bubble evolution in the cell. In
AEMWE, the PTL used in the cathode is usually Ni foam, carbon paper
and carbon cloth, while in PEMWE, the main PTL in the anode is usually
Ti-based, such as fibrous Ti or sintered Ti powder [25,97]. This leads to
differences in wettability, porosity, corresponding MPL properties, and
mechanical properties among PTLs, and will eventually lead to different
CL-PTL interfaces formed when CL and PTL are tightened by pressure.
Eventually, the distribution of bubble nucleation sites, bubble detach-
ment size, and bubble detachment frequency will be affected.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010755

S. Yuan et al.

Fig. 4. (a) Combining optical characterization and electrochemical characterization measurements to investigate the bubble evolution in an open electrolysis system.
Reproduced with permission from Iwata et al. [60]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V. (b) Investigate multiple bubble evolution behavior using CFD simulation approach.
Reproduced with permission from Wosiak et al. [67]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (c) Quantifying bubble size and 3D velocity with particle tracking velocimetry
technique. Reproduced with permission from Wu et al. [65]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (d1) Current fluctuation during constant voltage electrolyzer operation.
(d2) The percentage of different fluctuation frequency range at each current density after performing FFT on current-time data. Reproduced with permission from
Kwan et al. [81]. Copyright 2022, IOP Publishing.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010756

S. Yuan et al.

Fig. 5. (a) The difference between the working mechanism of PEMWE (left) and AEMWE (right). AEMWE is usually operated using either a cathode and anode
water/electrolyte supply mode or an anode water/electrolyte supply mode. (b) The hydrogen production is twice as much as the oxygen when the electrolysis cell is
working. Reproduced with permission from Liang et al. [98]. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Hydrogen gas produces significantly more bubbles than
oxygen during water electrolysis. Reproduced with permission from Matsushima et al. [99]. Copyright 2003, Elsevier B.V. (d) Three bubble evolution modes when
using foam electrode. Reproduced with permission from Iwata et al. [60]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V.

3. Bubble transport

3.1. Overview

The bubble transport process involves the processes in CLs, PTLs and
flow fields. Water is supplied and distributed to the whole reaction area
through the anode flow field and PTL. After applying voltage, OER and
HER occur and produce gases from the anode and cathode, respectively.
As shown in Fig. 6, because the anode is filled with liquid water, the
produced oxygen leaves the anode CL in the form of gas bubbles across
the PTL and then reaches flow field, which is further removed from the
cell driven by the water flow. Usually, the PEMWE only needs a water
supply  at  the  anode  side  because  water  is  consumed  by  anodic  OER
reaction [100,101]. But in some cases, the cathode is also supplied with
water [102]. In the later discussions, we will focus on the common case

that PEMWE is supplied with water at the anode only. In addition, due to
the  limitation  of  analytical  tools  and  methods,  the  knowledge  about
bubble transport within CL is still insufficient and needs more effort to
be investigated further. The following discussion will start with bubble
transport in PTL.

3.2. In porous transport layer

The bubble transport in PTL is a complex two-phase flow process in
the cell. Many efforts have recently been devoted to understanding this
process through imaging techniques, including optical, neutron, X-ray
imaging,  and  computational  studies  [77,103–106].  With  their  efforts,
we can now give a comprehensive illustration of bubble behavior in this
transport process.

Bubble transport routes in PTL are guided by the porous structure.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010757

S. Yuan et al.

Fig. 6. Overview of the bubble transport process in PEMWE (anode side).

(cid:0) 1  gas in PTL-on-Chip. Reproduced with permission from Lee et al.
Fig. 7. Bubble transport in PTL. (a) Captured images during constant injection of 10 mL min
[108]. Copyright 2017, Elsevier B.V. (b–c) Oxygen content distribution in PTL. In (b) PTL is shown in gray and oxygen content is shown in red. The coordinate axes
and arrows indicate the corresponding position of figures c–e. In (c) the saturation distribution of oxygen along the PTL cross-section is plotted for different current
densities. Reproduced with permission from Angelis et al. [113]. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d1-2) Comparison of the oxygen content of different
(cid:0) 2. Reproduced with permission from Satjaritanun et al. [77]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.
parts of PTL under the operating conditions of 1.0 A cm
(e) Neutron radiographs of a working PEMWE cell at different current densities. The water thickness (indicate the water saturation) is displayed as a color map and
represents the water distribution across the whole cell. Reproduced with permission from Maier et al. [27]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.

(cid:0) 2 and 4.0 A cm

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010758

S. Yuan et al.

and

throat

collected

size  distributions)

Oxygen generated in the anode tends to transport through large voids
and  may  be  stopped  by  the  throat  at  some  locations.  This  transport
behavior consists of two repeating steps: pressurization and penetration
[107]. A microfluidic platform developed by the Bazylak group, termed
PTL-on-Chip, explained this bubble transport behavior [107–110]. The
manufactured PTL-on-Chip can simulate felt, sintered powder, and foam
PTLs using volumetric pore space information (through-plane porosity
from
distributions
micro-computed  tomography  (micro  CT)  images.  Gas  is  then  injected
into simulated PTLs through the gas inlet to simulate the produced gas
bubbles  from  CL  [108].  With  the  continuous  gas  injection,  it  can  be
observed that the total saturation of gas in simulated PTL remains the
same most of the time while sometimes encountering a sharp increase.
This  long-time  constant  total  saturation  implies  that  the  gas  hardly
moves in the PTL and is under increasing pressurization. As shown in
Fig. 7a, the bubble flow in the pressurization state is hindered by the
limiting throat in PTL. The following steep increase of the total satura-
tion after a long pressurization time indicates a rapid gas penetration in
new  voids  in  PTL.  During  penetration,  the  limited  gas  flow  suddenly
breaches the previous limiting throat and grows with the low resistance
direction. The gas flow in different simulated PTLs followed the same
behavior but exhibited different flow pathways. The porosity distribu-
tions and throat size distributions determine the primary flow pathway
under different gas injection rates. The primary flow pathway remains
the same at all gas injection rates in one simulated PTL. At a higher gas
injection rate, new flow pathways will be opened up to increase trans-
port flux. Moreover, the gas flow behavior may switch from capillary
fingering to viscous-fingering in some PTL morphology at a higher gas
injection rate, resulting in a decrease in the local saturation near the gas
inlet.

(cid:0) 2 and 4.0 A cm

Bubble transport in practical PEMWE operation follows some similar
behavior as observed in the simulated PTL experiment. In the same PTL,
bubbles  tend  to  follow  some  preferential  pathways  guided  by  PTL’s
structure.  These  pathways  are  not significantly  influenced by  varying
current density, water feed rate and operating pressure [77,111,112].
Satjaritanun et al. have observed a working PEMWE cell through oper-
ando X-ray computed tomography [77]. From the in-plane view of the
cell, the oxygen followed almost the same transport pathways under 1.0
(cid:0) 2 at the same water feed rate. At the same time, a
A cm
three  times  larger  water  circulation  speed  did  not  influence  in-plane
(cid:0) 2.  In  the  through-plane  view
bubble  transport  behavior  at  1.0  A  cm
(Fig.  7d1–2),  the  oxygen  content  in  each  part  of  PTL  also  showed  a
similar pattern at different current densities. Similar transport behavior
has also been observed in Angelis’ works [113]. As shown in Fig. 7b and
c, the in-plane oxygen content distribution at different current densities
showed  a  similar  pattern,  implying  that  oxygen  escapes  the  cell  by
preferential routes. The oxygen distribution region is slightly wider at
high currents than at low currents, which could mean the original pri-
mary transport pathways have been extended. This result is consistent
with the transport pathway extension phenomenon in the simulated PTL
case [107].

The visualization of oxygen content distribution illustrates the whole
bubble transport route in PTL (Fig. 7b–e) [77,113]. The flow pathways
of the oxygen bubbles begin when the bubbles detach from the CL into
the preferred pores. In the first step, when the bubbles occupy the voids
with the low resistance in the part of PTL near the CL, the distribution of
oxygen seems not relevant to the ribs and channels but depends more on
the  PTL’s  morphology.  Subsequently,  some  bubbles  have  a  chance  to
move on and have a tendency to move gradually toward the pathways
underneath  the  channel.  When  the  bubble  reaches  the  PTL  near  the
channel, it is rapidly discharged and the occupied pores are released.
During this process, some bubbles are trapped in the PTL under the ribs,
leading  to  a  higher  oxygen  content  than  that  in  the  PTL  under  the
channel. It can be found that the rib and channel features of flow field
play a critical role in shaping the bubble transport pathway in PTL.

Although most operating conditions do not significantly affect the

bubble transport routes, changes in some operating conditions alter the
water/gas saturation profiles across the anode PTL at the through-plane
direction,  and  affect  the  electrochemical  reaction.  In  a  PEMWE  cell
operating at a steady state, the water saturation decreases from the PTL-
flow field interface to the PTL-CL interface [111,113,114]. This trend of
decreasing water saturation with decreasing distance from the PTL-CL
interface is the same for different current densities, but the final water
saturation near the PTL-CL interface is different. As current density in-
creases (Fig. 8a), the gas generation rate also increases, and the water
saturation near the PTL-CL interface decreases. Under a current density
(cid:0) 2, a water saturation of about 0.4 was observed near the
of 2.0 A cm
PTL-CL interface. In addition, the time required to reach a stable water
saturation  distribution  after  loading  current  also  decreases  with
increasing current. The temperature also has a significant impact on the
gas  saturation  distribution  [78].  The  increasing  temperature  has  a
bubble transport enhancement effect under different current densities
(Fig. 8b). This enhancement effect is most significant for the transport
process  near  the  PTL-CL  interface  at  low  current  densities,  causing  a
notable gas saturation decrease, which is beneficial for improving OER
performance. Near the PTL-flow field interface, the increasing temper-
ature  causes  a  gas  saturation  increase.  Unlike  what  occurs  near  the
PTL-CL interface, this saturation elevation effect also increases as the
current ramps up. Additionally, the increasing temperature reduces the
oxygen  accumulation  in  the  PTL  under  the  rib.  These  phenomena
observed  at  PTL-flow  field  interface  are  consistent  with  the  results
observed inside the flow channel, corresponding to an increase in bubble
size and an increase in the number of bubbles in the flow channel at the
same current [71,75,115].

Under  the  same  flow  field,  the  water/gas  saturation  distribution
within different PTLs at the cell scale is similar [27]. Since bubbles are
generated everywhere in the CL and their removal from the cell involves
a long path, the degree of gas accumulation in the PTL increases as it gets
closer to the outlet (Fig. 7e). As the current density increases, the region
of relatively insufficient water saturation within the PTL gradually ex-
pands  from  the  outlet  to  the  inlet.  However,  there  is  still  some  PTL
volume near the outlet location that maintains a high water saturation.

3.3. At the PTL-flow field interface

Bubbles develop from various sites on the PTL surface when the gas
travels  to  the  PTL-flow  field  interface  and  remain  attached  owing  to
surface tension forces (Fig. 9a). As time progresses, the bubble gradually
grows. When the dynamic pressure of flowing water surpasses the sur-
face adhesion force, the gas bubbles detach from the PTL surface and
join the water flow. The bubble growth and detachment process on the
PTL-flow field interface was observed to be a sub-second event (Fig. 9b)
[116]. The time of this process, termed bubble residence time, decreases
with increasing current (Fig. 9c). The average detachment diameter of
bubbles  increases  with  increasing  current  (Fig.  9d).  Leonard  et  al.
modeled  the  bubble  residence  time  as  a  function  of  the  detachment
diameter of bubbles for different current densities (Fig. 9e) [116].

(cid:0)

4πzF

t =

)

plr3

det + 2γr2
det
3RTj

(5)

Where  z  is  charge  number,  F  is  Faraday’s  constant,  pl  is  the  liquid
pressure,  r  is  bubble  radius,  γ  is  surface  tension,  and  j  indicates  the
current  density.  The  current  density  determines  the  growth  rate  of
bubbles on the PTL surface and thus affects the residence time. As dis-
cussed in 3.2, the temperature can affect the bubble transport behavior.
Higher  temperature  can  enhance  upward  gas  transport.  On  the  PTL
surface,  more  upward  gas  migration  could  result  in  a  larger  average
bubble  size  leaving  the  PTL  and  entering  the  channel  at  higher  tem-
peratures. This effect was observed by Li et al. in their PTL with straight-
through pores [75]. The water feed rate was found to have only a tiny
effect on the detachment diameter of bubbles, but was able to increase

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010759

S. Yuan et al.

Fig.  8. Gas/water  saturation  distribution  in  PTL.  (a)  Water  saturation  profiles  and  water  saturation  establishment  dynamics  across  the  thickness  of  the  PTL.
Reproduced with permission from Zlobinski et al. [111]. Copyright 2020, IOP Publishing. (b) Oxygen gas saturation profiles across the thickness of the anode PTL of
an operating electrolyzer and the effect of temperature on gas distribution. Reproduced with permission from Lee et al. [78]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.

the frequency of bubble detachment [117,118].

3.4. In flow field

After detaching from the PTL surface, bubbles are dispersed in the
water flow. At high current density, bubble flow in the flow channel will
show different flow regimes. At low current density, bubble coalescence
occurs at a lower frequency and the bubble size in the flow channel is
relatively  small.  This  flow  state  is  known  as  the  bubbly  flow  regime
(Fig.  9f1)  [71,73].  With  the  current  increase,  bubble  coalescence  be-
comes more frequent and forms slugs that can fill the diameter of the
channel, transforming the flow regime into slug flow (Fig. 9f2). In the
end, the slug flow develops into the annular flow with increasing gas
production.  At  this  stage,  the  gas  phase  occupies  most  spaces  of  the
channel  and  water  distribute  along  the  channel  wall  (Fig.  9f3).  This
development process in flow field can be observed through transparent
end-plates [71,75]. In a single-serpentine flow field, the part near the
inlet exhibits a bubbly flow regime. As the water flows, slugs start to
appear, and the flow regime changes to annular flow in the latter part.
Higher current density not only increases the percentage of slug flow
regime  and  annular  regime,  but  also  makes  flow  enter  the  annular
regime earlier. The change in flow rate did not show a significant effect
on  the  flow  regime  (Fig.  9g1).  Higher  operating  temperatures

significantly increase the size of the bubbles in the channel and may also
cause a shift in the flow regime similar to that which occurs when the
current density increases (Fig. 9g2).

In terms of spatial distribution, the rise in operating current/voltage
significantly increases the inhomogeneity of water-gas distribution and,
in turn, affects the distribution of current density. As shown in Fig. 10a1,
when  the  flow  rate  is  not  large  enough,  the  distribution  of  current
density gradually becomes more and more uneven as the current density
increases  [119].  The  current  density  distribution,  compared  to  the
water-gas distribution in the flow field, is much more consistent with the
water-gas  distribution  within  the  PTL.  As  shown  in  Fig.  10a2b2,  the
region of lower current density in the parallel flow field is not shown to
be significantly correlated with the gas distribution in the transparent
flow  field  [71].  By  comparing  the  current  density  distribution  in  the
parallel flow field with the water-gas distribution in the PTL (Fig. 7e), it
is found that these two distribution maps are highly similar, with the
higher  current  density  concentrated  in  the  region  of  higher  water
thickness.  The  region  of  lower  current  density  in  the  serpentine  flow
field is in the second half of the flow field and has some similarity to the
distribution of the gas distribution observed in the transparent flow field
(Fig. 10a3b1). Although to date there are no reports on the water-gas
distribution  in  the  PTL  when  using  a  serpentine  flow  field,  it  is  still
reasonable  to  speculate  that  the  water-gas  distribution  in  the  PTL  is

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107510

S. Yuan et al.

Fig. 9. (a) Schematic of bubble transport from CL to flow channel. (b–e) Bubble residence time in the channel and bubble departure diameter observed by operando
X-ray tomography. (b) Radiographs of an oxygen bubble appearing and departure on in flow channel. (c–e) The bubble residence time in the channel and bubble
departure diameter as a function of operating current. Reproduced with permission from Leonard et al. [116]. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (f) Three flow patterns in
the flow channel. Bubbly flow (f1), Slug flow (f2), Annular flow (f3). Reproduced from with permission Wang et al. [73]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V. (g1-2) O2
bubble flow pattern in flow fields at different flow rate and temperatures. Reproduced with permission from Majasan et al. [71]. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V.

consistent with the current density distribution based on the results of
the parallel one. Further study of the relationship between changes in
flow field characteristics and water-gas distribution in PTL is needed to
understand how the flow field affects the performance and stability of
PEMWE.

3.5. Bubble transport in AEMWE

Few articles have been published on the investigation of the trans-
port behavior of bubbles in AEMWE. Since the cell structures of AEMWE
and  PEMWE  are  almost  the  same,  the  bubble  transport  processes
involved  should  be  very  similar.  In  addition  to  some  differences  in
transport behavior due to the differences in hydrophobicity, porosity,
corresponding  MPL  properties,  and  mechanical  properties  brought
about  when  using  different  materials  of  PTL,  there  are  probably  two
main differences in the behavior of bubble transport between PEMWE
and AEMWE. Firstly, the hydrogen production rate is twice of oxygen
production rate at the same current density. In contrast to PEMWE, the
gas transport routes and gas saturation in the AEMWE cathode should
increase substantially. Moreover, considering that AEMWE often oper-
ates with electrolyte supplied on both sides of the cathode and anode,

the water-gas two-phase flow may be a more severe issue in AEMWE at
high current density. Another significant difference is the CL structure.
As discussed in 2.6, bubble evolution and bubble transport happen in the
same  space  in  self-supported  PTE.  In  some  self-supported  PTEs  made
with electrodeposition and electrospinning, the PTE surface is also the
catalytic surface [120,121]. Therefore, the transport process has an even
more significant influence on the reaction because the confined bubble
will keep masking the catalytic surface. The gas saturation distribution,
as in Figs. 7–8, may primarily reflect the gas transport path in PEMWE,
while in AEMWE using self-supported PTE, it may reflect which loca-
tions of the catalytic surface are more likely to be covered by bubbles
and cause performance loss.

4. Impacts of bubble

The  efficiency  of  PEMWE  cells  can  be  conveniently  compared  by
their working voltage at a given current density. The difference between
the cell working voltage and the equilibrium voltage E0  of the electro-
chemical reaction at a given operating current density indicates the ef-
ficiency  loss  of  PEMWE  cells.  This  voltage  loss  is  derived  from  three
parts: activation loss, Ohmic loss, and mass transport loss:

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107511

S. Yuan et al.

Fig. 10. (a1) Distribution of current density in electrolysis cell with different operating voltages. (a2) Distribution of current density in a parallel flow field. (a3)
Distribution of current density in triple-serpentine flow field. Reproduced with permission from Roenning et al. [119]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (b1) Gas-water
distribution  in  transparent  serpentine  flow  field  at  different  current  densities.  (b2)  Gas-water  distribution  in  transparent  parallel  flow  field  at  different  current
densities. Reproduced with permission from Majasan et al. [71]. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V.

ΔV = E0 + ηact + ηohm + ηmass

(6)

A typical polarization curve of PEMWE after dividing the three losses
is shown in Fig. 11e [122]. In most gas evolution reactions, the bubble
evolution  process  can  affect  all  these  three  losses  [33,34],  and  in
PEMWE cells, the impacts on activation loss and mass transport loss are
more  significant  as  no  liquid  electrolyte  is  used  [41,123–126].  In
PEMWE cells, the majority of mass transfer-related losses are derived
from the anode because of the complex two-phase flow behavior, and
the mass transport loss is observed to be noticeable when the current
density is over 1.0 A cm

(cid:0) 2 [127].

4.1. Activation loss

Activation  overpotential  ηact  reflects  the  kinetic  losses  in  electro-
chemical reactions and can be derived from the Butler-Volmer equation
[16]:

[

[

I = Aj0

exp

(cid:0)

αanF
RT

]
)

[
(cid:0) exp

(cid:0)

E (cid:0) Eeq

(cid:0)

αcnF
RT

E (cid:0) Eeq

]]
)

(7)

In  this  equation,  A  denotes  the  active  area,  j0,  αa  and  αc  denotes  the
anodic and cathodic apparent charge transfer coefficients, respectively.
During the gas evolution on the catalyst surface, the attached bubbles
mask part of the electrocatalytic surface area A, resulting in an addi-
tional activation overpotential [128,129]. The bubble coverage is usu-
ally defined as the ratio of the blocked active area to the total active
area. Numerous efforts have been devoted to investigating the degree of
bubble coverage of the catalytic surface and its influence on activation
loss [60,129–133]. Vogt provides an empirical relationship between the
bubble coverage and current density by observing the bubble evaluation

in  stagnant  and  flow  electrolytes  experiments  [129,130].  The  bubble
coverage θ  increases nonlinearly with the current density and crudely
has a relationship form as:

)m

(

j
jΘ→1

Θ =

(8)

Where j is the current density and jΘ→1  is a fictitious limiting current
density. In their case, the curve correlates with the data points well when
(cid:0) 2 (Fig. 11a). The effect of bubble coverage
m is 0.3 and jΘ→1  is 30 A cm
on  voltage  loss  was  also  observed  by  controlling  the  size  of  bubbles.
Iwata  et  al.  have  observed  different  bubble  growth  and  detachment
modes  by  adjusting  the  wettability  of  the  electrode  [60].  The  bigger
bubble sizes generated during the electrolysis process reflect the higher
bubble coverage and result in more voltage loss (Fig. 11d1). In addition
to  directly  observing  the  relationship  between  bubble  growth  and
detachment  and  voltage  losses,  some  superior  CL  designs  that  favor
increasing  the  bubble  nucleation  sites  and  decreasing  the  bubble
detachment size also demonstrate the negative effect of bubble coverage
on voltage loss [134,135]. However, it is worth noting that the regula-
tion of the bubble evolution process influences not only the activation
loss due to bubble coverage but also the other losses [33,34]. It is still
hard to quantify the effect of bubble coverage level on cell voltage.

4.2. Ohmic loss

The  Ohmic  loss  in  water  electrolysis  is  mainly  derived  from  ion-
conducting  resistance.  For  electrolysis  using  liquid  electrolyte,  both
attached bubbles and flowing bubbles in the electrolyte can block the
ion transport and therefore increase the Ohmic loss [33,34]. However, in
the  case  of  the  PEMWE  cell,  this  ion  transport  blockage  effect  is

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107512

S. Yuan et al.

Fig.  11. (a)  Coverage  of  the  bubble  based  on  the  current  density.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Balzer  et  al.  [130].  Copyright  2003,  IOP  Publishing.  (b)
Concentration profile around bubbles on the electrode surface during growth. Reproduced with permission from Angulo et al. [33]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (c)
Microconvection during bubble evolution. Reproduced with permission from Yang et al. [56]. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d1) Estimation of bubble
overpotential based on bubble coverage in water electrolysis (1 M KOH). (d2) Transport loss corresponding to Ni foam electrodes with different PTFE coverages. The
lower the PTFE coverages, the smaller and denser the bubble generated by the electrode in the water electrolysis. Reproduced with permission from Iwata et al. [60].
Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V. (e) Typical polarization curve of PEMWE after dividing the three losses. Reproduced with permission from Alia et al. [122]. Copyright
2020, IOP Publishing.

eliminated because of the use of solid electrolyte, typically PFSA ion-
omer. Literature has reported there is no significant effect of bubbles on
Ohmic loss in PEMWE. The influence of bubbles on activation and mass
transport loss is usually the main consideration when modeling the ef-
fect of bubbles on PEMWE [83]. However, considering the conductivity
of ionomer is related to its water content, and bubble masking may lead
to a certain decrease in PEM water content, resulting in a decrease in the
proton conductivity of the membrane, which in turn affects Ohmic loss.

4.3. Mass transport loss

Mass transport loss is affected by the concentration gradients of re-
actants,  intermediates,  and  products  during  water  electrolysis.  The
Nernst equation can describe the voltage loss related to the concentra-
tion profile during PEM water electrolysis. In the case of OER in anode
[16].

ηmass =

RTanode
nF

ln

CO2
CO2,0

(9)

Where CO2  is the concentration of oxygen at the catalyst surface and
CO2,0  is the reference working condition. The bubble evolution process is
driven by the gas supersaturation near the catalytic surface. Therefore,
the generation of bubbles can reduce the CO2  and lead to a decrease in
mass transport loss (Fig. 11b) [33,42]. In addition to the diffusion pro-
cess, bubbles also lead to microconvection near the evolution site, which
is beneficial for mass transport. As the dissolved gas changes the surface
tension, the gas concentration gradient may lead to a local change in
surface  tension  at  the  interface  of  the  bubble.  Also,  surface  tension
gradients  may  form  when  the  electrolyte  develops  a  temperature
gradient due to Ohmic heating. At this point, the resulting shear stress
can cause microconvection (Marangoni effect, Fig. 11c) [56]. The mass

transport  loss  reduction  effect  and  microconvection  effect  of  bubbles
were directly observed by Gabrielli and Kempler in the three-electrode
system  [49,136].  Although  bubble  evolution  is  beneficial  to  reduce
mass  transport  loss,  it  is  easy  to  incorrectly  correlate  the  increase  of
bubble  number  with  the  increase  in  mass  transport  loss  [123,125,
137–139].  Despite  bubbles  looking  like  one  of  the  causes  of  mass
transport loss when analogous to water management issues in fuel cells
in these cases [140], the cause of increasing mass transport loss is not too
many bubbles, but rather too few bubbles. If a single bubble is observed,
at high current density, the generation rate of gas molecules is high and
a faster bubble evolution is required to remove the excess supersatura-
tion. As a consequence, more bubbles over a period of time (i.e., higher
detachment frequency) will be observed. When the mass transport loss
increases, it means that the supersaturation is high, i.e., the supersatu-
ration  is  not  reduced  by  a  sufficiently  high  bubble  detachment  fre-
quency. If an electrode is observed, in the electrode with fewer bubble
nucleation sites, a higher local bubble detachment frequency is required
to reduce the local oxygen supersaturation to avoid high mass transport
loss [141]. As Fig. 11d1–2 shows, the intuitive phenomenon is that the
more bubbles are observed at the same time (high bubble detachment
frequency),  and  the  smaller  the  bubble  is  (small  bubble  detachment
diameter), the less mass transport overpotential can be observed.

4.4. Ideal bubble evolution behavior

Considering the bubble effect on both activation and mass transport
loss, the desired bubble evolution behavior in CL involves bubble gen-
eration site number, bubble detachment diameter and bubble detach-
ment frequency. To reduce the bubble coverage, bubbles need to leave
before growing too large. Therefore, the bubble detachment diameter
should be reduced at the same current density. To achieve lower mass

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107513

S. Yuan et al.

transport overpotential, more bubbles are desired to reduce the local gas
supersaturation  at  a  given  current  density  and  time.  Increasing  the
bubble nucleation site number and the bubble detachment frequency are
needed, especially at a high operating current density [134,142–145].

4.5. Bubble accumulation and water starvation

In  addition  to  bubble  evolution  occurring  at  the  catalytic  surface,
bubble  transport  behavior  in  the  PEMWE  cell  also  has  a  significant
impact on overall cell voltage loss. Since the bubble transport process
affects every process of bubble evolution, its effect on voltage is difficult
to  distinguish  by  a  certain  overpotential  alone.  The  accumulation  of

Fig. 12. (a1-3) Evolution of gas distribution from the in PTL during dynamic operation. (a1) Response of gas saturation during load ramp-down operation. (a2-3) The
response of the average gas saturation and voltage within the PTL during dynamic changes in current. Reproduced with permission from Lee et al. [70]. Copyright
2020, IOP Publishing. (b1) 50.4 cm long segmented single-flow electrolysis cell setup. (b2) Comparison of polarization curves for different segment tests at insuf-
ficient water supply. (b3) Polarization curves and voltage loss breakdown for the case of sufficient water supply (ref) versus the case of insufficient water supply(dry).
(cid:0) 2  vary with
Reproduced with permission from Immerz et al. [149]. Copyright 2018, IOP Publishing. (c) Current density and temperature distribution at 0.5 A cm
water stoichiometry. Reproduced with permission from Sun et al. [146]. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Gas distribution radiographs through the
anode PTL during operation. The top border is the PTL-Flow field interface and the bottom border is the CL-PTL interface. Reproduced from with permission Lee et al.
[72]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107514

S. Yuan et al.

gaseous oxygen in the anode is the main contributor to this voltage loss
[126]. In the scenario of high current density and poor bubble transport,
the  oxygen  bubble  generated  from  CL  travels  a  long  and  tortuous
pathway  in  the  PTL  and  cannot  be  removed  quickly,  leading  to  gas
accumulation [77,107]. The low gas removal rate in the PTL then sup-
presses  gas  evolution  and  induces  voltage  losses.  Additionally,  under
high gas accumulation levels, the gaseous oxygen forms a barrier in the
PTL and hinders the water from reaching the CL, which also affects the
electrolysis reaction [53,146]. The gas accumulation can be character-
ized by a high gas saturation in the PTL and can be observed both during
steady and dynamic cell operation [78,113]. In steady-state operation,
the phenomenon of in-plane gas transport in PTL and gas traps under the
flow  field  ribs  are  the  main  reasons  for  gas  accumulation  [61,77,78,
107]. As discussed in 3.2, bubbles tend to move out of the PTL following
some  preferential  pathways.  However,  these  pathways  do  not  always
have an orientation aligned with the direction of buoyancy. In PTL, the
bubbles prefer to move from the small pores to the large adjacent pores
[61,147].  Because  of  the  random  size  and  spatial  distribution  of  the
pores, the large adjacent pore may appear in the in-plane direction when
bubbles  move,  which  results  in  an  in-plane  bubble  movement.  This
behavior  makes  the  bubble  transport  path  tortuous  and  reduces  the
bubble transport rate (Fig. 7a). Moreover, some bubble transport path-
ways  lead  gas  to  the  area  under  the  flow  field  ribs  where  the
through-plane transport is blocked (Fig. 7b and c) [77,113]. For these
issues, introducing the through-plane bubble transport pathways with
low resistance and directing gas flow in PTL to the channel area have
been  proposed as  an effective solution for reducing the accumulation
induced  voltage  losses [41,61,148].  During dynamic  cell operation,  a
hysteresis  effect  of  gas  saturation  was  observed  [70].  This  hysteresis
effect is manifested by the fact that the change of gas saturation in the
PTL is much slower than the change of current (Fig. 12a1). During the
intermittent electrolysis operation, this hysteresis effect resulted in an
increase in residual gas accumulation (Fig. 12a2). With repeating load
up and load down cycles, this gas accumulation level gradually increases
and  reduces  the  electrolysis  efficiency  (Fig.  12a3).  This  dynamic
response behavior of gas saturation in PEMWE raises a critical issue for
the control strategy and cell design, especially when considering that
PEMWE usually works with renewable energy sources with intermittent
operation, such as solar and wind energy.

In the worst case of bubble transport, bubbles are accumulated near
the  CL,  leading  to  inhomogeneous  water  distribution  and  local  water
starvation. The current and temperature distribution thus become un-
even  and  unstable  [79,146].  Without  sufficient  water  supply,  large
voltage gaps can occur in different areas of the same cell under the same
current density (Fig. 12b2) [149]. The mass transport loss and Ohmic
loss  in  the  overall  voltage  loss  of  PEMWE  correspondingly  increase
substantially  (Fig.  12b3).  Moreover,  the  heat  generated  during  water
electrolysis cannot be effectively dissipated at the local water starvation
site, resulting in disastrous hot spots [72]. All of these consequences not
only  reduce  the  efficiency  of  the  PEMWE  cell  but  also  deteriorate  its
durability [150]. This extreme condition is usually due to insufficient
water supply rate and excessive current density. For this phenomenon,
Lee et al. defined a critical current density as a cell operation current
density limit when mass transport overpotential suddenly dominates cell
performance and the accumulated gas can result in cell failure [72]. In
the same PEMWE cell, the critical current density is related to the water
flow rate. A higher water supply rate can provide a higher critical cur-
rent density (Fig. 12d). Similarly, Sun et al. have discussed the critical
water stoichiometry for cell operation [146]. The water stoichiometry
indicates the ratio of the supplied water amount to the consumed water
amount  corresponding  to  the  working  current  density.  For  stable  cell
operation, water stoichiometry should be at least higher than the critical
water stoichiometry for the given working current density. Below the
critical water stoichiometry, the current density and  temperature dis-
tribution  will  become  extremely  uneven,  which  can  cause  undesired
degradation  (Fig.  12c).  The  electrolysis  operation  region  limited  by

critical current density or critical water stoichiometry can be extended
by optimizing the bubble and water transport in the PEMWE cell. Using
PTLs  and  flow  fields  with  enhanced  bubble  removal  capability  can
therefore make the water electrolysis more stable and safe.

Different  operating  conditions  have  different  effects  on  bubble
accumulation  and  on  the  performance  of  PEMWE.  The  effect  of  tem-
perature is most straightforward. As shown in Fig. 8b, temperature en-
hances  bubble  transport  and  reduces  bubble  accumulation,  which  in
turn can improve performance. By separating the mass transport over-
potential, it is found that increasing the temperature can decrease the
mass transport overpotential at all current densities. The effect of water
flow rate on bubble transport is not significant. Through the observation
of transparent cells as well as simulation, it can be found that the water
flow has little effect on the transport behavior of the bubble in PTL and
the flow regime of the bubble in the flow field [71,151,152]. However, it
has been found that changes in water flow rate affect the performance of
the cell. There are different opinions in the literature on the effect of
water flow rate on the performance of PEMWE. Majasan et al. conducted
their experiments in a parallel flow field (3 cm*3 cm) and showed that
(cid:0) 1  at an oper-
(cid:0) 1  to 60 ml min
increasing the flow rate from 15 ml min
ating  temperature  of  80
C  was  able  to  improve  the  performance  of
PEMWE [71]. In the results of the Roenning et al. tests in parallel and
serpentine flow fields (5 cm*5 cm), it was also found that an increase in
(cid:0) 1  was  able  to  improve  the
(cid:0) 1  to  50  ml  min
flow  rate  from  6  ml  min
performance of PEMWE [119]. Garcia-Navarro et al. performed exper-
iments  using  a  parallel  flow  field  with  an  active  area  of  25  cm2,  but
found that an increase in water flow rate would lead to a decrease in cell
performance [123]. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy shows
that the low-frequency resistance gradually increases as the water sup-
ply rate increases, which indicates that the mass transport resistance is
higher at a high water flow rate. Therefore, the influence of flow rate on
cell performance should be analyzed case by  case, which  depends on
many factors. In Garcia-Navarro’s experiment, a similar negative impact
was  observed  in  the  cell  operations  with  increasing  pressure.  The  in-
crease in pressure also leads to a decrease in cell performance, as well as
an increase in mass transport resistance. This increase in mass transfer
resistance is more pronounced when the pressure of the cathode water is
changed.

◦

4.6. Mechanical damage

The bubble evolution in water electrolysis has also been reported to
influence the stability of the catalyst and catalyst layer [150,153,154].
The generation and detachment of bubbles might introduce mechanical
damage,  especially  at  high  current  density  [150,155].  During  the
repeating  bubble  generation  and  detachment,  the  strain  induced  by
bubble  detachment  can  be  devastating  for  the  catalyst  [156].  When
bubbles are generated and accumulate in the cavity of the catalyst, they
may  introduce  stress  and  damage  to  the  catalyst  structure  and  might
even peel off catalysts from their substrate. It has been directly observed
that  the  generation  and  collapse  of  bubbles  in  OER  can  lead  to  the
structural oscillation of the catalyst [157]. Similarly, the stress of bub-
bles generated inside the pores may also change the porous structure of
CL  or  reduce  triple  phase  sites  by  affecting  the  contact  between  the
ionomer and catalysts surface. Therefore, providing facilitated bubble
transport  in  CL may  be  necessary for  improving  the  durability of  CL.
Unfortunately,  it  is  still  a  challenge  to  directly  observe  the  bubble
induced  catalyst  degradation  in  CL,  and  the  mechanism  of  bubble
induced  CL  performance  degradation  has  not  been  fully  understood.
However, reducing the bubble detachment size has been revealed to be a
solution to enhance catalyst stability [134,158]. In order to reduce the
cost  of  hydrogen  production,  it  is  necessary  to  improve  the  catalyst
lifetime and therefore the principle of this enhancement effect should be
further investigated in the future.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107515

S. Yuan et al.

4.7. Impacts of bubbles in AEMWE

Since AEMWE is usually fed with liquid alkaline electrolyte instead
(cid:0)
of pure water to enhance the conductivity of the OH
, in addition to
activation  loss  and  mass  transport  loss,  Ohmic  loss  also  needs  to  be
considered  for  both  hydrogen  and  oxygen  bubbles  [96].  Bubbles
dispersed  in  the  electrolyte  reduce  the  available  pathways  for  ion
migration, thus reducing the effective conductivity of the electrolyte. In
addition  to  preventing  ions  from  reaching  the  reaction  surface,
surface-attached  bubbles  also  lead  to  a  non-uniform  current  density
distribution on the reaction surface adjacent to the bubbles, affecting the
charge transfer process in these regions [33,34]. For mass transport loss
in AEMWE, it is more severely affected by bubbles than PEMWE due to
the  simultaneous  supply  of  electrolyte  at  both  cathode  and  anode  in
many studies and the more gas generated on the HER side. The effect is
neglectable at low current density, but after the current density exceeds
(cid:0) 2, mass transport loss can start to be noticed and starts to grow
1 A cm
rapidly  (Fig.  13a1).  Rational  bubble  management  can  significantly
reduce the overall mass transport loss (Fig. 13a2) [94]. In addition to
mass transport loss, the effect of bubbles on activation loss is amplified
when  using  PTEs,  especially  self-supported  electrodes  [32,159].  As
shown in Figs. 7–8, the bubble accumulation that occurs during bubble
transport not only affects the gas saturation distribution on the catalytic
surface,  but  also  directly  causes  bubble  coverage,  drastically  reduces
ESCA,  and  directly  causes  activation  loss  [60].  In  this  case,  bubble
transport optimization is much more critical than in the PEMWE.

5. Bubble management

To reduce the hydrogen production cost, increasing the performance
of the PEMWE cell and reducing its catalyst loading are essential. Ac-
cording  to  the  previous  discussion,  rational  bubble  management  can
greatly improve cell performance, improve operation stability and in-
crease catalyst  utilization. In  this section, we  will introduce the  most
recent advances in bubble management strategies.

5.1. Bubble management via catalyst layer design and innovation

5.1.1. Optimization of conventional catalyst layer

The  conventional  CCM/PTL  design  is  most  widely  employed  in
commercial PEMWE cells [16,25,160]. Minimizing the negative influ-
ence  of  low  bubbles  evolution  rate  and  sluggish  gas  transport  in
CCM/PTL is of importance to increase the performance of commercial
PEMWE  cells.  In  some  recent  studies,  several  methods  have  been  re-
ported to improve gas evolution and transport by optimizing the struc-
ture of conventional CL.

Optimizing porous structure, thickness, and triple-phase site distri-
bution  can  improve  the  bubble  evolution  and  transport  process.  The
ionomer content in CL is a critical parameter that influences the porous
structure of CL. Hegge et al. have investigated the influence of ionomer
content on CL structure by reconstructing the anode CL using a combi-
nation of FIB-SEM tomography and ionomer modeling [161]. As shown
in Fig. 14a, in an IrRuOx anode CL, the increasing ionomer content in CL
will fill the void volume and reduce the porosity and increase the pore
tortuosity in CL. A similar tendency can also be observed in IrO2/TiO2
and Ir black CL [100,162]. At high ionomer content, it is observed that
the cell performance is reduced and the mass transport loss is increased,
which indicates the low porosity and high pore tortuosity in CL result in
higher O2 bubble transport resistance [122,163]. However, as shown in
Fig. 14b, although lowering the ionomer content can improve perfor-
mance by reducing mass transport loss, too low ionomer content would
lead to additional performance loss [122]. Performance losses at lower
ionomer contents are mainly derived from a higher ionic resistance and
its associated overpotential [100]. In addition to the ionomer content,
the catalyst loading will also affect the mass transport in CL. The catalyst
loading significantly affects the CL thickness and influences the CL-PTL
(cid:0) 2 Ir loading, the thickness
(cid:0) 2 to 5 mg cm
interface [164]. From 1 mg cm
of CL increases from 5 μm to greater than 20 μm (Fig. 15a1). The low
thickness due to low loadings results in a more inhomogeneous PTL-CL
interface and a higher voltage at the same current density. The high Ir
loading does not always improve CL performance, and as the load in-
creases  to  a  certain  level,  CL  performance  at  high  currents  decreases
dramatically (Fig. 15a2). At high current densities, the rise in IR-free
voltage  for  high  Ir  loading  CL  is  mainly  due  to  the  difficulty  in
water-gas  transport  caused  by  the  increased  thickness  and  the  corre-
sponding  mass  transport  loss  (Fig.  15a3).  Therefore,  the  CL  has  an
optimal thickness that allows for both an optimal CL-PTL interface and
does not cause difficulties in water transport within the CL due to the CL
thickness. Kulkarni et al. have investigated the effects of catalyst load-
ings  and  porous  transport  layer  morphologies  on  cell  performance
[163].  The  interface  for  different  samples  is  characterized  via  X-ray
computed tomography along with electrochemical and modeling tech-
niques. As shown in Fig. 14d, in CCM type electrodes, lower IrOx loading
can lead to a less even catalyst cluster distribution and fewer areas that
PTL contacts well with CL. Collectively, these result in less triple phase
contact  area  (TPCA)  and  uneven  oxygen  generation,  reducing  bubble
generation sites and deteriorating bubble evolution and transport. In the
(cid:0) 2, the
sinter Ti PTL/CCM sample, this effect is most evident. At 1.5 A cm
portion of mass transport loss in high catalyst loading sample (2.2 mg
(cid:0) 2) is 23%, while this value increases to 69.9% when catalyst loading
cm
(cid:0) 2  (Fig. 14c). In the samples using Ti fiber as
decreases to 0.45 mg cm
PTL,  although  the  performance  decrease  due  to  catalyst  loading

Fig. 13. (a1) Polarization curves using Pt/C powder catalyst and carbon paper as cathode. (a2) Polarization curves using Ru2P nanofibers as cathode. Reproduced
from with permission Kim et al. [94]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107516

S. Yuan et al.

Fig. 14. (a) 3D-representation of the reconstructed IrRuOx catalyst layer with different ionomer content in pore space vol%. Reproduced with permission from Hegge
et al. [161]. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (b) HFR-corrected Tafel plots of CL with different ratios of ionomer to Ir. Reproduced with permission from Alia et al.
[122].  Copyright  2020,  IOP  Publishing.  (c–d)  Effect  of  catalyst  loading  on  anode  CL.  (c)  Overpotential  breakdown  of  polarization  curves  for  the  cell  with
(cid:0) 2  IrOx  loading.  (yellow  indicates  mass  transport,  blue  indicates  Ohmic  loss,  orange  indicates  activation  loss)  (d)  2D
CCM-Sintered  Ti  anode  with  0.45  mg  cm
reconstruction and 3D rendering images of catalyst (yellow) and PTLs for the cell with CCM-Sinter Ti PTL from x-ray tomography. Reproduced with permission from
Kulkarni et al. [163]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (e) Modify the CL-PTL interface by adding an IrOx interlayer. (e1) SEM image on nanofiber interlayer of the IrOx
hybrid anode with nanoparticle catalyst layer with 2 μm scale bar. (e2) Schematic of the function of nanofiber interlayer in the hybrid IrOx anode. Reproduced with
permission  from  Hegge  et  al.  [166].  Copyright  2020,  American  Chemical  Society.  (f)  BF-  and  HAADF-STEM  images  with  EDS  spectrum  images  (Ir,  F)  of
cross-sectioned anode catalyst layers for (top to bottom) optimal ink, high ionomer content ink, high solid concentration ink, and high solvent ratio ink. Reproduced
with permission from Alia et al. [122]. Copyright 2020, IOP Publishing.

reduction was not as much, it also showed a trend that mass transport
loss increased with the decrease in catalyst loading. Reducing the clus-
tering of catalysts and optimizing the PTL-CL interface can also increase
the TPCA and thus increase performance [163,165]. The clustering of
catalysts and catalyst homogeneity in CL can be tuned by the catalyst
concentration, solvent ratio ionomer content in ink, ink drying process,
and the variables in the coating process [122,141]. The PTL-CL interface
can be modified by controlling the CL surface texture and optimizing
catalyst distribution (Fig. 14f), as well as adding an interlayer between
CL and PTL (Fig. 14e1–2) [122,141,166,167].

Another method to improve bubble management is to control crack
patterns in conventional CL. Introducing and utilizing the cracks in CL
may enhance performance to some extent by creating favored bubble
nucleation sites and limiting bubble growth and coalescence [168–170].
The crack size and pattern can be controlled by the tensile stress during
synthesis. Zeradjanin et al. have investigated the roles of cracks based on
RuOx-based CLs [171]. Compared to a “crack-free” sample, a “cracked”
sample exhibited a higher and more stable bubble release rate at various
voltage levels. As a result, for OER performance, the “cracked” sample
yielded two times higher current density than the “crack-free” sample at
1.45 V.

5.1.2. Superaerophobic catalyst layer

Another  effective  way  to  enhance  water  electrolysis  efficiency  by

bubble  management  is  to  design  CL  with  superaerophobic  surfaces.
Superaerophobic CL is a type of superwetting electrodes. Superwetting
electrode  design  is  attracting  elevating  attention  recently  for  it  can
conveniently  achieve  desired  gas  management  in  many  gas-involving
electrochemical  reactions  [93,172–175].  By  modifying  the  surface
micro/nanostructure,  the  bubble  wettability  on  the  electrode  surface
can be manipulated reliably. The bubble wettability can be character-
ized by two parameters: bubble contact angle and bubble contact angle
hysteresis.  Analogous  to  superhydrophilic  and  superhydrophobic  sur-
◦
faces, the surface with a high bubble contact angle (usually >150
) and
negligible  hysteresis  is  defined  as  a  superaerophobic  surface,  and  the
surface  with  a  small  bubble  contact  angle  (usually  <10
)  and  appre-
ciable  hysteresis  is  defined  as  superaerophilic  surface  [58,176,177].
Generally, superwetting surfaces behave exactly opposite in the gas and
liquid  phases.  The
super-
aerophilicity, while the superhydrophilic surface is superaerophobic in
aqueous  media  (Fig.  16a)  [176,177].  The  Wenzel  model  and  Cassie
model can be employed to correlate the surface architectures and sur-
face  superwettability  [178].  In  the  Wenzel  model,  the  liquids  fully
occupy the valleys of the microstructure of the surface they touch. The
apparent contact angle θW  then can be described by [179]:

superhydrophobic

surface  exhibits

◦

cos θW = rcosθY

(10)

Where  the  actual  surface  contact  angle  θY  is  amplified  by  a  factor  r.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107517

S. Yuan et al.

Fig. 15. (a1) Anode CL thickness for CCM as a function of anode iridium loading. (a2) iR-free cell voltage at different current densities as a function of anode iridium
loading. (a3) Qualitative diagram of the water content profiles inside the anode CL for different thicknesses. Reproduced with permission from Bernt et al. [164].
Copyright 2018, IOP Publishing.

According  to  this  equation,  the  roughness  caused  by  surface  micro-
structure  shows  an  amplification  effect  on  the  wettability.  For  the
intrinsic  smooth  aerophobic  surface,  the  surface  microstructure  can
enlarge its bubble contact angle into a superaerophobic region.

The Wenzel model is valid when the surface roughness is relatively
small, and the Cassie model explains the high roughness or porous case
[178]. In the Cassie case, the high roughness of the surface enables the
liquids to only contact with the surface of the microstructure and the
surface  under  the  droplet  is  under  a  non-wetting  state.  The  apparent
contact angle θC  is given by [180]:

cos θC = (cid:0) 1 + fs(rcosθY + 1)

(11)

Where fs  denotes the area fractions of the solid. According to previous
analyses of bubble-induced voltage losses, low bubble adhesion that can
repel  bubbles  and  low  bubble  coverage  are  highly  desired for  bubble
management  in  water  electrolysis.  Therefore,  designing  the  electrode
with a surface microstructure that can achieve the Cassie state to realize
superaerophobic is a promising way for bubble management in PEMWE.
A wide variety of surface morphologies have been reported to have
superaerophobic nature in water electrolysis applications. Most of these
superaerophobic CLs are designed based on an array-like surface struc-
ture  [58,181],  including  nanosheets  array  [182–185],  nanoplatelets
array [62,186], nanodendrites array [187,188], nanopillars array [182],
nanotubes  array  [189],  and  nanocones  array  [190].  These  array-like
structures  divide  the  surface  into  discontinuous  parts  and  exhibit  a
high  surface  roughness,  which  is  consistent  with  the  Cassie  model
described. With such surface designs, the detachment bubble size during
electrolysis  is  significantly  reduced  and  the  bubble  detachment  fre-
quency is greatly improved. Lu et al. have engineered MoS2 CLs into flat
film  and  nanoplatelets  array  [62].  The MoS2  flat film  exhibits  a  rela-
tively low bubble contact angle of 135.2 ± 3.3
and large adhesive force
(124.8 ± 6.1 μN). With nanoplatelets array, the bubble contact angle is
◦
increased  to  153.6  ± 2.4
,  and  the  adhesive  force  is  decreased  to  an

◦

◦

extremely  small  level.  As  a  result,  the  size  of  bubbles  detached  from
nanoplatelets array electrode surface is only 1/10 of that on the flat film
one (Fig. 16b). With the smaller bubble size, the bubble release is also
enhanced. In corresponding to this bubble management, the HER per-
formance of the MoS2  nanoplatelets array CL is significantly improved
compared to the flat film one. Specifically, in the range of (cid:0) 0.2 V to
(cid:0) 0.5 V, the current increase of MoS2 nanoplatelets array CL was as high
(cid:0) 2 per 100 mV, while the flat MoS2 film only achieved 33
as 56 mA cm
(cid:0) 2  per  100  mV. At  higher  current density, the  performance of
mA  cm
MoS2 nanoplatelets array CL can even compete with Pt/C film. There are
also many efforts have been devoted to developing superaerophobic CLs
with Pt-based, Ru-based, and Ir-based catalysts [134,142,184,191,192].
Li et al. have fabricated a pine-shaped Pt nanoarray superaerophobic CL
on inert Ti foil via electrodeposition [134]. The pine-shaped Pt nano-
array amplifies the contact angle of bubbles of flat Pt from 136.7
to
. The gas bubble adhesive force is reduced from 145.6 ± 2.1 μN to
161.3
(cid:0) 2, the size
11.5 ± 1.2 μN (Fig. 16c1–2). At a current density of 60 mA cm
of bubble detached from nanoarray Pt is < 50 μm, while the bubbles on
flat  Pt  are  around  500  μm.  The  HER  performance  of  nanoarray  Pt  is
(cid:0) 1,  which  is  13.75  times  higher  than  Pt  flat  one
around  3.85  mA  mV
(Fig. 16c3). Except for modifying the flat CL, growing array-like surface
structures  on  substrates  like  carbon  cloths,  carbon  fiber  papers,  and
metal foams can also enable catalyst-coated PTL (PTE) to own super-
aerophobicity [143,189,193–195]. Han et al. have fabricated a super-
aerophobic  nitrogen-doped  tungsten  carbide  (N-WC)  nanoarray  PTE
based on carbon fiber paper [143]. Using a self-assembled hydrothermal
reaction  method,  the  nanodendrites  array  is  grown  on  the  surface  of
carbon fibers. The resulting N-WC nanoarray PTE enlarges the bubble
contact angle of the flat N-WC CL from 148
and reduces the
bubble  adhesion  force  from  12  μN  to  less  than  1.2  μN.  As  a  result,
compared to the flat N-WC CL, the detached bubble size from the N-WC
nanoarray PTE decreased from ~15 μm to ~5 μm. Accordingly, the HER
and OER performance has been substantially improved, even surpassing
some  commercial  Ir-based  catalysts  in  terms  of  OER  performance.

to 163.5

◦

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107518

S. Yuan et al.

Fig. 16. (a) Diagram illustrating the relationship between wettability of solid substrates in gaseous and aqueous media. Reproduced with permission from Yu et al.
[177]. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Images of bubbles generated on the flat electrode and the nanoarray superaerophobic electrode. Reproduced with
permission from Lu et al. [62]. Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (c1-3) Superaerophobic nano array Pt CL for PEMWE. (c1) SEM image of Flat Pt CL and its
contact angle. (c2) SEM image of Pine-shape nano array Pt CL and its contact angle (c3) Comparison of HER performance of Pt nanoarray electrode, nanosphere
electrode, and flat electrode. Reproduced with permission from Li et al. [134]. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (d1-d3) Application of nanoarray electrodes in
PEMWE  cells.  The  adoption  of  nanoarray  morphology  substantially  enhances  the  HER  performance  of  the  electrode  as  well  as  the  catalyst  mass  activity.  (d1)
Schematic illustrations of synthesis of Pt nanowires in-situ grown on PTL to fabricate PTE. (d2) HER performance of nanoarray PTE. (d3) Catalyst mass activity in
nanoarray PTE. Reproduced with permission from Xie et al. [209]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V.

Overall, these improvements brought by superaerophobic characteris-
tics can be observed in many other works, including HER and OER in
both  alkaline  and  acid  environments  [134,143,183,196],  suggesting
that superaerophobic CL design is reliable and efficient in improving the
efficiency of water electrolysis.

include  electrodeposition,

The design principles and synthesis approaches of superaerophobic
CLs have been discussed in some review articles comprehensively [58,
178,181,197–199].  The  commonly  used  synthesis  routes  for  super-
aerophobic  CLs
synthesis,
chemical-vapor-deposition, hydrothermal, and solvent thermal method
on  a  substrate  [200–207].  Although  these  methods  can  conveniently
prepare the desired surface morphology, it is challenging to apply these
methods to the practical CCM and PTE preparation for PEMWE cells. For
CCM, these synthesis routes are challenging to directly use PEM as the
substrate to grow these superaerophobic structures. Besides, the fabri-
cated superaerophobic CLs based on a substrate like Ti foil are difficult

template

to  directly  transfer  by  decal  method  on  PEM  while  maintaining  the
desired  structure.  Regarding  the  PTE,  although  the  superaerophobic
nano-structure can be conveniently achieved, the ionomer, on the one
hand, is challenging to contact well with all catalyst to maximize the
effective  triple-phase  interface,  which  may  lead  to  low  utilization  of
noble catalyst. Moreover, the addition of ionomer may affect the surface
structure and make the surface lose its original superaerophobic prop-
erties  [208].  However,  even  the  compromise  preparation  method
demonstrates the enhanced bubble management as well as electrolysis
performance  of  this  structure.  For  instance,  Xie  et  al.  introduced  a
compromise approach to integrating a nanoarray electrode (PtNW) into
a PEMWE cell based on their ultra-thin PTL (Fig. 16d1) [209]. Though
the  tip  of  the  nanoarrays  is  oriented  to  the  membrane  side,  this
array-like CL structure still exhibits a detachment size reduction effect.
The bubbles generated from the flat Pt CL are around 150–250 μm, while
on the PtNW CL surface, the bubble size is distributed mainly at < 100

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107519

S. Yuan et al.

μm. The enhanced bubble release brought a significant increase in HER
performance and the mass activity of the Pt (Fig. 16d2–3). Although this
design is able to take advantage of the bubble enhancement brought by
the array structure, it is not yet the ideal method for applying super-
aerophobic array CLs in practical PEMWE cells.

5.1.3. 3D ordered catalyst layer

Constructing  a  3D  ordered  CL  can  provide  multiple  benefits  for
bubble management compared to the conventional CL. First of all, the
3D structure of the CL generally provides a higher effective surface area,
as thus the number of nucleation sites of the bubble is increased. Sec-
ondly, when designing the 3D ordered structure of the CL, the preferred
nucleation  position  of  the  bubbles  can  be  controlled  to  reduce  the
probability of bubble adhesion. Moreover, a properly designed 3D or-
dered  CL  can  provide  facilitated  bubble  transport  paths,  reduce  the
bubble coalescence within the CL and accelerate the removal of bubbles
[61,184,210–214].  Kou  et  al.  have  demonstrated  an  excellent  3D

ordered CL structure (3DPNi) to facilitate gas bubble traffic [61]. This
CL is fabricated by 3D printing with solvent evaporation (Fig. 17a1). The
ordered structure and unobstructed channels with orientation aligned
with  buoyancy  direction  significantly  suppressed  the  bubble  in-plane
movement and avoided bubble trapping. As shown in Fig. 17a2, when
(cid:0) 1, the bubble
gas is injected from the bottom of CLs at a rate of 1 mL s
release in the disordered nickel foam CL exhibits an interrupted period
of 3131 ms, indicating a bubble accumulation within the CL, while the
3DPNi CL steadily and periodically releases bubbles by around 124 ms.
By solving the bubble trapping issue, it can be observed that the bubbles
on 3DPNi sample are much smaller than the conventional Ni foam one
during  electrolysis  (Fig.  17a3).  As  a  result,  the  activity  (current
normalized the ECSA) of the catalyst loaded on the 3DPNi is noticeably
higher than the catalyst loaded on normal nickel foam (Fig. 17a4). It is
worth noting that the channel size in the ordered 3D structure should be
neither too large nor too small and the thickness also needs to be opti-
mized.  Kim  et  al.  have  investigated  a  3D  ordered  structure  (WP

Fig. 17. (a1-4) 3DPNi electrode design for solving the bubble trapping. (a1) Schematic illustration fabrication of the 3D printing of 3DPNi electrode. (a2-3) Images of
the bubble release process from a Ni foam electrode and a 3DPNi electrode captured with a high-speed camera. (a2) The bubble trapping phenomenon observed in
gas injection experiment; (a3) Bubble release in water electrolysis. (a4) Polarization curves with current normalized to ECSA for 3DPNi based electrode (red) and Ni
foam based electrode (blue). Reproduced with permission from Kou et al. [61]. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (b1-2) 3D Woodpile-structured (WP structure)
Ir  electrode. (b1) Schematic illustration of  the 3D WP Ir  electrode. (b2) Comparison of  ECSA and activity normalized to ECSA of different structured 3D WP Ir
electrodes  with  commercial  Ir  black.  The  number  after  P  represents  the  size  of  the  channel.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Kim  et  al.  [210].  Copyright
2020, Nature.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107520

S. Yuan et al.

structure) with different channel sizes in PEMWE cells [210]. The 3D
WP-structured Ir CL is constructed with stacking 1D nanowires arrays
via  solvent-assisted  nanotransfer  printing  technology.  The  formed  3D
structure is shown in Fig. 17b1. The vertical channels have large pore
size (>200 nm), which belongs to the range of macropores, while the
spacing between layers belongs to the range of mesopores (<50 nm).
The  facilitated  access  of  water  to  the  catalytic  surface  and  readily
transport of evolved oxygen bubbles simultaneously improve the mass
activity  and  ECSA-specific  activity  of  Ir.  As  shown  in  Fig.  17b2,  the
number after P represents the size of the channel. All WP-structured CLs
present a higher ECSA-specific activity than commercial Ir black nano-
particles  (Fig.  17b2).  The  catalyst  mass  activity  of  the  P400  sample
reached up to 4.8 times that of the commercial Ir. The P200 sample has
the  densest  holes,  but  instead  of  bringing  an  increase  in  ECSA,  this
caused  a  significant  drop  in  mass  activity  and  ECSA-specific  activity.
Increasing  the  pore  size  from  200  nm  to  400  nm  brings  a  significant
performance improvement, while continuing to increase the pore size to
1200  nm  does  not  result  in  any  improvement  but  rather  in  a  perfor-
mance drop. In the single-cell measurements, it can be found that the
increase  in  thickness  will  significantly  reduce  the  performance  of  the
WP-structured CLs. This thickness-related performance reduction may
be because the growth of the bubble transport path due to the increase in
thickness leads to a decrease in the performance of the catalyst in the
upper part of the transport path, which ultimately reduces the average
catalyst activity.

5.1.4. Zoned catalyst layer: thin catalyst-coated liquid/gas diffusion layer
A thin catalyst-coated liquid/gas diffusion layer (CCLGDL) design is
a new type of PTE which has a zoned catalyst layer that can significantly
increase the catalyst utilization and reduce the thickness of the cell. The
concept of thin CCLGDL is proposed by Zhang group (Fig. 18a) [50,69,
73]. The performance enhancements result from the optimization of the
PTL/CL  interface  and  the  facilitated  bubble  evolution  and  removal
process. The zoned catalyst layer design is based on a thin Ti PTL, where
some CL area is beneath the PTL, and some CL area is exposed to the
through-holes of PTL. In the visualization of bubble generation during

water electrolysis, both hydrogen and oxygen bubbles are found to be
mainly generated from the interface between CL and adjacent PTL in
their  works.  Introducing  conductive  and  non-conductive  bodies  to
create new interfaces with the CL, it can be observed that bubbles are
only generated around the good electrical conductors [50,69,148]. This
reveals the importance of in-plane electron conduction for the perfor-
mance of CL. Moreover, it also means a significant decrease in catalyst
utilization in the CL region with poor contact with the PTL, which has
widely  been  observed  in  CCM-type  CLs  [163,165,166,215].  Based  on
these findings, CCLGDL was proposed.

As shown in Fig. 18a, in contrast to the direct binding of PTL to CCM,
CL is coated to the surface of thin Ti PTL in advance and then combined
with  PEM  to  form  the  CCLGDL.  The  thin  Ti  PTL  provides  facilitated
bubble removal channels and bubble nucleation sites at the bottom of
the  vertical  channels. The  number of  bubble  generation sites  and  the
bubble detachment frequency of the samples prepared by the thin Ti PTL
at the same current density are much higher than those of conventional
Ti-felt  samples  (Fig.  18c)  [73].  The  part  of  the  CL  zone  that  is  not
accessible to the PTL is removed, thereby reducing the unusable catalyst.
The Ir CCLGDL is fabricated by Ir electroplating and the Pt CCLGDL is
prepared  via  platinum  sputter deposition  [40,148].  With  much  lower
catalyst  loading  than  the  conventional  CCM,  both  Pt  CCLGDL  and  Ir
CCLGDL  exhibit  remarkable  catalyst  mass  activity.  When  using  Ir
CCLGDL  as  the  anode  in  the  PEMWE  cell,  the  performance  of  the  Ir
(cid:0) 2 Ir loading can be comparable to a
CCLGDL cell with only 0.17 mgIr cm
(cid:0) 2 Ir loading. The mass activity of Ir in
CCM/Ti felt cell with 3 mgIr cm
CCLGDL is 16 times that in the CCM/Ti felt (Fig. 18b) [40]. When using
Pt CCLGDL as the cathode in the PEMWE cell, the performance of the Pt
(cid:0) 2  Pt loading can be almost the
CCLGDL cell with only 0.086 mgPt  cm
(cid:0) 2  Pt loading. The mass ac-
same as a CCM/Ti felt cell with 3 mgPt  cm
tivity of Pt in CCLGDL can reach up to 31 times that in the CCM/Ti felt
(Fig. 18d) [148]. These works provide a new design for water electrol-
ysis CLs. With a more sophisticated catalyst layer and LGDL morphology
designs, the performance of CCLGDL can be further improved [26,209].

Fig. 18. (a–b) Thin catalyst-coated liquid/gas diffusion layer (CCLGDL) design and application in PEMWE anode. (a) Schematic diagram of three different anode
electrode designs and the bubbles in the different electrodes. In CCLGDL, the CL is coated directly on the TT-LGDL, removing the CL that is not in direct contact with
the TT-LGDL to achieve maximum catalyst utilization. (b) Polarization curves and Ir mass-specific current of three designs. Reproduced with permission from Yu et al.
[40].  Copyright  2022,  John  Wiley  and  Sons. (c)  Comparison  of  bubble  detachment  site  number,  average  detachment  diameter,  and  unit  detachment  frequency
(cid:0) 2. Reproduced with permission from Wang et al. [73]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V. (d) Pt
between the Ti felt PTL and TTLGDL at the current density of 200 mA cm
mass-specific current of Pt CCM with thin Ti PTLs, Pt CCM with Ti felt, and Pt CCLGDL (sample A3). Reproduced with permission from Kang et al. [148]. Copyright
2018, Elsevier B.V. (e) The polarization curve of PEMWE of magnetically modified electrocatalysts was employed. Reproduced with permission from Kaya et al.
[216]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107521

S. Yuan et al.

5.1.5. Magnetized catalyst layer

Another special method to enhance bubble management in PEMWE
is  fabricating  CLs  with  magnetized  catalysts.  Several  works  reported
enhanced  bubble  management  and  water  electrolysis  performance
under  an  external  magnetic  field  due  to  magnetohydrodynamic  and
magnetoaerodynamic effects [217–219]. The gas product in the anode,
oxygen, is a paramagnetic molecule and its transport can be influenced
by the magnetic field [220,221]. Therefore, in addition to applying an
external magnetic field, it is also possible to enhance the oxygen bubble
evolution and transport by magnetically modified catalysts [222]. Kaya
et al. have examined the enhancement of magnetically modified elec-
trocatalysts in PEMWE cell [216]. The anode catalyst IrO2 is modified by
introducing  magnetic  Fe3O4  via  a  modified  Adam’s  fusion  method  to
enhance  bubble  detachment  (Fig.  18e).  A  magnetizer  magnetizes  the
samples with adjustable field strength and up to 2 T magnetic flux. Both
on glassy carbon and in the single cell PEMWE, the addition of magnetic
Fe3O4  improved  the  electrolysis  efficiency.  A  CL  with  80%  IrO2-20%
Fe3O4 exhibits almost three times IrO2 mass activity than the 100% IrO2
CL.  Some  studies  also  investigated  magnetized  catalysts  in  alkaline
conditions and demonstrated their benefits [223–227].

5.2. Bubble management via porous transport layer design and innovation

The function of PTL in the PEMWE cell is to provide good thermal
and  electrical  conductivity,  support  the  fragile  CCM,  and  facilitate
bubble and water transport. The complex two-phase counter flux in the

anode contributes most of the mass transport loss to the performance
loss during water electrolysis [127]. Titanium felt and sintered titanium
is the most commonly employed anode PTLs in PEMWE cells. As dis-
cussed in 3.2 and 3.3, the structure and surface features of PTL signifi-
cantly  influence  the  bubble  transport  process.  The  blocked  upward
pathways  and  the  in-plane  transport  of  bubbles  in  PTL  lead  to  gas
accumulation and reduce the performance of PEMWE cells. To address
these issues, many novel PTL designs toward better bubble management
have been reported recently.

5.2.1. With patterned through pores

Recently, different PTLs with through pores have been reported and
demonstrated  a  performance  improvement  on  PEMWE  cells.  The
through pores PTLs (TPPTL) have a series of holes that penetrate the
entire  PTL,  from  the  PTL-flow  field  interface  to  the  CL-PTL  interface
[41]. The through pore geometries in PTLs have been proven to have a
restriction effect on the in-plane transport. The low transport resistance
in the through pores will guide bubbles transport following them rather
than moving in the high resistance route in the other part of the PTL.
Bazylak  group  has  investigated  the  gas  transport  in  the  TPPTL  in  a
working PEMWE cell via in operando X-ray radiography [228]. It has
been observed that although the gas generation site has a wide distri-
bution in the CL-PTL interface, the majority of bubbles transfer to the
PTL-flow  field  interface  via  the  through  pores.  Followed  by  a  similar
design,  the  Bazylak  group  added  patterned  through-pores  to  a  com-
mercial PTL by machining (Fig. 19a1) [41]. As shown in Fig. 19a2, the

Fig. 19. (a1-a3) Accelerating bubble transport by patterned through-pores in PTL. (a1) Schematic of the PTL with patterned through-pores. (PTP PTL) (a2) Gas
saturation profiles along the thickness direction (CL-PTL interface: tPTL = 0). In commercial PTL (top). In PTP PTL (bottom). (a3) IR-free cell potential and Tafel slope
of PEMWE cells with PTP PTL and commercial PTL. The green areas indicate the difference between PTP-PTL and commercial PTL in terms of mass transport loss.
Reproduced with permission from Lee et al. [41]. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Gas saturation profiles along the thickness direction (CL-PTL
interface: x/tPTL = 0) in Graded PTL design. In LP → HP PTL (top). In HP → LP PTL (bottom). Reproduced with permission from Lee et al. [232]. Copyright 2020,
Elsevier B.V. (c1-c2) Multilayer PTL  design. (c1) Schematic of the PTL with  MPL (MPL-PTL) and the function of MPL to improve  CL-PTL interface. (c2) IR-free
polarization  curves  of  different  PEMWE  test  cells.  MPL  2  represents  the  cell  with  MPL-PTL.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Schuler  et  al.  [233].  Copyright
2020, John Wiley and Sons.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107522

S. Yuan et al.

gas accumulation near the CL-PTL interface is significantly decreased.
(cid:0) 2,  the  gas  saturation  near  the
Under  a  current  density  of  9.0  A  cm
CL-PTL interface is only around half of that in the cell with sintered ti-
tanium power-based PTL. In addition, the gas saturation distribution in
the  whole  TPPTL  is  very  even  under  every  current  density  in  the
through-plane  direction.  This  gas  saturation  profile  indicates  that  the
TPPTL could greatly enhance the bubble transport. Correspondingly, the
mass transport loss is reduced by 76.7% at a high current density of 9.0
(cid:0) 2  (Fig.  19a3).  Notably,  because  of  less  CL-PTL  interface,  the
A  cm
activation loss is slightly increased. Future optimization of pore pattern
and  pore  size  may  further  increase  the  overall  cell  performance.
Applying through pores design on a Ti-foil, Zhang group has developed a
lithography  [229–231].  Combining
series  ultra-thin  PTLs  by
catalyst-coated  ultra-thin  PTLs  design,  the  water  electrolyzer  perfor-
mance is significantly improved by the facilitated bubble transport in
through pores.

5.2.2. With graded structure

In addition to shortening transport pathways, which are beneficial
for bubble management, enlarging CL-PTL interfacial area is also desired
to improve the electron transfer in PTL design. By analogy with leaves, a
hierarchic and graded structure may be a good solution that the inter-
facial area and bubble management can be taken into account simulta-
neously [28]. An ideal graded PTL design should maximize the contact
between CL and PTL using a relatively small pore size near the CL while
ensuring that bubbles can enter the PTL smoothly from the CL. At the
same time, the pore size should increase as it approaches the PTL-flow
field interface. In this way, the discharge of bubbles has a short trans-
mission  path  because  of  the  minimum  resistance  in  the  buoyancy  di-
rection. On the other hand, the smaller porosity at the bottom of PTL can
provide facilitated electron conducting routes. Lettenmeier et al. have
fabricated a graded Ti PTL by vacuum plasma spraying (VPS) and the
large/medium graded PTL demonstrated a lower mass transport limi-
tation  [234].  Lee  et  al.  have  investigated  the  liquid  water  transport
behavior of graded structures by pore network modeling [235]. When
increasing the porosity of PTL from the CL-PTL interface to the PTL-flow
field interface (LP→HP), the oxygen saturation is significantly decreased
compared  to  the  conventional  structure.  At  the  same time,  the  liquid
water permeability is also enlarged. With an opposite porosity gradient
(HP→LP), the oxygen is accumulated near the CL-PTL interface. These
simulation results are further confirmed in PEMWE cell operation [232].
Lee et al. prepared two PTLs with opposite pore gradients via VPS. The
experiment result exhibits a good consistency with the simulation result
that at different current densities, the gas saturation in LP→HP PTL is
lower than in HP→LP PTL (Fig. 19b). Correspondingly, the PEMWE cell
with LP→HP PTL achieved better performance than the cell with HP→LP
one.

Multilayer  PTL  configuration  such  as  MPL-PTL  is  also  a  kind  of
graded  PTL  [138,233,236–238].  Schuler  et  al.  have  co-sintered  two
commercially viable Ti powders to fabricate MPL-PTLs [233]. As shown
in Fig. 19c1, a typical MPL-PTL combines an MPL with 35.1% porosity
and  11.2  μm  mean  pore  size,  and  a  support  layer  (SL)  with  33.6%
porosity and 27.2 μm mean pore size. The addition of MPL drastically
reduces the surface roughness at the bottom of the PTL and reduces the
CCM  deformation  caused  during  assembly.  The  smaller  particle  size
offers a better bond between MPL and bumpy CL surfaces. The catalyst
utilization  is  therefore  improved.  Compared  to  PEMWE  cells  with
commercial  Ti  particle  sintered  PTL,  fiber  PTL,  the  PEMWE  cell  with
MPL-PTL  (MPL2)  has  a  significant  performance
improvement
(Fig. 19c2). With the addition of the MPL, the MPL-PTL sample has more
than two times higher catalyst utilization compared to the conventional
(cid:0) 2, a 45% reduction of mass
structure. At a current density of 2.0 A cm
transport loss is observed in MPL-PTL than in the conventional PTL.

5.2.3. Wettability modification

Similar  to  the  wettability  modification  of  GDL  in  PEM  fuel  cells

◦
), hydrophilic PTL (10

which is a powerful tool of water management [239–241], controlling
the wettability of PTL can also influence the mass transport in PEMWE
cells.  Li  et  al.  have  tested  Ti  mesh  PTL  with  different  wettability  in
PEMWE [242]. From hydrophobic to hydrophilic, reducing the contact
angle  leads  to  an  enhanced  performance  of  the  electrolysis  cell.  In
◦
) achieves a
contrast to hydrophobic PTL (120
(cid:0) 2. Further increasing the hy-
voltage drop of about 200 mV at 2 A cm
drophilicity of PTL to superhydrophilicity to improve its aerophobicity
can improve the bubble management of PTL at high current densities.
Zhao et al. reported a superhydrophilic PTL in PEMWE cells [243]. The
surface of titanium surfaces is naturally wetting to water. By boiling Ti
PTL in a solution consisting of NH4OH (25%), H4O4 (30%), H2O (45%),
the treated PTL exhibits a superhydrophilic feature. The wetting state
changes the water and bubble transport behavior in PTL. The operando
neutron  visualization reveals  that the PEMWE  cell equipped  with the
superhydrophilic  PTL  has  lower  oxygen  gas  saturation  than  the  un-
treated PTL (Fig. 20a1), indicating a bubble transport rate improvement.
With a minor change in activation and Ohmic overpotential, the reduced
mass transport loss significantly decreases the cell voltage by more than
(cid:0) 2, and the enhancement
11% for current densities higher than 5.0 A cm
becomes more significant as the current increases (Fig. 20a2). Patterned
amphiphilic  Ti-PTL  maybe  a  more  powerful  approach  to  manage  the
water-bubble counter flow. Lim et al. have proved that by creating hy-
drophobic  and  hydrophilic  channels  (Fig.  20b1–2),  the  patterned
amphiphilic PTL can significantly improve the performance of polymer
electrolyte membrane unitized regenerative fuel cells under electrolysis
cell  mode  [244].  As  shown  in  Fig.  20b3,  the  channel  split  by  the
amphiphilic  pattern  significantly  reduce  the  bubble  size  on  the  PTL
surface. The growth and separation of oxygen bubbles is faster through
hydrophobic channels, while large bubbles appear on the pristine hy-
drophilic surface. This phenomenon represents a separation of gas and
water transport, allowing the cell using PTL with amphiphilic pattern to
(cid:0) 2  was  achieved  with
reach  3.2  A  cm
pristine PTL.

(cid:0) 2  at  2  V,  while  only  1.4  A  cm

5.3. Bubble management via flow field designs

The flow field plays an important role in the water management in
PEM fuel cells, which significantly influences the water removal rate and
the  reactant  distribution.  Parallel,  serpentine,  and  interdigitated  flow
fields are commonly used in fuel cell [245–249]. Many subsequent new
designs have been developed based on them. The optimization of the
flow field is usually evaluated by water saturation, current density dis-
tribution, temperature distribution and pressure drop [245,250–254]. In
PEMWE  cells,  flow  field  would  also  affect  the  water  distribution  and
bubble management. In analogy to PEM fuel cell, flow field designs are
usually evaluated by gas saturation, current density distribution, tem-
perature distribution and pressure drop [25,71,255,256]. As discussed
by  Maier  et  al.,  until  now,  there  is  conflicting  information  about  the
performance of different flow field designs [25]. Both single serpentine
flow  field  and  parallel  flow  field  have  been  reported  to  have  better
performance  compared  to  other  designs  [71,257,258].  However,  it  is
noteworthy that an increasing number of works uses bipolar plates with
parallel flow fields recently, which might be because the parallel flow
field  has  shorter  channels  that  enable  the  bubbles  to  easily  flow  out
[122,259–261].  The  investigation  of  the  flow  field  and  flow  channel
optimization  toward  better  mass  transport  beyond  the  conventional
designs is still insufficient. Majasan et al. have reported that the anode
flow channel depth would influence mass transport loss, revealing the
potential  to  improve  electrolyzer  performance  via  flow  channel  opti-
mization [262]. Olesen et al. proposed a circular, interdigitated anode
flow  field  plate  for  high-pressure  PEMWE  [255].  The  uniformly
distributed heat, mass, and current density show the potential of flow
field optimization, especially for the high-pressure PEMWE, where the
flow  field  plate  is  usually  circular  rather  than  rectangular  because  of
mechanical  stability  at  elevated  pressures  [263,264].  Wu  et  al.  have

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107523

S. Yuan et al.

(cid:0) 1). (a2)
Fig. 20. (a1) Spatial distribution of the average gas saturation in anode side of treated PTL and untreated PTL (5 A cm
Polarization curves of PEMWE using treated PTL and untreated PTL. Reproduced with permission from Zhao et al. [243]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V. (b1-b2) EDS
mapping (top and cross section) results for carbon, and titanium elements. The red area indicating the coated area of P4VP homopolymer after the spraying process.
The red and black regions have hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties, respectively. (b3) Schematic representation of the effect of Amphiphilic pattern on bubble
evolution and transport, and photos of bubbles on the surface of untreated and treated PTL during water electrolysis. Reproduced with permission from Lim et al.
[244]. Copyright 2021, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

(cid:0) 2, water flow rate 0.5 mL min

proposed  a  novel  structured  mesh  channel  design  for  PEMWE  [265].
They used the validated 3D full-cell model coupled with a VOF method
and  they  found  that  oxygen  bubbles  are  split  by  the  skeleton  in  the
structured mesh channels, mitigating the formation of slug or annular
flow. In addition, the capillary force effect was enhanced by the treat-
ment  schemes  of  skeleton  surface  hydrophobicity  along
the
through-plane  direction,  which  facilitated  the  detachment  of  oxygen

bubbles from the PTL surface.

In addition to the PEMWE cells with conventional flow field, several
new  PEMWE  cell  architectures  have  been  reported  to  enhance  mass
transport  recently.  One  design  removes  the  flow  field  plate  from  the
anode and uses the PTL to act as flow fields simultaneously. Stiber et al.
used a combination of a Ti porous sintered layer on a Ti expanded metal
mesh as anode PTL and flow field [24]. As shown in Fig. 21a, the PTL is

Fig. 21. (a–c) Using a Ti mesh PTL to replace the anode flow field. (a) Schematic of the PEMWE cell configuration with double PTL as anode flow field. (b–c) SEM
images  of  double  PTL  (Ti  porous  sintered  layer/mesh-PTL).  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Stiber  et  al.  [24].  Copyright  2021,  John  Wiley  and  Sons.  (d–f)
All-in-one bipolar electrode design for reducing the interface and bubble transport resistance. (d) Schematic of the difference between conventional cell configuration
and all-in-one bipolar electrode cell configuration. (e–f) Image and 3D model of all-in-one bipolar electrode. Reproduced with permission from Yang et al. [266].
Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107524

S. Yuan et al.

directly in contact with a flat plate. The hills and valleys of the Ti mesh
serve  a  function  similar  to  the  flow  field  as  a  reactant  distributor
(Fig. 21b and c). The cooperation of sintered Ti with small pores and Ti
mesh with large pores constructs a graded structure that can improve
oxygen bubbles and water transport. Compared to conventional graded
PTL  cells  [233],  this  design  eliminated  the  PTL-flow  field  interface,
reduced  the  related  Ohmic  loss,  and  thus  increased  the  PEMWE  cell
performance. Compared to the cell with only Ti mesh, the cell with such
(cid:0) 2. A
design improved 31% efficiency at a current density of 4.0 A cm
similar  design  idea  was  reported  by  Yang  et  al.,  who  proposed  the
all-in-one  bipolar  electrodes  (AIOBE)  to  minimize  the  interface  resis-
tance [266]. As illustrated in Fig. 21e and f, an AIOBE consists of a pin
flow channel on the substrate, a PTL structure in joint with the pins, and
a Pt catalyst layer. The AIOBE is fabricated by 3D printing and sputter
coating.  Compared  to  the  conventional  cell,  the  AIOBE  reduced  the
thickness of the cell and reduced the number of the interface (Fig. 21d).
Benefitting from the compact structure, the AIOBE exhibits an ultra-low
Ohmic  resistance  of  ~100  mOhm  cm2.  The  bubble  transport  is  also
improved because of the similar design of ultra thin PTL [40]. Conse-
quently, the AIOBE achieved a high hydrogen production performance
(cid:0) 2 at 1.62 V and a high catalyst mass activity of 4.48 A
of 1000 mA cm
mg

(cid:0) 1
Pt.

5.4. Active bubble management methods

Bubble evolution and transport in PEMWE can also be improved by
active management methods. Applying external physical fields such as
magnetic field, ultrasonic field and gravity field has been proven to be
capable  of  enhancing  bubble  evolution  and  transport  [217,267,268].
Water electrolysis system control strategies such as pulse voltage and
pressure swing have also been observed to improve the electrolysis ef-
ficiency [269,270].

5.4.1. External physical fields assisted bubble management

When applying a magnetic field to the PEMWE cell, the magneto-
hydrodynamic and magnetoaerodynamic effects will influence the flow
regions  [216,271–273].  The  Lorentz  force  is  expected  to  be  an  addi-
tional force other than buoyancy to push the bubble away from the CL.

The  relative orientation  of  the  magnetic  field  to  the  PEMWE  cell  can
have a different effect on the bubbles. A magnetic field that is perpen-
dicular  to  the  horizontal  electrode  surface  results  in  the  spinning  of
bubbles. Whereas when the vertical electrode is affected by a parallel
magnetic field, the horizontal Lorentz force can accelerate the bubble
detachment  and  reduce  the  associated  performance  loss  (Fig.  22b).
However, if the arrangement of the electrode and magnetic field causes
the Lorentz force to be in the opposite direction of the buoyancy force,
then the addition of the external magnetic field will in turn become a
force that prevents the bubble from breaking away, thus causing addi-
tional  bubble  induced  loss  and  reducing  the  efficiency  of  water  elec-
trolyzer  [217].  Several  works  have  reported  the  performance
improvement  of  alkaline  water  electrolyzers  when  applying  external
magnetic fields [274,275]. And Kaya et al. have observed the positive
effect  of external  magnetic  fields  on  PEMWE  cell performance  [218].
The oxygen bubble removal is enhanced with an appropriate layout of
an  external  magnetic  field.  With  a  0.5  T  magnetic  field,  the  cell  per-
formance is increased by 33% compared to the conventional cell. This
performance improvement is less pronounced at low water flow rates,
probably because the bubbles detached from the CL do not leave the cell
fast enough at slow water flow rates, thus limiting the effect of bubble
detachment enhancement.

The application of ultrasonic and gravity fields to improve bubble
management has also been investigated in the study of water electrolysis
and other gas evolution reactions [267,268,276]. The ultrasonic field
can improve the bubble detachment by the influence of cavitation and
thus increase the water electrolysis efficiency. Li et al. have applied an
ultrasonic field to enhance hydrogen production efficiency in an alkaline
water  electrolyzer  [268].  The  ultrasonic  generators  were  directly  in
contact with the cell to generate an ultrasonic field at a power of 50 W
and a frequency of 60 Hz. The generated gas bubble quantity is increased
(cid:0) 2, the
by the ultrasonic field. At a current density of over 80 mA cm
efficiency  of  water  electrolysis  is  improved  by  5–18%.  Despite  the
additional  energy  consumption  required  to  introduce  the  ultrasonic
field, the total efficiency still rises. The gravity fields work with a similar
mechanism as the magnetic field. By enhancing the force that acceler-
ates bubble  transport, the  bubble  induced loss decreases. Wang et  al.
have carried out water electrolysis under a supergravity field [276]. The

Fig.  22. (a)  Illustration  of  a  pressure  swing  process  and  the  corresponding  response  of  cell  voltage  and  bubbles  during  water  electrolysis.  Reproduced  with
permission from Bakker et al. [269]. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (b) Schematic of magnetohydrodynamic and magnetoaerodynamic effect on bubbles and effect of
magnetic  field  on  PEMWE  cell  performance.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Kaya  et  al.  [218].  Copyright  2020,  Elsevier  B.V.  (c)  Schematic  of  pulse  voltage
operation in water electrolysis. Reproduced with permission from Demir et al. [270]. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107525

S. Yuan et al.

supergravity  field  was  applied  to  a  cylindrical  electrolytic  cell  by
centrifuge.  The  cell  was  under  a  horizontal  supergravity  field  and
normal  vertical  gravity.  The  cathode  and  anode  are  mounted
(cid:0) 2,
face-to-face and parallel to the direction of supergravity. At 0.5 A cm
a significant overpotential reduction was observed under various gravity
values from 25 G to 256 G.

5.4.2. Electrolyzer control strategy assisted bubble management

Another method to enhance bubble management is to optimize the
control  strategy  of  the  water  electrolysis  system.  As  observed  by  Lee
et al., intermittent unstable current input to the electrolyzer can lead to
an increase in residual gas accumulation, which can negatively affect the
performance of the PEM electrolyzer [70]. However, by modifying the
operation mode, the fluctuation of current or voltage can also be a tool
to  improve  the  bubble  evolution  and  transport.  Demir  et  al.  have
investigated the effect of pulse potential in water electrolysis [270]. As
shown in Fig. 22c, the voltage is applied to the electrolyzer in the form of
pulses. The energy consumption to produce a unit volume of hydrogen
during electrolysis is decreased under pulses voltages of different duty
cycles. This reduction may attribute to the pumping effect brought by
the incident pulse voltage. Under such pulse voltage, the bubble on the
CL  surface  can  be  fully  detached  between  two  voltage  load  states,
reducing  the  bubble-induced  voltage  loss.  In  addition  to  controlling
voltage, pressure swing has also been found to have an enhancing effect

on  electrolyzer  efficiency.  Bakker  et  al.  have  demonstrated  the  possi-
bility  of  facilitating  bubble  removal  in  alkaline  water  electrolysis  via
using pressure swing  control [269].  Instead  of a steady high-pressure
operation,  sudden  pressure  drop  operations  are  introduced  periodi-
cally. As shown in Fig. 22a, a sudden drop in pressure will first cause a
transient voltage rise, followed by a gradual drop in voltage to a new
stable value at the new pressure, and finally the voltage will continue to
drop  to  a  new  stable  value  as  the  pressure  rises  back  up.  At  the  first
moment of pressure drop, there is a rapid bubble growth according to
the  ideal  gas  law  and  leads  to  a  temporary  local  gas  accumulation,
resulting  in  the  first  voltage  peak.  The  bubble  that  has  grown  large
enough then detaches, reducing the voltage. In this way, the pressure
swing promotes the bubble evolution process in CL, and the overall ef-
ficiency of electrolysis is improved through a such periodic operation.
This method may also be effective in PEMWE.

5.5. Bubble management in AEMWE

Many of the bubble management strategies used in PEMWE above
can be borrowed in AEMWE. Recent AEMWE reports have shown that
similar  designs  can  significantly  improve  the  performance  of  electro-
lyzer.  Superaerophobic  CL  has  been  reported  by  Wan  et  al.  [87].
Combining  electrodeposition  and  direct  membrane  deposition,  they
create a highly porous CL which has a vertical channel array facing to

Fig. 23. (a) Construct superaerophobic 3D-ordered vertical channels in CL to enhance bubble management. (a1) Schematic of the superaerophobic 3D-ordered MEA
(cid:0) 2. Reproduced with permission from Wan et al. [87]. Copyright 2022,
(cid:0) 2  and 2000 mA cm
design. (a2) Overpotential breakdown for different MEA at 500 mA cm
Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Catalyst-coated TTLGDL design for AEMWE. (b1) Comparison of catalyst-coated Ti foam and catalyst-coated TTLGDL. (b2) Com-
parison  of  Tafel  plots of  AEMECs with  catalyst-coated  Ti  foam  and  catalyst-coated  TTLGDL. Reproduced  with  permission  from  Li et  al.  [277].  Copyright  2021,
American Chemical Society. (c) 3D-Printed Electrode for enhancing bubble management. (c1) Schematic of the 3D-Printed Electrode. (c2) HER and OER polarization
curves of the 3D-Printed Ni/Cu electrode and conventional Ni foam. Reproduced with permission from M ́arquez et al. [278]. Copyright 2022, American Chemical
Society. (d) Self-supported PTE design for enhanced AEMWE performance. (d1) Schematic of the self-supported NiFeOOH PTE (unified electrode). (d2) Comparison
of polarization curves of self-supported NiFeOOH PTE and conventional IrO2  CL. Reproduced with permission from Park et al. [120]. Copyright 2022, American
Chemical Society. (e) Construction of superhydrophilic (superaerophobic) structures on the PTE surface. (e1) Fabrication of superhydrophilic Fe0.2Ni0.8-P-S PTE.
(e2-4)  SEM  images  of  porous  nanoislands  array  on  superhydrophilic  Fe0.2Ni0.8-P-S  PTE.  (e5)  Effect  of  euperhydrophilic  PTE  on  bubble  size.  Reproduced  with
permission from Wan et al. [121]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107526

S. Yuan et al.

the PTL (Fig. 23a1). Such a structure takes advantage of the favorable
transport routes brought by the channel structure on the one hand, and
the superaerophobic CL surface brought by the array structure on the
other  hand,  which  significantly  reduces  the  mass  transport  loss.  As
(cid:0) 2,  the  mass
shown  in  Fig.  23a2,  at  a  current  density  of  500  mA  cm
transport loss of superaerophobic 3D-ordered MEA is almost 0, while the
mass  transport  loss  of  conventional  MEA  is  noticeable.  At  a  current
(cid:0) 2,  the  share  of  mass  transport  loss  in  total
density  of  2000  mA  cm
voltage loss of conventional CCM type MEA is 32.3%. In contrast, the
value of superaerophobic 3D-ordered MEA is only 9.6%. Zoned catalyst
layer design has also been reported recently. Zhang group has applied
their thin catalyst-coated liquid/gas diffusion layer design in AEMWE
[277].  As  shown  in  Fig.  23b,  in  this  design  (TTLGDL),  the  catalyst  is
coated  on  perforated  titanium  thin  foil.  Compared  to  conventional
Ti-foam, this design reduces the thickness of PTL from about 260 μm to
about  50  μm.  By  using  the  reduced  mass  transport  distance  and  the
vertical through-hole, the loss due to bubbles is greatly reduced. As can
be seen from Fig. 23b2, the separation of kinetics lines and polarization
curves appears later in TTLGDL than in Ti-foam. The separation appears
(cid:0) 2  in TTLGDL.
(cid:0) 2  in Ti-foam, while it appears at 1.6 A cm
at 0.3 A cm
M ́arquez et al. report on how 3D-printed electrode technology can be
used for bubble management to improve electrolysis performance [278].
Using 3D print, planar, pyramid, rod, cone and oval array structure can
be  fabricated  on  a  substrate.  From  planar  to  oval  array,  HER  perfor-
mance increases with the shape of the array. By increasing the number of
printed layers, 3D ordered electrodes can be obtained (Fig. 23c1). As
shown in Fig. 23c2, this 3D ordered structure results in a large perfor-
mance improvement per ECSA compared to Ni foam. This improvement
comes from lower bubble coverage and good bubble transport, and Kou
has  demonstrated  that  these  3D  ordered  electrodes  are  effective  in
solving  bubble  trapping  issues  compared  to  the  disordered  porous
structure of Ni foam [61].

Self-supported electrodes have been proven to be highly efficient and
are widely used as PTE in AEMWE. In contrast to conventional PTE, self-
supported PTE grows the catalyst directly on the PTL instead of spraying
CL on the PTL (Fig. 23d1) [32,120]. The surface of the self-supported
type PTE has more bubble generating sites than the dense packed con-
ventional CL. Therefore, electron transfer and mass transport are both
facilitated. For the anode CL, Park et al. have fabricated self-supported
PTE  (unified  electrode)  via  the  electrodeposition  method  [120].  The
EIS result shows that the unified electrode has lower charge transfer and
Ohmic resistance than conventional CL. The AEMWE using Pt/C cathode
and  unified  NiFeOOH  electrode  anode  show  higher  catalytic  activity
than a conventional CL based on commercial NiFe and IrO2 catalysts. As
shown in Fig. 23d2, at 1.9 V and with 1 M KOH supplied to both anode
and cathode, the unified electrode performs a current density of 3600
(cid:0) 2, which is almost twice as the cell with conventional IrO2 CL.
mA cm
For the cathode, the self-supported electrode also shows good perfor-
mance, especially in terms of reducing mass transport loss. Kim et al.
have designed a Ru2P nanofibers PTE through electrospinning [94]. The
RuO2  nanofibers  constitute  a  porous  network  conducive  to  gas-liquid
transport, and the phosphatization process introduces many pores into
the nanofiber surface, constituting sites conducive to bubble nucleation.
Compared to the cell using commercial Pt/C and carbon paper as PTL
(Pt/C/CP), the Ru2P nanofibers/CP cathode exhibit a significant mass
(cid:0) 2. In addition to the
transport loss reduction of around 0.4 V at 3.5 A cm
structural advantages, self-supported PTE has a variable microstructure
that allows for easy tuning of surface properties to effectively modify
wettability and bubble behavior at the same current density. Wan et al.
report a superaerophobic Fe0.2Ni0.8P0.5S0.5 PTE with nanoisland arrays
prepared  by  electrodeposition  (Fig.  23e1)  [121].  As  shown  in
Fig. 23e2–4, porous arrays of micron-sized nanoislands are uniformly
formed on nickel foam, where each nanoisland consists of many small
nanoparticles  of  a  few  nanometers  in  size.  The  contact  angle  of
◦
Fe0.2Ni0.8P0.5S0.5  PTE  is  0
,  while  the  Ni  foam  has  a  contact  angle  of
86.1
.  In  the  gas  bubble  contact  angle  test,  the  Fe0.2Ni0.8P0.5S0.5  PTE

◦

◦

, while the bubble contact angle
exhibits a bubble contact angle of 142.3
◦
of Ni foam is 72.8
. This allows the KOH to easily penetrate the entire
PTE  and  the  bubbles  to  detach  quickly  after  formation.  At  the  same
operation current density, it can be noticed that the average bubble size
decreases  and  the  bubble  size  distribution  moves  in  the  direction  of
decreasing bubble size (Fig. 23e5). This results in a significant reduction
in mass transport loss for Fe0.2Ni0.8P0.5S0.5  PTE at all current densities
compared to conventional CL. The percentage of mass transport loss is
(cid:0) 2. The AEMWE
reduced by about 20% at a current density of 2 A cm
(cid:0) 2
using Fe0.2Ni0.8P0.5S0.5 PTE delivers a high current density of 2.5 A cm
at 2.0 V.

In the context of commercialization, AEMWE should aim to run with
pure water as PEMWE in its applications. However, switching AEMWE
from operating with liquid electrolyte to operating with pure water is
challenging.  Many  novel  electrode  designs  may  suffer  from  a  perfor-
mance drop after switching to pure water operation due to the lack of
ion transport paths [85,277]. As shown in Fig. 24a1, the performance of
conventional  PTE  AEMWE  deteriorated  quite  severely  after  switching
from 1 M KOH to pure water operation. This is mainly due to the loss of
the additional ion transport pathway provided by KOH when providing
pure water and therefore the ECSA is reduced. (Fig. 24a2) [84,86]. After
switching to pure water operation, the ion is mainly transferred through
the  ionomer  network.  Therefore,  the  combination  optimization  of
electrocatalyst,  ionomer,  and  membrane  is  critical  for  better  perfor-
mance under pure water operation. Ideally, the ionomer should be able
to  form  a  continuous  network  and  transport  ions  to  all  reaction  sites
without impeding electron transport and mass transport. This optimi-
zation becomes more necessary and challenging for self-supported PTEs,
as well as for some three-dimensional structures, due to the inherent lack
of  reliance  on  ionomer  as  a  binder  and  the  difficulty  of  forming  a
continuous ionomer network across the through-plane direction of CL.
Rational optimization of ionomer in combination with PTE can result
in an excellent AEMWE performance under pure water operation. Wan
et al. have optimized the distribution of ionomers in Ni foam based self-
supported PTE [279]. After growing FeNi LDH on the Ni foam surface
using  the  hydrothermal  method,  the  ionomer  is  coated  on  the  PTE
directly using ultrasonic spraying to alter the ionomer content and dis-
tribution. When the ionomer content is reduced to 0, the ECSA may not
be effectively utilized due to poor ion conduction, and the performance
of  PTE  in  pure  water  operation  decreases  substantially  (Fig.  24b3).
Compared  to  bare  PTE,  even  10%  ionomer  content  can  substantially
improve  the  performance  of  PTE.  However,  continuing  to  raise  the
ionomer content does not keep the performance improving. When the
ionomer content is increased to 20%, the performance of AEMWE de-
creases instead. From the SEM results (Fig. 24b2), it can be found that
the coverage of the PTE surface by ionomer increases with the increase
of
increases,  the
high-frequency  resistance  gradually  increases,  indicating  that  the
excessive  ionomer  content  hinders  electron  transfer  (Fig.  24b1).  By
ionomer optimization for facilitating ion and charge transfer, the FeNi
LDH nanosheet array PTE achieved a high current density of 1900 mA
(cid:0) 2 at 1.90 V with pure water AEMWE operation. This performance is
cm
2.2 folds higher than that of the conventional CCM type CL based on
powdered IrO2. In the process of optimizing the ionomer content, it can
also be found that the content of ionomer not only affects the ion and
electron  conduction,  but  also  affects  the  morphology,  contact  angle,
porosity, and other properties. All these characteristics affect the per-
formance of bubble management. Moreover, as discussed in 5.1.2, ion-
omer may also deteriorate the surface properties of PTE surfaces that
originally exhibited superaerophobic features. Therefore, for pure water
operation,  it  is  crucial  to  investigate  the  influence  of  ionomer  on
different CLs to ensure adequate ion and electron transport routes while
utilizing  the  advantage  of  CL  structure  and  morphology  as  much  as
possible.

ionomer  content.  As  the

ionomer  coverage

PTL with a graded structure has been shown to be an effective design
for  bubble  management  and  performance  enhancement  in  PEMWE.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107527

S. Yuan et al.

Fig.  24. (a1)  Polarization  curves  when  running  AEMWE  with  DI  water  and  different  concentrations  of  KOH  (IrO2  anode  and  PtRu/C  cathode).  (a2)  Schematic
diagram of the state of the active area in CL when running with KOH and when running with DI water. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al. [84]. Copyright
2021,  IOP  Publishing.  (b1)  Schematic  of  the  effect  of  ionomer  content  on  the  construction  of  three-phase  interfaces  in  self-support  PTE.  (b2)  SEM  images  of
self-support PTE with and without ionomers on the surface. (b3) Effect of different ionomer contents on the polarization curves of AEMWE using self-support PTE.
Reproduced with permission from Wan et al. [279]. Copyright 2022, John Wiley and Sons.

Likewise, graded structure MPL-PTL has also been reported in AEMWE
[234,280]. Razmjooei et al. have introduced nickel-based MPL on the
top  of  PTL  by  spraying  globular  gas-atomized  Ni-based  powders  by
air-plasma spraying (Fig. 25a1) [280]. The graded PTL with low capil-
lary  pressure  MPL  facilitates  the  transport  of  water  from  the  flow
channel  to  the  reaction  site,  while  effectively  allowing  hydrogen  and
oxygen to flow in opposite directions, reducing the masking of the re-
action  site.  Moreover,  since  MPL  has  a  denser  structure,  it  can  also
improve the contact between PTL and CL, and in turn reduces interfacial
contact resistance. As shown in Fig. 25a2, compared with PTL without
MPL  and  Ni  mesh,  the  NiMPL-PTL  shows  a  significant  performance
improvement.  As  seen  by  the  electrochemical  impedance  spectrum

analysis,  the  high-frequency  resistance  and  low-frequency  resistance
results further confirm that this performance improvement comes from a
significant reduction in electron transfer resistance and mass transport
resistance (Fig. 25a3).

6. Challenges and future prospects

While  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  PEMWE  technology
development, we believe two important subfields still need particular
attention: micro- and nano-scale bubble behavior in PEMWE and bubble
management techniques in PEMWE engineering practice.

For bubble behavior in PEMWE, some excellent works have revealed

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107528

S. Yuan et al.

Fig. 25. (a1) Schematic of the NiMPL coating prepared on PTL using the APS technique. (a2) Comparison of the polarization curves of AEMWE using stainless steel
PTL, Ni mesh, and stainless steel PTL with NiMPL. (a3) Comparison of Nyquist plots of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements of AEMWE using PTL/
PTL configuration versus AEMWE using NiMPL-PTL/NiMPL-PTL. Reproduced with permission from Razmjooei et al. [280]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V.

the transport processes in PTL and flow fields. However, there is a lack of
knowledge about bubble behaviors at nanoscale inside the CL because of
the  challenges  associated  with  analytical  techniques  and  methods.
Although  we  have  been  able  to  describe  the  bubble  generation  and
detachment  processes  referred  to  as  bubble  evolution  theory,  these
discussions are difficult to directly infer the actual situation within the
CL. At the catalyst level, several works presented the enhancement of
OER  and  HER  by  using  nanostructures  and  attributed  it  to  the
enhancement of bubble evolution [134,281]. However, how the bubble
evolution  process  is  affected  by  such  nanostructures  at  the  nanoscale
and  thus  enhancing  the  electrochemical  reactions  still  remains  un-
known. At the pore level of the CL, the origin of oxygen and hydrogen
bubbles and their transport behavior within porous structure of CL are
still  not  acknowledged.  More  experimental  and  theoretical  work  is
needed in the understanding of the original production sites of bubbles
and the transport behavior of bubbles inside the CL, which would offer
the design principles for catalysts and CL structure.

Besides, the dynamic characteristics of bubble transport across the

whole PEMWE cell also need more research. The study of the transient
gas distribution in PTL reveals the hysteresis of gas transport in response
to current changes and the accumulation of gas during repeating load
changes, which results in performance loss under intermittent load [70].
Meanwhile, it has also been proved that by applying pulse voltage or
swinging pressure, bubble detachment can be enhanced and the elec-
trolyzer  efficiency  will  also  increase  accordingly  [269,270].  These
contradictory  phenomena  indicate  the  complexity  of  the  dynamic
characteristics and corresponding influence of bubbles under dynamic
operation.  Considering  the  intermittent  and  fluctuating  nature  of
renewable energy source which powers the PEMWE, more research is
needed to understand the dynamic characteristics of bubble transport.

7. Conclusions

As  a  promising  emerging  hydrogen  production  technology,  the
PEMWE has attracted worldwide attention recently due to its charac-
teristics of high efficiency, excellent flexibility, and good compatibility

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107529

S. Yuan et al.

with renewable energies. As a result, significant progress has been made
in  increasing  current  densities  at  the  same  precious  metal  catalyst
loadings.  However,  as  the  current  density  increases,  the  bubbles
generated during electrolysis have an increasingly negative impact on
the  efficiency  of  the  electrolysis.  The  bubble  evolution  process  in
PEMWE includes nucleation, growth, and detachment. On the one hand,
the evolution of bubbles reduces the gas supersaturation near the cata-
lytic surface to reduce mass transfer losses, while on the other hand, it
masks the catalytic surface to cause an increase in activation loss. The
evolution  process  can  be  affected  by  modifying  the  CL.  Designing  CL
towards  increasing  the  number  of  bubble  nucleation sites,  decreasing
the  bubble  detachment  size,  and  increasing  the  bubble  detachment
frequency will significantly improve the water electrolysis performance.
After  detachment, a  bubble transport process happens in the PEMWE
cell. Bubbles travel from CL to PTL and are then carried away by the
water flow in the flow field. The transport routes are determined by the
porosity,  wettability,  and  structure  of  each  component  in  PEMWE.
Bubble  accumulation  during  the  transport  process  hinders  water-gas
transport  and  reduces  cell  performance.  Especially  in  the  case  of  dy-
namic  loads,  bubble  accumulation  tends  to  become  severe.  Providing
sufficient, straightforward, and low-resistance bubble transport routes
in  CL,  PTL,  and  flow  field  can  reduce  bubble  accumulation  and  its
negative  impact  on  electrolyzer  performance.  Future  PEMWE  compo-
nents  design  and  electrolyzer  control  strategies  should  follow  these
principles  towards  better  bubble  evolution  and  transport  behavior  to
migrate  the  bubble-induced  loss.  More  effort  needs  to  be  devoted  to
developing  PEMWE  bubble  management  techniques  and  engaging  in
engineering practice in the future. In addition, the bubble management
techniques  in  PEMWE  also  provide  guidelines  and  solution  for  the
bubble issues in AEMWE and thus facilitate its better development.

In  this  article,  we  have  presented  a  comprehensive  review  of  the
bubble  evolution  and  transport  behaviors  in  PEMWE  cells  and  their
corresponding  impacts  on  cell  performance.  In  response  to  the  issues
induced  by  bubbles,  we  have  reviewed  the  most  recent  advances  in
bubble  management  strategies  for  PEMWE,  as  well  as  the  remaining
challenges  and  perspectives.  Despite  the  progress  made,  there  is  still
much room for improvement of water electrolyzer performance regards
bubble management due to a limited understanding of bubble evolution
and transport in PEMWE. Further development of bubble management
in PEMWE can be focused on, but not limited to, the following areas: 1)
in-situ characterizations of bubble evolution; 2) modeling the complex
multi-scale bubble transport process and its impact on electrochemical
performance;  3) optimizing CL and CL-PTL interface for more bubble
nucleation  sites,  smaller  bubble  detachment  size,  and  higher  bubble
detachment frequency; 4) designing CL, PTL, flow fields towards suffi-
cient, straightforward and low-resistance bubble transport routes across
the  whole  PEMWE  cell;  5)  improve  electrolyzer  operation strategy  to
prevent bubble accumulation during dynamic load.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgements

This paper was supported by National Key Research and Develop-
ment Program of China (2021YFB4001305), the National Natural Sci-
ence  Foundation  of  China  (No.  52276206),  and  the  Science  and
Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (21DZ1208600), the
Oceanic  Interdisciplinary  Program  of  Shanghai  Jiao  Tong  University

(SL2021ZD105).

References

[1] Hurtubia B, Sauma E. Economic and environmental analysis of hydrogen
production when complementing renewable energy generation with grid
electricity. Appl Energy 2021;304:117739. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2021.117739.

[2] Hermesmann M, Müller TE. Green, turquoise, blue, or grey? Environmentally
friendly hydrogen production in transforming energy systems. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2022;90:100996. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.100996.

[3] Action on clean hydrogen is needed to deliver net-zero by 2050. Here’s how.

World Economic Forum n.d, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/05/actio
n-clean-hydrogen-net-zero-2050/. [Accessed 10 June 2022].

[4] Jiao K, Xuan J, Du Q, Bao Z, Xie B, Wang B, et al. Designing the next generation of
proton-exchange membrane fuel cells. Nature 2021;595:361–9. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41586-021-03482-7.

[5] Cullen DA, Neyerlin KC, Ahluwalia RK, Mukundan R, More KL, Borup RL, et al.
New roads and challenges for fuel cells in heavy-duty transportation. Nat Energy
2021;6:462–74. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-00775-z.

[6] Shelef M, Kukkonen CA. Prospects of hydrogen-fueled vehicles. Prog Energy

Combust Sci 1994;20:139–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(94)90008-6.

[7] Yilanci A, Dincer I, Ozturk HK. A review on solar-hydrogen/fuel cell hybrid

energy systems for stationary applications. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2009;35:
231–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2008.07.004.

[8] Pan ZF, An L, Zhao TS, Tang ZK. Advances and challenges in alkaline anion

exchange membrane fuel cells. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;66:141–75.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2018.01.001.

[9] Ozden A, Shahgaldi S, Li X, Hamdullahpur F. A review of gas diffusion layers for

proton exchange membrane fuel cells—with a focus on characteristics,
characterization techniques, materials and designs. Prog Energy Combust Sci
2019;74:50–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.05.002.

[10] Glenk G, Reichelstein S. Economics of converting renewable power to hydrogen.
Nat Energy 2019;4:216–22. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-019-0326-1.
[11] Buttler A, Spliethoff H. Current status of water electrolysis for energy storage,

grid balancing and sector coupling via power-to-gas and power-to-liquids: a
review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;82:2440–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2017.09.003.

[12] Mohammadi A, Mehrpooya M. A comprehensive review on coupling different
types of electrolyzer to renewable energy sources. Energy 2018;158:632–55.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.06.073.

[13] Yu Z-Y, Duan Y, Feng X-Y, Yu X, Gao M-R, Yu S-H. Clean and Affordable

Hydrogen Fuel from Alkaline Water Splitting: Past, Recent Progress, and Future
Prospects. Adv Mater n.d.;n/a:2007100.. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.
202007100.

[14] G ̈otz M, Lefebvre J, M ̈ors F, McDaniel Koch A, Graf F, Bajohr S, et al. Renewable
Power-to-Gas: a technological and economic review. Renew Energy 2016;85:
1371–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2015.07.066.

[15] Zeng K, Zhang D. Recent progress in alkaline water electrolysis for hydrogen

production and applications. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2010;36:307–26. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2009.11.002.

[16] Carmo M, Fritz DL, Mergel J, Stolten D. A comprehensive review on PEM water
electrolysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38:4901–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2013.01.151.

[17] Shiva Kumar S, Himabindu V. Hydrogen production by PEM water electrolysis – a

review. Mater Sci Energy Technol 2019;2:442–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mset.2019.03.002.

[18] Ayers KE, Dalton L, Parker M. Direct electrochemical compression of hydrogen
and oxygen via PEM water electrolysis. Meet Abstr 2017. https://doi.org/
10.1149/MA2017-02/37/1664. MA2017-02:1664.

[19] Zhu S, Qin X, Xiao F, Yang S, Xu Y, Tan Z, et al. The role of ruthenium in

improving the kinetics of hydrogen oxidation and evolution reactions of
platinum. Nat Catal 2021;4:711–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-021-00663-
5.

[20] Gao J, Tao H, Liu B. Progress of nonprecious-metal-based electrocatalysts for

oxygen evolution in acidic media. Adv Mater 2021;33:2003786. https://doi.org/
10.1002/adma.202003786.

[21] Sapountzi FM, Gracia JM, Weststrate CJ, Kees-J, Fredriksson HOA,

Niemantsverdriet JW, Hans. Electrocatalysts for the generation of hydrogen,
oxygen and synthesis gas. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;58:1–35. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pecs.2016.09.001.

[22] Hackemüller FJ, Borgardt E, Panchenko O, Müller M, Bram M. Manufacturing of
large-scale titanium-based porous transport layers for polymer electrolyte
membrane electrolysis by tape casting. Adv Eng Mater 2019;21:1801201. https://
doi.org/10.1002/adem.201801201.

[23] Lee JK, Bazylak A. Optimizing porous transport layer design parameters via
stochastic pore network modelling: reactant transport and interfacial contact
considerations. J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:013541. https://doi.org/10.1149/
1945-7111/ab6557.

[24] Stiber S, Balzer H, Wierhake A, Wirkert FJ, Roth J, Rost U, et al. Porous transport

layers for proton exchange membrane electrolysis under extreme conditions of
current density, temperature, and pressure. Adv Energy Mater 2021;11:2100630.
https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.202100630.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107530

S. Yuan et al.

[25] Maier M, Smith K, Dodwell J, Hinds G, Shearing PR, Brett DJL. Mass transport in
PEM water electrolysers: a review. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.10.013. S0360319921039288.

[26] Li Y, Kang Z, Deng X, Yang G, Yu S, Mo J, et al. Wettability effects of thin titanium
liquid/gas diffusion layers in proton exchange membrane electrolyzer cells.
Electrochim Acta 2019;298:704–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2018.12.162.

[27] Maier M, Dodwell J, Ziesche R, Tan C, Heenan T, Majasan J, et al. Mass transport
in polymer electrolyte membrane water electrolyser liquid-gas diffusion layers: a
combined neutron imaging and X-ray computed tomography study. J Power
Sources 2020;455:227968. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.227968.

[28] Pham CV, Escalera-L ́opez D, Mayrhofer K, Cherevko S, Thiele S. Essentials of high
performance water electrolyzers – From catalyst layer materials to electrode
engineering. Adv Energy Mater 2021;11:2101998. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aenm.202101998.

[29] Yeo K-R, Lee K-S, Kim H, Lee J, Kim S-K. A highly active and stable 3D dandelion
spore-structured self-supporting Ir-based electrocatalyst for proton exchange
membrane water electrolysis fabricated using structural reconstruction. Energy
Environ Sci 2022. https://doi.org/10.1039/D2EE01042A. 10.1039.D2EE01042A.

[52] Yang X, Karnbach F, Uhlemann M, Odenbach S, Eckert K. Dynamics of single
hydrogen bubbles at a platinum microelectrode. Langmuir 2015;31:8184–93.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b01825.

[53] Lee JK, Bazylak A. Bubbles: the good, the bad, and the ugly. Joule 2021;5:19–21.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2020.12.024.

[54] Kumar R, Kuloor NK. The Formation of bubbles and drops. In: Drew TB,

Cokelet GR, Hoopes JW, Vermeulen T, editors. Advances in chemical engineering,
8. Academic Press; 1970. p. 255–368. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2377(08)
60186-6.

[55] Oguz HN, Prosperetti A. Dynamics of bubble growth and detachment from a

needle. J Fluid Mech 1993;257:111. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0022112093003015.

[56] Yang X. Marangoni convection at electrogenerated hydrogen bubbles, 7; 2018.
[57] Taqieddin A, Allshouse MR, Alshawabkeh AN. Editors’ choice—critical

review—mathematical formulations of electrochemically gas-evolving systems.
J Electrochem Soc 2018;165:E694–711. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0791813jes.
[58] Xu W, Lu Z, Sun X, Jiang L, Duan X. Superwetting electrodes for gas-involving
electrocatalysis. Acc Chem Res 2018;51:1590–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
accounts.8b00070.

[30] Chen Z, Guo L, Pan L, Yan T, He Z, Li Y, et al. Advances in oxygen evolution

[59] Schmidt LE, Keim NC, Zhang WW, Nagel SR. Memory-encoding vibrations in a

electrocatalysts for proton exchange membrane water electrolyzers. Adv Energy
Mater 2022:2103670. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.202103670.

[31] Li L, Wang P, Shao Q, Huang X. Recent progress in advanced electrocatalyst

design for acidic oxygen evolution reaction. Adv Mater 2021;33:2004243.
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202004243.

[32] Wang P, Wang B. Designing self-supported electrocatalysts for electrochemical
water splitting: surface/interface engineering toward enhanced electrocatalytic
performance. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2021;13:59593–617. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsami.1c17448.

[33] Angulo A, van der Linde P, Gardeniers H, Modestino M, Fern ́andez Rivas D.
Influence of bubbles on the energy conversion efficiency of electrochemical
reactors. Joule 2020;4:555–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2020.01.005.

[34] Zhao X, Ren H, Luo L. Gas bubbles in electrochemical gas evolution reactions.
Langmuir 2019;35:5392–408. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b00119.
(cid:0) 2

[35] Yang F, Kim MJ, Brown M, Wiley BJ. Alkaline water electrolysis at 25 A cm

with a microfibrous flow-through electrode. Adv Energy Mater 2020;10:2001174.
https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.202001174.

[36] Chatenet M, Pollet BG, Dekel DR, Dionigi F, Deseure J, Millet P, et al. Water

electrolysis: from textbook knowledge to the latest scientific strategies and
industrial developments. Chem Soc Rev 2022;51:4583–762. https://doi.org/
10.1039/D0CS01079K.

[37] Shih AJ, Monteiro MCO, Dattila F, Pavesi D, Philips M, da Silva AHM, et al. Water

electrolysis. Nat Rev Methods Primers 2022;2:1–19. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s43586-022-00164-0.

[38] Berg P, Promislow K, Pierre JS, Stumper J, Wetton B. Water management in PEM

fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc 2004;151:A341. https://doi.org/10.1149/
1.1641033.

[39] Wang XR, Ma Y, Gao J, Li T, Jiang GZ, Sun ZY. Review on water management

methods for proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;
46:12206–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.06.211.

[40] Yu S, Li K, Wang W, Xie Z, Ding L, Kang Z, et al. Tuning catalyst activation and
utilization via controlled electrode patterning for low-loading and high-efficiency
water electrolyzers. Small 2022;18:2107745. https://doi.org/10.1002/
smll.202107745.

[41] Lee JK, Lee C, Fahy KF, Kim PJ, Krause K, LaManna JM, et al. Accelerating bubble
detachment in porous transport layers with patterned through-pores. ACS Appl
Energy Mater 2020;3:9676–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaem.0c01239.
[42] Lubetkin SD. The fundamentals of bubble evolution. Chem Soc Rev 1995;24:243.

https://doi.org/10.1039/cs9952400243.

[43] Kalikmanov VI. Classical nucleation theory. In: Kalikmanov VI, editor. Nucleation
theory. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands; 2013. p. 17–41. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-90-481-3643-8_3.

[44] Blander M, Katz JL. Bubble nucleation in liquids. AIChE J 1975;21:833–48.

https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690210502.

[45] Ren H, German SR, Edwards MA, Chen Q, White HS. Electrochemical generation

of individual O2 nanobubbles via H2O2 oxidation. J Phys Chem Lett 2017;8:
2450–4. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.7b00882.

[46] Pe ̃nas P, van der Linde P, Vijselaar W, van der Meer D, Lohse D, Huskens J, et al.
Decoupling gas evolution from water-splitting electrodes. J Electrochem Soc
2019;166:H769. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1381914jes.

[47] Raman A, Penas P, Lohse D, Gardeniers H, Rivas DF. Potential response of single
successive constant-current-driven electrolytic hydrogen bubbles spatially
separated from the electrode n.d.:19.

[48] Fern ́andez D, Maurer P, Martine M, Coey JMD, M ̈obius ME. Bubble Formation at a
gas-evolving microelectrode. Langmuir 2014;30:13065–74. https://doi.org/
10.1021/la500234r.

[49] Kempler PA, Coridan RH, Lewis NS. Effects of bubbles on the electrochemical

behavior of hydrogen-evolving Si microwire arrays oriented against gravity.
Energy Environ Sci 2020;13:1808–17. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0EE00356E.

[50] Mo Jingke, Kang Z, Yang G, Li Y, Retterer ST, Cullen DA, et al. In situ

investigation on ultrafast oxygen evolution reactions of water splitting in proton
exchange membrane electrolyzer cells. J Mater Chem 2017;5:18469–75. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C7TA05681H.

disconnecting air bubble. Nat Phys 2009;5:343–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nphys1233.

[60] Iwata R, Zhang L, Wilke KL, Gong S, He M, Gallant BM, et al. Bubble growth and
departure modes on wettable/non-wettable porous foams in alkaline water
splitting. Joule 2021;5:887–900. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2021.02.015.
[61] Kou T, Wang S, Shi R, Zhang T, Chiovoloni S, Lu JQ, et al. Periodic porous 3D
electrodes mitigate gas bubble traffic during alkaline water electrolysis at high
current densities. Adv Energy Mater 2020;10:2002955. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aenm.202002955.

[62] Lu Z, Zhu W, Yu X, Zhang H, Li Y, Sun X, et al. Ultrahigh hydrogen evolution

performance of under-water “superaerophobic” MoS2 nanostructured electrodes.
Adv Mater 2014;26:2683–7. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201304759.
[63] Gross SJ, McDevitt KM, Mumm DR, Mohraz A. Mitigating bubble traffic in gas-
evolving electrodes via spinodally derived architectures. ACS Appl Mater
Interfaces 2021;13:8528–37. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c20798.
[64] Jiang M, Wang H, Li Y, Zhang H, Zhang G, Lu Z, et al. Superaerophobic RuO2-
based nanostructured electrode for high-performance chlorine evolution reaction.
Small 2017;13:1602240. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201602240.

[65] Wu Y, Zhang H, Wu X, Cen K. Quantifying bubble size and 3D velocity in a vortex
with digital holographic particle tracking velocimetry (DHPTV). Flow Meas
Instrum 2020;76:101826. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.flowmeasinst.2020.101826.
[66] Hreiz R, Abdelouahed L, Fünfschilling D, Lapicque F. Electrogenerated bubbles

induced convection in narrow vertical cells: PIV measurements and
Euler–Lagrange CFD simulation. Chem Eng Sci 2015;134:138–52. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ces.2015.04.041.

[67] Wosiak G, da Silva J, Sena SS, de Andrade RN, Pereira E. CFD simulation and
experimental comparison of bubble-induced convection during electrochemical
water splitting. Chem Eng J 2022;433:133194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2021.133194.

[68] Lagadec MF, Grimaud A. Water electrolysers with closed and open

electrochemical systems. Nat Mater 2020;19:1140–50. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41563-020-0788-3.

[69] Mo J, Kang Z, Retterer ST, Cullen DA, Toops TJ, Green JB, et al. Discovery of true
electrochemical reactions for ultrahigh catalyst mass activity in water splitting.
Sci Adv 2016;2:e1600690. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1600690.

[70] Lee Ch, Lee JK, Zhao B, Fahy KF, Bazylak A. Transient gas distribution in porous

transport layers of polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyzers. J Electrochem
Soc 2020;167:024508. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/ab68c8.

[71] Majasan JO, Cho JIS, Dedigama I, Tsaoulidis D, Shearing P, Brett DJL. Two-phase
flow behaviour and performance of polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysers:
electrochemical and optical characterisation. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:
15659–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.07.003.

[72] Lee JK, Lee C, Fahy KF, Zhao B, LaManna JM, Baltic E, et al. Critical current

density as a performance indicator for gas-evolving electrochemical devices. Cell
Rep Phys Sci 2020;1:100147. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2020.100147.
[73] Wang W, Yu S, Li K, Ding L, Xie Z, Li Y, et al. Insights into the rapid two-phase
transport dynamics in different structured porous transport layers of water
electrolyzers through high-speed visualization. J Power Sources 2021;516:
230641. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230641.

[74] Wani K, Araki T, Nagasawa K, Mitsushima S. Visualization of bubble behavior on
hydrophobic coated CL in PEM water electrolysis cell. Meet Abstr 2020;
MA2020–02:2459. https://doi.org/10.1149/MA2020-02382459mtgabs.

[75] Li Y, Kang Z, Mo J, Yang G, Yu S, Talley DA, et al. In-situ investigation of bubble
dynamics and two-phase flow in proton exchange membrane electrolyzer cells.
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:11223–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2018.05.006.

[76] Selamet OF, Deevanhxay P, Tsushima S, Hirai S. Investigation of gas generation in
regenerative fuel cells by low-energy X-rays. J Power Sources 2015;296:133–41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.07.043.

[77] Satjaritanun P, O’Brien M, Kulkarni D, Shimpalee S, Capuano C, Ayers KE, et al.
Observation of preferential pathways for oxygen removal through porous
transport layers of polymer electrolyte water electrolyzers. iScience 2020;23:
101783. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.101783.

[51] Brandon NP, Kelsall GH. Growth kinetics of bubbles electrogenerated at

[78] Lee Ch, Lee JK, Zhao B, Fahy KF, LaManna JM, Baltic E, et al. Temperature-

microelectrodes. J Appl Electrochem 1985;15:475–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF01059288.

dependent gas accumulation in polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyzer

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107531

S. Yuan et al.

porous transport layers. J Power Sources 2020;446:227312. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.227312.

[79] Panchenko O, Borgardt E, Zwaygardt W, Hackemüller FJ, Bram M, Kardjilov N,
et al. In-situ two-phase flow investigation of different porous transport layer for a
polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolyzer with neutron spectroscopy.
J Power Sources 2018;390:108–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2018.04.044.

[80] Leonard E, Shum AD, Danilovic N, Capuano C, Ayers KE, Pant LM, et al.

Interfacial analysis of a PEM electrolyzer using X-ray computed tomography.
Sustain Energy Fuels 2020;4:921–31. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9SE00364A.
[81] Kwan JTH, Nouri-Khorasani A, Bonakdarpour A, McClement DG, Afonso G,

Wilkinson DP. Frequency analysis of water electrolysis current fluctuations in a
PEM flow cell: insights into bubble nucleation and detachment. J Electrochem Soc
2022;169:054531. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/ac707f.

[82] Mazloomi K, Sulaiman N, Ahmad SA, Yunus NA. Analysis of the frequency
response of a water electrolysis cell. Int J Electrochem Sci 2013;8:9.

[83] Nouri-Khorasani A, Tabu Ojong E, Smolinka T, Wilkinson DP. Model of oxygen

bubbles and performance impact in the porous transport layer of PEM water
electrolysis cells. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:28665–80. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.09.167.

[84] Liu J, Kang Z, Li D, Pak M, Alia SM, Fujimoto C, et al. Elucidating the role of
hydroxide electrolyte on anion-exchange-membrane water electrolyzer
performance. J Electrochem Soc 2021;168:054522. https://doi.org/10.1149/
1945-7111/ac0019.

[85] Lindquist GA, Oener SZ, Krivina R, Motz AR, Keane A, Capuano C, et al.
Performance and durability of pure-water-fed anion exchange membrane
electrolyzers using baseline materials and operation. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
2021;13:51917–24. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c06053.

[86] Hassan NU, Zheng Y, Kohl PA, Mustain WE. KOH vs Deionized water operation in

anion exchange membrane electrolyzers. J Electrochem Soc 2022;169:044526.
https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/ac5f1d.

[87] Wan L, Xu Z, Xu Q, Wang P, Wang B. Overall design of novel 3D-ordered MEA
with drastically enhanced mass transport for alkaline electrolyzers. Energy
Environ Sci 2022;15:1882–92. https://doi.org/10.1039/D2EE00273F.

[88] Xu Q, Zhang L, Zhang J, Wang J, Hu Y, Jiang H, et al. Anion exchange membrane
water electrolyzer: electrode design, lab-scaled testing system and performance
evaluation. EnergyChem 2022;4:100087. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enchem.2022.100087.

[89] Chen Q, Luo L, Faraji H, Feldberg SW, White HS. Electrochemical measurements

of single H2 nanobubble nucleation and stability at Pt nanoelectrodes. J Phys
Chem Lett 2014;5:3539–44. https://doi.org/10.1021/jz501898r.

[90] Chen N, Paek SY, Lee JY, Park JH, Lee SY, Lee YM. High-performance anion

exchange membrane water electrolyzers with a current density of 7.68 A cm(cid:0) 2
and a durability of 1000 hours. Energy Environ Sci 2021;14:6338–48. https://doi.
org/10.1039/D1EE02642A.

[91] Zhuang H, Tkalych AJ, Carter EA. Surface energy as a descriptor of catalytic
activity. J Phys Chem C 2016;120:23698–706. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpcc.6b09687.

[92] Gupta G, Selvakumar K, Lakshminarasimhan N, Senthil Kumar SM, Mamlouk M.
The effects of morphology, microstructure and mixed-valent states of MnO2 on
the oxygen evolution reaction activity in alkaline anion exchange membrane
water electrolysis. J Power Sources 2020;461:228131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2020.228131.

[93] Xu Y, Wang C, Huang Y, Fu J. Recent advances in electrocatalysts for neutral and
large-current-density water electrolysis. Nano Energy 2021;80:105545. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.105545.

[94] Kim J-C, Kim J, Park JC, Ahn SH, Kim D-W. Ru2P nanofibers for high-

performance anion exchange membrane water electrolyzer. Chem Eng J 2021;
420:130491. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.130491.

[95] Jeon SS, Lim J, Kang PW, Lee JW, Kang G, Lee H. Design principles of NiFe-

layered double hydroxide anode catalysts for anion exchange membrane water
electrolyzers. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2021;13:37179–86. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsami.1c09606.

[96] Santoro C, Lavacchi A, Mustarelli P, Di Noto V, Elbaz L, Dekel DR, et al. What is
next in anion-exchange membrane water electrolyzers? Bottlenecks, benefits, and
future. ChemSusChem 2022;15:e202200027. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cssc.202200027.

[97] Li C, Baek J-B. The promise of hydrogen production from alkaline anion exchange
membrane electrolyzers. Nano Energy 2021;87:106162. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.nanoen.2021.106162.

[98] Liang C, Zou P, Nairan A, Zhang Y, Liu J, Liu K, et al. Exceptional performance of
hierarchical Ni–Fe oxyhydroxide@NiFe alloy nanowire array electrocatalysts for
large current density water splitting. Energy Environ Sci 2020;13:86–95. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C9EE02388G.

[99] Matsushima H, Nishida T, Konishi Y, Fukunaka Y, Ito Y, Kuribayashi K. Water

electrolysis under microgravity: Part 1. Experimental technique. Electrochim Acta
2003;48:4119–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0013-4686(03)00579-6.

[100] Bernt M, Gasteiger HA. Influence of ionomer content in IrO2/TiO2  electrodes on
PEM water electrolyzer performance. J Electrochem Soc 2016;163:F3179.
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0231611jes.

[101] Bonanno M, Müller K, Bensmann B, Hanke-Rauschenbach R, Peach R, Thiele S.
Evaluation of the efficiency of an elevated temperature proton exchange
membrane water electrolysis system. J Electrochem Soc 2021;168:094504.
https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/ac2188.

[102] Ito H, Maeda T, Nakano A, Hasegawa Y, Yokoi N, Hwang CM, et al. Effect of flow
regime of circulating water on a proton exchange membrane electrolyzer. Int J

Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:9550–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2010.06.103.

[103] Chen L, He A, Zhao J, Kang Q, Li Z-Y, Carmeliet J, et al. Pore-scale modeling of
complex transport phenomena in porous media. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2022;
88:100968. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100968.

[104] Ryan EM, Mukherjee PP. Mesoscale modeling in electrochemical devices—a

critical perspective. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2019;71:118–42. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2018.11.002.

[105] Bhaskaran S, Miliˇci ́c T, Surasani VK, Tsotsas E, Vidakovic-Koch T, Vorhauer-

Huget N. A new design of a microfluidic experimental cell for the study of two-
phase flow inside a PEM water electrolyzer. Meet Abstr 2022;MA2022–02:1641.
https://doi.org/10.1149/MA2022-02441641mtgabs.

[106] Satjaritanun P, Lopata JS, Cho H-S, Kim M-J, Zenyuk IV, Shimpalee S. Applying
the lattice Boltzmann method to simulate bubble growth in porous media for PEM
water electrolysis. Meet Abstr 2020;MA2020–02:2472. https://doi.org/10.1149/
MA2020-02382472mtgabs.

[107] Lee C, Hinebaugh J, Banerjee R, Chevalier S, Abouatallah R, Wang R, et al.
Influence of limiting throat and flow regime on oxygen bubble saturation of
polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyzer porous transport layers. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:2724–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2016.09.114.

[108] Arbabi F, Kalantarian A, Abouatallah R, Wang R, Wallace JS, Bazylak A.

Feasibility study of using microfluidic platforms for visualizing bubble flows in
electrolyzer gas diffusion layers. J Power Sources 2014;258:142–9. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.02.042.

[109] Arbabi F, Montazeri H, Abouatallah R, Wang R, Bazylak A. Three-dimensional

computational fluid dynamics modelling of oxygen bubble transport in polymer
electrolyte membrane electrolyzer porous transport layers. J Electrochem Soc
2016;163:F3062–9. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0091611jes.

[110] Arbabi F, Kalantarian A, Abouatallah R, Wang R, Wallace J, Bazylak A.

Visualizing bubble flows in electrolyzer GDLs using microfluidic platforms. ECS
Trans 2013;58:907–18. https://doi.org/10.1149/05801.0907ecst.

[111] Zlobinski M, Schuler T, Büchi FN, Schmidt TJ, Boillat P. Transient and steady

state two-phase flow in anodic porous transport layer of proton exchange
membrane water electrolyzer. J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:084509. https://doi.
org/10.1149/1945-7111/ab8c89.

[112] Schuler T, De Bruycker R, Schmidt TJ, Büchi FN. Polymer electrolyte water

electrolysis: correlating porous transport layer structural properties and
performance: Part I. Tomographic analysis of morphology and topology.
J Electrochem Soc 2019;166:F270–81. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0561904jes.
[113] De Angelis S, Schuler T, Charalambous MA, Marone F, Schmidt TJ, Büchi FN.

Unraveling two-phase transport in porous transport layer materials for polymer
electrolyte water electrolysis. J Mater Chem 2021;9:22102–13. https://doi.org/
10.1039/D1TA03379D.

[114] Seweryn J, Biesdorf J, Schmidt TJ, Boillat P. Communication—neutron

radiography of the water/gas distribution in the porous layers of an operating
electrolyser. J Electrochem Soc 2016;163:F3009–11. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.0641607jes.

[115] Hoeh MA, Arlt T, Manke I, Banhart J, Fritz DL, Maier W, et al. In operando

synchrotron X-ray radiography studies of polymer electrolyte membrane water
electrolyzers. Electrochem Commun 2015;55:55–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
elecom.2015.03.009.

[116] Leonard E, Shum AD, Normile S, Sabarirajan DC, Yared DG, Xiao X, et al.

Operando X-ray tomography and sub-second radiography for characterizing
transport in polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyzer. Electrochim Acta 2018;
276:424–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2018.04.144.

[117] Ito K, Maeda Y, Sakaguchi T, Tsukamoto S, Inada A, Tsuchiya Y, et al. Analysis
and visualization of water flow impact on hydrogen production efficiency in solid
polymer water electrolyzer under high-pressure condition. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2015;40:5995–6003. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.03.045.
[118] Li Y, Yang G, Yu S, Mo J, Li K, Xie Z, et al. High-speed characterization of two-

phase flow and bubble dynamics in titanium felt porous media for hydrogen
production. Electrochim Acta 2021;370:137751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2021.137751.

[119] Roenning FH, Roy A, Aaron DS, Mench MM. Mass transport limitations in

polymer electrolyte water electrolyzers using spatially-resolved current
measurement. J Power Sources 2022;542:231749. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2022.231749.

[120] Park JE, Park S, Kim M-J, Shin H, Kang SY, Cho Y-H, et al. Three-dimensional

unified electrode design using a NiFeOOH catalyst for superior performance and
durable anion-exchange membrane water electrolyzers. ACS Catal 2022;12:
135–45. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.1c04117.

[121] Wan L, Xu Z, Wang P, Liu P-F, Xu Q, Wang B. Dual regulation both intrinsic

activity and mass transport for self-supported electrodes using in anion exchange
membrane water electrolysis. Chem Eng J 2022;431:133942. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2021.133942.

[122] Alia SM, Reeves KS, Baxter JS, Cullen DA. The impact of ink and spray variables
on catalyst layer properties, electrolyzer performance, and electrolyzer durability.
J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:144512. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/
abc746.

[123] Garcia-Navarro JC, Schulze M, Friedrich KA. Measuring and modeling mass

transport losses in proton exchange membrane water electrolyzers using
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. J Power Sources 2019;431:189–204.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.05.027.

[124] Fritz DL, Mergel J, Stolten D. PEM electrolysis simulation and validation. ECS

Trans 2014;58:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1149/05819.0001ecst.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107532

S. Yuan et al.

[125] Suermann M, Schmidt TJ, Büchi FN. Investigation of mass transport losses in
polymer electrolyte electrolysis cells. ECS Trans 2015;69:1141–8. https://doi.
org/10.1149/06917.1141ecst.

[126] Lee CH, Banerjee R, Arbabi F, Hinebaugh J, Bazylak A. Porous transport layer

related mass transport losses in polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis: a
review. In: ASME 2016 14th International conference on nanochannels,
microchannels, and minichannels. Washington, DC, USA: American Society of
Mechanical Engineers; 2016, V001T07A003. https://doi.org/10.1115/
ICNMM2016-7974.

[127] Pushkarev AS, Pushkareva IV, Solovyev MA, Prokop M, Bystron T,

Rajagopalan SK, et al. On the influence of porous transport layers parameters on
the performances of polymer electrolyte membrane water electrolysis cells.
Electrochim Acta 2021;399:139436. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2021.139436.

[128] Gabrielli C, Huet F, Keddam M, Macias A, Sahar A. Potential drops due to an

attached bubble on a gas-evolving electrode. J Appl Electrochem 1989;19:
617–29. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01320636.

[129] Vogt H, Balzer RJ. The bubble coverage of gas-evolving electrodes in stagnant
electrolytes. Electrochim Acta 2005;50:2073. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2004.09.025. –9.

[130] Balzer RJ, Vogt H. Effect of electrolyte flow on the bubble coverage of vertical

gas-evolving electrodes. J Electrochem Soc 2003;150:E11. https://doi.org/
10.1149/1.1524185.

[131] Vogt H. The quantities affecting the bubble coverage of gas-evolving electrodes.

Electrochim Acta 2017;235:495–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2017.03.116.

[132] Mandin P, Derhoumi Z, Roustan H, Rolf W. Bubble over-potential during two-
phase alkaline water electrolysis. Electrochim Acta 2014;128:248–58. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2013.11.068.

[133] Leistra JA, Sides PJ. Voltage components at gas evolving electrodes.

J Electrochem Soc 1987;134:2442. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2100218.
[134] Li Y, Zhang H, Xu T, Lu Z, Wu X, Wan P, et al. Under-water superaerophobic pine-

shaped Pt nanoarray electrode for ultrahigh-performance hydrogen evolution.
Adv Funct Mater 2015;25:1737–44. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201404250.
[135] Huang H, Kim H, Lee A, Kim S, Lim W-G, Park C-Y, et al. Structure engineering

defective and mass transfer-enhanced RuO2 nanosheets for proton exchange
membrane water electrolyzer. Nano Energy 2021;88:106276. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.nanoen.2021.106276.

[136] Gabrielli C, Huet F, Nogueira RP. Fluctuations of concentration overpotential

generated at gas-evolving electrodes. Electrochim Acta 2005;50:3726–36.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2005.01.019.

[137] Suermann M, Schmidt TJ, Büchi FN. Cell performance determining parameters in
high pressure water electrolysis. Electrochim Acta 2016;211:989–97. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.electacta.2016.06.120.

[138] Lickert T, Kiermaier ML, Bromberger K, Ghinaiya J, Metz S, Fallisch A, et al. On

the influence of the anodic porous transport layer on PEM electrolysis
performance at high current densities. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45:6047–58.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.12.204.

[139] Tsushima S, Hirai S. In situ diagnostics for water transport in proton exchange

membrane fuel cells. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2011;37:204–20. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2010.06.001.

[150] Feng Q, Yuan X, Liu G, Wei B, Zhang Z, Li H, et al. A review of proton exchange
membrane water electrolysis on degradation mechanisms and mitigation
strategies. J Power Sources 2017;366:33–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2017.09.006.

[151] Hoseini Larimi SZ, Ramiar A, Esmaili Q, Shafaghat R. The effect of inlet velocity
of water on the two-phase flow regime in the porous transport layer of polymer
electrolyte membrane electrolyzer. Heat Mass Tran 2019;55:1863–70. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00231-018-2436-x.

[152] Li G. Lattice Boltzmann simulations of gas bubble transport in proton exchange
membrane water electrolysis cells. J Phys: Conf Ser 2022;2280:012048. https://
doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2280/1/012048.

[153] Sp ̈ori C, Kwan JTH, Bonakdarpour A, Wilkinson DP, Strasser P. The stability

challenges of oxygen evolving catalysts: towards a common fundamental
understanding and mitigation of catalyst degradation. Angew Chem Int Ed 2017;
56:5994–6021. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201608601.

[154] Li F-B, Robert Hillman A, Lubetkin SD, Roberts DJ. Electrochemical quartz crystal
microbalance studies of potentiodynamic electrolysis of aqueous chloride
solution: surface processes and evolution of H2 and Cl2 gas bubbles. J Electroanal
Chem 1992;335:345–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0728(92)80253-Z.
[155] Chen F-Y, Wu Z-Y, Adler Z, Wang H. Stability challenges of electrocatalytic

oxygen evolution reaction: from mechanistic understanding to reactor design.
Joule 2021;5:1704–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2021.05.005.
[156] Kou T, Wang S, Li Y. Perspective on high-rate alkaline water splitting. ACS

Materials Lett 2021;3:224–34. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsmaterialslett.0c00536.

[157] Han B, Stoerzinger KA, Tileli V, Gamalski AD, Stach EA, Shao-Horn Y. Nanoscale

structural oscillations in perovskite oxides induced by oxygen evolution. Nat
Mater 2017;16:121–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat4764.

[158] Lee HY, Barber C, Minerick AR. Improving electrokinetic microdevice stability by

controlling electrolysis bubbles. ELECTROPHORESIS 2014;35:1782–9. https://
doi.org/10.1002/elps.201400013.

[159] Wang R, Inoguchi K, Ohashi M, Someya S, Munakata T, Ishida M, et al. Effect of
catalyst distribution and structural properties of anode porous transport
electrodes on the performance of anion exchange membrane water electrolysis.
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:37757–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2021.09.078.

[160] Grigoriev SA, Fateev VN, Bessarabov DG, Millet P. Current status, research trends,

and challenges in water electrolysis science and technology. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2020;45:26036–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.03.109.

[161] Hegge F, Moroni R, Trinke P, Bensmann B, Hanke-Rauschenbach R, Thiele S, et al.

Three-dimensional microstructure analysis of a polymer electrolyte membrane
water electrolyzer anode. J Power Sources 2018;393:62–6. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.04.089.

[162] Trinke P, Keeley GP, Carmo M, Bensmann B, Hanke-Rauschenbach R. Elucidating

the effect of mass transport resistances on hydrogen crossover and cell
performance in PEM water electrolyzers by varying the cathode ionomer content.
J Electrochem Soc 2019;166:F465. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0171908jes.
[163] Kulkarni D, Huynh A, Satjaritanun P, O’Brien M, Shimpalee S, Parkinson D, et al.
Elucidating effects of catalyst loadings and porous transport layer morphologies
on operation of proton exchange membrane water electrolyzers. Appl Catal B
Environ 2022;308:121213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2022.121213.

[140] Liu Q, Lan F, Chen J, Zeng C, Wang J. A review of proton exchange membrane

[164] Bernt M, Siebel A, Gasteiger HA. Analysis of voltage losses in PEM water

fuel cell water management: membrane electrode assembly. J Power Sources
2022;517:230723. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230723.
[141] Taie Z, Peng X, Kulkarni D, Zenyuk IV, Weber AZ, Hagen C, et al. Pathway to
complete energy sector decarbonization with available iridium resources using
ultralow loaded water electrolyzers. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12:
52701–12. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c15687.

[142] Yu S, Xie Z, Li K, Ding L, Wang W, Yang G, et al. Morphology engineering of

iridium electrodes via modifying titanium substrates with controllable pillar
structures for highly efficient oxygen evolution reaction. Electrochim Acta 2022;
405:139797. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2021.139797.

[143] Han N, Yang KR, Lu Z, Li Y, Xu W, Gao T, et al. Nitrogen-doped tungsten carbide
nanoarray as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for water splitting in acid.
Nat Commun 2018;9:924. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03429-z.

[144] Lim J, Park D, Jeon SS, Roh C-W, Choi J, Yoon D, et al. Ultrathin IrO 2

nanoneedles for electrochemical water oxidation. Adv Funct Mater 2018;28:
1704796. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201704796.

[145] Li L, Jiang W, Zhang G, Feng D, Zhang C, Yao W, et al. Efficient mesh interface
engineering: insights from bubble dynamics in electrocatalysis. ACS Appl Mater
Interfaces 2021;13:45346–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c07637.

[146] Sun S, Xiao Y, Liang D, Shao Z, Yu H, Hou M, et al. Behaviors of a proton
exchange membrane electrolyzer under water starvation. RSC Adv 2015;5:
14506–13. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4RA14104K.

electrolyzers with low platinum group metal loadings. J Electrochem Soc 2018;
165:F305–14. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0641805jes.

[165] Lopata J, Kang Z, Young J, Bender G, Weidner JW, Shimpalee S. Effects of the

transport/catalyst layer interface and catalyst loading on mass and charge
transport phenomena in polymer electrolyte membrane water electrolysis
devices. J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:064507. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-
7111/ab7f87.

[166] Hegge F, Lombeck F, Cruz Ortiz E, Bohn L, von Holst M, Kroschel M, et al.

Efficient and stable low iridium loaded anodes for PEM water electrolysis made
possible by nanofiber interlayers. ACS Appl Energy Mater 2020;3:8276–84.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaem.0c00735.

[167] Yang G, Yu S, Kang Z, Li Y, Bender G, Pivovar BS, et al. Building electron/proton
nanohighways for full utilization of water splitting catalysts. Adv Energy Mater
2020;10:1903871. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201903871.

[168] Zeradjanin AR, Narangoda P, Spanos I, Masa J, Schl ̈ogl R. How to minimise
destabilising effect of gas bubbles on water splitting electrocatalysts? Current
Opinion in Electrochemistry 2021;30:100797. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
coelec.2021.100797.

[169] Zeradjanin AR, Ventosa E, Masa J, Schuhmann W. Utilization of the catalyst layer
of dimensionally stable anodes. Part 2: impact of spatial current distribution on
electrocatalytic performance. J Electroanal Chem 2018;828:63–70. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jelechem.2018.09.034.

[147] do Nascimento DF, Vimieiro Junior JR, Paciornik S, Carvalho MS. Pore scale

[170] Zeradjanin AR, La Mantia F, Masa J, Schuhmann W. Utilization of the catalyst

visualization of drainage in 3D porous media by confocal microscopy. Sci Rep
2019;9:12333. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-48803-z.

[148] Kang Z, Yang G, Mo J, Li Y, Yu S, Cullen DA, et al. Novel thin/tunable gas
diffusion electrodes with ultra-low catalyst loading for hydrogen evolution
reactions in proton exchange membrane electrolyzer cells. Nano Energy 2018;47:
434–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.03.015.

[149] Immerz C, Bensmann B, Trinke P, Suermann M, Hanke-Rauschenbach R. Local

current density and electrochemical impedance measurements within 50 cm
single-channel PEM electrolysis cell. J Electrochem Soc 2018;165:F1292–9.
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0411816jes.

layer of dimensionally stable anodes—interplay of morphology and active surface
area. Electrochim Acta 2012;82:408–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2012.04.101.

[171] Zeradjanin AR, Topalov AA, Van Overmeere Q, Cherevko S, Chen X, Ventosa E,
et al. Rational design of the electrode morphology for oxygen evolution –
enhancing the performance for catalytic water oxidation. RSC Adv 2014;4:9579.
https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ra45998e.

[172] Shan X, Liu J, Mu H, Xiao Y, Mei B, Liu W, et al. An engineered superhydrophilic/
superaerophobic electrocatalyst composed of the supported CoMoSx chalcogel for
overall water splitting. Angew Chem Int Ed 2020;59:1659–65. https://doi.org/
10.1002/anie.201911617.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107533

S. Yuan et al.

[173] George JE, Chidangil S, George SD. Recent progress in fabricating

[199] Li M, Wei J, Ren L, Zhao Y, Shang Z, Zhou D, et al. Superwetting behaviors at the

superaerophobic and superaerophilic surfaces. Adv Mater Interfac 2017;4:
1601088. https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.201601088.

[174] Xu W, Lu Z, Wan P, Kuang Y, Sun X. High-performance water electrolysis system
with double nanostructured superaerophobic electrodes. Small 2016;12:2492–8.
https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201600189.

[175] Lu Z, Sun M, Xu T, Li Y, Xu W, Chang Z, et al. Superaerophobic electrodes for

direct hydrazine fuel cells. Adv Mater 2015;27:2361–6. https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.201500064.

[176] Huang C, Guo Z. The wettability of gas bubbles: from macro behavior to nano
structures to applications. Nanoscale 2018;10:19659–72. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C8NR07315E.

[177] Yu C, Zhang P, Wang J, Jiang L. Superwettability of gas bubbles and its

application: from bioinspiration to advanced materials. Adv Mater 2017;29:
1703053. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201703053.

[178] Liu K, Yao X, Jiang L. Recent developments in bio-inspired special wettability.
Chem Soc Rev 2010;39:3240–55. https://doi.org/10.1039/B917112F.

[179] Wenzel RN. Resistance of solid surfaces to wetting by water. Ind Eng Chem 1936;

28:988–94. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie50320a024.

[180] Cassie ABD, Baxter S. Wettability of porous surfaces. Trans Faraday Soc 1944;40:

546–51. https://doi.org/10.1039/TF9444000546.

[181] Lu Z, Li Y, Lei X, Liu J, Sun X. Nanoarray based “superaerophobic” surfaces for gas
evolution reaction electrodes. Mater Horiz 2015;2:294–8. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C4MH00208C.

[182] Liu M, Sun Z, Li S, Nie X, Liu Y, Wang E, et al. Hierarchical superhydrophilic/
superaerophobic CoMnP/Ni2P nanosheet-based microplate arrays for enhanced
overall water splitting. J Mater Chem 2021;9:22129–39. https://doi.org/
10.1039/D1TA04713B.

interface between electrode and electrolyte. Cell Rep Phys Sci 2021;2:100374.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2021.100374.

[200] Zhang L, Yang X, Jiang B, Sun Y, Gong Z, Zhang N, et al. Superhydrophilic and
underwater superoleophobic Ti foam with robust nanoarray structures of TiO2 for
effective oil-in-water emulsion separation. Separ Purif Technol 2020;252:117437.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2020.117437.

[201] Riyajuddin S, Azmi K, Pahuja M, Kumar S, Maruyama T, Bera C, et al. Super-

hydrophilic hierarchical Ni-Foam-Graphene-Carbon nanotubes-Ni2P–CuP2 nano-
architecture as efficient electrocatalyst for overall water splitting. ACS Nano
2021;15:5586–99. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.1c00647.
[202] Xu Q, Wang P, Wan L, Xu Z, Sultana MZ, Wang B. Superhydrophilic/

superaerophobic hierarchical NiP2@MoO2/Co(Ni)MoO4 core–shell array
electrocatalysts for efficient hydrogen production at large current densities. ACS
Appl Mater Interfaces 2022;14:19448. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.2c01808.
–58.

[203] Barati Darband G, Aliofkhazraei M, Hyun S, Shanmugam S. Pulse

electrodeposition of a superhydrophilic and binder-free Ni–Fe–P nanostructure as
highly active and durable electrocatalyst for both hydrogen and oxygen evolution
reactions. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12:53719–30. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsami.0c13648.

[204] Shang L, Zhao Y, Kong X-Y, Shi R, Waterhouse GIN, Wen L, et al. Underwater

superaerophobic Ni nanoparticle-decorated nickel–molybdenum nitride nanowire
arrays for hydrogen evolution in neutral media. Nano Energy 2020;78:105375.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.105375.

[205] Shen J, Li B, Zheng Y, Dai Z, Li J, Bao X, et al. Engineering the composition and

structure of superaerophobic nanosheet array for efficient hydrogen evolution.
Chem Eng J 2022;433:133517. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.133517.

[183] Shan X, Liu J, Mu H, Xiao Y, Mei B, Liu W, et al. An engineered superhydrophilic/

[206] Hu Q, Wang Z, Huang X, Qin Y, Yang H, Ren X, et al. Integrating well-controlled

superaerophobic electrocatalyst composed of the supported CoMoS x  chalcogel  for
overall  water  splitting. Angew  Chem  Int  Ed  2020;59:1659–65. https://doi.org/10.1002/
anie.201911617.

[184] Jin J, Xiao T, Luo R, Nie X, Wang Y, Liu Z. Superaerophobic platinum nanosheets
arrays on conductive microgrids: a highly efficient electrocatalytic electrode for
hydrogen evolution reaction. ChemCatChem 2020;12:5062–6. https://doi.org/
10.1002/cctc.202000979.

[185] Akbar K, Hussain S, Truong L, Roy SB, Jeon JH, Jerng S-K, et al. Induced

superaerophobicity onto a non-superaerophobic catalytic surface for enhanced
hydrogen evolution reaction. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2017;9:43674–80.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b13918.

[186] Chen X, Sheng L, Li S, Cui Y, Lin T, Que X, et al. Facile syntheses and in-situ study

on electrocatalytic properties of superaerophobic CoxP-nanoarray in hydrogen
evolution reaction. Chem Eng J 2021;426:131029. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2021.131029.

[187] Zhang L, Huang J, Zheng Q, Li A, Li X, Li J, et al. Superaerophobic” NiCo

bimetallic phosphides for highly efficient hydrogen evolution reaction
electrocatalysts. Chem Commun 2021;57:6173–6. https://doi.org/10.1039/
D1CC01698A.

[188] Liu T, Li A, Zhou W, Lyu C. Hierarchical nano/micro/macro-assembled integrated
electrode with high-performance water electro-oxidation. Chem Eng J 2021;415:
128941. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.128941.

[189] Li H, Chen S, Zhang Y, Zhang Q, Jia X, Zhang Q, et al. Systematic design of

superaerophobic nanotube-array electrode comprised of transition-metal sulfides
for overall water splitting. Nat Commun 2018;9:2452. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-018-04888-0.

[190] Barati Darband Gh, Aliofkhazraei M, Sabour Rouhaghdam A. Three-dimensional

porous Ni-CNT composite nanocones as high performance electrocatalysts for
hydrogen evolution reaction. J Electroanal Chem 2018;829:194–207. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jelechem.2018.10.012.

[191] Yang Y, Yang P, Zhou L, He R, Hao Y, Wang J, et al. Electrospun IrP2-carbon
nanofibers for hydrogen evolution reaction in alkaline medium. Appl Surf Sci
2021;565:150461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2021.150461.

[192] Lu Z-X. Electrochemical fabrication of IrOx nanoarrays with tunable length and

morphology for solid polymer electrolyte water electrolysis. Electrochim Acta
2020:10.

[193] Sui C, Chen K, Zhao L, Zhou L, Wang Q-Q. MoS2-modified porous gas diffusion
layer with air–solid–liquid interface for efficient electrocatalytic water splitting.
Nanoscale 2018;10:15324–31. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8NR04082F.
[194] Guo M, Qayum A, Dong S, Jiao X, Chen D, Wang T. In situ conversion of metal
(Ni, Co or Fe) foams into metal sulfide (Ni3S2, Co9S8 or FeS) foams with surface
grown N-doped carbon nanotube arrays as efficient superaerophobic
electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. J Mater Chem 2020;8:9239–47.
https://doi.org/10.1039/D0TA02337J.

[195] Cao S, Huang H, Shi K, Wei L, You N, Fan X, et al. Engineering superhydrophilic/

superaerophobic hierarchical structures of Co-CH@NiFe-LDH/NF to boost the
oxygen evolution reaction. Chem Eng J 2021;422:130123. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2021.130123.

[196] Yu X, Yu Z-Y, Zhang X-L, Zheng Y-R, Duan Y, Gao Q, et al. Superaerophobic”

nickel phosphide nanoarray catalyst for efficient hydrogen evolution at ultrahigh
current densities. J Am Chem Soc 2019;141:7537–43. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jacs.9b02527.

core-shell structures into “superaerophobic” electrodes for water oxidation at
large current densities. Appl Catal B Environ 2021;286:119920. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apcatb.2021.119920.

[207] Tian Y, Lin Z, Yu J, Zhao S, Liu Q, Liu J, et al. Superaerophobic quaternary

Ni–Co–S–P nanoparticles for efficient overall water-splitting. ACS Sustainable
Chem Eng 2019;7:14639–46. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b02556.

[208] Tang C, Wang H-F, Zhang Q. Multiscale principles to boost reactivity in gas-

involving energy electrocatalysis. Acc Chem Res 2018;51:881–9. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00616.

[209] Xie Z, Yu S, Yang G, Li K, Ding L, Wang W, et al. Ultrathin platinum nanowire

based electrodes for high-efficiency hydrogen generation in practical electrolyzer
cells. Chem Eng J 2021;410:128333. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.128333.
[210] Kim YJ, Lim A, Kim JM, Lim D, Chae KH, Cho EN, et al. Highly efficient oxygen

evolution reaction via facile bubble transport realized by three-dimensionally
stack-printed catalysts. Nat Commun 2020;11:4921. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-020-18686-0.

[211] Jensen AW, Sievers GW, Jensen KD, Quinson J, Arminio-Ravelo JA, Brüser V,

et al. Self-supported nanostructured iridium-based networks as highly active
electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution in acidic media. J Mater Chem 2020;8:
1066–71. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9TA12796H.

[212] Oh S, Kim H, Kwon Y, Kim M, Cho E, Kwon H. Porous Co–P foam as an efficient
bifunctional electrocatalyst for hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions. J Mater
Chem 2016;4:18272–7. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6TA06761A.

[213] Dutta A, Morstein CE, Rahaman M, Cede ̃no L ́opez A, Broekmann P. Beyond

copper in CO2 electrolysis: effective hydrocarbon production on silver-nanofoam
catalysts. ACS Catal 2018;8:8357–68. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.8b01738.
[214] Liu C, Shviro M, Gago AS, Zaccarine SF, Bender G, Gazdzicki P, et al. Exploring
the interface of skin-layered titanium fibers for electrochemical water splitting.
Adv Energy Mater 2021;11:2002926. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.202002926.

[215] Kwen J, Doo G, Choi S, Guim H, Yuk S, Lee D-H, et al. Identification of the

electrical connection in the catalyst layer of the polymer electrolyte membrane
water electrolyzer. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2022;47:14017–26. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.02.136.

[216] Kaya MF, Demir N, Rees NV, El-Kharouf A. Magnetically modified electrocatalysts
for oxygen evolution reaction in proton exchange membrane (PEM) water
electrolyzers. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:20825–34. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.03.203.

[217] Li Y-H, Chen Y-J. The effect of magnetic field on the dynamics of gas bubbles in
water electrolysis. Sci Rep 2021;11:9346. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-
87947-9.

[218] Kaya MF, Demir N, Rees NV, El-Kharouf A. Improving PEM water electrolyser’s
performance by magnetic field application. Appl Energy 2020;264:114721.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114721.

[219] Bidin N, Azni SR, Islam S, Abdullah M, Ahmad MFS, Krishnan G, et al. The effect
of magnetic and optic field in water electrolysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:
16325–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.05.169.

[220] Cai J, Wang L, Wu P. Oxygen enrichment from air by using the interception effect
of gradient magnetic field on oxygen molecules. Phys Lett 2007;362:105–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physleta.2006.10.004.

[221] Ren X, Wu T, Sun Y, Li Y, Xian G, Liu X, et al. Spin-polarized oxygen evolution

reaction under magnetic field. Nat Commun 2021;12:1–12. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41467-021-22865-y.

[197] Feng XJ, Jiang L. Design and creation of superwetting/Antiwetting surfaces. Adv

[222] Zhang Y, Liang C, Wu J, Liu H, Zhang B, Jiang Z, et al. Recent advances in

Mater 2006;18:3063–78. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200501961.

[198] Liu M, Wang S, Jiang L. Nature-inspired superwettability systems. Nat Rev Mater

2017;2:1–17. https://doi.org/10.1038/natrevmats.2017.36.

magnetic field-enhanced electrocatalysis. ACS Appl Energy Mater 2020;3:
10303–16. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaem.0c02104.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107534

S. Yuan et al.

[223] Elias L, Chitharanjan Hegde A. Effect of magnetic field on HER of water

electrolysis on Ni–W alloy. Electrocatalysis 2017;8:375–82. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12678-017-0382-x.

[247] Wang X-D, Duan Y-Y, Yan W-M, Peng X-F. Local transport phenomena and cell
performance of PEM fuel cells with various serpentine flow field designs. J Power
Sources 2008;175:397–407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.09.009.

[224] Liu H-B, Zhong D, Han J, Pan L-M, Liu Y. Hydrogen bubble evolution from

[248] Yan W-M, Yang C-H, Soong C-Y, Chen F, Mei S-C. Experimental studies on optimal

magnetized nickel wire electrode. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:31724–30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.10.063.

[225] Yan J, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Xia S, Yu J, Ding B. Direct magnetic reinforcement of
electrocatalytic ORR/OER with electromagnetic induction of magnetic catalysts.
Adv Mater 2021;33:2007525. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202007525.
[226] Liu Y, Qie Y, Kong F, Yang Z, Yang H. Synthesis and magnetism of single-phase
γ′
-Fe4N by non-ammonia route and applied in oxygen evolution reaction
electrocatalysis. Mater Today Commun 2022;30:103103. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.mtcomm.2021.103103.

[227] Zhou G, Wang P, Li H, Hu B, Sun Y, Huang R, et al. Spin-state reconfiguration

induced by alternating magnetic field for efficient oxygen evolution reaction. Nat
Commun 2021;12:4827. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25095-4.
[228] Kim PJ, Lee C, Lee JK, Fahy KF, Bazylak A. In-plane transport in water

electrolyzer porous transport layers with through pores. J Electrochem Soc 2020;
167:124522. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/abb173.

[229] Mo J, Kang Z, Yang G, Retterer ST, Cullen DA, Toops TJ, et al. Thin liquid/gas

diffusion layers for high-efficiency hydrogen production from water splitting.
Appl Energy 2016;177:817–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2016.05.154.

[230] Kang Z, Mo J, Yang G, Retterer ST, Cullen DA, Toops TJ, et al. Investigation of
thin/well-tunable liquid/gas diffusion layers exhibiting superior multifunctional
performance in low-temperature electrolytic water splitting. Energy Environ Sci
2017;10:166–75. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6EE02368A.

[231] Steen SM, Mo J, Kang Z, Yang G, Zhang F-Y. Investigation of titanium liquid/gas

diffusion layers in proton exchange membrane electrolyzer cells. Int J Green
Energy 2017;14:162–70. https://doi.org/10.1080/15435075.2016.1253582.

[232] Lee JK, Lee C, Fahy KF, Kim PJ, LaManna JM, Baltic E, et al. Spatially graded

porous transport layers for gas evolving electrochemical energy conversion: high
performance polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyzers. Energy Convers Manag
2020;226:113545. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113545.
[233] Schuler T, Ciccone JM, Krentscher B, Marone F, Peter C, Schmidt TJ, et al.

Hierarchically structured porous transport layers for polymer electrolyte water
electrolysis. Adv Energy Mater 2020;10:1903216. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aenm.201903216.

[234] Lettenmeier P, Kolb S, Sata N, Fallisch A, Zielke L, Thiele S, et al. Comprehensive
investigation of novel pore-graded gas diffusion layers for high-performance and
cost-effective proton exchange membrane electrolyzers. Energy Environ Sci 2017;
10:2521–33. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7EE01240C.

[235] Lee JK, Lee Ch, Bazylak A. Pore network modelling to enhance liquid water
transport through porous transport layers for polymer electrolyte membrane
electrolyzers. J Power Sources 2019;437:226910. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2019.226910.

[236] Kang Z, Yu S, Yang G, Li Y, Bender G, Pivovar BS, et al. Performance improvement
of proton exchange membrane electrolyzer cells by introducing in-plane transport
enhancement layers. Electrochim Acta 2019;316:43–51. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.electacta.2019.05.096.

[237] Kim PJ, Lee JK, Lee Ch, Fahy KF, Shrestha P, Krause K, et al. Tailoring catalyst

layer interface with titanium mesh porous transport layers. Electrochim Acta
2021;373:137879. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2021.137879.

[238] Lettenmeier P, Kolb S, Burggraf F, Gago AS, Friedrich KA. Towards developing a

backing layer for proton exchange membrane electrolyzers. J Power Sources
2016;311:153–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.01.100.

[239] Wang Y, Liu T, He W, Wang S, Liu S, Yue L, et al. Performance enhancement of
polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells with a hybrid wettability gas diffusion
layer. Energy Convers Manag 2020;223:113297. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2020.113297.

[240] Niu Z, Bao Z, Wu J, Wang Y, Jiao K. Two-phase flow in the mixed-wettability gas
diffusion layer of proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Appl Energy 2018;232:
443–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.09.209.

[241] Jiao K, Zhou B. Effects of electrode wettabilities on liquid water behaviours in

PEM fuel cell cathode. J Power Sources 2008;175:106–19. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.09.048.

[242] Li H, Fujigaya T, Nakajima H, Inada A, Ito K. Optimum structural properties for an

anode current collector used in a polymer electrolyte membrane water
electrolyzer operated at the boiling point of water. J Power Sources 2016;332:
16–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.09.086.

[243] Zhao B, Lee C, Lee JK, Fahy KF, LaManna JM, Baltic E, et al. Superhydrophilic

porous transport layer enhances efficiency of polymer electrolyte membrane
electrolyzers. Cell Rep Phys Sci 2021;2:100580. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
xcrp.2021.100580.

[244] Lim A, Jeong H-Y, Lim Y, Kim JY, Park HY, Jang JH, et al. Amphiphilic Ti porous
transport layer for highly effective PEM unitized regenerative fuel cells. Sci Adv
2021;7:eabf7866. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abf7866.

[245] Azarafza A, Ismail MS, Rezakazemi M, Pourkashanian M. Comparative study of
conventional and unconventional designs of cathode flow fields in PEM fuel cell.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;116:109420. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2019.109420.

[246] Li X, Sabir I. Review of bipolar plates in PEM fuel cells: flow-field designs. Int J

Hydrogen Energy 2005;30:359–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2004.09.019.

operating conditions for different flow field designs of PEM fuel cells. J Power
Sources 2006;160:284–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2006.01.031.

[249] Pan M, Li C, Liao J, Lei H, Pan C, Meng X, et al. Design and modeling of PEM fuel

cell based on different flow fields. Energy 2020;207:118331. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2020.118331.

[250] Higier A, Liu H. Optimization of PEM fuel cell flow field via local current density
measurement. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:2144–50. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2009.12.116.

[251] Roshandel R, Arbabi F, Moghaddam GK. Simulation of an innovative flow-field
design based on a bio inspired pattern for PEM fuel cells. Renew Energy 2012;41:
86–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2011.10.008.

[252] Wang Y, Yue L, Wang S. New design of a cathode flow-field with a sub-channel to
improve the polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell performance. J Power
Sources 2017;344:32–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.01.075.
[253] Chowdhury MZ, Akansu YE. Novel convergent-divergent serpentine flow fields

effect on PEM fuel cell performance. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:25686–94.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.04.079.

[254] Chisholm G, Kitson PJ, Kirkaldy ND, Bloor LG, Cronin L. 3D printed flow plates

for the electrolysis of water: an economic and adaptable approach to device
manufacture. Energy Environ Sci 2014;7:3026–32. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C4EE01426J.

[255] Olesen AC, Frensch SH, Kær SK. Towards uniformly distributed heat, mass and

charge: a flow field design study for high pressure and high current density
operation of PEM electrolysis cells. Electrochim Acta 2019;293:476–95. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2018.10.008.

[256] Nie J, Chen Y, Cohen S, Carter BD, Boehm RF. Numerical and experimental study
of three-dimensional fluid flow in the bipolar plate of a PEM electrolysis cell. Int J
Therm Sci 2009;48:1914–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijthermalsci.2009.02.017.

[257] Li H, Nakajima H, Inada A, Ito K. Effect of flow-field pattern and flow

configuration on the performance of a polymer-electrolyte-membrane water
electrolyzer at high temperature. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:8600–10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.02.171.

[258] Lin R, Lu Y, Xu J, Huo J, Cai X. Investigation on performance of proton exchange

membrane electrolyzer with different flow field structures. Appl Energy 2022;
326:120011. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.120011.

[259] Martin A, Trinke P, Pham CV, Bühler M, Bierling M, Holzapfel PKR, et al. On the
correlation between the oxygen in hydrogen content and the catalytic activity of
cathode catalysts in PEM water electrolysis. J Electrochem Soc 2021. https://doi.
org/10.1149/1945-7111/ac38f6.

[260] Holzapfel PKR, Bühler M, Escalera-L ́opez D, Bierling M, Speck FD, Mayrhofer KJJ,
et al. Fabrication of a robust PEM water electrolyzer based on non-noble metal
cathode catalyst: [Mo3S13]2(cid:0) clusters anchored to N-doped carbon nanotubes.
Small 2020;16:2003161. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202003161.

[261] Mo J, Dehoff RR, Peter WH, Toops TJ, Green JB, Zhang F-Y. Additive

manufacturing of liquid/gas diffusion layers for low-cost and high-efficiency
hydrogen production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2016;41:3128–35. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.12.111.

[262] Majasan JO, Cho JIS, Maier M, Dedigama I, Shearing PR, Brett DJL. Effect of

anode flow channel depth on the performance of polymer electrolyte membrane
water electrolyser. ECS Trans 2018;85:1593–603. https://doi.org/10.1149/
08513.1593ecst.

[263] Upadhyay M, Lee S, Jung S, Choi Y, Moon S, Lim H. Systematic assessment of the
anode flow field hydrodynamics in a new circular PEM water electrolyser. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2020;45:20765–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2020.05.164.

[264] Olesen AC, Rømer C, Kær SK. A numerical study of the gas-liquid, two-phase flow
maldistribution in the anode of a high pressure PEM water electrolysis cell. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2016;41:52–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2015.09.140.

[265] Wu L, An L, Jiao D, Xu Y, Zhang G, Jiao K. Enhanced oxygen discharge with
structured mesh channel in proton exchange membrane electrolysis cell. Appl
Energy 2022;323:119651. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.119651.

[266] Yang G, Xie Z, Yu S, Li K, Li Y, Ding L, et al. All-in-one bipolar electrode: a new

concept for compact and efficient water electrolyzers. Nano Energy 2021;90:
106551. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2021.106551.

[267] Sakuma G, Fukunaka Y, Matsushima H. Nucleation and growth of electrolytic gas
bubbles under microgravity. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39:7638–45. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.03.059.

[268] Li S-D, Wang C-C, Chen C-Y. Water electrolysis in the presence of an ultrasonic

field. Electrochim Acta 2009;54:3877–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2009.01.087.

[269] Bakker MM, Vermaas DA. Gas bubble removal in alkaline water electrolysis with

utilization of pressure swings. Electrochim Acta 2019;319:148–57. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.electacta.2019.06.049.

[270] Demir N, Kaya MF, Albawabiji MS. Effect of pulse potential on alkaline water

electrolysis performance. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:17013–20. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.07.105.

[271] Liu Y, Pan L, Liu H, Chen T, Yin S, Liu M. Effects of magnetic field on water

electrolysis using foam electrodes. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:1352–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.11.103.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107535

S. Yuan et al.

[272] Hunt C, Zhang Z, Ocean K, Jansonius RP, Abbas M, Dvorak DJ, et al.

Quantification of the effect of an external magnetic field on water oxidation with
cobalt oxide anodes. J Am Chem Soc 2022;144:733–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jacs.1c08759.

[273] Wang K, Liao C, Wang W, Xiao Y, Liu X, Zuo Y. Removal of gas bubbles on an
electrode using a magnet. ACS Appl Energy Mater 2020;3:6752–7. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acsaem.0c00890.

[274] Kaya MF, Demir N, Albawabiji MS, Tas ̧  M. Investigation of alkaline water

Xiyang Cai earned his Bachelor’s degree in Alternative Energy
Science and Engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University
in 2018. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD degree in the Insti-
tute of Fuel Cell of the same University under the supervision of
Professor  Junliang  Zhang.  His  research  mainly  focuses  on
ammonia synthesis by electrochemical nitrogen reduction re-
action and nitrate reduction reaction.

electrolysis performance for different cost effective electrodes under magnetic
field. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:17583–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2017.02.039.

[275] Garc ́es-Pineda FA, Blasco-Ahicart M, Nieto-Castro D, L ́opez N, Gal ́an-

Mascar ́os JR. Direct magnetic enhancement of electrocatalytic water oxidation in
alkaline media. Nat Energy 2019;4:519–25. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-
019-0404-4.

[276] Wang M, Wang Z, Guo Z. Water electrolysis enhanced by super gravity field for
hydrogen production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:3198–205. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2010.01.128.

[277] Li K, Yu S, Li D, Ding L, Wang W, Xie Z, et al. Engineered thin diffusion layers for
anion-exchange membrane electrolyzer cells with outstanding performance. ACS
Appl Mater Interfaces 2021;13:50957–64. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.1c14693.

[278] M ́arquez RA, Kawashima K, Son YJ, Rose R, Smith LA, Miller N, et al. Tailoring

3D-printed electrodes for enhanced water splitting. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
2022;14:42153–70. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.2c12579.

[279] Wan L, Liu J, Xu Z, Xu Q, Pang M, Wang P, et al. Construction of integrated

electrodes with transport highways for pure-water-fed anion exchange membrane
water electrolysis. Small 2022;18:2200380. https://doi.org/10.1002/
smll.202200380.

[280] Razmjooei F, Morawietz T, Taghizadeh E, Hadjixenophontos E, Mues L, Gerle M,

et al. Increasing the performance of an anion-exchange membrane electrolyzer
operating in pure water with a nickel-based microporous layer. Joule 2021;5:
1776–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2021.05.006.

[281] Faber MS, Dziedzic R, Lukowski MA, Kaiser NS, Ding Q, Jin S. High-performance

electrocatalysis using metallic cobalt pyrite (CoS2) micro- and nanostructures.
J Am Chem Soc 2014;136:10053–61. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja504099w.

Shu  Yuan  received  his  Master’s  degree  from  the  University
College  London,  in  2019.  He  is  currently  pursuing  his  PhD
degree under the supervision of Prof. Xiaohui Yan at Shanghai
Jiao  Tong  University.  His  current  research  focuses  on  the
mechanism  of  mass  transport  and  the  electrode  design  in
polymer  electrolyte  membrane  water  electrolyzer  and  anion
exchange membrane water electrolyzer.

Congfan Zhao received his Bachelor’s degree from Southeast
University, in 2021. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree
under  the  supervision  of Prof.  Xiaohui  Yan  at  Shanghai  Jiao
Tong University. His present study focuses on the mechanism
of mass transfer and the design of reaction devices for energy
storage and conversion technology.

Lu  An  received  her  Bachelor’s  degree  from  Central  South
University, in 2018. She is currently pursuing her PhD degree
under the supervision of Prof. Junliang Zhang at Shanghai Jiao
Tong University. Her present study focuses on oxygen evolu-
tion reaction under acidic environment for energy storage and
conversion technology.

Shuiyun  Shen  is  an  Associate  Professor  of  Institute  of  Fuel
Cells, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University. She received her Bachelor and Master degree both
from Harbin Institute of Technology and Ph.D. degree from the
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. She has ever
worked as a postdoctor in the Hong Kong University of Science
and  Technology.  Her  key  expertise  is  in  electrochemistry,
electrocatalysis and fuel cells. She has published over 100 peer-
reviewed journal articles on electrochemical energy conversion
and storage, which have been cited for more than 1800 times so
far. She co-authored two books and co-invented 20 plus pat-
ents. She won the first prize of Shanghai Technology Invention
Award in 2020, ranked second.

Xiaohui  Yan  is  an  associate  professor  at  the  Department  of
Mechanical  Engineering,  Shanghai  Jiao  Tong  University.  He
earned his Bachelor’s degree in Energy and Power Engineering
at Xiꞌan Jiaotong University in 2012 and PhD degree in Me-
chanical Engineering at Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology in 2016. His research interests focus on the trans-
port phenomena in PEM fuel cells and PEM water electrolysis
cells. He has published over 80 peer-reviewed papers in fuel
cells and water electrolysis. He won the first prize of Shanghai
Technology Invention Award and Outstanding Teaching Award
of SJTU.

Junliang Zhang is Chair Professor, Director of Institute of Fuel
Cells, Executive Deputy Dean of Zhiyuan College at Shanghai
Jiao Tong University (SJTU). He received his BS and MS from
SJTU in 1994 and 1997, respectively, and his PhD from State
University  of  New  York  at  Stony  Brook  in  2005.  He  then
worked as a Research Associate  till 2007 at  Brookhaven Na-
tional Laboratory.  From  2007  to  2011,  Dr.  Zhang  worked at
General  Motors  Global  Research  &  Development,  Electro-
chemical Energy Research Laboratory, as a Research Scientist
and  later  a  Senior  Scientist  and  Team  Leader.  In  2011,  he
joined the Institute of Fuel Cells at SJTU.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107536
