Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Progress and challenges in using sustainable carbon anodes in rechargeable 
metal-ion batteries 

Niloofar Soltani, Amin Bahrami, Lars Giebeler *, Thomas Gemming, Daria Mikhailova * 

Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research (IFW) Dresden e.V., Helmholtzstr. 20, 01069 Dresden, Germany   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Biomass derived carbon 
Hard carbon 
Anode 
Cation storage mechanism 
Lithium-ion battery 
Sodium-ion battery 
Potassium-ion battery 

Rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are one of the most promising alternatives to effectively bypass fossil 
fuels.  However,  long-term  energy  application  of  LIBs  could  be  restricted  in  the  future  due  to  the  increased 
production cost of LIB arising from the shortage and inaccessibility of Li in the Earth’s crust. Na or K have been 
considered as substitutes for Li but in spite of their natural abundance, they suffer from low gravimetric/volu-
metric energy density. An alternative to increase the efficiency of sodium-ion battery (SIBs) and potassium-ion 
battery (KIBs) is to focus on finding the high-performing negative electrode, the anode. The large volume changes 
of alloying and conversion type anodes for KIBs and SIBs make hard carbons to a better option on this regard than 
usual  graphitic  carbons,  but  a  key  obstacle  is  the  reliance  on  unsustainable  sources.  Thus,  biomass-derived 
carbon could offer a promising alternative, and it has indeed been in the focus of much recent work. This re-
view highlights the recent advances in using carbon extracted from various biomass sources in rechargeable Li-, 
Na-, and K-ion batteries. Maximizing the energy and power densities as well as the lifetime of carbon anodes 
require an exploration of the right balance between carbon structures, pore morphology, chemical composition 
and  alkali metal-ion  storage.  Thus,  in this  review,  first, we  take  stock of  key  challenges and opportunities  to 
extract carbon from various plants structural components and identify the extracted carbon structure compared 
to graphite-like structure. Then, we provide an overview on morphological and structural modification of the 
extracted  carbons.  Finally,  we  show  how  the  physicochemical  properties,  structural  alignment  and  morpho-
logical variation of the biomass-derived carbon can affect the storage mechanism and electrochemical perfor-
mance.  The  extensive  overview  of  this  topic  provided  here  is  expected  to  stimulate  further  work  on 
environmentally  friendly  battery  design  and  towards  the  optimization  of  the  battery  performance.  Electrode 
materials in alkali-metal-ion batteries that are based on biomass-derived carbon may allow not only a technical 
breakthrough, but also an ethically and socially acceptable product.   

1. Introduction 

Modern societies rely on exhaustible and unequally distributed fossil 
fuels to satisfy the high demand for electrical energy. But this reliance is 
associated  with  a  high  cost  –  anthropogenic  global  warming  [1,2]  – 
which has triggered the search for cleaner and more sustainable energy 
sources [3–9]. Rechargeable LIBs are one of the most promising alter-
natives in this regard. Their high energy and power densities make such 
batteries  amenable  for  diverse  applications,  from  portable  electronic 
devices to medium- and large-scale systems in the automotive industry 
to grid support [1]. However, the application of LIBs is limited by some 
barriers such as safety considerations, uniformity of Li in Earth’s crust, 
durability, and specially by the fabrication costs [1,10]. The costs of LIB 

production could be cut by considering alternative raw materials, opti-
mizing manufacturing schemes, reducing inactive material in the bat-
tery, and replacing expensive materials, such as rare-metal-containing 
inorganic  compounds  in  electrodes  and  expensive  polymers  used  as 
separators  [11].  Furthermore,  cheaper  and  sustainable  raw  materials 
can  be  refined  to  substitute  for  classical  battery  components.  In  that 
context,  rechargeable  sodium-ion  batteries  (SIBs)  could  replace  LIBs, 
especially in large-scale storage devices, because Na is relatively cheaper 
and more abundant than Li. However, Na introduces some limitations 
because of its: 1) greater molecular weight and ionic radius than Li, 2) 
weaker  binding  to  graphite  as  compared  with  Li,  3)  higher  standard 
reduction potential (-2.71 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)), as 
compared with ~ -3.04 V for Li, and 4) lower gravimetric capacity (1165 

* Corresponding authors. 

E-mail addresses: l.giebeler@ifw-dresden.de (L. Giebeler), d.mikhailova@ifw-dresden.de (D. Mikhailova).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100929 
Received 30 June 2020; Received in revised form 12 March 2021; Accepted 19 April 2021   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)100929Availableonline26July20210360-1285/©2021TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

mAh/g  as  compared  with  3829  mAh/g  for  Li)  [12].  Potassium  (K)  is 
another alternative for Li, and is used in potassium-ion batteries (KIBs). 
K is abundant in the Earth’s crust (and thus relatively cheap) and has a 
low standard reduction potential (-2.93 V). It also has a high electrical 
conductivity, high rate of electron transfer between intercalated K atoms 
and the graphite layer, and fast ion-transportation kinetic in electrolyte 
as  compared  with  Na  cations  [13,14].  Nevertheless,  K  also  has  some 
limitations that hinder its effective use in a technically relevant appli-
cation. These include: i) poor ion diffusivity in the solid electrode, ii) 
large graphite volume change during cycling (~ 61%), iii) severe con-
sumption of electrolyte given the low electrochemical potential of K
/K 
in propylene carbonate, iv) persistent tendency to deposit in dendritic 
form, and v) limited energy and power density because of its high atomic 
mass [15,16]. 

+

+

+

+

and K

Another possibility is to focus on the negative electrode, or anode, in 
batteries. Typically, graphite is the most widely used form of carbon that 
forms anodes in batteries: it is able to react reversibly with Li with a 
theoretical specific capacity of 372 mAh/g vs. Li
/Li. Highly crystalline 
graphite can host up to one Li atom per six C atoms. The low theoretical 
specific capacity can originate from the Coulomb repulsion between Li 
ions in  nearest-neighbor sites.  Because this is  larger than the  binding 
energy of Li to the graphite, nearest-neighbor sites cannot be occupied 
by Li [17,18]. Therefore, researchers were motivated to use hard carbon 
(non-graphitizable carbon) with capacities larger than that of graphite. 
Hard  carbons  show  better  electrochemical  performance  than  that  of 
graphite because of their relatively good cyclability, morphology that is 
tailorable to the initial organic precursors and processing temperature, 
and  their  ability  to  accommodate  a  much  higher  amount  of  Li  than 
graphite. The latter can be attributed to the presence of hydrogen (H) 
and a large fraction of single graphene sheets, which allow the adsorp-
tion of a large amount of Li on both sides of the single-layer sheets [19]. 
In  addition,  the  poorly  or  non-graphitizable  carbons,  owing  to  their 
large interlayer distance (d002-spacing) and high porosities, can resolve 
the intercalation and extraction of Na
ions to an extent [20]. 
A sustainable yet cost-effective alternative is to use biomass-derived 
materials  obtained  via  low-cost  chemical  processes  in  the  anode. 
Biomass  includes  agricultural  residues  and  animal  or  wood  wastes. 
Based on the nature of the biomass, the pyrolysis temperature and pre- 
or  post-processing  procedures  can  be  optimized  to  fabricate  high- 
quality,  porous  carbonaceous  materials  with  channels  and  interstitial 
sites. In point of fact, biomass materials make it possible to avoid using 
expensive templates and, in most cases, environmentally harmful post- 
removal  process.  For  example,  the  pyrolysis  of  residues  from  pulp- 
paper  production and the  influence of functional groups and  molecu-
lar subunits in the polymeric structure is roughly described to show their 
amazing  and  porosity-directing  influence.  During  pyrolysis,  oxygen 
from  the  functional  groups  in  cellulosic  and  hemicellulosic  biomass 
transforms easily into H2O, CO and CO2 and enables an easier activation 
and  generation  of  micropores.  By  contrast,  the  aromatic  subunits  in 
lignin  conduct  to  form  nonporous  carbon  despite  the  presence  of 
oxygen-containing groups, because these are less effective in pore cre-
ation  [21,22].  The  dimensions  of  these  porous  systems  ranging  from 
macro- to meso- to micropore can be tuned to enable a particular design 
to  be  used  in  practical  application.  Therefore,  extensive  efforts  have 
been  undertaken  to  make  this  process  a  low-cost,  high-volume,  and 
commercially  sustainable  one.  However,  the  distinct  structure  and 
different reactivity of hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin to temperature 
result  in  different  decomposition  rates  during  the  pyrolysis  process, 
which makes the study of their carbonization mechanism rather chal-
lenging [21,23,24]. 

The  physical  and  chemical  characteristics  of  biomass-derived  car-
bons,  such  as  (hierarchical)  porosities,  crystallinity,  and  morphology, 
directly affect their electrochemical performance. Therefore, the opti-
mization of processing parameters such as pyrolysis temperature, acid or 
base treatment, reaction time, and doping elements considerably affect 
the efficiency of the electrode and, hence, that of the eventual battery. 

However,  the  industrialization  of  biomass-based  hard  carbon  produc-
tion faces some obstacles. These include the low initial Coulombic effi-
ciencies  of  hard  carbons  used  in  batteries,  resulting  from  an  over- 
proportionated formation of the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI); low 
carbon  yield  of  the  biomass  precursors;  and  their  chemical  diversity. 
Therefore, by knowing better the biomass structure and its composition, 
surface modification of extracted carbon by eliminating adsorbed mol-
ecules and oxygenated groups bonded to the carbon and optimization of 
electrolytes as well as understanding of the structure and function of the 
SEI in alkaline ion batteries, we help to facilitate the industrialization of 
the biomass anodes into batteries system. 

+

+

, and K

Here, we review recent advances in understanding the intercalation 
+
in graphite and the po-
, Na
behavior of the metal cations Li
tential  of  biomass-derived  carbons  as  anode  materials.  Although,  the 
behavior  of  metal-ion  storage  differs  based  on  the  biomass  used,  the 
good performance of biomass-derived carbon with expanded graphite 
demonstrates  its  potential  applicability  as  electrode  material.  The  re-
view will explore how the structure, porosity, and surface chemistry of 
the  biomass-derived  hard  carbon  can  be  tailored  by  simple  synthesis 
methods to enable metal-ion storage. It will also explore how single- and 
multi-element doping of N, P, B, and F could enhance the performance of 
the produced carbon as anode material. 

2. Structural forms of carbon 

Carbon shows unique versatility of its bonding chemistry among the 
elements. Free carbon atoms have the valence configuration of 2s2 2p2. 
These four valence electrons can be hybridized in three configurations of 
sp1,  sp2  and  sp3.  The  ability  to  hybridize  s-  and  p-orbitals  results  in 
various types of chemical bonds that eventually lead to the formation of 
various crystalline and disordered structures. In the sp3-configuration, 
the coordination of the four hybrid orbitals toward the four corners of a 
regular tetrahedron leads to the formation of a strong σ bond with an 
adjacent atom. In the sp2 configuration, three sp2-orbitals are occupied 
by three electrons, each pointing to one of the vertices of a triangle and 
forming σ bonds, whereas the fourth electron is located in the pz orbital 
that is perpendicular to the plane of the σ bonds [25–27]. 

The two most common natural crystalline forms of carbon, graphite 
and diamond, exhibit dramatic differences as a result primarily of short- 
range order [28]. 

Diamond-like structures possess a covalently bonded face-centered 
cubic  structure,  which  consists  of  fully  saturated  sp3-bonded  carbon 
atoms  with  a  density  of  3.515  g/cm3.  By  contrast,  graphite,  with  a 
density of 2.267 g/cm3, consists of covalently-bonded atoms in a hex-
agonal  structure  of  sp2-sites  bound  together  by  weak  Van-der-Waals 
forces provided by π orbitals. Due to the high surface area of graphene 
layers and π-π  interactions between them, the stacking these layers is 
unavoidable. This stacking results in a low surface area of graphene with 
a poor energy-storage performance [29]. Therefore, some spacers such 
as metal oxides [30], conducting polymers [31], carbon black [32], or 
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [33] are introduced into the interlayer spaces. 
Graphite  occurs  naturally,  is  mined  and  subsequently  purified  via 
hydrofluoric acid, but its reserves are limited. It can also be produced 
artificially by coking natural pitches or residues of crude-oil distillation 
by heating in the absence of air. The coke obtained after this long and 
complex  process  is  calcined  and  extruded  or  molded  to  form  rough 
blocks  of  the  desired  shape.  After  the  density  of  the  blocks  has  been 
adjusted by reimpregnation and several baking processes, the material is 
converted to graphite at around 3000
C by passing a current through a 
conducting coke bed surrounding the blocks. The need for high-energy 
heat treatment means that synthetic graphite for use as anode material 
is  currently  twice  as  expensive  as  treated  natural  graphite  [34].  Bat-
tery-grade graphite used in lithium-ion anodes is typically a mixture of 
synthetic and natural graphite [35]. 

◦

Unlike  crystalline  carbon  or  highly  ordered  graphite,  which  is 
formed  by  ABAB-stacked  graphene,  the  turbostratic  carbon  with 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009292N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

disordered multilayered graphene domains co-exists with various pro-
portions of sp2- and sp3-hybridization. In this kind of carbon, the pres-
ence  of  strong  crosslinks  between  the  disoriented  and  few  layered 
graphene domains inhibits the rearrangement of the disoriented layers 
into  a  more  parallel  structure  [25–27],  [36,37].  Glassy  and  pyrolytic 
carbons obtained from organic polymer and hydrocarbon gas, respec-
tively, are two examples of turbostratic carbons [38]. Carbon quantum 
dots  (CQDs)  of  less  than  10  nm  in  size  and  graphene  quantum  dots 
(GQDs) with structures smaller than 100 nm in size and  less than 10 
layers  thick  [39,40]  are  also  classified  into  this  category.  CQDs  are 
composed  of  turbostratic  carbon  and  a  nanocrystalline  core  with 
sp2-hybridized carbon while GQDs with similar structures compared to 
CQDs have higher crystallinity [41,42]. Extracted carbon from agricul-
tural biomass with disordered structure is also considered in the family 
of turbostratic carbons. Biomass as the less expensive source of carbon 
compared to polymer and hydrocarbon gas, plays the leading role for 
production of disorder carbons. However, due to complex structure of 
biomass,  a  deep  understanding  of  its  structural  and  chemical  charac-
teristics is required to optimize extraction process of disordered carbon 
with high carbon content and optimum porosity. 

2.1. Biomass-derived carbon 

Biomass, the oldest renewable source of stored energy according to 
its  biological  diversity,  source  and  origin,  is  classified  into  four  cate-
gories: wood, crops, seaweed, and animal wastes. All types of biomass 
receive their energy, directly or indirectly, from photosynthesis, during 
which plants convert sunlight, water, and CO2 to oxygen and carbohy-
drates. Subsequently, the consumption of carbohydrates as food by an-
imals  and  humans  provide  them  with  nourishment  [43].  Biomass 
contains a type of turbostratic carbon that can be obtained in a cheaper 
and  environmentally  more  friendly  way  than  carbon  extracted  from 
fossil  sources  [44].  In  addition,  extracting  carbon  from  biomass  is 
cheaper  than  extracting  it  from  rare-metal-bearing  inorganic  com-
pounds,  and  has  thus  received  greater  attention  in  recent  years [45]. 
Such hard carbon with a disordered microstructure can accommodate 
substantial amounts of Na and K ions between its enlarged interlayers, 
and it can thus function as highly efficient anode material. This section 
provides a detailed information of the structure of biomass and the py-
rolytic behavior of each main component of biomass as carbon sources. 

2.2. Biomass structure 

Cell  walls  of  plants  are  composed  of  essentially  three  organic 

compounds:  cellulose,  hemicellulose,  and  lignin  (Fig.  1).  Each  com-
pound has its own characteristics. Hemicellulose and lignin show only 
short-range ordering, whereas cellulose is crystalline. The proportion of 
these compounds change with species, the plant part they belong to, the 
nature of the cells, and the geographic location [46,47]. 

Since each species has different proportions of compounds and each 
compound possesses an individual amount of carbon, the total carbon 
content varies for various biomass. In woody plants, organs with higher 
lignin content (e.g. stems) tend to have a higher carbon content than 
organs with lower lignin content (e.g., leaves, roots, and reproductive 
organs).  Also,  in  herbaceous  plants,  more  carbon  content  is  found  in 
leaves than in stems and roots [49]. The carbon content in each plant 
organ  also  depends  on  the  age  of  the  plant  [50].  In  general,  woody 
plants, because of their relatively low growth rate, exhibit higher carbon 
content than herbaceous plants. On average, dried biochar from wood 
and  wood-agricultural  residue  contain  52  wt.%  carbon,  whereas  her-
baceous  and  agricultural  biomass  contain  49  wt.%  carbon.  However, 
among  the  sources  of  agricultural  biomass,  some  materials  with  the 
higher biochar yields content than that in woody plants, such as walnut 
shells, olive husk, and coconut shells containing 55, 58, and 51 wt.% 
carbon respectively exist [51,52]. 

Biomass with varying contents of hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin 
can  be  thermally  decomposed  using  different  process  parameters  to 
tailor  surface  chemistry,  structure,  total  carbon  content,  and  pore 
morphology of the resulting carbon. 

Despite the higher C/O ratio of lignin as compared with the other 
components,  biomass-derived  carbon  with  higher  cellulose  content 
shows greater potential for porosity formation but not necessarily be-
haves proportional. The porosity of char due to evaporating compounds 
is governed by the crystallinity, morphology, and functional groups of 
cellulose  [49,53–56].  Following  example  shall  demonstrate  the  influ-
ence of a nearly similar cellulose content on specific surface area of the 
extracted carbon. Cotton seed hair and paper with a cellulose content of 
80-95  %  and  85-99  %  could  be  considered  as  a  desirable  source  for 
fabricating porous carbon materials with high specific surface areas of 
2573 and 3524 m2/g, respectively [57,58]. 

◦

The thermal decomposition of lignin is slower over a broader tem-
C)  than  that  of  cellulose  and  hemicellulose. 
perature  range  (200-500
Cellulose  decomposes  between  200-400
C,  whereas  hemicellulose  de-
composes in the 200-320
C range. Regarding to higher oxygen to carbon 
content of cellulose and its high polymeric degree compared to lignin, it 
tends  to  be  decomposed  as  H2O,  CO2,  and  CO  at  lower  temperature. 
Interestingly, the total carbon content does not linearly correlate with 
the amount of cellulose in plants [21,23,59]. The treatment temperature 

◦

◦

Fig.  1. Structure  of  lignocellulosic  biomass  with  cellulose:  Linear  large  polymeric  molecules,  lignin:  a  complex  and  highly  cross-linked  aromatic  polymer  and 
hemicellulose: amorphous and highly branched macromolecular structure. Adapted from [48] after the required permission. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009293N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

◦

◦

higher than 600
C may result in a complete decomposition of lignin and 
the  collapse  of  the  structure.  Nevertheless,  the  thermal  treatment  of 
C could guarantee complete carbonization of the cellu-
biomass at 600
losic components while preserving parts of the aromatic building units 
[60]. However, the commonly found elements as K, Na, Mg and Ca in 
biomass by accelerating the degradation of the polymeric structure of 
cellulose  and  lignin,  result  the  formation  of  lower  molecular  weight 
compounds. In order to increase char yield, rapid removal of char from 
the pyrolysis reactor is essential [61]. 

Pyrolysis of biomass at a low temperature with a low heating rate but 
a high inert gas flow rate is expected to give a maximum yield of biochar 
that is highly enriched in carbon [62]. Fast pyrolysis at moderate py-
rolysis  temperature  of  400-600
C  increases  the  yield  of  bio-oil.  How-
ever, the biomass composition is the main influence on the char yield of 
the final carbon. For example, the char yield has been calculated to be 
13.2  and  34.4  wt.%  for  wheat  straw  and  coir,  respectively  [63].  In 
addition, walnut shells show fast charring speeds, high char yield of 51.3 
wt.%, and an abundant porosity [64]. 

◦

Besides  the  conventional  pyrolysis  processes,  molten  salts  Li2CO3, 
KCl,  Na2CO3,  ZnCl2,  K2CO3  etc.  due  to  their  high  heat  transfer,  high 
thermal stability and catalyst characteristics in the conversion process, 
represent a new possibility to produce charred materials. In this process, 
thermal decomposition of organic components in biomass is carried out 
in a molten salt bath. The higher heating rate in this process increases 
the  possibility  of  obtaining  less  char  yield  and  more  tar  fraction  (py-
rolysis  oil).  This  reduction  of  char  yield  is  mainly  attributed  to  the 
further production of C-H and C-O bonds and the aromatization of the 
carbon by the molten salts during pyrolysis [65–67]. Each salt has own 
catalytic effect that has a significant influence on the yield of products 
after  the  conversion  process.  Different  metal  ions  promote  different 
pyrolysis reactions. For example, potassium and sodium ions increase 
the char yield, while it is only slightly affected by calcium ions for the 
pyrolysis of wood. However, other additives such as chlorides, nitrates, 
and sulfates accelerate levoglucosan generation and, therefore, decrease 
the amount of the obtained char [68]. In addition, the salt itself has an 
influence on the specific surface area of the carbon. For example, peanut 
shells  carbonized  in  a  Li2CO3/K2CO3  mixture  have  a  higher  specific 
surface  area  than  those  treated  in  LiCO3/Na2CO3/K2CO3,  CaCl2,  or 
CaCl2/NaCl [65]. Shang et al. [69] also prepared a porous carbon from 
peanut shells by carbonization in a ZnCl2 molten salt with a SBET of 1642 
m2/g compared to the conventional oven-driven pyrolysis with SBET  =
95.51 m2/g. 

◦

◦

The temperature of the molten salts also affects the char yield. For 
example, the char yield, bio-oil and -gas products from cellulose pyrol-
◦
ysis in ZnCl2-KCl at 410 
C under N2 flow were estimated to 38%, 48%, 
C, 
and 14%, respectively [70]. With increasing the temperature to 520
the bio-oil and -gas yields increased indicating a de-polymerization of 
cellulose. The pyrolysis to the oil fraction was the dominant reaction at 
this  higher  pyrolysis  temperature.  He  et  al.  [71]  reported  on  lignite 
brown  coal  chars  obtained  with  and  without  molten  carbonate  salt 
(Li2CO3-Na2CO3-K2CO3) at 800 
C. The char obtained with the molten 
salt showed a lower char yield of 43% and higher d002 value of 0.371 nm 
in comparison to 58% and 0.364 nm for the samples treated without a 
molten salt. The char yield for samples treated in molten salt decreased 
from  67%  at  500 
C.  Lu  et  al.  [72]  also  obtained 
micro-sheet like porous carbon with specific surface area of 843 m2/g 
and  d-spacing  value  of  0.393  nm  by  treatment  of  bamboo  shell  with 
◦
molten Na2CO3-K2CO3 at 850 
C. The discussion above suggests that the 
key issues for having high char yields with optimized porosities are the 
selection of biomass and the conversion efficiency of biomass into car-
bon. Fig. 2 illustrates various biomass sources to synthesize char with 
different compositions. It shows the final properties of the biochar could 
be engineered by optimizing the composition of the biomass, tempera-
ture  and  heating  rate  [73,74].  In  addition,  it  is  illustrated  how  the 
extracted carbon inherits the texture and pore structure of the pristine 
biomass [75–78]. 

C  to  43%  at  800 

◦

◦

Fig. 2. The diverse range sources of biomass to synthesize biochar. Some pa-
rameters such as heating rate and temperature, as well as selecting the biomass 
with a favorable composition, directly affect the final quality of the biochar and 
lead to optimized biochar yield. 

2.3. Extraction of carbon from biomass 

◦

◦

Biomass-derived carbon is obtained by two stages of carbonization 
and polymerization. In the first stage, at temperatures between 400 and 
C, volatile matter containing H, N, and O is lost, and some C–O and 
700
C–C bonds are cleaved to form small molecules including CO, H2O, and 
◦
CO2. At a temperature close to 700
C, the residual carbon atoms form 
planar  aromatic  structures  with  predominantly  H-terminated  edges. 
However,  at  this  temperature  the  pyrolyzed  carbon  can  still  contain 
other  elements  such  as  O  and  N.  At  this  low  temperature  range  (~ 
700
C),  the  poor  stacking  of  C-C  aromatic  structures  can  lead  to  the 
C,  the  H 
formation  of  micropores.  In  the  second  stage,  at  600-1200
atoms  are  removed  and,  based  on  the  nature  of  carbon  resource,  the 
wrinkled graphite sheets are stacked either in a near-parallel fashion in 
regions called “organized carbon’ or arranged in a geometry resembling 
a ‘house of cards’. The pyrolyzed carbon displays a microporous struc-
ture  with  a  density  of  about  2.22  g/cm3  that  is  lower  than  that  of 
graphite. The structure contains many interstices  that result from the 
irregular cross-linked graphene sheets that form the micropores [79,80]. 
The final structure can vary based on the type of starting material and 
the operational temperature (Fig. 3 (a)). 

◦

The  pyrolyzed  carbon,  which  cannot  be  converted  into  crystalline 
graphite with infinite parallel layers of graphene (Fig. 3 (b)), even at 
◦
temperatures >3000
C, is called non-graphitizing carbon or hard carbon 
(Fig.  3  (c)).  However,  different  biomass  resources  show  different 
graphitization  behavior.  For  examples  biomass  waste  materials  with 
higher cellulose content such as sugarcane bagasse [81], pineapple leaf 
fibers [82], mengkuang leaves [83], wastepaper [84] and cotton [85] 
showed a relatively high degree of crystallinity. Rouzaud described that 
the  graphitization  improves  in  the  presence  of  hydrogen  and  at  a 
shortage of oxygen in the precursors [86]. 

Soft carbon can undergo graphitization more easily than hard car-
bon. The soft carbon usually starts to transform into a liquid phase at a 
◦
temperature around 400-500
C, and the planar graphene sheets arrange 
themselves easily in a near-parallel manner (Fig. 3 (d)). The tendency of 
soft  carbons  to  graphitization  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  carbon 
precursor.  Carbon derived  from highly condensed  aromatic hydrocar-
bon precursors is particularly amenable to graphitization [36,37,87,88]. 
The difficulty of graphitizing hard carbons even at high temperatures 
could be exacerbated for densely 3D crosslinked polymers and source 
materials enriched with lignin and hemicellulose [89]. Although lignin 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009294N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  3. a)  Graphitization  of  carbon  as  a  function  of  tem-
perature  by  growing  micrographitic  crystallites  of  highly 
disordered aromatic carbon at 1100 K to graphitic structure 
at  2000  K  [94],  b)  Structure  of  graphite,  c)  structure  of 
non-graphitizing  carbon,  d)  Structure  of  graphitizing  car-
bon [95], and e) Illustration of graphite unit cell (with a =
2.46  Å and c =6.71 Å) and graphitic crystallite (La, crys-
tallite  size;  Lc,  thickness)  [96],[97].  Adopted  from 
mentioned references after the required permission.   

Fig. 4. a) Idealized carbon structures (left column) and their expected signals for the 002 reflection (right column), 1 for a crystalline, graphitic carbon, 2 for a 
nanocrystalline, turbostratic carbon and 3 for an amorphous carbon (Intensit¨at, german = Intensity, Glanzwinkel, german = Bragg angle). Adapted from [98] with 
permission of DeGruyter. b) X-ray photographs of a crystalline carbon (bottom), nanocrystalline/turbostratic carbon (middle) and of an amorphous carbon (top). 
Adapted from [99] with permission of IOP Publishing. c) X-ray patterns of a crystalline, graphitic (bottom), a nanocrystalline/turbostratic (middle) carbon, adapted 
from [100] and of the amorphous carbon SuperPLi from Timcal, recorded as a transmission powder sample on a STOE Stadi P diffractometer, λ = 1.78896 Å, by one 
of the authors (top). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009295N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

◦

◦

possesses  low  oxygen  content,  its  short-range-ordered  structure  post-
pones  the  graphitization.  Biomass  which  contains  glucose  has  lower 
onset temperature for graphitization. Indeed, glucose melts to  form a 
liquid  intermediate  and  accelerates  the  graphitization  process  [35]. 
However,  Gomez  et  al.  [90]  have  shown  that  the  impregnation  of 
medium-density fiberboard (MDF) wood in a 1 M FeCl3  solution could 
promote the graphitization of disordered carbon at lower temperature of 
C. Here, the degree of graphitization α  of a hydrocarbon reached 
700
C, as determined from the IG-to-ID  intensity area ratio ac-
0.8 at 2000
cording to α=IG/(IG+ID1). For the iron-catalyzed pyrolysis of the wood, 
0.7  was  calculated  which  was  only  slightly  lower.  However,  in  an 
uncatalyzed  reaction  the  degree  of  graphitization  of  the  wood  hard 
carbon was determined to 0.3 only, even at temperatures up to 2800
C. 
Graphite from hard carbons is produced in a Fe-catalyzed reaction, by 
continuous  dissolution  of  disordered  carbon  into  iron  or  iron  carbide 
particles, which are obtained in situ by the carbothermal reduction of 
Fe3+
ions to Fe0. By decreasing the temperature, graphite precipitates 
from the Fe-FexC-C solution. The removal of the iron or the iron carbide 
particles via acid etching can result in a microporous structure [91]. Xu 
et al. [92] showed presence of trace metals such as iron in bean shells. 
This Fe content improved the degree of graphitization. Derbyshire et al. 
[93] also reported the formation of laminar graphite after cooling of a 
solution  of  non-ordered  carbon  in  cobalt  and  nickel  foils  heated  to 
~1000
C which led 
to  traces  of  these  compounds.  With  an  Fe  foil,  only  iron  carbide  was 
formed and no graphite was observed. 

C before. Ni and Co carbides are instable above 500

◦

◦

◦

2.4. Characteristics of biomass derived carbon 

To investigate the structure of carbons in general, several physical 
methods have proven to be of value. One of the most used techniques is 
X-ray diffraction (Fig. 4). From the models for the different structures of 
carbons, graphitic (crystalline, Fig. 4 (a.1)), turbostratic (nanocrystal-
line,  Fig.  4  (a.2))  and  amorphous  (Fig.  4  (a.3)),  the  influence  of  the 
structure  on  the  signal  width  and  the  intensity  of  the  related  X-ray 
patterns are exemplary shown in Fig. 4 (b) and 4 (c) [98]. It has been 
shown de-graphitized carbon black in addition to orientational disorder 
around normal layer (turbostratic stacks) features translational disorder 
along the layer plane (lubricostratic stacks). Measurements of the real, 
corresponding carbons are compared to the models by the circular X-ray 
patterns  of  a  Debye-Scherrer  film  camera  (Fig.  4  (b))  [99]  and  X-ray 
patterns recorded with the nowadays used modern X-ray diffractometers 
(Fig. 4 (c)) [100]. 

Based  on  the  conventional  rhombic  unit  cell  as  determined  for 
graphite [101], the structure of turbostratic carbon is classified in terms 
of  basal-plane  correlation  length  La  and  c-axis  correlation  length  Lc, 
which are estimated from the positions of the 002 and 100 Bragg re-
flections in diffraction pattern, respectively [25–27] (see Fig. 3 (e)). The 
d002 spacing is calculated by the Bragg’s equation, whereas the thickness 
(Lc) and average width of the graphitic domains (La) are calculated from 
the Scherrer equation. The 100 reflection corresponds to the honeycomb 
layers in the plane of the hexagonal lattice that are formed by sp2-hy-
bridization, whereas the 002 reflection is responsible for the domains of 
coherent parallel-stacked graphene sheets. The 002 reflection is clearly 
observed in soft carbon, which points to the stacking of carbon layers in 
a  near-parallel  orientation.  By  contrast,  hard  carbon  exhibits  a  less 
intense and weakly shaped 002 reflection, which indicates the presence 
of a substantial number of single graphene sheets. The intensity of the 
002 reflection increases with the carbonization temperature and moves 
to the higher angle. Because the hexagonal layers in turbostratic carbon 
rotate randomly with respect to each other about the c-axis, the inter-
layer spacing (d002), increases from 3.34 to 3.44 Å as compared to 3.35 Å 
in graphite. The Lc and La values were observed to be between 4 nm and 
10 nm for hard carbon and 100 nm for soft carbon. However, both types 
of carbon show approximately the same values of Lc  and La  (1 nm) at 
◦
C  [25–27],  [36,37,102].  Increasing  the 
temperatures  below  1000

carbonization temperature will cause more horizontal growth of pseu-
dographitic instead of vertical growth, therefore at higher temperature 
higher La value than Lc value is expected [103]. 

◦

Lotfabad et al. [104] observed the bimodal distribution in d spacing 
for  002  reflection  for  carbon  extracted  from  banana  peels.  Fig.  5  (a) 
shows the X-ray diffraction pattern of carbon obtained via carbonization 
of  banana  peel pseudo-graphite  (BPPG)  at  temperatures between  800 
and 1400
C. The carbon contains two graphene interlayers with spacing 
of 3.86 and 3.354 Å, respectively, as well as 2.12- and 5.49-nm-thick 
pseudo-graphitic  domains.  The  bimodal  distribution  of  the  interlayer 
spacing, d 002, indicated that the temperature was high enough to form 
equilibrium graphite (c/2 = 3.354 Å). This graphitization was due to 
small molecules of free sugars presented in banana peels which trans-
◦
formed to liquid phase at 1400
C and allowed the graphene sheets to 
partially  align  themselves.  Moreover,  pectin  in  the  banana  peels  un-
derwent  some  aromatic  ordering,  which  is  similar  to  the  behavior  of 
cross-linked lignin. However, no equilibrium graphite was observed to 
◦
form at a lower carbonization temperature of 800
C, and an interlayer 
spacing  of  3.97 Å  with  pseudo-graphitic  domains  of  1.53 nm  was  re-
ported  [104].  High-resolution  transmission  electron  microscopy 
(HRTEM) (Fig. 5 (b-d)), revealed more ordered carbon with increasing 
carbonization temperature. In both samples, which were heat-treated at 
◦
800 and 1100
C, well-defined mesopores were observed throughout the 
structure [104]. 

Raman  spectroscopy  is  another  technique  to  show  the  degrees  of 
graphitic ordering (Fig. 6). Carbon with various proportions of sp2- and 
sp3-hybridization shows different structure and physical properties. The 
degree of disorder and domain size of sp2 are proportionate to the ID/IG 
intensity ratio obtained from Raman spectra. The Tuinstra-Koenig [105] 
law  (Eq.  (1))  relates  the  ID/IG  ratio  to  the  crystallite size  of  graphitic 
samples, which can be used as a good approximation for the ratio. For 
the large crystallite size with few defects the G-peak is more intense than 
D-peak  while  by  increasing  the  defects  the  ID/IG  ratio  increases.  This 
increasing trend stops when the amount of defects exceed a certain value 
and the D-peak intensity starts to decrease [106]. 

More precise determination of the crystallite size (La) in the graphitic 
parts of the carbons can be calculated by an adapted Tuinstra-Koenig 
law as described by Mallet-Ladeira et al. [107]. 

ID
IG

∝

1
La[nm]

(1) 

For the highly amorphous carbon, the corresponding Raman spec-
(cid:0) 1  ≤ 1/λ  ≤
trum (Fig. 6 (a) upper) shows a plateau between 1300 cm
(cid:0) 1  representing  the  sum  of  vibrations  mainly  related  to  a 
1700  cm
disordered graphite lattice [36]. Turbostratic carbons are less disordered 
with  curved graphene  layers and  the  Raman  signals are  reduced to  a 
(cid:0) 1  and the broad D-band at 
relatively sharp G-band at about 1600 cm
(cid:0) 1 [36]. The G-band for the crystalline carbon at around 
about 1340 cm
(cid:0) 1  (belonging to active E2g  mode) corresponds to in-plane vi-
1580 cm
bration of sp2-bonded carbon atoms in the hexagonal lattice. The D band 
(cid:0) 1  (belonging to A1g  symmetry) mainly reflects the 
at around 1350 cm
small amounts of disordered carbon, edges, and other structural defects 
(e.g. sp3-bonded carbon, vacancies, and topological defects) [108]. 

Doping of carbon by other elements leads to an energy shift of the G 
band. For example, a shift of the G-band to a higher energy (blue shift) 
was observed in nitrogen-doped carbon because of the increased carrier 
concentration  from  doping  [109].  As  the  pyrolysis  temperature  in-
creases,  the  full-width  half-maximum  of  G-band  and  ID/IG  decreases, 
indicating more ordered structures [110,111]. 

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) has suitably been developed 
to determine hybridization states of carbon and carbon atoms bound to 
non-carbon  atoms  to  form  functional  groups  [112,113].  As  seen  in 
Fig. 7, the de-convoluted C 1s signal of the XP spectrum of a mesoporous 
carbon can show many participating C-C and C-O species at different 
binding  energies.  To  give  an  impression  on  the  respective  functional 
groups shown in the XP spectrum, such groups are marked with their 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009296N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 5. a) XRD pattern of BPPG heat-treated at 800, 1100, and 1400
BPPG-1400-A, respectively [104]. Adapted from mentioned reference with permission of the American Chemical Society. 

C with post air-activation, b-d) HRTEM micrographs of samples BPPG-800-A, BPPG-1100-A, and 

◦

Fig. 6. a) Raman spectra of crystalline, graphitic carbon (bottom), nanocrystalline turbostratic (middle) made by pyrolysis of polymer precursor film and amorphous 
carbons made by physical vapor deposition (PVD (top)). The corresponding scanning electron microscopy pictures in b) Show the individual sample architecture and 
c) The transmission electron microscopy images support the crystallinity complimentary to the Raman spectra. Adapted from ref. [36] with permission of Elsevier 
B.V. 

numbers in an exemplified carbon network. For a hard carbon, similar 
spectra  can  be  measured  with  deviations  in  the  binding  energies  ac-
cording to the binding energy referencing and general composition of 
the carbon, e.g. the influence of other elements like N, S or halogens. The 
sp2 carbon double bonds C=C of a typical hard carbon are located at a 
binding energy of 284.6 eV [114]. The sp3  carbon bonds C-C, the C-O 
and  the  C=O  bonds,  as  well  as  the  π(cid:0) π*  graphitic  shake-up  satellite 
cover  binding  energies  of  285.6,  286.7,  288.3,  and  290.4  eV,  respec-
tively  [114–116].  A  higher  peak-intensity  ratio  of  sp2/sp3  points  to 
lower levels of structural defects in the hard carbon. Note that variations 
of  the  π(cid:0) π*  contribution,  typically  related  to  the  delocalization  of  p 
electrons  e.g.  in  sp2-hybridized  carbon  system,  can  hint  to  different 
degree of (local) disorder. Higher disorder might be responsible for a 
localization of the π charge and the disappearance of the π(cid:0) π* contri-
bution [117,118]. 

However, the participation of the π(cid:0) π* contribution can alter e.g. by 
a degraded overlap of p orbitals compared to graphite, a shorter life time 
of  the  excited  state,  changes  in  the  layer-to-layer  interactions  and/or 
topographic effects [117–120]. 

3. Tailored carbon anodes derived from biomass 

Pyrolyzed biomass-derived carbon is non-graphitizing, hard carbon 
with  varying  textures,  morphologies,  and  degrees  of  crystallinity.  It 
provides short diffusion paths for ionic and electron transport and can 
therefore be an attractive material for anodes in metal-ion batteries. The 
solid structure of such carbon with short diffusion pathways is the basis 
for the excellent cyclability in batteries without substantial exfoliation 
during the insertion and extraction of ions. In addition, the tailorable 
porous  architecture  with  hierarchical  pore  structure,  if  desired,  can 
support high gravimetric specific energy capacity in the batteries. For 
example, the formation of Li layers on the graphene sheet, the storage of 
Li in the micropores, and the formation of LiC2, C–H–Li, or N–Li bonds, 
makes the turbostratic carbon structure more likely to have extra charge 
than fully-intercalated graphite with LiC6 stoichiometry [121,122]. 

To date, many studies have sought to improve the performance of 
pyrolyzed biomass-derived chars by engineering the char porosities (e.g. 
sacrificial silica template [123], chemical and physical activation [124, 
125]), chemical substitutional doping (e.g. boron [126], nitrogen [127], 
and phosphorous [128]), and the fabrication of hybrid nanocomposites 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009297N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 7. XP high resolution spectrum of the C 1s signal of mesoporous carbon (upper left). The spectrum fits represent eight contributions which can be related to 
several chemical functionalities in an exemplified carbon lattice (lower right). Adapted from ref. [112] with permission of Elsevier B.V. 

of 

the 

performance 

consisting  of  a  carbonaceous  matrix  and  a  transition  metal  oxide 
[129–131].  However, 
electrochemical 
energy-storage devices using existing carbonaceous material is limited 
in terms of charge capacity, rate capability, and electronic conductivity. 
Addressing these issues require the following: 1) electrodes composed of 
hard carbon with an optimized specific surface area to facilitate charge 
capacity [132–134]; 2) nanostructured carbon to shorten the diffusion 
pathways  at  the  electrode/electrolyte  interface  [135];  3)  hetero-
atom-doped carbon materials to alter electronic properties [136,137]; 
and  4)  hierarchically  porous  carbon  to  accelerate  ion  transport  with 
improved  rate  capability  [138,139].  Indeed,  the  hollow  macroporous 
cores, which are connected and open to the outer mesoporous shell can 
serve as an electrolyte reservoir and facilitate mass transport [140]. We 
discuss each of these in detail in the following sections. 

3.1. Morphological modification 

In most cases the extracted carbon inherits the textural architecture 
and porous structure of the pristine biomass. However, the structure and 
morphology of carbon could be modified to yield nano particles, nano-
tubes, nanofibers, nanosheets, and porous carbons with desired shape by 
using some chemical techniques [141–144]. In the following sections, 
we  will  explain  the  most  common  modification  techniques  which 
modify the morphology of the extracted carbon from biomass and affect 
the electrochemical properties of restructured carbon. 

3.1.1. Carbon quantum dots (0 D) 

During the past decades, zero-dimensional carbon dots (CDs) of less 
than 10 nm and with sp2/sp3 hybridization as a special class of carbon- 
based  nanostructures  with  tunable  band  gap  have  shown  exceptional 
chemical  and  physical  properties  that  may  facilitate  a  wide  range  of 
potential  applications  in  optics,  energy  storage,  medicine  and  others 
[40,145,146]. There are two routes for successful CD syntheses: I) the 
bottom-up method by converting suitable organic precursors to CDs via 
chemical,  thermal  decomposition,  solvothermal/hydrothermal  treat-
ment  or  microwave  synthesis,  and  II)  the  top-down  approach  by 
breaking  down  a  large  carbon  structure  e.g.  found  in  graphite,  soot, 
CNTs or activated carbons into CDs via an arc discharge method, laser 
ablation, electrochemical synthesis and etc.  However, these paths need 
either costly and toxic organic precursors or a complex equipment and 
to  synthesize  CDs.  Recently,  natural 
post-treatment  processes 

+

carbon-based materials such as silkworm chrysalides [147], rice husk 
[148], coconut husk [149], garlic [150], Jinhua bergamot [151], orange 
juice [152], and bagasse [153] can save expenses for the organic starting 
and  can  become  of  interest  for  the  syntheses  of  CQDs  and  GQDs. 
Although, not reaching a precise particle size is the main drawback of 
biomass as the growth rate of the particles can only be controlled by 
heating rate, reaction time and temperature to some extent. CDs with a 
high  concentration  of  oxygen-containing  surface  groups,  high  defect 
density or a large specific surface area show superior performances in 
supercapacitors. CDs derived from biomass that possess a large specific 
surface  area  and  a  high  content of  nitrogen  as  dopant  are  favored  as 
electrodes in supercapacitors due to their higher storage performance. 
Additionally, it is easier to synthesize high N-doped CDs from biomass 
compared to a bottom-up approach [154–157]. While CDs show inter-
esting results in supercapacitors, the reports about their utilization in 
batteries are still scarce. CDs as conductive additives in composite anode 
materials can significantly increase the electrochemical performance of 
the anodes. Thus, GQDs coated on VO2 enable a specific capacity ->420 
mAh/g and capacity retention of 94% after 1500 cycles at 18 A/g vs. 
/Li [158], CDs coated on a Mn3O4 composite reach a capacity of 934 
Li
mAh/g after 50 cycles at a 0.1 A/g vs. Li
/Li [159], and a Sb@CQDs 
composite  with  specific  capacity  of  510 mAh/g  after  120  cycles  at 
/Na  [160].  Hierarchical  TiO2(cid:0) x  imbedded  in  GQDs 
0.5 A/g  vs.  Na
give a specific capacity of 160 mAh/g at 10 C after 500 cycles vs. Li
/Li 
[161]. All these examples support the positive effect of CDs in electro-
chemical energy storage devices. In the previously described cases the 
electronic conductivity of the samples and the ion transfer rate between 
the electrolyte and the active material were increased by the combina-
tion of highly conductive CDs and their large specific surface area. The 
large potential of CDs in energy storage applications utilizing materials 
from renewable sources have not been reflected by literature yet. There 
are only few reports on the application of CDs derived from biomass in 
electrochemical processes. Yi et al. [162] reported on the synthesis of 
GQD/Fe3O4  nanocomposite  via  a  one-step  thermochemical  reaction. 
The thickness of synthesized GQD was measured about 10 nm accom-
panied with some multi- layer graphene with thickness of 10 to 150 nm. 
GQD/Fe3O4 delivered high specific capacity of 3829 mAh/g at 0.05 A/g 
vs. Li
/Li, which is four times higher compared to pure Fe3O4 having a 
theoretical  specific  capacity  of  924  mAh/g.  Alkaline  lignin,  the  main 
component  of  the  effluents  of  paper  pulping,  with  a  large  number  of 
hydrophilic groups, provided remarkably reactive sites for the growth 

+

+

+

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009298N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

and anchoring of iron nanoparticles, to be found back in the interlayer of 
the graphene-like carbon sheets. Abundant reactive sites for Li coordi-
nation and an optimized electronic structure for a fast charge transfer 
are the main reasons for the superior electrochemical performance. Peng 
et  al.  [163]  produced  CDs  from  glucose  with  5  nm  in  diameter  by  a 
simple  aqueous  solution  route.  The  carbohydrates  were  dehydrated 
using concentrated sulfuric acid followed by a decomposition into car-
bogenic (called carbogenic due to their oxygen content) nanoparticles 
by nitric acid. The glucose-derived carbon dots using chemical oxidation 
method  provide  a  superior  conductivity  and  a  rapid  ion  transport. 
Therefore, a good cycling performance and a high rate capability in LIBs 
and SIBs were reached, namely specific capacities of 864 mAh/g at 0.5 C 
and 153 mAh/g at 20 C after 500 cycles vs. Li
/Li and 324 mAh/g at 0.5 
C and 55.7 mAh/g at 20 C after 500 cycles vs. Na

/Na [164]. 

+

+

3.1.2. Nanotubes and nanowires (1D) 

CNTs are members of the fullerene structural family and related to 
spherical fullerenes. Bending and rolling a graphene layer theoretically 
forms seamless single-walled cylindrical structure composed of sp2-hy-
bridized  atoms  that can be  extended  to  a  multi-walled one  if  layered 
graphene is considered. In this type of structure, the graphite monolayer 
planes are often parallel to the tube axis [165,166]. 

Arc-discharge,  laser  ablation,  and  chemical-vapor  deposition  are 
typically used for the synthesis of CNTs [167]. Alternatively, CNTs and 
nanofibers can also be obtained sustainably from biomass. For example, 
Xie et al. [168] claimed that CNT can be extracted from bamboo or wood 
◦
by  pre-carbonizing  the  raw  materials  in  air  at  240
C  and  cyclically 
◦
heating the obtained materials to 400
C in the presence of oxygen at 
pressures below atmospheric (1 KPa). This cyclic oxidation procedure 
leads  to  the  decomposition  of  the  carbon  from  cellulose  microfibrils 
because it has a lower resistance to oxidation at elevated temperatures 
than  lignin.  Consequently,  a  channel forms  within  the  residual  lignin 
matrix. Since the volatile carbon-containing vapor was trapped inside 
the channel covered by carbonized lignin, it is concentrated on the in-
ternal  surface  of  this  “nano-channel”  and  finally  forms  the  CNT.  The 
pre-carbonization promotes the dehydration of cellulose to reach higher 
carbon contents and to stabilize the lignin to shift its decomposition to 
higher  temperatures.  To  test  this  mode  of  formation  of  CNTs  from 

biomass  sources,  these  authors  treated  pure  lignin  and  pure  cellulose 
with  the  same  heating-oxidation  protocol.  However,  they  were  not 
successful in producing CNTs. The authors attributed the failure to the 
molecular and spatial arrangement of cell walls [169]. 

◦

◦

Gao  et  al.  [170]  reported  the  synthesis  of  CNTs  from  yeast-wheat 
flour  dough  (Fig.  8  (a)).  The  fermented  dough  was  cut  into  small 
C for 6 h, and the pieces were then heated to 
pieces and dried at 50
750
C for 2 h in argon gas. During the heating process, highly dense 
CNTs were formed simultaneously on both the inner and outer surfaces 
of the porous activated wheat dough (AWD). The growth of yeast cells in 
the  dough  caused  the  adhesion  of  gluten  proteins  and  the  dough 
captured  CO2  released  during  the  decomposition  of  carbohydrates 
(starch and sugars) via the metastatic reactions of yeast. This prepara-
tion led to an expansion in size and an interconnected porous structure. 
SEM and TEM analysis (Fig. 8 (b-d)) revealed highly dense CNTs with 
3-20 μm in length and crystal-lattice spacing of ~0.35 nm on the acti-
vated dough surface and pore walls of AWD. 

CNTs  are  considered  to  be  a  good  anode  material  for  Li/Na-ion 
batteries in view of their unique structure; high electrical conductivity 
(106  S/m)  owing  to π-orbital  overlap; low  density;  high thermal  con-
ductivity to dissipate heat from electrodes; and high rigidity (Young’s 
modulus of the order of 1 TPa) [171–173]. Specific features of CNTs that 
help  to  increase  Li  intercalation  include  the  presence  of  delocalized 
electrons due to bended planar orbitals of sp2-hybridized carbon and its 
greater  electronegativity  as  compared  with  graphitic  sheets  [174]. 
However, CNT have an irreversible Li ion capacity, such that the rate of 
intercalation surpasses the removal rate and also lower binding energy 
with Li compared to cohesive energy of bulk Li: these are key factors that 
limits their applicability. In addition, unlike graphite, CNT anodes show 
broad voltage changes during the discharge process, which inhibits the 
use of CNTs in applications that require a stable power source. Various 
reversible capacities have been reported for CNT anodes and, in some 
cases, they exhibit an intercalation of up to LiC3, as compared with the 
LiC6 of graphite. This behavior shows that Li-storage in CNTs proceeds 
via mechanisms that differ from those in graphite [175–180]. 

+

The low capacity of CNT anodes is related to large energy barriers if 
Li
ions need to diffuse through the sidewalls. Opening the closed ends 
of the CNTs and introducing lateral topological defects on CNTs enable a 

Fig. 8. (a) Schematic illustration of the formation and morphology of yeast-derived CNTs. b) SEM image of the filamentous CNTs on the AWD surface. c) High- 
magnification  SEM  image  of  the  filamentous  CNTs,  (d)  HRTEM  image  of  CNT;  inset  shows  lattice  fringes  of  the  tube  wall.  Adopted  from  [170]  after  the 
required permission. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009299N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

+

+

ions [181]. After the removal of a carbon 
regular intercalation of Li
atom introduces a hole inside the CNT wall with open ends, Li
ions can 
access the internal walls of CNTs more easily and absorb on them more 
readily, and therefore accumulate successfully in the interior as well as 
on the exterior of CNTs. The energy barrier for the diffusion of Li
ions 
into the CNT can be decreased by simply cutting the ends. Long CNTs, 
with high aspect ratios ranging from several to tens of micrometers and 
diameters of up to a few nanometers, cause an effective reduction in the 
diffusion  of  Li
ions  by  forcing  the  ions  to  pass  through  a  long, 
one-dimensional pathway [171]. These results underline the importance 
of  optimizing  the  CNT  morphology  to  improve  their  Li
ion  storage 
capacity [171]. Two effective ways of modifying the length of CNTs are 
chemical  etching  and  ball  milling,  which  increase  the  reversible  ca-
pacities  for  Li  intercalation  to  681  mAh/g  (Li1.8C6)  [182]  and  641 
mAh/g (Li1.7C6) [183], respectively. 

+

+

+

The defects and disordered structures of CNTs derived from biomass 
could also facilitate the penetration of ions into the cavities of CNTs. For 
example,  carbonized  microtubular  carbon  extracted  from  cotton 
exhibited a reversible specific capacity of 315 mAh/g vs. Na
/Na. It also 
delivered specific capacities of 275 and 180 mAh/g at current rates of 
0.5 C and 1 C, respectively. The sloping potential profile was attributed 
to Na
ion adsorption on defects, edges, and the surface of the nano-
graphitic domains, whereas the plateau region was related to nanovoid 
filling [184]. 

+

+

In contrast with CNTs, the graphite layers in nanofibers (graphitic 
filamentous  structures)  are arranged either  perpendicular to  the fiber 
axis or at an angle to it [171,185]. Carbon nano-fibers (CNFs) with more 
disordered, less oriented structure and more defects could increase the 
reversible  capacities.  However,  the  presence  of  too  many  defect  sites 
could break the conjugated π bonds and make CNFs electrical insulators 
[186,187]. 

CNFs  performance  can  be  further  improved  by  creation  of  a  3D 
porous structure out of them. It will be explained in section 3.1.4 how 
interconnected  pores  networks  can  improve  the  electrochemical  per-
formance of the battery. Xing et al. [188] showed that by synthesis of 
phenolic  resin-based  mesoporous  nanofibers  using  hard  template  the 
delivered Li-storage capacity reached up to 1132 mAh/g at 0.1 A/g after 
100 cycles. A high rate capability with a specific capacity of 880 mAh/g 
at a current density of 5 A/g was demonstrated as well [189]. 

Tao et al. [142] showed that although the capacity of CNFs is less 
than that of graphene, it is comparable with that of electrospun carbon 
nanofibers from walnut shells. The carbon extracted from walnut shells 
exhibits long nanofibers with diameters of 280 nm and smooth surfaces 
with  abundant  pore  structure  and  good  flexibility.  To  prepare  the 
nanofibrous carbons, the liquefied products of the mixed walnut shell 
powder, phenol, and sulfuric acid, together with formaldehyde and so-
dium hydroxide, were first mixed and diluted by distilled water and 12 
wt.% polyvinyl alcohol. Polyvinyl alcohol adjusted the viscosity, and a 
nanofiber composite was produced by electrospinning. Finally, the dried 
electrospun material was carbonized at 1500
C for 1 h in an argon flow. 
The electrochemical performance of the nanofibers reached a specific 
capacity of 270 mAh/g at 0.03 A/g, and displayed a good cycling per-
formance and high reversibility of above 280 mAh/g after 200 cycles at 
0.1  A/g  vs.  Li
/Li.  These  results  demonstrate  that  the  1D  nano-
structured carbon, mutually interconnected in all directions, can reduce 
the path length and facilitate faster electron and metal-ion migration. 
Further,  the  presence  of  graphite-like  crystallite  layers  and  abundant 
pore volume led to an increased specific capacity [142]. 

+

◦

Luo et al. [190] proposed a novel hard carbon nanofiber derived from 
cellulose nanofibers. Cellulose nanofibers were prepared from bleached 
◦
pulp  and  carbonized  at  1000
C  under  argon  for  2  h.  The  resulting 
nanofibers were 50-100 nm wide, reached lengths of up to several mi-
crons, and had specific surface areas of 377 m2/g. They were stacked on 
top of each other forming an interconnected network in all directions, 
which reduced the path length for faster electron and Na-ion migration. 
The  nanofibers  showed  a  reversible  specific  capacity  of  above  250 

/Na; good rate capability 
mAh/g at a current density of 0.04 A/g vs. Na
of 85 mAh/g at 2 A/g; and a cycling stability of 176 mAh/g over 600 
cycles at a current density of 0.2 A/g. 

+

+

Jayaraman  et  al.  [191]  produced  1D  graphitic  fibers  with  a 
hollow-structured morphology via a modified catalytic chemical vapor 
deposition process using vegetable cooking oil as a carbon source. The 
synthesized  carbon  was  cycled  at  a  voltage  range  of  0.005-1.5  V  vs. 
Li
/Li and delivered capacities of ~512 and ~336 mAh/g at a current 
density of 0.037 A/g for first discharge and charge, respectively, and a 
Coulombic  efficiency  of  84%  after  80  cycles.  The  reason  of  this 
improvement is due to the 1D ordering that provides the features like 
shorter Li
ion diffusion pathways, high surface-to-volume ratio, tuning 
of the crystallographic orientation for facile charge transport. 

+

3.1.3. Nanosheets and flakes (2D) 

Carbon  nanowalls  (CNWs),  carbon  nanosheets,  or  nanoflakes  are 
two-dimensional self-supported networks of vertically aligned graphitic 
walls  with  high  surface-to-volume  ratios  and  low  thicknesses  ranging 
from  a  few  nanometers  to  several  tens  of  nanometers.  The  edges  of 
CNWs are composed of planar graphene sheet stacks that stand almost 
+
vertically on the substrate [192,193]. Regarding the adsorption of Li
ions on two sides of the graphene sheets, the theoretical specific capacity 
can increase to 744 mAh/g with the formation of an expected stoichi-
ometry of Li2C6  . However, according to some reports, Li ions seem to 
ions 
not  be  adsorbed  onto  pristine  monolayer  graphene:  instead,  Li
were located mainly within the CNWs interlayers and on the edges, or in 
association  with  defects  which  are  created  during  fabrication 
[194–197]. Positive lithiation energy of graphene compared to a nega-
tive  value  for  graphite  forces  the  absorbed  Li  atoms  on  graphene  to 
aggregate into clusters and eventually macroscopic dendrites instead of 
a formation of a stable Li(cid:0) graphene phase [179,180]. 

+

Two-dimensional carbon nanostructures, especially 2D porous car-
bon materials, are used in electrochemical energy storage. Large surface- 
to-volume  ratios,  sharp  edges  of  the  CNWs,  continuous  conducting 
pathways  for  electrons,  and  facile  strain  relaxation  during  battery 
operation  results  in  significant  improvements  in  power  and  energy 
density [198,199]. 

Various types of biomass materials have been used in previous work 
to  produce  nano  sheets.  Here,  we  give  some  examples  to  provide  an 
overview of the extraction of nanosheets from waste biomass materials. 
Wheat straw has been used to extract layered graphene (nanosheets) 
[200]. Wheat straw features layers of hydrophobic wax in its outermost 
part and also a loose layer of lignin and hemicellulose which protects the 
crystalline cellulose inside [201,202] (Fig. 9 (a)). Since the cross-linked 
polymers,  including  hemicellulose  and  lignin,  do  not  undergo  the 
complete removal during chemical activation, the crystalline cellulose 
was not separated efficiently and leads to the formation of carbon with 
honeycomb  morphology  [203].  However,  using  hydrothermal  pro-
cesses, e.g. with highly concentrated aqueous KOH solution, removed 
the wax and dissolved hemicellulose and lignin whereas the crystalline 
cellulose was partially degraded but not dissolved. The loose connec-
tions  between  the  cellulose  microfibrils  were  lost  completely  after 
◦
carbonization at 800
C with the residual KOH, and finally the separated 
layers of graphene were obtained. Additional carbonization and chem-
ical treatment with KOH (Fig. 9 (b-e)) led to the formation of a highly 
continuous, 1.2–3.5-nm-thick graphene sheet-like structure with abun-
dant micro- and mesoporosity [200]. Note that a pristine graphene sheet 
is atomically flat with a well-known thickness of 0.34 nm [204]. 

In  another  study,  2D  porous  carbon  nanosheets  derived  from  silk 
were synthesized in the presence of metal salts such as FeCl3 and ZnCl2 
[205]. Such salts not only facilitate the dissolution of natural silk but 
also act as effective activation and graphitization agents. Immersion of 
silk fibroin in FeCl3 and ZnCl2 solutions which induced a self-assembly 
of  the  hydrophobic  and  hydrophilic  blocks  of  silk  fibroin  [206]. 
Lamellar-like  layered  structures  were  converted  into  carbonaceous 
◦
materials at 900
C for 1 h in N2  atmosphere. The synergistic effects of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092910N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 9. a) Schematic diagram displaying the overall evolution of wheat straw into few-layer graphene, b, c) SEM, d) TEM, and e) SAED pattern of few-layer graphene. 
Adapted from [200] after the required permission. 

high  specific  surface  area  (SBET=2494  m2/g),  high  volume  of  hierar-
chical pores (2.28 cm3/g), and N-doping (4.7 wt.%) resulted in an ul-
trahigh reversible Li-storage capacity of 1865 mAh/g vs. Li

/Li. 

+

Another  material  used  to  produce  sheets  is  waste-starch-based 
packing  peanuts  [207].  At  a  rate  of  1  C,  carbonized  packing  peanut 
showed a specific capacity of 250 mAh/g vs. Li
/Li. This improved rate 
performance is related to the irregular 2D and porous microstructure of 
3D  interconnected  carbon  microsheets,  which  avoids  agglomeration 
during  electrode  fabrication,  facilitates  electrode/electrolyte  contact 
and  reduces  the  interfacial  charge  transfer  resistance.  Moreover,  the 
voids that form between microsheets buffer the slight volume changes 
during lithiation-delithiation process. 

+

+

Using wheat stalk as a precursor, Zhou et al. [208] obtained meso-
porous ultrathin 2D nanosheet carbon with high degree of graphitization 
(~90%) via hydrothermal synthesis followed by the mandatory graph-
itization process. The mesopores and the graphene layers thereby ob-
tained  were  seen  to  provide  extra  active  sites  to  store  Li
ions  and 
migration paths to facilitate a proper electron transfer. The intercalation 
ions are the main contributor to the rate performance and 
sites for Li
cycling stability. Flat voltage profiles with a negligible charge/discharge 
voltage  hysteresis revealed  the highly graphitic nature of the sample. 
The graphitic carbon nanosheet showed high reversible capacity (502 
mAh/g  at  0.1  C),  excellent  rate  capability  (461,  429,  305,  and  161 
mAh/g at 1, 2, 5, and 10 C, respectively) and superior cycling perfor-
mance (215 mAh/g at 5 C after 2000 cycles and 139.6 mAh/g at 10 C 
after 3000 cycles). 

+

Finally,  carbonized  and  hydrothermally  activated  peanut  skin  has 
been used to successfully generate porous carbon with high surface area 
of 2500 m2/g and a sheet-like structure [143]. These properties enable 
good rate capability and cycling stability of the carbon sheets. It deliv-
ered reversible capacity of 431 mAh/g at rate of 0.1 A/g and 47 mAh/g 
at rate of 10 A/g vs. Na

/Na. 

+

+

Sheet-like  structure  carbon  was  also  successfully  prepared  from 
cherry  petals  [209].  It  provided  an  initial  reversible  capacity  of  310 
mAh/g and delivered a high retention rate of 99.3% at 0.02 A/g after 
100  cycles  vs.  Na
/Na.  The electrochemical  process  was  also  investi-
gated by XPS analysis. The binding energy of the Na 1s spectral region of 
the electrode was measured during the charge/discharge at 1.6, 1.15, 
0.25, 0.1, and 0.01 V. The measurements revealed that the binding en-
ergy at a discharge voltage of 0.01 V (1071.4 eV) is greater than that at 
discharge to 0.1 V (1071.2 eV). This shift to higher binding energy at 
lower  voltage  was  interpreted  by  the  authors  as  corresponding  to 
sodium-ion  insertion/  extraction  in  the  interlayer  of  the  graphitic 
microcrystallites due to significant increase in valence of Na. However, 

the  binding  energy  of  the  Na  1s  spectra  from  0.1  V  to  3  V  is  almost 
+
adsorption behavior on the surface 
constant, which is indicative of Na
of the material at high potential stage. 

3.1.4. Porous carbon (3D) 

Since the capacitive reactions occur on the surface of the electrode, it 
is important to use carbon with high surface area [210]. Porous carbon, 
because  of  its  tunable  morphology  and  surface  functionality,  offers  a 
wide  range  of  possibilities  for  improvement  and  tailored  design  of  a 
battery anode. According to the International Union of Pure and Applied 
Chemistry  (IUPAC),  porous  materials  are  classified  into  three  groups: 
microporous ( d < 2 nm), mesoporous (2 nm ≤ d ≤ 50 nm), and mac-
roporous (d > 50 nm) [211]. The micropores is generated from dimin-
ishing of functional groups, volatilization of small molecules while the 
meso- and macropores are originated from the natural structure of the 
biomass precursor. Ion-buffering reservoirs can be formed in the mac-
ropores to minimize the diffusion distances to the interior surfaces [212, 
213].  Furthermore,  the  mesoporous  walls  provide  low-resistant  path-
ways to transport ions through a porous particle, and micropores confine 
the ions in their voids [214–216]. 

Drawbacks  in  the  electrochemical  energy  storage  properties  can 
often be overcome by integration of 2D graphene sheets to establish 3D 
porous and interconnected networks such as films, scaffolds or hierar-
chical  structures.  Batteries  with  porous  electrodes  offer  high  power 
density  in  addition  to  high  energy  density  [217,218].  They  can 
compensate large volume if active material is placed in the voids. The 
foam-like nature of the porous 3D carbons allows the electrolyte to be 
homogeneously distributed in the entire electrode composite and reach 
active sites, even in the pore system (e.g. with the help of the capillary 
effect). 

Despite the desirable specific capacity and rate capability of porous 
carbons [219], they suffer from parasitic reactions, in part because of 
SEI formation [220], poor Coulombic efficiency [221], and large (1 V or 
higher) charge/discharge voltage hysteresis [222]. Indeed, porous car-
bons with high specific surface area provide a large number of free high 
energy  sites  that  irreversibly  trap  metals  ions.  A  substantial  over-
potential is required to remove them [223]. Therefore, biomass-derived 
carbon  with  low  micropore  volume  is  desirable.  For  potassium,  even 
mesopores can be beneficial. 

Porous carbons are synthesized mainly by hard and soft templating 
processes [224–226]. Typical hard templates used for the fabrication of 
porous carbon are porous silica such as MCM-48 [227] or SBA-15 [228], 
colloidal silica [229], solid core/mesoporous shell silica [230], bimodal 
porous silica [231], metal carbides [232,233], and other materials. The 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092911N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

porous rigid and stable template is impregnated with a carbon precur-
sor,  but  the  template  determines  the  size  and  morphology  of  the  ob-
tained carbon. However, removing the hard template is quite difficult, 
requiring acid or strong base. Another method in which a hard template 
is used is benign ceramic templating, whereby the template is formed 
in-situ [234–237]. Here, an Mg salt or an Mg-organic compound is mixed 
with a carbon precursor [238,239]. During the carbonization, the Mg 
compound  converts  to  MgO  at  lower  temperature,  and  leaching  the 
carbon/MgO composite yields a porous carbon with a micropore size of 
1-1.9 nm. For example, absorption of Mg(NO3)2 solution on cotton leads 
to the formation of an MgO-template within the cotton-derived carbon 
and results in high surface area of 1260 m2/g [235] . 

Nie  et  al.  [240]  reported  the  formation  of  hollow  graphe-
ne-encapsulated Si particles by the magnesiothermic fabrication and a 
subsequent CVD process. Mesoporous SiO2 particles were first prepared 
by an aerosol spraying process using colloidal silica solution and sucrose 
as the precursor followed by calcination in air. By reduction of meso-
◦
porous SiO2  spheres via Mg at 900
C, composite particles of Si, MgO, 
and Mg2Si were obtained. In the next step via a CVD process and using 
acetonitrile vapor as carbon and nitrogen source and MgO as template 
and catalyst, graphene shells were formed on the Si particles. Finally, 
after selectively removing MgO, Mg2Si, and unreacted Mg by an acidic 
treatment, Si particles encapsulated in nitrogen-doped graphene cages 
were obtained. Another practical way to prepare mesoporous carbon is 
to employ a hard template with well-ordered regular channels, such as 

anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membranes. Xing et al. [188] synthesized 
mesoporous carbon  nanofibers  (MCNFs) by  using porous anodic AAO 
membrane and colloidal silica Ludox TM-40 as the dual hard templates, 
and phenol resin as the carbon precursor. The as-prepared MCNFs ma-
terial possesses large specific surface area, with a unique hierarchical 
nanostructure composed of open macroscaled channels derived from the 
channels  of  AAO  template,  in  combination  with  mesoscaled  pores 
developed from the removal of colloidal silica and micropores generated 
from the carbonization of phenol resins. 

In approaches using the soft template, the network is established by 
amphiphilic copolymer surfactants or other non-inorganic polymer-like 
formers [241,242]. However, the mesoporous textur of a soft template is 
usually not as precisely controllable as that of a hard template. The soft 
template is often formed during the reaction and directs the formation of 
a  porous  carbon  structure  and  may  be  readily  removed  by  solvent 
washing, thermal decomposition, or different drying approaches [241]. 
However, the synthesis of porous carbon materials by these methods is 
complicated, comprises multiple reaction steps with low ultimate yield, 
and often involves expensive or toxic raw materials. These reasons limit 
the success of such carbons as many processes show insufficient scal-
ability and can only be produced batchwise depending on the size of the 
reactor. 

Therefore,  biomass  has  attracted  considerable  attention  as  a 
resource. At the correct carbonization conditions, the chosen material 
preserves its natural pore and cell structure [243–248] which can be of 

◦

Fig. 10. a) Photographs of a natural red mangrove root piece 
and the carbonized structure of the aerenchyma tissue with a 
digital  closeup  view  image  and  a  scanning  electron  micro-
scopic  picture,  respectively  [247].  SEM  micrographs  of  b) 
Carbonized  porous  carbon  derived  from  rice  straws  at 800
C 
with  post  activated  with  KOH  [249],  c)  Carbonized  porous 
carbon derived from apricot shells [144], d) Carbonized peat 
moss at 1100
C [250], 
◦
e-g)  Carbonized  
C  and 
C,  (blue  arrows  indicate  the 
post-activated  in  steam  at  800
primary flow of steam in the reactor), and h) Pore-size distri-
bution of the hemp-derived carbon using Hg intrusion poros-
imetry  with  several  tens  of  micrometers  (I)  and  several 
micrometers  (II)  [251].  Adopted  from  mentioned  references 
after the required permission.   

C and post-activated in dry air at 300

hemp-derived  carbon  at  800

◦

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092912N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

interest for e.g. desalination as shown for a red mangrove root [247] or 
for energy storage applications [248] (Fig. 10 (a)) for which some more 
examples are given in the following paragraph. 

Carbon with parallel macroporous channels was obtained from rice 
straws (silica fraction as an “in-situ” sacrificial template) [249] (Fig. 10 
(b)), whereas carbon possessing pore channels with meso- and macro-
porous walls was derived from apricot shells [144] (Fig. 10 (c)). Mac-
roporous interconnected networks of carbon nanosheets were extracted 
from peat moss [250] (Fig. 10 (d)). Finally, channel-shaped pores and 
porous  walls  made  from  hemp  [251]  (Fig.  10  (e-g))  with  diverse 
pore-size distributions confirmed the feasibility of tailoring pore diam-
eter and pore shape of the carbonized biomass by the various synthesis 
process.  Nevertheless,  the  original  morphology  of  the  biomass  is  the 
primary contributor to the pore shape of the final carbon. Fig. 10 (h) 
shows  that  channel-shaped  pore  size  and  also  macro-porous  walls  of 
carbon are changed from several tens of micrometers (I) to several mi-
crometers (II), respectively. 

◦

Hydrothermal carbonization can offer a green and effective prepa-
ration  of  hydrochars  with  a  controlled  distribution  of  pores  from  the 
nanoscale to macroscopic dimensions. In this technique, water is used as 
the  reaction  medium  at  working  temperatures  of  180–250
C  under 
saturated pressure. The process involves numerous and simultaneously 
proceeding  reactions  of  hydrolysis,  dehydration,  decarboxylation, 
condensation,  polymerization,  and  aromatization  of  the  original  pre-
cursor. The carbon yield in this case (70–80%) is higher than that ob-
tained  by  pyrolysis  or  chemical  activation,  because  of  the  many 
functional groups on the surface [252]. However, different components 
of lignin, cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin show differing sensitivities 
toward hydrothermal processes, which strongly affects the characteris-
tics of the derived carbons. Lignin is most resistant to hydrolysis [253]. 
Some additional steps are needed for increasing the porosities and 
textural properties of the hydrochars. These include physical activation 
(that  is,  partial  gasification  of  chars  in  an  oxidizing  atmosphere  con-
taining CO2, O2, or H2O at high temperature) and chemical activation 
(that  is,  carbonization  after  impregnation  with  dehydrating  chemical 
reagents such as Na2CO3, K2CO3, NaOH, KOH, AlCl3, LiCl, KCl, ZnCl2, 
and H3PO4 at moderate temperature) [254]. ZnCl2 and H3PO4, owing to 
their excellent dehydration characteristics, are widely used in research 
but also for manufacturing [19]. The mechanism of the activation pro-
cess  is  not  fully  understood.  This  provides  a  possible  mechanism  of 
activation that high concentrations of ZnCl2 gives Brønsted acidity to the 
solution  and  helps  dissolve  the  cellulosic  constituents  of  the  biomass 
[255]. The advantage of using ZnCl2 is found in the evaporation of ZnO 
if the carbonization temperature is sufficiently high. 

In the case of a base, oxygen removes any crosslinking bonds and 
facilitates the further rearrangement of the graphene layer to assume a 
crystallite form. Subsequently, the alkali-metal compound is leached out 
and micropores are created in the structure [256]. The final surface area 
of porous carbon and the pore-size distribution are influenced consid-
erably by the amount of volatile matter removed during pyrolysis and 
the  concentration  of  the  activating  agent  for  removing  carbonaceous 
species. Dissolution of the reaction products of the activating agent in 
the carbon can create porosities with a specific surface area up to 3000 
m2/g. 

A biomass precursor with a natural pore system is advantageous for 
chemical activation. Wheat straws have a porous fibrous structure and 
possess a number of capillaries with strong adsorbability that facilitate 
the access to KOH in solution, which helps to distribute the activating 
agent in the whole material. Carbonization and the leaching out of the 
reacted activation compound leads to the formation of a homogeneously 
porous material [257]. 

One study subjected peat moss to carbonization and KOH treatment, 
accompanied  by  mild  air  activation,  to  produce  three-dimensional 
micro- and macroporous interconnected carbon nanosheets with a spe-
cific  surface  area  of  196.6  m2/g.  This  process  led  to  a  stable  cycling 
capacity  of  298  mAh/g  after  10  cycles  at  0.05  A/g,  good  cycling 

retention of 255 mAh/g at the 210th cycle, and high rate capacity of 203 
mAh/ g at 0.5 A/g vs. Na

/Na [250]. 

+

+

One hard carbon was obtained by pyrolyzing and reducing apricot 
◦
shells in H2/Ar at 1300
C [144]. The carbon had a specific surface area 
of  13  m2/g  and  exhibited  excellent  cyclic  stability  of  338  mAh/g  vs. 
Na
/Na after 300 cycle at 0.4 C, because of high sloping and plateau 
capacities. Hydrogen treatment appears to be beneficial to remove ox-
ygen from the carbon to facilitate the rearrangement of the graphene 
layers and to allow for a microcrystalline orientation along the a-axis, 
which results in a little bit smaller d002 and Lc, and larger La. The change 
in  the  structure  and  reduction  in  the  defects  concentration  due  to 
dangling  bonds  or  oxygen-containing  covalent  bond,  resulted  in  the 
outstanding  reversible  Na-storage  capacity  of  the  obtained  material. 
Samples pyrolyzed at lower temperature and without H2 possess a high 
level  of  defects  compared  to  the  carbon  reduced  by  hydrogen.  The 
electrochemical characterization of these carbons revealed better per-
formance at high rates of up to 4 C, which demonstrates the favorable 
behavior of highly defective carbon for fast Na
ion diffusion resulting 
from the higher interlayer distances [144]. However, hard carbon that is 
carbonized  at  low  temperature  and  with  high  level  of  defects  suffers 
from low electronic conductivity owing to its disordered microstructure 
[114]. Fingolo et al. [258] showed annealing under isopropanol vapors 
enabled to increase the sp2 carbon content and degree of graphitization 
of the biocarbons, which has improved electrical conductivity of these 
materials by up to three times. 

+

3.2. Element-doped carbon materials 

Although many novel materials have been proposed as anode ma-
terials for metal-ion batteries, only a few exhibits the efficiency required 
for  anodes  for  alkali-metal  storage.  For  example,  hard  carbon,  metal 
alloys, and metal oxides. 

Hard carbon has received most attention because of its potentially 
low production cost, abundant resources, and its high storage capacity 
suitable for use as a battery anode material. The performance of hard 
carbon anodes can be enhanced by heteroatoms substituting for carbon 
atoms in the graphene layers. Doping of carbon atoms by heteroatoms, 
such as nitrogen, boron, phosphorous and fluorine and etc. with electron 
acceptor  or  donator  capability,  changed  bond  distances  due  to  the 
substituted heteroatom, single or multiple doping and the total amount 
of  heteroatoms  in  the  carbon  structure,  can  provoke  disorder  in  the 
carbon structure and provide a higher number of point defects which 
may facilitate metal ion transport through modulated band structure of 
the  graphene  layers  [259,260].  These  modifications  contribute  to 
enhanced charge-carrier-transport kinetics by influencing the electronic 
conductivity [261,262]. 

◦

However, the synthesis method for doping the graphene sheets in a 
defined way is the main determinant of whether the heteroatoms are 
incorporated into functional groups or directly into the graphene lattice. 
This, in turn, affects the final electronical and electrochemical properties 
[263]. Most of the biomass materials naturally contain inevitable het-
eroatoms such as N, O, P and K. The carbonization of biomass containing 
doping elements are performed at relatively low temperatures of 600‒ 
1100
C. At higher temperature the doping level decreases dramatically. 
The formation of large amounts of defects and micropores in such a low 
temperature-treated  hard  carbons,  hinders  the  crystallization  of  the 
hexagonal carbon structure (small La and Lc values) and finally increases 
the contribution of high-voltage sloping capacities in the voltage profile. 
Although, the interlayer spacing of graphite increases with some doping 
elements like P, which extends the low-voltage plateau capacity, while 
increasing  the  defect  concentration  with  the  doping  element  leads  to 
higher  sloping  capacity.  With  an  elevated  carbonization  temperature 
and a continued crystallization process to the ordered hexagonal carbon 
structure,  the  low-voltage  plateau  capacity  becomes  more  prominent 
[264,265]. 

Table  1  lists  the  elemental  composition  of  some  types  of  biomass 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092913N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

including nitrogen, carbon, and oxygen, together with phosphorus oxide 
(P2O5). A more complete list for 86 biomass varieties is presented by 
Vassilev [266]. Despite the positive effect of heteroatoms on the elec-
trochemical performance of hard carbons, the attention should be paid 
to presence of unwanted impurities such as Al2O3, SiO2 and CaO and etc. 
in biomass which can have a negative effect on the anode performance. 
Hot washing and acid leaching can reduce the concentrations of alkali 
metals and alkaline earth metals. For example, animal bone is primarily 
composed  of  hydroxyapatite  (HA,  Cax(PO4,CO3)y(OH))  which  can  be 
removed with diluted hydrochloric acid. However, the removal of silica 
and alumina from biomass is more laborious [267,268]. The hard car-
bon derived from washed and unwashed pinecone biomass treated at 
1400
C was reported to have a capacity of 328 mAh/g and 299 mAh/g 
+
vs. Na
/Na, respectively. After 100 cycles, a drop-in plateau capacity 
was observed for the unwashed sample. This decay was explained by the 
sodium-ion-insertion process being hindered by impurities that occupy 
some active sites [102]. 

◦

3.2.1. Nitrogen doping 

Nitrogen, owing to its higher electronegativity of compared to car-
bon with 2.5 increases the repulsive interaction between carbon layers 
+
and enlarges the interlayer spacing, which is expected to improve Na
ion  battery  performance  [269,270].  It  has  been  reported  the  carbon 
doped with electron donors such as N exhibit greater conductivity than 
that of carbon doped with electron acceptors [271]. Nitrogen doped into 
graphene  exists  in  three  main  bonding  configurations:  pyridinic,  pyr-
rolic, and as graphitic nitrogen. The high-resolution N1s XP spectrum of 
nitrogen-doped  carbon  derived  from  bamboo  was  fitted  with  four 
different species with binding energies of 398.8, 400.3, 401.5, and 403.7 
eV. These correspond to pyridinic nitrogen, pyrrolic nitrogen, graphitic 
nitrogen (the most stable nitrogen species after carbonization), and N-O 
bonds, respectively [272]. Graphene doped with electron-rich graphitic 
N due to electrostatic repulsion between N and Li shows more efficient 
delithiation  while  pyridinic  and  pyrrolic  N  formed  at  the  edges  and 
defect sites promote the perpendicular diffusion of Li. It is known that 
pyridinic  N  (sp2-hybridization)  bonded  with  two  carbon  atoms  and 
pyrrolic N with sp3-hybridization can create defects to provide active 
sites for alkali-metal ion storage. With an increasing pyrolysis temper-
C, the specific capacity decreased congruently with the 
ature up to 1100
content  of  the  pyridinic  nitrogen.  This  behavior  indicated  the  signifi-
cance of a high nitrogen content for the realization of high performance 
LIBs  [273].  Graphitic  N  (sp2hybridized)  bonded  with  nitrogen atoms, 
which substitute carbon atoms in the hexagonal structure, can enhance 
the  conductivity  of  carbon  [274].  This  property  is  explained  by  the 
engagement of one electron in the formation of a π bond while the other 
electron  is  partially  localized  in  the  π*-state  of  the  conduction  band. 
(Fig. 11 (a)). In a nitrogen-doped graphene layer, pyridinic N and pyr-
rolic N donate one and two electrons, respectively, to the π-system of the 
carbon to give the carbon network a partially negative charge, which 
enhances the electrochemical activity for Na and K-storage. However, in 
these  two  structures  the  Fermi  level  is  shifted  slightly  to  the  valence 
band since the defects impose the p-type effect by withdrawing electrons 
from the graphene sheet. 

◦

The  materials  with  high  protein  content,  such  as  soybeans  [275], 

Table 1 
Chemical composition of four groups of biomass [266]  

Biomass group 

N (wt. 
%) 

P2O5 * 
(wt.%) 

C (wt. 
%) 

O (wt. 
%) 

Enriched 
in 

1. Wood 
2. Herbaceous and 

agricultural crops 
3. Aquatic biomass 
4. Animal waste 

0.4 
1.2 

2.2 
9.2 

3.5 
6 

9.8 
28.2 

52.1 
49.3 

43.2 
58.9 

41.2 
42.9 

45.8 
23.1 

CaO, SiO2 
K2O, SiO2 

Na2O, SO3 
CaO, P2O5   

* Chemical ash composition 

bean  shells  [92],  egg  white  [276],  ginkgo  leaves  [277],  human  hair 
[278], chitosan [279], catkin [280], grass [281], and typha orientalis 
[136]  can  yield  carbon  with  high  nitrogen  content.  In  plants,  N  con-
centrations  are  expected  to  be  higher  in  the  leaves  than  in  the  roots 
[282]. Nitrogen in biomass varies usually from 0.1 to 12 wt.% and, in 
general,  the  highest  and  lowest  N  contents  in  biomass  have  been 
observed in animal waste and wood, respectively [266]. Biomass with a 
protein concentration of approx. 50 wt.% can contain nitrogen between 
8 and 10 wt.% [283]. The chemical-activation process and carboniza-
tion temperature are the two main factors that define the N-content in 
carbon. Increasing the temperature and including an activating agent, e. 
g.  to  reach  a  porous  structure  and  high  specific  surface  area,  can 
significantly decrease the N content. Therefore, it is quite challenging to 
design carbon that simultaneously possesses high surface area, high N 
content, and partially graphitized structure [284]. 

Sun et al. [285] used pomelo peels to produce carbon with a high 
surface area, a uniform mesoporous structure, and an ultra-high nitro-
gen doping level of 14.51 wt.%. Li et al. [137] also succeed in obtaining 
hierarchical mesoporous carbon from eggs, with a surface area of 806 
m2/g and a bulk N-content of 6 wt.%. This carbon exhibited a reversible 
discharge capacity of 1780 mAh/g at 0.1 A/g as LIB anodes. Hou et al. 
[205] reported a reversible Li-storage capacity of 1865 mAh/g at 0.1 
A/g  for  hierarchical  porous  nitrogen-doped  carbon  derived  from  silk 
with nitrogen contents of 4.7 wt.%. Yang et al. [127] demonstrated that 
the  carbonization  of  okra,  followed  by  an  exfoliation  process,  led  to 
carbon with nitrogen content of 9.89 at%. The carbon exhibited high 
specific capacity of 292 mAh/g and extremely long cycle life exceeding 
2000 cycles vs. Na

/Na. 

+

Due  to  improvement  in  the  electrical  conductivity  and  wetting 
behavior  of  the  electrode/electrolyte  contact  [286],  N-doped  carbons 
can also give high rate capabilities, along with long-term cycling sta-
bility. Chen et al. [257] showed the pretreatment of wheat straw as raw 
material  with  HCl,  followed  by  an  activation  by  KOH  during  the 
carbonization  process,  resulted  in  the  successful  fabrication  of 
nitrogen-doped porous carbon with thin pore walls. Such carbon, owing 
to the content of nitrogen up to 5.3 wt.%, exhibits high specific capacity, 
long-term stability of 976 mAh/g at 0.37 A/g after 300 cycles and, in 
particular, ultra-high rate capability of 198 mAh/g, even at a current 
density of up to 37 A/g vs. Li

/Li. 

+

◦

Disordered  nanocrystalline  carbon  fibers  extracted  from  lignin 
possess low flexibility if they are not mixed with any synthetic polymer, 
which  causes  unstable  rate  capacity  and  poor  cycling  performance 
[287]. Higher molecular weight lignin also showed enhanced graphitic 
structure  with  improved  mechanical  properties  [288].  Tenhaeff  et  al. 
[289]  reported  that  the  lignin  carbon  extracted  from  hardwood  and 
treated at 2000
C showed a specific capacity of only about 100 mAh/g at 
a current density of 0.015 A/g over 40 cycles. In recent years, studies 
have reported the development of nitrogen-doped lignin as a precursor 
for carbon with high stability against electrolytes at low potentials and 
improved  energy/power  performance  [290–292].  Zhao  et  al.  [293] 
showed lignin-derived nitrogen- doped carbon delivered a high cyclic 
stable capacity up to 225 mAh/g at a current density of 0.06 A/g after 50 
cycles. Nitrogen can be doped artificially into carbons especially those 
extracted  from  lignin-enriched  biomass  [294]  via  chemical  vapor 
deposition [295], thermal annealing in NH3 [296], N2 plasma treatment 
[297],  alkaline  treatment  [294],  an  arc-discharge  method  [298],  or 
mechanochemistry [299]. 

Mechanochemistry entails the induction by mechanical energy (i.e. 
grinding,  milling,  ultrasonication,  etc.),  which  enables  reactions  by 
reducing the particle size, breaking chemical bonds, and creating new 
surfaces. Because of the relatively simple procedure and, in most cases, 
substantially reduced post-reaction treatment, this synthesis method is 
regarded as cost-effective and efficient for promoting chemical reactions 
between solids without the need for solvents. Schneidermann et al. [299] 
have reported the synthesis of nitrogen-doped carbon using a mixture of 
lignin, urea, and K2CO3 with a mechanochemical process. The mixture 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092914N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 11. A schematic of various types of bonding configurations of a) N [180],[344],[345], b) B [346], c) P [346], and d) F [347] atoms within the hexagonal lattice. 
Adopted from mentioned references after the required permission. 

was milled in a zirconia vessel for 30 min, and the product was pyro-
lyzed in nitrogen at 800

C for one hour. 

◦

The accurate control on nitrogen content and the ratios of different 
types  of  nitrogen  species  in  some  nitrogen-rich  biomass  are  difficult. 
Enabling the desired nitrogen content and its homogeneous distribution 
in biomass-derived carbon, requires removal of nitrogen as gaseous ni-
trogen oxides (NOx) during pyrolysis. This results in the formation of 
mesoporous and microporous structures. Then the carbon can be sub-
sequently  doped  with  a  desirable  level  of  nitrogen  by  means  of  post- 
treatments  in  the  presence  of  various  nitrogen  sources  such  as 
ammonia  (NH3),  urea,  and  nitrogen  gas  (N2).  These  structures  are 
beneficial to enhance the electronic conductivity of carbon [273]. 

3.2.2. Boron doping 

Doping with boron improves graphitization by increasing the inter-
lamellar  spacing  Lc  and  La.  As  shown  in  Fig.  11(b),  B-C  σ-bonds  are 
considerably polarized owing to the larger electronegativity of carbon 
with respect to boron, which induces a positive charge of 0.56 e in the 
boron atom [300]. The larger bond distance of B-C (1.48 Å) than that of 
C-C (1.41 Å) increases La [301–304]. Indeed, boron, with a lower elec-
tronegativity  (2)  than  carbon,  removes  π  electron  density  in  the  gra-
phene layers, which reduces the repulsion between the graphene layers. 
B  substitution  creates  an  electron-deficient  lattice  because  of  the  for-
mation of trigonal coordination with sp2-hybridized bond character. The 
three  bonds  tend  to  increase  the  in-plane  local  defects  in  the  carbon 
structure and therefore make it facile to accommodate for extra elec-
trons [223]. Graphene doped by electron accepting dopants like B shows 
different electronic properties compared to graphene doped by electron 
donating dopants such as N as revealed by the higher conductivity of the 
N-doped  graphene.  With  boron  doping  electron  holes  are  generated 
acting as a trap for free electrons. In the consequence, a strong decrease 
of free carrier mobility and conductivity is recognized [271]. 

As boron is not an element typically involved in plant growth it needs 
to be added before the pyrolysis. Boron is blended by using boric acid 
[305], ammonium hydrogen borate [306], or triethyl borate [307], and 
substitutes carbon atoms in the graphene layers. The binding energy of 
B1s  in  XPS  for  boron  substitution  in  the  carbon  lattice  shows  a  peak 
ranging between 186.9 and 188.8 eV [308]. Additionally, the various 
boron oxides and carbides (BC2O, BCO2, B2O3, and BC3) formed on the 
carbon surface have B1s peaks ranging from 189.0 to 193.2 eV [309]. 

+

Endo et al. [310] observed a B1s signal near 190 eV which is related to 
formation of boron nitride and BCxN sites. They reported that the for-
mation  of  these  compounds  is  followed  by  a  reduced  Li  insertion  ca-
pacity compared to pure boron doping. Nevertheless, B can also stabilize 
Li
ions and, therefore, prevents the clustering of Li species. By easily 
transferring the Li 2s electrons to BC3, with the electron density mainly 
concentrated  on  the  B  atom  (due  to  p-type  behavior),  and  filling  the 
usually empty pz  state of the B atom, BC3  binds stronger to Li in com-
parison with graphite. BC3 sheets can provide a specific capacity of 857 
mAh/g, which is 2.3 times higher than for graphite. However, due to 
presence of in-plane local defects, parallel diffusion of Li
ion to plane 
can  be  less  efficiently  [179,311].  Endo  et  al.  [310]  also  reported  an 
occupation  of  Li  insertion  active  sites,  such  as  edge-type  sites,  in  the 
carbon layers with B that inhibited the Li insertion process and reduced 
the charge capacity of the boron-doped samples. 

+

B-doped  carbon  is  also  a  highly  promising  candidate  as  a  sodium 
storage material. Owing to the electron acceptor effect of the boron in 
the  carbon  lattice,  the  Na  and  Li  insertion  starts  at  higher  voltage  of 
about 0.92 V and 1.2 V for B-doped graphene sheet. However, we should 
note that any oxygen in the hard carbon could increase the voltage up to 
even 2.52 V [223,312–314]. By doping B in the carbon structure, the 
positive binding energy between the graphene sheet of the hard carbon 
and Na changes to a negative value. B3+
transfers three electrons to the 
graphene sheet, which leads to strong interaction between the Na atoms 
and the graphene sheet in the vicinity of the B atoms. Another reason for 
this  strong  ionic  interaction  could  be  found  in  the  p-type  property  of 
boron,  which  could  easily  accept  an  electron  from  the  sodium  atom 
while  it  is  weaker  at  e.g.  electron-abundant  N-substitution  sites.  All 
these properties of boron direct the charging and discharging electro-
chemistry  to the slope  capacity  rather than the  plateau capacity. The 
high  binding  energy  between  the  B-sites  and  the  Na
ions  caused  a 
reduction  in  Na
ions  in  the  carbon 
structure  that  led  to  an  extremely  low  potential  plateau  and  a  high 
irreversible  capacity  in  the  first  cycle  [223].  However,  the  first-cycle 
Coulombic efficiency could increase by decreasing the specific surface 
area  of  the  hard  carbon  to  less  than  8.0  m2/g  [223].  Another  study 
subjected to potato starch, the boron-doped carbon was prepared in a 
two-step hydrothermal reaction and carbonization with a yield of about 
2  at.%.  The  electrochemical  performance  showed  the  high  reversible 
specific capacity of 964 mAh/g at a current density of 0.2 C. The carbon 

ions  motion  and  trapped  Na

+

+

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092915N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

also  exhibited  a  good  cycle  ability  with  a  specific  capacity  of 
356 mAh/g after 79 cycles at a current density of 0.5 C vs. Li
/Li [315]. 

+

phosphorus-doped sunflower-activated  carbon with  simple hydrother-
mal  and  calcination  methods.  They  reported  a  reversible  capacity  of 
1000 mAh/g after 200 cycles at a current density of 0.5 A/g for LIB. 

3.2.3. Phosphorous doping 

P–C bonds could enhance electrical conductivity by increasing the 
electron density around the Fermi level [316]. In contrast with boron, 
phosphorous  atoms  maintain  their  sp3-configuration.  Because  of  its 
large atomic size, phosphorous usually avoids substituting for carbon in 
the graphene layers and prefers edge sites instead [174]. Nonetheless, 
phosphorus forms a quasi-trigonal pyramidal coordination with carbon 
atoms with P-C σ-bond lengths of 1.76 Å. The higher length of P-C (1.54 
Å) than that of C-C forces phosphorous atoms to locate out of the plane. 
TEM  studies  also  confirm  the  short  and  curved  graphene  layers  in 
P-doped hard carbon. This protrusion is driven by the rehybridization of 
pz states of the vacant C sites toward the stabilization of the P-C system, 
which results in larger charge transfer between the P and C atoms as 
compared with e.g. the N-C system [199] (see Fig. 11(c)). Although P 
shows similar chemical properties as N, doping the carbon matrix with P 
shows a higher electron-donating ability and stronger n-type behavior 
compared to the N-doping [317]. Jeon et al. [318] reported doping of 
carbon with non-metal elements with an electronegativity <2.55 like P. 
Donating electrons to the C atoms and the low electronegativity, like in 
the case of P doping, causes stronger interaction of an intercalated metal 
ion  compared  to  N-doped  graphite.  P-doping  not  only  improved  the 
capacitive performance, it also resulted in an enhanced energy density 
compared to the respective N-doped carbon. 

The P2O5 content of biomass varies from 0.2‒41 wt.% and its content 
is highest in animal waste and agricultural residues [266]. Phosphorous 
is  usually  doped  into  carbon  with  the  help  of  phosphoric  acid  [319], 
triphenylphosphine  [320], ammonium phosphate [321], monosodium 
phosphate [322], etc. 

Lu et al. [323] succeeded in P doping into cotton-derived carbon that 
led to the weakening and breaking of C=O and partially C-O bonds as 
referred to the change in the XPS contributions at binding energies of 
533.1 and 532.0 eV, respectively. The phosphorous atoms were inserted 
into the C-O bonds to form C-O-P groups. The doped material delivered a 
reversible capacity of up to 242 mAh/g at 0.05 A/g, excellent rate ca-
pabilities of 123 mAh/g at a high current of 1 A/g, and long-term cycle 
life  with  ~88%  capacity  retention  after  even  600  cycles.  Electro-
chemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and galvanostatic intermittent 
titration technique suggested that P-doping caused the decrease of the 
charge-transfer resistance alongside drop in contact angle and improved 
of Na

ion migration kinetics as deduced from ref. [324]. 

+

Ji  et  al.  annealed  a  mixture  of  H3PO4  and  sucrose  to  obtain  POx- 
doped hard carbon as an anode material, which improved the capacity 
of un-doped carbon from 283 to 359 mAh/g. The more intense signal of 
phosphorous oxides at 134.5 and 133.1 eV positions than that for the P-C 
bond at 131.0 eV points to the presence of oxygen atoms in most of the 
doped phosphorus species. Although POx as a redox inactive agent could 
not contribute to the higher capacity, but caused an enlarged 002) d- 
spacing and domain defects, which finally resulted in plateau and slope 
regions that were shifted to higher potential profile values [325]. This 
larger  d-spacing  enables  a  vital  Na-ion  transfer,  as  indicated  by  an 
increased sodiation plateau capacity that is much more pronounced than 
the  slope  capacity  [223].  A  lower  sodiation  voltage  of  ≈0.32  V  was 
observed  in  the  potential  profile,  which  can  be  attributed  to  n-type 
behavior  of  the  P  dopant  that  could  not  accept  an  electron  from  the 
sodium as easily as B [223]. Additionally, a P(cid:0) O bond in carbon changes 
the morphology and composition of the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) 
layer and is beneficial to the formation of a thin and dense SEI layer 
[326]. 

The high-resolution P2p spectrum for P-doped carbon deconvoluted 
into  three  peaks  at  C3PO  (132.9  eV),  C2PO2/CPO3  (134eV),  and  C3P 
(130.5eV). The spectrum showed that after co-doping with B, C3P in-
creases from 7.2 at. % to 22.8 at. %, which consequently results in a 
reduced irreversible capacity in SIBs [327]. Xing et al. [328] prepared 

3.2.4. Fluorine doping 

The  crystal  structure  of  graphite  fluoride  has  gained  great  impor-
tance in improving the electrochemical performance of batteries [329]. 
Halogen atoms exhibit both the electron-withdrawing effect owing to 
the high electronegativity and the resonance-donating effect as a result 
of the existence of lone pair electrons [263]. Such influence causes the 
transformation of the sp2-carbon bond to the sp3-state. The high elec-
tronegativity  induced  by  fluorine-doping  enhances  Na
ion  trans-
+
portation  and  storage  by  weakening  the  repulsive  force  for  Na
ion 
insertion and removal. This phenomenon reduces the energy barrier for 
Na

ion insertion and offers more active sites for Na

ion storage. 

+

+

+

′

Because of strong repulsion between the paired electrons of F and 
unpaired electrons of the unbonded adjacent carbon atoms, the F-C bond 
sticks  out  of  the  basal  plane  and  stretches  the  C-C  bond  length  to 
1.57~1.58 Å (Fig. 11 (d)) [330,331]. Increasing D and D
, broadening of 
the G, and decreasing 2D bands in Raman spectra show the disorder in 
the graphene layers which is further intensified by F-doping [332,333]. 
XPS analysis of the carbon spectrum after fluorine saturation at 50 at. % 
shows that a majority of the bonds are C(cid:0) F, C(cid:0) F2, and C(cid:0) F3. Covalent 
bonds of C(cid:0) F2  and C(cid:0) F3  appear at binding energy levels higher than 
292 eV in the XPS spectrum, which confirms the formation of C(cid:0) Fn  at 
defects such as vacancies, free edges, or domain boundaries [332]. In the 
graphite fluoride (CFx) materials, the property of the C–F bond depends 
on the fluorine concentrations. For x < 0.1 the type of the bond between 
carbon  and  fluorine  is  ionic,  located  at  289.8  eV,  which  leads  to  an 
extremely  high  electrical  conductivity  of  2  × 105  S/cm.  For  higher 
fluorine  concentrations  the  conductivity  of  the  graphite  fluoride  de-
creases  because  of  the  formation  of  less  ionic  but  more  covalent  C–F 
bonds, which were detected at 291.8 eV [334,335]. Indeed, the ionic 
bonding keeps the planar nature of the graphene planes, whereas the 
interaction of the p orbitals of F with the π orbitals and the introduction 
of  a  large  strain  into  graphene  planes  pushes  the  carbon  out  of  the 
graphene plane in covalent bonding [333,336]. Therefore, the covalent 
C–F bonds (bond length of 1.41 Å) consist mainly of sp3-hybridized C 
atoms and F atoms with a binding energy of 114 kcal/mole, whereas 
ionic C–F bonds CxF (bond length of 3 Å) with x > 3 mainly originate 
from sp2-hybridized C atoms bound to F atoms with binding energy of 13 
kcal/mole [333,337]. The semi-ionic C–F bond (bond length of 1.7 Å) is 
an intermediate state between covalent and ionic bond and has higher 
polarities  than  covalent  C–F  bonds,  which  result  in  higher  positive 
charge  on  the  respective  carbon  atoms,  a  larger  graphite  interlayer 
distance as well as a higher electrochemical activity than the covalently 
bonded ones [334]. In addition, semi-ionic C–F bonds with high (partial) 
+
electronegativity on the graphite surface accelerated the diffusion of Li
ions in the charge/discharge process. Although the ionic nature of the 
C–F bonds is known to induce even higher electrical conductivity. It also 
offers an active site for the formation of the SEI and consequently in-
creases the irreversible capacity. C–F covalent bonds as strongest type 
among the C–F bonds, tend to irreversibly form LiF.  High covalent C–F 
bond ratio might destroy the conductive network of conjugate double 
bonds and finally reduces the discharge capacity [338]. This bond type 
also deforms the graphite surface structure which allows for the storage 
of  excess  lithium  [339].  However,  the  presence  of  a  negative  charge 
(oxygen  functionalities)  and  also  the  disordered  lattice  structure  can 
hinder  the  formation  of  the  semi-ionic  C–F  bond  and  LiF  formation 
[340]. As the surface doping is more relevant for LIB, intercalation of 
fluorine to form semi-ionic C–F bonds is beneficial in the case of KIB as 
the  graphene  interlayer  distance  increased  and  enabled  an  elevated 
electrochemical performance [341,342]. 

The fluorine-doped carbon particles derived from lotus petioles for SIB 
deliver an initial charge capacity of 230 mAh/g at a current density of 
0.05 A/g. They also maintain a charge capacity of 228 mAh/g at 0.2 A/g 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092916N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

as well as a stable capacity of 126 mAh/g at a rate of 0.5 A/g for 300 
cycles. This electrochemical performance may be related to the higher 
electronegativity  of  fluorine  (4)  compared  to  carbon  (2.6),  which  in-
creases the repulsive interaction between the carbon layer to interplanar 
spacing (0.41 nm), as well as the disordered structure [343]. F atoms 
have the highest electronegativity among all the elements, and, there-
fore, they induce the highest positive charge on carbon atoms. 

3.2.5. Metal-ion doping 

The  low  electronic  conductivity  of  hard  carbons  and  the  slow 
transport  of  metal  ions  in  the  hard  carbon  electrodes  during  the 
discharge  and  charge  processes  originate  from  the  different  stacking 
orientations of few-layer graphene clusters. These two main obstacles 
hamper  high  rate  capabilities  in  alkaline  ion  batteries.  As  intentional 
introduction of some metal elements into graphite as a dopant showed 
the doping metals can tune electronic properties, surface polarities and 
catalytic performances [348,349], hence a similar effect can be expected 
for hard carbons. 

to 

superconducting 

compounds.  Alkaline 

Large  anisotropy  of  electronic  conductivity  of  pristine  graphite  at 
room temperature (σa axis:σcaxis>100) can be significantly modified with 
intercalation of electron donor species [350,351]. Introduction of alkali 
and alkaline-earth metals into graphite by increasing the in-plane and, 
especially, the c-axis conductivity, convert the two non-superconducting 
components 
and 
alkaline-earth  metals  are  intercalated  between  the  graphene  layers 
based on their sizes [352]. Elements with smaller ionic radii like M = Li, 
Ca reach a stoichiometry of MC6, and for those with larger ionic radii 
like M = K, Rb, Cs the compound MC8 are expected to be formed as the 
final  constituent.  The  classical  synthesis  method  to  intercalate  the 
metals into interplanar graphite is the reaction of solid graphite with the 
vaporized metal at moderate temperatures in high vacuum. Due to high 
vapor pressure of K, Rb and Cs, these elements can easily intercalate into 
graphite  at  low  temperatures  to  form  crystallographically  ordered 
compounds up to MC8. For smaller metals like Na due to their low vapor 
pressure,  the  intercalation  into  graphite  is  more  challenging  [353]. 
However,  Na
ions  that  are  unable  to  intercalate  into  undoped  and 
unexpanded graphite can intercalate into B-, P-, and Al-doped graphite. 
Transferring electrons from B, P, and Al dopants to graphite strengthens 
the ion-graphene electrostatic interaction and provides the thermody-
+
namic driving force for Na
ions into graphite increases in the order of N < B < P < Al, which is 
associated with the electronegativity of the dopant [318]. 

ion intercalation. The intercalation of Na

+

+

However,  in  spite  of  the  weak  vapor  pressure  of  Li  and  its  lower 
electropositive character than Na, Li intercalates into graphite surpris-
ingly easy. Li-graphite intercalation compounds (Li-GIC) showed less air 
stability compared to heavy alkali metal-GIC and rapidly decomposed. 
Electrical conductivity of Cs-GIC was estimated to around 5 × 104 S/cm 
after 10 years exposure to air [354]. 

In addition, less electropositive alkaline earth metals such as Ca, Sr 
and Ba with lower volatilities compared to alkaline metals incompletely 
intercalate  into  graphite  and  lead  to  the  formation  of  mixtures  of 
graphite  and  the  intercalated  product  as  these  elements  are  usually 
carbide formers. However, Cahen et al. reported on the intercalation of 
Sr, Ba and Yb into graphite, using a LiCl–KCl molten salt as the reaction 
medium [355,356]. 

It was speculated that hard carbons with expanded graphite can be 
an effective alternative to the complex uncontrollable doping synthesis 
by metal vapors. However, due to cross-linking of the graphitic planes, 
alkaline metals cannot intercalate into non-graphitizable carbons sheets. 
Note, the enlarged interlayer spacing of alkaline intercalated graphite 
was  observed  in  disordered  carbon  prepared  from  cellulose  yarn  and 
glassy  carbon [357–361]. Shi  et al. [362] also showed an accelerated 
rearrangement  of  the  carbon  during  heating  for  amorphous  carbon 
containing  alkaline  metals,  during  the  penetration  of  molten  alkaline 
metals  into  a  porous  carbon  and  by  etching  the  O-containing  surface 
groups.  McNamara  et  al.  [363]  observed  the  important  role  of  Cs  on 

carbon ordering of polyfurfuryl alcohol-derived carbon which was more 
significant  compared  to  other  alkaline  metals.  Coconut  endocarp 
derived  carbon  with  an  expanded  d002  spacing  of  0.4  nm  originating 
from natural K-doped graphitic layers with K-contents of 6654 mg/kg 
showed a high initial reversible capacity of 314 mAh/g and a good cycle 
stability of 289 mAh/g after 200 cycles [364]. 

The low electronic conductivity of hard carbons can also be tackled 
by introducing transition metals into the hard carbon matrix to some 
extent to partially graphitize its structure [365,366]. Nevertheless, the 
intercalation  of  the  low  volatility  transition  metals  into  graphite  is 
difficult, and in most cases impossible as carbide formation is preferred 
[355,367]. Therefore, it is expected for hard carbons like for graphite 
that the insertion of transition metals takes place rather than an inter-
calation. In contrast to the ionic character of the graphite(cid:0) alkali metal 
bonds,  transition  metal  atoms  are  covalently  bonded  within  the  gra-
phene layers. These strong covalent bonds cause large in-plane lattice 
distortions of the graphene layers [368,369]. 

An increase of the carbonization temperature and a faster activation 
process enhance the reorganization of disordered carbons and act as two 
main factors which favor a higher electrical conductivity of such a hard 
carbon [370]. However, transition metal dopants such as Cr, Fe, Co, and 
Ni  can  significantly  decrease  the  graphitization  temperature.  Finding 
the transition metal with proper catalytic activity in carbon materials, 
mass ratio of hard carbon and transition metals and also selecting the 
optimum pyrolysis temperature of the metal-carbon composite plays an 
important role on the degree of carbon organization and on the resulting 
electronic  conductivity.  Additionally,  introducing  the  first-row  transi-
tion  metal elements such as  Co, Fe, Mn and  Ni into  carbon materials 
enhance  capacitance  and  electrocatalytic  properties  of  the  respective 
carbon materials and can be selected as a promising alternative for the 
replacement  of  precious  metals  [371–374].  The  ability  of  transition 
metals to act as a graphitization catalyst increases with its number of 
electron vacancies in the d-orbitals. Elements with fully occupied d-or-
bitals (e.g. Cu, Zn) are relatively inert in a reaction with carbon. Ele-
ments  with  partially  occupied  d-orbitals  (e.g.  Fe,  Co)  are  effective 
carbon solvents. Elements with less occupied d-orbitals (e.g. Ti, V) are 
carbide formers [375,376]. 

Maldonado  et  al.  [377]  reported  various  degrees  of  hard  carbon 
graphitization using different transition metals. The results showed that 
ID/IG  ratio  of  0.87,  0.99,  1.07  and  1.08  can  be  obtained  when  hard 
◦
carbon  is  catalytically  graphitized  at  1000
C  by  Cr,  Ni,  Fe  and  Co, 
respectively.  However,  by  increasing  the  pyrolysis  temperature  to 
C, the order of graphitization changed to Cr (0.71) ˃ Fe (0.78) ˃ Co 
1800
(0.96) ˃ Ni (1.01). Using Cr as a catalyst resulted in a decrease in the 
◦
graphite interlayer spacing from 0.382 to 0.337 nm at 500 and 1800
C, 
while, that of pristine hard carbon reduces to the minimum of 0.364 nm 
◦
at 1800

C. 

◦

Araujo et al. [85] demonstrated among the transition metals of Fe, Ni 
and Cu, nickel acted more effective as the catalyst for graphitization of 
carbon derived from cotton and the degree of graphitization enhanced 
◦
with  increasing  the  temperature  from  800  to  1200
C.  The  electrical 
conductivity of catalytically graphitized carbon was determined using a 
four-point probe showing that Ni catalyst can increase the conductivity 
of graphitized carbon to 27.96 S/m which provides the best performance 
among other metal catalysts. The negative ζ-potential value for graph-
itized carbon with Fe and Cu catalysts showed the insertion of oxygen 
and  nitrogen  atoms  into  the  graphite  during  pyrolysis.  However,  the 
positive ζ-potential value for the carbon with the Ni catalyst contribu-
tion resulted in a low-defected carbon material with less electronegative 
atoms in the graphite. 

A glucose-derived carbon, catalytically graphitized by Fe at 450
C 
for 6 hours in Ar/H2, delivered a remarkable specific capacity of 167 
mAh/g at 1 A/g, and a cycling stability of 201 mAh/g at 0.5 A/g vs. Na
/ 
Na  after  100  cycles  [366].  Carbon  derived  from  glucose  without  an 
additional  catalyst  exhibited  only  70  mAh/g  compared  to  that  of 
graphitized carbon with a specific capacity of 420 mAh/g at 0.05 A/g in 

+

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092917N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

the first cycle, which demonstrates the importance of the Fe catalysis 
during the carbon synthesis. Besides the catalytic effect of Fe, a larger 
size of the Fe nanoparticles leads to a smaller graphite interlayer dis-
tance and an increased stacking of the layers. Obrovac et al. [365] also 
reported on the reversible capacity obtained by Fe-catalyzed graphiti-
◦
zation of sugar carbon at 1200
C under a flow of argon. The high ca-
pacity of 366 mAh/g after 30 cycles at C/5 vs. Li
/Li is indicative of a 
high degree of graphitization and low turbostratic disorder. 

+

Hunter et al. showed a fast formation and growth of the Fe3C catalyst 
results in quicker graphitization for cellulose and glucose compared to 
starch. The presence of a large yield of disordered graphene sheets in 
carbonized starch blocks the mass transport of iron and thus restricts the 
growth of the Fe3C nanoparticles. Therefore, it takes longer for the Fe3C 
nanoparticles to reach the critical size needed for a significant contri-
bution to the graphitization [378]. 

3.2.6. Dual-doped carbon 

As already discussed in the previous sections (3.2.1-3.2.4), the dif-
ference  in  electronegativity  between  carbon  atoms  and  heteroatom 
doping  induces  the  charge  distribution  over  the  carbon  network  that 
alters the electrochemical performance of graphite. Therefore, it could 
be expected that synergetic effects of co-doping elements with higher 
and lower electronegativities than that of carbon could be much more 
pronounced than singly-doped carbon [301,379]. 

◦

With the pyrolysis of hydrolyzed chicken egg yolk and Fe(NO3)3 up 
to  1000
C  in  N2  atmosphere  nitrogen-  and  phosphorous  dual-doped 
nano  carbon  capsules  were  obtained  [128].  The  yolk  contains  nitro-
gen-  and  phosphorous-based  compounds,  which  were  reduced  and 
substituted  carbon  atoms  in  the  carbon  structure.  Subsequently, 
capsule-like  carbon  structures  were  formed  by  precipitation  and 
graphitization of C on iron particles. Finally, Fe was removed by an acid 
treatment and hollow-structured carbon was obtained. High resolution 
C1s spectra were fitted with four species at binding energies of 284.7, 
285.5, 285.8, and 287.8 eV, which are attributed to sp2 C–C, C–P, C–N, 
and C–O bonds, respectively. This result suggests that dual doping of N 
and  P  atoms  into  the  carbon  occurs.  Galvanostatic  discharge/charge 
cycles for this dual-doped hollow carbon showed that the contribution of 
the specific capacity below 0.5 V corresponds to the intercalation of Li 
cations into the layer of the carbon shells. The capacity above 0.5 V was 
ascribed to the capacitive contribution on the outer/inner surfaces and 
edge  planes  of  the  capsule  structure.  However,  no  obvious  voltage 
plateau was observed during the cycle suggesting a disordered stacking 
of the dual-doped carbon. The reversible capacity as high as 770 mAh/g 
at 0.5 A/g, with a rate capacity of 380 mAh/g at 15 A/g, supported that 
heteroatom doping provides additional Li intercalation sites beneficial 
for the electrochemical properties [128]. 

Corn husk doped naturally by nitrogen and oxygen treated by KOH 
solution delivered a reversible capacity 231 mAh/g at 0.1 A/g vs. K
/K. 
Moreover, at a high current density of 1 A/g, the reversible capacity still 
reached up to 135 mAh/g after 500 cycles. The results indicate that both 
capacitance  and  diffusion  are  responsible  for  the  K-cation  storage  in 
battery  [380].  Although  oxygen  may  have  a  negative  effect  on  the 
conductivity of the carbon network, it improves the wettability of car-
bon surface by the electrolyte to reduce the carbon inactive sites and 
offer more sites exposed for charge storage [381]. 

+

N  and  P  have  been  successfully  doped  into  carbon  sheets  derived 
from corn stalks via a hydrothermal reaction using (NH4)2HPO4  as the 
source of nitrogen and phosphorus. Since sp2 C–N and C–P may overlap 
with C–O contribution in C1s XP spectrum, and the sp3 C–N with C=O, 
information about successful doping of nitrogen and phosphorous into 
carbon sheets was obtained by fitting the high-resolution P2p XP spec-
trum. Three contributions were assigned to the intense parts of the signal 
at binding energies of 132.1, 133.1, and 133.6 eV. These energies were 
assigned to P–C, P–O, and P–N bonding, respectively. N and P as doping 
elements  have  been  reported  to  improve  electron  conductivity  and 
enable a higher  electrolyte-surface-wetting ability of the carbon. This 

carbon delivered a specific capacity of 277 mAh/g after 100 cycles at 
0.25C and a specific capacity of 202 mAh/g after 200 cycles at 1C, as 
well as a stable specific capacity of 105 mAh/g at a high rate of 5C after 
2000 cycles. These results point to the excellent cycle stability and su-
perior  rate  capability  of  dual-doped  carbon  sheets  derived  from  corn 
stalks [382]. 

Zhao et al. [383] used density functional theory (DFT) calculations to 
predict  the  behavior  of  N  doping  in  a  P-doped  carbon.  P  bonded  to 
carbon in two modes, outside the carbon surface or inside (means doped 
into  the  carbon  surface)  (Fig.  12  (a-b)).  The  inside  mode  caused  a 
distortion of the 2D carbon framework. P bonded to carbon according to 
these two modes decreased the  formation energy Ef  of graphitic N to 
0.14  eV  for  the  outside  mode  and  0.32  eV  for  the  inside  mode,  as 
compared with un-doped carbon with an Ef of up to 0.40 eV. However, in 
substitution  mode  the  calculated  adsorption  energy (Eads)  of  nitrogen 
(5.68 eV) directly on the doped phosphorous site showed that nitrogen is 
easily adsorbed on the un-doped carbon with an adsorption energy of 
3.68 eV. In this way, the new N–C bonds are formed and replace the 
former P–C bonds which are elongated and significantly weakened after 
N adsorption (Fig. 12 (c)). 

Zhang  et  al.  [384]  evaluated  the  electrochemical  behavior  of 
K-storage  and  Na-storage  for  high-N-content  carbon  nanosheets  after 
introducing P to their structure by annealing with NaH2PO4. When used 
as an anode in KIBs without P doping, the nanosheets showed a higher 
specific capacity of 238 mAh/g at 0.1 A/g than the nanosheets that were 
doped with P, which had a specific capacity of 207 mAh/g at 0.1 A/g 
after 250 cycles. However, a higher Na-storage capacity of 246 mAh/g 
after  100  cycles  at  0.1  A/g  was  obtained  for  P-doped  nanosheets. 
Un-doped nanosheets delivered 175 mAh/g sodiation capacity under the 
same conditions. The Na
ion diffusion coefficients measured by 
GITT  demonstrated that the introduction of  P to  N-rich carbon nano-
ion 
sheets improves the Na
diffusion coefficient [384]. 

ion diffusion coefficient and lowers the K

and K

+

+

+

+

Shanmugam  et  al.  [385]  described  the  interaction  between  the 
alkali-metal ions and doped graphene sheets to be mainly influenced of 
an ionic character. The adsorption energies of Li, Na, and K cations on 
B/N co-doped graphite sheets were found to be -2.66 eV, -1.88 eV, and 
-1.49 eV, respectively, and the adsorption of the metal ions increased by 
introducing defects into the graphite sheet [385]. It is notable that the 
doping  and  divacancy  (DV)  defect  created  by  removing  two  carbon 
atoms  was  able  to  better  adsorb  alkali  metals  as  compared  with  the 
defects  that  arose  from  structural  arrangement  of  carbon  atoms 
(stone-Wales (SW) defects) [386]. However, it has been reported that 
N-doping sites, not C defects, are the source of improved capacities in 
KIBs, whereas Na

ion storage is mediated by defects [387]. 

+

3.3. Biomass-derived carbon composites 

As  compared  to  graphite  [388],  hard  carbon  has  severe  voltage 
hysteresis proportional to the hydrogen content [121] and lower elec-
tronic conductivity arising from inhomogeneous potential/current dis-
tribution,  which  restricts  its  commercialization  for  application  in 
batteries. Surface functional groups and/or heteroatoms (such as O, N, P 
and  B)  are  one  solution  to  by-pass  these  drawbacks,  as  described  in 
Section 3.2. Here, we propose another solution to address the challenges 
of hard carbons for battery applications. To meet high-performance hard 
carbon anodes, conductive materials such as graphite and soft carbon or 
high-capacity  materials  such  as  metals  and  alloy  nanoparticles  are 
coated  on  the  defective  hard  carbon  to  improve  the  connectivity  be-
tween carbon atoms and enhance charge carrier transport, especially for 
the  electrons.  While  direct  mixing  of  higher  conductive  material  and 
hard carbon can cause phase separation due to different densities, the 
partial  embedment  of  metal  and  alloy  nanoparticles,  nitrides,  oxides, 
and carbides, or ceramic composites, in the pores of hard carbons can be 
efficient. This process leads to extra space on the hard carbon surface, 
thereby  buffering  the  volume  expansion  of  the  metals  upon  cation 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092918N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 12. Schematic illustrations of the orientation effect of the initially doped phosphorous on the later doped nitrogen; a) Outside mode, b) Inside mode, and c) 
Substitution mode [383]. Adopted from the mentioned reference after the required permission. 

insertion and effectively hinders the aggregation of alloy particles. For 
example, Lian et al. [389] reported that the embedment of 26.7 wt.% 
Ni-doped  CoS2  nanoparticles  (Ni0.5Co0.5)S2  in  a  yeast-derived  hard 
carbon improved the conductivity and led to a capacity of 600 mAh/g 
vs. Li

/Li at 0.5 A/g after 450 cycles. 

+

Pinning of Sn-Sb onto the surface of a hard carbon can help improve 
the carbon properties and allow it for an application as an anode ma-
terial [390]. After Li insertion and the formation of multiple phases like 
Li3Sb and LixSn (x < 4.4), the separated phases can be restored to the 
original Sn-Sb alloys after Li removal. Filling the carbon micropores with 
Sn-Sb alloys may act as the “root” for outer, larger alloy particles that 
help to firmly root  the nanoalloy particles  on the surface  of the hard 
carbon particles. Li et al. [390] pinned 29.8 wt.% nanosized Sn-Sb alloys 
onto a hard carbon surface. They reported that the surface areas of both 
alloy  and  carbon  exposed  to  the  electrolyte  decreased.  The  specific 
surface area of hard carbon after Sn-Sb pinning reduced from 400 to 159 
m2/g, which could explain the improvement of the Coulombic efficiency 
after  the  first  cycle.  In  the  voltage  profile,  the  Li-storage  behavior 
showed four regions during the Li insertion process: (1) a slope ranging 
from 1.1 to 0.8 V, attributed to the decomposition reaction caused by a 
small amount of surface oxide on the nano-SnSb; (2) the plateau at 0.8 V 
related to the alloy reaction of Li with Sb; (3) the smooth slope from 0.7 
to  0.2  V  corresponding  to  multistep  Li-Sn  alloy  reactions  and  the 
insertion reaction of Li into the non-graphitic carbon; and (4) a plateau 
from 0.1 to 0.0 V related mainly to the insertion of Li into the micropores 
of the hard carbon. 

Yang  et  al.  [391]  reported  a  minimal  agglomeration  of  Co3O4 
nanoparticles during Li insertion by embedding as well as pinning them 
into  the  porous  sugar-derived  hard  carbon.  They  recognized  that  the 
desquamating possibility of Co3O4 during cycling increased by pinning 
29.7 wt.% Co3O4  into superficial pores without embedding them into 
deeper pores. Combining the advantages of a high lithium storage ca-
pacity of Co3O4  and the structural stability of a hard carbon enabled a 
composite anode material with specific capacity of 403 mAh/g after 35 
/Li.  The  nanosized  Co3O4  particles  embedded  in  a  hard 
cycles  vs.  Li
carbon  during  Li  insertion  reduced  first  to  the  intermediate  product 
α-CoO  and  subsequently  to  Co.  The  researchers  suggested  that  the 
+ ⇄ 
addition of nanosized Co3O4 particles encouraged the reversible Li
LiOx reaction, which finally led to a higher initial Coulombic efficiency. 
Therefore, a simple combination of Co3O4 and a hard carbon was able to 
deliver a reversible capacity of 157 mAh/g after 10 cycles. 

+

Guo  et  al.  [392]  suggest  that  a  soft-carbon  coating  protects 
nano-sized  Sn  particles  embedded  in  the  mesopores  of  sugar-derived 
hard carbons against oxygen and improves the electrical conductivity 
of the final composite. They reported that the good cycling performance 
with a specific capacity of 400 mAh/g vs. Li
/Li after 30 cycles resulted 
from the embedding of nano-Sn particles in the mesopores of carbon, 
which prevented its agglomeration during Li insertion. In addition, Sn 
nanoparticles  significantly  contribute  to  the  high  specific  capacity  by 
inducing  the  SEI  film  decomposition,  and  here  especially  of  the  Li 

+

carbonates, at a voltage lower than 3 V which reduces ineffective side 
reactions and improves the Coulombic efficiency [392]. 

◦

Fig. 13 illustrates the synthesis of TiN and TiC coated on hard carbon 
as  undertaken  by  Cheng  et  al.  [393].  In  this  study,  nanocrystalline 
composites of TiN and TiC coated on the surface of hard carbon were 
synthesized by the reaction of cotton wool with TiCl4, followed by firing 
at 1400
C in nitrogen and argon. The hard carbon (HC)-TiN composites 
with 15.15 wt.% TiN showed better performance than that of HC and the 
TiC-HC composite with 8.65 wt.% TiC. After 50 cycles, HC, TiN/HC, and 
TiC/HC composites had reversible capacities of 216 mAh/g, 242 mAh/g, 
and 187 mAh/g vs. Na
/Na, respectively. According EIS measurements 
after 50 cycles, HC became more resistive (Rct = 296 Ω) than the TiN/HC 
composite (Rct  = 105 Ω). The authors concluded that the higher elec-
trochemical  performance  of  the  TiN/HC  was  related  to  an  enhanced 
charge transfer kinetics imparted by the highly conductive TiN coated 
on  the  surface  of  the  hard  carbon.  The  weak  cycling  behavior  of  the 
TiC/HC composite originated from its low ability to participate in sur-
face conversion reactions because of its larger crystallite size of 314 Å 
than that of TiN/hard carbon composite [393]. 

+

Jian et al. [394] reported mixing the hard carbon with 20 wt.% soft 
carbon could improve the hard carbon electrochemical performance as 
anode in KIBs. A ball-milled mixture of a hard carbon and a pyrolyzed 
soft  carbon  delivered  higher  rate  capability  and  long-term  cycling  of 
~200 mAh/g at 1C after 200 cycle compared to 160 mAh/g for pure 
hard carbon. The soft carbon with superior rate capability and electronic 
conductivity  compared  to  the  hard  carbon  was  responsible  for  this 
improvement.  Integrating  a  hard  carbon  with  high  long-term  cycling 
performance and a soft carbon with great rate capability could provide 
an anode material with highly amenable performance in KIBs. 

On the other hand, the volume expansion of active metals and alloys 
during electrochemical processes need to be reduced to improve the rate 
capability of a metal/graphite composite. Therefore, the preparation of 
a hard carbon-coated metal/graphite composite becomes necessary. The 
outside  layer  protects  the  electrolyte  from  the  highly  reactive  inside 
particle e.g. of an oxide or an alloy. The electrolyte would be continu-
ously  decomposed  in  case  the  core  particle  allocatesfreshly  formed 
surfaces to the electrolyte, as often recognized for materials undergoing 
large  volume  changes  during  cycling.  For  instance,  hollow  graphene- 
encapsulated Si particles of Nie et al. [395] delivered a remarkable rate 
capability of 890 mAh/g at 5 A/g and a good capacity retention over 200 
cycles. Indeed, empty spaces in such a yolk–shell structure are capable to 
accommodate  the  volume  expansion  of  Si  during  lithiation,  reducing 
disintegration of Si particles and capacity fading. 

Fig.  14  schematically  illustrates  the  synthesis  of  the  hard  carbon- 
coated  nano-Si/graphite  composite  [396]  consisting  of  silicon  nano-
particles  (14.6  wt.%)  coated  with  a  hard  carbon  (39.6  wt.%)  and 
graphite (45.8 wt.%) composite showed a reversible specific capacity of 
879 mAh/g with an excellent stability of 738 mAh/g after 150 cycles at 
0.12 A/g vs. Li
/Li. The Si nanoparticles were closely connected to the 
graphite  matrix  owing  to  the  hard  carbon,  which  had  considerable 

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092919N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 13. Schematic illustration of the synthesis process to fabricate hard carbon (HC)-TiN and HC-TiC composites and the morphology of the preparation-related 
composites. Adapted from ref. [393] with permission. 

Fig.  14. Illustration  of  the synthesis  of  the  interconnected  hard  carbon-coated nano-Si/graphite  (HC-nSi/G), a and  b) Low  and  high  magnification SEM images 
showing the hierarchical structure of the HC-nSi/G composite. Adopted from [396] after the required permission. 

influence on fast electron transport during charging and discharging. In 
addition, the hard carbon layer played a significant role in buffering the 
silicon  volume  changes,  which  can  reach  up  to  400%  during  electro-
chemical reactions with Li [396]. 

Fig.  15  displays  the  voltage  profiles  of  uncoated  and  amorphous- 
carbon-coated Sn nanoparticles. The uncoated Sn nanoparticles deliv-
ered  a  higher  charge  capacity  of  950  mAh/g,  but  only  for  one  cycle. 
Following  this,  the  capacity  faded  rapidly  to  reach  values  below  100 
mAh/g  after  30  cycles.  The  carbon-coated  Sn  nanoparticles  reached 
almost 800 mAh/g in the initial discharge cycle, but the specific capacity 
decreased between 600 to 700 mAh/g for the interval between the 5 and 
+
50th cycles [397], related to Li
/Li. These results indicated that the hard 
carbon acted as a proper “buffer- zone” for the volume change of LixSn. 
To improve the rate capability and reversibility of Li intercalation/ 
de-intercalation  on  the  graphite  surface,  hard  carbon  materials  were 
coated onto the graphite [398]. The porous and disordered hard carbon, 
with a different weight ratio to graphite, contributed most to the elec-
trochemical  performance  of  the  final  composite.  The  nitrogen  phys-
isorption results showed that the specific surface area of the obtained 
composites decreased gradually with increasing hard carbon content. It 
reported, the composite with 30 wt.% hard carbon exhibited a higher 

initial capacity of 374 mAh/g at 0.1 C than that of the composite with 10 
wt.%  hard  carbon,  which  had  a  capacity  of  365  mAh/g  at  the  same 
current rate. However, after 100 cycles the specific capacity reversed, 
and the lower hard carbon content of the composite became advanta-
geous, with a specific capacity of 349 mAh/g as compared with that of 
the composite with high hard carbon content, which was 340 mAh/g. At 
higher current rates, from 0.5 to 2C, the specific capacity of the com-
posite with 10 wt.% hard carbon also exceeded that of the composite 
with higher hard carbon content. This improved capacity was probably 
due  to  superior  conductivity  of  composite  with  lower  hard  carbon 
ion diffu-
content. GITT experiments revealed an undesirably slow Li
sion in composite with 30 wt.% hard carbon because of the enhanced 
+
interface distance and reduced electrical conductivity. DLi
values of 1.47 
(cid:0) 7 cm2/s were calculated for carbon content 
× 10
of 30 wt.% and the 10 wt.%, respectively. By increasing the current rate 
to 3C, the charging capacities of the composite with higher hard carbon 
content  improved,  which  confirms  that  high  content  is  critical  for 
reaching high-rate performance [398]. 

(cid:0) 7 cm2/s and 1.71 × 10

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092920N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

+

+

+

+

+

For an efficient intercalation of Na

ionization potential of 5.14 eV, only allows for the reversible formation 
of NaC64 with a theoretical capacity of 35 mAh/g [399,400]. Li–C bonds, 
because of their non-negligible covalent portion, result in a more stable 
intercalation of Li into the graphite layers than that of Na into graphite 
[401]. The bonds between Na and graphite are weak. In addition, there 
are large changes of the stretched C–C bonds after Na insertion [402] 
into  the  graphite  layer  and  the  enthalpy  of  the  formation  of  NaC8  is 
positive [403]. As a result, the intercalation of Na
ions into the gra-
ions [404]. The intercalation 
phene layer is more difficult than for of Li
of K
ions is even more difficult, given that their ionic radius is even 
. Nevertheless, KC8 is formed during potassiation 
larger than that of Na
by  an  exothermic  process  with  a  formation  enthalpy  of  -27.5  kJ/mol 
[405], which is lower than even that associated with the formation of 
LiC6, and causes a higher average intercalation voltage (See. Fig. 16 (a)). 
ions into the graphite structure, 
the interlayer distance must be modified. Two main strategies have been 
reported  for  applying  graphite  as  the  intercalation  anode  material  in 
combination with the sodium battery chemistry. The first strategy in-
volves a modified Hummers method typically used for graphene prep-
aration. Here, the purified graphite was oxidized and was then treated 
with heat to obtain partially reduced graphite. As a result, the interlayer 
distance was enlarged to 4.3 Å and the final half-cell battery delivered 
the reversible capacity of 284 mAh/g at a current density of 0.02 A/g 
[409]. The second strategy is to co-intercalate a solvation shell along 
with  the  Na
ion.  This  strategy  leads  to  the  formation  of  a  ternary 
graphite intercalation compound (t-GIC) with the general formula Na 
(solv)nCx  [15]  (Fig.  16  (b  I)).  Thus,  graphite  undergoes  a  reversible 
Na-storage through the intercalation of solvated-Na
, which results in a 
high  amount  of  intercalated  Na  reaching  the  stoichiometry  of  about 
+
NaC18–20 [410]. In the case of Li
occurs  for  highly  concentered  propylene  carbonate  (PC),  dimethyl 
sulfoxide  (DMSO),  and  ether  electrolytes.  However,  the  t-GIC  –  espe-
cially in propylene carbonate-based electrolytes with low concentrations 

ions, the intercalation of solvated Li

+

+

+

Fig. 15. Plots of a) the voltage profiles of the Sn nanoparticles, and b) with an 
amorphous carbon coating. Adopted from [397] after the required permission. 

4. Electrochemical performance of biomass-derived carbon 
compared to graphite in lithium-, sodium-, and potassium-ion 
batteries 

4.1. Cation intercalation into graphite and hard carbon 

In LIBs, the intercalation of Li

into graphite involves one Li per six C 
atoms  with  the  theoretical  capacity  of  372  mAh/g.  However,  in  SIBs 
and its high 
Na

, because of its larger ionic radius of 102 vs. 76 pm of Li

+

+

+

Fig. 16. a) Schematic of binary intercalation of Li, Na, 
and  K  ions  into  graphite  and reduced  graphene oxide 
(RGO).  Li  and  K  cations  can  intercalate  into  both 
graphite and RGO, while Na cations can only interca-
late  into  RGO  [406],  b)  Schematic  of  ternary  interca-
lation  of  solvated  Li  and  Na  cations  into  graphite:  (I) 
+
Intercalation of solvated Na
ions in Na half-cells with 
1 M NaFSI/tetraglyme (TEGDME) electrolyte [407], (II) 
ions intercalate reversible in EC-based electrolytes, 
Li
whereas the intercalation of solvated Li
ions occurs for 
highly concentrated PC, DMSO, and ether electrolytes. 
(III) Sometimes, in dilute electrolytes, the intercalation 
of solvated Li
ions is accompanied by the exfoliation 
of the graphene layers [408]. Adopted from mentioned 
references after the required permission.   

+

+

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092921N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

+

of  the  conducting  salt  LiPF6  –  is  instable  against  the  oxidation  and 
decomposition  of  co-intercalated  solvent  molecules.  This  instability 
eventually leads to the exfoliation of the graphite, with a negative effect 
on the cycling performance of LIBs (Fig. 16 (b II)) [408,411–413]. 

Organic solvents only poorly dissolve Na

ions compared with Li

+

+

+

ions,  which  leads  to  different  amounts  of  solvent-Na
co-intercalated 
into  graphite  in  various  electrolytes  [410,414].  Flexible  linear  ethers 
exhibit the most satisfactory electrochemical performance as electrolyte 
solvents for graphite [410]. Ethers with longer chain lengths trigger a 
higher Na-storage potential. In the case of well-solvated and, thereby, 
efficiently shielded Na
ions, longer ether chains weaken the unfavor-
able interaction between the Na intercalant and the graphite. As the Na 
intercalant  is  positively  charged,  longer  chains  of  the  ether  solvate 
molecules attenuate the repulsion force among these positively charged 
intercalants.  In  addition,  since  the  interlayer  distance  in  graphite  in-
creases owing to the co-intercalation, the repulsive interaction between 
the  negatively  charged  graphene  decreases  as  well.  Therefore,  as  the 
thermodynamic stability of the t-GICs increases by longer ether chains, 
the  average  co-intercalation  voltage 
increases  proportionally 
[415–417]. 

+

+

+

to 

the  graphite 

-DEGDME  diffusion 

In addition to the formation of thermodynamically more stable dis-
charging  products,  ether-based  solvents  with  increasing  chain  length, 
such as diethylene glycol dimethyl ether (DEGDME), dimethoxyethane 
(DME),  and  tetraethylene  glycol  dimethyl  ether  (TEGDME)  present 
another  advantage.  According  to  the  this  specified  properties,  a 
reversible capacity of ~150 mAh/g at a Na
ion storage potential of 0.6 
V were reached for DEGDME as compared with the potential of 0.78 V 
for  longer  chain  molecules  of  TEGDME  [417].  Moreover,  as  the  long 
chain ethers were inert against a reaction, only a thin SEI film of 3-7 nm 
was formed on the graphite surface as a result of minimal electrolyte 
component decomposition [407]. This layer only negligibly affected the 
Na
lattice.  By  contrast, 
carbonate-based  electrolytes,  in  combination  with  sodium  battery 
chemistry, were able to produce relatively thick SEI  layers. Here, the 
high electrolyte decomposition acted more as an insulator and impeded 
the Na
-solvent transport [15]. However, the oxidation of ether-based 
electrolytes at ~1 V restricts their application in hard carbon anodes. 
To  optimize  liquid  electrolyte  Na  batteries,  balance  the  anode  char-
ge/discharge to the cathode, and increase the usable voltage window, 
the co-intercalation voltage can be tuned up to 0.38 V by the conducting 
salt  concentration  [418].  Increasing  salt  concentration  of  the  electro-
lytes leads to a substantial decrease in the free solvent activity, which 
shifts  the  co-intercalation  voltage  to  lower  values.  Adjustment  of  the 
co-intercalation  potential  of  SIB  anodes  enables  high  output  voltages 
and  allows  the  development  of  high-energy  and  high-power-density 
SIBs.  In  the  work  of  Kim  et  al.  [417],  a  SIB  with  a  graphite  anode 
delivered  a  reversible  capacity  of  ≈150  mAh/g  for  2500  cycles,  and 
more than 75 mAh/g at 10 A/g, with ether-based electrolytes. The re-
searchers showed that the choice of the conducting salt anions, such as 
NaPF6, NaClO4, and NaCF3SO3 dissolved in the ether-based electrolytes 
affect the electrochemical reactions only marginally [417]. 

+

+

+

+

as  compared  with  Na

Although non-modified graphite can hardly be used as an efficient 
electrode material for SIBs, the intercalation of K
ions into the graphite 
layers in ethylene carbonate (EC)/diethyl carbonate (DEC)-based elec-
trolytes leads to a high theoretical capacity of 279 mAh/g, in spite of the 
larger  ionic  size  of  138  pm  of  K
[406].  The 
intercalated  K
ions  enlarge  the  interlayer  distance  of  fresh  graphite 
from 3.35 Å to 5.35 Å, and the volume expansion after full K interca-
lation  is  calculated  to be  almost six  times  larger in  contrast to  the  Li 
intercalation. This K-induced volume expansion/contraction of graphite 
during intercalation/de-intercalation is reversible and without a nega-
tive  effect  on  the  cycling  stability  [405].  K
ion  intercalation  into 
graphite contrasts with that of the intercalation of alloys and conversion 
electrode materials, which normally leads to fast electrode deactivation 
and an irreversible capacity drop [419,420]. In addition, some studies 
have  proposed  the  intercalation  of  various  K(solv)yC  species  into 

+

+

ions  are  smaller  than  solvated-Na

graphite with DEGDME and TEGDME-based electrolytes to form t-GIC 
+
[421,422].  Solvated  K
owing to the weaker Lewis acidity of K
property, in addition to the lower desolvation energy of K
vides higher transport numbers of solvated K
kinetics across the electrolyte/electrode interface [423]. 

ions in common solvents. This 
ions, pro-
ions and fast diffusion 

and  -Li

+

+

+

+

+

+

In  summary,  the  alkali  cation-solvent  molecule  complex  in  the 
graphite host should be chemically stable and should have a high LUMO 
level  to  ensure  the  reversible  co-intercalation.  When  the  complex  is 
instable, it can decompose, and gas evolution can trigger the exfoliation 
of  graphite  upon  co-intercalation  (Fig.  16  (b  III)).  A  straightforward 
strategy to enhance the intercalation efficiency of Na
ions is to use a 
hard carbon in the anode composite. Hard carbons have a non-ordered 
and  defective  structure  with  interlayer  distances  of  about  3.8 Å, 
large enough to form intercalation compounds. NaC8  was reported to 
deliver a theoretical capacity of 279 mAh/ g at low voltages of about 
0 V [424]. NaC6 was reached when the equilibrium interplanar distance 
was  increased  to  about  4.5  Å  [425].  No  co-intercalation  plateau  was 
detected in the voltage range of 0.6-0.8 V in the voltage profile of hard 
carbon.  This  observation  shows  that  Na  intercalates  into  graphite  to 
form a binary graphite intercalation compound regardless of the type of 
electrolyte  [426].  To  evaluate  the  effect  of  the  electrolyte  on  the 
reversible Na
ion storage capacity of hard carbon electrodes, electro-
chemical cycling was performed in carbonate-based electrolyte (EC, PC, 
and butylene carbonate (BC)) solutions containing NaClO4 (see Fig. 17). 
In  the  potentiogram,  a  slope  from  1.2  to  0.1  V  and  a  plateau  region 
between 0.1 and 0 V were observed during the initial sodiation. During 
de-sodiation, the presence of plateau and slope regions in this voltage 
range  suggesting  that  hard  carbons  reversibly  insert  sodium  when 
organic carbonates as electrolytes are used. As seen in Fig. 17 (b), the 
hard carbon electrode in the BC electrolyte showed a reversible capacity 
of ≥230 mAh/g in the early cycles. However, serious degradation began 
after the 20th cycle. In contrast with the BC solution, the hard carbon 
electrode retained a steady capacity in the EC and PC solutions [427]. By 
◦
considering  the  high  melting  point  of  EC  (~37
C),  a  PC-containing 
electrolyte  is  the  better  choice  for  SIBs.  The  SEI  formed  on  the  hard 
carbon after cycling represents a rough and non-uniform layer with a 
thickness  of  approximately  30  nm.  As  commonly  accepted, 
carbonate-based  electrolytes  are  thermodynamically  instable  at  the 
standard potential of Na, and some decomposition of the solvents occur. 
For long-term cycling an interfacial passivation is required. After one 
month, the discharge capacity still reached approximately 80% which 
also implied a low self-discharge. The surface film worked as a passiv-
ation  film  and  protected  the  Na-intercalated  hard  carbon  anode  from 
chemical reaction with the electrolyte [427]. 

Ponrouch et al. [428] reported that an additive-free and EC:PC-based 
electrolyte with both NaClO4 and NaPF6 as conducting salts was able to 
improve the reversible capacity of hard carbons to ≥300 mAh/g at C/10 
after  120  cycles.  Gebrekidan  et  al.  [429]  described  the  solubility  of 
NaPF6 in various single solvents decreased in order of EC (1.4m) > PC 
(1.0 m) > DEC (0.8m) > DMC (0.6m), which implies that NaPF6 is co-
ordinated  more  strongly  by  EC  followed  by  PC  in  the  electrolytes.  In 
addition,  the  lower  rate  of  exothermic  heat  of  NaPF6,  NaClO4,  and 
NaTFSI released for the electrolytes contain EC/PC compared to EC/DEC 
and EC/DMC in contact with sodiated hard carbon, indicated that this 
mixture is suitable as a safer solvent for SIBs. 

Galvanostatic discharge/charge cycles for graphite and hard carbon 
show different voltage profiles consistent with their different structures. 
Sites  that  Li  can  access  easily,  which  are  either  electronically  or 
geometrically  favored,  generally  contribute  to  a  sloping  profile  with 
large hysteresis for the hard carbon. By contrast, graphite is character-
ized by many equivalent sites for the lithiation. Their contributions yield 
the  potential  plateau.  The  sloping  discharge  profile  of  a  disordered 
carbon with many inequivalent Li coordination sites shows that most of 
the capacity was accumulated at a higher voltage range than that for a 
commercial, ordered carbon. Indeed, randomly aligned graphitic layers 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092922N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 17. Initial cycle and variation in reversible capacities for hard carbon electrodes in a) EC, b) PC, and c) BC solution containing 1 mol/l NaClO4 tested at 0.025 A/ 
g in beaker-type cells. Adopted from [427] with permission. 

facilitated  faster  metal  intercalation  as  compared  with  the  ordered 
graphitic layers in commercial graphite [207]. Because of this structural 
feature, hard carbons in KIBs perform well acording to the rate capa-
bility  experiments  [430].  However,  to  optimize  the  battery  perfor-
mance, the metal intercalation corresponding to the flat voltage plateau 
needs  to  be  extended,  while  the  sloping  region  should  be  shortened 
[431]. 

+

A voltage-capacity curve of a graphite electrode in the voltage range 
below 0.3 V showed several transition stages during the first lithiation. 
The potentials for potassiation and lithiation into graphite layer were 
reported to be around 0.24 V and 0.1 V vs. Li
/Li, respectively [432, 
433]. The intercalation of Li into the graphite structure can be classified 
into the intercalation stages LiC72, LiC36, LiC27, LiC18, LiC12, and LiC6 
[434–436]. The optical spectrum changes from black for graphite via 
blue for LiC18 to brown for LiC12 to finally reach a golden color for LiC6 
that points to significant changes in the electronic structure according to 
the lithiation [437]. Such influence manifests in the partial filling of the 
π* states, which are unoccupied in untreated graphite. The intercalation 
products LiC12 and LiC6 show a metallic character owing to the partially 
filled  π*  states  which  is  reflected  in  increasing  contributions  to  the 
respective density of states the more Li intercalates [437]. Additionally, 
phonon dispersion and electronic band structure calculations suggest a 
fast kinetics of K

at the expense of a lower capacity [438] . 

+

In  contrast  with  graphite,  neither  staging  nor  color  changes  were 
reported for hard carbon electrodes during K
intercalation. In 
this case, hard carbons have shown to benefit from the larger interplanar 
spacing compared to graphite, which resulted in a relatively constant 
distance during the potassiation or lithiation process [436]. 

or Li

+

+

Transition stages were also observed during the potassiation process 
of graphite as displayed in Fig. 18 (a) [406,433,439]. To elucidate the 
electrochemical  potassium-storage  mechanism  in  graphite  at  room 
temperature, ex situ XRD was carried out for selected states of charge in 

the first-cycle at C/10 (Fig. 18 (b)). By dropping the voltage from 0.3 V 
to 0.01 V, the sequential formation of KC36, KC24, and KC8 was described 
[433]. However, Luo et al. [406] calculated a staging scenario for the 
+
electrochemical  intercalation  of  K
ions  following  the  reaction  path 
KC24 → KC16 →KC8 via DFT. The color of graphite changed from black in 
the initial stage to gold after intercalation of K
ions at least until KC8 
(Fig. 18 (c) related to the gradual expansion of the graphitic interlayers 
and the changes in the electronic structure due to electron doping. The 
calculated electronic density of states (DOS) for graphite and KC8 indi-
cated an upshift of the Fermi level which may cause the change in the 
optical spectrum. 

+

The golden colored KC8 as the final product of potassiation exhibited 
a plateau above the plating potential of K metal [433]. This property is 
important  as  it  may  avoid  or  at  least  relieve  dendrite  formation  and 
increases the safety of an application. In spite of providing large specific 
capacities at low current rates, graphite in KIB compared to LIB anodes 
suffered  from  fast  fading  of  capacity  because  of  its  dramatic  volume 
expansion,  especially  at  high  rates.  Like  other  compounds  with  large 
volume changes, graphite shows partial structure decomposition during 
potassiation and depotassiation. Further, the specific capacity dropped 
significantly from 263 mAh/g at C/10 to 80 mAh/g at 1C [433], sug-
gesting  slower K
ions 
[406]. The large voltage hysteresis of 0.14 V between the charge and 
discharge  curves  justified  the  poor  rate  capability  [433].  However, 
selecting appropriate binders to ensure a uniform coating layer and a 
reduced formation of a SEI film could help to decrease the stress induced 
by the large volume expansion of graphite during potassiation. These 
modifications can then repel the rapid capacity drop. According to Zhao 
et al. [440], the use of EC:PC as electrolyte and Na alginate as a binder 
increased the efficiency of the electrochemical performance of graphite 
as  a  KIB  anode  inferred  from  higher  Coulombic  efficiency  and  better 
cycling stability. 

ion intercalation kinetics compared to the Li

+

+

Fig. 18. a) Galvanostatic potassiation/depotassiation at C/10 with the points 1-13, where b) Reaction-representative ex situ XRD measurements were performed. 
Adapted from ref. [433] with permission. c) Black-grayish polycrystalline graphite platelet in the initial state and after reaching the final potassiation state KC8. 
Adapted from ref. [406] with permission. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092923N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

+

In situ Raman spectroscopy has provided detailed insights into the K
ion insertion mechanism into few layered graphene [441]. As illustrated 
in Fig. 19 (a-c), the G peaks for the charged (Gc) and the discharged (Guc) 
state appeared in a voltage window between 0.37 to 0.2 V. The Gc peak 
shifted to lower wave numbers as the voltage decreased from 0.22 V to 
0.01 V (Fig. 19 (b,c)). This shift can be inferred to be the result of charge 
density on layers close to the intercalants. From 0.24 V to 0.15 V, the 
intensity of the Gc  peak increased as the Guc  and 2D peaks decreased, 
whereas all peaks become red-shifted. From 0.15 V to 0.01 V, the G peak 
in the Raman spectra changed from being symmetrical to being asym-
metrical (Fig. 19 (b)). However, the Guc  peak was assigned to the gra-
phene layers that were not adjacent to the K
ions are 
homogeneously distributed without localized charges, as related to the 
increase of the Guc  peak in the depotassiated state (e.g. at 2 V) in the 
absence  of  the  Gc  signal  [441].  It  should  be  noted,  that  even  more 
potassiation stages are observed with few layered graphene compared to 
graphite.  Raman  spectroscopy enables much  deeper  understanding as 
shown for the results on the alkali intercalation into hard carbons. Here, 
differences between Li on the one side and Na and K on the other side 
were  demonstrated  and  limitations  uncovered.  These  investigations 
supported by respective band structure and phonon dispersion calcula-
tions allow for recommendations towards the design of the hard carbon 
pores. This procedure was identified to be crucial to minimize diffusion 
barriers and to improve the performance of KIBs [438]. 

ions or where K

+

+

4.2. SEI formation on graphite and hard carbon in LIBs, SIBs and KIBs 

The  onset  potential  for  the  decomposition  of  electrolytes  and  the 
formation  of  a  passive  layer  composed  of  inorganic  and  organic  con-
stituents  on  carbons  are  different.  However,  no  standard  starting 

potential for the formation of the SEI on graphite and disordered carbons 
exists. It varies and depends on the composition of electrolyte, the ad-
ditives used in the electrolyte, the sweep rates, physical properties of the 
carbon  anode  such  as  particle  size,  pore  size,  and  surface  chemical 
composition  (adsorbed  species,  heteroatoms)  [442].  The  formation, 
thickness and, in general, chemical and physical properties of the SEI 
formed on graphite depend on the ratio of basal planes to edge planes. 
The edge planes provide more susceptible sites for the decomposition of 
the electrolyte, but also more access points for metal intercalation than 
the basal planes [436,443,444]. 

The SEI formation on graphite in KIBs commences at 0.6 V and its 
formation  is  expected  to  be  more  significant  at  0.15  V  [445].  While 
various voltages, including 2 V [446], 1.7 V [447], and 1 V [448], have 
been reported for SEI formation on graphite and related Li consumption. 
The most widely accepted and proven SEI formation voltage for graphite 
is 0.8 V in the first cycle [449]. However, the formation of thick pro-
tective SEI on graphite usually prevents further electrolyte degradation 
+
at voltages <0.8V vs. Li
/Li. It is favorable to stop the SEI formation 
+
ion intercalation at about <0.3 V. Unfortu-
before the start of the Li
nately, this demand is often out of reach for disordered (hard) carbons 
because of its earlier intercalation at about 1.5 V vs. Li
/Li [443,446]. 
The reduction peak appearing at ~1.1 V was ascribed to the irreversible 
reaction  of  the  electrolyte  with  surface  functional  groups  [450].  In 
general,  at  higher  voltages  (~0.8  V  vs.  Li
/Li)  the  formed  SEI  was 
mainly composed of organic polymeric compounds with low inorganic 
content. At low voltages the SEI was transformed into a more compact 
structure with inorganic salts as the main constituents neighboring the 
active material arranged in the form of an inner layer [451], however, 
this layer on sodiated hard carbon is nonhomogeneous and less compact 
in  nature  compared  to  that  in  LIBs.  In  addition,  the  electrolyte 

+

+

+

Fig.  19. a)  Linear  sweep  voltammogram  of  few  layered 
graphene  during  Raman  spectroscopy  experiments  with 
optical microscope images of initial, non-potassiated state 
and the final stage 1 corresponding to KC8  (top), intensity 
development according to partially localized charge due to 
ion  intercalation  (Gc,  middle)  and  the  shift  of  the  po-
K
sition of the G band where charges are equally distributed 
(Guc,  bottom).  b)  Raman  spectra  for  selected  states  of 
+
charge  with  the  respective  K
ion  intercalation  stages.  c) 
Waterfall plot of all Raman spectra taken between 0.37 V 
and 0.01 V. Adapted from ref. [441] with permission of the 
Royal Society of Chemistry.   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092924N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

decomposed further and established an outer SEI layer of mainly organic 
components [451,452]. 

The mainly organic part of the SEI on hard carbons in LIB is consti-
tuted by lithium organic compounds and others [443,444]. The main 
inorganic  compounds  (A2CO3  and  A2O)  of  SEI  are  Li2CO3  and  Li2O 
which are more enriched in the presence of EC [453]. The composition 
of the SEI can be also modified by surface functionalization. Ganesh et al. 
[454] reported on a H-terminated surface that postponed the reduction 
of the electrolytes such as EC or DMC, while an O/OH terminated surface 
EC reduced quickly. Oxygen-terminated sites allow for a better charge 
transfer than H-terminated sites and hence led to electrolyte reduction. 
Organic SEI compounds in KIBs are similar to LIB systems [445]. Wang 
et al. [455] revealed that (CH2OCO2K)2, C2H5OCO2K, KF and K2CO3 are 
the  dominant  components  of  the  SEI  layers  in  KFSI-  and  KPF6-based 
electrolytes.  They  observed  a  higher  amount  of  K2CO3  is  formed  in 
KPF6-based electrolytes compared to KFSI-based electrolytes. However, 
the SEI in the KFSI-based electrolyte is much more stable, compact and 
thinner than in the KPF6-based electrolyte. All these features, together, 
ensure good stability and high reversibility in the KFSI-based electrolyte. 
A study of the SEI on carbon in Na half-cells showed a lower dissolution 
energy of Na with respect to Li and the higher redox potential of Na
vs. 
Li
(~ 0.33V). A reduction of the electrolyte degradation at the surface 
of the sodiated anodes, affect SEI behavior [456]. Organic SEI compo-
nents  in  SIBs,  are  mainly  composed  of  sodium  alkyl  carbonates 
(ROCO3Na), sodium alkoxides (RONa), ethylene oxide oligomers (such 
as  polyethylene  oxide,  PEO,  (CH2-CH2-O)n),  semi-carbonates  and  so-
dium double alkyl carbonates (NaO2CO-C2H4-OCO2Na). The SEI in SIBs 
incorporates  higher  amounts  of  C=O  or  C-O  containing  species  than 
C-C/C-H as found in LIBs [457]. 

+

+

The higher solubility of the organic compounds formed on sodiated 
hard carbons compared to lithiated hard carbons, caused a conversion of 
(CH2OCO2Na)2 into Na2CO3 [457]. The use of fluoroethylene carbonate 
(FEC) together with NaTFSI conducts the formation of Na2CO3 and NaF, 
with  poor  electrochemical  performances.  However,  the  formation  of 
NaO2CO-C2H4-OCO2Na  and  NaF  in  the  mixture  of  NaPF6  and  FEC, 
showed better electrochemical performances. The presence of a rather 
insoluble species such as NaF can play an important role in stabilizing 
the SEI and in limiting solubility issues related to other compounds (such 
as  NaO2CO-C2H4-OCO2Na  here)  and  eventually  improve  the  capacity 
retention upon cycling [456]. The organic content of the SEI on sodiated 
hard  carbons  decreases  based  on  the  Na  salts  in  the  order:  NaPF6  >
NaClO4 > NaTFSI > NaFTFSI > NaFSI [457]. However, the SEI formed 
during sodiation was composed mainly of inorganic compounds such as 
Na2O, Na2OH, Na2F, Na2Cl, Na3O, Na3F2, and Na2CO3  [427]. Na
ion 
diffusion through the hard carbon SEI is dominated by inorganic con-
stituents,  such  as  Na2CO3  and  NaF.  iIn  the  case  of  the  SIB  a  higher 
diffusion energy is required e.g. compared to Li
ions which just diffuse 
through  an  mainly  organic  layer  with  some  Li2CO3  and  LiF  [458]. 
Higher amount of NaF was observed for NaFSI and NaFTFSI compared to 
NaPF6- and NaTFSI-containing electrolytes [457]. 

+

+

+

The composition of the SEI layer can be varied based on the used 
electrolyte. Xiao et al. [459] reported about the intercalation of Na
ions 
into  hard  carbons  with  TEGDME  and  a  carbonate  electrolyte.  The 
charge–discharge curves were recorded with an almost similar profile 
for  both  electrolytes.  However,  hard  carbons  showed  better  cycling 
stability in TEGDME than in the carbonate electrolyte, particularly at 
high current densities. This difference was attributed to the different SEI 
+
layer composition on the hard carbon surface, which affected the Na
ions transfer kinetics. Because of the weak decomposition of TEGDME 
on hard carbons, a thin SEI layer composed of organic compounds with 
C-O and O=C-O bonds was formed, which quickly stabilized around at 
0.5 V. However, after cycling in the carbonate electrolyte the surface 
ofthe hard carbon was covered by a thick SEI layer (mainly composed of 
inorganic compounds like Na2CO3) and did not stabilize until or even 
below 0.2 V. 

To  compare  the  electrochemical  performance  of  a  sucrose-derived 

+

+

+

hard carbon in EC:DEC and DEGDME electrolytes, it was tested in 0.8 M 
NaPF6/EC:DEC  (1:1  v/v)  and  0.8  M  NaPF6/DEGDME.  A  higher  irre-
versible capacity was observed for the EC:DEC solvent during the first 
cycle that supported a higher decomposition of the electrolyte compo-
nents to form the SEI on the hard carbon surface. Additionally, a larger 
voltage gap between cathodic and anodic peaks of 0.14 V for EC:DEC 
compared to 0.06 V for DEGDME indicated a slower Na
ion transport 
for  the  EC:DEC  system.  With  SEM,  a  thin  SEI  layer  on  a  smooth  and 
dense hard carbon surface was recognized for DEGDME. This observa-
tion  once  again  verified  the  efficiency  of  the  SEI  layer  to  protect 
DEGDME against further decomposition or the hard carbon anode from 
reactions with the electrolyte. As the main contribution of the SEI was 
identified in a high rate capability due to a fast Na
ion transport across 
the  layer  [460].  The  same  results  were  observed  by  Kim  et  al.  for  a 
natural graphite anode [461]. They showed that ether-based electrolytes 
with  suppressed  electrolyte  decomposition  only  form  a  negligible  SEI 
film on the graphite surface. This thin SEI was beneficial for the trans-
port of Na
-solvent complexes which were found to co-intercalate into 
the graphite lattice. Besides DEGDME, TEGDME and DME also showed a 
similar behavior. The chemical compositions of the SEI formed with EC: 
DEC and DEGDME electrolytes were analyzed by XPS. The O 1s spectra 
showed  the  existence  of  Na  alkoxide  and  Na2CO3/Na2CO2R,  corre-
sponding to the mono-, bi- and tri-oxygenated environments of carbon at 
533.3 eV, 531.8 eV and 536.5 eV, respectively, for hard carbons cycled 
in DEGDME and EC:DEC. The F1s spectra displayed two signal contri-
butions at 684.4 eV (Na-F) and 688.4 eV (P-F) related to the decompo-
sition  of  residual  NaPF6.  Depth  profiling  of  the  sample  with  Ar
ion 
sputtering led to a decrease in the O1s spectrum intensity, which was 
referred to C-O here, and an increase of the intensity in F1s spectrum, 
according to Na–F contributions. After sputtering times of >1 min., no 
distinct  change  was  recorded 
the  spectra.  The  DEGDME 
electrolyte-formed SEI was therefore quite thin and mainly consisted of 
NaF in the interior. However, sputtering of the SEI formed with the EC: 
DEC  electrolyte  showed  a  similar  change  in  the  spectra.  At  longer 
sputtering, a gradual change in the O1s spectrum intensity (referring to 
O-C(=O)O here) and a quick decrease in the Na–F contributions were 
found. This observation pointed to a thick SEI with inhomogeneously 
distributed organic and inorganic constituents [462]. 

in 

+

Fondard et al. [399] showed the best electrochemical performances 
on hard carbon electrodes with an electrolyte of NaPF6 dissolved in an 
EC:DMC electrolyte at addition of 3% FEC. The enhanced performance 
was attributed to the formation of a SEI composed of NaO2CO-C2H4-O-
CO2Na and NaF. On the other hand, a low NaF or a high Na2CO3 content 
result  in  poorer  electrochemical  performances.  Komaba  et  al.  [463] 
suggested  that  the  reversible  capacity  and  the  retention  for  the  hard 
carbon anodes could be improved by adding a small amount of FEC to 
the PC solvent. Although, the FEC additive enables a reduction at higher 
potential (~0.7 V) and a formation of a crack-free SEI on hard carbons to 
suppress the continuous reduction of the electrolyte on anode surface in 
SIBs. Nevertheless, the specific capacity and cyclability of the graphite 
become worse by FEC addition to the electrolyte for KIBs [464]. FEC 
stimulates  the  electrolyte  decomposition  at  potentials  below  2  V  vs. 
K
/K  and  results  in  larger  electrode  polarization  and  fast  capacity 
fading. When vinylene carbonate (VC) is added instead, the potential 
reduction of the electrolyte shifts to lower values and subsequently the 
chemistry of the SEI layer changes. Katorova et al. [465] showed that the 
SEI  is  mainly  composed  of  inorganic  components  in  carbonate-based 
electrolytes, whereas the VC additive changed the composition of the 
SEI to more organic compounds. These organic  compounds improved 
the mechanical properties of the SEI and made it more resistant toward 
fracturing during the hard carbon volume changes in potassiation and 
depotassiation. On the other hand, the VC additive negatively affected 
the  performance  of  SIBs  as  recognized  by  a  decreasing  discharge  ca-
pacity [466]. Yverick et al. [467] also improved the hard carbon anode 
performance in Na half-cells by manipulating the SEI formation at high 
charging  rate.  The  hard  carbon  with  thin  SEI  formed  by  ether-based 

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092925N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

electrolytes at 100 A/g exhibited the lowest impedance and delivered 
almost twice the capacity of the electrode with the SEI formed at 1 A/g. 

4.3. Role of texture and surface groups in biomass-derived anodes in LIBs 

◦

Various voltage profiles for different types of carbonaceous materials 
have  been  reported,  which  represent  individual  mechanisms  that 
depend  on  the  preparation  temperature.  Carbon  synthesized  at  low 
temperatures  <1000
C  contains  a  large  number  of  micropores  that 
interestingly can contribute marginally to the low voltage plateau ca-
pacity  [104,250].  Higher  first  lithiation  capacity,  in  addition  to  irre-
versible  capacity  loss  as  compared  with  carbon  synthesized  at  higher 
temperature,  is  commonly  observed  in  the  charge/discharge  curve. 
However, by increasing the carbonization temperature and decreasing 
the micropore volume, and with less Li uptake in the pores, the specific 
capacity as well as irreversible capacity loss decrease but exceed longer 
capacity retention [468]. 

The reported specific capacities for graphite were lower compared to 
the  hard  carbons.  By  contrast,  the  capacity  of  the  hard  carbon  faded 
faster  than  that  of  graphite  in  the  lithiation  process.  This  additional 
capacity is related to occupation of a second Li covalently bond to the 
nearest  neighbor  sites  of  a  Li  in  the  intercalated  carbon  and  also  the 
existence  of  different  Li-storage  sites  that  enable  the  plating  of  non- 
dendritic Li metal on the external surface of graphite. Finally, the ac-
commodation of Li in the vicinity of defects and micropores out of reach 
of the electrolyte is also a potential reason [469]. However, based on the 
treatment  temperature,  various  pore  shapes  such  as  open,  partially 
closed, and closed nanopores can be formed, which affect the adsorption 
and desorption kinetic of Li. 

It is understood that the smaller particles with higher surface area 
cause  larger  SEI  formation,  higher  irreversible  Li  loss  during  SEI  for-
mation, and higher exfoliation of the graphite as well. Therefore, using a 
low specific surface area of less than 40 m2/g, or even less than 10 m2/g 
to  suppress  side  reactions  at  charging  and  discharging  is  preferable 
[461]. The high number of micropores in biomass-derived hard carbon 
inhibits an optimized transport pathway for the electrolyte and even-
tually causes the reported dramatic drops in capacity, already after a few 
cycles [470]. The slow electrolyte transport in a microporous system is 
the reason why micropores in carbon materials are unable to yield good 
rate  performance,  especially  at  high  current  density.  By  contrast,  the 
existence of macropores is favorable for high rate performance. Zhang 
et al. [249] compared porous hard carbons derived from pine needles, 
with  a  high  specific  surface  area  of  3000  m2/g  but  few  macroporous 
channels  with  rice  straws  that  had  almost  the  same  surface  area  but 
more macroporous channels. They found that the porous carbon derived 
from rice straws had distinctly higher reversible capacity at high rates. 
This behavior can be explained by the fact that macropores quickly drain 
the  electrolyte  reservoir  and  enable  fast  spread  throughout  the  pore 
system to reach not only the mesopores but even the micropores. Cheng 

et al. [471] showed for air oxidized biomass, that the defects or micro-
pores on the basal plane of the carbon material were converted to large 
multi-channel pores and holes which helped to increase the lithiation 
capacity over 500 mAh/g of capacity. 

+

+

Fig. 20 (a) displays the first five cyclic voltammogram (CV) curves 
for porous carbon fibers, with a large pore size distribution from 0.3 nm 
to 40 nm. The electrolyte decomposition was recognized at 0.72 V vs. 
/Li as an additional cathodic current peak in the first cycle at a scan 
Li
rate  of  0.1  mV/s  in  a  voltage  window  of  0.01–3.0  V  vs.  Li
/Li.  In 
+
addition, the reduction current in the first cycle below 1.8 V vs. Li
/Li 
reaches  a  higher  value  as  compared  with  further  cycles.  This  extra 
current was inferred to represent the formation of the SEI film, which 
finally resulted in the higher discharge capacity of the first cycle than 
that of the second cycle [203]. Here, the anode suffered from an irre-
versible  capacity  of  about  39%.  This  behavior  was  attributed  to  the 
presence  of  ~7 %  oxygen-containing  surface  groups.  High-resolution 
XPS  revealed  hydroxyl,  carbonyl  (or  ether),  as  well  as  carboxyl  (or 
ester)  groups  with  binding  energies  of  286.2,  287.2,  and  288.9  eV 
respectively in the C1s spectrum. The capacitance of the sample was also 
calculated  based  on  the  integral  area  of  the  redox  processes  and  for 
different  scan  rates  ranging  from  0.1  to  10 mV/s  (see  Fig.  20  (b)). 
Almost  90%  of  the  charge  storage  at  all  scan  rates  resulted  in  a 
surface-related  capacitance  owing  to  the  non-faradaic  double  layer. 
These  results  underline  that the  synthesized porous  samples  could  be 
promising anode materials for high-power energy storage devices [203]. 
According  to  Mabuchi  et  al.  [473],  micropores  formed  between 
graphene layers in disordered carbons caused an excess capacity. They 
inhibited Li insertion, and induced an extensive passivation layer on the 
surface of the pores. This effect resulted in a pore-size reduction or even 
clogging of the pores. A decrease of diffusion coefficients were deter-
mined, and eventually Li was captured in the pores and was unavailable 
for further cycling [474]. Stephan et al. [19] reported that a high surface 
area can adversely affect the reversible capacity. Electrochemical mea-
surements  on  ZnCl2-activated  hard  carbon  from  banana  fibers  with  a 
specific  surface  area  of  1285  m2/g  revealed  a  significant  specific  ca-
pacity of 3123 mAh/g vs. Li
/Li in the first cycle. However, it exhibited 
high irreversible capacities of up to 88% for the subsequent cycle. These 
researchers  attributed  these  Coulombic  inefficiencies  to  huge  surface 
passivation and the clogging of pores and cavities. 

+

Beyond  the  influence  of  porosity,  surface  functional  groups  can 
significantly influence the intercalation reversibility of hard carbon, if is 
not treated at inert or at least dry conditions after finishing the pyrolysis 
[436,444,475].  To  decrease  irreversible  capacity,  a  surface-modified 
hard carbon was prepared by reducing the water content at tempera-
◦
tures between 50
C before pyrolysis. Kikuchi et al. [476] also 
confirmed  an  improved  cyclability  of  a  hard  carbon  once  the  surface 
hydroxyl groups and the adsorbed water on the surface were removed 
◦
during heating at 980
C in vacuum. However, Xie et al. [477] claimed 
that introduction of oxygen functional groups on sucrose-derived carbon 

◦
C to 180

Fig. 20. a) The first five CV curves cycled at 0.1 mV/s, b)
required permission. 

stable CV curves cycled at various scan rates from 0.1 to 10 mV/s. Adopted from [472] after the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092926N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

via oxygen-plasma treatment stabilized the solid electrolyte interface. 
The oxygen plasma could decrease active carbon sites due to its strong 
oxidizing ability. 

Another  alternative  to  a  post-pyrolysis  treatment  was  established 
with a thin carbonaceous layer prepared by chemical vapor deposition 
from  ethylene  after  the  carbonization  but  before  any  exposure  to 
ambient  conditions.  Electrochemical  tests  showed  a  decrease  in  the 
irreversible capacity with >150 mAh/g before the layer deposition to 
less than 70 mAh/g afterwards [478]. With the chemical vapor depo-
sition of a carbon layer from propene on a carbon cloth surface, B´eguin 
et  al.  [479]  initialized  an  1.5-fold  drop  in  the  irreversible  capacity 
attributed to a decrease in the amount of active sites involved in para-
sitic reactions or SEI formation. Additionally, the active surface area was 
reduced  by  such  treatment,  and  the  pyrolytic  carbon  layer  offered  a 
significantly more homogeneous surface with lower defect concentra-
tion. Indeed, a protected pyrolytic carbon layer on hard carbons avoided 
the  diffusion  of  Li
ions  into  the  active  sites  of  the  hard  carbon  in  a 
similar way [480]. 

+

Slow heating rate, high gas flow rate and the continuous removal of 
the released gases are further effective ways to decrease the specific and 
active surface area of hard carbons. A longer residence time of the hard 
carbon with the pyrolysis gas products, especially CO2 but others like O2 
as well, causes an extensive carbon burnout resulting in a larger specific 
surface area and the formation of micropores, which all contribute to 
irreversible capacity losses due to the high amount of generated active 
sites [62,481]. 

◦

Some  other  good  examples  are  shown  for  the  hydrogen-to-carbon 
ratio with typical values of 0.05-0.30 in pyrolytic carbons. The revers-
ible  capacities  of  hydrogen-containing  carbons,  heated  at  T  < 800
C 
were  directly  correlated  with  their  hydrogen  contents  [17].  Papanek 
et al. [482] reported a large reversible Li capacity due to Li intercalation 
and  binding  to  these  hydrogen-saturated  sites  at  similar  potentials. 
However, they showed that the binding of Li to a carbon atom in addi-
tion to a hydrogen atom changed the hybridization of the carbon-carbon 
bond from sp2 to sp3. This change in the carbon host resulted in a voltage 
profile hysteresis. Note, coating of hard carbons with a thin Al2O3 layer 
(~2 nm) as an artificial solid electrolyte interphase with the ability to 
ions upon lithiation also improved the average Coulombic 
conduct Li
efficiency of a hard carbon from 99.0 to 99.6% [483–485]. 

+

+

+

+

/Li associated with the Li

To  date,  it  is  assumed  that  Li  insertion  into  graphene  layers  and 
nanopores  of  hard  carbons  occurs  in  the  sloping  and  plateau  regions 
[486–490]. Lotfabad et al. [104] and Kubota et al. [491] showed three 
distinct regions in the potential profile for the lithiation and delithiation 
of a hard carbon. Region I contains a sloping potential curve at 2.0(cid:0) 0.25 
V vs. Li
ion insertion into the large interlayer 
spacings close to defects in the ionic state. In region II at an intermediate 
potential of 0.25(cid:0) 0.05 V, the signal corresponds to the intercalation of 
Li
ions into the narrow interlayer spacings. The third region represents 
the  low-potential  region  of  0.05(cid:0) 0.002  V  usually  displayed  as  a 
plateau-like curve, and the capacity is mainly dominated by Li insertion 
into micropores with pseudometallic clustering. The same concept was 
identified for the sodium case [104]. Nevertheless, the contribution of 
each  potential  region  to  the  final  specific  capacity  can  vary  by  the 
selected  synthesis  temperature.  For  sucrose-derived  hard  carbons 
treated at 700
C, the high potential region maximally contributes to the 
◦
C  the  middle  po-
specific  capacity  while  for  samples  treated  at  2000
tential region becomes important as well. A large potential hysteresis for 
the  lithiation  and  de-lithiation  was  observed  for  samples  treated  be-
tween 700 and 1300
C due to their higher dangling bonds or hydrogen 
terminated edges. This influence is smaller in samples treated at 1300
C 
≤ T ≤ 2000
C. With increasing carbonization temperature, the potential 
of the anodic peaks shifted to lower voltages than the Li intercalation 
potential in graphite (~0.09 V vs. Li

/Li) [491]. 

+

◦

◦

◦

◦

However, Qui et al. [424] reported on disadvantageous d-spacings 
for inserting Li according to the intercalation mechanism. They found 
that metal interactions with graphitic layers depend on the interlayer 

+

+

+

+

+

spacing and therefore determines if metal intercalation could occur or 
adsorption is the main step. Intercalation of Li hardly proceeded, given 
ions is very small as compared with the d002 spacing 
that the size of Li
of the hard carbon. The researchers inferred that the Li
ions were rarely 
intercalated into graphite with d-spacings >0.37 nm and an adsorption 
mechanism is preferred. The absence of a low-potential plateau in the 
CV curves indicated the correlation of the electrochemical behavior of 
Li

with an adsorption mechanism. 
Notably,  Alvin  et  al.  [313]  claimed  that  Li

intercalates  in  the 
graphitic layers at 0 V with very low current density of 0.003 A/g, and 
that metal plating occurred by further decreasing the potentials below 0 
V (at -0.03 V). Su et al. [492] discussed a more smooth and homogeneous 
lithium  deposition  at  the  inside  of  nanopores  of  hard  carbons  during 
lithiation at -0.05 V compared to inhomogeneous Li dendrite formation 
on  graphite  during  lithiation  at  -0.03  V.  Alvin´s  group  reported  on 
extremely low insertion rates which help to unblock inaccessible Li
ion 
intercalation  sites  but  only  at  voltages  near  0  V,  resulting  in  a  low--
voltage  plateau  capacity.  To  support  this  claim,  they  pointed  to:  1) 
emerging  broad  peak  at  4  ppm  in  solid-state  7Li  nuclear  magnetic 
resonance  (NMR)  at  the  voltage  between  0.1  and  0.0  V,  indicating  a 
strong interaction between Li and graphitic layers or micropore surfaces 
of  the  hard  carbon;  2)  the  existence  of  the  sharp  and  high-frequency 
peak  at  9  ppm  attributed  to  the  Li
intercalation  into  the  graphitic 
layers at potential near to 0 V; and 3) a chemical shift of 250 ppm cor-
responding  to  metallic  Li  at  potential  -0.03  V.  To  understand  the 
behavior of the Li
ion insertion into the graphene layers of hard car-
bons, DFT calculations were performed and showed a constant d-spacing 
during the Li insertion. For further information, the average charges of 
the carbon atoms during the carrier-ion insertion were also calculated. 
Normally, after cation insertion, the edge carbon atoms become partially 
negatively charged, which induces an electric repulsion force between 
the carbon atoms. This repulsive force becomes stronger as the cation 
size and its intercalacted amount increases. However, it was observed 
during Li insertion, that the charge transfer to carbon was not sufficient 
to  increase  this  repulsive  force  even  after  the  insertion  of  a  higher 
number  of  Li.  On  other  hand,  the  high  interactions  between  carrier 
atoms  by  increasing  the  amount  of  inserted  atoms  caused  the  carrier 
atoms became less ionic and subsequently decreased the charge transfer 
to  the  hard  carbon.  In  a  GITT  profile  at  0.05  A/g,  the  researchers 
+
observed that DLi
values decreased as the voltage decreased. This result 
was attributed to the repulsive forces between absorbed Li
ions at high 
and low voltages. However, this behavior was completely different for 
+
the graphite anode. Two minimum DLi
values between 0.1 and 0.05 V 
demonstrated that Li

gradually intercalated into the graphite layer. 

+

+

+

+

4.4. Mechanism of sodium storage during electrochemical reactions 

+

Different  Na

ion  storage  mechanisms  in  hard  carbons  have  been 
proposed in the high and low voltage regions [104,250,425,493]. A first 
proposed mechanism that applies to the high voltage region involves the 
adsorption of Na in the pores, between the domains and on the defect 
sites of hard carbons as these materials offer a wide adsorption energy 
distribution. A sloping voltage profile is caused by the adsorption sites. 
In  the  low  voltage  region,  the  intercalation  of  Na
ions  between  the 
graphene layers results in a plateau-like profile (Fig. 21 (a)). Avin et al. 
[313] showed the incomplete filling of the micropores present in highly 
porous  carbons with  low carbonization temperature while  all the mi-
cropores present in the hard carbons synthesized at 1200-1500
C were 
filled with Na
ions. The remaining micropores could be filled later near 
the cutoff potential. 

+

+

◦

Pyrolysis of polyaniline (PANI) forms hard carbons with a low po-
tential plateau between 0.0 and 0.2 V during Na
ion storage. In this 
voltage region, the intercalation of Na
ions into the spacing between 
the graphene layers appeared already. In this example, the high-voltage 
sloping region is related to Na
ion adsorption on storage-active surface 
sites [425]. Ding et al. [250] reported similar results for carbonized peat 

+

+

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092927N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 21. a) Schematic illustration of the adsorption–intercalation mechanism for Na
◦
carbon derived from mangosteen shells carbonized at 1500
carbons at various current densities from 0.02 to 0.2 A/g [494], and d) Na
second cycle for HC1500C2h at 0.02 A/g [494]. Adopted from mentioned references after the required permission. 

ion storage in hard carbon [424]. b) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of 
C for 0.5 h ≤ t ≤ 5h obtained at 0.02 A/g in the voltage range of 0(cid:0) 2 V. c) Cycling performance of hard 
ion diffusion coefficient determined from GITT experiments during the sodiation in the 

+

+

moss and attributed the low voltage region to the intercalation of Na
ions into a highly ordered pseudo-graphitic structure with dilated gra-
phene interlayers. In their experiments, the interlayer spacing expanded 
from 3.96 to 4.16 Å and was inversely proportional to the voltage region 
with 0.1 V ≥ U ≥ 0.001 V. 

+

◦

◦

The contribution of the plateau capacity increased proportionately 
with  the  carbonization  temperature  [102,491].  For  example  carbons 
extracted from pine cone [102], sucrose [493], lotus stem [495], kelp 
[496],  rice  husk  [497],  pine  nut  shell  [498],  and  corn  cob  [499]  at 
1600
C  showed  an  initial  low  voltage  plateau  capacity  two  to  three 
times  larger  than  the  capacity  contributions  from  the  high  voltage 
sloping region. Fig. 21 (b) shows the charge/discharge profiles of hard 
carbon derived from mangosteen shell at a current density of 0.02 A/g in 
the  voltage  range  of  0(cid:0) 2  V  [494].  Hard  carbon  prepared  at  1500
C 
(HC15002h) for 2 hours deliver the highest initial specific capacity of 
~330 mAh/g with a CE ≈ 83%. The rate performance of HC15002h at 
various current densities ranging from 0.02 to 0.2 A/g demonstrated a 
high specific capacity at a low-current density of 0.02 A/g, but also an 
excellent  rate  performance  among  other  hard  carbons  derived  from 
biomass (Fig. 21 (c)). For insights into sodium-ion storage mechanisms 
of hard carbons, galvanostatic intermittent titration (GITT) was used to 
+
measure the Na
◦
C  during  the 
ion  diffusion  coefficient  of  carbonized  carbon  at  1500
sodiation processes [494]. During the sodiation process at a decreasing 
voltage, Na
ion diffusion slowed down and, finally, at ~0.06 V a sharp 
decrease in the diffusion coefficient was observed. At voltages <0.03 V, 
a large increase in the diffusion coefficient was again registered, which 
decreased until the cutoff voltage was reached. The low diffusion coef-
ficient of Na
ions at low voltages and the high diffusion coefficient at 
high voltages corresponded with the plateau and sloping voltage regions 
of  the  discharging  profile,  respectively.  The  researchers  related  the 
higher diffusion coefficient in the sloping region to an easier adsorption 

ion diffusion coefficient. Fig. 21 (d) displays the Na

+

+

+

+

ions at the edges and surface defects of the graphene layers. The 
of Na
sharp decrease in the diffusion coefficient at ~0.1 V represented kinetic 
+
barriers due to electrostatic repulsion during the intercalation of Na
ions  into  the  graphene  interlayers.  This  repulsive  force  explained  the 
severe  capacity  fading  in  the  plateau  voltage  region  at  high  current 
densities.  The  sudden  increase  in  the  diffusion  coefficient  at  voltages 
<0.04 V corresponded to sodium metal-nanovoid filling [494]. In the 
voltage range of 0-1.0 V, the Na
ion diffusion coefficient was two or-
ders of magnitude lower than the diffusion coefficient of Li
ions into 
graphite [500]. 

+

+

+

Another  mechanistic  consideration  focused  on  the  storage  charac-
teristic of Na inside mesoporous hard carbon. The voltage sloping region 
was related to Na
ion insertion into the spacing between the graphene 
layers and the low voltage plateau region was attributed to Na filling/ 
plating into nanopores [185,501,502] (Fig. 22 (a)). Therefore, a large 
number  of  available  mesopores  indicates  an  extended  low-voltage 
plateau  upon  sodiation  [253].  A  decrease  in  the  electron-density 
contrast  between  the  carbon  matrix  and  the  nanopores  was  detected 
by ex situ small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) at voltages of 0, 0.2, and 2 
V, and indicated that Na
ions filled the nanopores. As seen in Fig. 22 
(cid:0) 1 (14-33 Å), which was 
(b), the scattering intensity around 0.03–0.07 Å
attributed to the nanopores in this hard carbon, decreased reversibly, 
pointing  to  a  decrease  in  the  electron-density  contrast  between  the 
carbon matrix and the nanopores [503]. 

+

The interlayer spacing in glucose-derived hard carbons was enlarged 
by shifting the broad Bragg 002 reflection to lower diffraction angles at 
0.2  V  as  compared  with  the  pristine  electrode.  This  observation  was 
accompanied by a complementary red shift of the Raman G-band at the 
same sloping voltage. Collectively, these observations confirm that the 
voltage-sloping region resulted from Na
ion insertion into the graphene 
interlayers [427]. The red shift of the G-band towards lower frequencies 
or wavenumbers resulted from the intercalation of the Na
ion between 

+

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092928N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 22. a) Schematic illustration of the intercalation–adsorption mechanism for Na
ion storage in hard carbons mechanism [502]. b) Ex situ SAXS patterns for hard 
carbon electrodes: (a) pristine, galvanostatically reduced to (b) 0.20 V, (c) 0.00 V, and d) reoxidized to 2.00 V in 1 mol/dm3 NaClO4 PC [503]. c) Discharge-charge 
profiles of a carbonized coconut shell electrode for the first few cycles obtained in 1.0 M NaClO4 in PC as the electrolyte [502], and d) operando 23Na ssNMR spectra 
with selected spectra for hard carbon/Na with NaPF6 as a electrolyte. The cell was cycled at a rate of C/20 (to achieve a capacity of 300 mA h/g in 20 hours) between 
2  and  0.05  V,  and  held  at  the  end  of  each  discharge  until  the  current  dropped  to  below  C/100  [504].  Adopted  from  mentioned  references  after  the 
required permission. 

+

+

+

/Na  corresponded  with  Na

the graphene layers, which was visualized by electron-density changes 
on the layer and led to a weakening of the interlayer C-C bonds [505]. 
This electron density was accordingly transferred into an antibonding π 
band of graphene layers [506]. During the intercalation of Na
ions into 
graphene interlayers, the IG/ID ratio decreased as the discharge voltage 
was lowered. The intensity of the G-band dropped dramatically when 
the  voltage  reached  0.1  V,  whereas  the  D-band  intensity  remained 
constant until the final discharge voltage of 0 V [427]. However, in the 
voltage region of 0.1 V ≥ U ≥ 0 V, the width of the D-band increased 
significantly and was blue-shifted towards higher wavenumbers [506]. 
Reddy  et  al. [502]  reported  similar results  for  carbonized coconut 
shells. Fig. 22 (c) displays the discharge-charge profiles of such a hard 
carbon electrode. They suggested that the sloping stage at higher volt-
ages  between  1.2  and  0.1  V  vs.  Na
ion 
adsorption on reactive surface sites and Na
ion insertion at defect sites 
and between layers up to NaC24. Further, the accommodation of metallic 
Na  in  the  nanopores  occurred  in  the  plateau  region  at  0.1-0.0  V  vs. 
/Na.  However,  the  defect  concentration  should  not  be  too  high, 
Na
because  the  activation  barriers  for  the  Na
ion  diffusion  increase 
considerably close to defect sites, and these increased barriers could be 
an explanation for part of the irreversible capacity. The initial charge 
capacity was 254 mAh/g, with an irreversible capacity loss of 95 mAh/g. 
Stratford et al. [504] also proposed a two-stage mechanism for insertion 
of Na
ions into hard carbons. These researchers found that operando 
23Na ssNMR spectra were dominated by two peaks at -10 ppm and 1135 
ppm for the pristine electrochemical cell corresponding to the NaPF6 in 
the electrolyte and the Na metal counter electrode, respectively. In the 
electrochemical process at voltages ~0.8 V, a single resonance initially 
appeared close to 0 ppm. The observed peak at ~0 ppm was related to 
the formation of the SEI layer related to electrolyte decomposition. At 
the  sloping  region  close  to  a  voltage  of  0.8  V,  the  signal  shifted  to  a 
negative  frequency of -40 ppm. However, a small negative shift at -4 

+

+

+

+

+

ppm was detected by ex situ 23Na MAS NMR. These observations indi-
cated the transfer of charge from inserted Na to carbon sheets at higher 
voltages associated with a localized charge near the carbon defects and 
not  throughout  the  whole  graphene  sheets.  The  researchers  therefore 
suggested that at higher voltages Na is largely deposited on pore walls 
and  in  larger  interlayer  regions,  most  likely  near  defects.  Finally,  by 
reaching a voltage below 0.18 V, an additional signal at a positive fre-
quency of 760 ppm emerged (Fig. 22 (d)) which implied that the sodium 
species  became  metallic  during  the  electrochemical  process.  They 
+
concluded regarding the strong ionic binding energy between the Na
ions and the defects (mono- and divacancies), and the weakened van der 
Waals interaction, that Na
ion intercalation was enhanced greatly at 
+(cid:0) C  interaction  gradually 
higher  voltages.  At  lower  voltages,  the  Na
became  less  ionic  and  the  charge  transfer  to  the  Na
ions  increased, 
which finally resulted in the extension of Na clusters as more metallic 
into the pore structure. However, at lower voltages the Na
iintercala-
tion between disordered graphene layers continued. 

+

+

+

+

Yet another scenario is discussed in a mechanistic sense to under-
stand  the  underlying  process  in  the  sloping  and  plateau  regions.  The 
sloping region in the voltage range of 1 V ≥ U ≥ 0.1 V is considered to 
belong to Na
ion adsorption at disordered graphene layers of the hard 
carbon material and the plateau region at ≈0.1 V is related to nanopore 
filling.  Zhang  et  al.  [507]  investigated  a  polyacrylonitrile  (PAN) 
carbonized at temperatures higher than 1000
C. Here, the sloping re-
+
gion was related to Na
ion storage on isolated or randomly oriented 
graphene layers and defect sites created by heteroatoms. The high spe-
cific  charging  capacity  obtained  at  voltages  ≥1  V  was  most  likely 
reached  by  the  high  content  of  heteroatoms.  The  constancy  of  the 
d-spacing  of  the  carbonized  PAN  during  Na
ion  storage  showed  a 
relationship of the development of the plateau region and the nanopore 
filling. By increasing the temperature above 2000
C, the sloping region 
diminished because of the improved ordering of graphene layers and the 

+

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092929N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

removal  of  the  heteroatoms.  A  single  plateau  at  almost  0.1  V  with  a 
capacity of ≈200 mAh/g remained. In the study of Kano et al. [508], 
◦
C with a high volume of closed pores of 
hard carbons prepared at 2600
0.37 cm3/g yielded a high reversible capacity of up to 413 mAh/g in the 
+
/Na [509]. Kamiyama et al. [510] 
voltage range of 0.2 to 0.0 V vs. Na
confirmed the participation of the large total volume of the closed pores 
produced at high temperatures to a high specific capacity at U < 0.15 V. 
Zhang et al. [495] demonstrated that the presence of closed pores 
rather than open pores in hard carbons were responsible for Na-metal 
cluster formation. Here, hard carbons derived from lotus stems treated 
◦
at  1400
C compared to other carbonization temperatures showed the 
highest  closed  nanopore  volume  which  contributed  to  the  largest 
plateau capacity at low voltage. The researchers assumed that at high 
temperatures open pores due to the internal structure shrinkage were 
sealed and thus, the closed pore ratio reached a maximum for the sample 
◦
treated  at  1400
C 
exhibited a distinct plateau capacity at -0.01 V, which further proved 
that Na metal deposition was linearly related to the closed pore ratio. 
Kubota et al. [491] suggested that small internal micropores formed at 
low  temperatures  between  the  carbon  planes  are  preferable  for  Li  to 
form small and planar clusters, whereas large micropores formed at high 
temperatures  support  the  Na  clustering.  Additionally,  the  reversible 
specific  sodiation  capacities  of  hard  carbons  independent  of  the  syn-
thesis temperature are mainly dominated by the formation of pseudo-
metallic Na clusters in micropores. 

C.  Comparatively,  the  sample  treated  at  1400

◦

4.5. Aspects of the potassium-storage mechanism 

Although the electrochemical properties of Na- and Li-cation storage 
in  hard  carbons  have  been  discussed  in  depth,  the  detailed  K-cation 
storage mechanism in hard carbon materials remains unclear. A broadly 
accepted  K-storage  mechanism  in  hard  carbons  is  the  adsorption- 
intercalation mechanism [313,483,511,512]. 

◦

+

Alvin et al. [313] suggested that Na and K voltage profiles, besides 
showing the sloping at higher voltages, also displayed plateau regions at 
lower voltages. This observation was in contrast with the voltage profile 
of Li with only a sloping region. The plateau capacities of SIB and KIB 
originate from the ion insertion into the graphitic layers, whereas ion 
adsorption on the defect sites is responsible for the sloping capacities. 
However, the contribution of the capacity in SIB usually attributed to the 
plateau region was more distinct compared to KIBs. As the carbonization 
temperature increased from 1000 to 1500
C, the sloping capacity in the 
LIB,  SIB  and  KIB  gradually  decreased,  while  the  low-voltage  plateau 
capacity in SIB and KIB increased. They demonstrated that Li
, and 
ions intercalated into the graphitic domains of lignin derived-hard 
K
carbons at low voltages of 0, 0.1, and 0.25 V, respectively [313]. Chen 
et al. [511] also confirmed the K
ion insertion mechanism proposed by 
Alvin  et  al.  [313]  but  showed  a  poor  rate  capability  with  increasing 
carbonization temperature related to a higher degree of graphitization. 
Along with these observations, Qian et al. [513] were able to follow the 
influence of mesopores on the adsorption and the later intercalation of 
K
ions into a disordered carbon. According to their results, such pores 
are able to accommodate up to six K
ions which enhances the transport 
kinetics significantly. Additionally, the IG/ID  ratio as a measure of the 
defect concentration in the carbon matrix obtained from Raman spec-
troscopy measurements seem to play a more important role than other 
properties like interlayer distance, adsorption capacity or specific sur-
face area in KIBs. 

, Na

+

+

+

+

+

Recently,  Kubota  et  al.  [491]  demonstrated  another  mechanistic 
consideration focused on the storage of potassium into the spacing be-
tween the graphene layers at a higher voltage, and K
ion insertion into 
micropores at a low voltage. Within the three sloping potential regions 
of 0.002-0.2, 0.2-0.7, and 0.7-2.0 V vs. K
ions insert first into the 
large graphene interlayer spacing accessible in the high-potential region 
of 0.7-2.0 V vs. K
ions occupy the narrow 
/K. In a second step, the K
interlayer at the intermediate potential region of 0.2-0.7 V vs. K
/K. The 

/K, K

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

third insertion into the micropores takes place in the low potential re-
/K.  The  carbonization  temperature  was 
gion  of  0.002-0.2  V  vs.  K
identified as the main influence on the insertion mechanism. For sam-
ples treated at low temperatures the dominant mechanism is the inser-
tion  of  K
ions  into  the  larger  spacings  between  the  graphene  layers 
while higher temperatures support the intercalation of K
ions into the 
interlayer with small distances. 

+

+

+

+

+

+

/Na. This higher intercalation voltage of K

Fig. 23 (a-b) present the dQ/dV curves in which intercalation and de- 
intercalation of K
ions into and out of the hard carbon was started at 0.2 
V and 0.33 V respectively, versus K
/K, whereas both intercalation and 
ions were detected at voltages lower than 0.1 V 
de-intercalation of Na
+
versus Na
ions into hard 
carbons enabled  them to tolerate the  larger potential polarizations at 
higher current densities. Thus, a better rate capability was expected that 
would enable KIBs to perform better than SIBs, especially with respect to 
high-power energy storage applications. Fig. 23 (c-d) display voltage- 
capacity  curves  during  the  potassiation/depotassiation  and  sodium/ 
desodiation of hard carbon electrodes with two sloping and two plateau 
potential regions. At a slow rate of C/10, a reversible capacity of 262 
mAh/g was obtained for the depotassiation process, which is lower than 
322 mAh/g associated with the desodiation process. At C-rates ≥ C/2, 
the capacities of the KIB outperformed those of SIB (Fig. 23 (e)). GITT 
experiments were conducted at C/10 to investigate the cause (Fig. 23 
(f)). Surprisingly, the diffusion coefficient of the K
ions was determined 
ions  in  both  insertion  and 
to  be  slightly  higher  compared  to  Na
removal.  This  unexpected  difference  in  the  diffusion  coefficients  was 
explained by different binding energies between K and carbon and Na 
and carbon. A lower charge density of the larger K
ion, the different 
levels of ionicity of Na
ions, and their varying ability to form 
covalent bonds with carbon structural sites were identified as the main 
influences [514]. 

and K

+

+

+

+

+

For improving the specific capacity of a KIB at high rates, utilization 
of N-doped hard carbons with a porous surface as anode materials were 
proposed. However, to avoid the low initial CE attributed to the high 
specific surface area of hard carbons, some researchers revealed sodium 
carboxymethylcellulose (CMCNa) as binder which had a significant ef-
fect on the electrochemical performance [515–517]. CMCNa increased 
mechanical strength and stability of the formed SEI and improved the 
initial CE by 10% as compared with polyvinylidene fluoride [518]. 

Hierarchical porous hard carbons with a specific surface area of 1030 
m2/g were subjected to dual-heteroatom doping (N and O). This pro-
cedure led to specific capacities of 365 and 118 mAh/g at 0.025 and 3 A/ 
g, respectively. The quasi-rectangular shape of the CV suggests that the 
+
total K charge storage results from a faradaic insertion/extraction of K
ions and a reversible non-faradaic adsorption, whereas the contribution 
of the non-faradaic adsorption becomes more significant at higher rates 
[515]. Chen et al. [430] reported the synthesis of shrimp shell-derived 
hierarchically  porous  nitrogen-doped  carbon  microspheres.  The  spe-
cific capacity of 154 mAh/g at a high rate of 72 C and great cyclic ca-
pacity  of  180  mAh/g  at  1.8  C  over  4000  cycles  demonstrated  a 
promising performance of this porous carbon as anode material in KIBs. 
The investigated hierarchically porous and additionally nitrogen-doped 
microstructure  of  the  obtained  carbon  caused  a  capacitive  (surface--
driven)  process  that  dominated  the  charge-storage  behavior.  In  the 
+
voltage  profile,  no  obvious  plateau  at  ~0.2  V  corresponding  to  K
intercalation was detected, which underlined that the majority of the 
capacity resulted from the surface-driven reaction in the sloping region. 
The valence-electron density of the K atom was totally transferred to the 
bonding  carbon  in  this  example  and  was  accumulated  around  the 
N-doping site. In addition, DFT calculations revealed that pyridinic N, 
which was identified as the dominating N species in the obtained porous 
carbon, increased the amount of ionic K(cid:0) C bonds around itself and thus 
led  to  stronger  K
ion  adsorption.  These  results  clearly  point  to  the 
contribution of N doping to improve the performance of potassium-ion 
batteries. 

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092930N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  23. dQ  /dV  profiles  of  a)  potassiation  and  depot-
assiation,  b)  sodiation  and  desodiation  of  hard  carbons. 
Discharge/charge profiles at C/10 in the second cycle of c) 
hard carbon/K half-cell, and d) hard carbon/Na half-cell. e) 
Rate  capability  performance  of  hard  carbon/K  and  hard 
carbon/Na  half  cells,  and  f)  diffusion  coefficients  calcu-
lated  from  the  GITT  experiments  for  hard  carbon/K  and 
hard carbon/Na half cells during the second charging cycle. 
Adopted from [514] after the required permission.   

4.6. Summary of the biomass-derived carbons and their respective battery 
performances 

Table 2 presents a comprehensive comparison of all affecting aspects 
of  the  biomass-derived  carbons  synthesized  by  various  methods.  To 
date, many groups tried to modify the carbon structure using various 
methods  to  improve  the  performance  of  these  materials  as  potential 
anodes  in  batteries.  However,  a  systematical  understanding  of  the 
overall functioning of hard carbons in batteries is challenging and still a 
subject  of  controversy.  Mainly  the  uncontrolled  heterogeneity  of  the 
carbon  materials  obtained  from  different  biomass  sources  by  distinct 
synthesis  approaches  is  the  most  important  reason.  Generally,  some 
carbon  materials  inherit  their  biomass  structure,  while  others  are 
modified by more complex methods to obtain the desired structure, such 
as particles, nanofibers and nanotubes. Significant results were achieved 
to control the final carbon porosity content, size and shape in order to 
improve  its  performance  in  the  final  battery.  In  addition,  doping  the 
carbon, with elements such as B, N, F, P or metals with electron acceptor 
or  donor  capability  in  order  to  modify  crystallite  domains,  interlayer 
distances and the number of point defects, is another way to increase the 
efficiency of these materials for battery operation. However, if the defect 
concentration generated around the elements is too high, it will act as an 
obstacle to the free movement of metal ions and electrons or can simply 
trap the adsorbed ions leading to irreversible capacities. 

In  all  biomass-derived  hard  carbons,  different  characteristics  like 
inherent porosity and defects, a wide range of interlayer spacings, the 

presence of (natural) doping elements such as N and P, exist simulta-
neously. These synergetic effects make it difficult to understand which 
factor plays a decisive role in increasing battery capacity or long-term 
stability. Nevertheless, the first principle to reach a relatively high and 
stable performance of hard carbon materials is to provide a structure 
facilitating  ion  movement  during  charging  and  discharging.  As  the 
second,  a  sufficient  electrical  conductivity  is  needed  which  directly 
impacts the charge transfer. 

Pores can irreversibly trap metal ions, therefore, a low specific sur-
face area of less than 40 m2/g with a low micropore volume is desirable. 
For potassium, even mesopores can be beneficial. A low specific surface 
area  can  suppress  parasitic  side  reactions,  thus  reducing  irreversible 
capacity losses during the charging and discharging processes. Consid-
ering  that,  lignin  hard  carbons  with  the  lowest  specific  surface  area 
exhibit  the  highest  Coulombic  efficiency.  Moreover,  the  presence  of 
meso-  and  macropores  in  lignin-derived  hard  carbons  supports  ionic 
diffusion. This effect becomes more pronounced when these pores are 
interconnected. However, the low-potential Na
ion storage and amount 
of close, non-interconnected pores increase with temperature of the heat 
treatment. Heat treatments of carbons at T > 1500
C lead to a trans-
formation of open to closed pores. From the other side, increasing the 
distance between carbon layers as well as enhancing the crystallinity can 
support  metal  ion  accommodation,  especially  in  case  of  Na  and  K. 
Doping of carbons with some electronegative elements can also help to 
accelerate alkaline ion diffusion and fast charge transfer. 

+

◦

The electrical conductivity of carbon is the other important factor for 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092931N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2 
Biomass-derived hard carbons and their performances as anodes in LIBs, SIBs and KIBs  

Salt/electrolyte/binder 

Mass 
loading 

Voltage 
range (V) 

Reversible capacity (mAh/g)/ 
Current density (A/g)/ Cycles 

Morphology/ interlayer distance 

BET(m2/g)/pore volume 
(cm3/g)/pore diameter(nm) 

1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 

1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 

5-8 mg 

0.01-3 

660/0.1/180 

Nanosheet /- 

LIBs 

—- 

0.01-3 

730/0.1/150 

N-doped spherical particles / 0.35 
nm 

719/0.46/2.6 

336/–/2-50 

25 µm 

0-3 

285/0.1/100 

Irregular shape /– 

<10/non-porous 

1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PTFE 

~12 g/ 
m2 
30 g/m2 

0.01-3 

837/0.1/50 

Carbon sheet 

0.01–3 

1052/0.1/80 

0-1.5 

350/0.03/50 

0-3 

137/3.75/10 

N-doped interconnected 
frameworks structure 

Quasi-spherical structural 
including disoriented graphene 
layer 
Fibers 

2500/–/1.4-1.7 

1940/1.3/3.2 

— 

243/0.41/0-25 

0.02- 2 

394/0.007/8 

microporous 

380/0.2/1-2 

1.4 mg 

0.01-3 

474/1/400 

3D connected porous structure 

706/–/<2 

10 g/m2 

0.001-2.8 

221/0.5/600 

Irregular shape /0.39 

130/0.19/~3 

—- 

—- 

3.5-4 g/ 
m2 
8-10 g/ 
m2 
5-8 mg 

0-2 

116/0.5/500 

0.01-3 

301/1/100 

0.01-2.5 

390/0.4/75 

0.01-3 

1488/1/250 

Microtubular carbon fibers / 0.39- 
0.4 
Irregular shape 

29/0.04/<10 

638/–/<2 

N- doped interconnected porous 
structure / 0.38 
Fiber bundle-like structure 

1980/0.93/4-30 

2096/1.83/4 

0.01-3 

523/0.1/180 

3D rod-like micro-structure /– 

344/0.22/2.53 

50 µm 

0.005-3 

471/0.037/50 

Irregular microporous structure 

146/0.05/5 

—- 

—- 

13 g/m2 

0-3 

0-3 

0-3 

270/0.37/100 

Irregular microporous structure 

549/0.31/– 

180/0.074/100 

Irregular microporous structure 

587/0.33/– 

1331/0.1/50 

3D connected porous structure 

1250/ –/1-4 

1.5 mg 

0.005-3 

577/0.1/20 

0.5 mg 

0.01-3 

260/0.1/700 

0.01-3 

620/0.1/100 

Quasi-porous spherical 
morphology 
Hierarchically porous carbon 
nanoribbons 
Porous particle 

133/–/– 

19.6/–/6-26 

1967/0.876/2-8 

1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 

1 M LiPF6 EC:DMC (1:1, v/ 
v) and FEC/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DMC:EMC 
(1:1:1, v/v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DMC:DEC 
(1:1:1, v/v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DMC:EMC 
(1:1:1, v/v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DMC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M LiPF6 EC:DMC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ no binder 
—— 

Biomass 
resources 

Corn cob 
[519] 

Indian 

prawn 
shell [520] 

Coffee 

grounds 
[521] 

Coir pith 
[522] 

Sugarcane 
bagasse 
[523] 

Mangrove 
charcoal 
[524] 

Rice straw 
[525] 

Pinecone 
[526] 

Peanut shell 

[527] 

Banana peel 

[104] 

Bamboo 
[528] 

Orange peel 

[529] 

Fish scale 
[530] 

Cattle bone 

[531] 

Ramie fiber 

[519] 

Tea leaves 
[532] 

Cherry 

stone [533] 
Olive stone 

[533] 

Human hair 

[534] 

Coconut oil 

[405] 

Mushrooms 

[535] 

Cashew nut 
sheath 
[536] 

Walnut shell 

[537] 

1 M LiPF6 EC:DMC (1:1, v/ 
v)/PVDF 

Corn cob 
[499] 

Shaddock 
peel [538] 

Indian 

prawn 
shell [520] 

Coffee 

grounds 
[523] 

Coir pith 
[539] 

Sugarcane 
bagasse 
[540] 

Switchgrass 

[541] 

Mangrove 
charcoal 
[542] 

0.6 M NaPF6 in EC:DMC (1: 
1 V)/ Sodium alginate 
1M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1M NaPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 

1 M NaClO4/ TEGDME/ 
PVDF 

1 M NaClO4  EC: PC (1:1 v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 

1 M NaClO4   EC:DEC (1:1 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaPF6 PC/ SBR-CMC 

0.01-3 

150/0.1/100 

Nano fibers 

408/0.25/0.8-1 

20-30 g/ 
m2 
—- 

0-2 

0-3 

SIBs 
275/0.06/100 

350/0.05/250 

0.01-3 

325/0.1/200 

Irregular non-porous particles 
/0.398 
Honeycomb-like morphology/0.38 

N-doped spherical particles/ 0.35 
nm 

3.7/–/– 

82/0.049/0.6-15 

336/–/2-50 

0.01-3 

154/0.2/50 

Irregular porous particles /– 

94/–/10-30 

20 g/m2 

0.01-3 

220/0.05/300 

Microporous graphene sheet 

2500/–/– 

15 g/m2 

0.01-2 

220/0.1/300 

Flake-like morphology /0.374 

2/–/– 

50 g/m2 

0.01-2 

200/0.025/400 

—- 

0-2 

278/0.03/5 

3D structure with linked 
macropores 
Irregular shape/0.37 

620/–/1.7-110 

6.8/–/~0.52 

(continued on next page) 

—- 

—- 

—- 

—- 

—- 

—- 

—- 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092932N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2 (continued ) 

Salt/electrolyte/binder 

Mass 
loading 

Voltage 
range (V) 

Reversible capacity (mAh/g)/ 
Current density (A/g)/ Cycles 

Morphology/ interlayer distance 

BET(m2/g)/pore volume 
(cm3/g)/pore diameter(nm) 

Biomass 
resources 

Rice straw 
[543] 

Pinecone 
[102] 

Argan shell 

[544] 

Peanut shell 

[527] 

Banana peel 

[104] 

Orange peel 

[529] 

Apple [545] 

Ramie fiber 

[519] 

Bamboo 
[528] 

Blue-green 

algae [546] 
Wheat straw 

[547] 

Coconut oil 

[405] 

Cashew nut 
sheath 
[536] 

Cotton [184] 

Egg shell 
[548] 

Walnut shell 

[549] 

Pistachio 

shell [550] 

Holly leaf 
[551] 

Pomelo 

peels [450] 

Peat moss 
[250] 

Wood 

cellulose 
[552] 

Okara [127] 

Lotus 

petiole 
[343] 

Apricot 

shell [144] 
Dandelions 

[103] 

Coconut 

shell [502] 

1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ CMC 
1 M NaPF6  EC: DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC/PC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ CMC 
1 M NaClO4 EC: DEC(1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4   EC:DMC (1:1, 
v/v) and FEC/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4   EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:PC (1:1, v/ 
v) and FEC/ PVDF 
—— 

0.8 M NaPF6 EC: DMC (1:1, 
v/v)/ Sodium alginate 
1 M NaClO4 PC/PVDF 

1 M NaClO4 EC:DMC (1:1, 
v/v) and FEC/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:PC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:PC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC: DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4   EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ no binder 

1 M NaClO4 EC: DMC (1:1, 
v/v) and FEC/ PTFE 
1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 

1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 EC:DEC (1:1, 
v/v)/ PVDF 
1 M NaClO4 PC and FEC/ 
PVDF 

Potato [553] 

3M KFSI DME/PVDF 

Ganoderma 
lucidum 
spore 
[554] 

Walnut 

septum 
[555] 

Loofah [489] 

Cotton [556] 
Soybeans 
[483] 

Hard-wood 
(oak) [557] 

Sucrose 
[557] 

1.0 M KPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 

0.8 M KPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 

1.0 M KPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
1.0 M KPF6 DME/ PVDF 
0.8 M KPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
0.4 M KPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 
0.4 M KPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 

10-15 g/ 
m2 
15-25 g/ 
m2 
12-20 g/ 
m2 
1.4 mg 

—- 

—- 

22-25 g/ 
m2 
—- 

—- 

—- 

—- 

0.01-2 

346/0.025/100 

Irregular granular shape /0.395 

~0/~0/undetectable 

0.001-2 

334/0.03/120 

Irregular shape /0.381 

40/0.03/3 

0-2 

300/0.025/70 

Irregularly shape /0.385 

24/0.018/3 

0.01-3 

190/0.25/400 

3D connected porous structure 

706/– /<2 

0.001-2.8 

210/0.5/600 

Irregular shape /0.39 

130/0.19/ ~3 

0.01-3 

156/0.5/100 

Irregular shape 

0.02-3 

245/0.02/80 

Irregular shape /0.385 

0.01-3 

122/0.1/100 

Nano-sheet/- 

0-2 

200/0.1/160 

0.01-2.5 

230/0.02/60 

Microtubular carbon fibers/0.39- 
0.4 
Carbon filament/0.36 

638/–/<2 

196/–/– 

719/0.46/2.6 

29/0.04/<10 

– 

0.01-3 

221/0.05/200 

Linked tubular macropores/ 0.383 

111/0.09/3.8 

1.5 mg 

0.005-3 

203/0.1/50 

Quasi-spherical morphology 

133/–/– 

—- 

0.01-3.0 

200/0.1/100 

Porous particle 

1967/0.876/2-8 

25-35 g/ 
m2 
10-15 g/ 
m2 
2-3 mg 

—- 

—- 

—- 

10 g/m2 

25 g/m2 

0-2 

305/0.03/100 

0.001-3 

246/0.05/200 

0.01-3 

170/0.1/300 

0.001-2 

185/0.6/500 

Hollow fibers with diameters 
around 10-20 μm/0.41 
Carbon fibers 

Continuous pore channel shape 
/0.37 
Irregular shape/0.36 

38/–/1-1.5 

28/–/– 

59/–/– 

137/0.06/0.74 

0.01-3 

253/0.02/100 

Lamellar structure/– 

–/–/1 

0-3 

181/0.2/220 

0.001-2.8 

255/0.1/200 

0.01-2.5 

196/0.1/200 

Carbon sheets with 3D connected 
porous structure / 
Nanosheets with hollow 
macroporous architecture /0.388 
Ribbon-like structure 

1272/–/4-23 

197/0.18/<4 

126/–/– 

14 g/m2 

0.01 -2 

247/0.11/50 

10-15 g/ 
m2 

0.001-2.8 

228/0.2/200 

12 g/m2 

0-2.5 

338/0.1/300 

0.001-3 

364/0.05/10 

N-doped- loosely packed graphitic 
sheets /0.39 
F doped-Irregulat shape/0.4 

– 

46/–/– 

3D connected porous structure 
/0.38 
Smooth hollow tube/0.37 

13/– 

5/– 

– 

10-20 g/ 
m2 
15-20 g/ 
m2 

8-12 g/ 
m2 
—- 

0-2 

250/0.01/40 

Irregular shape/– 

0.01-2.7 

196/0.5/400 

Irregular shape/– 

531/–/9.2 

KIBs 

0.02–3 

195/0.1/100 

Caged porous carbon/– 

104/–/– 

—- 

0.005- 3 

120/1/1000 

10-20 g/ 
m2 
—- 
15 g/m2 

0.01-3 

150/0.1/200 

0-2 
0.01-3 

120/2/500 
196/0.05/900 

N-doped porous tubular 
structures/0.376 

honeycomb-like micro-tubular 
structure 
Hollow fiber structure 
Irregular shape/0.38 

2.4 mg 

0.01-2.5 

150/0.1/150 

20 g/m2 

0.01-2.5 

50/0.1/150 

Interwoven nanoporous channels/ 
0.4 
Porous spherical particle /0.4 

100/–/20 

270/0.17/3.6 

427/–/1.88 
380/0.19/2 

156/–/3-20 

65/– 

—- 

0.01-3 

180/0.5/4000 

N-doped porous microspheres 

563/–/10 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092933N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2 (continued ) 

Biomass 
resources 

Sea food 
waste 
[430] 

Rice husk 
[512] 

Salt/electrolyte/binder 

Mass 
loading 

Voltage 
range (V) 

Reversible capacity (mAh/g)/ 
Current density (A/g)/ Cycles 

Morphology/ interlayer distance 

BET(m2/g)/pore volume 
(cm3/g)/pore diameter(nm) 

0.8 M KPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 

0.8 M KPF6 EC:DEC (1:1, v/ 
v)/ PVDF 

15 g/m2 

0.01–3 

103/0.5/300 

Irregular shape/0.39 

115/0.13/<3  

battery performance. Hard carbons with a low density of less than 1.5 g/ 
cm3  hamper  a  preparation  of  thin  conductive  electrodes,  having  less 
contact to the current collector. To decrease the thickness of the elec-
trode, hard carbons with a low specific surface area and random mor-
phologies 
including  broad  particle  size  distribution  for  dense 
compacting are desired. 

Furthermore, low intrinsic electrical conductivity and unsatisfactory 
rate performance of the biomass-derived hard carbon carbon are mainly 
linked to its disordered structure. The graphitization of a non-ordered 
carbon  structure  using  transition  metals  as  catalysts  to  have  a  non- 
graphitic/graphitic composite matrix, or modification of the graphene 
layer structure with elements such as nitrogen, can increase the elec-
trical  conductivity.  Among  biomass  waste  materials,  those  with  high 
cellulose content showed higher degrees of graphitization compared to 
that  of  materials  enriched  with  lignin  even  at  high  temperatures 
(>2000
C). However, cellulose has a low carbon content that makes it 
economically  unsuitable  for  extensive  use.  Therefore,  specific  modifi-
cation of lignin with its higher carbon content, e.g. by iron-catalyzed 
processes,  can  yield  larger  amounts  of  an  electrically  higher  conduc-
tive material. 

◦

5. Summary and outlook 

Rechargeable alkali metal-ion batteries are already well established 
for many devices that require cordless power supply. These applications 
are  realized  primarily  by  batteries  with  lithium-based  chemistries 
because lithium enables high energy power (e.g. for tools) or high en-
ergy  density  needed  for  vehicles  in  versatile  battery  architectures. 
Despite  the  advantages  of  lithium-based  batteries,  the  limited  avail-
ability of lithium may help to support the breakthrough of rechargeable 
sodium  and  potassium  batteries.  Indeed,  the  last  10  years  have  wit-
nessed great effort toward making such batteries into promising candi-
dates  for  next-generation  energy  storage  devices.  However,  these 
devices  still  need  materials  with  even  higher  electrode  performance, 
especially to improve power and energy density. 

Graphite is to date the most used anode material in LIBs, which also 
promises  for  suitable  electrochemical  storage  performance  properties 
for sodium- and potassium-ion batteries. However, the large Coulombic 
repulsion between lithium cations in the nearest-neighbor sites and the 
ineffectiveness of graphite to accommodate noteworthy concentrations 
of sodium cations between the graphene layers restricts the storage of 
large amount of heavier alkali metal ions in graphite. 

Nevertheless,  in  the  process  of  purifying  natural  graphite,  hydro-
fluoric acid must be used to remove silicate impurities. Intensive use of 
this toxic acid can pose detrimental impact on the environment. Syn-
thetic  graphite  produced  from  coking  natural  pitches  or  residues  of 
crude-oil  distillation  at  2500–3000
C  with  better  performance  and 
reliability compared to natural graphite still suffers from the long pro-
duction process and high energy consumption. The use of fossil fuels to 
support  its  production  process  results  in  additional  CO2  emission 
(7.5–9.9 kg CO2 per kWh) [558]. Thus, it is mandartory to progressively 
introduce  domestic,  sustainable,  and  non-toxic  sources  to  synthesize 
graphite anodes at relatively low temperatures and without the use of 
hydrofluoric acid. 

◦

Hard carbon is typically produced from fossil sources and biomass. It 
represents  a  non-graphitizable,  amorphous  carbon  with  randomly 

distributed clusters of partially oriented graphene sheets, and can offer 
more active storage sites and show better electrochemical performance 
than the highly ordered graphite. 

However, the cost of carbon from fossil sources is unpredictable as it 
is related to, e.g. the price of crude oil in stock exchanges or nowadays to 
climate taxes, as such a carbon is not sustainable. By contrast, biomass 
from different sources, including wastes, offers versatile carbon struc-
tures  and  an  easy  and  generally  cost-effective  carbonization  strategy, 
with  an  increasing  economic  value  by  the  finishing  to  a  high-value 
product.  Biomass-derived  carbon  products  of  different  structure 
dimensionality  have  received  an  increasing  level  of  interest  for  the 
fabrication  of  electrodes  for  energy  storage  devices.  The  focus  has 
initially been set on applications as anodes in alkali metal-ion batteries. 
Nevertheless,  the  application  of  biomass-derived  hard  carbons  in  a 
cathode composite may also be valuable for improving the performance 
of alkali-metal batteries, especially SIBs and KIBs [439]. 

However, some barriers need to be overcome to industrially produce 
carbon from most biomass sources for application as anodes. Sources of 
biomass are quite diffuse and may not be available in sufficient quan-
tities. Many sources also suffer from a low carbon yield and substantial 
efforts for purification are required. In view of the typically non-uniform 
structure  of  biomass,  it  may  remain  challenging  to  reproduce  the 
carbonization  process  on  an  industrial  scale,  in  particular,  to  safely 
control the morphology and structure of the biomass-derived carbon to 
guarantee  a  product  with  constant  properties.  This  aspect  can  be 
considered as the skeleton key to its use as anode materials in a battery. 
Indeed, the chemical composition of the same type of biomass can vary 
based on soil feeding type, age of the plants, fertilizer and pesticide dose, 
harvesting time, and the climate and geographical conditions [49,559, 
560].  Although  this  composition  variation  of  biomass  growing  at 
different conditions are not significant. It can change between 38-44% 
for cellulose, 20-23% for hemicellulose and 18-22 % for lignin [561]. 
Therefore,  it  is  crucial  that future  work  provides  deeper  insights  into 
understanding  of  the  composition  of  biomass  precursors  and  the 
mechanisms underlying the biomass-related effects and properties of the 
final carbon. 

As  a  further  subject,  the  broad  use  of  biomass  resources  to  create 
sustainable  and  eco-friendly  batteries  should  be  scrutinized.  One 
important  milestone  for  battery  use  is  the  zero  CO2  emission  electric 
vehicle (EV). Beside the aspect of non-fossil fuel power generation for 
the climate neutral EV, producing carbons from phytomass as plants or 
utilizing waste biomass can actively store larger amounts of CO2 and can 
be  one  important  part  in  the  mission  to  keep  the  CO2  value  at  least 
constant.  Biomass sources themselves reduce our dependence on fossil 
fuels  can  decrease  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  However,  this  idea  is 
working for fast growing plants and that as fast as the biomass is burned, 
new trees or plants take up CO2 produced by the combustion. Thus, the 
CO2 cycle theoretically remains in balance, and no extra carbon is added 
to the environment. Some possible solutions and outlooks can be found 
elsewhere  [562–565].  In  addition,  when  the  battery  electrodesreach 
their end-of-life, they could be decomposed biologically or incinerated, 
and its compounds can be recycled to the environment. 

Beside all positive aspects, negative sides are identified as well and 
need to be solved to avoid environmental and social discrepancies or 
worse. Disturbing the balance of an ecological or a social system can be 
disastrous that may comprise economic reasons like land speculation, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092934N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

concurring  crops  like  food  vs.  energy  production,  monocultures, 
extended land or water consumption to name just a few [566–568]. Even 
continuously removing “waste” biomass from the natural life cycle, that 
would otherwise become mixed manure at natural conditions, may have 
long-term negative effects on soil fertility and wildlife habitat [569]. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgment 

N.S. and A.B. acknowledges the Alexander von Humboldt Founda-

tion for the Postdoctoral Research Fellow funding. 

References 

[1] Goodenough JB, Park K-S. The Li-ion rechargeable battery: a perspective. J Am 

Chem Soc 2013;135:1167–76. 

[2] Høyer KG. The history of alternative fuels in transportation: the case of electric 

and hybrid cars. Utilities Policy 2008;16:63–71. 

[3] Bahrami A, Schierning G, Nielsch K. Waste recycling in thermoelectric materials. 

Adv Energy Mater 2020;10:1904159. 

[4] Xie X-C, Huang K-J, Wu X. Metal–organic framework derived hollow materials for 

electrochemical energy storage. J Mater Chem A 2018;6:6754–71. 
[5] Wang F-T, Wang Y-H, Xu J, Huang K-J, Liu Z-h, Lu Y-f, et al. Boosting 

performance of self-powered biosensing device with high-energy enzyme biofuel 
cells and cruciform DNA. Nano Energy 2020;68:104310. 

[6] Shuai H, Li J, Jiang F, Zhang X, Xu L, Hu J, et al. Electrochemically intercalated 
intermediate induced exfoliation of few-layer MoS2  from molybdenite for long- 
life sodium storage. Sci China Mater 2021;64:115–27. 

[7] Wang C, Li X, Zhao Y, Banis MN, Liang J, Li X, et al. Manipulating interfacial 
nanostructure to achieve high-performance all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries. 
Small Methods 2019;3:1900261. 

[8] Shuai H, Ge P, Hong W, Li S, Hu J, Hou H, et al. Electrochemically Exfoliated 

Phosphorene–Graphene Hybrid for Sodium-Ion Batteries. Small Methods 2019;3: 
1800328. 

[9] Bahrami A, Soltani N, Pech-Canul MI, Guti´errez CA. Development of metal-matrix 
composites from industrial/agricultural waste materials and their derivatives. 
Crit Rev Environ Sci Technol 2016;46:143–208. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10643389.2015.1077067. 

[10] Lu L, Han X, Li J, Hua J, Ouyang M. A review on the key issues for lithium-ion 

battery management in electric vehicles. J Power Sources 2013;226:272–88. 

[11] Daniel C. Lithium ion batteries and their manufacturing challenges. The Bridge 

(Washington, DC) 2015;45:21–4. 

[12] Slater MD, Kim D, Lee E, Johnson CS. Sodium-ion batteries. Adv Funct Mater 

2013;23:947–58. 

[13] Inagaki M. Applications of graphite intercalation compounds. J Mater Res 1989;4: 

1560–8. 

[14] Li J, Rui B, Wei W, Nie P, Chang L, Le Z, et al. Nanosheets assembled layered 
MoS2/MXene as high performance anode materials for potassium ion batteries. 
J Power Sources 2020;449:227481. 

[15] Li Y, Lu Y, Adelhelm P, Titirici M-M, Hu Y-S. Intercalation chemistry of graphite: 

alkali metal ions and beyond. Chem Soc Rev 2019;48:4655–87. 

[16] Zhang W, Liu Y, Guo Z. Approaching high-performance potassium-ion batteries 
via advanced design strategies and engineering. Sci Adv 2019;5:eaav7412. 

[17] Dahn JR, Zheng T, Liu Y, Xue J. Mechanisms for lithium insertion in 

carbonaceous materials. Science 1995;270:590–3. 

[18] Zheng T, Liu Y, Fuller E, Tseng S, Von Sacken U, Dahn J. Lithium insertion in high 
capacity carbonaceous materials. J Electrochem Soc 1995;142:2581–90. 
[19] Stephan AM, Kumar TP, Ramesh R, Thomas S, Jeong SK, Nahm KS. Pyrolitic 

carbon from biomass precursors as anode materials for lithium batteries. Mater 
Sci Eng: A 2006;430:132–7. 

[20] Peng Y-T, Lo C-T. Effect of microstructure and morphology of electrospun ultra- 
small carbon nanofibers on anode performances for lithium ion batteries. 
J Electrochem Soc 2015;162:A1085–1A93. 

[21] Deng J, Xiong T, Wang H, Zheng A, Wang Y. Effects of cellulose, hemicellulose, 
and lignin on the structure and morphology of porous carbons. ACS Sustain Chem 
Eng 2016;4:3750–6. 

[22] Yang H, Yan R, Chen H, Lee DH, Zheng C. Characteristics of hemicellulose, 

cellulose and lignin pyrolysis. Fuel 2007;86:1781–8. 

[23] Cagnon B, Py X, Guillot A, Stoeckli F, Chambat G. Contributions of hemicellulose, 

cellulose and lignin to the mass and the porous properties of chars and steam 
activated carbons from various lignocellulosic precursors. Bioresour Technol 
2009;100:292–8. 

[24] Wang F, Song R, Song H, Chen X, Zhou J, Ma Z, et al. Simple synthesis of novel 

hierarchical porous carbon microspheres and their application to rechargeable 
lithium-ion batteries. Carbon 2015;81:314–21. 

[25] Robertson J. Amorphous carbon. Adv Phys 1986;35:317–74. 
[26] Robertson J. Diamond-like amorphous carbon. Mater Sci Eng: R: Reports 2002; 

37:129–281. 

[27] Seifert G, Kuc A, Heine T. Hexagon preserving carbon nanofoams.Colombo L, 

Fasolino A, editors. . Computer-based modeling of novel carbon systems and their 
properties - beyond nanotubes. Dordrecht: Springer; 2010. p. 57–77. 
[28] Dennison J, Holtz M, Swain G. Raman spectroscopy of carbon materials. 

Spectroscopy 1996;11:38–45. 

[29] Zhao M-Q, Zhang Q, Huang J-Q, Tian G-L, Nie J-Q, Peng H-J, et al. Unstacked 

double-layer templated graphene for high-rate lithium–sulphur batteries. Nat 
Commun 2014;5:3410. 

[30] Wu Z-S, Zhou G, Yin L-C, Ren W, Li F, Cheng H-M. Graphene/metal oxide 

composite electrode materials for energy storage. Nano Energy 2012;1:107–31. 
[31] Zhang K, Zhang LL, Zhao X, Wu J. Graphene/polyaniline nanofiber composites as 

supercapacitor electrodes. Chem Mater 2010;22:1392–401. 

[32] Yan J, Wei T, Shao B, Ma F, Fan Z, Zhang M, et al. Electrochemical properties of 
graphene nanosheet/carbon black composites as electrodes for supercapacitors. 
Carbon 2010;48:1731–7. 

[33] Fan Z, Yan J, Zhi L, Zhang Q, Wei T, Feng J, et al. A three-dimensional carbon 
nanotube/graphene sandwich and its application as electrode in supercapacitors. 
Adv Mater 2010;22:3723–8. 

[34] Perner A, Vetter J. Lithium-ion batteries for hybrid electric vehicles and battery 
electric vehiclesScrosati B, Garche J, Tillmetz W, editors. . Advances in Battery 
Technologies for Electric Vehicles. 1st. Cambridge (UK): Woodhead Publishing; 
2015. p. 173–90. 

[35] Sagues WJ, Yang J, Monroe N, Han S-D, Vinzant T, Yung M, et al. A simple 

method for producing bio-based anode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Green 
Chem 2020;22:7093–108. 

[36] Wollbrink A, Volgmann K, Koch J, Kanthasamy K, Tegenkamp C, Li Y, et al. 

Amorphous, turbostratic and crystalline carbon membranes with hydrogen 
selectivity. Carbon 2016;106:93–105. 

[37] Harris PJ. Structure of non-graphitising carbons. Int Mater Rev 1997;42:206–18. 
[38] Randin J-P, Yeager E. Differential capacitance study on the edge orientation of 
pyrolytic graphite and glassy carbon electrodes. J Electroanal Chem Interfacial 
Electrochem 1975;58:313–22. 

[39] Wang D, Chen J-F, Dai L. Recent Advances in Graphene Quantum Dots for 

Fluorescence Bioimaging from Cells through Tissues to Animals. Part Part Syst 
Character 2015;32:515–23. 

[40] Sun Y-P, Zhou B, Lin Y, Wang W, Fernando KAS, Pathak P, et al. Quantum-sized 
carbon dots for bright and colorful photoluminescence. J Am Chem Soc 2006;128: 
7756–7. 

[41] Huang Z, Shen Y, Li Y, Zheng W, Xue Y, Qin C, et al. Facile synthesis of analogous 

graphene quantum dots with sp2  hybridized carbon atom dominant structures 
and their photovoltaic application. Nanoscale 2014;6:13043–52. 

[42] Lim SY, Shen W, Gao Z. Carbon quantum dots and their applications. Chem Soc 

Rev 2015;44:362–81. 

[43] Ort DR, Yocum CF, Heichel IF. Oxygenic photosynthesis: the light reactions. 

Oxygenic photosynthesis: the light reactions. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers; 1996. 

[44] Song S, Ma F, Wu G, Ma D, Geng W, Wan J. Facile self-templating large scale 

preparation of biomass-derived 3D hierarchical porous carbon for advanced 
supercapacitors. J Mater Chem A 2015;3:18154–62. 

[45] Natarajan S, Lee Y-S, Aravindan V. Biomass-derived carbon materials as 

prospective electrodes for high-energy lithium- and sodium-ion capacitors. Chem 
– Asian J 2019;14:936–51. 

[46] Blaschek HP, Ezeji TC. Science of alternative feedstocks. Corn-based Ethanol in 

Illinois and the US: University of Illinois 2007:112–28. 

[47] Lee S, Speight JG, Loyalka SK. Handbook of alternative fuel technologies. 

Handbook of alternative fuel technologies. 2nd. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2018. 

[48] Alonso DM, Wettstein SG, Dumesic JA. Bimetallic catalysts for upgrading of 

biomass to fuels and chemicals. Chem Soc Rev 2012;41:8075–98. 

[49] Ma S, He F, Tian D, Zou D, Yan Z, Yang Y, et al. Variations and determinants of 
carbon content in plants: a global synthesis. Biogeosciences 2018;15:693. 

[50] de Neergaard A, Porter JR, Gorissen A. Distribution of assimilated carbon in 

plants and rhizosphere soil of basket willow (Salix viminalis L.). Plant Soil 2002; 
245:307–14. 

[51] Daud WMAW, Ali WSW. Comparison on pore development of activated carbon 
produced from palm shell and coconut shell. Bioresour Technol 2004;93:63–9. 
[52] Jahirul MI, Rasul MG, Chowdhury AA, Ashwath N. Biofuels production through 
biomass pyrolysis—a technological review. Energies 2012;5:4952–5001. 
[53] Darmawan S, Wistara NJ, Pari G, Maddu A, Syafii W. Characterization of 

lignocellulosic biomass as raw material for the production of porous carbon-based 
materials. BioResources 2016;11:3561–74. 

[54] Chen H. Chemical composition and Structure of natural lignocellulose. Biotechnol 
Lignocellulose: Theory Pract Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands; 2014:25–71. 

[55] Domínguez-Robles J, Tamminen T, Liiti¨a T, Peresin MS, Rodríguez A, 

J¨a¨askel¨ainen A-S. Aqueous acetone fractionation of kraft, organosolv and soda 
lignins. Int J Biol Macromol 2018;106:979–87. 

[56] Petrov N, Budinova T, Razvigorova M, Zanzi R, Bj¨ornbom E, Minkova V. 

Preparation of activated carbons from cherry stones, apricot stones and grape 
seeds for removal of metal ions from water. 2nd Olle Lindstroem symposium on 
renewable energy - Bioenergy. Stockholm, Sweden 1999. p. 9-11. 

[57] Jiang Y, Zhang Z, Zhang Y, Zhou X, Wang L, Yasin A, et al. Bioresource derived 
porous carbon from cottonseed hull for removal of triclosan and electrochemical 
application. RSC Adv 2018;8:42405–14. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092935N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[58] Xie A, Dai J, Chen X, He J, Chang Z, Yan Y, et al. Hierarchical porous carbon 
materials derived from a waste paper towel with ultrafast and ultrahigh 
performance for adsorption of tetracycline. RSC Adv 2016;6:72985–98. 

[59] Ma S, He F, Tian D, Zou D, Yan Z, Yang Y, et al. Variations and determinants of 
carbon content in plants: a global synthesis. Biogeosciences 2018;15:693. 
[60] Brebu M, Vasile C. Thermal degradation of lignin—a review. Cellul Chem Technol 

2010;44:353. 

[61] Mahadevan R, Adhikari S, Shakya R, Wang K, Dayton D, Lehrich M, et al. Effect of 
alkali and alkaline earth metals on in-situ catalytic fast pyrolysis of lignocellulosic 
biomass: a microreactor study. Energy Fuels 2016;30:3045–56. 

[62] Xing W, Xue JS, Dahn JR. Optimizing pyrolysis of sugar carbons for use as anode 
materials in lithium-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 1996;143:3046–52. 
[63] Leth-Espensen A, Glarborg P, Jensen PA. Predicting biomass char yield from high 
heating rate devolatilization using chemometrics. Energy Fuels 2018;32: 
9572–80. 

[89] Sagues WJ, Jain A, Brown D, Aggarwal S, Suarez A, Kollman M, et al. Are lignin- 
derived carbon fibers graphitic enough? Green Chem 2019;21:4253–65. 
[90] Gomez-Martin A, Martinez-Fernandez J, Ruttert M, Heckmann A, Winter M, 

Placke T, et al. Iron-catalyzed graphitic carbon materials from biomass resources 
as anodes for lithium-ion batteries. ChemSusChem 2018;11:2776–87. 
[91] Yuan J, Giordano C, Antonietti M. Ionic liquid monomers and polymers as 

precursors of highly conductive, mesoporous, graphitic carbon nanostructures. 
Chem Mater 2010;22:5003–12. 

[92] Xu G, Han J, Ding B, Nie P, Pan J, Dou H, et al. Biomass-derived porous carbon 
materials with sulfur and nitrogen dual-doping for energy storage. Green Chem 
2015;17:1668–74. 

[93] Derbyshire F, Presland A, Trimm D. Graphite formation by the 

dissolution—precipitation of carbon in cobalt, nickel and iron. Carbon 1975;13: 
111–3. 

[94] Edwards IA, Menendez R, Marsh H. Introduction to carbon science. Butterworth- 

[64] Tao L, Huang Y, Zheng Y, Yang X, Liu C, Di M, et al. Porous carbon nanofiber 

Heinemann; 2013. 

derived from a waste biomass as anode material in lithium-ion batteries. J Taiwan 
Inst Chem Eng 2019;95:217–26. 

[95] Franklin RE. Crystallite growth in graphitizing and non-graphitizing carbons. 

Proceed R Soc Lond Ser A Math Phys Eng Sci 1951;209:196–218. 

[65] Wang J, Nie P, Ding B, Dong S, Hao X, Dou H, et al. Biomass derived carbon for 

[96] Krishna R, Wade J, Jones AN, Lasithiotakis M, Mummery PM, Marsden BJ. An 

energy storage devices. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:2411–28. 

[66] Nygård HS, Olsen E. Review of thermal processing of biomass and waste in 

molten salts for production of renewable fuels and chemicals. Int J Low-Carbon 
Technol 2012;7:318–24. 

understanding of lattice strain, defects and disorder in nuclear graphite. Carbon 
2017;124:314–33. 

[97] Al-Qasir II. Thermal neutron scattering in graphite. Raleigh, North Carolina: 

North Carolina State University; 2007. 

[67] Yin H, Lu B, Xu Y, Tang D, Mao X, Xiao W, et al. Harvesting capacitive carbon by 

[98] Berl E, Andreas K, Reinhardt L, Herbert W. Über die Natur der aktiven Kohlen. 

carbonization of waste biomass in molten salts. Environ Sci Technol 2014;48: 
8101–8. 

Z Phys Chem 1932;158A:273–89. https://doi.org/10.1515/zpch-1932-15817. 
[99] Biscoe J, Warren BE. An X-Ray Study of Carbon Black. J Appl Phys 1942;13: 

[68] Kleen M, Gellerstedt G. Influence of inorganic species on the formation of 

polysaccharide and lignin degradation products in the analytical pyrolysis of 
pulps. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1995;35:15–41. 

[69] Shang H, Lu Y, Zhao F, Chao C, Zhang B, Zhang H. Preparing high surface area 
porous carbon from biomass by carbonization in a molten salt medium. RSC Adv 
2015;5:75728–34. 

[70] Jiang H, Ai N, Wang M, Ji D, Ji J. Experimental study on thermal pyrolysis of 

biomass in molten salt media. Electrochemistry 2009;77:730–5. 

[71] He X, Zeng K, Xie Y, Flamant G, Yang H, Yang X, et al. The effects of temperature 

and molten salt on solar pyrolysis of lignite. Energy 2019;181:407–16. 
[72] Lu B, Hu L, Yin H, Mao X, Xiao W, Wang D. Preparation and application of 
capacitive carbon from bamboo shells by one step molten carbonates 
carbonization. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2016;41:18713–20. 

364–71. 

[100] Peng W-G, Strauss M, Pieper T, Kilian H-G. X-ray diffraction and model 

calculation on carbon blacks. Mol Phys 1993;80:419–29. 
[101] Hoerni J, Weigle J. Structure of graphite. Nature 1949;164:1088. 
[102] Zhang T, Mao J, Liu X, Xuan M, Bi K, Zhang XL, et al. Pinecone biomass-derived 
hard carbon anodes for high-performance sodium-ion batteries. RSC Adv 2017;7: 
41504–11. 

[103] Wang C, Huang J, Qi H, Cao L, Xu Z, Cheng Y, et al. Controlling pseudographtic 
domain dimension of dandelion derived biomass carbon for excellent sodium-ion 
storage. J Power Sources 2017;358:85–92. 

[104] Lotfabad EM, Ding J, Cui K, Kohandehghan A, Kalisvaart WP, Hazelton M, et al. 

High-density sodium and lithium ion battery anodes from banana peels. ACS 
Nano 2014;8:7115–29. 

[73] Kwapinski W, Byrne CM, Kryachko E, Wolfram P, Adley C, Leahy JJ, et al. 

[105] Tuinstra F, Koenig J. Raman spectrum of graphite. J Chem Phys 1970;53: 

Biochar from biomass and waste. Waste Biomass Valorization 2010;1:177–89. 

1126–30. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1674108. 

[74] Chowdhury ZZ, Hamid SBA, Das R, Hasan MR, Zain SM, Khalid K, et al. 

Preparation of carbonaceous adsorbents from lignocellulosic biomass and their 
use in removal of contaminants from aqueous solution. BioResources 2013;8: 
6523–55. 

[75] Chen C, Song J, Zhu S, Li Y, Kuang Y, Wan J, et al. Scalable and sustainable 

approach toward highly compressible, anisotropic, lamellar carbon sponge. Chem 
2018;4:544–54. 

[76] Zhao Y, Wang L, Huang L, Maximov MY, Jin M, Zhang Y, et al. Biomass-derived 

[106] Eckmann A, Felten A, Mishchenko A, Britnell L, Krupke R, Novoselov KS, et al. 
Probing the nature of defects in graphene by raman spectroscopy. Nano Lett 2012; 
12:3925–30. 

[107] Mallet-Ladeira P, Puech P, Toulouse C, Cazayous M, Ratel-Ramond N, 

Weisbecker P, et al. A Raman study to obtain crystallite size of carbon materials: a 
better alternative to the Tuinstra–Koenig law. Carbon 2014;80:629–39. 
[108] Pan D, Wang S, Zhao B, Wu M, Zhang H, Wang Y, et al. Li storage properties of 

disordered graphene nanosheets. Chem Mater 2009;21:3136–42. 

oxygen and nitrogen co-doped porous carbon with hierarchical architecture as 
sulfur hosts for high-performance lithium/sulfur batteries. Nanomaterials 2017;7: 
402. 

[109] Pisana S, Lazzeri M, Casiraghi C, Novoselov KS, Geim AK, Ferrari AC, et al. 

Breakdown of the adiabatic Born–Oppenheimer approximation in graphene. Nat 
Mater 2007;6:198–201. 

[77] Li X, Sun C, Cai Z, Ge F. High-performance all-solid-state supercapacitor derived 
from PPy coated carbonized silk fabric. Appl Surf Sci 2019;473:967–75. 
[78] Li J, Liu K, Gao X, Yao B, Huo K, Cheng Y, et al. Oxygen-and nitrogen-enriched 3D 
porous carbon for supercapacitors of high volumetric capacity. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 2015;7:24622–8. 

[79] Gogotsi Y, Presser V. Carbon nanomaterials. Carbon nanomaterials. Boca Raton: 

CRC Press; 2013. 

[80] Zhang F, Ma H, Chen J, Li G-D, Zhang Y, Chen J-S. Preparation and gas storage of 

high surface area microporous carbon derived from biomass source cornstalks. 
Bioresour Technol 2008;99:4803–8. 

[81] Mauricio MR, da Costa PG, Haraguchi SK, Guilherme MR, Muniz EC, Rubira AF. 
Synthesis of a microhydrogel composite from cellulose nanowhiskers and starch 
for drug delivery. Carbohydr Polym 2015;115:715–22. 

[82] Sasikala M, Umapathy MJ. Preparation and characterization of pineapple leaf 
cellulose nanocrystal reinforced gelatin bio-nanocomposite with antibacterial 
banana leaf extract for application in food packaging. New J Chem 2018;42: 
19979–86. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8NJ02973C. 

[83] Sheltami RM, Abdullah I, Ahmad I, Dufresne A, Kargarzadeh H. Extraction of 

cellulose nanocrystals from mengkuang leaves (Pandanus tectorius). Carbohydr 
Polym 2012;88:772–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2012.01.062. 

[84] Danial WH, Abdul Majid Z, Mohd Muhid MN, Triwahyono S, Bakar MB, Ramli Z. 
The reuse of wastepaper for the extraction of cellulose nanocrystals. Carbohydr 
Polym 2015;118:165–9. 

[85] Araujo RA, Rubira AF, Asefa T, Silva R. Metal doped carbon nanoneedles and 

effect of carbon organization with activity for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). 
Carbohydr Polym 2016;137:719–25. 

[110] Basavalingu B, Moreno JMC, Byrappa K, Gogotsi YG, Yoshimura M. 

Decomposition of silicon carbide in the presence of organic compounds under 
hydrothermal conditions. Carbon 2001;39:1763–6. 

[111] Maslova O, Ammar M, Guimbreti`ere G, Rouzaud J-N, Simon P. Determination of 
crystallite size in polished graphitized carbon by Raman spectroscopy. Phys Rev B 
2012;86:134205. 

[112] Reiche S, Blume R, Zhao XC, Su D, Kunkes E, Behrens M, et al. Reactivity of 

mesoporous carbon against water – an in-situ XPS study. Carbon 2014;77:175–83. 
[113] Susi T, Pichler T, Ayala P. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of graphitic carbon 
nanomaterials doped with heteroatoms. Beilstein J Nanotechnol 2015;6:177–92. 

[114] Yu Z-L, Xin S, You Y, Yu L, Lin Y, Xu D-W, et al. Ion-catalyzed synthesis of 

microporous hard carbon embedded with expanded nanographite for enhanced 
lithium/sodium storage. J Am Chem Soc 2016;138:14915–22. 

[115] Leiro J, Heinonen M, Laiho T, Batirev I. Core-level XPS spectra of fullerene, highly 
oriented pyrolitic graphite, and glassy carbon. J Electron Spectrosc Relat Phenom 
2003;128:205–13. 

[116] Dwivedi N, Yeo RJ, Satyanarayana N, Kundu S, Tripathy S, Bhatia C. 

Understanding the role of nitrogen in plasma-assisted surface modification of 
magnetic recording media with and without ultrathin carbon overcoats. Sci Rep 
2015;5:7772. 

[117] Blume R, Rosenthal D, Tessonnier J-P, Li H, Knop-Gericke A, Schl¨ogl R. 

Characterizing graphitic carbon with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy: A step- 
by-step approach. ChemCatChem 2015;7:2871–81. 

[118] Díaz J, Paolicelli G, Ferrer S, Comin F. Separation of the sp3 and sp2 components 
in the C1s photoemission spectra of amorphous carbon films. Phys Rev B 1996;54: 
8064–9. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.54.8064. 

[86] Rouzaud J-N. The multiscale organization as a fingerprint of the formation 

[119] Kelemen SR, Rose KD, Kwiatek PJ. Carbon aromaticity based on XPS II to II* 

conditions of carbons; a TEM study. Carbon 2004 : International Conference on 
Carbon at Brown University, RI, American Carbon Society 2004;4. 

[87] McDonald-Wharry JS, Manley-Harris M, Pickering KL. Reviewing, combining, 

and updating the models for the nanostructure of non-graphitizing carbons 
produced from oxygen-containing precursors. Energy Fuels 2016;30:7811–26. 
[88] Rodríguez-Mirasol J, Cordero T, Rodríguez J. High-temperature carbons from 

kraft lignin. Carbon 1996;34:43–52. 

signal intensity. Appl Surf Sci 1993;64:167–74. 

[120] Chen XC, Zhang Y, Merrill LC, Soulen C, Lehmann ML, Schaefer JL, et al. Gel 

composite electrolyte – an effective way to utilize ceramic fillers in lithium 
batteries. J Mater Chem A 2021. 

[121] Winter M, Besenhard JO, Spahr ME, Novak P. Insertion electrode materials for 

rechargeable lithium batteries. Adv Mater 1998;10:725–63. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092936N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[122] Roberts AD, Li X, Zhang H. Porous carbon spheres and monoliths: morphology 

[152] Sahu S, Behera B, Maiti TK, Mohapatra S. Simple one-step synthesis of highly 

control, pore size tuning and their applications as Li-ion battery anode materials. 
Chem Soc Rev 2014;43:4341–56. 

luminescent carbon dots from orange juice: application as excellent bio-imaging 
agents. Chem Commun 2012;48:8835–7. 

[123] Liang Y, Yang C, Dong H, Li W, Hu H, Xiao Y, et al. Facile synthesis of highly 
porous carbon from rice husk. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2017;5:7111–7. 

[124] Jain A, Aravindan V, Jayaraman S, Kumar PS, Balasubramanian R, 

Ramakrishna S, et al. Activated carbons derived from coconut shells as high 
energy density cathode material for Li-ion capacitors. Sci Rep 2013;3:3002. 

[125] Subramanian V, Luo C, Stephan AM, Nahm K, Thomas S, Wei B. Supercapacitors 
from activated carbon derived from banana fibers. J Phys Chemistry C 2007;111: 
7527–31. 

[126] Liu D, Yu S, Shen Y, Chen H, Shen Z, Zhao S, et al. Polyaniline coated boron doped 
biomass derived porous carbon composites for supercapacitor electrode materials. 
Ind Eng Chem Res 2015;54:12570–9. 

[127] Yang T, Qian T, Wang M, Shen X, Xu N, Sun Z, et al. A sustainable route from 

biomass byproduct okara to high content nitrogen-doped carbon sheets for 
efficient sodium ion batteries. Adv Mater 2016;28:539–45. 

[128] Zhao H, Gao Y, Wang J, Chen C, Chen D, Wang C, et al. Egg yolk-derived 

phosphorus and nitrogen dual doped nano carbon capsules for high-performance 
lithium ion batteries. Mater Lett 2016;167:93–7. 

[129] Wu J, Zuo L, Song Y, Chen Y, Zhou R, Chen S, et al. Preparation of biomass- 

derived hierarchically porous carbon/Co3O4  nanocomposites as anode materials 
for lithium-ion batteries. J Alloys Compd 2016;656:745–52. 

[130] Yan L, Yu J, Houston J, Flores N, Luo H. Biomass derived porous nitrogen doped 
carbon for electrochemical devices. Green Energy Environ 2017;2:84–99. 
[131] Duan M, Tian C, Hu Y, Mei A, Rong Y, Xiong Y, et al. Boron-doped graphite for 
high work function carbon electrode in printable hole-conductor-free mesoscopic 
perovskite solar cells. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2017;9:31721–7. 

[132] Qie L, Chen WM, Wang ZH, Shao QG, Li X, Yuan LX, et al. Nitrogen-doped porous 

carbon nanofiber webs as anodes for lithium ion batteries with a superhigh 
capacity and rate capability. Adv Mater 2012;24:2047–50. 

[133] Chen Y, Li X, Park K, Song J, Hong J, Zhou L, et al. Hollow carbon-nanotube/ 
carbon-nanofiber hybrid anodes for Li-ion batteries. J Am Chem Soc 2013;135: 
16280–3. 

[134] Li Y, Li Z, Shen PK. Simultaneous formation of ultrahigh surface area and three- 
dimensional hierarchical porous graphene-like networks for fast and highly stable 
supercapacitors. Adv Mater 2013;25:2474–80. 

[135] Chen Y, Lu Z, Zhou L, Mai Y-W, Huang H. Triple-coaxial electrospun amorphous 

carbon nanotubes with hollow graphitic carbon nanospheres for high- 
performance Li ion batteries. Energy Environ Sci 2012;5:7898–902. 

[153] Du F, Zhang M, Li X, Li J, Jiang X, Li Z, et al. Economical and green synthesis of 

bagasse-derived fluorescent carbon dots for biomedical applications. 
Nanotechnology 2014;25:315702. 

[154] Wang C, Wu D, Wang H, Gao Z, Xu F, Jiang K. Biomass derived nitrogen-doped 

hierarchical porous carbon sheets for supercapacitors with high performance. 
J Colloid Interface Sci 2018;523:133–43. 

[155] Hao Y, Zhang X, Yang Q, Chen K, Guo J, Zhou D, et al. Highly porous defective 

carbons derived from seaweed biomass as efficient electrocatalysts for oxygen 
reduction in both alkaline and acidic media. Carbon 2018;137:93–103. 
[156] Hoang VC, Nguyen LH, Gomes VG. High efficiency supercapacitor derived from 
biomass based carbon dots and reduced graphene oxide composite. J Electroanal 
Chem 2019;832:87–96. 

[157] Pawlak R, Liu X, Ninova S, D’Astolfo P, Drechsel C, Sangtarash S, et al. Bottom-up 
synthesis of nitrogen-doped porous graphene nanoribbons. J Am Chem Soc 2020; 
142:12568–73. 

[158] Chao D, Zhu C, Xia X, Liu J, Zhang X, Wang J, et al. Graphene quantum dots 

coated VO2 arrays for highly durable electrodes for Li and Na ion batteries. Nano 
Lett 2015;15:565–73. 

[159] Jing M, Wang J, Hou H, Yang Y, Zhang Y, Pan C, et al. Carbon quantum dot 
coated Mn3O4  with enhanced performances for lithium-ion batteries. J Mater 
Chem A 2015;3:16824–30. 

[160] Liu F, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Lin J, Su Q, Shi J, et al. A Facile Carbon Quantum Dot- 

Modified Reduction Approach Towards Tunable Sb@CQDs Nanoparticles for 
High Performance Sodium Storage. Batteries & Supercaps 2020;3:463–9. 

[161] Zhang W, Xu T, Liu Z, Wu N-L, Wei M. Hierarchical TiO2(cid:0) x  imbedded with 

graphene quantum dots for high-performance lithium storage. Chem Commun 
2018;54:1413–6. 

[162] Yi X, He W, Zhang X, Yue Y, Yang G, Wang Z, et al. Graphene-like carbon sheet/ 

Fe3O4  nanocomposites derived from soda papermaking black liquor for high 
performance lithium ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 2017;232:550–60. 
[163] Peng H, Travas-Sejdic J. Simple aqueous solution route to luminescent carbogenic 

dots from carbohydrates. Chem Mater 2009;21:5563–5. 

[164] Javed M, Saqib ANS, Ata-ur-Rehman, Ali B, Faizan M, Anang DA, et al. Carbon 
quantum dots from glucose oxidation as a highly competent anode material for 
lithium and sodium-ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 2019;297:250–7. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.electacta.2018.11.167. 

[165] Monthioux M, Kuznetsov VL. Who should be given the credit for the discovery of 

[136] Hu C, Wang L, Zhao Y, Ye M, Chen Q, Feng Z, et al. Designing nitrogen-enriched 

carbon nanotubes? Carbon 2006;44:1621–3. 

echinus-like carbon capsules for highly efficient oxygen reduction reaction and 
lithium ion storage. Nanoscale 2014;6:8002–9. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C4NR01184H. 

[137] Li Z, Xu Z, Tan X, Wang H, Holt CM, Stephenson T, et al. Mesoporous nitrogen- 

rich carbons derived from protein for ultra-high capacity battery anodes and 
supercapacitors. Energy Environ Sci 2013;6:871–8. 

[138] Qie L, Chen W, Xu H, Xiong X, Jiang Y, Zou F, et al. Synthesis of functionalized 3D 
hierarchical porous carbon for high-performance supercapacitors. Energy Environ 
Sci 2013;6:2497–504. 

[166] Kanchi S, Ahmed S, Sabela MI, Hussain CM. Nanomaterials: Biomedical, 
Environmental, and Engineering Applications. John Wiley & Sons; 2018. 

[167] Al-Saleh MH, Sundararaj U. Review of the mechanical properties of carbon 
nanofiber/polymer composites. Composites, Part A 2011;42:2126–42. 
[168] Xie X, Goodell B, Qian Y, Daniel G, Zhang D, Nagle DC, et al. A method for 

producing carbon nanotubes directly from plant materials. Forest Prod J 2009;59. 

[169] Goodell B, Xie X, Qian Y, Daniel G, Peterson M, Jellison J. Carbon nanotubes 

produced from natural cellulosic materials. J Nanosci Nanotechnol 2008;8: 
2472–4. 

[139] Liang Y, Wu D, Fu R. Carbon microfibers with hierarchical porous structure from 

[170] Gao Z, Song N, Zhang Y, Schwab Y, He J, Li X. Carbon nanotubes derived from 

electrospun fiber-like natural biopolymer. Sci Rep 2013;3:1119. 

[140] Fang B, Kim JH, Kim M-S, Yu J-S. Hierarchical nanostructured carbons with 

meso–macroporosity: design, characterization, and applications. Acc Chem Res 
2013;46:1397–406. 

[141] Jayaraman S, Madhavi S, Aravindan V. High energy Li-ion capacitor and battery 

using graphitic carbon spheres as an insertion host from cooking oil. J Mater 
Chem A 2018;6:3242–8. 

yeast-fermented wheat flour and their energy storage application. ACS Sustain 
Chem Eng 2018;6:11386–96. 

[171] De las Casas C, Li W. A review of application of carbon nanotubes for lithium ion 

battery anode material. J Power Sources 2012;208:74–85. 

[172] Kawasaki S, Hara T, Iwai Y, Suzuki Y. Metallic and semiconducting single-walled 
carbon nanotubes as the anode material of Li ion secondary battery. Mater Lett 
2008;62:2917–20. 

[142] Tao L, Huang Y, Yang X, Zheng Y, Liu C, Di M, et al. Flexible anode materials for 

[173] Landi BJ, Ganter MJ, Cress CD, DiLeo RA, Raffaelle RP. Carbon nanotubes for 

lithium-ion batteries derived from waste biomass-based carbon nanofibers: I. 
Effect of carbonization temperature. RSC Adv 2018;8:7102–9. 

[143] Wang H, Yu W, Shi J, Mao N, Chen S, Liu W. Biomass derived hierarchical porous 
carbons as high-performance anodes for sodium-ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 
2016;188:103–10. 

[144] Zhu Y, Chen M, Li Q, Yuan C, Wang C. A porous biomass-derived anode for high- 

performance sodium-ion batteries. Carbon 2018;129:695–701. 

lithium ion batteries. Energy Environ Sci 2009;2:638–54. 

[174] Dobrota AS, Paˇsti IA, Mentus SV, Skorodumova NV. A DFT study of the interplay 
between dopants and oxygen functional groups over the graphene basal 
plane–implications in energy-related applications. PCCP 2017;19:8530–40. 

[175] Shimoda H, Gao B, Tang X, Kleinhammes A, Fleming L, Wu Y, et al. Lithium 
intercalation into opened single-wall carbon nanotubes: storage capacity and 
electronic properties. Phys Rev Lett 2001;88:015502. 

[145] Cao L, Wang X, Meziani MJ, Lu F, Wang H, Luo PG, et al. Carbon dots for 

[176] Chen WX, Lee JY, Liu Z. The nanocomposites of carbon nanotube with Sb and 

multiphoton bioimaging. J Am Chem Soc 2007;129:11318–9. 

[146] Yang S-T, Cao L, Luo PG, Lu F, Wang X, Wang H, et al. Carbon dots for optical 

imaging in vivo. J Am Chem Soc 2009;131:11308–9. 

[147] Feng J, Wang W-J, Hai X, Yu Y-L, Wang J-H. Green preparation of nitrogen-doped 

carbon dots derived from silkworm chrysalis for cell imaging. J Mater Chem B 
2016;4:387–93. 

[148] Wang Z, Liu J, Wang W, Wei Z, Wang F, Gong P, et al. Photoluminescent carbon 

quantum dot grafted silica nanoparticles directly synthesized from rice husk 
biomass. J Mater Chem B 2017;5:4679–89. 

[149] Chunduri LAA, Kurdekar A, Patnaik S, Dev BV, Rattan TM, Kamisetti V. Carbon 
quantum dots from coconut husk: evaluation for antioxidant and cytotoxic 
activity. Mater Focus 2016;5:55–61. 

[150] Zhao S, Lan M, Zhu X, Xue H, Ng T-W, Meng X, et al. Green synthesis of 

bifunctional fluorescent carbon dots from garlic for cellular imaging and free 
radical scavenging. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2015;7:17054–60. 

[151] Yu J, Song N, Zhang Y-K, Zhong S-X, Wang A-J, Chen J. Green preparation of 

carbon dots by Jinhua bergamot for sensitive and selective fluorescent detection 
of Hg2+

. Sens Actuators, B 2015;214:29–35. 

and Fe3+

SnSb0.5  as Li-ion battery anodes. Carbon 2003;41:959–66. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0008-6223(02)00425-6. 

[177] Claye AS, Fischer JE, Huffman CB, Rinzler AG, Smalley RE. Solid-state 

electrochemistry of the Li single wall carbon nanotube system. J Electrochem Soc 
2000;147:2845–52. 

[178] Frackowiak E, Gautier S, Gaucher H, Bonnamy S, Beguin F. Electrochemical 
storage of lithium in multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Carbon 1999;37:61–9. 
[179] Liu Y, Artyukhov VI, Liu M, Harutyunyan AR, Yakobson BI. Feasibility of lithium 
storage on graphene and its derivatives. J Phys Chem Lett 2013;4:1737–42. 
[180] Lu Y-F, Lo S-T, Lin J-C, Zhang W, Lu J-Y, Liu F-H, et al. Nitrogen-doped graphene 
sheets grown by chemical vapor deposition: synthesis and influence of nitrogen 
impurities on carrier transport. ACS Nano 2013;7:6522–32. 

[181] Meunier V, Kephart J, Roland C, Bernholc J. Ab initio investigations of lithium 
diffusion in carbon nanotube systems. Phys Rev Lett 2002;88:075506. 

[182] Eom J, Kwon H-S, Liu J, Zhou O. Lithium insertion into purified and etched multi- 

walled carbon nanotubes synthesized on supported catalysts by thermal CVD. 
Carbon 2004;42:2589–96. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092937N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[183] Eom J, Kim D, Kwon H. Effects of ball-milling on lithium insertion into multi- 
walled carbon nanotubes synthesized by thermal chemical vapour deposition. 
J Power Sources 2006;157:507–14. 

[184] Li Y, Hu YS, Titirici MM, Chen L, Huang X. Hard carbon microtubes made from 
renewable cotton as high-performance anode material for sodium-ion batteries. 
Adv Energy Mater 2016;6:1600659. 

[212] Xing Y, Fang B, Bonakdarpour A, Zhang S, Wilkinson DP. Facile fabrication of 

mesoporous carbon nanofibers with unique hierarchical nanoarchitecture for 
electrochemical hydrogen storage. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39:7859–67. 

[213] Xing Y, Wang S, Fang B, Song G, Wilkinson DP, Zhang S. N-doped hollow urchin- 

like anatase TiO2@C composite as a novel anode for Li-ion batteries. J Power 
Sources 2018;385:10–7. 

[185] Alves AK, Bergmann CP, Berutti FA. Novel synthesis and characterization of 

[214] Zhang D, Zhao J, Feng C, Zhao R, Sun Y, Guan T, et al. Scalable synthesis of 

nanostructured materials. Novel synthesis and characterization of nanostructured 
materials. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag; 2013. 

[186] Shin HJ, Kim KK, Benayad A, Yoon SM, Park HK, Jung IS, et al. Efficient reduction 
of graphite oxide by sodium borohydride and its effect on electrical conductance. 
Adv Funct Mater 2009;19:1987–92. 

[187] Bagri A, Mattevi C, Acik M, Chabal YJ, Chhowalla M, Shenoy VB. Structural 

evolution during the reduction of chemically derived graphene oxide. Nat Chem 
2010;2:581. 

[188] Xing Y, Wang Y, Zhou C, Zhang S, Fang B. Simple synthesis of mesoporous carbon 

nanofibers with hierarchical nanostructure for ultrahigh lithium storage. ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces 2014;6:2561–7. 

[189] Fang B, Kim M-S, Kim JH, Lim S, Yu J-S. Ordered multimodal porous carbon with 
hierarchical nanostructure for high Li storage capacity and good cycling 
performance. J Mater Chem 2010;20:10253–9. 

[190] Luo W, Schardt J, Bommier C, Wang B, Razink J, Simonsen J, et al. Carbon 

nanofibers derived from cellulose nanofibers as a long-life anode material for 
rechargeable sodium-ion batteries. J Mater Chem A 2013;1:10662–6. 
[191] Jayaraman S, Singh G, Madhavi S, Aravindan V. Elongated graphitic hollow 

nanofibers from vegetable oil as prospective insertion host for constructing 
advanced high energy Li-Ion capacitor and battery. Carbon 2018;134:9–14. 

[192] Hiramatsu M, Hori M. Carbon nanowalls: synthesis and emerging applications. 
Carbon nanowalls: synthesis and emerging applications. Wien: Springer-Verlag; 
2010. 

[193] Terrones M. Science and technology of the twenty-first century: synthesis, 

properties, and applications of carbon nanotubes. Annu Rev Mater Res 2003;33: 
419–501. 

[194] Pollak E, Geng B, Jeon K-J, Lucas IT, Richardson TJ, Wang F, et al. The interaction 

of Li+ with single-layer and few-layer graphene. Nano Lett 2010;10:3386–8. 

[195] Yao F, Gunes F, Ta HQ, Lee SM, Chae SJ, Sheem KY, et al. Diffusion mechanism of 
lithium ion through basal plane of layered graphene. J Am Chem Soc 2012;134: 
8646–54. 

[196] Radhakrishnan G, Cardema JD, Adams PM, Kim HI, Foran B. Fabrication and 

hierarchical macropore-rich activated carbon microspheres assembled by carbon 
nanoparticles for high rate performance supercapacitors. J Power Sources 2017; 
342:363–70. 

[215] Bahrami A, Simon U, Soltani N, Zavareh S, Schmidt J, Pech-Canul MI, et al. Eco- 
fabrication of hierarchical porous silica monoliths by ice-templating of rice husk 
ash. Green Chem 2017;19:188–95. 

[216] Soltani N, Simon U, Bahrami A, Wang X, Selve S, Epping JD, et al. Macroporous 
polymer-derived SiO2/SiOC monoliths freeze-cast from polysiloxane and 
amorphous silica derived from rice husk. J Eur Ceram Soc 2017;37:4809–20. 

[217] Jayaraman S, Jain A, Ulaganathan M, Edison E, Srinivasan MP, 

Balasubramanian R, et al. Li-ion vs. Na-ion capacitors: A performance evaluation 
with coconut shell derived mesoporous carbon and natural plant based hard 
carbon. Chem Eng J 2017;316:506–13. 

[218] Sennu P, Arun N, Madhavi S, Aravindan V, Lee Y-S. All carbon based high energy 

lithium-ion capacitors from biomass: The role of crystallinity. J Power Sources 
2019;414:96–102. 

[219] Wenzel S, Hara T, Janek J, Adelhelm P. Room-temperature sodium-ion batteries: 
Improving the rate capability of carbon anode materials by templating strategies. 
Energy Environ Sci 2011;4:3342–5. 

[220] Lee J, Chen Y-M, Zhu Y, Vogt BD. Tuning SEI formation on nanoporous 

carbon–titania composite sodium ion batteries anodes and performance with 
subtle processing changes. RSC Adv 2015;5:99329–38. 

[221] Mao C, Wood M, David L, An SJ, Sheng Y, Du Z, et al. Selecting the best graphite 
for long-life, high-energy Li-Ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2018;165: 
A1837–1A45. 

[222] Flandrois S, Simon B. Carbon materials for lithium-ion rechargeable batteries. 

Carbon 1999;37:165–80. 

[223] Li Z, Bommier C, Chong ZS, Jian Z, Surta TW, Wang X, et al. Mechanism of Na-ion 
storage in hard carbon anodes revealed by heteroatom doping. Adv Energy Mater 
2017;7:1602894. 

[224] Chuenchom L, Kraehnert R, Smarsly BM. Recent progress in soft-templating of 

porous carbon materials. Soft Matter 2012;8:10801–12. 

electrochemical characterization of single and multi-layer graphene anodes for 
lithium-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2012;159:A752–AA61. 

[225] Zhao X, Su F, Yan Q, Guo W, Bao XY, Lv L, et al. Templating methods for 
preparation of porous structures. J Mater Chem 2006;16:637–48. 

[197] Ji K, Han J, Hirata A, Fujita T, Shen Y, Ning S, et al. Lithium intercalation into 

bilayer graphene. Nat Commun 2019;10:275. 

[198] Russo P, Xiao M, Zhou NY. Carbon nanowalls: A new material for resistive 

switching memory devices. Carbon 2017;120:54–62. 

[199] Yang Y, Tang D-M, Zhang C, Zhang Y, Liang Q, Chen S, et al. Protrusions” or 

“holes” in graphene: which is the better choice for sodium ion storage? Energy 
Environ Sci 2017;10:979–86. 

[200] Chen F, Yang J, Bai T, Long B, Zhou X. Facile synthesis of few-layer graphene 
from biomass waste and its application in lithium ion batteries. J Electroanal 
Chem 2016;768:18–26. 

[201] Barthlott W, Neinhuis C, Cutler D, Ditsch F, Meusel I, Theisen I, et al. 

Classification and terminology of plant epicuticular waxes. Bot J Linnean Soc 
1998;126:237–60. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8339.1998.tb02529.x. 
[202] Pambou E, Li Z, Campana M, Hughes A, Clifton L, Gutfreund P, et al. Structural 
features of reconstituted wheat wax films. J R Soc, Interface 2016;13:20160396. 
[203] Li X, Han C, Chen X, Shi C. Preparation and performance of straw based activated 
carbon for supercapacitor in non-aqueous electrolytes. Microporous Mesoporous 
Mater 2010;131:303–9. 

[204] Sheng Z-H, Shao L, Chen J-J, Bao W-J, Wang F-B, Xia X-H. Catalyst-free synthesis 
of nitrogen-doped graphene via thermal annealing graphite oxide with melamine 
and its excellent electrocatalysis. ACS Nano 2011;5:4350–8. 

[205] Hou J, Cao C, Idrees F, Ma X. Hierarchical porous nitrogen-doped carbon 

nanosheets derived from silk for ultrahigh-capacity battery anodes and 
supercapacitors. ACS Nano 2015;9:2556–64. 

[206] Yun YS, Cho SY, Shim J, Kim BH, Chang SJ, Baek SJ, et al. Microporous carbon 
nanoplates from regenerated silk proteins for supercapacitors. Adv Mater 2013; 
25:1993–8. 

[207] Etacheri V, Hong CN, Pol VG. Upcycling of packing-peanuts into carbon 

microsheet anodes for lithium-ion batteries. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49: 
11191–8. 

[208] Zhou X, Chen F, Bai T, Long B, Liao Q, Ren Y, et al. Interconnected highly 

graphitic carbon nanosheets derived from wheat stalk as high performance anode 
materials for lithium ion batteries. Green Chem 2016;18:2078–88. 

[209] Zhu Z, Liang F, Zhou Z, Zeng X, Wang D, Dong P, et al. Expanded biomass-derived 
hard carbon with ultra-stable performance in sodium-ion batteries. J Mater Chem 
A 2018;6:1513–22. 

[210] Hooch Antink W, Choi Y, Seong Kd, Kim JM, Piao Y. Recent progress in porous 
graphene and reduced graphene oxide-based nanomaterials for electrochemical 
energy storage devices. Adv Mater Interfaces 2018;5:1701212. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/admi.201701212. 

[211] Soltani N, Bahrami A, Pech-Canul M, Gonz´alez L. Review on the physicochemical 
treatments of rice husk for production of advanced materials. Chem Eng J 2015; 
264:899–935. 

[226] Strubel P, Thieme S, Biemelt T, Helmer A, Oschatz M, Brückner J, et al. ZnO hard 
templating for synthesis of hierarchical porous carbons with tailored porosity and 
high performance in lithium-sulfur battery. Adv Funct Mater 2015;25:287–97. 

[227] Ryoo R, Joo SH, Jun S. Synthesis of highly ordered carbon molecular sieves via 
template-mediated structural transformation. J Phys Chem B 1999;103:7743–6. 

[228] Jun S, Joo SH, Ryoo R, Kruk M, Jaroniec M, Liu Z, et al. Synthesis of new, 

nanoporous carbon with hexagonally ordered mesostructure. J Am Chem Soc 
2000;122:10712–3. 

[229] Fang B, Kim M, Hwang S, Yu J-S. Colloid-imprinted carbon with tailored 
nanostructure as an unique anode electrocatalyst support for formic acid 
oxidation. Carbon 2008;46:876–83. 

[230] Fang B, Kim JH, Kim M-S, Bonakdarpour A, Lam A, Wilkinson DP, et al. 

Fabrication of hollow core carbon spheres with hierarchical nanoarchitecture for 
ultrahigh electrical charge storage. J Mater Chem 2012;22:19031–8. 

[231] Kim JH, Fang B, Kim M-S, Yoon SB, Bae T-S, Ranade DR, et al. Facile synthesis of 
bimodal porous silica and multimodal porous carbon as an anode catalyst support 
in proton exchange membrane fuel cell. Electrochim Acta 2010;55:7628–33. 

[232] Gogotsi Y, Nikitin A, Ye H, Zhou W, Fischer JE, Yi B, et al. Nanoporous carbide- 

derived carbon with tunable pore size. Nat Mater 2003;2:591–4. 

[233] Oschatz M, Borchardt L, Pinkert K, Thieme S, Lohe MR, Hoffmann C, et al. 

Hierarchical carbide-derived carbon foams with advanced mesostructure as a 
versatile electrochemical energy-storage material. Adv Energy Mater 2014;4: 
1300645. 

[234] Morishita T, Soneda Y, Tsumura T, Inagaki M. Preparation of porous carbons from 
thermoplastic precursors and their performance for electric double layer 
capacitors. Carbon 2006;44:2360–7. 

[235] Zhu C, Akiyama T. Cotton derived porous carbon via an MgO template method for 

high performance lithium ion battery anodes. Green Chem 2016;18:2106–14. 

[236] Sun Q, Jiang T, Zhao G, Shi J. Porous Carbon material based on biomass prepared 

by MgO template method and ZnCl2 activation method as electrode for high 
performance supercapacitor. Int J Electrochem Sci 2019;14:1–14. 
[237] Muller A, Scrivener K, Gajewicz A, McDonald P. Use of bench-top NMR to 

measure the density, composition and desorption isotherm of C–S–H in cement 
paste. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2013;178:99–103. 

[238] Unur E, Brutti S, Panero S, Scrosati B. Nanoporous carbons from hydrothermally 
treated biomass as anode materials for lithium ion batteries. Microporous 
Mesoporous Mater 2013;174:25–33. 

[239] Morishita T, Suzuki R, Tsumura T, Habazaki H, Inagaki M. Preparation of 

mesoporous carbons by carbonization of the mixtures of poly (vinyl alcohol) with 
magnesium salts. TANSO 2006;2006:220–6. 

[240] Nie P, Le Z, Chen G, Liu D, Liu X, Wu HB, et al. Graphene caging silicon particles 

for high-performance lithium-ion batteries. Small 2018;14:1800635. 

[241] Xie Y, Kocaefe D, Chen C, Kocaefe Y. Review of research on template methods in 

preparation of nanomaterials. J. Nanomater 2016;2016. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092938N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[242] Thomas A, Goettmann F, Antonietti M. Hard templates for soft materials: creating 

[272] Li D, Zhang L, Chen H, Ding L-x, Wang S, Wang H. Nitrogen-doped bamboo-like 

nanostructured organic materials. Chem Mater 2008;20:738–55. 

[243] Gonçalves TAP, Marcati CR, Scheel-Ybert R. The effect of carbonization on wood 

structure of dalbergia violacea, stryphnodendron polyphyllum, tapirira 
guianensis, Vochysia Tucanorum, and pouteria torta from the Brazilian Cerrado. 
IAWA J 2012;33:73–90. 

[244] M¨arkle T, R¨osch M. Experiments on the effects of carbonization on some 

cultivated plant seeds. Vegetation History Archaeobotany 2008;17:257–63. 
[245] Braadbaart F, van Bergen PF. Digital imaging analysis of size and shape of wheat 
and pea upon heating under anoxic conditions as a function of the temperature. 
Vegetation History Archaeobotany 2005;14:67–75. 

[246] Parameswaran N, Stamm A. Strukturelle und chemo-physikalische 

Ver¨anderungen bei der Verkohlung von vier tropischen Laubh¨olzern. 
Holzforschung 1983;37:309–20. 

[247] Wood AR, Garg R, Justus K, Cohen-Karni T, LeDuc P, Russell AJ. Intact mangrove 

root electrodes for desalination. RSC Adv 2019;9:4735–43. 

[248] Momodu D, Madito M, Barzegar F, Bello A, Khaleed A, Olaniyan O, et al. 
Activated carbon derived from tree bark biomass with promising material 
properties for supercapacitors. J Solid State Electrochem 2017;21:859–72. 
[249] Zhang F, Wang K-X, Li G-D, Chen J-S. Hierarchical porous carbon derived from 

rice straw for lithium ion batteries with high-rate performance. Electrochem 
Commun 2009;11:130–3. 

[250] Ding J, Wang H, Li Z, Kohandehghan A, Cui K, Xu Z, et al. Carbon nanosheet 
frameworks derived from peat moss as high performance sodium ion battery 
anodes. ACS Nano 2013;7:11004–15. 

[251] Um JH, Ahn C-Y, Kim J, Jeong M, Sung Y-E, Cho Y-H, et al. From grass to battery 

anode: agricultural biomass hemp-derived carbon for lithium storage. RSC Adv 
2018;8:32231–40. 

[252] Demir-Cakan R, Baccile N, Antonietti M, Titirici M-M. Carboxylate-rich 

carbonaceous materials via one-step hydrothermal carbonization of glucose in the 
presence of acrylic acid. Chem Mater 2009;21:484–90. 

[253] Dou X, Hasa I, Hekmatfar M, Diemant T, Behm RJ, Buchholz D, et al. Pectin, 

Hemicellulose, or Lignin? Impact of the biowaste source on the performance of 
hard carbons for sodium-ion batteries. ChemSusChem 2017;10:2668–76. 
[254] Mestre AS, Carvalho AP. Nanoporous carbons synthesis: an old story with exciting 

new chapters. editor. In: Hcine Ghrib T, editor. Porosity, Process, Technologies 
and Applications. London, UK: IntechOpen; 2018. p. 37–68. 

¨
Ozcan 

¨
O. Preparation and characterization of activated carbon from 

[255] Ates¸  F, 

poplar sawdust by chemical activation: comparison of different activating agents 
and carbonization temperature. Eur J Eng Res Sci 2018;3:6–11. 

[256] Marsh H, Yan DS, O’Grady TM, Wennerberg A. Formation of active carbons from 

cokes using potassium hydroxide. Carbon 1984;22:603–11. 

[257] Chen L, Zhang Y, Lin C, Yang W, Meng Y, Guo Y, et al. Hierarchically porous 
nitrogen-rich carbon derived from wheat straw as an ultra-high-rate anode for 
lithium ion batteries. J Mater Chem A 2014;2:9684–90. 

carbon nanotubes: promising anode materials for sodium-ion batteries. Chem 
Commun 2015;51:16045–8. 

[273] Wu J, Pan Z, Zhang Y, Wang B, Peng H. The recent progress of nitrogen-doped 

carbon nanomaterials for electrochemical batteries. J Mater Chem A 2018;6: 
12932–44. 

[274] Wang C, Wu D, Wang H, Gao Z, Xu F, Jiang K. A green and scalable route to yield 
porous carbon sheets from biomass for supercapacitors with high capacity. 
J Mater Chem A 2018;6:1244–54. 

[275] Zhang D, Wang G, Xu L, Lian J, Bao J, Zhao Y, et al. Defect-rich N-doped porous 

carbon derived from soybean for high rate lithium-ion batteries. Appl Surf Sci 
2018;451:298–305. 

[276] Long W, Fang B, Ignaszak A, Wu Z, Wang Y-J, Wilkinson D. Biomass-derived 

nanostructured carbons and their composites as anode materials for lithium ion 
batteries. Chem Soc Rev 2017;46:7176–90. 

[277] Hao E, Liu W, Liu S, Zhang Y, Wang H, Chen S, et al. Rich sulfur doped porous 
carbon materials derived from ginkgo leaves for multiple electrochemical energy 
storage devices. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:2204–14. 

[278] Zhang S, Zheng M, Lin Z, Li N, Liu Y, Zhao B, et al. Activated carbon with 
ultrahigh specific surface area synthesized from natural plant material for 
lithium–sulfur batteries. J Mater Chem A 2014;2:15889–96. 

[279] Guo D, Wei H, Chen X, Liu M, Ding F, Yang Z, et al. 3D hierarchical nitrogen- 

doped carbon nanoflower derived from chitosan for efficient electrocatalytic 
oxygen reduction and high performance lithium–sulfur batteries. J Mater Chem A 
2017;5:18193–206. 

[280] Li Y, Wang G, Wei T, Fan Z, Yan P. Nitrogen and sulfur co-doped porous carbon 
nanosheets derived from willow catkin for supercapacitors. Nano Energy 2016; 
19:165–75. 

[281] Obernberger I, Brunner T, B¨arnthaler G. Chemical properties of solid 

biofuels—significance and impact. Biomass Bioenergy 2006;30:973–82. 
[282] Gislum R, Griffith S. Tiller production and development in perennial ryegrass in 

relation to nitrogen use. J Plant Nutr 2005;27:2135–48. 

[283] Lim TK. Edible medicinal and non-medicinal plants. Edible medicinal and non- 

medicinal plants. Dordrecht: Springer; 2012. 

[284] Zhao L, Fan LZ, Zhou MQ, Guan H, Qiao S, Antonietti M, et al. Nitrogen- 

containing hydrothermal carbons with superior performance in supercapacitors. 
Adv Mater 2010;22:5202–6. 

[285] Sun F, Gao J, Zhu Y, Pi X, Wang L, Liu X, et al. A high performance lithium ion 

capacitor achieved by the integration of a Sn-C anode and a biomass-derived 
microporous activated carbon cathode. Sci Rep 2017;7:40990. 

[286] Candelaria SL, Garcia BB, Liu D, Cao G. Nitrogen modification of highly porous 
carbon for improved supercapacitor performance. J Mater Chem 2012;22: 
9884–9. 

[287] Kai D, Tan MJ, Chee PL, Chua YK, Yap YL, Loh XJ. Towards lignin-based 

functional materials in a sustainable world. Green Chem 2016;18:1175–200. 

[258] Fingolo AC, Bettini J, da Silva Cavalcante M, Pereira MP, Bufon CCB, 

[288] Jin J, Ding J, Klett A, Thies MC, Ogale AA. Carbon fibers derived from 

Santhiago M, et al. Boosting electrical conductivity of sugarcane cellulose and 
lignin biocarbons through annealing under isopropanol vapor. ACS Sustain Chem 
Eng 2020;8:7002–10. 

[259] Dai J, Yuan J. Modulating the electronic and magnetic structures of P-doped 

graphene by molecule doping. J Phys: Condens Matter 2010;22:225501. 

fractionated–solvated lignin precursors for enhanced mechanical performance. 
ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2018;6:14135–42. 

[289] Tenhaeff WE, Rios O, More K, McGuire MA. Highly Robust lithium ion battery 
anodes from lignin: an abundant, renewable, and low-cost material. Adv Funct 
Mater 2014;24:86–94. 

[260] Luo Z, Lim S, Tian Z, Shang J, Lai L, MacDonald B, et al. Pyridinic N doped 

[290] Zhao H, Wang Q, Deng Y, Shi Q, Qian Y, Wang B, et al. Preparation of renewable 

graphene: synthesis, electronic structure, and electrocatalytic property. J Mater 
Chem 2011;21:8038–44. 

lignin-derived nitrogen-doped carbon nanospheres as anodes for lithium-ion 
batteries. RSC Adv 2016;6:77143–50. 

[261] Ma X, Ning G, Qi C, Xu C, Gao J. Phosphorus and nitrogen dual-doped few-layered 

[291] Yang J, Wang Y, Luo J, Chen L. Facile preparation of self-standing hierarchical 

porous graphene: a high-performance anode material for lithium-ion batteries. 
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2014;6:14415–22. 

porous nitrogen-doped carbon fibers for supercapacitors from plant 
protein–lignin electrospun fibers. ACS Omega 2018;3:4647–56. 

[262] Wang H, Zhang C, Liu Z, Wang L, Han P, Xu H, et al. Nitrogen-doped graphene 

[292] Du L, Wu W, Luo C, Xu D, Guo H, Wang R, et al. Lignin-derived nitrogen-doped 

nanosheets with excellent lithium storage properties. J Mater Chem 2011;21: 
5430–4. 

porous carbon as a high-rate anode material for sodium ion batteries. 
J Electrochem Soc 2019;166:A423–4A8. 

[263] Pumera M. Heteroatom modified graphenes: electronic and electrochemical 

[293] Zhao H, Wang Q, Deng Y, Shi Q, Qian Y, Wang B, et al. Preparation of renewable 

applications. J Mater Chem C 2014;2:6454–61. 

[264] Li Z, Bommier C, Chong ZS, Jian Z, Surta TW, Wang X, et al. Mechanism of Na-ion 
storage in hard carbon anodes revealed by heteroatom doping. Adv Energy Mater 
2017;7:1602894. 

[265] Alvin S, Chandra C, Kim J. Extended plateau capacity of phosphorus-doped hard 

carbon used as an anode in Na- and K-ion batteries. Chem Eng J 2020;391: 
123576. 

[266] Vassilev SV, Baxter D, Andersen LK, Vassileva CG. An overview of the chemical 

composition of biomass. Fuel 2010;89:913–33. 

[267] Suzuki T, Nakajima H, Ikenaga N-o, Oda H, Miyake T. Effect of mineral matters in 
biomass on the gasification rate of their chars. Biomass Convers Biorefinery 2011; 
1:17–28. 

[268] Gudka B, Jones JM, Lea-Langton AR, Williams A, Saddawi A. A review of the 

mitigation of deposition and emission problems during biomass combustion 
through washing pre-treatment. J Energy Inst 2016;89:159–71. 

[269] Wang X, Sun G, Routh P, Kim D-H, Huang W, Chen P. Heteroatom-doped 

graphene materials: syntheses, properties and applications. Chem Soc Rev 2014; 
43:7067–98. 

[270] Wu P, Du P, Zhang H, Cai C. Microscopic effects of the bonding configuration of 

[271] Poh HL, 

nitrogen-doped graphene on its reactivity toward hydrogen peroxide reduction 
reaction. PCCP 2013;15:6920–8. 

ˇ
Simek P, Sofer Z, Tomandl I, Pumera M. Boron and nitrogen doping of 
graphene via thermal exfoliation of graphite oxide in a BF3  or NH3  atmosphere: 
contrasting properties. J Mater Chem A 2013;1:13146–53. 

lignin-derived nitrogen-doped carbon nanospheres as anodes for lithium-ion 
batteries. RSC Adv 2016;6:77143–50. 

[294] Graglia M, Pampel J, Hantke T, Fellinger T-P, Esposito D. Nitro lignin-derived 

nitrogen-doped carbon as an efficient and sustainable electrocatalyst for oxygen 
reduction. ACS Nano 2016;10:4364–71. 

[295] Endo K, Tatsumi T. Nitrogen doped fluorinated amorphous carbon thin films 

grown by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition for low dielectric constant 
interlayer dielectrics. Appl Phys Lett 1996;68:3656–8. 

[296] Li X-j, Yu X-x, Liu J-y, Fan X-d, Zhang K, Cai H-b, et al. Synthesis of nitrogen- 
doped graphene via thermal annealing graphene with urea. Chin J Chem Phys 
2012;25:325. 

[297] Soudani N, Najar-Souissi S, Abderkader-Fernandez VK, Ouederni A. Effects of 
nitrogen plasma treatment on the surface characteristics of olive stone-based 
activated carbon. Environ Technol 2017;38:956–66. 

[298] Belgacem AB, Hinkov I, Yahia SB, Brinza O, Farhat S. Arc discharge boron 

nitrogen doping of carbon nanotubes. Mater Today Commun 2016;8:183–95. 

[299] Schneidermann C, J¨ackel N, Oswald S, Giebeler L, Presser V, Borchardt L. Solvent- 
free mechanochemical synthesis of nitrogen-doped nanoporous carbon for 
electrochemical energy storage. ChemSusChem 2017;10:2416–24. 

[300] Yang L, Jiang S, Zhao Y, Zhu L, Chen S, Wang X, et al. Boron-doped carbon 

nanotubes as metal-free electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction. Angew 
Chem Int Ed 2011;50:7132–5. 

[301] Ryu J, Park M, Cho J. Boron and nitrogen co-doped porous carbon materials 

derived from orange peels as an electrocatalyst for the all-vanadium redox flow 
batteries. Meeting Abstracts: The Electrochemical Society 2015;MA2015-03:652. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092939N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[302] Chen M-H, Wu G-T, Zhu G-M, You J-K, Lin Z-G. Characterization and 

electrochemical investigation of boron-doped mesocarbon microbead anode 
materials for lithium ion batteries. J Solid State Electrochem 2002;6:420–7. 
[303] Tanaka U, Sogabe T, Sakagoshi H, Ito M, Tojo T. Anode property of boron-doped 
graphite materials for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries. Carbon 2001;39:931–6. 

[304] Hagio T, Nakamizo M, Kobayashi K. Studies on X-ray diffraction and Raman 

spectra of B-doped natural graphite. Carbon 1989;27:259–63. 

[332] Robinson JT, Burgess JS, Junkermeier CE, Badescu SC, Reinecke TL, Perkins FK, 
et al. Properties of fluorinated graphene films. Nano Lett 2010;10:3001–5. 
[333] Feng W, Long P, Feng Y, Li Y. Two-dimensional fluorinated graphene: synthesis, 

structures, properties and applications. Adv Sci 2016;3:1500413. 

[334] Nakajima T, Koh M, Gupta V, ˇZemva B, Lutar K. Electrochemical behavior of 

graphite highly fluorinated by high oxidation state complex fluorides and 
elemental fluorine. Electrochim Acta 2000;45:1655–61. 

[305] Ling Z, Wang Z, Zhang M, Yu C, Wang G, Dong Y, et al. Sustainable synthesis and 

[335] Sun X, Zhang Y, Song P, Pan J, Zhuang L, Xu W, et al. Fluorine-doped carbon 

assembly of biomass-derived B/N co-doped carbon nanosheets with ultrahigh 
aspect ratio for high-performance supercapacitors. Adv Funct Mater 2016;26: 
111–9. 

[306] Xia Q, Yang H, Wang M, Yang M, Guo Q, Wan L, et al. High energy and high 

power lithium-ion capacitors based on boron and nitrogen dual-doped 3D carbon 
nanofibers as both cathode and anode. Adv Energy Mater 2017;7:1701336. 
[307] Monteiro F, Larrude D, Maia da Costa M, Terrazos L, Capaz RB, Freire Jr F. 

Production and characterization of boron-doped single wall carbon nanotubes. 
J Phys Chem C 2012;116:3281–5. 

[308] Shirasaki T, Derr´e A, M´en´etrier M, Tressaud A, Flandrois S. Synthesis and 

characterization of boron-substituted carbons. Carbon 2000;38:1461–7. 

[309] Cermignani W, Paulson TE, Onneby C, Pantano CG. Synthesis and 
characterization of boron-doped carbons. Carbon 1995;33:367–74. 

[310] Endo M, Kim C, Nishimura K, Fujino T, Miyashita K. Recent development of 

carbon materials for Li ion batteries. Carbon 2000;38:183–97. 

[311] Agnoli S, Favaro M. Doping graphene with boron: a review of synthesis methods, 

physicochemical characterization, and emerging applications. J Mater Chem A 
2016;4:5002–25. 

[312] Dahn JR, Reimers JN, Sleigh AK, Tiedje T. Density of states in graphite from 
electrochemical measurements on Lix(C1-zBz)6. Phys Rev B 1992;45:3773–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.45.3773. 

[313] Alvin S, Cahyadi HS, Hwang J, Chang W, Kwak SK, Kim J. Revealing the 

intercalation mechanisms of lithium, sodium, and potassium in hard carbon. Adv 
Energy Mater 2020;10:2000283. 

[314] Chae Y-J, Kim S-O, Lee JK. Employment of boron-doped carbon materials for the 
anode materials of lithium ion batteries. J Alloys Compd 2014;582:420–7. 
[315] Lu X, Chen L. Boron-doped carbon nano-/microballs from orthoboric acid-starch: 

preparation, characterization, and lithium ion storage properties. J Nanomater 
2018;2018:4987340. 

[316] Wu F, Dong R, Bai Y, Li Y, Chen G, Wang Z, et al. Phosphorus-doped hard carbon 
nanofibers prepared by electrospinning as an anode in sodium-ion batteries. ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:21335–42. 

[317] Ma C, Deng C, Liao X, He Y, Ma Z, Xiong H. Nitrogen and phosphorus codoped 
porous carbon framework as anode material for high rate lithium-ion batteries. 
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:36969–75. 

[318] Jeon T, Lee S, Jung SC. Boron-, nitrogen-, aluminum-, and phosphorus-doped 

graphite electrodes for non-lithium ion batteries. Curr Appl Phys 2020;20: 
988–93. 

[319] Wu J, Yang Z, Sun Q, Li X, Strasser P, Yang R. Synthesis and electrocatalytic 

activity of phosphorus-doped carbon xerogel for oxygen reduction. Electrochim 
Acta 2014;127:53–60. 

[320] Wang B, Yu L, Zhang J, Pu Y, Zhang H, Li W. Phosphorus-doped carbon supports 
enhance gold-based catalysts for acetylene hydrochlorination. RSC Adv 2014;4: 
15877–85. 

[321] Liu Q, Zhou Y, Chen S, Wang Z, Hou H, Zhao F. Cellulose-derived nitrogen and 
phosphorus dual-doped carbon as high performance oxygen reduction catalyst in 
microbial fuel cell. J Power Sources 2015;273:1189–93. 

[322] Hou H, Shao L, Zhang Y, Zou G, Chen J, Ji X. Large-area carbon nanosheets doped 

with phosphorus: a high-performance anode material for sodium-ion batteries. 
Adv Sci 2017;4:1600243. 

blacks: highly efficient metal-free electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction. 
ACS Catal 2013;3:1726–9. 

[336] Kim J, Zhou R, Murakoshi K, Yasuda S. Advantage of semi-ionic bonding in 

fluorine-doped carbon materials for the oxygen evolution reaction in alkaline 
media. RSC Adv 2018;8:14152–6. 

[337] Di Vittorio S, Dresselhaus M, Dresselhaus G. A model for disorder in fluorine- 

intercalated graphite. J Mater Res 1993;8:1578–85. 

[338] Liu Y, Jiang L, Wang H, Wang H, Jiao W, Chen G, et al. A brief review for 
fluorinated carbon: synthesis, properties and applications. Nanotechnol Rev 
2019;8:573–86. 

[339] Gupta V, Nakajima T, Ohzawa Y, Iwata H. Electrochemical characteristics and 

structures of surface-fluorinated graphites with different particle sizes for lithium 
ion secondary batteries. J Fluorine Chem 2001;112:233–40. 

[340] Gong YJ, Pyo S, Kim H, Cho J, Yun H, Kim H, et al. Advanced Li metal anode by 
fluorinated metathesis on conjugated carbon networks. Energy Environ Sci 2021; 
14:940–54. 

[341] Lee C, Han Y-J, Seo YD, Nakabayashi K, Miyawaki J, Santamaría R, et al. C4F8 

plasma treatment as an effective route for improving rate performance of natural/ 
synthetic graphite anodes in lithium ion batteries. Carbon 2016;103:28–35. 

[342] Zhao Y, Yang L, Ma C, Han G. One-step fabrication of fluorine-doped graphite 
derived from a low-grade microcrystalline graphite ore for potassium-ion 
batteries. Energy Fuels 2020;34:8993–9001. 

[343] Wang P, Qiao B, Du Y, Li Y, Zhou X, Dai Z, et al. Fluorine-doped carbon particles 
derived from lotus petioles as high-performance anode materials for sodium-ion 
batteries. J Phys Chem C 2015;119:21336–44. 

[344] Zheng F, Yang Y, Chen Q. High lithium anodic performance of highly nitrogen- 
doped porous carbon prepared from a metal-organic framework. Nat Commun 
2014;5:5261. 

[345] Raj CR, Samanta A, Noh SH, Mondal S, Okajima T, Ohsaka T. Emerging new 

generation electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction. J. Mater. Chem. A 
2016;4:11156–78. 

[346] Xu A, Shi L, Zeng L, Zhao T. First-principle investigations of nitrogen-, boron-, 
phosphorus-doped graphite electrodes for vanadium redox flow batteries. 
Electrochim Acta 2019;300:389–95. 

[347] Xie J, Zhao X, Wu M, Li Q, Wang Y, Yao J. Metal-free fluorine-doped carbon 

electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction outcompeting hydrogen evolution. Angew Chem 
Int Ed 2018;57:9640–4. 

[348] Serraon ACF, Del Rosario JAD, Abel Chuang P-Y, Chong MN, Morikawa Y, 

Padama AAB, et al. Alkaline earth atom doping-induced changes in the electronic 
and magnetic properties of graphene: a density functional theory study. RSC Adv 
2021;11:6268–83. 

[349] Toh RJ, Poh HL, Sofer Z, Pumera M. Transition metal (Mn, Fe, Co, Ni)-doped 
graphene hybrids for electrocatalysis. Chem Asian J 2013;8:1295–300. 
[350] McRae E, Marˆech´e JF. c-axis conductivity and conductivity anisotropy in graphite 

intercalation compounds. J Mater Res 1988;3:75–86. 

[351] Kaskhedikar NA, Maier J. Lithium storage in carbon nanostructures. Adv Mater 

2009;21:2664–80. 

[352] Kaneko T, Saito R. First-principles study on interlayer state in alkali and alkaline 
earth metal atoms intercalated bilayer graphene. Surf Sci 2017;665:1–9. 
[353] Chapman J. Alkali metal doped graphene: superconductivity, structural, magnetic 

[323] Lü H-Y, Zhang X-H, Wan F, Liu D-S, Fan C-Y, Xu H-M, et al. Flexible P-doped 

and optical properties. The University of Manchester (United Kingdom); 2015. 

carbon cloth: vacuum-sealed preparation and enhanced Na-storage properties as 
binder-free anode for sodium ion batteries. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2017;9: 
12518–27. 

[324] Yi J, Qing Y, Wu C, Zeng Y, Wu Y, Lu X, et al. Lignocellulose-derived porous 
phosphorus-doped carbon as advanced electrode for supercapacitors. J Power 
Sources 2017;351:130–7. 

[325] Li Z, Ma L, Surta TW, Bommier C, Jian Z, Xing Z, et al. High capacity of hard 

carbon anode in Na-ion batteries unlocked by POx doping. ACS Energy Lett 2016; 
1:395–401. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00172. 

[326] Tao H, Du S, Zhang F, Xiong L, Zhang Y, Ma H, et al. Achieving a high- 

performance carbon anode through the P–O bond for lithium-ion batteries. ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:34245–53. 

[327] Lu K, Lu S, Gu T, Zheng X, Ke K, Li X, et al. Onium salts-derived B and P dual- 
doped carbon microspheres as anode material for high-performance sodium-ion 
batteries. Electrochem Commun 2019;103:22–6. 

[328] Xing X, Liu J, Wang W, Chen Z, Yixuan F. Application of phosphorus-doped 

sunflower disc-based activated carbon in anode materials for lithium ion 
batteries. J Process Eng 2019;19:434–9. 

[329] Han SS, Yu TH, Merinov BV, Van Duin AC, Yazami R, Goddard III WA. Unraveling 
structural models of graphite fluorides by density functional theory calculations. 
Chem Mater 2010;22:2142–54. 

[330] Zboˇril R, Karlický F, Bourlinos AB, Steriotis TA, Stubos AK, Georgakilas V, et al. 
Graphene fluoride: a stable stoichiometric graphene derivative and its chemical 
conversion to graphene. Small 2010;6:2885–91. 

[331] Wasalathilake KC, Ayoko GA, Yan C. Effects of heteroatom doping on the 

performance of graphene in sodium-ion batteries: a density functional theory 
investigation. Carbon 2018;140:276–85. 

[354] Matsumoto R, Arakawa M, Yoshida H, Akuzawa N. Alkali-metal-graphite 

intercalation compounds prepared from flexible graphite sheets exhibiting high 
air stability and electrical conductivity. Synth Met 2012;162:2149–54. 
[355] Cahen S, El-Hajj I, Speyer L, Berger P, Medjahdi G, Lagrange P, et al. Original 

synthesis route of bulk binary superconducting graphite intercalation compounds 
with strontium, barium and ytterbium. New J Chem 2020;44:10050–5. 
[356] Guerard D, Chaabouni M, Lagrange P, El Makrini M, Herold A. Insertion de 
metaux alcalino-terreux dans le graphite. Carbon 1980;18:257–64. 

[357] Marsh H, Murdie N, Edwards AS, Boehm HP. In: Thrower PA, editor. Chemistry & 

Physics of Carbon, 20. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1987. p. 213. 

[358] H´erinckx C, Perret R, Ruland W. Interstitial compounds of potassium with carbon 

fibres. Nature 1968;220:63–4. https://doi.org/10.1038/220063a0. 

[359] Halpin MK, Jenkins GM. Interaction of glassy carbon with alkali metal vapours. 

Proceed R Soc Lond Ser A, Math Phys Sci 1969;313:421–31. 

[360] Guerard D, Herold A. Intercalation of lithium into graphite and other carbons. 

Carbon 1975;13:337–45. 

[361] Sato K, Noguchi M, Demachi A, Oki N, Endo M. A mechanism of lithium storage in 

disordered carbons. Science 1994;264:556. 

[362] Shi C, Hu L, Hou J, Guo K, Zhai T, Li H. Alkali metal boosted atom rearrangement 
in amorphous carbon towards crystalline graphitic belt skeleton for high 
performance supercapacitors. Energy Storage Mater 2018;15:82–90. 
[363] McNamara KW, Ayyappan P, Rajagopalan R, Chen JG, Foley HC. Localized 

crystallization of polyfurfuryl alcohol derived carbon by alkali metals. Carbon 
2013;56:109–20. 

[364] Wu F, Liu L, Yuan Y, Li Y, Bai Y, Li T, et al. Expanding interlayer spacing of hard 
carbon by natural K+ doping to boost Na-ion storage. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
2018;10:27030–8. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092940N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[365] Obrovac MN, Zhao X, Burke LT, Dunlap RA. Reversible lithium insertion in 

[395] Nie P, Le Z, Chen G, Liu D, Liu X, Wu HB, et al. Graphene caging silicon particles 

catalytically graphitized sugar carbon. Electrochem Commun 2015;60:221–4. 

for high-performance lithium-ion batteries. Small 2018;14:1800635. 

[366] Li Y, Hu J, Wang Z, Yang K, Huang W, Cao B, et al. Low-temperature catalytic 
graphitization to enhance Na-ion transportation in carbon electrodes. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 2019;11:24164–71. 

[367] Makrini ME, Gu´erard D, Lagrange P, H´erold A. Insertion de lanthanoides dans le 

graphite. Carbon 1980;18:203–9. 

[368] Liu X, Wang CZ, Yao YX, Lu WC, Hupalo M, Tringides MC, et al. Bonding and 
charge transfer by metal adatom adsorption on graphene. Phys Rev B 2011;83: 
235411. 

[369] Chung DDL. A review of exfoliated graphite. J Mater Sci 2016;51:554–68. 
[370] Hoffmann V, Rodriguez Correa C, Sautter D, Maringolo E, Kruse A. Study of the 
electrical conductivity of biobased carbonaceous powder materials under 
moderate pressure for the application as electrode materials in energy storage 
technologies. GCB Bioenergy 2019;11:230–48. 

[371] Giraudet J, Claves D, Hamwi A. Transition metals oxyfluorides intercalated into 

graphite: new synthesis route and electrochemical properties. Synth Met 2001; 
118:57–63. 

[372] Zhong W, Chen J, Zhang P, Deng L, Yao L, Ren X, et al. Air plasma etching 

towards rich active sites in Fe/N-porous carbon for the oxygen reduction reaction 
with superior catalytic performance. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:16605–10. 

[373] Cai S, Meng Z, Tang H, Wang Y, Tsiakaras P. 3D Co-N-doped hollow carbon 

spheres as excellent bifunctional electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction 
and oxygen evolution reaction. Appl Catal, B 2017;217:477–84. 

[396] Jeong S, Li X, Zheng J, Yan P, Cao R, Jung HJ, et al. Hard carbon coated nano-Si/ 

graphite composite as a high performance anode for Li-ion batteries. J Power 
Sources 2016;329:323–9. 

[397] Noh M, Kwon Y, Lee H, Cho J, Kim Y, Kim MG. Amorphous carbon-coated tin 

anode material for lithium secondary battery. Chem Mater 2005;17:1926–9. 
[398] Ge C, Fan Z, Zhang J, Qiao Y, Wang J, Ling L. Novel hard carbon/graphite 

composites synthesized by a facile in situ anchoring method as high-performance 
anodes for lithium-ion batteries. RSC Adv 2018;8:34682–9. 

[399] Yang Z, Zhang J, Kintner-Meyer MC, Lu X, Choi D, Lemmon JP, et al. 

Electrochemical energy storage for green grid. Chem Rev 2011;111:3577–613. 

[400] Ge P, Fouletier M. Electrochemical intercalation of sodium in graphite. Solid State 

Ion 1988;28:1172–5. 

[401] Moriwake H, Kuwabara A, Fisher CA, Ikuhara Y. Why is sodium-intercalated 

graphite unstable? RSC Adv 2017;7:36550–4. 

[402] Nobuhara K, Nakayama H, Nose M, Nakanishi S, Iba H. First-principles study of 
alkali metal-graphite intercalation compounds. J Power Sources 2013;243:585–7. 
[403] Liu Y, Merinov BV, Goddard WA. Origin of low sodium capacity in graphite and 
generally weak substrate binding of Na and Mg among alkali and alkaline earth 
metals. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2016;113:3735–9. 

[404] Xu Y-S, Duan S-Y, Sun Y-G, Bin D-S, Tao X-S, Zhang D, et al. Recent developments 
in electrode materials for potassium-ion batteries. J Mater Chem A 2019;7: 
4334–52. 

[374] Lee YJ, Jung JC, Park S, Seo JG, Baeck S-H, Yoon JR, et al. Nano-sized Ni-doped 

[405] Gaddam RR, Yang D, Narayan R, Raju K, Kumar NA, Zhao X. Biomass derived 

carbon aerogel for supercapacitor. J Nanosci Nanotechnol 2011;11:6528–32. 

[375] Sung C-M, Tai M-F. Reactivities of transition metals with carbon: implications to 
the mechanism of diamond synthesis under high pressure. Int J Refract Met Hard 
Mater 1997;15:237–56. 

[376] Yan Q, Li J, Zhang X, Hassan EB, Wang C, Zhang J, et al. Catalytic graphitization 
of kraft lignin to graphene-based structures with four different transitional metals. 
J Nanopart Res 2018;20:223. 

[377] Maldonado-H´odar FJ, Moreno-Castilla C, Rivera-Utrilla J, Hanzawa Y, Yamada Y. 
Catalytic graphitization of carbon aerogels by transition metals. Langmuir 2000; 
16:4367–73. 

carbon nanoparticle as anodes for high performance sodium and lithium ion 
batteries. Nano Energy 2016;26:346–52. 

[406] Luo W, Wan J, Ozdemir B, Bao W, Chen Y, Dai J, et al. Potassium ion batteries 

with graphitic materials. Nano Lett 2015;15:7671–7. 

[407] Maibach J, Jeschull F, Brandell D, Edstr¨om K, Valvo M. Surface layer evolution on 

graphite during electrochemical sodium-tetraglyme co-intercalation. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 2017;9:12373–81. 

[408] Yamada Y, Yamada A. Superconcentrated electrolytes for lithium batteries. 

J Electrochem Soc 2015;162:A2406–2A23. 

[409] Wen Y, He K, Zhu Y, Han F, Xu Y, Matsuda I, et al. Expanded graphite as superior 

[378] Hunter RD, Rowlandson JL, Smales GJ, Pauw BR, Ting VP, Kulak A, et al. The 

anode for sodium-ion batteries. Nat Commun 2014;5:4033. 

effect of precursor structure on porous carbons produced by iron-catalyzed 
graphitization of biomass. Mater Adv 2020;1:3281–91. 

[379] Balach J, Singh HK, Gomoll S, Jaumann T, Klose M, Oswald S, et al. 

Synergistically enhanced polysulfide chemisorption using a flexible hybrid 
separator with N and S dual-doped mesoporous carbon coating for advanced 
lithium–sulfur batteries. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2016;8:14586–95. 

[380] Wang Q, Gao C, Zhang W, Luo S, Zhou M, Liu Y, et al. Biomorphic carbon derived 
from corn husk as a promising anode materials for potassium ion battery. 
Electrochim Acta 2019;324:134902. 

[381] Yuan C, Liu X, Jia M, Luo Z, Yao J. Facile preparation of N-and O-doped hollow 

carbon spheres derived from poly (o-phenylenediamine) for supercapacitors. 
J Mater Chem A 2015;3:3409–15. 

[382] Qin D, Liu Z, Zhao Y, Xu G, Zhang F, Zhang X. A sustainable route from corn stalks 
to N, P-dual doping carbon sheets toward high performance sodium-ion batteries 
anode. Carbon 2018;130:664–71. 

[383] Zhao G, Shi L, Xu J, Yan X, Zhao T. Role of phosphorus in nitrogen, phosphorus 

dual-doped ordered mesoporous carbon electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction 
reaction in alkaline media. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:1470–8. 

[384] Zhang Y, Li L, Hong W, Qiu T, Xu L, Zou G, et al. Influence of P doping on Na and 

K storage properties of N-rich carbon nanosheets. Mater Chem Phys 2019;236: 
121809. 

[410] Jache B, Adelhelm P. Use of graphite as a highly reversible electrode with 

superior cycle life for sodium-ion batteries by making use of co-intercalation 
phenomena. Angew Chem Int Ed 2014;53:10169–73. 

[411] Moon H, Mandai T, Tatara R, Ueno K, Yamazaki A, Yoshida K, et al. Solvent 

activity in electrolyte solutions controls electrochemical reactions in Li-ion and 
Li-sulfur batteries. J Phys Chem C 2015;119:3957–70. 

[412] Nie M, Abraham DP, Seo DM, Chen Y, Bose A, Lucht BL. Role of solution structure 

in solid electrolyte interphase formation on graphite with LiPF6  in propylene 
carbonate. J Phys Chem C 2013;117:25381–9. 

[413] Buqa H, Würsig A, Goers D, Hardwick LJ, Holzapfel M, Nov´ak P, et al. Behaviour 
of highly crystalline graphites in lithium-ion cells with propylene carbonate 
containing electrolytes. J Power Sources 2005;146:134–41. 

+

[414] Jung SC, Kang Y-J, Han Y-K. Origin of excellent rate and cycle performance of Na 
-solvent case. Nano 

-solvent cointercalated graphite vs. poor performance of Li
Energy 2017;34:456–62. 

+

[415] Kim H, Yoon G, Lim K, Kang K. A comparative study of graphite electrodes using 
the co-intercalation phenomenon for rechargeable Li, Na and K batteries. Chem 
Commun 2016;52:12618–21. 

[416] Yoon G, Kim H, Park I, Kang K. Conditions for reversible Na intercalation in 
graphite: theoretical studies on the interplay among guest ions, solvent, and 
graphite host. Adv Energy Mater 2017;7:1601519. 

[385] Shanmugam S, Nachimuthu S, Subramaniam V. DFT study of adsorption of ions 

[417] Kim H, Hong J, Park YU, Kim J, Hwang I, Kang K. Sodium storage behavior in 

on doped and defective graphene. Materials Today Communications 2020;22: 
100714. 

natural graphite using ether-based electrolyte systems. Adv Funct Mater 2015;25: 
534–41. 

[386] Bommier C, Ji X, Greaney PA. Electrochemical properties and theoretical capacity 

[418] Xu Z-L, Yoon G, Park K-Y, Park H, Tamwattana O, Kim SJ, et al. Tailoring sodium 

for sodium storage in hard carbon: Insights from first principles calculations. 
Chem Mater 2018;31:658–77. 

intercalation in graphite for high energy and power sodium ion batteries. Nat 
Commun 2019;10:2598. 

[387] Share K, Cohn AP, Carter R, Rogers B, Pint CL. Role of nitrogen-doped graphene 

[419] Klein F, Jache B, Bhide A, Adelhelm P. Conversion reactions for sodium-ion 

for improved high-capacity potassium ion battery anodes. ACS Nano 2016;10: 
9738–44. 

[388] Yoshio M, Wang H, Fukuda K, Abe T, Ogumi Z. Soft carbon-coated hard carbon 
beads as a lithium-ion battery anode material. Chem Lett 2003;32:1130–1. 
[389] Lian Y, Xin W, Zhang M, Li Y, Yang L, Guo Y, et al. Low-content Ni-doped CoS2 

embedded within N, P-codoped biomass-derived carbon spheres for enhanced 
lithium/sodium storage. J Mater Sci 2019;54:8504–14. 

[390] Li H, Wang Q, Shi L, Chen L, Huang X. Nanosized SnSb alloy pinning on hard non- 
graphitic carbon spherules as anode materials for a Li ion battery. Chem Mater 
2002;14:103–8. 

[391] Yang R, Wang Z, Liu J, Chen L. Nano Co3O4  particles embedded in porous hard 
carbon spherules as anode material for Li-ion batteries. Electrochem Solid-State 
Lett 2004;7:A496–9. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1819861. 

[392] Guo B, Shu J, Tang K, Bai Y, Wang Z, Chen L. Nano-Sn/hard carbon composite 
anode material with high-initial coulombic efficiency. J Power Sources 2008;177: 
205–10. 

[393] Cheng H, Garcia-Araez N, Hector AL, Soul´e S. Synthesis of hard carbon-TiN/TiC 

composites by reacting cellulose with TiCl4 followed by carbothermal 
nitridation/reduction. Inorg Chem 2019;58:5776–86. 

batteries. PCCP 2013;15:15876–87. 

[420] Zhong Y, Xia X, Shi F, Zhan J, Tu J, Fan HJ. Transition metal carbides and nitrides 

in energy storage and conversion. Adv Sci 2016;3:1500286. 

[421] Wang L, Yang J, Li J, Chen T, Chen S, Wu Z, et al. Graphite as a potassium ion 
battery anode in carbonate-based electrolyte and ether-based electrolyte. J Power 
Sources 2019;409:24–30. 

[422] Li L, Liu L, Hu Z, Lu Y, Liu Q, Jin S, et al. Understanding high-rate K

-solvent Co- 
intercalation in natural graphite for potassium-ion batteries. Angew Chem Int Ed 
2020;59:12917–24. 

[423] Wu X, Leonard DP, Ji X. Emerging non-aqueous potassium-ion batteries: 

challenges and opportunities. Chem Mater 2017;29:5031–42. 

[424] Qiu S, Xiao L, Sushko ML, Han KS, Shao Y, Yan M, et al. Manipulating 

adsorption–insertion mechanisms in nanostructured carbon materials for high- 
efficiency sodium ion storage. Adv Energy Mater 2017;7:1700403. 

[425] Cao Y, Xiao L, Sushko ML, Wang W, Schwenzer B, Xiao J, et al. Sodium ion 

insertion in hollow carbon nanowires for battery applications. Nano Lett 2012;12: 
3783–7. 

[426] Xiao B, Rojo T, Li X. Hard carbon as sodium-ion battery anodes: progress and 

challenges. ChemSusChem 2019;12:133–44. 

+

[394] Jian Z, Hwang S, Li Z, Hernandez AS, Wang X, Xing Z, et al. Hard–soft composite 

[427] Komaba S, Murata W, Ishikawa T, Yabuuchi N, Ozeki T, Nakayama T, et al. 

carbon as a long-cycling and high-rate anode for potassium-ion batteries. Adv 
Funct Mater 2017;27:1700324. 

Electrochemical Na insertion and solid electrolyte interphase for hard-carbon 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092941N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

electrodes and application to Na-ion batteries. Adv Funct Mater 2011;21: 
3859–67. 

[428] Ponrouch A, Go˜ni A, Palacín MR. High capacity hard carbon anodes for sodium 

ion batteries in additive free electrolyte. Electrochem Commun 2013;27:85–8. 
[429] Eshetu GG, Grugeon S, Kim H, Jeong S, Wu L, Gachot G, et al. Comprehensive 
insights into the reactivity of electrolytes based on sodium ions. ChemSusChem 
2016;9:462–71. 

[430] Chen C, Wang Z, Zhang B, Miao L, Cai J, Peng L, et al. Nitrogen-rich hard carbon 
as a highly durable anode for high-power potassium-ion batteries. Energy Storage 
Mater 2017;8:161–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ensm.2017.05.010. 

[431] Wang T, Su D, Shanmukaraj D, Rojo T, Armand M, Wang G. Electrode materials 
for sodium-ion batteries: considerations on crystal structures and sodium storage 
mechanisms. Electrochem Energy Rev 2018;1:200–37. 

[432] Ohzuku T, Iwakoshi Y, Sawai K. Formation of lithium-graphite intercalation 

compounds in nonaqueous electrolytes and their application as a negative 
electrode for a lithium ion (shuttlecock) cell. J Electrochem Soc 1993;140:2490. 
[433] Jian Z, Luo W, Ji X. Carbon electrodes for K-ion batteries. J Am Chem Soc 2015; 

137:11566–9. 

[434] Zhang S, Ding MS, Xu K, Allen J, Jow TR. Understanding solid electrolyte 

[457] Eshetu GG, Diemant T, Hekmatfar M, Grugeon S, Behm RJ, Laruelle S, et al. 

Impact of the electrolyte salt anion on the solid electrolyte interphase formation 
in sodium ion batteries. Nano Energy 2019;55:327–40. 

[458] Soto FA, Yan P, Engelhard MH, Marzouk A, Wang C, Xu G, et al. Tuning the solid 

electrolyte interphase for selective Li-and Na-ion storage in hard carbon. Adv 
Mater 2017;29:1606860. 

[459] Xiao B, Soto FA, Gu M, Han KS, Song J, Wang H, et al. Lithium-pretreated hard 
carbon as high-performance sodium-ion battery anodes. Adv Energy Mater 2018; 
8:1801441. 

[460] Bai P, He Y, Zou X, Zhao X, Xiong P, Xu Y. Elucidation of the sodium-storage 

mechanism in hard carbons. Adv Energy Mater 2018;8:1703217. 

[461] Kim H, Hong J, Park Y-U, Kim J, Hwang I, Kang K. Sodium storage behavior in 
natural graphite using ether-based electrolyte systems. Adv Funct Mater 2015;25: 
534–41. 

[462] Bai P, He Y, Xiong P, Zhao X, Xu K, Xu Y. Long cycle life and high rate sodium-ion 
chemistry for hard carbon anodes. Energy Storage Mater 2018;13:274–82. 

[463] Komaba S, Ishikawa T, Yabuuchi N, Murata W, Ito A, Ohsawa Y. Fluorinated 

ethylene carbonate as electrolyte additive for rechargeable Na batteries. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 2011;3:4165–8. 

interface film formation on graphite electrodes. Electrochem Solid-State Lett 
2001;4:A206–2A8. 

[464] Bie X, Kubota K, Hosaka T, Chihara K, Komaba S. A novel K-ion battery: 

hexacyanoferrate (II)/graphite cell. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:4325–30. 

[435] Gallagher KG, Dees DW, Jansen AN, Abraham DP, Kang S-H. A volume averaged 
approach to the numerical modeling of phase-transition intercalation electrodes 
presented for LixC6. J Electrochem Soc 2012;159:A2029–2A37. 

[436] Shellikeri A, Watson V, Adams D, Kalu E, Read J, Jow T, et al. Investigation of 
pre-lithiation in graphite and hard-carbon anodes using different lithium source 
structures. J Electrochem Soc 2017;164:A3914–3A24. 

[437] Boesenberg U, Sokaras D, Nordlund D, Weng T-C, Gorelov E, Richardson TJ, et al. 

Electronic structure changes upon lithium intercalation into graphite–Insights 
from ex situ and operando x-ray Raman spectroscopy. Carbon 2019;143:371–7. 
[438] Euchner H, Vinayan BP, Reddy MA, Fichtner M, Groß A. Alkali metal insertion 
into hard carbon – the full picture. J Mater Chem A 2020;8:14205–13. 

[465] Katorova NS, Luchkin SY, Rupasov DP, Abakumov AM, Stevenson KJ. Origins of 

irreversible capacity loss in hard carbon negative electrodes for potassium-ion 
batteries. J Chem Phys 2020;152:194704. 

[466] Sawicki M, Shaw LL. Advances and challenges of sodium ion batteries as post 

lithium ion batteries. RSC Adv 2015;5:53129–54. 

[467] Rangom Y, Gaddam RR, Duignan TT, Zhao X. Improvement of hard carbon 

electrode performance by manipulating SEI formation at high charging rates. ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11:34796–804. 

[468] Lim DG, Kim K, Razdan M, Diaz R, Osswald S, Pol VG. Lithium storage in 

structurally tunable carbon anode derived from sustainable source. Carbon 2017; 
121:134–42. 

[439] Beltrop K, Beuker S, Heckmann A, Winter M, Placke T. Alternative 

[469] Nakadaira M, Saito R, Kimura T, Dresselhaus G, Dresselhaus M. Excess Li ions in a 

electrochemical energy storage: potassium-based dual-graphite batteries. Energy 
Environ Sci 2017;10:2090–4. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7EE01535F. 

[440] Zhao J, Zou X, Zhu Y, Xu Y, Wang C. Electrochemical intercalation of potassium 

into graphite. Adv Funct Mater 2016;26:8103–10. 

small graphite cluster. J Mater Res 1997;12:1367–75. 

[470] Cheng F, Liang J, Zhao J, Tao Z, Chen J. Biomass waste-derived microporous 
carbons with controlled texture and enhanced hydrogen uptake. Chem Mater 
2008;20:1889–95. 

[441] Share K, Cohn AP, Carter RE, Pint CL. Mechanism of potassium ion intercalation 

[471] Cheng Q, Tamura N. Boron-doped activated carbon material. WO2016157508A1. 

staging in few layered graphene from in situ Raman spectroscopy. Nanoscale 
2016;8:16435–9. 

[442] Nov´ak P, Ufheil J, Buqa H, Krumeich F, Spahr ME, Goers D, et al. The importance 
of the active surface area of graphite materials in the first lithium intercalation. 
J Power Sources 2007;174:1082–5. 

[443] Verma P, Maire P, Nov´ak P. A review of the features and analyses of the solid 
electrolyte interphase in Li-ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 2010;55:6332–41. 

[444] An SJ, Li J, Daniel C, Mohanty D, Nagpure S, Wood III DL. The state of 

understanding of the lithium-ion-battery graphite solid electrolyte interphase 
(SEI) and its relationship to formation cycling. Carbon 2016;105:52–76. 
[445] Naylor AJ, Carboni M, Valvo M, Younesi R. Interfacial reaction mechanisms on 
graphite anodes for K-ion batteries. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11: 
45636–45. 

[446] Aurbach D, Levi MD, Levi E, Schechter A. Failure and stabilization mechanisms of 

graphite electrodes. J Phys Chem B 1997;101:2195–206. 

[447] Kang S-H, Abraham D, Xiao A, Lucht BL. Investigating the solid electrolyte 

interphase using binder-free graphite electrodes. J Power Sources 2008;175: 
526–32. 

[448] Besenhard J, Winter M, Yang J, Biberacher W. Filming mechanism of lithium- 
carbon anodes in organic and inorganic electrolytes. J Power Sources 1995;54: 
228–31. 

[449] Elizabeth I, Mathur R, Maheshwari P, Singh B, Gopukumar S. Development of 

SnO2/multiwalled carbon nanotube paper as free standing anode for lithium ion 
batteries (LIB). Electrochim Acta 2015;176:735–42. 

[450] Hong K-l, Qie L, Zeng R, Yi Z-q, Zhang W, Wang D, et al. Biomass derived hard 

carbon used as a high performance anode material for sodium ion batteries. 
J Mater ChemA 2014;2:12733–8. 

[451] Lu P, Li C, Schneider EW, Harris SJ. Chemistry, impedance, and morphology 
evolution in solid electrolyte interphase films during formation in lithium ion 
batteries. J Phys Chem C 2014;118:896–903. 

[452] Nie M, Chalasani D, Abraham DP, Chen Y, Bose A, Lucht BL. Lithium ion battery 

graphite solid electrolyte interphase revealed by microscopy and spectroscopy. 
J Phys Chem C 2013;117:1257–67. 

[453] Kim S-P, Van Duin AC, Shenoy VB. Effect of electrolytes on the structure and 

evolution of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) in Li-ion batteries: a molecular 
dynamics study. J Power Sources 2011;196:8590–7. 

[454] Ganesh P, Kent P, Jiang D-e. Solid–electrolyte interphase formation and 

electrolyte reduction at Li-ion battery graphite anodes: Insights from first- 
principles molecular dynamics. J Phys Chem C 2012;116:24476–81. 

[455] Wang H, Liu J, Shen Z., Solid Electrolyte Interphase and Nitrogen Doping Effect 
on Potassium Storage Mechanism in Graphite. ECS Meeting Abstracts; MA2018- 
01:450, 2018. 10.1149/MA2018-01/3/450. 

[456] Fondard J, Irisarri E, Courr`eges C, Palacín MR, Ponrouch A, Dedryv`ere R. SEI 
composition on hard carbon in Na-ion batteries after long cycling: influence of 
salts (NaPF6, NaTFSI) and additives (FEC, DMCF). J Electrochem Soc 2020;167: 
070526. 

2016. 

[472] Wu XL, Chen LL, Xin S, Yin YX, Guo YG, Kong QS, et al. Preparation and Li storage 
properties of hierarchical porous carbon fibers derived from alginic acid. 
ChemSusChem 2010;3:703–7. 

[473] Mabuchi A. A survey on the carbon anode materials for rechargeable lithium 

batteries. TANSO 1994;1994:298–306. 

[474] Hwang YJ, Jeong SK, Nahm KS, Shin JS, Stephan AM. Pyrolytic carbon derived 
from coffee shells as anode materials for lithium batteries. J Phys Chem Solids 
2007;68:182–8. 

[475] Fong R, Von Sacken U, Dahn JR. Studies of lithium intercalation into carbons 
using nonaqueous electrochemical cells. J Electrochem Soc 1990;137:2009–13. 
[476] Kikuchi M, Ikezawa Y, Takamura T. Surface modification of pitch-based carbon 
fibre for the improvement of electrochemical lithium intercalation. J Electroanal 
Chem 1995;396:451–5. 

[477] Xie H, Wu Z, Wang Z, Qin N, Li Y, Cao Y, et al. Solid electrolyte interface 

stabilization via surface oxygen species functionalization in hard carbon for 
superior performance sodium-ion batteries. J Mater Chem A 2020;8:3606–12. 
[478] Buiel E, Dahn JR. Reduction of the irreversible capacity in hard-carbon anode 

materials prepared from sucrose for Li-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 1998;145: 
1977–81. 

[479] B´eguin F, Chevallier F, Vix C, Saadallah S, Rouzaud JN, Frackowiak E. A better 

understanding of the irreversible lithium insertion mechanisms in disordered 
carbons. J Phys Chem Solids 2004;65:211–7. 

[480] Ohzawa Y, Yamanaka Y, Naga K, Nakajima T. Pyrocarbon-coating on powdery 

hard-carbon using chemical vapor infiltration and its electrochemical 
characteristics. J Power Sources 2005;146:125–8. 

[481] Irisarri E, Ponrouch A, Palacin MR. Review—hard carbon negative electrode 

materials for sodium-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162:A2476–82. 

[482] Papanek P, Radosavljevi´c M, Fischer J. Lithium insertion in disordered carbon(cid:0)

hydrogen alloys: intercalation vs covalent binding. Chem Mater 1996;8:1519–26. 

[483] Tao L, Liu L, Chang R, He H, Zhao P, Liu J. Structural and interface design of 
hierarchical porous carbon derived from soybeans as anode materials for 
potassium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2020;463:228172. 

[484] Lu H, Chen X, Jia Y, Chen H, Wang Y, Ai X, et al. Engineering Al2O3 atomic layer 
deposition: enhanced hard carbon-electrolyte interface towards practical sodium 
ion batteries. Nano Energy 2019;64:103903. 

[485] Lu W, Liang L, Sun X, Sun X, Wu C, Hou L, et al. Recent progresses and 

development of advanced atomic layer deposition towards high-performance Li- 
ion batteries. Nanomaterials 2017;7. 

[486] Tatsumi K, Conard J, Nakahara M, Menu S, Lauginie P, Sawada Y, et al. 7Li NMR 
studies on a lithiated non-graphitizable carbonfibre at low temperatures. Chem 
Commun 1997:687–8. 

[487] Nagao M, Pitteloud C, Kamiyama T, Otomo T, Itoh K, Fukunaga T, et al. Structure 
characterization and lithiation mechanism of nongraphitized carbon for lithium 
secondary batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2006;153:A914–9A9. 

[488] Hardwick LJ, Ruch PW, Hahn M, Scheifele W, K¨otz R, Nov´ak P. In situ Raman 

spectroscopy of insertion electrodes for lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors: 
First cycle effects. J Phys Chem Solids 2008;69:1232–7. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092942N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[489] Wu Z, Wang L, Huang J, Zou J, Chen S, Cheng H, et al. Loofah-derived carbon as 
an anode material for potassium ion and lithium ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 
2019;306:446–53. 

[518] Yang J, Ju Z, Jiang Y, Xing Z, Xi B, Feng J, et al. Enhanced capacity and rate 

capability of nitrogen/oxygen dual-doped hard carbon in capacitive potassium- 
ion storage. Adv Mater 2018;30:1700104. 

[490] Stevens DA, Dahn JR. High capacity anode materials for rechargeable sodium-ion 

[519] Jiang Q, Zhang Z, Yin S, Guo Z, Wang S, Feng C. Biomass carbon micro/nano- 

batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2000;147:1271. 

[491] Kubota K, Shimadzu S, Yabuuchi N, Tominaka S, Shiraishi S, Abreu-Sepulveda M, 
et al. Structural analysis of sucrose-derived hard carbon and correlation with the 
electrochemical properties for lithium, sodium, and potassium insertion. Chem 
Mater 2020;32:2961–77. 

[492] Su X, Dogan F, Ilavsky J, Maroni VA, Gosztola DJ, Lu W. Mechanisms for lithium 
nucleation and dendrite growth in selected carbon allotropes. Chem Mater 2017; 
29:6205–13. 

[493] Bommier C, Surta TW, Dolgos M, Ji X. New mechanistic insights on Na-ion 

storage in nongraphitizable carbon. Nano Lett 2015;15:5888–92. 
[494] Wang K, Jin Y, Sun S, Huang Y, Peng J, Luo J, et al. Low-cost and high- 

performance hard carbon anode materials for sodium-ion batteries. ACS Omega 
2017;2:1687–95. 

[495] Zhang N, Liu Q, Chen W, Wan M, Li X, Wang L, et al. High capacity hard carbon 
derived from lotus stem as anode for sodium ion batteries. J Power Sources 2018; 
378:331–7. 

[496] Wang P, Zhu X, Wang Q, Xu X, Zhou X, Bao J. Kelp-derived hard carbons as 
advanced anode materials for sodium-ion batteries. J Mater Chem A 2017;5: 
5761–9. 

structures derived from ramie fibers and corncobs as anode materials for lithium- 
ion and sodium-ion batteries. Appl Surf Sci 2016;379:73–82. 

[520] Elizabeth I, Singh BP, Trikha S, Gopukumar S. Bio-derived hierarchically macro- 

meso-micro porous carbon anode for lithium/sodium ion batteries. J Power 
Sources 2016;329:412–21. 

[521] Luna-Lama F, Rodríguez-Padr´on D, Puente-Santiago AR, Mu˜noz-Batista MJ, 

Caballero A, Balu AM, et al. Non-porous carbonaceous materials derived from 
coffee waste grounds as highly sustainable anodes for lithium-ion batteries. 
J Cleaner Prod 2019;207:411–7. 

[522] Mullaivananathan V, Sathish R, Kalaiselvi N. Coir pith derived bio-carbon: 

demonstration of potential anode behavior in Lithium-ion batteries. Electrochim 
Acta 2017;225:143–50. 

[523] Gao G, Cheong L-Z, Wang D, Shen C. Pyrolytic carbon derived from spent coffee 
grounds as anode for sodium-ion batteries. Carbon Res Conv 2018;1:104–8. 
[524] Liu T, Luo R, Qiao W, Yoon S-H, Mochida I. Microstructure of carbon derived from 
mangrove charcoal and its application in Li-ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 2010; 
55:1696–700. 

[525] Wang L, Schnepp Z, Titirici MM. Rice husk-derived carbon anodes for lithium ion 

batteries. J Mater Chem A 2013;1:5269–73. 

[497] Rybarczyk MK, Li Y, Qiao M, Hu Y-S, Titirici M-M, Lieder M. Hard carbon derived 
from rice husk as low cost negative electrodes in Na-ion batteries. J Energy Chem 
2019;29:17–22. 

[526] Zhang Y, Zhang F, Li G-D, Chen J-S. Microporous carbon derived from pinecone 
hull as anode material for lithium secondary batteries. Mater Lett 2007;61: 
5209–12. 

[498] Guo H, Sun K, Lu Y, Wang H, Ma X, Li Z, et al. Hard carbons derived from pine nut 

[527] Lv W, Wen F, Xiang J, Zhao J, Li L, Wang L, et al. Peanut shell derived hard 

shells as anode materials for Na-ion batteries. Chin Phys B 2019;28:068203. 

[499] Liu P, Li Y, Hu Y-S, Li H, Chen L, Huang X. A waste biomass derived hard carbon 
as a high-performance anode material for sodium-ion batteries. J Mater Chem A 
2016;4:13046–52. 

[500] Zhang F, Yao Y, Wan J, Henderson D, Zhang X, Hu L. High temperature 

carbonized grass as a high performance sodium ion battery anode. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 2017;9:391–7. 

[501] Jian Z, Bommier C, Luo L, Li Z, Wang W, Wang C, et al. Insights on the mechanism 
of Na-ion storage in soft carbon anode. Chem Mater 2017;29:2314–20. 
[502] Anji Reddy M, Helen M, Groß A, Fichtner M, Euchner H. Insight into sodium 
insertion and the storage mechanism in hard carbon. ACS Energy Lett 2018;3: 
2851–7. 

[503] Komaba S, Murata W, Ishikawa T, Yabuuchi N, Ozeki T, Nakayama T, et al. 

Electrochemical Na insertion and solid electrolyte interphase for hard-carbon 
electrodes and application to Na-ion batteries. Adv Funct Mater 2011;21: 
3859–67. 

[504] Stratford JM, Allan PK, Pecher O, Chater PA, Grey CP. Mechanistic insights into 
sodium storage in hard carbon anodes using local structure probes. Chem 
Commun 2016;52:12430–3. 

[505] Wang Z, Huang X, Chen L. Lithium insertion/extraction in pyrolyzed phenolic 
resin. J Power Sources 1999;81:328–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-7753 
(99)00262-1. 

[506] Wang Z, Huang X, Xue R, Chen L. A new possible mechanism of lithium insertion 
and extraction in low-temperature pyrolytic carbon electrode. Carbon 1999;37: 
685–92. 

[507] Zhang B, Ghimbeu CM, Laberty C, Vix-Guterl C, Tarascon JM. Correlation 

between microstructure and Na storage behavior in hard carbon. Adv Energy 
Mater 2016;6:1501588. 

[508] Kano A, Hojo N, Ito S, Fujimoto M, Nakura K. New carbon materials with large 
closed pore volume as anode for high energy Na-ion batteries. 228th ECS Meeting 
Phoenix. The Electrochemical Society; 2015. p. 221. 

[509] Kano A, Okano T, Hojo N, Ito S, Fujimoto M, Nakura K. New carbon materials 

carbon as ultralong cycling anodes for lithium and sodium batteries. Electrochim 
Acta 2015;176:533–41. 

[528] Zhang X, Hu J, Chen X, Zhang M, Huang Q, Du X, et al. Microtubular carbon fibers 
derived from bamboo and wood as sustainable anodes for lithium and sodium ion 
batteries. J Porous Mater 2019;26:1821–30. 

[529] Xiang J, Lv W, Mu C, Zhao J, BJJoA Wang. Activated hard carbon from orange 
peel for lithium/sodium ion battery anode with long cycle life. J Alloys Compd 
2017;701:870–4. 

[530] Selvamani V, Ravikumar R, Suryanarayanan V, Velayutham D, Gopukumar S. Fish 
scale derived nitrogen doped hierarchical porous carbon—a high rate performing 
anode for lithium ion cell. Electrochim Acta 2015;182:1–10. 

[531] Niu J, Shao R, Liang J, Dou M, Li Z, Huang Y, et al. Biomass-derived mesopore- 
dominant porous carbons with large specific surface area and high defect density 
as high performance electrode materials for Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors. 
Nano Energy 2017;36:322–30. 

[532] Han S-W, Jung D-W, Jeong J-H, Oh E-S. Effect of pyrolysis temperature on carbon 
obtained from green tea biomass for superior lithium ion battery anodes. Chem 
Eng J 2014;254:597–604. 

[533] Caballero A, Hern´an L, Morales J. Limitations of disordered carbons obtained 
from biomass as anodes for real lithium-ion batteries. ChemSusChem 2011;4: 
658–63. 

[534] Ou J, Zhang Y, Chen L, Yuan H, Xiao D. Heteroatom doped porous carbon derived 
from hair as an anode with high performance for lithium ion batteries. RSC Adv 
2014;4:63784–91. 

[535] Campbell B, Ionescu R, Favors Z, Ozkan CS, Ozkan M. Bio-derived, binderless, 
hierarchically porous carbon anodes for Li-ion batteries. Sci Rep 2015;5:14575. 
[536] Nagalakshmi M, Kalaiselvi N. Mesoporous dominant cashewnut sheath derived 

bio-carbon anode for LIBs and SIBs. Electrochim Acta 2019;304:175–83. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2019.02.123. 

[537] Tao L, Zheng Y, Zhang Y, Ma H, Di M, Zheng Z. Liquefied walnut shell-derived 

carbon nanofibrous mats as highly efficient anode materials for lithium ion 
batteries. RSC Adv 2017;7:27113–20. 

with large closed pore volume for the anode of high energy Na-ion batteries. 
Meeting Abstracts, MA2016-02. The Electrochemical Society; 2016. p. 668. 
https://doi.org/10.1149/MA2016-02/5/668. 

[538] Sun N, Liu H, Xu B. Facile synthesis of high performance hard carbon anode 
materials for sodium ion batteries. J Mater Chem A 2015;3:20560–6. 

[539] Mullaivananathan V, Packiyalakshmi P, Kalaiselvi N. Multifunctional bio carbon: 

[510] Kamiyama A, Kubota K, Nakano T, Fujimura S, Shiraishi S, Tsukada H, et al. High- 
capacity hard carbon synthesized from macroporous phenolic resin for sodium- 
ion and potassium-ion battery. ACS Appl Energy Mater 2020;3:135–40. 
[511] Chen C, Wu M, Wang Y, Zaghib K. Insights into pseudographite-structured hard 
carbon with stabilized performance for high energy K-ion storage. J Power 
Sources 2019;444:227310. 

[512] Li W, Li Z, Zhang C, Liu W, Han C, Yan B, et al. Hard carbon derived from rice 
husk as anode material for high performance potassium-ion batteries. Solid State 
Ionics 2020;351:115319. 

[513] Qian Y, Jiang S, Li Y, Yi Z, Zhou J, Tian J, et al. Understanding mesopore volume- 
enhanced extra-capacity: Optimizing mesoporous carbon for high-rate and long- 
life potassium-storage. Energy Storage Materials 2020;29:341–9. 

[514] Jian Z, Xing Z, Bommier C, Li Z, Ji X. Hard carbon microspheres: potassium-ion 

anode versus sodium-ion anode. Adv Energy Mater 2016;6:1501874. 
[515] Yang J, Ju Z, Jiang Y, Xing Z, Xi B, Feng J, et al. Enhanced capacity and rate 

capability of nitrogen/oxygen dual-doped hard carbon in capacitive potassium- 
ion storage. Adv Mater 2018;30:1700104. 

[516] Wu X, Xing Z, Hu Y, Zhang Y, Sun Y, Ju Z, et al. Effects of functional binders on 
electrochemical performance of graphite anode in potassium-ion batteries. Ionics 
2019;25:2563–74. 

[517] Adams RA, Varma A, Pol VG. Temperature dependent electrochemical 

performance of graphite anodes for K-ion and Li-ion batteries. J Power Sources 
2019;410-411:124–31. 

a coir pith waste derived electrode for extensive energy storage device 
applications. RSC Adv 2017;7:23663–70. 

[540] Rath PC, Patra J, Huang HT, Bresser D, Wu TY, Chang JK. Carbonaceous anodes 

derived from sugarcane bagasse for sodium-ion batteries. ChemSusChem 2019; 
12:2302–9. 

[541] Zhang F, Yao Y, Wan J, Henderson D, Zhang X, Hu L. High temperature 

carbonized grass as a high performance sodium ion battery anode. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces 2016;9:391–7. 

[542] Nakabayashi K, Dabin C, Han Y, Oh J, Miyawaki J, Yoon S-H. Structural effects on 

the enhancement of first-cycle Coulombic efficiency of mangrove-derived hard 
carbon as an anode material in sodium ion batteries. SN Appl Sci 2019;1:177. 

[543] Wang Q, Zhu X, Liu Y, Fang Y, Zhou X, Bao J. Rice husk-derived hard carbons as 

high-performance anode materials for sodium-ion batteries. Carbon 2018;127: 
658–66. 

[544] Dahbi M, Kiso M, Kubota K, Horiba T, Chafik T, Hida K, et al. Synthesis of hard 
carbon from argan shells for Na-ion batteries. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:9917–28. 
[545] Wu L, Buchholz D, Vaalma C, Giffin GA, Passerini S. Apple-biowaste-derived hard 

carbon as a powerful anode material for Na-ion Batteries. ChemElectroChem 
2016;3:292–8. 

[546] Meng X, Savage PE, Deng D. Trash to treasure: from harmful algal blooms to high- 

performance electrodes for sodium-ion batteries. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49: 
12543–50. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092943N. Soltani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[547] Qin D, Chen S. A sustainable synthesis of biomass carbon sheets as excellent 
performance sodium ion batteries anode. J Solid State Electrochem 2017;21: 
1305–12. 

[548] Li X, Liang J, Hou Z, Zhu Y, Qian Y. Recycling chicken eggshell membranes for 

high-capacity sodium battery anodes. RSC Adv 2014;4:50950–4. 

[549] Wahid M, Gawli Y, Puthusseri D, Kumar A, Shelke MV, Ogale S. nutty carbon: 

morphology replicating hard carbon from walnut shell for Na ion battery anode. 
ACS Omega 2017;2:3601–9. 

[550] Xu S-D, Zhao Y, Liu S, Ren X, Chen L, Shi W, et al. Curly hard carbon derived from 

pistachio shells as high-performance anode materials for sodium-ion batteries. 
J Mater Sci 2018;53:12334–51. 

[551] Zheng P, Liu T, Yuan X, Zhang L, Liu Y, Huang J, et al. Enhanced performance by 
enlarged nano-pores of holly leaf-derived lamellar carbon for sodium-ion battery 
anode. Sci Rep 2016;6:26246. 

[552] Shen F, Zhu H, Luo W, Wan J, Zhou L, Dai J, et al. Chemically crushed wood 

cellulose fiber towards high-performance sodium-ion batteries. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 2015;7:23291–6. 

[553] Cao W, Zhang E, Wang J, Liu Z, Ge J, Yu X, et al. Potato derived biomass porous 
carbon as anode for potassium ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 2019;293:364–70. 
[554] Yang M, Dai J, He M, Duan T, Yao W. Biomass-derived carbon from Ganoderma 

lucidum spore as a promising anode material for rapid potassium-ion storage. 
J Colloid Interface Sci 2020;567:256–63. 

[555] Gao C, Wang Q, Luo S, Wang Z, Zhang Y, Liu Y, et al. High performance 

potassium-ion battery anode based on biomorphic N-doped carbon derived from 
walnut septum. J Power Sources 2019;415:165–71. 

[556] Xu B, Qi S, Li F, Peng X, Cai J, Liang J, et al. Cotton-derived oxygen/sulfur co- 
doped hard carbon as advanced anode material for potassium-ion batteries. Chin 
Chem Lett 2020;31:217–22. 

[557] Prabakar SJR, Han SC, Park C, Bhairuba IA, Reece MJ, Sohn K-S, et al. 

Spontaneous formation of interwoven porous channels in hard-wood-based hard- 
carbon for high-performance anodes in potassium-ion batteries. J Electrochem 
Soc 2017;164:A2012–6. 

[558] Ellingsen LA-W, Hung CR, Strømman AH. Identifying key assumptions and 

differences in life cycle assessment studies of lithium-ion traction batteries with 
focus on greenhouse gas emissions. Transp Res Part D: Transp Environ 2017;55: 
82–90. 

[559] Shinogi Y, Kanri Y. Pyrolysis of plant, animal and human waste: physical and 

chemical characterization of the pyrolytic products. Bioresour Technol 2003;90: 
241–7. 

[560] Heitk¨otter J, Marschner B. Interactive effects of biochar ageing in soils related to 

feedstock, pyrolysis temperature, and historic charcoal production. Geoderma 
2015;245:56–64. 

[561] Arundale RA, Bauer S, Haffner FB, Mitchell VD, Voigt TB, Long SP. Environment 
has little effect on biomass biochemical composition of miscanthus × giganteus 
across soil types, nitrogen fertilization, and times of harvest. BioEnergy Res 2015; 
8:1636–46. 

[562] Azar C, Lindgren K, Larson E, M¨ollersten K. Carbon capture and storage from 

fossil fuels and biomass – costs and potential role in stabilizing the atmosphere. 
Clim Change 2006;74:47–79. 

[563] Schmidt H-P, Anca-Couce A, Hagemann N, Werner C, Gerten D, Lucht W, et al. 
Pyrogenic carbon capture and storage. GCB Bioenergy 2019;11:573–91. 
[564] Sayre R. Microalgae: the potential for carbon capture. Bioscience 2010;60:722–7. 
[565] Mathews JA. Carbon-negative biofuels. Energy Policy 2008;36:940–5. 
[566] Searchinger TD. Biofuels and the need for additional carbon. Environ Res Lett 

2010;5:024007. 

[567] Abbasi T, Abbasi SA. Biomass energy and the environmental impacts associated 
with its production and utilization. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2010;14:919–37. 
[568] Sterner M, Fritsche U. Greenhouse gas balances and mitigation costs of 70 modern 
Germany-focused and 4 traditional biomass pathways including land-use change 
effects. Biomass Bioenergy 2011;35:4797–814. 

[569] Blanco-Canqui H, Lal R. Crop residue removal impacts on soil productivity and 

environmental quality. Crit Rev Plant Sci 2009;28:139–63.  

Niloofar  Soltani  received  her  M.S.  in  Materials  Science  and 
Engineering from Sharif University of Technology, Iran.   She 
obtained  her  Ph.D.  in  material  science  from  the  National 
Polytechnic Institute -CINVESTAV, Mexico and during her Ph. 
D.,  she  joined  Professor  Aleksander  Gurlo’s  group  at  Berlin 
Institute of Technology for 7 months. She then moved to the 
National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) to work as 
a  postdoctoral  research  fellow.  She  was  later  awarded  the 
“Leibniz-DAAD and then Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship” 
working  in  Leibniz  Institute  for  Solid  State  and  Materials 
Research in Dresden, Germany. Her present research activities 
focus  on  synthesizing  of  new  anode  materials  for  Li-ion 

batteries.  

Amin Bahrami is an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow 
at  Leibniz  Institut  für  Festk¨orper-  und  Werkstoffforschung 
Dresden  (IFW),  Germany.  In  2016  he  received  his  Ph.D.  in 
Materials Science from CINVESTAV-IPN (M´exico). He worked 
as  a  post-doctoral  researcher  at  Universidad  Nacional 
Aut´onoma de M´exico (UNAM) until end of 2018. His present 
research activity is focused on the synthesis of new bulk and 
thin  film  thermoelectric  materials.  He  has  been  engaged  in 
several  research  projects,  and  authored  or  co-authored  more 
than 35 academic papers in high level international journals.  

Lars Giebeler studied chemistry at the Universities of Gießen 
and Leipzig and received his doctoral degree from the Materials 
Science’s Institute at TU Darmstadt under supervision of Prof. 
Hartmut Fueß. After his postdoctoral research at the KU Leuven 
(Prof. Johan Martens) and at the TU Darmstadt (Prof. Christian 
Hess), he joined the Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Ma-
terials  Research  (IFW)  Dresden’s  Institute  of  Complex  Mate-
rials in 2009 and has become group leader in 2011. In 2018 he 
joined  EXCOR  Korrosionsforschung  GmbH  and  after  a  two 
years period he has taken the central X-ray diffraction facility 
of the IFW Dresden over in December 2020. His research in-
terests  focus  on  active  (nanosized)  materials  for  technically 

relevant applications, operando diffraction and spectroscopy techniques  

Thomas  Gemming  obtained  a  diploma  in  physics  at  the 
Karlsruhe  Institute  of  Technology,  Germany,  in  1994  on  the 
topic of electro ceramics. In 1998 he received his doctoral de-
gree  in  chemistry  from  the  University  Stuttgart,  Germany. 
From 1994 to 2000 he worked at the Max-Planck-Institute for 
Metal  Research  in  Stuttgart.  In  2000  he  joined  the  Leibniz 
Institute for Solid State and Material Research (IFW) Dresden 
where he is currently heading the IKM-Division Structure An-
alytics  and  the  Department  for  Micro-  and  Nanostructures. 
From 2015 to 2019 he served as acting director of the Institute 
for Complex Materials. Furthermore, he has been the Executive 
Secretary of the German Society for Electron Microscopy since 
2006.  His  research  interests  center  around  microscopy,  spectroscopy,  and  the  under-
standing of the microscopic principles of the function of electronic and chemically active 
materials and devices e.g. for energy applications.  

Daria  Mikhailova  has  obtained  a  diploma  in  chemistry  in 
1996 and a PhD degree in chemistry in 2000 at the Moscow 
State  University,  Russia.  Her  research  included  physical  and 
chemical  aspects  of  solid-state  synthesis  of  high-temperature 
superconductors with target cationic and anionic stoichiome-
tries. From 2005 to 2010, she did a post-doctoral work at the 
Technical  University  of  Darmstadt,  Germany,  on  the  field  of 
high-pressure synthesis and characterization of novel magnetic 
transition metal oxides as well as synthesis and electrochemical 
characterization of new cathode materials for Li-ion batteries. 
From 2011 to 2017, she worked as a senior scientist at the Max 
Planck  Institute  of  Chemical  Physics  of  Solids  in  Dresden, 
Germany, and at the Karlsruhe Institute for Technology, Germany. Her research dealt with 
studies of novel oxides for magnetic and electrochemical applications. From 2017, she is 
working at the Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research in Dresden, Ger-
many, in the electrochemical energy storage group, and from 2018 she is the head of the 
group. Her research focuses on development of metal-ion batteries and supercapacitors 
including all cell components as cathodes, anodes, binder and electrolytes. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10092944