Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Soot inception: Carbonaceous nanoparticle formation in flames 

Jacob W. Martin a, b, Maurin Salamanca a, Markus Kraft *,a, b,c 
a Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, West Site, Philippa Fawcett Drive, Cambridge, CB3 0AS, United Kingdom 
b Cambridge Centre for Advanced Research and Education in Singapore, CREATE Tower, 1 CREATE Way, Singapore 138602 
c School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637459   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
soot 
soot formation 
incipient soot 
carbon black 
carbon nanodots 

1. Introduction 

The  route  by  which  gas-phase  molecules  in  hydrocarbon  flames  form  condensed-phase  carbonaceous  nano-
particles (incipient soot) is reviewed. These products of incomplete combustion are introduced as particulates 
and materials revealing both their useful applications and unwanted impacts as pollutants. Significant advances 
in experimental techniques in the last decade have allowed the gas phase precursors and the transformation from 
molecules  to  nanoparticles  to  be  directly  observed.  These  measurements  combined  with  computational  tech-
niques allow for various mechanisms known to date to be compared and explored. Questions remain surrounding 
the  various  mechanisms  that  lead  to  nanoparticle  formation.  Mechanisms  combining  physical  and  chemical 
routes, so-called physically stabilised soot inception, are highlighted as a possible “middle way”.   

The  carbonaceous  products  of  incomplete  combustion  have  fasci-
nated and frustrated many. Interest in their illumination, pigments and 
heating gave way to dissatisfaction as they filled our cities with toxic air. 
This  review  attempts  to  capture  this  fascination  and  frustration  by 
examining one of the least well understood aspects of incomplete com-
bustion,  the  self-assembly  of  gas-phase  molecules  into  carbonaceous 
nanoparticles. 

This review is written for three main fields: combustion science, at-
mospheric  science  and  chemical  engineering.  Combustion  science  is 
concerned  with  understanding  the  physical  and  chemical  processes 
involved in flames, of interest to many of the great scientists. Michael 
Faraday  wrote,  in  his  famous  set  of  public  lectures  on  the  chemical 
history of a candle [1], 

“There is not a law under which any part of this universe is governed 
which does not come into play, and is touched upon in these phe-
nomena. There is no better, there is no more open door by which you 
can enter the study of natural philosophy, than by considering the 
physical phenomena of a candle.” 

Indeed  many  doors  have  been  opened  by  the  study  of  flames, 
allowing for an unprecedented understanding of chemical kinetics and 
physical processes. However, the formation mechanism of carbonaceous 
particles  in  hydrocarbon  flames  has  remained  a  perennial  unsolved 

problem  in  the  field,  although  not  for  lack  of  effort  (see  the  many 
detailed reviews on soot properties and formation written over the last 
two decades – Richter and Howard in 2000 [2], Frenklach in 2002 [3], 
McEnally, Pfefferle, Atakan and Kohse-H¨oinghaus in 2006 [4], the book 
edited by Bockhorn, D’Anna, Sarofim and Wang in 2009 [5], D’Anna in 
2009 [6], Wang in 2011 [7], Haynes in 2019 [8], Frenklach and Mebel 
[9]  with  some  recent  reviews  focusing  on  experimental  aspects  by 
Hansen, Cool, Westmoreland and Kohse-H¨oinghaus in 2009 [10], Li and 
Fei Qi in 2010 [11], Desgroux et al. in 2013 [12], Fei Qi in 2013 [13], 
Niessner in 2014 [14], Kittelson and Kraft in 2014 [15], Michelsen in 
2017 [16], Wang and Chung in 2019 [17] and Baldelli, Rogak et al. [18], 
as well as a recent glossary of soot nomenclature [19]). It has only been 
in  the  last  decade,  however,  that  experimental  and  computational 
techniques  in  combustion  science  have  been  able  to  peek  behind  the 
door  to  reveal  insights  into  the  earliest  formation  mechanisms  of 
carbonaceous particulates in the flame. 

To  clarify  the  problem,  carbonaceous  particle  (soot)  formation  is 
separated  into  four  main  steps  (see  Fig.  1  based  on  a  schematic  by 
Bockhorn from 1994 [20]):  

1.  Precursor formation  
2.  Nanoparticle formation  
3.  Primary particle formation  
4.  Aggregate formation 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: mk306@cam.ac.uk (M. Kraft).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100956 
Received 14 November 2020; Received in revised form 24 August 2021; Accepted 26 August 2021   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)100956Availableonline17September20210360-1285/©2021ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 1. Schematic of carbonaceous particulate formation in flames. Fuel pyrolysis and single ring species from Hansen et al. [10], Johansson et al. [21]. Multiring 
aromatic structures from Commodo et al. [22] (Used with permission CC-BY-NC-ND). Nanoparticles imaged with HIM are shown from [23] (Used with permission 
from John Wiley and Sons©). Primary particles are also shown in the HIM as well as with HRTEM [24]. Aggregates are shown with SEM for a lamp black particle 
(Orion carbons) as well as HRTEM of a primary particle [24] (Used with permission from Elsevier ©). 

The  first  distinction  is  between  molecular  precursors  and  nano-
particles. The process of nanoparticle formation is called “inception”, a 
term that has recently been agreed upon as it avoids mechanistic lan-
guage  such  as  “nucleation”  or  “polymerisation”  [19].  Soot  is  then  a 
carbonaceous  condensed-phase  particulate/particle  formed  from  mo-
lecular gas-phase precursors; carbonaceous, as they are predominantly 
elemental carbon, but also contain a significant amount of hydrogen and 
condensed-phase as they are either solids or liquids, but not gas-phase 
[16,19,25–31]. This review will also introduce a mass threshold of 1000 
Da to define this transition. 

We will make a second distinction in this review between incipient 
nanoparticles and primary particles. These steps are not strictly distinct 
but  overlap  and  influence  each  other  (for  example,  incipient  nano-
particles grow/coagulate into primary particles). However, a distinction 
is made between incipient nanoparticles and primary particles for the 
following reasons. Firstly, many of the incipient nanoparticles have very 
low coagulation efficiencies and are therefore readily emitted alongside 
larger particles [32–38]. Secondly, evidence has recently emerged for 
non-spherical primary particles, indicating coagulation of nanoparticles 
without significant coalescence [23]. Finally, flames can be established 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009562J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

which are dominated by nanoparticles [39]. Therefore we will introduce 
the term carbonaceous nanoparticles to bridge the combustion, mate-
rials and atmospheric terminology [6,40–45]. 

Primary particles are defined according to the terminology for car-
bon blacks (quoted from the ASTM D3053 standard with italicised term 
added by the authors), 

‘Carbon black exhibits aciniform (grape-like) morphology composed 
of  spheroidal  “primary  particles”  strongly  fused  together  to  form 
discrete  entities  called  aggregates.  The  primary  particles  are  con-
ceptual in nature, in that once the aggregate is formed the “primary 
particle”  no longer exists, they are no longer discrete and have no 
physical boundaries amongst them. The aggregates are loosely held 
together  by  weaker 
larger  entities  called 
agglomerates.’ 

forming 

forces 

Carbon  black  is  a  mature  soot  with  low  hydrogen  content  in  the 
primary  particles   [19].  Soot  is  often  also  internally  mixed  with 
condensed  aromatics  on  the  aggregates,  which  has  implications  for 
human  health  [46,47].  Carbon  blacks  are  thermally  treated  to  near 
complete carbonisation (loss of heteroatoms, such as hydrogen, leaving 
a disordered carbon solid) with minimal health impacts if handled with 
care  [48].  We  refer  the  reader  to  the  recent  review  [18]  on  the  car-
bonisation of soot as it takes on a shell [49–52], maturing into a carbon 
black once hydrogen is almost fully evolved, but we will not discuss this 
further as the focus of this review is on nanoparticle formation. 

Atmospheric science is concerned with the combustion products as 
an  aerosol  –  solid  or  liquid  particles  suspended  in  the  air.  Soot  is 
particularly problematic as an aerosol, posing significant risk for human 
health  and  the  climate  [46,47,53–64].  Chemical  engineers  are  then 
often tasked with eliminating these emissions. This requires a compre-
hensive and complete understanding of the process. The problem was 
most clearly articulated by Palmer and Cullis in 1965 [65], 

“A major breakthrough in understanding carbon formation will have 
been achieved when it becomes possible in at least one case to ac-
count for the entire course of nucleation and growth of carbon on the 
fundamental  knowledge  of  reaction  rates  and 
basis  of  a 
mechanisms.” 

Since  this  was  written,  scientific  advances  have  allowed  for  this 
problem  to  be  partially  resolved  –  models  do  exist  for  specific  cases. 
Simple  kinetic  models,  considering  acetylene  concentrations,  allowed 
the mass of soot emissions to be reproduced [66], but particle numbers 
were  predicted  incorrectly.  Computational  simulations  coupled  with 
kinetic experiments in the 1970s and 1980s allowed for models to be 
developed  that  considered  different  nucleation  species  in  detailed 
chemistry models [67]. It was only in the late 1980s to early 1990s that 
combining  a  kinetic  mechanism  for  PAH  growth  (HACA  -  Hydrogen 
Abstraction Carbon Addition) and an irreversible dimerisation of aro-
matic species allowed particle number to be captured [35,68–72], with 
one of the most popular implementations (ABF mechanism) published in 
2000 [73] (differing minimally from ref. [72]). This soot model was able 
to reproduce many experimental observations such as the equivalence 
ratio threshold (ϕ > 2) and the low (∼1450 K) and high temperature 
thresholds  for  soot  formation  (so-called  “soot  bell  curve”  or  “soot  is-
land”) [74–78]. It is important to note that irreversible dimerisation is 
an  empirical  model  in  that  by  fitting  model  parameters  to  particular 
experimental  “cases”  reasonable  nucleation  rates  can  be  attained. 
However, for a new combustion system it is rarely predictive. 

Attempts  to  provide  such  a  predictive  model  for  nanoparticle  for-
mation have since focused on developing more detailed models. Kinetic 
mechanisms  can  now  be  automatically  generated  for  many  reaction 
classes  in  combustion  chemistry  (e.g.  RMG  -  reaction  mechanism 
generator [79]) and some PAH mechanisms now allow growth of large 
PAH  (up  to  coronene)  [80,81].  For  larger  PAH,  kinetic  Monte  Carlo 
simulations allow the formation of curved aromatics [82–89] as well as 

curvature  and  crosslinks  [90–96].  Particle  dynamics  such  as  coagula-
tion, growth, oxidation and fragmentation can be computed, allowing 
the  particle  size  distribution  to  be  modelled  [35,97–104].  However, 
these attempts have not improved our predictive power significantly due 
to the lack of understanding concerning nanoparticle formation. In fact, 
experimental and computational work from the last decade has shown 
that irreversible dimerisation of pyrene  at flame temperatures cannot 
occur [7,105,106] with models including reversibility practically elim-
inating the nucleation flux [107]. This leads us to restate our comment 
from 2014 that [15], 

“None of the existing soot models have predictive power.” 

A fundamental understanding of the mechanism (or mechanisms) of 
soot  nanoparticle  formation  is  therefore  critical  for  developing  more 
predictive  models  to  control  or  eliminate  carbonaceous  particulates 
from combustion devices. 

The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  review  the  molecule-to-particle 
transition (inception) in detail with a focus on the formation of molec-
ular precursors and the nanoparticle formation mechanisms. 

Section  2  explores  the  detection  of  nanoparticles  as  well  as  the 
health, climate and material motivation for understanding this mecha-
nism. Much of this extended introduction can be skipped by readers who 
are already familiar with the field, however the experimental results for 
nanoparticles  will  be  critically  discussed  throughout  the  rest  of  the 
document  and  therefore  Section  2.1  on  is  recommend  reading.  The 
discussion about internally mixed soot in Section 2.2 is also important 
when discussing liquid-like mechanisms for nanoparticle formation. 

Section  3  begins  the  main  text  with  a  review  of  the  formation  of 
molecular precursors. The use of sooting propensity scales are briefly 
discussed,  highlighting  the  important  role  of  aromatic  species  and  5- 
membered  rings.  Formation  of  pericondensed  aromatic  hydrocarbons 
through traditional growth pathways is  then explored  with recent in-
sights  into  detection  of  pentagonal  ring-containing  PAH.  Larger  PAH 
(aromers) formed through crosslinking are then discussed with a focus 
on the previous difficulties in their detection and their chemical struc-
ture, which has recently been exposed. The final precursors discussed 
are  the  PAH  that  cluster  to  form  soot.  This  section  on  precursors 
therefore provides the necessary understanding of the molecular species 
present in the flame before nanoparticle formation begins. 

Section  4  provides  a  systematic  comparison  of  formation  mecha-
nisms for soot nanoparticles. This section has been arranged in a similar 
manner to the 1993 book “Carbon Black: Science and Technology” [108] 
edited  by  Donnet,  Bansal  and  Wang,  but  is  significantly  updated  and 
partially  restructured.  The  reasons  for  providing  this  comprehensive 
overview of mechanisms are recent new insights and the resurfacing of 
old mechanisms. It does, however, give the impression that the mech-
anisms are disjointed so we have therefore added a section combining 
physical and chemical mechanisms, which we argue best describe the 
partial success of the “irreversible dimerisation” models proposed in the 
literature. 

Finally,  Section  5  summarises  the  mechanisms  and  experiments, 
using electronic structure theory to compare different chemical mech-
anisms and redrawing some important historical plots with the insights 
from the last decade. An outlook is provided for further scientific and 
technological directions required to resolve the formation mechanism of 
carbonaceous nanoparticles in the flame. 

2. Detection and Motivations 

This section introduces the many nanoparticles in combustion sys-
tems and provides the motivations for understanding the formation of 
carbonaceous nanoparticles. We will not comprehensively discuss all of 
these topics, only those that relate to understanding the formation of 
carbonaceous  nanoparticles.  We  recommend  a  variety  of  in-depth  re-
views for the interested reader. For the experimental finding concerning 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009563J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

2.1. Detection 

Particles  down  to  a  nanometre  in  size  were  initially  observed  via 
electron microscopy by Wersborg et al. [26] in 1973. Laser scattering 
and extinction also indicated nanoparticles (down to 5 nm) two years 
later [110]. Some of the first nanoparticles to be quantitatively detected 
in the flame were positively charged species with molecular weight of 
order 103 (cid:0) 104  Da, found in low pressure premixed flames [111] (see 
Fig. 2). Small, positively charged molecules are known to form in flames 
through  chemionisation  reactions,  therefore  the  presence  of  charged 
soot  nanoparticles  is  not  surprising  [112].  Their  size  was  limited  to 
below  104  Da  [109].  Higher  sensitivity  nanoparticle  detectors  have 
recently found the majority of these sub 3 nm particles to be positively 
charged  [113,114].  However,  in  sooting  flames  the  charged  nano-
particle  modes  that  are  present  quickly  coagulate  with  electrons  and 
small  charged  species  to  form  neutral  particles,  leaving  only  a  small 
fraction of the soot charged [115–121]. 

In  1985,  the  C60  buckminsterfullerene  molecule  (see  Fig.  17)  was 
discovered by laser ablation of a graphite target [122] and two years 
later in low pressure benzene flames [123]. Since this time their com-
bustion synthesis has been developed into a commercial technology (e.g. 
Nano-C)  generating  kilogram  scale  of  magic  number  fullerenes,  for 
example C60 and C70, that have found applications in many fields such as 
organic solar voltaics and medicine [124–127]. Significant controversy 
has surrounded the role of fullerenes in soot formation. The formation of 
fullerenes in flames will not be specifically discussed (see the reviews 
[128–130]), but will only focus on their role in the formation of larger 
carbonaceous nanoparticles. Graphene or giant aromatic molecules can 
also be formed in some particular operating conditions of low pressure 
rich premixed acetylene flames [128]. Microwave heating has also been 
shown to allow graphene synthesis in flames at atmospheric conditions 
[131,132]. Flame synthesis of graphene in the gas phase has yet to be 
developed into a mature technology. 

Fig. 2. Positive ion mass spectrometry of an C2H2/O2  low pressure premixed 
flame  ϕ = 2.7  kPa  at  various  heights  above  the  burner  [109].  Used  with 
permission from John Wiley and Sons ©. 

carbonaceous  nanoparticles  in  combustion  flames  recent  reviews 
include Ref. [6,7,12,16,18]. Some motivations for this study from both a 
human health and climate perspective will be discussed, also drawing on 
recent reviews [46,53,54,56–58,60–63]. Finally, recent material appli-
cations  and  some  specific  examples  such  as  fluorescent  nanodots  are 
discussed. 

Fig.  3. Normalised  particle  size  distributions  measured  by  1  nm-SMPS  (a) 
bars), HIM  (b) bars), and LII  (blue line)  in an  n-butane/O2/N2  ϕ = 1.75  pre-
mixed flame [152] (Used with permission from Taylor & Francis). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009564J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

matured nanoparticles in Ref. [19]), which may have been imaged using 
TEM [153,154]. 

Particles >4–6 nm were also found that eventually become the pri-
mary particle mode. Grotheer and colleagues developed a time-of-flight 
reflectron  mass  spectrometer  able  to  measure  millions  of  mass  units 
[155] and in 2007 they showed that aromatic molecules growth right 
through to nanoparticles with millions of mass-to-charge values could be 
detected using photoionisation [156–158]. Fig. 4 shows similar results 
from a nano differential size mobility analyser (nano-DMA) [140,149, 
159–164]. This figure shows nanoparticles increasing in mass to form 
primary particles. We will refer to nanoparticles >4–6 nm mode as pri-
mary (nano)particles. Helium ion microscopy and electron microscopy 
have  provided  evidence  for  nanoparticles  down  to  1.5  nm  in  size 
showing  their  development  into  primary  particles,  shown  in  Fig.  6  b 
[23]. This study also revealed primary particles’ non-symmetric struc-
ture indicating they form, at least partly, through coagulation of smaller 
nanoparticles. 

Some  evidence  has  emerged  for  structural  or  chemical  differences 
between the incipient and primary particles. The H/C ratio is known to 
be higher for the incipient nanoparticles (H/C=0.7–0.4) [27–31,165]. 
The issue with using the H/C ratio to distinguish incipient and primary 
particles is that as soon as particles are formed at the high temperatures 
in  the  flame,  carbonisation  leads  to  a  reduction  in  the  H/C  ratio. 
Therefore, it is unclear whether incipient nanoparticles then mature due 
to carbonisation or if they are formed from different molecular units. 
Grotheer  found  that  the  photoionisation  process  was  a  two-photon 
process for incipient nanoparticles and a single-photon process for pri-
mary  nanoparticles  [166].  The  two-photon  process  indicated  that 
smaller  aromatics  are  the  constituents  of  the  incipient  nanoparticles 
[12]. These smaller nanoparticles also lack visible light absorption when 
measured by laser spectroscopy, suggesting small aromatics with only a 
few aromatic rings [162,163,167–170] and leading some to label these 
incipient nanoparticles as “transparent” or nanoorganic carbons (NOC) 
[164,167]. However, recent optical studies indicate only slight differ-
ences  between  the  molecular  units  involved  in  incipient  and  primary 
nanoparticles [171]. Instead the supramolecular organisation was sug-
gested to be the distinguishing feature between these nanoparticles. 

Laser induced visible fluorescence is only observed when the primary 
nanoparticles are observed [173]. Fig. 5 shows this fluorescence, which 
has been observed since the 1980s when rare gas plasma lasers became 
available [172,174–176]. Initially, this was seen as a response from the 
individual molecules as PAH are known to fluoresce [177]. However, 
the signal extending well into the visible spectrum suggested an excimer 
origin. Excimers are long-lived optical states that are formed from the 
delocalisation  of  the  π–π*  excited  state  across  both  stacked  aromatic 
species, and are present in the fluorescence spectra of PAH dissolved in 
liquids  [178,179].  Time  resolved  laser  induced  fluorescence  (TR-LIF) 
experiments  have  further  supported  the  view  that  this  green  fluores-
cence  signal  belongs  to  excimers  [180,181].  Excimer  states  are 
long-lived (tens of nanoseconds) and TR-LIF confirmed such long-lived 
states  for  signals  in  the  range  500–600  nm.  Critically,  the  excimer 
signal  suggests  that  physically  bound,  stacked  aromatic  species  are 
present during soot formation. In Section 3 another change in the flame 
chemistry  is  shown  with  the  transition  from  a  nucleation-dominated 
flame with larger aromatic species being observed [39]. 

There  is  still  no  consensus  on  the  naming  and  number  of  distinct 
nanoparticles [19] and we do not see a resolution of these issues until 
the mechanisms involved can be fully understood. Maximally there is 
evidence for six nanometre-sized species that can exist in various com-
bustion environments;  

• Charged nanoparticles (∼1 nm)  
• Fullerenes (∼1 nm, polyhedral carbons)  
• Graphene  (> 1  nm,  nanographenes,  giant  polycyclic  aromatic 

Fig. 4. Particle size distribution measured on a Vienna style nanoDMA in an 
C2H4/air premixed flame [22]. (Used with permission CC-BY-NC-ND). 

size 

such 

analysers, 

[28,29,133–135].  Particle 

By  the  1990s  laser  scattering/extinction,  laser  induced  incandes-
cence (LII) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) had established 
that larger (∼3 nm) incipient nanoparticles were present in all sooting 
as 
flames 
nano-differential mobility analysers (nano-DMA), also began to be able 
to detect nanometre sized particles down to ∼3 nm in flames at this time 
using  electrometers  or  condensation  particle  counters  (CPC)  [98,133, 
136–139]. Atomic force microscopy in the 2000s allowed for the direct 
measurements  of  these  nanoparticles  [140–142]  (see  Fig.  6).  These 
nanoparticles were shown to form at an equivalence ratio just below or 
close to values where soot primary particles or aggregates form [140, 
143,144]. All sooting flames, including aromatic fuels such as benzene 
flames, were found to possess this mode near 3 nm [145–149], which 
will be referred to as incipient nanoparticles in this review. Desgroux and 
co-workers have studied so-called nucleation-dominated flames [39,150, 
151]. Nucleation-dominated flames allow nanoparticles to form but they 
do not increase in size with residence time in the flame. This was sug-
gested  to  be  due  to  marginal  surface  growth  and  coagulation,  with 
oxidation dominating, meaning the soot mass increases only by nucle-
ation from the gas phase [39,150]. These flames have been stabilised at 
atmospheric and low pressure premixed flames for methane, ethylene 
and  n-butane  [39,150–152]  (see  Fig.  3).  The  incipient  nanoparticles 
they  contain  may  be  partially  carbonised  and  will  be  referred  to  as 
partially  matured  nanoparticles  (also  referred  to  as  monomer  partially 

Fig. 5. Green fluorescence from UV laser excitation of a methane-air diffusion 
flame [172]. Used with permission from Springer Nature America  ©. 

hydrocarbons) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009565J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 6. a) – d) Various combustion products sampled from a McKenna burner with an ethylene/air atmospheric pressure premixed flame with varying equivalence 
ratio. Imaging performed using a) AFM [189], b) HIM [23] and c) SEM [190]. e) – f) Combustion products from solid combustion of coal [186] and biomass [187], 
respectively, imaged using SEM. g) Particle number distribution in an urban environment [191]. h) – k) Deposition of nanoparticles within mammals from inhalation 
[192,193]. Used with permission from Taylor & Francis©, Springer Nature CC and MDPI CC. 

• Incipient  nanoparticles  (1–6  nm  otherwise  called  transparent  nano-
particles, nanoorganic carbon –  NOC, D’Alessio nanoparticles, pre-
cursor nanoparticles, soot nuclei, nascent soot, disordered)  

• Partially matured nanoparticles (1–6 nm monomer partially matured, 

incandescent nanoparticles) 

• Primary  (nano)particles  (>4–6  nm  otherwise  called  stacked  nano-
particles,  growth  precursors,  soot  nuclei,  Dobbin’s  nanoparticles, 
nascent soot) 

It is important to mention that many of the naming conventions of 
nanoparticles are directly associated with the mechanism or model of 
growth that is thought to occur, thus our reason for choosing the more 
neutral  names  of  incipient  and  primary  nanoparticles.  As  will  be  dis-
cussed in the following section, particles below 10 nm will be considered 
nanoparticles  and  therefore  primary  particles  below  this  size  will  be 
considered primary nanoparticles. 

2.2. Unwanted particulates 

Particulates  (particles)  from  combustion  are  undesirable  in  the 
context of atmospheric/climate science. It is important to outline some 
semantics when discussing combustion products as particulates. The use 
of  nanoparticles  in  the  atmospheric  community  often  refers  to  all  ul-
trafine particles (<100 nm), while some have suggested <50 nm to be 
the threshold of defining nanoparticles (others <30 nm where quantum 
confinement  effects  become  important)  [182].  We  will  follow  the 
nomenclature  used  by  many  in  the  combustion  community,  which 
predominantly refers to these smallest particles (<10 nm) [6,46] as the 
nanoparticle mode or nucleation fraction. For the sake of consistency, 
this will be denoted here as PM0.01 (particulates with diameters <0.01 
μm i.e. <10 nm). 

To further aid our discussion of the range of combustion products 
emitted  as  particulates  we  have  prepared  Fig.  6.  The  majority  of 

combustion products fall below 2.5 μm (PM2.5 or fine fraction) and have 
significant  negative  health  impacts  [183,184]. Most  primary  combus-
tion emissions just below this range are soot aggregates (see Fig. 6 c). As 
mentioned these are fractal-like arrangements of smaller carbon spheres 
(called “primary particles” in combustion and “nodules” or “spherules” 
in materials science). These primary particles are chemically connected 
to their neighbours, forming a solid aggregate, as opposed to physically 
connected soot agglomerates (see Fig. 6 f). Fig. 6 c) – d) shows the soot 
emitted  from  a  heavily  sooting  ethylene  flame  revealing  that  with 
increasing fuel-rich conditions, unburnt hydrocarbons will condense on 
the soot aggregate. This forms an “internally mixed soot” of black carbon 
(highly carbonised primary combustion product) and brown carbon or 
organic carbon (collection of unburnt hydrocarbons and small aromatic 
species) [53,185]. Even larger brown carbon spheres of condensed un-
burnt hydrocarbons, often called “tar balls”, can form. (When the soot is 
separate  from  the  organic  carbon  it  is  called  “externally  mixed  soot” 
[186,187].) The brown carbon spheres are produced from smouldering 
fires such as agricultural fires. Recent work using high resolution mass 
spectrometry  showed  that  this  brown  carbon  is  made  up  of  a  large 
proportion  of  oxygenated and  unsubstituted PAH. These  species  have 
the mean molecular mass of benzo[a]pyrene as well as some aliphatic 
structures with aromatic cores [188]. We will return to the internally 
mixed  soot  with  unburnt  hydrocarbons  when  we  discuss  liquid-like 
mechanisms in nanoparticle formation. 

A further complication arises when comparing the various aerosol 
modes  found  in  the  literature.  Often  the  terminology  of  “nuclei”, 
“accumulation”  and  “coarse”  modes  are  borrowed  from  atmospheric 
science when discussing engine emissions. These modes refer to nuclei 
upon  which  condensation  can  occur  with  the  accumulation  mode 
referring to water droplets or brown carbon internally mixed soot in the 
atmosphere  or  engine  respectively  [194–196].  The  “nuclei”  mode  is 
usually defined as <100 nm or ultrafine PM0.1 and constitutes most of 
the  soot  particulates  emitted in  the  urban  environment  (see  Fig. 6  g) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009566J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[191]. It is found that the condensed aromatics and hydrocarbons on 
internally mixed soot lead to an accumulation mode in the exhaust of 
diesel engines, which can be demonstrated by solvent extraction, with a 
particle thermal denuder or via thermogravimetric analysis [194–196]. 
In short, the “nuclei” mode discussed in atmospheric science often refers 
to particles upon which condensation occurs and should not be confused 
with incipient soot nanoparticles, which are PM0.01 emissions. 

Many detailed reviews on the health impact of combustion products 
have  been  conducted  over  the  past  two  decades  [46,47,54–64]  and 
therefore only a cursory discussion will be provided. We will highlight at 
the outset, however, that the health impacts of the nanoparticle mode 
are still not well understood or widely measured [36]. The carcinoge-
nicity of soot and diesel exhaust particulates has been mainly associated 
with the small aromatic molecules that are present in the brown carbon 
fraction [197–199] (such as napthalene, acenaphthylene, acenaphthene, 
fluorene, phenanthrene, anthracene, pyrene and the particularly active 
benzo[a]pyrene). Fig. 6 h) –  k) shows the deposition of particles as a 
function of size [192,193]. It is clear that the nanoparticles are able to 
penetrate further into the lungs and translocate from the lungs into the 
circulatory  system  in  animals  and  humans  [200,201]  while  carrying 
carcinogenic aromatics [202]. For engine emissions, other species such 
as sulfur or transition metals could also adsorb onto the surface of the 
nanoparticles and may further contribute to their reactivity and oxida-
tive  potential.  These  nanoparticles  have  higher  surface  area  to  mass 
ratios compared with larger particles [6,203]. Due to these large surface 
areas, nanoparticles are very potent inducers of oxidative stress [202, 
204,205].  Once  in  the  bloodstream  they  can  lead  to  cardiovascular 
disease such as heart attacks and strokes due to plaque build-up [206]. 
There is also evidence that the smallest nanoparticles readily cross the 
blood-brain  barrier  in  mammals  (rodents)  [193],  causing  an  inflam-
matory response and impacting development [207]. In vitro toxicolog-
ical studies have shown that once in the organs, PM0.01 are taken up by 
cells causing toxicity and mutagenicity [208]. Various studies have also 
found  a  significant  amount  of  oxygen  on  the  nanoparticles’  surfaces 
[209–212] which is correlated to their hydrophilic character [213–216]. 
This  hydrophilic  character  leads  to  partial  water  solubility,  which  is 
cause for concern in human health and suggests an additional impact on 
the  climate  through  cloud  seeding  [214,216,217].  Black  carbon  is 
already  implicated  in  1.1  W/m2  [53]  of  climate  heating,  potentially 
matching methane’s contribution to global heating. Brown carbon has a 
cooling impact on the atmosphere that offsets the warming caused by 
black carbon in most agricultural burning [53]. Internally mixed soot 
has an intermediate forcing contribution compared with black carbon 
[218]. Industrial sources of carbonaceous emissions, on the other hand, 

are predominantly black carbon and are therefore important to elimi-
nate. These detrimental effects depend on the chemical and structural 
composition of the nanoparticles, so it is critical that we understand the 
formation mechanism of these particulates. 

Nanoparticles  (PM0.01)  are  emitted  by  combustion  systems, 
including  vehicles,  industrial  burners  and  indoor  combustion  sources 
like  cookstoves/heaters,  which  are  a  significant  source  of  airborne 
nanoparticles  [46,203,219–222].  Significantly  lower  coagulation  effi-
ciencies were found for the nanoparticles compared with primary soot 
particles and have been demonstrated to be emitted from combustion 
devices [162]. Particularly concerning is that devices operating close to 
the  equivalence  ratio,  such  as  natural  gas  domestic  burners  or  cook-
stoves, have been shown to produce these nanoparticles [32–34,36,38, 
222].  The  emission  of  these  nanoparticles  can  be  explained  by  the 
decreasing  physical  interactions  between  nanoparticles  below  5  nm 
leading to low coagulation efficiencies at flame temperatures [33,35,37, 
38].  The  low  interaction  energy  between  incipient  nanoparticles  was 
confirmed with atomic force microscopy (AFM) studies showing the van 
der Waals interactions of these particles are decreased compared with 
primary  soot  particles  [162].  Preliminary  work  shows  that  aftertreat-
ment systems are only able to remove 40–50% of particles below 10 nm 
[223]. Another issue to consider is that fuels that are known to decrease 
the  mass  of  soot  emissions  can  increase  the  number  of  nanoparticles 
formed,  for  example  biodiesel  [219,224].  Recently,  the  effective 
removal  of  these  nanoparticles  has  been  achieved  using  fibrous  and 
granular  activated  carbon  filters  [225].  Challenges  still  exist  for  the 
detection  of  nanoparticles  [226–229].  Current  regulations  for  the 
number of particles emitted from vehicles are based on instruments that 
are only able to measure down to 23 nm reliably [229–231]. 

2.3. Useful materials 

Carbon blacks are an old material and yet many new applications are 
being  found  for  them  that  rely,  critically,  on  their  formation  and 
chemical  composition.  Examples  include  conductive  carbon  black  for 
electronics  and  battery  applications,  such  as  in  lithium  ion  batteries. 
Some  applications that have  yet  to become  widely used  include elec-
trodes in dye sensitised solar cells [232], fluorescent carbon nanodots 
[233]  and  coherent  spin  systems  for  quantum  computing  [234].  Un-
derstanding the earliest stages of carbonaceous particle formation would 
be beneficial for chemically tuning the properties of carbon blacks. This 
could  provide  the  means  to  increase  the  yield  of  carbon  blacks,  thus 
reducing  CO2  emissions.  Smaller  particles  could  be  produced  by  un-
derstanding  particle  formation,  which  can  be  useful  for  applications 
where high surface area is required. 

Useful  fluorescing  carbonaceous  quantum  dots  have  also  recently 
been  synthesised  in  flames.  As  previously  mentioned,  visible  fluores-
cence is present within sooting flames [172] (see Fig. 5). Yet fluorescent 
nanoparticles were only recently extracted by Liu et al. in 2007 [235]. 
This was achieved by various acid treatments of candle soot and a size 
separation  using  gel  electrophoresis  to  provide  nanoparticles  with  a 
variety of fluorescent emissions from blue to red (see Fig. 7). 

A simpler solvent-based method was developed using size exclusion 
chromatography  showing  similar  results  [236].  Recently,  a  one  step 
method  was  developed  by  adding  various  amounts  of  benzene  to  a 
premixed ethylene flame; a single extraction allowed for nanoparticles 
that fluorescence emissions from blue to yellow to be produced [237]. 
Raman  spectroscopy  suggested  this  tunability  was  achieved  by 
increasing the size of the aromatic structures within the nanoparticles. 
Evidence  has  also  mounted  for  tunability  through  the  nanoparticle 
diameter [233,238–240]. 

3. Precursor formation 

Fig.  7. Carbon  nanodots  illuminated  using  ordinary  light  and  UV  revealing 
various fluorescence emissions as a function of size [235]. Used with permission 
from John Wiley & Sons©. 

This section will discuss the formation of molecular soot precursors. 
This  begins with the  sooting threshold in  premixed  flames, which  in-

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009567J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

3.1. Sooting propensity 

Insights  into  the  threshold  for  soot  formation  of  different  species 
were initially explored in premixed flames by answering the question of 
how much oxygen is sufficient to halt soot formation for different fuels. 
The C/O ratio for the onset of yellow luminosity (soot incandescence) 
was found to be near C/O= 0.5 and some fuel dependence suggested this 
metric  to  determine  sooting  propensity  [241].  But  in  1962,  Millikan 
showed that the C/O ratio at which incandescence appeared for a single 
fuel  was  temperature  dependent  [242],  while  also  showing  that  the 
non-equilibrium  concentration  of  water  could  explained  the  C/O 
threshold of 0.5. Glassman and coworkers extended this showing that, in 
fact,  if  the  different  flame  temperatures  were  taken  into  account  the 
threshold considered at a single temperature could be directly correlated 
only with the number of C–C bonds in the fuel. This showed that the C/O 
sooting threshold in premixed flames relates more to the hydrocarbon 
radical  pool  competing  with  oxidising  species  and  does  not  provide 
insight into the relative sooting propensities of different fuels, leading 
Glassman to conclude his 1989 review [76], 

“Thus, under premixed conditions, all fuels must break down to the 
same essential species, which has been postulated to be acetylene, 
which builds into a soot particle.” 

Glassman and others established that there is a lower temperature 
threshold where soot is only found to form above 1450–1600 K [243]. 
Wagner and coworkers also established a high temperature limit for soot 
formation  [77].  This  produced  the  well-known  “bell-shaped”  curve 
where soot volume fraction peaks at a temperature of ∼1600 K and was 
halted for temperatures past ∼2000 K (see Fig. 8). This curve was found 
be largely unaffected by increasing pressure except for an increase in the 
soot volume fraction. This temperature dependence indicates that soot 
relies  on  a  chemical  growth  mechanism  that  requires  a  significant 
temperature to be sustained, however higher temperatures can fragment 
the intermediates leading to soot formation. 

The temperature and C/O relationship for soot formation was critical 
for  the  development  of  low-temperature  combustion  devices  (such  as 
homogeneous  charge  compression  ignition  (HCCI)  engines  [245]). 
These  devices  run  at  low C/O  ratios to  avoid  significant  soot  volume 

Fig.  8. “Bell-shaped”  curve  for  soot  volume  fraction  (fν∞)  versus  carbon  to 
oxygen ratio (C/O) and maximum flame temperature (Tmax) [77] for a premixed 
C2H4/air flame. Used with permission from Elsevier ©. 

troduces fuel decomposition pathways such as β-scission. The entropy- 
driven  nature  of  fuel  pyrolysis  and  soot  formation  makes  Section  3.1 
of particular importance. Next, sooting propensities in diffusion flames, 
shocktubes and pyrolysis reactors reveal the importance of fuel structure 
and  identify  aromatic  species  as  key  intermediates.  The  formation  of 
acetylene  and  propargyl  –  the  main  precursors  to  benzene  –  are  dis-
cussed, followed by the formation of the first ring (benzene) and larger 
aromatics  through  the  HACA  mechanism  (PCAH)  or  through  cross-
linking  and  dehydrogenation  (aromers).  Finally,  the  aromatic  species 
that are seen to cluster towards soot nanoparticles are outlined. 

Fig. 9. Thermodynamics of fuel pyrolysis and formation of carbon in engine conditions [244]. (Used with permission from Elsevier ©).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009568J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

fractions and low temperatures to avoid nitrous oxide emissions [15]. It 
is also important to note that this threshold describes the beginning of 
significant  soot  mass  and  incandescence  from  the  flame  occurring  at 
C/O  > 0.5  [77].  However,  evidence  has  recently  emerged  for  nano-
particles being produced below this range as low as C/O  = 0.4 [152, 
173]. Therefore, it is important to consider that this “bell-shaped” curve 
corresponds to the production of significant volume fraction of primary 
nanoparticles that rapidly grow/agglomerate into soot aggregates and 
incandesce. 

The universality of sooting thresholds in premixed flames, discussed 
previously,  indicates  that  many  fuels  undergo  similar  chemical  trans-
formations to form soot in these systems. One of the most significant 
steps  we  will  discuss  is  β-scission,  which  is  critical  for  larger  fuel 
decomposition.  This  begins  with  hydrogen  (radical)  abstraction  or 
thermal hydrogen loss from an aliphatic fuel. Let’s consider the forma-
tion of the n-propyl radical, 

CH3 (cid:0) CH2 (cid:0) CH3 + H• →CH3(cid:0)β CH2(cid:0)α C•H2 + H2.

(1)  

The C-C β bond (immediately removed from the free radical site) has a 
significantly reduced bond strength of ∼35 kcal/mol [246], compared 
with a C–C single bond energy of ∼100 kcal/mol. Thermal decomposi-
tion of the alkyl radical therefore proceeds rapidly above 900 K, 

CH3(cid:0)β CH2(cid:0)α C•H2 →C•H3 + CH2 = CH2.

(2)  

For longer aliphatics the product formed is often itself an alkyl radical 
and will continue with subsequent scissions until the whole molecule 

has fragmented or “unzipped” into C1–C3 fragments. In fact, considering 
all of the thermal decomposition pathways in premixed conditions, only 
a handful of small C1–C7 species form from hydrocarbon fuels [4]. This 
insight  has  been  used  in  the  HyChem  modelling  approach  [244].  Ex-
periments  are  used  in  this  approach  to  determine  the  fragmentation 
product distribution of small species from complex fuels and then using 
smaller fuel mechanisms for subsequent combustion or soot formation 
modelling (recent attempts to perform a similar thermal fragmentation 
analysis using reactive forcefields is also of interest [247,248]). 

H-abstraction/β-scission demonstrate some important principles for 
soot formation. Species have to be stable at temperatures in the flame 
where soot forms as entropy favours the breakdown of molecules into 
fewer  species.  This  is  fundamental  to  pyrolysis  and  soot  formation  – 
being endothermic processes they are driven primarily by entropy [7]. 
Fig.  9  shows  the  Gibbs  free  energy  for  C11H22  pyrolysis.  For  the  first 
three steps the thermal decomposition of the fuel is driven by an increase 
in entropy as fuels are broken into smaller species. Enthalpy then drives 
the first ring formation (step 4). Further growth of aromatics (steps 5 
and 6), which will be discussed later, is also seen to be driven by entropy 
as hydrogen is released. 

For  further discussions  we refer  the  reader  to the  review by  McE-
nally,  Pfefferle,  Atakan  and  Kohse-H¨oinghaus [4]  in  which  important 
chemical concepts for fuel decomposition and aromatics formation such 
as  bond  energies,  resonantly  stabilised  radicals  and  unimolecular 
dissociation of hydrocarbon radicals are explained, as are the decom-
position products of several fuels. Several papers summarise new find-
ings  related  to  different  kinds  of  fuels  [10,11,13,249–251]  and  the 

Fig. 10. Contribution on the yield sooting index (YSI) of A) Oxygenated fuels, B) aromatic and C) aliphatic functional groups  [255]. Used with permission from 
Elsevier ©. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009569J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

development of new techniques for new species to be identified in fuel 
decomposition [94,252–254]. 

The diffusion flame has been used extensively to assess the sooting 
propensity  of  fuel  blends,  answering  the  important  question  of  how 
much soot will be produced by a certain species under rich conditions 
(see  Dryer’s  2015  review  for  a  comprehensive  discussion  [256]).  For 
example, the height reached without soot emission by a wickfed diffu-
sion flame (smoke point height) has been a staple of measuring sooting 
propensities since the beginning of the 20th century [241,257,258] (and 
developed into the ASTM D1322 “Standard Test Method for Smoke Point 
of Kerosene and Aviation Turbine Fuel”). Calcote and Manos in 1983 
combined  various  literature  data  into  a  burner  agnostic  scale  –  the 
Threshold Sooting Index (TSI) [259]. Critically, it was found that binary 
mixtures would follow a linear mixing rule with TSI [260]. (This metric 
has  been  extended  to  oxygenated  biofuels  with  the  Oxygen  Extended 
Sooting Index (OESI) [261,262], which we will not be discussing further 
in this review.) A theoretical method proposed by Sarofim’s group al-
lows  prediction  of  the smoke  point of  pure  hydrocarbon liquids  from 
low-sooting paraffins to highly sooting aromatics; the method was based 
on structural group contributions [263]. The accuracy of smoke point 
measurements  were  improved  by  considering  the  fuel  flow  rate  as  a 
function of flame height – the so-called fuel uptake rate measurement 
with  threshold  imaging  (FURTI)  method  [264].  Independent  work 
confirmed the suitability of this method [265] and further improved the 
threshold image processing [266]. 

Another approach is measuring the soot volume fraction using op-
tical approaches such as the yield soot index (YSI) [255,267]. In the YSI 
method, a methane co-flow diffusion flame is doped with a small amount 
of  the  species  of  interest  and  the  maximum  soot  volume  fraction  is 
measured.  This  methodology  has  been  found  to  robustly  determine 
sooting  propensities allowing  a  wide range of  species  to be analysed, 
especially larger cyclic and aromatic species that have very low smoke 
point heights [267–269]. This model was also expanded to measure and 
predict the sooting tendency of oxygenated fuels [255]. A methodology 
was  recently  developed  to  improve  the  Abel  transform  required  to 
determine  the  soot  volume  fraction  using  a  low-cost  two-colour  py-
rometry approach [270]. The micropyrolysis index (MPI) [271,272] and 
particle size measurements should also be mentioned for determining 
sooting propensity [273]. 

Across the indices the ordering of the sooting propensities follows 
aromatics > unsaturated aliphatics > saturated aliphatics > oxygenated 
aliphatics  [4,46,255].  Fig.  10  shows  the  impact  of  various  functional 
groups on sooting tendency using the YSI. These results show the critical 
role fuel structure plays in soot precursor formation for particular aro-
matic species. 

3.2. Acetylene, Propargyl and Benzene 

Acetylene  was  first  isolated  by  Davy  in  1836  and  he  immediately 
noted the significant luminosity and soot produced by this fuel [274]. It 
was then found by Berthelot [275] and others that acetylene was formed 
from the pyrolysis of hydrocarbons in arcs and tube furnaces (the partial 

Fig. 11. Spin density of propargyl radical (UB3LYP/cc-pVTZ iso=0.025 a.u.).  

Fig.  12. Diffusion  pool  flame  benzene  and  hexane  fuels  [283].  Used  with 
permission from Elsevier ©. 

combustion  of  hydrocarbons  now  being  the  dominant  industrial  syn-
thesis route for acetylene). In the 1890s, Lewes then showed that this 
acetylene formation preceded soot formation in flames. This led him to 
posit that acetylene was the origin of luminosity and therefore soot in 
flames [276]. 

The formation mechanism is well understood in fuel rich conditions. 
Alkenes pyrolyse through H-abstraction and thermal fragmentation to 
alkynes such as acetylene (C2H2) [2]. 
C2H4 + H•→C2H3

• + H2 →C2H2 + H• + H2

(3) 

Of  particular importance to soot  formation are the resonantly sta-
bilised radicals (RSR) such as propargyl, which is formed from hydrogen 
abstraction from allene/propyne or reactions between methylene radi-
cals with acetylene [277], 
•CH2 + C2H2→C3H•

3 + H•

(4) 

•

In valence bond theory the stabilisation can be said to arise from a 

resonance between two Kekul´e structures [277], 
[H (cid:0) C• = C = CH2 ↔ H (cid:0) C ≡ C (cid:0) C•H2]

(5)  

In  molecular  orbital  theory  the  π-radical  in  propargyl  is  said  to  be 
partially  delocalised  between  two  sites.  This  spreads  the  spin  density 
across the molecule reducing the reactivity [278] (see Fig. 11). Prop-
argyl  is  therefore  unable  to  form  strong  bonds  with  O  in  the  flame 
(cid:0) 1)  and  is  not  susceptible  to  radical  induced  frag-
(D0 < 20  kcal  mol
mentation from H• [277]. This means propargyl and other delocalised 
π-radicals  are  stable  enough  to  increase  in  concentration  and  are 
therefore important intermediates for soot formation [277,279,280]. 

In 1825, Faraday demonstrated the significant sooting propensity of 
aromatic fuels such as benzene, even as he isolated benzene for the first 
time [281]. The sooting propensity can be illustrated by considering a 
simple diffusion pool flame, see Fig. 12, remembering that soot provides 
the luminosity of the flame (incandescence). For the benzene fuel, soot is 
rapidly formed at low heights above the burner, but for an aliphatic fuel 
such as hexane, a “dark zone” is observed that indicates a delay in soot 
formation [282]. This “dark zone” implies that the aliphatic fuels must 
be broken down into soot precursor species before becoming soot. 

The formation of benzene is of fundamental importance for under-
standing the formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and 
soot in aliphatic fuels. The formation of benzene and small aromatics has 
been reviewed previously [2–4,254,284] and three main reaction routes 
proposed  for  the  formation  of  the  first  aromatic  PAH,  benzene  (see 
Fig. 13). 

The first reaction involves the presence of C2H2, whereas the others 
involve resonantly stabilised radicals (RSR). In all cases the formation of 
benzene  comes  from  a  sequential  addition  of  small  molecules.  The 
acetylene  pathway  for  benzene  formation  was  proposed  in  the  1980s 
[284,285] and has been studied in order to obtain appropriate values of 
the thermodynamic properties and rate constants of its reactions [286, 
287]. This pathway has been found to be dominant at the medium-low 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095610J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 13. First aromatic ring formation from propangyl (C3H3•), acetylene (C2H2), methyl (CH3•), cyclopentadienyl (C5H5•) with other species possessing a variety of 
isomeric structures [10]. Used with permission from Elsevier ©. 

temperature regime [288,289]. 

Later 

in  1992,  Miller  and  Melius  [289]  proposed 

the 
•
self-recombination  of  propargyl  radicals  (C3H3
)  as  the  key  step  in 
benzene formation. The reaction of two propargyl radicals is favoured 
over the radical-molecule reaction (C4 radical + acetylene). The reason 
is  that  the  competing  oxidation  reactions  of  C3H3  are  slow  due  to 
resonance stabilisation [277]. Therefore, the propargyl pathway is the 
main mechanism for benzene formation with successive studies recog-
nising this reaction to be predominant at high temperatures [279,280]. 
Another proposed mechanism for the first aromatic ring formation is 
the cyclopentadienyl route, obtained from the combination of C2 and C3 
pathways or the oxidation of aromatic. These radical reactions are in 
equilibrium; nevertheless, they lead to benzene ring formation that is 
highly stable due to aromaticity, and in this way, the reaction is pro-
moted  toward  the  product  [2,290–292].  Recently,  the  reaction  of 
cyclopentadienyl  and  acetylene  to  form  tropyl,  benzyl  and  vinyl-
cyclopentadienyl  has  also been  suggested  to  explain  the  formation  of 
odd-numbered carbon species [21,293] and methyl addition [294]. For 
a more detailed discussion of the early ring formation we recommend 
the 2020 review by Kohse-H¨oinghaus [254]. 

3.3. Pericondensed aromatic hydrocarbons (PCAH) 

Growth of the aromatics past the first ring proceeds predominantly 
by  a radical mechanism where a colliding hydrogen radical (or other 
radical) abstracts an aromatic hydrogen atom, providing a reactive site 
where acetylene can attach – the so-called hydrogen abstraction carbon 

(acetylene)  addition  (HACA)  mechanism  [3,285].  Fig.  14  shows  one 
pathway that highlights the HACA mechanism, plotting the change in 
the  free  energy  (at  T = 1800  K,  P = 1  atm)  and  showing  a  table  of 
species consumed or produced by Wang [7]. The process is seen to be 
energetically  downhill  and  spontaneous.  This  is  primarily  due  to  the 
generation  of  hydrogen  gas  which  entropically  drives  the  aromatic 
growth [7]. 

As  the  PAH  grows,  a  variety  of  topological arrangements  of  fused 
aromatic rings are produced. Mass spectrometry allowed the ratio of the 
carbon to hydrogen (H/C ratio) in the PAH to be measured as H/C =
0.3–0.5  [128].  The  reason  for  the  presence  of  these  species  was 
explained by considering the thermodynamic stability of pericondensed 
polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PCAH), revealing an “island of stability” or 
the “stabilomers” as described by Stein and Fahr, where aromatic rings 
are  fused in  a roughly  circular fashion [295]. A lower H/C ratio  was 
found  than  that  from  PAH  with  only  hexagonal  pericondensed  rings 
(maximally pericondensed structures) and explained by the presence of 
pentagonal rings. Evidence for pentagonal rings has recently been found 
from tunable photoionisation mass spectrometry, which makes use of 
synchrotron light sources [21,296,297]. For example, many molecular 
formulas that were historically associated with only 6-membered ring 
structures were found to be a mixture of isomers with many pentagonal 
rings[94,296–298]. For example, the ion with m/z 202 usually associ-
ated  with  pyrene  has  been 
the 
pentagonal-containing fluoranthene species [94]. Heptagonal rings can 
also  be  integrated  for  specific  bay  closure  reactions  next  to  partially 
embedded pentagonal rings [299,300]. This indicates kinetically driven 

to  be  composed  of 

found 

Fig. 14. HACA mechanism with energetics of the intermediates and species count highlighting the release of H2  [7]. Used with permission from Elsevier ©.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095611J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 16. Stoichiometry of aromatics in nearly sooting flames imaged using HR- 
AFM [22]. Used with permission from Elsevier CC-BY-NC-ND. 

(cid:0) 3, those of pyrene and cor-
“If the mole fraction of benzene is ∼ 10
(cid:0) 7, respectively, which are of 
(cid:0) 5  and 10
onene would be roughly 10
the same orders of magnitude as the number densities of soot nuclei 
(1011–1013  cm

(cid:0) 3)” 

Therefore, either PCAH the size of pyrene to coronene are involved in 

soot formation or larger aromatic species of a similar concentration. 

3.4. Aromatic Oligomers (Aromers) 

There has been growing evidence for a larger class of PAH, so-called 
aromers  (=aromatic  oligomers),  from  300–1000  Da  [128,165,303]. 
Detection  of  large  aromatic  species  has  been  historically  challenging 
[12]. Gas chromatography can detect species up to 8 aromatic rings with 
liquid chromatography extending this up to 11 rings [302,304]. The first 
technique  to  detect  large  PAH  was  positive  ion  mass  spectrometry, 
allowing species >500 Da to be found in 1965 [305]. However, early 
laser ionisation mass spectrometry (LI-MS) in the 1990s was unable to 
detect  these  larger  aromatics  [306].  A  breakthrough  in  LI-MS  came 
when the laser wavelength was tuned to provide the correct resonance 
for ionisation of larger PAH species with >11 rings [156,303,307] (a 
more complete explanation of the effect is described in Desgroux et al. 
[12]). Homann et al. demonstrated in low pressure benzene/oxygen rich 
premixed flames that the concentration of aromatics did not decrease 
monotonically, as mentioned in the previous section, but increased from 
300 Da to 620 Da [128,303]. Many recent results from LI-MS and sec-
ondary  ion-mass  spectrometry  (SIMS)  have  reproduced  these  results 
[39,211,308], while recent advances in mass analysers’ resolution have 
shown clear evidence for the presence of large pericondensed aromatics 
in  diffusion  [309]  and  premixed  flames  [310,311]  with  minimal 
amounts of oxygen present (see Fig. 15). 

Other  evidence  for  species  significantly  larger  than  pyrene  came 
from  electron  microscopy  and  spectroscopy.  Fringe  analysis  of  high 
resolution  transmission  electron  micrographs  indicate  larger  species 
than pyrene are present in early soot [51,312–314]. In a recent study 
comparison with simulated HRTEM images indicated that species closer 
to  circumpyrene  in  size  are  present  in  early  soot  nanoparticles  [315, 
316].  Optical  spectroscopy  also  revealed  evidence  of  larger  species. 
Raman spectroscopy suggested aromatic species are approximately 1 nm 
in size [22,141,317–325]. Optical band gap measurements have been 
historically employed to suggest the size of the aromatic species [316, 
326–329]. Recent studies show stronger sensitivities to ring topologies 
[330], functional groups [331], radical character and curvature [332]. 
On top of this, the size of the nanoparticle changes the band gap due to 
quantum confinement effect [233,333]. Wang et al. demonstrated this 
size dependence by measuring the optical gap and ionisation energy for 
nanoparticles  >4  nm  at  room  temperature  [233,239].  This  followed 

Fig.  15. Mass  spectrometry  results  for  aromers  from  Desgroux  et  al.  [39], 
Jacobson et al. [309], Zhang et al. [310]. Used with permission from Elsevier 
©and John Wiley & Sons©. 

pathways play an important role in PCAH formation and mechanisms 
that  only  consider  the  most  thermodynamically  stable  6-membered 
species are incomplete. 

Finally, it is interesting to compare the concentration of PCAH with 
that  of  soot.  It  has  long  been  known  in  mass  spectrometry  that  the 
concentration  of  PCAH decreases  exponentially  with  mass [301,302]. 
This  allows  the  mole  fraction  of  the  species  potentially  available  in 
nanoparticle formation to be estimated [7]: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095612J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

quantum confinement, which was shown to be due to stacked aromatic 
species [238,240,333]. This provided the first possible resolution of a 
significant question surrounding whether an indirect or direct optical 
band gap is found in early carbonaceous nanoparticles (direct optical 
transition  is  expected  for  a  graphitic  material  whereas  an  indirect 
transition is expected for a disordered aromatic polymer), with the au-
thors concluding that [233] (square brackets and italicised text added by 
the authors of this review): 

“For the CNPs [carbon nanoparticles] studied here, however, we find 
the  k  exponent  is  decidedly  equal  to  2  [indirect  transition]  even 
though the transition is expected to be excitonic (k  = 1 /2) [direct 
transition].... Clearly,  the band  gap exhibits  the expected  quantum 
confinement effect.” 

This size dependency clearly makes the optical band gap less useful 

than other techniques for determining the size of aromatic domains. 

Further evidence for aromers comes from recent direct imaging of 
aromatic  soot  precursors  using  non-contact  or  high  resolution  atomic 
force  microscopy  (nc/HR-AFM)  from  a  nearly  sooting  premixed 
ethylene flame [22,334] (see Fig. 1). Fig. 16 shows the H /C ratio for a 
collection of these directly imaged molecules with species significantly 
larger  than  pyrene  seen  (up  to  650  Da).  Additionally,  many  of  these 
molecules  were  found  to  contain  a  higher  concentration  of  hydrogen 
than that of maximally pericondensed species (the most condensed a set 
of hexagonal rings can be in an aromatic), due to methyl groups and the 
hydrogenation of the edges. This technique was limited to flat aromatics 
sampled from nearly sooting flames and could not adequately image the 
3D aromatic molecules produced in a sooting flame. However, recent 
advances  in  HR-AFM  have  been  developed  that  could  allow  3D  aro-
matics to be imaged in the future [335]. 

Homann  interpreted  these  larger  PAH  as  containing  curved  PAH 
(cPAH) [128]. The evidence for this curvature came from these larger 
PAH readily forming negative ions. Curved aromatics, as with fullerenes, 
are known to have a high electron affinity and to easily form negative 
ions [336]. The type of curvature to which he was referring is due to the 
complete enclosure of a pentagonal ring within the aromatic network 
that causes the aromatic molecule to be bent out of plane and curved like 
a bowl. More direct evidence for curved PAH came from the extraction 
of corannulene 1a from flames and the completely closed cages of car-
bon – C60  fullerenes – formed in particular flame conditions [123,337] 
(see Fig. 17). 

In these low pressure benzene flames where fullerenes are formed the 
location of larger PAH in the flame occurs before the formation of ful-
lerenes, as well as their loss of hydrogen, suggesting they were fullerene 
precursors [338]. Recently, hydrogenated fullerenes have been extrac-
ted and crystallised from low pressure flames showing closure can occur 
before complete loss of hydrogen [339]. However, in most atmospheric 

flames the conditions for fullerene formation are unfavourable. They are 
therefore in a low concentration [340] and are unable to contribute to a 
soot formation mechanism. HRTEM has recently demonstrated tortuous 
fringes suggesting significant curvature [24,341]. This imaging showed 
that the earliest soot primary particles (sampled from a coflow diffusion 
flame), in particular, are significantly curved [24] (see Fig. 1 HRTEM). 
The addition of cyclopentadiene [342] and oxygen [343] has also been 
shown to increase tortuosity of the nanostructure. 

It  is  interesting  to  consider  from  where  this  curvature  originates. 
Fig. 18 shows the various mechanisms that have been proposed exper-
imentally or computationally explored for curvature integration due to 
pentagonal  ring  embedding.  These  can  be  broadly  separated  into  the 
corannulene pathway and the planar or flat PAH (fPAH) pathways. The 
corannulene pathway was suggested by Pope and Howard [344]. It in-
volves  small  PAH  and  goes  through  the  intermediate  corannulene, 
which is the most well-known curved aromatic. Starting from benzene, a 
series  of  HACA  reactions  generate  a  variety  of  fPAH,  as  well  as  pre-
cursors for the cPAH. Recently,  evidence has been found for a HACA 
pathway starting from cyclopentadiene either with acetylene [21,290, 
292] or methyl addition [345] that generates a variety of fPAH, some 
with  an  odd  number  of  π-electrons  giving  resonantly  stabilised 
π-radicals. 

The first pentagon integrating reaction is shown in Fig. 18 i) where 
an aryl crosslink reaction between benzene and naphthalene is followed 
by cyclodehydrogenation to form fluoranthene. Aryl crosslinks twist the 
aromatic species  relative to  one another so  that there is  an  angle  be-
tween the two aromatic planes, due to the steric hindrance of the hy-
drogens neighbouring the crosslink. The π-bonding is optimal when the 
two aromatic planes are colinear and therefore at flame temperatures 
these  species  rapidly  transform  into  planar  structures  in  a  process  of 
cyclodehydrogenation  or  ring  condensation  [346].  This  reaction  is 
well-known experimentally [347] and is used in many modern mecha-
nisms  of  soot  PAH  chemistry  [348].  Pope  and  Howard  suggested  a 
mechanism where fluoranthene can also be generated from a thermal 
edge reconstruction or rearrangement with an edge pentagon becoming 
embedded and surrounded by three hexagonal rings [344,349] (Fig. 18 
ii)). HACA growth then can generate the next intermediate, benzo[ghi] 
fluoranthene,  with  a  partially  embedded  pentagon  enclosed  by  four 
hexagonal rings. This intermediate has also been suggested to arise from 
oxidation of a zig-zag edge [350,351] or cyclodehydrogenation of the 
bay  edge  site  of  benzo[c]phenanthrene  [352]  (Fig.  18  iii)  and  iv)). 
Fig.  18  v)  shows  the  final  enclosure  of  the  pentagonal  ring  through 
HACA  growth  onto  benzo[ghi]fluoranthene,  also  referred  to  as  a  bay 
capping reaction. This forms corannulene, the most well-known curved 
aromatic with five hexagonal rings enclosing a pentagonal ring [288]. 
Before this bay capping reaction the aromatic is flat, but afterwards the 
aromatic is bent into a bowl shape due to the considerable strain created 

Fig. 17. Kekul´e and 3D molecular structure of corannulene 1a and buckminsterfullerene C60.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095613J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 18. Curvature integration mechanisms for small species. Inset top right shows the five pentagon embedding reactions; i) aryl-crosslinking between a zig-zag and 
free-edge followed by dehydrogenation, ii) edge reconstruction occurs above 1000 K often radical catalysed, iii) oxidation of a zig-zag edge leads to carbon monoxide 
loss, iv) cyclodehydrogenation can occur in a bay-site, v) HACA growth where hydrogen abstraction followed by acetylene addition embeds a pentagonal ring. Inset 
bottom centre shows the aromer pathway that relies on HACA and crosslinking of two small aromatics to form a cPAH. The structure circled in red is based on the 
structure imaged in HR-AFM [22]. Site types are shown with blue arrows to aid the discussion. 

by the enclosed pentagon [353]. This step is critical as the benzo[ghi] 
fluoranthene is still able to thermally rearrange into a flat aromatic with 
an edge-based pentagonal ring. However, once the pentagon has become 
embedded  through  a  HACA  reaction  the  mechanisms  for  pentagon 
migration  are  unlikely  to  occur.  This  migration  involves  C2  rotations 
(Stone-Thrower-Wales transformations) with significant energetic bar-
riers that kinetically “lock”  the less stable pentagonal ring within the 
hexagonal network, which has been demonstrated experimentally from 
flash pyrolysis studies [349]. Lafleur et al. [337], however, found cor-
annulene  to  be  in  low  concentrations  in  benzene  flames  [(mass  cor-
annulene)/(mass pyrene) from 0.008 to 0.0063]. This pathway therefore 
appears to not be a primary formation mechanism of cPAH. Given that 
corannulene  is  the  smallest  cPAH  known  to  date  [353]  this  suggests 
species  <300  Da  contain  rim-based  pentagonal  rings  and  partially 
embedded pentagons present in flat aromatics. 

The other curvature integration pathways mirror the reactions seen 
in  the  corannulene  pathway  yet  become  more  likely  as  the  aromatic 
grows  in  size. Cyclodehydrogenation of  a  bay site  followed  by  HACA 
growth  has  been  studied  using  kinetic  Monte  Carlo  simulations  of 
growing aromatics and has been found to enclose pentagonal rings [86, 
88,91]. However, these reactions are slow as they require a particular 
bay site, which is not readily generated for PAH ∼500 Da in size [9,300]. 
This pathway is therefore unlikely to provide the curvatures required to 
explain the significant curvature integration in flame or fullerene for-
mation  [288].  An  oxidation  pathway  is  also  more  likely  for  larger 

aromatics  [350,351].  Experimentally  it  has  been  found  that  partially 
premixed diffusion (Bunsen-type) flames have structures with increasing 
curvature  as  a  function  of  oxygen  concentration  [343]  and  another 
recent study using in situ HRTEM imaging showed curling of graphene 
flakes  into  curved  fragments  at  the  surface  of  a  soot  particle  during 
oxidation [354]. It is unclear how oxidation contributes to overall cur-
vature integration, however, the low amount of oxygen found in incip-
ient soot [142] and the prevalence of these curved species in diffusion 
flames [24], with much lower oxygen concentrations, indicates it is also 
not a primary curvature integration mechanism. Recent Kinetic Monte 
Carlo (KMC) simulations of PAH growth from HACA do not support the 
significant curvature integration observed [9,300]. 

Thermal rearrangements have also been found to provide partially 
embedded  pentagonal  rings  that  with  further  HACA  growth  produce 
cPAH [349,355,356]. These can be classified into pericondensation and 
edge rearrangements. Pericondensation involves the rearrangements of 
orthocondensed  (otherwise  known  as  catacondensed)  PAH  into  peri-
condensed  structures  with the  loss  of  hydrogen.  This  has  been  exten-
sively explored as a synthesis route for buckybowls and graphene [349, 
355–357].  Edges  of  aromatics  are  highly  mobile  above  1300  K  and 
rapidly  rearrange  into  partially  and  fully  embedded  pentagonal  rings 
[349]. Some example schemes from buckybowl synthesis are shown in 
Fig. 19. 

Another recent experimental work on the transformation of ethylene 
into  graphene  on  an  Rh(111)  surface  using  scanning  tunnelling 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095614J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 19. Thermal rearrangements that embed pentagonal rings [349].  

microscopy  found  some  interesting  thermal  transformation  of  PAH 
[357]. Long acenes were formed at 470 K, however, heating to 670 K led 
to the breakup of these long acenes and the formation of pericondensed 
species, which then grow and fuse into polycrystalline graphene. While 
in this study the surface likely catalysed the rapid rearrangement reac-
tion,  flash  pyrolysis  experiments  demonstrate  that  past  1300  K  aro-
matics  also  rapidly  rearrange  into  pericondensed  species  in  the  gas 
phase [349]. However, edge rearrangement competes with the embed-
ding of pentagonal rings by allowing the migration of the ring to an edge 
(as it does not involve hydrogen loss and is therefore highly reversible). 
This  inhibits  the  formation  of  long  acenes  and  was  the  initial  reason 
curvature integration was not explored in the combustion community 
for a long time – the edge rearrangements were thought to provide more 
thermodynamically stable planar PAH [288]. 

Homann suggested the aromer pathway, which is a combination of 
the  aryl  crosslinking,  cyclodehydrogenation  and  HACA/bay  capping 
reactions, which can be seen in the inset of Fig. 18. The experimental 
evidence for the aryl crosslinking of two fPAH arises from the presence 
of  a  separate  distribution  of  larger  PAH  as  mentioned,  suggesting  a 
separate  mechanism  from  HACA  [303].  Recent  tandem  mass  spec-
trometry has also been used with collision-induced dissociation to show 
the fragmentation of this mode at 500 Da [358]. The possible radical 
sites for aryl crosslinking are shown in Fig. 20, which we will consider 
further in Section 5. 

Howard considered σ-radicals produced from hydrogen abstraction 
from the edges of hexagonal and pentagonal rings and computed that 
molecules ∼600 Da in size would contain 1–6 of these radical sites each 
[31]. σ-radicals are considered to be the most reactive radicals in the 
flame,  reacting  readily  with  acetylene  in  the  HACA  mechanism  [3]. 
Homann mentioned the odd number of carbon atoms and suggested a 

non-bonding  π-radical  that  is  delocalised  [303]  and  has  also  been 
imaged  in  HR-AFM  [359].  These  resonantly  stabilised  π-radicals  are 
important in benzene formation, as mentioned – being less reactive than 
σ-radicals, they have longer lifetimes in the flame [10]. Frenklach also 
suggested a partially saturated rim-based pentagonal ring that forms a 
π-radical, showing it impacts surface rearrangements and growth pro-
cesses,  but  did  not  explore  the  reactivity  with  other  aromatic  species 
[82,86]. 

Subsequent  cyclisation  of  these  aryl  crosslinked  species  has  been 
experimentally found to favour the partial embedding of a pentagonal 
ring as opposed to a hexagonal ring [360,361] (e.g. the free edge found 
to preferentially react with the zig-zag edge in pyrene pyrolysis, forming 
a pentagonal ring). Evidence for the crosslinking and partial embedding 
of pentagonal rings has also been found in HR-AFM with species found 
containing two aromatic segments with predominantly hexagonal rings 
linked via pentagonal rings [22]. These species are then highly ortho-
condensed  and  will  thermally  rearrange  and  cyclodehydrogenate  to 
further  embed  the  pentagonal  rings,  with  HACA  growth  also  contrib-
uting to pentagon enclosure. a-mer4 from Fig. 18 is highlighted as this 
aromatic network was experimentally observed in HR-AFM experiments 
[22]  (see  Fig.  1  IS4).  This  species  can  rapidly  cyclodehydrogenate  or 
have HACA growth to form the curved species. Evidence for this sug-
gestion comes from the slightly higher concentration of hydrogen rich 
species in the 300 to 700 Da range and the fact that dehydrogenation 
rapidly gives way to species in the region with H/C ratios suggesting 
pericondensed  structures  [338].  More  recently  principal  component 
analysis of SIMS-TOF MS of soot from flames provides strong evidence 
that  the  aromers  arise  from  the  crosslink  of  small  aromatics  with  a 
subsequent dehydrogenation of 4–8 hydrogens [362]. 

Aryl  crosslinks  and  further  thermal  rearrangements  are  known  to 

Fig. 20. Reactive edges of soot precursors.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095615J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

integrate curvature and close cage structures completely [2]. However, 
it  appears  that  multiple  crosslinks  are  required  for  the  integration  of 
sufficient curvature to allow for complete formation into fullerenes. This 
is not possible in most atmospheric sooting flames but is possible in some 
low  pressure  flames  [91,128].  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Homann 
originally suggested that this process was enhanced by the physical in-
teractions holding PAH dimers together while the edge zipped up [109, 
128]. This was based on an early model of fullerene formation called the 
zipper  mechanism  [363].  The  summarised  synthesis  work  on  buck-
ybowls highlights that no such physical interactions are required and 
that crosslinks, cyclodehydrogenation and thermal rearrangements are 
sufficient to integrate curvature. 

3.5. Clustering (reactive) PAH 

Reactive PAH were reported in one of the first mass spectrometry 
studies  of  aromatic  species  in  flames  in  1967  [165].  Of  course,  the 
naming “reactive PAH” contains the connotation of a chemical reaction 
occurring, which is yet to be shown, therefore we refer to these species 
as clustering PAH through either physical or chemical routes. It was only 
during  the  2000s  that  mass  spectrometric  instruments  were  able  to 
observe the molecule to particle transition, using soft laser desorption 
ionisation techniques with reflectron time-of-flight mass analysers that 
could extend the range to millions of mass/charge (m/z) units [155]. 
With  these  instruments  Grotheer  and  colleagues  were  able  to  show 
clustering of aromatics [158]. Fig. 21 shows this series of peaks with a 
periodicity of Δ = 500 Da. 

This has since been reproduced in an atmospheric ethylene premixed 
flame by Carbone et al. revealing clustering only for the positive ions 
with Δ = 450 Da and not for the negative ions [364] (see Fig. 22). We 
will return to this work at the end of the review. 

From Grotheer and colleagues mass spectrometric studies the colli-
sion efficiency to allow such aromatic species to cluster was computed 
[85]. This comes from a simple second order kinetic model that has been 
found to accurately describe the rate of soot formation, 

RCa,b = CE × βa,b × Ca × Cb,

(6)  

where the reaction rate, RCa,b , of molecules a and b is the product of the 
collision efficiency, CE  (other authors use α [7], β [107] or γ [365]); the 
free  molecular  collision  coagulation  kernel,  βa,b;  the  concentration  of 
molecules  a,  Ca;  and  b,  Cb  (in  Kraft  notation [85])  (the collision  effi-
ciency  is  often  further  split  to  separately  consider  the  van  der  Waals 
enhancement, EF, which we will not do in this work). It was found that 
aromatic species would need to cluster with a collision efficiency CE  >
0.01 (see Fig. 36). In other studies collision efficiencies ranging from CE 
= 0.01 (cid:0) 1.0 have been used to produce the flux of nanoparticles found 

during soot formation [2]. Therefore the goal of the rest of the review is 
to explore what is allowing PAH to stably cluster at these high collision 
efficiencies. 

4. Nanoparticle formation 

While the transition from molecule to carbonaceous nanoparticle is 
somewhat arbitrary we will consider any species above 1000 Da to be a 
nanoparticle.  The  growth  of  curved  or  planar  pericondensed  PAH  is 
generally not found to extend past 1000 Da. There are some exceptions 
to this definition that are worth mentioning. PAH growth has been seen 
to  extend  slightly  further  than  1000  Da,  in  low-pressure  premixed 
acetylene  flames  [128,303,366]  and  inverse  diffusion  flames  [367]. 
Another exception is the formation of giant fullerenes that can extend to 
6000  Da  within  low-pressure  flames  [109].  As  our  focus  is  on  the 
incipient nanoparticles that lead to primary and aggregate carbonaceous 
particles  these  exceptions  are  not  an  issue.  Previously  a  particular 
diameter value has been used as the threshold to describe the molecule 
to  particle  transition.  Section  2  discussed  the  many  instruments  that 
have been developed to measure mobility diameter and therefore it is 
natural to want to connect the nanoparticle mass to it’s diameter. For 
example the threshold of 1000 Da is a particle on the order of a nano-
metre in diameter [368]. However, many assumptions are required to 
convert from the molecular weight to particle diameter (or conversely 
from mobility diameter to particle diameter) including H/C ratio, den-
sity and the clustering species involved in nanoparticle formation. It is 
also questionable to approximate such molecular structures as spheri-
cally  homogeneous.  For  these  reasons  we will  avoid  discussing  nano-
particle diameters and focus on the question: by which mechanism do 
molecules cluster past 1000 Da to form nanoparticles? For the sake of 
clarity, chemical mechanisms will be referred to as disproportionation or 
inception or polymerisation while physical mechanisms will be referred to 
as  nucleation.  Mechanisms  involving  both  chemical  and  physical  in-
teractions will be referred to as physically stabilised soot inception. 

Table 1 lists the many mechanisms that have been proposed for the 
formation  of  carbonaceous  nanoparticles  in  hydrocarbon  flames.  The 
main strengths and weaknesses that have been discussed in the literature 
are consolidated. We have provided a schematic of the most relevant 
nanoparticle formation mechanisms in Fig. 23. 

4.1. Disproportionation 

4.1.1. Diatomic carbon 

The earliest view of soot formation was the direct dehydrogenation 
of  hydrocarbon  fuel  into  solid  carbon  particulates  [65].  Flame  spec-
troscopy revealed how the ethylene optical emissions (CH*, CHO*) gave 
way  to  the  C2  Swan  bands  that  cease  upon  soot  formation  with 
increasing  fuel/air  ratio  [369].  This  led  Smith  in  1940  to  suggest 
disproportionation of the fuel into C2 and H2 with the former reacting to 
form solid soot [see Table1(a)]. However, the concentration of C2  was 
found  to  be  too  low  to  support  soot  formation  [282].  Additionally, 
flames  in  which  C2  was  produced  in  high  concentrations,  such  as 
cyanogen  (C2N2)  [370]  and  carbon  suboxide  (C3O2)  [424]  were  not 
found to produce significant amounts of soot. 

4.1.2. Carbon monoxide 

Carbon monoxide is produced during fuel pyrolysis and is one of the 
main products of incomplete combustion [see Table 1 (b)]. The so-called 
Boudouard reaction was well-known in gas works where carbon mon-
oxide decomposes into solid carbon deposits and was also suggested to 
produce soot in flames [371] [see Table1(b)] according to, 

2CO ⇌C + CO2

(7) 

Fig. 21. Mass spectrum of high-molecular weight species extracted from a 13 
kPa acetylene-oxygen flame (ϕ = 3.25) by molecular beam mass spectrometry 
with 193 nm laser ionisation [158]. Used with permission form KIT CC. 

An equilibrium analysis revealed that at >1000 K carbon formation 
is not possible from Eq. 7 and therefore carbon monoxide dominates at 
flame  temperatures  over  disproportionation  to  solid  carbon  and  CO2 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095616J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 22. Mass defect vs mass to charge ratio of flame ions (positive left, negative right) sampled in an ethylene/air premixed flame from a McKenna burner [364]. 
Used with permission from Elsevier ©. 

[372]. 

4.2. Acetylene inception 

combustion  exhaust  (Eq.  9).  Many other  small  positively  charged  hy-
drocarbons  are  produced  through  protonation  with  the  formyl  cation 
(Eq. 10). 

Under  rich  flame  conditions  the  primary  ion-producing  reactions 

Acetylene  was  initially thought  to  directly polymerise  into  carbon 
[see Table 1 (c)]. This was supported in the 20th century by Porter’s flash 
pyrolysis  experiments,  which  showed  acetylene  decomposition  to  a 
carbonaceous  material  after  photoexcitation  with  no  extractable  frac-
tions [373]. Porter suggested a radical chain mechanism where acety-
lene added to the carbon material and hydrogen was evolved (leading to 
what  we  will  call  an  amorphous  inception  mechanism).  Others  sug-
gested  acetylene  reactions  catalysed  by  C2  [65]  [see  Table  1(d)  and 
Fig. 23]. The presence of a significant amount of hydrogen in early soot 
nanoparticles  suggested  more  complex  mechanisms  were  at  play  and 
other intermediates such as PAH were important. 

4.2.1. Chemi-ions 

Calcote provided one of the first detailed reviews of various path-
ways and kinetics involved in acetylene inception [425] [see Table 1(e) 
and  Fig.  23].  He  showed  that  none  of  the  chemical  mechanisms  sug-
gested  before  the  1980s  were  rapid  enough  to  explain  nanoparticle 
formation. Instead, he proposed an ionic mechanism based on two ob-
servations:  the  correlation  between  soot  and  charged  species  in  the 
flame and the more rapid reactions between neutral species and charged 
hydrocarbon ions. 

The correlations between soot and charged species are well-known 
and  have  been  thoroughly  reviewed  by  Hayhurst  and  Jones  [112], 
Lawton  and  Weinberg  [426]  and  more  recently  by  Fialkov  [115]. 
Briefly, significant concentrations of charged species are found in flames 
(cid:0) 3) [364,375,427]. This significant charge concen-
(1015 (cid:0) 1017  ions m
tration  was  found  to  be  due  to  chemi-ionisation  reactions  and  not 
thermal ionisation [428]. Chemi-ionisation reactions rely on the ejec-
tion of an electron in a high energy reaction between an electronically 
excited molecule and a neutral species. The main reactions are [112], 

CH* + O•→CHO+ + e(cid:0)

CHO+ + H2O→CO + H3O+

CHO+ + neutral→protonated+ + CO,

(8)  

(9)  

(10)  

where the electronically excited carbyne (CH
) reacts with an oxygen 
+
radical (O•) to form the cation radical formyl (CHO
) (Eq. 8). This is a 
short-lived radical that reacts rapidly with other species including water 
to  form  the  hydronium  ion  (H3O
),  which  is  the  predominant  ion  in 

+

*

become, 

CH* + C2H2→C3H3

+ + e(cid:0)

C3H3

+ + C2H2→C5H+

5 ( + C2H2⇒PAH+)

PAH + C3H3

+→PAH++•

•C3H2

PAH + CHO+→PAH+ + CO

soot⇌soot+ + e(cid:0)

(11)  

(12)  

(13)  

(14)  

(15)  

+

where excited carbyne reacts with acetylene (C2H2) to form propenyl 
cations (C3H3
), which are longer lived as they can cyclise into cyclo-
propenyl  (Eq.  11)  [115].  PAH  are  known  to  become  charged  as  they 
grow through reactions with chemi-ions (Eq. 13 and 14) allowing them 
to be detected in molecular beam mass spectrometry [128]. Soot can 
also be charged due to thermoionisation (Eq. 15), which is most effective 
for larger soot particles that are sufficiently carbonised to have a low 
work function [115]. 

Why are these positive species not neutralised by negative charges? 
The  primary  negative  species  are  electrons,  however,  low  concentra-
tions of negatively charged species are able to be formed i.e. in equi-
librium with the electrons. 
e(cid:0) + H2O⇌H + OH(cid:0)

(16)  

e(cid:0) + C2H2⇌H + C2H(cid:0)

e(cid:0) + cPAH⇌cPAH(cid:0)

e(cid:0) + soot⇌soot(cid:0)

(17)  

(18)  

(19)  

Formation  of  negative  ions  is  through  electron attachment.  However, 
the electron affinity of most flame species is low, with most electron ion 
collisions  leading  to  elastic  scattering  and  the  majority  of  negative 
charge being carried by the electrons [112,115], explaining the lack of 
neutralisation. One exception is curved PAH that easily become nega-
tively charged by electron attachment (Eq. 18), as shown by Homann 
[128]. Soot is also able to become negatively charged through electron 
attachment [116–120]. Electron attachment (Eq. 19) and thermoioni-
sation (Eq. 15) provide a charge equilibrium for primary and aggregate 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095617J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 23. Schematics for a collection of mechanisms from Table 1.  

soot particles that is in thermal equilibrium and is described by the Saha 
equation [115]. This list of flame ion reactions is not comprehensive and 
more complete mechanisms exist for flame ion chemistry [429]. 

Returning  to  soot  formation,  Calcote  also  drew  attention  to  the 
location  of  the  ions  directly  preceding  the  formation  of  soot  nano-
particles and to the similar soot and ionic concentrations (1014  (cid:0) 1016 
(cid:0) 3), suggesting a causative link [375]. It is well-known in atmo-
ions m
spheric chemistry that reactions involving charged species and neutral 
molecules can be significantly faster than neutral-neutral reactions due 
to the ion-induced dipole forces. Calcote’s reaction mechanism was then 
based on the chemical polymerisation of C3H3
with acetylene (Eq. 13) 
[see Fig. 23(e)) [375]. Charged molecules were suggested to polymerise 

+

by acetylene addition at a rate sufficient to explain the rapid growth of 
soot  nanoparticles.  Preliminary  studies  supported  such  a  mechanism 
with positive nanoparticles up  to 8 × 103  Da being found using mass 
spectrometry  in  acetylene  flames  [109,384]  (see  Fig.  2).  Experiments 
involving electric fields and easily ionised metals were used to further 
explore such a mechanism. 

Electric fields have long been seen as evidence for an ionic mecha-
nism. Brande in 1814 showed that a diffusion flame can be deflected 
towards a negative plate within an electric field, suggesting positive ion 
carriers  [430]. The  influence on  soot  inception  is  complicated  by  the 
production of an ionic wind. The accelerated chemi-ions in the flame 
entrain air in such a way that the flame is aerated, increasing oxidation 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095618J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Table 1 
Formation mechanisms for soot nanoparticles. Schemes are shown as well as the strengths and weaknesses of each mechanism. The possibility of the mechanism being 
involved in the formation of carbonaceous nanoparticles is also suggested.  

Mechanisms 

Scheme 

Strengths 

Weaknesses 

Possible 

Disproportionation  
(a) diatomic carbon 

fuel → C2(g) + H2  → C(s)  

Presence of C2  [369].  

Cyanogen (C2H2)-oxygen flame sootless [370]. 
Soot contains hydrogen [25].  

(b) CO 

2CO → C(s) + CO2  

Boudouard reaction well-known on surfaces low 
T [371]. 

Thermodynamics do not support this past 1000 K  
[372]. 

-HC2

•
• + C2H2  → -C2HC

Suggested from photolysis of acetylene [373]. 

Presence of C2  [369], reactivity of C2H2[374].  

Too slow; does not explain aromatic sooting 
propensity [65]. 
Insufficient C2  at flame T [65].  

Acetylene inception  
(c) amorphous 

(d) C2, acetylene  

(e) chemi-ion 

(f) graphene 

(g) icospiral 

C2  + C2H2  → 2C2H + 2C2H2→ 
2C4H3  + C2  → 2C4H2+C2H  
+ + C2H2  → PAH
C3H3

+

PAH(σ•) + C2H2  → PAH  
PAH(σ•) + C2H2  → cPAH → 
icospiral  

Polyyne inception    
(h) ring condensation 

C2H2  → CnH2  → PAH → C(s)  

(i) fullerene-like 

C2H2  → CnH2  → cage (+ PAH)  

Polyaromatic inception    
(j) PAH, PAH 

PAH + PAH → PAH-PAH  

Ion-neutral reactions are fast. Ions and soot 
correlated [375]. 
Acetylene rapidly forms PAH [3,285]. 

Reactions are not much faster [376]. Neutral PAH 
grow at same rate [366]. 
Too slow for nanoparticle formation [3]. 

PAH integrate curvature [377,378], fullerenes 
present in flames [123], templated growth is fast 
[379], spirals and onions observed in HRTEM  
[380,381]. 

Many polyynes in the flame [165], 
thermodynamically stable at high T [382]. 
Fullerenes present in flames [123]. High 
pressure acetylene pyrolysis simulations [385]. 

Too slow [288]. Closure into fullerenes is more 
likely [128]. 

Rigid unlikely to cyclise [383]. Radical-induced 
fragmentation limits growth [384]. 
Radical-induced fragmentation limits growth  
[384], fullerenes are formed from aromatic 
species in flames [128]. 

PAH most stable, resistant to radical-induced 
fragmentation, so high conc. [3,295], curved 
PAH were also suggested [386]. 

Edges are unreactive in pericondensed PAH  
[387]. 

(k) aryl, PAH(6) 

PAH(σ•) + PAH(6) → PAH-PAH   Hydrogen abstraction generates many σ radicals  

[31].  

(l) aryl, aryl 

PAH(σ•) + PAH(σ•) → PAH- 
PAH  

Hydrogen abstraction generates many σ radicals  
[31], strong bonds formed [388].  

(m) 

PAH-PAH → PAH  

cyclodehydrogenation 

(n) pentaring, pentaring 

(o) aryl, pentaring 

(AALH) 

PAH(5) + PAH(5) → PAH(5)=
(5)PAH  
PAH(σ•) + PAH(5) → PAH-(5) 
PAH  

(p) aryl, RSR (CHRCR) 

PAH(π•) + PAH(σ•) → PAH- 
PAH(π•)  

(q) aryne 

PAH(σ•) → PAH(2σ•) + PAH → 
PAH-PAH  

(r) furans 

PAH(σ•) + O

• + PAH → Furan  

Ring condensation rapid at flame temperature  
[361] reduces impact of radical-induced 
fragmentation. 
Pentaring more reactive than 6-mem ring [389]. 

Pentaring more reactive than 6-mem ring [90]. 

π and σ-radicals are present in flames [31,303]. 
Reaction easily lose H to regenerate π-radical  
[21].  

Strong binding energy to PAH [390,391]. 

Furan-like PAH found in some flames [393]. 
Oxygen can enhance soot formation [394]. 

Requires large number of radicals for creating 
σ-radicals [7], prone to radical-induced 
fragmentation [3]. Low collision efficiency [388].  

Requires large number of radicals for creating 
σ-radicals [7]. Low conc. and collision efficiency  
[388].  

Slow as relies on the initial crosslinking of aryl 
radicals (see above). 

Symmetry forbidden [2+2] pericyclic reaction 
unstable [389]. 

Requires large number of radicals for creating 
σ-radicals [7]. Prone to radical-induced 
fragmentation.  
Conc. of odd number PAH (likely to be π-radicals) 
not reduced [303]. Radical-induced 
fragmentation likely to compete.  

Requires two H-abstraction the second having a 
significant barrier [392], unlikely due to 
concentrations of H and PAH(σ•) [31].  

Large oxygen rich PAH not found in most flames  
[128,395]. Insignificant oxygen content has been 
found in early soot particles [142]. Prone to 
thermal and radical-induced fragmentation  
[396]. 

Aliphatics are found to increase later in the flame  
[400,401]. Prone to radical-induced 
fragmentation [246], condensible tar can be 
removed with fast sampling [402]. 
Dimerisation not possible <650 Da [7,105,106].  

Enhancement is minor ≈2.5 kcal/mol [404].  

Some vapours are light emitting  [397]. 
Condensible tar is seen in thermophoretic 
samples from diffusion flames [398,399]. 

Irreversible dimerisation describes soot particle 
number [72]. Internal rotors improve stability  
[387]. 
Evidence from IR spectroscopy [403]. Seen in 
HR-AFM [334]. Improves clustering [404]. 

Physical nucleation    
(s) aliphatic polymer 

Fuel → polymer → [polymer]n  

(t) fPAH 

fPAH → [fPAH]n  

(u) aliphatic chains 

(v) aromatic polymer 

(w) penta-linked (APLH) 

(x) cPAH 

(y) ion, fPAH 

PAH + aliphatic → ∼PAH∼ → 
[∼PAH∼]n  
Fuel → aromatics → polymer → 
[polymer]n  

(5)PAH(σ•) + (5)PAH → PAH 
(5)=(5)PAH  
cPAH → [cPAH]n  

Large polymers are able to condense [134,405]. 
Large polymer can cluster more effectively  
[406], extension of polyaromatic routes. 
Imaged HR-AFM [334], provides planar species  
[408] 

Prone to radical-induced fragmentation, 
aromatically linked PAH have lower dimerisation 
propensity than fPAH [406,407]. 
Unlikely for (5)PAH(σ•) to react with pentaring, 
prone to radical-induced fragmentation.  

van der Waals interactions [109]. Dipole-dipole 
interactions improve clustering [24,353]. 
Long range interactions [409]. 

Dimerisation energy similar to fPAH i.e. too low  
[353]. 
Low binding energies [410]. 

(continued on next page) 

N 

N 

N 

N 

N 

N 

N 

N 

N 

N 

Y 

Y 

Y 

N 

Y 

Y 

Y 

Y 

N 

N 

N 

Y 

Y 

N 

N 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095619J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Table 1 (continued ) 

Mechanisms 

Scheme 

Strengths 

Weaknesses 

Possible 

(z) ion, cPAH 

fPAH + C3H3
fPAH → cPAH + C3H3
[cPAH]

+ → [PAH]n
+ → 

+

+
n  

Long range strong interactions [24,353]. 

Limited to small clusters [24]. 

Physically stabilised soot inception    
(aa) zipper mechanism 

fPAH-fPAH → cPAH  

(bb) internal rotors 

(cc) aliphatic, bridge- 
linked (CH2-ABLH)  

(dd) acetylene bridge- 
linked (C2H2-ABLH)  

(ee) O2, bridge-linked 

(O2-ABLH)  

[PAH(σ•),PAH(5)]* → PAH- 
PAH  

PAH(π•) + PAH(π•) → PAH- 
(CH2)m-PAH  
PAH(π•) + PAH(σ•) + C2H2  → 
PAH-C2H2-PAH  
PAH(π•) + O2  + PAH → PAH- 
O2-PAH  

(ff) excimer 

PAH* + PAH → (PAH,PAH)*  

(gg) multicentre-linked 
(pancake) (AMLH) 

(hh) zig-zag-linked 

(AZLH) 

PAH(deloc.π•) + PAH 
(deloc.π•)→ PAH≡PAH  
2diradicaloid → 
diradicaloid=diradicaloid  

(ii) rim-linked (ARLH) 

PAH(loc.π•) + PAH(π•)/(5)PAH 
→ PAH-PAH  

Suggested for fullerene formation [109,128, 
386]. 
Increase interaction time for polyaromatic 
reactions [9,411], bound internal rotors for 
large PAH [106]. 
Allows stacking and bonding [134,404]. Mass 
spectrometric evidence in some flames [358]. 
Acetylene is abundant and π-radicals have also 
been detected [334], stable complex [412].  

Oxygen is found to enhance soot formation in 
some flames [93], binding energies are strong  
[413]. 

Presence of fluorescence in soot forming region  
[414], excimers formed with stacked PAH  
[415]. LIF gives long duration fluorescence 
supporting excimers [180,181]. 
Many π-radicals present [334,417], multicentre 
bonds allowing stacking [418,419].  

Long acenes have large dimerisation energies [7, 
421], large PAH with zig-zag edges can be 
open-shell singlet multiradicals [422,423]. 
Many π-radicals present [334,417]. Strong 
bonding and less prone to radical-induced 
fragmentation [353].  

Y 

N 

Y 

Y 

Y 

N 

N 

Y 

Aryl-linked aromatics cannot stack. 

Aryl-radical collision did not reveal effect for 
small PAH [388]. 

Prone to radical-induced fragmentation [246], 
high H/C ratio  

Prone to radical-induced fragmentation [246], 
polymerisation mechanism unclear. 

Insignificant oxygen content has been found in 
early soot nanoparticles [142]. Prone to 
radical-induced fragmentation [246], 
polymerisation mechanism unclear. 
Weak interactions over nanoseconds [181], can 
only stabilise a dimer, trimers weakly bound  
[416]. 

Low interaction energy [353,419,420], 
polymerisation mechanism unclear. 

Acenes fragment or rearrange into fPAH [7,357]. 

Y 

Unknown concentrations of PAH(loc.π•) and 
collision efficiencies.  

Y  

and thereby reducing soot formation. Weinberg and Place were the first 
to realise that a counterflow diffusion flame would allow for the ionic 
wind to have no impact on the aeration of the flame [431]. Counterflow 
flames provide a flame front nearly perpendicular to the flow field. An 
electric field applied across the burner provides an ionic wind, which 
merely shifts the stagnation surface. Soot’s residence time in the flame 

was found to be reduced, as was the size of the primary particles. Fig. 24 
shows the significant impact of the electric field on the formation of soot, 
recently measured using laser induced incandescence (LII) as well as the 
aromatic species and the hydroxyl radical using laser induced fluores-
cence (LIF) [432]. 

The  application  of  the  electric  field  shifts  the  reaction  zone, 

Fig. 24. Counterflow diffusion flame with fuel C2H4  injected from the bottom mixing with the oxidant O2/N2  injected from the top. The panels show without (top) 
and with (bottom) an electric potential difference of 1 kV applied. Luminous carbon particulates measured with LII disappear from the flame upon application of the 
field (from Park et al. [432]; used with permission from Taylor & Francis ©). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095620J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

providing some quenching of the production of aromatic. However, the 
impact  on  soot  formation  is  more  pronounced  with  the  complete 
removal of soot. This effect is most pronounced when the electric field is 
established  in  such  a  way  that  shifts  the  chemi-ions  formed  in  the 
chemiluminescence  zone  of  the  flame  into  the  soot-forming  region, 
increasing  the  charge  present  during  soot  formation  [115].  Weinberg 
suggested that this reduces soot formation through the attachment of 
cations to soot particles; 

soot + C3H3

+⇌soot+ + C2H2 + H•.

(20) 

This charge attachment reduces the coagulation efficiency of soot as 
an excess of positive charge increases the repulsion between soot pri-
mary  particles.  The  size  reduction  was  then  initially  attributed  to  a 
reduction  in  the  residence  time  of  the  charged  soot  in  the  flame.  By 
tuning  the  direct  current  (DC)  electric  field  strength,  these  positively 
charged soot particles were held in the soot forming region, allowing 
them to grow to hundreds of nanometres in size. Weinberg suggested 
that only soot particles larger than 9 nm are able to become charged due 
to  charge  attachment  as  in  Eq.  20  [426].  However,  as  has  been 
mentioned,  smaller  charged  soot  particles  were  also  observed  as  the 
resolution of particle mass analysers improved [109]. Furthermore, the 
electric field uniformly reduces all soot primary particles’ diameters, not 
only the charged soot, indicating that charged and neutral soot forma-
tion is linked [115]. Using DC electric fields to explore the impact of 
ionic soot mechanisms is challenging. The flow fields can be modified 
through ionic winds and chemi-ions can shift within the flame, which 
makes  distinguishing  the  impact  on  soot  nanoparticle  formation  and 
soot aggregation difficult to decouple. Alternating current electric fields 
have also shown an impact on soot nanoparticle formation, causing soot 
emissions  to  increase  or  decrease  depending  on  the  frequency  and 
voltages  used  [433].  These  results  were  interpreted  as  primarily 
impacting soot nanoparticle formation. 

Addition  of  easily  ionised  metals  to  flames  provides  a  further  op-
portunity  to  explore  ionic  aspects  of  soot  formation.  They  have  long 
been  studied  as  anti-smoke  additives  to  diesel  engines  [434]  and  in 
polystyrene combustion have been shown to reduce soot emissions by 
50–90% [435]. These metals increase the ionic concentrations through a 
variety of processes and reactions: 

M + OH*→MOH+ + e(cid:0)

(25)  

Thermal ionisation (Eq. 21) is the first mechanism considered for alkali 
metals as they possess a low ionisation potential. Ashton and Hayhurst 
found the rate of thermoionisation in a hydrogen flame to be determined 
(cid:0) 9T1/2exp( (cid:0) EI /RT), 
by  the Saha  equation to be k = (9.9 ± 2.7) × 10
where  EI  is  the  ionisation  energy  [436],  with  the  ionisation  energy 
decreasing down the periodic table. Therefore, larger alkali metals are 
expected to be more completely ionised in flames. Experimentally, the 
ionisation effect can be less pronounced as seen in Fig. 25 where ionic 
concentrations are measured in a premixed flame aspirated with water 
and alkali metal salts [437]. 

The  delayed  increase  in  the  charge  concentration  for  most  alkali 
metals in this flame was explained as being due to the high ionisation 
potential  of  these  species.  The  charging  later  in  the  flame  when  the 
temperature is lower was suggested to be due to charge transfer from 
hydronium ions (Eq. 22). This late charging is thought to primarily in-
fluence coagulation. In this case, charge transfer to soot increases the 
fraction of positively charged soot primary particles (Eq. 24). This re-
duces the coagulation efficiency due to electrostatic repulsion, produc-
ing less aggregated primary particles that are more easily oxidised. A 
partially premixed coflow ethylene flame (ϕ = 2.27) probed by small 
angle X-ray diffraction indicates that the size of primary particles does 
not  change  significantly  for  potassium  addition  [438].  However,  in  a 
different flame (premixed ethylene/air flame on a modified PerkinElmer 
burner  ϕ = 2.6)  potassium  has  been  found  to  reduce  the  size  of  the 
primary particles [439]. Another complication in interpreting these re-
sults is the catalytic effects of alkali metals. Potassium has been found to 
reduce the mass of soot as demonstrated by experiments that added the 
potassium further downstream where coagulation has already occurred, 
finding  a  decrease  in  soot  emissions  from  improved  oxidation  [440]. 
Recent X-ray absorption spectroscopy supports a “classic catalytic role of 
activating O2  into reactive oxygen species, with the mobility of K2CO3 
facilitating the transport of these species to immobilised soot particles” 
[441].  Similar  challenges  exist  for  interpreting  the  role  of  alkaline 
metals such as Ba, Ca, etc., which are known to form cations with excited 
hydroxyl  (Eq.  25)  and  catalytically  produce  the  aggressive  hydroxyl 
oxidant [115]. 

M⇌M+ + e(cid:0)

H3O+ + M→H2O + M+ + H

C3H3

+ + M→H2O + M+ + H

soot + M+→soot+ + M

(21)  

(22)  

(23)  

(24)  

+

Cesium  provided  the  most  insight  on  the  impact  of  ions  on  soot 
formation. It has a low ionisation potential and leads to a considerable 
increase in the ionic concentration in the soot-forming region of most 
flames [437], as seen in Fig. 25. In the mentioned study, a decrease in 
the chemi-ion corresponding to C3H3
was found, indicating that the 
metal was able to be charged through charge transfer according to Eq. 
23, and was suggested to support a chemical mechanism for soot for-
mation (Eq. 12). The reduction in soot was then explained by Calcote as 
being due to the reduction in the number of nuclei chemically grown 
from C3H3
[375]. However, in situ small angle X-ray diffraction using 
synchrotron light sources has recently found that the addition of cesium 
into an ethylene flame doubles the concentration of the smallest carbon 
nanoparticles [438], which  suggests that cesium promotes  soot nano-
particle formation. This would indicate a different mechanism for the 
soot reduction, one which is more in line with that suggested by Howard 
and Kausch [442] and Bonczyk [443]. In their proposed mechanisms, 
the ions play a stabilising role for nuclei, producing large numbers of 
smaller carbon particles with increased surface area allowing for their 
rapid oxidation and destruction and leading to less soot. 

+

Fig. 25. Ionisation signal with different metals added to fuel rich flames [437]. 
Used with permission from Elsevier ©. 

Other significant critiques arose for the chemical ionic mechanism. 
Firstly, there are a number of soot-producing systems that have insuf-
ficient ion concentration such as benzene flames, shocktube and pyrol-
ysis experiments [2]. Secondly, the molecular beam mass spectrometry 
of larger PAH found that the growth rates of charged and neutral aro-
matic  molecules  were  similar  [366].  While  reaction  rates  can  be 
enhanced in atmospheric chemistry for ions at room temperature, the 
high  temperatures  found  in  flames  provide  thermal  energies  that 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095621J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

overwhelm  any  ion  induced-dipole  enhancement  [376].  The  HACA 
mechanism was able to explain the growth of pericondensed aromatic 
molecules  under  flame  conditions  [3].  We  will  return  to  ion-induced 
nucleation  mechanisms  in  the  context  of  physical  nucleation  later  in 
this review. 

4.2.2. Graphene 

Graphene is a 2D layer of hexagonally arranged carbon atoms. In the 
context of this review nanoparticle formation is considered growth of a 
PAH towards the graphene limit (large PAH with hundreds of carbon 
atoms) [see Table 1(f)  and Fig. 23] [115]. This is  envisaged to occur 
through the HACA mechanism reported earlier. It is clear, however, that 
while this mechanism can explain the formation of small aromatics it 
cannot explain the rapid formation of soot nanoparticles [3]. There is an 
exception for low pressure premixed acetylene oxygen flames in which 
the conditions can be tuned to produce large flat graphene structures 
[366].  This  is  of  considerable  interest  for  the  gas  phase  synthesis  of 
graphene for material and electronic applications. Most of the studies 
have focused on plasma reactors using low sooting fuels, such as alco-
hols,  to  produce  graphene  in  the  gas  phase  at  atmospheric  pressure 
[444–446]. 

4.2.3.

Icospiral 

The discovery of fullerenes by Kroto, Curl and Smalley in 1985 [122] 
led to a number of new proposed mechanisms for soot formation [447]. 
The first was that buckminsterfullerene C60  could act as the nuclei for 
soot formation, an idea supported by their detection in some particular 
flames [123]. However, the concentration of C60 was found to be too low 
in  atmospheric  flames  to  be  critical  for  soot  formation  [128,340].  A 
second suggestion was that an aromatic species was formed that then 
curved onto itself like a nautilus shell [379] [see Table 1(g) and Fig. 23]. 
This  geometry  (the  icospiral)  is  achieved  by  two  screw  dislocations 
allowing  for  the  fullerene  layers  to  be  wound  together  (see  Fig.  26). 
Evidence  came  from  electron  micrographs  of  soot  and  carbon  black 
particles,  where  closed  and  spiral  fringes  indicated  such  an  icospiral 
seed [380,381]. These early electron micrographs were often formed by 
strong  electron  annealing  that  allowed  for  the  fringes  to  be  clearly 
imaged.  Such  annealing  is  known  to  convert  many  zero-dimensional 
carbon  materials  such  as  nanodiamond  into  fullerene-like  carbon  on-
ions [448], suggesting these structures were formed during the electron 
irradiation. 

The  icospiral  geometry  was  suggested  to  allow  for  a  templated 
growth process, which is known to be rapid and the predominant growth 
mechanism in crystals [450]. Templated HACA growth of a small aro-
matic on a larger aromatic structure has recently been studied compu-
tationally. Minimal, if any, impact at flame temperatures was found for 
templated  HACA  growth  due  to  the  weak  dispersion  forces  involved 
between  acetylene  and  graphene  [451].  Some  other  recent  work  on 

curved aromatics has shown that HACA type growth can be enhanced 
due to curvature integration [452]. While this is of considerable interest, 
curvature has also been found to modify the rate of oxidation, in most 
cases  increasing  it  [351,453].  Therefore,  more  work  is  required  to 
determine the impact that curvature has on PAH growth. Nevertheless, 
the  fraction  of  hydrogen  in  early  soot  and  the  molecular  beam  mass 
spectrometry support the view that PAH growth does not extend past 
1000 Da in most sooting flames, which would be required for an ico-
spiral [288]. 

In summary, acetylene is critical for PAH formation and therefore 
indirectly  contributes  to  soot  nanoparticle  formation.  However,  the 
HACA  mechanism  is  too  slow  to  explain  soot  nanoparticle  formation 
through chemi-ions, graphene or icospirals due to weak enhancements 
to PAH growth from ionic, curvature or templating effects. 

4.3. Polyyne inception 

The  first  molecular  beam  mass  spectrometry  from  within  flames 
revealed significant concentrations of polyynes, suggesting they could 
be  potential  precursors  to  soot  nanoparticles  [165].  The  first  kinetic 
mechanism developed focused on the stability of polyynes that are more 
thermodynamically  stable  than pericondensed aromatic hydrocarbons 
at  high  temperatures  (> 2000  K)  and  suggested  a  ring  condensation 
where  polyynes  react  to  form  PAH  species  [382]  [see  Table  1(h)]. 
Recent  molecular  beam  Raman  analysis  also  confirms  the  significant 
concentration of polyynes present in soot forming flames [454]. How-
ever, mass spectrometry showed that the growth of these species was not 
found to extend past 150 Da [128,165]. This is because they are prone to 
degrade  in  flame  environments  [9].  Hydrogen  addition  to  growing 
polyynes leads to radical-induced fragmentation such as, 

H (cid:0) C ≡ C (cid:0) C ≡ C (cid:0) H + H• → H(cid:0) •C = CH (cid:0) C ≡ C (cid:0) H

→ H (cid:0) C ≡ C (cid:0) H+•C ≡ C (cid:0) H,

where the hydrogen addition leads to a radical that fragments through a 
β-scission,  breaking  up  the  chain  [9].  Analysis  of  polyynes  in  partial 
equilibrium with hydrogen radicals and H2 supported a limit to polyyne 
growth of CmH2, m< 16 [384,455]. Long polyynes are unlikely to cyclise 
into PAH due to their high rigidity [383] and are more likely to degrade 
to acetylene and C4 species that cyclise into aromatics [10]. 

Recently a range of reactive molecular dynamics simulations have 
suggested a fullerene-like polyyne mechanism [385,456,457], reminis-
cent  of  fullerene  cage  formation,  which  was  explored  using  similar 
methods  [458]  [see  Table  1(i)  and  Fig.  23].  In  simulations  involving 
highly concentrated mixtures of acetylene and other fuels (0.1 g/cm3), 
and  extreme  temperatures  (2000–3000  K),  large  fullerene-like  struc-
tures were observed [385,456,457]. These extreme temperatures led to 
C-H  bonds  breaking  and  a  large  number  of  radicals.  These  radicals 

Fig. 26. Icospiral growth as envisaged by Kroto [449]. Used with permission from Elsevier ©.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095622J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

quickly  react  in  these  high  density  simulations  forming  long  polyyne 
chains that condense into cage structures. As mentioned, such growth of 
long polyynes is not observed in hydrocarbon flames. The H /C ratio of 
early  soot  particles  of  0.4–0.7  is  also  too  high  compared  with  what 
would  be  expected  from  a  fullerene-like  polyyne  mechanism.  Careful 
reactive  molecular  dynamics  of  benzene  pyrolysis  showed  the  initial 
formation  of  aromatic  species  [459,460]  and  only  after  loss  of  all 
hydrogen  atoms  were  fullerene-like  cages  able  to  form.  This  result 
matches  what  is  observed  in  the  negative  mass  spectrum  during  aro-
matic to fullerene transformations [128,338,339]. 

The  discussion  of  polyynes  leads  us  to  recall  the  comment  from 

Donnet, Bansal and Wang from 1993 [108], 

“...the presence of a particular species is not sufficient proof that it is 
involved in soot formation. A species may be present because it is not 
reactive.” 

It also reminds us that a soot mechanism must take into account not 
only the construction towards soot nanoparticles (forward reactions) but 
also the destruction of the growing species (reverse reactions). 

4.4. Polyaromatic inception 

Some of the first to discuss a polyaromatic inception were perhaps 
Rummel and Veh [461] in 1941, when they suggested that moderately 
sized PAH molecules react to form soot. These species had by then been 
extracted  from  sooting flames.  These  suggestions  were  revived  in  the 
discussion of meteoric carbon [462] and nanoorganic carbon in flames 
in the 1990s [170]. 

We  have  already  mentioned  that  as  PAH  grow  in  the  harsh  envi-
ronment  within  flames  they  form  and  fragment  producing  many  sta-
bliomers  (highly  pericondensed  aromatics)  [295],  which  have  low 
reactivity  towards  each  other  [see  Table  1(j)].  Therefore,  most  poly-
aromatic inception mechanisms rely on a radical species recombining 
with other radicals or crosslinking with reactive PAHs. 

Experimental evidence for such a mechanism historically came from 
the  significant  increase  in  soot  production  following  the  addition  of 
chlorine,  which  increased  the  aryl-radical  [463]  and  aromer  concen-
trations [128]. Since then, crosslinked species have been directly imaged 
in HR-AFM strongly suggesting crosslinking (see Fig. 1) [22]. Indirect 
evidence has also been provided from the mechanical hardness of pri-
mary soot particles measured with in situ nanoindentation HRTEM ex-
periments [464]. These experiments combined with reactive molecular 
dynamics simulations suggested 2–3 crosslinks per aromatic molecule to 
provide the hardness values measured [465,466]. 

4.4.1. Aryl-linked (AALH) 

Palmer and  Cullis suggested that the abstraction of an edge-based 
hydrogen  from  a  PAH  produces  an  aryl-type  σ-radical  able  to  react 
with highly pericondensed PAH containing hexagonal rings (PAH(6)) – 
called aryl, PAH(6) polyaromatic inception [see Table 1(k)]. This fol-
lows the well-known pyrolysis reactions of aromatics. Benzene pyroly-
sis, for example, will yield biphenyl with subsequent phenyl additions 
giving triphenylene, which involves cyclodehydrogenation [see Table 1 
(m)]  [360].  Unless  subsequent  cyclodehydrogenation  takes  place  the 
phenyl  addition  of  an  aromatic  ring  is  prone  to  radical-induced  frag-
mentation  [467];  for  example,  bond  energies  of  only  (cid:0) 20  to  (cid:0) 23 
kcal/mol  are  found  for  the  hydrogenated  biphenyl/phenyl-benzene 
complex  [468,469].  Therefore,  soot  mechanisms  involving  the  reac-
tion between σ-radicals and highly aromatic PAH were not considered to 
be thermally stable in the flame  under radical-induced  fragmentation 
[3]. However, in pyrolysis systems operating at lower temperatures the 
aryl, PAH(6) inception appears to be critical for the formation of PAH 
and possibly carbonaceous nanoparticles [470,471]. 

As the aromatic network increases in size, so does the concentration 
of σ-radicals. This in turn heightens the chance of the aryl, aryl poly-

.

aromatic  inception  mechanism  occurring  [see  Table  1(l)].  Howard 
calculated that PAH ≈ 600 Da in partial equilibrium with H
/H2  would 
each  possess  1–6  σ-radicals  [31].  However,  a  reactive  molecular  dy-
namics study of colliding aryl, aryl PAH found collision efficiencies one 
to two orders of magnitude lower than those required for nanoparticle 
formation as discussed [388]. Some other reactive molecular dynamics 
studies  have  suggested  rapid  clustering of  PAH  radicals  with  close  to 
unity  CE  [472,473].  However,  the  high  densities  of  soot  precursor 
molecules  used,  0.2  g/cm3,  significantly  enhanced  the  clustering, 
overshadowing the importance of fragmentation in flames where PAH 
(cid:0) 6  g/cm3  [115]. Furthermore, high tempera-
densities are closer to 10
tures (2000–2500 K) have often been used to speed up these simulations, 
leading to direct hydrogen loss from PAH edges. This does not occur, at 
any significant rate, at flame temperatures without a radical abstraction, 
which means that the number of radicals in these simulations is much 
higher than in the flame itself [472,473]. Mao et al. demonstrated the 
importance  of temperature in reactive molecular  dynamics [474]. No 
clustering  was  seen  at  2000  K  for  PCAH  such  as  coronene,  however 
increasing the temperature to 2500 K led to hydrogen loss and chemical 
inception  [474].  Chemical  inception  has  been  suggested  at  2000  K  if 
nickel is added [475]. However, even in combustion systems with large 
amounts  of  metals  present,  such  as  diesel  engines,  small  amounts  of 
metals are found in the soot suggesting no critical role of metals in soot 
formation [476]. Finally, aryl-linked hydrocarbons have been suggested 
to be prone to radical-induced fragmentation [9], and therefore many 
consider cyclodehydrogenation to be critical for the high temperature 
stability  of  these  linkages  [see  Table  1(m)]  as  was  discussed  for  the 
aromers. 

More  reactive  edges  on  PAH  molecules  than  maximally  peri-
condensed were also suggested to contribute to polyaromatic inception, 
such as rim-based pentagonal rings on acenaphalene or the 9, 10 low 
aromaticity free edge on phenanthrene [90]. While these edges are not 
able to crosslink with one another (e.g. [2+2] pericyclic reactions are 
symmetry forbidden [389]) [see Table 1(n) and Fig. 23] they have sig-
nificant reactivity with aryl σ-radical PAH [see Table 1(o) and Fig. 23 
o)]. Significant bond energies of  (cid:0) 44 kcal/mol have been calculated 
between phenyl radicals and acenapthalene crosslinks, suggesting flame 
stability [477]. However, hydrogen addition to the unsaturated carbon 
part of the crosslink would lead to its breakdown. This could be over-
come if hydrogen abstraction from the saturated carbon formed a closed 
shell  C–C  bond,  which  is  highly  stable  [478]  forming  aromatic 
aryl-linked hydrocarbons (AALH) (see Fig. 27(a)). As with the other aryl 
crosslinks a similar low collision efficiency would be expected as was 
determined for aryl, aryl crosslinks [388]. 

Another recent suggestion was a partial dehydrogenation to form a 
so-called E-bridge structure allowing the formation of 3D structures [9]. 
Evidence for such an E-bridge can be seen in the fully unsaturated dual 
pentagon species in Fig. 1 IS30  Commodo et al. [22]. 

Within an aromatic molecule π-electrons are able to form aromati-
cally  stabilised  bonds,  providing  significant  thermal  stability  within 
PAH  and  allowing  for  radical  chain  reactions  [see  Table  1(p)  and 
Fig. 23]. An odd number of π-electrons within hexagonal ring networks 
gives rise to a resonance stabilised π-radical (RSR). A mechanism where 
RSR  crosslinks  with  aryl  radicals  forms  a  strong  bond  (80  kcal/mol) 
[21]. Critically, this is rapidly further stabilised by a unimolecular loss of 
hydrogen with a barrier of only 4.5 kcal/mol. This regenerates the RSR 
and  further  reactions  with  aryl  radicals  can  occur.  The  ability  to 
regenerate the reactive radicals led to the naming of the mechanism as 
clustering  of  hydrocarbons  by  radical-chain  reactions  (CHRCR)  [see 
Table  1(r)]  and  Fig.  27(b)].  Unlike  the  mechanism  between  aryl  and 
pentarings  [see  Table  1(p)]  CHRCR  does  not  require  a  subsequent 
hydrogen  abstraction  to  produce  a  stable  single  bond  as  hydrogen  is 
instead easily lost, restoring aromaticity to the π-radical. It has also been 
suggested to operate between any unsaturated carbon species, however, 
the critical aspect is the regeneration of the RSR with hydrogen loss. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095623J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

themselves,  reactions  with  σ-radicals  were  calculated  to  form  strong 
bonds even more so than with pentaring polyaromatic inception [21]. A 
possible  answer  to  the  similar  concentration  of  even  and  odd  carbon 
fragments in flames could be inferred from the recent HR-AFM analysis 
of aromatic soot precursors [22]. Many regions of aromatic molecules 
with an odd number of carbon atoms, where one would anticipate an 
RSR to form, contained a hydrogen saturated edge carbon (most often on 
a zig-zag site). Therefore, while aromatic σ-radicals can react with RSR, 
it  is  unclear  how  hydrogen  radicals  could  terminate  these  chain  re-
actions. Hydrogen addition across the crosslink at the unsaturated car-
bon atom, or neighbouring site, could also lead to fragmentation [9]. 
Therefore, experimental evidence for this pathway is required as well as 
a full reaction mechanism that includes all pathways. A low collision 
efficiency  would  also  be  expected  for  this  mechanism,  as  with  other 
polyaromatic inception mechanisms (see Section 5.1). 

4.4.2. Arynes 

Arynes can form when two hydrogen abstractions occur from a PAH 
and  have  been  suggested  to  allow  for  PAH  crosslinking  [390]  [see 
Table 1(q)]. The simplest example is o-benzyne (1,2-didehydrobenzene 
see  Fig.  28),  where  benzene  loses  two  neighbouring  hydrogen  atoms 
[390,391]. 

There are three main resonances that describe its electronic struc-
ture; the alkyne with a triple bond, cumulene with three neighbouring 
double-bonds and the open-shell diradical. There is little contribution 
from the diradical resonance structure (given a singlet-triplet splitting of 
38 kcal/mol [479]).  A more significant diradical character, and  reac-
tivity similar to two σ-radicals, is found for meta and para-benzyne (with 
singlet-triplet  splitting  of  21  and  4  kcal/mol  respectively  [479]). 
o-benzyne is closest to the cumulene structure from NMR studies. Recent 
HR-AFM  suggest  larger  arynes  are  also  dominated  by  the  cumulene 
resonance structure, with contributions from the alkyne resonance as we 
will  see.  This  electronic  structure  leads  to  a  reduction  in  reactivity 
compared  with a  σ-radical.  However,  this  may  increase  their  concen-
tration due to their reduced susceptibility to oxidation (as with the C3 
pathway for benzene formation) or acetylene addition, making them of 
interest for polyaromatic inception [390,480]. 

o-Benzyne rapidly dimerises, like a cumulene, to form biphenylene 
possessing an anti-aromatic 4-membered ring. Flash vacuum pyrolysis of 
biphenylene and polyphenylenes show thermal rearrangements to per-
icondensed  aromatics  with  5-  and  6-membered  rings,  suggesting  this 
pathway could contribute to PAH growth [481]. It can also react like an 
alkyne through a concerted Diels-Alder cycloaddition with acenes (see 
Fig. 29). Reaction paths were computed showing a possible role for PAH 
growth  and  nanoparticle  formation  [390].  Fragmentation  barriers  of 
40–47 kcal/mol indicate these crosslinks are thermally stable in flames. 
Rates for these reactions were not computed making the route difficult 
to  compare  with  soot  formation  mechanisms.  Other  contributions  of 
o-benzyne have been suggested in the decomposition of benzyl radicals 
studied in shocktubes [482] and combinations with (C3H3) resonantly 
stabilised radicals leading to a rapid pathway to indene [483]; however, 
more  work  is  needed  to  determine  the  role  of  these  species  in  PAH 

Fig. 27. Nanoparticles suggested from chemical inception mechanisms.  

However,  such  an  increased  reactivity  for  odd  numbers  of  carbon 
atoms, most likely to be RSR, was not seen experimentally [303]. For 
this reason Homann suggested that RSR were not very reactive. While it 
is  true  that  aromatic  RSR  are  less  reactive  for  recombination  with 

Fig. 28. Kekul´e structure for o-benzyne.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095624J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 29. o-benzyne polyaromatic mechanism [390]. Used with permission from ACS ©.  

growth. 

4.4.3. Carbenes 

The concentration of these species in flames is critical for assessing 
an aryne mechanism. Phenyl – produced by one hydrogen abstraction – 
is able to undergo a unimolecular decomposition to o-benzyne with a 
barrier of some 80 kcal/mol. This large barrier makes phenyl concen-
trations significantly greater than o-benzyne in flames [484]. It was also 
found that above 1500 K, the benzyne ring breaks open and the linear 
form  of  l-C6H4  becomes  dominant  [484].  For  larger  PAH,  hydrogen 
abstraction  is  unlikely  to  provide  two  neighbouring  sites,  given  the 
average 1–6 σ-radical sites per 600 Da species as mentioned [31]. The 
other  option  for  aryne  creation  is  the  decomposition  pathway  of  the 
neighbouring  hydrogen  from  larger  σ-radical  PAH.  This  has  not  been 
explored in larger PAH but if similar barriers are seen, as for phenyl, 
then concentrations of arynes would be expected to be low. 

Finally,  o-benzyne  reacting  with  the  rim-based  pentagonal  ring  of 
acenapthalene has been shown to form a 4/5-membered ring pair that 
breaks  open  into  the  7-membered  ring  species  pleidene  [485].  This 
species and similar molecules readily dimerise through a cycloaddition 
reactions due to their diradical character [486]. These species have yet 
to be explored in the context of soot formation. 

Indirect insight into an aryne mechanism in nanoparticle formation 
can be provided by a recent exploration of the pyrolysis of coronene and 
dibenzo[a,e]pyrene [487] (see Fig. 30). 

These  two  species  have  the  same  number  of  carbon  atoms  but 
significantly different edge types: coronene possesses a more condensed 
structure with six zig-zag and six free edges while dibenzo[a,e]pyrene 
possesses nine free edges, three armchair edges and two zig-zag edges. If 
an aryne route was dominant, the species with more free edges would be 
expected  to  dimerise  more  readily,  forming  more  soot.  However, 
dibenzo[a,e]pyrene, with its numerous free edges, inhibits soot forma-
tion  compared  to  coronene  (with  more  zig-zag  edges  than  free),  sug-
gesting an aryne mechanism is not dominant. 

Carbenes are neutral species with a valence of two and two unshared 
electrons. Methylene :CH2 is the most well-known hydrocarbon carbene 
•
and is important in combustion for 
CH radical formation [488]. Car-
benes have also been shown to be important intermediates for molecular 
rearrangements of larger PAH [481]. A variety of electronic spin con-
figurations are possible for such species (see Fig. 31) [489]. For meth-
ylene, the lowest energy state is the triplet (3B1) with the singlet (1A1) 
lying 9.0 kcal/mol higher in energy [490]. 

Triplet carbenes possess high reactivity with methylene recombina-
•
CH3 a σ-radical) 
tion rates 1–2 orders of magnitude faster than methyl (
at  flame  temperatures  [491].  Carbenes  can  be  stabilised  in  the  less 
reactive  singlet  states  through  heteroatoms  [489]  or  solvation  [492], 
which can lead to reduced reactivity as seen by considerable barriers to 
dimerisation [489,493]. However, these effects are unlikely to be pre-
sent in flames due to the low concentrations of aromatics. 

Of interest for polyaromatic inception mechanisms are aryl carbenes 
(see Fig. 32). For example, phenylcarbene could be formed in a com-
bustion environment from hydrogen abstraction from benzyl, benzene 
with 
CH  radical  [494]  and  perhaps  from  carbon  atom  addition  to 
benzene in rare cases [495]. 

•

This phenylcarbene could recombine forming the bridge that will be 
discussed  in  section  4.6.  However,  thermal  rearrangement  of  phenyl-
carbene  rapidly  forms  the  more  stable  dehydrotropylium  (or  cyclo-
heptatrienylidene)  [496].  The  electronic  structure  has  yet  to  be 
confirmed  for  this  product,  however,  calculations  suggest  two  triplet 
states only 1.5 and 3.2 kcal/mol above the singlet ground state [497]. 
This indicates stabilisation through a cumulene structure as was seen for 
o-benzyne. Nevertheless, this species readily dimerises with rates yet to 
be  determined.  Further  thermal  decomposition  of  dehydrotropylium 
gives fulvenallene [496]. Fulvenallene is also known to crosslink [494]. 
At  flame  temperatures  (1500–2000  K),  even  further  fragmentation  of 
fulvenallene forms cyclopentadienylidene, another carbene [494,498]. 
Pentagonal ring containing carbenes such as cyclopentadienylidene and 

Fig. 30. Kekul´e structure for dibenzo[a,e]pyrene.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095625J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 31. Carbene electronic spin configurations. Redrawn from [489].  

crosslinking  followed  by  ring  condensation  [508]  and  there  is  some 
recent evidence from biofuel experiments that oxygen content can in-
crease PAH or soot growth under certain conditions [394]. Furan-like 
PAH are found in some flames [393] and are a significant component 
of brown carbon [188]. However, large oxygen-rich PAH have not been 
found in most flames [128,395], and jet stirred reactors [509]. Insig-
nificant oxygen content has also been found in early soot particles [142]. 
A recent comparison of molecules predicted from these oxygen cross-
linking reactions with those structures found in HR-AFM [22] indicate 
an overprediction of furan species [510] (with none found in HR-AFM), 
suggesting significant fragmentation pathways are not included [509]. 
However, oxygenated PAH are still difficult to detect and differentiate 
from  their  hydrocarbon  counterparts  and  could  be  significant  in 
oxygenated fuels [511–513]. 

In summary, many polyaromatic inception mechanisms have been 
suggested. Some have been integrated into kinetic Monte Carlo simu-
lations and have shown the ability to grow nanoparticles ≈ 2 nm in size 
[514] (see Fig. 27(a)). We will return to comparing them in the final 
section. 

Fig. 32. Kekul´e structure for aryl carbenes.  

4.5. Physical nucleation 

fluorenylidene are found to be reactive with a triplet ground state [497, 
499]  indicating  greater  reactivity  than  dehydrotropylium.  Hexagonal 
ring carbenes with odd π-electron species such as phenalenyl and zig-zag 
edges  have  been  suggested  to  dimerise  rapidly  [500].  However,  re-
activities similar to σ-radicals are predicted due to the delocalisation of 
the π-bonding system [501] as indicated by the low barriers for rotation 
[502]. For all these crosslinked carbene species rapid rearrangement to 
pericondensed species is found above 1200 K, potentially contributing to 
PAH formation [503]. 

A further option includes aromatics crosslinking through a carbene 
bridge, e.g. diphenylcarbene. It is unclear how these would form in the 
flame, however, some stabilisation and reduced reactivity of the triplet 
carbene can occur for aromatic extension of phenylcarbene providing 
decoupled localisable π-diradicals that polymerise [504,505]. We will 
return to these diradicals in Section 4.6. 

Finally,  unsaturated  (or  “free”)  carbenes  could  allow  crosslinks 
((R2)-C=C:)  e.g.  fluoren-9-ylidenemethylidene.  These  could  form  in 
flames from hydrogen abstraction e.g. 9-methylfluorene. These species 
are able to dimerise as well as add across a double bond [506], however, 
these  species  have  not  yet  been  detected  or  explored  in  gas  phase 
combustion chemistry. 

Insufficient knowledge of the rates and reaction pathways makes it 
difficult  to  consider  possible  contributions  of  carbene  mechanisms  to 
PAH growth and nanoparticle formation. We therefore did not add an 
entry to Table 1. However, the high concentration of H
radicals and H2 
in soot forming regions of the flame would suggest a small concentration 
of carbenes (as has been found from radical scavenging experiments of 
small aryl carbenes [507]). 

•

4.4.4. Furans 

Oxygen  has  been  suggested  to  allow  aromatic  species  to  crosslink 
through 5-membered oxygen heterocycles [93] [see Table 1(r)]. Pyrol-
ysis  experiments  have  demonstrated  that  aromatic  phenols  allow  for 

Frankland was perhaps the first to consider a physical nucleation or 
condensation mechanism for soot formation. Upon lighting a candle at 
the summit of Mont Blanc he noticed a significant reduction in flame 
luminosity [515]. Back at the Royal Society, he made use of air pumps to 
reproduce  this  effect  as  well  as  operate  a  candle  above  atmospheric 
pressure  finding  an  increased  flame  luminosity,  which  indicated  that 
soot  formation  was  being  inhibited  or  enhanced,  respectively.  Frank-
land’s initial suggestion that the emission of light from flames was not 
from  solid  particles  but  from  a  dense  vapour  was  quickly  disproved 
[516]. However, the strong pressure dependence of soot formation has 
long been seen as evidence for physical nucleation of hydrocarbons in 
flames. 

Recent experiments on sooting flames within high pressure chambers 
further  highlights  the  influence  of  pressure  on  soot  formation 
[517–520]. Fig. 33 reveals the increase in primary particle size of soot 
aggregates, sampled from within the pressure vessel, as the pressure was 
increased.  Such  a  strong  dependence  is  not  seen  for  kinetically 
controlled chemical pathways in soot formation [324,521], for example 
HACA growth, as they are characterised by reaction rates, which are first 
order in monomer concentration [7]. However, the significant increase 
in  particle  size  and  non-linear  increase  in  soot  volume  with  pressure 
[517,522]  suggest  condensation,  which  is  second  order  in  monomer 
concentration [3,7]. 

4.5.1. Aliphatic polymer 

Polymerisation of fuel into an aliphatic polymer that condenses [see 
Table  1(s)]  can  be  quickly  dismissed  given  the  rapid  radical-induced 
fragmentation of aliphatic fuels in flames and that no large liquid par-
ticles  are  detected  with  laser  scattering  [523].  However,  aromatic 
polymerisation  [see  Table  1(t)]  has  been  considered  in  detail  as 
mentioned in the previous section. After the influential paper of Rummel 
and Veh [461] suggesting that larger polycyclic molecules precipitate 
soot particles, Parker and Wolfhard suggested such a mechanism [524]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095626J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 33. Soot sampled from ethylene counterflow diffusion flames over a variety of pressures [519]. Used with permission from Elsevier ©.  

In their 1950 review they state, 

“Higher  hydrocarbons  are  formed  by  pyrolysis.  The  molecular 
weight  and  concentration  of  these  increase  until  the  saturation 
vapour  pressure  is  exceeded,  whereupon  condensation  occurs  and 
fine droplets are formed.” 

The  higher  hydrocarbons  they  discussed  are  crosslinked  PAH  that 
form an aromatic polymer which then condenses into a liquid droplet. 
The evaporation or thermal breakdown was proposed to be counteracted 
by carbonisation reactions. This mechanism represents a combination of 
many  mechanisms  already  discussed,  where  PAH  grow  through  the 
HACA  mechanism,  polymerise  according  to  a  polyaromatic  inception 
mechanism and then physically nucleate. Such a proposal relies there-
fore on the mechanisms preceding condensation and is subject to their 
limitations. 

Liquid halos around soot particles have been suggested to indicate a 
liquid-like  mechanism  that  subsequently  carbonises  and  forms  soot 
[398].  Recently  evidence  was  found  that  this  halo  is  most  likely  a 
sampling artifact [402,525]. Invasive sampling often involves injection 
of  a  cold  probe  onto  which  soot  particles  are  thermophoretically 
deposited [526]. Fig. 34 shows the impact of the probe’s residence time 
in the flame which  we obtained using a high speed camera. For long 
residence  times  a  liquid  halo  is  observed,  however,  upon  decreasing 
residence time the liquid halo is removed [402,525]. It was also inter-
esting to observe the evaporation of these halos if the sample was left in 
the  electron  microscope’s  vacuum  for  24  hours,  indicating  it  is  not 
persistent at flame temperatures (other insights into the electron beam 
intensities  required  to  not  cause  nanostructural  changes  are  also  re-
ported [525]). As mentioned, other non-invasive techniques (X-ray or 

optical  scattering)  confirm  that  there  is  no  evidence  for  these  large 
liquid-like droplets [523]. 

A simple explanation for this observation in the TEM and AFM is that 
during the rapid cooling from thermophoretic sampling the soot parti-
cles present in the flame act as nucleation sites for the condensation of 
aromatic  soot  precursor  molecules  present  in  the  gas  phase.  This  is 
supported by the fact that the effect is only seen in diffusion flames or 
very  rich  premixed  flames,  where  aromatic  concentrations  would  be 
high enough to enable condensation [190] (see Fig. 6 d). As mentioned 
in Section 2, these species have been previously called internally mixed 
particles where soot is mixed with brown carbons, organic carbon or tar 
and have been considered more important in turbulent flames such as 
forest  fires,  where  aromatic  species  can  escape  the  flame  front  and 
condense on soot. 

It is clear, however, that as the primary particles traverse the diffu-
sion  flame  the  coating  becomes  harder  to  remove  as  our  sampling  is 
limited in its speed [402]. In particular, just prior to coagulation of the 
primary particles into aggregates it was found to be increasingly difficult 
to sample rapidly enough to remove the halo, suggesting the aromatics 
are increasing their boiling point as they grow. Wang et al. also showed 
with infrared spectroscopy that the early soot particles are low in ali-
phatics but that these increase as they mature, which is assumed to be 
due to hydrogenation of the surface [209]. This suggests an increase in 
reactivity of the surface. However, these discussions do not principally 
concern nanoparticle formation. 

4.5.2. fPAH 

Direct physical nucleation of flat PAH species (fPAH) [see Table 1(t) 
and Fig. 23] has been, arguably, the most widely explored mechanism in 

Fig. 34. TEM images of soot sampled at 25 mm HAB from an ethylene coflow diffusion flame and different sampling times [402]. The calibration bar in the images 
corresponds to 200 nm. Used with permission from Elsevier CC-BY 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095627J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

soot nanoparticle formation. This suggestion was considered unlikely by 
Haynes and Wagner in their 1981 review given the low boiling/subli-
mation temperatures for PAH molecules [523]. While condensation was 
seen  as  unlikely,  the  evidence  for  stacked  aromatic  species  grew 
following the discovery of a green fluorescence signal in flames in the 
1980s (see Fig. 5), as mentioned in Section 2. 

Miller turned to the formation of molecular clusters and used, as a 
proxy to cluster stability, the dimerisation of PAH in flames employing 
intermolecular  potentials,  suggesting  it  could  be  possible  for  larger 
species  to  condense  [527,528].  These  results  were  extended  by  per-
forming highly accurate calculations of intermolecular energies between 
PAH and provided a new description of the intermolecular interactions, 
making  use  of  the  SAPT(DFT)  method  to  develop  the  isotropic  PAH 
anisotropic  potential  (isoPAHAP)  [529].  Experiments  confirmed  the 
accuracy  of  the  forcefield  in  describing  both  the  virial  coefficient  for 
benzene and the exfoliation energy of graphene [529]. More recently, 
scanning  tunnelling  microscopy  of  coronene  clusters  revealed  similar 
morphologies  to  isoPAHAP  clusters  compared  with  other  potentials 
[530]  (see  Fig.  35).  These  structures  also  matched  the  herringbone 
crystal structure of coronene [531]. 

Wang  developed  a  full  statistical  description  of  PAH  homodimer-
isation  using  statistical  mechanics  [7].  This  was  combined  with  the 
isoPAHAP forcefield allowing for the determination of the intermolec-
ular vibrations, νi, and intermolecular interactions, Eint, for fPAH [529]. 
The equilibrium constant for dimerisation could then be computed as; 

ΔH =

(

∑6

i=1

1
2

+

)

1
exp(hνi/kBT) (cid:0) 1

hνi (cid:0) 4kBT (cid:0) Eint,

(26)  

[
= ln

ΔS
kB

h6p
π4(8M)3/2(ekBT)4

σ2
m
σd

]

(cid:0)

)1/2

IA,dIB,dIC,d
IA,mIB,mIC,m

[

∑6

i=1

+

hνi/kBT
exp(hνi/kBT) (cid:0) 1

(cid:0)

]
ln(1 (cid:0) exp( (cid:0) hνi/kBT))

,

(

K = exp

(cid:0)

)

,

ΔH (cid:0) TΔS
kBT

(27)  

(28)  

where ΔH is the change in enthalpy, ΔS is the change in entropy, p is the 
pressure, νk  is the kth intermolecular vibrational frequency, Eint  is the 
dimer  interaction  energy,  h  is  Planck’s  constant,  kB  is  the  Boltzmann 

constant, T is the temperature, Ik,m  and Ik,d  are the moments of inertia for 
monomer and dimer respectively, for the kth principal axis of each, M is 
the monomer  mass and σm  and σd  are the symmetry  numbers for the 
monomer and dimer, respectively. Fig. 36 shows the equilibrium con-
stant of dimerisation for various sized fPAH, where K > 1 dimerisation is 
favoured  at  1  bar.  The  curves  reveal  that  species  larger  than  circum-
coronene (C54H18, 667 Da) would be required to form stable dimers at 
temperatures in the flame where soot begins to form (1500 K). 

Fig. 36 also shows collision efficiencies of fPAH, determined from 
molecular  dynamics  simulations  [106],  providing  a  more  straightfor-
ward comparison with polyaromatic inception mechanisms. A compar-
ison  is  drawn  with  collision  efficiency  to  be  required  to  explain 
experimental PAH mass spectra [533]. It is clear that insufficient colli-
sion efficiencies are found for physical nucleation of the size of species 
found to cluster in the flame at 1500 K. This analysis is consistent with a 
recent estimate of the boiling point of fPAH [534]. It was found that a 
fPAH with 60–65 carbon atoms would be required to form liquid par-
ticles at temperatures within the flame where soot forms (1450–1700 K) 
considering the low partial pressures of aromatics found in flames. 

Other  suggestions  were  made  for  the  stabilisation  of  moderately 
sized PAH clustering through activation of non-equilbrium internal ro-
tations.  In  molecular  dynamics  simulations  of  colliding  PAH  species, 
Miller  observed  orbiting  of  the  PAH  [528].  Schultz  and  Frenklach 
explored this effect using a quantum molecular dynamics approach and 
found evidence for internal rotors [387]. The establishment of internal 
rotors  were  suggested  to  remove  thermal  energy  from  intermolecular 
vibrations  between  the  clustering  PAH  reducing  fragmentation.  From 
vibrational  analysis  only  one  bound  internal  rotor  can  be  identified 
(cid:0) 1  twisting mode) [106]. In a non-equilibrium scenario it was 
(∼10 cm
estimated that at least four internal rotors would be required to provide 
a  significant  nucleation  flux  [7,9].  Experiments  on  supersonic  jets  of 
pyrene  also  confirm  the  lack  of  stability  past  its  boiling  point  [105]. 
These results suggest that non-equilibrium effects are unlikely to enable 
a physical nucleation of PAH. 

4.5.3. Aliphatic chains 

The  presence  of  aliphatic  chains  was  suggested  to  improve  the 
clustering of fPAH due to the entropic advantages of more internal de-
grees of freedom [404,535] [see Table 1(u)]. These chains have been 
observed in HR-AFM of PAH [334] (see Fig. 37). 

Metadynamics  simulations  were  employed  that  allowed  the  free 

Fig. 35. a-b) Scanning tunneling microscopy imaged clusters of coronene molecules. c-d) Shows potential orientations of the coronene molecules in these clusters 
[530]. e) Shows the computational results from clusters formed during a molecular dynamics simulation of coronene with different forcefields used [532]. Used with 
permission from Elsevier ©. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095628J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 36. (left) K as a function of temperature for pyrene, coronene, ovalene, hexabenzocoronene and circumcoronenene with 4, 7, 10, 13 and 19 rings respectively 
[106]. (right) Collision efficiency of fPAH derived from molecular dynamics simulations. Experimentally determined values by Raj et al. also shown [533]. Used with 
permission from Royal Society of Chemistry  ©. 

Fig. 37. HR-AFM image of an aliphatic chain attached to an aromatic [334]. 
Used with permission from Elsevier CC. 

energy to be directly and economically computed from molecular dy-
namics  simulations  with  guided  dynamics  [404,535].  Again,  similar 
results  were  found  for  pericondensed  PAH  but  soft  modes  could  be 
included from aliphatic chains. They were found to improve the clus-
tering  rate  but  the  collision  efficiencies  were  similar  to  the  peri-
condensed  sub-structure,  indicating  it  is  the  dispersion  interactions 
between the pericondensed structure that still govern the ability to form 
complexes at high temperature. However, for 500 Da mass species the 
chains  are  still  unable  to  provide  the  increased  intermolecular  forces 
required to allow for clustering at temperatures exceeding 1500 K. 

4.5.4. Aromatic polymer 

Evidence  for  heterogeneous  nucleation,  where  aromatic  polymers 
are  nuclei,  has  also  been  suggested  within  some  early  primary  soot 
particles  [see  Table  1(v)].  High  resolution  transmission  electron  mi-
croscopy, which is sensitive to stacked aromatic structures, has found 
disordered cores without such stacking [49,50,536–543] (see our own 
image Fig. 38 sampled with methodology from Ref. [342]). Automated 
methods to detect these regions have been developed in fringe analysis 
software [544]. This feature has been interpreted as indicating an aro-
matic  polymer  nuclei  [166].  It  should  be  mentioned  that  other  fuels 
provide early primary soot particles with significant internal fringes i.e. 
do not contain disordered nuclei [52]. 

The possibility of aromatic polymers acting as nuclei for heteroge-
neous nucleation was explored by Chung and Violi in 2011 [535]. Ful-
lerenes (C60 and C180) were used as proxies for these nanoparticles. Little 
impact on the rate of clustering was found for heterogeneous nucleation 

Fig. 38. Soot primary particle from a 10% cyclohexane doped hexane co-flow 
diffusion flame imaged with HRTEM showing disordered cores. 

of fPAH in these simulations. Classical nucleation theory would dictate 
that  the  vapour  needs  to  be  supersaturated  before  condensation  is 
possible heterogenenously [450]. Therefore, while the nuclei can reduce 
the  barrier  for  nucleation  and  therefore  increase  the  nucleation  rate, 
they cannot allow condensation of species that lack sufficient intermo-
lecular interactions to condense. 

The  condensation  of  polyaromatic  clusters  formed  via  aryl-linked 
PAH have also been suggested. Using molecular dynamics simulations, 
aryl-linked PAH were found to cluster with greater propensity than their 
monomeric  components;  however,  the  two  aromatic  planes  were  not 
coplanar,  which  significantly  reduced  physical  interactions  compared 
with  similar sized  pericondensed PAH  [406]. Therefore, for  the  same 
reason pericondensed fPAH are unable to cluster, aryl-linked PAH are 
unlikely to be able to condense until they grow to larger than 5 nm [37] 
(see Section 5.1 for full comparison). 

4.5.5. Penta-linked (APLH) 

Pentagonal ring linked aromatic species can form planar species with 
similar cluster behaviour as planar pericondensed PAH [see Table 1(w) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095629J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 39. Potential energy surface of the planar crosslinked aromatic molecule with a double bond (highlighted in yellow) (at 0 K with M06-2X/cc-pVTZ+ZPE level of 
theory) [408]. Inset shows similar species from HR-AFM [22]. Used with permission from Elsevier CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. 

and Fig. 23]. Recent HR-AFM results and theoretical studies have sug-
gested  that  these  species  form  from  planar  aromatics  crosslinked 
through  pentagonal  rings  (see  Fig.  1  IS43).  It  was  found  that  these 
species could form through a σ-radical on a rim-based pentagonal ring 
attacking  a  rim-based  pentagonal  ring  (aryl-pentaring  mechanism) 
[408] (see Fig. 39). 

If  the  pentagonal  ring  is  partially/fully  saturated  a  double  bond 
forms  between  the  two  pentagonal  rings  leading  to  a  flat  geometry. 
Metadynamics  studies  showed  this  crosslinked  molecule  to  have  a 
similar  free  energy  profile  to  a  similar  sized  pericondensed  species. 
Molecular  dynamics  confirmed  that  the  planar  penta-linked  species 
clusters  at  a  similar  rate  to  a  pericondensed  molecule.  Species  1d  in 
Fig. 39 will be discussed later as it is a localised π-radical able to bond 
and stack. 

Another planar penta-linked aromatic crosslink could be formed by a 
σ-radical on a 6-membered ring attacking a rim-based pentagonal ring. 
Frenklach and Mebel recently showed this species can dehydrogenate to 
form an E-bridge structure, as mentioned [9]. Further dehydrogenation 
could lead to a planar structure (see Fig. 1 IS43). However, as with fPAH 
these  penta-linked  species  are  unlikely  to  possess  the  interaction  en-
ergies to condense at temperatures within the flame where nanoparticles 
form. 

4.5.6. cPAH 

Homann was one of the first to consider that curved polycyclic ar-
omatic hydrocarbons (cPAH) could cluster and lead to soot formation 
[109] [see Table 1(x) and Fig. 23]. The discovery of fullerenes in flames 
helped support such a suggestion [123,128] as well as the extraction and 
detection  of  corannulene  in  flame  products  [337].  Evidence  was  also 

provided from species found in the negative ion mass spectrometry that 
led  to  fullerene  formation  [128],  cPAH  being  more  likely  to  form 
negative species due to their high electron affinity [336]. More recently, 
high resolution transmission electron microscopy suggested a significant 
fraction of early soot nanoparticles contain cPAH [24,341]. 

Fig.  40  shows  the  electrostatic  potential  surrounding  water,  cor-
annulene  (a  cPAH)  and  coronene  (a  fPAH).  Corannulene  possesses  a 
similar  dipole  moment  to  water,  however,  it  still  has  a  similar  local 
quadrupolar charge distribution to coronene. This polarity is due to the 
flexoelectric  effect  [545],  where  pyramidalisation  of  sp2  carbon  net-
works rehybridises the π-bonding network [546–548]. Small PAH were 
unable  to  curve  until  at  least  six  rings  are  present  with  an  internal 
5-membered  ring  being  critical  [24].  For  the  size  of  species  found  in 
early soot nanoparticles this dipole is considerable (between 4–6.5 D) 
[545].  These  larger  cPAH  (>11  rings,  ≈ 450  Da)  were  found  to  be 
persistently polar at flame temperatures and did not invert at tempera-
tures within the flame where soot forms [549]. 

How  does  this  electric  dipole  moment  possibly  improve  the  clus-
tering of cPAH compared with fPAH [24]. Comparing the dimerisation 
energy  between  cPAH  and  fPAH  we  found  little  difference  for  1–2 
pentagonal rings with a significant decrease in binding energy for cPAH 
with  ≥3  internal  pentagonal  rings  [24].  High  accuracy  calculations 
(SAPT(DFT)) revealed that while the dipole moment does enhance the 
binding  energy,  the  steric  issues  of  stacking  cPAH  led  to  reduced 
dispersion interactions [24]. A new forcefield, curPAHIP, was developed 
to  see  whether  this  result  translated  into  an  enhanced  clustering rate 
[550].  While  collision  efficiencies  were  greater  for  corannulene 
compared  with  coronene,  the  similar  binding  energy  meant  little  dif-
ference  was  found  in  clustering  behaviours.  Thus,  suggesting  cPAH 

Fig. 40. Cross section of the electric potential, (+) blue, (-) red for water, corannulene and coronene [353]. Used with permission form Elsevier ©/  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095630J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

nucleation is as unlikely as fPAH nucleation. Finally, for heterogeneous 
clusters  of  cPAH  some  enhanced  interactions  were  found  where  the 
smaller cPAH fits into the concave side of larger cPAH, however, this 
enhancement was not found to be significant [551]. 

4.5.7.

ion, fPAH 

Frenklach  and  Wang  in  1991  were  among  the  first  to  suggest  the 
possibility  of  an  ion-induced  physical  nucleation  mechanism  in  soot 
formation [68] [see Table 1(y)]. Experimental work on cationic benzene 
dimers had found an enhanced binding energy increasing from - 0.5–3 
to - 17 kcal/mol for the neutral to the cationic dimer, respectively [552, 
553]. More recently, computational work on larger PAH cationic dimers 
found binding energies in the range - 15–20 kcal/mol for PAH with 4–5 
rings  [MP2/6-31G(d)]  [554].  Larger  clusters  were  recently  explored 
using basin hopping and density functional tight binding methods [555]. 
More compact clusters were formed with a positively charged dimer or 
trimer in the centre, indicating that the enhanced binding energy is only 
reserved the a few molecules in the cluster adjacent to the ion. Cation-π 
interactions are more significant with small cations such as metals or 
flame ions. Binding energies to benzene of - 108 and - 151 kcal/mol were 
+

, respectively [409], while the 1 + cation Na

found for Mg
was found to be weakly bound with - 21 kcal/mol. Binding energies of 
larger  PAH  (1–4  rings)  with  more  flame  relevant  chemi-ions  were 
recently  computed  [410]. Binding  energies  of  -  30–60,  -  18–27  and  - 
+
+
26–32  kcal/mol  were  found  between  CHO
, 
respectively. Chen and Wang noted; 

and Fe2+

and  H3O

,  c-C3H3

+

2+

“...the cation-enhanced binding remains to be too weak to impact the 
gas-phase PAH chemistry or the clustering of PAHs leading to soot 
nucleation.” 

4.5.8.

ion, cPAH 

Curved PAH, unlike planar PAH, have considerable interactions with 
ions due to their polarity. This could lead to an ion-induced nucleation 
mechanism [see Table 1(z) and Fig. 23]. cPAH–ion interactions are well- 
known [556] and have been used in lithium ion storage [557]. We have 
previously mentioned the large number of ions present in flames from 
+
chemi-ionisation reactions. In 2018, a binding energy between c-C3H3
and a 15 ring cPAH with two pentagonal rings were computed to be - 
40.6 kcal/mol [24], suggesting important interactions for soot forma-
tion. Quantum ab initio molecular dynamics revealed this complex to be 
stably bound at 1500 K over 2 ps [549]. Molecular dynamics simulations 
of corannulene clustering revealed a near doubling of the clustering rate 
with ions present, while no difference was found for coronene clustering 
in the presence of ions [550] (see Fig. 41). However, only a couple of 
cPAH can be bound to an ion with further growth requiring supersatu-
ration  of  the  vapour  of  cPAH  from  classical  nucleation  theory  [450], 
which we have previously demonstrated as being unlikely. 

Such  a  mechanism  could  perhaps  explain  the  positively  charged 
experimentally nanoparticle mode, mentioned in Section 2.1, as corre-
lations  have  been  found  with  large  aromer  species  in  low  pressure 
acetylene flames and this mode [558]. Larger nanoparticles are found to 
take on a charge distribution given by thermal equilibrium [121,559]. 
However, the speed with which they acquire their charge indicates it is 
not  from  thermal  ionisation  but  from  coagulation  of  charged  nano-
particles suggesting a link between larger soot particles and this mode 
[115]. Finally, recent work showed a high charge fraction (up to 95%) of 
sub-3  nm  nanoparticles  in  the  flame  front  where  the  chemi-ion  con-
centration is greatest [114]. This could provide evidence for the charged 
nanoparticle mode in atmospheric flames. However, it is clear that these 
nanoparticles  do  not  contribute  significantly  to  primary  particle  for-
mation with a recent study measuring the charge fraction of sub-10 nm 
nanoparticles concluding that [121]: 

“Ion-induced  soot  nucleation  was  not  the  main  contributor  to 
nucleation since the charge fraction was less than 10% when Tmax  <
2000 K.” 

In  summary,  physical  nucleation  provides  a  rapid  soot  formation 
pathway, given that sufficiently strong intermolecular interactions allow 
for  a  supersaturated  vapour to  form.  However,  the  clustering  PAH  in 
flames of mass 500 Da are found instead to have interactions too weak to 
explain soot formation. 

4.6. Physical + Chemical 

The  crux  of  the  soot  formation  problem  is  that  the  physical  and 
electrical condensation of precursor molecules is rapid but too weak to 
hold  soot  together,  while  most  chemical  bonds  are  strong  but  the 
mechanisms proposed to date are too slow to account for rapid growth of 
soot as observed in experiments. A mechanism that combines both as-
pects, condensation and chemical bonds, is required – so-called physi-
cally stabilised soot inception. 

One of the first clear articulations of such a proposal was from Harris 

and Weiner in 1989 [560]: 

“Once coagulated they will quickly become chemically knit together 
since a significant fraction of the aromatic species are radicals.” 

Miller followed with a similar suggestion in 1991 that [528]: 

“...if individual PAH or their dimers undergo rapid, irreversible re-
actions, the net rate of production of the soot nuclei may be suffi-
ciently high so that the concentration of the nuclei far exceeds the 
concentrations of the reacting, intermediate species.” 

Frenklach and Wang developed this suggestion into a kinetic model 
for  soot  formation,  where  PAH  dimerisation  was  assumed  to  be  irre-
versible, facilitated by some sort of chemical or non-equilibrium process 

Fig. 41. Clustering of cPAH corannulene and fPAH coronene at 500 K with and without ions (K

+
) present [550]. Used with permission from Taylor & Francis©.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095631J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[68]: 

“...one cannot judge the PAH coagulation flux using the equilibrium 
assumption –  these fluxes must be computed kinetically. The equi-
librium among individual PAHs and clusters may never be attained, 
and  the  mass  flux is  likely  to be  driven by  an  irreversible process 
following the dimer formation...It is also possible that a PAH dimer is 
stabilized  by  a  reaction  with  an  aliphatic,  forming  a  covalently 
bonded link between the PAH layers... the van der Waals enhance-
ment should be larger than the factor or 2.2 assumed in the present 
study.” 

This irreversible nucleation of PCAH was the first successful kinetic 
model of soot formation that captured the particle number as well as the 
volume  fraction  [68–72].  Similar  suggestions  have  been  proposed 
recently such as partially reversible, dampened or reactive dimerisation 
models  [107,561–563].  These  models  have  arguably  been  the  most 
successful in describing nanoparticle formation in flames. This section 
details  some  possible  detailed  mechanisms  to  explain  such  a  “middle 
way”. 

4.6.1. Zipper mechanism 

Homann suggested that an aryl-linked PAH dimer could fold upon 
itself then react at the rim, releasing hydrogen and becoming a curved 
PAH or a fullerene – the zipper mechanism [109,128,386] [see Table 1 
(aa)]. Aryl-linked hydrocarbons are unable to bond without disrupting 
the stacked configuration (for the size of PAH found in flames) due to the 
direction  of  the  σ-radical  bonding  that  is  optimal  when  the  bond  is 
colinear with the aromatic planes. For fullerene formation, it has been 
found instead that near-complete loss of hydrogen is required before the 
carbon will curl and close into a fullerene [459]. 

4.6.2.

Internal rotors 

Frenklach  and  Mebel  recently  suggested  an  enhancement  of  poly-
aromatic polymerisation due to colliding PAH activating internal rota-
tions [9] [see Table 1(bb)]. These rotors were argued to provide multiple 
opportunities for an aryl-radical to attach to a reactive edge of a PAH 
such as a rim-based pentagonal ring. For an internal rotor to be persis-
tent between non-bonded monomers they must be strongly bound. In-
teractions in the T-configuration (C–H with π-network) are too weak to 
provide  a  persistent  internal  rotor  [564].  Therefore,  the  only  bound 
internal rotor that could form, from analysis of the intermolecular vi-
brations,  is  the  twisting  mode  of  a  stacked  dispersion  stabilised  PAH 
dimer [106], thus the reason for its consideration in this section. 

Preliminary results of aryl-radical recombination in reactive molec-
ular dynamics at flame temperatures did not reveal such an enhance-
ment [388]. However, significantly larger PAH would be requires to see 
the bound internal rotor at temperatures within the flame where soot 
forms. More work is clearly required to examine the impact of internal 
rotors in enhancing polyaromatic polymerisation of aryl-radicals. 

4.6.3. Bridge-linked (ABLH) 

Aliphatic bridges between stacked PAH have also been discussed in 
detail since the 1990s [see Table 1(cc) and Fig. 23]. In relation to the 
formation of interstellar dust, a mechanism was proposed by which a 
“cross-linked structure of aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons” formed 
and was suggested to explain soot formation under certain flame con-
ditions [3,462]. Aliphatic bridges were also included in the early models 
of stacked species from Homann et al. [109], which showed one of the 
first  stacked  complex  that  was  stabilised  by  an  aliphatic  chain.  This 
mechanism  was  suggested  as  part  of  the  formation  of  some  of  the 
smallest nanoparticles in flames with D’Alessio commenting during the 
1994 Heidelberg soot workshop [134]: 

“We think of two-ring structures connected together with some non- 
aromatic, some aliphatic bridges.” 

This description would later become known as aromatic aliphatic- 
linked  hydrocarbons  (AALH)  [82],  which  also  include  aryl-linked 
pentagon containing species [90]. 

Molecular dynamics revealed that aliphatic bridged ([CH2]n, n = 2) 
aromatics of mass ∼250 Da were found to stack below the boiling point 
of  the  aromatic  species  [535,565].  However,  at  flame  temperatures 
(above the boiling point) these physical interactions were overcome and 
clustering of these species was at a significantly lower rate compared 
with  pericondensed  PAH.  Considering  also  the  hydrogen  content 
required  for  aliphatically-linked  chemical  mechanisms  at  least  one 
[CH2]n, n = 1 linkage would be required per PAH. This would lead to an 
H/C ratio greater than one, when most early soot nanoparticles have H/
C = 0.5.  However,  the  rapid  carbonisation  processes  that  occur  in 
flames could rapidly decrease the H/C ratio, so this is less conclusive. 
Detailed kinetic mechanisms of how these aliphatic crosslinks form 
and  fragment  have  also not been  explored  in  significant  detail. Some 
kinetic Monte Carlo codes do include such aliphatic crosslinks allowing 
comparison with other chemical pathways [91,95,478,514]. However, 
the aryl bond continue to be more dominate than these aliphatic links 
(high  collision  efficiencies  between  radicals  were  assumed).  More 
recently, for a [CH2]n, n = 2 aliphatic crosslink, one conceivable option 
is the reaction between two benzylic methylene π-radicals. Simulations 
and experiments have recently been performed using free electron laser 
IR radiation and mass spectrometry to probe the pyrolysis products of 
benzyl  and  indenyl  [566–568].  The  crosslinked  species  bibenzyl  was 
found  and  shown  to  rapidly  cyclodehydrogenate  into  pericondensed 
structures in a similar manner to the aryl-linked species discussed pre-
viously. These methyl radical sites could form from hydrogen abstrac-
•
tion of a methyl group. Methyl radical sites -C
H2 have not been directly 
imaged  using  HR-AFM,  however,  the  precursor  -CH3  group  has  been 
imaged  in  soot  precursor  molecules  using  HR-AFM  [22].  Another 
+
possible mechanism proposed by Chen and Wang [410] involves C3H3
reacting with the edge of a PAH to provide a methyl radical group. It is 
also conceivable that for larger PAH the rearrangement reactions could 
be  less  important.  Aliphatic  bridges  have  yet  to  be  imaged  using 
HR-AFM (while they have been imaged in pitch [569]) although some 
preliminary  evidence  for  them  in  the  low  temperature  regions  of  an 
inverse diffusion flame has been found [358]. 

Acetylene groups attached to the edge of PAH have also been sug-
gested to crosslink the PAH, reacting either with an RSR [412] or PAH 
σ-radical [472,570] [see Table 1(dd) and Fig. 23]. The later route has 
recently been extensively explored and called aromatic α-alkynyl-linked 
hydrocarbon (AαALH) [570], where an alkynylated aromatic reacts with 
a σ-radical; PAH-C≡CH + PAH֗• → PAH-C

•=CH-PAH. 

More  work  is  required  to  explore  the  fragmentation  routes  for 
aliphatic  and  acetylene  bridges  detailed  to  date.  An  example  of  a 
possible fragmention route for the AαALH mechanism, similar to that 
mentioned in polyaromatic inception Section 4.4 [9,246], is the addition 
of  two  hydrogen  atoms  to  the  bridge  leading  to  β-scission  and 
fragmentation, 
PAH (cid:0) C• = CH (cid:0) PAH +2H•→PAH (cid:0) CH = CH (cid:0) PAH + H•

→PAH(cid:0)β CH2(cid:0)α C•H (cid:0) PAH
→PAH• + CH2 = CH (cid:0) PAH.

Finally,  an  oxygen-containing  double  crosslink  was  suggested  be-
tween PAH where one is a RSR [413] [see Table 1(ee) and Fig. 23]. The 
impact of oxygen crosslinks can be considered minimal in most cases due 
to  the  lack  of  significant  oxygen  in  soot  nanoparticles  [142]  and  the 
ability of pyrolysis reactors to produce soot without oxygen being pre-
sent [2]. 

4.6.4. Excimers 

Excimers have been discussed as evidence for stacking of aromatic 
species in previous sections. They are an optically excited bound state 
between  stacked  aromatics  that  has  been  suggested  to  stabilise  soot 
nanoparticles [see Table 1(ff)] [415]. Fig. 42 shows the potential energy 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095632J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

4.6.5. Multicentre-linked (pancake) (AMLH) 

The term “Pancake bond” was coined by Mulliken and Person in the 
1960s [574] to describe a multicentre two-electron bond [see Table 1 
(gg) and Fig. 23]. These form when AB stacking of aromatic species, both 
with an odd number of π-electrons in an aromatic network, allows for 
the  two  singly  occupied  molecular  orbitals  (SOMO)  χa,  χb  to  form  a 
multicentre bonding molecular orbital, ϕ+ = N+(χa + χb), where N+ is 
the normalisation constant [419] (see Fig. 44). These  bonds form be-
tween  π-radicals  that  are  delocalised  on  the  edge  of  a  6-membered 
network. For larger non-symmetric aromatic species, it was found that 
the multicentre bond only forms across a few edge carbon atoms [575], 
which can be seen in Fig. 44. 

In flames, odd π-electron aromatics have been directly imaged in soot 
precursors using HR-AFM [22] and have been suggested to stabilise soot 
nanoparticles [417,418]. However, the pancake bonding is weak due to 
the strong Pauli repulsion from the molecular orbitals not involved in 
the pancake bond. Therefore, poor overlap between orbitals is found in 
these multicentre  bonds with < 10  kcal/mol of additional  interaction 
above that of the dispersion interactions [419,575]. They are also highly 
angle  dependent,  breaking  after  rotating  by  30∘,  requiring  strict  AB 
stacking  [420].  In  fact,  for  small  species  such  as  phenanenyl,  a 
non-stacked  crosslinked  species  is  lower  in  energy  than  the  stacked 
configuration (a so-called σ-dimerisation [576]). This σ-dimer has been 
shown to dehydrogenate forming a 7-membered ring fPAH [577]. 

4.6.6. Zig-zag-linked (AZLH) 

Wang was the first to consider localisation of π-radicals due to dir-
adical character (diradicaloid) in the context of soot formation in 2010 
[7]. Since then, considerable work has been undertaken to explore their 
impact on soot formation [421,423,578] [see Table 1(hh) and Fig. 23]. 
Localised states have been experimentally observed and computation-
ally studied at the zig-zag edge of graphene [579–582]. Some aromatic 
molecules with dual zig-zag edges and an even number of π-electrons 
can  possess  a  diradical  character.  In  Section  4.4.2  &  4.4.3,  we  intro-
duced  arynes  and  carbene  diradicals  formed  with  σ-radicals.  A  2019 
review from Hofmann et al. [278] provided a comprehensive discussion 
of  diradical  reactivity  of  π-radicals.  Firstly,  they  distinguish  between 
localisable  and  nonlocalisable  diradicals.  For  the  former,  an  orbital 
transformation  is  able  to  “localize  their  singly  occupied  orbitals  on 
different sites so that they do not share a considerable region of space.” 
[278]. Carbynes and carbenes are examples of unlocalisable diradicals 
for  which  a  complex  interplay  between  exchange  and  coulomb  in-
teractions  determines  whether  the  species  is  closed-shell  singlet  or 
triplet  and  determines  the  reactivity.  This  orbital  localisation  can  be 
performed  for  most  π-networks,  making  them  localisable  diradicals. 
While many metrics have been proposed, the recommended indicator 
for diradical character in these localisable diradicals (for which the ex-
change  interactions  are  weaker)  is  the  singlet–triplet  energy  splitting 
ΔEST. Fig. 45 shows the transition from a closed-shell species where the 

Fig. 42. Potential energy surface for the optical states of an aromatic dimer. 
The  binding  energy  of  the  excimer  is  indicated  by  De  [181].  Used  with 
permission from Royal Society of Chemistry ©. 

surface for the ground and excited states of a stacked aromatic dimer 
[181,415,571]. After laser excitation of a π (cid:0) π* transition on one of the 
aromatic planes, the excited state delocalises over the dimer leading to 
an  energy  reduction.  The binding  energy  De  is  usually  defined  as  the 
energy for the excimer to dissociate (see Fig. 42). A wide range of small 
fPAH  species  have  been  calculated  with  binding  energies  up  to  -  20 
kcal/mol found [181,572], too low to provide significant stabilisation at 
flame temperatures. The stabilisation is also only appreciable between 
pairs of species; the trimer is found to be weakly bound indicating the 
excimer is only able to delocalise effectively across two species [416]. 
Time resolved studies have found lifetimes of tens of nanoseconds for 
the excimer state [181], which are too short to provide stability over the 
hundreds of nanoseconds to milliseconds required for soot nanoparticle 
formation.  Finally,  insufficient  UV  light  is  produced  in  the  flame  to 
maintain a sufficient concentration of these species. This is evidenced by 
no spontaneous emission of the excimer signal. These excimers therefore 
require external, often laser, illumination to maintain and produce the 
fluorescence response. 

An interesting aside is that aliphatically bridged species have been 
computationally  predicted  to  produce  the  excimer  signal  [572],  indi-
cating  that  stacked,  non-conducting  bridges  also  possess  the  excimer 
signal  (see  Fig.  43).  They  were  also  able  to  show  that  the  effect  is 
significantly different in excimers containing pentagonal rings forming 
more tightly bound structures (for cyclopentadiene increasing to - 32 
kcal/mol), leading to a decreased fluorescence emission [573]. 

Fig. 43. Isosurfaces (±0.05) of the orbitals involved in the S0→ S1  optical transition for aliphatically bridged benzene dimers [572]. Used with permission from the 
Royal Society of Chemistry ©. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095633J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 44. Molecular orbital representation of pancake bonding where  two singly occupied molecular orbitals (SOMO) χa  and χb  form a multicentre two electron 
bonding highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) ϕ+. Based on Kertesz [419]. 

Fig. 45. Schematic showing the energies of the triplet and singlet as the degeneracy between the frontier orbitals, ϵ, is lifted. Redrawn from Stuyver et al. [278]. Note 
that hHOMO  and hLUMO  are the one-electron energies associated with the HOMO and LUMO and not the full orbital energies. The triplet is shown as constant to allow 
for comparison. 

singlet is lower in energy. 

As the difference in the one-electron energy of the frontier orbitals, ϵ, 
decreases it gains diradical character, ΔEST→0, which is named a dir-
adicaloid  (usually  considered  to  be  thermally  accessible).  A  diradical 
forms when the localisable orbitals become degenerate, ϵ  = 0, giving 
either an open-shell singlet or triplet, depending on magnitude of the 
Coulomb and exchange interactions as well as potential spin polarisation 

Fig. 46. Kekul´e structure for acenes.  

effects [278]. A clear indication of diradical character is if the triplet is 
lower in energy than the closed shell singlet, ΔEST > 0. A good example 
of  diradicaloids  is  the  polyacene  series  (anthracene,  tetracene,  penta-
cene, etc. see Fig. 46). 

As the number of linearly fused rings increases ΔEST  approaches zero 
but does not become negative and therefore becomes a open-shell singlet 
ground  state  for  infinite  polyacene  [278].  This  leads  to  significant 
reactivity of acenes with >5 rings spontaneously dimerising in solvent at 
room  temperature  [583].  This  dimerisation  is  a  [4+4]  cycloaddition 
reaction,  which  is  symmetry  forbidden  but  can  be  achieved  through 
photoexcitation at room temperature or thermal excitation in a flame. 
Polyacenes require considerable length of some five rings to attain 
significant  binding  energies  up  to  -  39  kcal/mol  [421,423],  which  is 
nearing  a  value  of  significance  for  soot  formation.  Given  the  growth 
mechanisms found for PAH it is highly unlikely that a concentration of 
linear acenes with >5 rings will be present as evidenced by the species 
observed in the HR-AFM [22]. However, a hydrogenated pentacene was 
directly  observed  in  HR-AFM  imaging  [22]  (PS8  see  Fig.  47).  This  is 
interesting for two reasons. Firstly, it shows that protonation can change 
the  character  of  a  reactive  PAH  with  further  protonation  potentially 
leading to a non-reactive closed shell species. Secondly, this protonated 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095634J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 47. Kekul´e structure for hydrogenated pentacene, crosslinked dimer and dehydrogenated peripentacene.  

diradicaloid takes on a doublet radical electronic state with considerable 
reactivity.  Recent  experiments  have  shown  that  hydrogenated  penta-
cene can form dimers in the solid state [584] (we calculate a bond en-
ergy of - 50.1 kcal/mol at the M06-2X/cc-pVTZ//B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) 
level  of  theory).  These  dimers  were  also  found  to  dehydrogenate  to 
large 14 ring peripentacene species [584]. 

Non-acene  species  have  also  been  considered.  Koley  et  al.  [421] 
considered adding circular pericondensed PAHs to the end of the acene 
to  combine  stacked  dispersion  interactions  and  acene  cycloaddition. 
However, this type of structure is highly unlikely to form in the flame 
from a HACA type mechanism and has not been observed in HR-AFM 
studies [22]. Finally, larger non-acene PAH in roughly rectangular ge-
ometry, such as peripentacene, were computed to dimerise along their 
opposite  zig-zag  edges  [423]  [see  Fig.  23(hh)].  But  as  with  the  poly-
acenes, zig-zag edges of at least 5 rings were required to attain binding 
energies of - 41 kcal/mol. If we consider that in HR-AFM such symmetric 
species are not widely found and rarely are more than three adjacent 
zig-zag  edges found (with a maximum of four zig-zag edges in a row 
observed) [22], it is unlikely that this mechanism can explain the clus-
tering of species of mass near 500 Da. However, diradicals are attractive 
as  soot  precursors  as  they  can  theoretically  polymerise,  which  is  dis-
cussed next. 

4.6.7. Rim-linked (ARLH) 

Rim-bonds  arise  from  localised  π-radicals  that  allow  bonded  and 
stacked configurations with considerable binding energy as well as form 
true  diradicals  enabling  chain  reactions  [see  Table  1(ii)  Fig.  23]. 
Localised electronic states were discussed in the previous section with 

regard to diradicaloids in even-numbered aromatic systems. 

In odd-numbered π-electron aromatic systems localisation can also 
occur through the presence of non-hexagonal rings, e.g. fluorenyl and 
indenyl, or methylene groups [418]. Fig. 48 shows the π-radicals based 
on localised edge types as compared with phenalenyl-type edges that are 
delocalised  as  the  network  enlarges.  Spin  density  has  been  found  to 
linearly correlate with the reactivity of a site, both for dimerisation and 
ability to abstract [278]. It is important to reiterate that by localised we 
do not mean that the π-radical is solely localised to a single carbon site, 
as with the σ-radical formed from hydrogen abstraction from a PAH, but 
that  the  π-radical  is  pinned  to  the  edge.  For  example,  while  the 
indenyl-type radical is strictly a resonantly stabilised radical, with the 
spin density being shared between two equivalent positions, it is still a 
localised  electronic  state.  This  is  shown  in  Fig.  48  as  the  aromatic 
network is enlarged, minimal changes to the spin density of the most 
spin  rich  carbon  atoms  are  seen  [278,353].  The  first  three  localised 
π-radicals  can  be  classed  as  arising  from  hydrogen  abstractions  from 
fluorene, indene and a methyl group and are well-known reactive spe-
cies in the flame[10]. 

Partial saturation of aromatic edges from hydrogen addition is the 
second class of localised π-radicals. The earliest discussion of this in the 
soot literature that we could find was by Abrahamson in 1977 [586], in 
which saturated platelets were suggested to form soot. These partially 
saturated edges and aromatic interiors were suggested to form reactive 
localised  π-radicals.  The  issue  with  these  suggestions  and  the  reason 
saturation  was  not  generally  considered  is  that  at  high  temperatures, 
hydrogen  is  readily  lost  from  partially  saturated  PCAH  (part  sat. 
PCAH-type)  with  strong  aromatic  stabilisation  [31].  Aromatic 

Fig. 48. Different classes of π-radicals with spin density isosurfaces=0.025 computed with the B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) level of theory as a function of size. The Mulliken 
spin density value is shown for the most spin rich carbon site. Carbon atoms marked with s are saturated. Used with permission from ACS CC-BY [585]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095635J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

stabliomers are predicted to be fully unsaturated from thermodynamic 
calculations [295]. 

The recent experimental work from Commodo et al. [22], challenged 
the lack of saturation by showing that particular ring topologies allow 
partially and fully saturated aromatic edges. In the previous section, we 
mentioned partially protonated pentacene had been found in the flame 
[22] and allowed for strong dimerisation energies. Fig. 48 shows mini-
mal  delocalisation  of  the  spin  density  for  this  partially  saturated 
diradicaloid-type localised π-radical (Part. sat. diradicaloid-type). The 
other edge type imaged was a partially saturated rim-based pentagonal 
ring (part. sat. rim. pent.-type) (see Fig. 1 species IS1). This π-radical is 
similar  in  topology  to  the  benzyl-type  π-radical,  but  is  perhaps  more 
likely  to  form  as  many  more  rim-based  pentagonal  rings  were  found 
compared with methyl groups [22]. The importance of these radicals in 
the HACA mechanism [587] and shuttling rim-based pentagons along 
zig-zag edges was first appreciated in calculations performed by Fren-
klach and coworkers [83,84]. Wang and coworkers found that this site 
reacted  with  the  σ-radical  phenyl  to  form  a  stable  species  unable  to 
break open across the pentagonal ring (this is opposed to hexaphenyl-
ethane,  which  readily  breaks  to  form  free  radicals  [588]).  Further  to 
this, Frenklach and Mebel recently confirmed that this site is also un-
likely to fragment at flame temperatures showing remarkable stability 
against radical-induced fragmentation [9]. 

Of  most  interest  for  soot  formation  are  polyaromatic  mechanisms 
that involve these reactive sites. A recent computational study system-
atically computed the energetics of polyaromatic crosslinks with local-
ised π-electrons (see Fig. 52) [575,585,589]. Significant bond energies 
were  found  with  σ-radicals,  but  interestingly  strong  bonds  were  also 
formed  between  localised  π-radicals  [575,589].  These  results  are  un-
surprising  considering  that  smaller  localised  π-radicals  are  known  to 
recombine and form large aromatics in flames e.g. benzyl forms phen-
anthrene  [566],  indenyl  forms  chrysene  [590],  cyclopentadiene  and 
indenyl  form  fluorene  [591,592],  while  benzyl  and  indenyl  can  form 
pyrene [567], as mentioned. Further experimental evidence comes from 
the molecules that readily soot and could be seen as precursors for these 
localised π-radicals through hydrogen addition or abstraction, such as 
toluene,  fluorene,  indene,  cyclopentadiene  and  acenapthalene  [255]. 
Another example is the significantly enhanced sooting of 1,2,4-trime-
thylbenzene  compared  with  the  structural  isomer  n-  propylbenzene 
[593] (see Fig. 49). 

While  these  small  species  appear  to  crosslink  and  cyclo-
dehydrogenate,  larger  localised  π-radicals  could  form  dispersion- 
stabilised  stacks.  One  of  the  first  suggestions  of  dispersion-stabilised 
stacked  and  bonded  localised  π-radicals  was  perhaps  from  Tonachini 
et al. in 2015 [413], where a partially saturated rim-based pentagonal 
ring crosslinks with a PAH through a reaction with oxygen (see Fig. 23 
(ee)). In other work it was found that significant bonding could occur in 
stacked  aromatics  between  localised  π-radicals  without  any  oxygen 
[575] (see Fig. 50). A full thermodynamic equilibrium analysis of the 
dimer  further  confirmed  the  stability  of  such  structures  in  flames 
(1500–2000 K) and a significant physical enhancement for larger spe-
cies [589]. 

We decided to name these structures rim-bonded to distinguish them 
from  aryl-bonded  [589].  Fig.  50  shows  the  tyre  analogy  where 
rim-linked hydrocarbons could be thought to link via the rim of a bicycle 

wheel,  which  is  only  accessible  on  the  face  of  the  molecule.  The 
aryl-linked structure can be thought of linking via the tyre so that the 
bond is colinear with the aromatic planes. This naming was chosen to 
also distinguish them from delocalised π-radicals that can form σ-dimers 
when  not  stacked  but  form  weak  multicentre  pancake  bonds  when 
stacked [418]. 

It is still unclear how prevalent such sites are within the flame. In 
early soot formed from pyrolysis, significant spin concentrations were 
found  (≈ 1021  spins/gram)  using  electron  paramagnetic  resonance 
(EPR) [594]. Wang put this number into context in his review stating 
that [7]: 

“Assuming the residue is made of carbon only, the number of spins is 
roughly 1/50 atoms, or one free radical for each pair of PAHs of the 
size of coronene.” 

This has recently been explored in EPR experiments on soot collec-
tion  at  different  locations  in  the  flame  [417].  A  change  in  radical 
character  occurred  at  soot  inception  suggesting  the  involvement  of 
π-radicals [417]. 

An initial attempt was made to answer the question of concentration 
using  a  computational  approach  by  considering  localised  π-radicals 
formed  from  hydrogen  addition  and  abstraction  from  a  rim-based 
•
/ 
pentagonal ring on acenapthalene (i.e. in partial equilibrium with H
H2 in the flame) [595]. This was a similar approach to that employed by 
Howard in 1991 to consider the formation of σ-radicals from hydrogen 
abstraction [31]. It was found that, for temperatures in the flame where 
soot begins to form (1400–1500 K), 0.1 to 0.01 fraction of rim-based 
pentagonal rings were localised π-radicals. This is consistent with the 
ratio of unsaturated, fully saturated and partially saturated rim-based 
pentagonal rings found in HR-AFM of 27:12:4 [22]. This is a consider-
able fraction and under certain circumstances is greater than the mole 
fraction of σ-radicals on rim-based pentagonal rings. At higher temper-
atures  (1800–2000  K)  the  unsaturated  rim-based  pentagonal  ring  is 
favoured. Perhaps most interestingly for a soot mechanism, KMC sim-
ulations showed that multiple partially saturated sites could exist on a 
single aromatic molecule indicating di- or multiradicals may be possible 
[595]. 

Computationally  screening  the  electronic  structures  of  HR-AFM 
species [22], IS56 shown in Fig. 1, was found to possess a triplet dir-
adical ground state [585]. Fig. 51 shows the spin density isosurface and 
geometry  of  this  species  revealing  the  localised  π-radicals  are  almost 
identical to the monoradical shown in Fig. 48. Addition or removal of 
hydrogen from the edge of other imaged species imaged with HR-AFM 
were  also  demonstrated  to  possess  diradical  triplet  ground  states 
[585].  Fig.  51  also  shows  the  dominant  Kekul´e  structure,  however, 
uniquely  for  this  species  a  closed  shell  Kekul´e  structure  can  also  be 
drawn, where all of the π-electrons are paired. In hexagonal ring aro-
matic  structures  only  non-Kekul´e  structures  possess  an  open-shell 
ground  state  [596–598],  however,  the  presence  of  these  particular 
sites  allows  for  the  stabilisation  of  a  diradical  ground  state,  demon-
strating  they  are  truly  localised  [278]  and  that  the  reactivity  of  the 
localised π-radical sites are maintained in the diradical. Importantly for 
a  soot  mechanism,  π-diradicals  and  π-multiradicals  retain  their  reac-
tivity after dimerisation (see such a series in Fig. 51), called polymeri-
sation of aromatic rim-linked hydrocarbons (PARLH) [585]. As noted by 

Fig. 49. Kekul´e structures.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095636J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 50. a) Bonded and b) bonded + stacked binding energies [575]. c) Shows the dimers only interacting through dispersion interactions. d) The blue arrow shows 
the additional enhancement due to localised π-radical bonds. Used with permission from Elsevier ©. 

Fig. 51. π-Diradical spin density and open-shell Kekul´e structure (inset). The reaction scheme for polymerisation of aromatic rim-linked hydrocarbons (PARLH) is 
also shown. The reactive triplet state is maintained for additional reactions with π-diradicals. 

Abrahamson  [586]  in  1977,  such  chain  reactions  could  allow  for  the 
rapid growth of soot to occur. 

Another aspect that makes these species of interest is the ability of 
physical interactions to enhance the reaction rate. Quantum mechanics/ 
molecular mechanics (QM/MM) simulations of reactive dimerisation of 
π-diradicals  showed  evidence  for  such  an  significant  enhancement 
[585].  Internal  rotors  of  the  condensed  dimer  were  found  to  allow 
reactive  localised  π-radicals  multiple  opportunities  to  react.  This 
enhancement was not observed for σ-diradicals, but only for the π-dir-
adicals that can react while stacked. Some preliminary evidence for such 
an  enhancement  has  been  potentially  seen  for  benzyl  recombination, 
where close to the vapour pressure of benzyl the reaction rates increased 
well past the high pressure limit [599]. 

Further preliminary evidence from mass spectrometry exists for the 
clustering aromatics to be partially saturated with hydrogen, which are 
more  likely  to  be  localised  π-radicals.  The  clustering  species  from 
Grotheer et al. have a H/C of 0.4, while a pericondensed aromatic at the 

molecular  mass  seen  would  be  expected  to  have  a  H/C  of  0.3  [158]. 
There was also a preference for an even number of hydrogen atoms in 
the clustered species that could indicate reaction between species with 
an  odd  number  of  hydrogen,  which  are  more  likely  to  be  localised 
π-radicals. Recently, Carbone et al. presented a positive mass spectrum, 
which  is  more  likely  to  be  a  partially  saturated  species  [364]  (while 
cPAH  are  found  in  the  negative  mass  spectrum  as  mentioned  [128]). 
Fig. 22 shows how the positive species cluster, while the negative mass 
species  did not.  As  with the  earlier  work  a  H/C ratio  close  to 0.5  in-
dicates  reactive  species  with  an  excess  of  hydrogen.  However,  no 
definitive experimental evidence has been found to date and significant 
work is required to justify such an interpretation of these results. This 
preliminary  exploration  reveals  that  understanding  how  hydrogen  is 
gained and lost by the edge as well as ring topology will be critical for 
understanding the importance of this pathway. 

Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that  localised  π-radicals  are  only  edge 
localised  in  the  manner  described  by  Stuyver  et  al.  [278];  they  do 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095637J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 52. Bond energy (kcal/mol) between various small aromatic molecules [575]. Used with permission from American Chemical Society©.  

possess  some  resonance  stability  (their  spin  density  is  partially  delo-
calised and shared between more than one site). This makes their re-
action with molecular oxygen slow at flame temperatures (e.g. benzyl 
[600]) meaning their concentration could be considerable in a similar 
manner  to  propargyl  [10].  Atomic  oxygen,  on  the  other  hand,  reacts 
readily  with  localised  π-radical  sites  as  has  been  shown  with 
fluorenyl-type radicals [601]). Ozone injection into flames is a simple 
means of increasing atomic oxygen concentration and has been found to 
significantly reduce soot formation [602], however, the connection with 
the PARLH mechanism needs to be explored in more detail to determine 
if  a  direct  connection  exists.  Preliminary  simulations  also  appear  to 
reveal  a  connection  between  the  removal  of  these  sites  with  atomic 
oxygen  and  the  formation  of  graphene  in  plasmas  that  also  requires 
further exploration [603]. 

5. Summary and outlook 

5.1. Mechanism comparison 

Physical nucleation of PAH is only possible for large PAH (667 Da) 
[7,105,106] with significantly higher molecular mass than the species 
seen to cluster in mass spectrometry studies [158,364]. Previous work 
[106] reveals that physical nucleation of pericondensed aromatics, such 
as  pyrene,  is  unable  to  explain  the  formation  of  soot.  We  therefore 
conclude  that  the  model  of  irreversible  dimerisation  of  pyrene  can 
describe aspects of soot formation, yet not because pyrene is actually 
dimerising – it points to another mechanism with similar concentrations 
of the critical species and similarly high collision efficiencies. Therefore, 
we see this model as acting as a surrogate for the real soot formation 
model. 

We  can  now  systemically  consider  chemical  mechanisms.  Fig.  52 
shows the bond energies between the various reactive edge types that 
have been detailed in this review (full details can be found in [575] and 
[589]). The bond energies are used to consider the thermal stability of 
the first crosslink critical for each chemical mechanism. It has already 
been established that bond energies above - 40 kcal/mol are found to be 
readily broken in flames (such as β-scission [246] and PAH dimerisation 
[7]). Thermal fragmentation is described by the energy barrier between 
the  bound  and  the  transition  states.  However,  we  found  the 
Bell-Evans-Polanyi relationship is still observed (the barrier was linearly 

proportional to the bond energy, for the weakly bound species) and that 
for many structures the reaction was barrierless or small [589]. How-
ever, the grid of species is obviously not complete and weaker bonds 
could  be  involved  if  sufficient  concentration  of  these  species  and 
perhaps non-equilibrium effects are at play. This bond table, however, 
does provide an appropriate way to classify bonding configurations and 
suggests possible pathways. 

The grid suggests a naming strategy based on the reactive species; A) 
σ-radicals, B) localised π-radicals, C) delocalised π-radicals and D) dir-
adicaloids:  

• Aromatic  aryl-linked  hydrocarbons  (AALH),  involving  aryl-type 
σ-radicals A), of which the clustering of hydrocarbons radical chain 
reactions (CHRCR) mechanism [21] is a subset with aryl-radicals A) 
attacking delocalised π-radicals C). What are usually called alipha-
tic/aromatic linked hydrocarbons [90] are also represented by A)+
E) and A)+F2) reactions. Strong, thermally stable bonds are formed.  
• Aromatic  rim-linked  hydrocarbons  (ARLH),  involving  localised 
π-radicals  B).  Strong  bonds  are  only  formed  with  other  localised 
π-radicals,  however,  as  the  aromatic  network  enlarges  dispersion 
interactions could allow for a physical+chemical mechanism. Mul-
tiradicals could also form that would allow for a chain reaction to 
proceed. 

• Aromatic multicentre-linked hydrocarbon (AMLH), involving delo-
calised  π-radicals  PAH  C).  These  react  with  themselves  through 
pancake bonds but are also able to form non-stacked σ-dimers, which 
are shown in this table. 

• Aromatic  zig-zag-linked  hydrocarbons  (AZLH),  involving  dir-
adicaloids  D).  These  react  through  cyclisations  but  can  also  poly-
merise weakly. 

The forward rate constant was also computed for the small aromatics 
(cid:0) 1  for  aryl-radical 
[589].  The  maximum  rate  was  1012  cm3mol
recombination. Previous work from Frenklach and Mebel showed that 
even with a forward rate of this order there is still insufficient nucleation 
flux for nanoparticle formation [9]. This leaves us with the uncomfort-
able conclusion that no chemical mechanism involving these small ar-
omatics can explain soot nucleation. 

(cid:0) 1s

In Section 4.6 a “middle way” was presented between physical and 
chemical mechanisms. This can be schematically shown based on the C/ 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095638J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

5.2. Outlook 

These  final  comments  will  concentrate  on  fundamental  gaps  in 
experimental and modelling approaches as well as more practical steps 
that  can  be  taken  to  reduce  the  emission  of  these  species  from 
combustion. 

5.2.1. Experimental outlook 

To  guide  the  discussion  around  fundamental  gaps  in  current 
knowledge we have plotted some representative data for experimentally 
observed  species in  a  H/C  vs molecular  mass graph  that  was  initially 
plotted by Wagner, Jander and Homann in 1990 [604]  (see Fig. 54). 

The molecular masses of the different species are determined directly 
from either HR-AFM [22,334], mass spectrometry data [109,156,158, 
166,211,303,308,364,366,401,605]  or size  exclusion chromatography 
[367] from hydrocarbon flames. In modern high resolution mass spec-
trometers,  the  H/C  ratio  can  be  determined  directly  assuming  only 
carbon  and  hydrogen  are  present.  The  H/C  ratio  of  the  other  nano-
particles, primary particles and aggregate particles are determined from 
elemental analysis with the ranges chosen to cover the observed values. 
Arrows  show  the  pathways  from  precursors  to  particles  for  which 
experimental data or a correlation exists, unless otherwise mentioned 
below.  It  is  helpful  to  make  use  of  molecular  mass  data  from  mass 
spectrometry instead of mobility diameter in order to directly compare 
molecular growth and nanoparticle formation. However, for the primary 
and  aggregate  soot  modes  this  requires  using  size  exclusion  chroma-
tography results that have greater uncertainty. 

Looking at Fig. 54, the first and most evident trend is a decrease in 
hydrogen  content  of  the  carbonaceous  species  as  the  mass  increases. 
This follows from the entropically driven nature of soot formation due to 

Fig. 53. Schematic of various soot nanoparticles arranged as a function of their 
C/H ratio and molecular weight. 

H versus molecular weight diagram introduced by Violi in 2007 [5] (see 
Fig. 53). It is important to consider that these mechanisms might not be 
independent.  To  illustrate  this,  a  structure  with  multiple  types  of 
bonding is shown in the top right of the figure, with a curved species and 
ion included to indicate that electrical condensation could also enhance 
the inception of reactive species. 

Fig. 54. The variety of transformation of hydrocarbons towards soot formation. The inset shows the various data sources [22,109,156,166,211,303,308,364,366, 
367,401,605]. Abbreviations include PM for premixed flame, DF for diffusion flame, IDF for inverse diffusion flame and QDF for quench diffusion flame. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095639J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

H2  evolution  [7].  The  initial  formation  of  polyynes  from  acetylene  is 
well  understood  [606]  and  growth  does  not  extend  much  beyond  10 
carbon atoms due to radical induced fragmentation and cyclisation into 
pericondensed aromatic hydrocarbons (PCAH). i) PCAH primarily form 
via  the  HACA  growth  mechanism  and  recombination  reactions  [10]. 
More work is needed to understand the variety of isomers of PCAH. The 
generally  accepted  view  that  HACA  growth  proceeds  through  only 
6-membered rings has recently been challenged computationally [607] 
and experimentally [21,22,296], with the presence of pentagonal rings 
being  more  prevalent  than  previously  thought.  These  new  insights 
require  more  detailed  understanding  of  methyl  additions  [345,608], 
ring enlargements [294], aromaticity [609], curvature [452] and frag-
mentation routes. Finally, synchrotron methods such as double imaging 
Photoelectron Photoion Coincidence Spectroscopy method (i2PEPICO) 
promise better isomer discernment for larger PAH with pentagonal rings 
[297] as well as resolution improvements in PI-MS experiments. 

localised  π-radical  recombinations 

A second large distribution of species with mass near 500 Da has also 
been detected in many different flame environments [39,156,211,303, 
303,307–311] – called “ii) aromers” by Homann [128]. It is not entirely 
clear how these form but suggestions include crosslinking of σ-radicals 
[128]  or 
then  cyclo-
dehydrogenate  to  form  nearly  pericondensed  structures.  Evidence  for 
such  a  crosslinking  reaction  recently  was  shown  from  hierarchical 
clustering analysis of SIMS-TOF MS providing strong evidence that the 
aromers arise from crosslinking of small aromatics with 4–8 hydrogen 
atoms lost during subsequent cyclisation [362]. Curvature integration is 
also  not  fully  understood.  The  curvature  integration  seen  experimen-
tally [24] cannot be explained through HACA growth alone [9,300] and 
therefore  pathways  such  as  crosslinking  that  allow  for  embedded 
pentagonal rings are also required [2,610]. 

that 

In low-pressure flames certain pathways that do not lead to soot have 
been explored. HACA growth can be continued in low pressure acetylene 
flames to form large iv) graphene structures [366]. v) Fullerenes can 
form in benzene/oxygen flames [123]. The fullerenes are suggested to 
form due to multiple crosslinks of small aromatics, producing aromers 
large  enough  to  be  significantly  curved  to  become  fullerenes  during 
dehydrogenation. It is still unclear how aromatics close to form fuller-
enes. Computational work suggests that hydrogen must be mostly lost 
from  the  aromatics  before  they  can  curl  and  close  to  form  fullerene 
carbon cages [459]. Experimental work recently showed the formation 
of hydrogenated fullerene C66H4 with heptagonal rings in hydrocarbon 
flames [339], suggesting closure before complete dehydrogenation. It is 
still  unclear  whether  subsequent  dehydrogenation  and  C2  loss  could 
explain  the  formation  of  the  symmetric  fullerene  C60  –  as  has  been 
proposed for plasmas in the “shrinking hot giant model” [129,611]. The 
synthesis of aerosolised graphene is also of industrial significance. It is 
still unclear how low pressure acetylene/oxygen flames [366] and mi-
crowave reactors [444] are able to produce planar graphene and avoid 
fullerene or soot formation, however, the influence of localised π-radi-
cals requires further exploration [300]. 

vi) Charged nanoparticles are formed in acetylene flames (but not 
significantly  in  benzene  flames).  One  possible  explanation  for  this 
observation  is  an  ion,  cPAH  electrical  condensation  mechanism.  This 
could  explain  the  correlation  Homann  found  with  the  larger  aromer 
species  and  these  nanoparticles  [558]  and  why  their  mass  is  low  – 
ion-dipole interaction can only stabilise a few cPAH. However, this is 
simply conjecture and detailed fragmentation studies using mass spec-
trometry  are  required  to  understand  the  nanoparticles’  constituents. 
More  work  is  also  needed  to  understand  how  electrical  condensation 
involving cPAH can influence chemical mechanisms as briefly shown in 
Fig. 53, but it appears that it is not the critical route for nanoparticle 
formation in atmospheric flames [121]. 

iii) Clustering PAH have only been observed with a periodicity of 
∼500 Da [158,364] suggesting that these larger aromers are the reactive 
structures  that  lead  to  soot  formation.  From  HR-AFM  it  appears  that 
reactive  edges  are  in  partial  equilibrium  with  hydrogen  radicals  and 

hydrogen  gas  [22,575]  leading  to  a  significant  fraction  of  localised 
π-radicals and σ-radicals. More work is needed to understand which sites 
are  in  high  enough  concentrations  to  rapidly  form  the  vii)  incipient 
nanoparticles in the flame. Ongoing work is required on the influence 
of extractive molecular beam sampling for mass spectrometry [612] and 
new in situ non-intrusive approaches are required to understand these 
clustering species. The influence of ozone on these pathways would also 
be of interest as a means of removing localised π-radicals [585]. 

Further  processes  lead  to  larger  > 4  nm  viii)  primary  nano-
particles. The primary nanoparticle mode is found to increase in mass 
until  it  becomes  the  primary  soot  particle  mode  seen  in  aggregates 
around 10–20 nm in size [22]. We will not discuss the further processes 
involved in formation of aggregate soot particles as this is not the focus 
of this review, but will mention again that the liquid-like halos are now 
thought to be due to sampling artifacts (see Fig. 34 in Section 4.5.1). It is 
clear that much is still to be understood about nanoparticle formation 
requiring further experimental studies to fill in the gaps. 

5.2.2. Modelling outlook 

Modelling also requires significant developments going forward in 
order to better understand and describe soot formation. Reproducibility 
in  modelling  combustion  kinetics  has  always  been  a  strength  within 
combustion science [613]. Starting with CHEMKIN-A Chemical Kinetics 
Software  Package,  developed  by  Sandia  National  Laboratories  in  the 
1960s, standardisation of the kinetic and thermodynamic data format 
allowed for the widespread use of such software packages for modelling 
combustion. This was further facilitated by the software being open and 
made  available  on  the  world  wide  web  (an  informative  historical 
description can be found by Council [614] and we have also recently 
reviewed the various databases available online at present [615]). These 
approaches  have  allowed  experimental  and  increasingly  powerful 
computational  approaches  to  provide  insights  into  soot  formation.  A 
recent  example  of  the  power  of  these  techniques  is  the  paper  from 
Frenklach  and  Mebel  on  comparing  various  reactive  aromatics  in 
forming soot [9]. However, these approaches are limited by the size of 
the  mechanisms  that  can  be  developed  by  hand  [616].  Automation, 
therefore, has developed naturally as kinetic mechanisms for realistic 
fuels begin to contain thousands of reactions and thus require software 
to construct. One such example is the Reaction Mechanism Generator 
(RMG)  [79,617]  that  employs  rules  based  on  species  fragmentation 
patterns to predict reaction pathways and thermodynamics to develop 
mechanisms. RMG also performs automated electronic structure calcu-
lations  for  specific  classes  of  reactions  [618]  (another  example  being 
EStokTP: Electronic Structure to Temperature- and Pressure-Dependent 
Rate Constants [619]). The use of freely available software has always 
allowed for robust collaboration in soot modelling, starting with Fren-
klach’s MoMIC soot library for CHEMKIN [620]. With new open data 
initiatives it is an imperative that software and data are made available 
with  publications  to  continue  the  reproducibility  for  which  this  com-
munity has become known. For example, recent efforts from the Internal 
Sooting Flame (ISF) Workshop to standardise experimental flame con-
figurations allowed simpler collaboration and comparisons with models. 
Another challenge of modelling soot is the multiscale nature of the 
problem. Different scales often require different numerical approaches 
and this has made comparison between models challenging to date. For 
example, as PAH grow it becomes unfeasible to describe every possible 
reaction path in a kinetic mechanism; this has been tackled by switching 
to stochastic approaches such as kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulation 
of aromatic growth (e.g. the KMC-ARS in MOpS [85] – https://github. 
com/ucam-ceb-como/MOpS/,  SNAPS  [92,95]  from  Violi  et  al.  and 
implementations from Frenklach et al. [84,86]). In terms of KMC, this 
requires  all  of  the  jump  processes  and  their  associated  rates  to  be 
explicitly stated and the approximations used to couple kinetic mecha-
nisms and KMC to be disclosed in publications. Reproduction of PAH 
isomers that are now experimentally attainable from HR-AFM and PI-MS 
needs to be demonstrated with such codes. Various scales also require 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095640J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 55. Linking spatial and temporal scales for modelling nanoparticle formation and pollution dispersion.  

model reduction to allow for kinetic mechanisms to be applied to larger 
scale simulations, such as computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simula-
tions. This is known as surrogate model creation, where the goal is to 
create a smaller kinetic mechanism that captures the main features of 
the combustion phenomena with a simpler model than the full mecha-
nism or model [621,622]. A variety of approaches for model reduction 
are available including support vector machines, polynomial response 
surface models, interpolations, radial basis functions, splines and arti-
ficial  neural networks,  to  name  a  few.  The importance  of  finding  the 
optimal approximation for reducing a particular problem was recently 
highlighted [623]. Experimental approaches to model reduction are also 
attractive. The Hybrid Chemistry (HyChem) approach to fuel pyrolysis 
allows experimentally derived fragmentation patterns to be coupled to 
small  hydrocarbon  mechanisms  providing  a  significant  reduction  in 
mechanism size [624]. 

This sort of multiscale modelling of soot formation, however, has led 
to  highly  customised  software  developed  independently  by  various 
groups (see Fig. 55 for our approach). This is due to challenges associ-
ated with linking of various data structures and numerical approaches. 
One  of  the  early  projects  that  sought  to  solve  this  problem  was  the 
Collaboratory for Multi-scale Chemical Science (CMCS) project started 
in 2001 [625] and led by members of the combustion community in the 
USA.  This  project  used  the  recently  developed  semantic  web  tools 
(developed in computer science to extend the internet into a machine 
readable and writable platform) to link and connect models and data for 
combustion  applications.  The  approach  was  memorably  presented  by 
Frenklach at the 31st  International Symposium on Combustion in Hei-
delberg, Germany (2006) with his PrIMe database [626,627]. While the 
entire  framework  developed  in  the  CMCS  project  did  not  ultimately 
become widely used [628] the project led to critical infrastructure for 
modelling soot including the Active Thermochemical Tables (ATcT), the 
Basis Set Exchange (BSE), Group Additivity Thermodynamic Properties 
(GATP  –  now  used  in  RMG  to  good  effect)  and  the  highly  successful 
GRI-Mech kinetic mechanism [629]. 

Since  these  initial  efforts  to  build  a  web-based  infrastructure  for 
combustion science, considerable advances have been made in semantic 
web  technologies,  with  current  focus  being  on  Knowledge  Graph 

technologies.  This  recently  led  us  to  develop  new  and  extended 
Knowledge  Graph  Ontologies  for  both  the  microscale;  OntoKin  [630] 
(for representing chemical kinetic reaction mechanisms including ther-
modynamics), OntoCompChem [631] (representing electronic structure 
calculations), OntoSpecies (representing molecular species), and for the 
macroscale; OntoCAPE [632] (representing chemical engineering plants 
and extended to decentralised eco-industrial parks in OntoEIP [633]), 
Weather  Ontology  [634]  (representing  wind,  rain,  temperature  and 
humidity), OntoPowSys [635] (representing power systems) and Onto-
CityGML  [636]  (an  extension  of  CityGML  representing  buildings  and 
infrastructure [637]). While these approaches are in their infancy, they 
open up the possibility of rigorously and consistently linking models and 
data across spatial and temporal scales as demonstrated in Fig. 55 as well 
as comparison between models and data [638]. One example was the 
recent virtual sensor for atmospheric pollutants emitted from ships that 
linked models and data from microscale kinetic mechanisms to models 
of  engine  performance and  pollutant  emissions, through  to the  atmo-
spheric dispersion of these pollutants across Singapore [639]. Automa-
tion  is  captured  by  the  OntoAgent  ontology  [640]  which  enables 
expansion  and  improvement  of  agents  operating  on  the  knowledge 
graph. We envisage that such a systematic approach will be critical for 
providing  the  infrastructure  to  develop  the  multiscale  descriptions  of 
combustion to elucidate the formation of carbonaceous nanoparticles in 
flames. 

5.2.3. Practical steps 

The more practical aspects of reducing nanoparticle emissions from 
combustion  devices  require  that  these  emissions  are  eliminated  in 
flames  or  removed  in  aftertreatment  systems.  While  we  have  shown 
experimental studies that are able to detect various nanoparticle modes, 
routine  measurements  of  these  smallest  nanoparticle  emissions  from 
combustion  devices  are  still  not  possible.  As  measurements  improve, 
empirical models will be able to establish operating conditions to reduce 
nanoparticle  emissions.  However,  fundamental  understanding  could 
provide more direct means to limit emission of these smallest combus-
tion products. We will highlight one recent example of fuel mix design 
where  the  yield  sooting  index  was  used  to  provide  a  diesel  fuel  with 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095641J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

reasonable  cetane  number  but  significantly  lower  sooting  propensity 
[641].  These  approaches  could  also  be  extended  with  particle  size 
measurements for reducing nanoparticle emissions from engines. This is 
particularly  important  as  new  lean  engine  combustion  systems  are 
developed to reduce soot mass but not necessarily soot nanoparticles. 
Similar insights into the effects of cool combustion, charge and ozone 
injection  [602,642,643],  hydrogen  and  ammonia  addition  [644,645] 
and  biofuels  [646,647]  on  nanoparticle  emissions  are  also  required. 
Another approach is to consider aftertreatment systems. As mentioned 
in  Section  2.2, many  of  the  smallest nanoparticles  are not  filtered by 
aftertreatment systems [223] due to their low coagulation efficiencies 
[37]. Recent efforts to remove these nanoparticles with activated carbon 
or  fibre  filters  need  to  be  more  extensively  explored  [225].  It  is  also 
unclear  how  nanoparticle  filtration  will  improve  as  the  soot  cake  de-
velops [648]. 

Ultimately, the emission of carbonaceous nanoparticles needs to be a 
research and industrial priority for the future of combustion devices and 
new material applications. We end this review with the comment from 
Miller, Pilling and Troe’s 2005 review [649]: 

“Hopefully, whoever writes this review in 2054 will report that there 
is then a complete, quantitative understanding of the mechanism of 
soot formation in combustion.” 

Recent modelling and experimental advances suggest such enlight-

enment might occur sooner than 2054. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

None of the authors have declared a conflict of interest. 

Acknowledgments 

Firstly, we thank the reviewers for their contributions that signifi-
cantly  improved  the  manuscript.  Thanks  to  the  members  of  the 
Computational Modelling Group in the Department of Chemical Engi-
neering and Biotechnology at the University of Cambridge, who over the 
years have contributed to much of the work reviewed above. We would 
also like to thank the many collaborators with whom we have worked. In 
particular, we thank those involved in computing the crosslinks between 
various reactive aromatics found in Fig. 52: Angiras Menon and Laura 
Pascazio,  with  collaborators  Dingyu  Hou  and  Xiaoqing  You  from 
Tsinghua University. Thanks to Angiras Menon, Sebastian Mosbach and 
Jethro  Akroyd  for  insights  into  the  knowledge  graph  technologies. 
Thanks to Jethro Akroyd and Louise Renwick for their careful editing of 
the  text.  The  authors  are  grateful  to  EPSRC  (grant  number:  EP/ 
R029369/1) and ARCHER for financial and computational support as a 
part of their funding to the UK Consortium on Turbulent Reacting Flows 
(www.ukctrf.com). This project is supported by the National Research 
Foundation (NRF), Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under its Campus 
for  Research  Excellence  and  Technological  Enterprise  (CREATE)  pro-
gramme. M. Kraft gratefully acknowledges the support of the Alexander 
von Humboldt foundation. 

References 

[1] Faraday M. A course of six lectures on the chemical history of a candle: to which 

is added a lecture on platinum. Harper & Brothers; 1861. 

[2] Richter H, Howard J. Formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and their 
growth to soot: a review of chemical reaction pathways. Progress in Energy and 
Combustion Science 2000;26(4-6):565–608. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360- 
1285(00)00009-5. 

[3] Frenklach M. Reaction mechanism of soot formation in flames. Physical 

Chemistry Chemical Physics 2002;4(11):2028–37. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
b110045a. 

[4] McEnally CS, Pfefferle LD, Atakan B, Kohse-H¨oinghaus K. Studies of aromatic 

hydrocarbon formation mechanisms in flames: Progress towards closing the fuel 
gap. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2006;32(3):247–94. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pecs.2005.11.003. 

[5] Combustion Generated Fine Carbonaceous Particles. In: Bockhorn H, D’Anna A, 
Sarofim A, Wang H, editors. KIT Scientific Publishing; 2009. https://doi.org/ 
10.5445/KSP/1000013744. 

[6] D’Anna A. Combustion–formed nanoparticles. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2009;32:593–613. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2008.09.005. 
[7] Wang H. Formation of nascent soot and other condensed-phase materials in 

flames. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2011;33(1):41–67. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.09.009. 

[8] Haynes BS. Combustion research for chemical processing. Proceedings of the 

Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):1–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2018.06.183. 

[9] Frenklach M, Mebel AM. On the mechanism of soot nucleation. Physical 

Chemistry Chemical Physics 2020;22(9):5314–31. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
D0CP00116C. 

[10] Hansen N, Cool TA, Westmoreland PR, Kohse-H¨oinghaus K. Recent contributions 
of flame-sampling molecular-beam mass spectrometry to a fundamental 
understanding of combustion chemistry. Progress in Energy and Combustion 
Science 2009;35(2):168–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2008.10.001. 
[11] Li Y, Qi F. Recent applications of synchrotron VUV photoionization mass 

spectrometry: insight into combustion chemistry. Accounts of chemical research 
2010;43(1):68–78. https://doi.org/10.1021/ar900130b. 

[12] Desgroux P, Mercier X, Thomson KA. Study of the formation of soot and its 

precursors in flames using optical diagnostics. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2013;34(1):1713–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.09.004. 

[13] Qi F. Combustion chemistry probed by synchrotron VUV photoionization mass 
spectrometry. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2013;34(1):33–63. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.09.002. 

[14] Niessner R. The many faces of soot: Characterization of soot nanoparticles 
produced by engines. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2014;53: 
12366–79. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201402812. 

[15] Kittelson D, Kraft M. Particle formation and models. Encyclopedia of Automotive 

Engineering 2014:1–23. 

[16] Michelsen HA. Probing soot formation, chemical and physical evolution, and 

oxidation: A review of in situ diagnostic techniques and needs. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2017;36(1):717–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2016.08.027. 

[17] Wang Y, Chung SH. Soot formation in laminar counterflow flames. Progress in 
Energy and Combustion Science 2019;74:152–238. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pecs.2019.05.003. 

[18] Baldelli A, Trivanovic U, Sipkens TA, Rogak SN. On determining soot maturity: A 

review of the role of microscopy-and spectroscopy-based techniques. 
Chemosphere 2020:126532. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2020.126532. 

[19] Michelsen HA, Colket M, Bengtsson P-E, D’Anna A, Desgroux P, Haynes BS, et al. 

A review of terminology used to describe soot formation and evolution under 
combustion and pyrolytic conditions. ACS nano 2020. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.0c06226. 

[20] Bockhorn H. Soot Formation in Combustion: Mechanisms and Models. Springer 

Science & Business Media; 1994. 

[21] Johansson KO, Head-Gordon MP, Schrader PE, Wilson KR, Michelsen HA. 

Resonance-stabilized hydrocarbon-radical chain reactions may explain soot 
inception and growth. Science 2018;361(6406):997–1000. https://doi.org/ 
10.1126/science.aat3417. 

[22] Commodo M, Kaiser K, De Falco G, Minutolo P, Schulz F, D’Anna A, et al. On the 
early stages of soot formation: Molecular structure elucidation by high-resolution 
atomic force microscopy. Combustion and Flame 2019;205:154–64. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.03.042. 

[23] Schenk M, Lieb S, Vieker H, Beyer A, G¨olzh¨auser A, Wang H, et al. Imaging 

nanocarbon materials: soot particles in flames are not structurally homogeneous. 
ChemPhysChem 2013;14(14):3248–54. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
cphc.201300581. 

[24] Martin JW, Botero M, Slavchov RI, Bowal K, Akroyd J, Mosbach S, et al. 

Flexoelectricity and the formation of carbon nanoparticles in flames. The Journal 
of Physical Chemistry C 2018;122(38):22210–5. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jpcc.8b08264. 

[25] Thomas A. Carbon formation in flames. Combustion and Flame 1962;6:46–62. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(62)90066-4. 

[26] Wersborg BL, Howard JB, Williams GC. Physical mechanisms in carbon formation 
in flames. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1973;14(1):929–40. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(73)80085-2. 

[27] Harris SJ, Weiner AM. Chemical kinetics of soot particle growth. Annual Review 
of Physical Chemistry 1985;36(1):31–52. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev. 
pc.36.100185.000335. 

[28] D’Alessio A, D’Anna A, D’orsi A, Minutolo P, Barbella R, Ciajolo A. Precursor 
formation and soot inception in premixed ethylene flames. Symposium 
(International) on Combustion 1992;24(1):973–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0082-0784(06)80115-3. 

[29] Dobbins RA, Subramaniasivam H. Soot precursor particles in flames. Soot 

Formation in Combustion. Springer; 1994. p. 290–301. 

[30] Blevins LG, Fletcher RA, Benner Jr BA, Steel EB, Mulholland GW. The existence of 
young soot in the exhaust of inverse diffusion flames. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2002;29(2):2325–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1540-7489 
(02)80283-8. 

[31] Howard JB. Carbon addition and oxidation reactions in heterogeneous 

combustion and soot formation. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1991; 
23(1):1107–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80371-1. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095642J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[32] D’Alessio A, Barone A, Cau R, D’Anna A, Minutolo P. Surface deposition and 

coagulation efficiency of combustion generated nanoparticles in the size range 
from 1 to 10 nm. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2005;30(2):2595–603. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.267. 

[33] Lindstedt R, Waldheim B. Modeling of soot particle size distributions in premixed 
stagnation flow flames. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2013;34(1): 
1861–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.05.047. 

[34] Sirignano M, D’Anna A. Coagulation of combustion generated nanoparticles in 
low and intermediate temperature regimes: An experimental study. Proceedings 
of the Combustion Institute 2013;34(1):1877–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2012.06.119. 

[35] Saggese C, Ferrario S, Camacho J, Cuoci A, Frassoldati A, Ranzi E, et al. Kinetic 

modeling of particle size distribution of soot in a premixed burner-stabilized 
stagnation ethylene flame. Combustion and Flame 2015;162(9):3356–69. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.06.002. 

[36] Pedata P, Stoeger T, Zimmermann R, Peters A, Oberd¨orster G, D’Anna A. Are we 
forgetting the smallest, sub 10 nm combustion generated particles? Particle and 
fibre toxicology 2015;12(1):34. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12989-015-0107-3. 

[37] Hou D, Zong D, Lindberg CS, Kraft M, You X. On the coagulation efficiency of 
carbonaceous nanoparticles. Journal of Aerosol Science 2020;140:105478. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2019.105478. 

[38] Huo Z, Cleary MJ, Sirignano M, Masri AR. A sectional soot formation kinetics 

scheme with a new model for coagulation efficiency. Combustion and Flame 
2021;230:111444. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.111444. 
[39] Desgroux P, Faccinetto A, Mercier X, Mouton T, Aubagnac Karkar D, El Bakali A. 
Comparative study of the soot formation process in a -nucleation and a sooting 
low pressure premixed methane flame. Combustion and Flame 2017;184:153–66. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.05.034. 

[40] Minutolo P, Gambi G, D’Alessio A, Carlucci S. Spectroscopic characterisation of 
carbonaceous nanoparticles in premixed flames. Atmospheric Environment 1999; 
33(17):2725–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1352-2310(98)00330-6. 

[41] Kammler HK, M¨adler L, Pratsinis SE. Flame synthesis of nanoparticles. Chemical 
Engineering & Technology: Industrial Chemistry-Plant Equipment-Process 
Engineering-Biotechnology 2001;24(6):583–96. https://doi.org/10.1002/1521- 
4125(200106)24:6<583::AID-CEAT583>3.0.CO;2-H. 

[42] Mueller R, M¨adler L, Pratsinis SE. Nanoparticle synthesis at high production rates 
by flame spray pyrolysis. Chemical Engineering Science 2003;58(10):1969–76. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-2509(03)00022-8. 

[43] Eremin AV. Formation of carbon nanoparticles from the gas phase in shock wave 
pyrolysis processes. Progress in energy and combustion science 2012;38(1):1–40. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2011.09.002. 

[44] Fern´andez CG, Picaud S, Devel M. Calculations of the mass absorption cross 

sections for carbonaceous nanoparticles modeling soot. Journal of Quantitative 
Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer 2015;164:69–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jqsrt.2015.05.011. 

[45] Kelesidis GA, Goudeli E, Pratsinis SE. Flame synthesis of functional 

nanostructured materials and devices: Surface growth and aggregation. 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2017;36(1):29–50. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2016.08.078. 

[46] Lighty JS, Veranth JM, Sarofim AF. Combustion aerosols: factors governing their 

size and composition and implications to human health. Journal of the Air & 
Waste Management Association 2000;50(9):1565–618. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10473289.2000.10464197. 

[47] Landrigan PJ, Fuller R, Acosta NJR, Adeyi O, Arnold R, Basu NN, et al. The Lancet 
Commission on pollution and health. The Lancet 2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0140-6736(17)32345-0. 

[48] Marsh H, Reinoso FR. Activated carbon. Elsevier; 2006. 
[49] Ishiguro T, Takatori Y, Akihama K. Microstructure of diesel soot particles probed 

by electron microscopy: First observation of inner core and outer shell. 
Combustion and Flame 1997;108(1-2):231–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010- 
2180(96)00206-4. 

[57] Millar G, Abel T, Allen J, Barn P, Noullett M, Spagnol J, et al. Evaluating human 

exposure to fine particulate matter part I: Measurements. Geography Compass 
2010;4(4):281–302. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-8198.2010.00325.x. 
[58] Millar G, Abel T, Allen J, Barn P, Noullett M, Spagnol J, et al. Evaluating human 
exposure to fine particulate matter part ii: Modeling. Geography Compass 2010;4 
(7):731–49. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-8198.2010.00344.x. 

[59] Miller MR, Shaw CA, Langrish JP. From particles to patients: Oxidative stress and 
the cardiovascular effects of air pollution. Future Cardiology 2012;8(4):577–602. 
https://doi.org/10.2217/fca.12.43. 

[60] Janssen NA, Hoek G, Simic-Lawson M, Fischer P, Van Bree L, Ten Brink H, et al. 
Black carbon as an additional indicator of the adverse health effects of airborne 
particles compared with PM10 and PM2.5. Environmental health perspectives 
2011;119(12):1691–9. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1003369. 

[61] Lippmann M. Toxicological and epidemiological studies of cardiovascular effects 

of ambient air fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and its chemical components: 
coherence and public health implications. Critical reviews in toxicology 2014;44 
(4):299–347. https://doi.org/10.3109/10408444.2013.861796. 

[62] Grahame TJ, Klemm R, Schlesinger RB. Public health and components of 

particulate matter: the changing assessment of black carbon. Journal of the Air & 
Waste Management Association 2014;64(6):620–60. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10962247.2014.912692. 

[63] Wyzga RE, Rohr A. Long-term particulate matter exposure: Attributing health 
effects to individual PM components. Journal of the Air & Waste Management 
Association 2015;65(5):523–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
atmosenv.2012.07.036. 

[64] Schraufnagel DE, Balmes J, Cowl CT, De Matteis S, Jung S-H, Mortimer K, et al. 

Air pollution and non-communicable diseases: a review by the forum of 
international respiratory societies’ environmental committee. part 2: air pollution 
and organ systems. Chest 2019;155(2):409–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chest.2018.10.041. 

[65] Palmer HB, Cullis CF. The formation of carbon from gases. Chemistry and Physics 

of Carbon 1965;1:265–325. 

[66] Kennedy IM. Models of soot formation and oxidation. Progress in Energy and 
Combustion Science 1997;23(2):95–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-1285 
(97)00007-5. 

[67] Jensen D. Prediction of soot formation rates: a new approach. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London A Mathematical and Physical Sciences 1974;338(1614): 
375–96. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1974.0092. 

[68] Frenklach M, Wang H. Detailed modeling of soot particle nucleation and growth. 
Symposium (International) on Combustion 1991;23(1):1559–66. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80426-1. 

[69] Mauss F, Sch¨afer T, Bockhorn H. Inception and growth of soot particles in 

dependence on the surrounding gas phase. Combustion and Flame 1994;99(3-4): 
697–705. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(94)90064-7. 

[70] Mauss F, Trilken B, Breitbach H, Peters N. Soot formation in partially premixed 
diffusion flames at atmospheric pressure. Soot formation in combustion. Springer; 
1994. p. 325–49. 

[71] Mauß F, Bockhorn H. Soot formation in premixed hydrocarbon flames: Prediction 

of temperature and pressure dependence. Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie 
1995;188(1-2):45–60. https://doi.org/10.1524/zpch.1995.188.Part_1_2.045. 
[72] Wang H, Frenklach M. A detailed kinetic modeling study of aromatics formation 
in laminar premixed acetylene and ethylene flames. Combustion and Flame 1997; 
110(1-2):173–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(97)00068-0. 
[73] Appel J, Bockhorn H, Frenklach M. Kinetic modeling of soot formation with 

detailed chemistry and physics: laminar premixed flames of C2 hydrocarbons. 
Combustion and flame 2000;121(1-2):122–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010- 
2180(99)00135-2. 

[74] Graham S, Homer J, Rosenfeld J. The formation and coagulation of soot aerosols 
generated by the pyrolysis of aromatic hydrocarbons. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London A Mathematical and Physical Sciences 1975;344(1637): 
259–85. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1975.0101. 

[50] Hurt RH, Crawford GP, Shim H-S. Equilibrium nanostructure of primary soot 

[75] Frenklach M, Taki S, Durgaprasad M, Matula R. Soot formation in shock-tube 

particles. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2000;28(2):2539–46. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(00)80670-0. 

[51] Vander Wal RL, Tomasek AJ. Soot nanostructure: dependence upon synthesis 

conditions. Combustion and Flame 2004;136(1-2):129–40. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2003.09.008. 

[52] Botero ML, Sheng Y, Akroyd J, Martin J, Dreyer JA, Yang W, et al. Internal 

structure of soot particles in a diffusion flame. Carbon 2019;141:635–42. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2018.09.063. 

[53] Bond TC, Doherty SJ, Fahey DW, Forster PM, Berntsen T, Deangelo BJ, et al. 

Bounding the role of black carbon in the climate system: A scientific assessment. 
Journal of Geophysical Research Atmospheres 2013;118(11):5380–552. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50171. 

pyrolysis of acetylene, allene, and 1,3-butadiene. Combustion and Flame 1983;54 
(1–3):81–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(83)90024-X. 

[76] Glassman I. Soot formation in combustion processes. Symposium (International) 
on Combustion 1989;22(1):295–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(89) 
80036-0. 

[77] B¨ohm H, Hesse D, Jander H, Lüers B, Pietscher J, Wagner H, et al. The influence 
of pressure and temperature on soot formation in premixed flames. Symposium 
(International) on combustion 1989;22(1):403–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0082-0784(89)80047-5. 

[78] Tree DR, Svensson KI. Soot processes in compression ignition engines. Progress in 
Energy and Combustion Science 2007;33(3):272–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pecs.2006.03.002. 

[54] Highwood EJ, Kinnersley RP. When smoke gets in our eyes: The multiple impacts 

[79] Gao CW, Allen JW, Green WH, West RH. Reaction mechanism generator: 

of atmospheric black carbon on climate, air quality and health. Environment 
international 2006;32(4):560–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2005.12.003. 
[55] Hoffmann B, Moebus S, Mhlenkamp S, Stang A, Lehmann N, Dragano N, et al. 
Residential exposure to traffic is associated with coronary atherosclerosis. 
Circulation 2007;116(5):489–96. https://doi.org/10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.693622. 

[56] Murr L, Garza K. Natural and anthropogenic environmental nanoparticulates: 

Their microstructural characterization and respiratory health implications. 
Atmospheric Environment 2009;43(17):2683–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
atmosenv.2009.03.002. 

Automatic construction of chemical kinetic mechanisms. Computer Physics 
Communications 2016;203:212–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2016.02.013. 

[80] Slavinskaya NA, Riedel U, Dworkin SB, Thomson MJ. Detailed numerical 

modeling of PAH formation and growth in non-premixed ethylene and ethane 
flames. Combustion and Flame 2012;159(3):979–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2011.10.005. 

[81] Raj A, Prada IDC, Amer AA, Chung SH. A reaction mechanism for gasoline 
surrogate fuels for large polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Combustion and 
Flame 2012;159(2):500–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2011.08.011. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095643J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[82] Frenklach M. On surface growth mechanism of soot particles. Symposium 

(International) on Combustion 1996;26(2):2285–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0082-0784(96)80056-7. 

[83] Frenklach M, Schuetz CA, Ping J. Migration mechanism of aromatic-edge growth. 

Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2005;30(1):1389–96. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2004.07.048. 

[84] Whitesides R, Domin D, Salom´on-Ferrer R, Lester WA, Frenklach M. Embedded- 
ring migration on graphene zigzag edge. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 
2009;32 I(1):577–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2008.06.096. 

[85] Raj A, Celnik M, Shirley R, Sander M, Patterson R, West R, et al. A statistical 
approach to develop a detailed soot growth model using PAH characteristics. 
Combustion and Flame 2009;156(4):896–913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2009.01.005. 

[86] Whitesides R, Frenklach M. Detailed kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of graphene- 
edge growth. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2010;114(2):689–703. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/jp906541a. 

[87] Whitesides R, Frenklach M. Effect of reaction kinetics on graphene-edge 

morphology and composition. Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie 2015;229(4). 
https://doi.org/10.1515/zpch-2014-0633. 

[88] Yapp EK, Wells CG, Akroyd J, Mosbach S, Xu R, Kraft M. Modelling PAH 

curvature in laminar premixed flames using a detailed population balance model. 
Combustion and Flame 2017;176:172–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2016.10.004. 

[89] Leon G, Eaves N, Akroyd J, Mosbach S, Kraft M. A new methodology to calculate 

process rates in a kinetic Monte Carlo model of PAH growth. Combustion and 
Flame 2019;209:133–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.07.032. 
[90] D’Anna A, Violi A, D’Alessio A, Sarofim AF. A reaction pathway for nanoparticle 
formation in rich premixed flames. Combustion and Flame 2001;127(1): 
1995–2003. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(01)00303-0. 

[91] Violi A, Sarofim AF, Voth GA. Kinetic monte carlo-molecular dynamics approach 

to model soot inception. Combustion Science and Technology 2004;176(5-6): 
991–1005. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200490428594. 

[92] Lai JY, Elvati P, Violi A. Stochastic atomistic simulation of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbon growth in combustion. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2014; 
16(17):7969–79. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4CP00112E. 

[93] Elvati P, Dillstrom V, Violi A. Oxygen driven soot formation. Proceedings of the 

Combustion Institute 2017;36(1):825–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2016.09.019. 

[94] Johansson KO, Dillstrom T, Elvati P, Campbell MF, Schrader PE, Popolan- 

Vaida DM, et al. Radical-radical reactions, pyrene nucleation, and incipient soot 
formation in combustion. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2017;36(1): 
799–806. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.130. 

[95] Wang Q, Saldinger JC, Elvati P, Violi A. Molecular structures in flames: A 

comparison between SNapS2 and recent AFM results. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2021;38(1):1133–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2020.06.250. 

[96] Saldinger JC, Elvati P, Violi A. Stochastic and network analysis of polycyclic 

aromatic growth in a coflow diffusion flame. Physical Chemistry Chemical 
Physics 2021;23(7):4326–33. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0CP03529G. 
[97] Balthasar M, Kraft M. A stochastic approach to calculate the particle size 

distribution function of soot particles in laminar premixed flames. Combustion 
and Flame 2003;133(3):289–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(03) 
00003-8. 

[98] Zhao B, Yang Z, Johnston MV, Wang H, Wexler AS, Balthasar M, et al. 

Measurement and numerical simulation of soot particle size distribution functions 
in a laminar premixed ethylene-oxygen-argon flame. Combustion and Flame 
2003;133(1-2):173–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02)00574-6. 
[99] Singh J, Patterson RI, Kraft M, Wang H. Numerical simulation and sensitivity 

analysis of detailed soot particle size distribution in laminar premixed ethylene 
flames. Combustion and Flame 2006;145(1-2):117–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.combustflame.2005.11.003. 

[100] Goudeli E, Eggersdorfer ML, Pratsinis SE. Coagulation–Agglomeration of Fractal- 
like Particles: Structure and Self-Preserving Size Distribution. Langmuir 2015;31: 
1320–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/la504296z. 

[101] Goudeli E, Eggersdorfer ML, Pratsinis SE. Coagulation of agglomerates consisting 
of polydisperse primary particles. Langmuir 2016;32(36):9276–85. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b02455. 

of the Combustion Institute 2017;36(1):935–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2016.06.051. 

[108] Donnet J-B, Bansal RC, Wang M-J. Carbon black: science and technology. CRC 

Press; 1993. 

[109] Baum T, L¨offler S, L¨offler P, Weilmünster P, Homann K-H. Fullerene ions and their 
relation to PAH and soot in low-pressure hydrocarbon flames. Berichte der 
Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische Chemie 1992;96(7):841–57. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/bbpc.19920960702. 

[110] D’Alessio A, Di Lorenzo A, Sarofim A, Beretta F, Masi S, Venitozzi C. Soot 

formation in methane-oxygen flames. Symposium (International) on Combustion 
1975;15(1):1427–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(75)80401-2. 
[111] Homann KH, Str¨ofer E. Charged Soot Particles in Unseeded and Seeded Flames. 
In: Lahaye J, Prado G, editors. Soot in Combustion Systems and its Toxic 
Properties. New York and London: Plenum Press; 1983. p. 217. 

[112] Hayhurst AN, Jones HRN. Ions and soot in flames. Journal of the Chemical 

Society, Faraday Transactions 2 1987;83(1):1. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
f29878300001. 

[113] Carbone F, Moslih S, Gomez A. Probing gas-to-particle transition in a moderately 
sooting atmospheric pressure ethylene/air laminar premixed flame. Part II: 
Molecular clusters and nascent soot particle size distributions. Combustion and 
Flame 2017;181:329–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.02.021. 
[114] Yang W, Kangasluoma J, Attoui M, Fang J, Junninen H, Kulmala M, et al. The 
high charge fraction of flame-generated particles in the size range below 3 nm 
measured by enhanced particle detectors. Combustion and Flame 2017;176: 
72–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.10.003. 

[115] Fialkov A. Investigations on ions in flames. Progress in Energy and Combustion 

Science 1997;23:399–528. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-1285(97)00016-6. 
[116] Maricq MM. A comparison of soot size and charge distributions from ethane, 
ethylene, acetylene, and benzene/ethylene premixed flames. Combustion and 
Flame 2006;144(4):730–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2005.09.007. 

[117] Maricq MM. Thermal equilibration of soot charge distributions by coagulation. 
Journal of aerosol science 2008;39(2):141–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jaerosci.2007.10.009. 

[118] Maricq MM. The dynamics of electrically charged soot particles in a premixed 
ethylene flame. Combustion and Flame 2005;141(4):406–16. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.01.014. 

[119] Maricq MM. Bipolar diffusion charging of soot aggregates. Aerosol Science and 
Technology 2008;42(4):247–54. https://doi.org/10.1080/02786820801958775. 
[120] Maricq MM. On the electrical charge of motor vehicle exhaust particles. Journal 

of Aerosol Science 2006;37(7):858–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jaerosci.2005.08.003. 

[121] Wang M, Sharma G, Zhang H, You X, Biswas P. Charge characteristics of sub-10 
nm soot particles in premixed ethylene flames. Fuel 2020;279:118511. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118511. 

[122] Kroto HW, Heath JR, O’Brien SC, Curl RF, Smalley RE. C60: 

Buckminsterfullerene. Nature 1985;318(6042):162–3. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
318162a0. 

[123] Gerhardt P, L¨offler S, Homann K. Polyhedral carbon ions in hydrocarbon flames. 

Chemical Physics Letters 1987;137(4):306–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009- 
2614(87)80889-8. 

[124] Grieco WJ, Lafleur AL, Swallow KC, Richter H, Taghizadeh K, Howard JB. 

Fullerenes and PAH in low-pressure premixed benzene/oxygen flames. 
Symposium (International) on Combustion 1998;27(2):1669–75. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80006-4. 

[125] Bogdanov A, Deininger D, Dyuzhev G. Development prospects of the commercial 

production of fullerenes. Technical Physics 2000;45(5):521–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1134/1.1259670. 

[126] Goel A, Hebgen P, Vander Sande JB, Howard JB. Combustion synthesis of 

fullerenes and fullerenic nanostructures. Carbon 2002;40(2):177–82. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0008-6223(01)00170-1. 

[127] Howard J.B., Kronholm D.F., Modestino A.J., Richter H.. Method for combustion 

synthesis of fullerenes. 2008. US Patent 7,396,520. 

[128] Homann KH. Fullerenes and soot formation - New pathways to large particles in 
flames. Angewandte Chemie, International Edition in English 1998;37(18): 
2435–51. 10.1002/(SICI)1521-3773(19981002)37:18%3C2434::AID- 
ANIE2434%3E3.0.CO;2-L. 

[102] Kelesidis GA, Goudeli E, Pratsinis SE. Morphology and mobility diameter of 

[129] Rodríguez-Fortea A, Irle S, Poblet JM. Fullerenes: formation, stability, and 

carbonaceous aerosols during agglomeration and surface growth. Carbon 2017; 
121:527–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2017.06.004. 

[103] Pejpichestakul W, Ranzi E, Pelucchi M, Frassoldati A, Cuoci A, Parente A, et al. 
Examination of a soot model in premixed laminar flames at fuel-rich conditions. 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):1013–21. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.104. 

[104] Bodor AL, Cuoci A, Faravelli T, Franzelli B. A forward approach for the validation 
of soot sizing models using laser-induced incandescence (lii). Applied Physics B 
2020;126(3):1–19. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00340-020-7383-9. 

[105] Sabbah H, Biennier L, Klippenstein SJ, Sims IR, Rowe BR. Exploring the role of 

PAHs in the formation of soot: pyrene dimerization. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry Letters 2010;1(19):2962–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jz101033t. 
[106] Totton TS, Misquitta AJ, Kraft M. A quantitative study of the clustering of 

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons at high temperatures. Physical Chemistry 
Chemical Physics 2012;14(12):4081–94. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2cp23008a. 

[107] Eaves NA, Dworkin SB, Thomson MJ. Assessing relative contributions of PAHs to 
soot mass by reversible heterogeneous nucleation and condensation. Proceedings 

reactivity. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science 
2011;1(3):350–67. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.21. 

[130] Mojica M, Alonso JA, M´endez F. Synthesis of fullerenes. Journal of Physical 
Organic Chemistry 2013;26(7):526–39. https://doi.org/10.1002/poc.3121. 
[131] Münzer A, Xiao L, Sehlleier YH, Schulz C, Wiggers H. All gas-phase synthesis of 
graphene: Characterization and its utilization for silicon-based lithium-ion 
batteries. Electrochimica Acta 2018;272:52–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
electacta.2018.03.137. 

[132] Singh M, Sengupta A, Zeller K, Skoptsov G, Vander Wal RL. Effect of hydrogen 
concentration on graphene synthesis using microwave-driven plasma-mediated 
methane cracking. Carbon 2019;143:802–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbon.2018.11.082. 

[133] Toossi R. Surface analysis of combustion-generated soot particles by X-ray 

photoelectron spectroscopy. Combustion and flame 1992;90(1):1–10. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0010-2180(92)90132-9. 

[134] D’Anna A, D’Alessio A, Minutolo P. Spectroscopic and chemical characterization 
of soot inception processes in premixed laminar flames at atmospheric pressure. 
Soot Formation in Combustion. Springer; 1994. p. 83–103. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095644J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[135] Michelsen HA, Tivanski AV, Gilles MK, Van Poppel LH, Dansson MA, Buseck PR. 
Particle formation from pulsed laser irradiation of soot aggregates studied with a 
scanning mobility particle sizer, a transmission electron microscope, and a 
scanning transmission X-ray microscope. Applied optics 2007;46(6):959–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.46.000959. 

[136] Lasher SW. Ultra-fine soot investigation in flames. Massachusetts Institute of 

Technology; 1999. 

[137] Hepp H, Siegmann K. Mapping of soot particles in a weakly sooting diffusion 

flame by aerosol techniques. Combustion and flame 1998;115(1-2):275–83. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(97)00346-5. 

[138] Skillas G, Burtscher H, Siegmann K, Baltensperger U. Density and fractal-like 
dimension of particles from a laminar diffusion flame. Journal of colloid and 
interface science 1999;217(2):269–74. https://doi.org/10.1006/jcis.1999.6370. 
[139] Maricq MM, Harris SJ, Szente JJ. Soot size distributions in rich premixed ethylene 

flames. Combustion and Flame 2003;132(3):328–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0010-2180(02)00502-3. 

[140] Barone A, D’Alessio A, D’Anna A. Morphological characterization of the early 
process of soot formation by atomic force microscopy. Combustion and Flame 
2003;132(1-2):181–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02)00434-0. 

[141] Commodo M, De Falco G, Bruno A, Borriello C, Minutolo P, D’Anna A. 

Physicochemical evolution of nascent soot particles in a laminar premixed flame: 
from nucleation to early growth. Combustion and Flame 2015;162(10):3854–63. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.07.022. 

[142] Commodo M, D’Anna A, De Falco G, Larciprete R, Minutolo P. Illuminating the 
earliest stages of the soot formation by photoemission and Raman spectroscopy. 
Combustion and Flame 2017;181:1339–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2017.03.020. 

[143] Cecere D, Sgro L, Basile G, D’Alessio A, D’Anna A, Minutolo P. Evidence and 

characterization of nanoparticles produced in nonsooting premixed flames. 
Combustion science and technology 2002;174(11-12):377–98. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/00102200215079. 

[144] Thierley M, Grotheer HH, Aigner M, Yang Z, Abid A, Zhao B, et al. On existence of 
nanoparticles below the sooting threshold. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2007;31(1):639–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.08.035. 
[145] Dobbins RA, Fletcher RA, Benner BAJ, Hoeft S. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
in flames, in diesel fuels, and in diesel emissions. Combustion and Flame 2006; 
144(4):773–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.09.008. 

[146] Di Stasio S, Mitchell JBa, Legarrec JL, Biennier L, Wulff M. Synchrotron SAXS <in 
situ> identification of three different size modes for soot nanoparticles in a 
diffusion flame. Carbon 2006;44(7):1267–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbon.2005.10.042. 

[147] Dobbins RA. Hydrocarbon nanoparticles formed in flames and diesel engines. 
Aerosol Science and Technology 2007;41(5):485–96. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02786820701225820. 

[148] D’Anna A, Commodo M, Minutolo P. Particle inception in a laminar premixed 

flame of benzene. Combustion science and technology 2008;180(5):758–66. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200801893754. 

[149] Abid A, Tolmachoff E, Phares D, Wang H, Liu Y, Laskin A. Size distribution and 
morphology of nascent soot in premixed ethylene flames with and without 
benzene doping. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2009;32(1):681–8. 

[150] Mouton T, Mercier X, Wartel M. Laser-induced incandescence technique to 

identify soot nucleation and very small particles in low-pressure methane flames. 
Applied Physics B 2013;112:369–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00340-013-5446- 
x. 

[151] Bladh H, Olofsson N-E, Mouton T, Simonsson J, Mercier X, Faccinetto A, et al. 
Probing the smallest soot particles in low-sooting premixed flames using laser- 
induced incandescence. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2015;35(2): 
1843–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.06.001. 

[152] Betrancourt C, Liu F, Desgroux P, Mercier X, Faccinetto A, Salamanca M, et al. 

Investigation of the size of the incandescent incipient soot particles in premixed 
sooting and nucleation flames of n-butane using LII, HIM, and 1 nm-SMPS. 
Aerosol Science and Technology 2017;51(8):916–35. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02786826.2017.1325440. 

[153] Mosbach S, Celnik MS, Raj A, Kraft M, Zhang HR, Kubo S, et al. Towards a 

detailed soot model for internal combustion engines. Combustion and Flame 
2009;156(6):1156–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.01.003. 

[154] Moallemi A, Kazemimanesh M, Kostiuk LW, Olfert JS. The effect of sodium 

chloride on the nanoparticles observed in a laminar methane diffusion flame. 
Combustion and Flame 2018;188:273–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2017.10.009. 

[155] Grotheer H-H, Pokorny H, Barth K-L, Thierley M, Aigner M. Mass spectrometry up 
to 1 million mass units for the simultaneous detection of primary soot and of soot 
precursors (nanoparticles) in flames. Chemosphere 2004;57(10):1335–42. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2004.08.054. 

[156] Happold J, Grotheer H-H, Aigner M. Distinction of gaseous soot precursor 
molecules and soot precursor particles through photoionization mass 
spectrometry. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 2007;21(7):1247–54. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/rcm.2955. 

[157] Baquet TG, Grotheer H-H, Aigner M. Simultaneous detection of two types of soot 

precursor particles using photoionization mass spectrometry. Rapid 
Communications in Mass Spectrometry 2007;21(24):4060–4. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/rcm.3297. 

[158] Happold J, Grotheer H-H, Aigner M. Soot precursors consisting of stacked 

pericondensed PAHs. In: Bockhorn H, D’Anna A, Sarofim A, Wang H, editors. 
Combustion Generated Fine Carbonaceous Particles. KIT Scientific Publishing, 
Karlsruhe, Germany; 2009. p. 277–88. 

[159] Sgro L, De Filippo A, Lanzuolo G, D’Alessio A. Characterization of nanoparticles 
of organic carbon (noc) produced in rich premixed flames by differential mobility 
analysis. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2007;31(1):631–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.08.026. 

[160] Stirn R, Baquet TG, Kanjarkar S, Meier W, Geigle KP, Grotheer H-H, et al. 

Comparison of particle size measurements with laser-induced incandescence, 
mass spectroscopy, and scanning mobility particle sizing in a laminar premixed 
ethylene/air flame. Combustion science and technology 2009;181(2):329–49. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200802483498. 

[161] Commodo M, Sgro LA, Minutolo P, D’Anna A. Characterization of combustion- 
generated carbonaceous nanoparticles by size-dependent ultraviolet laser 
photoionization. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2013;117(19):3980–9. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/jp401061d. 

[162] Sgro L, Basile G, Barone A, D’Anna A, Minutolo P, Borghese A, et al. Detection of 
combustion formed nanoparticles. Chemosphere 2003;51(10):1079–90. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0045-6535(02)00718-X. 

[163] D’Anna A, Rolando A, Allouis C, Minutolo P, D’Alessio A. Nano-organic carbon 
and soot particle measurements in a laminar ethylene diffusion flame. 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2005;30(1):1449–56. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.276. 

[164] D’Anna A, Commodo M, Violi S, Allouis C, Kent J. Nano organic carbon and soot 
in turbulent non-premixed ethylene flames. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2007;31(1):621–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.062. 
[165] Homann K, Wagner H. Some new aspects of the mechanism of carbon formation 

in premixed flames. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1967;11(1): 
371–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(67)80161-9. 

[166] Grotheer H-H, Wolf K, Hoffmann K. Photoionization mass spectrometry for the 

investigation of combustion generated nascent nanoparticles and their relation to 
laser induced incandescence. Applied Physics B 2011;104(2):367–83. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00340-011-4403-9. 

[167] D’Alessio A, D’anna A, Gambi G, Minutolo P. The spectroscopic characterisation 
of UV absorbing nanoparticles in fuel rich soot forming flames. Journal of aerosol 
science 1998;29(4):397–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-8502(97)00457-6. 

[168] Basile G, Rolando A, D’Alessio A, D’Anna A, Minutolo P. Coagulation and 

carbonization processes in slightly sooting premixed flames. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2002;29(2):2391–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1540-7489 
(02)80291-7. 

[169] Sgro L, Barone A, Commodo M, D’Alessio A, De Filippo A, Lanzuolo G, et al. 

Measurement of nanoparticles of organic carbon in non-sooting flame conditions. 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2009;32(1):689–96. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2008.06.216. 

[170] D’Alessio A, Gambi G, Minutolo P, Russo S, D’Anna A. Optical characterization of 

rich premixed CH4/O2  flamesacross the soot formation threshold. Symposium 
(International) on Combustion 1994;25(1):645–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0082-0784(06)80696-X. 

[171] De Falco G, Picca F, Commodo M, Minutolo P. Probing soot structure and 

electronic properties by optical spectroscopy. Fuel 2020;259:116244. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.116244. 

[172] Gardiner WC. The chemistry of flames. Scientific American 1982;246(2):110–25. 
[173] Minutolo P, Gambi G, D’Alessio A. Properties of carbonaceous nanoparticles in 

flat premixed C2H4/air flames with C/O ranging from 0.4 to soot appearance 
limit. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1998;27(1):1461–9. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80553-5. 

[174] Coe D, Steinfeld J. Fluorescence excitation and emission spectra of polycyclic 

aromatic hydrocarbons at flame temperatures. Chemical Physics Letters 1980;76 
(3):485–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2614(80)80652-X. 

[175] Haynes B, Jander H, Wagner HG. Optical studies of soot-formation processes in 
premixed flames. Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische Chemie 1980; 
84(6):585–92. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102208308923666. 

[176] Di Lorenzo A, D’alessio A, Cincotti V, Masi S, Menna P, Venitozzi C. UV 

absorption, laser excited fluorescence and direct sampling in the study of the 
formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in rich CH4/O2  flames. 
Symposium (International) on Combustion 1981;18(1):485–91. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0082-0784(81)80054-9. 

[177] Smyth KC, Shaddix CR, Everest DA. Aspects of soot dynamics as revealed by 
measurements of broadband fluorescence and flame luminosity in flickering 
diffusion flames. Combustion and Flame 1997;111(3):185–207. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0010-2180(97)00017-5. 

[178] Birks J, Dyson D, Munro I. ‘Excimer’ fluorescence II. Lifetime studies of pyrene 
solutions. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A Mathematical and 
Physical Sciences 1963;275(1363):575–88. https://doi.org/10.1098/ 
rspa.1963.0187. 

[179] Hoche J, Schmitt H-C, Humeniuk A, Fischer I, Mitri´c R, R¨ohr MI. The mechanism 
of excimer formation: an experimental and theoretical study on the pyrene dimer. 
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2017;19(36):25002–15. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/C7CP03990E. 

[180] Sirignano M, Collina A, Commodo M, Minutolo P, D’Anna A. Detection of 
aromatic hydrocarbons and incipient particles in an opposed-flow flame of 
ethylene by spectral and time-resolved laser induced emission spectroscopy. 
Combustion and Flame 2012;159(4):1663–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2011.11.005. 

[181] Mercier X, Carrivain O, Irimiea C, Faccinetto A, Therssen E. Dimers of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons: the missing pieces in the soot formation process. Physical 
Chemistry Chemical Physics 2019;21(16):8282–94. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C9CP00394K. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095645J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[182] Pui DY, Chen D-R. Nanometer particles: a new frontier for multidisciplinary 

research. Journal of aerosol science 1997;29(4). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021- 
8502(96)00495-8. 

[183] Atkinson RW, Carey IM, Kent AJ, Staa TPV, Anderson R, Cook DG. Long-Term 

Exposure to Outdoor Air Pollution and Incidence of Cardiovascular Diseases. 
Epidemiology 2013;24(1):44–53. https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
EDE.0b013e318276ccb8. 

[184] Gold DR, Litonjua A, Schwartz J, Lovett E, Larson A, Nearing B, et al. Ambient 
pollution and heart rate variability. Circulation 2000;101(11):1267–73. https:// 
doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.101.11.1267. 

[185] Sharma N, China S, Bhandari J, Gorkowski K, Dubey M, Zaveri RA, et al. Physical 
properties of aerosol internally mixed with soot particles in a biogenically 
dominated environment in California. Geophysical Research Letters 2018;45(20): 
11–473. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL079404. 

[186] Makonese T, Meyer J, Von Solms S. Characteristics of spherical organic particles 
emitted from fixed-bed residential coal combustion. Atmosphere 2019;10(8):441. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos10080441. 

[187] Chakrabarty RK, Beres ND, Moosmüller H, China S, Mazzoleni C, Dubey MK, et al. 

Soot superaggregates from flaming wildfires and their direct radiative forcing. 
Scientific reports 2014;4:5508. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep05508. 

[188] West CP, Hettiyadura APS, Darmody A, Mahamuni G, Davis J, Novosselov I, et al. 
Molecular composition and the optical properties of brown carbon generated by 
the ethane flame. ACS Earth and Space Chemistry 2020;4(7):1090–103. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acsearthspacechem.0c00095. 

[189] De Falco G, Commodo M, Minutolo P, D’Anna A. Flame-formed carbon 

nanoparticles: Morphology, interaction forces, and hamaker constant from afm. 
Aerosol Science and Technology 2015;49(5):281–9. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02786826.2015.1022634. 

[190] Slowik JG, Cross ES, Han J-H, Davidovits P, Onasch TB, Jayne JT, et al. An inter- 

comparison of instruments measuring black carbon content of soot particles. 
Aerosol Science and Technology 2007;41(3):295–314. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02786820701197078. 

[191] Kumar P, Fennell P, Britter R. Effect of wind direction and speed on the dispersion 
of nucleation and accumulation mode particles in an urban street canyon. Science 
of the total environment 2008;402(1):82–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2008.04.032. 

[192] Hinds WC. Aerosol technology: properties, behavior, and measurement of 

airborne particles. John Wiley & Sons; 1999. 

ultrafine ambient particulate matter causes cardiovascular effects. Toxicological 
Sciences 2014;140(1):61–72. https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfu063. 
[207] Allen JL, Oberdorster G, Morris-Schaffer K, Wong C, Klocke C, Sobolewski M, 

et al. Developmental neurotoxicity of inhaled ambient ultrafine particle air 
pollution: Parallels with neuropathological and behavioral features of autism and 
other neurodevelopmental disorders. Neurotoxicology 2017;59:140–54. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2015.12.014. 

[208] Sgro L, Simonelli A, Pascarella L, Minutolo P, Guarnieri D, Sannolo N, et al. 

Toxicological properties of nanoparticles of organic compounds (noc) from flames 
and vehicle exhausts. Environmental science & technology 2009;43(7):2608–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es8034768. 

[209] Cain JP, Gassman PL, Laskin A, Wang H. Micro-FTIR study of soot chemical 

composition’evidence of aliphatic hydrocarbons on nascent soot surfaces. 
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2010;12(20):5206–10. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/B924344E. 

[210] Schenk M, Lieb S, Vieker H, Beyer A, G¨olzh¨auser A, Wang H, et al. Morphology of 
nascent soot in ethylene flames. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2015;35 
(2):1879–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.05.009. 

[211] Irimiea C, Faccinetto A, Mercier X, Ortega I-K, Nuns N, Therssen E, et al. 

Unveiling trends in soot nucleation and growth: When secondary ion mass 
spectrometry meets statistical analysis. Carbon 2019;144:815–30. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.carbon.2018.12.015. 

[212] Lambe A, Ahern A, Wright J, Croasdale D, Davidovits P, Onasch T. Oxidative 

aging and cloud condensation nuclei activation of laboratory combustion soot. 
Journal of Aerosol Science 2015;79:31–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jaerosci.2014.10.001. 

[213] Commodo M, De Falco G, Larciprete R, D’Anna A, Minutolo P. On the 

hydrophilic/hydrophobic character of carbonaceous nanoparticles formed in 
laminar premixed flames. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 2016;73: 
56–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2015.09.005. 

[214] Sgro LA, D’Anna A, Minutolo P. On the characterization of nanoparticles emitted 

from combustion sources related to understanding their effects on health and 
climate. Journal of hazardous materials 2012;211:420–6. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.10.097. 

[215] Petzold A, Gysel M, Vancassel X, Hitzenberger R, Puxbaum H, Vrochticky S, et al. 

On the effects of hydrocarbon and sulphur-containing compounds on the CCN 
activation of combustion particles. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 
Discussions 2005;5(3):2599–642. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-5-3187-2005. 

[193] Kang JH, Cho J, Ko YT. Investigation on the effect of nanoparticle size on the 

[216] Grimonprez S, Wu J, Faccinetto A, Gosselin S, Riber E, Cuenot B, et al. 

blood–brain tumour barrier permeability by in situ perfusion via internal carotid 
artery in mice. Journal of drug targeting 2019;27(1):103–10. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/1061186X.2018.1497037. 

[194] Adler G, Riziq AA, Erlick C, Rudich Y. Effect of intrinsic organic carbon on the 
optical properties of fresh diesel soot. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 2010;107(15):6699–704. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0903311106. 
[195] Swanson J, Kittelson D. Evaluation of thermal denuder and catalytic stripper 

methods for solid particle measurements. Journal of Aerosol Science 2010;41(12): 
1113–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2010.09.003. 

[196] Lapuerta M, Ballesteros R, Rodríguez-Fern´andez J. Thermogravimetric analysis of 
diesel particulate matter. Measurement Science and Technology 2007;18(3):650. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-0233/18/3/015. 

[197] Bostr¨om CE, Gerde P, Hanberg A, Jernstr¨om B, Johansson C, Kyrklund T, et al. 
Cancer risk assessment, indicators, and guidelines for polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons in the ambient air. Environmental Health Perspectives 2002;110: 
451–88. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.110-1241197. 

[198] Baird WM, Hooven LA, Mahadevan B. Carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbon-DNA adducts and mechanism of action. Environmental and 
Molecular Mutagenesis 2005;45(2-3):106–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
em.20095. 

[199] Rengarajan T, Rajendran P, Nandakumar N, Lokeshkumar B, Rajendran P, 

Nishigaki I. Exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons with special focus on 
cancer. Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine 2015;5:182–9. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S2221-1691(15)30003-4. 

[200] Mills NL, Amin N, Robinson SD, Anand A, Davies J, Patel D, et al. Do inhaled 
carbon nanoparticles translocate directly into the circulation in humans? 
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 2006;173(4):426–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.200506-865OC. 

[201] Miller MR, Raftis JB, Langrish JP, Mclean SG, Samutrtai P, Connell SP, et al. 

Inhaled nanoparticles accumulate at sites of vascular disease. ACS Nano 2017;11 
(5):10623–4. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6b08551. 

[202] Borm PJ, Robbins D, Haubold S, Kuhlbusch T, Fissan H, Donaldson K, et al. The 
potential risks of nanomaterials: A review carried out for ECETOC. Particle and 
Fibre Toxicology 2006;3(11):1–35. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-8977-3-11. 

[203] Kittelson DB, Watts WF, Johnson JP. Nanoparticle emissions on Minnesota 

highways. Atmospheric Environment 2004;38(1):9–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.atmosenv.2003.09.037. 

[204] Møller P, Danielsen PH, Karottki DG, Jantzen K, Roursgaard M, Klingberg H, et al. 

Oxidative stress and inflammation generated DNA damage by exposure to air 
pollution particles. Mutation Research - Reviews in Mutation Research 2014;762: 
133–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrrev.2014.09.001. 

[205] Yang H, Liu C, Yang D, Zhang H, Xi Z. Comparative study of cytotoxicity, 

oxidative stress and genotoxicity induced by four typical nanomaterials: The role 
of particle size, shape and composition. Journal of Applied Toxicology 2009;29 
(1):69–78. https://doi.org/10.1002/jat.1385. 

[206] Devlin RB, Smith CB, Schmitt MT, Rappold AG, Hinderliter A, Graff D, et al. 

Controlled exposure of humans with metabolic syndrome to concentrated 

Hydrophilic properties of soot particles exposed to oh radicals: A possible new 
mechanism involved in the contrail formation. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2021;38(4):6441–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.306. 
[217] Wittbom C, Eriksson A, Rissler J, Carlsson J, Roldin P, Nordin E, et al. Cloud 

droplet activity changes of soot aerosol upon smog chamber ageing. Atmospheric 
Chemistry and Physics 2014;14(18):9831–54. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-14- 
9831-2014. 

[218] Kelesidis GA, Bruun CA, Pratsinis SE. The impact of organic carbon on soot light 

absorption. Carbon 2021;172:742–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbon.2020.10.032. 

[219] Sirignano M, Conturso M, Magno A, Di Iorio S, Mancaruso E, Vaglieco BM, et al. 
Evidence of sub-10 nm particles emitted from a small-size diesel engine. 
Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 2018;95:60–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.expthermflusci.2018.01.031. 

[220] Yao XH, Lau NT, Fang M, Chan CK. On the time-averaging of ultrafine particle 

number size spectra in vehicular plumes. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 
2006;6(12):4801–7. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-6-4801-2006. 

[221] R¨onkk¨o T, Virtanen A, Kannosto J, Keskinen J, Lappi M, Pirjola L. Nucleation 

mode particles with a nonvolatile core in the exhaust of a heavy duty diesel 
vehicle. Environmental Science and Technology 2007;41(18):6384–9. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/es0705339. 

[222] Minutolo P, D’Anna A, Commodo M, Pagliara R, Toniato G, Accordini C. Emission 
of ultrafine particles from natural gas domestic burners. Environmental 
Engineering Science 2008;25(10):1357–64. https://doi.org/10.1089/ 
ees.2007.0188. 

[223] Sirignano M, D’Anna A. Filtration and coagulation efficiency of sub-10 nm 

combustion-generated particles. Fuel 2018;221:298–302. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.fuel.2018.02.107. 

[224] Malorni L, Guida V, Sirignano M, Genovese G, Petrarca C, Pedata P. Exposure to 
sub-10 nm particles emitted from a biodiesel-fueled diesel engine: In vitro toxicity 
and inflammatory potential. Toxicology letters 2017;270:51–61. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.toxlet.2017.02.009. 

[225] Kim C, Kang S, Pui DY. Removal of airborne sub-3 nm particles using fibrous 

filters and granular activated carbons. Carbon 2016;104:125–32. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.carbon.2016.03.060. 

[226] Kittelson DB, Watts WF, Johnson JP, Schauer JJ, Lawson DR. On-road and 

laboratory evaluation of combustion aerosols-Part 2: Summary of spark ignition 
engine results. Journal of Aerosol Science 2006;37(8):931–49. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jaerosci.2005.08.008. 

[227] Kittelson DB, Watts WF, Johnson JP. On-road and laboratory evaluation of 

combustion aerosols-Part1: Summary of diesel engine results. Journal of Aerosol 
Science 2006;37(8):913–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2005.08.005. 

[228] Wang C, Huddle T, Lester EH, Mathews JP. Quantifying curvature in high- 

resolution transmission electron microscopy lattice fringe micrographs of coals. 
Energy & Fuels 2016;30(4):2694–704. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
energyfuels.5b02907. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095646J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[229] Focsa C, Duca D, Noble J, Vojkovic M, Carpentier Y, Pirim C, et al. Multi- 

technique physico-chemical characterization of particles generated by a gasoline 
engine: Towards measuring tailpipe emissions below 23 nm. Atmospheric 
Environment 2020:117642. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.117642. 

[230] Wang X, Grose MA, Caldow R, Osmondson BL, Swanson JJ, Chow JC, et al. 
Improvement of Engine Exhaust Particle Sizer (EEPS) size distribution 
measurement - II. Engine exhaust particles. Journal of Aerosol Science 2016;92: 
83–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2015.11.003. 

[231] Zheng Z, Durbin TD, Karavalakis G, Johnson KC, Chaudhary A, Cocker DR, et al. 
Nature of sub-23-nm particles downstream of the European particle measurement 
programme (PMP)-compliant system: A real-time data perspective. Aerosol 
Science and Technology 2012;46(8):886–96. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02786826.2012.679167. 

[232] Mulay MR, Chauhan A, Patel S, Balakrishnan V, Halder A, Vaish R. Candle soot: 

Journey from a pollutant to a functional material. Carbon 2019;144:684–712. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2018.12.083. 

[233] Liu C, Singh AV, Saggese C, Tang Q, Chen D, Wan K, et al. Flame-formed carbon 
nanoparticles exhibit quantum dot behaviors. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 2019;116(26):12692–7. https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.1900205116. 

[234] N´afr´adi B, Choucair M, Dinse K-P, Forr´o L. Room temperature manipulation of 
long lifetime spins in metallic-like carbon nanospheres. Nature communications 
2016;7:12232. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms12232. 

[235] Liu H, Ye T, Mao C. Fluorescent carbon nanoparticles derived from candle soot. 

Angewandte Chemie - International Edition 2007;46(34):6473–5. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/anie.200701271. 

[236] Russo C, Apicella B, Ciajolo A. Blue and green luminescent carbon nanodots from 
controllable fuel-rich flame reactors. Scientific reports 2019;9(1):1–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41598-019-50919-1. 

photoionization mass spectrometry. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2008; 
10(1):20–34. https://doi.org/10.1039/b713460f. 

[254] Kohse-H¨oinghaus K. Combustion in the future: The importance of chemistry. 

Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2021;38(1):1–56. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.375. 

[255] Das DD, John PCS, McEnally CS, Kim S, Pfefferle LD. Measuring and predicting 
sooting tendencies of oxygenates, alkanes, alkenes, cycloalkanes, and aromatics 
on a unified scale. Combustion and Flame 2018;190:349–64. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.12.005. 

[256] Dryer FL. Chemical kinetic and combustion characteristics of transportation fuels. 

Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2015;35(1):117–44. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2014.09.008. 

[257] Kewley J, Jackson JS. The burning of mineral oils in wick-fed lamps. Journal of 

the Institute of Petroleum 1927;13:364–94. 

[258] Schalla R, McDonald G. Mechanism of soot formation in flames. Fifth Symposium 

(International) on Combustion 1955. 

[259] Calcote H, Manos D. Effect of molecular structure on incipient soot formation. 
Combustion and Flame 1983;49(1-3):289–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010- 
2180(83)90172-4. 

[260] Gill R, Olson D. Estimation of soot thresholds for fuel mixtures. Combustion 

Science and Technology 1984;40(5-6):307–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00102208408923814. 

[261] Barrientos EJ, Lapuerta M, Boehman AL. Group additivity in soot formation for 
the example of C-5 oxygenated hydrocarbon fuels. Combustion and Flame 2013; 
160(8):1484–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.02.024. 
[262] Lemaire R, Lapalme D, Seers P. Analysis of the sooting propensity of C-4 and C-5 
oxygenates: Comparison of sooting indexes issued from laser-based experiments 
and group additivity approaches. Combustion and Flame 2015;162(9):3140–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.03.018. 

[237] Sirignano M, Russo C, Ciajolo A. One-step synthesis of carbon nanoparticles and 

[263] Yan S, Eddings EG, Palotas AB, Pugmire RJ, Sarofim AF. Prediction of Sooting 

yellow to blue fluorescent nanocarbons in flame reactors. Carbon 2020;156: 
370–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2019.09.068. 

[238] Chen D, Wang H. Homo–lumo gaps of homogeneous polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbon clusters. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2019;123(45): 
27785–93. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b08300. 

[239] De Falco G, Mattiello G, Commodo M, Minutolo P, Shi X, D’Anna A, et al. 

Electronic band gap of flame-formed carbon nanoparticles by scanning tunneling 
spectroscopy. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2021;38(1):1805–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.07.109. 

[240] Wan K, Shi X, Wang H. Quantum confinement and size resolved modeling of 

electronic and optical properties of small soot particles. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2021;38(1):1517–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2020.07.145. 

[241] Street J, Thomas A. Carbon formation in pre-mixed flames. Fuel 1955;34(1):4–36. 
[242] Millikan RC. Non-equilibrium soot formation in premixed flames. The Journal of 

Physical Chemistry 1962;66(5):794–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100811a006. 
[243] Glassman I, Nishida O, Sidebotham G. Critical temperatures of soot formation. 

Soot Formation in Combustion. Springer; 1994. p. 316–24. 

[244] Wang H, Xu R, Wang K, Bowman CT, Hanson RK, Davidson DF, et al. A physics- 

based approach to modeling real-fuel combustion chemistry - I. Evidence from 
experiments, and thermodynamic, chemical kinetic and statistical considerations. 
Combustion and Flame 2018;193:502–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2018.03.019. 

Tendency for Hydrocarbon Liquids in Diffusion Flames. Energy & Fuels 2005;19 
(6):2408–15. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef050107d. 

[264] Watson RJ, Botero ML, Ness CJ, Morgan NM, Kraft M. An improved methodology 

for determining threshold sooting indices from smoke point lamps. Fuel 2013; 
111:120–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.04.024. 

[265] Luo J, Zhang Y, Zhang Q, Liu J, Wang J. Evaluation of sooting tendency of 

acetone–butanol–ethanol (ABE) fuels blended with diesel fuel. Fuel 2017;209: 
394–401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.08.019. 

[266] Graziano B, Ottenw¨alder T, Manderfeld D, Pischinger S, Grüefeld G. Advanced 
methodology for the detection of smoke point heights in hydrocarbon flames. 
Energy & Fuels 2018;32(3):3908–19. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
energyfuels.7b03584. 

[267] McEnally CS, Pfefferle LD. Improved sooting tendency measurements for aromatic 
hydrocarbons and their implications for naphthalene formation pathways. 
Combustion and Flame 2007;148(4):210–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2006.11.003. 

[268] McEnally CS, Pfefferle LD. Sooting tendencies of nonvolatile aromatic 

hydrocarbons. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2009;32 I(1):673–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2008.06.197. 

[269] Montgomery MJ, Das DD, McEnally CS, Pfefferle LD. Analyzing the robustness of 

the yield sooting index as a measure of sooting tendency. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):911–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2018.06.105. 

[245] Zhao F, Asmus TN, Assanis DN, Dec JE, Eng JA, Najt PM. Homogeneous charge 

[270] Dreyer JA, Slavchov RI, Rees EJ, Akroyd J, Salamanca M, Mosbach S, et al. 

compression ignition (HCCI) engines. SAE Technical Paper 2003. 

[246] Ratkiewicz A, Truong TN. Kinetics of the C-C bond beta scission reactions in alkyl 
radical reaction class. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2012;116(25): 
6643–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp3018265. 

[247] Kwon H, Lele A, Zhu J, McEnally CS, Pfefferle LD, Xuan Y, et al. Reaxff-based 
molecular dynamics study of bio-derived polycyclic alkanes as potential 
alternative jet fuels. Fuel 2020;279:118548. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fuel.2020.118548. 

[248] Kwon H, Etz BD, Montgomery MJ, Messerly R, Shabnam S, Vyas S, et al. Reactive 
molecular dynamics simulations and quantum chemistry calculations to 
investigate soot-relevant reaction pathways for hexylamine isomers. The Journal 
of Physical Chemistry A 2020;124(21):4290–304. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jpca.0c03355. 

[249] Battin-Leclerc F. Detailed chemical kinetic models for the low-temperature 

combustion of hydrocarbons with application to gasoline and diesel fuel 
surrogates. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 2008;34:440–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2007.10.002. 

[250] Kohse-H¨oinghaus K, Oßwald P, Cool TA, Kasper T, Hansen N, Qi F, et al. Biofuel 
combustion chemistry: From ethanol to biodiesel. Angewandte Chemie - 
International Edition 2010;49(21):3572–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
anie.200905335. 

Improved methodology for performing the inverse abel transform of flame images 
for color ratio pyrometry. Applied Optics 2019;58(10):2662–70. https://doi.org/ 
10.1364/AO.58.002662. 

[271] Crossley SP, Alvarez WE, Resasco DE. Novel micropyrolyis index (MPI) to 

estimate the sooting tendency of fuels. Energy & fuels 2008;22(4):2455–64. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef800058y. 

[272] Tran MK, Dunn-Rankin D, Pham TK. Characterizing sooting propensity in 

biofuel–diesel flames. Combustion and flame 2012;159(6):2181–91. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2012.01.008. 

[273] Botero ML, Mosbach S, Kraft M. Sooting tendency and particle size distributions 
of n-heptane/toluene mixtures burned in a wick-fed diffusion flame. Fuel 2016; 
169:111–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.12.014. 

[274] Davy E. Notice of a new gaseous bicarburet of hydrogen. Report of the Sixth 

Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science 1836;5:62–3. 

[275] Berthelot M. Sur une nouvelle s´erie de compos´es organiques, le quadricarbure 
d’hydrog`ene et ses d´eriv´es (translation: Note on a new series of organic 
compounds, tetra-carbon hydride and its derivatives). Comptes rendus de 
l’Acadmie des Sciences 1860;50:805–8. 

[276] Lewes VB, Thorpe JF. Iii. the cause of luminosity in the flames of hydrocarbon 
gases. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 1894;57(340-346):450–68. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspl.1894.0174. 

[251] Li Y, Zhang L, Yuan T, Zhang K, Yang J, Yang B, et al. Investigation on fuel-rich 

[277] Hahn DK, Klippenstein SJ, Miller JA. A theoretical analysis of the reaction 

premixed flames of monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: Part I. Intermediate 
identification and mass spectrometric analysis. Combustion and Flame 2010;157 
(1):143–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.07.021. 

[252] Wang Z, Popolan-Vaida DM, Chen B, Moshammer K, Mohamed SY, Wang H, et al. 
Unraveling the structure and chemical mechanisms of highly oxygenated 
intermediates in oxidation of organic compounds. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2017;114(50):13102–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1707564114. 

[253] Taatjes CA, Hansen N, Osborn DL, Kohse-H¨oinghaus K, Cool TA, 

Westmoreland PR. “Imaging” combustion chemistry via multiplexed synchrotron- 

between propargyl and molecular oxygen. Faraday discussions 2002;119:79–100. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/B102240G. 

[278] Stuyver T, Chen B, Zeng T, Geerlings P, De Proft F, Hoffmann R. Do diradicals 
behave like radicals? Chemical reviews 2019;119(21):11291–351. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00260. 

[279] Colket MB, Seery DJ. Reaction mechanisms for toluene pyrolysis. Symposium 
(International) on Combustion 1994;25(1):883–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0082-0784(06)80723-X. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095647J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[280] Marinov NM, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK. Aromatic and Polycyclic Aromatic 

Hydrocarbon Formation in a Laminar Premixed n -Butane Flame. Combustion and 
Flame 1998;213:192–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(97)00275-7. 

[281] Faraday M. XX. On new compounds of carbon and hydrogen, and on certain other 
products obtained during the decomposition of oil by heat. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London 1825;115:440–66. https://doi.org/ 
10.1098/rstl.1825.0022. 

[282] Gaydon AG. Spectroscopy and Combustion Theory Lond. S; 1948. 
[283] Kobayashi Y, Furuhata T, Amagai K, Arai M. Soot precursor measurements in 

benzene and hexane diffusion flames. Combustion and Flame 2008;154(3): 
346–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.03.022. 

[284] Bittner JD, Howard JB. Composition profiles and reaction mechanisms in a near- 

sooting premixed benzene/oxygen/argon flame. Symposium (International) on 
Combustion 1981;18(1):1105–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(81) 
80115-4. 

[285] Frenklach M, Clary DW, Gardiner Jr WC, Stein SE. Detained kinetic modeling of 
soot formation in shock-tube pyrolysis of acetylene. Symposium (International) 
on Combustion 1985;20(1):887–901. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(85) 
80578-6. 

hydrocarbons and their radicals in a fuel-rich benzene–oxygen flame. Physical 
Chemistry Chemical Physics 2000;2(8):1667–75. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
A908190I. 

[304] Benigni P, DeBord JD, Thompson CJ, Gardinali P, Fernandez-Lima F. Increasing 
polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) molecular coverage during fossil oil analysis by 
combining gas chromatography and atmospheric-pressure laser ionization fourier 
transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FT-ICR MS). Energy & 
Fuels 2016;30(1):196–203. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.5b02292. 

[305] Bonne U, Homann K, Wagner HG. Carbon formation in premixed flames. 

Symposium (International) on Combustion 1965;503. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0082-0784(65)80197-7. 

[306] Dobbins RA, Fletcher RA, Chang H-C. The evolution of soot precursor particles in 
a diffusion flame. Combustion and Flame 1998;115(3):285–98. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0010-2180(98)00010-8. 

[307] Apicella B, Millan M, Herod A, Carpentieri A, Pucci P, Ciajolo A. Separation and 
measurement of flame-formed high molecular weight polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons by size-exclusion chromatography and laser desorption/ionization 
time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 
2006;20(7):1104–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/rcm.2419. 

[286] Mebel AM, Georgievskii Y, Jasper AW, Klippenstein SJ. Temperature- and 

[308] Faccinetto A, Desgroux P, Ziskind M, Therssen E, Focsa C. High-sensitivity 

pressure-dependent rate coefficients for the HACA pathways from benzene to 
naphthalene. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2017;36(1):919–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.013. 

[287] Smith MC, Liu G, Buras ZJ, Chu T-C, Yang J, Green WH. Direct Measurement of 
Radical-Catalyzed C6H6 Formation from Acetylene and Validation of Theoretical 
+
+
Rate Coefficients for C2H
5  C2H2  Reactions. The Journal of 
3  C2H2  and C4H
Physical Chemistry A 2020;124(14):2871–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jpca.0c00558. 

[288] Frenklach M, Ebert LB. Comment on the proposed role of spheroidal carbon 

clusters in soot formation. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1988;92(2):561–3. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/j100313a061. 

[289] Miller JA, Melius CF. Kinetic and thermodynamic issues in the formation of 

aromatic compounds in flames of aliphatic fuels. Combustion and Flame 1992;91 
(1):21–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(92)90124-8. 

[290] Knyazev VD, Slagle IR. Kinetics of the reaction between propargyl radical and 
acetylene. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2002;106(23):5613–7. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/jp0144909. 

[291] D’Anna A, Kent J. Aromatic formation pathways in non-premixed methane 

flames. Combustion and Flame 2003;132(4):715–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0010-2180(02)00522-9. 

[292] Savee JD, Selby TM, Welz O, Taatjes CA, Osborn DL. Time-and isomer-resolved 
measurements of sequential addition of acetylene to the propargyl radical. The 
Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2015;6(20):4153–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b01896. 

[293] Mao Q, Cai L, Langer R, Pitsch H. The role of resonance-stabilized radical chain 
reactions in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon growth: Theoretical calculation and 
kinetic modeling. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2021;38(1):1459–66. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.07.117. 

[294] Zhao L, Kaiser RI, Lu W, Xu B, Ahmed M, Morozov AN, et al. Molecular mass 
growth through ring expansion in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons via 
radical–radical reactions. Nature communications 2019;10(1):1–7. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41467-019-11652-5. 

[295] Stein SE, Fahr A. High-temperature stabilities of hydrocarbons. The Journal of 

Physical Chemistry 1985;89(17):3714–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
j100263a027. 

[296] Johansson K, Lai J, Skeen S, Popolan-Vaida D, Wilson K, Hansen N, et al. Soot 
precursor formation and limitations of the stabilomer grid. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2015;35(2):1819–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2014.05.033. 

[297] Mercier X, Faccinetto A, Batut S, Vanhove G, Boˇzani´c D, Hr´odmarsson H, et al. 
Selective identification of cyclopentaring-fused PAHs and side-substituted PAHs 
in a low pressure premixed sooting flame by photoelectron photoion coincidence 
spectroscopy. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2020;22(28):15926–44. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D0CP02740E. 

[298] Mouton T, Mercier X, Desgroux P. Isomer discrimination of pahs formed in 

sooting flames by jet-cooled laser-induced fluorescence: application to the 
measurement of pyrene and fluoranthene. Applied Physics B 2016;122(5):123. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00340-016-6397-9. 

[299] Menon A, Leon G, Akroyd J, Kraft M. A density functional theory study on the 
kinetics of seven-member ring formation in polyaromatic hydrocarbons. 
Combustion and Flame 2020;217:152–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2020.03.032. 

[300] Leon G, Menon A, Pascazio L, Bringley EJ, Akroyd J, Kraft M. Kinetic Monte Carlo 
statistics of curvature integration by HACA growth and bay closure reactions for 
PAH growth in a counterflow diffusion flame. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2021;38(1):1449–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.352. 

[301] Bockhorn H, Fetting F, Wenz H. Investigation of the formation of high molecular 

hydrocarbons and soot in premixed hydrocarbon-oxygen flames. Berichte der 
Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische Chemie 1983;87(11):1067–73. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/bbpc.19830871121. 

[302] Homann K. Formation of large molecules, particulates and ions in premixed 
hydrocarbon flames; progress and unresolved questions. Symposium 
(International) on Combustion 1985;20:857–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082- 
0784(85)80575-0. 

[303] Keller A, Kovacs R, Homann K-H. Large molecules, ions, radicals and small soot 

particles in fuel-rich hydrocarbon flames. part iv. large polycyclic aromatic 

detection of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons adsorbed onto soot particles using 
laser desorption/laser ionization/time-of-flight mass spectrometry: An approach 
to studying the soot inception process in low-pressure flames. Combustion and 
Flame 2011;158(2):227–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2010.08.012. 

[309] Jacobson RS, Korte AR, Vertes A, Miller JH. The molecular composition of soot. 

Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2020;59(11):4484–90. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/anie.201914115. 

[310] Zhang W, Shao C, Sarathy SM. Analyzing the solid soot particulates formed in a 
fuel-rich flame by solvent-free matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization fourier 
transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry. Rapid Communications in 
Mass Spectrometry 2020;34(4):e8596. https://doi.org/10.1002/rcm.8596. 
[311] Sabbah H, Commodo M, Picca F, De Falco G, Minutolo P, D’Anna A, et al. 

Molecular content of nascent soot: Family characterization using two-step laser 
desorption laser ionization mass spectrometry. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2021;38(1):1241–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.09.022. 

[312] Vander Wal RL, Bryg VM, Hays MD. Fingerprinting soot (towards source 

identification): Physical structure and chemical composition. Journal of Aerosol 
Science 2010;41(1):108–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2009.08.008. 

[313] Yehliu K, Vander Wal RL, Boehman AL. Development of an hrtem image analysis 
method to quantify carbon nanostructure. Combustion and Flame 2011;158(9): 
1837–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2011.01.009. 

[314] Apicella B, Ciajolo A, Tregrossi A, Abrahamson J, Vander Wal RL, Russo C. 

HRTEM and EELS investigations of flame-formed soot nanostructure. Fuel 2018; 
225:218–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.03.091. 

[315] Botero ML, Chen D, Gonz´alez-Calera S, Jefferson D, Kraft M. HRTEM evaluation 
of soot particles produced by the non-premixed combustion of liquid fuels. 
Carbon 2016;96:459–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2015.09.077. 

[316] Adkins EM, Miller JH. Extinction measurements for optical band gap 

determination of soot in a series of nitrogen-diluted ethylene/air non-premixed 
flames. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2015;17(4):2686–95. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/C4CP04452E. 

[317] Ivleva NP, Messerer A, Yang X, Niessner R, P¨oschl U. Raman microspectroscopic 

analysis of changes in the chemical structure and reactivity of soot in a diesel 
exhaust aftertreatment model system. Environmental science & technology 2007; 
41(10):3702–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/es0612448. 

[318] Lapuerta M, Oliva F, Agudelo JR, Stitt JP. Optimization of Raman spectroscopy 
parameters for characterizing soot from different diesel fuels. Combustion science 
and technology 2011;183(11):1203–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00102202.2011.587484. 

[319] Schmid J, Grob B, Niessner R, Ivleva NP. Multiwavelength raman 

microspectroscopy for rapid prediction of soot oxidation reactivity. Analytical 
chemistry 2011;83(4):1173–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac102939w. 

[320] Herdman JD, Connelly BC, Smooke MD, Long MB, Miller JH. A comparison of 
raman signatures and laser-induced incandescence with direct numerical 
simulation of soot growth in non-premixed ethylene/air flames. Carbon 2011;49 
(15):5298–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2011.07.050. 

[321] Seong HJ, Boehman AL. Evaluation of Raman parameters using visible raman 
microscopy for soot oxidative reactivity. Energy & Fuels 2013;27(3):1613–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef301520y. 

[322] Russo C, Ciajolo A. Effect of the flame environment on soot nanostructure inferred 

by Raman spectroscopy at different excitation wavelengths. Combustion and 
Flame 2015;162(6):2431–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2015.02.011. 

[323] De Falco G, Commodo M, D’Anna A, Minutolo P. The evolution of soot particles in 
premixed and diffusion flames by thermophoretic particle densitometry. 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2017;36(1):763–70. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.108. 

[324] Commodo M, Joo PH, De Falco G, Minutolo P, D’Anna A, Gülder OL. Raman 

spectroscopy of soot sampled in high-pressure diffusion flames. Energy & Fuels 
2017;31(9):10158–64. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b01674. 
[325] Apicella B, Pr´e P, Alf`e M, Ciajolo A, Gargiulo V, Russo C, et al. Soot nanostructure 
evolution in premixed flames by High Resolution Electron Transmission 
Microscopy (HRTEM). Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2015;35(2): 
1895–902. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.06.121. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095648J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[326] Minutolo P, Gambi G, D’Alessio A. The optical band gap model in the 

interpretation of the UV-visible absorption spectra of rich premixed flames. 
Symposium (International) on Combustion 1996;26(1):951–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0082-0784(96)80307-9. 

[327] Allouis C, D’Alessio A, Beretta F, Borghese A. Ultraviolet absorption and 
fluorescence measurements in turbulent spray flames. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2000;28(1):311–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784 
(00)80225-8. 

[328] Tregrossi A, Ciajolo A. Spectral signatures of carbon particulate evolution in 
methane flames. Combustion science and technology 2010;182(4–6):683–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200903466517. 

[329] Botero ML, Adkins EM, Gonz´alez-Calera S, Miller H, Kraft M. PAH structure 
analysis of soot in a non-premixed flame using high-resolution transmission 
electron microscopy and optical band gap analysis. Combustion and Flame 2016; 
164:250–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.11.022. 

[330] Adkins EM, Miller JH. Towards a taxonomy of topology for polynuclear aromatic 

[350] Sendt K, Haynes BS. Density functional study of the chemisorption of o2  on the 
zig-zag surface of graphite. Combustion and Flame 2005;143(4):629–43. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.08.026. 

[351] Singh R, Frenklach M. A mechanistic study of the influence of graphene curvature 

on the rate of high-temperature oxidation by molecular oxygen. Carbon 2016; 
101:203–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2016.01.090. 

[352] Violi A. Cyclodehydrogenation reactions to cyclopentafused polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2005;109(34):7781–7. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/jp052384r. 

[353] Martin JW, Bowal KL, Menon A, Slavchov RI, Akroyd J, Mosbach S, et al. Polar 
curved polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in soot formation. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):1117–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2018.05.046. 

[354] Toth P, Jacobsson D, Ek M, Wiinikka H. Real-time, in situ, atomic scale 

observation of soot oxidation. Carbon 2019;145:149–60. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.carbon.2019.01.007. 

hydrocarbons: linking electronic and molecular structure. Physical Chemistry 
Chemical Physics 2017;19(41):28458–69. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C7CP06048C. 

[355] Scott LT. Chemistry at the interior atoms of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 

Chemical Society Reviews 2015;44(18):6464–71. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C4CS00479E. 

[331] Chen D, Wang H. HOMO-LUMO energy splitting in polycyclic aromatic 

[356] Scott LT, Hashemi MM, Bratcher MS. Corannulene bowl-to-bowl inversion is 

hydrocarbons and their derivatives. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 
2019;37(1):953–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.120. 

[332] Menon A, Dreyer JA, Martin JW, Akroyd J, Robertson J, Kraft M. Optical band 

gap of cross-linked, curved, and radical polyaromatic hydrocarbons. Physical 
Chemistry Chemical Physics 2019;21(29):16240–51. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C9CP02363A. 

[333] Adkins EM, Giaccai JA, Miller JH. Computed electronic structure of polynuclear 

aromatic hydrocarbon agglomerates. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 
2017;36(1):957–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.06.186. 

[334] Schulz F, Commodo M, Kaiser K, Falco GD, Minutolo P, Meyer G, et al. Insights 

into incipient soot formation by atomic force microscopy. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):885–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2018.06.100. 

[335] Martin-Jimenez D, Ahles S, Mollenhauer D, Wegner HA, Schirmeisen A, 

Ebeling D. Bond-level imaging of the 3D conformation of adsorbed organic 
molecules using atomic force microscopy with simultaneous tunneling feedback. 
Physical Review Letters 2019;122:196101. https://doi.org/10.1103/ 
PhysRevLett.122.196101. 

[336] Denifl S, Ptasi´nska S, Sonnweber B, Scheier P, Liu D, Hagelberg F, et al. Free- 

electron attachment to coronene and corannulene in the gas phase. The Journal of 
Chemical Physics 2005;123(10):104308. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2008947. 

[337] Lafleur AL, Howard JB, Marr JA, Yadav T. Proposed fullerene precursor 

corannulene identified in flames both in the presence and absence of fullerene 
production. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1993;97(51):13539–43. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/j100153a020. 

[338] Bachmann M, Wiese W, Homann K-H. PAH and aromers: Precursors of fullerenes 
and soot. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1996;26(2):2259–67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(96)80053-1. 

rapid at room temperature. Journal of the American Chemical Society 1992;114 
(5):1920–1. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00031a079. 

[357] Wang B, Knig M, Bromley CJ, Yoon B, Treanor M-J, Garrido Torres JA, et al. 
Ethene to graphene: Surface catalyzed chemical pathways, intermediates, and 
assembly. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2017;121(17):9413–23. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b01999. 

[358] Adamson BD, Skeen SA, Ahmed M, Hansen N. Detection of aliphatically bridged 
multi-core polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in sooting flames with atmospheric- 
sampling high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry A 2018;122(48):9338–49. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.8b08947. 
[359] Schulz F, Commodo M, Kaiser K, Falco GD, Minutolo P, Meyer G, et al. Insights 

into incipient soot formation by atomic force microscopy. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):885–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2018.06.100. 

[360] Mukherjee J, Sarofim AF, Longwell JP. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from 

the high-temperature pyrolysis of pyrene. Combustion and Flame 1994;96(3): 
191–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(94)90008-6. 

[361] Sarofim AF, Longwell JP, Wornat MJ, Mukherjee J. The role of biaryl reactions in 
PAH and soot formation. Soot Formation in Combustion. Springer; 1994. 
p. 485–99. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-85167-4_27. 

[362] Faccinetto A, Irimiea C, Minutolo P, Commodo M, D’Anna A, Nuns N, et al. 

Evidence on the formation of dimers of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in a 
laminar diffusion flame. Communications Chemistry 2020;3(1):1–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s42004-020-00357-2. 

[363] Irle S, Zheng G, Wang Z, Morokuma K. The C60  formation puzzle ”solved”: QM/ 
MD simulations reveal the shrinking hot giant road of the dynamic fullerene self- 
assembly mechanism. Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2006;110:14531–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp061173z. 

[339] Tian H-R, Chen M-M, Wang K, Chen Z-C, Fu C-Y, Zhang Q, et al. An 

[364] Carbone F, Canagaratna MR, Lambe AT, Jayne JT, Worsnop DR, Gomez A. 

unconventional hydrofullerene C66H4  with symmetric heptagons retrieved in low- 
pressure combustion. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2019;141(16): 
6651–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.9b01638. 

[340] Heymann D, Chibante LP, Brooks RR, Wolbach WS, Smalley RE. Fullerenes in the 
Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary layer. Science 1994;265(5172):645–7. https://doi. 
org/10.1126/science.265.5172.645. 

[341] Wang C, Huddle T, Huang CH, Zhu W, Vander Wal RL, Lester EH, et al. Improved 
quantification of curvature in high-resolution transmission electron microscopy 
lattice fringe micrographs of soots. Carbon 2017;117:174–81. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.carbon.2017.02.059. 

[342] Salamanca M, Botero ML, Martin JW, Dreyer JA, Akroyd J, Kraft M. The impact of 
cyclic fuels on the formation and structure of soot. Combustion and Flame 2020; 
219:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.04.026. 

[343] Huang C-H, Vander Wal RL. Partial premixing effects upon soot nanostructure. 

Combustion and Flame 2016;168:403–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2016.01.006. 

[344] Pope C, Marr J, Howard J. Chemistry of fullerenes C60  and C70  formation in 

flames. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1993;97:11001–13. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/j100144a018. 

[345] Wu XZ, Yao YR, Chen MM, Tian HR, Xiao J, Xu YY, et al. Formation of Curvature 

Subunit of Carbon in Combustion. Journal of the American Chemical Society 
2016;138(30):9629–33. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.6b04898. 

[346] Haddon RC. Hybridization and the orientation and alignment of π-orbitals in 

nonplanar conjugated organic molecules: π-orbital axis vector analysis (POAV2). 
Journal of the American Chemical Society 1986;108(11):2837–42. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ja00271a009. 

[347] Orchin M, Reggel L. Aromatic cyclodehydrogenation. v. a synthesis of 

fluoranthene1. Journal of the American Chemical Society 1947;69(3):505–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01195a009. 

[348] Unterreiner BV, Sierka M, Ahlrichs R. Reaction pathways for growth of polycyclic 

aromatic hydrocarbons under combustion conditions, a DFT study. Physical 
Chemistry Chemical Physics 2004;6(18):4377. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
b407279k. 

[349] Scott LT, Bratcher MS, Hagen S. Synthesis and Characterization of a C36H12 
Fullerene Subunit. Journal of the American Chemical Society 1996;118(36): 
8743–4. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja9621511. 

Exploratory analysis of a sooting premixed flame via on-line high resolution (APi- 
TOF) mass spectrometry. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2019;37: 
919–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.08.020. 

[365] Kholghy MR, Veshkini A, Thomson MJ. The core-shell internal nanostructure of 

soot - A criterion to model soot maturity. Carbon 2016;100(January):508–36. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2016.01.022. 

[366] Weilmünster P, Keller A, Homann K-H. Large molecules, radicals, ions, and small 
soot particles in fuel-rich hydrocarbon flames: Part I: positive ions of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) in low-pressure premixed flames of acetylene and 
oxygen. Combustion and Flame 1999;116(1-2):62–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0010-2180(01)00310-8. 

[367] Russo C, Apicella B, Lighty J, Ciajolo A, Tregrossi A. Optical properties of organic 
carbon and soot produced in an inverse diffusion flame. Carbon 2017;124:372–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2017.08.073. 

[368] Michelsen HA. Effects of maturity and temperature on soot density and specific 
heat. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2021;38(1):1197–205. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.383. 

[369] Smith ECW. The Emission Spectrum of Hydrocarbon Flames. Proceedings of the 

Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 1940;174 
(956):110–25. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1940.0009. 

[370] Reis A. Beitr¨age zur Kenntnis der Flammen. Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie 

1914;88(1):513–68. https://doi.org/10.1515/zpch-1914-8836. 
[371] Behrens H. Flame instabilities and combustion mechanism. Symposium 

(International) on Combustion 1953;4(1):538–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0082-0784(53)80075-5. 

[372] Hirschler MM. Soot from fires: II. mechanisms of soot formation. Journal of fire 

sciences 1985;3(6):380–414. https://doi.org/10.1177/073490418500300602. 

[373] Porter G. Carbon formation in the combustion wave. Symposium (International) 

on Combustion 1953;4(1):248–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(53) 
80031-7. 

[374] Gaydon A, Fairbairn A. Carbon formation from C2H2  and CO in discharge tubes. 

Symposium (International) on Combustion 1955;5(1):324–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0082-0784(55)80043-4. 

[375] Calcote HF, Olson DB, Keil DG. Are ions important in soot formation? Energy & 

Fuels 1988;2(4):494–504. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef00010a016. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095649J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[376] Wang H, Weiner B, Frenklach M. Theoretical Study of Reaction between 

[402] Botero ML, Eaves N, Dreyer JA, Sheng Y, Akroyd J, Yang W, et al. Experimental 

Phenylvinyleum Ion and Acetylene. Journal of Physical Chemistry 1993;97(40): 
10364–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/J100142a017. 

[377] Lafleur AL, Howard JB, Taghizadeh K, Plummer EF, Scott LT, Necula A, et al. 
Identification of C20H10  Dicyclopentapyrenes in Flames: Correlation with 
Corannulene and Fullerene Formation. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1996; 
100(43):17421–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp9605313. 

[378] Grieco WJ, Howard JB, Rainey LC, Sande JBV. Fullerenic carbon in combustion- 

generated soot. Carbon 2000;38(4):597–614. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0008- 
6223(99)00149-9. 

[379] Kroto HW, McKay K. The formation of quasi-icosahedral spiral shell carbon 

particles. Nature 1988;331(6154):328–31. https://doi.org/10.1038/331328a0. 

[380] Iijima S. Direct observation of the tetrahedral bonding in graphitized carbon black 

by high resolution electron microscopy. Journal of Crystal Growth 1980;50(3): 
675–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0248(80)90013-5. 

[381] Ugarte D. Curling and closure of graphitic networks under electron-beam 

irradiation. Nature 1992;359(6397):707–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/359707a0. 
[382] Krestinin A. Polyyne model of soot formation process. Symposium (International) 

on Combustion 1998;27(1):1557–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98) 
80564-X. 

[383] Liu M, Artyukhov VI, Lee H, Xu F, Yakobson BI. Carbyne from first principles: 
chain of C atoms, a nanorod or a nanorope. ACS nano 2013;7(11):10075–82. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn404177r. 

[384] Gerhardt P, Homann K. Ions and charged soot particles in hydrocarbon flames. 2. 
Positive aliphatic and aromatic ions in ethyne/oxygen flames. Journal of Physical 
Chemistry 1990;94(13):5381–91. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100376a039. 

[385] Zhang C, Zhang C, Ma Y, Xue X. Imaging the C black formation by acetylene 
pyrolysis with molecular reactive force field simulations. Physical Chemistry 
Chemical Physics 2015;17(17):11469–80. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5CP00926J. 
[386] Ahrens J, Bachmann M, Baum T, Griesheimer J, Kovacs R, Weilmnster P, et al. 
Fullerenes and their ions in hydrocarbon flames. International Journal of Mass 
Spectrometry and Ion Processes 1994;138:133–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
0168-1176(94)04036-2. 

[387] Schuetz CA, Frenklach M. Nucleation of soot: Molecular dynamics simulations of 
pyrene dimerization. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2002;29(2): 
2307–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1540-7489(02)80281-4. 

[388] Mao Q, Hou D, Luo KH, You X. Dimerization of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon 
molecules and radicals under flame conditions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 
A 2018;122(44):8701–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.8b07102. 

[389] Santos RC, Bernardes CE, Diogo HP, Piedade MFM, Canongia Lopes JN, Minas da 
Piedade ME. Energetics of the thermal dimerization of acenaphthylene to 
heptacyclene. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2006;110(6):2299–307. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp056275o. 

[390] Comandini A, Abid S, Chaumeix N. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon growth by 

diradical cycloaddition/fragmentation. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 
2017;121(31):5921–31. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.7b05562. 

[391] Hirsch F, Constantinidis P, Fischer I, Bakels S, Rijs AM. Dimerization of the benzyl 

radical in a high-temperature pyrolysis reactor investigated by IR/UV ion dip 
spectroscopy. Chemistry–A European Journal 2018;24(30):7647–52. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/chem.201800852. 

[392] Hou D, You X. Reaction kinetics of hydrogen abstraction from polycyclic aromatic 

hydrocarbons by H atoms. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2017;19(45): 
30772–80. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7cp04964a. 

[393] Johansson KO, Dillstrom T, Monti M, El Gabaly F, Campbell MF, Schrader PE, 

et al. Formation and emission of large furans and oxygenated hydrocarbons from 
flames. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2016;113(30):8374–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1604772113. 

[394] Merchan-Merchan W, McCollam S, Pugliese JFC. Soot formation in diffusion 

oxygen-enhanced biodiesel flames. Fuel 2015;156:129–41. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.fuel.2015.04.011. 

[395] Zhang W, Shao C, Sarathy SM. Analyzing the solid soot particulates formed in a 
fuel-rich flame by solvent-free MALDI FT ICR mass spectrometry. Rapid 
Communications in Mass Spectrometry 2020;34:e8596. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
rcm.8596. 

[396] Vasiliou A, Nimlos MR, Daily JW, Ellison GB. Thermal decomposition of furan 

generates propargyl radicals. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2009;113(30): 
8540–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp903401h. 

[397] Frankland E. On the source of light in luminous flames. Journal of the Franklin 

Institute 1869;87(5):330–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-0032(69)90579-1. 

[398] Reilly P, Gieray R, Whitten W, Ramsey J. Direct observation of the evolution of 

and numerical study of the evolution of soot primary particles in a diffusion 
flame. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2019;37(2):2047–55. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.185. 

[403] McKinnon JT, Meyer E, Howard JB. Infrared analysis of flame-generated PAH 

samples. Combustion and Flame 1996;105(1-2):161–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
0010-2180(95)00185-9. 

[404] Elvati P, Violi A. Thermodynamics of poly-aromatic hydrocarbon clustering and 
the effects of substituted aliphatic chains. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 
2013;34(1):1837–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.07.030. 

[405] Lahaye J, Prado G. Formation of carbon particles from a gas phase: Nucleation 
phenomenon. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 1974;3(4):473–81. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/BF00341000. 

[406] Iavarone S, Pascazio L, Sirignano M, De Candia A, Fierro A, De Arcangelis L, et al. 
Molecular dynamics simulations of incipient carbonaceous nanoparticle 
formation at flame conditions. Combustion Theory and Modelling 2017;21(1): 
49–61. https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830.2016.1242156. 

[407] Elvati P, Turrentine K, Violi A. The role of molecular properties on the 

dimerization of aromatic compounds. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 
2019;37(1):1099–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.065. 

[408] Pascazio L, Martin J, Menon A, You D, Akroyd J, Kraft M. Aromatic penta-linked 

hydrocarbons in soot nanoparticle formation. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2021;38(1):1525–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.09.029. 

[409] Kolakkandy S, Pratihar S, Aquino AJA, Wang H, Hase WL. Properties of 

, and Fe2+
Complexes Formed by Na
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2014;118(40):9500–11. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/jp5029257. 

Binding with Benzene Molecules. The 

, Mg2+

+

[410] Chen D, Wang H. Cation-π Interactions between Flame Chemi-ions and Aromatic 
Compounds. Energy & Fuels 2017;31(3):2345–52. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
energyfuels.6b02354. 

[411] Chen T. Formation of covalently bonded polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the 

interstellar medium. The Astrophysical Journal 2018;866(2):113. https://doi. 
org/10.3847/1538-4357/aae38f. 

[412] Giordana A, Maranzana A, Tonachini G. Carbonaceous Nanoparticle Molecular 
Inception from Radical Addition and van der Waals Coagulation of Polycyclic 
Aromatic Hydrocarbon-Based Systems. A Theoretical Study. The Journal of 
Physical Chemistry C 2011;115(35):17237–51. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
jp2010698. 

[413] Maranzana A, Tonachini G. Antagonistic functionalized nucleation and oxidative 
degradation in combustive formation of pyrene-based clusters mediated by triplet 
O and O2: Theoretical study. ChemPhysChem 2015;16(12):2615–24. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/cphc.201500332. 

[414] Miller JH, Mallard WG, Smyth KC. The observation of laser-induced visible 

fluorescence in sooting diffusion flames. Combustion and Flame 1982;47:205–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(82)90101-8. 

[415] Miller JH. Aromatic excimers: evidence for polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbon 

condensation in flames. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2005;30(1): 
1381–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.192. 

[416] Das A, Mahato K, Chakraborty T. Excimer formation in the mixed dimers of 

naphthalene and 1-methoxynaphthalene in a supersonic jet. Physical Chemistry 
Chemical Physics 2001;3(10):1813–8. https://doi.org/10.1039/B010098F. 
[417] Vitiello G, De Falco G, Picca F, Commodo M, D’Errico G, Minutolo P, et al. Role of 

radicals in carbon clustering and soot inception: A combined EPR and raman 
spectroscopic study. Combustion and Flame 2019;205:286–94. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.04.028. 

[418] Small D, Rosokha SV, Kochi JK, Head-Gordon M. Characterizing the dimerizations 
of phenalenyl radicals by ab initio calculations and spectroscopy: σ-bond 
formation versus resonance π-stabilization. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 
2005;109(49):11261–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp054244n. 

[419] Kertesz M. Pancake bonding: An unusual pi-stacking interaction. Chemistry–A 

European Journal 2019;25(2):400–16. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
chem.201802385. 

[420] Cui Z-H, Lischka H, Beneberu HZ, Kertesz M. Rotational barrier in phenalenyl 

neutral radical dimer: Separating pancake and van der Waals interactions. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society 2014;136(15):5539–42. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ja412862n. 

[421] Koley D, Arunan E, Ramakrishnan S. Computational investigations on covalent 

dimerization/oligomerization of polyacenes: Is it relevant to soot formation? 
Journal of Computational Chemistry 2012;33(21):1762–72. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/jcc.23014. 

the soot carbonization process in an acetylene diffusion flame via real-time 
aerosol mass spectrometry. Combustion and Flame 2000;122(1-2):90–104. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(00)00105-X. 

[422] Philpott MR, Kawazoe Y. Triplet states of zigzag edged hexagonal graphene 

molecules c6m**2h6m  (m= 1, 2, 3,, 10) and carbon based magnetism. The Journal 
of Chemical Physics 2011;134(12):124706. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3569135. 

[399] Kholghy M, Saffaripour M, Yip C, Thomson MJ. The evolution of soot morphology 

[423] Zhang HB, You X, Wang H, Law CK. Dimerization of polycyclic aromatic 

[400]

in a laminar coflow diffusion flame of a surrogate for Jet A-1. Combustion and 
Flame 2013;160(10):2119–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2013.04.008. 
¨
Oktem B, Tolocka MP, Zhao B, Wang H, Johnston MV. Chemical species 
associated with the early stage of soot growth in a laminar premixed ethylene- 
oxygen-argon flame. Combustion and Flame 2005;142(4):364–73. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.03.016. 

[401] Cain J, Laskin A, Kholghy R, Thomson J. Molecular characterization of organic 
content of soot along the centerline of a coflow diffusion flame. Physical 
Chemistry Chemical Physics 2014;16:25862–75. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C4CP03330B. 

hydrocarbons in soot nucleation. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2014;118 
(8):1287–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp411806q. 

[424] Klemenc A, Wechsberg R, Wagner G. Über das Verhalten von Kohlensuboxyd und 
die in homogener Gasphase verlaufende Reaktion C3O2⇌ CO2  + C2. Zeitschrift 
für Physikalische Chemie 1934;170(1):97–111. https://doi.org/10.1515/zpch- 
1934-17009. 

[425] Calcote HF. Mechanisms of soot nucleation in flames-A critical review. 

Combustion and Flame 1981;42(C):215–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180 
(81)90159-0. 

[426] Lawton J, Weinberg F. Electrical aspects of combustion. Oxford: Clarendon P.; 

1969. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095650J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[427] Carbone F, Canagarat MR, Lambe AT, Jayne JT, Worsnop DR, Gomez A. Detection 
of weakly bound clusters in incipiently sooting flames via ion seeded dilution and 
collision charging for (APi-TOF) mass spectrometry analysis. Fuel 2021;289: 
119820. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119820. 

[428] Calcote HF. Electrical properties of flames: Burner flames in transverse electric 

fields. Symposium on Combustion and Flame, and Explosion Phenomena 1948;3 
(1):245–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1062-2896(49)80033-X. 
[429] Alquaity AB, Han J, Chahine M, Selim H, Belhi M, Sarathy SM, et al. 

Measurements of positively charged ions in premixed methane-oxygen 
atmospheric flames. Combustion Science and Technology 2017;189(4):575–94. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2016.1226821. 

[430] Brande WT. XXII. On some new electro-chemical phenomena. The Philosophical 
Magazine 1814;44(196):124–30. https://doi.org/10.1080/14786441408637425. 

[431] Place ER, Weinberg FJ. Electrical control of flame carbon. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 1966;289 
(1417):192–205. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1966.0006. 

[432] Park DG, Choi BC, Cha MS, Chung SH. Soot Reduction Under DC Electric Fields in 

Counterflow Non-Premixed Laminar Ethylene Flames. Combustion Science and 
Technology 2014;186(4-5):644–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00102202.2014.883794. 

[433] Kono M, Iinuma K, Kumagai S. The effect of DC to 10 mhz electric field on flame 

luminosity and carbon formation. Symposium (International) on Combustion 
1981;18(1):1167–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(81)80121-X. 

[434] Magaril ER, Magaril RZ. Engine fuels. Moscow: KDU; 2008. 
[435] Chung SL, Lai NL. Suppression of soot by metal additives during the combustion 

of polystyrene. Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association 1992;42 
(8):1082–8. https://doi.org/10.1080/10473289.1992.10467056. 

[436] Ashton A, Hayhurst A. Kinetics of collisional ionization of alkali metal atoms and 

recombination of electrons with alkali metal ions in flames. Combustion and 
Flame 1973;21(1):69–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(73)90008-4. 
[437] Graham SM, Goodings JM. Metallic ions in hydrocarbon flames. II. Mechanism for 

the reduction of C3H
journal of mass spectrometry and ion processes 1984;56(2):205–22. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0168-1176(84)85044-2. 

+
3  by metals in relation to soot suppression. International 

[438] Di Stasio S, Legarrec JL, Mitchell JB. Synchrotron radiation studies of additives in 
combustion, II: Soot agglomerate microstructure change by alkali and alkaline- 
earth metal addition to a partially premixed flame. Energy and Fuels 2011;25(3): 
916–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef1012209. 

[439] Simonsson J, Olofsson NE, Bladh H, Sanati M, Bengtsson PE. Influence of 

potassium and iron chloride on the early stages of soot formation studied using 
imaging LII/ELS and TEM techniques. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 
2017;36(1):853–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.003. 

[440] Rinkenburger A, Toriyama T, Yasuda K, Niessner R. Catalytic Effect of Potassium 
Compounds in Soot Oxidation. ChemCatChem 2017;9(18):3513–25. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/cctc.201700338. 

[441] Davies CJ, Mayer A, Gabb J, Walls JM, Degirmenci V, Thompson PB, et al. 

Operando potassium K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy: investigating 
potassium catalysts during soot oxidation. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 
2020. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0CP01227K. 

[442] Howard JB, Kausch WJ. Soot control by fuel additives. Progress in Energy and 

Combustion Science 1980;6(3):263–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(80) 
90018-0. 

[443] Bonczyk P. Effects of metal additives on soot precursors and particulates in a 
C2H4/O2/N2/Ar premixed flame. Fuel 1991;70(12):1403–11. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/0016-2361(91)90006-V. 

[444] Dato A, Radmilovic V, Lee Z, Phillips J, Frenklach M. Substrate-free gas-phase 
synthesis of graphene sheets. Nano letters 2008;8(7):2012–6. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/nl8011566. 

[445] Dato A. Graphene synthesized in atmospheric plasmas’a review. Journal of 

Materials Research 2019;34(1):214–30. https://doi.org/10.1557/jmr.2018.470. 

[446] Musikhin S, Fortugno P, Corbin JC, Smallwood GJ, Dreier T, Daun KJ, et al. 

Characterization of few-layer graphene aerosols by laser-induced incandescence. 
Carbon 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2020.05.052. 

[447] Kroto HW. New light on ’the case of imperfect combustion’. Journal of the 

Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions 1991;87(18):2871–5. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/FT9918702871. 

[448] Ugarte D. Onion-like graphitic particles. Carbon 1995;33:989–93. https://doi. 

org/10.1016/0008-6223(95)00027-B. 

[449] Kroto H. CB

60  buckminsterfullerene, other fullerenes and the icospiral shell. 

Computers & Mathematics with Applications 1989;17(1):417—423. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0898-1221(89)90171-5. 

[450] Kashchiev D. Nucleation. Butterworth-Heinemann; 2000. 
[451] Indarto A, Giordana A, Ghigo G, Maranzana A, Tonachini G. Polycyclic aromatic 

hydrocarbon formation mechanism in the ‘particle phase’. a theoretical study. 
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2010;12(32):9429–40. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/C000491J. 

[452] Raj A. Structural effects on the growth of large polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 

by C2H2. Combustion and Flame 2019;204:331–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2019.03.027. 

[453] Raj A, Yang SY, Cha D, Tayouo R, Chung SH. Structural effects on the oxidation of 
soot particles by O2: Experimental and theoretical study. Combustion and Flame 
2013;160(9):1812–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.03.010. 

[454] Le KC, Lefumeux C, Bengtsson P-E, Pino T. Direct observation of aliphatic 

structures in soot particles produced in low-pressure premixed ethylene flames 
via online raman spectroscopy. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2019;37 
(1):869–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.08.003. 

[455] Michaud P, Delfau J, Barassin A. The positive ion chemistry in the post- 
combustion zone of sooting premixed acetylene low pressure flat flames. 
Symposium (International) on Combustion 1981;18(1):443–51. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0082-0784(81)80050-1. 

[456] Han S, Li X, Nie F, Zheng M, Liu X, Guo L. Revealing the Initial Chemistry of Soot 
Nanoparticle Formation by ReaxFF Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Energy & 
Fuels 2017;31(8):8434–44. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b01194. 

[457] Liu J, Ke H, Zhong K, He X, Xue X, Wang L, et al. Higher activity leading to higher 

disorder: A case of four light hydrocarbons to variable morphological 
carbonaceous materials by pyrolysis. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2018; 
122(51):29516–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b07762. 

[458] Qian H-J, van Duin ACT, Morokuma K, Irle S. Reactive Molecular Dynamics 

Simulation of Fullerene Combustion Synthesis: ReaxFF vs DFTB Potentials. 
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2011;7(7):2040–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/ct200197v. 

[459] Saha B, Shindo S, Irle S, Morokuma K. Quantum chemical molecular dynamics 

simulations of dynamic fullerene self-assembly in benzene combustion. ACS Nano 
2009;3(8):2241–57. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn900494s. 

[460] Saha B, Irle S, Morokuma K. Hot giant fullerenes eject and capture C2  molecules: 
QM/MD simulations with constant density. Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2011; 
115(46):22707–16. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp203614e. 

[461] Rummel K, Veh P-O. Die Strahlung leuchtender Flammen. Erster Teil: 

Schrifttumsgrundlagen, Arbeitshypothesen und Vorversuche (Translation: The 
radiance of glowing flames. Part 1: Foundations, working hypotheses and 
preliminary experiments). Archiv für das Eisenhüttenwesen 1941;14(10):489–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/srin.194101863. 

[462] Morgan WA, Feigelson ED, Wang H, Frenklach M. A new mechanism for the 

formation of meteoritic kerogen-like material. Science 1991;252(5002):109–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.252.5002.109. 

[463] McKinnon J, Howard J. Application of soot formation model: effects of chlorine. 
Combustion science and technology 1990;74(1-6):175–97. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/00102209008951687. 

[464] Bhowmick H, Biswas SK. Relationship between physical structure and tribology of 
single soot particles generated by burning ethylene. Tribology Letters 2011;44(2): 
139–49. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11249-011-9831-5. 

[465] Pascazio L, Martin JW, Botero ML, Sirignano M, D’Anna A, Kraft M. Mechanical 
properties of soot particles: The impact of crosslinked polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons. Combustion Science and Technology 2019;0(0):1–21. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/00102202.2019.1668380. 

[466] Pascazio L, Martin JW, Bowal K, Akroyd J, Kraft M. Exploring the internal 

structure of soot particles using nanoindentation: A reactive molecular dynamics 
study. Combustion and Flame 2020;219:45–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2020.04.029. 

[467] Fahr A, Mallard WG, Stein SE. Reactions of phenyl radicals with ethene, ethyne, 

and benzene. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1988;21(1):825–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(88)80314-X. 

[468] Park J, Burova S, Rodgers A, Lin M. Experimental and theoretical studies of the 

+
5  C6H6  reaction. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 1999;103(45): 

C6H
9036–41. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp9920592. 
[469] Shukla B, Tsuchiya K, Koshi M. Novel products from c6h

+
5  c6h6/c6h5  reactions. 

The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2011;115(21):5284–93. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/jp201817n. 

[470] Comandini A, Malewicki T, Brezinsky K. Chemistry of polycyclic aromatic 

hydrocarbons formation from phenyl radical pyrolysis and reaction of phenyl and 
acetylene. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2012;116(10):2409–34. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/jp207461a. 

[471] Shukla B, Koshi M. A highly efficient growth mechanism of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2010;12(10):2427–37. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/B919644G. 

[472] Yuan H, Kong W, Liu F, Chen D. Study on soot nucleation and growth from PAHs 
and some reactive species at flame temperatures by Reaxff molecular dynamics. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2019;195:748–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ces.2018.10.020. 

[473] Keller M, de Bruin T, Matrat M, Nicolle A, Catoire L. A theoretical multiscale 
approach to study the initial steps involved in the chemical reactivity of soot 
precursors. Energy & Fuels 2019;33(10):10255–66. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
energyfuels.9b02284. 

[474] Mao Q, van Duin ACT, Luo KH. Formation of incipient soot particles from 

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: A ReaxFF molecular dynamics study. Carbon 
2017;121:380–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2017.06.009. 

[475] Shabnam S, Mao Q, van Duin AC, Luo K. Evaluation of the effect of nickel clusters 

on the formation of incipient soot particles from polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons via reaxff molecular dynamics simulations. Physical Chemistry 
Chemical Physics 2019;21(19):9865–75. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9CP00354A. 
[476] Morajkar PP, Abdrabou MK, Raj A, Elkadi M, Stephen S, Ali MI. Transmission of 

trace metals from fuels to soot particles: An ICP-MS and soot nanostructural 
disorder study using diesel and diesel/karanja biodiesel blend. Fuel 2020;280: 
118631. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118631. 

[477] Violi A, Sarofim A, Truong T. Quantum mechanical study of molecular weight 
growth process by combination of aromatic molecules. Combustion and Flame 
2001;126(1-2):1506–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(01)00268-1. 
[478] Violi A, Kubota A, Truong T, Pitz W, Westbrook C, Sarofim A. A fully integrated 

kinetic monte carlo/molecular dynamics approach for the simulation of soot 
precursor growth. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2002;29(2):2343–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1540-7489(02)80285-1. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095651J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[479] Wenthold PG, Squires RR, Lineberger W. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy 
of the o-, m-, and p-benzyne negative ions. electron affinities and singlet- triplet 
splittings for o-, m-, and p-benzyne. Journal of the American Chemical Society 
1998;120(21):5279–90. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja9803355. 

[505] Woodcock HL, Moran D, Brooks BR, Schleyer PvR, Schaefer HF. Carbene 

stabilization by aryl substituents. is bigger better? Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 2007;129(12):3763–70. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja068899t. 

[506] Stang PJ. Unsaturated carbenes. Chemical Reviews 1978;78(4):383–405. https:// 

[480] Comandini A, Brezinsky K. Theoretical study of the formation of naphthalene 
from the radical/π-bond addition between single-ring aromatic hydrocarbons. 
The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2011;115(22):5547–59. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/jp200201c. 

[481] Pastor MB, Kuhn AJ, Nguyen PT, Santander MV, Castro C, Karney WL. Hydrogen 
shifts and benzene ring contractions in phenylenes. Journal of Physical Organic 
Chemistry 2013;26(9):750–4. https://doi.org/10.1002/poc.3126. 

[482] Matsugi A. Thermal decomposition of benzyl radicals: Kinetics and spectroscopy 
in a shock tube. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2020;124(5):824–35. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.9b10705. 

[483] McCabe MN, Hemberger P, Reusch E, Bodi A, Bouwman J. Off the beaten path: 
Almost clean formation of indene from the ortho-benzyne + allyl reaction. The 
journal of physical chemistry letters 2020;11(8):2859–63. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.jpclett.0c00374. 

[484] Madden L, Moskaleva L, Kristyan S, Lin M. Ab initio MO study of the unimolecular 
decomposition of the phenyl radical. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 1997; 
101(36):6790–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp970723d. 

[485] Kolc J, Michl J. π, π-biradicaloid hydrocarbons. pleiadene family. i. 

photochemical preparation from cyclobutene precursors. Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 1973;95(22):7391–401. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00803a030. 
[486] Konishi A, Kubo T. Benzenoid quinodimethanes. Physical Organic Chemistry of 

Quinodimethanes. Springer; 2017. p. 69–105. 

[487] Ono K, Matsukawa Y, Dewa K, Watanabe A, Takahashi K, Saito Y, et al. Formation 

mechanisms of soot from high-molecular-weight polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons. Combustion and Flame 2015;162(6):2670–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.03.022. 

[488] Frank P, Bhaskaran K, Just T. High-temperature reactions of triplet methylene and 
ketene with radicals. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1986;90(10):2226–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/j100401a046. 

[489] Bourissou D, Guerret O, Gabbai FP, Bertrand G. Stable carbenes. Chemical 
Reviews 2000;100(1):39–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr940472u. 
[490] Jensen P, Bunker P. The potential surface and stretching frequencies of ̃X

3

B1 

methylene (CH2) determined from experiment using the Morse oscillator-rigid 
bender internal dynamics Hamiltonian. The Journal of chemical physics 1988;89 
(3):1327–32. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.455184. 

[491] Baulch DL, Cobos CJ, Cox RA, Esser C, Frank P, Just T, et al. Evaluated kinetic 
data for combustion modelling. Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 
1992;21(3):411–734. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.555908. 

[492] Costa P, Sander W. Hydrogen bonding switches the spin state of diphenylcarbene 

from triplet to singlet. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2014;53(20): 
5122–5. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201400176. 

[493] Graham DC, Cavell KJ, Yates BF. Dimerization mechanisms of heterocyclic 

carbenes. Journal of physical organic chemistry 2005;18(4):298–309. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/poc.846. 

[494] He C, Thomas AM, Galimova GR, Morozov AN, Mebel AM, Kaiser RI. Gas-Phase 

Formation of Fulvenallene (C7H6) via the Jahn–Teller Distorted Tropyl (C7H7) 
Radical Intermediate under Single-Collision Conditions. Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 2020;142(6):3205–13. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.9b13269. 
[495] McKee ML, Reisenauer HP, Schreiner PR. Combined ab initio molecular dynamics 

and experimental studies of carbon atom addition to benzene. The Journal of 
Physical Chemistry A 2014;118(15):2801–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
jp501107b. 

[496] Kvaskoff D, Lüerssen H, Bednarek P, Wentrup C. Phenylnitrene, phenylcarbene, 
and pyridylcarbenes. rearrangements to cyanocyclopentadiene and fulvenallene. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society 2014;136(43):15203–14. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ja506151p. 

[497] Schreiner PR, Karney WL, von Ragu´e Schleyer P, Borden WT, Hamilton TP, 

Schaefer HF. Carbene rearrangements unsurpassed: details of the C7H6  potential 
energy surface revealed. The Journal of Organic Chemistry 1996;61(20):7030–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jo960884y. 

[498] Polino D, Famulari A, Cavallotti C. Analysis of the reactivity on the C7H6  potential 

energy surface. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2011;115(27):7928–36. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp2019236. 

[499] Bofill JM, Bru N, Farras J, Olivella S, Sole A, Vilarrasa J. Molecular and electronic 

doi.org/10.1021/cr60314a003. 

[507] Guthier K, Hebgen P, Homann K-H, Hofmann J, Zimmermann G. Addition and 

cyclization reactions in the thermal conversion of hydrocarbons with enyne 
structure, ii. analysis of radicals and carbenes from ethynylbenzene. Liebigs 
Annalen 1995;1995(4):637–44. https://doi.org/10.1002/jlac.199719971217. 
[508] Yang Y, Mulholland J, Akki U. Formation of furans by gas-phase reactions of 
chlorophenols. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1998;27(2):1761–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80017-9. 

[509] Liu P, Chen B, Li Z, Bennett A, Sioud S, Sarathy SM, et al. Evolution of oxygenated 

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon chemistry at flame temperatures. Combustion 
and Flame 2019;209:441–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2019.08.018. 

[510] Wang Q, Saldinger JC, Elvati P, Violi A. Molecular structures in flames: A 

comparison between SNapS2 and recent AFM results. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2021;38(1):1133–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2020.06.250. 

[511] Nystr¨om R, Sadiktsis I, Ahmed TM, Westerholm R, Koegler JH, Blomberg A, et al. 
Physical and chemical properties of rme biodiesel exhaust particles without 
engine modifications. Fuel 2016;186:261–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fuel.2016.08.062. 

[512] Guan C, Cheung CS, Li X, Huang Z. Effects of oxygenated fuels on the particle- 

phase compounds emitted from a diesel engine. Atmospheric Pollution Research 
2017;8(2):209–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apr.2016.08.005. 

[513] Yang B, Sun W, Moshammer K, Hansen N. Review of the influence of oxygenated 

additives on the combustion chemistry of hydrocarbons. Energy & Fuels 2021: 
InPress. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c01841. 

[514] Violi A, Venkatnathan A. Combustion-generated nanoparticles produced in a 

benzene flame: a multiscale approach. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2006;125 
(5):054302. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2234481. 

[515] Frankland E. On the influence of atmospheric pressure upon some of the 

phenomena of combustion. Journal of the Chemical Society 1862;15(1861): 
168–96. https://doi.org/10.1039/JS8621500168. 

[516] Lewes VB. XXV.–The luminosity of coal-gas flames. Journal of the Chemical 

[517] Karatas¸ AE, Gülder 

Society, Transactions 1892;61:322–39. https://doi.org/10.1039/CT8926100322. 
¨
OL. Soot formation in high pressure laminar diffusion flames. 
Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2012;38(6):818–45. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.pecs.2012.04.003. 

[518] Desgroux P, Mercier X, Lefort B, Lemaire R, Therssen E, Pauwels J. Soot volume 
fraction measurement in low-pressure methane flames by combining laser- 
induced incandescence and cavity ring-down spectroscopy: Effect of pressure on 
soot formation. Combustion and Flame 2008;155(1-2):289–301. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.05.016. 

[519] Amin HM, Bennett A, Roberts WL. Determining fractal properties of soot 

aggregates and primary particle size distribution in counterflow flames up to 
10atm. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):1161–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.07.057. 

[520] Commodo M, Karatas¸  AE, De Falco G, Minutolo P, D’Anna A, Gülder 

¨
OL. On the 

effect of pressure on soot nanostructure: A raman spectroscopy investigation. 
Combustion and Flame 2020;219:13–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2020.04.008. 

[521] Mansouri A, Zimmer L, Dworkin SB, Eaves NA. Impact of pressure-based haca 

rates on soot formation in varying-pressure coflow laminar diffusion flames. 
Combustion and Flame 2020;218:109–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2020.03.030. 

[522] McArragher J, Tan K. Soot formation at high pressures: a literature review. 

Combustion Science and Technology 1972;5(1):257–61. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/00102207208952530. 

[523] Haynes BS, Wagner HG. Soot Formation. Progress in Energy and Combustion 
Science 1981;7(4):229–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(81)90001-0. 

[524] Parker W, Wolfhard H. 418. Carbon formation in flames. Journal of the Chemical 

Society (Resumed) 1950:2038–49. https://doi.org/10.1039/JR9500002038. 
[525] Botero ML, Akroyd J, Chen D, Kraft M, Agudelo JR. On the thermophoretic 

sampling and tem-based characterisation of soot particles in flames. Carbon 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2020.09.074. 

structure of the low-lying electronic states of cycloalkenylidenes. 
cyclopentadienylidene. Journal of the American Chemical Society 1988;110(12): 
3740–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00214a006. 

[526] Dobbins RA, Megaridis CM. Morphology of flame-generated soot as determined 
by thermophoretic sampling. Langmuir 1987;3(2):254–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/la00074a019. 

[500] Coburn TT, Jones W. Carbene-carbene rearrangements in the 

[527] Miller JH, Smyth KC, Mallard WG. Calculations of the dimerization of aromatic 

acenaphthylcarbene-phenalenylidene system. Tetrahedron Letters 1973;14(40): 
3903–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-4039(01)87068-4. 

[501] Oyarzún AM, Latham CD, Radovic LR, Briddon PR, Rayson MJ. Spin density 
distributions on graphene clusters and ribbons with carbene-like active sites. 
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2018;20(42):26968–78. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/C8CP03313G. 

[502] Pogodin S, Agranat I. Theoretical notions of aromaticity and antiaromaticity: 

phenalenyl ions versus fluorenyl ions. The Journal of organic chemistry 2007;72 
(26):10096–107. https://doi.org/10.1021/jo701939c. 

[503] Wentrup C, Wilczek K. Thermal interconversion of phenylcarbene and 

tropylidene. preliminary communication. Helvetica Chimica Acta 1970;53(6): 
1459–63. https://doi.org/10.1002/hlca.19700530628. 

[504] Kirmse W. Persistent triplet carbenes. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 

2003;42(19):2117–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr800518t. 

hydrocarbons: Implications for soot formation. Symposium (International) on 
Combustion 1985;20(1):1139–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(85) 
80604-4. 

[528] Miller JH. The kinetics of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbon agglomeration in 

flames. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1991;23(1):91–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80246-8. 

[529] Totton TS, Misquitta AJ, Kraft M. Assessing the Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon 
Anisotropic Potential with Application to the Exfoliation Energy of Graphite. The 
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2011;115(46):13684–93. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/jp208088s. 

[530] Wang CS, Bartelt NC, Ragan R, Thürmer K. Revealing the molecular structure of 

soot precursors. Carbon 2018;129:537–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbon.2017.12.005. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095652J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[531] Fawcett E, Trotter J, Robertson JM. The crystal and molecular structure of 

coronene. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A Mathematical and 
Physical Sciences 1966;289(1418):366–76. https://doi.org/10.1098/ 
rspa.1966.0017. 

[532] Pascazio L, Sirignano M, Anna AD. Simulating the morphology of clusters of 

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons : The influence of the intermolecular potential. 
Combustion and Flame 2017;185:53–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2017.07.003. 

[533] Raj A, Man PLW, Totton TS, Sander M, Shirley RA, Kraft M. New polycyclic 

aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) surface processes to improve the model prediction 
of the composition of combustion-generated PAHs and soot. Carbon 2010;48(2): 
319–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2009.09.030. 

[534] Liu P, Li Y, Sarathy SM, Roberts WL. Gas-to-Liquid Phase Transition of PAH at 
Flame Temperatures. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2020;124(19): 
3896–903. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.0c01912. 

[535] Chung S-H, Violi A. Peri-condensed aromatics with aliphatic chains as key 

intermediates for the nucleation of aromatic hydrocarbons. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2011;33(1):693–700. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2010.06.038. 

[536] Chen HX, Dobbins RA. Crystallogenesis of particles formed in hydrocarbon 

[537] Shaddix CR, Palot´as 

combustion. Combustion Science and Technology 2000;159(1):109–28. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/00102200008935779. 
´
AB, Megaridis CM, Choi MY, Yang NY. Soot graphitic order in 
laminar diffusion flames and a large-scale JP-8 pool fire. International Journal of 
Heat and Mass Transfer 2005;48(17):3604–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2005.03.006. 

[538] Müller J-O, Su DS, Wild U, Schl¨ogl R. Bulk and surface structural investigations of 
diesel engine soot and carbon black. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2007;9 
(30):4018–25. https://doi.org/10.1039/b704850e. 

[539] Alf`e M, Apicella B, Barbella R, Rouzaud J-N, Tregrossi A, Ciajolo A. Structure- 
property relationship in nanostructures of young and mature soot in premixed 
flames. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2009;32(1):697–704. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2008.06.193. 

[540] Vander Wal RL, Bryg VM, Huang C-H. Insights into the combustion chemistry 
within a gas-turbine driven auxiliary power unit as a function of fuel type and 
power level using soot nanostructure as a tracer. Fuel 2014;115:282–7. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.07.011. 

[541] Seong HS, Choi S, Lee K. Examination of nanoparticles from gasoline direct- 
injection (GDI) engines using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). 
International Journal of Automotive Technology 2014;15(2):175–81. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s12239-014-0019-5. 

[542] La Rocca A, Bonatesta F, Fay M, Campanella F. Characterisation of soot in oil from 
a gasoline direct injection engine using transmission electron microscopy. 
Tribology International 2015;86:77–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
triboint.2015.01.025. 

[543] Toth P, Palotas AB, Ring TA, Eddings EG, Vander Wal R, Lighty JS. The effect of 
oxidation pressure on the equilibrium nanostructure of soot particles. Combustion 
and Flame 2015;162(6):2422–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2015.02.009. 

[544] Toth P, Palotas AB, Eddings EG, Whitaker RT, Lighty JS. A novel framework for 
the quantitative analysis of high resolution transmission electron micrographs of 
soot II. robust multiscale nanostructure quantification. Combustion and Flame 
2013;160(5):920–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.01.003. 

[545] Martin JW, Slavchov RI, Yapp EK, Akroyd J, Mosbach S, Kraft M. The polarization 
of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons curved by pentagon incorporation: the role 
of the flexoelectric dipole. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2017;121(48): 
27154–63. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b09044. 

[546] Dumitricǎ T, Landis CM, Yakobson BI. Curvature-induced polarization in carbon 
nanoshells. Chemical Physics Letters 2002;360(1-2):182–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0009-2614(02)00820-5. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
2007;104(13):5274–8. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0609396104. 

[555] Dontot L, Spiegelman F, Rapacioli M. Structures and energetics of neutral and 

cationic pyrene clusters. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2019;123(44): 
9531–43. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.9b07007. 

[556] Dunbar RC. Binding of transition-metal ions to curved π  surfaces: corannulene 

and coronene. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2002;106(42):9809–19. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp020313b. 

[557] Zabula AV, Filatov AS, Spisak SN, Rogachev AY, Petrukhina MA. A Main Group 
Metal Sandwich: Five Lithium Cations Jammed Between Two Corannulene 
Tetraanion Decks. Science 2011;333(6045):1008–11. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.1208686. 

[558] Homann K-H, Wagner HG. Some aspects of soot formation. Dynamics of 

Exothermicity (Combust. Sc. Techol. Book Series, Vol. 2). Carbon and Breach 
Publishers; 1996. p. 151–84. 

[559] Sgro LA, D’Anna A, Minutolo P. Charge distribution of incipient flame-generated 
particles. Aerosol Science and Technology 2010;44(8):651–62. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/02786826.2010.483701. 

[560] Harris SJ, Weiner AM. A picture of soot particle inception. Symposium 

(International) on Combustion 1989;22(1):333–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0082-0784(89)80039-6. 

[561] Aubagnac-Karkar D, El Bakali A, Desgroux P. Soot particles inception and pah 
condensation modelling applied in a soot model utilizing a sectional method. 
Combustion and Flame 2018;189:190–206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2017.10.027. 

[562] Kholghy MR, Kelesidis GA, Pratsinis SE. Reactive polycyclic aromatic 

hydrocarbon dimerization drives soot nucleation. Physical Chemistry Chemical 
Physics 2018;20:10926–38. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CP07803J. 
[563] Kholghy MR, Eaves NA, Veshkini A, Thomson MJ. The role of reactive PAH 

dimerization in reducing soot nucleation reversibility. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):1003–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2018.07.110. 

[564] Totton TS, Misquitta AJ, Kraft M. A First Principles Development of a General 

Anisotropic Potential for Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons. Journal of Chemical 
Theory and Computation 2010;6(3):683–95. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ct9004883. 

[565] Wong D, Whitesides R, Schuertz C, Frenklach M. Molecular dynamics simulations 

of PAH dimerization. In: Bockhorn H, D’Anna A, Sarofim A, Wang H, editors. 
Combustion Generated Fine Carbonaceous Particles. KIT Scientific Publishing 
Karlsruhe; 2009. p. 247–57. 

[566] Sinha S, Raj A. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) formation from benzyl 

radicals: a reaction kinetics study. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2016;18 
(11):8120–31. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5CP06465A. 

[567] Sinha S, Rahman RK, Raj A. On the role of resonantly stabilized radicals in 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) formation: pyrene and fluoranthene 
formation from benzyl–indenyl addition. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 
2017;19(29):19262–78. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CP02539D. 

[568] Hirsch F, Reusch E, Constantinidis P, Fischer I, Bakels S, Rijs AM, et al. Self- 
reaction of ortho-benzyne at high temperatures investigated by infrared and 
photoelectron spectroscopy. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2018;122(49): 
9563–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.8b09640. 

[569] Chen P, Metz JN, Mennito AS, Merchant S, Smith SE, Siskin M, et al. Petroleum 

pitch: Exploring a 50-year structure puzzle with real-space molecular imaging. 
Carbon 2020;161:456–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2020.01.062. 

[570] Liu P, Jin H, Chen B, Yang J, Li Z, Bennett A, et al. Rapid soot inception via 

α-alkynyl substitution of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Fuel 2021;295: 
120580. 

[571] Saigusa H, Lim EC. Excimer formation in van der Waals dimers and clusters of 
aromatic molecules. Accounts of chemical research 1996;29(4):171–8. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/ar950169v. 

[547] Kalinin SV, Meunier V. Electronic flexoelectricity in low-dimensional systems. 

[572] Krueger RA, Blanquart G. Predicting aromatic exciplex fluorescence emission 

Physical Review B 2008;77(3):1–4. https://doi.org/10.1103/ 
PhysRevB.77.033403. 

energies. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2019;21(20):10325–35. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/C9CP02027F. 

[548] Kvashnin AG, Sorokin PB, Yakobson BI. Flexoelectricity in Carbon 

[573] Krueger RA, Blanquart G. Predicting the photoresponse of soot nuclei: 

Nanostructures: Nanotubes, Fullerenes, and Nanocones. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry Letters 2015;6(14):2740–4. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jpclett.5b01041. 

[549] Martin JW, Menon A, Lao CT, Akroyd J, Kraft M. Dynamic polarity of curved 
aromatic soot precursors. Combustion and Flame 2019;206:150–7. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.04.046. 

[550] Bowal K, Martin JW, Misquitta AJ, Kraft M. Ion-induced soot nucleation using a 
new potential for curved aromatics. Combustion Science and Technology 2019; 
191(5):1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2019.1565496. 

[551] Bowal K, Martin JW, Kraft M. Self-assembly of curved aromatic molecules in 

nanoparticles. Carbon 2021;182:70–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbon.2021.05.013. 

[552] Liu S, Jarrold MF, Bowers MT. Ion-molecule clustering in simple systems. a study 

of the temperature dependence of the dimerization reactions of CH2CF
(benzene), and C6D
theory. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1985;89(14):3127–34. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/j100260a035. 

+
6  (benzene-d6) in their parent neutral gases: experiment and 

+
2 , C6H

+
6 

[553] Shi X, Bartell LS. Electron diffraction and monte carlo studies of liquids. 1. 

intermolecular interactions for benzene. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1988; 
92(20):5667–73. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100331a024. 

[554] Rhee YM, Lee TJ, Gudipati MS, Allamandola LJ, Head-Gordon M. Charged 

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon clusters and the galactic extended red emission. 

Spectroscopic characteristics of aromatic aggregates containing five-membered 
rings. Combustion and Flame 2020;217:85–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2019.10.028. 

[574] Mulliken RS, Person WB. Molecular complexes: a lecture and reprint volume. 

Wiley-Interscience; 1969. 

[575] Martin JW, Hou D, Menon A, Pascazio L, Akroyd J, You X, et al. Reactivity of 

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon soot precursors: Implications of localized 
π-radicals on rim-based pentagonal rings. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 
2019;123(43):26673–82. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b07558. 

[576] Mou Z, Uchida K, Kubo T, Kertesz M. Evidence of σ-and π-dimerization in a series 
of phenalenyls. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2014;136(52): 
18009–22. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja509243p. 

[577] Uchida K, Ito S, Nakano M, Abe M, Kubo T. Biphenalenylidene: isolation and 

characterization of the reactive intermediate on the decomposition pathway of 
phenalenyl radical. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2016;138(7): 
2399–410. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5b13033. 

[578] Altarawneh M, Oluwoye I, Dlugogorski BZ. Singlet-diradical character in large 
PAHs triggers spontaneous-ignition of coal. Combustion and Flame 2020;212: 
279–81. 

[579] Kobayashi K. Electronic structure of a stepped graphite surface. Physical Review B 

1993;48(3):1757. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.48.1757. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095653J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[580] Klein D. Graphitic polymer strips with edge states. Chemical Physics Letters 1994; 

217(3):261–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2614(93)E1378-T. 

[581] Nagai H, Nakano M, Yoneda K, Kishi R, Takahashi H, Shimizu A, et al. Signature 
of multiradical character in second hyperpolarizabilities of rectangular graphene 
nanoflakes. Chemical Physics Letters 2010;489(4-6):212–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cplett.2010.03.013. 

[582] Sun Z, Wu J. Open-shell polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Journal of Materials 
Chemistry 2012;22(10):4151–60. https://doi.org/10.1039/C1JM14786B. 
[583] Bendikov M, Duong HM, Starkey K, Houk K, Carter EA, Wudl F. Oligoacenes: 

theoretical prediction of open-shell singlet diradical ground states. Journal of the 
American Chemical Society 2004;126(24):7416–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ja048919w. 

[584] Hiley CI, Whitehead GF, Zanella M, Delacotte C, Manning TD, Rosseinsky MJ. 

Detection and crystal structure of hydrogenated bipentacene as an intermediate in 
thermally induced pentacene oligomerization. The Journal of Organic Chemistry 
2019;84(13):8481–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.9b00671. 

[585] Martin JW, Pascazio L, Menon A, Akroyd J, Kaiser K, Sculz F, et al. π-diradical 
aromatic soot precursors in flames. Journal of the American Chemical Society 
2021;143(31):12212–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c05030. 

[586] Abrahamson J. Saturated platelets are new intermediates in hydrocarbon 

pyrolysis and carbon formation. Nature 1977;266(24):323–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/266323a0. 

[587] Frenklach M, Singh RI, Mebel AM. On the low-temperature limit of HACA. 

Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):969–76. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.068. 

[588] Dames E, Sirjean B, Wang H. Weakly bound carbon- carbon bonds in 

acenaphthene derivatives and hexaphenylethane. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry A 2009;114(2):1161–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp909662m. 

[589] Menon A, Martin JW, Akroyd J, Kraft M. Reactivity of polycyclic aromatic 

hydrocarbon soot precursors: Kinetics and equilibria. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry A 2020;124(48):10040–52. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jpcc.9b07558. 

[606] Hansen N, Klippenstein SJ, Westmoreland P, Kasper T, Kohse-H¨oinghaus K, 

Wang J, et al. A combined ab initio and photoionization mass spectrometric study 
of polyynes in fuel-rich flames. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2008;10(3): 
366–74. https://doi.org/10.1039/B711578D. 

[607] Kislov V, Sadovnikov A, Mebel A. Formation mechanism of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons beyond the second aromatic ring. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry A 2013;117(23):4794–816. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp402481y. 
[608] Hansen N, Schenk M, Moshammer K, Kohse-H¨oinghaus K. Investigating repetitive 
reaction pathways for the formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in 
combustion processes. Combustion and Flame 2017;180:250–61. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.09.013. 

[609] Liu M, Green WH. Capturing aromaticity in automatic mechanism generation 

software. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2019;37(1):575–81. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.006. 

[610] Tsefrikas VM, Scott LT. Geodesic Polyarenes by Flash Vacuum Pyrolysis. Chemical 

Reviews 2006;106(12):4868–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr050553y. 
[611] Martin JW, McIntosh GJ, Arul R, Oosterbeek RN, Kraft M, S¨ohnel T. Giant 

fullerene formation through thermal treatment of fullerene soot. Carbon 2017; 
125:132–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2017.09.045. 

[612] Adamson BA, Skeen SA, Ahmed M, Hansen N. Nucleation of soot: experimental 
assessment of the role of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) dimers. 
Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie 2020;234(7–9):1295–310. https://doi.org/ 
10.1515/zpch-2020-1638. 

[613] Green Jr WH. Predictive kinetics: a new approach for the 21st century. Advances 

in Chemical Engineering 2007;32:1–313. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2377 
(07)32001-2. 

[614] Council NR. Transforming Combustion Research through Cyberinfrastructure. 

Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2011, ISBN 978-0-309-16387-3. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/13049. 

[615] Menon A, Krdzavac NB, Kraft M. From database to knowledge graph’using data in 
chemistry. Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering 2019;26:33–7. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.coche.2019.08.004. 

[590] Jin H, Yang J, Xing L, Hao J, Zhang Y, Cao C, et al. An experimental study of 

[616] Lu T, Law CK. Toward accommodating realistic fuel chemistry in large-scale 

indene pyrolysis with synchrotron vacuum ultraviolet photoionization mass 
spectrometry. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2019;21(10):5510–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C8CP07285J. 

[591] Wang D, Violi A, Kim DH, Mullholland JA. Formation of naphthalene, indene, and 

benzene from cyclopentadiene pyrolysis: A DFT study. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry A 2006;110(14):4719–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp053628a. 
[592] Kim DH, Mulholland JA, Wang D, Violi A. Pyrolytic hydrocarbon growth from 
cyclopentadiene. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2010;114(47):12411–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp106749k. 

[593] Chu C, Zhang T, Thomson MJ. The chemical structure effects of alkylbenzenes on 

soot formation in a laminar co-flow flame. Combustion and Flame 2019;204: 
237–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.03.010. 

[594] Yan S, Jiang Y-J, Marsh ND, Eddings EG, Sarofim AF, Pugmire RJ. Study of the 
evolution of soot from various fuels. Energy & Fuels 2005;19(5):1804–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef049742u. 

[595] Menon A, Martin JW, Leon G, Hou D, Pascazio L, You X, et al. Reactive localized 
π-radicals on rim-based pentagonal rings: properties and concentration in flames. 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2021;38(1):565–73. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2020.07.042. 

[596] Su X, Li C, Du Q, Tao K, Wang S, Yu P. Atomically precise synthesis and 

characterization of heptauthrene with triplet ground state. Nano letters 2020;20 
(9):6859–64. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.0c02939. 

[597] Li J, Sanz S, Castro-Esteban J, Vilas-Varela M, Friedrich N, Frederiksen T, et al. 
Uncovering the triplet ground state of triangular graphene nanoflakes engineered 
with atomic precision on a metal surface. Physical Review Letters 2020;124(17): 
177201. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.177201. 

[598] Mishra S, Beyer D, Eimre K, Kezilebieke S, Berger R, Gr¨oning O, et al. Topological 
frustration induces unconventional magnetism in a nanographene. Nature 
Nanotechnology 2020;15(1):22–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-019-0577-9. 

[599] Luther K, Oum K, Sekiguchi K, Troe J. Recombination of benzyl radicals: 

dependence on the bath gas, temperature, and pressure. Physical Chemistry 
Chemical Physics 2004;6(16):4133–41. https://doi.org/10.1039/B407074G. 

computations. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2009;35(2):192–215. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2008.10.002. 

[617] Green WH. Automatic generation of reaction mechanisms. Computer Aided 

Chemical Engineering. 45. Elsevier; 2019. p. 259–94. 

[618] Bhoorasingh PL, Slakman BL, Seyedzadeh Khanshan F, Cain JY, West RH. 

Automated transition state theory calculations for high-throughput kinetics. The 
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2017;121(37):6896–904. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.jpca.7b07361. 

[619] Cavallotti C, Pelucchi M, Georgievskii Y, Klippenstein S. Estoktp: Electronic 

structure to temperature-and pressure-dependent rate constants’a code for 
automatically predicting the thermal kinetics of reactions. Journal of chemical 
theory and computation 2018;15(2):1122–45. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jctc.8b00701. 

[620] Revzan K, Brown N, Frenklach M. Soot formation codes. URL: http://www me 

berkeley edu/soot S 1999. 

[621] Mitsos A, Oxberry GM, Barton PI, Green WH. Optimal automatic reaction and 

species elimination in kinetic mechanisms. Combustion and Flame 2008;155(1- 
2):118–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.03.004. 

[622] Pepiot P, Cai L, Pitsch H. Model reduction and lumping procedures. Computer 

Aided Chemical Engineering. 45. Elsevier; 2019. p. 799–827. 

[623] Garud SS, Karimi IA, Kraft M. LEAPS2: Learning based evolutionary assistive 

paradigm for surrogate selection. Computers & Chemical Engineering 2018;119: 
352–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2018.09.008. 

[624] Wang S, Wu D, Yang B, Ruckenstein E, Chen H. Semimetallic carbon honeycombs: 
New three-dimensional graphene allotropes with Dirac cones. Nanoscale 2018;10 
(6):2748–54. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7nr07824b. 

[625] Myers JD, Allison TC, Bittner S, Didier B, Frenklach M, Green WH, et al. 
A collaborative informatics infrastructure for multi-scale science. Cluster 
Computing 2005;8(4):243–53. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-005-4092-4. 

[626] Frenklach M. Transforming data into knowledge’process informatics for 

combustion chemistry. Proceedings of the combustion Institute 2007;31(1): 
125–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.08.121. 

[600] Pelucchi M, Cavallotti C, Faravelli T, Klippenstein S. H-Abstraction reactions by 

[627] You X, Packard A, Frenklach M. Process informatics tools for predictive modeling: 

OH, HO2, O, O2  and benzyl radical addition to O2  and their implications for 
kinetic modelling of toluene oxidation. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 
2018;20(16):10607–27. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CP07779C. 

Hydrogen combustion. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics 2012;44(2): 
101–16. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.20627. 

[628] Schuchardt K, Pancerella C, Rahn LA, Didier B, Kodeboyina D, Leahy D, et al. 

[601] Frenklach M, Liu Z, Singh RI, Galimova GR, Azyazov VN, Mebel AM. Detailed, 
sterically-resolved modeling of soot oxidation: Role of O atoms, interplay with 
particle nanostructure, and emergence of inner particle burning. Combustion and 
Flame 2018;188:284–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2017.10.012. 

Portal-based knowledge environment for collaborative science. Concurrency and 
Computation: Practice and Experience 2007;19(12):1703–16. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/cpe.1201. 

[629] Smith GP, Golden DM, Frenklach M, Moriarty NW, Eiteneer B, Goldenberg M, 

et al. GRImech 3.0 reaction mechanism. Sandia National Laboratory 2000. 

[602] Sun W, Gao X, Wu B, Ombrello T. The effect of ozone addition on combustion: 

[630] Farazi F, Akroyd J, Mosbach S, Buerger P, Nurkowski D, Salamanca M, et al. 

Kinetics and dynamics. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2019;73: 
1–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.02.002. 

[603] Leon G, Martin JW, Bringley EJ, Akroyd J, Kraft M. The role of oxygenated species 
in the growth of graphene, fullerenes and carbonaceous particles. Carbon 2021; 
182:203–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2021.05.052. 

[604] Jander H, Wagner HG. “Soot Formation in Combustion”: An International Round 

Table Discussion. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht; 1990. 

[605] Irimiea C, Faccinetto A, Carpentier Y, Ortega I-K, Nuns N, Therssen E, et al. 

A comprehensive protocol for chemical analysis of flame combustion emissions by 
secondary ion mass spectrometry. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 
2018;32(13):1015–25. https://doi.org/10.1002/rcm.8133. 

Ontokin: An ontology for chemical kinetic reaction mechanisms. Journal of 
Chemical Information and Modeling 2019;60(1):108–20. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00960. 

[631] Krdzavac N, Mosbach S, Nurkowski D, Buerger P, Akroyd J, Martin J, et al. An 
ontology and semantic web service for quantum chemistry calculations. Journal 
of chemical information and modeling 2019;59(7):3154–65. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00227. 

[632] Morbach J, Yang A, Marquardt W. Ontocape’a large-scale ontology for chemical 

process engineering. Engineering applications of artificial intelligence 2007;20 
(2):147–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2006.06.010. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095654J.W. Martin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[633] Zhou L, Zhang C, Karimi IA, Kraft M. An ontology framework towards 

decentralized information management for eco-industrial parks. Computers & 
Chemical Engineering 2018;118:49–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compchemeng.2018.07.010. 

[634] of Computer Engineering at Technical University of Vienna I.. Weather ontology. 

http://www.auto.tuwien.ac.at/downloads/thinkhome/ontology/WeatherOnt 
ology.owl; last accessed 2018-12-18). 

[635] Devanand A, Karmakar G, Krdzavac N, Rigo-Mariani R, Eddy YF, Karimi IA, et al. 

Ontopowsys: A power system ontology for cross domain interactions in an eco 
industrial park. Energy and AI 2020:100008. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
egyai.2020.100008. 

[636] Eibeck A, Lim MQ, Kraft M. J-park simulator: An ontology-based platform for 

cross-domain scenarios in process industry. Computers & Chemical Engineering 
2019;131:106586. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2019.106586. 
[637] Kolbe TH, Gr¨oger G, Plümer L. CityGML: Interoperable access to 3D city models. 

Geo-information for disaster management. Springer; 2005. p. 883–99. 

[638] Eibeck A, Chadzynski A, Lim MQ, Aditya K, Ong L, Devanand A, et al. A parallel 
world framework for scenario analysis in knowledge graphs. Data-Centric 
Engineering 2020;1. https://doi.org/10.1017/dce.2020.6. 

[639] Farazi F, Salamanca M, Mosbach S, Akroyd J, Eibeck A, Aditya LK, et al. 

Knowledge graph approach to combustion chemistry and interoperability. ACS 
omega 2020;5(29):18342–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.0c02055. 
[640] Zhou X, Eibeck A, Lim MQ, Krdzavac NB, Kraft M. An agent composition 

framework for the J-Park Simulator-a knowledge graph for the process industry. 
Computers & Chemical Engineering 2019;130:106577. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.compchemeng.2019.106577. 

[641] Kessler T, John PCS, Zhu J, McEnally CS, Pfefferle LD, Mack JH. A comparison of 

computational models for predicting yield sooting index. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2021;38(1):1385–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2020.07.009. 

[642] Ju Y, Sun W. Plasma assisted combustion: Dynamics and chemistry. Progress in 

Energy and Combustion Science 2015;48:21–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pecs.2014.12.002. 

[643] Ju Y, Reuter CB, Yehia OR, Farouk TI, Won SH. Dynamics of cool flames. Progress 
in Energy and Combustion Science 2019;75:100787. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pecs.2019.100787. 

[644] Jamrozik A, Grab-Rogali´nski K, Tutak W. Hydrogen effects on combustion 

stability, performance and emission of diesel engine. International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.05.049. 
[645] Bennett AM, Liu P, Li Z, Kharbatia NM, Boyette W, Masri AR, et al. Soot formation 
in laminar flames of ethylene/ammonia. Combustion and Flame 2020;220:210–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.06.042. 

[646] Salamanca M, Sirignano M, D’Anna A. Particulate formation in premixed and 
counter-flow diffusion ethylene/ethanol flames. Energy & Fuels 2012;26(10): 
6144–52. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef301081q. 

[647] Ferraro F, Russo C, Schmitz R, Hasse C, Sirignano M. Experimental and numerical 
study on the effect of oxymethylene ether-3 (OME3) on soot particle formation. 
Fuel 2020;286:119353. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119353. 

[648] Lao CT, Akroyd J, Eaves N, Smith A, Morgan N, Bhave A, et al. Modelling particle 

mass and particle number emissions during the active regeneration of diesel 

particulate filters. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2019;37(4):4831–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.07.079. 

[649] Miller JA, Pilling MJ, Troe J. Unravelling combustion mechanisms through a 
quantitative understanding of elementary reactions. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2005;30(1):43–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2004.08.281. 

Jacob Martin completed a Bachelor of Science in Chemistry and Physics followed by a 
Masters in Chemistry at the University of Auckland (New Zealand). This included research 
in  the  areas  of  ultrafast  spectroscopy,  Raman  spectroscopy,  Bayesian  data  analysis, 
computational  chemistry  and  microfluidics.  He  completed  a  PhD in  the  Department  of 
Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology at the University of Cambridge under the su-
pervision of Prof Markus KRAFT as a member of Churchill College. For his PhD, Jacob 
studied the formation of soot in flames using molecular dynamics and electronic structure 
methods to explore the self-assembly of soot and disordered carbon materials. In 2020 he 
joined the Cambridge Centre for Carbon Reduction in Chemical Technology in Singapore 
as a research fellow. In 2021 he began a Forrest Fellowship in the Department of Physics 
and Astronomy at Curtin University, Perth, Australia. 

Maurin Salamanca Chemistry and obtained her B.Sc. at the Universidad de Antioquia 
(Colombia) as well as her Doctorate in Chemical Science (Summa Cum Laude). During her 
B.Sc. studies, she synthesized materials based on tungsten and molybdenum for hydro-
carbon transformation. The focus of her doctoral studies was the effect of biofuels on the 
soot physicochemical characteristics produced in different combustion systems. She did an 
internship,  during  her  doctoral  studies,  in  Prof.  Andrea  D’Anna’s  group  at  Universit`a 
Federico II di Napoli. She was selected by the Alexander von Humboldt foundation for one 
of  the  prestigious  Humboldt  Research  Postdoctoral  Fellowships  for  early-career  re-
searchers.  She  developed  her  research  at  Bielefeld  University  in  the  Department  of 
Chemistry,  working  under  the  advisement  of  Professor  Katharina  Kohse-Hinghaus.  She 
joined  the  CoMo  group  in  2018  to  investigate  the  formation  of  soot  and  oxides  nano-
particles in flames under the supervision of Prof Markus KRAFT. In 2020, she started a new 
position as Assitant Professor in the Department of Chemistry at Universidad Nacional de 
Colombia - Sede Medellín. 

Markus Kraft is a Fellow of Churchill College Cambridge and Professor in the Department 
of  Chemical  Engineering  and  Biotechnology.  He  is  the  director  of  CARES  ltd.,  the 
Singapore-Cambridge CREATE Research Centre. He obtained the academic degree ’Dip-
lom Technomathematiker’ at the University of Kaiserslautern in 1992 and completed his 
Doctor rerum naturalium in Technical Chemistry at the same University in 1997. Subse-
quently, he worked at the University of Karlsruhe and the Weierstrass Institute for Applied 
Analysis  and Stochastics  in Berlin. In 1999  he  became a lecturer  in the Department  of 
Chemical Engineering, University of Cambridge. He has a strong interest in the area of 
computational modelling and optimisation targeted towards developing carbon abatement 
and emissions reduction technologies for the automotive, power and chemical industries. 
He has contributed significantly towards the detailed modelling of combustion synthesis of 
organic and inorganic nanoparticles and worked on engine simulation, spray drying and 
the granulation of fine powders. More recently, he has been working on cyber physical 
systems  employing  time  varying  knowledge  graphs  with  the  aim  to  build  large  cross 
domain applications that help to reduce energy consumption and harmful emissions. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10095655