Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress  in  Energy  and  Combustion  Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Heat  transfer  modelling  in  Discrete  Element  Method  (DEM)-based 
simulations  of  thermal  processes:  Theory  and  model  development 

∗
Zhengbiao Peng, Elham Doroodchi, Behdad Moghtaderi 

Priority Research Centre for Frontier Energy Technologies & Utilization, University of Newcastle, Callaghan 2308, NSW, Australia 

a r t i c l e 

i n f o 

a b s t r a c t 

Article history: 
Received 17 November 2019 
Accepted 2 April 2020 
Available online 27 April 2020 

Keywords: 
Thermal DEM 
Heat transfer modelling 
CFD 
Particulate ﬂow 
Thermal processes 
Thermal models 

Over the past decade, DEM-based simulation has become a promising alternative to physical measure- 
ments of thermal particulate systems. Despite their rapid advancement and successful applications to a 
wide range of industrial processes, a comprehensive review of the theory that underpins the thermal 
DEM-based simulations is yet to be conducted. This work presents a critical and in-depth review of all 
major thermal models and heat transfer mechanisms pertinent to DEM-based simulations. Other critical 
aspects such as boundary conditions and particle body temperature distribution that were often over- 
looked are also summarised and discussed, aiming to provide a clear path for the development of robust 
thermal DEM-based models. 

The quasi-analytical solution based on the Hertzian contact theory proves classic and remains the main 
method to solving the conduction of static contacts. Recent attempts have been mainly directed towards 
improving the calculation of conduction through collisional contacts and the thin wedge of interstitial 
ﬂuid between particles. Empirical correlations that were developed before 1981 remain predominant in 
calculating the ﬂuid-particle convection coeﬃcient. Though more accurate, the discrete models of radia- 
tion that rely on the solution of view factors amongst individual particles have been applied much less 
than the continuum models due to the signiﬁcant computational overhead. Generally, previous efforts 
have led to the construction of a solid framework of thermal DEM-based models. Signiﬁcant work is re- 
quired to improve existing or develop new heat transfer sub-models, particularly those for accurate and 
eﬃcient modelling of conduction and radiation in particle-laden systems. 

© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 

1. Introduction 

Thermal/reacting  particulate  systems  are  commonly  encoun- 
tered  in  industrial  processes  as  diverse  as  coal  gasiﬁcation,  iron 
and  steelmaking,  drug  manufacturing,  energy  generation  and 
storage,  fuel  production,  upgrading  and  decarbonization,  and 
granular material processing including mixing, drying, granulation 
and coating. In these processes, particles are either the reactants 
themselves  (e.g.  [1–4] ),  or  the  medium  that  is  used  to  enhance 
the heat transfer or chemical reaction rates (e.g. [5 , 6] ). The main 
mechanisms that make the involvement of particles so preferable 
for  achieving  high  system  operation  eﬃciency  include:  (i)  large 
interfacial  area  available  for  heat  and  mass  transfer;  (ii)  high 
relative  velocity  between  the  ﬂuid  phase  and  discrete  particles 
followed  by  the  high  convective  heat  transfer;  and  (iii)  a  third 
heat transfer mechanism, namely particle radiation, taking place. 
However, the presence of particles also introduces signiﬁcant com- 

∗ Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: behdad.moghtaderi@newcastle.edu.au (B. Moghtaderi). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2020.100847 
0360-1285/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 

plexities and uncertainties of physics to the particulate system [7] . 
A good understanding of the theory and mechanisms that underlie 
the  heat  transfer  characteristics  in  thermal/reacting  particulate 
processes is largely lacking which however is pivotal to the design 
and operation of relevant industrial processes. 

According to the third law of thermodynamics or the Clausius 
statement,  heat,  a  form  of  energy,  ﬂows  throughout  the  system 
driven by the temperature difference. Heat transfer occurs mainly 
through  three  mechanisms,  namely,  conduction,  convection  and 
radiation.  Heat  might  be  also  simultaneously  generated,  in  the 
context  of  particulate  systems,  often  through  chemical  reactions 
[6 , 8] ,  phase  change  [9]  and  the  energy  dissipation  mechanisms 
[10] due to friction amongst particles and kinetic energy loss in 
the event of collisions. Al-Arkawazi [10] calculated the amount of 
heat energy due to different mechanisms in packed and ﬂuidised 
beds and found the heat generated through the energy dissipation 
mechanisms due to friction and collision only adds up to a tiny 
portion (approaching zero after particles are ﬂuidised) compared 
to the heat transferred through the three main mechanisms, hence 
has  been  neglected  in  the  majority  of  previous  studies.  Heat 

2 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Notation 

Symbols 
A c 
A 
i 
Bi 
c p 
d 
D 

E 
E m 
f 
i 
F 
ij 
F n 
F o 
G 
h 
H c 
H g 

H m 
I 
I r 
k 
k e 

k n 
k r 

l 
l 
ij 
l m 

L max 
m 
N c 
N 
j 

pb 

Nu 
Pr 
q 
Q 
r 
r c 
r 
ij 
ic ,r 
r 

maximum contact area, m 2 
radiation area of particle i ,  m 2 
Biot number, −
speciﬁc heat, J/(kg • K) 
diameter, m 
distance  from  a  particle’s  centroid  to  the  separa- 
tion plane, m 
Young (cid:3) s modulus, Pa 
effective Young (cid:3) s modulus, Pa 
force acting on particle i , N 
view factor between two surfaces, −
normal contact force, N 
Fourier number, −
incident radiation, W/m 2 
convective heat transfer coeﬃcient, W/(m 2 • K) 
particle-particle contact thermal conductance, W/K 
conductance through the interstitial ﬂuid between 
the two particles, W/K 
effective heat conductance, W/K 
particle moment of inertia, kg • m 2 
radiative intensity, W/(m 2 • sr) 
thermal conductivity, W/(m • K) 
effective thermal conductivity of particles, W/(m • 
K) 
normal spring stiffness, N/m 
effective thermal conductivity of radiation, W/(m • 
K) 
conduction length, m 
distance between the centroids of two particles, m 
distance between the centroids of two contacting 
particles, m 
maximum permissible normal distance, m 
mass, kg 
total number of particle contacts, −
total number of points on particle i being interact- 
ing with particle j, −
Nusselt number, −
Prandtl number, −
heat ﬂux through the packed bed, W/m 2 
heat energy, J 
radius, m 
particle-particle contact radius, m 
equivalent radius of the tapered cone, m 

ici , r 

icj  radius of the isothermal core inside a particle, par- 

r 
l 

r m 
r 
s,f 

Ra 
Re 
s 

S 
t 
t c 
T 
T 
i 
U g 
U 
mf 

ticle i and particle j,  m 
particle- layer contact radius in surrounding layer 
method, m 
geometric mean of the radii of the two particles, m 
radius  due  to  intersection  between  the  cone  and 
the particle, m 
Rayleigh number, −
Reynolds number, −
minimum  conduction  distance  between  a  pair  of 
particles, m 
half the surface separation distance, m 
time, s 
particle collision duration, s 
temperature, K 
torque acting on particle i , N • m 
gas velocity, m/s 
minimum ﬂuidisation velocity, m/s 

v 
i 
V C 
V 
ij 

x 
i 

velocity of particle i , m/s 
volume of computational cell, m 3 
volume of each of the tapered cones between par- 
ticles i and j , m 3 
position of particle i , m 

Greek letters 
αr 
αs 
γ
δ
ε
ε
b 
εp 
ϑ
θ R 
λg 
μ
μ

b , μ

absorption coeﬃcient of a radiative medium, −
particle thermal diffusivity, m 2 /s 
ratio of speciﬁc heats, −
surrounding layer thickness, m 
bed porosity or voidage, −
bed bulk or average porosity or voidage, −
emissivity of particle, −
average slope of particle surface roughness, −
radiation temperature, K 
mean free path of gas molecules, m 
dynamic viscosity, Pa • s 

0  viscosities  at  the  mean  bulk  temperature  and  the 

mean wall temperature, Pa • s 
density, kg/m 3 
particle surface asperity, m 
Stefan–Boltzmann constant, 5.67  × 10 −8 W/(m 2 K 4 ) 
scattering coeﬃcient, −
Poisson’s ratio of particles, −
overall view factor, −
solid concentration, −
solid angle, −
dimensionless particle thermal conductivity, −
angular speed of particle i , rad/s 

Subscripts 
∞ 

ρ
ϱ
σ
σ s 
υ
ϒ
φs 
ϕ
χ
ω 
i 

f 
g 
i, j 
p 
pp 
pfp 
Pf 
pfw 
r 
s 
w 

surrounding 
ﬂuid 
gas phase 
index 
particle 
particle-particle 
particle-ﬂuid-particle 
Packing factor 
particle-ﬂuid-wall 
relative 
solid phase 
wall 

generation  due  to  chemical  reactions  and/or  phase  change  that 
occur in certain application scenarios is not covered in the present 
work.  Accordingly,  this  review  speciﬁcally  centres  on  the  theory 
and mechanisms of heat transfer in thermal particulate systems. 

Despite  the  signiﬁcant  progress  achieved  in  the  measuring 
techniques  of  heat  transfer,  e.g.  the  electrically  heated  single 
sphere buried in the unheated packing [11 , 12] , laser ﬂash method 
[13 , 14] ,  mass  transfer  analogy  and  simultaneous  heat  and  mass 
transfer [15] and the regenerative heating technique [16] , it proves 
extremely challenging (if not impossible) to fully understand the 
heat transfer characteristics of particulate systems via the exper- 
imental approach alone. For this reason, the numerical approach 
based on Discrete Element Method (DEM) has become increasingly 
popular  as  it  provides  detailed  local  and  transient  information 
on ﬂow and heat transfer at the particle scale. However, due to 
the  complexities  of  the  thermal  particulate  systems  in  terms  of 
time-  and  temperature-dependent  ﬂow  structures  and  material 
properties,  new  time  and  length  scales  introduced  by  particle 
interactions,  high  nonlinearity  and  anisotropy  in  interphase  heat 
and mass transfer, and high heterogeneities in stress and particle 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

3 

contact mechanics, it is challenging to develop a robust thermal 
DEM-based  model  that  is  capable  of  addressing  all  major  prob- 
lems associated with heat transfer and suits different application 
scenarios. 

Generally,  numerical  models  developed  for  investigating  the 
particulate  systems  could  be  categorised  based  on  two  main 
frameworks,  namely  Eulerian–Eulerian  and  Eulerian–Lagrangian. 
Models that were built based upon the Eulerian–Eulerian frame- 
work mainly include the mixture model and the two-ﬂuid model 
(TFM).  This  category  of  models  essentially  treats  both  the  ﬂuid 
phase and solid particles as the continuum. The approach is com- 
putationally preferable and can simulate the ﬂow and heat transfer 
of a large number of particles in actual processes [17–24] . For ap- 
plications in which mesoscopic features are of subtle importance, 
this approach suﬃces. However, the treatment of the solid phase 
as the continuum disobeys the discrete nature of solid particles, 
thus limited by the local homogeneity assumption and the diﬃ- 
culties associated with the construction of constitutive equations 
for the stress tensor and effective thermal conductivity of the solid 
phase.  More  importantly,  the  Eulerian–Eulerian  approach  cannot 
reveal information at the particle-scale such as temperature, intra- 
particle and particle surface temperature distribution, particle con- 
tact, local void fraction or local ﬂuid-solid ﬂow structure. All the 
information, however, is vital to the study of ﬂow and heat trans- 
fer in thermal/reacting particulate systems. 

Models that were built in the Eulerian–Lagrangian framework 
mainly include Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS)-DEM [25] , Com- 
putational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)-DEM [26] , and lattice Boltzmann 
Method (LBM)-DEM [27] . This category of models completely over- 
comes the abovementioned drawbacks of Eulerian–Eulerian based 
models.  Indeed,  it  has  been  extensively  proven  that  the  DEM- 
based simulation is a promising approach for simulating the heat 
transfer and ﬂuid ﬂow in particulate systems [28 , 29] . For instance, 
by explicitly solving the particle dynamics of individual particles, 
the challenge associated with particle contact heterogeneities in- 
duced  by  stress  chains  is  directly  addressed,  and  the  transient 
distribution  of  particle  temperature  is  resolved  at  the  mesoscale 
[30] .  However,  as  individual  particles  are  tracked  and  the  ﬂow 
and heat transfer related to each particle are resolved, the DEM- 
based  simulation  is  computationally  demanding  for  solving  the 
solid phase. Moreover, models of DNS and LBM themselves entail 
high  computational  expense  in  solving  the  ﬂuid  phase.  As  a  re- 
sult, simulations using a DEM-based model were often limited to 
small systems that contain a small number of particles (e.g., thou- 
sands of particles). However, in recent years, with the ample avail- 
ability of high-computational power accompanied with advanced 
parallel-computation algorithms (based on MPI, OpenMP and GPU) 
[6 , 7 , 31–33] , the DEM-based models (in particular CFD-DEM) have 
been  applied  successfully  to  a  wide  range  of  thermal/reacting 
industrial  processes  to  undergo  detailed  analysis  of  the  chemo- 
physics where millions of particles are present. 

DEM-based models that involve heat transfer are also referred 
to  as  thermal  DEM-based  models.  Despite  the  success  of  their 
broad  industrial  applications  (e.g.  [34–36] ),  a  comprehensive  re- 
view of the thermal models developed and/or applied in previous 
thermal DEM-based simulations is yet to be conducted except for a 
few reviews that have centred on speciﬁc topics, e.g., heat transfer 
of nanoﬂuids in porous media by Xu et al. [37] , DNS of mass, mo- 
mentum and heat transfer in dense gas-solid ﬂows by Deen et al. 
[25] , and CFD simulation of dense particulate reaction systems by 
Zhong et al. [34] . This work places the review focus on the theory 
underpinning thermal DEM-based simulations in terms of thermal 
models and heat transfer mechanisms. Before presenting the de- 
tails, a general description of the development and state-of-the-art 
of these thermal models is given as follows. 

• Conduction 

Batchelor & Brien [38] proposed the classic equation that is an 
approximately analytical solution of conductive heat transfer when 
two particles are in contact. The equation is applicable for static 
f r p  (cid:5) 1  where  r c  is  the  contact  radius  and 
contacts  when  k s r c / k 
r p  is the rigid particle radius. k s  and k 
f  denote the thermal con- 
ductivities of solid particles and the ﬂuid, respectively. For mov- 
ing particles, Soo [39] applied the elasticity theory to evaluate the 
contact area and contact duration which were then quantitatively 
examined  by  Sun  and  Chen  [40]  who  calculated  the  conductive 
heat transfer when two moving particles collided. The formula was 
subsequently  adapted  by  Zhou  et  al.  [41]  for  easy  implementa- 
tion in DEM-based simulations. In conventional DEM-based mod- 
els, the unrealistic properties of particle material were used to al- 
low for the acceptable simulation turnaround time. This, however, 
leads to the unrealistic contact area and contact duration, hence 
incorrect or, to be more speciﬁc, overestimated conductive heat ex- 
change. Zhou et al. [42] later proposed a correction factor to rec- 
tify the incorrect collisional conduction calculation. However, this 
correction factor only accounts for the overestimated contact area 
[35 , 42] . Morris et al. [43] derived two physically-based terms to 
correct both the contact area and contact time, but the time cor- 
rection was analytical derived for binary collisions, thus is limited 
to relatively dilute systems. Instead of using correction factors Patil 
et al. [44] calculated the correct integrated amount of heat trans- 
fer during one collision using the real particle properties and input 
it into DEM simulations as a packet of energy at the beginning of 
the collision. However, the model was confronted by other diﬃ- 
culties, e.g. unable to conveniently consider other contact events 
including the rolling or resting motion of particle clusters on the 
wall. 

For scenarios where conduction through the interstitial ﬂuid in 
between two interacting particles is signiﬁcant, i.e. when k s r c / k 
f r p 
(cid:5) 1 is not satisﬁed,  Rong&Horio [45]  proposed a surrounding 
layer method that determines when and how to consider the in- 
direct  conduction  through  the  interstitial  ﬂuid;  the  method  was 
later  slightly  modiﬁed  by  Musser  [46]  for  easy  implementation. 
In this method, the conductive heat transfer through the body of 
solid particles is not considered as part of the indirect conduction 
paths. Rather differently, Cheng et al. [47] introduced the concept 
of Voronoi polyhedron and proposed two sub-models (Models A 
and B) that calculate the indirect particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction 
through both the body of solid particles and the interstitial ﬂuid. 
Recently, the Models A and B of Cheng et al. [47] have been mod- 
iﬁed by Gan et al. [48] and Chen et al. [49] , respectively, for mod- 
elling polydisperse particulate systems. Vargas & McCarthy [50] ex- 
tended the model of Batchelor & Brien [38] by simply adding the 
thermal conductance through the interstitial ﬂuid for the applica- 
tion to granular materials. Also, Tsory et al. [51] proposed a simpli- 
ﬁed method by dividing the particle contact into solid-solid contact 
and air gaps and calculated the conductive heat transfer by sum- 
ming up conduction through these two parts. For scenarios with 
f  <  1,  Cheng  et  al.  [52]  just  recently  proposed  a  similar  ap- 
k s / k 
proach to the concept of Voronoi polyhedrons, i.e. the Delaunay 
tessellation for calculating the conduction through stagnant ﬂuid 
in void spaces of packed beds. 

• Convection 

Compared  to  conduction  and  radiation,  heat  transfer  through 
convection  has  been  relatively  better  understood  in  particulate 
systems.  Recent  effort s  towards  improving  the  existing  correla- 
tions  or  proposing  new  correlations  are  rather  scarce.  The  clas- 
sic model of Ranz & Marshall [53] proposed based on the evap- 
oration experiments of water droplets has been widely applied in 

4 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

DEM-based simulations. This model also becomes the foundation 
of  many  succedent  models  (e.g.  [54–56] ).  Generally,  the  models 
can be grouped based on their applications to systems of differ- 
ent  solid  concentrations  into  dense  system  models  (packed  bed, 
rotary drums), less dense system models (ﬂuidised bed) and dilute 
system models (pneumatic conveying). Gnielinski [57 , 58] proposed 
a semi-empirical model based on the experimental data available 
in  the  literature  for  packed  pebble  particles.  Similar  works  have 
been published since then with different correlations proposed for 
predicting the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient in packed bed 
reactors but for different ﬂow conditions (or Reynolds numbers) 
[15 , 59 , 60] . After verifying the correlation of Gunn [61] that proves 
accurate only for systems with the solid concentration less than 
0.3, Tavassoli [62] modiﬁed Gunn’s correlation [61] for the entire 
spectrum  of  solid  concentration  (from  0  to  0.65).  Bandrowski  & 
Kaczmarzyk  [63]  proposed  a  correlation  for  the  pneumatic  con- 
veying system but covering a limited range of Reynolds number 
(from 180 to 1800). Li and Mason [64] modiﬁed the correlation of 
Bandrowski & Kaczmarzyk [63] for all possible Reynolds numbers 
in  the  operation  of  pneumatic  transport  systems.  Li  and  Mason 
[64]  therefore  suggested  users  re-evaluate  the  exponent  of  their 
correlation  and  relate  it  to  solid  concentration  and  particle  size, 
or particle Reynolds number. Li and Mason [64] ’s work was fol- 
lowed  by  Al-Arkawazi  [65]  who  recently  conducted  experiments 
and modiﬁed the exponent for dense particulate systems. 

• Radiation 

Heat transfer through radiation is relatively more challenging 
to be fully considered in particulate systems compared to conduc- 
tion and convection. Models available in the public domain could 
be categorised into i) the continuum approach and ii) the discrete 
approach. The former employs a radiation temperature for a par- 
ticle which can be obtained through solving the ﬁeld of radiative 
intensity [66–68] of the particle-ﬂuid mixture. However, this radia- 
tion temperature was more commonly treated as an averaged sur- 
rounding temperature of the particle for the sake of computation 
eﬃciency [35 , 42 , 66–74] . 

The  discrete  approach  considers  the  radiative  heat  transfer 
amongst  individual  particles  based  on  the  solution  of  view  fac- 
tors [69] . Evidently, the discrete approach is more delicate to cal- 
culate  the  radiative  heat  transfer,  yet  the  determination  of  view 
factors incurs signiﬁcant computational overhead. Previous effort s 
are  directed  mainly  towards  accurately  calculating  the  view  fac- 
tors [49 , 69 , 75–78] . Wu et al. [78] presented three sub-models for 
calculating  radiative  events  within  different  ranges,  namely,  mi- 
croscopic range, short-range and long-range, respectively. Models 
of the short-range radiation are based on the concept of Voronoi 
polyhedron and different methods (e.g. [49 , 69 , 78] ) have been de- 
veloped to calculate the view factors between two interacting par- 
ticles. For the long-range radiation model, it is straightforward to 
calculate the view factor between unit particles without blockage. 
However,  it  is  extremely  challenging  to  determine  the  view  fac- 
tor between a pair of particles with blockage. To this end, differ- 
ent  methods  [79–83]  have  been  proposed  for  the  calculation  of 
view factors, but largely limited to static particulate systems due 
to the inhibitive computational cost. Very recently, Forgber & Radl 
[84] proposed an inherently simple yet eﬃcient method to calcu- 
lating the view factor for dynamic particle-laden systems. 

• Other  aspects  relating  to  the  thermal  models  of  DEM-based 

simulations 

Apart from the above thermal models for resolving the main 
heat  transfer  mechanisms,  other  aspects  also  play  an  important 
role in developing a robust thermal DEM-based model. Generally, 
these  aspects  require  due  care  when  different  particle  materials 
are simulated. Speciﬁcally, for thermally thick particles with a large 

Biot number ( Bi (cid:5) 0.1), the assumption of isothermal particles does 
no longer hold. Both one-dimensional (1D) and three-dimensional 
(3D) models have been proposed to resolve the temperature dis- 
tribution inside individual particles [85–93] . Also, for these ther- 
mally  thick  particles,  the  temperature  at  the  particle  surface  is 
nonuniform [90 , 91 , 94–96] . The inﬂuence of the non-uniform parti- 
cle surface temperature distribution on the convective heat trans- 
fer  was  considered  by  multiplying  the  conventional  heat  trans- 
fer  coeﬃcient  by  a  distribution  function  [90 , 91 , 94–97] .  On  the 
opposite,  for  thermally  thin  particles  Oschmann&Kruggel-Emden 
[90 , 91]  reported  a  signiﬁcant  discrepancy  between  predicted  re- 
sults and experimental measurements when the temperature dis- 
tribution within the reactor wall was ignored. Further, Hrenya’s re- 
search group [43 , 98–100] proposed a new wall boundary condition 
with the constant heat ﬂux, which was considered more practical 
and accurate in many industrial processes. All these aspects have 
been proven pivotal to the ﬁdelity of a thermal DEM-based model 
after the extensive comparison with the experimental data. 

The primary objective of this study is to provide a critical and 
in-depth review of the theory and all major thermal models relat- 
ing to heat transfer mechanisms in the literature of thermal DEM- 
based simulations. Different models have been detailed, grouped 
and compared, with a view to providing modellers with the key 
information to selecting the ideal model for simulating a speciﬁc 
problem.  The  relative  importance  of  main  heat  transfer  mecha- 
nisms  in  different  application  scenarios  has  been  examined  and 
discussed to emphasise the dominant mechanisms as well as jus- 
tify the negligence of trivial mechanisms for a speciﬁc application. 
The important roles of other aspects in developing a robust ther- 
mal DEM-model have also been demonstrated with examples and 
comparisons.  Lastly,  recommendations  for  future  work  are  given 
to  state  the  shortcomings  of  existing  thermal  models  and  shed 
light on the research scope towards which future effort s should be 
directed. 

2. Description of particle ﬂow dynamics 

Since  DEM-based  simulation  is  a  popular  and  active  research 
area, the detailed description of the governing equations and the 
discussion of the model’s capabilities, shortcomings and applica- 
tions can be readily found in the literature, e.g. as summarised in 
[25 , 27 , 34 , 101–103] .  The  governing  equations  of  the  ﬂuid  ﬂow  (if 
there is any) can also be found in the literature, thus not given 
here for brevity. 

In  particulate  systems,  a  single  particle  is  interacting  with 
neighbouring particles, surrounding ﬂuid, and walls. There are sev- 
eral  approaches  reported  in  the  literature  for  solving  the  parti- 
cle ﬂow dynamics including the stochastic and deterministic ap- 
proaches  [104 , 105] .  The  stochastic  approach  is  computationally 
more  effective  yet  suffers  from  drawbacks  such  as  collisions  are 
treated as instantaneous and binary in nature [105–108] . In this 
work, only the deterministic approach that is also the predominant 
approach applied in DEM-based simulations of particulate systems 
is presented as follows. 

The  motion  of  a  single  particle  is  solved  based  on  Newton’s 
equations of motion in a ﬁnite difference scheme and expressed 
by, 

d x i 
dt 

= v i 

(1) 

The equations for the translational and rotational motion of par- 

ticle i are, 

(cid:2) 

m i 

d v i 
∂t 

= 

f i 

(2) 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

5 

= 

T i 

(3) 

(cid:2) 

and, 
d ω i 
I i 
∂t 
In general, the total force acting on a particle comprises col- 
lisional  contact  forces,  ﬂuid  forces  and  the  gravitational  force. 
The  torques  acting  on  a  particle  mainly  include  the  component 
due to the tangent contact force and the component due to the 
rolling resistance [7 , 109–111] . Models based on the deterministic 
approach  such  as  linear  spring-dashpot  model  [112–114]  and  its 
simpliﬁed version (i.e. linear spring model) [115] , simpliﬁed Hertz–
Mindlin  and  Deresiewicz  model  [116]  and  Walton  and  Braun’s 
model [113] could be employed to calculate the collisional contact 
forces and torques. For brevity, the details of these models are not 
given here. 

A linear equation of heat transfer is applied with the assump- 
tion  that  each  discrete  particle  has  a  characteristic  temperature. 
Accordingly, the evolution of particle temperature is described by, 

(cid:2) 

= 

Q i 

m i c p,i 

d T i 
∂t 
i  is  the  heat  energy  transferred  between  particle  i  and 
where  Q 
its surroundings including other particles, reactor walls and ﬂuid 
through conduction, convection and radiation. 

(4) 

3. Heat transfer mechanisms and thermal models 

In  thermal  particulate  systems,  the  three  main  heat  transfer 
mechanisms  (conduction,  convection  and  radiation)  take  place. 
Speciﬁcally, the heat transfer might involve the following mecha- 
nisms [117] , 

• Conduction  through  the  ﬂuid  in  the  gap  between  two-point 

contacting or non-contacting particles; 

• Conduction through the ﬂuid between two area-contacting par- 

ticles; 

• Conduction  through  the  contact  area  between  two  area- 

contacting particles; 

• Conduction through the ﬂuid in void spaces; 
• Convection between ﬂuid and solid particles; 
• Convection between ﬂuid and wall; 
• Radiation between the surfaces of solid particles; 
• Radiation between adjacent voids of ﬂuid; and, 
• Radiation between ﬂuid and solid particles. 

In this section, the theory of major heat transfer mechanisms 
is detailed and different thermal models for calculating the heat 
ﬂux through a speciﬁc mechanism are presented and interpreted, 
accompanied by model inputs, limitations and shortcomings when 
applied for speciﬁc scenarios. 

3.1. Conduction 

Whenever  a  temperature  gradient  exists,  conduction  occurs 
through  collisions  of  molecules.  Fourier’s  law  assumes  that  the 
transfer  speed  of  thermal  signals  is  inﬁnitely  large  [118] .  That 
is,  a  point  that  locates  inﬁnitely  far  from  the  point  of  a  heat 
pulse  can  be  inﬂuenced  even  in  an  inﬁnitesimally  short  time. 
This assumption is valid for most of industrial thermal processes. 
Therefore,  in  a  system/process  that  involves  particles  and  has  a 
spatial temperature distribution, conductive heat transfer is occur- 
ring  amongst  all  particles,  through  the  ﬂuid  in  void  spaces,  and 
between  particle-ﬂuid  and  particle-walls.  However,  it  is  compu- 
tationally prohibitive and often unnecessary to consider all these 
conduction  events.  Batchelor  and  Brien  [38]  suggested  that  only 
the conduction through particle contacts needs to be considered 
f r p  (cid:5) 1.  For  rigid  solid  particles,  if  we  assume  the 
when  k s r c / k 

ratio of r c / r p ≈ 0.01, it is required that k s / k 
f (cid:5) 100, which is not 
satisﬁed  in  many  practical  systems.  Therefore,  different  models 
have  been  developed  aiming  to  fully  account  for  the  conductive 
heat transfer in a particulate system which can be described by: i) 
conduction between two particles or between a particle and wall 
and ii) conduction through the ﬂuid in void spaces. 

3.1.1. Conduction between two particles or between a particle and 
wall 

Generally, the conductive heat transfer between two particles 
or between a particle and wall is comprised of two parts, namely 
indirect conduction and direct conduction. When two particles are 
approaching each other, a signiﬁcant amount of thermal conduc- 
tion  through  the  thin  wedge  of  interstitial  ﬂuid  (air  or  liquid) 
might occur when the surface-to-surface distance between the par- 
ticles  is  small  enough.  This  part  of  conduction  is  often  referred 
to as indirect conduction. After the particles physically come into 
contact, the conductive heat transfer occurs through the particle 
body overlap, thus referred to as direct conduction. Different treat- 
ments have been reported to calculate the indirect and direct con- 
duction  heat  transfer,  which  are  reviewed  and  discussed  in  this 
section. 

Mathematically,  all  numerical  algorithms  of  conductive  heat 
transfer for particle-particle can be applied for particle-wall where 
the  wall  is  treated  as  a  particle  with  the  inﬁnite  diameter 
[35 , 42 , 43 , 45 , 70 , 71 , 90–92 , 99 , 100] .  Therefore,  models  of  conductive 
heat transfer are presented only for a pair of solid particles. 

Indirect particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction. 
Surrounding layer method 

Rong and Horio [45] assumed there is a gas layer surrounding 
each particle with the thickness of δ. If the surface of a particle in- 
tersects with the gas layer of another particle, the conductive heat 
transfer between the two particles is deemed signiﬁcant and needs 
to be considered. To develop the model, Rong and Horio [45] fur- 
ther assumed that: 

• Heat conduction occurs along the direction (one dimensional) 

parallel to the centre-to-centre line of the two particles; 

• There is a minimum gas interval between the contacting sur- 

faces; 

• After two particles are in direct surface contact, the heat con- 
duction rate is uniform across the contact area and calculated 
based on the minimum gas interval; 

• Heat transfer resistance inside the particles is negligible. 

Mono-sized particles 

When the surface-to-surface separation distance of two parti- 
cles is above zero but less than δ, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), the con- 
ductive heat transfer is considered as heat absorption and release 
through the interstitial ﬂuid layer, calculated by, 

(cid:3)
Q i j = k 
f 

T j − T i 

(cid:4) (cid:5) θ0 

0 

2 π r p sin θ
l i j − 2 r p cos θ d ( r p sin θ ) d p < l i j ≤ d p + δ

(5) 

where l 
ij is the distance between the centroids of particles i and j . 
After the particles come into contact, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), the 
amount  of  conductive  heat  transfer  is  the  superposition  of  the 
heat energy exchanged through the interstitial ﬂuid layer and that 
through the assumed gas interval, calculated by, 

(cid:3)
Q i j = k 
f 

(cid:4) (cid:5) θ0 

T j − T i 
(cid:3)

βp 
(cid:4)
T j − T i 
s 

+ k 
f 

2 π r p sin θ
l i j − 2 r p cos θ d ( r p sin θ ) 

2 
π ( r p sin βp ) 

l i j ≤ d p 

(6) 

6 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Fig. 1.  Schematic of the surrounding layer method for calculating indirect conductive heat transfer between two particles. 

where s is the assumed minimum gas interval (or minimum con- 
duction distance as called later in [43 , 98–100 , 119] ), which is in- 
voked to prevent the integral from being singular when the two 
particles are in point contact. The integral limits θ
0 and β p are the 
angles delineating the region of particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction 
and calculated based on the geometrical relations between the gas 
layers and the particles as, 

θ0 = co s 

−1 

(cid:6) 

i j + r 2 
l 2 

(cid:7) 
2 
p − ( r p + δ) 
2 r p l i j 

(cid:8)
βp = max 

(cid:8)
−1 

(cid:9)

l i j 
d p 

co s 

(cid:8)
−1 

(cid:9)(cid:9)

d p − s 
d p 

, co s 

(7) 

(8) 

The calculation of the heat transfer area of each sliced circular 
band is also illustrated in Fig. 1 , i.e., the A-A (cid:3) view for the above 
two scenarios. It is worth mentioning that to aid in understanding 
the method, the unexpanded form of the originally derived equa- 
tions by Rong and Horio [43] is presented which however can be 
easily expanded with the angle θ as the integration variable. 

Musser [46] modiﬁed the original surrounding layer method of 
Rong and Horio [43] by replacing the trigonometric functions with 
lengths  and  discarding  the  second  term  on  the  right-hand  side 
of Eq. (6) , i.e. heat transfer through the contact region. As such, 
standard quadrature routines are capable of managing the integral 
term. In the modiﬁed surrounding layer method, speciﬁcally, the 

particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction is calculated by, 

(cid:3)
Q i j = k 
f 

T j − T i 

(cid:4) (cid:5) 

r 
l 

2 π r 
(cid:10) 
r 2 
p − r 2 

r c 

l i j − 2 

dr l i j ≤ d p + δ

(9) 

where r c  and r 
l  are the contact radius between particles i and j 
(after coming into contact) and the contact radius between par- 
ticle  i  and  the  surrounding  layer  of  particle  j ,  respectively.  It  is 
clear that r c and r 
0 ), respec- 
tively, as depicted in Fig. 1 . Before two particles are touching each 
other, β p = 0; after two particles are in direct contact (including 
point contact), β p is calculated by Eq. (8) . The modiﬁed surround- 
ing layer method has been used more often than its original ver- 
sion. 

l correspond to ( r p sin β p ) and ( r p sin θ

It can be seen in the surrounding layer method, the conductive 
heat transfer through the body of solid particles is not taken into 
account and the indirect particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction is calcu- 
lated merely through the thin wedge of interstitial ﬂuid. These de- 
tails are the main differences from the Voronoi polyhedron-based 
method that is detailed in the next section for calculating the in- 
direct particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction. 

To date, the surrounding layer method and its modiﬁed version 
have  been  widely  applied  for  simulations  of  indirect  conductive 
heat transfer, such  as in [43 , 98–100 , 119] . The application of this 
method requires a priori values of two parameters, namely, δ and 
s . As listed in Table 1 , different values of δ and s have been used 
in previous simulations. 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

7 

Table 1 
Values of δ and s used for calculating the indirect particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction by the surrounding layer method. 

Author(s) 

Rong and Horio [45] 
Morris et al. [99] 
Morris et al. [100] 
Lattanzi and Hrenya [98] 
Lu et al. [119] 
Wang et al. [120] 

λg : mean free path of gas molecules. 

Particle size d p (mm) 

Layer thickness δ(mm) 

1 
0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
1 
1 

r p 
0.4 r p 
0.4 r p 
0.4 r p 
1.08 r p 
0.2 r p 

Min. conduction distance s (m) 
4  × 10 −10 
2 . 75 × 10 −8 ( ∼ λg ) 
2 . 75 × 10 −8 ( ∼ λg ) 
2 . 75 × 10 −8 ( ∼ λg ) 
1  × 10 −6 
Not given 

Fig. 2.  Dependence of non-dimensional indirect particle-ﬂuid-wall (pfw) conduction on the non-dimensional overlap (normalised by r p ), lens ( = ( δ + r p )/ r p ) and s ( = s / r p ) . 
Reprinted from Ref. [119] with permission of Elsevier. 

Rong & Horio [45] and Vargas & McCarthy [50] assumed δ = r p 
which  was  considered  large  enough  to  accurately  calculate  the 
conductive heat transfer. Morris et al. [99] conducted static, single- 
particle analysis and found that expanding the gas layer from 0.2 r p 
to 0.41 r p (derived from geometric arguments) did not dramatically 
increase the amount of overall heat transfer as the majority of con- 
ductive heat transfer occurs in a small separation distance. Indeed, 
as graphically expressed in Fig. 2 when a particle collides with the 
wall (non-dimensional overlap ≥ 0), the heat transfer keeps almost 
constant, independent of particle-wall overlap. However, when the 
particle  is  not  in  contact  with  wall  (non-dimensional  overlap  < 
0), the heat transfer increases with the decrease of particle-wall 
distance. In particular when the particle is approaching the wall, 
the heat transfer increases sharply by approximately 70% when the 
particle moves only 0.3% of the particle radius towards the wall. It 
is evident that conductive heat transfer occurs mainly when two 
particles are very close to each other. Moreover, for a given s , the 
conductive heat transfer increases by more than 1.5 times when 
varying δ from 0.01 r p  to 0.09 r p  [119] but the increased amount 
is diminishing as δ increases. It seems the critical value of δ lies 
around 0.1 r p for the case examined in Fig. 2 . 

The minimum conduction distance s has been physically related 
to the height of roughness asperities at the particle surface and the 
rarefaction effect of gas that reduces the gas thermal conductivity. 
Therefore, the value of s is jointly determined by the surface as- 
perities (for non-smooth particle surface) and the thermal accom- 
modation coeﬃcient and mean free path of the background gas. In 
the study of Rong and Horio [45] , a value of s = 4  × 10 −10 m was 
employed yet with no justiﬁcation provided. Morris et al. [99] and 
Lattanzi and Hrenya [98] used the mean free path of gas molecules 
as the minimum conduction distance, i.e. s = 2.75  × 10 −8  m as 
smooth particles were used in their works. It is acknowledged that 
in a static system the value of s has a more signiﬁcant impact on 
the total amount of heat transfer compared to δ, as illustrated in 

Fig. 3.  Impact of minimum conduction distance on the normalised conductive heat 
transfer rate for different layer thicknesses. Adapted from Ref. [99] with permission 
of Elsevier. 

Fig. 3 . When the chosen value of s is small ( s / r p  ≤ 10 −3 ), an ac- 
ceptable deviation is obtained; when s is too large, e.g. s / r p = 0.1, 
the predicted results becomes nonsensible. Speciﬁcally, the impact 
of layer thickness on the amount of heat transfer becomes more 
pronounced with the deviation reaching 37% when varying δ from 
0.2 r p  to 0.1 r p  or 0.4 r p . Therefore, a large value of s is not rec- 
ommended for DEM-based modelling of conductive heat transfer 
[99] in static or dense particulate systems (as explained next). 

Recently, Lattanzi and Hrenya [121] further evaluated the sensi- 
tivity of predicted results to the selected values of δ and s in dy- 
namic, multi-particle systems, as shown in Fig. 4 . The percentage 
change in the average indirect particle-ﬂuid-wall heat transfer co- 

8 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Fig. 4.  Sensitivity of predicted indirect particle-ﬂuid-wall conduction heat transfer to (a) surrounding layer thickness ( δ) with s / r p = 10 −4 
distance ( s ) with δ/ r p = 0.4. Adapted from Ref. [121] with permission of John/Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

and (b) minimum conduction 

eﬃcient ( %(cid:17) ¯H 
p f w ) is used as the reference for conducting the sen- 
sitivity analysis. Opposite to what has been observed in static sys- 
tems, the predicted indirect conduction shows strong dependence 
on the selected value of δ, e.g. over 50% error in predicting %(cid:17) ¯H 
p f w 
when δ is altered from 0.2 r p to 0.1 r p or 0.3 r p over the range of φs 
∈ [0,  0.6]. Noticeably, the predicted indirect conduction is insensi- 
tive to the selected value of s for φs ≤ 0.5 and becomes strongly 
dependent on s only in very dense particulate systems (e.g. packed 
beds). However, consistent with those in static systems, the pre- 
dicted percentage change in the average indirect conduction heat 
transfer decreases when a larger δ or a smaller s is used. 

From  the  results  shown  above,  it  can  be  concluded  that  due 
care is required when selecting the value of δ for modelling rela- 
tively dilute systems, whereas in dense systems with φs > 0.5 the 
value of s needs to be carefully selected. However, no consensuses 
or rigorous guidelines are available in the public domain for deter- 
mining values of δ and s . Further work including delicate experi- 
mental measurements or direct numerical simulations is required 
to correlate values of δ and s with the key parameters of particu- 
late systems. 

Multi-sized particles 

It is worth noting that the surrounding layer method by Rong 
and  Horio  [45]  was  developed  for  mono-sized  particle  systems. 
However, the assumption that heat transfer paths are in parallel 
with the centre-to-centre line of the two particles allows for its 
easy extension for particulate systems of polydisperse particles. 

Speciﬁcally,  for  particles  i  and  j ,  assuming  r 

i ,  after  geo- 
metrical derivation and rearrangements, the indirect particle-ﬂuid- 
particle conduction is calculated by [46] , 

j  >  r 

(cid:3)
Q i j = k 
f 

T j − T i 

(cid:4) (cid:5) 

r 
l 

r c 

l i j −

(cid:11)(cid:10) 

2 π r 
− r 2 + 

(cid:12) 

r 2 
i 

r 2 
j 

− r 2 

(cid:13) dr 

where 

(cid:14) (cid:15) (cid:15) (cid:16) 

(cid:3)

l = 
r 

(cid:4)
r j + δ j 

2 

−

(cid:6) (cid:3)

(cid:4)
r j + δ j 

2 

(cid:7) 2 
+ l 2 
i j 

− r 2 
i 

⎧ 
⎪ ⎨ 
0 
(cid:21) 

⎪ ⎩ 

r c = 

(cid:11)

(cid:13)
i + l 2 
j −r 2 
r 2 
i j 
2 l 
i j 

2 

−

r 2 
j 

2 l i j 

(cid:3)
l i j > 
(cid:3)

l i j ≤

(cid:4)
r i + r j 
(cid:4)
r i + r j 

(10) 

(11) 

(12) 

where δ

j is the layer thickness of particle j . 

Voronoi polyhedron-based method 

The concept of Voronoi polyhedrons [122] was proposed as a 
means to discretising a continuous space. The shapes of Voronoi 
polyhedrons are obtained based on the connecting lines between 
each  element  point  and  its  nearest  points.  In  a  particulate  sys- 
tem, the element points are the centroids of individual particles 
and each Voronoi polyhedron contains one particle. Cheng et al. 
[47]  proposed  that  the  indirect  conductive  heat  transfer  occurs 
only between two particles that are contained in two neighbour- 
ing Voronoi polyhedrons. 

Mono-sized particles 

In  a  packed  bed  or  a  dense  ﬂuidised  bed,  a  particle  is  sur- 
rounded by a number of other particles and the heat transfer be- 
tween a pair of particles should be affected by the presence of sur- 
rounding particles. Cheng et al. [47] simpliﬁed the situation by as- 
suming: 

• Heat  transfer  occurs  only  in  the  double  pyramids  that 
share 
the  pyra- 
mids  vertexes  sitting  at  the  centroids  of  the  two 
particles. 

the  Voronoi  boundary  plane  with 

• Heat transfer between two particles is not affected by the pres- 

ence of other particles or ﬂuid. 

To achieve the analytical solution, Cheng et al. [47] further re- 
placed the double pyramids with double tapered cones that have 
the same volume. The conductive heat transfer is calculated based 
on the nominal area, i.e. the area of the face shared by the two ta- 
pered cones. The indirect conductive heat transfer consists of three 
parts: (i) conduction through the body of particle i inside the cone; 
(ii) conduction through the air between the particle surfaces; (iii) 
conduction through the body of particle j inside the cone. Based 
on  further  assumptions,  Cheng  et  al.  [47]  proposed  two  models, 
namely Model A and Model B, for calculating the indirect conduc- 
tive heat transfer between two particles. 

Model  A:  As  illustrated  in  Fig.  5 ,  it  is  assumed  that  (i) 
the  surface  of  a  tapered  cone  is  isothermal;  (ii)  the  con- 
duction  through  the  interstitial  ﬂuid  occurs  only  in  the  re- 
gion  of  the  green  cylinder;  and  (iii)  conduction  occurs  along 
the  direction  parallel  to  the  centre-to-centre  line  of  the  two 
particles. 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

9 

It is worth mentioning that for scenarios where particles are 
moving, it is highly computationally demanding to construct the 
transient Voronoi polyhedrons for a dense particulate system. Yang 
et al. [123] thus related the properties of Voronoi polyhedrons to 
the local spatial distribution of particles, based on which the value 
of r 
r i j = 0 . 56 r p ( 1 − ε i ) 
where  ε
which is an output parameter from DEM-based simulations. 

i  is  the  local  void  fraction  at  the  position  of  particle  i , 

ij is calculated by [42] , 

(20) 

−1 / 3 

Obviously,  the  conductive  heat  transfer  through  the  intersti- 
tial  ﬂuid  between  two  particles  diminishes  as  the  distance  2 S 
increases.  Zhou  et  al.  [42]  suggested  a  value  of  S  =  0.5 r p  be- 
yond which the indirect conduction through particle-ﬂuid-particle 
is negligible. 

Model B: As illustrated in Fig. 6 , this model assumes that there 
ic and 
is an isothermal core inside each particle with a radius of r 
a representative temperature that is equal to the particle tempera- 
ture. 

The heat ﬂux is calculated through dividing the space of each 
tapered  cone  into  a  number  of  elementary  concentric  annular 
spaces and integrating the differential heat ﬂux based on the el- 
ement  angle  θ and  the  local  radius  r .  The  differential  heat  ﬂux 
through an elementary annular space is, 

Fig. 5.  Schematic of Model A of the Voronoi polyhedron-based method for calcu- 
lating the indirect conduction between two particles: (a) before contacting and (b) 
after contacting. 

Accordingly, the total conductive heat transfer is calculated by, 

d Q i j 

= 

(cid:11)

(cid:3)
Q i j = 

(cid:4)
T j − T i 

×

(cid:5) 

r 
s, f 

r 
s,i j 

l 
pi 
k 
pi 

2 π r 
l 
f 
+ 
+ 
k 
f 

dr 

l 
p j 
k 
p j 

(13) 

where l 
and the ﬂuid phase, respectively, and calculated by, 

f are the conduction lengths for particles i and j , 

pj and l 

pi , l 

where, 
r θ = r p + S/ cos θ

(cid:13)(cid:25)(cid:3)

1 
r 
ic 

− 1 
r p 

2 π k pi sin θ

(cid:4)

(cid:11)
+ 

(cid:4)
(cid:3)
dθ
T j − T i 
(cid:13)(cid:25)(cid:3)
f sin θ

π k 

r p − 1 
1 
r θ

(cid:4)

(cid:11)
+ 

(cid:13)(cid:25)(cid:3)

1 
r 
ic 

− 1 
r p 

(cid:4)

2 π k p j sin θ

(21) 

(cid:12) 

l pi = l p j = l s = 
(cid:22)
f = 2 
l 

( r p + S ) −

p − r 2 − r ( r p + S ) 
r 2 
(cid:23)
(cid:12) 
r 2 
p − r 2 

r i j 

where S is half the surface separation distance between particles i 
and j , and calculated by, 
(cid:4)
l i j − 2 r p 

(cid:3)
S = 

(16) 

/ 2 

s,f is the radius due to the intersection between the cone and the 
r 
particle (i.e. the radius of the green cylinder). r 
ij is the equivalent 
radius of the tapered cone. These two radii are calculated by, 

s, f = 
r 

(cid:12) 

r 2 
i j 

r p r i j 
+ ( r p + S ) 2 
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
π l i j 
3 V i j / 

(cid:12) 

r i j = 

(17) 

(18) 

where V 
particles i and j . 

ij  is the total volume of the two tapered cones between 

s,ij is the contact radius and equals to, 
r 

0 S ≥ 0 
r c S < 0 

(19) 

(cid:24)
r s,i j = 

From  Eq.  (13) ,  it  is  clear  that  the  indirect  particle-ﬂuid-particle 
conduction  calculated  by  the  Voronoi  polyhedron-based  method 
not  only  considers  the  conduction  through  the  interstitial  ﬂuid 
between  the  two  particles,  but  the  conduction  through  a  por- 
tion of solid particles’ bodies. Compared to the above surrounding 
layer method, more conduction paths have been considered in the 
Voronoi polyhedron-based method. 

Integrating Eq. (21) over the range of θ ∈ [ θ c , θ

(14) 

(cid:3)

Q i j = π

T j − T i 

(cid:4)(cid:11)

(cid:13)
1 
b 

(cid:8)

(cid:9)
a − b cos θ0 
a − b cos θc 

ln 

(15) 

where, 
(cid:8)

(cid:9)(cid:8)

a = 

1 
2 k pi 
(cid:26)
b = 1 / 

+ 

1 
2 k p j 
(cid:27)
f ( r p + S ) 
k 
⎛ 

(cid:9)
− 1 
r p 

1 
r ic 

+ 

1 
f r p 

k 

⎞ 

θ0 = cos 

−1 

⎝ 

(cid:12) 

r p + S 
( r p + S ) 2 + r 2 
i j 

⎠ 

(cid:24)
θc = 

0 
sin 

−1 ( r c / r p ) 

S ≥ 0 
S < 0 

(22) 

0 ] leads to, 

(23) 

(24) 

(25) 

(26) 

(27) 

Evidently, the application of Model B requires an input param- 
eter, i.e. the radius of the isothermal core inside each particle ( r 
ic ), 
which is the main difference from Model A that does not involve 
any ﬁtting parameters. The dependency of predicted results on the 
ic  is  shown  in  Fig.  7 .  Clearly,  the  value  of  r 
selected  value  of  r 
ic 
affects the predicted results of conduction amongst the particles, 
f ( < 10 3 ) due to the large thermal 
particularly for low values of k s / k 
resistance to heat conduction inside the particles. From Fig. 7 (b), 
it is clear that the value of c = 0.5 ( r 
ic  = 0.5 r p ) generates effec- 
tive thermal conductivities that are in good agreements with the 
measured values and those predicted using other models includ- 
ing  Model  A.  Indeed,  in  the  work  of  Cheng  et  al.  [47]  more  re- 
sults were presented to demonstrate the validity of Model B us- 
ic  = 0.5 r p in providing almost identical results with Model A. 
ing r 
However, it is worth noting that mono-sized particles were used 

10 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Fig. 6.  Schematic of Model B of the Voronoi polyhedron-based method for calculating the indirect conductive heat transfer between two particles: (a) before contacting and 
(b) after contacting. 

Fig. 7.  Effect of the radius of the isothermal core ( c = r 
conductivity to c and (b) comparison of the predicted results using different models against the measured values. Adapted from Ref. [47] with permission of Elsevier. 

ic / r p ) on the predicted results of heat transfer in a packed bed: (a), sensitivity of the predicted effective thermal 

in the work of Cheng et al. [47] . For systems of multi-sized parti- 
ic are required, as detailed in the following 
cles, different values of r 
section. Also, Cheng et al. [47] ’s work is limited to analysis at the 
particle scale with the assumed uniform intraparticle temperature 
distribution. In cases where the assumption of isothermal particles 
does not hold ( Bi (cid:5) 0.1), as detailed in Section 4.1.1 , the deploy- 
ment of Model A or Model B might lead to very different outputs 
and due care is required for selecting a reasonable r 

ic . 

Multi-sized particles 

Model A : Gan et al. [48] modiﬁed the Model A of Cheng et al. 
[47]  for  calculating  the  indirect  particle-ﬂuid-particle  conduction 
between particles of different sizes. The particle-ﬂuid-particle con- 
duction is calculated using Eq. (13) with modiﬁcations made only 
to  the  calculations  of  conduction  lengths  for  particles  i  and  j , 
and  the  ﬂuid  phase.  Speciﬁcally,  the  radical  tessellation  instead 
of Voronoi tessellation is applied where the radical plane is con- 

i = ( r 2 

structed to separate particles i and j . The radical plane is such that 
the vertex-tangent lengths to the two particles are equal, i.e. l t in 
Fig. 8 (a). Therefore, the distance from the centroid of particle i to 
i j ) / 2 l 
the  plane  is  D 
i j  based  on  the  trigonometrical 
relationships for the case when the two particles are not touching 
( Fig. 8 (a)). For the case when the two particles are in physical con- 
tact, Gan et al. [48] calculated the value of D 
i based on the contact 
radius r c by, 
(cid:12) 

i  − r 2 

j + l 2 

D i = 

r 2 
i 

− r 2 
c 

(28) 

j = l 

ij − D 

i . The size of the plane ( r 

ij ) is determined 
Accordingly, D 
i and ε
i ) using 
based on the quantities relating to particle i (i.e. r 
Eq. (20) . However, another plane size ( r (cid:3) 
ij ) is introduced for particle 
j to circumvent the inconsistency induced by the different particle 
sizes ( Fig. 8 ). r (cid:3) 
ij is determined based on the law of equal ratios of 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

11 

Fig. 8.  Schematic of the modiﬁed Model A of the Voronoi polyhedron-based method for calculating the indirect conductive heat transfer between two particles of different 
sizes: (a) before contacting and (b) after contacting. 

similar triangles as, 

(cid:12) 

(cid:3) 
i j = D j r 
r 

s, f / 

r 2 
j 

− r 2 
s, f 

(29) 

The radius r 

s,f  is calculated based on the smaller particle be- 

tween particles i and j by, 
(cid:12) 
(cid:3)

r i r i j / 

r 2 
i j 

+ D 2 
i 

s, f = 
r 

(cid:12) 

⎧ 
⎪ ⎨ 

⎪ ⎩ 

r j r i j / 

r 2 
i j 

+ D 2 
j 

(cid:4)
r i ≤ r j 
(cid:4)
r i > r j 

(30) 

(cid:3)

After obtaining the values of the above parameters, the conduc- 
tion lengths for particles i and j , and the ﬂuid phase are calculated 
by, 

(cid:12) 

l pi = 

− r 2 − r D i / r i j 

r 2 
i 
(cid:12) 

l p j = 

(cid:3) 
r 2 
− r 2 − r D j /r 
i j 
j 
(cid:8)(cid:12) 

(cid:12) 

f = l i j −
l 

r 2 
i 

− r 2 + 

r 2 
j 

(cid:9)
− r 2 

(31) 

(32) 

(33) 

Substituting Eqs. (31) –(33) into Eq. (13) , the indirect particle-ﬂuid- 
particle conduction heat transfer between two unequal particles is 
obtained. 

It  is  important  to  point  out  that  in  the  work  of  Gan  et  al. 
[48] ,  the  above  modiﬁed  Model  A  was  developed  originally  for 
modelling the indirect conduction between two ellipsoids. Speciﬁ- 
cally, two ﬁctitious spheres were used with their radii equal to the 
mean curvature radii of the closest (or contacting) points of the 
two ellipsoids. Good agreements have been achieved between the 

predicted  effective  thermal  conductivity  of  the  packed  ellipsoids 
and  the  experimental  data.  However,  a  direct  validation  of  this 
model  for  calculating  indirect  conduction  amongst  polydisperse 
spherical particles has not been reported. Clearly, inherent incon- 
sistencies exist when applying the radical tessellation, e.g. after the 
particles come into contact the radical plane does not align with 
i  is  calculated  differently  us- 
the  contact  surface  (that  is  why  D 
ing Eq. (28) ). Moreover, the conduction is calculated based on the 
small  particle,  which  certainly  simpliﬁes  the  problem  and  could 
signiﬁcantly underestimate the total conduction amount for cases 
where the particle sizes are substantially different. Further work 
is required to address these uncertainties and more importantly to 
improve the model by accounting for more heat ﬂux paths with 
extensive experimental validation. For these reasons, the modiﬁed 
Model B of Cheng et al. [47] might be more reliable for calculating 
the indirect conduction between multi-sized particles, as detailed 
below. 

Model B : Just recently, Chen et al. [49] extended the Model B 
of Cheng et al. [47] for multi-sized particulate systems to consider 
the effect of particle size difference. With the same assumption of 
an  isothermal  core  inside  the  particle,  the  temperature  distribu- 
tion in the region between two adjacent particles is numerically 
calculated, as shown in Fig. 9 . The initial temperature difference 
between the two particles is 1 °C, surrounded by the stagnant ﬂuid 
with the thermal conductivity that is 1/20 th of the particle thermal 
conductivity.  It  is  evident  that  the  temperature  distribution  and 
heat ﬂux paths of multi-sized particles are substantially different 
from those of mono-sized particles, suggesting there is a need to 
consider the effect of particle size difference on the indirect con- 
duction amongst multi-sized particles. 

Through  similar  derivations  based  on  the  assumed  heat  ﬂux 
paths  [47]  with  the  radical  Voronoi  tessellation  algorithm  Chen 

12 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Fig. 9.  Temperature distribution around two adjacent particles. (a) mono-sized particles; (b) multi-sized particles. The white lines denote the isothermal surfaces and the 
blacklines perpendicular to the white lines represent the heat ﬂux paths. Reprinted from Ref. [49] with permission of Elsevier. 

et  al.  [49]  proposed  the  following  equation  to  calculate  the 
inter-particle conductance, 

H i j = 

(cid:3)

Q i j 
(cid:4)
T j − T i 
⎧ 
π k 

⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎨ 
⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ 

π k 

= 

π k 

(cid:3)
f l i j 

(cid:4)
1 − (cid:17)α2 
(cid:10) 
| (cid:18)| 
2 
(cid:3)
f l i j 

(cid:4)
1 − (cid:17)α2 
A + B 
(cid:3)
f l i j 

(cid:4)
1 − (cid:17)α2 
(cid:10) 
| (cid:18)| 

ln 

  1 − Y 1 
1 + Y 1 

(cid:11)

1 
δimin 

(cid:13)

− 1 
δimax 

(cid:18) > 0 

(cid:18) = 0 

(34) 

arctan ( Y 2 ) 

(cid:18) < 0 

where (cid:18) = (1 + (cid:17)αA )(1 − (cid:17)αB ) represents the discriminant for 
i ). (cid:17)α is the 
j > r 
the integration to arrive at Eq. (34) (assuming r 
dimensionless particle radius difference and given by, 
(cid:17)α = α j − αi 
where  α
i  =  r 
Y 1 =  X max −X 
min 
1 −X max X 

2  are  calculated  by 

(35) 

i / l 

ij  and  α
j  =  r 
min  and Y 2 =  X max −X 
1+ X max X 
( A + B ) (cid:10) 
| (cid:18)| 

ij .  Y 

j / l 
1  and  Y 
min 
min , respectively, with, 
( A + B ) (cid:10) 
| (cid:18)| 

δimin 

δimax ,  X min = C + 

X max = C + 

(36) 

(cid:10) 

where  C = ( (cid:17)αB − 1 ) / 
imin  are  the  upper  and 
lower  limits  of  their  original  integral  equations  and  calculated 
by, 

imax  and  δ

| (cid:18)| .  δ

δimax = 

1 + 

(cid:3)
π l 2 
i j 

4 A n 
1 − (cid:17)α2 

(cid:4) − (cid:17)α

, 

! " 

1 
2 
! " 

# 

# 

δimin = 

1 
2 

1 + 

(cid:3)
l 2 
i j 

4 r 2 
c 
1 − (cid:17)α2 

(cid:4) − (cid:17)α

(37) 

where  A n  is  the  nominal  area  of  the  shared  plane  of  the  two 
Voronoi cells and r c = 0 before the two particles come into con- 

1 
α j k p j 
i = r 

tact. Parameters A and B in the above equations are expressed by, 

A = 

(cid:11)

1 
αi k pi 

r i 
r ici 

(cid:13)
− 1 

+ 

,  B = 

1 
αi 

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

r j 
r ic j 

− 1 

+ 

1 
α j 

(38) 

For the mono-sized systems, r 
reduced to the Model B of Cheng et al. [47] , i.e., Eq. (23) . 

j thus (cid:17)α = 0, Eq. (34) can be 

Likewise, the size of the isothermal core ( r 

ic ) is the only un- 
known  independent  variable  of  Chen  et  al. (cid:3) s  model  [49] ,  as  in- 
volved in the calculation of parameters A and B . Different values of 
ic , characterised by the dimensionless number c = r 
r 
ic / r p have been 
used to ﬁt the experimental data from different sources [124–129] , 
as shown in Fig. 10 . Based on the comparisons, it was suggested 
f ≤ 5. 
that c = 0.5 for 5 < k s / k 
f < 10, 0 0 0 and c = 0.6 for 1 ≤ k s / k 
f < 1, no value of c was suggested since un- 
For cases where k s / k 
der such conditions, the assumption of the isothermal core does 
no longer hold [49] , as indicated by the underestimated values of 
k e in Fig. 10 . 

Compared to the modiﬁed Model A, all heat ﬂux paths between 
the two particles have been considered in the modiﬁed Model B, 
thus avoiding the problem of underestimating the indirect conduc- 
tion suffered by the modiﬁed Model A, as detailed above. However, 
f  < 1, Model B is invalid. Further work is re- 
for cases with k s / k 
f < 1) 
quired for solving the indirect conduction in such cases ( k s / k 
by either improving the modiﬁed Model A or seeking solutions to 
the issues associated with the non-isothermal core in the modiﬁed 
Model B. 

Direct particle-particle conduction.  Apart from the indirect particle- 
ﬂuid-particle  conduction,  direct  conduction  occurs  through  the 
elastic body overlap when two particles physically come into con- 
tact. This conduction is often assumed to be one-dimensional, per- 
pendicular to the contact area. Two different scenarios are treated 
separately. The ﬁrst scenario is when the two particles have a zero 
relative velocity and the contact between them does not change 
over time. This type of contact is referred to as static contact, a 
typical example of which can be found in packed beds. The second 
scenario is when two particles collide and separate quickly. This 
type of contact is referred to as collisional contact, as commonly 

 
 
 
 
 
Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

13 

Fig. 10.  Comparison between the predicted results using different values of c ( = r 

ic / r p ) and the experimental data. Adapted from Ref. [49] with permission of Elsevier. 

encountered in dynamic particulate systems  (e.g. rotating drums 
and ﬂuidised beds). In the calculation of these two types of direct 
conduction, the properties of each particle including size, density, 
thermal conductivity and heat capacity are considered separately. 
Therefore, the models presented in this section are also applicable 
to systems of polydisperse particles. 

Conduction through static contacts 
For the conductive heat transfer that occurs during the static 
contact of two particles, the heat ﬂux across the boundary between 
the two particles is described as, 
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
T j − T i 
Q i j = H c 

(39) 

Batchelor and Brien [38] proposed an approximately analytical 
solution based on the Hertzian contact theory for the calculation 
of H c which is expressed as, 

H c = 2 k s r c = 2 k s 

(cid:10) 

(cid:11)
r ∗δn = 2 k s 

(cid:13)1 / 3 

3 F n r m 
4 E m 

Obviously, the contact radius r c is calculated as, 

(cid:13)1 / 3 

(cid:11)
r c = 

3 F n r m 
4 E m 

where E m  and r m  are the effective Young (cid:3) s modulus and the ge- 
ometric mean of the radii of the two particles, respectively, and 
expressed as, 
(cid:8)

E m = 

1 − υ 2 
i 
E i 

+ 

(cid:9)−1 
1 − υ 2 
j 
E j 

(40) 

(41) 

(42) 

(43) 

r m = 

r i r j 
r i + r j 

where υ is the Poisson’s ratio of the particles. 

Eqs.  (40) –(43)  indicate  that  particle  properties  including  size 
and  materiel  properties  (e.g.  thermal  conductivity  and  Young’s 
modulus)  have been  considered in  the  method  of  Batchelor  and 
Brien [38] . 

r c was also calculated based on the normal contact overlap ( δn ) 

provided that δn is suﬃciently small by [130] , 

(cid:10) 

r c = 

2 δn r p − δ2 
n 

(44) 

Similarly,  the  inter-particle  conductance  was  often  simply  ex- 
pressed by [35 , 42] , 

H c = 

(cid:3)

4 r c 
(cid:4)
1 / k pi + 1 / k p j 

(45) 

Conduction through collisional contacts 

In  particulate  systems,  particles  constantly  collide  with  each 
other or with reactor walls. Heat is thus conducted through the 
contact  area.  As  far  as  individual  collisions  are  concerned,  the 
amount of heat that is transferred in the collision of a pair of par- 
ticles is very small due to the short contact time (in the order of 
10 −6 s) [44] . However, over the time scale of interest in practical 
processes,  particularly  in  particulate  ﬂows  with  an  average  solid 
concentration greater than 0.2, a large number of collisions could 
concurrently occur, resulting in a signiﬁcant amount of heat energy 
transferred through the collisional contacts. 

Sun and Chen [40] performed a quantitative evaluation of the 
basic concept that was put forth originally by Soo [39] who used 
the  elasticity  theory  to  evaluate  the  area  and  duration  of  parti- 
cle  contacts  (with  themselves  and  reactor  walls).  The  work  was 
followed by Zhou et al. [41] who adapted the model of Sun and 
Chen  [40]  for  better  compatibility  with  the  implementation  of 
DEM-based models. Speciﬁcally, the model calculates the conduc- 
tive heat ﬂux by, 

Q i j = 

(cid:3)

(cid:4)−0 . 5 

c (cid:3) A c t 0 . 5 
c 
(cid:3)
ρp j c p j k p j 
+ 

(cid:3)
(cid:4)−0 . 5 

(cid:4)
T j − T i 

ρpi c pi k pi 

where, c (cid:3) is a coeﬃcient that is determined by, 

(cid:3) = 
c 

0 . 435 
c 1 

(cid:11)(cid:10) 

(cid:13)
2 − 4 c 1 ( c 3 − F o ) − c 2 
c 2 

(46) 

(47) 

14 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

3 are calculated by, 

in  which  F o  denotes  the  Fourier  number,  deﬁned  as  ( αs t c ) /r 2 
c . 
αs ( = k s / ρs c ps ) is the particle thermal diffusivity. Constants c 
2 , 
1 , c 
and c 
c 1 = −2 . 3 (cid:19)2 + 8 . 909 (cid:19)2 − 4 . 235 , 
c 2 = 8 . 169 (cid:19)2 − 33 . 77 (cid:19)2 + 24 . 885 , 
c 3 = −5 . 785 (cid:19)2 + 24 . 464 (cid:19)2 − 20 . 511 . 
pi )/( ρ
where (cid:19) = ( ρ
pi c 
(cid:8)

pj c 
pj ). A c is the contact area and equals, 
(cid:9)

(48) 

0 . 4 

A c = π r 2 

c = π

1 . 25 

m m 
E i j 

( r m v 

rel ) 0 . 8 

(49) 

The particle collision duration (contact time) is estimated by, 

(cid:8)
t c = 2 . 94 

1 . 25 

m m 
E i j 

(cid:9)

0 . 4 

( r m v 

rel ) 

−0 . 2 

(50) 

ref is the normal relative velocity between particles i and j. 
ij is 

where v 
m m is the reduced particle mass and m m = m 
the overall elastic modulus and E 

i + m 

j /( m 

j ). E 

i m 

i j = 4 

3 E m . 

Correction  to  contact  radius  and  contact  time.  It  is  worth  noting 
that the contact area and contact time obtained from the DEM so- 
lution of particle collisions are signiﬁcantly overpredicted. Specif- 
ically, DEM calculations based on the soft sphere model generally 
use a Young (cid:3) s modulus (or spring stiffness) that is much smaller 
than its real value of the particle material to allow for a larger solid 
time step and hence a shorter computation time. This large time 
step would yield the correct contact forces provided that the par- 
ticle overlap is small enough, e.g., less than 0.1% of the particle di- 
ameter for particles that are moving with a relative velocity twice 
their minimum ﬂuidisation velocity [44] . This is because the arti- 
ﬁcially lengthened contact time does not affect the post-collision 
velocities, yet it does result in erroneous physics that depend on 
the collision duration, e.g. cohesion and heat transfer [43] . There- 
fore, this unrealistic Young (cid:3) s modulus (or spring stiffness) gener- 
ates a large contact overlap (and hence a large contact area) and a 
lengthened contact duration, which, in turn, result in the overes- 
timated heat transfer through particle contacts. Different methods 
have been proposed to correct the erroneous contact area and con- 
tact time. 

Zhou-Yu-Zulli method [ 35 ] 

Zhou et al. [35] proposed a correction factor to reduce the con- 

tact area based on the Hertzian theory which reads, 

(cid:11)
= 

c = 

r c0 
r c 

(cid:13)0 . 2 

E m 
E m 0 

(51) 

where, E m is the value based on the Young’s modulus used in the 
m 0  is  the  value  calculated  from  the 
DEM-based  simulation  and  E 
real Young’s modulus of the particle material. The addition of “0”
to the subscript is intended to mean the value of a quantity calcu- 
lated from the real properties of the particle material and to dis- 
tinguish from the value used in DEM-based simulations. Lu et al. 
[119] presented a similar correction factor as a function of particle 
spring stiffness for the linear spring-dashpot model as, 

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

2 / 3 

r c0 = 

k n 
k n 0 

r c 

(52) 

where k n is the spring constant used in the simulation. k 
n 0 is the 
real spring constant of the particle material and can be correlated 
with the real Young’s modulus by, 

k n 0 = 

√ 

4 
3 

r m E m 0 

(53) 

It is clear that the above Zhou-Yu-Zulli method only accounts 
for the overestimated contact area, whereas the artiﬁcially length- 
ened contact time is still not rectiﬁed. Indeed, in the simulations 
of Zhou et al. [35] , the correction factor c was determined by ﬁt- 
ting the predicted results using different values of c to the exper- 
imental data. This implies that the rectiﬁcation only through the 
inclusion of the correct factor by Eq. (51) or (52) might not suf- 
ﬁce to compensate for the overestimated heat transfer due to the 
usage of unrealistic particle material properties (Young’s modulus 
or spring stiffness), particularly in cases where the amount of con- 
duction  heat  transfer  also  relies  on  the  contact  duration  (e.g.  in 
dynamic particulate systems). 

Morris et al.’s method [ 43 ] 

Morris et al. [43] derived two physically-based correction fac- 
tors  to  compensate  for  both  the  overestimated  contact  area  and 
contact time. Speciﬁcally, based on the actual inter-particle ther- 
mal conductance, the area correction factor is expressed as, 

c area = 

(cid:11)
1 
r c 

(cid:13)1 / 3 

3 F n r m 
4 E m 0 

(54) 

The correction factor for the contact time is taken as the ratio 
of actual to simulated differential heat transfer and described by, 

(cid:11)
c time = 

(cid:13)2 / 3 (cid:11)

t c0 
t c 

(cid:13)1 / 3 

F n 0 t c0 
F n t c 

(55) 

n 0  when  a  model 
In  Eq.  (55)  the  only  unknown  variable  is  F 
other than Hertzian is used. F 
n 0 impinges on particle’s momentum 
change after the collision, which only depends on the restitution 
coeﬃcient of the particle material, independent of the contact law 
or the degree of artiﬁcial softening. To simplify the problem, Mor- 
c 0 / F n t c ) 1/3 
ris et al. [43] further assumed the second term, i.e. ( F 
is unity. Therefore, the correction factor for the contact time is re- 
duced to, 
(cid:11)
c time = 

(cid:13)2 / 3 

(56) 

n 0 t 

t c0 
t c 

It should be noted that the assumption of equal actual and sim- 
ulated instantaneous impulses (product of force by time) is true for 
the Hertzian contact model but is not strictly correct for a non- 
Hertzian  contact  model  (e.g.  linear  spring-dashpot  model).  Also, 
the contact time by Eq. (50) is for the Hertzian model. For other 
models (e.g. linear spring dashpot model and Hertzian spring dash- 
pot model), the calculation of t c  varies, depending on the model 
inputs [43] . 

For conduction through static contacts, only the correction fac- 
tor for contact area ( Eq. (54) ) needs to be included. For dynamic 
systems with particle contacts lasting for a certain duration, both 
correction factors (for contact area and time) ( Eqs. (54) and (56) ) 
are required for the correct calculation of conduction heat transfer 
in DEM-based simulations. 

Morris et al. [43] numerically investigated the heat transfer in 
the gas-solid ﬂow down a heated inclined ramp and found good 
agreements between predicted and actual amounts of heat trans- 
fer with the inclusion of the two correction factors. However, the 
correction factor for contact time was analytically derived from the 
Hertzian theory by only considering binary collisions. Indeed, Mor- 
ris et al. [43] pointed out that the time correction works only for 
dilute and moderately dense systems (with the mean coordination 
number less than 2). 

Patil et al.’s method [ 44 ] 

Instead of using correction factors, Patil et al. [44] calculated 
the correct amount of heat transfer during one collision based on 
Sun and Chen’s model [40] using the real particle properties, and 
directly input it into DEM simulations as a packet of energy at the 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

15 

Fig. 11.  Contributions of different conduction mechanisms to the total conductive heat transfer amount for two particle thermal conductivities: (a) k s = 0.08 W /( m • K ) and 
(b) k s = 30 W /( m • K ) under different superﬁcially gas velocities. Adapted from Ref. [42] with permission of John/Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

beginning  of  the  collision.  As  a  result,  the  total  amount  of  heat 
transfer during one collision is calculated by, 
(cid:4)
0 . 87 A c t 0 . 5 
T j − T i 
(cid:3)
(cid:4)−0 . 5 
+ 

(cid:3)
(cid:4)−0 . 5 

Q i j = 

(57) 

c 
ρp j c p j k p j 

ρpi c pi k pi 

(cid:3)

Compared  to  the  original  version  of  Sun  and  Chen’s  model 
[40] ( Eq. (46) ), Patil et al. [44] set c (cid:3) = 0.87. Moreover, calculations 
of A c and t c , by Eqs. (49) and (50) , respectively, are based on the 
real particle material properties. 

The method by Patil et al. [44] was also found very compatible 
with the implementation of DEM-based models given that a con- 
tact list is constantly registered throughout the DEM-based sim- 
ulation.  Also,  this  method  is  deemed  more  eﬃcient  as  it  avoids 
the discrete energy transfer at each DEM time step, as would be 
the case for Zhou-Yu-Zulli method [35] and Morris et al.’s method 
[43] . Moreover, the instantaneous inclusion of the collisional heat 
transfer does not cause any numerical issue (i.e. numerical insta- 
bility such as divergence or sudden abortion due to the genera- 
tion of local extrema) as the amount of heat transfer in individ- 
ual collisions is very small. Despite these advantages in addition 
to the simple implementation, this approach also suffers from se- 
vere drawbacks as it equally treats all collisional contacts. Prob- 
lems arise when inconsistent (or very different) collision times are 
present for different types of contacts, e.g., collisional contact be- 
tween  two  moving  particles,  clusters  of  particles  rolling  against 
wall, and momentary rest of the clusters at the bottom distribu- 
tor  plate  or  against  the  wall.  Treatment  of  these  different  types 
of collisional contacts requires further elaboration of Patil et al.’s 
model [44] . 

Discussion  of  direct  and  indirect  conductions.  The  relative  impor- 
tance between direct and indirect conductions was examined. The 
Voronoi polyhedron-based method [35 , 42 , 70 , 71] was employed for 
calculating the indirect particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction. 

Fig.  11  shows  the  contributions  from  different  conduction 
mechanisms for two types of particle materials, namely thermally 
thick particles with k s = 0.08 W/(m • K) and thermal thin particles 
with k s = 30 W/(m • K) under different operating conditions. The 
percentage refers to the contribution from each conduction mech- 
anism  to  the  total  conductive  heat  transfer  amount.  Clearly,  for 
thermally thick particles, the contribution from the direct particle- 
particle conduction is negligible before the bed operating regime 
is altered from packed to ﬂuidised beds. For other bed operating 
regimes  under  even  higher  superﬁcial  gas  velocities,  the  contri- 
bution from the direct particle-particle conduction is even smaller 

Fig. 12.  Contributions of different conduction mechanisms to the total conductive 
heat transfer amount for different particle thermal conductivities ( U g / U 
mf  = 0). 
Adapted from Ref. [35] with permission of Elsevier. 

due to the lower solid concentration and hence less particle con- 
tacts. 

As  U g  increases,  the  contribution  from  the  two  types  of  in- 
direct  particle-ﬂuid-particle  conduction,  i.e.  with  particle-particle 
in  contact  (indirect-WC)  and  without  particle-particle  in  contact 
(indirect-NC),  changes  in  the  opposite  way.  The  indirect-NC  in- 
creases  as  U G  increases  and  becomes  the  dominant  conduction 
mf  ≈
mechanism  even  before  the  particles  are  ﬂuidised  (at  U g / U 
0.5). However, the indirect-WC decreases as U g  increases, due to 
the decreased particle contacts after the particles are ﬂuidised. For 
thermally thin particles ( Fig. 11 (b)), the story is rather similar ex- 
cept for the contribution from the direct particle-particle conduc- 
tion, which becomes comparable with contributions from indirect 
particle-ﬂuid-particle  conductions  when  weak  gas  ﬂows  through 
the bed. Moreover, the indirect-NC conduction becomes dominant 
mf = 1). Similarly, 
only after the particles are fully ﬂuidised (at U g / U 
both direct and indirect-WC conductions that rely on the number 
of particle contacts decrease as U g increases. 

Fig. 12 shows the relative importance of different conduction 
mechanisms over a wide range of particle thermal conductivities 

16 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Fig. 13.  Contributions of different conduction mechanisms to the total conductive heat transfer amount for: (a) k s = 1 W /( m • K ) and (b) k s = 75 W /( m • K ) under different 
bed temperatures ( U g / U 

mf = 0). Adapted from Ref. [35] with permission of Elsevier. 

mf  = 0). 
examined in a packed bed with the stagnant ﬂuid ( U g / U 
For  thermally  thick  particles  with  the  low  thermal  conductivity, 
the conduction mechanism of indirect-WC is dominant, contribut- 
ing almost 70% of the total conduction amount. As k s / k 
f increases, 
the indirect particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction between either con- 
tacting  or  non-contacting  particles  weakens;  on  the  contrary, 
the  direct  conduction  through  particle-particle  contacts  becomes 
f  >  3.4, 
more  signiﬁcant.  For  thermally  thin  particles  with  k s / k 
the  direct  conduction  through  particle-particle  contacts  becomes 
dominant. 

The  variation  of  the  relative  importance  of  different  conduc- 
tion  mechanisms  as  a  function  of  temperature  in  a  packed  bed 
mf  = 0) is shown in Fig. 13 . Notice- 
with the stagnant ﬂuid ( U g / U 
ably, as the bed temperature increases, the contribution from each 
conduction mechanism stays almost unchanged for both thermally 
thick and thermally thin particles, suggesting the relative impor- 
tance of different conduction mechanisms is insensitive to the bed 
temperature. For thermally thick particles ( Fig. 13 (a)), as the bed 
temperature increases, the contribution from indirect-WC conduc- 
tion slightly increases and that from direct conduction slightly de- 
creases. However, the variation in the percentage of contribution 
is  rather  small  with  a  standard  deviation  less  than  2%  for  both 
indirect-WC and direct conductions. 

It  is  worth  noting  that  the  data  associated  with  the  packed 
bed  regime  in  Figs.  11  –13  are  presented  for  the  packing  struc- 
ture  obtained  by  numerically  settling  mono-sized  spherical  par- 
ticles under gravity [35 , 42] . Therefore, the packing structure dis- 
cussed above may be viewed as random loose packing (RLP), which 
is often considered as the lower limit of a packing structure. Cheng 
et al. [47] stressed the important role of packing structure in deter- 
mining the heat transfer characteristics in a packed bed. Hence, the 
relative importance of different conduction mechanisms may vary 
for other packing structures, ranging from RLP to the upper limit, 
i.e. random close packing (RCP). Moreover, for packed beds of poly- 
disperse or non-spherical particles, the packing structure depends 
non-trivially  on  the  size  distribution  and  shape  of  the  particles, 
thus might also yield different amounts of heat transfer through 
the conduction mechanisms. Therefore, due care is required when 
considering different conduction mechanisms in a packed bed that 
has a packing structure substantially different from those discussed 
in Figs. 11–13 . 

Other simpliﬁed methods.  The above methods are predominant in 
the  calculation  of  particle-particle  or  particle-wall  conduction  in 
thermal  DEM-based  simulations.  Some  simpliﬁed  methods  have 
also been reported in the literature. Despite the simpleness, these 

Fig. 14.  Schematic illustration of the conductive heat transfer model by Vargas and 
McCarthy [50] . 

methods  might  be  adequate  for  the  solution  of  conduction  heat 
transfer in certain scenarios, hence are also reviewed here. 

Method by Vargas and McCarthy [ 50 ] 

For  heat  transfer  in  granular  media,  Vargas  and  McCarthy 
[50] considered the conduction between two contacting particles 
as a combination of i) through the contact area and ii) through the 
gas in between the two particles, as illustrated in Fig. 14 . The fol- 
lowing assumptions were made in their model: 

• All phases are inert and thermally stable; 
• Adsorption of gas on particle surface is negligible; 
• Temperatures are continuous across all interfaces; 
• The conductivity of the interstitial ﬂuid is small relative to that 

of the particle; 

• Heat only ﬂows between contacting particles. 

Therefore,  the  total  thermal  conductance  in  the  absence  of  a 

liquid bridge between the two particles is expressed as, 

H t = H c + H g 

(58) 

The Hertzian contact theory is applied to calculate the conduc- 
tance between two contacting particles ( H c ), i.e. Eq. (40) . H g is the 
conductance  through  the  interstitial  ﬂuid  between  the  two  con- 
tacting particles, which is expressed as, 

H g = 

A g k ∗
g 
l g 

(59) 

where A g is the area exposed to the gas and is estimated as half 
the particle surface area minus the area of particle-particle contact, 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

17 

Fig. 15.  Schematic illustration of the particle-particle contact surface for the decomposition method by Tsory et al. [51] . 

given by, 

A g = 2 π r 2 

(cid:6) 
(cid:8)
1 − 1 
2 

(cid:9)

(cid:7) 
2 

r c 
r p 

(60) 

l g = 

l g  is the averaged length over which the heat ﬂux applies and is 
determined by, 
(cid:27)
(cid:26)
1 − π
R 2 
4 
R − a 
In Eq. (59) , k ∗
g  is the modiﬁed gas conductivity for ﬁnite lengths 
and is related to the gas conductivity k g in an inﬁnite gas medium 
by [131] , 

(61) 

∗
g  = 
k 

k g 
1 + M 
l g 

(62) 

(cid:22)

+ 

δg 

1 
P r 

M  = 

(cid:23)
2 − ( ac ) 
2 
( ac ) 
2 

where M is referred to as the temperature jump distance and can 
be estimated as, 
2 − ( ac ) 
1 
( ac ) 
1 

γ
γ + 1 
where γ is the ratio of speciﬁc heats. ac represents the thermal ac- 
commodation coeﬃcient at each particle surface. It is worth noting 
that ac is an empirical parameter, the determination of which re- 
lies on the availability of experimental data or literature data [50] . 
Moreover, compared to the surrounding layer method by Rong and 
Horio  [45]  and  the  Voronoi  polyhedron-based  method  by  Cheng 
et al. [47] , this method considers the conduction only when two 
particles  are  in  physical  contact,  thus  limited  to  applications  of 
packed beds and granular media. 

(63) 

Method by Tsory et al. [ 51 ] 

Tsory  et  al.  [51]  calculated  the  conductive  heat  transfer  in  a 
compressed packed bed based on the particle surface topography. 
Speciﬁcally, the particle-particle contact region is decomposed into 
two parts: solid-solid contact and air gaps, as depicted in Fig. 15 , 
through which the conductive heat transfer takes place. The con- 
tact area is determined based on the overlap obtained in the con- 
ventional DEM simulations by, 
A c = π r 2 
c 

(64) 

The portion of the solid-solid contact is calculated based on the 

particle material properties by, 

√ 

⎧ 
⎨ 
P 
2 
E m ϑ 
⎩ 
1 

= 

A s 
A c 

ϑ > 0 

ϑ = 0 

(65) 

where P is the compression load ( N / m 2 ). ϑ is the average slope of 
particle surface roughness which is a function of the RMS equiva- 
lent surface roughness, i.e., ϑ = 0 . 076 ( ϑ 2 
j ) 0 . 26 . In the simula- 
tions, the value of ϑ can be set as a constant for particles of the 

i  + ϑ 2 

(67) 

(68) 

(69) 

same material. Clearly, the determination of the value of ϑ relies 
on delicate measurements of particle surface topography. 

The conduction heat transfer between the two particles is cal- 
culated by summing up the area-weighted contributions from the 
above two conductive heat transfer mechanisms, 

Q pp = 

Q s + 

A s 
A c 

A g 
A c 

Q g 

(66) 

where  Q s  and  Q g  are  heat  transfer  through  solid-solid  contact 
points and that through the air gaps, respectively, and calculated 
by, 

(cid:4)
T j − T i 

(cid:3)
8 r c 
1 / k pi + 1 / k p j 
(cid:3)
8 r c 
1 / k pi + 2 / k 

(cid:4)
T j − T i 

Q s = 

Q g = 

f + 1 / k p j 

Compared  to  the  surrounding  layer  method  and  the  Voronoi 
polyhedron-based method, the method by Tsory et al. [51] can be 
viewed  to  have  partially  calculated  the  conductive  heat  transfer 
through particle contacts; or in other words, a correction factor is 
implicitly included in the calculation by considering the portion of 
air gaps inside the particle contact. 

The conductive heat transfer between the particle and the sur- 
rounding air is also considered by Tsory et al. [51] and is expressed 
by, 

Q 

p f = 4 k 

(cid:3)
f d eq 

(cid:4)
f − T i 
T 

(cid:10) 

f is the surrounding air temperature. d eq is the equivalent 
where T 
f /π where A 
diameter calculated by d eq = 
f is the surface area 
A 
available for the heat transfer which is the difference between the 
total particle surface area and the area overlapped with other par- 
ticles or walls. 

Tsory et al. [51] developed this method for compressed packed 
bed. For scenarios where particles are ﬂuidised or there is a signiﬁ- 
cant distance amongst the particles, the application of this method 
needs to be complemented by other methods to accurately account 
for the particle-particle and particle-wall conductive heat transfer. 

3.1.2. Conduction through ﬂuid in void spaces 

In packed bed reactors with the stagnant ﬂuid, conductive heat 
transfer occurs through the ﬂuid in void spaces surrounded by the 
particles. As illustrated in Fig. 16 , the ﬂuid in the void space is con- 
nected through the pores and exchanges heat energy if a tempera- 
ture gradient is present. The connections amongst the void spaces 
are described using a similar approach to the concept of Voronoi 
polyhedrons, i.e., the Delaunay tessellation. The Delaunay tessella- 
tion maps a particulate system into a number of tetrahedra; each 
tetrahedron  has  its  four  vertices  sitting  at  the  centroids  of  four 

18 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Finney packing ( ε
b  = 0.366). As discussed above, the amount of 
conductive heat transfer through the ﬂuid in void spaces increases 
as the void space increases. Therefore, this critical value is deemed 
to vary with the porosity of the packed bed. Further work might 
be required to quantify the critical value of k s / k 
f  for packed bed 
reactors of different porosities. 

3.2. Convection 

Convective heat transfer characterises the propagation of heat 
in the moving ﬂuids (natural or forced). Speciﬁcally, in the pres- 
ence of a temperature gradient, the motion of a ﬂuid induces the 
convective heat transfer by i) collective motion of large numbers 
of molecules (advection) and ii) local random motion of individ- 
ual molecules (diffusion) [132] . Therefore, the total convective heat 
transfer is the superposition of energy transport by the above two 
sub-mechanisms. It is also customary to use the term convection 
when referring to this cumulative energy transport. 

Fig. 16.  Schematic of conduction through ﬂuid in void spaces surrounded by parti- 
cles. 

neighbouring particles as shown in Fig. 16 . Depending on the par- 
ticle spatial distribution, the particles do not necessarily have to 
touch  each  other,  thus  generating  different  shapes  of  the  cross- 
section of the pore throat. Just recently, Cheng et al. [52] employed 
a cylinder to model the conduction between two connected void 
spaces. Speciﬁcally, for two connected void spaces i and j , the con- 
ductive heat transfer is calculated by, 
T i − T j 
i j,e f f k 
f 
l i j 

Q i j = π r 2 

(70) 

ij is the cylinder length equal to the distance between the 
where l 
centroids of void spaces i and j. r 
ij,eff is cylinder radius equal to the 
equivalent radius of the cross-section of the pore throat connecting 
the void spaces i and j , calculated by 

(cid:21) 

i j,e f f = 
r 

A i j,cs 
π

(71) 

where A 

ij,cs is the cross-sectional area of the pore throat. 

From its deﬁnition ( Eq. (70) ), it is clear that under the same 
temperature ﬁeld the conduction through ﬂuid in void spaces: (i) is 
determined mainly by the particle spatial distribution (or the pack- 
ing structure in packed beds) and (ii) increases as the bed porosity 
increases due to the increased pore sizes. Also, the model only re- 
lies on the spatial distribution of the particles, hence applicable to 
multi-sized particles. 

The role of the conduction through ﬂuid in void spaces in the 
total heat transfer in packed beds is shown in Fig. 17 . It is clear 
from Fig. 17 (a) that for large values of k s / k 
f  the predicted results 
by the models with or without the inclusion of conduction through 
void ﬂuid are in good agreements with the measured values. How- 
ever, for small values of k s / k 
f , the predicted results using the model 
without the consideration of conduction through void ﬂuid slightly 
underestimate the effective thermal conductivity ( k e ). These results 
are justiﬁed by the results shown in Fig. 17 (b) in which the con- 
duction  through  ﬂuid  in  void  spaces  is  negligible  for  large  val- 
f , but becomes the dominant heat transfer mechanism 
ues of k s / k 
f is small ( < 0.5). In the work of Cheng et al. [52] a value 
when k s / k 
f  = 5 was mentioned as the reference point to determine 
of k s / k 
whether the conduction through ﬂuid in void spaces needs to be 
considered  in  DEM-based  simulations  of  heat  transfer  in  packed 
beds. However, Cheng et al. [52] conducted the evaluation for the 

In a packed or ﬂuidised bed, the ﬂuid tortuously ﬂows through 
the  particles  and  mixes  vigorously.  Therefore,  convection  takes 
place  mainly  between  i)  ﬂuid  and  particle  surface  and  ii)  ﬂuid 
and wall surface. Mechanisms governing these two types of con- 
vective  heat  transfer  are  fundamentally  the  same,  yet  different 
case-by-case,  depending  on  the  ﬂow  structure  close  to  the  heat 
transfer surface. The convective heat transfer is generally expressed 
as, 
i, f = h i,con v A i (cid:17)T 
Q 
where A 
i is the surface area available for the convective heat trans- 
fer to take place on particle i , solely dependent on the geometri- 
cal dimensions. (cid:17)T is the temperature difference that acts as the 
i,conv  is the convective heat trans- 
driving force of heat transfer. h 
fer coeﬃcient, which is determined by the ﬂow characteristics that 
are often described by the Reynolds number ( Re = ρ
f ) and 
bed voidage ( ε), and the physical properties of the ﬂuid that might 
be  described  using  the  Prandtl  number  ( Pr  =  c 
f ).  Clearly, 
i,conv is the most important dependent 
for a speciﬁc application, h 
variable. 

(72) 

pf μ

f Ud 

i / μ

f / k 

A large volume of literature has focused on the relationship be- 
tween  h 
i,conv  and  the  ﬂow  characteristics  (e.g.  laminar  or  turbu- 
lent), ﬂuid properties and geometrical properties (e.g. shape and 
surface roughness). Accordingly, a number of correlations, the ma- 
jority  of  which  are  empirical  or  semi-empirical,  have  been  de- 
i,conv . These correlations were normally ex- 
veloped to estimate h 
pressed in the form of Nusselt Number ( Nu = h 
f ) which 
measures the relative importance between convective and conduc- 
tive heat transfer at a boundary in a ﬂuid ﬂow. 

i,conv d 

i / k 

In a thermal particulate system, it has been recognised that the 
convective heat transfer shows a strong dependence on many pa- 
rameters including the local ﬂow condition, the nature of the ﬂow 
regime and particle ﬂow characteristics. Moreover, different mea- 
suring techniques provide different experimental data [133] . There- 
fore,  a  given  correlation  is  often  not  generally  applicable  to  dif- 
ferent systems or even different operating conditions in the same 
system. The correlation for a speciﬁc application should thus be 
selected with due care by considering a number of relevant pa- 
rameters, as further discussed in this section. It is worth emphasis- 
ing that this study is not intended to review all of the correlations 
for predicting the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient, which might 
however be found in the literature. Instead, the correlations that 
have been widely applied in previous thermal DEM-based simula- 
tions are reviewed and discussed. 

3.2.1. Convection between ﬂuid and particle surface 
Particulate convection correlations applied in DEM-based simulations. 
The most popular correlations of convection that have been em- 
ployed  in  previous  thermal  DEM-based  simulations  are  listed  in 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

19 

Fig. 17.  Role of the conduction through ﬂuid in void spaces in a thermal packed bed: (a) comparison between the predicted results using models with and without con- 
sidering conduction through void ﬂuid and (b) comparison between the contribution from conduction through void ﬂuid and the contribution from other heat transfer 
mechanisms. Adapted from Ref. [52] with permission of Elsevier. 

Table  2 .  Ranz  and  Marshall  [53]  conducted  experiments  on  the 
evaporation of water droplets and correlated Nu with the dimen- 
sionless  numbers  Re  and  Pr ,  i.e.  Eq.  (73)  for  the  low  Reynolds 
number  ( <  200)  and  Pr  <  250.  Hughmark  [134]  later  collected 
the literature data and showed that Eq. (73) is valid for Re < 450. 
Recently, Buist et al. [135] measured the convective heat transfer 
coeﬃcient between a single particle and the unbounded ﬂow and 
their experimental data extended the validity of Eq. (73) for the 
Reynolds number up to 1500. However, in their work [135] , the 
even roader application ranges of Re ( ∈ [1,  10 4 ]) and Pr ( ∈ [0.6, 
380])  were  reported  (without  their  own  experimental  veriﬁca- 
tion) for Eq. (73) for single spheres. The relationship established 
between Nu and Re and Pr has become the foundation that under- 
pins many other correlations developed in the following decades 
for  predicting  the  convective  heat  transfer  coeﬃcient.  However, 
many of them targeted single spherical particles (e.g. [ 54–56 , 136] ). 
For instance, Whitaker [136] collected previously published exper- 
imental data and proposed an empirical correlation for the forced 
convection  around  single  spheres  for  Re  ∈  [3.5,  7.6  × 10 4 ]  and 
Pr ∈ [0.71,  380]. This correlation has been occasionally applied in 
ﬂuidised bed reactors (e.g. in [137] ). 

Churchill  [138]  proposed  a  correlation  ( Eq.  (75) )  for  assisted 
convection by combining correlations for pure free and pure forced 
convection and found the third root of the sum of the third pow- 
ers provided the best predicted results, as opposed to the correla- 
tions using the second or fourth powers. The correlation appeared 
to be valid for spheres over the entire potential ﬂow and laminar 
boundary layer regimes ( Re < 10 4 , Ra < 10 9 ) and for all Pr . Agarwal 
[139] developed the voidage function to consider the effect of the 
presence of other particles on the convection coeﬃcient for an iso- 
lated particle in liquid ﬂuidised beds ( Pr ≥ 7.3). It was experimen- 
tally found by Mankad et al. [140] that the correlation by Agarwal 
[139] ( Eq. (80) ) provided better predicted results of horizontal liq- 
uid ﬂows through ﬁxed packings at a range of voidages and ﬂow 
rates than the correlation of Ranz and Marshall [53] . Irrespective 
of this ﬁnding, the correlation by Agarwal [139] has been rarely 
applied (the authors only found in [141] ). Malone and Xu [141] ap- 
plied the Agarwal [139] ’s correlation in the liquid ﬂuidised bed and 
found  the  predicted  results  differed  quite  dramatically  from  the 
published experimental data. The explanation by Malone and Xu 
[141] for this discrepancy is Agarwal’s correlation [139] might not 
be applicable to ﬂuidised systems where the distribution of bed 
voidage is anisotropic. 

Bandrowski and Kaczmarzyk [63] measured gas-to-particle heat 
transfer  in  vertical  pneumatic  conveying  systems  using  particles 
with diameters up to 2.56 mm; a correlation ( Eq. (85) ) for the op- 
erating conditions of φs  ∈ (0.0 0 025,  0.05) and Re ∈ (180,  1800) 
was developed. However, it was found that Bandrowski and Kacz- 
marzyk’s correlation underestimates h 
i,conv for modelling the dilute 
system of polymer pellets with the average φs less than 0.05 [64] . 
Li  and  Mason  [64]  modiﬁed  the  correlation  of  Bandrowski  and 
Kaczmarzyk [63] and proposed a new correlation ( Eq. (82) ) for the 
pneumatic transport system, covering the entire range of Re . The 
authors (Li and Mason [64] ) stressed that the exponent m = 3.5 
is  suitable  only  for  dilute  particulate  systems  and  the  value  of 
m needs adjustment for higher solid concentrations. Recently, Al- 
Arkawazi  [65]  conducted  experiments  of  liquid-solid  ﬂuidisation 
and developed a porosity function with the exponent of m = 4.75 
for  the  entire  range  of  solid  concentration  (i.e.  0  < φs  <  0.65). 
They then [10] incorporated the exponent into the correlation of Li 
and Mason [64] to model the heat transfer in packed and ﬂuidised 
beds  with  air  and  water  as  the  ﬂuidising  medium,  respectively. 
However, the experimental validation of their exponent ( m = 4.75) 
along with Li and Mason’s correlation [64] was performed only for 
the gas packed bed. Li and Mason’s correlation [64] has also been 
applied  by  Malone  and  Xu  [141]  for  heat  transfer  modelling  in 
liquid ﬂuidised beds where a qualitative agreement was reported 
with the experimental results of Patel and Simpson [142] : the heat 
transfer coeﬃcient reaches the peak at a voidage of approximately 
0.75. However, the rigorous validation of Li and Mason’s correla- 
tion [64] for applications in liquid particulate systems is missing 
in the public domain. 

Wakao and Kaguei [60] evaluated the experimental data avail- 
able  at  that  time  and  selected  the  data  (covering  Pr  ∈  [0.7,  1]) 
that passed their criteria and proposed a semi-empirical correla- 
tion, i.e. Eq. (78) for calculating the average convective heat trans- 
fer coeﬃcient for Re ∈ [15,  8.5  × 10 3 ]. They [60] did not explicitly 
specify the regime of the particulate ﬂow to which the correlation 
is  applicable  to.  Tavassoli  [62]  conducted  extensive  DNS  simula- 
tions and veriﬁed that the correlation of Wakao and Kaguei [60] is 
valid only for packed beds with an average solid concentration ( φs ) 
around  0.6.  Further,  Tavassoli  [62]  found  that  the  correlation  by 
Gunn [61] ( Eq. (76) ) is accurate only for dilute systems with φs 
< 0.3. Similarly, Buist et al. [135] reported a large difference (but 
within  20%  error  margin)  between  experiments  and  simulations 
using Gunn’s correlation ( Eq. (76) ) when φs = 0.5. It is worth reit- 

20 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Table 2 
Major correlations of convective heat transfer applied in previous thermal DEM-based simulations. 

Authors 

Ranz&Marshall [53] 

Whitaker [136] 

Correlation Eq. 
Nu = 2 . 0 + 0 . 6 R e 1 / 2 
Re ∈ ( 1 , 10 4 ) , Pr ∈ [ 0 . 6 , 380 ] 

P r 1 / 3 

Churchill [138] 

(cid:22)

(cid:4)
(cid:3)
P r 0 . 4 ( μ
0 . 4 R e 1 / 2 + 0 . 06 R e 2 / 3 
Nu = 2 . 0 + 
(cid:26)
(cid:3)
Re ∈ 

, Pr ∈ [ 0 . 71 , 380 ] , μ

b / μ0 ) 1 / 4 

3 . 5 , 7 . 6  × 10 4 (cid:27)
(cid:23)
( Nu − N u 0 ) f F ( Pr ) 
A F R e 1 / 2 P r 1 / 3 

3 

(cid:4)
b / μ0 ∈ [ 1 , 3 . 2 ] 
(cid:23)

3 

(cid:22)

= 1 + 

A N R a 1 / 4 

f F ( Pr ) 

A F R e 1 / 2 P r 1 / 3 f N ( Pr ) 

Gunn [61] 

Gnielinski [57 , 58] 

Wakao&Kaguei [60] 

KTA standards [59] 

Agarwal [139] 

Achenbach [15] 

Li&Mason [64] 

Tavassoli [62] 

Zhuang et al. [36] 

where , A F = 0 . 69 , A F = 0 . 659 , N u 0 = π
(cid:26)
1 + ( C F /Pr ) 2 / 3 (cid:27)1 / 4 
(cid:26)
f F ( Pr ) = 
, f N ( Pr ) = 
C F and C N are unspeciﬁed for spheres 
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
Re < 10 4 , Ra < 10 9 , all Pr 

1 + ( C N /Pr ) 9 / 16 (cid:27)4 / 9 

(cid:4)(cid:3)
7 − 10 ε + 5 ε 2 

(cid:3)
1 + 0 . 7 R e 1 / 5 
Nu = 
(Re < 10 5 , ε > 0 . 7 , Pr ∈ (0 . 6 , 380)) 

(cid:4)
P r 1 / 3 

(cid:3)
+ 

(cid:4)
1 . 33 − 2 . 4 ε + 1 . 2 ε 2 

R e 0 . 7 

P r 1 / 3 

Nu = f ε N u sp 
where , N u p = 2 + 

(cid:10) 

Nu 2 
1 
lam = 0 . 664 ( Re/ε ) 
2 P r 

lam + Nu 2 
1 
3 , N u 
turb = 
N u 
0 . 7 , 10 4 (cid:27)(cid:4)
(cid:26)
(cid:3)
Re/ε ≤ 2  × 10 4 , ε ≈ 0 . 4 , Pr ∈ 

turb , f ε = 1 + 1 . 5 ( 1 − ε ) 

0 . 037 ( Re/ε ) 0 . 8 
1 + 2 . 443 ( Re/ε ) −0 . 1 (cid:3)

Pr 
(cid:4)
P r 2 / 3 − 1 

Nu = 2 + 1 . 1 R e 0 . 6 
(cid:26)
(cid:3)
Re ∈ 

P r 1 / 3 
15 , 8 . 5  × 10 3 (cid:27)
(cid:8)
Nu = 1 . 27 R e 0 . 36 
(cid:3)
100 , 10 5 (cid:4)
(cid:3)
Re ∈ 

(cid:4)
, ε ≈ 0 . 4 , Pr ∈ [ 0 . 7 , 1 ] 
(cid:9)
P r 1 / 3 
ε 1 . 18 
(cid:4)
, ε ∈ ( 0 . 36 , 0 . 42 ) , Pr ∈ [ 0 . 7 , 1 ] 

(cid:8)
+ 0 . 033 R e 0 . 86 

(cid:9)
P r 1 / 2 
ε 1 . 07 

Nu = 2 . 0 + 0 . 6 ε −1 . 23 
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
Re < 10 4 , ε ∈ ( 0 . 35 , 1 ) , Pr ≥ 7 . 3 

R e 1 / 2 

P r 1 / 3 

$ 
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
4 
1 . 18 R e 0 . 58 

(cid:22)

(cid:11)
0 . 23 

Nu = 
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
Re/ε ≤ 7 . 7  × 10 5 , ε ≈ 0 . 4 , Pr ∈ [ 0 . 7 , 1 ] 

+ 

Re 
1 − ε 

% 
(cid:13)0 . 75 (cid:23)
4 

0 . 25 

⎧ 
⎨ 

⎩ 

R e 1 / 2 
2 + 0 . 6 ε m 
2 + 0 . 5 ε m 
R e 1 / 2 
2 + 0 . 0 0 0 045 ε m 

P r 1 / 3 
P r 1 / 3 + 0 . 02 ε m 
R e 1 . 8 

Nu = 

R e 0 . 8 

P r 1 / 3 

Re < 200 
200 < Re < 1500 
Re > 1500 

m = 3 . 5 for dilute systemsm = 4 . 75 for dense systems [ 65 ] 
( ε ∈ ( 0 . 35 , 1 ) , Pr ∈ [ 0 . 7 , 1 ] ) 

(cid:4)(cid:3)
7 − 10 ε + 5 ε 2 

(cid:3)
Nu = 
( Re ∈ ( 0 , 100 ) , ε ∈ ( 0 . 35 , 1 ) , Pr ∈ [ 0 . 7 , 1 ] ) 

1 + 0 . 1 R e 1 / 5 

(cid:4)
P r 1 / 3 

(cid:3)
+ 

(cid:4)
R e 0 . 7 
1 . 33 − 2 . 19 ε + 1 . 15 ε 2 

P r 1 / 3 

(cid:24)

Nu = 

P r 1 / 3 

2 + 0 . 6 R e 1 / 2 
0 . 03 R e 1 . 3 
Re ≤ 100 
( ε ∈ ( 0 . 35 , 1 ) , Pr ∈ [ 0 . 7 , 1 ] ) 

Re > 100 

Bandrowski&Kaczmarzyk [63]  Nu = 0 . 00114 ( 1 − ε ) −0 . 5984 

R e 0 . 8159 

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
Re ∈ 

180 , 1 . 8 × 10 3 (cid:4)

(cid:4)
, ε ∈ ( 0 . 95 , 1 ) , Pr ∈ [ 0 . 7 , 1 ] 

(73) 

(74) 

(75) 

(76) 

(77) 

(78) 

(79) 

(80) 

(81) 

(82) 

(83) 

(84) 

(85) 

Application ranges of Re , ε and Pr are mainly the modiﬁed values reported in studies after the original work, as described in the text; for correlations that 
were developed in gas systems, the application range of Pr is indicated as Pr ∈ [0.7,  1] in the present study. 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

21 

erating that the validity of Gunn’s correlation was claimed to be in 
the range of φs ∈ (0, 0.65) in the original work [61] . Based on their 
DNS simulations of convection in the ﬂow of mono-sized particles, 
Tavassoli [62] modiﬁed Gunn [61] (cid:3) s correlation and proposed a re- 
vised correlation ( Eq. (83) ) that covers the entire range of φs ( φs ∈ 
(0, 0.65)) for gas-solid systems ( Pr ∈ [0.7, 1]). 

b ≈ 0.4) over broad ranges of Re / ε

Similarly, Gnielinski [57 , 58] examined the experimental data of 
earlier research and proposed a correlation ( Eq. (77) ) for ﬁxed beds 
( ε
b ( ≤ 2 × 10 4 ) and Pr ( ∈ [0.7, 
10 4 ]). Gnielinski [143] recommended their correlation for the pre- 
diction of convective heat transfer coeﬃcient in the core of high- 
temperature packed pebble-bed nuclear reactors. Meanwhile, the 
German Nuclear Safety Standard Commission (KTA) [59] proposed 
a correlation ( Eq. (79) ) to determine the heat transfer coeﬃcient 
of  solids  to  ﬂowing  gas  for  a  German  high-temperature  reactor 
(HTR). This work was followed by Achenbach [15] who developed a 
similar correlation ( Eq. (81) ) for gas systems but covering an even 
broader range of Reynolds number ( Re / ε

b ≤ 7.7 × 10 5 ). 

Discussion on particulate convection correlations for DEM-based simu- 
lations.  A review of major thermal DEM-based simulations involv- 
ing  convective  heat  transfer  published  since  2009  [10 , 35 , 36 , 42–
4 4 , 66–68 , 70–73 , 85 , 86 , 90–92 , 96 , 98–100 , 119 , 120 , 137 , 14 4–155] 
(as 
listed  in  Table  S1  of  the  Supplementary  Material)  indicates,  the 
correlations by Ranz and Marshall [53] , Gunn [61] and Gnielinski 
[57 , 58] are the predominant correlations that have been applied 
for calculating the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient. It is worth 
noting that these three correlations were all proposed before 1981. 
It is also found that the correlation by Gnielinski [57 , 58] was used 
mainly for dense beds (e.g. on a grate, rotary drum, shaft kiln and 
stove), whereas the correlation of Gunn [61] was applied mainly 
in relatively dilute particulate systems (e.g., bubbling ﬂuidised bed, 
spout  ﬂuidized bed, and circulating ﬂuidized bed).  However, the 
correlation of Ranz and Marshall [53] has been employed in both 
dilute  and  dense  particulate  systems,  covering  a  broad  range  of 
applications when compared to other correlations. The correlation 
of Li and Mason [64] that was developed for pneumatic transport 
systems  (with  its  revised  version  proposed  very  recently  by  Al- 
Arkawazi [10] ) has been applied relatively more often compared 
to other correlations (except the above three correlations). 

As  the  validation  study  of  their  CFD-DEM  model,  Wei  et  al. 
[73] monitored the temperatures of 9 hot spheres (initial temper- 
ature: 180 °C) immersed inside packed cold spheres (25 °C). Cold 
gas (25 °C) was blown through the interstitial space in the packed 
bed.  Fig.  18  shows  the  predicted  evolutional  curves  of  tempera- 
tures of the 9 hot spheres using the correlations of Gunn [61] , Li 
and Mason [64] , and Ranz and Marshall [53] . The benchmark ex- 
perimental data of Collier et al. [156] are included for validation. 
The correlation by Ranz and Marshall [53] provides the best match 
with the experimental data. By contrast, the correlations by Gunn 
[61]  and  Li  and  Mason  [64]  that  were  developed for  dilute  sys- 
tems ( φs < 0.3) fail to describe the temperature evolution of the 
hot spheres. The results indicate the importance of the operating 
regime (indicated by the solid concentration φs or the average bed 
voidage ε
b ) of the system when choosing a correlation of convec- 
tive heat transfer coeﬃcient. 

Abdulmohsin  and  Al-Dahhan  [133]  measured  the  averaged 
convective  heat  transfer  coeﬃcient  at  the  middle  cross-section 
of  a  packed  bed.  Four  correlations  [15 , 57 , 59 , 60]  that  were  de- 
veloped  speciﬁcally  for  the  packed  bed  were  applied  to  predict 
the convective heat transfer. As shown in Fig. 19 , all correlations 
generate values of Nu that agree well with the experimental data 
b ) ∈ [10 3 ,10 4 ]. The correlation by Achenbach 
for Re 
[15]  provides the best agreement with the experimental data 
h .  Wakao  and  Kaguei’s  correlation 
over  the  entire  range  of  Re 
[60] provides reasonable agreements with the experimental data 

h  = Re /(1 − ε

Fig. 18.  Comparison of predicted temperature evolution using different convection 
models against the experimental data in a rectangular packed bed. Reprinted from 
Ref. [73] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 19.  Comparison of the predicted values of Nu using different em pirical corre- 
lations against the measured values. Adapted from Ref. [133] with permission of 
Elsevier. 

h (  ≈ 60).  The 
and  the  maximum  deviation  is  13%  at  the  low  Re 
correlations  by  Gnielinski  [57]  and  KTA  standards  [59]  are  valid 
h  ≥ 400  with  the  maximum  deviations  of  3.4%  and  2.2%, 
for  Re 
respectively. However, these two correlations [57 , 59] signiﬁcantly 
h  <  200. 
overestimate  Nu  for  laminar  ﬂow  conditions  with  Re 
The results indicate that apart from the operating regime of the 
particle bed, the ﬂow conditions characterised by Re also need to 
be  considered  when  one  selects  a  correlation  for  predicting  the 
convection heat transfer coeﬃcient. 

It is also worth mentioning that for the low Reynolds number 
( Re ≤ 100), Tavassoli [62] revised the correlation of Gunn [61] over 
the  entire  spectrum  of  solid  concentration,  i.e.  from  packed  bed 
to pneumatic conveying regimes. The predicted results using the 
revised  Gunn’s  correlation  ( Eq.  (83) )  excellently  match  the  pre- 
dicted results of DNS simulations, as shown in Fig. 20 . However, 
Gunn’s  correlation  ( Eq.  (76) )  fails  to  predict  the  convective  heat 
transfer coeﬃcient for high solid concentrations ( φs ≥ 0.3), though 
generating  reasonable  predictions  for  Re  >  50  in  dilute  systems 
( φs < 0.3). Such effort as that made by Tavassoli [62] is scarce in 

22 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Fig. 20.  Comparison between Gunn’s correlation [61] and the revised Gunn’s correlation by Tavassoli [62] for particulate convection under low Reynolds number ( ≤100). 
Courtesy of Dr. H. Tavassoli Estahbanati [62] . 

recent years but quite needed to elaborate the existing correlations 
for more accurate modelling of ﬂuid-particle convection. 

Noticeably, compared to Re and ε

b (or φs ) that characterise the 
ﬂow of the system, Pr that characterises the physical properties of 
the ﬂuid phase (gas or liquid) has been discussed much less fre- 
quently in the literature. In particular, in the context of thermal 
DEM-based simulations of particulate systems, the majority of pre- 
vious studies (as reviewed in the present work) have focused on 
the gas systems in which Pr is almost a constant in the range of 0.7 
to 1. Accordingly, discussion on the correlations speciﬁcally with 
regard to the application range of Pr is rather scarce. The infor- 
mation on Pr collected from the literature for the correlations that 
have been commonly applied in thermal DEM-based simulations is 
provided in Table 2 . Due care is required to ensure the application 
range of Pr is also satisﬁed when selecting a correlation of convec- 
tive heat transfer coeﬃcient for modelling a speciﬁc problem. 

3.2.2. Convection between ﬂuid and wall surface 

Convection  between  ﬂuid  and  reactor  walls  has  often  been 
treated separately from that between ﬂuid and solid particles due 
to the surface geometrical difference. Generally, correlations that 
were developed for convection between ﬂuid and planar or cylin- 
drical wall surfaces could be applied in DEM-based simulations, as 
reported in a large volume of literature. For brevity, these correla- 
tions are not all reviewed and discussed in the present work. 

Glicksman, Decker and Baskakov [157] proposed a correlation of 
convective heat transfer coeﬃcient between wall and the particle- 
ﬂuid emulsion, 

$ 

Nu = 

h w d p 
k 
f 

= 

5 . 0 + 0 . 05 R e p P r  R e p < 150 
0 . 18 Re 0 . 8 

R e p ≥ 150 

p  P r 1 / 3 

(86) 

Wrangham [158] developed a correlation for calculating ﬂuid- 
wall convective heat transfer in a long pipe ( L / D > 60) where the 
turbulence is fully developed with Re D ∈ [10 4 ,1.2  × 10 5 ] and Pr ∈ 
[0.7,  120], expressed as, 
D  P r n 
N u D = aRe 0 . 8 
where a = 0.23; n = 0.4 when heating ﬂuids and n = 0.3 when 
cooling ﬂuids. 

(87) 

Scott et al. [159] used the correlation ( Eq. (87) ) for both packed 
and ﬂuidised regimes. Malone and Xu [141] calculated the ﬂuid- 
wall convection using Eq. (87) in liquid ﬂuidised beds. Zhou et al. 
[35 , 42] applied the same correlation to determine the heat transfer 
coeﬃcient between ﬂuid and the inner wall of a cylindrical column 
for both packed and ﬂuidised beds. Hou et al. [70 , 71] employed the 
correlation ( Eq. (87) ) but with a = 0.037 and n = 1/3 for convec- 
tion between gas and the immersed cylindrical tube wall surface. 

It is worth noting that compared to the vigorous mixing and 
tortuous motion of ﬂuid when ﬂowing through the particles, the 
ﬂuid in the region very close to the wall is close to stagnant. As a 
result, most of the temperature gradients and the large heat trans- 
fer resistance lie in this region, which is often described as a thin 
ﬁlm layer with the thickness less than the particle diameter [44] . 
However, in conventional CFD-DEM simulations, the computational 
cell size is required to be much greater than the particle size [7] , 
indicating the ﬂuid ﬂow structure inside this thin layer is unre- 
solved. This, in turn, leads to the conundrum of accurately resolv- 
ing the convective heat transfer between the ﬂuid and wall surface. 
It is also challenging to experimentally measure the ﬂuid-wall con- 
vective heat transfer coeﬃcient inside the thin layer. More detailed 
simulations, e.g. those based on DNS [25 , 62] , might be required to 
resolve the mesoscale ﬂow structure in the thin layer and provide 
data for developing appropriate correlations. 

Patil et al. [44] adopted Eq. (86) in their thermal CFD-DEM sim- 
ulations. However, h w was used by the authors as a ﬁtting param- 
eter to match their predicted results to the experimental data on 
account of the non-modelled heat transfer mechanisms in the less 
mobile near-wall regions. 

3.3. Radiation 

Radiation  refers  to  the  emission  or  transmission  of  energy 
in the form of waves or subatomic particles through space or a 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

23 

tionally much less amenable due to its nature of non-contact and 
long-range interactions. For this reason, in the majority of previ- 
ous DEM-based simulations, heat transfer through radiation is ig- 
nored when the operating temperature is not high enough. How- 
ever,  thanks  to  the  availability  of  supercomputing  resources  and 
eﬃcient  numerical  techniques  [see  e.g.,  168 , 169] ,  signiﬁcant  ad- 
vancements have been made to the models of thermal radiation. 

In this section, the continuum and discrete approaches for re- 
solving the radiative heat transfer in particulate systems are de- 
scribed and discussed. It is also worth mentioning that for liquid- 
solid systems, the contributions due to radiant heat transfer disap- 
pear [170] , hence the discussion is limited to gas systems. 

3.3.1. Continuum approach 

For particle i with the surface temperature T 

i , the radiative heat 

Fig. 21.  Non-dimensional solid conductivity of the packed pebble beds under dif- 
ferent operation temperatures [151 , 161] . 

material  medium,  including  electromagnetic  radiation,  particle 
radiation,  acoustic  radiation  and  gravitational  radiation.  Thermal 
radiation  is  one  kind  of  electromagnetic  radiation  generated  by 
the  thermal  motion  of  subatomic  particles  in  matter  that  has  a 
temperature  above  absolute  zero  ( − 273.15 ◦C).  The  subatomic 
particle motion results in charge acceleration or dipole oscillation, 
thus generating electromagnetic radiation. In packed or ﬂuidised 
beds,  each  particle  is  surrounded  by  other  particles,  ﬂuid  and 
reactor walls. Radiative heat transfer is occurring among the sur- 
faces of these objects. It has been identiﬁed in both experimental 
[160]  and  numerical  [78 , 151]  studies  that,  the  amount  of  heat 
transfer  through  thermal  radiation  increases  signiﬁcantly  as  the 
temperature increases, as indicated by its fourth-order dependence 
on the temperature ( Eq. (88) ). Wu et al. [151] plotted the experi- 
mental data of dimensionless solid conductivity ( χ = k s / ( 4 σ d p T 3 ) ) 
in packed bed reactors obtained by Niessen & Ball [161] against 
temperature, as shown in Fig. 21 . It was found that in the region 
with T ≤ 550 ◦C and χ ≥ 10, the heat ﬂux of particle radiation 
is  low.  However,  for  regions  of  high  temperature  and  ultra-high 
temperature ( T > 550 ◦C), the particle radiation is signiﬁcant and 
should be accurately considered [161–163] . 

Generally, mathematical models that have been developed for 
calculating  the  radiative  heat  transfer  could  be  categorised  into 
two  main  groups,  namely,  the  continuum  approach  [see  e.g., 
42,164–166 ] and the discrete approach [see e.g., 49 , 69 , 78 , 84 , 151 ]. 
The continuum approach often involves assumptions and/or sim- 
pliﬁcations and uses the effective properties of the bed, the values 
of which strongly rely on experimental inputs, whilst the discrete 
approach focuses on individual particles. 

In theory, all visible objects are emitting radiative energy (of 
different amounts) to the particle, in particular when the ambient 
ﬂuid is treated as a grey media. Photons travel freely through the 
ﬂuid without interacting with ﬂuid molecules. The theory of inde- 
pendent scattering and adsorption of radiation proves valid when 
the overall solid volume fraction is less than 0.05 and the parti- 
cle size is small [84] . For high volume fractions and large particle 
sizes, Ozkaynak [167] experimentally found that the emission co- 
eﬃcients could be as high as 0.7 and 1.0. Clearly, models based on 
the discrete approach suit more for calculating the thermal radi- 
ation in particulate systems as it accounts for the radiative ther- 
mal  ﬂuxes  between  all  surface  elements.  However,  compared  to 
conduction and convection, consideration of radiation is computa- 

(cid:4)
θ 4 
R − T 4 
i 
is 

transfer with the surrounding environment is calculated by, 
(cid:3)
i, rad = σ ε pi A i 
Q 
constant 
where 
(5.67  × 10 −8 W/(m 2 K 4 )).  ε
pi  is  the  particle  surface  emissivity, 
depending on particle material, temperature and surface condition. 
θ R is the radiation temperature and determined by, 

Stefan-Boltzmann 

(88) 

the 

σ

(cid:13)1 / 4 

(cid:11)
θR = 

G 
4 σ

(89) 

where G is the incident radiation (W/m 2 ) and calculated by G = 
& 
4 π
0  I r d Ω. Ω is the solid angle. I r is the radiative intensity and can 
be solved by the radiative transfer equation (RTE). For an absorb- 
ing, emitting and scattering medium at position (cid:2) r in the direction 
(cid:2) s , the RTE reads, 

d I r ( (cid:2) r , (cid:2) s ) 
ds 

+ ( αr + σs ) I r ( (cid:2) r , (cid:2) s ) = αr n 2 T 2 
f 
π

+ 

σs 
4 π

(cid:5) 

4 π

0 

I r ( (cid:2) r , (cid:2) s ) ϕ ( (cid:2) s , (cid:2) s ) dΩ

(90) 
where αr , σ s , n , and ϕ are absorption coeﬃcient, scattering coeﬃ- 
cient, refractive index, and phase function, respectively. Models in- 
cluding P-1 [171] and discrete ordinates (DO) [172] radiation mod- 
els are often used to solve the RTE for the particle-ﬂuid mixture. 
Radiative properties such as αr , σ s and n of the mixture are com- 
puted based on the radiative properties of each phase weighted by 
their volume fraction. 

A  few  studies  [e.g.,  66–68,173]  solved  the  radiative  intensity 
ﬁeld  of  the  ﬂuidised  media.  However,  the  radiation  through  the 
ﬂuid (gas) is often ignored due to its low emissivity [42 , 71] . Ac- 
cordingly, the calculation of the radiative heat transfer is further 
simpliﬁed by assuming there is a spherical domain of radiative in- 
ﬂuence enclosing the particle and the radiative heat is transferred 
between the particle surface and the enclosure surface, expressed 
by [42 , 72] , 
(cid:3)
i, rad = σ ε pi A i 
Q 
i , local  is  the  temperature  of  the  enclosure  surface.  Zhou 
where  T 
et al. [42] determined the value of T 
i , local  by averaging the ﬂuid 
temperature and the temperature of particles that reside in the en- 
closed spherical domain (cid:22), 

(cid:4)
i,local − T 4 
T 4 
i 

(91) 

i, local = ε 
T 

f T 

(cid:3)
f, (cid:22) + 

(cid:4) 1 
1 − ε 
f 
N − 1 

N−1 (cid:2) 

T j 

(92) 

j=1 
j(cid:13) = i 
f , (cid:22) is the ﬂuid temperature in the domain. N and ε
where T 
f  are 
the number of particles and the volume fraction of the ﬂuid phase 
in  the  domain,  respectively.  Understandably,  the  size  of  the  en- 
closure  is  critical  for  the  accurate  account  of  radiation.  A  larger 
domain that is deemed more accurate incurs more computational 

24 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

cost. Zhou et al. [42] set the domain diameter two times greater 
than the particle diameter. Similarly, Krause et al. [72] deﬁned the 
radiative enclosure as a sphere with the same size as that used 
by Zhou et al. [42] but assuming that if the centroid of one actual 
particle lies within the ﬁctitious domain, half the particle surface 
is considered. Accordingly, T 

i , local is calculated by, 

(cid:14) (cid:15) (cid:15) (cid:16) 

’ 

j σ A 
’ 
j σ A 

2 ε p j T 4 
j 
j 
2 ε p j 
j 

i,local =  4 
T 

(93) 

Evidently, models of thermal radiation based on the continuum 
approach are too simpliﬁed with many key parameters not consid- 
ered, e.g. particle material thermal conductivity and local packing 
structure. Wu et al. [151] reported that the effect of solid conduc- 
tivity on radiation is negligible only when χ > 10 for which, how- 
ever, the thermal radiation makes just a marginal contribution and 
can be ignored ( Fig. 21 ). Also, for scenarios of packed beds, Cheng 
and Yu [69] demonstrated the packing structure is pivotal to the 
correct determination of the magnitude of radiative heat transfer. 
Therefore, it is necessary to consider using the discrete approach 
for accurately calculating the thermal radiation in some applica- 
tion scenarios. 

3.3.2. Discrete approach 

Models of the discrete approach were developed mainly in re- 
cent years (since 2013). In the discrete approach, the radiation heat 
transfer between two surface elements is a function of, apart from 
temperature, their surface separation distance, relative orientation 
and size. All these geometrical factors can be characterised by a 
single quantity, namely view factor, which is also called conﬁgu- 
ration factor, diffusive view factor, angle factor or shape factor in 
the literature. It is computationally prohibitive to consider the ra- 
diative energy exchange amongst all surface elements in a partic- 
ulate system. Subsequently, different statistical models have been 
proposed for calculating the radiative heat transfer from different 
scales, namely full integral scale (i.e. long-range radiation), partial 
integral scale (short-range radiation) and sub-particle scale (i.e. mi- 
croscopic radiation), as detailed as follows. Likewise, radiation be- 
tween ﬂuid and its surroundings is not considered [42 , 71] and ac- 
cordingly, the nonparticipating medium is assumed to separate the 
particles [174] . 

Short-range  radiation.  The  Voronoi  tessellation  method  [175] ,  as 
discussed  above,  is  used  to  discretise  the  spatial  domain  into  a 
number  of  independent  Voronoi  polyhedrons  with  one  particle 
contained  in  each  element.  The  short-range  radiation  model  is 
developed based on the geometrical relationships amongst these 
Voronoi polyhedrons. 

Cheng & Yu method [ 69 ] 

Cheng and Yu [69] proposed a simpliﬁed model based on the 
Voronoi polyhedrons ( Fig. 5 ), for the calculation of radiative heat 
transfer amongst mono-sized particles with the following assump- 
tions: 

• The particle diameter is much greater than the radiation wave- 

length; 

• All particles are opaque solids; 
• The particle surface is grey emitting; 
• (cid:17)T / T across a sphere layer is much less than unity; 
• Radiation heat transfer occurs only between two particles con- 

tained in two neighbouring Voronoi polyhedrons; 

• Radiation  heat  transfer  between  two  adjacent  particles  exists 
only in the imaginary radiating surface, i.e. ACBB (cid:3) C (cid:3) A (cid:3) ( Fig. 5 (a)), 
which is ideally insulated and diffusely reﬂective. 

Based on the above assumptions, Cheng and Yu [69] calculated 

the radiant exchange between particles i and j by, 

(cid:3)

Q i j = 

σ
1 −ε 
pi 
ε 
pi A 
i 

(cid:4)
i  − T 4 
T 4 
j 
+  1 
+ 
i ϒ
A 
i j 
j  are the areas of surfaces AA (cid:3)  and BB (cid:3)  ( Fig. 5 (a)). 
ij is the overall view factor between particle i and the interface 

1 −ε 
p j 
ε 
p j A 
j 

i  and A 

where A 
ϒ

(94) 

of the double tapered cones shared with particle j , calculated by, 

(cid:24)(cid:22)(cid:11)

ϒi j = F i j + 

(cid:8)

+ 

(cid:13)

1 
F iR 

A i 
A j 

(cid:9)(cid:23)(−1 

· 1 
F jR 

(95) 

ij , F 

iR , and F 

jR  are the view factors between surfaces AA (cid:3) 
where F 
and BB (cid:3) , AA (cid:3) and ACBB (cid:3) C (cid:3) A (cid:3) , and BB (cid:3) and ACBB (cid:3) C (cid:3) A (cid:3) , respectively. For 
mono-sized spheres with the same geometrical and physical prop- 
jR = 1, and F 
erties, F 
ji . In addition to rela- 
tions of A 

pj , Eq. (94) can be reduced to, 

ij = F 

ij + F 
i = A 
(cid:3)

ji + F 
iR = 1, F 
j and ε 
pi = ε 
(cid:4)
σ
T 4 
i  − T 4 
j 
i ( 1 −F 
( 1 −ε 
pi ) 
A 
+ 
ε 
2 
pi A 
i 

i j ) 

2 

Q i j = 

(96) 

The  view  factor F 

ij  is  not  constant,  varying  with  the  pack- 
ing  structure  and  can  be  calculated  by  extending  the  numerical 
method of Jones [77] which however signiﬁcantly adds complexi- 
ties to the calculation. Moreover, it is not allowed by Jones’ method 
to directly reduce areas that are in visual contact with those de- 
rived from the Voronoi polyhedron approach [92] . 

Decomposing method by Wu et al. [ 78 ] 

The  work  of  Cheng  and  Yu  [69]  is  improved  by  Wu  et  al. 
[78]  who  assumed  that  the  view  factor  from  one  particle  to  its 
neighbouring particle is equivalent to that from the particle to the 
interface of Voronoi tessellations. Subsequently, Wu et al. [78] de- 
composed the interface into a number of right-angled triangles, as 
shown in Fig. 22 . The overall view factor ϒ
ij is obtained by calcu- 
lating the view factors from the sphere to the right-angled trian- 
gles. Accordingly, based on the work of Feingold and Gupta [75] , 
the overall view factor is calculated directly by, 

ϒi j = 

(cid:11)
1 
4 π arccos 

(cid:13)
1 
c 2 

− 1 

8 π arcsin 

(cid:6) (cid:3)

(cid:7) 

(cid:4)
c 2 
1 − c 2 
2 − 2 
1 
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
c 2 
1 + c 2 
2 
1 

− 1 
16 

(97) 

where c 

1 = Y / H, c 

2 = L / Y . 

Compared  to  the  method  by  Cheng  and  Yu  [69] ,  Wu  et  al.’s 
method  [78]  calculates  the  radiative  heat  transfer  merely  based 
on the geometrical relationships between the interacting particles, 
thus deemed more computationally effective. 

Analytical solution by Chen et al. [ 49 ] 

Very recently, Chen et al. [49] conducted further derivation and 
ij . Based 

provided the analytical solution of the local view factor F 
on the reciprocity rule of the view factor [76] , we have 

(cid:3)
A i F iR = A i 

(cid:4)
1 − F i j 

(cid:3)
,  A j F jR = A j 

(cid:4)
1 − F ji 

= A j − A i F i j 

(98) 

After incorporating Eq. (98) , Eq. (95) could be written as, 

ϒi j = 

A j / A i − F 2 
i j 
1 + A j / A i − 2 F i j 

(99) 

i  to  A (cid:3) 
j  is  equal  to  that  from  A 
i  to  A 
j 
j in the vertical direction), together with 
ij  can be 

As  the  view  factor  from  A 
(the projected surface of A 
the reciprocity rule of the view factor, the view factor F 
calculated by, 
A (cid:3) 
i 
F i (cid:3) 
A i 

1 + cos ( θim ) 
2 

F i j = F i j (cid:3) = 

(100) 

j (cid:3) = 

F i (cid:3) 
j (cid:3) 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

25 

Fig. 22.  Decomposing method for the calculation of overall view factor ϒ
factor from the sphere to one of the right-angled triangles of the interface [78] . 

ij between particles i and j : (a) view factor from a sphere to the polygonal interface and (b) view 

where,  F 
j (cid:3)  is  the  view  factor  between  the  two  coaxial  circular 
i (cid:3) 
planes, i.e. A (cid:3) 

j , and calculated by, 

i and A (cid:3) 
" 

⎛ 

⎞ 
2 
4 r (cid:3) 
⎠ 
j 
2 
r (cid:3) 
i 

F i (cid:3) 

j (cid:3) = 

1 
⎝ z −
2 

z 2 −

where, 

z = 1 + 

2 
4 r (cid:3) 
j 
2 
r (cid:3) 
i 

+ 

l 2 
j (cid:3) 
i (cid:3) 
2 
r (cid:3) 
i 

(101) 

(102) 

j (cid:3)  is  the  vertical  distance  between  surfaces  A (cid:3) 
l 
i (cid:3) 
j cos θ
ij − r 
j (cid:3)  = l 
l 
i (cid:3) 
are the radius of A (cid:3) 
i and A (cid:3) 
are obtained by, 

im and r (cid:3) 
i sin θ
j , respectively. The angles θ
(cid:9)

im − r 

jm . r (cid:3) 

i cos θ

i = r 

i  and  A (cid:3) 
j  and 
j sin θ
j = r 
jm 
im and θ

jm 

(cid:8)
−1 

θim = cos 

(cid:8)
−1 

θ jm = cos 

1 − (cid:17)α2 
2 δimax 

− (cid:17)α

, 

1 − (cid:17)α2 
2 ( δimax + (cid:17)α) 

+ (cid:17)α

(cid:9)

(103) 

The  calculation  of  parameters  (cid:17)α and  δ

imax  is  given  in 

Eq. (35) and (37) , respectively. 

Likewise, as the above method by Chen et al. [49] is based on 
the properties of each particle, the method can be applied to sys- 
tems of polydisperse particles. 

Long-range radiation.  At this scale, a particle exchanges radiative 
heat with all other particles in the bed. This, of course, is the most 
accurate solution as the thermal radiation heat transfer between 
any pair of particles or between any particle and reactor walls is 
considered. However, it is computationally impossible, and often 
unnecessary, to consider all of the radiation activities occurring in 
the bed. For two particles with a large distance in between, due to 
blockages, the actual amount of radiative heat transfer is negligible. 
Statistically in a packed bed, as shown in Fig. 23 , the view factor 
for all Voronoi neighbours occupies 83.43%. When taking into ac- 
count the radiative heat exchange with the peripheral two or three 

layers of particles, the averagely cumulative sum of view factor in- 
creases to 98.69% or 99.91%, respectively [78] . Therefore, it suﬃces 
to consider the radiative heat transfer between a particle and the 
particles that reside within its peripheral three layers. Also, such 
information lends theoretical support for reasonably selecting the 
size of the enclosure domain in the continuum approach, as dis- 
cussed above. 

In an extremely  dilute system where it can be assumed that 
there is no blockage between a pair of particles, the analytical so- 
lution of the overall view factor between two unit spheres is ex- 
pressed by Tanaka [176] as, 
2 η − sin ( 2 η) 
(cid:10) 
¯l 2 − 4 cos 2 ( η) 

sin ( 2 η) dη ¯l ≥ 2 

1 
π ¯l 

(cid:5)  π
2 

(104) 

ϒ = 

0 

where η is  the  angle  between  the  normal  to  an  elemental  area 
and a line connecting this elemental area to another.  ¯l is the nor- 
malised  distance  between  the  centroids  of  two  spheres  by  the 
sphere radius ( ¯l = l/ r p ). When  ¯l < 2 , i.e., the two particles are in 
physical contact, the solution is deduced to, 

ϒ = 

2 η − sin ( 2 η) 
(cid:10) 
¯l 2 − 4 cos 2 ( η) 

sin ( 2 η) dη

(cid:13)
¯l 2 
4 

(cid:3)
π ¯l 

+ 

(cid:5)  π
2 

4 
(cid:4)
2 + ¯l 
(cid:3)
¯l 2 
16 

(cid:11)
cos −1 
(cid:4)
¯l − 2 

¯l < 2 

(105) 

In  a  packed  or  dense  ﬂuidised  bed,  there  are  more  or  fewer 
blockages between a pair of particles. In such cases, methods in- 
cluding adaptive integration [83] , Monte Carlo [80–82] , and Tanaka 
integral [79] were often used to calculate the view factors. As being 
highly  executable  with  parallelisation  algorithms  of  multithread- 
ing and graphics processing unit (GPU), the Monte Carlo method 
using ray tracing becomes increasingly popular in the calculation 
of view factors in complex three-dimensional geometries [78 , 81] . 
However, for moving particle systems where view factors must be 
updated frequently, the Monte Carlo method entails a long simula- 
tion turnaround time, thus might not be applicable. 

Recently, Forgber and Radl [84] proposed an eﬃcient method to 
calculate the view factors for particle-laden systems. This method 

26 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Fig. 23.  View factor distribution around a given particle (coloured in white) (a) and quantitative description of the view factor as a function of distance (b). Reprinted from 
Ref. [78] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 24.  Schematic of calculation of view factors by Forgber and Radl’s method. Reprinted from Ref. [84] with permission of Elsevier. 

is based upon the particle-particle solid angle ϕ, as illustrated in 
Fig. 24 , calculated by, 

sin ( ϕ i − j ) = 

r j 
l i j 

= 

r j 
r j S i − j + r i + r j 

(106) 

j )/ r 

i − r 

ij − r 

i − j = ( l 

i − j is the normalised particle-particle surface distance and 
where S 
apparently S 
j . Firstly, the surface of the particle 
of interest is divided into a number of discrete points in an area- 
equally manner. The criterion to consider a point at the surface of 
particle i that interacts with a neighbouring particle j is: the dis- 
tance from the point to the centre-to-centre vector is smaller than 
a maximum permissible normal distance l max , which is calculated 
by, 
l max = sin ϕ 
(107) 
where  ϕ∗
i − j + 
is 
i − j .  The  algorithm  is  applied  to  all  particles  sur- 
0 . 03407 e 
rounding particle i and more importantly, the regions shadowed by 
other particles can also be considered. Once the total number of 
points ( N 
j ) that are identiﬁed as being interacting with particle j , 
the overall view factor between particles i and j is determined as, 

solid  angle,  ϕ ∗ = ϕ 

corrected 

−1 . 965 S 

∗r i 

the 

ϒi j = 

N j 
N p 

(108) 

Microscopic  radiation.  For  particle  material  with  the  ﬁnite  heat 
conductivity and χ < 10, the effect of particle surface tempera- 
ture  non-uniformity  on  the  thermal  radiation  between  two  par- 
ticles should be considered [78 , 144 , 151] . To this end, the micro- 
scopic model can be applied in which the particle surface is evenly 
divided into a number of planar elements and each element is con- 
sidered as an isothermal surface.  The radiative heat transfer be- 
tween  two  particles  is  then  calculated  as  the  sum  of  those  be- 
tween radiatively interacting pairs of surface elements of the two 
particles. The radiative heat transfer between two surface elements 
is calculated by Eq. (94) but using the values of parameters asso- 
ciated with each surface element including surface area, emissiv- 
ity and view factor. The view factor between two surface elements 
may be treated as the value from a surface element to the neigh- 
bouring spheres [78] . 

Clearly, as the number of surface elements increases, the ther- 
mal radiation between two particles resolved by the microscopic 
radiation model asymptotically approaches its analytical solution. 
However, the application of the microscopic radiation model to an 
actual  thermal/reacting  process  that  involves  a  large  number  of 
particles is undoubtedly impractical as the execution of the model 
is prohibitively computational demanding. 

where N p is the total points discretising the surface of particle i . 

3.3.3. Discussion on the radiant models of different scales 

To save computational time, the position of each point at the 
particle surface is calculated once and stored. The transient posi- 
tion of each point at a time step is obtained by a simple transla- 
tional transformation in the inertial frame of reference. 

Some important variables including the effective thermal con- 
ductivity  of  radiation  and  the  dimensionless  radiation  exchange 
factor were often employed in industry to describe and evaluate 
the thermal radiation characteristics of a thermal/reacting system. 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

27 

Fig. 25.  Comparison of different models for calculating the effective thermal conductivity of radiation in a packed bed of graphite pebbles ( ε p = 0.8 and k s (cid:5) k r ): (a) 
short-range radiation model and (b) long-range radiation model. Adapted from Ref. [78] with permission of Elsevier. 

The effective thermal conductivity of radiation of a packed bed re- 
actor is deﬁned as, 

k r = 

Q 
rad 
2 π H(cid:17)T 

ln 

r out 
r in 

(109) 

rad , H and (cid:17)T are the heating power of the inner wall, the 
where Q 
height of the packed bed and the temperature difference between 
the hot and cold walls, respectively. r out and r 
in are the outer and 
inner radii of the packed bed reactor, respectively. 

The predicted k r of a packed bed of graphite pebbles using the 
short-range and long-range radiation models are compared against 
those predicted using existing correlations by Kunii&Smith [170] , 
Zehner, Bauer and Schlünder (ZBS) [177 , 178] and Schotte [179] , as 
shown in Fig. 25 . The short-range radiation model signiﬁcantly un- 
derpredicts k r for temperatures higher than 10 0 0 ◦C, whereas the 
long-range  radiation  model  generates  values  of  k r  that  perfectly 
match the predicted results using the ZBS correlation for tempera- 
tures up to 30 0 0 ◦C. The results generally indicate that the short- 
range  radiation  model  does  not  suit  for  modelling  processes  of 
high temperatures ( ≥ 10 0 0 ◦C) as it only considers the thermal ra- 
diation amongst neighbouring particles. On the contrary, the long- 
range  radiation  model  provides  accurate  results  of  thermal  radi- 
ation  for processes of  high temperatures due  to  the full  consid- 
eration of view factors. However, it should be noted that for the 
case examined in Fig. 25 , the thermal conductivity of particle ma- 
terial ( k s ) is far greater than k r (i.e. k s (cid:5) k r ) and the assumption of 
uniform temperature distribution on the particle surface holds. For 
cases where the condition k s (cid:5) k r is not met, due care is required 
when applying the long-range radiation model, as detailed next. 

Fig. 26 shows the comparison between the predicted total effec- 
tive thermal conductivity employing different models of radiation 
and the experimental data of Rousseau et al. [160] obtained in a 
non-nuclear High Temperature Test Unit (HTTU). In HTTU, the nat- 
ural convection through the packed bed can be neglected, hence 
the  total  effective  thermal  conductivity  ( k e )  is  the  sum  of  ther- 
mal conductivities of radiation and conduction (i.e. k e = k r + k c ). 
It should be noted that k c remains almost constant (about 2W/(m 
•  K))  at  different  tem peratures  in  HTTU,  thus  the  variation  of 
k e  reﬂects that of k r . Clearly, the microscopic model provides re- 
sults that are in good agreement with the experimental data and 
those predicted using the ZBS correlation [177 , 178] . This is because 
the microscopic model can be seen as a quasi-analytical solution of 
the radiative heat transfer between two particles. 

Fig. 26.  Comparison of different models for calculating the radiative heat transfer. 
Adapted from Ref. [78] with permission of Elsevier. 

Interestingly, the short-range model generates results that best 
match the experimental data, whereas the long-range model sig- 
niﬁcantly overestimates k e . As discussed above, the long-range ra- 
diation  model  applies  when  the  assumption  of  uniform  particle 
surface temperature is valid, i.e., when χ > 10 or k s (cid:5) k r . However, 
in the experiments of Rousseau et al. [160] , the thermal conduc- 
tivity of particle material is ﬁnite, varying with the temperature. 
Therefore, the condition of k s (cid:5) k r or χ > 10 is not satisﬁed. As a 
result, the assumed uniform temperature on the particle surface in 
the long-range radiation model leads to the overestimated energy 
exchange and hence a greater k e . The results imply that though the 
long-range model accurately calculates the view factors, the model 
requires further modiﬁcations for cases with k s ~ O ( k r ) or χ < 10, 
probably by taking into account the temperature non-uniformity 
on the particle surface. 

The short-range model underestimates the view factors, which 
however counterbalances the overestimation of solid thermal con- 
ductivity and hence the conductive heat transfer to some extent. 

28 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Consequently,  the  short-range  model  provides  an  improved  pre- 
diction of k e and hence the best agreement with the experimental 
data [160] . Wu et al. [78] further conﬁrmed that for cases when 
k s ~ O ( k r ) or χ < 10, the short-range radiation model is the prefer- 
able choice for predicting the overall heat transfer of the system 
when  the  operating  temperature  is  not  higher  than  1215 ◦C .  In 
addition,  the  short-range  model  is  more  computationally  viable, 
as  opposed  to  the  microscopic  radiation  model.  Therefore,  the 
short-range radiation model is recommended by Wu et al. [78] for 
predicting  the  overall  heat  transfer  in  practical  particle-laden 
systems with k s ~ O ( k r ) and T ≤ 1215 ◦C . 

4. Other important aspects relating to the model development 

4.1. Treatment of temperature distribution of a particle 

4.1.1. Intraparticle temperature distribution 

In the majority of previous studies, the lumped capacitance ap- 
proximation  that  assumes  a  homogeneous  temperature  distribu- 
tion throughout each solid particle was often deployed. As clariﬁed 
above, this simpliﬁcation is only valid for thermally thin particles 
that have a small Biot number ( Bi = h /( k s / d p ) < 0.1) and a large 
Fourier number ( F o = αs t/d 2 
p > 0 . 1 ), achieved by choosing materi- 
als with the high thermal conductivity and/or a small particle size. 
For cases with a large Bi and a small Fo , intraparticle temperature 
distribution  should  be  considered.  Moreover,  as  Bi  measures  the 
relative importance of convective and conductive heat transfer, a 
value of Bi < 0.1 suggests that the intraparticle heat transfer re- 
sistance is negligible compared to the external resistance around 
the particle. Therefore, it seems reasonable to consider a uniform 
temperature distribution inside the particle with a low Bi . How- 
ever,  it  is  not  practically  sensible  to  satisfy  the  above  two  con- 
ditions  simultaneously  in  some  scenarios,  e.g.,  during  the  initial 
heating/cooling even for small particles [86] . Therefore, the com- 
monly  applied  assumption  of  uniform  intraparticle  temperature 
(i.e., lumped heat capacity model) is not justiﬁed in such cases, and 
the intraparticle temperature distribution should be considered for 
the sake of high-quality predictions. 

Gan et al. [88 , 89] conducted the pioneering DEM-based simu- 
lations to track the sedimentation of melting solid particles in an 
upward-ﬂowing warm ﬂuid. Steps forward from the model of Gan 
et  al.  [88 , 89]  were  carried  out  by  Brosh  and  Levy[86],  Laguerre 
et al. [180] , Rickelt t al. [148] , Sadhukhan et al. [181] , Dierich et al. 
[87] and Mahmoudi et al. [182] , who however mainly applied the 
1D  radial  temperature  distribution  model.  Due  to  computational 
overhead,  the  3D  model  of  intraparticle  heat  transfer  was  often 
limited to single particle scale before 2013 (e.g. [97 , 183–186] ). 

Terreros et al. [187] conducted the ﬁrst study of integrating the 
3D resolved heat transfer in a Cartesian formulation into DEM and 
validated the predicted results against FEM-investigations. Subse- 
quently, the DEM-based models incorporating the 3D interparticle 
heat transfer model have been applied for modelling various ther- 
mal particulate systems. For example, Sudbrock et al. [96] fully re- 
solved the 3D temperature distribution inside individual particles 
and  conducted  CFD-DEM  modelling  for  convective  drying  of  sil- 
ica gel and beech wood spheres in mechanically agitated beds. Os- 
chmann and Kruggel-Emden and their colleagues [90–92] recently 
applied the 3D model of intraparticle heat transfer into their CFD- 
DEM  framework to  investigate heat  transfer in packed beds and 
speciﬁcally examine the importance of fully resolved intraparticle 
temperature distribution for thermally thick particle materials. 

Generally,  in  the  1D  model  of  intraparticle  heat  transfer,  the 
partial differential equation (PDE) along the radial direction of a 
spherical particle is expressed by, 
∂ 2 T 
∂ r 2 

(cid:8)
= k s 

∂ k s 
∂r 

∂T 
∂r 

∂T 
∂r 

∂T 
∂t 

ρs c ps 

+  ˙ q V 

(110) 

2 
r 

+ 

+ 

(cid:9)

where,  ˙ q V  ( W/ m 3 ) is the heat source within the particle. For cases 
where  the  particle  properties  ( ρs ,  c ps  and  k s )  are  constant  and 
˙ q V = 0 , an analytical solution is available for Eq. (110) . However, 
a numerical solution must be resorted to simulate processes in- 
volving mass transfer and chemical reactions [148] . In such cases 
Eq.  (110)  is  often  solved  by  a  ﬁnite  difference  (FD)  method,  e.g. 
Crank–Nicolson method. 

The boundary conditions at the particle centre (i.e., r = 0) and 

at the particle surface (i.e., r = R ) for the above PDE are, 

∂T 
∂t 

k s 

∂T 
∂t 

k s 

= 0 

r=0 

= h ( T ∞ − T R ) 

r= R 

(111) 

(112) 

where the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient h was often calcu- 
lated using the Nusselt correlation as reviewed in Section 3.2.1 , e.g. 
by the correlation of Gnielinski [148 , 188] . 

In the 3D model of intraparticle heat transfer with constant par- 
ticle properties and no internal heat generation, the temperature 
ﬁeld is solved by [93] , 
∂ 2 T 
∂ x 2 

∂ 2 T 
∂ y 2 

∂ 2 T 
∂ z 2 

∂T 
∂t 

(113) 

+ 

= 

+ 

1 
αs 

It should be noted Eq. (113) is applicable to both spherical and 
non-spherical particles. However, a staircase shaped particle sur- 
face is yielded for spherical particles when using the formulation 
in the Cartesian coordinates and a correction to the particle sur- 
face is required. For this reason, the intraparticle temperature dis- 
tribution is often resolved under the spherical coordinates and ex- 
pressed as [91 , 93] , 

∂T 
∂t 

1 
αs 

= 

∂ 2 T 
∂ r 2 

+ 

∂T 
∂r 

1 
r 

+ 

1 
r 2 sin θ

∂ 
∂θ

(cid:8)

sin θ

(cid:9)

∂T 
∂θ

+ 

1 
r 2 sin 2 θ

∂ 2 T 
∂ ϕ 2 

(114) 
where r , θ and ϕ are the coordinates inside the particle along the 
radial, polar and azimuthal directions, respectively. Eqs. (113) and 
(114) can be solved through an implicit FD method. 

Oschmann et al. [92] resolved the intraparticle temperature dis- 
tribution to examine the evolution of temperature inside the parti- 
cles when a hot particle (600 K) came into contact with a cold par- 
ticle (300 K). Three different particle materials were used, namely, 
glass, steel and aluminium with the thermal conductivity of 1.4, 
14.9 and 903 W/(m • K), respectively. Fig. 27 shows the temper- 
ature evolution for the three particle materials. The temperature 
of the hot particle (on the left-hand side) is not shown to stand 
out the temperature change inside the cold particle. The resolved 
temperature distribution using Eq. (114) by the FD method (scat- 
tered squares) is shown atop of the predicted results (continuous 
contour) using the Finite Volume Method (FVM) based on the CFD- 
package ANSYS Fluent. It can be seen under the same conditions, 
the temperature inside the aluminium particle that has the largest 
thermal conductivity changes the fastest and becomes almost uni- 
form in a short time of 100 s. However, for the thermally thick par- 
ticle materials (glass and steel), signiﬁcant temperature gradients 
(or  extremely  non-uniform  temperature  distribution)  are  present 
inside the particle even after a time of 500 s. 

A  follow-up  study  was  conducted  by  Oschmann  &  Kruggel- 
Emden  [90]  in  which  the  temperature  distribution  inside  solid 
particles in a packed bed is fully resolved. The detailed evolution 
of the average temperature at the particle surface and that at the 
particle core are shown in Fig. 28 . Three representative materials, 
namely aluminium, wood and polyoxymethylene (POM) were used. 
Wood and POM are selected as the typical thermally thick mate- 
rial. These two materials have the same thermal conductivity and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

29 

Fig. 27.  Temperature evolutions calculated by the FD method using 20,482 nodes in DEM simulations and by FVM using 192,0 0 0 cells in ANSYS Fluent for two spheres in 
contact. Values of the hot (left) particle are blanked to stand out the temperature evolution in the cold (right) particle. FD nodes are represented by scattered squares and 
FVM results are shown as the contour plot. Reprinted from Ref. [92] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 28.  Temperature distribution for different materials: (a) evolution of particle surface temperature and particle core temperature for aluminium, wood and POM. (b) 
comparison of surface and core temperatures at t = 90 s for one representative aluminium particle and one POM particle. Reprinted from Ref. [90] with permission of 
Springer Nature. 

speciﬁc heat capacity and hence the same Bi ( = 23.5), but different 
densities, i.e., the density of wood is half that of POM. Aluminium 
represents  the  thermally  thin  material  with  Bi  =  3.21  × 10 −3 
[90] . For the thermally thick material (wood or POM) the temper- 
ature at the particle surface is signiﬁcantly higher than the core 
temperature through the entire heating process (250 s). However, 
for  the  thermally  thin  material  (aluminium)  the  particle  surface 
temperature  and  core  temperature  are  the  same  since  the  very 

beginning  of  the  heating  process.  This  result  justiﬁes  that  the 
assumption of uniform intraparticle temperature distribution (i.e., 
lumped heat capacity model) holds only for thermally thin materi- 
als ( Bi < 0.1). Further, as also critically shown in Fig. 28 (b) for the 
thermally thick material (e.g., POM), the temperature distribution 
over the particle surface is extremely non-uniform, which needs 
to  be  carefully  treated  in  the  model,  as  detailed  in  the  next 
section. 

30 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Sudbrock et al. [96] numerically investigated the drying process 
of  silica  gel  and  beech  wood  using  two  models:  i)  a  1D  model 
that solves the radial temperature distribution inside the particle 
( Eq. (110) ) with a uniform convective ﬂux on the particle surface 
and ii) a 3D model that fully resolves the spatial distribution of 
temperature inside the particle ( Eq. (114) ) with a nonuniform con- 
vective ﬂux on the particle surface ( Eq. (117) ). In the 3D model, 
the material anisotropy of beach wood was considered by employ- 
ing the anisotropic thermal conductivity inside the particles, whilst 
the isotropic thermal conductivity was used for silica gel particles. 
It can be seen from Fig. 30 for silica gel ( k s ≈ 1.4 W/(m • K)) no 
appreciable difference in the predicted results is noticed when us- 
ing a uniform or nonuniform convective ﬂux at the particle surface, 
either of which agrees with the experimental data. However, for 
beechwood ( k s ≈ 0.08 W/(m • K)) the 3D model that considers the 
nonuniform convective ﬂux at the particle surface clearly provides 
a  better  agreement  with  the  experimental  data  in  terms  of  the 
evolutional trend of drying rate, as opposed to the 1D model. The 
discrepancy  between  the  predicted  results  of  the  3D  model  and 
the experimental data was attributed to the poor representation 
of the material anisotropy of beech wood particles in the model, 
the ignored particle shrinkage process, and the ignored evapora- 
tion process of the liquid ﬁlm that was initially attached to the 
beechwood in the experiments [96] . However, the results indicate 
that inclusion of the non-uniform surface temperature distribution 
for  thermally  thick  particles  is  necessary  for  achieving  accurate 
predicted results. 

4.2. Thermal wall boundary conditions 

Three  classical  thermal  boundary  conditions  are  available  in 
DEM-based simulations for heat transfer: (i) constant wall temper- 
ature (i.e. Dirichlet condition); (ii) constant wall ﬂux (i.e. Neumann 
condition); and (iii) a linear combination of the above two condi- 
tions (i.e. Robin or mixed condition). In DEM-based simulations of 
particulate ﬂows, the wall is often set at a constant temperature or 
as adiabatic (with zero heat ﬂux). However, the important role of 
two aspects associated with wall boundaries: (i) temperature pro- 
ﬁle within the wall and (ii) constant heat ﬂux on the wall, in deter- 
mining the prediction accuracy of thermal DEM-based simulations 
has been identiﬁed in the literature. 

4.2.1. Temperature proﬁle within the wall 

In  the  majority  of  previous  studies,  despite  the  consideration 
of  particle-wall  conductive  heat  transfer,  the  description  of  heat 
transfer  within  the  wall  is  often  overlooked,  i.e.,  using  a  con- 
stant temperature on the wall boundaries. However, Oschmann and 
Kruggel-Emden [90] reported large deviations between simulations 
and experiments for materials that have a high thermal conduc- 
tivity (thermally thin materials). They emphasised that the CFD- 
DEM  framework  must  be  extended  to  consider  the  particle-wall 
heat transfer coupling algorithm. To this end, the particles and the 
wall are discretised into a number of cell elements, as illustrated 
in Fig. 31 . For the cell at the particle surface that is thermally in- 
teracting with the wall, the Neumann boundary condition (second 
kind) applies, 
∂T 
k 
∂s 

(118) 

= 

Q i j 
A N 

where A N  is the particle cell surface area that is contacting with 
ij is the amount of heat transferred between the particle 
the wall. Q 
surface cell and the wall, calculated using the conduction thermal 
models discussed in Section 3.1.1 . 

Fig. 29.  Correction on the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient for non-uniform tem- 
perature distribution on the particle surface. The ﬂuid passing the CFD cell (cell is 
larger than the particle) is represented by one ﬂuid velocity vector v (cid:25) 
f T is the tem- 
perature at the surface point of interest and ψ is the angle of the surface point 
towards the point of stagnation. 

4.1.2. Particle surface temperature distribution 

In a packed or ﬂuidised bed, due to the spatial heterogeneity of 
temperature distribution, the local ﬂuid temperature surrounding 
individual particles is different. Moreover, as indicated in Fig. 28 (b) 
for thermally thick particle materials, the temperature distribution 
at their own surface is not uniform. Therefore, the heat transfer 
coeﬃcient on the particle surface is not constant. However, in con- 
ventional CFD-DEM simulations, the computational cell size is of- 
ten several times larger than the particle size. As a result, the tem- 
perature distribution in a computational cell, thus on the particle 
surface,  is  not  resolved.  For  this  reason,  a  uniform  particle  sur- 
face temperature is often assumed in previous CFD-DEM simula- 
tions which however is valid only when the heat transfer resis- 
tance inside the particle is signiﬁcantly smaller than the resistance 
amongst the particles [30 , 90 , 91 , 94–96] , that is, 

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

Bi = 

h 
k s / d p 

or  = 

H c 
k s A/r 

= 

H c 
k s π r 

= 

2 
π

r c 
r p 

< 0 . 1 

(115) 

where  h  is  the  convective  heat  transfer  coeﬃcient  (described  in 
Section 3.2.1 ) when there is a ﬂow around the particle, and H c is 
the thermal conductance (calculated by Eq. (40) ) if the ﬂuid be- 
tween the particles is stagnant. 

Signiﬁcant effort s have been made towards quantifying the het- 
erogeneous  heat  transfer  on  the  surface  of  thermally  thick  par- 
ticles.  A  correlated  distribution  function  [91 , 96]  obtained  jointly 
by  experimental  measurements  [94 , 95]  and  numerical  studies 
[97] was proposed to describe the variation of temperature on the 
particle surface, which is expressed by, 
f ( ψ ) = 2 . 1098 + 0 . 208 ψ − 1 . 018 ψ 2 + 0 . 2552 ψ 3 
(116) 
where ψ  is the angle between the connecting line of the stagna- 
tion point and the particle centroid and the connecting line be- 
tween the point of interest and the particle centroid, as depicted 
in Fig. 29 . 

Subsequently,  the  local  convective  heat  transfer  coeﬃcient  at 

the particle surface is, 
¯h = f ( ψ ) h 

(117) 

where h is the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient calculated con- 
ventionally  in  Section  3.2.1  for  particles  with  a  constant  surface 
temperature. 

Recently,  Oschmann  and  Kruggel-Emden  [91]  speciﬁcally  in- 
vestigated the  particle-wall heat  transfer in their CFD-DEM  sim- 
ulations. The temperature distribution inside a stationary wall is 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

31 

Fig. 30.  Comparison of the drying rate in experiments and simulations: (a) motionless silica gel; (b) agitated silica gel; (c) motionless beech wood; and (d) agitated beech 
wood. Adapted from Ref. [96] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

solved through the energy transport equation in the solid region, 

∂ 
∂t 

( ρ

wall h 

wall ) = ∇ ( k 

wall ∇ T 

wall ) + S 
h 

(119) 

wall ,  k 

wall  and  T 

wall  are  the  enthalpy,  thermal  conductiv- 
where  h 
ij / V C rep- 
ity and temperature inside the wall, respectively. S 
resents the volumetric energy source term in each computational 
cell. 

h = Q 

Oschmann and Kruggel-Emden [91] simulated the heat transfer 
mf < 0.6) through the cold 
when the hot gas (100 °C) ﬂows ( U g / U 
packed particles (25 °C) using models with and without consider- 
ing the heat transfer within the wall. Two different particle ma- 
terials, namely aluminium and POM were used, representing ther- 
mally thin and thermally thick materials, respectively. The temper- 
ature  distribution  within  the  particle  was  fully  resolved  through 
the 3D intraparticle heat transfer model, as described above, thus 
the non-uniform temperature distribution on the particle surface 
is considered. The predicted temperature distributions of particles 
that reside at the packed bed surface behind the aluminium oxide 
wall are shown in Fig. 32 for the two particle materials. Notice- 
able differences ( Fig. 32 (a)) are observed for Aluminium (thermally 
thin material) between the predicted results using the model with- 
out considering the wall heat transfer (WHT) and the experimen- 
tal data captured using an infrared camera. Speciﬁcally, the con- 
tact area between solid particles and the bed walls exhibits strong 
cooling with a much lower particle temperature in the experiment. 
By contrast, after incorporating WHT, the predicted results show 
reasonably good agreements with the experimental measurements. 
However, for POM (thermally thick material) that has a low ther- 
mal conductivity, there is not a signiﬁcant improvement of the pre- 
dicted results after incorporating WHT. 

Fig. 33 shows the quantitative evolution of the average temper- 
ature of all these surface particles, as indicated in the sub-ﬁgures 
(b)  and  (d)  for  POM  and  aluminium,  respectively.  Clearly,  for 
POM,  exclusion  of  WHT  has  a  marginal  effect  on  the  predicted 

Fig. 31.  Particle-wall heat transfer with the temperature proﬁles within each body 
resolved. 

32 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Fig. 32.  Comparison of surface temperatures of a packed bed between DEM-based simulations and experiments (measured by an infrared camera) at three different instants 
for aluminium and POM. Reprinted from Ref. [91] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 33.  Comparison of the evolution of the average temperature of bed surface particles between DEM-based simulations and experiments for POM and aluminium. The 
subplots (b) and (d) indicate the data shown in (a) and (c) are extracted from the bed surface particles for POM and Aluminium, respectively. Dotted green lines are the 
minimum and maximum experimental values and the solid green line is the mean experimental value. Reprinted from Ref. [91] with permission of Elsevier. 

results.  However,  for  aluminium,  the  model  without  consider- 
ing  WHT  signiﬁcantly  overpredict  the  particle  temperature  (by 
~ 35%). Therefore, for thermally thin material with Bi < 0.1, it is 
recommended to consider the WHT in the DEM-based simulations. 

4.2.2. Constant heat ﬂux at the wall 

Despite the successful applications of constant wall temperature 
in DEM-based simulations, Lattanzi and Hrenya [98] claimed that 
the boundary condition of constant heat ﬂux at the wall is more 
practical and more accurate for the following reasons: 

• Impact of heat generation from combustion, reactions, and/or 
solar heating, on the system thermodynamic performance can 
be more accurately considered using a constant heat ﬂux at the 
boundary; 

• Temperature resolution inside the wall plays a critical role in 
evaluating the mechanical stresses and selection of construction 
materials for a given set of operating conditions; 

• Such a boundary condition yields the proﬁles of wall tempera- 
ture and the temperature of each phase that vary in both time 
and space, thus for potential ‘‘hot spots” to be identiﬁed. 

However, the implementation of a constant heat ﬂux at the wall 
in the framework of DEM-based models is not straightforward. Lat- 
tanzi  and  Hrenya  [98]  extended  the  conventional  thermal  CFD- 
DEM framework to include a boundary condition where the heat 
ﬂux varies in both space and time for the solid and ﬂuid phases. 
The main mechanism underlying their boundary treatment is that 

the total heat ﬂux to the ﬂuid-solid mixture remains constant. The 
main assumptions of this new boundary condition are: i) all phases 
experience the same local wall temperature and ii) heat transfer to 
each phase occurs in parallel. The total heat ﬂux at the wall can be 
written, 
(cid:3)(cid:3) 
(cid:3)(cid:3) 
(cid:3)(cid:3) 
s ( x , t ) 
f ( x , t ) + q 
w = q 
q 

(120) 

To recast the heat ﬂux obtained in DEM for individual particles 
into the locally averaged value in each CFD cell, the heat ﬂux to 
the solid phase in a CFD cell adjacent to the wall boundary is cal- 
culated as the averaged value of those to all particles contained in 
the cell over a CFD time step, expressed as, 
N DEM (cid:2) 

n 
j (cid:2) 

(cid:3)(cid:3) 
s ( x , t ) = 
q 

1 
N DEM A W 

j=1 

i =1 

H s,i ( T w − T i ) 

(121) 

where N DEM is the solid time steps within a continuum time step; 
j  and A W  are the number of particles and the area of the CFD 
n 
s,i is the total particle-wall 
cell adjacent to the wall, respectively. H 
heat transfer coeﬃcient for particle i and H 
pfw,i , as 
detailed in Section 3.1.1 . The ﬂuid heat ﬂux is computed based on 
the continuum assumption and for a CFD cell it is expressed as, 
(cid:3)(cid:3) 
f ( x , t ) = −ε 
q 
Substituting Eqs. (121) and (122) into (120) , after spatial dis- 

pw.i  + h 

s,i  = h 

f ∇ T 
f 

(122) 

f k 

cretization, leads to, 
∂ T 
f 
∂n 

+ H w ( x , t ) T 

f = C ( x , t ) 

(123) 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

33 

Fig. 34.  Predicted results with the new boundary condition: (a) wall ﬂux obtained using the new BC that is averaged over the right wall and compared to the imposed wall 
ﬂux as a function of time and (b) simulated heat ﬂux data for the wall, solids, and gas along the column height at steady state (simulation time = 1 s). Adapted from Ref. 
[98] with permission of Elsevier. 

, C = 

q (cid:3)(cid:3) 
ε t 
f,k −1 k t 

w + B t 
f,k −1 

, A = 

f,k −1 

N DEM (cid:2) 

n 
j (cid:2) 

j=1 

i =1 

H s,i 
, 
N DEM A c 

where, 

H w = 

A t 
ε t 
f,k −1 k t 
n 
j (cid:2) 

N DEM (cid:2) 

B = 

j=1 

i =1 

H s,i 
N DEM A c 

T i 

(124) 

Therefore, the wall boundary condition with the constant ﬂux 

is formulated as a Robin BC. 

Lattanzi and Hrenya [98] applied the new boundary condition 
to simulate the heat transfer between falling particles and the hot 
gas in a heat exchanger. The averaged heat ﬂux at the wall was 
monitored  and  compared  against  the  imposed  value  that  was  a 
linear ramp, as shown in Fig. 34 (a). It can be seen the monitored 
wall heat ﬂux obtained using the new BC excellently agrees with 
the imposed value. Also, the local heat ﬂuxes of the solid and gas 
phases were extracted along the height of the wall after the sys- 
tem has reached the steady-state, as shown in Fig. 34 (b). Despite 
the ﬂuctuations, the total heat ﬂux that is the sum of heat ﬂuxes 
from the solid and gas phases remains almost constant at the wall 
(with subtle ﬂuctuations). Therefore, this new boundary condition 
is realised by imposing a constant total wall heat ﬂux, whilst al- 
lowing the heat ﬂux to each phase to vary with both space and 
time. 

5. Further discussion 

5.1. Heat transfer modelling in previous DEM-based simulations 

Major  previous  DEM-based  simulations,  in  particular  CFD- 
DEM  simulations,  that  involve  heat  transfer  have  been  re- 
viewed  [10 , 35 , 36 , 42–44 ,  4 9–51 , 66–6 8 , 70–74 , 84–86 , 90–92 , 96 , 98–
100 , 119 , 120 , 137 , 141 , 144–146 , 148 , 150–152 ,  154 , 189–192]  (as  listed 
in  Table  S2  of  the  Supplementary  Material).  Zhu  et  al.  [101]  re- 
ported that the number of publications using DEM to simulate the 
particulate ﬂows booms around 20 0 0. The review indicates heat 
transfer modelling of thermal particulate systems using DEM-based 
models  becomes  popular  only  after  2015,  reﬂected  by  the  large 
number of annual publications. The majority of the applications are 
in packed bed reactors, ﬂuidised bed reactors and rotating drum 
reactors, speciﬁcally in thermal/reacting systems including drying, 
mixing,  pneumatic  conveying,  ironmaking  blast  furnace  and  cat- 
alytic reaction. 

The quasi-analytical solution by Batchelor and Brien [38] proves 
classic and remains the main (or even the only) method to solv- 
ing  the  conduction  of  static  contacts.  Batchelor  and  Brien  [38] ’s 
method was applied in almost every study except those in which 
the  conduction  through  static  contacts  was  not  considered.  The 
conduction through collisional contacts was solved mainly based 
on the model ( Eq. (46) ) by Zhou et al. [41] . The conduction heat 
transfer through interstitial ﬂuid between particles is considered 
f  < 100 holds in most of 
in the majority of these studies as k s / k 
these studies. For simulating the conduction through the intersti- 
tial ﬂuid between particles, the surrounding layer method [45] and 
the Voronoi polyhedron-based method [47] have been most widely 
applied with the former mainly used in relatively dilute systems 
(e.g. ﬂuidised bed reactors and pneumatic conveying systems) and 
the latter mainly in dense systems (e.g. packed bed reactors and 
rotating drums). The simpliﬁed method by Vargas and McCarthy 
[50] ( Eq. (58) ) has been applied in dense particulate systems, but 
not  as  often  as  the  above  two  methods,  as  does  the  simpliﬁed 
method by Tsory et al. [51] ( Eq. (66) ). 

The  convection  heat  transfer  mechanism is  considered in  the 
majority of previous thermal DEM-based simulations. As discussed 
in Section 3.2.1 , the empirical correlations developed before 1981 
by Ranz&Marshall [53] (Eq. (73)), Gunn [61] (Eq. (76)), and Gnielin- 
ski [57 , 58] ( Eq. (59) ) remain predominant in predicting the par- 
ticulate  convection  coeﬃcient.  The  correlation  of  Li  and  Mason 
[64] (Eq. (82)) and its revised version by Al-Arkawazi[10] seems 
increasingly popular. 

Radiation was not considered in the majority of previous stud- 
ies, thus relatively has not been extensively studied compared to 
conduction and convection. Also, radiation was consistently con- 
sidered when the temperature was above 600 °C. The number of 
studies  that  solved  the  radiative  heat  transfer  using  the  model 
based on the continuum approach ( Eq. (88) ) is much more than 
that  using  the  model  based  on  the  discrete  approach  ( Eq.  (94) ). 
Compared to the continuum approach, the discrete approach that 
relies on the solution of view factors and considers the effects of 
more parameters (e.g. particle material thermal conductivity and 
local packing structure) is more accurate, but its application incurs 
signiﬁcantly more computational cost. 

The  temperature  distribution  throughout  the  particle  body 
(interior and surface) was not resolved in the majority of previous 
DEM-based  simulations,  though  thermally  thick  particles  with  a 
small k s were examined in some of these studies. Indeed, solving 
the  temperature  distribution  inside  each  particle,  particularly 
using the 3D heat transfer model, incurs more computational cost. 

34 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

Fig. 35.  Comparison of different heat transfer mechanisms. (a) T g = 100 ◦C and (b) T g = 10 0 0 ◦C and U g / U 
Sons Inc. 

mf = 5.3. Adapted from Ref. [42] with permission of John Wiley & 

However, as discussed in Section 4.1 , the temperature distribution 
inside  a  particle  and  that  on  the  particle  surface  might  be  ex- 
tremely non-uniform for thermally thick particles, which in turn 
results in different heat transfer characteristics. Therefore, eﬃcient 
models  are  needed  to  fully  resolve  the  temperature  distribution 
inside  a  particle  for  modelling  particulate  systems  involving 
thermally thick particles. 

5.2. Relative importance of different heat transfer mechanisms 

Zhou et al. [42] examined the relative importance of the three 
main  heat  transfer  mechanisms  (conduction,  convection  and  ra- 
diation) in particulate systems covering packed and ﬂuidised bed 
regimes,  as  shown  in  Fig.  35 .  For  the  case  shown  in  Fig.  35 (a), 
the  heat  transfer  coeﬃcient  (HTC)  of  radiation  is  negligible  due 
to  the  low  operating  temperature  ( T g  =  100 ◦C).  At  U g / U 
mf  =  0, 
i.e. no gas ﬂow through the bed, conduction dominates over con- 
vection. However, after starting the gas ﬂow, convection immedi- 
ately becomes signiﬁcant. The HTC of conduction remains almost 
constant before the particles are ﬂuidised due to the unchanged 
mf  ≈ 0.4, convection be- 
packing structure. Consequently, at U g / U 
comes  equally  important  as  conduction.  As  U g  increases  further, 
convection  becomes  the  dominant  heat  transfer  mechanism  and 
conduction weakens due to bed expansion and the reduced par- 
ticle  contacts.  Under  the  high  temperature  ( Fig.  35 (b)),  the  con- 
vection HTC is much greater than the conduction HTC as the sys- 
tem approaches the thermal equilibrium due to the highly ﬂuidised 
mf = 5.3). However, the role of radiation becomes no- 
regime ( U g / U 
ticeably  more  signiﬁcant  as  the  bed  temperature  increases.  The 
magnitude of radiation HTC increases at a greater rate even than 
that  of  convection  HTC,  which  implies  radiation  will  eventually 
become the dominant heat transfer mechanism for high temper- 
atures (e.g. T 

bed > 10 0 0 ◦C). 

Hou  et  al.  [70]  modelled  the  heat  transfer  between  ﬂuidised 
particles and a hot immersed tube surface. Effects of key param- 
eters  including  ﬂuidisation  gas  velocity  ( U exc  =  U g  − U 
mf ),  par- 
ticle  thermal  conductivity  and  tube  surface  temperature  on  the 
heat ﬂux were examined. The relative importance of different heat 
transfer  mechanisms  was  quantiﬁed  when  these  key  parameters 
were altered, as shown in Fig. 36 . The convection remains the most 
important heat transfer mechanism in Fig. 36 (a) and (b) due to the 
low tube surface temperature (100 ◦C) and the limited number of 
contacts between ﬂuidised particles and the tube surface. As the 
ﬂuidisation gas velocity increases ( Fig. 36 (a)), the particles are ﬂu- 
idised more and the number of particle-tube contacts decreases, 
thus the contribution from conduction decreases. As the particle 

thermal conductivity increases ( Fig. 36 (b)), the contribution from 
conduction becomes more important, yet is still a small percent- 
age ( < 20%) compared to that from convection (~80%). However, as 
the temperature of the tube surface increases ( Fig. 36 (c)), the con- 
tribution from radiation increases sharply and contributions from 
convection and conduction decrease accordingly. For the case ex- 
amined in Fig. 36 the contribution from radiation surpasses that 
from convection at T 

tube = 1350 ◦C. 

The heat exchange between particles of different materials and 
the hot tube surface was also examined under the ﬂuidisation gas 
mf = 5 [71] , as shown in Fig. 37 . As the tempera- 
velocity of U g / U 
tube = 200 ◦C) is low in Fig. 37 (a), the radiation is negligi- 
ture ( T 
ble, thus not included. It is clear that the conductive heat trans- 
fer is dominant for small, cohesive particles (Powders A and A0), 
whereas the convective heat transfer is dominant for large, non- 
cohesive particles (Powder B). This is because, under the same nor- 
malised ﬂuidised gas velocity, large and non-cohesive particles are 
ﬂuidised more leading to a more dilute system and hence fewer 
particle-tube  surface  contacts.  The  relative  importance  of  differ- 
ent  heat  transfer  mechanism  under  the  relatively  high  tempera- 
tube = 600 ◦C) is shown in Fig. 37 (b) for Powder A. Though 
ture ( T 
conduction remains the more important mechanism compared to 
convection for these small particles, radiation becomes more sig- 
niﬁcant and contribute the most to the total heat transfer at this 
high temperature. 

Generally,  conduction  hinges  on  the  local  particle  spatial  ar- 
rangements (or the number of particle contacts) and particle phys- 
ical  and  thermal  properties  (e.g.  size,  thermal  conductivity  and 
heat  capacity).  Convection  relies on  the  ﬂow  conditions  and  the 
resultant slip velocity between particles and the ﬂuid phase which 
is also determined by the local particulate structure. Radiation is 
mainly determined by the temperature and the particle spatial dis- 
tribution. Clearly, the particle spatial arrangements are crucial to 
all major heat transfer mechanisms. However, the importance of a 
speciﬁc heat transfer mechanism in a given scenario is determined 
jointly by the particle spatial distribution, ﬂow conditions and par- 
ticle/ﬂuid material properties. Therefore, a good understanding of 
the above heat transfer mechanisms and a detailed evaluation of 
the importance of each mechanism are pivotal to the development 
of a thermal DEM-based model for modelling a speciﬁc thermal 
particulate system. 

5.3. Recommendations for future work 

Based on the above discussion, it is evident that further work is 
required to improve the heat transfer sub-models for the accurate 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

35 

Fig. 36.  Relative importance of different heat transfer mechanisms as a function of: (a) ﬂuidisation velocity ( T 
conductivity ( T 
& Sons Inc. 

tube = 100 ◦C and k s = 1.1 W /( m • K )); (b) particle thermal 
tube = 100 ◦C and U exc = 0.5 m / s ); and (c) tube temperature ( U exc = 0.5 m / s and k s = 1.1 W /( m • K )). Adapted from Ref. [70] with permission of John Wiley 

Fig. 37.  Evaluation of heat exchange between ﬂuidised particles and the immersed hot tube surface at different temperatures: (a) T 
(b) T 

tube = 600 ◦C for Powder A. Reprinted from [71] with permission of Elsevier. 

tube = 200 ◦C for different powders and 

account of different heat transfer mechanisms. Speciﬁcally, future 
works recommended for the development of robust thermal DEM- 
based models are summarised as follows. 

(i) The  application  of  the  surrounding  layer  method  by  Rong 
and Horio [45] relies on a priori values of two parameters: 
i)  the  layer  thickness  δ and  ii)  the  minimum  conduction 
distance s . Previous studies indicate for relatively dilute ( φs 
≤ 0.5), dynamic particulate systems, the predicted indirect 
conduction heat transfer strongly relies on δ and is insensi- 
tive to s . Nevertheless, in dense or static particulate systems 
the predicted indirect conduction heat transfer strongly re- 
lies on s but not δ. To date, no theoretical consensuses or 
rigorous guidelines for selecting values of δ and s exist in 
the public domain. As δ is an inherent parameter resulting 
from the assumption of the method, further insight into the 
critical value of δ for different application scenarios might 
be obtained through theoretical analysis or direct numerical 
simulations. Also, further work particularly delicate experi- 
mental measurements might be required to correlate s with 
particle  surface  properties  (asperities)  and  the  background 
gas properties (e.g. mean free path and thermal accommo- 
dation coeﬃcient). 

(ii) Model A of the Voronoi polyhedron-based method by Cheng 
et  al.  [47]  has  been  successfully  applied  in  thermal  DEM- 
based  simulations  (e.g.  [8 , 41 , 42 , 70 , 71 , 91 , 92] )  where  mono- 
sized particles are assumed. For multi-sized particles, Model 
B  that  considers  all  heat  ﬂux  paths  is  deemed  capable  of 

providing  a  more  reliable  solution.  However,  Model  B  is 
valid  when  the  assumption  of  the  isothermal  core  inside 
f  >  1).  For  cases  with  k s / k 
each  particle  holds  (when  k s / k 
f 
< 1 [78] (more likely to happen in liquid-particle systems), 
work is required to address issues associated with the fail- 
ure of the assumed isothermal core in Model B. Gan et al. 
[48] modiﬁed the Model A of Cheng et al. [47] by employ- 
ing the radical tessellation and provided a good alternative 
for calculating the indirect conduction amongst multi-sized 
particles. However, signiﬁcant work is required to improve 
the model, e.g. by including more heat ﬂux paths and more 
importantly, to extensively validate the model. 

(iii) When  resolving  conduction  using  convectional  DEM-based 
models,  the  contact  radius  and  contact  time  are  signiﬁ- 
cantly overpredicted. The correction factors by Zhou-Yu-Zulli 
method  Eq.  (51)  or  (52)  [35 , 119]  only  correct  the  contact 
area and do not suﬃce to compensate for the overestimated 
heat  transfer  due  to  the  usage  of  unrealistic  particle  ma- 
terial  properties  [35] .  Indeed,  in  the  majority  of  previous 
studies,  the  correction  factor  was  often  treated  more  like 
an adjustable parameter rather than calculated based on the 
real Young’s modulus of the particle material. Morris et al. 
[43] proposed correction factors for correcting both the con- 
tact area and contact time and signiﬁcant improvements to 
the predicted results have been demonstrated. However, the 
time correction was analytically derived from Hertzian the- 
ory  by  only  considering  binary  collisions,  thus  limited  to 
dilute and moderately dense particulate systems (with the 

36 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

mean coordinate number less than 2). For dense systems ( φs 
> 0.5) in which the conductive heat transfer is only impor- 
tant  and  multi-body  collisions  and  enduring  contacts  pre- 
vail, utilising the time correction proposed by Morris et al. 
[43]  is  expected  to  underestimate  the  conduction  through 
collisional contacts. Further work is thus required to improve 
the time correction for particle laden systems. The method 
by  Patil  et  al.  [44]  is  a  step  forward  which  however  re- 
quires further elaboration in the treatment of different types 
of collisional events (e.g. rolling and rest of particle clusters 
against the wall). 

(iv) For other simpliﬁed methods including the method by Var- 
gas  and  McCarthy  [50]  and  that  by  Tsory  et  al.  [51] ,  pa- 
rameters associated with the quantiﬁcation of particle sur- 
face  topography  are  involved,  e.g.  ac  in  Eq.  (63)  and  ϑ
in  Eq.  (65) .  Future  work  particularly  delicate  experimental 
measurements is required to develop empirical correlations 
or look-up tables for providing valid values of these param- 
eters as inputs to the application of the simpliﬁed methods. 
(v) For conduction, the reviewed methods and relevant key pa- 
rameters were examined mainly for the gas-particle systems. 
Few studies have been devoted to the conduction heat trans- 
fer in liquid-particle systems and simpliﬁed treatments were 
often  adopted.  In  [10 , 141]  that  modelled  heat  transfer  in 
liquid ﬂuidised beds, for instance, conduction amongst ﬂu- 
idised particles was treated simply as static contacts. Future 
work is required when applying the methods to liquid sys- 
tems, e.g., understanding the relationship between the value 
of s and the physical characteristics (particle surface prop- 
erties and interactions with liquid molecules) at the particle 
surface. 

(vi) Cheng  et  al.  [52]  evaluated  the  conduction  heat  transfer 
through ﬂuid in void spaces in packed beds and mentioned 
f  = 5 as the reference point, below which 
the value of k s / k 
the conduction through the void ﬂuid needs to be included 
in  the  simulation.  From  the  deﬁnition  of  this  conduction 
mechanism,  however,  it  is  clear  that  its  contribution  in- 
creases as the bed voidage ( ε) increases. Work might be re- 
quired to correlate the importance of this conduction mech- 
f and bed voidage ( ε) particularly for packed 
anism with k s / k 
beds reactors of ﬁne(cohesive) particles. 

(vii) In conventional CFD-DEM simulations, the ﬂuid ﬂow struc- 
tures  in near-wall regions are  not resolved due  to  the  re- 
quired large computational cell size to satisfy the assump- 
tions  made  when  developing  the  governing  equations  [7] . 
However, most of the prominent temperature gradients and 
heat transfer resistances lie within these near-wall regions 
[44] .  More  detailed  simulations,  e.g.  those  based  on  DNS, 
might be required to resolve the mesoscale ﬂow structures 
in the near-wall thin layer and provide critical data for de- 
veloping appropriate correlations or wall functions to accu- 
rately account for the ﬂuid-wall convective heat transfer. 

(viii) Despite the high prediction accuracy, the application of ex- 
isting discrete models of radiation is largely limited by the 
signiﬁcant computational overhead for calculating the view 
factors between individual particles and their surroundings. 
Eﬃcient  numerical  algorithms  (e.g.  for  models  using  ray 
tracing)  or  novel  methodologies  (e.g.  that  by  Forgber  and 
Radl [84] ) are required to boost the computational eﬃciency 
of discrete models for calculating thermal radiation particu- 
larly in dynamic particle-laden systems. 

(ix) Though the heat transfer models and mechanisms reviewed 
and discussed in this study are generally for spherical par- 
ticles, it is worth mentioning the heat transfer modelling of 
non-spherical particles including conduction, convection and 
radiation is way not well established. Firstly, no conduction 

models are currently available for non-spherical particles as 
the shape/size of the contact zone cannot be predicted for 
particles of irregular-shape [92] . Gan et al. [48] modiﬁed the 
indirect  conduction  model  of  Cheng  et  al.  [47]  for  a  pair 
of ellipsoids by deploying two  ﬁctitious  spheres that have 
the  radii  equal  to  the  mean  curvature  radii  of  the  closest 
(or contacting) points of the ellipsoids. Clearly, as discussed 
above, the model was developed based on spherical particles 
and  the  authors  [48]  also  pointed  out  more  experimental 
data are required to validate the model. For convection, the 
calculation of convective heat transfer coeﬃcients was still 
based on the knowledge of spherical particles by incorporat- 
ing the sphericity or the concept of equal volume [193–195] . 
The  presence  of  non-spherical  or  even  arbitrarily  shaped 
particles leads to different particle-particle and particle-ﬂuid 
interactions, which in turn result in different packing struc- 
ture and more importantly different ﬂow and temperature 
ﬁelds  [193 , 194 , 196] .  Indeed,  signiﬁcant  discrepancies  were 
found between the convective heat transfer characteristics of 
spherical and non-spherical particles. For instance, He and 
Tafti  [193]  found,  as  the  Reynolds  number  increased,  the 
mean Nu of ellipsoidal assemblies were increasingly greater 
than that of spherical particles. Due to the complexities of 
the system, it is also challenging to experimentally measure 
the  heat  transfer  characteristics  of  non-spherical  particles, 
and previous effort s were mainly made through numerical 
methods  (e.g.  [197–202] )  or  for  a  speciﬁc  shape,  e.g.  long 
cylinders [203–205] . Correlations of high generality for con- 
vection that have considered all key parameters character- 
ising the particle shape are missing in the public domain. 
For radiation, methods based on Voronoi polyhedrons can- 
not be readily implemented for non-spherical particles and 
it is computational prohibitive to calculate the view factors 
between pairs of surface elements of two irregular-shaped 
particles. Therefore, signiﬁcant work might be required for 
the  development  of  thermal  DEM-based  models  for  non- 
spherical particles. 

6. Conclusions 

In this work, the thermal models and heat transfer mechanisms 
underpinning  DEM-based  simulations  of  thermal  particulate  sys- 
tems were reviewed. Other important aspects relating to the de- 
velopment of thermal DEM-based models were also summarised 
and discussed. Major ﬁndings are given as follows. 

Conduction  between  two  particles  was  found  signiﬁcant  only 
when they were close to each other. Indirect conduction was simu- 
lated mainly using the surrounding layer method and the Voronoi 
polyhedron-based method. In static or dense particulate systems 
the predicted indirect conduction heat transfer strongly depended 
on the selected value of s , but not a strong function of δ; a large 
value of s was not recommended for these systems. On the con- 
trary, in relatively dilute, dynamic particulate systems ( φs < 0.5), 
the predicted indirect conduction heat transfer strongly depended 
on  δ but  insensitive  to  s .  Model  A  of  the  Voronoi  polyhedron- 
based method suited more for calculating the indirect conduction 
between mono-sized particles, whereas Model B appeared prefer- 
able for calculations between multi-sized particles. Correction fac- 
tors for contact area and contact time are required to compensate 
for the overestimated conduction heat transfer due to using un- 
realistic properties of the particle material in conventional DEM- 
based models. 

In  packed  beds  of  thermally  thick  spheres  with  the  ran- 
dom  loose  packing  structure,  the  contribution  from  the  direct 
particle-particle  conduction  was  negligible  and  the  indirect 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

37 

particle-ﬂuid-particle conduction between two contacting particles 
was dominant. As the superﬁcial gas velocity increased, both direct 
conduction and indirect conductions that rely on particle contacts 
decreased;  the  indirect  conduction  without  particles  in  contact 
increased and became the dominant conduction mechanism even 
before  the  particles  were  ﬂuidised.  As  the  particle  thermal  con- 
ductivity  increased,  the  indirect  conduction  weakened,  whereas 
the  direct  conduction  through  particle-particle  contacts  became 
more  signiﬁcant.  The  contributions  from  different  conduction 
mechanisms  appeared  insensitive  to  the  bed  temperature.  How- 
ever, the relative importance of different conduction mechanisms 
in  packed  beds  strongly  depends  on  the  packing  structure.  The 
simpliﬁed methods by Vargas and McCarthy [50] and Tsory et al. 
[51]  are  easy  to  implement  and  computationally  amenable  yet 
require  inputs  that  rely  on  the  availability  of  experimental  data 
f  = 5 was mentioned as 
or empirical correlations. A value of k s / k 
the reference point, below which the conduction through stagnant 
ﬂuid in void spaces of packed beds needs be considered. 

Correlations developed before 1981 by Ranz and Marshall [53] , 
Gunn  [61] ,  and  Gnielinski  [57 , 58]  remain  predominant  for  pre- 
dicting the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient. The correlation by 
Gnielinski  [57 , 58]  was  used  mainly  for  dense  beds,  whereas  the 
correlation  of  Gunn  [61]  was  applied  mainly  in  relatively  dilute 
particle  systems.  However,  the  correlation  of  Ranz  and  Marshall 
[53]  has  been employed  in both dilute  and dense  particles sys- 
tems, covering a broad range of applications. The correlation of Li 
and Mason [64] and its revised version by Al-Arkawazi [10] have 
been increasingly more applied in thermal DEM-based simulations. 
Apart from the operating regime of the particle bed (described by 
bed  voidage),  the  ﬂow  conditions  characterised  by  the  Reynolds 
number  need  to  be  considered  and  due  care  is  also  required  to 
ensure the application range of Prandtl number is satisﬁed when 
selecting a correlation for predicting the convection heat transfer. 
The amount of heat transfer through thermal radiation signiﬁ- 
cantly increased as the temperature increased and should be con- 
sidered when the temperature exceeds 550 ◦C. Models of thermal 
radiation based on the continuum approach are too simpliﬁed with 
many  key  parameters  not  considered.  In  packed  bed  reactors,  it 
suﬃced to consider the radiative heat transfer between a particle 
and the particles within its peripheral three layers, accounting for 
99.91% of the total thermal radiation occurring to the particle. The 
microscopic radiation model is the most accurate yet also the most 
computationally demanding. The short-range radiation model was 
recommended for predicting the overall heat transfer in practical 
particle-laden systems with k s ~ O ( k r ) and T ≤ 1215 ◦C; for other 
systems, the long-range radiation model can be applied. 

The  assumption  of  uniform  intraparticle  temperature  (i.e., 
lumped capacitance approximation) holds only for thermally thin 
materials ( Bi < 0.1). For the thermally thick material, the temper- 
ature on the particle surface is non-uniform and the inclusion of 
the non-uniform temperature distribution on the particle surface 
proves pivotal to achieving accurate predicted results. Large devi- 
ations were observed between simulations and experiments using 
models without considering the heat transfer within the wall for 
the thermally thin material. Constant wall heat ﬂux boundary con- 
dition yielded the proﬁles of wall temperature and the tempera- 
ture of each phase that varied in both time and space. The relative 
importance of different heat transfer mechanisms in a given ap- 
plication is determined jointly by particle spatial distribution, ﬂow 
conditions and particle/ﬂuid material properties. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

None. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors wish to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support by The 

Australian Coal Industry’s Research Program (ACARP) C26004. 

Supplementary materials 

Supplementary  material  associated  with  this  article  can  be 

found, in the online version, at doi: 10.1016/j.pecs.2020.100847 . 

References 

[1] Enache DI , Hutchings GJ , Taylor SH , Natividad R , Raymahasay S , Winterbot- 
tom JM , et al. Experimental evaluation of a threephase downﬂow capillary 
reactor. Ind Eng Chem Res 2005; 44 :6295–303 . 

[2] Enache DI , Hutchings GJ , Taylor SH , Stitt EH . The hydrogenation of isophorone 
to trimethyl cyclohexanone using the downﬂow single capillary reactor. Catal 
Today 2005; 105 :569–73 . 

[3] Losey MW , Schmidt MA , Jensen KF . Microfabricated multiphase packedbed 
reactors: characterization of mass transfer and reactions. Ind Eng Chem Res 
2001; 40 :2555–62 . 

[4] Marquez N , Castano P , Moulijn JA , Makkee M , Kreutzer MT . Transient be- 
havior and stability in miniaturized multiphase packed bed reactors. Ind Eng 
Chem Res 2010; 49 :1033–40 . 

[5] Pronk P . Fluidized bed heat exchangers to prevent fouling in ice slurry systems 

and industrial crystallizers . Delft university of technology; 2006 . 

[6] Luo C , Peng Z , Doroodchi E , Moghtaderi B . A three-dimensional hot ﬂow 
model for simulating the alumina encapsulated Ni-NiO methane-air CLC sys- 
tem based on the computational ﬂuid dynamics-discrete element method. 
Fuel 2018; 224 :388–400 . 

[7] Peng Z , Doroodchi E , Luo C , Moghtaderi B . Inﬂuence of void fraction calcula- 
tion on ﬁdelity of CFD-DEM simulation of gas-solid bubbling ﬂuidized beds. 
AIChE J 2014; 60 :20 0 0–18 . 

[8] Hou Q , E D , Kuang S , Li Z , Yu AB . DEM-based virtual experimental blast fur- 

nace: a quasi-steady state model. Powder Technol 2017; 314 :557–66 . 

[9] Azmir J , Hou Q , Yu AB . Discrete particle simulation of food grain drying in a 

ﬂuidised bed. Powder Technol 2018; 323 :238–49 . 

[10] Al-Arkawazi S . Modeling the heat transfer between ﬂuid-granular medium. 

Appl Therm Eng 2018; 128 :696–705 . 

[11] Rimkevicius S , Uspuras E . Experimental investigation of pebble beds thermal- 

hydraulic characteristics. Nucl Eng Des 2008; 238 :940–4 . 

[12] Rousseau P , Van Staden M . Introduction to the PBMR heat transfer testfacility. 

Nucl Eng Des 2008; 238 :3060–72 . 

[13] Vozár L , Hohenauer W . Flash method of measuring the thermal diffusivity. A 

review. High Temp - High Press 2003; 35/36 :253–64 /2004 . 

[14] Stankus SV , Savchenko IV . Laser ﬂash method for measurement of liquid met- 

als heat transfer coeﬃcients. Thermophys Aeromech 2009; 16 :585–92 . 

[15] Achenbach E . Heat and ﬂow characteristics of packed beds. Exp Therm Fluid 

Sci 1995; 10 :17–27 . 

[16] Hoogenboezem T . Heat transfer phenomena in ﬂowthrough packed beds . South 

Africa: North-West University; 2007 . 

[17] Chan  SH ,  Abou-Ellail  MMM .  A  two-ﬂuid  model  for  reacting  turbulent 

two-phase ﬂows. J Heat Transf 1994; 116 :427–35 . 

[18] Kuipers JAM , Prins W , Vanswaaij WPM . Numerical calculation of wall-tobed 
heat transfer coeﬃcients in gas-ﬂuidized beds. AIChE J 1992; 38 :1079–91 . 
[19] Wunschmann J , Schlünder E . Heat transfer from heated surfaces to spherical 

packings. Int Chem Eng 1980; 20 :555–63 . 

[20] Mousazadeh F , van den Akker HEA , Mudde RF . Eulerian simulation of heat 
transfer in a trickle bed reactor with constant wall temperature. Chem Eng J 
2012; 207-208 :675–82 . 

[21] Reddy RK , Joshi JB . CFD modeling of solid-liquid ﬂuidized beds of mono and 

binary particle mixtures. Chem Eng Sci 2009; 64 :3641–58 . 

[22] Syamlal M , O’Brien TJ . Simulation of granular layer inversion in liquid ﬂu- 

idized beds. Int J Multiph Flow 1988; 14 :473–81 . 

[23] Doroodchi E , Galvin KP , Fletcher DF . The inﬂuence of inclined plates on ex- 
pansion behaviour of solid suspensions in a liquid ﬂuidised bed - a compu- 
tational ﬂuid dynamics study. Powder Technol 2005; 160 :20–6 . 

[24] Jiao L , Kuang S , Yu AB , Li Y , Mao X , Xu H . Three-Dimensional modeling of an 
ironmaking blast furnace with a layered cohesive zone. Metall Mater Trans B 
2020; 51 :258–75 . 

[25] Deen NG , Peters EAJF , Padding JT , Kuipers JAM . Review of direct numeri- 
cal simulation of ﬂuid–particle mass, momentum and heat transfer in dense 
gas–solid ﬂows. Chem Eng Sci 2014; 116 :710–24 . 

[26] Zhu HP , Zhou ZY , Yang RY , Yu AB . Discrete particlesimulation o fparticu- 
late systems: a review of major applications and ﬁndings. Chem Eng Sci 
2008; 63 :5728–70 . 

[27] Owen DRJ , Leonardi CR , Feng YT . An eﬃcient framework for ﬂuid–struc- 
ture interaction using the lattice Boltzmann method and immersed moving 
boundaries. Int J Numer Meth Engng 2011; 87 :66–95 . 

[28] Kwapinska M , Saage G , Tsotsas E . Mixing of particles in rotary drums: a com- 
parison of discrete element simulations with experimental results and pene- 
tration models for thermal processes. Powder Technol 2006; 161 :69–78 . 

38 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

[29] Kwapinska M , Saage G , Tsotsas E . Continuous versus discrete modelling of 

heat transfer to agitated beds. Powder Technol 2008; 181 :331–42 . 

[30] Vargas  WL ,  McCarthy  JJ .  Heat  conduction  in  granular  materials.  AIChE  J 

2001; 47 :1052–9 . 

[31] Jajcevic D , Siegmann E , Radeke C , Khinast JG . Large-scale CFD–DEM simula- 

tions of ﬂuidized granular systems. Chem Eng Sci 2013; 98 :298–310 . 

[32] Peng Z , Zanganeh J , Doroodchi E , Moghtaderi B . Flame propagation and re- 
ﬂections of pressure waves through ﬁxed beds of RTO devices: a cfd study. 
Ind Eng Chem Res 2019; 58 :23389–404 . 

[33] Gan J , Zhou Z , Yu AB . A GPU-based DEM approach for modelling of particu- 

late systems. Powder Technol 2016; 301 :1172–82 . 

[34] Zhong W , Yu AB , Zhou G , Xie J , Zhang H . CFD simulation of dense particulate 
reaction system: approaches, recent advances and applications. Chem Eng Sci 
2016; 140 :16–43 . 

[35] Zhou ZY , Yu AB , Zulli P . A new computational method for studying heat 

transfer in ﬂuid bed reactors. Powder Technol 2010; 197 :102–10 . 

[36] Zhuang  Y ,  Chen  X ,  Luo  Z ,  Xiao  J .  CFD–DEM  modeling  of  gas–solid  ﬂow 
and  catalytic  MTO  reactionin  a  ﬂuidized  bed  reactor.  Comput  Chem  Eng 
2014; 60 :1–16 . 

[37] Xu  HJ ,  Xing  ZB ,  Wang  FQ ,  Cheng  ZM .  Review  on  heat  conduction, 
heat  convection,  thermal  radiation  and  phase  change  heat  transfer  of 
nanoﬂuids in porous media: fundamentals and applications. Chem Eng Sci 
2019; 195 :462–83 . 

[38] Batchelor GK , Brien RW . Thermal or electrical conduction through a granular 

material. Pro Roy Soc Lond A Math Phys Sci 1977; 355 :313–33 . 

[39] Soo SL . Fluid dynamics of multiphase systems . Waltham, Massachusetts: Blais- 

dell Pub Co; 1967 . 

[40] Sun J , Chen MM . A theoretical analysis of heat transfer due to particle impact. 

Int J Heat Mass Transf 1988; 31 :969–75 . 

[41] Zhou JH , Yu AB , Horio M . Finite element modeling of the transient heat con- 

duction between colliding particles. Chem Eng J 2008; 139 :510–16 . 

[42] Zhou ZY , Yu AB , Zulli P . Particle scale study of heat transfer in packed and 

bubbling ﬂuidized beds. AIChE J 2009; 55 :868–84 . 

[43] Morris  AB ,  Pannala  S ,  Ma  Z ,  Hrenya  CM .  Development  of  soft-sphere 
contact  models  for  thermal  heat  conduction  in  granular  ﬂows.  AIChE  J 
2016; 62 :4526–35 . 

[44] Patil AV , Peters EAJF , Kuipers JAM . Comparison of cfd-dem heat transfer sim- 

ulations with infrared/visual measurements. Chem Eng J 2015; 277 :388–401 . 

[45] Rong D , Horio M . DEM simulation of char combustion in a ﬂuidized bed. In: 
Procedings of the second international conference on CFD in the minerals and 
process industries . CSIRO; 1999. p. 65–70 . 

[46] Musser JMH . Modeling of Heat Transfer and Reactive Chemistry for Particles 
in Gas-Solid Flow Utilizing Continuum-Discrete Methodology (CDM) PhD Thesis. 
West Virginia University; 2011 . 

[47] Cheng GJ , Yu AB , Zulli P . Evaluation of effective thermal conductivity from 

the structure of a packed bed. Chem Eng Sci 1999; 54 :4199–209 . 

[48] Gan J , Zhou ZY , Yu AB . Particle scale study of heat transfer in packed and 

ﬂuidized beds of ellipsoidal particles. Chem Eng Sci 2016; 144 :201–15 . 

[49] Chen L , Wang C , Moscardini M , Kamlah M , Liu S . A DEM-based heat trans- 
fer model for the evaluation of effective thermal conductivity of packed beds 
ﬁlled with stagnant ﬂuid: thermal contact theory and numerical simulation. 
Int J Heat Mass Tran 2019; 132 :331–46 . 

[50] Vargas WL , McCarthy JJ . Conductivity of granular media with stagnant inter- 
stitial ﬂuids via thermal particle dynamics simulation. Int J Heat Mass Tran 
2002; 45 :4847–56 . 

[51] Tsory T , Ben-Jacob N , Brosh T , Levy A . Thermal DEM-CFD modeling and sim- 
ulation of heat transfer throgh packed bed. Powder Technol 2013; 244 :52–60 . 
[52] Cheng GJ , Gan J , Xu D , Yu AB . Evaluation of effective thermal conductivity in 
random packed bed: heat transfer through ﬂuid voids and effect of packing 
structure. Powder Technol 2020; 361 :326–36 . 

[53] Ranz  WE ,  Marshall  WR .  Evaporation  from  drops.  Chem  Eng  Prog 

1952; 48 :141–6 . 

[54] Baeyens  J ,  Van  Gauwbergen  D ,  Vinckier  I .  Pneumatic  drying:  the  use 
of  large-scale  experimental  data  in  a  design  procedure.  Powder  Technol 
1995; 83 :139–48 . 

[55] Feng Z-G , Michaelides EE . A numerical study on the transient heat transfer 
from a sphere at high Reynolds and Peclet numbers. Int J Heat Mass Transf 
20 0 0; 43 :219–29 . 

[56] Kemp IC , Bahu RE , Pasley HS . Model development and experimental studies 
of vertical pneumatic conveying dryers. Drying Technol 1994; 12 :1323–40 . 
[57] Gnielinski V . Formula for calculating the heat and mass transfer through ﬂow 

of a ﬁxed bed at medium and large Peclet. Process Technol 1978; 12 :63–366 . 

[58] Gnielinski V . Equations for the calculation of heat and mass transfer during 
ﬂow through stationary spherical packings at moderate and high Peclet num- 
bers. Int Chem Eng 1981; 21 :378–83 . 

[59] Standards KTA . Reactor core design of high temperature gas-cooled reac-tors, 
part 2: heat transfer in spherical fuel elements . Salzgitter, Germany: Nuclear 
Safety StandardsCommission; 1983 . 

[60] Wakao N , Kaguei S . Heat and mass transfer in packed bed . 1st ed. New York: 

Gordonand Breach Science Publishers; 1982 . 

[64] Li J , Mason DJ . A computational investigation of transient heat transfer in 
pneumatic transport of granular particles. Powder Technol 20 0 0; 112 :273–82 . 
[65] Al-Arkawazi S , Marie C , Benhabid K , Coorevits P . Modeling the hydrodynamic 
forces betweenﬂuid–granular medium by coupling DEM–CFD. Chem Eng Res 
Des 2017; 117 :439–47 . 

[66] Bellan S , Gokon N , Matsubara K , Cho HS , Kodama T . Heat transfer analysis of 
5kWth circulating ﬂuidized bed reactor for solar gasiﬁcation using concen- 
trated XE light radiation. Energy 2018; 160 :245–56 . 

[67] Bellan S , Kodama T , Matsubara K , Gokon N , Cho HS , Inoue K . Thermal per- 
formance of a 30 kW ﬂuidized bed reactor for solar gasiﬁcation: a CFD-DEM 
study. Chem Eng J 2019; 360 :1287–300 . 

[68] Bellan S , Matsubara K , Cho HS , Gokon N , Kodama T . A CFD-DEM study of hy- 
drodynamics with heat transfer in a gas-solid ﬂuidized bed reactor for solar 
thermal applications. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2018; 116 :377–92 . 

[69] Cheng GJ , Yu AB . Particle scale evaluation of the effective thermal conductiv- 
ity from the structure of a packed bed: radiation heat transfer. Ind Eng Chem 
Res 2013; 52 :12202–11 . 

[70] Hou Q , Zhou ZY , Yu AB . Computational study of heat transfer in a bubbling 

ﬂuidized bed with a horizontal tube. AIChE J 2012; 58 :1422–34 . 

[71] Hou Q , Zhou ZY , Yu AB . Gas–solid ﬂow and heat transfer in ﬂuidized beds 
with tubes: effects of material properties and tube array settings. Powder 
Technol 2016; 296 :59–71 . 

[72] Krause  B ,  Liedmann  B ,  Wiese  J ,  Bucher  P ,  Wirtz  S ,  Piringer  H , 
et  al.  3D-DEM-CFD  simulation  of  heat  and  mass  transfer,  gas  combus- 
tion and calcination in an intermittent operating lime shaft kiln. Int J Heat 
Mass Transf 2017; 117 :121–35 . 

[73] Wei G , Zhang H , An X , Xiong B , Jiang S . CFD-DEM study on the heat transfer 
characteristics and microstructure of the blast furnace raceway with ellip- 
soidal particles. Powder Technol 2019; 346 :350–62 . 

[74] Xie Q , Chen Z , Hou Q , Yu AB , Yang RY . DEM investigation of heat transfer in 

a drum mixer with lifters. Powder Technol 2017; 314 :175–81 . 

[75] Feingold A , Gupta KG . New analytical approach to the evaluation of conﬁgu- 
ration factors in radiation from spheres and inﬁnitely long cylinders. J Heat 
Trans-T ASME 1970; 92 :69–76 . 

[76] Gupta KG . Analytical and numerical evaluation of conﬁguration factors in radia- 

tion heat transfer . University of Ottawa; 1969 . 

[77] Jones LR . Diffuse radiation view factors between two spheres. J Heat Transf 

1965; 87 :421–2 . 

[78] Wu H , Gui N , Yang X , Tu J , Jiang S . Effect of scale on the modeling of radiation 
heat transfer in packed pebble beds. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2016; 101 :562–9 . 
[79] Feng YT , Han K . An accurate evaluation of geometric view factors for mod- 
elling  radiative  heat  transfer  in  randomly  packed  beds  of  equally  sized 
spheres. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2012; 55 :6374–83 . 

[80] Maltby JD , Burns PJ . Performance, accuracy, and convergence in a threedi- 
mensional Monte Carlo radiative heat transfer simulation. Numer Heat Transf- 
Part B 1991; 19 :191–209 . 

[81] Walker T . The Use of Primitives in the Calculation of Radiative View Factors PhD 

Thesis. University of Sydney; 2014 . 

[82] Walker T , Xue SC , Barton GW . Numerical determination of radiative view fac- 

tors using ray tracing. J Heat Transf 2010; 132 :072702 . 

[83] Walton GN . Calculation of obstructed view factors by adaptive integration . Na- 

tional Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg; 2002 . 

[84] Forgber T , Radl S . A novel approach to calculate radiative thermal exchange 

in coupled particle simulations. Powder Technol 2018; 323 :24–44 . 

[85] Baniasadi M , Baniasadi M , Peters B . Coupled cfd-dem with heat and mass 
transfer to investigate the melting of a granular packed bed. Chem Eng Sci 
2018; 178 :136–45 . 

[86] Brosh T , Levy A . Modeling of heat transfer in pneumatic conveyer using a 

combined DEM-CFD numerical code. Dry Technol 2010; 28 :155–64 . 

[87] Dierich F , Nikrityuk PA , Ananiev S . 2D modeling o fmoving particles with 

phase-change effect. Chem Eng Sci 2011; 66 :5459–73 . 

[88] Gan  H ,  Chang  J ,  Feng  JJ ,  Hu  HH .  Direct  numerical  simulation  of  the 
sedimentation  of  solid  particles  with  thermal  convection.  J  Fluid  Mech 
2003; 481 :385–411 . 

[89] Gan H , Feng JJ , Hu HH . Simulation of the sedimentation of melting solid par- 

ticles. Int J Multiph Flow 2003; 29 :751–69 . 

[90] Oschmann T , Kruggel-Emden H . Numerical and experimental investigation of 
the heat transfer of spherical particles in a packed bed with an implicit 3D 
ﬁnite difference approach. Granul Matter 2017; 19 :47 . 

[91] Oschmann T , Kruggel-Emden H . A novel method for the calculation of par- 
ticle heat conduction and resolved 3D wall heat transfer for the CFD/DEM 
approach. Powder Technol 2018; 338 :289–303 . 

[92] Oschmann T , Schiemann M , kruggel-Emden H . Development and veriﬁcation 
of a resolved 3D inner particle heat transfer model for the discrete element 
method (DEM). Powder Technol 2016; 291 :392–407 . 

[93] Ozisik N . Finite difference methods in heat transfer . Boca Raton: CRC Press; 

1994 . 

[94] Gillespie B , Crandall ED , Carberry JJ . Local and average interphase heat trans- 
fer coeﬃcients in a randomly packed bed of spheres. AIChE J 196 8; 14 :4 83–90 . 
[95] Rhodes J , Peebles F . Local rates of mass transfer from spheres in ordered ar- 

[61] Gunn DJ . Transfer of heat or mass to particles in ﬁxed and ﬂuidised beds. Int 

rays. AIChE J 1965; 11 :481–7 . 

J Heat Mass Transf 1978; 21 :467–76 . 

[62] Tavassoli H . Direct Numerical Simulation of Dense Gas–Solids Non-isothermal 

Flows PhDthesis. Eindhoven University of Technology; 2014 . 

[63] Bandrowski J , Kaczmarzyk G . Gas-to-particle heat transfer in vertical pneu- 
matic conveying of granular materials. Chem Eng Sci 1978; 33 :1303–10 . 

[96] Sudbrock F , Kruggel-Emden H , Wirtz S , Scherer V . Convective drying of ag- 
itated silica gel and beech wood particle beds—experiments and transient 
DEM-CFD simulations. Dry Technol 2015; 33 :1808–20 . 

[97] Niazmand H , Renksizbulut M . Transient three-dimensional heat transfer from 
rotating spheres with surface blowing. Chem Eng Sci 2003; 58 :3535–54 . 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

39 

[98] Lattanzi AM , Hrenya CM . A coupled, multiphase heat ﬂux boundary condition 

[133] Abdulmohsin RS , Al-Dahhan MH . Characteristics of convective heat transport 

for the discrete element method. Chem Eng J 2016; 304 :766–73 . 

[99] Morris AB , Pannala S , Ma Z , Hrenya CM . A conductive heat transfer model for 
particle ﬂows over immersed surfaces. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2015; 89 :1277–89 . 
[100] Morris  AB ,  Ma  Z ,  Pannala  S ,  Hrenya  CM .  Simulations  of  heat  transfer 
to  solid  particles  ﬂowing  through  an  array  of  heated  tubes.  Sol  Energy 
2016; 130 :101–15 . 

[101] Zhu HP , Zhou ZY , Yang RY , Yu AB . Discrete particle simulation of particulate 

systems: theoretical developments. Chem Eng Sci 2007; 62 :3378–96 . 

[102] Yang GC , Jing L , Kwok CY , Sobral YD . A comprehensive parametric study of 

LBM-DEM for immersed granular ﬂows. Comput Geotech 2019; 114 :103100 . 

[103] Han Y , Cundall PA . LBM–DEM modeling of ﬂuid–solid interaction in porous 

media. Int J Numer Anal Met 2013; 37 :1391–407 . 

[104] Zhang H , Liu Q , Qin B , Bo H . Simulating particle collision process based on 

Monte Carlo method. J Nucl Sci Technol 2015; 52 :1393–401 . 

in a packed pebble-bed reactor. Nucl Eng Des 2015; 284 :143–52 . 

[134] Hughmark  GA .  Mass  and  heat  transfer  from  rigid  spheres.  AIChE  J 

1967; 13 :1219–21 . 

[135] Buist KA , Backx BJGH , Deen NG , Kuipers JAM . A combinedexperimentaland- 
simulationstudyof ﬂuid-particle heat transferindensearraysofstationaryparti- 
cles. Chem Eng Sci 2017; 169 :310–20 . 

[136] Whitaker S . Forced convection heat transfer correlations for ﬂow in pipes, 
past ﬂat plates, single cylinders, single spheres, and for ﬂow in packed beds 
and tube bundles. AIChE J 1972; 18 :361–71 . 

[137] Sae-heng S , Swasdisevi T , Amornkitbamrung M . Investigation of temperature 
distribution and heat transfer in ﬂuidized bed using a combined CFD–DEM 
model. Dry Technol 2011; 29 :697–708 . 

[138] Churchill SW . A comprehensive correlating equation for laminar, assisting, 

forced and free convection. AIChE J 1977; 23 :10–16 . 

[105] Wu CL , Zhan JM , Li YS , Lam KS . Dense particulate ﬂow model on unstructured 

[139] Agarwal PK . Transport phenomena in multi-particle systems: 2 particle–ﬂuid 

mesh. Chem Eng Sci 2006; 61 :5726–41 . 

[106] Buist KA , Seelen LJH , Deen NG , Padding JT , Kuipers JAM . On an eﬃcient hy- 
brid soft and hard sphere collision integration scheme for DEM. Chem Eng Sci 
2016; 153 :363–73 . 

[107] Richardson DC , Walsh KJ , Murdoch N , Michel P . Numerical simulations of 
granular dynamics: I. Hard-sphere discrete element method and tests. Icarus. 
2011; 212 :427–37 . 

[108] Peng Z , Yuan Z . Numerical simulation of gas-solid ﬂow behaviours in desul- 
furization tower based on Monte Carlo. In: Proceedings of the Chinese Society 
of Electrical Engineering , 28; 2008. p. 6–14 . 

[109] Peng Z , Doroodchi E , Alghamdi Y , Moghtaderi B . Mixing and segregation of 
solid mixtures in bubbling ﬂuidized beds under conditions pertinent to the 
fuel reactor of a chemical looping system. Powder Technol 2013; 235 :823–37 . 
[110] Peng Z , Moghtaderi B , Doroodchi E . A modiﬁed direct method for void fraction 

calculation in CFD–DEM simulations . Adv Powder Technol; 2015 . 

[111] Peng ZB , Doroodchi E , Moghtaderi B , Evans GM . A DEM-based analysis of the 
inﬂuence of aggregate structure on suspension shear yield stress. Adv Powder 
Technol 2012; 23 :437–44 . 

[112] Silbert LE , Ertaz D , Grest GS , Halsey TC , Levine D , Plimpton SJ . Granular 
ﬂow down an inclined phane: Bagnold scaling and rheology. Phys Rev E 
2001; 64 :051302 . 

[113] Walton OR , Braun RL . Viscosity, granular-temperature, and stress calculations 
for shearing assemblies of inelastic, frictional disks. J Rheol 1986; 30 :949–81 . 
[114] Cundall PA , Strack ODL . A discrete numerical model for granular assemblies. 

Geotechnique 1979; 29 :47–65 . 

[115] Di Renzo A , Di Maio FP . Comparison of contact-force models for the sim- 
ulation  of  collisions  in  DEM-based  granular  ﬂow  codes.  Chem  Eng  Sci 
2004; 59 :525–41 . 

[116] Langston PA , Tuzun U , Heyes DM . Continuous potential discrete particle sim- 
ulations of stress and velocity-ﬁelds in hoppers—transition from ﬂuid to gran- 
ular ﬂow. Chem Eng Sci 1994; 49 :1259–75 . 

[117] Yagi S , Kunii D . Studies on effective thermal conductivities in packed beds. 

AIChE J 1957; 3 :373–81 . 

[118] C K , Beck JV , Haji-Sheikh A , Litkouhi B . Heat conduction using green’s functions . 

Second ed. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2010 . 

[119] Lu  L ,  Morris  A ,  Li  T ,  Benyahia  S .  Extension  of  a  coarse  grained  particle 
method to simulate heat transfer in ﬂuidized beds. Int J Heat Mass Transf 
2017; 111 :723–35 . 

[120] Wang S , Luo K , Hu C , Lin J , Fan J . CFD-DEM simulation of heat transfer in 
ﬂuidized beds: model veriﬁcation, validation, and application. Chem Eng Sci 
2019; 197 :280–95 . 

[121] Lattanzi AM , Hrenya CM . Indirect conduction in gas–solids systems: static vs. 

dynamic effects. AIChE J 2017; 63 :4685–93 . 

[122] Voronoi MG . Nouvells applications des parameters continus a la theorie des 
formes quadratiques. Journal fur die Reine und Angew and te Mathematik 
1908; 134 :198–287 . 

[123] Yang RY , Zou RP , Yu AB . Voronoi tessellation of the packing of ﬁne uniform 

spheres. Phys Rev E 2002; 65 :041302 . 

[124] Jaguaribe  EF ,  Beasley  DE .  Modeling  of  the  effective  thermal  conductivity 
and diffusivity of a packed bed with stagnant ﬂuid. Int J Heat Mass Tran 
1984; 27 :399–407 . 

[125] Krupiczka R . Analysis of thermal conductivity in granular materials. Int Chem 

Eng 1967; 7 :122–44 . 

[126] Nozad I , Carbonell RG , Whitaker S . Heat conduction in multiphase systems—I: 
theory and experiment for two-phase systems. Chem Eng Sci 1985; 40 :843–55 . 
[127] Prasad V , Kladias N , Bandyopadhaya A , Tian Q . Evaluation of correlations for 
stagnant thermal conductivity of liquid-saturated porous beds of spheres. Int 
J Heat Mass Transf 1989; 32 :1793–6 . 

[128] Preston F.W. Mechanim of heat transfer in unconsolidated porous media at 

low ﬂow rates: pennsylvania state university; 1957. 

[129] Waddams A . The ﬂow of heat through granular material. J Soc Chem Ind 

1944; 63 :339–47 . 

[130] Moysey PA , Thompson MR . Modelling the solids inﬂow and solids conveying 
of single-screw extruders using the discrete element method. Powder Technol 
2005; 153 :95–107 . 

[131] Kennard EH . Kinetic theory of gases . NY: McGraw-Hill; 1938 . 
[132] Incropera FP , Dewitt DP , Bergman TL , Lavine AS . Fundamentals of heat and 
mass transfer . Revised ed. New York, United States: John Wiley & Sons Inc; 
2007 . 

heat and mass-transfer. Chem Eng Sci 1988; 43 :2501–10 . 

[140] Mankad S , Nixon KM , Fryer PJ . Measurements of particle–liquid heat transfer 

in systems of varied solids fraction. J Food Eng 1997; 31 :9–33 . 

[141] Malone KF , Xu BH . Particle-scale simulation of heat transfer in liquid-ﬂu- 

idised beds. Powder Technol 2008; 184 :189–204 . 

[142] Patel RD , Simpson JM . Heat-transfer in aggregative and particulate liquid-ﬂu- 

idized beds. Chem Eng Sci 1977; 32 :67–74 . 

[143] Gnielinski V . Fluid-Particle heat transfer in ﬂow through packed beds of solids . 

2nd ed. Heidelberg: Springer; 2010 . 

[144] Wu H , Gui N , Yang X , Tu J , Jiang S . A smoothed void fraction method for 
CFD-DEM simulation of packed pebble beds with particle thermal radiation. 
Int J Heat Mass Transfer 2018; 118 :275–88 . 

[145] Komossa  H ,  Wirtz  S ,  Scherer  V ,  Herz  F ,  Specht  E .  Heat  transfer 
in  indirect  heated  rotary  drums  ﬁlled  with  monodisperse  spheres: 
comparison  of  experiments  with  DEM  simulations.  Powder  Technol 
2015; 286 :722–31 . 

[146] Di Maio FP , Di Renzo A , Trevisan D . Comparison of heat transfer models 
in DEM–CFD simulations of ﬂuidized beds with an immersed probe. Powder 
Technol 2009; 193 :257–65 . 

[147] Simsek E , Brosch B , Wirtz S , Scherer V , Krüll F . Numerical simulation of grate 
ﬁring systems using a coupled CFD/discrete element method (DEM). Powder 
Technol 2009; 193 :266–73 . 

[148] Rickelt S , Sudbrock F , Wirtz S , Scherer V . Coupled DEM/CFD simulation of 
heat transfer in a generic grate system agitated by bars. Powder Technol 
2013; 249 :360–72 . 

[149] Wiese J , Wissing F , Hohner D , Wirtz S , Scherer V , Ley U , et al. DEM/CFD 
modeling  of  the  fuel  conversion  in  a  pellet  stove.  Fuel  Process  Technol 
2016; 152 :223–39 . 

[150] Sutkar VS , Deen NG , Patil AV , Salikov V , Antonyuk S , Heinrich S , et al. CFD—
DEM model for coupled heat and mass transfer in a spout ﬂuidized bed with 
liquid injection. Chem Eng J 2016; 288 :185–97 . 

[151] Wu H , Gui N , Yang X , Tu J , Jiang S . Numerical simulation of heat transfer in 
packed pebble beds: CFD-DEM coupled with particle thermal radiation. Int J 
Heat Mass Transf 2017; 110 :393–405 . 

[152] Zhao  Y ,  Jiang  M ,  Liu  Y ,  Zheng  J .  Particle-scale  simulation  of  the  ﬂow 
and heat transfer behaviors in ﬂuidized bed with immersed tube. AIChE J 
2009; 55 :3109–24 . 

[153] Zhao  L ,  Lu  Y .  Hydrogen  production  by  biomass  gasiﬁcation  in  a  super- 
critical  water  ﬂuidized  bed  reactor:  a  CFD-DEM  study.  J  Supercrit  Fluids 
2018; 131 :26–36 . 

[154] Yang WJ , Zhou ZY , Yu AB . Particle scale studies of heat transfer in a moving 

bed. Powder Technol 2015; 281 :99–111 . 

[155] Shimura K , Matsuo A . Using an extended CFD–DEM for the two-dimensional 
simulation of shock-induced layered coal-dust combustion in a narrow chan- 
nel. Proc Combust Inst 2019; 37 :3677–84 . 

[156] Collier AP , Hayhurst AN , Richardson JL , Scott SA . The heat transfer coeﬃcient 
between a particle and a bed (packed or ﬂuidised) of much larger particles. 
Chem Eng Sci 2004; 59 :4613–20 . 

[157] Kunii D , Levenspiel O . Fluidization engineering . Butterworth–Heinemann Lim- 

ited; 1991 . 

[158] Wrangham DA . The elements of heat ﬂow . London: Chatto and Windus; 1961 . 
[159] Scott SA , Davidson JF , Dennis JS , Hayhurst AN . Heat transfer to a single sphere 
immersed in beds of particles supplied by gas at rates above and below min- 
imum ﬂuidization. Ind Eng Chem Res 2004; 43 :5632–44 . 

[160] Rousseau PG , du Toit CG , van Antwerpen W , van Antwerpen HJ . Separate ef- 
fects tests to determine the effective thermal conductivity in the PBMR HTTU 
test facility. Nucl Eng Des 2014; 271 :4 4 4–58 . 

[161] Niessen H , Ball S . Heat transport and afterheat removal for gas cooled reac- 
tors under accident conditions IAEA-TECDOC-1163 . International Atomic Energy 
Agency; 20 0 0 . 

[162] Dayal R . Numerical Modelling of Processes Governing Selective Laser Sintering 

Ph.D. Thesis. Darmstadt: Technische Universität; 2014 . 

[163] Tien  CL .  Thermal  radiation  in  packed  and  ﬂuidized  beds.  J  Heat  Transf 

1988; 110 :1230–42 . 

[164] Chen  JC ,  Churchill  SW .  Radiant  heat  transfer  in  packed  beds.  AIChE  J 

1963; 9 :35–41 . 

[165] Dixon AG . Heat transfer in ﬁxed beds at very low ( < 4) tube-to-particle diam- 

eter ratio. Ind Eng Chem Res 1997; 36 :3053–64 . 

[166] Fillion MH , Côté J , Konrad JM . Thermal radiation and conduction properties 
ofmaterials ranging from sand to rock-ﬁll. Can Geotech J 2011; 48 :532–42 . 

40 

Z. Peng, E. Doroodchi and B. Moghtaderi / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 79 (2020) 100847 

[167] Ozkaynak TF , Chen JC , Frankenﬁeld TR . An experimental investigation of ra- 
diant heat transfer in high temperature ﬂuidized bed. In: Proceedings of the 
fourth International Conference on Fluidization ; 1983. p. 371–8 . 

[168] Kloss  C ,  Goniva  C ,  Hager  A ,  Amberger  S ,  Pirker  S .  Models,  algorithms 
and validation for opensource DEM and CFD-DEM. Prog Comput Fluid Dyn 
2012; 12 :140–52 . 

[169] Fan F , Parteli EJR , Pöschel T . Origin of granular capillarity revealed by parti- 

cle-based simulations. Phys Rev Lett 2017; 118 :218001 . 

[170] Kunii D , Smith JM . Heat transfer characteristics of porous rocks. AIChE J 

1960; 6 :71–8 . 

[171] Cheng P . Two-Dimensional radiating gas ﬂow by a moment method. AIAA J 

1964; 2 :1662–4 . 

[172] Chui EH , Raithby GD . Computation of radiant heat transfer on a non-orthog- 
onal  mesh  using  the  ﬁnite-volume  method.  Numer  Heat  Transf  B-Fund 
1993; 23 :269–88 . 

[173] Chen JC , Chen KL . Analysis of simultaneous radiative and conductive heat 

[198] Richter A , Nikrityuk PA . New correlations for heat and ﬂuid ﬂow past el- 
lipsoidal and cubic particles at different angles of attack. Powder Technol 
2013; 249 :463–74 . 

[199] Wadewitz A , Specht E . Limit value of the nusselt number for particles of dif- 

ferent shape. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2001; 44 :967–75 . 

[200] Wittig K , Nikrityuk P , Richter A . Drag coeﬃcient and Nusselt number for 
porous  particles  under  laminar  ﬂow  conditions.  Int  J  Heat  Mass  Transf 
2017; 112 :1005–16 . 

[201] Deen NG , Kriebitzsch SHL , van der Hoef MA , Kuipers JAM . Direct numerical 
simulation of ﬂow and heat transfer in dense ﬂuid–particle systems. Chem 
Eng Sci 2012; 81 :329–44 . 

[202] Yang J , Wang Q , Zeng M , Nakayama A . Computational study of forced con- 
vective heat transfer in structured packed beds with spherical or ellipsoidal 
particles. Chem Eng Sci 2010; 65 :726–38 . 

[203] Michaelides E . Particles, bubbles & drops: their motion, heat and mass transfer . 

World Scientiﬁc; 2006 . 

transfer in ﬂuidized beds. Chem Eng Commun 1981; 9 :255–71 . 

[204] Juncu G . Unsteady heat transfer from an elliptic cylinder. Int J Heat Mass 

[174] Chen JC , Grace JR , Golriz MR . Heat transfer in ﬂuidized beds: design methods. 

Transf 2008; 51 :920–8 . 

Chem Eng Sci 2005; 150 :123–32 . 

[175] Rycroft CH . VORO ++ : a three-dimensional voronoi cell library in C ++ . Chaos 

2009; 19 :041111 . 

[176] Tanaka S . Exact view-factor analysis for radiation from a sphere to another 
sphere linked with a coaxial cylinder. Rev Faculty Maritime Sci Kobe Univ 
2008; 5 :85–92 . 

[177] Bauer R , Schliinder EU . Effective radial thermal conductivity of packing in gas 
ﬂow. part II. thermal conductivity of the packing fraction without gas ﬂow. 
Int Chem Eng 1978; 18 :189–204 . 

[178] Zehner P , Schliinder EU . Thermal conductivity of granular materials at mod- 

erate temperatures. Chem Ing Tech 1970; 42 :933–41 . 

[179] Schotte W . Thermal conductivity of packed beds. AIChE J 1960; 6 :63–7 . 
[180] Laguerre O , Ben Amara S , Alvarez G , Flick D . Transient heat transfer by free 
convection in a packed bed of spheres: comparison between two modelling 
approaches and experimental results. Appl Therm Eng 2008; 28 :14–24 . 
[181] Sadhukhan AK , Gupta P , Saha RK . Modeling and experimental investigations 
on the pyrolysis of large coal particles. Energy Fuel 2011; 25 :5573–83 . 
[182] Mahmoudi AH , Hoffmann F , Peters B . Application of XDEM as a novel ap- 
proach to predict drying of a packed bed. Int J Therm Sci 2014; 75 :65–75 . 
[183] Defraeye T , Blocken B , Carmeliet J . CFD analysis of convective heat transfer 
at the surfaces of a cube immersed in a turbulent boundary layer. Int J Heat 
Mass Transf 2010; 53 :297–308 . 

[184] Dierich F , Nikrityuk PA . A numerical study of the inﬂuence of surface rough- 

ness on the convective heat transfer in a gas ﬂow. CMES 2010; 64 :251–66 . 

[185] Shao X , Shi Y , Yu Z . Combination of the ﬁctitious domain method and the 
sharp interface method for direct numerical simulation of particulate ﬂows 
with heat transfer. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2012; 55 :6775–85 . 

[186] Zheng  G ,  List  R .  Convective  heat  transfer  of  rotating  spheres  and 
spheroids with non-uniform surface temperatures. Int J Heat Mass Transf 
1996; 39 :1815–26 . 

[187] Terreros I , Lordanoff I , Charles JL . Simulation of continuum heat conduction 

using DEM domains. Comput Mater Sci 2013; 69 :46–52 . 

[188] Achenbach E . Heat and ﬂow characteristics of packed beds. Exp Thermal Fluid 

Sci 1995; 10 :17–27 . 

[189] Kaneko  Y ,  Shiojima  T ,  Horio  M .  DEM  simulation  of  ﬂuidized  beds  for 

gas-phase oleﬁn polymerization. Chem Eng Sci 1999; 54 :5809–21 . 

[190] Swasdisevi  T ,  Tanthapanichakoon  W ,  Charinpanitkul  T ,  Kawaguchi  T , 
Tanaka T , Tsuji Y . Prediction of gas–particle dynamics and heat transfer in 
a two-dimensional spouted bed. Adv Powder Technol 2005; 16 :275–93 . 
[191] Chaudhuri B , Muzzio FJ , Tomassone MS . Modeling of heat transfer in granular 

ﬂowing rotating vessels. Chem Eng Sci 2006; 61 :6348–60 . 

[192] Sharaf OZ , Al-Khateeb AN , Kyritsis DC , Abu-Nada E . Numerical investigation 
of nanoﬂuid particle migration and convective heat transfer in microchannels 
using an Eulerian-Lagrangian approach. J Fluid Mech 2019; 878 :62–97 . 
[193] He L , Tafti DK . Heat transfer in an assembly of ellipsoidal particles at low to 
moderate Reynolds numbers. Int J Heat Mass Transfer 2017; 114 :324–36 . 
[194] Gerhardter H , Prieler R , Schluckner C , Knoll M , Hochenauer C , Mühlböck M , 
et al. Modelling convective heat transfer to non-spherical particles. Powder 
Technol 2019; 343 :245–54 . 

[195] Tavassoli H , Peters EAJF , Kuipers JAM . Direct numerical simulation of ﬂuid—
particle heat transfer in ﬁxed random arrays of non-spherical particles. Chem 
Eng Sci 2015; 129 :42–8 . 

[196] He L , Tafti DK , Nagendra K . Evaluation of drag correlations using particle 
resolved simulations of spheres and ellipsoids in assembly. Powder Technol 
2017; 313 :332–43 . 

[197] Richter A , Nikrityuk PA . Drag forces and heat transfer coeﬃcients for spher- 
ical, cuboidal and ellipsoidal particles in cross ﬂow at sub-critical Reynolds 
numbers. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2012; 55 :1343–54 . 

[205] Kishore N , Gu S . Effect of blockage on heat transfer phenomena of spheroid 
particles  at  moderate  Reynolds  and  Prandtl  numbers.  Chem  Eng  Technol 
2011; 34 :1551–8 . 

Dr Zhengbiao Peng ’s principal area of expertise lies in 
areas of particle technology, ﬂuid mechanics, and heat 
transfer and chemical reactions in multiphase processes. 
Other areas of his expertise include in-house codes of 
DEM-based  modelling  of  ﬂuid-solid  ﬂow,  heat  transfer 
and chemical reactions, in-house codes of computational 
ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) modelling of thermal/reacting pro- 
cesses, interfacial phenomena, colloidal science, ice nucle- 
ation, microﬂuidics, parallel computation and multi-scale 
modelling of actual industrial problems. Dr Peng received 
his PhD (2009) in Chemical Engineering from Southeast 
University, China. Upon completion of his PhD studies, 
Dr Peng commenced his academic research career in the 
School of Engineering at The University of Newcastle (Australia). He has published 
over 80 scholarly articles and has been involved in many research projects (over $9 
million) funded by both Australian government and industry. 

A/Prof Elham Doroodchi’s research is underpinned by 
the  two  general  areas  of  ﬂuid  mechanics  and  particle 
technology with the main focus being on the fundamen- 
tal and applied research into multiphase systems. Specif- 
ically, the research has focused on hydrodynamics of ﬂu- 
idized beds, and solid particle, droplet and bubble motion 
in ﬂuid. The research carried out by A/Prof Doroodchi has 
involved a combination of novel and conventional exper- 
imental measurement techniques (e.g. particle image ve- 
locimetry) and theoretical modelling (e.g. computational 
ﬂuid dynamics). In all cases, the fundamental understand- 
ing of the interaction between the phases is obtained un- 
der conditions relevant to the actual industrial-scale and 
subsequently has been applied to the engineering design of multiphase systems 
such as particle classiﬁers, separators and mixers. A/Prof Doroodchi has attracted 
in excess of $17 million in research grants and has published over 140 scholarly 
articles. She has also supervised 14 PhD projects to completion. 

Prof. Behdad Moghtaderi’s research theme is “Thermo- 
Fluid Engineering” encompassing applications in the gen- 
eral ﬁeld of energy and the environment. The focus of 
his research is development of technologies suitable for 
direct/indirect minimisation of greenhouse gas emissions, 
particularly in application areas, such as: Ventilation Air 
Methane  (VAM),  renewable  energy  systems,  advanced 
low emission coal technologies, hydrogen powered micro- 
energy systems, and energy eﬃciency. Since joining The 
University of Newcastle in 1999, Prof Moghtaderi has at- 
tracted in excess of $59 million in research funding. He 
is a co-inventor of the GRANEXTM heat engine which is 
being marketed internationally by Granite Power Pty Ltd. 

