Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Energy crop-based rhizoremediation and lignocellulosic biomass
production as sustainable bioeconomy-driven solution for biofuel
generation and waste mitigation

Nandita Das a, Dinesh Kumar Maheshwari b, Piyush Pandey a,*
a Soil and Environmental Microbiology Lab, Department of Microbiology, Assam University, Silchar, 788011, Assam, India
b Department of Botany and Microbiology, Gurukul Kangri University, Haridwar, Uttarakhand, 249404, India

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
Crude oil contamination
Bioremediation
Bioconversion of bioenergy crops
Bioenergy
Rhizosphere
Microbiome

Increasing global energy consumption has created an urgent need to address climate change and consequently,
the need for sustainable and renewable energy has increased. Simultaneously, the pervasive presence of crude oil
hydrocarbons in the ecosystem, stemming from exploration and extraction activities, underscores the urgency for
developing effective and environment-friendly remediation technologies. Hence, here we describe use of non-
edible  second-generation  energy  crops  for  rhizoremediation  of  oil  contaminated  soil,  to  yield  plant  biomass
for bioenergy and carbon sequestration. This could address the restoration of petroleum hydrocarbon contam-
inated soil, along with waste management for biofuel production. This strategy could also save the agricultural
land  that  is  under  threat  as  a  consequence  of  crude  oil  contamination.  The  strategies  for  enhanced  rhizor-
emediation with bioenergy  crops have been elaborated, including soil, and microbiome engineering. Further-
more,  the  article  delves  into  recent  technological  advancements  aimed  at  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  biofuel
production  with  bioenergy  crops,  employing  methodologies  such  as  synthetic  biology,  systems  biology,  and
metabolic engineering. Despite the promising aspects of this approach, challenges in biofuel production using
bioenergy crops are acknowledged, including issues such as N2O emissions, biodiversity loss, and water quality
management.  The  article  not  only  outlines  these  challenges  but  also  proposes  remedial  strategies  to  address
them.  Through  this  comprehensive  discussion,  valuable  insights  are  provided  on  the  potential  of  petroleum
hydrocarbon-contaminated  soils  for  biomass  production  within  the  framework  of  achieving  sustainable  bio-
energy  generation.  This  approach  has  potential  to  mitigate  CO2  emissions,  remediate  polluted  lands,  and
significantly contribute to the global effort to combat climate change.

1. Introduction

Global energy demand has been steadily increasing over the past few
decades, with an average annual increase of 2.5 % between 2000 and
2019 [1]. However, in 2021, the global requirement for fossil fuels were
94.5 million barrels per day [1,2]. Fossil fuels, including oil, coal, and
natural  gas,  have  been  the  primary  sources  of  energy  for  the  world,
accounting for about 84 % of global energy consumption [3]. Fossil fuels
pose notable environmental concerns due to the high levels of green-
house  gas  emissions  into  the  atmosphere  during  their  processing  and
combustion [4]. Further, the environmental impact of fossil fuel usage is
exacerbated by their spillage during transportation and leakage, causing
harm to both marine and terrestrial ecosystems [5,6]. The oil spillage in

the marine environment causes infiltration of contaminants into the soil,
causing pollution of surrounding aquafers [7,8]. The Enbridge oil spill,
which occurred in 2010 in Michigan, resulted in the release of over 1
million gallons of crude oil into the soil and nearby waterways, causing
environmental damages and health impacts on nearby living commu-
nities [9]. In addition to this, in 2006, an oil pipeline operated by the
company Prudhoe Bay in Alaska spilled over 250,000 gallons of crude
oil  onto  1300  miles  (2100  km)  coastline  and  nearby  wetlands.  The
spillage  resulted  in  the  deterioration  of  the  natural  soil  habitat  and
impacted all forms life, including zooplanktons, fish, animals, and birds
[10]. Similarly, the Niger Delta in Nigeria is likely the world’s largest
crude  oil  contaminated  region,  with  approximately  2000  oil  affected
sites due to the 13 million tonne of fossil fuel spill [11].

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: piyushddn@gmail.com, piyush.pandey@aus.ac.in (P. Pandey).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2024.101161
Received 3 July 2023; Received in revised form 22 February 2024; Accepted 26 May 2024

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)101161Availableonline4June20240360-1285/©2024ElsevierLtd.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.

N. Das et al.

The global economy is predicted to grow at an average annual rate of
3.2  %  between  2021  and  2030,  resulting  in  increased  energy  con-
sumption and transportation requirements [12,13]. The transportation
sector currently contributes to 20 % of fossil fuel CO2 emissions into the
atmosphere  but  is  projected  to  contribute  23  %  by  2030,  potentially
escalating the issue [14,15]. Biobased energies, with their closed carbon
cycle and net zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, have the possibility
of fulfilling human energy needs and providing additional advantages
such as land reclamation and restoring biodiversity [16–18]. However,
new technologies evolving with the utilization of non-edible lignocel-
lulosic  biomass  for  remediating  polluted  sites  and  bio-based  energy
production  are  nature-based  solutions  for  reducing  greenhouse  gas
emissions, promoting energy independence, and also driving economic
growth  [19,20].  Rhizoremediation  is  a  specific  bioremediation  tech-
nique that involves the utilization of plant root systems and microbial
interactions to immobilised, degrade, uptake and remove organic and
inorganic  pollutants  from  soil  and  water  for  total  environmental
clean-up. It has played a significant role in restoring ecosystems [21,22].
Among  the  suitable  candidates  for  rhizoremediation,  bioenergy  crops
such as Switchgrass, Jatropha curcas, Salix spp., Arundo donax and Mis-
canthus  sp.  stand  out  because  of  their  high  biomass  production,  and
adaptability  to  varying  adverse  environmental  conditions  [23,24].
Moreover, besides their remedial properties, bioenergy crops offer major
contributions  to  mitigate  atmospheric  greenhouse  gas  concentrations
and sequester carbon in soil [25,26]. Furthermore, biofuels generated
from these crops can be a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels, which
account for a significant proportion of greenhouse gas emissions [27].
The deep root systems of these crops can also enhance soil quality and
promote biodiversity by providing habitat for beneficial organisms [28].
Additionally, the extensive root systems of non-edible bioenergy crops
can mitigate soil erosion and facilitate water retention, thereby aiding
the  restoration  of  water-based  ecosystems  such  as  wetlands  [29,30].
Usually, food crops such as sugarcane, sugar beet, sorghum, corn, wheat,
barley, rapeseed, sunflower, and canola have been widely used across
the globe for biofuel production. Nevertheless, the utilization of these
food crops for the rhizoremediation of crude oil-contaminated soil raises
valid concerns regarding potential food contamination, as growing food
crops in contaminated soil results in accumulation of toxic contaminants
in  plants’  tissue  [31].  Therefore,  growing  non-edible  bioenergy  crops
offer  efficient  rhizoremediation  due  to  their  adaptability  to  contami-
nated sites, low maintenance requirements, and high biomass produc-
tion efficiency, all without compromising with food contamination [24].
Energy crops currently provide close to 3 % of liquid transportation
fuels, 3 % of global heat production, and approximately 1.5 % of elec-
trical power [32,33]. Biofuels are being explored as a replacement for
petroleum because these are nontoxic, sulfur-free, biodegradable, and
have  renewable-source  origins  [34].  More  than  2000  patents  on
biofuel-related applications were submitted annually in the last decade.
Grain bioethanol, cellulosic bioethanol, biodiesel, and bio-pyrolysis are
the  four  fields  currently  dominating  biofuel  patent  activities  [35,36].
However,  global  investments  in  biofuels  dropped  from  $27  billion  in
2007 to $2 billion in 2017 [37]. The total number of patent submissions
experienced a significant decrease, dropping from more than 6000 in
2011  to  approximately  2500  in  2017  [37],  which  suggests  that  the
absence of consistent legislation, impediments to the scaling-up process,
and  insufficient  technological  advancements  serve  as  significant  bar-
riers. China, the United States, Japan, Europe, and Canada are among
the  top  10  producers  of  biofuels  worldwide  [38].  Current  biofuel
research focuses on building cost-effective automation for new biofuels
and  increasing  the  gross  processing  efficiency  of  existing biofuel  pro-
duction  [39]. The conversion  of  lignocellulosic biomass into  valuable
biorefinery products is crucial for reaching carbon neutrality and pro-
moting the circular economy [40,41].

Recently, Che Hamzah et al. [42], reviewed the potential of J. curcas
as  a  biodiesel  feedstock  with  the  perspective  of  its  significance  to
Malaysia’s socio-economic growth. Similarly, giant reed and Miscanthus

Jatropha

jet  biofuel

the  production  of

has been promoted for its commercial use for heat, and electricity pro-
duction [43]. Wang et al. [44], provided an overview of the latest sci-
entific progress on Miscanthus for its biological characteristics, biofuel
production,  and  potential  for  heavy  metal  phytoremediation.  Baker
et al. [45], reviewed the efficiency of Willow plants to generate biofuels
and challenges during its generation process. Alherbawi et al. [46], had
reviewed
through
hydro-processing and suggested its use to reduce greenhouse gas emis-
sions by up to 75 % as compared to commercially used jet-fuel. Davida
and Ragauskas [47], explored the biochemical processes of Switchgrass
concerning  biofuel  production, which  included  aspects  like  elemental
composition, chemical constituents, biopolymer components, and their
respective  structures.  Additionally,  the  impact  of  these  chemical  ele-
ments  on  the  biological  conversion  to  ethanol  and  the  production  of
pyrolysis oils had been explained. Similarly, there are reviews available
where  rhizoremediation  of  hydrocarbon  contaminated  soil  has  been
explained by using the plants like Jatropha. curcas [48], Melia azedarach
[49], and Salix alba [50]. Chandra and Kumar et al. [51], described the
several phytoremediation mechanisms that are utilised by plants such as
Festuca  arundinacea  (Tall  fescue),  Brassica  campestris  (Alfalfa)  and
Panicum  virgatum  L.  (Switchgrass),  to  decontaminate  hydrocarbon
polluted  soil.  Additionally,  Hussain  et  al.  [52],  reviewed  the  current
understanding of rhizoremediation, including plant selection, inocula-
tion  with  specific  microbial  strains  (both  hydrocarbon-degrading  and
plant growth-promoting microbes), and the use of soil amendments to
improve remediation efficiency, using Willow and Poplar plants in rhi-
zoremediation.  In  consideration  of  the  diverse  advantages  associated
with non-edible bioenergy crops in the areas of biofuel generation and
rhizoremediation,  this  review  suggests  an  integrated  prospect  which
involves  the  remediation  of  crude  oil-contaminated  sites  through  the
implementation of non-edible bioenergy crops, followed by the utiliza-
tion of the resultant contaminated feedstock for biofuel production.

Further  scientific  research  is  required  to  enhance  the  efficacy  of
bioenergy crops for both rhizoremediation and biofuel production, as
the research in these areas is still in the early stages [39,40]. This re-
quires  an  interdisciplinary  approach  that  integrates  knowledge  from
these different fields for the use of advanced technologies. The under-
lying mechanisms that govern the interaction between bioenergy crops
and  crude  oil  pollutants,  scaling  up  their  cultivation,  exploring  their
economic  viability,  and  investigating  their  impact  on  soil  quality,
biodiversity, and ecosystem health has been elaborated and discussed.
The investigation further explores the strategies for enhancing the bio-
economy  of  nations  through  the  application  of  these  nature-based
techniques,  thereby  promoting  climate-friendly  development.  The
outcome of the critical analysis and the perceptions generated through
this review could play a pivotal role in driving progress towards tackling
global environmental challenges, while also paving the way for a sus-
tainable future.

2. Potential consequences of crude oil contamination

Crude  oil  contamination  may  occur  for  various  reasons,  including
human activities, natural disasters, and equipment failures [53]. Mining
and industrial activities continue to be major contributors to crude oil
pollution  in  the  soil  despite  existing  regulations  and  safety  measures
[54].  Anthropogenic  activities  can  lead  to  spills  during  the  trans-
portation or storage of crude oil, which can contaminate the environ-
ment [55]. Natural disasters such as hurricanes and floods can also cause
oil spills and contamination [56]. Equipment failures, such as pipeline
leaks  or  tanker  ruptures,  release  large  amounts  of  oil  into  the  soil  or
marine water. Chang and Lin. [57], reviewed 242 incidents involving
storage tanks that took place at industrial sites over a span of 40 years.
Crude  oil  pollution  can  negatively  impact  agriculture  by  reducing
crop yield, the germination of seeds, and the longevity of plant life [58].
The potential for various plant components to absorb hydrocarbons and
other contaminants in crude oil may result in their accumulation within

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)1011612

N. Das et al.

the  food  web.  Even  at  low  levels  of  crude  oil,  the  seed  germination
process  is  hindered  [59].  In  10  %  and  20  %  polluted  soils,  the  seed
germination index was found to drop from 100 % to 29.7 % and 39 %,
respectively [60]. Plants growing in oil-contaminated sites showed 60 %
lower  chlorophyll  content  as  crude  oil  contamination  reduces  the
growth  of  plants  by  damaging  intercellular  components  [61].  By
adhering to the soil particles, crude oil reduces soil porosity, increases
the dry density, and makes the soil more acidic. The hydrophobic nature
of these pollutants lowers soil organic carbon content and prevents the
geochemical cycling of nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus [62].
(cid:0) 1  of  petroleum  products  are
The  concentrations  above  5000  mg  kg
therefore regarded as severely high levels of pollution [63]. The inha-
lation of airborne hazardous gases and dust generated during the pro-
cessing  of  petroleum  hydrocarbons  has  been  shown  to  have  adverse
effects  on  human  health  [64,65].  According  to  Kuranchie  et  al.  [66],
individuals may potentially encounter acute adverse impacts resulting
from exposure to toluene, benzene, xylene, and ethylbenzene emitting
from  the  contaminated  soil.  The  consumption  of  food  that  has  been
polluted  with  petroleum  components  has  the  potential  to  lead  to  the
development  of  chronic  illnesses,  including  skin  allergies,  as  well  as
impair  the  proper  functioning  of  the  lungs,  bladder,  and  kidneys.
Furthermore, regular exposure to such contaminants may increase the
risk of cancer in several organs [67].

Crude oil consequences have caused the loss of 33 % of the world’s
useable or preferable agricultural land, reducing family food security by
60 % and increasing childhood malnutrition by 24 % [68]. Over 600
million  people  globally  had  been  affected  by  existing  oil  fields,  and
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are known as signifi-
cant environmental pollutant due to their mutagenic and carcinogenic
properties  [69,70].  PAHs  can  persist  in  soil  for  extended  periods,  be
difficult to remediate, and migrate from soil to groundwater, resulting in
contamination  of  drinking  water  sources  and  potential  exposure  to
humans and other living organisms [71,72].

According  to  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change
(IPCC), the oil and gas industry is responsible for approximately 37 % of
global  carbon  dioxide  emissions  from  fossil  fuel  combustion  [73,74].
Further, the United States Environmental Protection Agency estimates
that burning one gallon of gasoline results in the release of 8.91 kg of
CO2 into the atmosphere [75]. In 2019, global CO2 emissions from en-
ergy use totalled 33.1 gigatons, with crude oil accounting for 34 % of
those  emissions.  According  to  the  reports,  the  Deepwater  Horizon  oil
spill in 2010 released between 6 and 9 million metric tons of methane
into  the  atmosphere  [76].  Moreover,  the  global  oil  and  gas  industry
releases at least 13 million metric tons of methane annually, which is 20
%  higher  than  previous  estimates  [77].  With  all  such  consequences,
global  climate  change  results  in  an  increase  in  the  frequency  and  in-
tensity  of  hurricanes,  which  increases  the  risk  of  oil  spills  and  other
forms of contamination in coastal areas [78–80].

The  consequences  of  crude  oil  spills  are  multifaceted,  spanning
ecological, social, and economic dimensions. However, several biolog-
ical methods are increasingly being used to enhance the bioremediation
of crude oil-contaminated environments, which involves the use of mi-
croorganisms  to  degrade  and  remove  such  contaminants  [81,82].
Adaptation of rhizoremediation techniques utilizing second-generation
bioenergy crops provides several advantages over traditional methods
of remediation, including lower cost, less environmental disruption, and
the ability to treat contaminants in-situ [83]. However, rhizoremediation
may  be  limited  by  factors  such  as  low  microbial  activity  and  low
bioavailability  of  contaminants  [84].  By  harnessing  intricate  in-
teractions between plant roots and beneficial microorganisms, suitable
plants can degrade a large number of pollutants and produce a consid-
erably high-value biomass quantity. Biological methods can be used to
introduce beneficial microorganisms, increase nutrient availability, and
manipulate environmental conditions to optimize microbial growth and
activity  [85].  Furthermore,  the  effective  execution  of  this  emerging
discipline  necessitates  the  integration  of  a  variety  of  disciplines,

including  metagenomics,  systems  biology,  and  genetic  engineering
methodologies. In order  to ensure  the effective  and efficient  usage of
these innovative procedures, it is essential to engage in thorough and
frequent monitoring of potential ecological consequences.

3. Rhizoremediation and its advantage using second-generation
bioenergy crops for the degradation of crude oil in soil

The  process  of  crude  oil  remediation  involves  the  elimination  of
organic and inorganic contaminants from the environment through the
implementation of physical, chemical, and biological degradation pro-
cesses [86].  The physical method  involves several  techniques such as
vapor  extraction,  filtration,  electro-remediation,  solidification,  and
thermal  remediation  [87,88].  While  chemical  procedures,  including
oxidation,  reduction,  solubilization,  and  hydrolysis  of  contaminants
[89].  Rhizoremediation  is  a  biological  process  of  degrading  organic
contaminants in the soil using the plant microbe interactions in rhizo-
sphere [90]. Rhizoremediation can effectively removes petroleum hy-
drocarbons,  from  the  environment  through  total  mineralization  [91].
Observations  have  shown  that  the  breakdown  of  total  petroleum  hy-
drocarbons  (TPH)  pollutants  may  reach  up  to  90  %  with  plants  like
Lolium.  multiflorum  (Ryegrass)  when  augmented  with  efficient  hydro-
carbon catabolising bacteria [92]. Moreover, Alfalfa plants have been
utilised  to mitigate  the  soil contaminated  with  heavy metal  pollution
(Cu, Pb, and Zn concentrations of 87, 100, and 110 mg kg1 DW), as well
as petroleum hydrocarbons (3800 mg kg1  DW), due to their ability to
tolerate  and  thrive  in  soil  polluted  with  different  contaminants  [93].
However,  the  rhizodegradation  by  Alfalfa  was  particularly  noticeable
when the soil was bioaugmented with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which
stimulated plant growth, resulting in a 56 % and 105 % increase in shoot
and  root  biomass,  respectively,  to  mitigate  plant  stress  [93].  A  study
conducted by Hou et al. [94], observed an increase in the biomass of
Festuca arundinacea L. and the degradation of PAHs in oil-contaminated
soil.  This  was  achieved  through  rhizoremediation  treatments  using
bacteria that have plant growth promoting properties and the ability to
produce biosurfactants. In an additional investigation Zhang et al. [95],
revealed significant degradation rate of 76 %–80 % for diesel fuel within
the  rhizosphere  of  native  estuarine  plants.  In  a  recent  study  by  Khan
et  al.  [96],  it  was  found  that  two  bacterial  strains,  Bacillus  sp.  and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, were able to successfully establish themselves
in the roots of Rhizophora mangle L. Furthermore, these bacterial strains
were involved in defending the plant against pathogens, promoting the
growth, and  effectively breaking  down more than 80 % of the  PAHs.
Fig. 1 illustrates various phytoremediation approaches such as phyto-
volatilization, phytoextraction, phytostabilization, phytoaccumulation,
phytodegradation,  phytoadsorption,  rhizofiltration,  rhizodegradation,
and  phytodesalination  for  contaminant  removal.  It  highlights  the
involvement of microorganisms and their interactions in the degrada-
tion  of  organic  matter  and  diverse  pollutants  within  the  plant  rhizo-
sphere.  The  root  microbiome  is  crucial  in  enhancing  plant-microbe
interactions  to  increase  contaminant  degradation  in  the  rhizosphere,
which is referred to as microbe-assisted phytoremediation technology
(MAPT). Understanding these interactions is key to developing effective
phytoremediation strategies.  Additionally, it  demonstrates an alterna-
tive  approach  involving  CO2  fixation  and  biomass  generation  to
contribute towards circular economy by biofuel production.

Bacteria such as Acidobacter, Alteromonas, Arthrobacter, Burkholderia,
Dietzia, Enterobacter, Kocuria, Marinobacter, Mycobacterium, Pandoraea,
Pseudomonas,  Staphylococcus,  Streptobacillus,  Streptococcus,  and  Rhodo-
coccus play crucial role in the degradation of crude oil and its compo-
nents [97,98]. Similarly, obligate hydrocarbonoblastic bacteria such as
Nesiotobacter,  Nitratireductor,  Acinetobacter,  Marinobacter,  Pseudoalter-
omonas, and Sphingomonas have very low abundance in uncontaminated
soil  [99],  which  otherwise  rises  with  increase  in  the  hydrocarbon
contamination  [100].  The  ability  of  bacteria  to  thrive  in  highly
contaminated environments may be attributed to their distinct genetic

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)1011613

N. Das et al.

Fig. 1. Rhizoremediation approach to combat soil and water pollution caused by various contaminants.

characteristics, as well as their catabolic properties. The use of meta-
genomics, and metabolomics analysis has identified dominant microbial
genera and their potential genetic interaction in rhizosphere, that play a
significant role in rhizoremediation [101,102]. Enzymes such as alkane
1-monooxygenase,  alcohol  dehydrogenase,  cyclohexanol-dehydro
genase and cyclohexanone 1,2 monooxygenase are involved in degra-
dation of xenobiotic compounds present in crude oil contaminated soils
[103–105].  The  catabolic  pathways  and  genes  utilise  by  different
hydrocarbonoblastic bacterial species for TPH and PAH degradation are
depicted  in  Fig.  2  (predicted  from  Kyoto  encyclopedia  of  genes  and
genomes).  The  KEGG  database  was  utilised  to  reconstruct  metabolic
for  polyaromatic  hydrocarbon  compounds,  revealing
pathways
dioxygenase-mediated  ring-cleavage  and  oxidation  of  aromatic  mole-
cules  break  down  PAH  compounds,  with  oxygenase  producing  in-
termediates  like  salicylate  and  catechol.  Most  microbial  communities
use dioxygenase routes for active phenolic and benzoate degradation.
Here  pyrene  degradation,  phthalate  synthesis,  and  benzoate  degrada-
tion  pathways  have  been  reconstructed.  The  genes  involved  in  the
respective metabolic pathways are also given [106].

In  rhizoremediation  process,  the  deep  root  system  provides  a
microaerophilic  environment  and  nutrients  for  the  development  and
proliferation of microorganisms [107]. Plants release more than 20 % of
their photosynthetically fixed carbon into the rhizosphere with various
other  compounds,  including  amino  acids,  sugars,  and  phenolic  com-
pounds.  which  modify  soil  properties,  establish  beneficial  microbial
diversity,  facilitate  nutrient  acquisition, and  reduce  competition from
neighbouring  plants  [108–110].  Root  exudates  can  be  classified  as
passive  root  exudates,  root  tissue  lysates,  mucilage  compounds,  and
secondary metabolites based on their chemical nature [111]. Microbes
provide  nutrients  and  growth  hormones  to  plants,  defend  them  from
various  plant  diseases,  and  cause  pollution  degradation  [112,113].

including

There are various compounds and enzymes synthesized by the microbial
counterpart,
exopolysaccharides,  bio-
siderophores,
surfactants,  ACC  deaminase,  organic  acids,  and  oxidoreductases,  that
enhance plant growth. These substances have different functions, such
as scavenging iron, chelating metals, solubilizing compounds, lowering
stress hormones, mineralizing metals, solubilizing organic compounds,
and  degrading  contaminants  [114].  Plant  roots  provide  nutrients,
proper  aeration,  and  moisture  and  stimulate  the  biodegradation  of
contaminants  in  the  root  through  the  root  microbiome  [115].  Addi-
tionally,  microbes  promote  root  development  and  balance  the  stress
hormone production level [116]. The ‘Rhizosphere effect’ of root during
rhizoremediation is created by the secretion of analogous compounds
such as terpenes and flavonoids, which are similar to several xenobiotic
compounds  [117].  These  organic  molecules  act  as  co-metabolite  and
enhance rhizoremediation process  by  increasing microbial population
and activity [118]. Plant roots release linoleic acid, which functions as a
surfactant to enhance the bioavailability of PAH (pyrene) by creating a
coating on soil particles. This leads to increased adherence of bacteria to
the  contaminant  [119].  Further,  secretion  of  low  molecular  weight
organic acids such as malic acid and citric acids increase bioavailability
of  xenobiotic compounds  [120].  On  the  other  hand,  the  formation of
biofilms  leads  to  the  aggregation  of  microbes  under  a  self-secreted
mucilaginous  exopolysaccharide  matrix,  which  increases  the  attach-
ment, and therefore survival of microorganisms, at contaminated sites
[121].

The effectiveness of rhizoremediation varies depending on the type
and concentration of the contaminants and the plant genotype [122].
Two  species  of  Salix,  i.e.,  S.  purpurea  and  S.  miyabeana,  grown  in
PHC-contaminated  soil  resulted  in  the  shifting  of  the  microbiome  to
more hydrocarbon  degraders  and microorganisms  beneficial  for plant
health [123]. It has been observed that the introduction of citric acid and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)1011614

N. Das et al.

Fig. 2. The metabolic pathways of bacteria that involve the aerobic breakdown of aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons.

oxalic acid into the soil enhanced the availability of phenanthrene and
pyrene [124]. Similarly, M. x giganteus energy crop grown in contami-
nated soil showed reduced biomass, but enhanced C10–C40 degradation
(58  ± 14  %)  compared  to  control  [125].  Further,  Cajanus  cajan  has
demonstrated significant potential in remediating petroleum oily sludge
by reducing contaminants by up to 68.9 % in a period of 90 days [126].
However, much of the rhizodegradation studies has been explained for
laboratory experiments and its pertinent to extend these finding to field
experimental set-ups. The dispersion of crude oil by a variety of plant
species, such as grasses, legumes, herbs, medicinal plants, ornamentals,
and trees, has been well researched [127–129]. Choosing appropriate
species  of  plants  and  genotypes  is  crucial  for  developing  potential
remediation techniques [130]. The constant and efficient reclamation of
petroleum hydrocarbon contaminated soil may involve the cooperative

action  of  several  microorganisms,  applied  through  plant  roots  during
rhizoremediation  [131,132]. However,  the  selection  of  plants  for rhi-
zoremediation  necessitates  consideration  and  determination  based  on
the  climatic  zone  corresponding  to  their  native  ecological  niche.
L. multiflorum [131], Miscanthus [132], Salix sp. [133], are distributed
throughput  the  temperate  regions  also  including  South-west  Asia,
southern Europe, north-west Africa and show high resistance towards
heat stress, adaptable to a wide range of climatic and soil conditions.
Medicago  sativa  L.  (alfalfa)  is  one  of  the  most  popular  fodder  crops
throughout the world, and considered as major carbon sink because of
its  high  production  and  deep  root  systems  [134].  Festuca  arundinacea
Schreb (Tall fescue) from temperate regions is well-adapted to climatic
extremes of heat, drought and cold [135]. Similarly, estuarine plants are
very  resilient  to  a  variety  of  environmental  challenges,  including

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)1011615

N. Das et al.

variations in salt, rainfall, currents, and water levels or tides, making
them suitable plant partner for rhizoremediation processes [136].

Employing non-edible perennial energy crops is currently receiving a
lot  of  attention  worldwide  as  a  new  concept  in  “sustainable  rhizor-
emediation” of damaged soils [137]. The use of plant-microbe interac-
tion to reclaim crude oil contaminated lands has additional benefits, as
one being recommended here for use of biomass for biofuel production.
Yet, there could be even more benefits of rhizoremediation using energy
crops,  that could  be realized  with  more research  and  applications.  In
fact,  the  extended  benefits  could  be  explained  in  terms  of  reducing
climate  change,  meet  energy  demands,  promote  social  and  economic
growth, and create a sustainable environment. Fig. 3 demonstrated the
rhizoremediation of petroleum hydrocarbon by plant-microbe pair. The
root  exudates  release  by  the  plant  root  cells  enhances  the  microbial
degradation  of  petroleum  hydrocarbons.  The  microbial  cells  release
several plant growths promoting substances for the growth and devel-
opment  of  the  plant.  With  the  help  of  biostimulation  and  bio-
augmentation  techniques  the  degradation  process  can  be  accelerated.
The complete process leads to the carbon sequestration and reduction of
greenhouse gases.

3.1. Second-generation energy crops as potential resources for
rhizoremediation of crude oil contaminate soil

Second-generation biofuels exhibit distinctive characteristics setting
them apart from other types, primarily attributable to their use of non-
edible raw materials. These materials include lignocellulosic biomass,
agricultural  waste,  byproducts  from  the  forestry  industry,  or  rapidly
growing  energy-specific  crops  [138,139].  According  to  the  World

Bioenergy Association (WBA, 2021), the world’s biofuel output in 2019
was estimated to reach 159 billion litres, with the Americas representing
70 % of the overall production [140]. It is estimated that biofuels, bio-
chemicals, and biomaterials will replace fossil fuels by more than 30 %
in the next few years [141]. The forestry and agriculture industries can
provide  lignocellulosic  feedstocks  as  an  alternative  to  petrochemical
resources [142]. By combining rhizoremediation with resource gener-
ation, it is possible to simultaneously address environmental contami-
nants and promote economic development [143]. Fig. 4 illustrates the
four different separate groups of biofuels based on their origin of live-
stock:  first,  second,  third,  and  fourth  generation  biofuels  [144,145].
First-generation biofuels, such as ethanol and biodiesel, are primarily
derived from edible biomass such as sugarcane and maize [146]. The use
of lignocellulosic biomass, which encompasses non-edible wood, agri-
cultural waste, and municipal waste materials, are considered as the 2nd
generation biofuel that significantly eliminates these concerns, and the
cost  of  these  particular  biomass  is  much  lower  in  comparison  to  the
feedstock of the first generation [147,148]. Cyanobacteria and algae are
used  for  the  production  of  third-  and  fourth-generation  biofuels,
respectively [149], which are emerging and dynamic fields, and their
practical use is constrained by a scarcity of the requisite manufacturing
resources [150].

Some of the non-edible bioenergy crops such as J. curcas, Populus sp.,
Miscanthus sp., Salix sp., Ricinus communis, etc. may be considered for
hydrocarbon  rhizodegradation  and  biofuel  generation  for  their  addi-
tional environmental adaptability and efficiency. J. curcas, a member of
the Euphorbiaceae family, thrives in hot, arid climates, shows resistance
to heat [151], and is able to tolerate drought conditions and extremely
polluted and infertile soils. The potential of J. curcas in remediating soil

Fig. 3. Graphical illustration of petroleum hydrocarbon metabolism by plant-microbe pair.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)1011616

N. Das et al.

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of different biofuel feedstocks and different types of biofuels.

contaminated with crude oil and heavy metals has been explored, along
with biodiesel production. Results showed that J. curcas could remove
up  to  89.8  %  and  91.2  %  of  crude  oil  and  heavy  metal  from  soil,
respectively, while the extracted oil from harvested seeds had a biodiesel
conversion efficiency of 86.5 % and 87.5 % [152]. The plant was also
found to remove up to 90 % of diesel from the soil and produce seed oil
for biodiesel (86.4 %), with the oilcake residue improving soil quality
[153].  Jamil et  al. [154], showed  that with the application  of appro-
priate chelating agents and essential plant supplements, the plantation
of  J.  curcas  in  mining  fly  ash  landfills  can  reduce  the  degree  of
contamination.  The  decontamination  of  pyrene-spiked  soil  with  the
application of J. curcas and an efficient microbial consortium has been
demonstrated  [155].  A  consortium  of  five  efficient  PAH  degraders
(Pseudomonas  aeruginosa,  Pseudomonas  fragi,  Klebsiella  pneumoniae,
Alcaligenes  faecalis,  and  Acinetobacter  sp.)  was  bioaugmented  in
pyrene-contaminated  soil  through  the  J.  curcas  rhizosphere,  demon-
strating  high  efficacy  in  rhizosphere-mediated  remediation  with  the
removal of 97.2 % of pyrene within 60 days [48]. Another study found
that J. curcas, when combined with compost amendments, significantly
reduced soil TPH (78.8 %) concentrations in mine spoils after 16 weeks
[156]. Abioye et al. [157], used J. curcas seedlings to treat organically
modified soil for 84 days with 3 %, and 6 % (w/w) waste lubricating oil
and  discovered  that  the  soil was  completely  decontaminated  after  12
weeks. Chelating agents, biosurfactants, and organic acids released by
the roots of J. curcas can acidify the surrounding soil and accelerate the
mobilization  of  soil-bound  contaminants  [158].  The  seed  yield  of
J.  curcas  varies  based  on  soil  composition  and  geographical  location,

with an annual range of 0.1–15 metric tons per hectare [159].

Similarly,  Poplars  are  a  rapidly  growing,  genetically  diverse  plant
that can tolerate a variety of soil conditions and climates. Poplars are
recognized as a powerful phytoremediator due to their ability to act as a
phytoextractor  and  phytostabilizor,  generating  significantly  high
amounts  of  biomass  [160].  Poplar  trees  significantly  reduce  the  total
petroleum hydrocarbon (TPH) concentration, ranging from 47 % to 85
% in contaminated soils during the 24 months of growth, depending on
the type of hydrocarbon [161]. Wyman et al. [162], found that intro-
ducing a Pseudomonas strain into hybrid poplars led to a reduction in
trichloroethylene  (TCE)  and  an  enhanced  degradation  process.  The
dioxane degrading efficiency of Amycolata sp. CB1190 was enhanced via
bioaugmentation of Poplar root extract (40 mg/L) in contaminated soil,
which  resulted  in  removing  up  to  100  mg/L  dioxane  within  45  days
[163]. Degradation of naphthalene by Kurthia sp. SBA4, Bacillus circu-
lans SBA12, and Microbacterium varians SBA8 isolated from P. deltoides
rhizosphere showed degradation rates of 85.3 %, 95.8 %, and 86.8 %,
respectively, after a period of 6 days of incubation [164]. Despite the
fact that the presence of plants served as the most effective therapy for
PAH  dissipation (82–87 %),  further inoculation  with the  Burkholderia
fungorum DBT1 strain resulted in the most significant PAH reduction (up
to  99  %)  [165].  Additionally,  PAH  degradation  can  be  enhanced  by
increasing the abundance and activity of the PAH-degrading microbial
community in the rhizosphere of the plants [166]. With higher rates of
photosynthesis, Poplars  are recognized as  good carbon buffers due to
their ability to sequester large amounts of CO2  in woody biomass and
soil [167]. These trees have been used to phytoremediate a wide range

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)1011617

N. Das et al.

of  pollutants,  including  petroleum  hydrocarbons,  heavy  metals,  atra-
zine,  trichloroethylene,  chloroacetanilide  herbicides,  and  benzene
[168–170]. In addition to phytoremediation, the poplar tree also per-
forms efficiently with landfill leachate, polluted waste water, and tan-
nery waste [171]. With its high biomass content, Poplar is considered an
excellent choice for bioethanol production due to its high ratio of cel-
lulose and average lignin and hemicellulose content [172,173]. Besides,
these poplar trees can yield up to 15.3 tons of biomass per year, which
can be converted into biofuels such as ethanol and biodiesel [174].

The ability to grow and proliferate in a disturbed, adverse environ-
ment makes Ricinus communis (castor) plants as one of the most prom-
ising candidates for phytoremediation and carbon sequestration [175].
These plants were able to effectively remove up to 85 % of total petro-
leum hydrocarbons from soil within 90 days of growth, through both
root and shoot uptake and biodegradation by microorganisms associated
with the plant’s root system [176,177]. Castor is now being recognized
as a third-generation energy crop with potential for phytoremediation
and carbon sequestration [178]. It is a sustainable and environmentally
sustainable  source  of  energy  due  to  the  greater  seed  yield  (902–950
kg/ha),  comparatively  high  oil  content  (46–55  %),  and  low  emission
[179,180]. Due to its high viscosity (226 mm2s-1 to 281.8 mm2s-1 at 40
◦
C), castor oil is better suited for lubrication than biodiesel production
[181].

Being non-food, Miscanthus crops were effective in removing petro-
leum hydrocarbons from contaminated soil, with up to 80 % removal
within 90 days [182]. In one of the reports, Miscanthus plants were able
to degrade and absorb 65 % diesel fuel from contaminated soil within 90
days, and also enhanced the organic matter content of the soil while also
promoting  microbial  diversity  [183].  Miscanthus  sp.  has  been  used
efficiently for biofuel generation as well as phytoremediation of heavy
metal-contaminated  soil  via  thermal  conversion  [184].  Growing
M. giganteus on oil-contaminated soil (40 g/kg) decreased the content of
petroleum products by 13 % when compared to the control. Miscanthus
had a high biomass yield and could produce up to 16.2 tons of dry matter
per hectare per year, making it a highly productive bioenergy crop [185,
186].

Salix sp. (Willow) [187], and Arundo donax (Giant reed) [188], have
been found to be effective in removing petroleum hydrocarbons from
contaminated soil through rhizoremediation [189], with removal effi-
ciency ranging from 55.7 % to 74.5 % [190]. Further, root exudates from
hybrid  willow  (Salix  alba×matsudana),  applied  with  Sphingomonas
yanoikuyae  JAR02,  supported  15–20  %  benzo  [a]pyrene  degradation
[191]. Both Willow and Giant reed have high biomass production, low
ash content, and high cellulose and hemicellulose content, making them
promising feedstocks for biofuel production [192,193]. Some varieties
of Willow trees can produce up to 20 tons of biomass per hectare per
year [194]. Similarly, the use of a bacterial consortium (B. subtilis SR1,
B. subtilis S1I26, Paenibacillus sp. S1I8, and S. arlettae S1I1) when applied
with Melia azedarach plants, resulted in a notable improvement in the
breakdown of BaP, with 88 % reduction in soil, over a period of 60 days
[195]. The introduction of the endophyte Pseudomonas putida PD1 into
two  willow  clones  (Salix  purpurea  94,006  and  Salix  discolour  S-365)
(cid:0) 1 phenanthrene led to a 25–40
growing in soil polluted with 100 mg kg
% enhancement in the rate of degradation of this PAH [196]. Giant reed
is another plant which is capable of growing in a wide range of soils with
high pH, salt content, and metal concentrations, making it a significant
energy  crop  for  ecological  remediation  and  the  manufacture  of  bio-
polymers and bioenergy [197]. Hemp and flax have also demonstrated
potential for phytoremediation and biofuel generation from soil polluted
with Cd in laboratory experiments [198,199].

Depending on the type of the biomass, there could be different types
of biofuels which can be produced from the contaminated biomass. For
instance, Miscanthus is a very promising candidate for bioethanol feed-
stock production, utilizing sulfuric acid as a catalyst the productivity can
be  improved  [44].  Conversely,  substituting  petrol  with  bioethanol
derived from Willow leads to a reduction in emissions [200]. Han et al.

[201],  investigated  the  process  of  producing biobutanol  through  ABE
fermentation using acid hydrolysate (H2SO4) material of Willow (Salix
caprea). Sekoai et al. [202], investigated the application of nanomaterial
Ni, W, and Ni–W catalysts in the biotransformation of Jatropha oil into
biodiesel.  Through  biochemical  conversion,  the  sugars  present  in
bamboo  can  undergo  fermentation  via  enzymatic,  transforming  them
into both bioethanol and methane. This capability enhances the versa-
tility of bamboo in comparison to wood and other traditional sources of
biofuel [203]. Studies have shown that hemp has the potential to yield
over 800 L of biodiesel per hectare per year, which is higher than other
biofuel crops [204]. During the reductive catalytic fractionation step in
bioethanol production from Poplar sawdust, hydrogen transfer reactions
were carried out using Raney Ni as a catalyst in a one-pot procedure
[205]. The isopropanol (2-PrOH) in the original solution served a dual
role by providing hydrogen and acted as a solvent for the breakdown of
lignin. The findings revealed that the amount of 2-PrOH in the initial
liquid of RCF had a significant impact on both the chemical composition
and the yield of the lignin oil. As a result, this had a significant effect on
the  properties  of  the  pulps  and  subsequently  changed  the  production
process of bioethanol [206]. Further, Wyman et al. [162], suggested that
Poplar  wood  can  yield  significant  amounts  of  glucose  (41.4  g/L)  and
xylose (22.3 g/L) when treated with a 2 % H2SO4 concentration, which
can  further  undergo  fermentation  process  to  produce  biodiesel.
Numerous  non-edible  oils  producing  plants  such  as  Pongamia  pinnata
(karanja), Hevea brasiliensis (rubber), Madhuca indica (mahua), Azadir-
achta  indica  (neem),  Nicotiana  tabacum  (tobacco),  Gossypium  hirsutum
(cotton seed), Simmondsia chinensis (jojoba), Moringa oleifera (moringa),
Mesua  ferrea  (Nahor),  Schleichera  oleosa  (kusum),  Simarouba  glauca
(Simarouba),  and  Sapindus  mukorossi  (soap  nut),  are  also  potential
feedstock for biodiesel production [207].

3.2. Strategies to enhance rhizoremediation

The rhizoremediation process is influenced by several factors, as it is
a biological mutualistic phenomenon, so the association of both mem-
bers plays a vital role in the degradation process [208]. Factors include
soil type, concentration of pollutants, pH of the soil, presence of organic
matter,  temperature,  available  nutrients,  soil  moisture,  oxygen  avail-
ability,  the  solubility  of  contaminants,  available  microbial  flora,  and
their metabolic capacities to remediate pollutants [209,210]. The age
and type of the particular plant and the concentration of soluble nutri-
ents in the rhizosphere greatly influence the degradation process [211].
An additional carbon and nitrogen source provided by the root exudates
creates an ambient environment for microorganisms to degrade organic
contaminants [212]. The chemical composition of root exudates has a
highly  crucial  impact  on  shaping  the  microbial  community  in  the
rhizosphere [213]. Many interconnecting factors, such as the history of
pollution, composition, porosity, permeability, density of soil and dis-
tribution of contaminants, metabolic functioning of microbes, and di-
versity,  may  result  in  variations  in  rhizoremediation  process  [214].
Below, we present a brief discussion on several strategies that may be
implemented to enhance the rhizoremediation process.

3.2.1. Soil engineering

Soil engineering techniques can enhance the functionality of soil by
adding nutrients such as N, P, K, Zn, Fe, and Ca [215]. Composting and
adding earthworms can increase microbial numbers and reduce uptake
of contaminants, while biochar, cattle manure, fly ash, and plants waste
can  also  improve  soil  organic  carbon  content  and  overall  soil  health
[216]. Agamuthu et al. [217], used J. curcas to remediate hydrocarbon
petroleum, and found that the addition of soil amendment agents such as
banana  skin,  brewery  spent  grain,  and  spent  mushroom  compost
improved the rhizoremediation efficiency up to 96 % [218]. Ryegrass
(Lolium  perenne)  and  lucerne  (Medicago  sativa)  could  improve  pyrene
degradation in soil up to 46 % when bio-compost was applied [219].
Further, study showed the application of nitrogen fertilizers increases

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)1011618

N. Das et al.

the above ground biomass in Switchgrass up to 68 % [220]. The appli-
cation of biochar leads to the immobilization of PAHs and facilitates the
removal  of  contaminants  through  mechanisms  such  as  ion  exchange,
electrostatic
interactions,  and  volatilization  [221].  The  Plant
Growth-Promoting  Rhizobacteria  (PGPR)  have  the  ability  to  produce
various types of biosurfactants. These biosurfactants play a crucial role
in increasing the adsorption of hydrocarbons as well as facilitating the
process  of  mineralization  [222].  This  mineralization  process  involves
the  conversion  of  hydrocarbons  into  less  toxic  substances.  In  recent
years, the utilization of PGPR and biochar in the process of bioremedi-
ation for soil contaminated with hydrocarbons has become increasingly
significant  [223].  Biosurfactant-producing  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa
showed  the  degradation  of  n-hexadecane  up  to  68.3  %  in  60  days  of
experimentation  [224].  Similarly,  the  comprehensive  investigation  of
the effects of nutrients (NPK), aeration, and the bio-induction of native
soil microorganisms, along with the stimulation of external microbial
communities, found to be beneficial for soil remediation contaminated
with oil [225,226].

3.2.2. Microbiome engineering

soil

The

[232].

bioaugmentation

Microbiome engineering may be accomplished in three ways: 1) in-
situ  augmentation  of  the  rhizosphere  soil  via  changes  in  community-
specific  supplements  [227,228],  or  2)  in-situ  reductions  of  harmful
bacteria, in which the rhizosphere environment is altered to prevent the
growth of other undesirable microorganisms [229], or 3) in-situ appli-
cation of “bacterial consortium”  as an artificial community to operate
and  modulate  the  indigenous  microbial  community  for  remediation
purposes  [230].  Finding  the  appropriate  species  and  strains  for  each
substrate is essential for an effective bioengineered microorganism. For
instance,  a  chelating  gene  (phytochelatin  synthase;  PCSAt)  obtained
from Arabidopsis thaliana was transferred into Mesorhizobium haukii to
improve its phytochelating activity [231]. Enhancing siderophore pro-
duction  can  be  achieved  by  regulating  the  transcriptional  unit  PvdS
regulator  on  the  pvdD  and  pvdA  genes  of  Pseudomonas  fluorescens  in
polluted
efficient
hydrocarbon-degrading Pseudomonas in the rhizosphere of teak (Tectona
grandis), gmelina (G. arborea), neem (Azadirachta indica), and champak
(Michelia  champaca)  to  enhance  biodegradation  of  crude  oil  has  been
evaluated  [233].  The  phthalate  acid  catabolic  gene  cluster
(phtBAabcdCR) was inserted into E. coli strain BL21 (DE3) to improve
phthalate  acid  degradation  [234].  The  pyrene  and  phenanthrene
biodegradation  by  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  N6P6  were  improved  as  a
consequence of the genetic reconstruction of the lasI/rhlI and quorum
sensing  (QS)  genes  [235].  To  degrade  resistant  organic  pollutants,
beneficial  microbial  consortia  and  microbial  fuel  cells  are  two  recent
concepts that can be implemented in microbiological bioremediation. In
the context of analysing soil microbial diversity, the use of metagenomic
analysis may be employed for the assessment of bacterial species that are
intrinsically linked, the construction of functional structural models, and
the  generation  of  genetic  fingerprints  [236].  The  feasibility  of  con-
structing an artificial microbiome including species with various func-
tionalities  may  be  achieved  via  the  use  of  a  synthetic  microbial
community  [237].  This  area  of  bioremediation  is  now  exploring  new
approaches to CRISPR toolkits and guide RNA (gRNA) synthesis in order
to produce genes that are pertinent to remediation processes [238].

of

3.2.3. Phyto-engineering

The selection of plants with high contaminant degrading efficiency is
the  foremost  step  in  the  phyto-engineering  approach  for  crude  oil
degradation. The presence of a plant species with a substantial amount
of  aboveground  biomass  is  of  utmost  importance  in  the  process  of
phytoextraction  [239].  Conversely,  the  inclusion  of  a  plant  species
characterised by an extensive root system or a significant belowground
biomass  is  critical  for  the  successful  implementation  of  rhizor-
emediation. Nevertheless, the presence of contaminants often impedes
the development of plants in polluted areas [240]. The introduction of

ACC deaminase genes into transgenic plants has been proven to effec-
tively reduce ethylene levels, resulting in a more robust and expansive
root system [241]. Plant breeding and genetic modification may result in
higher  nutrient  intake,  increased  root  exudate  production, better  sur-
vival, and improved pollutant’s mineralization [242]. Salix viminalis and
Salix alba, breeding efforts have led to the development of variants that
accumulate  metal  pollutants  at  a  higher  rate,  which  could  be  further
enhanced by the addition of cytochrome P450, an enzyme that promotes
the breakdown of halogenated hydrocarbons [243]. Fermentate 5-hy-
droxylase (F5H), a cytochrome P450 enzyme, catalyzes hydroxylation
in lignin production pathways. Overexpression of F5H leads to increased
syringyl lignin concentrations in Poplar tissues. The C4H promoter leads
to  higher  syringyl  concentrations  in  stems.  F5H’s  function  in  lignin
composition management and potential for lignin engineering in plant
species  are  confirmed,  with  reduced  levels  of  thioglycolic  acid  and
Klason lignin in C4H–F5H lines [244]. Willow trees with enhanced root
development and increased production of root exudates have been bred
for  use  in  phytoremediation  of  contaminated  soils  [245].  Moreover,
manipulation of the gene expression (Growth-regulating factors; GRFs)
that  controls  root  growth  and  development  in  Switchgrass  results  in
larger and more complex root systems with better bioremediation ca-
pabilities  [246].  The  phytoremediation  of  pentaerythritol  tetranitrate
(PETN)  was  examined  in  model  systems  of  plant  tissue  culture  using
Populus simonii [247]. Willow and Poplar trees have both been used in
scientific  studies  about  the  removal  of  explosives  [248].  Wang  et  al.
[249],  engineered  transgenic  Arabidopsis  plants  to  produce  a
root-specific laccase (LAC1) derived from cotton plants. The researchers
observed  that  these  modified  plants  exhibited  increased  tolerance  to
phenolic compounds and 2, 4, 6-trichlorophenol when secreted into the
rhizosphere. Further, the insertion of the bphC gene in tobacco plants,
derived  from  Pandoraea  pnomenusa  B-356,  showed  a  successful
enhancement in the degradation process of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) [250]. Moreover, Uchida et al. [251], reported that the incor-
poration  of  the  extradiol  dioxygenase  genes  responsible  for  aromatic
cleavage (DBfB) into Arabidopsis plants elevated the degradation rate of
2,  3-dihydroxybiphenyl  (2,  3-DHB).  Similarly,  the  incorporation  of
haloalkane  dehydrogenase  (DhaA)  into  tobacco  plants  led  to  an
enhanced  detoxification  process  for  1-chlorobutane  within  the  rhizo-
sphere  [252].  Additionally,  manipulation  of  plant  growth  through
methods  like  rhizoboxes  can  also  promote  deep  root  penetration  in
contaminated  soil  layers,  facilitating  appropriate  root-oil  interactions
[253].  Berchmans  and  Hirata  [254],  found  that  two-step  trans-
esterification  is  an  effective  way  to  produce  biodiesel  from  crude
J. curcas oil. The oil with more than 15 % FFA (furfuryl alcohol) was
initially treated with an acid catalyst (1 % H2SO4) and methanol (60 %
w/w) to reduce its FFA content below 1 %, and further NaOH acid was
used to increase the yield of the oil up to 90 % in 120 min. The results
showed that the methyl esters yield was 90 % for pretreated J. curcas oil
and 55 % for non-pretreated oil. Similarly, Chitra et al. [255], reported
successful transesterification of J. curcas oil using 20 % methanol, a 5:1
M ratio, and a 1.0 % NaOH catalyst, achieving 98 % methyl ester pro-
duction after 90 min.

Consequently, the implementation of a wide range of strategies to
improve rhizoremediation presents a promising approach for tackling
environmental challenges. By leveraging the intricate interplay between
plants and the microbial community in the rhizosphere, these method-
ologies present a wide range of potential avenues for effective pollutant
mitigation.  However,  there  has  been  limited  research  conducted  on
second-generation bioenergy crops. The aforementioned advantageous
applications of these energy crops could be further enhanced through
the implementation of molecular modifications. Through the strategic
optimization  of plant  selection, cultivation of microbial  communities,
and  manipulation  of  root  exudates,  the  practise  of  rhizoremediation
showcases  its  capacity  to  effectively  address  diverse  pollutants  and
facilitate  the  restoration  of  soil  health.  Moreover,  ongoing  scientific
investigation  and  advancement  in  this  domain  are  imperative  for

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)1011619

N. Das et al.

enhancing  and  broadening  the  repertoire  of  methodologies  accessible
for sustainable and ecologically sound soil remediation practises.

4. Bioconversion of contaminated lignocellulosic feedstock and
its potential risk

Biofuels are produced from biomass, or organic materials generated
from  living  organisms  [256].  The  production  of  biofuels  involves  the
conversion of biomass into liquid or gaseous fuels through a variety of
processes,  such  as  fermentation,  transesterification,  and  gasification
[257,258]. Biofuels are considered a potential renewable source of en-
ergy due to the utilization of organic materials, which may be replen-
ished  at  a  faster  rate  in  comparison  to  fossil  fuels  [259,260].
Nevertheless, it is widely acknowledged that second-generation biofuels
are characterized by greater degree of sustainability [261]. Two exam-
ples  of  alternative  fuels  are  cellulosic  ethanol  and  biogas.  Cellulosic
ethanol is derived from non-food crops like Switchgrass, while biogas is
created from organic waste materials such as food scraps and manure
[262,263].  However,  using  the  biomass  generated  from  the  plants
growing  in  contaminated  soil  also  present  challenges,  that  crude  oil
components may get accumulated in a plant tissues [264,265]. The use
of contaminated biomass for bioconversion can lead to the migration of
hazardous  substances  into  the  biofuel  which  is  undesired  [266].
Otherwise, in rural areas, incineration and dumping of such non-edible
biomass  is  commonly  practiced  [267,268],  which  may  result  in  sec-
ondary contamination of the soil when pollutants are directly released
back  into  the  environment  during  the  decomposition  process  [269].
Therefore, more research and careful consideration are necessary when
processing these biomasses for the purpose of biofuel generation. The
following  sections  will  provide  a  comprehensive  description  of  the
appropriate  measures  that  need  to  be  taken  in  order  to  handle  this
biomass effectively.

4.1. Feedstock preparation

The first stage in the production of biofuels entails the preparation of
the feedstock. The choice of feedstock is contingent upon the specific
biofuel  being  generated,  and  it  may  include  plant-derived,  animal-
derived, or from waste sources [270,271]. The feedstock is subjected to a
series  of  processes  including  collection,  cleaning,  and  preparation  in
order  to  be  rendered  suitable  for  conversion.  In  the  process  of
manufacturing  ethanol,  there  are  a  number  of  stages  that  must  be
completed, such as harvesting, cleaning, and milling, in order to extract
the starch or sugar content of the raw material [272,273]. In addition,
the  correct  preparation  of  feedstock  is  an  essential  step  that  must  be
taken to ensure its quality and purity for subsequent conversion activ-
ities, which are carried out in order to maximize output and optimize
efficiency throughout the process of producing biofuel [274–277]. In the
context of cellulose hydrolysis without any pre-treatment, the average
yield is approximately 20 %. However, the utilization of pre-treatment
methodologies  possesses  the  capability  to  significantly  enhance  the
production,  frequently  exceeding  90  %  of  the  maximum  theoretical
yield [278].

One of the challenges with the plants growing in contaminated en-
vironments  is  their  poor  growth  and,  hence,  relatively  little  biomass.
Janus et al. [279], demonstrated that Miscanthus sp. grown on polluted
soil had a higher accumulation in the roots as a compared to the shoots
and  stems.  Also,  biomass  collected  from  such  environments  requires
additional  steps  for  feedstock  preparation  and  cleaning.  Also,  the
contaminated feedstock had a higher ash content and a lower energy
content compared to the feedstock grown in uncontaminated soil [280].
For instance, Miscanthus sp. growing in crude oil-contaminated soil (10
% w/w) resulted in a significant decrease in both the quality and yield of
the produced biomass [281,282]. Harvested stalks from sweet sorghum
growing  in  soil  contaminated  with  5  %  (w/w)  crude  oil  showed  low
sugar content [283]. Similarly, there was no observable germination of

J.  curcas  seeds  planted  on  soil  contaminated  with  crude  oil  at  a  con-
centration of 10 % (w/w) [284]. However, in the presence of slugs and
biofertilizers, J. curcas plants growing in polluted areas exhibited a 40 %
increase  in  growth  [285].  The  growth  of  Poplar  trees  in  crude
oil-contaminated soil was found to be statistically enhanced by 145 %
after  the  amendment of  oxygen  and  nutrients,  showed  an  increase  in
root  length  as  compared  to  the  control  samples  [286].  Further,  the
impact of oil sludge and zinc on the physiological and biochemical pa-
rameters of the Miscanthus plant has been studied. The results showed
that oil sludge increases plant biomass accumulation, while the presence
of zinc reduces root and shoot biomass. The antioxidant response of the
plant  was  enhanced  via  the  activation  of  superoxide  dismutase  and
glutathione-S-transferase enzymes, indicating a potential mechanism for
detoxification  [287]. The  concurrent  presence  of  these  compounds  in
soil  has  a  substantial  influence  on  the  properties  of  plants.  Further,
Miscanthus sp. growing in diesel-contaminated sites amended with bio-
char  showed  improved  plant  physiological  properties  and  can  reduce
(cid:0) 1 [288].
contaminants concentrations ranging from 250 to 5000 mg kg
Further, the of Salix clones (J1010, P54, P667) showed potential effi-
ciency  for  phytoremediation  of  cadmium,  zinc,  and  lead  [289].  As  a
sustainable  and  renewable  resource,  further  bamboo  can  be  used  for
bioethanol production and other valuable products [290]. Huang et al.
[291],  noted  lower  levels  of  Cu,  Zn,  Pb,  and  Cd  content  in  bamboo
(Phyllostachys edulis) rhizosphere soil compared to non-rhizosphere soil.
Another  challenge  is  that  the  cost  of  feedstock  preparation  for
second-generation  energy  crops  grown  in  crude  oil-contaminated  soil
can be higher due to the need for extensive cleaning and processing of
the feedstock, which can take longer and lead to delays in the production
process [292,293].

The  preparation  of  contaminated  feedstock  adds  complexity  that
necessitates the development of novel solutions. By comprehending the
influence of pollution on the development of plants and implementing
strategies  such  as  additional  washing  and  the  initial  breakdown  of
feedstock  using  hydrocarbon-degrading  microbes  during  the  prepara-
tion of feedstock, it is possible to pursue a biofuel production process
that is both efficient and sustainable while simultaneously addressing
environmental issues.

4.2. Pre-treatment

Crude oil contamination of soil can significantly alter the chemical
composition of biomass, leading to increased viscosity and density that
makes  it  challenging  to  handle  during  pre-treatment  and  difficult  to
break  down  into  its  constituent  sugars  [294–297].  Various  chemical
methods  like  acids,  alkalis,  oxidation,  and  solvents  are  employed  to
facilitate the breakdown of lignocellulosic components [298,299]. Sol-
vent extraction involves the use of solvents to dissolve crude oil con-
taminants,  while  acid  treatment  uses  acid  to  break  down  these
contaminants [300]. Oxidation involves the use of chemicals to oxidize
crude  oil  components,  making  it  more  susceptible  to  removal  [301].
Organic  pollutants  such  as  heavy  metals,  polycyclic  aromatic  hydro-
carbons, organochlorine pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, and di-
oxins  can  be  extracted  using  pressurized  liquid  extraction  (PLE),
supercritical  fluid  extraction  (SFE),  and  subcritical  water  extraction
techniques,  which  depend  on  the  level  of  selectivity  and  yield  rates
[302–305].  Biological  pre-treatment  techniques  have  also  been
employed using microorganisms to degrade crude oil contaminants from
the biomass [306,307]. Many fungal and bacterial strains, such as Tri-
choderma, Aspergillus, Clostridium, and Bacillus, produce cellulolytic en-
zymes  that  can  hydrolyse  cellulose  into  simpler  sugars  and  also
metabolize  crude  oil  contaminants  [308,309].  A  novel  Miscanthus  sp.
pretreatment  method  using  lignin-degrading  bacteria  has  been  devel-
oped to address biomass recalcitrance in biofuel production. The bac-
terial  consortium  produced  laccase  using  plants  biomass.  The  results
showed  that  all  bacterial  pretreatments  significantly  decreased  lignin
laccase  mediators.  Utilization  of
content,

especially  with

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116110

N. Das et al.

lignin-degrading bacteria, Pseudomonas strain AS1 could remove up to
50.1 % lignin, resulting in a 2.2-fold increase in total sugar and glucose
yields [310]. The use of a lipase catalyst in enzymatic transesterification
has  gained  considerable  interest  in  the  field  of  biodiesel  production
[305]. This approach is valued for its simplicity, minimal requirements
for  wastewater  treatment,  efficient  glycerol  recovery,  environmental
compatibility, and absence of undesirable adverse effects. The quantity
of enzymes used, the length of the hydrolysis, and the structural char-
acteristics  that  emerged  from  pre-treatment  techniques  all  have  an
impact  on  the  enzymatic  hydrolysis  of  lignocellulosic  biomass  [307].
Prior to and after enzymatic hydrolysis, intermittent ultrasonication of
biomass  has  been  demonstrated  to  significantly  increase  the  ethanol
output by around 20 %, while the enzyme loading is reduced by about
50 % [311]. China’s annual agricultural waste production is estimated
to be over 670 million tons. This quantity of biomass has the potential to
provide a sufficient amount of ethanol that may potentially substitute
for around 4 billion barrels of oil if it were to be converted into fuel
[312].

Thus, appropriate pre-treatment of raw feedstock may enhance the
efficiency of subsequent conversion steps by increasing the availability
and accessibility. These practices also promote the release of hemicel-
lulose and cellulose content from the feedstock, which are further con-
verted  to  monosaccharides  during  enzymatic  hydrolysis.  Moreover,
these  approaches  also  reduce  the  concentration  of  inhibitors  produce
during the processing steps, that may hinder the efficiency of subsequent
conversion process. Kotoky et al. [49], demonstrated that employing a
highly  effective  bacterial  community  with hydrocarbon-degrading  ca-
pabilities in the rhizosphere not only facilitates contaminant degrada-
tion but also leads to reduced accumulation of PAH in the plant tissues.
This suggests that bioaugmentation of efficient degrader in the rhizo-
sphere of plants can potentially decrease the absorption of contaminants
by  plants,  improving  the  feasibility  of  pre-treatment  procedures  for
feedstock management.

4.3. Conversion into biofuel

One of the most commonly employed methods of biofuel conversion
is the biochemical route, which utilizes enzymes or microorganisms to
break down the feedstock into simpler compounds suitable for biofuel
production  [313].  In  this  process,  complex  carbohydrates  present  in
lignocellulosic  biomass  undergo  saccharification  and  fermentation
[314].  Alkali-pretreated  M.  sacchariflorus,  when  saccharified  with
cellulase, hemicellulase, and xylanase isolated from A. niger and Ther-
momyces lanuginosus, respectively, yields 220 mg of glucose per gram
[315,316]. Moreover, a combination of chemical and biological treat-
ments is often used for higher sugar yields. Biological pretreatment is
less expensive and operates under mild conditions, using microorgan-
isms  to  degrade  lignocellulosic  feedstocks  [317].  The  sugar  content
found in Miscanthus has a high potential for effective fermentation into
bioethanol via the use of S. cerevisiae [318]. A study conducted by Guo
et al. [319], showed that the use of C. shehatae resulted in 64 %–66 %
yield of ethanol, when dilute acid-pretreated Miscanthus sp. feedstock
was  used.  Further,  the  saccharification  of  Miscanthus  sp.  through  the
application of commercial cellulase treatment led to a significant 61 %
increase in the total sugar content [320]. Utilizing laccase and manga-
nese  peroxidase  enzymes,  C.  subvermispora  effectively  removed  lignin
from Switchgrass within a period of 18 days. This process led to glucose
yields of 37.15 % by mass, marking a notable 2- to 3-fold rise in com-
parison  to  untreated  feedstocks.  Further,  extending  the  pretreatment
duration to 35 days resulted in an additional enhancement of 10–30 % in
glucose yield [321].

The  thermochemical  route  employs  heat  and  pressure  to  convert
feedstock into biofuels through processes including pyrolysis, gasifica-
tion, and liquefaction [322]. Pyrolysis is a thermochemical process that
involves subjecting the feedstock to elevated temperatures ranging from
300
C in an oxygen-deficient environment [323,324]. This

C to 1000

◦

◦

◦

◦
C–500

◦
C and 500

◦
C and 280

◦
C, hemicellulose between 250

C/min)  and  maintained  at  a  temperature  of  500

process yields three main products: a liquid bio-oil, a solid biochar, and a
combustible gas [325]. In the course of pyrolysis, cellulose breaks down
◦
◦
C and 350
C,
between 300
◦
and lignin between 200
C [326]. Miscanthus sp. was treated
◦
C. With
with rapid pyrolysis with various residence times at 350
an increase in pyrolysis temperature, it was found that the yield of gases
increased (from 20.9 to 35.5 wt%) while the output of bio-oil declined
(from  57.2  to  47.7  wt%).  The  energy  conversion  efficiency  of  Mis-
canthus-derived  bio-oil  had  also  been  proven  to  be  lower  because  it
contains more inorganic components than softwoods [327]. However,
contamination  present  in  the  biomass  can  have  detrimental  effects,
reducing its heating value and making it less suitable for efficient gasi-
fication.  In  one  of  the  studies,  Oginni  et  al.  [328],  conducted  a
comparative analysis of the product yields resulting from the pyrolysis
process of Miscanthus sp. and Switchgrass cultivated on reclaimed mining
lands. The pyrolysis was carried out in a fixed-bed batch reactor (heating
rate  of  70
C  for  a
duration of 30 min [329]. In comparison to Switchgrass, the use of Mis-
canthus  sp.  resulted  in  a  greater  bio-oil  yield  of  51  %  (by  weight).
Furthermore, biochar generated at higher pyrolysis temperatures were
shown to exhibit great efficacy in the elimination of contaminants [330].
Additionally, crude oil contaminates the biomass, leading to an in-
crease in tar content within the produced gas during gasification [331].
The  accumulation  of  concentrated  tar  and  slag  in  the  gasification  of
contaminated ash renders it unsuitable for disposal in certain locations
[332].  However,
the  application  of
high-temperature  gasification  techniques  can  facilitate  the  thermal
degradation  of  organic  contaminants,  addressing  some  of  these  chal-
lenges [333,334]. To prevent the production of dioxins, it is crucial to
◦
maintain temperatures above  850
C and  closely monitor  the process
[335]. SundarRajan et al. [336], reported that hydrothermal liquefac-
tion (HTL) could remove Zn, Pb, and Cu from the substrate with more
than  99  %  efficiency  of.  Previous  reports  on  bioenergy  plants  like
Jatropha curcas showed effective removal of PAH contamination from
soil by forming symbiotic relationships with PAH-degrading microbial
communities [337].

is  anticipated

that

it

◦

However,  the  production  cost  of  ethanol  from  lignocellulosic
biomass is higher than using starch or sugar-based feedstocks. The main
challenge is the need for an effective biomass pretreatment process to
optimize  sugar  production.  Simultaneous  fermentation  of  xylose  and
glucose requires an appropriate microbial species for large-scale biofuel
conversion.  Although,  genetically  engineered  microbial  communities
have shown promising results at laboratory-scale, but concerns remain
about their stability, vitality, and efficiency when implemented on an
industrial  scale.  Fig.  5  depicts  various  pre-treatment  techniques
employed  on  lignocellulosic  biomass  generated  from  bioenergy  crops
used for rhizoremediation. In the rhizoremediation process, the intro-
duction  of  a  proficient  hydrocarbon-degrading  bacterial  community
through bioaugmentation leads to soil decontamination and reduces the
accumulation  of  contaminants  within  plant  cells.  The  plant  growth-
promoting attributes further contribute to increased plant growth and
biomass.  Additionally,  the  application  of  biochar  and  composting  en-
hances both plant and microbial functions, fostering their proliferation
in contaminated soil. Moreover, contaminated feedstock requires thor-
ough cleaning and washing before undergoing chemical, physical, and
biological  treatments.  The  pre-treated  samples  are  subsequently  sub-
jected to biochemical and thermochemical processes. Biochemical con-
version yields bioethanol and biogas, while thermochemical conversion
produces bio-oil, bioethanol, biohydrogen, and biomethane.

5. Strategies to enhance biofuel production

Numerous strategies have been developed to enhance biofuel  pro-
duction, such as genetic and metabolic engineering, synthetic biology,
and  bioprocess  optimization  [338].  Metabolic  engineering  involves
modifying  metabolic  pathways,  whereas  synthetic  biology  utilizes

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116111

N. Das et al.

Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of different stages of biofuel production to enhance circular economy.

genetic  engineering  techniques  to  introduce  novel  abilities  in  an  or-
ganism,  and  bioprocessing  involves  the  optimization  of  fermentation
conditions to improve efficiency [339]. Bioprocess optimization aims to
improve the efficiency of biofuel production processes through optimi-
zation of fermentation conditions and utilization of advanced technol-
ogies such as continuous fermentation and microbial consortia [340].
These methods have demonstrated promising results in enhancing bio-
fuel  production  and  offer  potential  solutions  for  sustainable  energy
production.  In  recent  years  molecular  technologies  employed  for  the
enhancement of biofuel production from bioenergy crops, are discussed
below.

5.1. Genetic engineering approach

Several  genetic  strategies  have  been  proposed  to  improve  agricul-
tural traits in bioenergy plants which may include manipulation of key
genes  including  those,  which  have  role  in  biosynthesis  and  tri-
acylglycerols (TAGs). TAGs are involved in degradation of hydrocarbon
contaminants,  and  also  affects  yield,  growth,  and  stress  tolerance  of
plants.  Specific  genes  such  as  diacylglycerol  acyltransferase  (DGAT),
acetyl-CoA  carboxylase  (ACCase),  and  glycerol-3-phosphate  dehydro-
genase  (GPD1)  have  been  targeted  to  enhance  TAG  biosynthesis  in
J.  curcas  [341].  Suppressing  genes  responsible  for  the  production  of
linoleic acids and toxic metabolites, and engineering genes for unusual
TAGs is another approach to enhance oil production abilities in plants
[342]. Additionally, enhancing tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses is

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116112

N. Das et al.

a key strategy to enable the cultivation of non-edible oil plants under
adverse environmental conditions [343]. Genetic modification of a key
cellulose  production  gene  in  Miscanthus  biofuel  crops  resulted  in
increased  biomass  (20  %)  production  and  cellulose  (15  %)  content
[344].  A study  by  Hua  et  al.  [345], employed  genetic  engineering  to
enhance  the  resistance  of  the  bioenergy  crop  Switchgrass  against  the
fungal  pathogen  Colletotrichum  incanum.  However,  contaminated
biomass can restrict lignocellulosic degradation by the native microbial
community  [346].  Thus,  genetic  modifications  of  genes  of  some  mi-
crobial  enzymes  can  accelerate  degradation  to  meet  industrial  needs.
Site-directed mutations in the endoglucanase of Pseudomonas horikoshii,
resulted in elevated enzyme activity for the breakdown of p-nitrophenyl
cellobiose [347]. Similarly, engineered Feruloyl Esterase-A from Asper-
gillus  awamori  showed  higher  substrate  affinity  and  thermal  stability
than the native enzyme [348]. Overexpression of PdDUF266A genes in
transgenic poplar showed significant enhancement in biomass (34 %)
and cellulose (37 %) production [349]. Transgenic Switchgrass showed
40 % increase in total sugar yield due to by enzymatic saccharification
[350].  Certain  Poplar  clones are  suitable  for the  phytoremediation of
industrial effluents containing TNT and RDX, trichloroethylene, chlor-
oacetanilide herbicides, and other organic pollutants [351]. Oliver et al.
[352],  studied  the  role  of  cyanobacteria  by  introducing  and  over-
expressing the acsA gene, which plays a crucial role in the synthesis of
fatty acids and hydrocarbons. The use of a mutant strain had the po-
tential to improve production by 28 %. Geobacillus thermoglucosidasius
could produce cellulosic ethanol from lignocellulosic biomass without

intermediate  steps.  By  integrating  the  cglT  gene  from  Thermoanaer-
obacter brockii and localizing genes encoding cellulolytic enzymes, two
strains, BZ9 and BZ10, were constructed. The celA gene from Clostridium
thermocellum and the cel6B gene from Thermobifida fusca were introduces
in  strain  BZ10,  while  strain  BZ9  had  a  plasmid  encoding  celA  from
Caldicellulosiruptor  bescii.  Both  strains  showed  enhanced  growth  on
pre-treated wheat straw, achieving higher viable cells [353]. Another
study investigated the impact of overexpressing the atoAD, adc, and adh
genes  in  Clostridium  beijerinckii  on  the  production  of  bioethanol.  The
overexpression  of  these  genes  leads  to  the  synthesis  of  5  g/L  of  iso-
(cid:0) 1  [354].  By
propanol,  with  a  volumetric  productivity  of  0.4  g  L
adding  two  operons  from  E.  coli  that  code  for  xylose  assimilation
(XylA/B) and PPP enzymes (Tal and Tkt), a recombinant Z. mobilis CP4
(pZB5)  strain  was  constructed  that can  turn  both  pentose  and  hexose
sugars  in  lignocellulosic  hydrolysates  into  ethanol  at  the  same  time
[355].  Similarly,  Work  et  al.  [356],  also  made  a  second  recombinant
Z.  mobilis  CP4  (pZB206)  strain  that  can  turn  arabinose  sugar  into
ethanol. This strain was made by expressing five E. coli genes related to
arabinose  metabolism.  The  bioenergy  production  of  the  starchless
Chlamydomonas  reinhardtii  mutants  sta6  [ADP-glucose  pyrophosphor-
ylase] and sta7-10 [isoamylase] were studied. Results showed that ge-
netic  starch  blockage  increases lipid accumulation  (~1.4-  to 1.8-fold,
respectively) during nitrogen deprivation. Further, a promising strain of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae called GRE3OE produced 53.39 g/L of ethanol
in 48 h from alkaline-distilled sweet sorghum bagasse, sorghum straw,
and xylose hydrolysate [357]. The pathways for de novo biosynthesis of

(cid:0) 1  h

Fig. 6. Application of genetic engineering of E. coli cells to enhance biofuel production.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116113

N. Das et al.

biodiesel have been effectively engineered in E. coli is demonstrated in
Fig.  6.  The  hemicellulose  was  hydrolysed  to  xylose  using  an  endox-
ylanase catalytic domain (Xyn10B) derived from Clostridium stercorarium
and a xylanase (Xsa) obtained from Bacteroides ovatus. Overexpression of
the pdc gene and the adhB gene, which code for pyruvate decarboxylase
(PDC) and alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), set up the pathway for making
ethanol. The flux through the E. coli fatty acid pathway was enhanced in
order to enhance the production of free fatty acids and acyl-CoAs. This
was achieved by disrupting the fadE gene, which encodes the acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase (FadE), and by increasing the expression of acetyl-CoA
carboxylase (ACCase), thioesterases (TE), and fatty acyl-CoA synthase
(FadD). The atfA gene derived from A. baylyi, which encodes the wax
synthase/acyl-coenzyme  A:  diacylglycerol  acyltransferase
ester
(WS/DGAT), was utilised to facilitate the production of fatty acid ethyl
esters [358].

5.2. Metabolic and synthetic biology approaches

In recent years, genetic engineering has been utilised to introduce
foreign genes, such as pyruvate decarboxylase (pdc) and alcohol dehy-
drogenase (adh), into strains of E. coli [359]. This genetic modification
has resulted in enhanced capabilities in directing carbon flux towards
increased  ethanol  production  [360].  Moreover,  the  combination  of
metabolic  engineering  techniques  and  CRISPR-enabled  trackable
genome  engineering  has  led  to  the  creation  of  a  novel  recombinant
E. coli strain. This particular strain has exhibited remarkable tolerance
towards furfural, withstanding concentrations of up to 4.7 g/L [361].
Furthermore, it has demonstrated cross-tolerance to various end prod-
ucts, including isobutanol, butanol, and ethanol, along with resilience to
high temperatures and NaCl [362]. These advancements highlight the
potential of genetic and metabolic engineering in optimizing microbial
strains for enhanced biofuel production [363]. Liew et al. [364], showed
that the overexpression of a key enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of
fatty acids (ACCase) in the bacterium E. coli resulted in a 50 % increase
in biodiesel production. Similarly, 5-fold increase ethanol production in
the yeast S. cerevisiae was achieved by modifying the expression levels of
several key genes such as ADH2, PDC1, PDC5, and ADH1 involved in
ethanol metabolism. In another study, Joshi et al. [362], engineered the
overexpression of key enzymes such as carbon monoxide dehydrogenase
(CODH), acetyl-CoA synthase (ACS), and alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)
in  Clostridium  autoethanogenum  for  higher  yields  (2.6-fold)  of  ethanol
from carbon monoxide. One recent study involved the disruption of the
hydA hydrogenase gene in the wild strain of Clostridium acetobutylicum,
resulted in a recombinant strain that was able to produce 18.3 % more
butanol, with 31.2 % decrease in the by-product acetone. Incorporation
of  the  α-ketoisocaproate  dioxygenase  gene  from  Rattus  norvegicus
(RnKICD) in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 has boosted its ability to pro-
duce  isobutene,  a  gas  used  as  fuel  [365].  The  productivity  of  iso-
butyraldehyde  and  isobutanol  directly  from  CO2  was  enhanced  by
overexpressing
ribulose  1,5-bisphosphate  carboxylase/oxygenase
(Rubisco)  in  the  genetically  engineered  strain  S.  elongatus  PCC7942
[366]. Synthetic biology tools were also used to introduce pathways for
production  of  isoprenoids  in  E.  coli,  which  could  be  converted  into
advanced  biofuels  such  as  farnesene  and  bisabolene  [364].  The  engi-
neered strain was able to produce up to 2.4 g/L of farnesene and 0.8 g/L
of bisabolene from lignocellulosic; biomass [365]. Further, engineered
E. coli, produced 5.5 times more glucose from cellulose than wild-type
[367]. Similarly, engineered yeast showed 2.4 times more production
of lignocellulosic degrading enzymes for the production of ethanol and
2,3-butanediol  from  Switchgrass  [368].  Thiolase  (thlACA)  from  Clos-
and  3-hydroxybutyryl-CoAdehydrogenase
tridium
(hbdCT) from Clostridium tyrobutyricum were introduced into a recom-
binant  Clostridium  cellulovorans  adhE2  strain  [369].  The  engineered
strain showed 50 % (0.34 g/g) high yield in the production of n-butanol
from  cellulose  [370].  An  ethanologenic  recombinant  strain  of  E.  coli
FBR5, exhibited stability in the absence of antibiotics and demonstrated

acetobutylicum

the  resilience  to  ethanol  concentrations  of  up  to  50  g/L.  The  ethanol
output of this particular substance reaches a maximum of 45 g/L, indi-
cating  its  potential  suitability  for  large-scale  generation  of  ethanol
[370]. The overexpression of the THI4 and HAP4 genes in S. cerevisiae
BY4741 revealed high glucose consumption rates and ethanol concen-
trations  within  26  h  of  fermentation  [371].  A  mutant  strain  of  Clos-
tridium  acetobutylicum  JB200  produced  up  to  21  g/L  of  butanol  from
glucose  in  batch  fermentation  and  shown  resilient  butanol  tolerance.
The histidine kinase (HK) in JB200 has its C-terminal truncated due to a
single-base  deletion  in  the  cac3319  gene.  Due  to  improved  butanol
tolerance,  the  cac3319  mutant  (HKKO)  further  showed  90  %  greater
productivity and 44.4 % more butanol production, potentially impacting
industrial  use  [372].  Similarly,  the  upregulation  of  groESL  genes  in
Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824 led to a notable enhancement in
final  butanol  titres,  exhibiting  an  increase  of  up  to  40  %  and  33  %
compared to the wild-type strain [373]. A genetically modified strain of
Pichia  pastoris  was  capable  of  generating  a  yield  of  284  mg/L  of  iso-
butanol when provided with 2-ketoisovalerate as a supplement. In order
to enhance production, the genes associated with the  L-valine biosyn-
thetic  pathway  were  overexpressed,  leading  to  a  notable  rise  in  pro-
duction  titres  of  up  to  2.22  g/L.  This  enhancement  represents  a
substantial 43-fold augmentation as compared to the wild strain. Also,
the  overexpression  of  alcohol-O-acyltransferase  enzymes  led  to  the
production of 51 mg/L of isobutyl acetate ester and 24 mg/L of isopentyl
acetate ester [374]. In another research, Yarrowia lipolytica was genet-
ically engineered to augment the synthesis of lipids and citric acid. The
strain  was  generated  by  overexpressing  the  homologous  genes  DGA1
and DGA2, while simultaneously deleting the SNF1 lipid regulator. In
nitrogen  limited  condition,  the  strain  exhibited  the  capacity  to  accu-
mulate lipid at a concentration above 4.8 g/L, or about 53 % of the dry
cell  mass  [375].  In  order  to  address  sustainability  issues,  researchers
investigated the viability of combining wastewater treatment with the
generation of biofuel by the oleaginous yeast Rhodosporidium toruloides.
Synthetic
synthetic
sugar-containing wastewater anaerobic fermentation broth (SSCW-AFB)
were both treated using R. toruloides for aerobic fermentation process.
Sequencing  batch  culturing  was  utilised  to  improve  nutrient  removal
and  microbial  lipid  buildup,  and  it  resulted  in  total  organic  carbon
(TOC) removal rates of 87 % and 61 %, as well as lipid content rates of
30 % and 73 % [376]. Metabolic engineering of pHBD, pCRT, pBCD-et-
fAB  and  pADHE  genes  from  Thermoanaerobacterium  saccharolyticum
JW/SL-YS485  was  studied  for  n-butanol  production.  The  clostridial
n-butanol pathway was incorporated through genetic manipulations in
wild-type  strains, resulting  in 0.85 g/L  n-butanol production  from 10
g/L xylose. However, lactate-deficient strains produced n-butanol (1.05
g/L  from  10  g/L  xylose),  corresponding  to  26  %  of  the  theoretical
maximum  [377]. Similarly, an  integrated  metabolic  and  evolutionary
engineering  of  Clostridium  cellulovorans  has  been  illustrated  in  Fig.  7.
CoA-dependent  acetone-butanol-ethanol  (ABE)  pathway  comprising
adhE1  and  ctfAB-adc  from  Clostridium  acetobutylicum  ATCC  824  was
introduced  into  C.  cellulovorans,  and  the  recombinant  strain  showed
138-fold  increase  in  butanol  and  acetone  production  from  low-cost
lignocellulosic agricultural waste [378].

sugar-containing  wastewater

(SSCW)  and

5.3. Nanotechnology approaches

The  use  of  nanoparticles  (NPs)  presents  a  viable  resolution  to  the
current challenges associated with biomass utilization, particularly due
to their cost-effectiveness. Nanomaterials possess distinctive character-
istics that make them very suitable for enhancing biofuel production.
These include exceptional catalytic capabilities, a high surface area-to-
volume  ratio,  notable  selectivity,  and  the  potential  to  be  recycled.
Nanotechnology-based  approaches  have  been  explored  for  enhancing
biofuel  production,  and  several  studies  have  shown  promising  results
[379]. Nanoremediation of crude oil pollutants in contaminated sites is a
very  promising  method  for  reducing  the  infiltration  of  harmful

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116114

N. Das et al.

Fig. 7. The integrated metabolic and evolutionary engineering of Clostridium cellulovorans, particularly emphasizing the CoA-dependent acetone-butanol-ethanol
(ABE) pathway as a means to enhance biofuel production.

chemicals into plant tissues [380]. Further, the cleaned-up polluted area
might  be  utilised  for  additional  crop  cultivation.  Nanoparticles  like
nZVI,  ZnO,  TiO2,  carbon  nanotubes,  fullerenes,  and  bimetallic  nano-
metals possess favourable properties for soil remediation methodologies
[381]. NPs also have the ability to reduce heavy metal concentrations in
contaminated soil by immobilising ions such as As (III), Cd, Cr (VI), Pb
(II),  etc.  Various  organic  pollutants,  such  as  carbamates,  chlorinated
organic solvents, DDT, and PCBs, have been degraded using NPs [382].
Nanoparticles have been used to enhance sugar output during the pre-
treatment stage. The sawdust of yellow Poplar was converted to hemi-
cellulose at a concentration of 96 % (w/w) by using sulfuric acid at a
concentration  of  0.8  % (w/v)  at  a  temperature of  175
C  [383].  In a
study by Al Zubi et al. [384], it was found that using sulfuric acid with
PFS and AS nanomaterials increased the conversion of hemicelluloses by
66 % and 61 %, respectively, when the acid levels were 50- and 400-fold
higher than the standard concentration level. The utilization of nano-
scale  zero-valent  iron  (nZVI)  as  a  catalyst  for  transesterification  of
cooking  sludge  to  obtained  96  %  yield  of  fatty  acid  methyl  esters
(FAMEs),  is  a  major  component  of  biodiesel.  Nanoparticles  of  metals
such as Fe, Al, Mg, Mn, Ag, Au, Cu, B, Si, and metallic oxides like Al2O3,
Co3O4, TiO2, ZnO, and CuO, as well as metallic combinations like Mg–Al
and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), are used as chemical additives in biofuel

◦

production  to  improve  the  fuel  quality  and  efficiency  [385,386].  A
nanoparticle-based  photocatalytic  systems  using  titanium  dioxide
nanoparticles was developed for efficient hydrogen gas conversion from
biomass [387]. The system achieved a hydrogen production rate of 14.8
mmol/h/g  catalyst,  which  is  a  significant  improvement  compared  to
other reported systems [388]. Sekoai et al. [389], investigated the use of
nanoparticles in improving the efficiency and yields of various biofuel
production processes, such as biogas, biodiesel, and bioethanol. Nano-
particles have the potential to be employed at numerous stages in the
manufacture  of  biofuels,  including  the  initial  processing  of  feedstock
and  their  usage as  catalysts  in  chemical  reactions. The findings  show
that, compared to biodiesel-diesel blends with and without the presence
of alcohol, the inclusion of nanoparticles could result in a considerable
decrease in specific fuel production, ranging from 20 % to 23 % [389].
Higher  ethanol  production
(213.5  %)  was  noted  utilizing
cobalt-ferrite-silica  (CoFe2O4@SiO2–CH3)  employing  functionalized
silica magnetic nanoparticles [390]. Similar to this, Ivanova et al. [391],
found  increased  bioethanol  fermentation  in  the  presence  of  magnetic
nanoparticles, leading to an efficiency of 91 % of the expected output.
The combined effect of blending CNT nanoparticles and neem biodiesel
with  diesel  fuel  resulted  in  a  reduction  of  NOx,  HC,  CO,  and  smoke
emission by 9.2 %, 6.7 %, 5.9 %, and 7.8 %, respectively [392]. About

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116115

N. Das et al.

94 % of butyl biodiesel generation was accomplished by utilizing elec-
trospun polyacrylonitrile nanofiber [393]. Further, Sanusi et al. [394],
suggested using nanoparticles NiO improve bioethanol production from
lignocellulosic biomass by 145 % in biorefineries with the reduction of
acetic acid content by 110 %. The study found a 9.2 % reduction in NOx,
HC,  CO,  and  smoke  emissions  by  combining  CNT  nanoparticles  with

neem  biodiesel  in  diesel  fuel.  However,  in  another  interesting  study,
CaSO4/Fe2O3–SiO2  nanoparticles were employed to illustrate the pro-
cess of biodiesel generation from J. curcas. The nanoparticles had a pore
size of 90 nm and possess a surface area of 391 m2/g. The manufacture of
biodiesel from crude J. curcas had an initial efficiency of 94 % under
optimal circumstances. Further, this efficiency declined to 85 % after

Fig. 8. Illustration of application of nanotechnology for improving the efficiency of bioconversion process, where- (a) Biomass pretreatment effectiveness, enzyme
hydrolysis, and microbial fermentation can be enhanced by the introduction of nanomaterials; while (b) the application of enzyme-immobilised magnetic nano-
particles in the pretreatment and hydrolysis stages of second-generation bioethanol production has been demonstrated.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116116

N. Das et al.

four cycles as a result of nanoparticle inactivation. The cause for this
deactivation may be attributed to the accumulation of reaction medium
components  that  obstructed  the  pores  after  the  fourth,  seventh,  and
ninth cycles. The observed reduction in surface area to 252 m2/g sug-
gested  a  corresponding  decline  in  the  generation  of  biodiesel  [395].
Fig. 8 demonstrate the application of nanomaterials in improving the
efficiency of lignocellulosic bioconversion. The pre-treatment methods
may employ nano shear hybrid alkaline technology (NSHA) technology.
Additionally, nanofibers, nano-magnetic materials, and nano-catalysts
can  find  application  in  hydrolysis  and  saccharification  processes
[396].  The  biological  conversion  of  feedstocks  for  biofuel  production
could further be improved with the use of genetically engineered mi-
crobes,  in  addition  to  nanotechnology-supported  stages.  Further,  the
produced biofuel undergoes purification through nano filters and carbon
nanotubes. Nano sensor detectors are then utilised for the optimization
and detection of biofuel purity within the flow [397] (Fig. 8a). Similarly,
the application of enzymes immobilised in nanoparticles in the process
of saccharification and hydrolysis of the feedstock during its biochem-
ical conversion into biofuel and biodiesel can be suggested. It could also
facilitate  the  recovery  of  immobilised  enzymes  after  the  hydrolysis
process  and  enhancement  of  bioconversion  through  application  of
nanocatalysts (Fig. 8b).

5.4. Microbial approaches to enhance biofuel production

Microbial  diversity  approach  for  biofuel  production  utilise  the
interaction between a wide array of microorganisms, including bacteria,
fungus, and algae, which collaborate synergistically to generate biofuels
[398].  The aforementioned  methodologies  provide  several benefits  in
comparison  to  conventional  methodologies  that  depend  on  a  solitary
organism or a limited number of genetically modified strains [399]. The
advantages include heightened adaptability to fluctuations in the envi-
ronment  and  the  capacity  to  execute  intricate  metabolic  pathways
[400]. A recent investigation including three microbial strains, namely
Clostridium  thermocellum,  Caldicellulosiruptor  bescii,  and  Caldicellulosir-
uptor obsidiansis, which directly converted carbon dioxide into biofuels,
and achieved the maximum production of 0.14 g/L of butanol, per hour
[401]. A new bacterial strain, Micrococcus luteus, had been identified for
its  unique  lipolytic  transesterification  activity,  making  it  a  potential
candidate for biodiesel production [402]. This is due to its enzymes that
facilitate the process of converting lipids into biodiesel, highlighting the
potential of lipolytic bacteria in biodiesel production. Further, the pro-
duction of bioethanol was enhanced by pre-treating Miscanthus saccha-
riflorus  using  NaOH.  Miscanthus  hydrolysed  through  Saccharomyces
cerevisiae  fermentation  produced  ethanol  at  59.20  g/L  with  a  20  %
pretreated  biomass  loading  [403].  Further,  cultivation  of  Miscanthus
sinensis had the potential to greatly enhance the richness and population
size of the soil microbial composition. Two yeast strains, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae (CDBT2) and Wickerhamomyces anomalous (CDBT7), were used
together  in  an  electrochemical  cell  to  increase  ethanol  production.
Control  cultures  produced  12.6  and  10.1  mg  of  ethanol  per  mL,
respectively. When supplied with 4V, these cultures produced 19.8 and
23.7 ± 0.51 % more ethanol, respectively. Co-culturing only increased
ethanol production by 3.96–0.83 % [403].

The  bacterial  population  degrades  the  cellulytic  content  of  plant
biomass,  leaving  behind  fragmented  molecules  that  may  be  further
utilised by another microbial community that is able to convert these
intermediate  sugars  into  bioethanol  through  fermentation  process
[404]. Thus, a co-consortium of seven species with high cellulase and
β-glucosidase activity including Trichoderma reesei, Escherichia ferguso-
nii,  Proteus  vulgaris,  Aspergillus  glaucus,  Bacillus  mycoides,  and  Serratia
marcescens, provided an efficient way to reduce agricultural waste with
biofuel generation [405]. Acetogenic bacteria, which can utilise CO and
CO2 as sources of carbon for metabolism and development in the pres-
ence of H2 and synthesize bioethanol and other valuable biofuels, were
used in the syngas fermentation process. When biological pretreatment

was used in addition to bacterial treatment, there was a higher rate of
lignin  breakdown.  This  was  mostly  due  to  the  benefits  of  bacterial
treatment, such as its ability to help with genetic modification and to
survive in a variety of environments [406]. Further, bacterial strains like
Sphingobium sp. SYK-6, Rhodococcus sp., Ceriporiopsis sp., Pandoraea sp.,
Galactomyces sp., and Mycobacterium sp. could degrade lignin and PAHs,
making it easier to break down cellulose [407].

5.5. Optimization of fermentation process

An ideal pretreatment method reduces the intermolecular bonds in
the lignocellulosic biomass refractory structure, making the feedstock
easier  for  enzymatic  accessibility  and  saccharification  to  break  down
[408].  This  results  in  relatively  lesser  formation  of  inhibitors  and  an
enhanced recovery rate of cellulose and hemicellulose. The integration
of the milling process with alkaline pretreatment, specifically using so-
dium  hydroxide  (NaOH),  has  been  identified  as  the  most  effective
combined  process  [409].  This  technique  significantly  improves  the
glucose yield, reaching a maximum of 300 mg/g from sugarcane bagasse
(SCB)  biomass.  This  phenomenon  has  the  potential  to  enhance  the
glucose  yields  derived  from  several  lignocellulosic  bioenergy  crops
[410]. Shafaei et al. [411], demonstrated the most effective parameters
for  manufacturing  bioethanol  (3.19  g/L)  under  alkaline  pretreatment
conditions from Arundo donax L. (Giant reed), which was achieved at
◦
C, and a
3.0 % NaOH concentration, a pretreatment temperature of 60
pretreatment period of 30 min. Similarly, optimum conditions for bio-
diesel production from J. curcas, which require 0.16 v/v methanol to
pretreated oil and 24 min of reaction time at a reaction temperature of
◦
60
C, were noted to be 1.43 v/v H2SO4 acid catalyst, 0.28 v/v methanol
C
to oil, and 88 min of reaction time at a reaction temperature of 60
[412]. Miscanthus sinensis genotypes showed the highest yield and effi-
ciency  of raw  bioethanol production  (234–253 g/kg  DM, 83%–86 %)
when subjected to 1.5 % NaOH [413].

◦

Biofuel production can be used with other complementary methods,
which may include wastewater treatment or carbon capture, to enhance
the  sustainability  and  efficiency  of  biofuels  production  processes.  For
instance,  wastewater  remediation  provides necessary  nutrients for  in-
crease  cultivation  of  the  desire  feedstocks,  while  at  the  same  time  as
carbon capture can be mitigate the greenhouse fuel emissions related to
biofuel  production  [414].  Switchgrass  grown  with  wastewater  had  a
higher  biomass  yield  and  lignocellulosic  content  (20.1  t/ha),  as
compared to chemical fertilizers (16.8 t/ha) treatment. The lignocellu-
losic content of 48.9 % was recorded, compared to 44.5 % with chemical
fertilizers  [415].  According  to  Yang  et  al.  [416],  the  use  of  carbon
capture technology has the potential to significantly reduce the life cycle
of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  associated  with  biofuel  production  from
Switchgrass,  with  a  potential  reduction  of  up  to  82  %.  Further,  the
improvement of new feedstocks can increase the availability of biomass
for biofuel production. Switchgrass and J. curcas can grow in marginal
lands that are fallacious for food vegetation, and they require much less
water and fertilizer [417]. J. curcas can be grown on approximately 24
million  hectares  of  marginal  lands  in  India,  which  can  yield  up  to  7
billion metric tons of oil per year and might be used to supply up to 9.9
billion litres of biodiesel per year [418]. The total land for Switchgrass
cultivation  in  the  United  States  is  approximately  62  million  hectares,
which could yield up to 408 million metric tons of biomass per annum.
This biomass can be used to supply up to 103 billion litres of ethanol or
12 billion litres of butanol annually [419].

In order to increase the ethanol production from lignocellulosic hy-
drolysate, Zymomonas mobilis was applied for high-density fermentation
with cell recycling. The results indicate that successful co-fermentation
of glucose and xylose necessitates sufficient nutrient levels, and when
combined  with  high-cell  density  fermentation  with  cell  recycling,  it
yields  three  times  the  ethanol  production  compared  to  traditional
fermentation  methods.  The  cells  exhibit  great  recyclability  in  CS  hy-
drolysate that has been prepared with ammonia. The ethanol titre was

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116117

N. Das et al.

35.1 g/L, while the metabolic yield and ethanol productivity were 1.82 g
L-1  h-1  and  96.44  %,  respectively,  in  the  first  24  h  [420].  Moreover,
Scheffersomyces stipitis strains exhibit improved performance in enzyme
hydrolyzates with high maize stover and Switchgrass levels, resulting in
decreased  lag  phase,  increased  fermentation  rates,  greater  ethanol
tolerance, and higher output. They also reduce diauxic lag when tran-
sitioning  from  glucose  to  xylose  and  can  accumulate  over  40  g/L  of
ethanol in less than 167 h [421]. Fig. 9 illustrates various upstream and
downstream processes involved in biofuel production. In the upstream
process,  the  use  of  genetically  engineered  microorganisms  capable  of
hydrocarbon  degradation  enhances  the  biochemical  conversion  of
contaminated feedstock (refer section 4.2). The selection of an appro-
priate pre-treatment method is crucial prior to the fermentation process.
During fermentation, factors such as the type of fermenters, optimiza-
tion of physiochemical parameters, aeration, and nutrient availability
are  essential  for  achieving  optimal  fermentation.  Following  the
fermentation process, various downstream processes, including extrac-
tion  and  purification,  can  be  accomplished  using  various  nanotech-
nology  methods  (refer  section  5.3).  Additionally,  blending  of  the
produced biomass is carried out using standard protocols.

5.6. Advance technologies for biofuel processes

For microbial biofuel generation, optimization of metabolic flux and
route  modulation  are  essential  parts  of  the  process  [422].  Metabolic
engineering now makes use of various biosensors, which are genetically
programmed  substances  that  translate  input  signals  into  quantifiable
outputs  such  as  gene  expression  and  fluorescence  production  [423].
Several studies utilise the biosensors to optimize metabolic pathway for
the  production  of  several  biofuel  products  such  as  2-ketoisovalerate,
isoprene,  fatty  acids,  butanol,  alkenes,  and  fatty  alcohols  [424].
Through successful genetic engineering and editing techniques, such as
CRISPR, and subsequent advances in these process optimisations have
enhanced  cell  productivity  [425,426].  Two  key  genome  editing
methods,  MEM  (modified  endonuclease-mediated)  and  REM  (RNA--
guided  endonuclease-mediate)  engineering,  utilizes  ZFNs  (zinc-finger
nucleases),  ZF  (zinc-finger)  and  TALEN  (transcription  activator-like
effector)  in  metabolic  pathway  modification  of  biofuel  production  in
recent  years [427].  However,  constant  efforts  are  required  to  express
new  predictable  and  controllable  genes  and  optimize  their  metabolic
attributes with high-throughput sequencing and gene editing.

The  development  of  strategies  focused  on  improving  biofuel

Fig. 9. Different upstream and downstream strategies to enhance biofuel production.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116118

N. Das et al.

production is a crucial step towards achieving renewable and sustain-
able  energy  solutions.  By  employing  techniques  such  as  genetic  engi-
neering,  metabolic  optimization,  and  bioprocess  modification,
researchers have shown promising results in enhancing the production
of biofuels, improving the quality of the feedstock, and elevating pro-
duction pathways. The integration of these interdisciplinary endeavours
has a profound effect on enhancing production efficiency. Nevertheless,
the manipulation of genetic material and the process of protein synthesis
in  lignocellulosic  bioenergy  crops  for  the  purpose  of  producing  high-
quality biofuel remains a recent concept that demands constant inves-
tigation. Fig. 10 presents a comprehensive overview of the sequential
application of second-generation lignocellulosic bioenergy crops in the
biofuel  production  processes.  Rhizoremediation  involves  the  use  of
efficient degrading bacteria to enhance pollutant degradation in the soil.
Following  rhizoremediation,  the  contaminated  feedstock  undergoes
pretreatment.  Bioconversion  is  then  conducted  through  various  tech-
niques,  including  the  application  of  microbial  enzymes,  gasification,
pyrolysis, liquefaction, and hydrolysis methods (refer section 4). Addi-
tionally, the enhancement of biofuel production involves the incorpo-
ration of various approaches such as metabolic, genetic, and synthetic
biology techniques to augment bioenergy production (refer section 5).

6. Global scenario on bioenergy research

In the current global scenario, the requirement for biofuels is antic-
ipated to increase by 41 billion litres per annum, or 28 %, between the
periods of 2021 and 2026, which is one-fifth of the demand surge to pre-
Covid-19  [428,429].  For  instance,  the  International  Energy  Agency
predicts that by 2035, biomass may contribute an extra 50EJ (or 10 %)

to the world’s primary energy needs [430]. Based on changes in land use
and technological advancements, global demand for biofuels is expected
to rise by 2070 and can be met entirely by lignocellulosic and food crops
[431]. With the increasing health risk and cost of fossil fuels, bioenergy
could be a great sustainable alternative. 130 billion litres per year of
energy are produced globally now. To achieve the global energy needs,
this must increase by three times by 2030 and five times by 2050, to 650
billion  litres  per  year  [432].  Recently,  nations  with  the  highest  pub-
lished  work  on  bioenergy  production,  along  with  phytoremediation
include China, the United States, India, Italy, and Spain [433]. Over the
past 10 years, 2000 or more patents for biofuel applications have been
submitted annually. The four major fields at the vanguard of the world’s
biofuel  patents  include  grain  bioethanol  production,  cellulosic  bio-
ethanol production, biodiesel manufacturing, and biopyrolysis activity
[434]. China (647), the World Intellectual Property Organization (343)
and the United States (266) have the highest number of patented works
on  bioenergy  production  [435,436].  However,  in  Asia,  countries  like
India are attempting to achieve 20 % ethanol production by 2025, while
Indonesia’s 40 % contribution is set to take effect in 2022 to promote the
expansion of biodiesel manufacturing [434]. India may face challenges
in meeting its 20 % biodiesel production target in just 5 years, although
even  if  it  reaches  11  %  blending,  India  will  become  the  world’s
third-largest ethanol manufacturer, followed by the United States and
Brazil [437]. France and Germany, two of the ten largest manufacturers
of  biofuels  worldwide,  continue  to  actively  file  patents  throughout
Europe.  Other  nations,  like  Japan,  give  greater  priority  to  the
advancement  of  bio-pyrolysis  techniques,  while  Canada  and  Korea
concentrate on bio-diesel and grain bio-ethanol production technolog-
ical  inventions  [438,439].  However,  an  interesting  fact  has  emerged

Fig. 10. Overview of the application of second-generation lignocellulosic bioenergy crops in rhizoremediation and bioenergy production.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116119

N. Das et al.

through a thorough analysis of patent files: despite the lack of a sub-
stantial  production sector, countries like Japan, Korea, Australia, and
Mexico are some of the leading countries generating biofuel patent ap-
plications [440]. On the other hand, with significant biofuel production,
nations  like  Thailand  and  Indonesia  have  virtually  limited  patent  ac-
tivities. This can point to an opportunity to develop a market that can
benefit from economies of scale in those areas [441]. Fig. 11a, demon-
strates the global annual production of biofuel ranging from 5 million to
2 billion, also major countries contributing largest biofuel production
was shown in the pie diagram in Fig. 11 b. Further the production of
biofuel since 2007 to 2021 by the major countries such as USA, Brazil,
European Union, China and Canada, have been presented in Fig. 11 c.

6.1. Bioeconomy of sustainable bioremediation approaches

Rhizoremediation  techniques  may  offer  a  more  resilient  economic
basis for the shift towards bioeconomic society [442]. A key element of
the bioeconomy is the use of ecosystem services, circularity, and geo-
stationary biodiversity to restore arid marginal regions and abandoned
industrial sites [443]. Many countries have started to realise the benefits
of  recycling  contaminated  sites  into  productive  green  lands  [444].
Although  ecogenomics  techniques  could  be  able  to  alleviate  some  of
these limitations, adopting these restrictions would be more challenging
for regulatory bodies [444,445]. The yearly cost of soil restoration in the
EU is estimated at over $38 billion [446]. The anticipated growth in the
market  size  for  biofuels  derived  from  lignocellulosic  feedstock,  from
2021  to  2026,  is  projected  to  reach  USD  1.4  billion.  The  rhizor-
emediation strategy is centred on the creation of bio-based value chains,
a collection of related tasks carried out to bring goods or services to the
market  by  enhancing  biological  bulk  material  (feedstock)  [447].

However,  due  to  ambiguous  market references  and  applications,  esti-
mates  of  the  amount  of  employment  and  economic  development
generated by bioremediation efforts in the bioeconomy are still insuf-
ficient, mirroring the absence of a value chain on polluted sites [448].
The production of commodities or services in polluted environments is
impacted  by  the  potential  intrinsic  value  of  bioresources  [449].  An
interdisciplinary  holistic  examination  of  the  complete  value  chains,
from feedstock, processing, and conversion, up to the levels of product
production and marketing, is necessary for the creation of sustainable
goods and processes from polluted regions [450]. Global bioeconomy
systems have benefited from the use of bioenergy crops in the produc-
tion  of  bioenergy  and  the  removal  of  pollutants  [451].  The  North
America  with  USD  47.2  billion  market  size  in  2022,  is  the  leading
country in biofuel production [452]. Energy crops are able to metabolize
pollutants  and  incorporate  them  into  their  biomass  in  addition  to
degrading them [453]. For instant biofuel production through Jatropha
reached USD 3186.2 million in 2023 [454]. This potential application
thus fulfils the requirements of global energy and regenerates revenue.
Moreover, the primary focus of COP actions is on the implications of
achieving carbon neutrality via nature-based approaches, particularly in
the context of bioenergy and the biobased economy [455]. Fig. 12a il-
lustrates the global market for biofuel production. In 2020, the biofuel
market  reached  $120.6  billion,  with  a  projected  increase  to  approxi-
mately $229.14 billion by 2032 [454]. Fig. 12b focuses on the countries
that contribute significantly to the overall market revenue worldwide.
North America, Europe, and Asia Pacific emerge as the leading regions,
generating  the  highest  revenue  in  the  biofuel  market  [454].  Fig.  13,
depicts the global production of biofuels from various feedstocks. Corn
ethanol stands out as the highest producing biofuel, with major contri-
butions  from  the  United  States,  China,  Argentina,  and  Canada.

Fig. 11. a) Global map showing the production of biofuel using lignocellulosic biomass. The colour differences showing the production rate annually. b) Pie diagram
showing the major countries biofuel production. c) Bar diagram showing the production of biofuel over the years up to 2021 [441].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116120

N. Das et al.

Fig. 12. a) Bar diagram showing the market size of worldwide biofuel production over the years, with a forecast till 2033. b) Global map showing the countries with
largest biofuel market share.

Fig. 13. Bar diagram showing the diverse biofuel production across various countries, showcasing the use of different feedstocks in the process.

Additionally, countries such as Brazil, India, Colombia, and South Africa
showcase  significant  ethanol  production  through  sugarcane  biomass
[456]. The diagram further illustrates the utilization of palm oil, canola
oil, and biodiesel productions in the overall biofuel landscape.

7. Concerns with bioenergy crops and remedies for their
mitigation

High demand for bioenergy crops exhibits numerous advantages, but
there  is  a  constant  debate  due  to  some  limitations  and  cultivation
challenges [457]. The most concerning aspect of these crop plants is that
they  are  deep-rooted  plants  that  have  the  ability  to  alter  water  and
nutrient cycle dynamics on the basis of their nutritional requirements
[458].  Some  of  the  environmental  issues  related  to  bioenergy  crop
cultivation are listed below.

Additionally, the use of residues from industrial and agricultural waste
such as biochar and fly ash can increase soil fertility and increase carbon
sequestration [462]. However, land transitions are a primary determi-
nant  of  N2O  emissions  and  have  negative  impact  on  soil  fertility  by
changing  soil  physiochemical  properties.  For  instance,  approximately
40  %  of  bioethanol  production  in  North  America  primarily  relies  on
maize  (corn)  as  the  main  energy  crop  but  higher  maize  production
(presently  1210  million  thousand  tonnes  annually  worldwide)  could
potentially increase the consequences related to N2O emissions [463].
Thus, instead of using first generation energy crop like maize, use of
second-generation  bioenergy  crops  may  serve  as  the  sink  and  source
transitional pole between the SOC and fossil fuels and can be a viable
option to reduce atmospheric CO2 emissions with pollutant remediation
[464,465].  These  crops  can  be  included  in  current  energy  choices  to
increase the efficiency of energy consumption [466].

7.1. Carbon sequestration and greenhouse emission

7.2. Soil erosion and soil organic carbon

Perennial plants can enhance soil health by absorbing atmospheric
CO2  and  storing  it  as  organic  carbon  [459].  Temperature,  rainfall,
moisture content, and initial soil constituents all influence the carbon
sequestration efficiency of energy crops [460]. Application of potential
microbes  with  plant  growth-promoting  attributes  such  as  bacteria,
cyanobacteria,  fungi,  and  mycorrhizae  enhance  the  restoration  of
contaminated  environments  and  soil  natural  properties  [461].

Energy production using first-generation bioenergy crops impact soil
quality in terms of nutrient availability and carbon storage potential, as
well as the making it susceptible for erosion [467]. The expansion of
maize  acreage,  residue  removal  practices,  and  land  use  changes  are
three primary factors that contribute to soil erosion [468]. The rising
demand for ethanol production has led to an increase in corn acreage,
which can negatively affect soil retention due to the inherently looser

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116121

N. Das et al.

planting density of this crop [469]. Agricultural residues left on the soil
surface are prone to erosion by air and water, and the removal of crop
residues during harvest exacerbates erosion risk [470]. Direct incorpo-
ration  of  organic  matter  and  other  protective  measures  can  serve  as
viable management practices to mitigate soil erosion [471]. Land use
conversion  can  either  exacerbate  or  mitigate  soil  degradation,  but
transitioning  from  traditional  agricultural  crops  to  second-generation
bioenergy crops may positively impact soil quality and water holding
capacity [472]. For example, the utilization of Miscanthus giganteus, a
high-yielding  perennial,  could  result  in  87  %  reduction  of  land  re-
quirements along with low-inputs, with eight times higher yield [473].

7.3. Water quality and quantity

Energy production from bioenergy crops is significantly impacted by
water  availability,  primarily  through  substantial  water  demand  and
land-use changes [474]. Land use conversion, particularly from native
agricultural land or grassland to perennial grasses such as Switchgrass,
and Miscanthus sp., can also directly affect hydrological processes such
as evapotranspiration, surface runoff, water yield, and soil water storage
[475]. High-producing tree species used as energy crops require more
water  for  higher  biomass  production  and  exhibit  higher  rates  of
evapotranspiration than food crops [476]. The majority of herbaceous
energy crops also require a considerable amount of water for optimal
growth and are only suitable for regions with high rainfall [477]. With
regards to the increase in bioenergy crop cultivation, nutrient pollution,
specifically nitrate pollution, is a significant problem for water quality.
Furthermore, the extensive root structures of bioactive trees are capable
of  absorbing  groundwater  and  underground  streams,  leading  to  an
impact  on  the  local  water  balance  [478]  and  also  contributing  to
groundwater shortages [479,480]. Thus, appropriate crop selection can
effectively manage these water-related challenges by striking a balance
between bioenergy production and water resource preservation [481].

7.4. Biodiversity loss

The type of crops being used for bioenergy production system, and
land usage, are critical factors that result in bioenergy generation at the
cost of biodiversity loss [482,483]. The cultivation of energy crops on
marginal or underutilized land can enhance vegetation [484] while the
risk  of  biodiversity  loss  can  be  mitigated  by  improved  management
practices.  The  regions  of  Asia,  Central  America,  and  South  America,
where  first-generation  biofuel  crops  were  planted,  there  was  a  37  %
decrease in local species richness and a 49 % decrease in abundance, as
compared to locations with primary vegetation [485]. While the impacts
of  second-generation  biofuels  were  less  severe,  these  locations  still
experienced a 25 % decrease in species richness and a 19 % decrease in
abundance compared to areas with primary vegetation [485]. Research
shows second-generation biofuels such as coppiced willow in temperate
regions  improve  biodiversity  by  diversifying  vegetation,  increasing
invertebrate  abundance,  and  providing  food  for  birds,  thereby
enhancing  avian  diversity  [486,487].  Land-use  management  intensity
was highest for first-generation biofuel crops, reaching 48 %, in contrast
to  the  16  %  observed  for  second-generation  crops  [488].  Ryegrass,
Miscanthus,  Poplar,  Willow  offer  relatively  stable  environments  for
maintaining wild species, reducing the risk of native species loss [489,
490].

7.5. Socio-economic impact

availability,  economic  feasibility,  land  rights,  labour  practices,  public
support, and public interest [494]. In particular, the creation of local
employment  opportunities  and  economic  benefits  are  the  two  most
pressing issues related to the use of biomass for energy generation [495].
One such study, estimated that equivalent to 93.5 thousand and 133.0
thousand of full-time people were working in the biomass supply chain,
in 1996 and 2008 respectively [496]. Also, the provision of energy crops
or forest or agricultural wastes as fuel could generate 515,000 new jobs
[497,498].  These  considerations  are  crucial  for  the  sustainable  and
equitable development of bioenergy as a renewable energy source.

8. Limitations and challenges

Bioenergy crops offer great potential for producing biofuels that are
more environmentally friendly than conventional fossil fuels. However,
there  are  many  limitations  and  challenges  associated  with  the  use  of
these crops in biofuel production that need to be addressed [499]. The
intensive agricultural practices, such as crop irrigation and fertilization,
increase the total cost of production [500,501]. Additionally, the cost of
processing and refining the biomass into fuel can also be high, which
limit  the  economic  viability  of  second-generation  bioenergy  crops
[502]. One of the significant obstacles for the global expansion of bio-
fuels is the ongoing debate over the standards for sustainable produc-
tion, energy balances, and greenhouse gas savings of biofuels [503]. This
debate could result in protectionist measures that unfairly discriminate
against biofuel supplier countries. The economic benefits of bioenergy
crop production for smallholder farmers are uncertain. Due to the high
investment costs and uncertain biofuel markets, the economic benefits
of the bioeconomy are yet to reach its potential [504–506].

Another challenge is the potential impact of intensive cultivation of
these  crops  on  land  use  and  ecosystems  as  discussed  above  [507].
Expanding agricultural land for bioenergy crops can alter natural hab-
itats,  causing  damage  to  ecosystems  and  ecological  services  [508].
Furthermore,  some  crops  such  as  monoculture  farms  can  further
contribute to biodiversity loss and soil degradation. Biomass feedstocks
can  be  difficult  to  efficiently  convert  into  fuels  due  to  chemical
complexity [509]. The variability in biomass quality and quantity can
pose challenge for processing and refining. Additionally, there may be
concerns about the overall impact of bioenergy production on food se-
curity, as land use for bioenergy crops may compete with land use for
food production [510,511].

There  are  certain  limitations  in  rhizoremediation  approaches  too,
that  need  to  be  considered  before  implementing.  One  of  the  primary
limitations is the requirement of a large field area for in-situ remediation.
Additionally, the age of the particular plant can affect the efficiency of
rhizoremediation. Severe pollution can hinder both plant and microbial
growth,  which  can  limit  the  effectiveness  of  rhizoremediation.  The
success  of  this  technique  is  also  dependent  on  environmental  factors
such  as  temperature,  pH,  and  soil  moisture,  which  can  impact  the
growth and activity of the microorganisms responsible for biodegrada-
tion. Another challenge with rhizoremediation is the disposal of plant
parts that accumulate the hydrocarbons. Furthermore, there is a risk that
PAHs may enter the food chain, particularly if the contaminated soil is
used for agricultural purposes. The application of seasonal plants may be
limited,  which  can  restrict  the  application  of  rhizoremediation  under
certain circumstances.

9. Conclusion and future prospect

To comprehensively evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of
bioenergy  production  and  mitigate  negative  impacts,  it  is  critical  to
conduct  timely  consequence  assessments  [491–493].  The  socioeco-
nomic effects of bioenergy can be further categorised into subcategories
such as employment growth, wealth generation, food and nutrition se-
curity, macroeconomic expansion, rural economy development, energy

Bioenergy  crops  offer  a  promising  solution  for  addressing  global
challenges related to energy production, climate change, and environ-
mental  degradation  [512].  Their  ability  to  be  used  for  both  biofuel
production and rhizoremediation, bioenergy crops can generate a vari-
ety of economic, environmental, and social benefits [513]. The utiliza-
tion  of  rhizoremediation  in  biofuel  production  can  enhance  the
productivity of bioenergy crops by reducing the toxicity of pollutants,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116122

N. Das et al.

improving  nutrient  availability,  and  mitigating  environmental  stress
[514,515]. Production of biofuels using lignocellulosic/bioenergy crops
such as Jatropa, Switchgrass and Miscanthus have potential to provide a
sustainable alternative to fossil fuels, reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and  provide  improved  energy  security  [516,517].  This  approach  pro-
vides a closed system for recycling waste, reducing waste, and creating
sustainable  energy  sources.  They  can  increase  renewable  energy  pro-
duction,  reduce  reliance  on  fossil  fuels,  and  also  contribute  to  the
development  of  a  low-carbon  economy.  Furthermore,  the  use  of  bio-
energy crops for rhizoremediation treatment can address environmental
pollution and restore degraded ecosystems, thus generating economic
benefits  through the restoration of ecosystem services [518]. In addi-
tion, bioenergy crops can generate income for farmers and contribute to
community  development,  especially  in  rural  areas.  Moreover,  the
impact of bioenergy crop cultivation on soil quality, biodiversity, and
ecosystem  health  should  be  investigated  to  ensure  sustainable  and
environmentally conscious practises [487]. By developing effective and
cost-effective methods to monitor and quantify the efficacy of rhizor-
emediation  techniques,  identifying  suitable  plant  and  microorganism
interactions  for  various  pollutants  degradation,  and  utilizing  rhizor-
emediation with other treatment methods, pollution complexity issues
can  be  fully  addressed.  Additionally,  bioenergy  from  crops  offers
promising solutions to achieve a sustainable natural economy, but it is
important  to  overcome  potential  commercial  restrictions  associated
with their management [519]. A holistic and integrated approach that
balances economic, environmental, and social considerations is neces-
sary for the benefits of bioenergy crops to be realized and to ensure the
minimum negative impacts.

The utilization of bioenergy crops for rhizoremediation of crude oil-
contaminated  soil,  coupled  with  subsequent  biofuel  production  from
biomass,  presents  a  promising  avenue  for  sustainable  environmental
remediation and energy generation. To advance this innovative strategy,
focused  research  efforts  are  imperative.  There  is  a  critical  need  to
develop bioenergy crops resilient to the stressors posed by contaminated
environments.  This  may  involve  employing  genetic  engineering  tech-
niques  to  enhance  the  crops’  stress  response  mechanisms.  The  incor-
poration of nano materials and enzymes in bioconversion methods has
introduced  cost  challenges.  Thus,  investigating  the  synthesis  of  cost-
effective  nanomaterial  catalysts  and  utilizing  CRISPR-Cas  systems  for
the genetic modification of microbial enzymes can substantially enhance
the cost efficiency of biofuel production. Leveraging advanced micro-
biome  engineering  tools  can  facilitate  the  recruitment  of  a  beneficial
microbiome tailored for rhizoremediation, offering a nuanced approach
to environmental restoration. Also, optimizing the efficiency of biomass
to bioethanol conversion warrants attention through the modification or
bioengineering  of  metabolic  pathways,  particularly  in  relation  to
fermentation  and  crude  oil  degradation,  utilizing  proteomics  and
metabolomics. Further, scaling up the entire process demands compre-
hensive  life-cycle  and  economic  viability  assessments  to  ensure  its
practicality  and  sustainability  on  a  larger  scale.  Addressing  these
research  avenues  will  undoubtedly  contribute  to  the  evolution  and
successful  implementation  of  this  novel  strategy.  Research  may  also
focus  on  the  production  of  cellulases  to  release  optimum  amount  of
fermentable sugar from bioenergy crops using yeast, bacteria, and fungi,
and also to enhance their catalytic capabilities using techniques like site
directed  mutagenesis  and  protein  engineering.  Thus,  this  complete
strategy is required to be made more efficient and cost-effective, to be
promoted as a more environmentally friendly approach that aligns with
carbon neutrality goals.

Informed consent statement

Not applicable.

Authors contributions

Nandita Das prepared the complete draft of manuscript and is the
major contributor. Dinesh Kumar Maheswari provided necessary infor-
mation  for  and  partially  wrote  the  article.  Piyush  Pandey  con-
ceptualised, corrected and finalised the manuscript, also supervised the
work.

Acknowledgments and funding

Authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support received from
Department  of  Biotechnology,  Ministry  of  Science  and  Technology,
Government of India.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Nandita Das: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Meth-
odology,  Writing  –  original  draft.  Dinesh  Kumar  Maheshwari:  Data
curation, Writing –  review &  editing. Piyush Pandey: Conceptualiza-
tion,  Funding  acquisition,  Project  administration,  Resources,  Supervi-
sion, Validation, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

References

[1] International Energy Agency. Renewables 2020. Paris, https://doi.org

/10.1002/peng.20026; 2020.

[2] International Energy Agency. Coal 2021 - analysis and forecast to 2026. available

at: https://www.iea.org/reports/coal-2021. [Accessed 17 March 2023].

[3] International Energy Agency. Gas 2021 - analysis and forecast to 2026. available

at: https://www.iea.org/reports/gas-2021. [Accessed 17 March 2023].
[4] Perera F. Pollution from fossil-fuel combustion is the leading environmental

threat to global pediatric health and equity: solutions exist. Int J Environ Res Publ
Health 2017;14(12). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14121539.

[5] Stephen RC, et al. Oil spills and their effect on the environment. In: The handbook

of environmental chemistry, vol. 42. Springer; 2016. p. 1–22. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-23877-9_1.

[6] Cordes EE, Jones DOB, Schlacher TA, Amon DJ, Bernardino AF, Brooke S,
Carney R, DeLeo DM, Dunlop KM, Escobar-Briones EG, Gates AR, G ́enio L,
Gobin J, Henry LA, Herrera S, Hoyt S, Joye M, Kark S, Mestre NC, Witte U.
Environmental impacts of the deep-water oil and gas industry: a review to guide
management strategies. Front Environ Sci 2016;4(SEP). https://doi.org/
10.3389/fenvs.2016.00058.

[7] Adeniran MA, Oladunjoye MA, Doro KO. Soil and groundwater contamination by
crude oil spillage : a review and implications for remediation projects in Nigeria.
May, https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2023.1137496; 2023.

[8] Akhtar N, Syakir Ishak MI, Bhawani SA, Umar K. Various natural and

anthropogenic factors responsible for water quality degradation: a review. Water
(Switzerland) 2021;13(19). https://doi.org/10.3390/w13192660.

[9] Graham JD, et al. Environmental impact assessment of Enbridge oil spill in
Michigan. J Great Lake Res 2015;41(3):869–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jglr.2015.05.012.

[10] National Resource Defense Council. Prudhoe Bay oil spill. 2006. available at:

https://www.nrdc.org/stories/prudhoe-bay-oil-spill. [Accessed 17 March 2023].
[11] Lind ́en O, Pålsson J. Oil contamination in ogoniland, Niger delta. Ambio 2013;42

(6):685–701. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-013-0412-8.

[12] https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2021/executive-summary.
[13] Schiermeier Q. The search for clean energy. Nature 2020;585:S50–2. https://doi.

org/10.1038/d41586-020-02652-6.

[14] EIA. Bioenergy explained. U.S. Energy Information Administration; 2021.

Available at: https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/bioenergy/.

[15] Chen H, Shen J, Ye M, Wang H, Huang Y, Zhuang Q. The global pattern of

transportation carbon dioxide emissions and future scenarios. Environ Sci
Technol 2020;54(11):6628–37. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b07485.
[16] Canadell JG, Schulze ED. Global potential of biospheric carbon management for
climate mitigation. Nat Commun 2014;5. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6282.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116123

N. Das et al.

[17] Sikkema R, Al Seadi T. Biogas from crop digestion. In: Biogas handbook.

[44] Wang C, Kong Y, Hu R, Zhou G. Miscanthus: a fast-growing crop for

Academic Press; 2017. p. 43–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-810446-
5.00003-8.

environmental remediation and biofuel production. GCB Bioenergy 2021;13(1):
58–69.

[18] Preethi, Gunasekaran M, Kumar G, Karthikeyan OP, Varjani S, Rajesh Banu J.

[45] Baker P, Charlton A, Johnston C, Leahy JJ, Lindegaard K, Pisano I, Skinner C.

Lignocellulosic biomass as an optimistic feedstock for the production of biofuels
as valuable energy source: techno-economic analysis, Environmental Impact
Analysis, Breakthrough and Perspectives. Environ Technol Innov 2021;24:
102080. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2021.102080.

[19] Barrag ́an-Oca ̃na A, Merritt H, S ́anchez-Estrada OE, M ́endez-Becerril JL, del Pilar

Longar-Blanco M. Biorefinery and sustainability for the production of biofuels
and value-added products: a trends analysis based on network and patent
analysis. PLoS One 2023;18(1 January):1–18. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0279659.

[20] Schmer MR, Vogel KP, Mitchell RB, Perrin RK. Net energy of cellulosic ethanol
from switchgrass. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105(2):464–9. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.0704767105.

[21] Hoang SA, Lamb D, Seshadri B, Sarkar B, Choppala G, Kirkham MB, Bolan NS.
Rhizoremediation as a green technology for the remediation of petroleum
hydrocarbon-contaminated soils. J Hazard Mater 2021;401:123282.

[22] Alotaibi F, Hijri M, St-Arnaud M. Overview of approaches to improve

rhizoremediation of petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated soils. Appl Microbiol
2021;1(2):329–51. https://doi.org/10.3390/applmicrobiol1020023.
[23] Heaton EA, Long SP, Voigt TB, Jones MB, Clifton-Brown J. Miscanthus for

renewable energy generation: European Union experience and projections for
Illinois. Mitig Adapt Strategies Glob Change 2004;9(4):433–51.

[24] Bauddh K, Singh B, Korstad J. Phytoremediation potential of bioenergy plants. In:
Phytoremediation potential of bioenergy plants; 2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-981-10-3084-0.

A review of Willow (Salix spp.) as an integrated biorefinery feedstock. Ind Crop
Prod 2022;189:115823.

[46] Alherbawi M, McKay G, Mackey HR, Al-Ansari T. A novel integrated pathway for

Jet Biofuel production from whole energy crops: a Jatropha curcas case study.
Energy Convers Manag 2021;229:113662.

[47] David K, Ragauskas AJ. Switchgrass as an energy crop for biofuel production: a
review of its ligno-cellulosic chemical properties. Energy Environ Sci 2010;3(9):
1182–90.

[48] Singha LP, Pandey P. Rhizobacterial community of Jatropha curcas associated

with pyrene biodegradation by consortium of PAH-degrading bacteria. Appl Soil
Ecol 2020;155:103685.

[49] Kotoky R, Rajkumari J, Pandey P. The rhizosphere microbiome: significance in

rhizoremediation of polyaromatic hydrocarbon contaminated soil. J Environ
Manag 2018;217:858–70.

[50] Hauptvogl M, Kotrla M, Prˇcík M, Paukov ́a ˇZ, Kov ́aˇcik M, Loˇs ́ak T.

Phytoremediation potential of fast-growing energy plants: challenges and
perspectives–a review. Pol J Environ Stud 2019;29(1):505–16.

[51] Chandra R, Kumar V. Phytoremediation: a green sustainable technology for

industrial waste management. In: Phytoremediation of environmental pollutants.
CRC Press; 2017. p. 1–42.

[52] Hussain I, Puschenreiter M, Gerhard S, Sch ̈oftner P, Yousaf S, Wang A,

Reichenauer TG. Rhizoremediation of petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated
soils: improvement opportunities and field applications. Environ Exp Bot 2018;
147:202–19.

[25] Von Cossel M, Wagner M, Lask J, Magenau E, Bauerle A, Von Cossel V, Winkler B.

[53] Chinedu E, Chukwuemeka CK. Oil spillage and heavy metals toxicity risk in the

Prospects of bioenergy cropping systems for a more social-ecologically sound
bioeconomy. Agronomy 2019;9(10):605.

[26] Tiefenbacher A, Sand ́en T, Haslmayr HP, Miloczki J, Wenzel W, Spiegel H.

Optimizing carbon sequestration in croplands: a synthesis. Agronomy 2021;11(5):
882.

[27] Jeswani HK, Chilvers A, Azapagic A. Environmental sustainability of biofuels: a

review. Proc Roy Soc 2020;476(2243):20200351.

[28] Zhang X, Cai Z, Cheng Y, Zhuang X, Cai Q, Xie L, Zhang X, Chen J. The potential
of bioenergy crops for phytoremediation of petroleum hydrocarbon contaminated
soils: a review. Environ Sci Pollut Control Ser 2020;27(30):37503–18. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-09819-1.

[29] Yang Y, Hobbie SE, Hernandez RR, Fargione J, Grodsky SM, Tilman D, Zhu YG,
Luo Y, Smith TM, Jungers JM, Yang M, Chen WQ. Restoring abandoned farmland
to mitigate climate change on a full earth. One Earth 2020;3(2):176–86. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.07.019.

[30] Smith P, Calvin K, Nkem J, Campbell D, Vizzarri M, Cherubini F, Grassi G,

Korotkov V, Le A, Lwasa S, Mcelwee P, Miguel JS, Taboada A, Manning FC. Which
practices co-deliver food security, climate change mitigation and adaptation, and
combat land degradation and desertification?. August 2019, 1532–1575, https://
doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14878; 2020.

[31] Koçar G, Civas ̧  N. An overview of biofuels from energy crops: current status and

future prospects. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2013;28:900–16.

Niger Delta, Nigeria. J Health Pollut 2018;8(19):180905.

[54] Mulenga C. Soil governance and the control of mining pollution in Zambia. Soil

Secur 2022;6:100039.

[55] Purwendah EK, Mangku DGS, Periani A. Dispute settlements of oil spills in the sea
towards sea environment pollution. In: First international conference on
progressive civil society (ICONPROCS 2019). Atlantis Press; 2019, May. p. 245–8.
[56] Steinberg LJ, Sengul H, Cruz AM. Natech risk and management: an assessment of

the state of the art. Nat Hazards 2008;46:143–52.

[57] Chang JI, Lin CC. A study of storage tank accidents. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2006;

19(1):51–9.

[58] Ukaogo PO, Ewuzie U, Onwuka CV. Environmental pollution: causes, effects, and
the remedies. In: Microorganisms for sustainable environment and health.
Elsevier; 2020. p. 419–29.

[59] Zhang B, Matchinski EJ, Chen B, Ye X, Jing L, Lee K. Marine oil spills—oil
pollution, sources and effects. In: World seas: an environmental evaluation.
Academic Press; 2019. p. 391–406.

[60] Ilyas N, Shoukat U, Saeed M, Akhtar N, Yasmin H, Khan W, Iqbal S. Comparison
of plant growth and remediation potential of pyrochar and thermal desorption for
crude oil-contaminated soils. Sci Rep 2021;11(1):2817.

[61] Han G, Cui BX, Zhang XX, Li KR. The effects of petroleum-contaminated soil on
photosynthesis of Amorpha fruticosa seedlings. Int J Environ Sci Technol 2016;
13:2383–92.

[32] Balat M, Balat H. Recent trends in global production and utilization of bio-ethanol

[62] Jin T, Tang J, Lyu H, Wang L, Gillmore AB, Schaeffer SM. Activities of

fuel. Appl Energy 2009;86(Supplement 1):S227–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2009.04.043.

[33] Elum ZA, Ahmadi M, Ogunsona EO. A review of patents in biodiesel production: a
promising approach for sustainable development. J Clean Prod 2018;189:884–97.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.04.149.

[34] Prasad R, Pandey KK. Biofuels: green energy for sustainable development.

Springer; 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-0070-9.

[35] https://www.statista.com/statistics/274168/biofuel-production-in-leading-count

ries-in-oil-equivalent/.

[36] Malode SJ, Prabhu KK, Mascarenhas RJ, Shetti NP, Aminabhavi TM. Recent

advances and viability in biofuel production. Energy Convers Manag X 2021;10:
100070. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2020.100070.

[37] Alessandra Salgado and Francisco Boshell. Biofuels: slump in investment and
innovations must be reversed. IRENA; December 3, 2019. https://energypost.
eu/biofuels-slump-in-investment-and-innovations-must-be-reversed/.
[38] Hasan M, Abedin MZ, Amin MB, Nekmahmud M, Ol ́ah J. Sustainable biofuel

economy: a mapping through bibliometric research. J Environ Manag 2023;336:
117644.

[39] Yang Y, Hobbie SE, Hernandez RR, Fargione J, Grodsky SM, Tilman D, Zhu YG,
Luo Y, Smith TM, Jungers JM, Yang M, Chen WQ. Restoring abandoned farmland
to mitigate climate change on a full earth. One Earth 2020;3(2):176–86. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.07.019.

[40] Popp J, Lakner Z, Harangi-r ́akos M, F ́ari M. The effect of bioenergy expansion :

food , energy , and environment. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;32:559–78.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.01.056.

[41] Banu JR, Kavitha S, Tyagi VK, Gunasekaran M, Karthikeyan OP, Kumar G.

microplastics (MPs) in agricultural soil: a review of MPs pollution from the
perspective of agricultural ecosystems. J Agric Food Chem 2022;70(14):
4182–201.

[63] Pinedo J, Ib ́a ̃nez R, Lijzen JPA, Irabien A. Assessment of soil pollution based on

total petroleum hydrocarbons and individual oil substances. J Environ Manag
2013;130:72–9.

[64] Kwon HS, Ryu MH, Carlsten C. Ultrafine particles: unique physicochemical
properties relevant to health and disease. Exp Mol Med 2020;52(3):318–28.
[65] Guo L, Hu J, Xing Y, Wang H, Miao S, Meng Q, Gao P. Sources, environmental

levels, and health risks of PM2. 5-bound polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in
energy-producing cities in northern China. Environ Pollut 2021;272:116024.

[66] Kuranchie FA, Angnunavuri PN, Attiogbe F, Nerquaye-Tetteh EN. Occupational
exposure of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX) to pump
attendants in Ghana: implications for policy guidance. Cogent Environ Sci 2019;5
(1):1603418.

[67] Sun K, Song Y, He F, Jing M, Tang J, Liu R. A review of human and animals

exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: health risk and adverse effects,
photo-induced toxicity and regulating effect of microplastics. Sci Total Environ
2021;773:145403.

[68] Munaweera TIK, Jayawardana NU, Rajaratnam R, Dissanayake N. Modern plant
biotechnology as a strategy in addressing climate change and attaining food
security. Agric Food Secur 2022;11(1):1–28.

[69] Barathi S, Gitanjali J, Rathinasamy G, Sabapathi N, Aruljothi KN, Lee J,

Kandasamy S. Recent trends in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons pollution
distribution and counteracting bio-remediation strategies. Chemosphere 2023:
139396.

Lignocellulosic biomass based biorefinery: a successful platform towards circular
bioeconomy. Fuel 2021;302:121086.

[70] Sakshi, Singh SK, Haritash AK. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: soil pollution

and remediation. Int J Environ Sci Technol 2019;16:6489–512.

[42] Che Hamzah NH, Khairuddin N, Siddique BM, Hassan MA. Potential of Jatropha
curcas L. as biodiesel feedstock in Malaysia: a concise review. Processes 2020;8
(7):786.

[71] Alegbeleye OO, Opeolu BO, Jackson VA. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: a

critical review of environmental occurrence and bioremediation. Environ Manag
2017;60:758–83.

[43] Energy, F. Miscanthus (Miscanthus x giganteus) for biofuel production.

[72] Padhye LP, Srivastava P, Jasemizad T, Bolan S, Hou D, Sabry S, Bolan N.

Contaminant containment for sustainable remediation of persistent contaminants
in soil and groundwater. J Hazard Mater 2023:131575.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116124

N. Das et al.

[73] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate change 2014 synthesis
report summary for policymakers. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/
2018/05/SYR_AR5_FINAL_full_wcover.pdf; 2014.

[74] National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). (n.d.). Causes of Oil
Spills. Retrieved March 17, 2023, from https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/oil-
and-chemical-spills/oil-spills/about-oil-spills/causes-o.

[75] Summerhayes C. Deep water – the gulf oil disaster and the future of offshore
drilling. Underw Technol 2011;30(2). https://doi.org/10.3723/ut.30.113.
[76] Atlas RM, Hazen TC. Oil biodegradation and bioremediation: a tale of the two
worst spills in U.S. history. Environ Sci Technol 2011;45(16):6709–15. https://
doi.org/10.1021/es2013227.

[77] Zedalis RJ. International energy law: rules governing future exploration,

exploitation and use of renewable resources. Int Energy Law: Rules Governing
Future Exploration, Exploitation and Use of Renewable Resources 2017:1–341.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315252056.

[78] IPCC. In: Stocker TF, Qin D, Plattner GK, Tignor M, Allen SK, Boschung J,

Nauels A, Xia Y, Bex V, Midgley PM, editors. Climate change 2013: the physical
science basis. Contribution of working group I to the fifth assessment report of the
intergovernmental Panel on climate change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press; 2013. p. 1535.
[79] IPCC. In: Shukla PR, Skea J, Slade R, Al Khourdajie A, van Diemen R,

McCollum D, Pathak M, Some S, Vyas P, Fradera R, Belkacemi M, Hasija A,
Lisboa G, Luz S, Malley J, editors. Climate change 2022: mitigation of climate
change. Contribution of working group III to the sixth assessment report of the
intergovernmental Panel on climate change. Cambridge, UK and New York, NY,
USA: Cambridge University Press; 2022. https://doi.org/10.1017/
9781009157926.

[98] Chernikova TN, Bargiela R, Toshchakov SV, Shivaraman V, Lunev EA,

Yakimov MM, Golyshin PN. Hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria Alcanivorax and
Marinobacter associated with microalgae Pavlova lutheri and Nannochloropsis
oculata. Front Microbiol 2020;11:572931.

[99] Kotoky R, Rajkumari J, Pandey P. The rhizosphere microbiome: significance in

rhizoremediation of polyaromatic hydrocarbon contaminated soil. J Environ
Manag 2018;217:858–70.

[100] Rane NR, Tapase S, Kanojia A, Watharkar A, Salama ES, Jang M, Jeon BH.

Molecular insights into plant–microbe interactions for sustainable remediation of
contaminated environment. Bioresour Technol 2022;344:126246.

[101] Sah D, Rai JPN, Ghosh A, Chakraborty M. A review on biosurfactant producing
bacteria for remediation of petroleum contaminated soils. 3 Biotech 2022;12(9):
218.

[102] Mason OU. Metagenomics, metatranscriptomics and single cell genomics reveal

functional response of active Oceanospirillales to Gulf oil spill. 2012.

[103] Mason OU. Metagenomics, metatranscriptomics and single cell genomics. 2012.
[104] Kumar V, Agrawal S, Bhat SA, Am ́erico-Pinheiro JHP, Shahi SK, Kumar S.

Environmental impact, health hazards, and plant-microbes synergism in
remediation of emerging contaminants. Clean Chem Eng 2022;2:100030.
[105] Gerhardt KE, Huang XD, Glick BR, Greenberg BM. Phytoremediation and

rhizoremediation of organic soil contaminants: potential and challenges. Plant Sci
2009;176(1):20–30.

[106] Das N, Bhuyan B, Pandey P. Correlation of soil microbiome with crude oil
contamination drives detection of hydrocarbon degrading genes which are
independent to quantity and type of contaminants. Environ Res 2022;215:
114185.

[107] Turner TR, James EK, Poole PS. The plant microbiome. Genome Biol 2013;14(6):

[80] Aa I, Op A, Ujj I, Mt B. A critical review of oil spills in the Niger Delta aquatic

1–10. https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2013-14-6-209.

environment: causes, impacts, and bioremediation assessment. Environ Monit
Assess 2022;194(11):816.

[81] Ambaye TG, Chebbi A, Formicola F, Prasad S, Gomez FH, Franzetti A, Vaccari M.
Remediation of soil polluted with petroleum hydrocarbons and its reuse for
agriculture: recent progress, challenges, and perspectives. Chemosphere 2022;
293:133572.

[82] Ivshina IB, Kuyukina MS, Krivoruchko AV, Elkin AA, Makarov SO,

Cunningham CJ, Philp JC. Oil spill problems and sustainable response strategies
through new technologies. Environ Sci J Integr Environ Res: Process Impacts
2015;17(7):1201–19.

[83] Mbachu AE, Chukwura EI, Mbachu NA. Role of microorganisms in the

degradation of organic pollutants: a review. Energy Environ Eng 2020;7(1):1–11.
[84] Saeed Q, Xiukang W, Haider FU, Kuˇcerik J, Mumtaz MZ, Holatko J, Mustafa A.
Rhizosphere bacteria in plant growth promotion, biocontrol, and bioremediation
of contaminated sites: a comprehensive review of effects and mechanisms. Int J
Mol Sci 2021;22(19):10529.

[108] Ma W, Tang S, Dengzeng Z, Zhang D, Zhang T, Ma X. Root exudates contribute to

belowground ecosystem hotspots: a review. Front Microbiol 2022;13(October):
1–19. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.937940.

[109] Strehmel N, B ̈ottcher C, Schmidt S, Scheel D. Profiling of secondary metabolites in
root exudates of Arabidopsis thaliana. Phytochemistry 2014;108:35–46.
[110] Adeleke BS, Babalola OO. Roles of plant endosphere microbes in agriculture-a

review. J Plant Growth Regul 2022;41(4):1411–28.

[111] Gouda S, Kerry RG, Das G, Paramithiotis S, Shin HS, Patra JK. Revitalization of
plant growth promoting rhizobacteria for sustainable development in agriculture.
Microbiol Res 2018;206:131–40.

[112] Das PP, Singh KR, Nagpure G, Mansoori A, Singh RP, Ghazi IA, Singh J. Plant-soil-
microbes: a tripartite interaction for nutrient acquisition and better plant growth
for sustainable agricultural practices. Environ Res 2022;214:113821.

[113] Khan N, Bano A, Ali S, Babar MA. Crosstalk amongst phytohormones from planta
and PGPR under biotic and abiotic stresses. Plant Growth Regul 2020;90:
189–203.

[85] Almutairi M. The assessment strategy for selecting and evaluating

[114] Weston LA, Ryan PR, Watt M. Mechanisms for cellular transport and release of

geoenvironmental remediation. In: Geopolymers and other geosynthetics.
IntechOpen; 2019.

allelochemicals from plant roots into the rhizosphere. J Exp Bot 2012;63(9):
3445–54.

[86] Gavrilescu M, Pavel LV, Cretescu I. Characterization and remediation of soils
contaminated with uranium. J Hazard Mater 2009;163(2–3):475–510.

[87] Rajendran S, Priya TAK, Khoo KS, Hoang TK, Ng HS, Munawaroh HSH, Show PL.

A critical review on various remediation approaches for heavy metal
contaminants removal from contaminated soils. Chemosphere 2022;287:132369.

[88] Sharma P, Bano A, Singh SP, Dubey NK, Chandra R, Iqbal HM. Recent

advancements in microbial-assisted remediation strategies for toxic
contaminants. Clean Chem Eng 2022;2:100020.

[115] Jha P, Panwar J, Jha PN. Secondary plant metabolites and root exudates: guiding

tools for polychlorinated biphenyl biodegradation. Int J Environ Sci Technol
2015;12:789–802.

[116] Martin BC, George SJ, Price CA, Ryan MH, Tibbett M. The role of root exuded low
molecular weight organic anions in facilitating petroleum hydrocarbon
degradation: current knowledge and future directions. Sci Total Environ 2014;
472:642–53.

[117] Ajijah N, Fiodor A, Pandey AK, Rana A, Pranaw K. Plant Growth-Promoting

[89] Pilon S. Phytorremediation. Anual review of plant biology. 2005.
[90] Pizarro-Tobías P, Niqui JL, Roca A, Solano J, Fern ́andez M, Bastida F, Ramos JL.

Bacteria (PGPB) with biofilm-forming ability: a multifaceted agent for sustainable
agriculture. Diversity 2023;15(1):112.

Field trial on removal of petroleum-hydrocarbon pollutants using a microbial
consortium for bioremediation and rhizoremediation. Environ Microbiol Reports
2015;7(1):85–94.

[91] Ruley JA, Amoding A, Tumuhairwe JB, Basamba TA. Rhizoremediation of

petroleum hydrocarbon–contaminated soils: a systematic review of mutualism
between phytoremediation species and soil living microorganisms.
Phytoremediation 2022:263–96.

[92] Duxbury PH. Phytoremediation systems for treatment of contaminant mixtures in

soil. 2000.

[93] Agnello AC, Bagard M, van Hullebusch ED, Esposito G, Huguenot D. Comparative

bioremediation of heavy metals and petroleum hydrocarbons co-contaminated
soil by natural attenuation, phytoremediation, bioaugmentation and
bioaugmentation-assisted phytoremediation. Sci Total Environ 2016;563:
693–703.

[94] Hou J, Wang Q, Liu W, Zhong D, Ge Y, Christie P, Luo Y. Soil microbial

community and association network shift induced by several tall fescue cultivars
during the phytoremediation of a petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated soil. Sci
Total Environ 2021;792:148411.

[95] Zhang X, Wang Z, Liu X, Hu X, Liang X, Hu Y. Degradation of diesel pollutants in
Huangpu-Yangtze River estuary wetland using plant-microbe systems. Int
Biodeterior Biodegrad 2013;76:71–5.

[96] Khan IU, Qi SS, Gul F, Manan S, Rono JK, Naz M, Du DL. A green approach used
for heavy metals ‘Phytoremediation’Via invasive plant species to mitigate
environmental pollution. A Review. Plants 2023;12(4):725.

[97] Das N, Das A, Das S, Bhatawadekar V, Pandey P, Choure K, Pandey P. Petroleum
hydrocarbon catabolic pathways as targets for metabolic engineering strategies
for enhanced bioremediation of crude-oil-contaminated environments.
Fermentation 2023;9(2):196.

[118] Ch JAJ, Romero RM. Evaluation of Cajanus cajan (pigeon pea) for

phytoremediation of landfill leachate containing chromium and lead, vol. 6514;
2016. https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2016.1186592. May.

[119] Bauddh, K., Singh, B., & Korstad, J. (n.d.). Phytoremediation potential of

bioenergy plants.

[120] Gao Y, Ren L, Ling W, Gong S, Sun B, Zhang Y. Desorption of phenanthrene and
pyrene in soils by root exudates. Bioresour Technol 2010;101(4):1159–65.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2009.09.062.

[121] Nebesk ́a Allamin IA, Halmi MIE, Yasid NA, Ahmad SA, Abdullah SRS, Shukor Y.
Rhizodegradation of petroleum oily sludge-contaminated soil using Cajanus cajan
increases the diversity of soil microbial community. Sci Rep 2020;10(1):1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-60668-1.

[122] Popp J, Harangi-R ́akos M, Gabnai Z, Balogh P, Antal G, Bai A. Biofuels and their
co-products as livestock feed: global economic and environmental implications.
Molecules 2016;21(3):1–26. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules21030285.
[123] Zeven AC, De Wet JM. Dictionary of cultivated plants and their regions of

diversity: excluding most ornamentals, forest trees and lower plants. Pudoc; 1982.

[124] Hussain I, Puschenreiter M, Gerhard S, Sch ̈oftner P, Yousaf S, Wang A,

Reichenauer TG. Rhizoremediation of petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated
soils: improvement opportunities and field applications. Environ Exp Bot 2018;
147:202–19.

[125] Filgueiras TS. Herbaceous plant communities. In: The Cerrados of Brazil: ecology

and natural history of a neotropical savanna. Columbia University Press; 2002.
p. 121–39.
[126] Kidd P, Mench M,

 ́
Alvarez-L ́opez V, Bert V, Dimitriou I, Friesl-Hanl W,

Puschenreiter M. Agronomic practices for improving gentle remediation of trace
element-contaminated soils. Int J Phytoremediation 2015;17(11):1005–37.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116125

N. Das et al.

[127] Hoang SA, Lamb D, Seshadri B, Sarkar B, Choppala G, Kirkham MB, Bolan NS.
Rhizoremediation as a green technology for the remediation of petroleum
hydrocarbon-contaminated soils. J Hazard Mater 2021;401:123282.

[128] Alotaibi F, Hijri M, St-Arnaud M. Overview of approaches to improve

rhizoremediation of petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated soils. Appl Microbiol
2021;1(2):329–51.

[159] Trabucco A, Achten WM, Bowe C, Aerts RAF, Orshoven JV, Norgrove L, Muys B.
Global mapping of Jatropha curcas yield based on response of fitness to present
and future climate. Gcb Bioenergy 2010;2(3):139–51.

[160] Xiong J, Xie Y, et al. Phytoremediation of petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated
soil using Populus deltoides cv. ’Nanlin 895. Environ Sci Pollut Control Ser 2019;
26(14):13926–36.

[129] Reid WV, Ali MK, Field CB. The future of bioenergy. Global Change Biol 2020;26

[161] Liang Z, Zeng H, Kong J. Contrasting responses and phytoremediation potential of

(1):274–86. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14883.

[130] Ashokkumar V, Venkatkarthick R, Jayashree S, Chuetor S, Dharmaraj S, Kumar G,
Chen WH, Ngamcharussrivichai C. Recent advances in lignocellulosic biomass for
biofuels and value-added bioproducts - a critical review. Bioresour Technol 2022;
344(PB):126195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2021.126195.

[131] Ghahramani A, Howden SM, del Prado A, Thomas DT, Moore AD, Ji B, Ates S.

Climate change impact, adaptation, and mitigation in temperate grazing systems:
a review. Sustainability 2019;11(24):7224.

[132] Fradj NB, Rozakis S, Borzęcka M, Matyka M. Miscanthus in the European bio-

economy: a network analysis. Ind Crop Prod 2020;148:112281.

[133] Cotrina Cabello GG, Ruiz Rodriguez A, Husnain Gondal A, Areche FO, Flores DDC,

Astete JAQ, Cruz Nieto DD. Plant adaptability to climate change and drought
stress for crop growth and production. CABI Reviews; 2023. 2023.
[134] Anthony TL, Szutu DJ, Verfaillie JG, Baldocchi DD, Silver WL. Carbon-sink

potential of continuous alfalfa agriculture lowered by short-term nitrous oxide
emission events. Nat Commun 2023;14(1):1926.

[135] Ahmed LQ, Escobar-Guti ́errez AJ. Tall fescue (Festuca arundinacea Schreb.)

shows intraspecific variability in response to temperature during germination.
Agronomy 2022;12(5):1245.

[136] Farrer EC, Van Bael SA, Clay K, Smith MK. Plant-microbial symbioses in coastal
systems: their ecological importance and role in coastal restoration. Estuar Coast
2022;45(7):1805–22.

[137] Tripathi N, Hills CD, Singh RS, Atkinson CJ. Biomass waste utilisation in low-

carbon products: harnessing a major potential resource. NPJ Clim Atmos sci 2019;
2(1):35.

[138] Balan V. Current challenges in commercially producing biofuels from

lignocellulosic biomass. Int Sch Res Notices 2014;2014.

[139] Pikula K, Zakharenko A, Stratidakis A, Razgonova M, Nosyrev A, Mezhuev Y,

Golokhvast K. The advances and limitations in biodiesel production: feedstocks,
oil extraction methods, production, and environmental life cycle assessment.
Green Chem Lett Rev 2020;13(4):275–94.

[140] Ning P, Yang G, Hu L, Sun J, Shi L, Zhou Y, Wang Z, Yang J. Recent advances in
the valorization of plant biomass. Biotechnol Biofuels 2021;14(1):1–22. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13068-021-01949-3.

[141] Sorda G, Banse M, Kemfert C. An overview of biofuel policies across the world.

Energy Pol 2010;38(11):6977–88.

[142] Tan J, Li Y, Tan X, Wu H, Li H, Yang S. Advances in pretreatment of straw biomass
for sugar production. Front Chem 2021;9(June):1–28. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fchem.2021.696030.

[143] Aparicio JD, Raimondo EE, Saez JM, Costa-Gutierrez SB, Alvarez A, Benimeli CS,
Polti MA. The current approach to soil remediation: a review of physicochemical
and biological technologies, and the potential of their strategic combination.
J Environ Chem Eng 2022;10(2):107141.

[144] Alalwan HA, Alminshid AH, Aljaafari HA. Promising evolution of biofuel
generations. Subject review. Renew Energy Focus 2019;28:127–39.

[145] Dutta K, Daverey A, Lin JG. Evolution retrospective for alternative fuels: first to

fourth generation. Renew Energy 2014;69:114–22.

two poplar species to combined strontium and diesel oil stress. Plants 2023;12
(11):2145.

[162] Wyman CE, Dale BE, Elander RT, Holtzapple M, Ladisch MR, Lee YY, Saddler JN.

Comparative sugar recovery and fermentation data following pretreatment of
poplar wood by leading technologies. Biotechnol Prog 2009;25(2):333–9.
[163] Kelley SL, Aitchison EW, Deshpande M, Schnoor JL, Alvarez PJ. Biodegradation of
1, 4-dioxane in planted and unplanted soil: effect of bioaugmentation with
Amycolata sp. CB1190. Water Res 2001;35(16):3791–800.

[164] Bisht S, Pandey P, Sood A, Sharma S, Bisht NS. Biodegradation of naphthalene

and anthracene by chemo-tactically active rhizobacteria of Populus deltoides.
Braz J Microbiol 2010;41:922–30.

[165] Andreolli M, Lampis S, Poli M, Gullner G, Bir ́o B, Vallini G. Endophytic

Burkholderia fungorum DBT1 can improve phytoremediation efficiency of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Chemosphere 2013;92(6):688–94.
[166] Singha LP, Pandey P. Rhizosphere assisted bioengineering approaches for the

mitigation of petroleum hydrocarbons contamination in soil. Crit Rev Biotechnol
2021;41(5):749–66.

[167] Gielen B, Calfapietra C, Lukac M, Wittig VE, De Angelis P, Janssens IA,

Moscatelli MC, Grego S, Cotrufo MF, Godbold DL, Hoosbeek MR, Long SP,
Miglietta F, Polle A, Bernacchi CJ, Davey PA, Ceulemans R, Scarascia-
Mugnozza GE. Net carbon storage in a poplar plantation (POPFACE) after three
years of free-air CO2 enrichment. Tree Physiol 2005;25(11):1399–408. https://
doi.org/10.1093/treephys/25.11.1399.

[168] Werner C, Haas E, Grote R, Gauder M, Graeff-H ̈onninger S, Claupein W,

Butterbach-Bahl K. Biomass production potential from Populus short rotation
systems in Romania. GCB Bioenergy 2012;4(6):642–53.

[169] Shukla OP, Juwarkar AA, Singh SK, Khan S, Rai UN. Growth responses and metal
accumulation capabilities of woody plants during the phytoremediation of
tannery sludge. Waste Manag 2011;31(1):115–23.

[170] Sannigrahi P, Ragauskas AJ, Tuskan GA. Poplar as a feedstock for biofuels: a

review of compositional characteristics. Biofuels, Bioprod Biorefining 2010;4(2):
209–26.

[171] Justin MZ, Pajk N, Zupanc V, Zupanˇciˇc M. Phytoremediation of landfill leachate
and compost wastewater by irrigation of Populus and Salix: biomass and growth
response. Waste Manag 2010;30(6):1032–42.

[172] Stolarski MJ, Krzy  ̇zaniak M, Łuczy ́nski M, Załuski D, Szczukowski S,

Tworkowski J, Gołaszewski J. Lignocellulosic biomass from short rotation woody
crops as a feedstock for second-generation bioethanol production. Ind Crop Prod
2015;75:66–75.

[173] Porth I, El-Kassaby YA. Using Populus as a lignocellulosic feedstock for

bioethanol. Biotechnol J 2015;10(4):510–24.

[174] Pleguezuelo CRR, Zuazo VHD, Bielders C, Bocanegra JAJ, PereaTorres F,

Martínez JRF. Bioenergy farming using woody crops. Rev Agron Sustain Dev
2015;35:95–119.

[175] Budsberg E, Crawford J, Gustafson R, Bura R, Puettmann M. Ethanologens vs.

acetogens: environmental impacts of two ethanol fermentation pathways.
Biomass Bioenergy 2015;83:23–31.

[146] Lee RA, Lavoie JM. From first-to third-generation biofuels: challenges of

[176] Boda RK, Majeti NVP, Suthari S. Ricinus communis L. (castor bean) as a potential

producing a commodity from a biomass of increasing complexity. Anim Front
2013;3(2):6–11.

[147] Naik SN, Goud VV, Rout PK, Dalai AK. Production of first and second generation
biofuels: a comprehensive review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2010;14(2):578–97.
[148] Moravvej Z, Makarem MA, Rahimpour MR. The fourth generation of biofuel. In:

Second and third generation of feedstocks. Elsevier; 2019. p. 557–97.
[149] Godbole V, Pal MK, Gautam P. A critical perspective on the scope of

interdisciplinary approaches used in fourth-generation biofuel production. Algal
Res 2021;58:102436.

[150] Lieder M, Rashid A. Towards circular economy implementation: a comprehensive

review in context of manufacturing industry. J Clean Prod 2016;115:36–51.

[151] Odetoye TE. Thermochemical characterization of Nigerian Jatropha curcas fruit
and seed residues for biofuel production. Energy, Ecol Environ 2018. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40974-018-0104-0.

[152] Ewunie GA, Morken J, Lekang OI, Yigezu ZD. Factors affecting the potential of

Jatropha curcas for sustainable biodiesel production: a critical review. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2021;137:110500.

[153] McKeon TA. Emerging industrial oil crops. In: Industrial oil crops; 2016. https://

doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-893997-98-1.00011-7.

[154] Jamil S, Abhilash PC, Singh N, Sharma PN. Jatropha curcas: a potential crop for
phytoremediation of coal fly ash. J Hazard Mater 2009;172(1):269–75.
[155] Nero BF. Phytoremediation of petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated soils with

two plant species: jatropha curcas and Vetiveria zizanioides at Ghana Manganese
Company Ltd. Int J Phytoremediation 2021;23(2):171–80.

[156] Singh J, Singh AV. Microbial strategies for enhanced phytoremediation of heavy

metal-contaminated soils. Environ. Pollut. Bioremed.Approac. 2017;9:249–64.

[157] Abioye OP, Ijah UJJ, Aransiola SA. Phytoremediation of soil contaminants by the
biodiesel plant Jatropha curcas. Phytoremediation potential of bioenergy plants
2017:97–137.

[158] Daˆassi D, Qabil Almaghribi F. Petroleum-contaminated soil: environmental
occurrence and remediation strategies. 3 Biotech 2022;12(6):139.

candidate for revegetating industrial waste contaminated sites in peri-urban
Greater Hyderabad: remarks on seed oil. Environ Sci Pollut Control Ser 2017;24
(24):19955–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-9654-5.

[177] Rajkumar M, Sandhya S, Prasad MNV, Freitas H. Perspectives of plant-associated
microbes in heavy metal phytoremediation. Biotechnol Adv 2012;30(6):1562–74.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2012.04.011.

[178] Kiran BR, Prasad MNV. Ricinus communis L. (Castor bean), a potential multi-

purpose environmental crop for improved and integrated phytoremediation.
EuroBiotech J 2017;1(2):101–16. https://doi.org/10.24190/issn2564-615x/
2017/02.01.

[179] da Costa Barbosa D, Serra TM, Meneghetti SMP, Meneghetti MR. Biodiesel

production by ethanolysis of mixed castor and soybean oils. Fuel 2010;89(12):
3791–4.

[180] Fadhil AB, Al-Tikrity ET, Albadree MA. Biodiesel production from mixed non-

edible oils, castor seed oil and waste fish oil. Fuel 2017;210:721–8.

[181] Obanla OR, Mohammed FU, Alebiosu OS, Ojewumi ME, Oladimeji TE,

Babatunde DE. Study on the lubricating properties of Castor (Ricinus communis)
and hydroxylated rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) seed oil. ACS Omega 2021;6(43):
28471–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.0c05810.

[182] Bourgeois E, Dequiedt S, Leli`evre M, van Oort F, Lamy I, Ranjard L, Maron PA.
Miscanthus bioenergy crop stimulates nutrient-cycler bacteria and fungi in
wastewater-contaminated agricultural soil. Environ Chem Lett 2015;13(4):
503–11. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-015-0532-4.

[183] Pandey VC, Bajpai O, Singh N. Energy crops in sustainable phytoremediation.

Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;54:58–73.

[184] Koco ́n A, Matyka M. Phytoextractive potential of Miscanthus giganteus and Sida
hermaphrodita growing under moderate pollution of soil with Zn and Pb. J Food
Agric Environ 2012;10(2 3):1253–6.

[185] Nsanganwimana F, Al Souki KS, Waterlot C, Douay F, Pelfrˆene A, Ridoˇskov ́a A,
Louvel B, Pourrut B. Potentials of Miscanthus x giganteus for phytostabilization of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116126

N. Das et al.

trace element-contaminated soils: ex situ experiment. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf
2021;214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2021.112125.

[186] Iqbal Y, Gauder M, Claupein W, Graeff-H ̈onninger S, Lewandowski I. Yield and

quality development comparison between miscanthus and switchgrass over a
period of 10 years. Energy 2015;89:268–76.

[187] Krzy ̇zaniak M, Stolarski MJ, Waliszewska B, Szczukowski S, Tworkowski J,

 ́
Snieg M. Willow biomass as feedstock for an integrated multi-product

Załuski D,
biorefinery. Ind Crop Prod 2014;58:230–7.

[188] Zhang D, Jiang QW, Liang DY, Huang S, Liao J. The potential application of giant
reed (Arundo donax) in ecological remediation. Front Environ Sci 2021;9(May):
1–14. https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2021.652367.

[189] Singh J, Kumar M, Sharma A, Pandey G, Chae K, Lee S. We are IntechOpen , the
world ’ s leading publisher of Open Access books Built by scientists , for scientists
TOP 1 %. Intech 2016;11(tourism):13. https://www.intechopen.com/books/adv
anced-biometric-technologies/liveness-detection-in-biometrics.

[190] Kulig B, Gacek E, Wojciechowski R, Oleksy A, Kołodziejczyk M, Szewczyk W,
Klimek-Kopyra A. Biomass yield and energy efficiency of willow depending on
cultivar, harvesting frequency and planting density. Plant Soil Environ 2019;65
(8):377–86. https://doi.org/10.17221/594/2018-PSE.

[214] Gautam M, Mishra S, Agrawal M. Causes, effects and sustainable approaches to

remediate contaminated soil. Environ Pollut Remed 2021:451–95.

[215] Frossard E, Bucher M, M ̈achler F, Mozafar A, Hurrell R. Potential for increasing
the content and bioavailability of Fe, Zn and Ca in plants for human nutrition.
J Sci Food Agric 2000;80(7):861–79.

[216] Ngo PT, Rumpel C, Doan TT, Jouquet P. The effect of earthworms on carbon

storage and soil organic matter composition in tropical soil amended with
compost and vermicompost. Soil Biol Biochem 2012;50(April):214–20. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2012.02.037.

[217] Agamuthu P, Abioye OP, Aziz AA. Phytoremediation of soil contaminated with
used lubricating oil using Jatropha curcas. J Hazard Mater 2010;179(1–3):891–4.
[218] Cullen CM, Aneja KK, Beyhan S, Cho CE, Woloszynek S, Convertino M, McCoy SJ,
Zhang Y, Anderson MZ, Alvarez-Ponce D, Smirnova E, Karstens L, Dorrestein PC,
Li H, Sen Gupta A, Cheung K, Powers JG, Zhao Z, Rosen GL. Emerging priorities
for microbiome research. Front Microbiol 2020;11(February). https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmicb.2020.00136.

[219] Wang MC, Chen YT, Chen SH, Chien SC, Sunkara SV. Phytoremediation of pyrene
contaminated soils amended with compost and planted with ryegrass and alfalfa.
Chemosphere 2012;87(3):217–25.

[191] Rentz JA, Alvarez PJ, Schnoor JL. Benzo [a] pyrene co-metabolism in the

[220] Jung JY, Lal R. Impacts of nitrogen fertilization on biomass production of

presence of plant root extracts and exudates: implications for phytoremediation.
Environ Pollut 2005;136(3):477–84.

switchgrass (Panicum virgatum L.) and changes in soil organic carbon in Ohio.
Geoderma 2011;166(1):145–52.

[192] Alshaal T, Elhawat N, Katai J. Giant reed (Arundo donax L.): a green technology
for clean environment giant reed (Arundo donax L.): a green technology for clean
environment (Issue October), https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10395-2;
2014.

[193] Ge X, Xu F, Vasco-Correa J, Li Y. Giant reed: a competitive energy crop in
comparison with miscanthus. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;54:350–62.
[194] Keoleian GA, Volk TA. Renewable energy from willow biomass crops: life cycle
energy, environmental and economic performance. BPTS 2005;24(5–6):385–406.
[195] Kotoky R, Pandey P. Difference in the rhizosphere microbiome of Melia azedarach
during removal of benzo (a) pyrene from cadmium co-contaminated soil.
Chemosphere 2020;258:127175.

[196] Khan Z, Roman D, Kintz T, delas Alas M, Yap R, Doty S. Degradation,
phytoprotection and phytoremediation of phenanthrene by endophyte
Pseudomonas putida, PD1. Environ Sci Technol 2014;48(20):12221–8.

[197] Liu YN, Guo ZH, Xiao XY, Wang S, Jiang ZC, Zeng P. Phytostabilisation potential
of giant reed for metals contaminated soil modified with complex organic
fertiliser and fly ash: a field experiment. Sci Total Environ 2017;576:292–302.

[198] Bjelkov ́a M, Genˇcurov ́a V, Griga M. Accumulation of cadmium by flax and linseed

cultivars in field-simulated conditions: a potential for phytoremediation of Cd-
contaminated soils. Ind Crop Prod 2011;33(3):761–74.

[199] Canu M, Mul`e P, Spanu E, Fanni S, Marrone A, Carboni G. Hemp cultivation in
soils polluted by Cd, Pb and Zn in the mediterranean area: sites characterization
and phytoremediation in real scale settlement. Appl Sci 2022;12(7). https://doi.
org/10.3390/app12073548.

[200] Budsberg E, Rastogi M, Puettmann ME, Caputo J, Balogh S, Volk TA, Johnson L.
Life-cycle assessment for the production of bioethanol from willow biomass crops
via biochemical conversion. For Prod J 2012;62(4):305–13.

[201] Han SH, Cho DH, Kim YH, Shin SJ. Biobutanol production from 2-year-old willow

biomass by acid hydrolysis and acetone–butanol–ethanol fermentation. Energy
2013;61:13–7.

[202] Sekoai PT, Ouma CNM, Du Preez SP, Modisha P, Engelbrecht N, Bessarabov DG,
Ghimire A. Application of nanoparticles in biofuels: an overview. Fuel 2019;237:
380–97.

[203] Littlewood J. Potential for bamboo as a feedstock for lignocellulosic biofuel
production (Doctoral dissertation. Imperial College London); 2013.

[204] Rehman M, Fahad S, Du G, Cheng X, Yang Y, Tang K, Deng G. Evaluation of hemp
(Cannabis sativa L.) as an industrial crop: a review. Environ Sci Pollut Control Ser
2021;28(38):52832–43.

[205] Kor ́anyi TI, Fridrich B, Pineda A, Barta K. Development of ‘Lignin-

First’approaches for the valorization of lignocellulosic biomass. Molecules 2020;
25(12):2815.

[206] Kumar SJ, Gujjala LKS, Dash A, Talukdar B, Banerjee R. Biodiesel production from
lignocellulosic biomass using oleaginous microbes. Lignocellulosic biomass
production and industrial applications 2017:65–92.

[207] Chintagunta AD, Zuccaro G, Kumar M, Kumar SJ, Garlapati VK, Postemsky PD,
Simal-Gandara J. Biodiesel production from lignocellulosic biomass using
oleaginous microbes: prospects for integrated biofuel production. Front Microbiol
2021;12:658284.

[208] Hutchinson SL, Schwab AP, Banks MK. Biodegradation of petroleum

hydrocarbons in the rhizosphere. Phytoremediation: transformation and control
of contaminants 2003:355–86.

[209] Neina D. The role of soil pH in plant nutrition and soil remediation. Appl Environ

Soil Sci 2019;2019(3). https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/5794869.

[210] Jain A, Chakraborty J, Das S. Underlying mechanism of plant–microbe crosstalk
in shaping microbial ecology of the rhizosphere. Acta Physiol Plant 2020;42:1–13.

[211] Wenzel WW. Rhizosphere processes and management in plant-assisted

[221] Saeed M, Ilyas N, Jayachandran K, Shabir S, Akhtar N, Shahzad A, Bano A.

Advances in Biochar and PGPR engineering system for hydrocarbon degradation:
a promising strategy for environmental remediation. Environ Pollut 2022;305:
119282.

[222] Lal S, Ratna S, Said OB, Kumar R. Biosurfactant and exopolysaccharide-assisted
rhizobacterial technique for the remediation of heavy metal contaminated soil: an
advancement in metal phytoremediation technology. Environ Technol Innov
2018;10:243–63.

[223] Tang J, Zhu W, Kookana R, Katayama A. Characteristics of biochar and its

application in remediation of contaminated soil. J Biosci Bioeng 2013;116(6):
653–9.

[224] Saikia RR, Deka S, Deka M, Sarma H. Optimization of environmental factors for
improved production of rhamnolipid biosurfactant by Pseudomonas aeruginosa
RS29 on glycerol. J Basic Microbiol 2012;52(4):446–57.

[225] Mahmud MS, Chong KP. Formulation of biofertilizers from oil palm empty fruit

bunches and plant growth-promoting microbes: a comprehensive and novel
approach towards plant health. J King Saud Univ Sci 2021;33(8):101647. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jksus.2021.101647.

[226] Rebello S, Nathan VK, Sindhu R, Binod P, Awasthi MK, Pandey A. Bioengineered

microbes for soil health restoration: present status and future. Bioengineered
2021;12(2):12839–53. https://doi.org/10.1080/21655979.2021.2004645.

[227] Molina G, Usmani Z, Sharma M, Yasri A, Gupta VK, editors. Microbes in agri-

forestry Biotechnology. CRC Press; 2022.

[228] Brenzinger K, Kujala K, Horn MA, Moser G, Guillet C, Kammann C, Müller C,

Braker G. Soil conditions rather than long-term exposure to elevated CO2  affect
soil microbial communities associated with N-cycling. Front. Microbiol. 2017;8:
270386.

[229] Hrynkiewicz K, Baum C. The potential of rhizosphere microorganisms to promote
the plant growth in disturbed soils. Environmental protection strategies for
sustainable development; 2012. p. 35–64.

[230] Nandy S, Panchal D, Kapley A, Pal S. Indigenous microorganisms: an effective in-
situ tool to mitigate organic pollutants from contaminated sites. Microbial
technologies for wastewater recycling and management. first ed. Boca Raton: CRC
Press; 2022. p. 119–40.

[231] Sriprang R, Hayashi M, Ono H, Takagi M, Hirata K, Murooka Y. Enhanced

accumulation of Cd2+ by a Mesorhizobium sp. transformed with a gene from
Arabidopsis thaliana coding for phytochelatin synthase. Appl Environ Microbiol
2003;69(3):1791–6. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.69.3.1791-1796.2003.
[232] Lemare M, Puja H, David SR, Mathieu S, Ihiawakrim D, Geoffroy VA, Rigouin C.
Engineering siderophore production in Pseudomonas to improve asbestos
weathering. Microb Biotechnol 2022;15(9):2351–63. https://doi.org/10.1111/
1751-7915.14099.

[233] Hakim S, Naqqash T, Nawaz MS, Laraib I, Siddique MJ, Zia R, Mirza MS, Imran A.
Rhizosphere engineering with plant growth-promoting microorganisms for
agriculture and ecological sustainability. Front Sustain Food Syst 2021;5
(February):1–23. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2021.617157.

[234] Li D, Yan J, Wang L, Zhang Y, Liu D, Geng H, Xiong L. Characterization of the

phthalate acid catabolic gene cluster in phthalate acid esters transforming
bacterium-Gordonia sp. strain HS-NH1. Int Biodeterior Biodegrad 2016;106:
34–40.

[235] Mangwani N, Kumari S, Das S. Involvement of quorum sensing genes in biofilm
development and degradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons by a marine
bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa N6P6. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2015;99:
10283–97.

[236] Van Hamme JD, Singh A, Ward OP. Recent advances in petroleum microbiology.

Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2003;67(4):503–49.

bioremediation (phytoremediation) of soils. 2009.

[237] Eng A, Borenstein E. Microbial community design: methods, applications, and

[212] Brimecombe MJ, De Leij FA, Lynch JM. The effect of root exudates on rhizosphere
microbial populations. In: Pinton R, Varini Z, Nannipieri P, editors. The
rhizosphere, biochemistry and organic substances at the soil–plant interface;
2000. p. 95–140.

[213] Iannucci A, Canfora L, Nigro F, De Vita P, Beleggia R. Relationships between root
morphology, root exudate compounds and rhizosphere microbial community in
durum wheat. Appl Soil Ecol 2021;158:103781.

opportunities. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2019;58:117–28.

[238] Chakraborty R, Karmakar S, Ansar W. Advances and applications of
bioremediation: network of omics, system biology, gene editing and
nanotechnology. Environmental Informatics: Challenges and Solutions; 2022.
p. 167–99.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116127

N. Das et al.

[239] Yan A, Wang Y, Tan SN, Mohd Yusof ML, Ghosh S, Chen Z. Phytoremediation: a
promising approach for revegetation of heavy metal-polluted land. Front Plant Sci
2020;11:359.

[240] Abhilash PC, Jamil S, Singh N. Transgenic plants for enhanced biodegradation

and phytoremediation of organic xenobiotics. Biotechnol Adv 2009;27(4):
474–88.

[269] Hoang AT, Varbanov PS, Niˇzeti ́c S, Sirohi R, Pandey A, Luque R, Ng KH.

Perspective review on Municipal Solid Waste-to-energy route: characteristics,
management strategy, and role in circular economy. J Clean Prod 2022;359:
131897.

[270] Bart JC, Palmeri N, Cavallaro S. Biodiesel science and technology: from soil to oil.

Elsevier; 2010.

[241] Arshad M, Saleem M, Hussain S. Perspectives of bacterial ACC deaminase in

phytoremediation. Trends Biotechnol 2007;25(8):356–62.

[271] Tier I. California renewable diesel multimedia evaluation. 2010.
[272] Himmel ME, Adney WS, Baker JO, Elander R, McMillan JD, Nieves RA, Zhang M.

[242] Sun H, Jiang S, Jiang C, Wu C, Gao M, Wang Q. A review of root exudates and
rhizosphere microbiome for crop production. Environ Sci Pollut Control Ser 2021;
28:54497–510.

[243] Li Y, Xie T, Zha Y, Du W, Yin Y, Guo H. Urea-enhanced phytoremediation of

cadmium with willow in pyrene and cadmium contaminated soil. J Hazard Mater
2021;405:124257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124257.

[244] Alber A, Ehlting J. Cytochrome P450s in lignin biosynthesis. Adv Bot Res 2012;

61:113–43 [Academic Press].

[245] Vanek T, Zeman S. Phytoremediation of selected explosives in a model system of

Advanced bioethanol production technologies: a perspective. 1997.

[273] Walls LE, Rios-Solis L. Sustainable production of microbial isoprenoid derived

advanced biojet fuels using different generation feedstocks: a review. Front
Bioeng Biotechnol 2020;8:599560.

[274] Zulqarnain Mohd, Yusoff MH, Ayoub M, Ramzan N, Nazir MH, Zahid I, Abbas N,
Elboughdiri N, Mirza CR, Butt TA. Overview of feedstocks for sustainable
biodiesel production and implementation of the biodiesel program in Pakistan.
ACS Omega 2021;6(29):19099–114. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsomega.1c02402.

plant tissue cultures. J Plant Biotechnol 2000;27(5):395.

[275] Balan V. Current challenges in commercially producing biofuels from

[246] Omidbakhshfard MA, Proost S, Fujikura U, Mueller-Roeber B. Growth-regulating

factors (GRFs): a small transcription factor family with important functions in
plant biology. Mol Plant 2015;8(7):998–1010.

[247] Vanˇek T, Nepovim A, Podlipna R, Zeman S, Vagner M. Phytoremediation of

selected explosives. Water Air Soil Pollut Focus 2003;3:259–67.

[248] Vanek T, Zeman S. Phytoremediation of selected explosives in a model system of

plant tissue cultures. J Plant Biotechnol 2000;27(5):395.

[249] Wang GD, Li QJ, Luo B, Chen XY. Ex planta phytoremediation of trichlorophenol
and phenolic allelochemicals via an engineered secretory laccase. Nat Biotechnol
2004;22(7):893–7.

[250] Macek T, Novakova M, Kotrba P, Viktorova J, Loveck ́a P, Fiser J, Mackova M.
Genetically modified plants designed for phytoremediation of toxic organic and
inorganic contaminants. Phytotechnologies: Remediation of environmental
contaminants 2012:415.

[251] Uchida E, Ouchi T, Suzuki Y, Yoshida T, Habe H, Yamaguchi I, Nojiri H. Secretion
of bacterial xenobiotic-degrading enzymes from transgenic plants by an
apoplastic expressional system: an applicability for phytoremediation. Environ
Sci Technol 2005;39(19):7671–7.

[252] Kawahigashi H. Transgenic plants for phytoremediation of herbicides. Curr Opin

Biotechnol 2009;20(2):225–30.

[253] Schmidt JE, Lowry C, Gaudin AC. An optimized rhizobox protocol to visualize

root growth and responsiveness to localized nutrients. JoVE 2018;(140):e58674.
[254] Berchmans HJ, Hirata S. Biodiesel production from crude Jatropha curcas L. seed
oil with a high content of free fatty acids. Bioresour Technol 2008;99(6):1716–21.

[255] Chitra P, Venkatachalam P, Sampathrajan A. Optimisation of experimental

conditions for biodiesel production from alkali-catalysed transesterification of
Jatropha curcus oil. Energy Sustain Dev 2005;9(3):13–8.

[256] Malode SJ, Prabhu KK, Mascarenhas RJ, Shetti NP, Aminabhavi TM. Recent

advances and viability in biofuel production. Energy Convers Manag X 2021;10
(December 2020):100070. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2020.100070.
[257] Mathew GM, Raina D, Narisetty V, Kumar V, Saran S, Pugazhendi A, Sindhu R,

Pandey A, Binod P. Recent advances in biodiesel production: challenges and
solutions. Sci Total Environ 2021;794:148751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2021.148751.

lignocellulosic biomass. ISRN Biotechnol 2014;2014(i):1–31. https://doi.org/
10.1155/2014/463074.

[276] Agarwal aK, Agarwal Ra, Gupta T, Gurjar BR. Biofuels: technology, challenges

and prospects. 2017.

[277] Pikula K, Zakharenko A, Stratidakis A, Razgonova M, Nosyrev A, Mezhuev Y,

Tsatsakis A, Golokhvast K. The advances and limitations in biodiesel production:
feedstocks, oil extraction methods, production, and environmental life cycle
assessment. Green Chem Lett Rev 2020;13(4):11–30. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17518253.2020.1829099.

[278] Brosse N, Dufour A, Meng X, Sun Q, Ragauskas A. Miscanthus: a fast-growing crop
for biofuels and chemicals production. Biofuels, Bioprod Biorefining 2012;6(5):
580–98.

[279] Janus A, Pelfrˆene A, Sahmer K, Heymans S, Deboffe C, Douay F, Waterlot C. Value

of biochars from Miscanthus x giganteus cultivated on contaminated soils to
decrease the availability of metals in multicontaminated aqueous solutions.
Environ Sci Pollut Control Ser 2017;24(22):18204–17.

[280] Lohri CR, Diener S, Zabaleta I, Mertenat A, Zurbrügg C. Treatment technologies
for urban solid biowaste to create value products: a review with focus on low-and
middle-income settings. Rev Environ Sci Biotechnol 2017;16:81–130.

[281] Nebesk ́a D, Tr ̈ogl J,

ˇ
Sevců A,

ˇ
Sp ́anek R, Markov ́a K, Davis L, Burdov ́a H,

Pidlisnyuk V. Miscanthus x giganteus role in phytodegradation and changes in
bacterial community of soil contaminated by petroleum industry. Ecotoxicol
Environ Saf 2021;224(August). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2021.112630.
[282] Lewandowski I, Kicherer A. Combustion quality of biomass: practical relevance
and experiments to modify the biomass quality of Miscanthus x giganteus. Eur J
Agron 1997;6(3–4):163–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1161-0301(96)02044-8.

[283] Wang F, Liu CZ. Development of an economic refining strategy of sweet sorghum
in the Inner Mongolia region of China. Energy Fuel 2009;23(8):4137–42.
[284] Agbogidi OM, Eruotor PG, Ohwo OA. Germination response of Jatropha curcas L.
seeds as influenced by crude oil in soil. J Agric Biol Sci 2011;2(5):114–7.
[285] Bhatia SK, Bhatia RK, Jeon JM, Pugazhendhi A, Awasthi MK, Kumar D, Yang YH.
An overview on advancements in biobased transesterification methods for
biodiesel production: oil resources, extraction, biocatalysts, and process
intensification technologies. Fuel 2021;285:119117.

[258] Mahapatra S, Kumar D, Singh B, Sachan PK. Biofuels and their sources of

[286] Cook RL. Phytoremediation of a petroleum-hydrocarbon contaminated shallow

production: a review on cleaner sustainable alternative against conventional fuel,
in the framework of the food and energy nexus. Energy Nexus 2021;4(August
2021):100036. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nexus.2021.100036.

[259] Ho DP, Ngo HH, Guo W. A mini review on renewable sources for biofuel.

Bioresour Technol 2014;169:742–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2014.07.022.

[260] Deora PS, Verma Y, Muhal RA, Goswami C, Singh T. Biofuels: an alternative to
conventional fuel and energy source. Mater Today Proc 2022;48:1178–84.

aquifer, elizabeth city, NC: planting methods and preliminary results. 2008.

[287] Muratova A, Lyubun Y, Sungurtseva I, Turkovskaya O, Nurzhanova A.

Physiological and biochemical characteristic of Miscanthus× giganteus grown in
heavy metal–oil sludge co-contaminated soil. J Environ Sci 2022;115:114–25.
[288] Pidlisnyuk V, Herts A, Khomenchuk V, Mamirova A, Kononchuk O, Ust’ak S.
Dynamic of morphological and physiological parameters and variation of soil
characteristics during Miscanthus× giganteus cultivation in the diesel-
contaminated land. Agronomy 2021;11(4):798.

[261] Schenk PM, Thomas-Hall SR, Stephens E, Marx UC, Mussgnug JH, Posten C,

[289] Cao Y, Tan Q, Zhang F, Ma C, Xiao J, Chen G. Phytoremediation potential

Hankamer B. Second generation biofuels: high-efficiency microalgae for biodiesel
production. Bioenergy Res 2008;1:20–43.

evaluation of multiple Salix clones for heavy metals (Cd, Zn and Pb) in flooded
soils. Sci Total Environ 2022;813:152482.

[262] Lewandowski I, Kicherer A. Combustion quality of biomass: practical relevance
and experiments to modify the biomass quality of Miscanthus x giganteus. Eur J
Agron 1997;6(3–4):163–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1161-0301(96)02044-8.

[263] Xiao MZ, Sun Q, Hong S, Chen WJ, Pang B, Du ZY, Yang W Bin, Sun Z, Yuan TQ.

Sweet sorghum for phytoremediation and bioethanol production. J Leather Sci
Eng 2021;3(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s42825-021-00074-z.

[264] Banerjee S, Das D, Ghosh AK. Production of bioethanol from microalgal feedstock:
a circular biorefinery approach. Potential and challenges of low carbon fuels for
sustainable transport 2022:33–65.

[265] Mujtaba M, Fraceto L, Fazeli M, Mukherjee S, Savassa SM, de Medeiros GA,
Vilaplana F. Lignocellulosic biomass from agricultural waste to the circular
economy: a review with focus on biofuels, biocomposites and bioplastics. J Clean
Prod 2023:136815.

[266] Haq IU, Qaisar K, Nawaz A, Akram F, Mukhtar H, Xu Y, Choong TSY. Advances in

valorization of lignocellulosic biomass towards energy generation. Catalysts
2021;11(3):309.

[267] Nanda S, Berruti F. Municipal solid waste management and landfilling
technologies: a review. Environ Chem Lett 2021;19:1433–56.

[268] Ossai IC, Ahmed A, Hassan A, Hamid FS. Remediation of soil and water

contaminated with petroleum hydrocarbon: a review. Environ Technol Innov
2020;17:100526.

[290] Littlewood J, Wang L, Turnbull C, Murphy RJ. Techno-economic potential of
bioethanol from bamboo in China. Biotechnol Biofuels 2013;6:1–13.
[291] Huang G, Zhou X, Guo G, Ren C, Rizwan MS, Islam MS, Hu H. Variations of

dissolved organic matter and Cu fractions in rhizosphere soil induced by the root
activities of castor bean. Chemosphere 2020;254:126800.

[292] Balan V. Current challenges in commercially producing biofuels from

lignocellulosic biomass. Int Sch Res Notices 2014;2014.

[293] Pikula K, Zakharenko A, Stratidakis A, Razgonova M, Nosyrev A, Mezhuev Y,

Golokhvast K. The advances and limitations in biodiesel production: feedstocks,
oil extraction methods, production, and environmental life cycle assessment.
Green Chem Lett Rev 2020;13(4):275–94.

[294] Ning P, Yang G, Hu L, Sun J, Shi L, Zhou Y, Wang Z, Yang J. Recent advances in
the valorization of plant biomass. Biotechnol Biofuels 2021;14(1):1–22. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13068-021-01949-3.

[295] Tan J, Li Y, Tan X, Wu H, Li H, Yang S. Advances in pretreatment of straw biomass
for sugar production. Front Chem 2021;9(June):1–28. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fchem.2021.696030.

[296] Li X, Shi Y, Kong W, Wei J, Song W, Wang S. Improving enzymatic hydrolysis of

lignocellulosic biomass by bio-coordinated physicochemical pretreatment — a
review. Energy Rep 2022;8:696–709. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
egyr.2021.12.015.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116128

N. Das et al.

[297] Sun S, Sun S, Cao X, Sun R. The role of pretreatment in improving the enzymatic
hydrolysis of lignocellulosic materials. Bioresour Technol 2016;199:49–58.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.08.061.

[325] Zhang C, Chao L, Zhang Z, Zhang L, Li Q, Fan H, Hu X. Pyrolysis of cellulose:

evolution of functionalities and structure of bio-char versus temperature. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2021;135:110416.

[298] Boadu KO, Joel OF, Essumang DK, Evbuomwan BO. A review of methods for

[326] Oginni O, Singh K. Pyrolysis characteristics of Arundo donax harvested from a

removal of contaminants in used lubricating oil, vol. 26; 2019. p. 1–11. https://
doi.org/10.9734/CSJI/2019/v26i430101. 4.

[299] Murungi PI, Sulaimon AA. Petroleum sludge treatment and disposal techniques: a
review. Environ Sci Pollut Control Ser 2022;29(27):40358–72. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11356-022-19614-z.

[300] Mwanza MM, Ndunda EN, Bosire GO, Nyamori VO, Martincigh BS. Advances in
sample pretreatment and detection of PCBs in the environment. J Hazard Mater
Adv 2021;4(October):100028. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hazadv.2021.100028.
[301] Barp L, Miklavˇc A. Pressurized liquid extraction: a powerful tool to implement

extraction and purification of food contaminants. 2023. p. 1–25.

[302] Berg BE, Lund HS, Kringstad A, Kvernheim AL. Routine analysis of hydrocarbons,

PCB and PAH in marine sediments using supercritical CO2 extraction.
Chemosphere 1999;38(3):587–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0045-6535(98)
00213-6.

[303] Ławniczak, Ł., Wo, M., & Heipieper, H. J. (n.d.). Microbial degradation of
hydrocarbons — basic principles for bioremediation: a review. 1–19.

[304] Shukla A, Kumar D, Girdhar M, Kumar A, Goyal A, Malik T, Mohan A. Strategies
of pretreatment of feedstocks for optimized bioethanol production: distinct and
integrated approaches. Biotechnol Biofuels Bioprod 2023;16(1):1–33. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s13068-023-02295-2.

reclaimed mine land. Ind Crop Prod 2019;133:44–53.

[327] Kim JY, Oh S, Hwang H, Moon YH, Choi JW. Assessment of miscanthus biomass
(Miscanthus sacchariflorus) for conversion and utilization of bio-oil by fluidized
bed type fast pyrolysis. Energy 2014;76:284–91.

[328] Oginni O, Singh K, Zondlo JW. Pyrolysis of dedicated bioenergy crops grown on
reclaimed mine land in West Virginia. J Anal Appl Pyrol 2017;123:319–29.
[329] Hoang AT, Ong HC, Fattah IR, Chong CT, Cheng CK, Sakthivel R, Ok YS. Progress

on the lignocellulosic biomass pyrolysis for biofuel production toward
environmental sustainability. Fuel Process Technol 2021;223:106997.
[330] Papa AA, Di A, Rapagn`a S. Biomass as a renewable source to produce synthesis
gas by catalytic gasification process, vol. 92; 2022. p. 295–300. https://doi.org/
10.3303/CET2292050. December 2021.

[331] Oyedeji OA. Understanding and modeling the formation of syngas contaminants

during biomass gasification. 2019. p. 1–216.

[332] Zhou H, Meng A, Long Y, Li Q, Zhang Y. A review of dioxin-related substances
during municipal solid waste incineration. Waste Manag 2015;36:106–18.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2014.11.011.

[333] SundarRajan P, Gopinath KP, Arun J, GracePavithra K, Joseph AA, Manasa S.

Insights into valuing the aqueous phase derived from hydrothermal liquefaction.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021;144:111019.

[305] Vasic K, Knez Z, Leitgeb M. Bioethanol production by enzymatic hydrolysis from

[334] McKay G. Dioxin characterisation, formation and minimisation during municipal

different. Molecules 2021;26(753):1–23.

[306] Baruah J, Nath BK, Sharma R, Kumar S, Deka RC, Baruah DC, Kalita E. Recent
trends in the pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass for value-added products.
Front Energy Res 2018;6(DEC):1–19. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fenrg.2018.00141.

[307] Buˇsi ́c A, Mardetko N, Kundas S, Morzak G, Belskaya H,

ˇ
Santek MI, Komes D,

ˇ
Santek B. Bioethanol production from renewable raw materials and its

Novak S,
separation and purification: a review. Food Technol Biotechnol 2018;56(3):
289–311. https://doi.org/10.17113/ftb.56.03.18.5546.

[308] Guo H, Zhao Y, Chen X, Shao Q, Qin W. Pretreatment of Miscanthus with biomass-
degrading bacteria for increasing delignification and enzymatic hydrolysability.
Microb Biotechnol 2019;12(4):787–98.

[309] Baskar G, Aiswarya R. Trends in catalytic production of biodiesel from various

feedstocks. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;57:496–504.

[310] Malhotra M, Suman SK. Laccase-mediated delignification and detoxification of
lignocellulosic biomass: removing obstacles in energy generation. Environ Sci
Pollut Control Ser 2021;28:58929–44.

[311] Subhedar PB, Gogate PR. Intensification of enzymatic hydrolysis of lignocellulose
using ultrasound for efficient bioethanol production: a review. Ind Eng Chem Res
2013;52(34):11816–28.

[312] Li D. Analysis of agricultural biomass energy use and greenhouse gas reduction

evidence from China. J Environ Public Health 2022;2022.

[313] Liu CG, Xiao Y, Xia XX, Zhao XQ, Peng L, Srinophakun P, Bai FW. Cellulosic

ethanol production: progress, challenges and strategies for solutions. Biotechnol
Adv 2019;37(3):491–504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2019.03.002.
[314] Devi A, Bajar S, Kour H, Kothari R, Pant D, Singh A. Lignocellulosic biomass

valorization for bioethanol production: a circular bioeconomy approach.
Bioenergy Res 2022;15(4):1820–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12155-022-
10401-9.

[315] Cho S, Chae J-I, Seo K-S, Jin-Choi N. Effect of hemicellulase , cellulase , xylanase
and alkali pretreatment on the saccharification of Miscanthus. Afr J Agric 2013;8
(22):2778–85. https://doi.org/10.5897/AJAR12.1618.

[316] Sch ̈afer J, Sattler M, Iqbal Y, Lewandowski I, Bunzel M. Characterization of

Miscanthus cell wall polymers. GCB Bioenergy 2019;11(1):191–205. https://doi.
org/10.1111/gcbb.12538.

solid waste (MSW) incineration. Chem Eng J 2002;86(3):343–68.

[335] SundarRajan P, Gopinath KP, Arun J, GracePavithra K, Joseph AA, Manasa S.

Insights into valuing the aqueous phase derived from hydrothermal liquefaction.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021;144:111019.

[336] Rajendran S, Priya TAK, Khoo KS, Hoang TK, Ng HS, Munawaroh HSH, Show PL.

A critical review on various remediation approaches for heavy metal
contaminants removal from contaminated soils. Chemosphere 2022;287:132369.

[337] Almutairi M. The assessment strategy for selecting and evaluating

geoenvironmental remediation. In: Geopolymers and other geosynthetics.
IntechOpen; 2019.

[338] Jouzani GS, Sharafi R, Soheilivand S. Fueling the future; plant genetic engineering
for sustainable biodiesel production. Biofuel Res J 2018;5(3):829–45. https://doi.
org/10.18331/BRJ2018.5.3.3.

[339] Ramzi AB. Metabolic engineering and synthetic biology. Omics applications for

systems biology. 2018. p. 81–95.

[340] Martinez-Burgos WJ, Sydney EB, de Paula DR, Medeiros ABP, de Carvalho JC,

Soccol VT, Soccol CR. Biohydrogen production in cassava processing wastewater
using microbial consortia: process optimization and kinetic analysis of the
microbial community. Bioresour Technol 2020;309:123331.

[341] Zhang TT, He H, Xu CJ, Fu Q, Tao Y Bin, Xu R, Xu ZF. Overexpression of type 1
and 2 diacylglycerol acyltransferase genes (JCDGAT1 and JCDGAT2) enhances oil
production in the woody perennial biofuel plant jatropha curcas. Plants 2021;10
(4):1–13. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10040699.

[342] Vanhercke T, Dyer JM, Mullen RT, Kilaru A, Rahman MM, Petrie JR, Green AG,
Yurchenko O, Singh SP. Metabolic engineering for enhanced oil in biomass. Prog
Lipid Res 2019;74(December 2018):103–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
plipres.2019.02.002.

[343] Giri VP, Shukla P, Tripathi A, Verma P, Kumar N, Pandey S, Mishra A. A Review of
sustainable use of biogenic nanoscale agro-materials to enhance stress tolerance
and nutritional value of plants. Plants 2023;12(4):815.

[344] Demura T, Ye ZH. Regulation of plant biomass production. Curr Opin Plant Biol

2010;13(3):298–303.

[345] Hua B, Dai J, Liu B, Zhang H, Yuan X, Wang X, Cui Z. Pretreatment of non-sterile,

rotted silage maize straw by the microbial community MC1 increases biogas
production. Bioresour Technol 2016;216:699–705.

[317] Wan C, Li Y. Effectiveness of microbial pretreatment by Ceriporiopsis

[346] Kuhad RC, Deswal D, Sharma S, Bhattacharya A, Jain KK, Kaur A, Karp M.

subvermispora on different biomass feedstocks. Bioresour Technol 2011;102(16):
7507–12.

Revisiting cellulase production and redefining current strategies based on major
challenges. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;55:249–72.

[318] Lee WC, Kuan WC. Miscanthus as cellulosic biomass for bioethanol production.

Biotechnol J 2015;10(6):840–54.

[319] Guo GL, Chen WH, Chen WH, Men LC, Hwang WS. Characterization of dilute acid

pretreatment of silvergrass for ethanol production. Bioresour Technol 2008;99
(14):6046–53.

[320] Xu N, Zhang W, Ren S, Liu F, Zhao C, Liao H, Peng L. Hemicelluloses negatively
affect lignocellulose crystallinity for high biomass digestibility under NaOH and H
2 SO 4 pretreatments in Miscanthus. Biotechnol Biofuels 2012;5:1–12.
[321] Wan C, Li Y. Effectiveness of microbial pretreatment by Ceriporiopsis

subvermispora on different biomass feedstocks. Bioresour Technol 2011;102(16):
7507–12.

[322] Kumar G, Shobana S, Chen WH, Bach QV, Kim SH, Atabani AE, Chang JS.
A review of thermochemical conversion of microalgal biomass for biofuels:
chemistry and processes. Green Chem 2017;19(1):44–67.

[323] Chhabra V, Shastri Y, Bhattacharya S. Kinetics of pyrolysis of mixed municipal

solid waste-A review. Procedia Environ Sci 2016;35:513–27. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proenv.2016.07.036.

[324] Inayat A, Ahmed A, Tariq R, Waris A, Jamil F, Ahmed SF, Ghenai C, Park YK.
Techno-economical evaluation of bio-oil production via biomass fast pyrolysis
process: a review. Front Energy Res 2022;9(January):1–9. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fenrg.2021.770355.

[347] Samanta D, Govil T, Saxena P, Thakur P, Narayanan A, Sani RK. Extremozymes
and their applications. In: Extremozymes and their industrial applications.
Academic Press; 2022. p. 1–39.

[348] Yin X, Hu D, Li JF, He Y, Zhu TD, Wu MC. Contribution of disulfide bridges to the
thermostability of a type A feruloyl esterase from Aspergillus usamii. PLoS One
2015;10(5):e0126864.

[349] Brandon AG, Scheller HV. Engineering of bioenergy crops: dominant genetic

approaches to improve polysaccharide properties and composition in biomass.
Front Plant Sci 2020;11:282.

[350] Shen H, Poovaiah CR, Ziebell A, Tschaplinski TJ, Pattathil S, Gjersing E, Engle NL,
Katahira R, Pu Y, Sykes R, Chen F, Ragauskas AJ, Mielenz JR, Hahn MG, Davis M,
Stewart CN, Dixon RA. Enhanced characteristics of genetically modified
switchgrass (Panicum virgatum L.) for high biofuel production. Biotechnol
Biofuels 2013;6(1):1–15. https://doi.org/10.1186/1754-6834-6-71.
[351] G ́omez L, Contreras A, Bolonio D, Quintana J, O ̃nate-S ́anchez L, Merino I.

Phytoremediation with trees. Adv Bot Res 2019;89:281–321 [Academic Press].

[352] Oliver JW, Atsumi S. Metabolic design for cyanobacterial chemical synthesis.

Photosynth Res 2014;120:249–61.

[353] Bashir Z, Sheng L, Anil A, Lali A, Minton NP, Zhang Y. Engineering Geobacillus

thermoglucosidasius for direct utilisation of holocellulose from wheat straw.
Biotechnol Biofuels 2019;12:1–16.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116129

N. Das et al.

[354] Majidian P, Tabatabaei M, Zeinolabedini M, Naghshbandi MP, Chisti Y. Metabolic
engineering of microorganisms for biofuel production. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2018;82:3863–85.

[355] Wang X, He Q, Yang Y, Wang J, Haning K, Hu Y, Yang S. Advances and prospects

in metabolic engineering of Zymomonas mobilis. Metab Eng 2018;50:57–73.

[356] Work VH, Radakovits R, Jinkerson RE, Meuser JE, Elliott LG, Vinyard DJ,

Posewitz MC. Increased lipid accumulation in the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
sta7-10 starchless isoamylase mutant and increased carbohydrate synthesis in
complemented strains. Eukaryot Cell 2010;9(8):1251–61.

[357] Wang H, Cao L, Li Q, Wijayawardene NN, Zhao J, Cheng M, Kang YQ.

Overexpressing GRE3 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae enables high ethanol
production from different lignocellulose hydrolysates. Front Microbiol 2022;13:
1085114.

[358] Lin H, Wang Q, Shen Q, Zhan J, Zhao Y. Genetic engineering of microorganisms

for biodiesel production. Bioengineered 2013;4(5):292–304.

[359] Ohta K, Beall DS, Mejia JP, Shanmugam KT, Ingram LO. Genetic improvement of
Escherichia coli for ethanol production: chromosomal integration of Zymomonas
mobilis genes encoding pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase II.
Appl Environ Microbiol 1991;57(4):893–900.

[360] Zaldivar J, Nielsen J, Olsson L. Fuel ethanol production from lignocellulose: a

challenge for metabolic engineering and process integration. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 2001;56:17–34.

[361] Mougiakos I, Bosma EF, Ganguly J, van der Oost J, van Kranenburg R. Hijacking
CRISPR-Cas for high-throughput bacterial metabolic engineering: advances and
prospects. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2018;50:146–57.

[362] Joshi A, Verma KK, Rajput VD, Arora J. Metabolic engineering of microorganisms
in advancing biofuel production. In: Advances in lignocellulosic biofuel
production systems. Woodhead Publishing; 2023. p. 181–202.

[363] Adegboye MF, Ojuederie OB, Talia PM, Babalola OO. Bioprospecting of microbial
strains for biofuel production: metabolic engineering, applications, and
challenges. Biotechnol Biofuels 2021;14(1):1–21.

[364] Liew F, Henstra AM, Winzer K, K ̈opke M, Simpson SD, Minton P. Insights into CO

2 fixation pathway of Clostridium autoethanogenum by targeted. Mutagenesis
2016;7(3):1–10. https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00427-16.

[365] Du G, Che J, Wu Y, Wang Z, Jiang Z, Ji F, Xue C. Disruption of hydrogenase gene
for enhancing butanol selectivity and production in Clostridium acetobutylicum.
Biochem Eng J 2021;171:108014.

[366] Atsumi S, Higashide W, Liao JC. Direct photosynthetic recycling of carbon dioxide

to isobutyraldehyde. Nat Biotechnol 2009;27(12):1177–80.

[367] Wang C, Zada B, Wei G, Kim SW. Metabolic engineering and synthetic biology

approaches driving isoprenoid production in Escherichia coli. Bioresour Technol
2017;241:430–8.

[368] Liu CL, Tian T, Alonso-Gutierrez J, Garabedian B, Wang S, Baidoo EE, Lee TS.

Renewable production of high density jet fuel precursor sesquiterpenes from
Escherichia coli. Biotechnol Biofuels 2018;11(1):1–15.

[369] Zhao C, Zhang Y, Li Y. Production of fuels and chemicals from renewable

resources using engineered Escherichia coli. Biotechnol Adv 2019;37(7):107402.

[383] Sankaran R, Markandan K, Khoo KS, Cheng CK, Ashokkumar V, Deepanraj B,

Show PL. The expansion of lignocellulose biomass conversion into bioenergy via
nanobiotechnology. Front Nanotechnol 2021;3:96.

[384] Al Zubi MA, Areche FO, Morales Alberto MN, Cotrina Cabello GG, Gomez AS,
Legua Cardenas JA, Quispe-Vidalon D. Conversion of lignocellulose biomass to
bioenergy through nanobiotechnology. J Sustain Dev Energy, Water Environ Syst
2023;11(2):1–25.

[385] Soudagar MEM, Nik-Ghazali NN, Kalam MA, Badruddin IA, Banapurmath NR,
Akram N. The effect of nano-additives in diesel-biodiesel fuel blends: a
comprehensive review on stability, engine performance and emission
characteristics. Energy Convers Manag 2018;178:146–77.

[386] Elkelawy M, Abd Elhamid E, Alm Eldin Mohamad H, Abo-Samra S. Abd-Elhay

Elshennawy I. Nanoparticles additives for Diesel/Biodiesel fuel blends as a
performance and emissions enhancer in the applications of direct injection diesel
engines: A comparative Review. J Eng Res 2023;7(1):112–21.

[387] Sancho-Sanz I, Korili SA, Gil A. Catalytic valorization of CO2 by hydrogenation:

current status and future trends. Catal Rev 2021:1–75.

[388] Mumtaz M, Baqar Z, Hussain N, Bilal M, Azam HMH, Iqbal HM. Application of
nanomaterials for enhanced production of biodiesel, biooil, biogas, bioethanol,
and biohydrogen via lignocellulosic biomass transformation. Fuel 2022;315:
122840.

[389] Sekoai PT, Ghimire A, Ezeokoli OT, Rao S, Ngan WY, Habimana O, Hung CH.

Valorization of volatile fatty acids from the dark fermentation waste Streams-A
promising pathway for a biorefinery concept. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021;
143:110971.

[390] Wu Q, Xie X, Wang Y, Roskilly T. Effect of carbon coated aluminum nanoparticles
as additive to biodiesel-diesel blends on performance and emission characteristics
of diesel engine. Appl Energy 2018;221:597–604.

[391] Ivanova V, Petrova P, Hristov J. Application in the ethanol fermentation of

immobilized yeast cells in matrix of alginate/magnetic nanoparticles, on
chitosan-magnetite microparticles and cellulose-coated magnetic nanoparticles.
Intern Rev Chem Eng 2011;3(2):289–98.

[392] Bidir MG, Millerjothi NK, Adaramola MS, Hagos FY. The role of nanoparticles on

biofuel production and as an additive in ternary blend fuelled diesel engine: a
review. Energy Rep 2021;7:3614–27.

[393] Rather AH, Khan RS, Wani TU, Beigh MA, Sheikh FA. Overview on

immobilization of enzymes on synthetic polymeric nanofibers fabricated by
electrospinning. Biotechnol Bioeng 2022;119(1):9–33.

[394] Sanusi IA, Suinyuy TN, Kana GE. Impact of nanoparticle inclusion on bioethanol

production process kinetic and inhibitor profile. Biotechnol Reports 2021;29:
e00585.

[395] Guti ́errez-L ́opez AN, Mena-Cervantes VY, García-Solares SM, Vazquez-Arenas J,
Hern ́andez-Altamirano R. NaFeTiO4/Fe2O3–FeTiO3 as heterogeneous catalyst
towards a cleaner and sustainable biodiesel production from Jatropha curcas L.
oil. J Clean Prod 2021;304:127106.

[396] Arora A, Nandal P, Singh J, Verma ML. Nanobiotechnological advancements in
lignocellulosic biomass pretreatment. Mater Sci Energy Technol 2020;3:308–18.

[370] Ma L. Design of a continuous-flow, immobilized-cell fermentor system for

[397] Mishra A, Bhatt R, Bajpai J, Bajpai AK. Nanomaterials based biofuel cells: a

production of bioethanol (Doctoral dissertation). 2014.

review. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46(36):19085–105.

[371] Shi X, Zou Y, Chen Y, Zheng C, Ying H. Overexpression of a water-forming NADH
oxidase improves the metabolism and stress tolerance of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae in aerobic fermentation. Front Microbiol 2016;7:1427.

[398] Sharma P, Kumar S, Pandey A. Bioremediated techniques for remediation of metal
pollutants using metagenomics approaches: a review. J Environ Chem Eng 2021;9
(4):105684.

[372] Xue C, Zhao J, Chen L, Yang ST, Bai F. Recent advances and state-of-the-art

strategies in strain and process engineering for biobutanol production by
Clostridium acetobutylicum. Biotechnol Adv 2017;35(2):310–22.

[373] Tomas CA, Welker NE, Papoutsakis ET. Overexpression of groESL in Clostridium
acetobutylicum results in increased solvent production and tolerance, prolonged
metabolism, and changes in the cell’s transcriptional program. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2003;69(8):4951–65.

[374] Pe ̃na DA, Gasser B, Zanghellini J, Steiger MG, Mattanovich D. Metabolic

engineering of Pichia pastoris. Metab Eng 2018;50:2–15.

[375] Zeng SY, Liu HH, Shi TQ, Song P, Ren LJ, Huang H, Ji XJ. Recent advances in

metabolic engineering of Yarrowia lipolytica for lipid overproduction. Eur J Lipid
Sci Technol 2018;120(3):1700352.

[376] Liu X, Wang D, Li A. Biodiesel production of Rhodosporidium toruloides using
different carbon sources of sugar-containing wastewater: experimental analysis
and model verification. J Clean Prod 2021;323:129112.

[377] Bhandiwad A, Shaw AJ, Guss A, Guseva A, Bahl H, Lynd LR. Metabolic

engineering of Thermoanaerobacterium saccharolyticum for n-butanol
production. Metab Eng 2014;21:17–25.

[378] Wen Z, Ledesma-Amaro R, Lin J, Jiang Y, Yang S. Improved n-butanol production
from Clostridium cellulovorans by integrated metabolic and evolutionary
engineering. Appl Environ Microbiol 2019;85(7).

[379] Sekoai PT, Ouma CNM, Du Preez SP, Modisha P, Engelbrecht N, Bessarabov DG,
Ghimire A. Application of nanoparticles in biofuels: an overview. Fuel 2019;237:
380–97.

[380] Karn B, Kuiken T, Otto M. Nanotechnology and in situ remediation: a review of
the benefits and potential risks. Environ Health Perspect 2009;117(12):1813–31.

[381] Thomas S, Thomas MS, Pothen LA, editors. Nanotechnology for environmental

remediation. John Wiley & Sons; 2022.

[382] Hidangmayum A, Debnath A, Guru A, Singh BN, Upadhyay SK, Dwivedi P.

Mechanistic and recent updates in nano-bioremediation for developing green
technology to alleviate agricultural contaminants. Int J Environ Sci Technol 2022:
1–26.

[399] Miraglia M, Berdal KG, Brera C, Corbisier P, Holst-Jensen A, Kok EJ, Zagon J.
Detection and traceability of genetically modified organisms in the food
production chain. Food Chem Toxicol 2004;42(7):1157–80.

[400] Cowan DA, Ramond JB, Makhalanyane TP, De Maayer P. Metagenomics of

extreme environments. Curr Opin Microbiol 2015;25:97–102.

[401] Salehi Jouzani G, Taherzadeh MJ. Advances in consolidated bioprocessing

systems for bioethanol and butanol production from biomass: a comprehensive
review. Biofuel Res J 2015;2(1):152–95.

[402] Yao W, Liu K, Liu H, Jiang Y, Wang R, Wang W, Wang T. A valuable product of
microbial cell factories: microbial lipase. Front Microbiol 2021;12:743377.

[403] Rai AK, Al Makishah NH, Wen Z, Gupta G, Pandit S, Prasad R. Recent

developments in lignocellulosic biofuels, a renewable source of bioenergy.
Fermentation 2022;8(4):161.

[404] Ramamurthy PC, Singh S, Kapoor D, Parihar P, Samuel J, Prasad R, Singh J.

Microbial biotechnological approaches: renewable bioprocessing for the future
energy systems. Microb Cell Factories 2021;20(1):1–11.

[405] Tripathi M, Lal B, Syed A, Mishra PK, Elgorban AM, Verma M, Srivastava N.

Production of fermentable glucose from bioconversion of cellulose using efficient
microbial cellulases produced from water hyacinth waste. Int J Biol Macromol
2023;252:126376.

[406] Zhang G, Dong Y. Design and application of an efficient cellulose-degrading
microbial consortium and carboxymethyl cellulase production optimization.
Front Microbiol 2022;13:957444.

[407] Krivoruchko A, Kuyukina M, Peshkur T, Cunningham CJ, Ivshina I. Rhodococcus

strains from the specialized collection of alkanotrophs for biodegradation of
aromatic compounds. Molecules 2023;28(5):2393.

[408] Awoyale AA, Lokhat D, Eloka-Eboka AC, Adeniyi AG. Feedstock conditioning and
pretreatment of lignocellulose biomass. In: Bioethanol: a green energy substitute
for fossil fuels. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2023. p. 47–68.
[409] Shukla A, Kumar D, Girdhar M, Kumar A, Goyal A, Malik T, Mohan A. Strategies
of pretreatment of feedstocks for optimized bioethanol production: distinct and
integrated approaches. Biotechnol Biofuels Bioprod 2023;16(1):44.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116130

N. Das et al.

[410] Fan M, Zhao C, Huang X, Zhang H, Xie J. Enhanced digestibility and

[441] World Bioenergy Association. Global bioenergy statistics 2021. 2021. https://

fermentability of sugarcane bagasse in biofuel production by surfactant-assisted
dilute acid pretreatment. Ind Crop Prod 2021;172:114006.

[411] Shafaei H, Taghizadeh-Alisaraei A, Abbaszadeh-Mayvan A, Tatari A. Modeling

and optimization of alkaline pretreatment conditions for the production of
bioethanol from giant reed (Arundo donax L.) biomass using response surface
methodology (RSM). Biomass Conversion and Biorefinery 2023:1–16.
[412] Meher LC, Churamani CP, Arif MD, Ahmed Z, Naik SN. Jatropha curcas as a

renewable source for bio-fuels—a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2013;26:
397–407.

[413] Wang C, Kong Y, Hu R, Zhou G. Miscanthus: a fast-growing crop for

environmental remediation and biofuel production. GCB Bioenergy 2021;13(1):
58–69.

[414] Ambaye TG, Vaccari M, Bonilla-Petriciolet A, Prasad S, van Hullebusch ED,

Rtimi S. Emerging technologies for biofuel production: a critical review on recent
progress, challenges and perspectives. J Environ Manag 2021;290:112627.

[415] Chaganti VN, Ganjegunte G, Meki MN, Kiniry JR, Niu G. Switchgrass biomass
yield and composition and soil quality as affected by treated wastewater
irrigation in an arid environment. Biomass Bioenergy 2021;151:106160.
[416] Yang M, Baral NR, Anastasopoulou A, Breunig HM, Scown CD. Cost and life-cycle
greenhouse gas implications of integrating biogas upgrading and carbon capture
technologies in cellulosic biorefineries. Environ Sci Technol 2020;54(20):
12810–9.

[417] Gmünder S, Singh R, Pfister S, Adheloya A, Zah R. Environmental impacts of

Jatropha curcas biodiesel in India. BioMed Res Int 2012;2012.
[418] Gelfand I, Sahajpal R, Zhang X, Izaurralde RC, Gross KL, Robertson GP.

Sustainable bioenergy production from marginal lands in the US Midwest. Nature
2013;493(7433):514–7.

[419] Bioenergy IEA. Switchgrass production in the USA Switchgrass production in the

USA. 2011.

[420] Li Y, Zhai R, Jiang X, Chen X, Yuan X, Liu Z, Jin M. Boosting ethanol productivity
of Zymomonas mobilis 8b in enzymatic hydrolysate of dilute acid and ammonia
pretreated corn stover through medium optimization, high cell density
fermentation and cell recycling. Front Microbiol 2019;10:2316.
[421] Richardson T. Strain improvement of Scheffersomyces stipitis for the

bioconversion of lignocellulosic biomass into ethanol. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Guelph); 2013.

[422] Tang TC, An B, Huang Y, Vasikaran S, Wang Y, Jiang X, Zhong C. Materials design

by synthetic biology. Nat Rev Mater 2021;6(4):332–50.

[423] Peralta-Yahya PP, Zhang F, Del Cardayre SB, Keasling JD. Microbial engineering
for the production of advanced biofuels. Nature 2012;488(7411):320–8.
[424] Ng IS, Tan SI, Kao PH, Chang YK, Chang JS. Recent developments on genetic
engineering of microalgae for biofuels and bio-based chemicals. Biotechnol J
2017;12(10):1600644.

[425] Javed MR, Noman M, Shahid M, Ahmed T, Khurshid M, Rashid MH, Khan F.

Current situation of biofuel production and its enhancement by CRISPR/Cas9-
mediated genome engineering of microbial cells. Microbiol Res 2019;219:1–11.

[426] Cotta MA. Ethanol production from lignocellulosic biomass by recombinant

Escherichia coli strain FBR5. Bioengineered 2012;3(4):197–202.

[427] Jeswani HK, Chilvers A, Azapagic A. Environmental sustainability of biofuels: a
review: environmental sustainability of biofuels. Proc R Soc A 2020;476(2243).
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2020.0351.

[428] International Energy Agency. Net zero by 2050: a roadmap for the global energy

sector, vol. 70; 2021.

[429] Birol. IEA; 2021. https://www.iea.org/contributors/dr-fatih-birol.
[430] IRENA, https://www.iea.org/reports/africa-energy-outlook-2022/key-findings.
[431] Gielen D, Gorini R, Wagner N, Leme R, Gutierrez L, Prakash G, Renner M. Global

energy transformation: a roadmap to 2050. 2019.

[432] Service UFA. India biofuels annual. 2009. IN9080, http://gain.fas.usda.gov/

Recent.GAIN.Publications/General.Report_New.Delhi_India_6-12-2009.pdf.
[433] Mahlia TMI, Syazmi ZAHS, Mofijur M, Abas AP, Bilad MR, Ong HC, Silitonga AS.

Patent landscape review on biodiesel production: technology updates. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2020;118:109526.

[434] Cheng Y-L, Lee C-Y, Huang Y-L, Buckner CA, Lafrenie RM, D ́enomm ́ee JA,

Caswell JM, Want DA, Gan GG, Leong YC, Bee PC, Chin E, Teh AKH, Picco S,
Villegas L, Tonelli F, Merlo M, Rigau J, Diaz D, Mathijssen RHJ. We are
IntechOpen , the world ’ s leading publisher of Open Access books Built by
scientists , for scientists TOP 1 %. Intech 2016;11(tourism):13. https://www.inte
chopen.com/books/advanced-biometric-technologies/liveness-detection-in-bio
metrics.

[435] Veza I, Muhammad V, Oktavian R, Djamari DW, Said MFM. Effect of COVID-19 on
biodiesel industry: a case study in Indonesia and Malaysia. Int J Automot Mech
Eng 2021;18(2):8637–46.

[436] Kumar S, Shrestha P, Salam PA. A review of biofuel policies in the major biofuel

producing countries of ASEAN: production, targets, policy drivers and impacts.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2013;26:822–36.

www.worldbioenergy.org/news/640/47/Global-Bioenergy-Statistics-2021/.

[442] Nandy S, Fortunato E, Martins R. Green economy and waste management: an
inevitable plan for materials science. Prog Nat Sci: Mater Int 2022;32(1):1–9.

[443] D’Amato D, Bartkowski B, Droste N. Reviewing the interface of bioeconomy and
ecosystem service research. Ambio 2020;49:1878–96. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13280-020-01374-0.

[444] Stephenson PJ. Bioeconomy and circular economy approaches need to enhance

the focus on biodiversity to achieve sustainability. 2022. p. 1–20.

[445] Devereux R, Rublee P, Paul JH, et al. Development and applications of microbial
ecogenomic indicators for monitoring water quality: report of a workshop
assessing the state of the science, research needs and future directions. Environ
Monit Assess 2006;116:459–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-006-7665-7.
[446] Panagos P, Van Liedekerke M, Yigini Y, Montanarella L. Contaminated sites in

Europe: review of the current situation based on data collected through a
European network. J Environ Publ Health 2013;2013.

[447] Pawlowski J, Kelly-Quinn M, Altermatt F, Apoth ́eloz-Perret-Gentil L, Beja P,

Boggero A, Kahlert M. The future of biotic indices in the ecogenomic era:
Integrating (e) DNA metabarcoding in biological assessment of aquatic
ecosystems. Sci Total Environ 2018;637:1295–310.

[448] Francocci F, Trincardi F, Barbanti A, Zacchini M, Sprovieri M. Linking

bioeconomy to redevelopment in contaminated sites: potentials and enabling
factors. Front Environ Sci 2020;8:144.

[449] Zaimes GG, Vora N, Chopra SS, Landis AE, Khanna V. Design of sustainable
biofuel processes and supply chains: challenges and opportunities. Processes
2015;3(3):634–63.

[450] Antar M, Lyu D, Nazari M, Shah A, Zhou X, Smith DL. Biomass for a sustainable

bioeconomy: an overview of world biomass production and utilization. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2021;139:110691.

[451] Scarlat N, Dallemand JF, Monforti-Ferrario F, Nita V. The role of biomass and

bioenergy in a future bioeconomy: policies and facts. Environ Dev 2015;15:3–34.
[452] Blair MJ, Gagnon B, Klain A, Kuliˇsi ́c B. Contribution of biomass supply chains for

bioenergy to sustainable development goals. Land 2021;10(2):181.

[453] L ́opez-Bellido L, Wery J, L ́opez-Bellido RJ. Energy crops: prospects in the context

of sustainable agriculture. Eur J Agron 2014;60:1–12.

[454] Energy and PowerBiofuels Market. Biofuels market size will hit around USD 243,
vol. 37; February 2024. Billion by 2033, https://www.precedenceresearch.
com/biofuels-market.

[455] Jaradat AA. Genetic resources of energy crops: biological systems to combat

climate change. Aust J Crop Sci 2010;4(5):309–23.

[456] IEA. India could triple its biofuel use and accelerate global deployment. Paris:

IEA; 2024. https://www.iea.org/commentaries/india-could-triple-its-biofuel-use
-and-accelerate-global-deployment. Licence: CC BY 4.0.

[457] Cherubini F, Strømman AH. Life cycle assessment of bioenergy systems: state of
the art and future challenges. Bioresour Technol 2011;102(2):437–51.

[458] Thorup-Kristensen K, Halberg N, Nicolaisen M, Olesen JE, Crews TE, Hinsinger P,
Dresbøll DB. Digging deeper for agricultural resources, the value of deep rooting.
Trends Plant Sci 2020;25(4):406–17.

[459] Gerke J. The central role of soil organic matter in soil fertility and carbon storage.

Soil Syst 2022;6(2):33.

[460] Jangir CK, Kumar S, Meena RS. Significance of soil organic matter to soil quality

and evaluation of sustainability. Sustainable agriculture. Scientific Publisher,
Jodhpur 2019:357–81.

[461] Agostini F, Gregory AS, Richter GM. Carbon sequestration by perennial energy
crops: is the jury still out? Bioenerg Res 2015;8:1057–80. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12155-014-9571-0.

[462] Kumar A, Usmani Z, Kumar V. Biochar and flyash inoculated with plant growth

promoting rhizobacteria act as potential biofertilizer for luxuriant growth and
yield of tomato plant. J Environ Manag 2017;190:20–7.

[463] Khanna M, Crago CL, Black M. Can biofuels be a solution to climate change? The

implications of land use change-related emissions for policy. Interface Focus
2011;1(2):233–47.

[464] Skoufogianni E, Solomou A, Charvalas G, Danalatos N. Maize as energy crop. In:

Maize-production and use. London, UK: IntechOpen; 2019.

[465] Creutzig F, Ravindranath NH, Berndes G, Bolwig S, Bright R, Cherubini F,

Masera O. Bioenergy and climate change mitigation: an assessment. Gcb
Bioenergy 2015;7(5):916–44.

[466] Karekezi S, Lata K, Coelho ST. Traditional biomass energy: improving its use and
moving to modern energy use. In: International conference for renewable
energies; 2004, June. p. 1–60.

[467] Blanco-Canqui H, Lal R. Crop residue removal impacts on soil productivity and

environmental quality. Crit Rev plant Sci 2009;28(3):139–63.

[468] Panagos P, Borrelli P, Meusburger K, Alewell C, Lugato E, Montanarella L.

Estimating the soil erosion cover-management factor at the European scale. Land
Use Pol 2015;48:38–50.

[469] Hartemink AE. Sugarcane for bioethanol: soil and environmental issues. Adv

[437] The Energy and Resources Institute. Accelerating biodiesel blending in India

Agron 2008;99:125–82.

policy brief. www.teriin.org; 2023.

[438] Darda S, Papalas T, Zabaniotou A. Biofuels journey in Europe: currently the way
to low carbon economy sustainability is still a challenge. J Clean Prod 2019;208:
575–88.

[439] Ebadian M, van Dyk S, McMillan JD, Saddler J. Biofuels policies that have

encouraged their production and use: an international perspective. Energy Pol
2020;147:111906.

[440] WIPO. Patent-based technology analysis report – alternative energy, vol. 116.

World Intellectual Property Office; 2009.

[470] Turmel MS, Speratti A, Baudron F, Verhulst N, Govaerts B. Crop residue

management and soil health: a systems analysis. Agric Syst 2015;134:6–16.
[471] Rasmussen PE, Collins HP. Long-term impacts of tillage, fertilizer, and crop

residue on soil organic matter in temperate semiarid regions. Adv Agron 1991;45:
93–134.

[472] McCalmont JP, Hastings A, McNamara NP, Richter GM, Robson P, Donnison IS,

Clifton-Brown J. Environmental costs and benefits of growing Miscanthus for
bioenergy in the UK. Gcb Bioenergy 2017;9(3):489–507.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116131

N. Das et al.

[473] Bonsch M, Humpen ̈oder F, Popp A, Bodirsky B, Dietrich JP, Rolinski S,

Stevanovic M. Trade-offs between land and water requirements for large-scale
bioenergy production. Gcb Bioenergy 2016;8(1):11–24.

[474] Malinowska M, Donnison I, Robson P. Morphological and physiological traits that

explain yield response to drought stress in Miscanthus. Agronomy 2020;10(8):
1194.

[475] Kroll F, Müller F, Haase D, Fohrer N. Rural–urban gradient analysis of ecosystem
services supply and demand dynamics. Land Use Pol 2012;29(3):521–35.
[476] Heaton EA, Dohleman FG, Miguez AF, Juvik JA, Lozovaya V, Widholm J,

Zabotina OA, McIsaac GF, David MB, Voigt TB, Boersma NN, Long SP.
Miscanthus. A promising biomass crop. Adv Bot Res 2010;56©:75–137. https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-381518-7.00003-0.

[505] Geyer R, Stoms DM, Lindner JP, Davis FW, Wittstock B. Coupling GIS and LCA for
biodiversity assessments of land use: Part 1: inventory modeling. Int J Life Cycle
Assess 2010;15:454–67.

[506] Helms IV JA, Ijelu SE, Wills BD, Landis DA, Haddad NM. Ant biodiversity and
ecosystem services in bioenergy landscapes. Agric Ecosyst Environ 2020;290:
106780.

[507] Sharma N, Bohra B, Pragya N, Ciannella R, Dobie P, Lehmann S. Bioenergy from
agroforestry can lead to improved food security, climate change, soil quality, and
rural development. Food Energy Secur 2016;5(3):165–83.

[508] Weng Y, Chang S, Cai W, Wang C. Exploring the impacts of biofuel expansion on

land use change and food security based on a land explicit CGE model: a case
study of China. Appl Energy 2019;236:514–25.

[477] Bhatti S, Heeren DM, Evett SR, O’Shaughnessy SA, Rudnick DR, Franz TE,

[509] Cherubini F. GHG balances of bioenergy systems–Overview of key steps in the

Neale CM. Crop response to thermal stress without yield loss in irrigated maize
and soybean in Nebraska. Agric Water Manag 2022;274:107946.
[478] Venendaal R, Jørgensen U, Foster CA. European energy crops: a synthesis.

Biomass Bioenergy 1997;13(3):147–85.

[479] Zhao F, Wu Y, Wang L, Liu S, Wei X, Xiao J, Sun P. Multi-environmental impacts
of biofuel production in the US Corn Belt: a coupled hydro-biogeochemical
modeling approach. J Clean Prod 2020;251:119561.

[480] Wu M, Zhang Z, Chiu YW. Life-cycle water quantity and water quality

implications of biofuels. Curr Sustain Renew Energy Reports 2014;1:3–10.
[481] Lapp A. Seasonal variability of groundwater contribution to watershed discharge
in discontinuous permafrost in the north klondike river valley, yukon. Doctoral
dissertation, Universit ́e d’Ottawa/University of Ottawa; 2015.

[482] Pedroli B, Elbersen B, Frederiksen P, Grandin U, Heikkil ̈a R, Krogh PH, Spijker J.

Is energy cropping in Europe compatible with biodiversity?–Opportunities and
threats to biodiversity from land-based production of biomass for bioenergy
purposes. Biomass Bioenergy 2013;55:73–86.

[483] Immerzeel DJ, Verweij PA, Van Der Hilst F, Faaij AP. Biodiversity impacts of

bioenergy crop production: a state. 2014.

production chain and methodological concerns. Renew Energy 2010;35(7):
1565–73.

[510] Aghbashlo M, Hosseinzadeh-Bandbafha H, Shahbeik H, Tabatabaei M. The role of

sustainability assessment tools in realizing bioenergy and bioproduct systems.
Biofuel Res J 2022;9(3):1697–706.

[511] Raikova S, Piccini M, Surman MK, Allen MJ, Chuck CJ. Making light work of

heavy metal contamination: the potential for coupling bioremediation with
bioenergy production. J Chem Technol Biotechnol 2019;94(10):3064–72.
[512] Rahman MM, Mostafiz SB, Paatero JV, Lahdelma R. Extension of energy crops on

surplus agricultural lands: a potentially viable option in developing countries
while fossil fuel reserves are diminishing. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;29:
108–19.

[513] Pidlisnyuk V, Stefanovska T, Lewis EE, Erickson LE, Davis LC. Miscanthus as a

productive biofuel crop for phytoremediation. Crit Rev Plant Sci 2014;33(1):
1–19.

[514] Prabha J, Kumar M, Tripathi R. Opportunities and challenges of utilizing energy
crops in phytoremediation of environmental pollutants: a review. Bioremediation
Environ Sustain 2021:383–96.

[484] Edrisi SA, Abhilash PC. Exploring marginal and degraded lands for biomass and

[515] Ramakrishna W, Rathore P, Kumari R, Yadav R. Brown gold of marginal soil:

bioenergy production: an Indian scenario. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;54:
1537–51.

[485] Tudge SJ, Purvis A, De Palma A. The impacts of biofuel crops on local

biodiversity: a global synthesis. Biodivers Conserv 2021;30(11):2863–83.
[486] Piotrowska NS, Czachorowski SZ, Stolarski MJ. Ground beetles (carabidae) in the

short-rotation coppice willow and poplar plants—synergistic benefits system.
Agriculture 2020;10(12):648.

[487] Dauber J, Jones MB, Stout JC. The impact of biomass crop cultivation on

temperate biodiversity. Gcb Bioenergy 2010;2(6):289–309.

[488] Robson P, Hastings A, Clifton-Brown J, McCalmont J. Sustainable use of

Miscanthus for biofuel. In: Achieving carbon negative bioenergy systems from
plant materials. Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing; 2020.

[489] Finch JW, Karp A, McCabe DPM, Nixon S, Riche AB, Whitmore AP. Miscanthus,

short-rotation coppice and the historic environment. 2009.

[490] Schr ̈oder P, Beckers B, Daniels S, Gn ̈adinger F, Maestri E, Marmiroli N, Sæbø A.
Intensify production, transform biomass to energy and novel goods and protect
soils in Europe—a vision how to mobilize marginal lands. Sci Total Environ 2018;
616:1101–23.

[491] Brinkman ML, Wicke B, Faaij AP, van der Hilst F. Projecting socio-economic
impacts of bioenergy: current status and limitations of ex-ante quantification
methods. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;115:109352.

[492] Wu Y, Zhao F, Liu S, Wang L, Qiu L, Alexandrov G, Jothiprakash V. Bioenergy

production and environmental impacts. Geosci Lett 2018;5(1):1–9.

[493] Benti NE, Gurmesa GS, Argaw T, Aneseyee AB, Gunta S, Kassahun GB, Asfaw AA.
The current status, challenges and prospects of using biomass energy in Ethiopia.
Biotechnol Biofuels 2021;14(1):1–24.

[494] Rather RA, Wani AW, Mumtaz S, Padder SA, Khan AH, Almohana AI, Baba TR.

Bioenergy: a foundation to environmental sustainability in a changing global
climate scenario. J King Saud Univ Sci 2022;34(1):101734.

[495] Openshaw K. Biomass energy: employment generation and its contribution to

poverty alleviation. Biomass Bioenergy 2010;34(3):365–78.

[496] Fagern ̈as L, Johansson A, Wil ́en C, Sipil ̈a K, M ̈akinen T, Helynen S, Rogulska M.

Bioenergy in Europe. Opportunities and barriers, vol. 2352. VTT Tierdotteita
Research Notes; 2006.

[497] Remedio EM, Domac JU. Socio-economic analysis of bioenergy systems: a focus

on employment. Rome: FAO; 2003.

[498] Carpentieri AE, Larson ED, Woods J. Future biomass-based electricity supply in

Northeast Brazil. Biomass Bioenergy 1993;4(3):149–73.

[499] Hannon M, Gimpel J, Tran M, Rasala B, Mayfield S. Biofuels from algae:

challenges and potential. Biofuels 2010;1(5):763–84.

[500] Milano J, Ong HC, Masjuki HH, Chong WT, Lam MK, Loh PK, Vellayan V.

Microalgae biofuels as an alternative to fossil fuel for power generation. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2016;58:180–97.

[501] Tilman D, Cassman KG, Matson PA, Naylor R, Polasky S. Agricultural

sustainability and intensive production practices. Nature 2002;418(6898):671–7.
[502] Chen X, Cui Z, Fan M, Vitousek P, Zhao M, Ma W, Zhang F. Producing more grain

with lower environmental costs. Nature 2014;514(7523):486–9.

[503] Sims RE, Mabee W, Saddler JN, Taylor M. An overview of second generation

biofuel technologies. Bioresour Technol 2010;101(6):1570–80.

[504] Iriarte A, Villalobos P. Greenhouse gas emissions and energy balance of sunflower

biodiesel: identification of its key factors in the supply chain. Resour Conserv
Recycl 2013;73:46–52.

plant growth promoting bacteria to overcome plant abiotic stress for agriculture,
biofuels and carbon sequestration. Sci Total Environ 2020;711:135062.
[516] Lorenz K, Lal R, Lorenz K, Lal R. Biomass and bioenergy. Carbon Sequestration in

Agricultural Ecosystems 2018:261–99.

[517] Low T, Booth C, Council I. The weedy truth about biofuels. Melbourne: Invasive

Species Council; 2007.

[518] Lacalle RG, Becerril JM, Garbisu C. Biological methods of polluted soil

remediation for an effective economically-optimal recovery of soil health and
ecosystem services. J Environ Sci Publ Health 2020;4(2):112–33.

[519] Sims RE. Bioenergy to mitigate for climate change and meet the needs of society,
the economy and the environment. Mitig Adapt Strategies Glob Change 2003;8
(4):349–70.

Nandita Das is pursuing her Ph.D in Microbiology, at Department
of  Microbiology,  Assam  University,  Silchar,  India.  Her  field  of
interest  includes  Environmental  Microbiology,  Bioremediation,
Environmental  and  Microbial  Genomics.  She  did  her  M.Sc.  in
Microbiology,  from  Assam  University,  Assam  (2016)  with  1st
division. She qualified prestigious competitive exams like ICAR
(Indian Council of Agricultural Research) NET (2017) and GATE
(Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering)  in 2018. She has also
worked  as  ‘Research  Fellow’  in  research  project  –  ‘Impact  of
rhizosphere  mediated  bioremediation  of  polyaromatic  hydro-
carbon on different soil microbiome, in contaminated surface soil of oil and gas drilling
sites  in  Assam’  (2017–2020).  She  has  published  five  research  papers  in  international
journals of repute high impact factors.

Prof. (Dr.) Dinesh Kumar Maheshwari, former Vice- Chancellor
(Gurukul  Kangri  Vishwavidyalaya,  Haridwar)  a  renowned
Botanist  and  Microbiologist,
is  holding  MHRD-UGC-BSR
Eminent Faculty Fellowship (2018–2021) after his superannu-
ation. He served as a lecturer in the Department of Botany, DAV
(PG) College, Muzaffarnagar (1977–1985) and moved as Reader
to  the  Department  of  Microbiology,  Barkatullah  University,
Bhopal  (1986–1991).  He  joined  as  a  professor  in  1990  at  the
Department of Botany and Microbiology, Gurukul Kangri Uni-
versity, Haridwar. Since last 30 years and still giving guidance
and supervision to the young researchers in the department. As a student, he was selected
under UNESCO program and worked in Biol. Res. Centre (Szeged), Hungry in the year
1983–1984. He was Visiting Professor, Science University of Tokyo, Noda (Japan) in 1993
and  1998  and  Guest  Professor  in  the  various  university  including  University  of  Ulm
(Germany), University of Gent (Belgium), University of Barcelona (Spain), University of
Tokyo (Japan), Daegu University (Korea). Prof. Maheshwari have published about 180
research papers and review articles in leading peer reviewed Journals, published so far. 49
candidates  have  been awarded  Doctorate (Ph.D.) degree  under  his supervision.  He  has
successfully completed 16 Major Research Projects and have 02 patents. He is a fellow of
Indian Bot. Society, Indian Phytopathology Society and New York Acad. Of Science.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116132

N. Das et al.

Prof  (Dr)  Piyush  Pandey  is  working  at  the  department  of
Microbiology, Assam University, India. He has twenty-two years
of academic and research experience. His research group works
on plant associated bacteria, with their potential applications in
agriculture and environment. He has published more than 120
research and  review articles  in journals  of high  impact, three
books,  and  undertaken  sixteen  research  grants.  He  has  been
awarded with ‘DBT-Centre for Excellence award’ for working on
plant-rhizosphere  mediated  bioremediation  of  polyaromatic
hydrocarbons. Also, he has been ‘Overseas Associate’ to Agroscope, Switzerland, SICI-SMP
fellow  to  York  University,  Canada.  Prof  Pandey  is  Fellow  of  International  Society  of
Environmental Botanists, member of several scientific societies and has an editorial role in
reputed Journals. He has been extensively working on rhizoremediation of environmental
pollutants, and environmental genomics. He has supervised 20+ PhD students. Two Indian
patents had been awarded, while another is under active consideration.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience103(2024)10116133
