Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Numerical approaches for thermochemical conversion of char 

Nils Erland L. Haugen a, b, *, Brandon Ka Yan Loong c, Reginald E. Mitchell c 
a Department of Energy and Process Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway 
b Department of Thermal Energy, SINTEF Energy Research, Trondheim, Norway 
c Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, USA   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Char 
combustion 
gasification 
thermal annealing 
ash vaporization 
fragmentation 
numerical models 

1. Introduction 

This  paper  gives  a  review  of  the  current  state  of  the  art  for  numerical  simulations  of  char  conversion.  In 
particular, it presents models that have been developed to describe the physical and chemical phenomena that 
characterize thermochemical char conversion. All particle sizes are covered, ranging from pulverized particles to 
wood logs. The aim of the paper is to give the reader the required starting point in order to develop his own 
simulation  tool.  Two  fundamentally  different  approaches  are  studied  in  detail,  namely  the  resolved  particle 
approach and the point particle approach. In the resolved approach, both the char particle itself and the sur-
rounding boundary layer is resolved. This means that heat, mass and momentum transfer are accurately handled. 
For the point particle approach, which is computationally much cheaper, one has to rely on suitable models to 
estimate for example the heat, mass and momentum transfer. Finally, the paper also gives detailed descriptions of 
how to handle ash inclusions in the char in addition to particle fragmentation and thermal annealing.   

The  combustion  and  gasification  characteristics  of  the  chars  from 
coal  and  biomass  have  received  considerable  attention  owing  to 
greenhouse  gas  emission  concerns  and  mandates.  Efforts  to  mitigate 
these  concerns  require  changes  to  process  operating  conditions  that 
result in low emissions of such atmospheric pollutants as the oxides of 
nitrogen and sulfur, NOx and SOx, respectively. Char conversion is the 
rate-limiting step in nearly all coal and biomass utilization technologies. 
In pulverized coal applications, the ratio of characteristic devolatiliza-
tion times to char oxidation times is of the order 0.1 and in fluidized-bed 
applications, this ratio is of the order 0.01 [1]. Biomass has considerably 
larger volatile matter contents than coals and as a consequence, devo-
latilization times are longer with biomass materials than with coals and 
with some biomass materials, char oxidation may start before devola-
tilization  has  completely  ended.  The  ratio  of  characteristic  devolatili-
zation times and combustion times for biomass is provided in the study 
undertaken  by  Li  et  al.  [2].  For  particles  from  ~100  to  1500  µm  in 
diameter burning in air at 1173 K, the ratio is reported to be in the range 
~0.5 to ~0.7 for the woody biomass studied. For coals, the ratio was in 
the range 0.1 to 0.2, consistent with the findings of Smith [1] . Conse-
quently,  accurate  prediction  of  the  performances  of  coal-  and 
the  accurate 
biomass-fired  combustors  and  gasifiers 

requires 

characterization of the physical and chemical processes that take place 
during the char conversion process.  This paper is concerned with the 
various models that have been developed to describe the physical and 
chemical  phenomena  that  characterize  thermochemical  char  conver-
sion.  Many  of  the  simplifying  assumptions  that  are  used  to  yield  a 
solvable set of governing equations are assessed. 

The prediction of char conversion rates in combustors and gasifiers 
requires models that predict the gas phase temperature and composition 
profiles established inside these devices as well as models that predict the 
initial char structure, which depends on devolatilization behaviors. This 
paper does not address predicting pyrolysis or devolatilization behaviors 
of coals and biomass materials. Papers concerned with modeling coal and 
biomass devolatilization are available in the published literature [3–12]. 
The  devolatilization  models  fall  into  two  categories  -  kinetics-based 
models  (in  which  one,  two  or  multiple  independent,  irreversible, 
first-order reactions are used to describe the release rates of gases, tars 
and char) [3,7,11,12] or structural-based models (in which the chemical 
structure of the carbonaceous material is used to formulate expressions 
for the yields of gases, tars and char) [4–6, 8–10] . For char particles 
smaller  than about 150  microns  in size, devolatilization  is essentially 
complete before the onset of significant char conversion but for larger 
particles, char conversion models must be initiated during the devolati-
lization process. The current review is applicable to all sizes of chars, 
from pulverized particles to wood logs and even forest fires. 

* Corresponding author: Nils Erland L. Haugen 

E-mail address: nils.e.haugen@sintef.no (N.E.L. Haugen).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.100993 
Received 16 March 2021; Received in revised form 14 January 2022; Accepted 23 January 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100993Availableonline2May20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Nomenclature 

Variable Description Units 
A 

Aa, Aov 

ac 
Ac 
AE 

Aint 

Ak,f 
Ap 
Apore 
AR 

bij 
Bi 
CD 
Ci 
Ci,k 

Cg 
cp,char 
cpg 
cp,MO 
cp,p 
cp,solid 
Cs,i 

dchar 
dcoal 
dcrit,MOn 

dequiv 

dI 

D i 
Di,k 

D i,ash 
D i,eff 

D Kn,i 
dMO 

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 2 s

Pre-exponential factor in Arrhenius expression for reaction 
rate coefficient reaction dep. 
Power-law kinetics: pre-exponential factor in Arrhenius 
expression for apparent or overall rate coefficient model 
dep. 
Volatile mineral condensation coefficient (see Eq. (201)) 
External surface area of grid cell m2 
Pre-exponential factor in Arrhenius expression for rate 
coefficient for a desorption reaction with activation energy 
E mol m
Power-law kinetics: pre-exponential factor in Arrhenius 
expression for intrinsic reaction rate coefficient model dep. 
Pre-exponential factor for rate constant kk,f Reaction dep. 
Geometric external surface area of particle m2 
Cross sectional area of a pore m2 
Aspect ratio of a non-spherical particle, the ratio of the 
lengths of the particle’s major to minor axis m2 
Elements of the particle fragmentation progeny matrix 
Biot number 
Drag coefficient 
Concentration of species i in reaction k mol m
Fraction of particles that leave the size bin per unit time 
owing to a reduction in diameter below the lower bin 
cutoff due to char reactivity (see Eq. (168)) 
Gas concentration within pore mol m
Heat capacity of char J kg
Heat capacity of the gas J kg
Heat capacity of mineral oxide inclusion J kg
(cid:0) 1 K
Effective heat capacity of the particle J kg
Heat capacity of solid material 
The area-specific concentration of species i adsorbed on a 
surface mol m
Char particle diameter m 
Coal particle diameter m 
Critical cluster size for volatile mineral species nucleation 
(see Eq. (200)) m 
Diameter of a spherical particle having the same volume as 
the non-spherical particle m 
Mean diameter of mineral inclusions inside the char 
particle m 
Bulk diffusivity of species
Fraction of particles that leave density class per unit time 
owing to a reduction in apparent density due to char 
reactivity (see Eq. (168)) 
Diffusivity of species i in ash layer m2 s
Effective diffusion coefficient of species i in porous 
material m2 s
Knudsen diffusivity of species i m2 s
Diameter of a single mineral inclusion embedded in char 
particle core m 

(cid:0) 1 
(cid:0) 1 K

(cid:0) 1 K
(cid:0) 1 

i m2 s

(cid:0) 1 K

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 2 

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

D MSi,eff  Effective diffusion coefficient of volatile mineral species in 

(cid:0) 1 

pores of particle corem2 s
Diameter of particle m 
Diameter of particle at time t m 
Diameter of carbonaceous core of particle at time t m 

dp 
dp,t 
dpc,t 
D pore,i,eff Effective diffusion coefficient of species i in a given pore 

Dth 
dp 

(cid:0) 1 

with constant cross section m2 s
(cid:0) 1 
Gas thermal diffusivity m2 s
The volume-mean diameter of mineral oxide particles 
outside the char particle’s outer surface at time t (see Eq. 
(223)) m  

′

(cid:0) 1 

Ea, E
a 
Eave 

F 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

Ed 

f(Ed) 

F(Ed) 

Eint 
Ek,f 
Eov 

Apparent activation energy, power-law kinetics J (mol)
The mean value of the activation energy distribution for 
modeling desorption reactions J (mol)
Activation energy for a desorption reaction (see Eq. (171)) 
J (mol)
Intrinsic activation energy, power-law kinetics J (mol)
Activation energy for rate constant kk,f J (mol)
Apparent activation energy under Zone II conditions J 
(mol)
Forces due to particle collisions in particle momentum 
equation (Eq. (5)) N 
Active site distribution function in thermal annealing 
model (see Eq.(171)) 
Distribution of annealing activation energies in the 
thermal annealing model (see Eq.(175)) 
Correction to particle response time for non-Stokesian flow 
(see Eq. (33)) 
Mass fraction of mineral matter in receded core volume 
that appends to the exterior ash layer 
Pore surface roughness factor 
Mass fraction of mineral matter in receded core volume 
that is shed from particle 
Distribution function describing the adsorbed oxygen 
concentration on the carbonaceous surface 
fc(φi,m)  Effectiveness factor-Thiele modulus correction function 
g 
Δ ̂

Gravitational constant m s

fr 
fshed 

f(E, t) 

fMM 

(cid:0) 2 

fg 

GR 

ΔGv 

h 
hchar 

hf0 

H 
H0 

Ji 
ji,rpc 

K 

′

ka, k
a 

kAKM 
kAV-ER 

kB 
KC,k 
keff 

kfrag 
kim 
kint 

kk, kk,f 

kk,r 

kov 

Kp 
Kn 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) n 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 2 s

(cid:0) 2 s

(cid:0) 2 K

(cid:0) 2 K

Gibbs function change for mineral vaporization reaction J 
(mol)
Change in the Gibbs free energy for volatile mineral 
droplet formation per unit volume J m
Enthalpy J kg
Enthalpy of gaseous phase that leaves the char particle (see 
Eq. (52)) J kg
Enthalpy of formation at reference temperature and 
pressure J kg
Heat transfer coefficient for single film model W m
Heat transfer coefficient for a spherical particle without a 
Stefan flow W m
Diffusive flux of species i kg m
Molar flux of reactive gas i at the outer surface of the 
particle core mol m
Permeability of the porous particle material (see Eq. (16)) 
m2 
Apparent reaction rate coefficients, power-law kinetics s
(atm)
Reaction rate coefficient for the apparent kinetic model s
Reaction rate coefficient for the Avrami-Erofeev reaction 
model s
Boltzmann constant J K
Equilibrium constant for reaction k 
Effective reaction rate coefficient for a desorption reaction 
(cid:0) 1 
employing the distributed activation energy approach s
Fragmentation rate constant m
Mass transfer coefficient mol m
Intrinsic reaction rate coefficients, power-law kinetics kg 
m
Rate constant of reaction k in forward direction Reaction 
dep. 
Rate constant of reaction k in reverse direction Reaction 
dep. 
Overall apparent reaction rate coefficient for the removal 
of carbon from a surface kg m
Equilibrium constant 
Knudsen number (Kn = mean free path/characteristic 
length) 

(cid:0) 1 (atm)

(cid:0) 1 (atm)

(cid:0) 2 s
(cid:0) 2 s

(cid:0) 1 
(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 2 s

(cid:0) 2 s

(cid:0) m 

(cid:0) n 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009932N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

lshape 
Lpore 
m 
m 

Shape factor in the grain model of internal surface area 
Mean length of pores in char m 
Mass kg 
Intrinsic reaction order with respect to the reactive gas 
partial pressure, power-law kinetics; the true reaction 
order 
Mass of the ash in the char particle kg 

(cid:0) 1 

Molar mass of carbon kg (kmol)
Mass of char in a particle kg 
Char consumption rate kg s
Mass diffusion rate of species i in a pore kg s

mash 
̂
MC 
mchar 
˙mchar 
˙mdiff,i 
̂
Molar mass of species i kg (kmol)
Mi 
mMO 
Mass of mineral oxide inclusions in char particle core kg 
˙MMOvap,t  Rate at which all vaporized mineral oxides leave particle 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

core at time t kg s

(cid:0) 1 

̂MMSi 
mMOn 
mp 
˙mreac,i 
˙mtot,i 
msolid 
′
n,  n

′′
n

′′′

n

NAV 
Ndens 
Ni 
NI 
˙ni 

˙ni,k 

np 
Nr 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

Molecular weight of volatile mineral species i kg (mol)
molecular mass of mineral oxide species kg (molecule)
Mass of particle kg 
Mass consumption rate of species i in a pore kg s
Total mass diffusion rate of species i at a pore inlet kg s
Total mass of solid particle material (char plus ash) kg 
Apparent reaction order with respect to the reactive gas 
partial pressure, power-law kinetics 
Oxygen reaction order associated with the heterogeneous 
CO/CO2 molar product ratio 
Reaction order associated with the Avrami-Erofeev 
reaction model 
Avogadro’s number molecule (mol)
Number of apparent density classes considered 
Number of moles of species i adsorbed on a surface 
Total number of inclusions in the char particle’s core 
Molar flux of gaseous species i at the external particle 
surface mol m
Molar flux of gaseous species i due to reaction k mol m
(cid:0) 1 
s
Number of pores per unit particle volume 
Number of heterogeneous reactions occurring on the solid 
surface 

(cid:0) 2 s

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 2 

Nreac des Number of desorption reactions in the heterogeneous 

Ns 

Ns 
˙ntotal 
Nsize 

n(u) 

reaction mechanism 
Number of reactant species (gas and adsorbed) involved in 
heterogeneous reactions (used in Eq. (7)) 
Number of gas phase species 
Total molar flux of gaseous species mol m
Number of size bins describing the fragmentation size 
distribution 
The number of volatile mineral oxide particles in the 
boundary layer per unit volume having volume u 
Nusselt number 

(cid:0) 2 s

(cid:0) 1 

Nu 
NCO/NCO2 Heterogeneous molar product ratio of CO to CO2 
P 
Pg,s 

Total pressure Pa 
Partial pressure of reactive gas at the outer surface of char 
particle atm 
Partial pressure of species i Pa 
Elements in the apparent density tensor that describes 
variations in fragmentation with particle density 
Partial pressure of mineral species i at the mineral 
inclusion Pa 
Equilibrium partial pressure of mineral species i at the 
surface of a vaporizing mineral inclusion inside the char 
particle Pa 
Saturation partial pressure of volatile mineral species at 
conditions in the particle’s boundary layer Pa 

Pi 
Pi,j,k,m 

PMSi 

Peq
MSi 

P*
MOn 

Pref 
Qconv 

qgas  (cid:0)

qrad 

Qrad 
qreac 

Qreac 

qreac,k 
r 
Ra, R

′

a 

Reference pressure for equilibrium calculation bar 
Overall particle energy release rate due to convection kJ 
(cid:0) 1 
s

reac Energy released as heat due to gas-phase homogeneous 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 3 s

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 2 

(cid:0) 3 s

reaction kJ m
Energy flux from particle surface due to radiation kJ m
(cid:0) 1 
s
Overall particle energy release rate due to radiation kJ s
Energy released as heat due to heterogeneous reaction kJ 
m
Overall particle energy release rate due to heterogeneous 
reaction kJ s
Heat of reaction for reaction k kJ (mol)
radius m 
The rate of change in the fraction of the initial char mass 
remaining (defined in Eq. (73)) s
Intrinsic reactivity of char kg m

(cid:0) 1 
(cid:0) 2 s

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

Rext 

̂Ri 
Rint 

Rc 
˙
Rcondensation Rate of condensation of volatile mineral species in the 

particle’s boundary layer mol m
Intrinsic char reactivity evaluated at the conditions 
existing at the external surface of the char particle kg m
(cid:0) 1 
s

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 3 s

(cid:0) 2 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 2 s

Molar reactivity of gaseous species i mol m
Intrinsic char reactivity evaluated at the conditions inside 
the particle kg m

(cid:0) 2 s
Molar reaction rate of reaction k mol m

̂ℜk 
˙rcondensation,MOn Condensation rate in the particle’s boundary layer for 
a mineral droplet having diameter dMOn  mol s

(cid:0) 2 s

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

˙
Rnucleation  Rate of nucleation of volatile mineral species in the 

particle’s boundary layer mol m

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 3 s

˙rnucleation,MOn Rate of homogeneous nucleation of volatile mineral 
(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 3 s

(cid:0) 2 s

droplet in the particle’s boundary layer nuclei m
(cid:0) 1 
Area-specific rate of carbon removal kg m
Mean radius of pores in particle m 
Particle radius m 
Rate of reaction of volatile mineral particles in the 
particle’s boundary layer mol m
Universal gas constant J (mol)
Particle Reynolds number 
Number of active sites in the thermal annealing model (see 
Eq. (173)) 

(cid:0) 3 s
(cid:0) 1 
(cid:0) 1 K

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 2 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 3 

Strain tensor s
Total surface site density sites m
Mass specific internal surface area m2 kg
Fraction of particles per unit time of size dp,i and apparent 
density ρp,k that fragment (see Eq. (168)) s
Total surface area of a surface m2 
Volume specific internal surface area m2 m
Sherwood number 
time s 
Temperature K 
Temperature of the effective boundary layer K 
Gas temperature K 
Particle temperature K 
Effective radiating temperature of the surroundings K 
(cid:0) 1 
Fluid velocity vector m s
Superficial gas velocity within the particle pores m s
(cid:0) 1 
Fluid velocity vector m s
Volume m3 
Volume occupied by ash material m3 
Volume of grid cell in the resolved particle approach m3 

St 
Sv 
Sh 
t 
T 
TBL 
Tg 
Tp 
Trad 
u 
us 
v 
V 
Vash 
Vc 
Vchar  pores Total volume occupied by the pores in the char m3 
VMO 

Volume of the mineral oxide inclusions inside particle core 
m3 

(cid:0) 1 

Rov 
rpore 
rp 
˙Rreaction 

̂Ru 
Rep 
S 

S 
Sd 
Sg 
Si,k 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009933N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

υMOn 

Vobj 

(cid:0) 1 

molecular volume of a droplet of the mineral oxide species 
that condenses in the particle’s boundary layer m3 
(molecule)
Total volume of the char particle, including char, ash, and 
pores m3 
Volume of a char particle m3 

Vp 
Vtrue,char  Volume occupied by solid carbonaceous material m3 
vt 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 3 s

(cid:0) 3 s

The average volume of mineral oxide particles outside the 
char particle’s outer surface at time t (see Eq. (222)) m3 
Source term in continuity equation (Eq. (1)) due to 
interaction with unresolved point particles (defined in Eq. 
(50)) kg m
Source term in energy equation (Eq. (3)) due to interaction 
(cid:0) 3 
with unresolved point particles (defined in Eq. (52)) J m
(cid:0) 1 
s
Source term in species conservation equation (Eq. (4)) due 
to interaction with unresolved point particles (defined in 
Eq. (53)) kg m
Production rate of gas phase species i due to heterogeneous 
(cid:0) 1 
reactions on particle j in the point particle approach kg s
Source term in momentum equation (Eq. (2)) due to 
(cid:0) 2 s
interaction with unresolved point particles kg m
Char conversion 
Mole fraction of species i at external particle surface 
Mole fraction of species i in bulk field 
Mass fraction of ash in char particle 
Mass fraction of species i 
Mass fraction of mineral matter in the core of the particle 
Length along a pore m 
Number of collisions between volatile mineral oxide 
particles per unit time per unit volume (see Eq. (209)) 

(cid:0) 2 

Mode of conversion parameter governing particle apparent 
density (see Eq. (130)) 
Parameter in expression for αI (see Eq. (149)) 
Mass accommodation factor associated with the rate of 
volatile mineral condensation (see Eq. (204)) 
Parameter in the expression for the vaporization 
effectiveness factor that accounts for Stefan flow effects 
(see Eq. (148)) 
Activity of the solid or liquid mineral oxide 
Mode of conversion parameter governing particle size (see 
Eq. (131)) 
Collision frequency function - the rate of collisions per 
mineral oxide particle per unit volume 
Bin diameter ratio parameter in the fragmentation model 
(see Eq. (159)) 
Volume change upon reaction at outer surface of particle 
core 
Thickness of ash layer surrounding char particle m 
Char particle emissivity 
Temperature exponent in expression for the approximate 
mass transfer coefficient (see Eq. (129)) 
Effectiveness factor 
Effectiveness factor for species i 

˙
Wg 

˙Wh 

˙
Wi 

˙wi,j 

˙Wu 

xc 
Xi,s 
Xi,∞ 
Yash 
Yi 
YMO 
z 
zij 

GREEK 
α 

α′
αc 

αI 

aMOn 
β 

β(u, v) 

γ 

γ 

δ 
εp 
ζ 

η 
ηi 

ηvap 
Θ 
Θash 
θc 
Θi 
θtherm 
Λ 

λgas 
λth 

μ 
ν 
νi 

ν′
i,k 
ν′′
i,k 
ξn 

ρ 
ρash 
ρchar 
ρg 
ρMM 
ρMO 
ρpc 

ρsolid 

Effectiveness factor for vaporization in mean-field theory 
Porosity of the porous char particle 
Porosity of the ash layer surrounding the char particle core 
Pore constriction factor 
Fraction of carbon sites occupied by adsorbed species i 
Correction term that accounts for the effects of Stefan flow 
Thiele modulus for a non-spherical particle (see Section 
3.7.3) 
Thermal conductivity of a gas W m
Effective thermal conductivity of the porous material W 
m
Dynamic viscosity Pa s 
Kinematic viscosity m2 s
Moles reactant species i consumed per mole of carbon 
gasified 
Stoichiometric coefficient of reactant species i in reaction k 

(cid:0) 1 K

(cid:0) 1 K

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 2 

Stoichiometric coefficient of product species i in reaction k 
Total area-specific concentration of all carbon sites mol 
m
Density kg m
Apparent density of the ash kg m
(cid:0) 3 
Apparent density of char kg m
Average gas density kg m
Apparent density of mineral matter in the ash layer kg m
Apparent density of mineral oxide inclusions kg m
Apparent density of ash-containing char particle core kg 
m
Apparent density of particle, including char and ash kg 
m

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 3 

(cid:0) 3 

τ 

(cid:0) 4 

(cid:0) 1 

σMOn 

(cid:0) 2 K

ρtrue,char  True (skeletal) density of the char particle kg m
σ 
σd 

Stefan-Boltzmann constant W m
The standard deviation of the activation energy 
distribution when modeling a desorption reaction J 
(mol)
Specific surface tension of a droplet of the mineral oxide 
species that condenses in the particle’s boundary layer kg 
(cid:0) 2 
s
Pore tortuosity factor: ratio of the actual diffusive path 
length to a straight path length 
Particle response time s 
Particle response time for Stokesian flow s 
Stress tensor Pa 
Thiele modulus for vaporization: ϕI
Thiele modulus 
Stefan flow constant (see Eq. (117)) 
Volume fraction of inclusions inside particle 
The double integral defined in Eq. (220) 
Structural parameter in the random pore model (RPM) 
Non-dimensional size distribution of mineral oxide 
particles outside the particle’s outer surface (see Eq. (215)) 
ω,  ω*  Parameters in the fragmentation rate expression (see Eq. 

τp 
τSt 
τ 
φI 
φL,i 
φSte,t 
ϕI 
χ 
ψ 
ψ(η) 

= (dP /dI)

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
3φI

√

˙ωi 

(167)) 
Source term of species i due to gas phase reactions kg m
(cid:0) 1  
s

(cid:0) 3 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009934N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

The  equations  presented  apply to  chars  exposed to  both  oxidizing 
and reducing environments and hence, char reactivity to O2, H2O and 
CO2 must be modeled. Approaches that assume power-law kinetics are 
briefly discussed but since high levels of CO and/or H2 may be present in 
the environments of interest, approaches that account for the inhibiting 
effects of these gases on gasification rates are also presented and dis-
cussed. Attention is given to multi-step heterogeneous reaction models 
in which Langmuir-Hinshelwood type reaction mechanisms are used to 
describe the overall adsorption-desorption process. 

Consideration  is  given  to  the  most  detailed  simulation  approach, 
where  both  the  gas  phase  and  the  char  are  completely  resolved.  Nu-
merical  treatment  requires  discretization  of  both  the  volume  of  gas 
within  the  containing  reactor  walls  and  the  volume  within  the  outer 

surfaces of the char particles. This permits direct account for variations 
in gas composition and temperature inside particles, which is especially 
important for large particles. 

Equations are also presented for cases in which the char particles are 
not resolved but treated as point-sources in the flow field. These equa-
tions  reveal  the  coupling  between  the  solid  and  gas  phases;  the  as-
sumptions  that  investigators  have  used  to  model  this  coupling  are 
highlighted. This approach is commonly referred to as the "point-par-
ticle approach" (PPA) since as far as the fluid solver is concerned, the 
particles are treated as infinitely small points that do not occupy any 
volume.  In  this  approach,  all  coupling  between  the  fluid  and  solid  is 
handled through models, this is the case for e.g. momentum, mass and 
heat  transfer.  The  effects  of  turbulence  on  char  conversion  rates  is 

Fig. 1. Scanning electron micrographs of Pittsburgh #8 coal/char particles [14]. The bar in the micrographs on the left denotes 100 µm. In addition to the raw coal 
(upper row), chars with two different residence times are shown: tres = 47 ms (middle row) and tres = 117 ms (lower row). The raw coal particles, nominally 100 µm 
in diameter, were injected into a laminar flow reactor having 12% oxygen, by volume, at 1 atm. The gas temperature in the reactor decreased from ~1710 K at 47 ms 
to ~1532 K at 117 ms. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009935N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

discussed in light of both Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) and 
large eddy simulation (LES) turbulence modeling approaches. Results of 
direct  numerical  simulations  (DNSs)  are  presented  to  illustrate  the 
impact of these approaches on char conversion rates and overall con-
version times. In these point-particle approximations, sub-models for the 
mode of burning govern the changes in char size and apparent density 
during  mass  loss;  non-uniform  composition  and  temperature  profiles 
inside particles are accounted for via the Thiele modulus/effectiveness 
factor approach. 

During the course of char conversion, individual particles experience 
variations  in  gas-phase  temperature  and  composition  that  impact  the 
conversion rates of the char owing to variations in the transport rates of 
reactive gases through particle pores and variations in heterogeneous 
reaction rates on pore surfaces. The sizes and apparent densities of the 
char  particles  also  vary,  as  do  the  specific  surface  areas  of  the  char. 
These physical properties of the char impact conversion rates and must 
be accurately characterized for accurate prediction of char conversion 
times. In addition, ash transformations in particles vary as the relative 
effects of ash vaporization, diffusion, and film development change due 
to the particle surroundings. Ash film development influences the rates 
of diffusion of reactive gases to char surfaces and hence, impacts char 
conversion  rates.  Ash  film  diffusion  could  enhance  catalytic  effects, 
thereby impacting overall char conversion times. 

Fragmentation also occurs during the thermochemical conversion of 
char. Whereas percolative type fragmentation may be dominant during 
devolatilization,  breakage  and  attrition  type  fragmentation  are  more 
important during char conversion [13]. Fragments are not only smaller 
in size than their parent particles; they can also have higher or lower 
apparent  densities.  These  physical  changes  must  be  characterized  in 
order to accurately predict char conversion rates. 

In Fig. 1, the temporal evolution of a pulverized coal exposed to hot 
combustion products is shown. As exposure time increases, the particles 
become more porous and the number of smaller particles increases, most 
likely  a  consequence  of  fragmentation.  The  large  holes  at  the  outer 
surfaces  of  particles  were  created  when  volatile  matter  escaped  the 
particles  during  devolatilization.  Some  particles  appear  to  have  large 
void volumes within their outer surfaces. The small white particles on 
the surfaces of the larger particles in the photos are ash, which means 
that for this coal in these conditions, there was no build-up of ash-film. 
In general, the mode of conversion of a char particle can be divided 
into three different zones (or regimes), depending on the relationship 
between the rates of diffusion and reaction of the reactant species. Zone I 
conversion is defined as when reactant diffusion rates are much faster 
than  consumption  rates.  This  means  that  the  reactant  concentration 
within the char particle is spatially uniform. For this mode of conver-
sion, which is kinetically controlled, the apparent density of the char 
particle will be reduced while its radius is unchanged. Zone III conver-
sion is defined as the opposite extreme, when chemical reaction rates are 
much faster than diffusion rates. For this mode, all reactant species are 
consumed as soon as they reach the external surface of the char. Hence, 
the reactant concentration inside the particle is essentially zero, and the 
particle  loses  mass  by  reducing  its  radius  while  having  a  constant 
apparent density. For the intermediate regime, referred to as Zone II, the 
rate of diffusion is not too different from the kinetic rate. This means that 
the reactant concentration is higher at the particle surface than in its 
interior, but the reactant concentration in the interior is still non-zero. 
The particle will therefore lose mass both due to changes in apparent 
density and radius. 

The  main  aim  of  this  paper  is  first  to  present  a  comprehensive 
overview  of  the  full  spectrum  of  different  numerical  methods  and 
models available for simulating char conversion. This includes a thor-
ough presentation of the methodologies themselves, together with the 
associated  evolution  equations  and  the  most  relevant  model  and 
constitutive equations. From this, the reader should be able to imple-
ment and use the full range of different numerical methods and models 
for char conversion. Then, instead of stating that one method is better 

than the other, we try to guide the reader to which methods should be 
used  for  a  given  problem.  This  could  be,  for  example,  problems 
involving  the  conversion  of  billions  of  micrometer-sized  particles  in 
pulverized  burners,  millions  of  centimeter-sized  particles  in  fluidized 
beds or a few decimeter sized wood logs in wood stoves.  For all of these 
problems, one can try to obtain as much detail as possible of individual 
particles by resolving the smallest scale of the char particle and the fluid 
in its immediate surroundings, or, towards the other extreme, one can 
aim at simulating a full-sized industrial combustion chamber by using 
state-of-the-art modelling to account for the effects of individual parti-
cles.  As  such,  this  paper  aims  at  being  the  starting  point  for  anyone 
intending to perform numerical simulations involving char conversion. 

2. Governing equations 

In this section, we first present the governing equations for the gas 
phase outside the outer surface of a solid object. Then, equations for the 
interior  of  a  resolved  solid  object,  including  both  solid  and  gaseous 
volumes within the porous solid, are given. Finally, the equations for a 
non-resolved solid are shown based on the point particle approximation. 

2.1. Fluid Equations 

In the following, it is assumed that the char particles are embedded in 
a  gaseous  phase.  The  gaseous  fluid  is  described  by  the  continuity 
equation 

∂ρ
∂t

+ ∇⋅(ρu) = ˙W g,

(1)  

which yields an expression for the time evolution of the gas density (ρ), 
where  u  is  the  fluid  velocity  vector.  Furthermore,  the  momentum 
equation is given by 

∂ρu
∂t

+ ∇⋅(ρuu) = ∇⋅τ + ˙Wu

(2)  

the stress tensor τ, is expressed as: τ = (cid:0) P⋅I + μS . Here, P is the 
where
fluid pressure, I is the identity matrix, μ is the dynamic viscosity, ν is the 

kinematic  viscosity  (ν=μ/ρ),  and  S  is  the  strain  tensor  S =

[
(∇u +

(∇u)T) (cid:0) 2
I (∇⋅u)]. When it comes to conservation of energy, there are 
3
a number of different energy equations one can choose to solve. Here, 
we have chosen total enthalpy. The equation for total enthalpy (h) is 
given by 

∂ρh
∂t

+ ∇⋅(ρuh) = ∇⋅(ρDth∇h) + ˙W h,

(3)  

where Dth is the thermal diffusivity. Gas temperature is calculated from 

the relation h = hf 0 +

∫T

Tref

cp,g dT, where hf0  is the enthalpy of the gas 

mixture at the reference temperature and pressure, 298 K and 1 atm, 
respectively, and cp,g  is the constant pressure specific heat of the gas. 
Finally, the evolution equation for the mass fraction Yi of species i reads 

∂ρYi
∂t

+ ∇⋅(ρYiu) = ∇⋅Ji + ˙ωi + ˙W i,

(4)  

where  ˙ωi  is  the  source  term  due  to  gas-phase  reactions  and  Ji  is  the 
diffusive flux of species i,  given by 

Ji = ρD i∇Yi  

Here, D i  is the molecular diffusivity of the species. It should be noted 
that the diffusive flux has been significantly simplified here by assuming 
the mixture averaged approximation and by neglecting several terms/ 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009936N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

effects that are known to influence the species diffusion under certain 
conditions. Since the mixture average approximation does not guarantee 
mass conservation, a correction velocity may be introduced both in the 
energy and species conservation equations to overcome this limitation. 
Alternatively,  the  diffusive  flux  may  be  calculated  by  the  use  of  full 
multicomponent  diffusion  instead  of  the  mixture  average  approxima-
tion. The reader is referred to Hirschfelder et al. [15] for a more accurate 
expression of the diffusive flux. The source terms in Eqs. (1) - (4),  ˙Wg, 
˙
˙Wu, 
Wi, are due to the interaction with any unresolved (point) 
particles. For resolved particles, these source terms are omitted and the 
exchange  between  solid  and  fluid  phases  are  handled  through  appro-
priate boundary conditions. 

˙
Wh  and 

2.2. Resolved particles 

In order to obtain the best description of a solid carbonaceous object, 
the solid object should be resolved by a large number of small grid cells. 
The  evolution  of  the  relevant  parameters  will  then  be  calculated  for 
every cell within the object. The solid object will be connected to the 
surrounding fluid phase through appropriate boundary conditions. This 
is commonly referred to as resolved particle DNS (RP-DNS). A number of 
papers  have  been  devoted  to  numerical  simulations  of  such  resolved 
reacting particles [16-41] or surfaces [16]. Only some of these papers 
include conversion of the carbonaceous part of the solid [16-18, 20-24, 
26-30, 32,36-39, 41-43] while the remaining ones only consider devo-
latilization and/or drying. Most of the papers that do consider conver-
sion of the carbonaceous part of the solid do not consider carbonaceous 
conversion on the internal porous surface of the char, but rather allocate 
all  char  conversion  to  the  external  particle  surface  [16,18,20,23,24, 
28-30, 42]. This means that apparent heterogeneous kinetics is required. 
For this kind of kinetics, the Arrhenius parameters are dependent on the 
exact conditions of interest, such as fluid temperature and particle size. 
In order to account for the internal char conversion within the porous 
structure, one can try to resolve the porous structure on the numerical 
mesh [26,27,36,37,40]. This can be done by making the pores as long 
radial wedges [37], channels between almost rectangular blocks of solid 
[27], spherical cavities [36], or voids between a large number of densely 
packed carbonaceous spheres [26]. It is interesting to see that one can 
now start to simulate particles with resolved pores in this way, but as the 
achievable pore size distribution is far from realistic (only the largest 
pores can be resolved on the grid), it is not clear what the benefit of 
resolving the pores is. A more numerically efficient and probably also 
more accurate approach is to treat the carbonaceous solid as a porous 
media [17,32]. In this approach, the carbonaceous part of the particle is 
handled through a statistical description of the pore size distribution and 
tortuosity. This latter approach yields the best trade-off between accu-
racy and CPU cost and is recommended for accurate simulations of char 
conversion. This is also the approach that will be described below. 

When  the  primary  focus  is  on  the  interior  of  the  char,  it  is  quite 
common  to  assume  the  char  to  be  a  perfectly  spherical  particle 
embedded  in  an  infinitely  large  quiescent  fluid  [44-48].  Under  these 
assumptions,  it  is  sufficient  to  discretize  the  particle  in  the  radial  di-
rection only. This will be referred to as the resolved-particle in quiescent 
fluid (RP-QF) approach. Such a discretization is illustrated in Fig. 2 but 
in  this  rendition,  the  boundary  layer  surrounding  the  particle  is  dis-
cretized as well. If the surrounding fluid has a velocity relative to the 
particle,  only  radial  discretization  is  not  sufficient.  Instead,  the  sur-
rounding fluid has to be discretized in all spatial dimensions. For par-
ticles larger than about 150 μm, homogeneous reaction in the boundary 
layer may be significant and should be taken into account for accurate 
predictions of char particle mass loss rates. Resolving the boundary layer 
accomplishes this end. For smaller particles, conversion of CO to CO2 in 
the boundary layer is negligible and the single-film model (see Section 
3.3.2)  applies;  the  gas  phase  does  not  have  to  be  resolved.  Instead, 
models for mass and heat transfer can be used as boundary conditions. 

i+1

(cid:0) r3

Fig. 2. Illustration of the resolved particle and its resolved boundary layer. The 
particle  volume  is  discretized  into  a  number  of  concentric  spherical  shells, 
where the volume of shell i is vi = (4π /3)(r3
i ). The governing species and 
energy conservation equations are applied to each volume element in order to 
determine the species concentrations and particle temperatures at each radial 
position.  Resolving  the  boundary  layer  permits  homogeneous  reaction  in  the 
boundary layer to be included in the calculation. There is no need to resolve the 
boundary layer when homogeneous reaction is assumed to be negligible in the 
boundary layer. Models for mass and heat transfer across the boundary layer 
can  be  used  to  relate  conditions  at  the  particle’s  outer  surface  (i.e.,  at  rp)  to 
conditions in the free-stream (i.e., at rfilm). 

The  simplified  one-dimensional  approach  described  above  has  the 
advantage that it is very fast, since it does not solve for the fluid, and the 
solid is treated along one dimension only. This means that it may be an 
ideal  strategy  to  use  the  RP-QF  approach  either  when  very  detailed 
heterogeneous kinetics are being used (since detailed kinetics is much 
more  time  consuming  than  its  global  counterpart),  or  when  a  large 
number of particles with large Biot numbers have to be treated. The Biot 
Number (defined as Bi = HL/λth, where H is the convective heat transfer 
coefficient,  λth  is  the  thermal  conductivity  of  the  particle  and  L  is  a 
characteristic length, taken as the volume of the particle divided by its 
external surface area), is used to describe the distribution of energy (or 
temperature) inside the particle over time. For small Biot numbers, the 
temperature  distribution  during  transients  within  the  particle  can  be 
taken as uniform. A large number of particles with large Biot numbers 
have to be treated, for example, in grate firing of solid fuels, where the 
evolution of every individual fuel particle is tracked. It is important to 
realize that the RP-QF framework is applicable only for cases that are 
strictly spherically symmetric. This is not the case for example for grate 
firing, but the method is still used [49] since the error introduced is less 
than  the  error  associated  with  using  the  point  particle  approach  for 
particles with large Biot numbers. 

In the following, we will present the relevant evolution equations for 
fully resolved particles in a resolved fluid. The evolution of the particle 
velocity (v) is found by integrating all surface and volume forces acting 
on the particle, such that 

mp

dv
dt

=

∫

s

τ⋅ndA +

⎛

∫

⎝

V

⎞

ρsoliddV (cid:0) Vpρ

⎠g + F.

(5) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009937N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Here, n is the normal vector to the surface, dA is a small surface element, 
g is the gravitational acceleration, ρsolid  is the apparent density of the 
solid material (including both char and ash), F includes forces due to 
particle collisions while mp and Vp are the mass and volume of the solid 
object, respectively. The position of the center of the object is given by x. 
Knowing the velocity of the solid object, the evolution equation for its 
position is given by 

dx
dt

= v.

(6) 

Let  us now  consider a  set  of  Nreac  heterogeneous  reactions  for the 

char, where the molar reaction rate of reaction k is given by 

̂ℜk = kk,f ΠNs

i=1 C

′
i,k

ν
i

(cid:0) kk,rΠNs

i=1C

ν′′
i,k
i

.

(7)  

In  this  equation,  kk,f  is  the  rate  constant  for  the  forward  direction  of 
reaction k, Ns is the number of reactant species (gaseous and adsorbed) 
involved  in  the  heterogeneous  reactions,  Ci  is  the  concentration  of 
reactant species i, and ν′
i,k  are the stoichiometric coefficients of 
species i on the reactant and product sides, respectively, of reaction k. 
The rate constant for the reverse direction of reaction k is determined 
from  the  forward  rate  constant  and  the  equilibrium  constant  for  the 
reaction,  KC,k  (kk,r  = kk,f
).  The  rate  constant  of  the  forward 
direction of reaction k is given by 

i,k  and ν′′

/KC,k

(

kk,f = Ak,f exp

(cid:0)

)

,

Ek,f
̂RuTp

(8)  

where Ak,f  and Ek,f are the corresponding pre-exponential factor and 
activation energy, respectively, and ̂Ru  is the gas constant. More details 
about the heterogeneous chemical kinetics are found in Section 3.2. The 
concentration of species i is calculated by 

Ci =

Pi
̂RuT

,

(9)  

where Pi is the partial pressure of species i and T is the gas temperature. 
The gas temperature inside a char particle can to a good approximation 
be set equal to the particle temperature for thermally thin particles, or to 
the local particle temperature for thermally thick particles. 

Based on the above, the reactivity of gaseous species i is given by 

̂Ri =

∑Nreac

k=1

)

(
ν′′
i,k (cid:0) ν

′
i,k

̂ℜk

Here,  Sg  is  the  mass  specific  internal  surface  area  of  the  char.  For  a 
resolved  particle,  which  is  discretized  in  the  radial  direction,  the 
outermost shell of grid cells requires some special treatment. For this 
shell,  reaction  at  the  external  surface  area  must  be  added  to  that  on 
internal surfaces to yield the evolution of the apparent char density in 
the grid cell. Thus, 

∂ρchar

)

(cid:0)

r = rp
∂t

= (cid:0) ρcharRcSg (cid:0)

AcΘ
Vc

Rc,s = (cid:0) Rc,s

(
ρcharSgRc

/

Rc,s +

)
.

Θ
Δr

(14) 

In the equation above,  which  is only applicable for the  outermost 
grid cell, Ac is the external surface area of the grid cell while Vc ≈ ApΔr is 
the volume of a grid cell with thickness Δr. Also in the above equation, Θ 
is the porosity of the material in the shell, Rc is the intrinsic char reac-
tivity evaluated at conditions existing in the outermost shell, and Rc,s is 
the char reactivity evaluated at conditions existing at the external sur-
face of the particle. 

The internal surface area will be discussed in more detail in Section 
3.1.2. In the above expression, the apparent density of char is given as 
ρchar, which varies with mass loss as discussed in Section 3.3.3. 

It is customary to consider a char particle as a porous solid material. 
The continuity equation, which handles the evolution of the gas density 
within the pores of the char, is then given by 

∂Θρg
∂t

(cid:0)
+ ∇⋅

)

ρgus

= ˙ωg

(15)  

where ρg is the average density of the gaseous phase, us is the superficial 
velocity of the gas and  ˙ωg  represents all sources of gas. The superficial 
velocity  of  the  gas  within  the  pores  can  be  obtained  by  solving  the 
momentum equation, but since fluid motion in a porous medium like 
char will never be turbulent or show any significant recirculation etc., it 
is  more  common  to  use  Darcy’s  law  to  solve  for  the  superficial  fluid 
velocity: 

us = (cid:0)

K
μ

∇P,

(16)  

where, K is permeability, μ is dynamic viscosity and P is pressure, which 
is obtained from the relevant equation of state. 

The mass fraction of gas-phase species i is governed by the following 

transport equation 

(10)  

∂ΘρgYi
∂t

(cid:0)

+ ∇⋅

)

(cid:0)

= ∇⋅

ρgYius

ρgD i,eff ∇Yi

)

+ ˙ωi + ˙W i.

(17)  

where  Nreac  is  the  number  of  heterogeneous  reactions.  The  intrinsic 
reactivity of the char can be described as 

Rc = ̂M C⋅

∑Nreac des

k=1

̂ℜk

(11)  

̂
MC  is the molar mass of carbon and Nreac des

where 
is the number of 
desorption  reactions, reactions  in  which  a  gaseous  species  is  released 
from the solid surface, extracting a carbon atom from the carbonaceous 
matrix  in  the  process.  When  it  is  assumed  that  all  adsorbed  species 
maintain steady-state concentrations, char reactivity can be determined 
from the reactivities of the gas phase species. 

˙
Here,  ˙ωi  represents  gaseous  sources  of  species  i  and 
Wi  represents 
sources of gas-phase species i due to interactions with the solid phase. 
Following an approach similar to that of Satterfield [50], the effective 
diffusivity  of  species  i,  D i,eff ,  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  bulk  and 
Knudsen  diffusion  coefficients  for  the  species,  D i and  D Kn,i,  respec-
tively, and is given by 

D i,eff =

(

Θθc
τ

)(

1
D i

+

1
D Kn,i

)(cid:0) 1

(18)  

where  the  Knudsen  diffusion  coefficient  for  species  i  depends  on  the 
mean pore radius and molecular weight of the diffusing species [50]: 

(Rc)ss =

∑Nspec gas

i=1

̂Ri

̂M i.

(12)  

D Kn,i =

(

2rpore
3

√

) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
8̂RuTp
.
π ̂M i

(19) 

See Appendix A for a discussion of char reactivity based on heteroge-
neous reaction mechanisms. 

The evolution of the apparent char density is given by 

∂ρchar
∂t

= (cid:0) ρcharRcSg.

(13)  

In Eq. (18), τ is the tortuosity factor and θc  is the pore constriction 
factor, factors that account for the fact that pores are not straight nor of 
constant cross section. The tortuosity factor is the ratio of the length of 
the actual diffusive paths through the porous material to the length of a 
straight path through the material. Values for tortuosity between three 
and  seven  are  reasonable  for  chars;  a  value  of  three  is  predicted  for 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009938N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

randomly oriented, long cylindrical pores [50]. The constriction factor 
accounts  for  the  variations  in  pore  cross-sectional area  normal  to the 
diffusional path and is a function of the ratio of the smallest to largest 
cross-sectional pore area. Its value is between zero and one, the lower 
the  value  the  greater  the  impact  of  bottleneck-type  pores  on  limiting 
diffusive  flow  through  the  porous  system.  In  Satterfield  [50],  the 
constriction  factor and tortuosity factor  are combined into  one factor 
and is called the “tortuosity factor”. The ratio τ/θc  (termed “τ” in Sat-
terfield), is a measure of the tortuous paths and varying cross-sections of 
the pores through which gases diffuse. 

Constriction  factors  for  coal  and  biomass  chars  have  not  yet  been 
determined. These factors cannot be determined directly; they must be 
deduced  from  the  determinations  of  tortuosity,  porosity  and  effective 
transport properties. Values for θc  are available for selected electrode 
materials.  Constriction  factors  in  the  range  0.15  to  0.23  have  been 
determined for  various electrode microstructures with porosities  near 
50%  [51].  In  a  study  to  analyze  the  microstructures  of  porous 
lithium-ion  electrolytes  [52],  constriction  factors  were  found  to 
decrease  from  about  0.75  to  0.5  as  the  porosity  of  the  electrolyte 
increased from about 25% to 55%. 

Attempts to predict the constriction factor for a porous network from 
pore size distributions have been undertaken. Münch and Holzer [53] 
defined  the  constrictivity  β  as  β  = (rmin50/rmax50)2,  where  rmin50  and 
rmax50  are  the  50%-quantiles  of  a  continuous  pore  size  distribution 
(c-psd)  and  a  mercury-intrusion-porosimetry  pore  size  distribution 
(MIP-psd),  respectively.  The  c-psd,  which  assumes  that  the  porous 
structure is a single continuum, independent of possible connectivities, 
is calculated either from a three-dimensional synthetic microstructural 
model  of  the  porous  material  of  interest  or  from  a  three-dimensional 
image  of  the  porous  material  (measured  via  nano-tomography,  for 
example).  Processing  of  the  analytical  microstructures  using  an  algo-
rithm that calculates the amount of the total pore volume that can be 
filled  with  circles  and  spheres  of  a  specific  pore  radius  leads  to  the 
determination  of  the  volume  fraction  of  pores  of  all  sizes  considered 
[53].  The  volume  fractions 
in  the  smallest  of  pores  of  the 
three-dimensional  microstructural  model  can  be  determined  in  this 
manner.  Mercury  cannot  penetrate  the  smallest  pores  of  materials 
(without employing high intrusion pressures that might compress the 
sample being tested) and hence, a measured MIP-psd is strongly influ-
enced by narrow constrictions along the intrusion pathways. If mercury 
intrusion porosimetry is not performed, a MIP-psd can be simulated for 
the  microstructural  model  or  nano-tomographic  image  using  c-psd 
techniques [53]. Forty-three synthetic microstructures were examined 
by  Stenzel  et  al.  [54]  in  efforts  to  determine  a  correlation  between 
intrinsic and effective transport properties. For each microstructure, Θ, τ 
and  β  were  determined.  An  optimization  algorithm  revealed  that  all 
three  parameters  were  needed  to  derive  an  adequate  correlation  be-
tween effective and intrinsic thermal conductivities. The correlation was 
validated using data obtained with porous nickel-phase solid oxide fuel 
cell  anodes.  Values  determined  for  β  (nominally,  the  same  as  the 
constriction factor) were in the range 0.2 to 0.4. A number of different 
ways to define constrictivity exists that are based on c-psd and MIP-psd. 
This study supports the use of using the radius at the 50% quantile of the 
c-psd to determine the average size of bulges (rmax) along the tortuous 
path and the radius at the 50% quantile of the MIP-psd to define the 
average size of bottlenecks (rmin) along the path when determining the 
constriction factor. This technique has not yet been used to determine 
such factors for chars produced from coals or biomass. This study sup-
ports the use an equation of the type given by Eq. (18) to relate effective 
and intrinsic diffusivities in that all three parameters (Θ, τ and θc) are 
used in the correlation. 

Recent coal char combustion modelers [55,56] have also proposed 
using the pore-size-distribution to estimate the effective diffusion coef-
ficient for coal chars. In their approach, the ratio τ/θc is replaced by the 
ratio τ/f,  where f is the fraction of the total porosity in the feeder pores 
of the char. The total porosity of a char particle consists of the porosity in 

˚
A) and 

˚
A < dpore < 500

˚
A), the mesopores (20

the micropores (dpore < 20
˚
the macropores (dpore > 500
A). The feeder pores are in the macropore 
range. It is these larger pores that feed reactive gases into the smaller 
pores  where  char  conversion  is  most  appreciable.  Sun  and  Hurt  [56] 
assume that the pore structure conforms to the pore tree model of Si-
mons [57], where macropores feed mesopores and mesopores feed mi-
cropores and where the long-path-length transport to the interior of the 
char particle is via the macropores. As such, any variations in pore cross 
section in the micropore and mesopore size ranges insignificantly impact 
mass transport inside the particle. Consequently, in this approach, only 
the macropore size range needs to be considered when modeling pore 
diffusion  —  Knudsen  diffusion  is  neglected.  Note  that  for  a  specified 
particle porosity, the larger the fraction of pores in the macropore size 
range (the larger f), the less the impact of variations in cross sectional 
area on the transport property and conversely, the smaller the fraction of 
macropores (the lower f), the greater the impact of variations in cross 
sectional area on transport properties. Thus f accounts for variations in 
pore cross sections in essentially the same manner that the constriction 
factor does. Sun and Hurt [56] recommend a value of 6 for the ratio τ/f, 
a value that suggests that θc  = 0.5 when pores are randomly oriented, 
cylindrical and relatively long. In the absence of experimental data, a 
value of 0.5 is recommended for θc for coal and biomass chars. 

Knudsen diffusion accounts for the effect of finite mean free path of 
gas molecules and is important in the transport of molecules in the small 
pores of char particles where molecules collide with pore walls as often 
as they collide with each other. The mean pore size, rpore, is discussed in 
more detail in Section 3.1.1. Since the pores are very small, the fluid and 
the solid are typically assumed to be in thermal equilibrium inside the 
particle, i.e.; for a tiny porous volume inside the particle, the fluid and 
solid within this small volume have the same temperature. This means 
that a single equation for temperature is sufficient to obtain accurate 
results: 

(cid:0)

Θρgcp,g + ρsolidcp,solid

) ∂T
∂t

+ ρgcp,gus⋅∇T = ∇⋅(λth∇T) + qgas(cid:0) reac + qreac.

(20) 

In the above equation, cp is the heat capacity at constant pressure, λth 
is the effective thermal conductivity of the porous material (including 
the gas within the pores and the solid), qgas (cid:0)
reac is the energy released as 
heat due to gas-phase, homogeneous chemical reaction, and qreac
is the 
energy released as heat by the heterogeneous chemical reactions at the 
internal surfaces of the char. It is expressed as 

qreac =

∑Nreac

k=1

̂ℜkqreac,kSgρchar

(21)  

where the quantity qreac,k represents the heat of reaction for reaction k. 
For the outermost shell, in the same way as for Eq. (14), account must be 
made  for  the  presence  of  the  outer  external  surface.  Hence,  for  the 
outermost shell, 

qreac =

∑Nreac

(

k=1

̂ℜkqreac,kSgρchar +

(cid:0)

Θ ̂ℜkqreac,k

/

)

Δr

)

s

(22)  

where in the first term of the summation, reaction rates are calculated at 
the conditions associated within Vshell  and in the second term, the re-
action rates are calculated at the conditions existing at the outer surface. 
Since thermal equilibrium between solid and gas is assumed, the energy 
released during reaction is heating both the solid and the gas. 

2.2.1. Boundary conditions 

All the above equations must be solved for the interior of the char, 
while at the interface between the char particle and the embedding fluid 
(the  external  char  surface),  appropriate  boundary  conditions  must  be 
applied.  For  a  particle  at  rest,  the  gas  phase  velocity  at  the  particle 
surface must equal the superficial velocity of the gas just inside of the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009939N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

boundary, i.e.; 

u|gas,s = us|char,s

(23)  

where us is given by Eq. (16). If the particle is not at rest, the velocity of 
the  particle  surface (including both translation and rotation)  must be 
added  to  the  right-hand  side  of  the  above  equation.  The  gas  phase 
density at the surface is calculated directly from Eq. (1), eliminating the 
need for a boundary condition for density. 

The boundary is assumed to be an infinitely thin layer around the 
particle. This means that the relevant boundary condition for tempera-
ture and species is to set the heat and mass flux gradients to zero at the 
boundary.  Consequently,  the  heat  and  mass  fluxes  from  the  particle 
interior  to  the  particle  surface  should  be  equal  to  the  heat  and  mass 
fluxes from the particle surface to the surrounding gas. Based on this, the 
following  expression  should  be  used  for  the  temperature  boundary 
condition: 

λth∇T|solid,s = qrad + λgas∇T|gas,s

where 

(

qrad = σϵp

rad (cid:0) T 4
T 4

solid,s

)
.

(24)  

(25) 

The term ∇T|solid,s is the temperature gradient of the solid evaluated 
at the surface based on temperature inside the solid, while ∇T|gas,s is the 
corresponding gradient evaluated in the gas phase. In the above equa-
tion,  σ  is  the  Stefan-Boltzmann  constant,  εp  is  the  emissivity  of  the 
particle  surface, Trad  is  the effective radiative temperature of the sur-
roundings,  and  Tsolid,s  is  the  temperature  of  the  particle  surface.  In 
addition,  the  solid  and  gaseous  temperatures  at  the  surface  must  be 
equal, i.e.: 

T|solid,s = T|gas,s.

(26) 

Correspondingly, the boundary condition for gas phase species k is 

given by 

Di,eff ∇Yi|solid,s = Di∇Yi|gas,s

and 

Yi|solid,s = Yi|gas,s.

(27)  

(28)  

Spherical-symmetric particle in non-resolved fluid 

When  the  spherical-symmetric  approximation  (RP-QF)  is  applied, 
the particle is resolved only along the radial direction, and the fluid is 
not resolved at all. Models for mass and heat transfer are then used as 
boundary  conditions.  In  such  cases,  the  right-hand  side  of  Eq.  (24) 
should be substituted with 

Ftemp =

(cid:0)

Nu λgas
dp

Tg,∞ (cid:0) Tg,s

)

+ qrad

(29)  

where Nu is the Nusselt number and dp  is the particle diameter. Simi-
larly, the right-hand side of Eq. (27) should be substituted by 

Fspec,i =

(cid:0)

Sh Di
dp

)

Yi,∞ (cid:0) Yi,s

(30)  

where Sh is the Sherwood number. In the above equations, Tg,∞ and Yi,∞ 
are the gas temperature and mass fraction of species i, respectively, in 
the ambient. When calculating the Nusselt and Sherwood numbers, ac-
count should be made for the effects of Stefan flow (see Section 3.3.2 
and/or refs. [58-60]). 

2.3. The point particle approximation 

In principle, one would always solve for the above set of equations 
for all particles, i.e., resolving the particles on the computational mesh. 

This does, however, become prohibitively time consuming when a large 
number of particles are involved. For small particles, which have radii 
that are significantly smaller than the mesh size used to solve for the 
surrounding fluid, the point particle approximation can be used. In this 
approximation, the particles are considered as points as far as the fluid 
solver is concerned. This means that the particles do not displace any 
fluid, but they do still act as sources of mass, momentum, species, and 
heat. Since the particles are not resolved on a numerical mesh, appro-
priate  models  are  used  to  represent  the  physical  processes  inside  the 
particles and at the boundary between the particles and the fluid. For 
cases where the volume fraction of solid particles cannot be neglected, 
for example in dense beds, the fluid displacement will be accounted for 
through  the  introduction  of  a  solid  volume  fraction  term  in  the  fluid 
equation. A schematic diagram of point-particles in a flow field is shown 
in Fig. 3, with radial gas concentration profiles emphasized for a single 
point-particle. 

In contrast to the resolved particle approach, in which all scales of 
the fluid are resolved, including the boundary layer around the particles 
(RP-DNS), the point particle approach may be used in combination with 
three  different  levels  of  fluid  solvers  that  do  not  resolve  the  particle 
boundary layer. These three different levels refer to solvers where 1) all 
scales of the fluid (carrier-phase) are resolved in a point particle DNS 
(PP-DNS) [61-69], 2) the largest turbulent scales are resolved in a LES 
[70] or 3) no turbulent scales are resolved (but modelled) in a RANS 
solver [71]. For LES solvers, semi-industrial furnaces may be simulated 
while for PP-DNS, only smaller cases can be handled. Some examples are 
laboratory jet flames [62-64], low Reynolds number shear layers [66, 
67], isotropic turbulence [69] or laminar flows [65,68]. Out of these, 
only some include char reactions [62-64, 66,68,69], and it is only the 
work  of  Kruger  et  al.  [69]  that  has  its  primary  interest  on  the  char 
conversion  process.  Keeping  in  mind  that  char  conversion  is  the  rate 
limiting process for most industrial plants, it is clear that there is a need 
for a more concentrated effort on the conversion of char. 

The resonance scale of the turbulence is defined as the time scale that 
equals the response time of the particles. If the resonance scale of the 
turbulence is resolved in the fluid solver, the relevant interactions be-
tween particles and fluid are properly handled. This is the case for DNS 
and  well  resolved  LES  simulations.  In  the  opposite  case,  where  the 
resonance scales of the fluid are not resolved, which is the case for RANS 
and coarse grained LES simulations, the particle-turbulence interaction 
must be accounted for through models. There are two primary effects 
that  these  models  must  account  for:  1)  a  turbulent  fluid  will  cause 
embedded particles to form clusters with high number-density of par-
ticles,  surrounded  by  voids  where  there  are  essentially  no  particles. 
Within these clusters, the particles will consume the reactant gas, while 
there  are  still  large  amounts  of  reactant  gas  in  the  voids  outside  the 
clusters. This yields a net reduction in the heat and mass transfer rates to 
the particles. In addition, the models must also account for the fact that 
2) the small-scale turbulence (scales smaller than the resonance scale) 
will yield a relative velocity between the particles and the fluid. This 
relative difference results in increased heat and mass transfer rates be-
tween particles and fluid. The reader is referred to the work of Haugen 
and collaborators for appropriate models that account for both of these 
effects [69,72-74]. 

Particles embedded in a turbulent flow will disperse due to turbulent 
eddies. This is because the particles follow the path of the larger tur-
bulent eddies. In particular, all eddies larger than the resonance scale 
will transport the particles, while the smaller eddies will typically be too 
fast to yield any significant transport. Instead, the smaller eddies will 
result in a net relative velocity between the particles and the fluid. For 
the special case of tracer particles (no inertia), even the smallest eddies 
will contribute to the dispersion while the relative velocity will be zero. 
Since the turbulence itself is not resolved in RANS models, an appro-
priate model is required in order to emulate turbulent dispersion. Such a 
model typically works by giving the particles random kicks that result in 
a  reasonable  dispersion.  This  will,  however,  result  in  large  relative 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099310N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Fig. 3. Illustration of the point-particle. Each point-particle is treated as a sink for reactant species and a source for reaction products. The point-particle absorbs 
energy from the flow field in gasification environments and releases energy to the flow field in combustion and oxy-combustion environments. Only average particle 
conditions are determined, but gradients in reactant concentration are accounted for through the effectiveness factor. 

velocities between the particles and the fluid – even for tracer particles. 
This is not physical and may result in an over-estimation of the heat and 
mass  transfer  between  particle  and  fluid  since  these  depend  on  the 
relative  velocity.  It  is  therefore  important  to  realize  that  the  typical 
turbulent dispersion models implemented in RANS simulation tools may 
not necessarily result in reasonable heat and mass transfer, even though 
the dispersion characteristics of the particles are correctly reproduced. A 
first study of the effect of turbulence on the mass transfer to char par-
ticles in RANS simulations is presented in Karchniwy et al.[71]. 

Integrating Eq. (5) over the particle yields the following expression 
for the particle velocity evolution in the point particle approximation if 
forces due to particle collisions are omitted 

mp

dv
dt

=

1
2

ρCDAp|u (cid:0) v|(u (cid:0) v) +

(cid:0)

mp (cid:0) ρV

)

g =

mp
τp

(u (cid:0) v) +

(cid:0)

mp (cid:0) ρV

)
g.

(31)  

Here  and  in  the  following,  subscript  p  refers  to  particle-integrated 
quantities,  while  CD  is  the  drag  coefficient;  Ap = πr2
p  is  the  cross- 
sectional area of the particle; mp = ρp⋅πd3
/6 is the mass of the particle, 
p
ρp being the apparent particle density; dp = 2rp is the particle diameter; 
and τp is the particle response time. The drag coefficient will decrease for 
increasing Stefan flow velocity and this decrease becomes relevant for 
very large Stefan flows. A model for the drag coefficient as a function of 
Stefan flow velocity has been developed by Jayawickrama et al. [75]. 

For Stokesian flow (i.e., when the particle Reynolds number is small), 

the response time is given by τSt = ρpd2
18νρ. If the particle Reynolds number 
is  above  unity,  a  correction  to  this  equation  is  required,  such  that  a 

p

general expression for the particle response time is given by 

τp = τStfg

(32)  

where fg is a correction that is different from unity for non-zero particle 
Reynolds numbers. A popular correction function, which is valid for Rep 
< 1000, is given by [76,77] 

(
1 + 0.15Re0.687

p

)(cid:0) 1

.

fg =

(33)  

The equation for particle position, as given by Eq. (6), is unchanged for 
the point particle approximation. 

It  is  important  to  realize  that  the  reactant  distribution  within  the 
particle  is unknown for  the point particle  approximation. This  means 
that Eq. (7) cannot be integrated directly to yield the particle averaged 
molar  reaction  rate  of  reaction  k.  Instead,  the  average  reactant  con-
centration in the particle (Ci,p) is defined such that the particle-averaged 
reaction rate of reaction k is given by 

̂ℜk,p = kk,f ΠNs

i=1 C

′
ν
i,k
i,p

(cid:0) kk,rΠNs

i=1C

ν′′
i,k
i,p .

(34) 

In the point-particle approach, temperature gradients inside particles 
are  neglected.  Particles  are  assumed  to  be  thermally  thin  (small  Biot 
number), yielding a single temperature for the entire particle, and re-
action rate coefficients are evaluated at this temperature. The particle- 
averaged reaction rate is defined based on the integral of the resolved 
reaction rate of reaction k over the entire volume (Vp) of the particle: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099311N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

̂ℜk,p =

1
Vp

∫

Vp

̂ℜk dV,

(35)  

̂ℜk  is found from Eq. (7). In order to find the average reactant 
where 
concentration, the effectiveness factor for species i (ηi) is utilized, which 
is defined such that 

Ci,p = ηi⋅Ci,s

(36)  

where Ci,s is the concentration of species i at the surface of the particle. 
(See  Section  3.3.1  for  a  discussion  of  alternative  definitions  of  the 
effectiveness factor.) Based on this, Eq. (34) can now be re-written to 
yield 

Given the change in particle mass, as obtained from Eq. (43), it is not 
known if the change in mass will be due to a reduction in particle radius 
or  density  –  or  both.  This  is  determined  by  the  mode  of  conversion, 
which will be discussed in Section 3.3.3. 

By assuming that the particle is thermally thin, (rendering a constant 
temperature  throughout  the  particle),  the  temperature  evolution,  as 
presented  in  Eq.  (20),  can  be  integrated  together  with  the  boundary 
condition given in Eq. (24) to yield 

dTp
dt

=

1
mpcp,solid

(Qreac + Qrad + Qconv)

(45)  

where the reactive heating of the entire particle (Qreac) is expressed as 

̂ℜk,p = kk,f ΠNs

i=1

(cid:0)

)ν

′

i,k (cid:0) kk,rΠNs
i=1

(cid:0)

)ν′′

i,k .

ηiCi,s

ηiCi,s

(37)  

Qreac

∑Nreac

k=1

̂ℜk,p qreac,k St.

(46)  

This is formally correct only for first order reactions and homogeneous 
internal surface area, but it is commonly used for other cases as well. The 
calculation of species surface concentrations will be discussed in Section 
3.3.2 while the effectiveness factor will be discussed in more detail in 
Section 3.3.1. 

In analogy with Eq. (10), which gives the reactivity of species i at a 
given grid cell within the resolved particle, the following equation for 
the overall reactivity of species i for the entire particle is defined: 

̂Ri,p =

∑Nreac

k=1

(
ν′′
i,k (cid:0) ν

′
i,k

)

.

̂ℜk,p

Here, St is the total particle surface area, internal plus external surface 
area (St = mpSg + Ap). The radiative heating (Qrad)

is given by 

∫

Qrad =

qraddA

Ap

while the convective heating (Qconv)

Qconv = HAp

(38)  

(cid:0)

Tp (cid:0) Tg

)
,

is found from 

(47)  

(48)  

In the same way, the reactivity of the particle (analogous to Eq. (11)) can 
be defined as: 

Rc,p = MC⋅

∑Nreac des

k=1

̂ℜk,p ,

(39)  

where  Nreac des  is  the  number  of  desorption  reactions  that  release  a 
carbon atom from the surface. 

The evolution of the particle mass can now be found by considering 

mass loss on both internal and external particle surfaces: 

dmp
dt

=

(

dmp
dt

)

(

+

s

)

dmp
dt

int

(cid:0)

= (cid:0)

Ap⋅Rc,s + Sgmp⋅Rc,p

)
.

(40)  

where Rc,s  is the intrinsic reactivity evaluated at conditions existing at 
the  external  surface  of  the  particle.  Rearranging  the  right-hand-side 
yields 

(

= (cid:0)

1 +

)

Sgmp
Ap

Rc,p
⋅
Rc,s

dmp
dt

⋅Ap⋅Rc,s.

(41) 

Realizing that particle reactivity is maximum on its external surface, 
the effectiveness factor can be expressed as η = Rc,p/Rc,s, and the particle 
mass loss rate can be rewritten as 

(

= (cid:0)

1 +

Sgmp
Ap

dmp
dt

)

⋅η

⋅Ap⋅Rc,s.

(42)  

Since mp = ρchar ⋅ Vp, the mass rate expression can be written as 

(

= (cid:0)

1 +

dmp
dt

Sg⋅ρchar⋅Vp
Ap

)

⋅η

⋅Ap⋅Rc,s = (cid:0)

1 +

⋅Ap⋅Rc,s.

(43)  

(

)

Sg⋅ρchar⋅dp⋅η
6

The second term in the parenthesis of the above expression is dominant 
except  for  situations  when  carbon  conversion  rates  are  very  near  the 
diffusion-limited rates (i.e., when η approaches zero). For η >∼ 0.001,η 
>∼ 0.001, unity in the parenthesis term of Eq. (43) can be neglected, 
and since Rc,s = Rc,p/η, 

the equation simplifies to 

dmp
dt

= (cid:0) Sg⋅ρchar⋅Vp⋅Rc,p = (cid:0) Sg⋅mp⋅Rc,p.

(44)  

where  H  is the  convective  heat transfer  coefficient. It  is  important to 
note that one should use the thermally thin approximation only when 
the Biot number, which is given by 

Bi =

H Vp
Ap λgas

,

(49)  

πr3

p  and Ap = 4πr2

is smaller than 0.1. If the thermally thin approximation cannot be used, 
the point particle approximation is not applicable. Hence, for large Biot 
numbers, the particle has to be resolved with one of the resolved particle 
approaches presented in Section 2.2: RP-DNS or RP-QF. For spherical 
particles,  the  particle  volume  and  external  surface  area  are  given  by 
Vp = 4
p , respectively. The heat transfer coefficient, H, 
3
models the heat transfer through the boundary layer around the particle. 
This is not trivial since the boundary layer is associated with an outflow 
due to the heterogeneous reactions (Stefan flow), and since there may be 
gas phase reactions within the boundary layer. On top of this, the par-
ticle  typically  has  a  velocity  relative  to  the  fluid.  The  heat  and  mass 
transfer coefficients will be handled in detail in Section 3.3.2. The heat 
and mass transfer models will also be affected by the way the remaining 
ash is treated. Whether the remaining ash is assumed to form a dense ash 
layer around the particle, redistribute within the remaining char, or just 
fall off, may have a dramatic effect on transport to and from the particle. 
The ash treatment is presented in Section 3.4. 

Wood logs have large Biot numbers and due to the internal structure 
of  a  wood  stove,  their  boundary  layers  cannot  be  modelled  using 
traditional models for heat and mass transfer through boundary layers. 
When simulating conversion of wood logs, one therefore has to use some 
version of the resolved particle approach [48]. 

The source terms in the fluid equations due to point particles can be 
found by summing the contributions from all particles Np within a given 
grid cell with volume δV, such that 

˙W g =

1
δV

∑Np

j=1

dmp,j
dt

.

(50)  

This is the source term in the continuity equation (Eq. (1)); the evolution 
of the particle mass is given by Eq. (43). The source term in the mo-
mentum equation (Eq. (2)) contains two terms, the first is due to mo-
mentum added to the fluid because of mass transport from the particles, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099312N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

while the second is due to the drag between the particles and the fluid. 
Hence, the momentum source term is given by 

3. Physio-chemical modelling 

˙Wu =

1
δV

(

∑Np

j=1

vj

dmp,j
dt

+

mp,j
τp,j

(cid:0)

u (cid:0) vj

)
)

.

The source term in the enthalpy equation is given by 
)

(

˙W h =

1
δV

∑Np

j=1

dmp,j
dt

hchar (cid:0) Qcond

3.1. Porosity and internal surface area 

(51) 

All  chars  are  porous,  which  means  that  a  certain  fraction  of  their 
volume is made up of pores, while the rest is solid material. The porosity 
is defined as 

(52)  

Θ =

Vpore
Vp

,

(54)  

where hchar is the enthalpy of the gaseous phase that leaves the particle. 
Here, it is assumed that the solid and the gas within the pores of the solid 
are  in  thermal  equilibrium,  which  means  that the  temperature  of the 
gaseous reaction products entering the gas phase has the same temper-
ature as the particle. This may not be a good approximation for small 
particles. A certain fraction of the heat of reaction may then be directly 
transferred to the gas phase while the remaining part is heating the solid. 
This fraction is commonly set to 0.3 [78], but particle specific values 
have also been proposed [79]. Finally, the source of species i is found 
from 

˙W i =

1
δV

(

∑Np

j=1

˙wi,j + Yi

)

dmp,j
dt

(53)  

where  ˙wi,j  is the production rate of gas phase species i due to hetero-
geneous reactions on particle j. 

A point particle will always be associated with one single fluid grid 
cell. If the source of a given quantity from the particle is large compared 
to the rate by which the quantity is transported away from the grid cell 
by advection and/or diffusion, there will be a strong accumulation of 
this quantity in the grid cell. Too strong accumulations will yield nu-
merical instabilities that eventually may result in the code crashing. The 
natural reflex of researchers working with numerical flow simulations is 
to  increase  resolution  when  such  strong  spikes  in  any  quantity  give 
numerical  issues.  This  will,  however,  only  make  things  worse,  since 
transferring the entire source term to an even smaller grid cell will yield 
an even stronger relative accumulation. The solution to this problem is 
therefore to distribute the sources over several neighboring grid cells. A 
common approach is to use a Gaussian profile as the distribution func-
tion, such that the further from the particle a cell is, the less of its source 
it  will  get.  This  is  a  very  straightforward  approach  that  is  easy  to 
implement. The width of the Gaussian profile cannot be determined on 
physical grounds, though. So, it is typically made wide enough to get rid 
of the sharpest gradients. Another problem with this approach is that for 
a  three-dimensional  solver,  the  number  of  receiving  grid  points  in-
creases very quickly when the width of the Gaussian distribution func-
tion increases. A width of just a few grid points will quickly start to slow 
down the code due to the large number of cells that must be called for 
every particle. An alternative to this approach, which is more physically 
sound  and  also  faster  already  for  relatively  small  widths,  is  to  add  a 
diffusing step to the source before it is added to the evolution equation. 
This method was found by Kruger et al. [69] to yield very good results, 
both regarding accuracy and calculation efficiency. 

In the previous paragraph, we discussed the issue of strong particle 
source terms in relatively small grid cells. In the other extreme, when the 
grid cells are much larger than the particles, the source terms from the 
particle will be distributed homogeneously over a very large volume (the 
volume  of  the  grid  cell). This  resembles an  artificially  large diffusion 
coefficients, which may result in failed gas-phase ignition. One possible 
solution to this can be to use the double-film model, where the flame is a 
part of the film model (see Section 3.3.2 for a discussion of the double 
film model). 

where  Vpore  is  the  total  volume  of  all  the  pores  within  the  reference 
volume Vp. Here, and in the following, we make the following assump-
tions [80]:  

1  Pores  are  the  volumes  between  the  ill-fitted  building  blocks  that 

make up the solid structure.  

2  The pore structure of a char particle is homogeneous throughout.  
3  The pore structure is continuous and interconnecting  
4  Any  surface  in  a  char  particle  (either  the  external  surface  or  any 
imaginary  one  drawn  in  the  interior  of  the  particle)  consists  of  a 
fraction Θ of pore mouths and a fraction (1 (cid:0) Θ) of solid material.  
5  The pores are cylindrical with a mean radius rpore and a mean length 

Lpore 

The above assumptions mean that the relationship between the pore 

parameters and the porosity is given by 

nporeLporeπr2

pore = Θ

(55)  

where npore  is the number density of pores (number of pores per unit 
volume). Similarly, for the surface area density (Sv in m2/m3), it is also 
true that 

Sv = Sgρchar = (1 (cid:0) Θ)frnporeLpore2πrpore

(56)  

where Sg  is the mass specific surface area and the term inside the pa-
rentheses on the right-hand-side is due to pores intersecting each other 
[80], which yields a reduction in surface area, while fr  is a roughness 
factor that accounts for the fact that the pore surface area is increased by 
the roughness of the pore walls. By combining the above two equations, 
one can solve for the mean pore radius 

rpore =

2Θ(1 (cid:0) Θ)fr
Sgρchar

and the average pore length times the number density of pores 

Lporenpore =

(cid:0)

)2

Sgρchar
4πΘ(1 (cid:0) Θ)2f 2
r

.

(57)  

(58)  

Typical  values  for  Θ  and  fr  in  chars  are  ½  and  2,  respectively,  which 
means  that  the  product  (1  (cid:0) Θ)fr  ≈ 1.  This  explains  why  it  is  rather 
common to define the mean pore radius as 

rpore =

2Θ
Sgρchar

.

(59) 

pore

Based on the work by Wheeler [80], the number of pore mouths per 
unit geometric external area is np = Θ/(sin(αpore)πr2
), where αpore is the 
average angle of intersection of pores with the external surface. Wheeler 
argued that pores could run perpendicular to the external surface, par-
allel to the external surface or at any angle αpore  to it. If αpore  has the 
approximately random value of 45
, then the number of pore mouths per 
unit  external  geometric  area  is  np = Θ/(
).  Since  npore  =
npAp/Vp, when Eq. (57) is used for the mean pore radius, the number of 
pore mouths per unit particle volume can be expressed as 

̅̅̅̅̅
2

πr2

√

pore

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099313N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

npore =

√
̅̅̅
2

(cid:0)

Sgρchar

)2

4π Θ(1 (cid:0) Θ)2 f 2
r

)

,

(

Ap
Vp

where  Ap  is  the  geometric  external  surface  area  of  the  particle. 
Employing this expression for the pore number density in Eq. (58) re-
sults in the following expression for the average pore length 

√

̅̅̅
2

/

Vp

Ap.

Lpore =

For  a  number  of  char  particles  (e.g.,  cenospheres),  assumption 
number 2 above is not valid for the particle as a whole. Since the pore 
structure of the carbonaceous part of the particle is homogeneous, the 
equations  above  are  still  expected  to  be  valid  for  the  carbonaceous 
material forming the shell around the central void. 

The  surface  area  of  char  is  typically  determined  by  utilizing  the 
Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) theory, where the physical adsorption 
of a given molecular species on the char surface is measured. Several 
different species, such as CO2, N2 or O2, can be used for the experimental 
measurements. The result  does, however, depend  on which  species is 
used. For a typical coal char, the measured surface area is smaller (20- 
100 m2/g) when N2 is used as the adsorbed gas compared to when CO2 is 
used (200-500 m2/g). This means that CO2, despite the fact that it is a 
larger molecule, accesses smaller pores than N2 does. This is commonly 
explained by the capillary effect of CO2, which allows it to penetrate 
smaller  pores  than  N2.  Hence,  measurements  with  CO2  include  the 
surface area of all pores down to micropores while measurements with 
N2 only include pores down to mesopores. For oxidation reactions, the 
relevant adsorbing gas is O2, but due to its high reactivity with the solid 
material  it  is  not  convenient  to  use  for  BET  measurements.  Any  het-
erogeneous reaction mechanism is developed based on the given surface 
area measurements, which means that if CO2 is used to obtain the sur-
face area of the char, the calculated reactivities will be lower than if N2 is 
used. When calculating char reactivity with a given intrinsic heteroge-
neous mechanism, it is therefore crucial that the surface area of the char 
is  measured  with  the  same  absorbing  gas  as  was  used  to  obtain  the 
heterogeneous mechanism. 

In theory, a surface-area based reaction mechanism includes both the 
internal  and  the  external  surface  area  when  calculating  the  reaction 
rates.  In  reality,  since  the  internal  surface  area  is  many  orders  of 
magnitude  larger  than  the  external  surface  area,  the  external  surface 
area can be neglected. It is therefore important to distinguish between 
an apparent chemical mechanism, based on the external surface area, 
and  internal-surface-area  based  mechanisms,  based  on  the  internal 
surface area. 

3.1.1. Porosity evolution 

The volume of the ash-containing porous char particle is composed of 
the volume occupied by the solid, carbonaceous material (Vtrue,char), the 
volume occupied by the ash (Vash) and the volume oocupied by the pores 
pores): Vobj = Vtrue,char + Vash + Vchar
in the char (Vchar
pores. The volume 
occupied by the solid carbonaceous material can be expressed in terms 
of the true density of the char (ρtrue,char = mchar/Vtrue,char) and the volume 
occupied by the ash can be expressed in terms of the apparent density of 
the ash (ρash  = mash/Vash). When the expression for the total volume is 
divided by Vobj, the following equation is derived: 

mchar

1 =

/
ρtrue,char
Vobj

+

mash/ρash
Vobj

+

Vchar pores
Vobj

.

(60) 

The apparent density of the ash-containing porous char particle is 

ρchar = mchar/Vobj. Employing this expression in the first term of the right- 
hand-side of Eq. (60) and using it to eliminate Vobj  in the second term 
results in 
ρchar
ρtrue,char

mashρchar
mcharρash

+ Θ  

1 =

+

where the final term in Eq. (60) is identified as the porosity of the porous 
char,  i.e.,  Θ = Vchar pores
yields 

.  Rearranging  the  equation,  solving  for  porosity 

Vobj

Θ = 1 (cid:0)

ρchar
ρtrue,char

(cid:0)

ρcharmash
ρashmchar

.

Denoting the mass fraction of ash in the particle by Yash, then mash  =
Yashmsolid and mchar = (1 (cid:0) Yash)msolid and hence, the above expression for 
char porosity can be expressed as 

Θ = 1 (cid:0)

ρchar
ρtrue,char

(cid:0)

ρcharYash
.
ρash(1 (cid:0) Yash)

(61) 

During char conversion, the apparent density of the char follows the 
mode of conversion relations (see Section 3.3.3) and since the ash in-
clusions only lose mass from their outer surfaces, their apparent den-
sities are constant. Thus, this equation permits the char porosity at any 
time to  be determined from the  instantaneous  values  of the  apparent 
density of the char and the ash mass fraction. For an ash-free char par-
ticle, Eq. (61) reduces to the expected relation. 

In  the  Zone  II  conversion  regime  in  which  both  particle  apparent 
density and size decrease during mass loss (see Sections 1 and 3.3.3 for 
more information on the different zones of conversion), the porosity will 
vary throughout the char, with the highest porosity closer to the external 
surface. This is not a problem for the resolved particle approach, where 
this variation is indeed resolved by the computational mesh, such that 
the  porosity  within  any  computational  cell  can  be  considered  as  uni-
form. For the point particle approach, however, this spatial variation is 
not resolved, which means that the reported porosity is averaged over 
the  entire  particle.  This  shortcoming  of  the  point  particle  approach 
means  that  the  diffusion  of  species  through  the  outer  volumes  of  the 
particle is underestimated, since the local porosity in these volumes is 
higher than the mean value that is actually used to calculate the pore 
diffusivity. 

3.1.2. Evolution of internal surface area 

The internal surface area of a char will change as char conversion 
proceeds.  Two  common  models  describing  this  change  are  the  grain 
model  [81,82]  and  the  random  pore  model  [81,83-85].  In  the  grain 
model, which presumes the porous carbon particle to be a collection of 
grains of various shapes and sizes, the volume specific internal surface 
area (in m2/m3) is given by 

Sv = Sv,0(1 (cid:0) xc)lshape ,

(62)  

where lshape  is the grain shape factor, a factor that depends on the ge-
ometry of the grains, while the char conversion is defined as 

xc = 1 (cid:0)

mchar
mchar,0

(63)  

where mchar,0 is the initial mass of the char. Theoretically, for flat-plate 
grains, lshape = 0, for cylindrical grains, lshape = 1
2 and for spherical grains, 
lshape = 2
3. In practice, the value used for lshape  is determined by fitting 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099314N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Fig. 4. Volume specific (left) and mass specific (right) surface area as a function of conversion for the random pore model (RP) and the grain model (Grain) with 
different parameters. 

carbon  conversion  data.  For  lshape = 1,  the  model  corresponds  to  the 
homogeneous  reaction  model  [86]  in  which  particle  shape  and  pore 
structure  remain  uniform  and  constant  during  carbon  conversion. 
Sometimes,  this  model  is  referred  to  as  the  volume  reaction  model 
(VRM) or volumetric model. For lshape = 2
3, spherical grains are assumed 
to  continuously  shrink  in  size  during  carbon  conversion,  causing  the 
particle diameter to shrink while apparent density remains constant. 

This  model  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  the  shrinking  core  model 
(SCM). The grain model predicts a decrease in the total surface area per 
unit  particle  volume  with  increasing  mass  loss  over  the  full  range  of 
carbon conversion (see black lines in Fig. 4). This yields a carbon con-
version rate that decreases with mass loss over the lifetime of the par-
ticle,  a  characteristic not  observed experimentally.  The early  work  of 
Dutta  et  al.  [87,88]  clearly  demonstrate  that  in  the  initial  stages  of 
<
∼ 0.4xc <∼ 0.4),  reaction  rate  profiles  exhibit  a 
carbon  conversion  (xc
maximum. Despite this, some researchers (e.g. [89]) have found that the 
grain model adequately describes their char combustion data up to 50% 
char conversion. 

For the random pore model (RPM), which is based on overlapping 

pore evolution, the volume specific internal surface area is 

Sv = Sv,0(1 (cid:0) xc)

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 (cid:0) ψ ln(1 (cid:0) xc)

(64)  

where ψ is a structural parameter, having values ranging from 0 to about 
25.  Bhatia  and  Perlmutter  [81]  give  an  expression  for  the  structural 
parameter, ψ, but in practice it is typically determined by fitting carbon 
conversion data. Typical values are in the range 5 to 20, the larger the 
value, the less the porosity of the solid particle material. For ψ > 2, the 

Fig. 5. Conversion where the volume specific surface area has its maximum as 
a function of the structural parameter. 

random pore model predicts an initial increase in the surface area per 
unit volume. The conversion corresponding to the peak of surface area, 
xc,peak, varies with the structural parameter as 
)
.

xc,peak = 1 (cid:0) exp

(

(cid:0)

(65) 

1
ψ

1
2

This is shown graphically in Fig. 5 where it is noted that the initial 
increase  in  surface  area  density  continues  until  larger  conversion  for 
larger values of ψ. It can also be observed, as predicted by Dutta et al. 
[87,88], that the surface area continues to increase for conversions as 
large  as  0.4  if  ψ  is  large  enough.  The  increase  in  surface  area  with 
conversion is reflective of the opening of initially closed pores, exposing 
new  pore  surfaces  for  reaction  while  the  decrease  in  surface  area 
throughout the remainder of carbon conversion is due to pore growth 
and coalescence. The grain and random pore models yield similar xc-t 
profiles when m = 1 and ψ = 0, as demonstrated, for example, by Bhatia 
and Perlmutter [81] and by Raghunathan and Yang [90]. In Fig. 4, both 
the volume specific and the mass specific surface areas are shown as a 
function of conversion for the random pore and the grain models. From 
the left-hand panel, we can see that the volume specific surface area is 
monotonically decreasing with conversion for all cases except for the 
random pore models with larger values of ψ. For the RP model with ψ =
5, the volume specific surface area is increasing until conversion is 0.26, 
after which it starts to decrease. From the right-hand panel of Fig. 4, it 
can be observed that the mass specific surface area is increasing with 
conversion for all models except for the grain model with m = 1, which 
has a constant specific surface area. 

Although  the  grain  and  random  pore  models  were  developed  for 
steam  and  CO2  gasification,  both  models  have  been  applied  to  com-
bustion. In recent years, most researchers have applied the random pore 
model to describe conversion rates for both combusting and gasifying 
coal and biomass char particles (e.g., [84,91-98]). Fermoso et al., [99] 
demonstrated  that  the  random  pore  model  better  described  steam 
gasification data compared to the grain model for the chars of two coals, 
two biomass materials and a petroleum coke. Lu and Do [100] found 
that both models adequately described conversion rate data for chars 
having  high  ash-contents.  Some  biomass  chars  and  alkali  catalyzed 
carbons exhibit a maximum in reactivity in the high conversion range, a 
feature not predicted by the random pore or grain models. Duman et al. 
[101] modified the random pore model to include an additional con-
version term to account for such behavior. The random pore model is 
conceptually more correct than the grain model, since it accounts for the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099315N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

non-monotonic  evolution  of  the  internal  particle  surface  area,  a  phe-
nomenon observed with most coal and biomass char particles. Conse-
quently, the random pore model is recommended for use to account for 
the  evolution  of  internal  surface  area  during  char  conversion  in  both 
combustion  and  gasification  environments.  It  should  be  emphasized, 
however, that model selection should be based on the quality of the fits 
to experimental data. 

BET surface area measurements yield the mass specific surface areas 
of a given particle (Sg, in m2/kg), which are related to the volume spe-
cific  surface  area  through  the  apparent  density  of  the  particle:  Sv  =
ρcharSg. Hence, it follows that 

Sg
Sg0

=

Sv
Sv0

ρchar,0
ρchar

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 (cid:0) ψ ln(1 (cid:0) xc)

.

=

(66)  

Note  that  when  applying  the  random  pore  model  to  a  combusting  or 
gasifying carbon particle, the mass specific surface area of the particle 
increases  throughout  carbon  conversion  (see  the  right-hand  panel  of 
Fig. 4). 

3.1.3. Adsorbed species concentrations 

For adsorption-desorption reaction models, one must know the sur-
face concentration, or site fraction, of any adsorbed species participating 
as a reactant in the reactions. The number of moles of species i that is 
adsorbed on a surface of total area St is given by 

Ni = Cs,i⋅St

(67)  

where Cs,i is the surface concentration (in mol/m2) of adsorbed species i. 
The above equation can now be differentiated with respect to time to 
yield the evolution equation for the surface concentration of adsorbed 
species i as 

dCs,i
dt

=

1
St

dNi
dt

(cid:0)

Cs,i
St

dSt
dt

= ̂Ri (cid:0)

Cs,i
St

dSt
dt

.

(68)  

The surface concentration of free carbon sites is given by Cs,free  = ξn  (cid:0)
∑

Cs,i  where ξn is the total surface concentration of all carbon sites. 

i∕=free

Instead of the surface concentration, it is often convenient to define 

the adsorbed species site fraction as 

Θi =

Cs,i
ξn

.

(69)  

For a total of Nads adsorbed species, where a free carbon site is consid-
ered as an adsorbed species, it is then clear that 

∑Nads

i=1

Θi = 1.

Eq. (68) can now be re-written as 

dΘi
dt

=

̂Ri
ξn

(cid:0)

Θi
St

dSt
dt

.

(70)  

The total surface concentration of all carbon sites is expected to be of 
similar magnitude for all chars. It is calculated from the total surface site 
density (Sd, total number of carbon sites per unit area) of the carbona-
ceous material and Avogadro’s number (NAV): ξn = Sd/NAV. Its value is of 
the order 10

(cid:0) 7 kmol/m2. 

Measurements of the surface site density (the total number of carbon 
sites per unit area) of a char are scarce; few values can be found in the 
literature. Coal and biomass chars are amorphous carbons and as such, 
there is no well-defined surface within the solid material on which to 
base  density  functional theory estimations of  the surface  site  density. 
Consequently, there are few DFT estimates of the surface site density of 
chars. Tsuge et al. [102] report the surface site density of an amorphous 
diamond-like carbon surface to be in the range 1.5 – 3 × 1019 sites/m2, a 

value close to that reported for diamond (~2 × 1019  sites/m2  [103]). 
Amorphous carbons have less development of structural anisotropy with 
more disordered and defective structures than crystalline carbons like 
diamond – their site densities should be higher than that for diamond. 
HRTEM fringe image analyses of coal chars indicate that their graphene 
patterns are shorter and more isotropic than they are in graphite and 
that the extent of crystalline order and the size and linearity of lamellar 
features are less [104,105]. Such effects increase the number of carbon 
atoms per unit area – the surface site density of coal and biomass chars 
should be higher than that of graphite. Reports of measurements of the 
surface site density of graphite are also difficult to find in the literature. 
A  value  of  3.82  × 1019  sites/m2  was  calculated  via  DFT  employing 
properties of the graphite (0001) surface [106]. 

By considering the area occupied by a subset of the fused hexagonal 
rings on the graphene layers in graphite, a site density of ~4 × 1019 
sites/m2  can  be  estimated  for  its  surface  site  density.  There  are  no 
pristine graphene surfaces in coal and biomass chars. Any surfaces that 
are present are not as smooth nor as uniform, reflective of more disorder 
in the amorphous carbon structure. In addition, the graphene patterns 
on the surfaces are not all oriented in the same direction and the fused 
rings are not all the same. Smaller rings tend to increase the number of 
atoms per unit area. Consequently, the surface site density of a graphene 
layer should represent the lower limit for the surface site density of an 
amorphous solid such as a coal or biomass char. The relatively low value 
determined by Tsuge et al. [102] is a consequence of the solid used in 
their study having a diamond-like structure, although amorphous. Coal 
and biomass chars should have surface site densities higher than 4 ×
1019 sites per m2. 

MC,  where ρchar  is  the  apparent  density of  the char,  NAV

An upper limit for the surface site density of a char can be estimated 
based on measurements of its mass specific surface area, Sg. For a char 
sample,  the  total  number  of  carbon  atoms  per  unit  volume  is 
ρcharNAV/ ̂
is 
Avogadro’s number and  ̂MC  is the molar mass of carbon. The number of 
surface carbon atoms/molecules per unit volume is ρcharSgSd, where Sd 
is the surface site density (in #-sites/m2). The fraction of the total carbon 
atoms  in  any  char  sample  that  are  surface  carbon  atoms  is  therefore 
̂MC/NAV. Setting this relation to unity and solving for Sd  yields its 
SgSd
maximum possible value: Sd,max = NAV/ ̂MCSg. If this were the value used 
for the surface site density, all the carbon atoms would be surface car-
bons,  an  unreasonable  scenario  –  there  would  be  no  bulk  carbons  to 
expose when adsorbed species desorb. As an example, for a char having 
a specific surface area of Sg = 450 m2/g, Sd,max = 1.11 × 1020 sites/m2. 
Based  on  the  above  discussion,  it  is  expected  that  for  coal  and 

biomass  chars,  4  × 1019  sites/m2  < Sd  < NAV/ ̂
MCSg,  where  Sg  is  the 
specific surface area of the char. In the work of Mitchell and co-workers 
(e.g., see [98,107,108]), a value of 6.5 × 1019 sites/m2 was used for the 
surface site density of coal and biomass chars. 

3.2. Carbon particle reaction models 

The chemical kinetic mechanisms developed to date to predict the 
mass loss rate and off-gas composition of a carbon particle of specified 
diameter exposed to an environment of specified temperature, pressure 
and gas composition can be divided into two groups: apparent particle 
reaction rate models and intrinsic particle reaction rate models. With 
apparent reaction rate models (sometimes referred to as global, overall 
or macroscopic particle reaction rate models), carbon conversion rates 
are expressed in terms of the overall effects of mass transport and the 
chemical reactivity of the particle material. Only the size and apparent 
density of the particle are used when describing the particle’s physical 
state. Processes that govern mass transport and heterogeneous chemical 
reaction  inside  the  particle  are  not  considered  individually.  With 
intrinsic  reaction  rate  models  (sometimes  referred  to  as  microscopic 
particle reaction rate models), carbon conversion rates are expressed as 
separate functions of mass transport effects and the intrinsic reactivity of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099316N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

the carbonaceous particle material, which depends solely on chemical 
reaction effects. Such carbon particle material properties as total surface 
area, porosity, size, and apparent density are used when describing the 
physical  state  of  the  particle  and  characterizing  the  effects  of  mass 
transport through particle pores. 

With apparent reaction rate models, power-law kinetics are usually 
used to describe carbon reactivity whereas with intrinsic reaction rate 
models, both power-law kinetics and kinetics based on heterogeneous 
reaction mechanisms are used to describe carbon reactivity. Power-law 
kinetics have no fundamental basis but as has been shown by Hurt and 
Haynes [109], power-law kinetics can yield carbon conversion rates that 
mimic  the  conversion  rates  obtained  with  detailed  adsorption/de-
sorption  reaction  mechanisms  when  a  broad  distribution  function  is 
used to describe the distribution of activation energies for adsorption 
and/or desorption reactions. Surface heterogeneity is given as a reason 
for needing broad distribution functions for adsorption and desorption 
processes.  Employing  an  adsorption/desorption  turnover  model  for 
carbon oxidation developed by Haynes [110], Hurt and Haynes [109] 
found  that  increased  surface  coverage  of  adsorbed  species  leads  to 
decreased  adsorption  rates,  and  that  decreased  surface  coverage  of 
adsorbed  species  leads  to  decreased  desorption  rates.  Consequently, 
during char conversion, the steady-state coverage of adsorbed species, 
which  occurs  when  adsorption  and  desorption  rates  are  equal,  never 
reaches a limiting value of adsorption control or desorption control but 
instead,  maintains  intermediate  values  over  wide  ranges  of  oxygen 
partial pressure. Hurt and Haynes [109] noted that char reaction occurs 
in a stable regime of mixed adsorption/desorption control that can be 
approximated using nth-order kinetics. 

3.2.1. Apparent particle reaction rate models 

Several researchers [e.g., [111-120]] define an overall reaction rate 
Rov (in kg/m2/s), the rate of removal of carbon per unit external surface 
area of the particle (Ap), as follows: 
(

)

Rov ≡ (cid:0)

1
Ap

dm
dt

= (cid:0)

1
πd2
p

dm
dt

.

(71)  

Once these overall reaction rates are determined for particles burning 
under selected conditions of gas temperature, pressure and composition, 
they are correlated with temperature and reactive gas partial pressure, 
assuming power-law kinetics: 

Rov = kovPn

g,s.

(72)  

Here, kov is the overall reaction rate coefficient (in kg/m2/s/atmn), Pg,s is 
the partial pressure of the reactive gas at the outer surface of the carbon 
particle, and n is the apparent reaction order with respect to the reactive 
gas partial pressure. The overall reaction rate coefficient is expressed on 
an external surface area basis. Arrhenius parameters that describe the 
rate coefficient are found by fitting experimental data: kov  = Aov exp( (cid:0)
Ea /̂

RuTP). 
Sometimes Eq. (71) is rearranged to yield the following expression 
for the mass loss rate in terms of the overall reaction rate coefficient and 
its Arrhenius parameters: 

(cid:0)

dm
dt

= Ap Rov = Ap kov Pn

g,s = Ap Aov exp( (cid:0) Ea / ̂RuTP) Pn

g,s.

In  this  approach,  the  product  Ap  Aov  is  considered  as  a  single 
parameter when fitting experimental data to determine kinetic param-
eters, and the mass loss rate is written as 

(cid:0)

dm
dt

= A

′

ov exp( (cid:0) Ea / ̂RuTP) Pn

g,s  

′

ov

= Ap Aov. Several researchers have taken this approach, see 
where A
for example, references [121-123]. Note that overall particle reaction 
rates  are  classified  as  apparent  reaction  rates,  being  void  of  any 

description of the effects of heterogeneous reaction inside the particle. 
Some researchers [e.g., [105,124-128]] define an apparent reaction 
(cid:0) 1), expressed by either of the following relations: 
rate, Ra (in s
(
)

(

)

Ra ≡ (cid:0)

1
m0

dm
dt

or

R

′

a ≡ (cid:0)

1
m

dm
dt

(73) 

In  the  first  of  these  relations,  m0  is  the  initial  mass  of  the  carbon 
particle and Ra represents the rate of change in the fraction of the initial 
mass remaining. In the second relation, R
a  represents the rate of change 
in the fraction of the instantaneous mass remaining. In both cases, the 
apparent reaction rate is correlated with temperature and reactive gas 
partial pressure as shown in Eq. (74): 

′

Ra = ka⋅Pn

′

(cid:0)
g,s = Aa exp

and R

′

′

′

a = k

a⋅Pn

g,s = A

/

(cid:0) Ea
(cid:0)
a exp

′

̂RuTp
/

′

(cid:0) E
a

′

)
⋅Pn
g,s
̂RuTp

′

)
⋅Pn
g,s

(74)  

′

where ka  and k
a  are the temperature dependent apparent reaction rate 
′
coefficients  (which  are  expressed  in  Arrhenius  form)  and  n
is  the 
apparent reaction order with respect to the reactive gas partial pressure. 
Like  the overall reaction  rate coefficients,  once the  apparent  reaction 
rate  coefficients  are  determined  for  particles  burning  under  selected 
conditions  of  gas  temperature,  pressure  and  composition,  they  are 
correlated with temperature and reactive gas partial pressure to deter-
mine the apparent pre-exponential factor, activation energy and reac-
tion  order.  The  kinetic  parameters  for  the  apparent  reaction  rate 
coefficients  are  expected  to  vary  with  carbon  type.  Also,  parameters 
determined for pulverized fuel sizes may differ from parameters deter-
mined for millimeter size particles, in the same way as parameters ob-
tained  under zone  I  conditions may  differ  from those  obtained  under 
zone II or III conditions. 

The  rate  equations  shown  in  Eqs.  (72)  and  (74)  are  examples  of 
power-law  kinetics.  Owing  to  an  undefined  reaction  mechanism,  the 
reaction  order  is  used  to  describe  the  dependence  of  the  rate  on  the 
reactant gas concentration (or partial pressure). 

O2 ,  where  n

= ACOexp((cid:0) ECO /̂

Note that carbon particle temperatures are needed in order to eval-
uate apparent reaction rate coefficients employing apparent activation 
energies and pre-exponential factors. These are calculated from carbon 
particle energy balances that require the determination of energy release 
rates, which depend on the ΔHR  of the global carbon consumption re-
actions.  The  fraction  of  the  carbon  converted  to  CO  depends  upon 
temperature, increasing with increasing temperature. In many studies, 
the molar CO/CO2  heterogeneous product ratio is expressed in Arrhe-
nius  form:  NCO/NCO2
RuT), (e.g.,  see  [115,129-131]). 
The investigations of Tognotti et al. [132] demonstrate that this ratio has 
a  slight  dependence  on  the  oxygen  concentration,  decreasing  with 
increasing oxygen concentration (or partial pressure) at fixed particle 
temperature. To capture this effect, some researchers include an oxygen 
dependence  on  the  molar  CO/CO2  ratio,  multiplying  the  Arrhenius 
expression  by  Pn′′
is  the  reaction  order.  The  results  of  in-
vestigations by Day et al. [133] suggest that the molar CO/CO2 ratio also 
depends  on  the  water  partial  pressure  (or  concentration),  slightly 
decreasing  with  increasing  PH2O.  A  discussion  of  Arrhenius  fits  to 
experimentally observed product distributions during carbon oxidation 
is given below, in Section 3.2.2.2.1. 
The predictions for Rov, Ra and R

a  are most accurate in conditions in 
which  the  reaction  rate  coefficients  were  determined.  If  determined 
under Zone I burning conditions (when burning rates are chemically- 
limited),  inaccurate  predictions  will  result  if  applied  to  particles 
burning under Zone II conditions (when burning rates are limited by the 
combined effects of mass diffusion and chemical reaction). The reverse 
is also true. This is a shortcoming of using apparent or overall particle 
reaction  rate  models.  If  carbon  particles  are  burning  under  Zone  III 
conditions, when burning rates are limited by the diffusion of reactants 
to the outer surfaces of particles, reliable parameters that describe the 
reaction rate coefficients cannot be obtained from analysis of the data. 

′′

′

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099317N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

The contributions of chemical reaction effects to particle reactivities are 
insignificant when conversion rates are diffusion limited. 

When power-law kinetic expressions are employed, predicted con-
version rates are most inaccurate when predictions are for environments 
having pressures that differ greatly from the pressures used in the ex-
periments  to  obtain  data  from  which  the  kinetic  parameters  were 
derived. If kinetic parameters were adjusted to obtain predictions that 
agree with data obtained in experiments performed at 1 atm, the model 
is not likely to accurately predict conversion rates in environments at 20 
atm. This could be a consequence of chemical reaction rates increasing 
with increasing pressure and diffusional transport rates decreasing with 
increasing pressure, these opposing effects not being properly captured 
employing power-law kinetics. 

Several investigators have used power-law kinetics to correlate their 
mass loss data obtained with coal and biomass chars exposed to oxygen. 
Data analyses yielded reaction orders in the range 0 to 1, with orders 
greater than 0.6 associated mostly with combustion tests performed at 
temperatures less than 1000 K, when particles were burning under Zone 
I conditions. For studies performed at temperatures higher than 1000 K 
when particles burn under Zone II conditions in oxygen-containing en-
vironments, apparent reaction orders ranged from fractional values (e.g., 
[114,115,118,134-136]) to 1 (e.g., [111,121,126,137-140]), with most 
being fractional orders. Some of the fractional orders are below a value 
of 0.5, however based on the work of Thiele [141], apparent reaction 
orders  should  be  greater  than  0.5.  The  work  of  Murphy  and  Shaddix 
[142] show that ash dilution effects could explain such low fractional 
orders. 

Some  of  the  more  recent  apparent  reaction  rate  models  have 
Arrhenius  parameters  that  describe  the  apparent  reaction  rate  co-
efficients that depend on the composition of the parent coal [143] and 
some have parameters that depend on the extent of thermal annealing as 
well as the char precursor [114,128,138]. Apparent reaction rate models 
employing power-law kinetic expressions have also been applied to the 
carbon-carbon  dioxide  reaction  (see  [138,144-148])  as  well  as  the 
carbon-steam gasification reaction (see [149,150]). 

Recently,  Ren  et  al.  [151]  presented  an  apparent  kinetic  model 
(AKM)  that  yields  predictions  that  better  agree  with  experimentally 
observed  conversion 
in 
high-temperature gasification environments than most apparent kinetic 
reaction  rate  models.  The  model  uses  a  Boltzmann-based  function  to 
describe the gasification process that leads to the following expression 
for the carbon conversion (xc) rate: 

rates  of  petroleum  coke  particles 

dxc
dt

= kAKMxc(1 (cid:0) xc).

(75) 

The rate coefficient kAKM is expressed in Arrhenius form. To facilitate 
comparison with the overall reaction rate and apparent reaction rate as 
given by Eqs. (71) and (73) above, Eq. (75) is equivalent to the following 
expression for the mass loss rate: 

(cid:0)

1
m

dm
dt

= kAKM(1 (cid:0) m/m0) = kAKMxc.

(76)  

This form of the AKM model reveals that it predicts an instantaneous 
fractional mass loss rate that varies with conversion. The petroleum coke 
particles employed in experiments by Ren et al. [151] during develop-
ment  of  the  model  exhibited  smooth  outer  surfaces  with  few  pores 
throughout conversion. Reaction occurs primarily at the periphery of the 
particles. Since the gasification behaviors of such petroleum coke par-
ticles differs from that of coal and biomass char particles, the applica-
bility of this model to coal and biomass char gasification is unknown. 

The  Avrami-Erofeev  [152]  apparent  reaction  rate  model  has  been 
employed  to  describe  biomass  char  conversion  rates  that  exhibit 
sigmoidal  gasification behaviors, accelerating  conversion rates during 
the initial stages of gasification and decelerating conversion rates during 
the final stages. For such chars, the conversion rate attains its maximum 
value at intermediate values of the extent of conversion. None of the 
apparent reaction rate models discussed above is capable of predicting 
such behavior. The Avrami-Erofeev reaction model for char conversion 
is expressed as 

dxc
dt

= kAV⋅ER⋅n′′′⋅(1 (cid:0) xc)[ (cid:0)

ln(1 (cid:0) xc)](n′′′(cid:0) 1)/n′′′

(77)  

′′′

where  kAV∙ER  is  the  apparent  reaction  rate  constant  (expressed  in 
Arrhenius form) and n
is referred to as a reaction order, dependent on 
the reaction mechanism. The classical Avrami-Erofeev equations [153] 
are usually applied to the analysis of isothermal reactions in solids with 
nuclei formation, growth and consumption, in particular, to the analysis 
of  crystal  aggregate  growth.  In  such  applications,  the  reaction  order 
′′′ = 2 for one-dimensional growth 
depends on the reaction mechanism: n
of  nuclei,  3  for  two-dimensional  growth  and  4  for  three-dimensional 
growth.  Bhatia  and  Perlmutter  [81]  indicate  that  the  Avrami  theory 
provides  the  underlying  principle  governing  pore  growth  and  pore 
overlap in their random pore model, which constitutes the basis of the 
model  developed  to  describe  the  dependence  of  char  internal  surface 
′′′ ≤ 1.0, the 
area on char conversion (see Section 3.1.2). In Eq. (77), for n
conversion rate decreases from the onset of char conversion, however, 
for reaction orders greater than unity, the conversion rate initially in-
creases  with  conversion  before  reaching  a  maximum  and  decreasing 
throughout the remainder of char conversion. A value of 2 for n
has 
been employed to fit steam gasification conversion data [154]. With this 
value for the reaction order, the rate reaches a maximum at about 40% 
the 
few 
char  conversion.  Relatively 
Avrami-Erofeev  apparent  reaction  rate  model  in  the  analysis  of  their 
char  conversion  data.  However,  we  recommend  its  use  when  data 
indicate a conversion rate that exhibits sigmoidal behavior. 

researchers  have  used 

′′′

Many studies concerned with modeling carbon particle behavior use 
apparent, overall particle conversion rates that employ power-law ki-
netics despite the fact that such models are limited in their applicability, 
being  most  accurate  only  in  conditions  of  temperature,  pressure  and 
composition similar to the ones used in obtaining the data needed to 
evaluate  model  parameters.  Carbon  particle  models  that  use  intrinsic 
reactivity-based  conversion  rates  are  deemed  to  be  more  capable  of 
accurately predicting carbon particle mass loss rates when particles are 
exposed to a wide range of conditions. 

3.2.2.

Intrinsic reaction rate models 

Unlike  apparent  reaction  rate  models,  which  account  both  for 
chemical kinetics and internal diffusion, intrinsic reaction rate models 
do  not  account  for  diffusion.  When  developing  intrinsic  models,  it  is 
assumed that the reactive gas concentration to which the char is exposed 
is  uniform  over  all  char  surfaces.  Consequently,  Zone  I  conversion  is 
implicitly assumed throughout this subsection. For the resolved particle 
approach, this assumption is always satisfied for a given grid cell. For the 
point particle approach, however, the concept of the effectiveness fac-
tor, as discussed in Section 3.3.1, must be utilized in order to account for 
internal diffusion limitations, i.e.; Zone II or III conversion. 

3.2.2.1. Intrinsic  chemical  reactivity. Many  researchers  define  the 
intrinsic  chemical  reactivity  of  a  carbon  particle  (Rc,  in  kg/m2/s)  as 
follows: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099318N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

1
mc

dmc
dt

= (cid:0) SgRc,

(78)  

where Sg is the total internal, mass specific, surface area of the particle. 
(see  Section  3.1.2  for  more  details  on  internal  surface  area.)  This 
expression can be rewritten in terms of the conversion rate: 

1
(1 (cid:0) xc)

dxc
dt

= SgRc.

(79)  

Multiplying by (1 (cid:0) xc) yields the following expression for the carbon 
conversion rate: 

[
= (1 (cid:0) xc) SgRc = (1 (cid:0) xc)

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 (cid:0) ψ ln(1 (cid:0) xc)

Sg0

]

Rc.

dxc
dt

(80)  

Rc  is independent of any mass transport effects and depends solely on 
effects associated with the rates of the heterogeneous chemical reactions 
that occur at active sites on the carbonaceous, pore surfaces. 

3.2.2.2. Power-law  based  intrinsic  chemical  reactivity  models. Many  re-
searchers have expressed the intrinsic chemical reactivity of the carbo-
naceous  particle  material  in  oxidizing  and  gasifying  environments  in 
power-law form [56,89,96,97,147,148,155-171], 

Rc = kintPm

(cid:0)
g,s = Aint exp

(cid:0) Eint

/

)

̂RuTp

Pm
g,s,

(81)  

where kint is the intrinsic chemical reaction rate coefficient (in kg/m2/s/ 
atmm), Pg,s is the partial pressure of the reactive gas in contact with the 
carbon surface and m is the true (or intrinsic) reaction order with respect 
to the reactive gas partial pressure. The intrinsic chemical reaction rate 
coefficient is expressed on a unit total surface area basis. The true re-
action order reflects the actual dependence of the intrinsic reaction rate 
on the reactive gas concentration. With coal and biomass chars, the true 
reaction order falls in the range zero to one. 

To  understand  fractional  reaction  orders  during  char  conversion, 
consider  the  following  three-step  adsorption/desorption  reaction 
mechanism for carbon oxidation: 

r1: Cf + O2 → C(O) + O 
r2: Cf + C(O) + O2 → CO2 + C(O) 
r3: Cb + C(O) → CO + Cf. 

This  three-step  adsorption/desorption  reaction  mechanism  for  carbon 
oxidation is similar to the one considered by Hurt and Calo [172] but 
here, the products of the adsorption reaction differs and free and bulk 
carbons are shown in the reaction steps. Assuming a steady state for the 
adsorbed oxygen concentration during the course of reaction leads to the 
following expression for the intrinsic reactivity of carbon to oxygen in 
terms  of reaction  rate coefficients  for reactions  r1,  r2 and r3  and the 
concentration of oxygen ([O2]), (see Appendix A): 

Rc = ̂M C

{

(

k1k3ξn[O2]
(k1[O2] + k3)

1 +

k2ξn[O2]
(k1[O2] + k3)

)}

.

(82) 

Analysis  of this  expression  reveals  how  the  rate  limiting reactions 
and overall reaction order vary as temperature is increased. For the three 
reactions of concern, it is expected for the adsorption reaction to have 
the  lowest  activation  energy  and  the  desorption  reaction  to  have  the 
highest, i.e., E1 < E2 < E3. As a consequence, the rate of the adsorption 
reaction increases the slowest and the desorption reaction the fastest, as 
temperature is increased. At low temperatures, the rate of the adsorption 
reaction is the fastest of the three reactions and the rate of the desorption 
reaction is the slowest at the lowest temperatures. In the limit k1[O2] >
>k3, analysis of Eq. (82) reveals that Rc ≈ ̂
) /k1  –  the 
reactivity is independent of the oxygen concentration (m = 0). This is a 

(k1 +k2ξn

MCk3ξn

regime  in  which  adsorption,  complex-enhanced  adsorption  and 
desorption  all  influence  char  reactivity,  although the  overall  reaction 
rate is limited by the rate of the desorption reaction, the slowest of the 
three. As temperature is increased to the low-to-moderate range, the rate 
of  the  desorption  reaction  becomes  faster  than  that  of  the  complex- 
enhanced  adsorption  reaction.  In  the  limits  k1[O2]  ≫  k3  and  k2ξn  ≪ 
k1, it can be shown that Rc ≈ ̂
MCk3ξn. The reactivity is also independent 
of the oxygen concentration (m = 0) in this regime and the desorption 
reaction controls char reactivity, although not the slowest of the three 
reactions.  Whenever  k1[O2]  ≫  k3,  char  reactivity  will  exhibit  near 
zeroth-order behavior and the desorption reaction will limit the overall 
reaction  rate.  Such  behavior  is  expected  at  low  to  moderate 
temperatures. 

As temperature is increased to the moderate-to-high range, the rate 
of the desorption reaction exceeds that of the adsorption reaction. It can 
be shown that in the limit k1[O2] ≪ k3, Eq. (82) can be approximated 
as  follows: Rc ≈ ̂MCk1ξn[O2](k2ξn[O2] +k3)/k3. This  expression  reveals 
that reactivity is influenced by both adsorption and desorption in this 
regime.  At  moderate  temperatures,  when  the  rate  of  the  complex- 
enhanced  adsorption  reaction  is  still  faster  than  the  adsorption  reac-
tion (k1[O2] ≪ k3 and k2ξn ≪ k1), it can be shown that Eq. (81) reduces to 
Rc ≈ ̂
MCk1ξn[O2].  At  sufficiently  high  temperature,  a  point  is  reached 
when the desorption reaction proceeds at the fastest rate of all the three 
reactions. For the limiting case k1[O2] ≪ k3 and k2ξn[O2] ≪ k3, Eq. (82) 
also reduces to Rc ≈ ̂MCk1ξn[O2]. For this limit, char reactivity exhibits 
first-order behavior and adsorption controls the overall conversion rate. 
Thus,  owing  to the  different temperature dependences  of  the  rates of 
reactions r1, r2 and r3, the rate controlling step during carbon oxidation 
will  vary  as  temperature  varies.  At  low-to-moderate  temperatures, 
zeroth order behavior will be exhibited and at moderate-to-high tem-
peratures, first-order behavior will be exhibited. Since these limits are 
not actually reached, the reaction order would exhibit fractional values 
as temperature varies from low to high. Temperatures considered to be 
low, moderate and high depend on the char. A highly reactive char will 
have lower moderate and high values than a slowly reacting char. 

It should be noted that different heterogeneous reaction mechanisms 
will yield different regimes for rate controlling reactions. Based on the 
three-step adsorption/desorption mechanism analyzed by Hurt and Calo 
[172], which differs from the mechanism just discuss by the adsorption 
reaction and its stoichiometry, the O2-complex reaction controls at low 
temperatures, the desorption reaction at moderate temperatures and the 
adsorption reaction at high temperatures. No matter what the mecha-
nism, the rate controlling steps will vary with temperature and oxygen 
concentration. If power-law kinetics are used to describe the reactivities 
predicted by the reaction mechanism, variations in reaction order would 
be required for accurate characterizations, and the order is likely to be 
fractional. 

As already mentioned, the work of Hurt and Haynes [109] demon-
strates  that  when  distributions  of  activation  energies  are  used  to 
describe  the  rates  of  the  adsorption  and  desorption  reaction  steps, 
power-law kinetics can adequately describe carbon particle reactivity. It 
should be emphasized, however, that this only holds when particles are 
undergoing conversion under steady-state conditions, when the particle 
temperature  is  relatively  constant.  Power-law  kinetics  can potentially 
yield  inaccurate  prediction  of  mass  loss  rates  when  carbon  particles 
experience  significant  temperature  gradients  while  burning.  A 
power-law  model  that  has  a  temperature-dependent  reaction  order 
would be needed for accurate predictions. 

Power-law kinetic expressions have also been used to describe the 
intrinsic  reactivities  of  carbon  to  CO2  and  carbon  to  H2O.  A  simple 
adsorption/desorption Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism for the car-
bon-CO2 reaction 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099319N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

r4: C + CO2 ⇄ C(O) + CO 
r3: C(O) → CO 

yields the following expression for carbon reactivity to CO2: 

RCO2,int =

kakdPCO2
kaPCO2 + kd

(83)  

Here,  ka  and  kd  are  the  rate  coefficients  of  the  adsorption  (r4)  and 
desorption (r3) reactions presented above, respectively. When temper-
atures and pressures are in such ranges that the adsorption process is the 
rate  limiting  step  (kd≫kaPCO2 ),  RCO2,int ∼ kaPCO2 ,  and  first-order  rate 
behavior is observed. When the desorption process is the rate limiting 
step  (kd≪kaPCO2 ),  RCO2,int ∼ kd,  and  zeroth-order  rate  behavior  is 
observed.  Since  the  activation  energies  of  desorption  reactions  are 
usually greater than those of adsorption reactions, first-order behavior 
would be observed at high temperatures and zeroth-order at low tem-
peratures. Fractional reaction order rate behavior is observed at mod-
erate conditions of temperature. Note that at a fixed temperature, as the 
pressure is increased to the point where kaPCO2 ≫kd, the observed rate 
would exhibit zeroth-order behavior. The carbon-steam reacting system 
behaves similarly, first-order behavior being observed at high temper-
ature when the adsorption reaction limits the reactivity and near zeroth- 
order behavior at moderate to low temperatures and high pressure when 
the  desorption  step  controls  carbon  reactivity.  For  gasification  of  an 
Australian bituminous coal at 0.5 MPa, Kajitani et al. [93] determined 
fractional  reaction  orders  of  0.73  and  0.86  for  CO2  and  H2O,  respec-
◦
tively,  at  1300
C.  At  low  temperatures,  the  reaction  order  for  CO2 
gasification was found to be 0.54 at this pressure. 

It  should  be  noted  that  carbon  particle  temperature  is  needed  in 
order  to  evaluate  intrinsic  reaction  rate  coefficients.  When  particle 
temperature is not specified, it must be calculated using the particle’s 
energy  balance,  an  equation that  relates energy  release rates  via  het-
erogeneous chemical reaction to the rates of energy loss from the par-
ticle  via  convection  and  radiation.  As  mentioned  above,  to  properly 
account for energy release rates due to chemical reaction, the CO/CO2 
product  ratio  must  be  accurately  described  as  a  function  of  particle 
temperature. 

3.2.2.2.1. The CO/CO2 product ratio during char oxidation. Reaction 
rate models that employ power-law kinetics must be coupled with a sub- 
model that describes the product distribution of the carbon oxidation 
reaction. As already mentioned, reaction products permit the determi-
nation of the ΔHR of the global carbon consumption reaction and hence, 
permit the calculation of the particle temperature employing the parti-
cle’s energy balance. 

Both CO and CO2  are the primary products of the carbon oxidation 
reaction and factors that govern the product ratio have been the subject 
of  several  experimental  investigations  [129-132,  173-175].  The  ratio 
depends upon the formation rates of CO and CO2  during the course of 
reaction. The formation rates of both these species increase with tem-
perature, however, whereas CO2  formation rates are first-order in the 
oxygen concentration, CO formation rates exhibit fractional order be-
haviors. Nearly all studies indicate that the CO/CO2 ratio increases with 
increasing  temperature  and  several  studies  indicate  that  the  ratio  de-
creases with increasing oxygen concentration. Phillips et al., [131] and 
Laurendeau [176] hypothesized that these differences in CO and CO2 
formation rates stem from CO production occurring primarily at edge 
carbons of graphitic planes and CO2  production at inorganic sites. As 
noted  by  Skokova  [175],  not  only  are  temperature  and  oxygen  con-
centration important in determining the CO/CO2  ratio but other char 
characteristics  that  may  impact  this  ratio  include  the  sizes  of  carbon 
crystallites, pore structure, surface area, chemical composition and the 
nature of the functional groups on the surface. Foord [177] found that 
the CO/CO2  ratio varies with heat treatment of the carbon. Increased 
heat treatment increases the extent of crystalline organization, creating 
a more ordered surface thereby facilitating surface diffusion. The higher 

the mobility of adsorbed oxygen complexes, the higher the rate of CO2 
formation. Consequently, increased mobility of adsorbed oxygen species 
owing to heat treatment should tend to decrease the CO/CO2  product 
ratio. Therefore, the potential for devolatilization conditions to impact 
the  product  distribution  during  oxidation  of  coal  and  biomass  chars 
exists. 

Experiments performed to determine the product ratio of the carbon 
oxidation  reaction  must  be  done  with  care.  Efforts  must  be  taken  to 
minimize mass transfer effects, thereby reducing the oxidation of CO as 
it leaves the carbon surface. Tognotti et al. [132] performed tests up to 
1700 K in an electrodynamic balance and showed that at high temper-
atures, the measured CO/CO2 ratio starts to be less than that predicted 
by the Arrhenius  fit of data obtained at lower temperatures, a conse-
quence of homogeneous oxidation of CO very close to the particle sur-
face.  The  higher  the  temperature,  the  more  likely  homogeneous 
oxidation, which lowers the CO/CO2 ratio of the gases diffusing from the 
surface of the particle. 

The  measured  CO/CO2  ratios  are  usually  correlated  in  Arrhenius 
form, with several investigators multiplying the Arrhenius expression by 
Pn′′
is the reaction order. 
O2  to capture the oxygen dependence, where n
Thus, 
/

′′

NCO

NCO2 = ACOexp( (cid:0) ECO / ̂RuT)⋅Pn′′
O2

.

The  results  of  selected  investigations  that  focused  on  the  CO/CO2 
ratio  are  shown  in  Fig.  6.  As  noted,  the  CO/CO2  ratio  increases  with 
increasing temperature. Arthur [129] was one of the first to investigate 
the CO/CO2  product ratio during carbon oxidation and suggested the 
Arrhenius  form  to  describe  its  temperature  dependence.  The  dashed 
line  labeled  “1”  in  the  figure  represents  the  correlation  by  Arthur, 
which has been used in many char reaction rate models: NCO/NCO2
= 10 
3.4exp((cid:0) (52 kJ /mol) /̂
RuT). Arthur  employed  an  artificial  graphite 
(99.8% fixed carbon) and a very low-volatile bituminous coal (94.2% 
fixed carbon) in his investigations, both yielding similar CO/CO2 ratios 
during oxidation. 

Fig. 6. Measured CO/CO2 ratios during carbon oxidation 1) artificial graphite/ 
coal char: E = 52 kJ/mol [129], 2) graphite 513EK: E = 60 kJ/mol [174], 3) 
graphite RW III: E = 78 kJ/mol [174], 4) cellulose char: E = 40 kJ/mol [175], 
5)  petroleum  pitch  char:  E  = 75  kJ/mol  [175],  6)  graphite:  E  = 77  kJ/mol 
′′= 0.27 [130], 8) Spherocarb char, 5% O2: E =
[175], 7) soot: E = 27 kJ/mol, n
′ ′=
25 kJ/mol, n
′ ′= 0. 21 [132], 
0.21 [132], 10) Spherocarb char, 100% O2: E = 26 kJ/mol, n
′ ′= 0.18  [173],  12) 
11)  vitreous  carbon,  1.6  × 10
(cid:0) 3-1.3 × 10
′ ′= 0.22 [131]. 
graphon, 1.3 × 10

′ ′= 0.21 [132], 9) Spherocarb char, 20% O2: E = 26 kJ/mol, n

(cid:0) 2  %  O2:  E  = 25  kJ/mol, n
(cid:0) 2  % O2: E = 32-35 kJ/mol, n

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099320N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Interestingly, the activation energies that describe the product dis-
tribution fall more or less into two major ranges, those in the range 50 - 
80 kJ/mol (plotted as dashed lines 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6) and those in the 
range  25  -  35  kJ/mol  (plotted  as  solid  lines  7  -  12).  Those  carbons 
examined  that  yielded  CO/CO2  product  ratios  falling  into  the  higher 
activation energy range are mostly graphitic or graphitizable materials. 
All of the materials examined by Skokova [175] had elemental carbon 
contents greater than 94%, and most of these carbons yielded CO/CO2 
ratios that fall into this higher activation energy range. Not all the data 
obtained by Skokova are shown, only data for graphite (line 6) and two 
chars  produced  at  the  same  heat  treatment  temperature,  one  from  a 
graphitizable precursor, petroleum pitch (line 5) and the other from a 
non-graphitizable  precursor, cellulose (dotted line 4), which does  not 
yield ratios in the higher activation energy range. Common to the car-
bons in the high activation energy range is their graphitic nature. 

Those carbons examined that yielded CO/CO2 product ratios falling 
into the lower activation energy range are soot (solid line 7), Spherocarb 
(solid lines 8, 9 and 10), a vitreous carbon (solid line 11), and graphon 
(solid line 12). Soot is an amorphous carbon that consists of agglomer-
ations  of  nanoparticles  having  diameters  less  than  about  30  nm. 
Spherocarb,  a carbon molecular sieve, is a  graphitized carbon having 
both micropores and macropores of the order 50 nm. Being a molecular 
sieve,  it  has  a  narrow,  uniform  porosity.  Vitreous  carbons  (or  glassy 
carbons)  are  non-graphitizable,  microporous  carbons  widely  used  as 
electrode materials. Graphon is a conductive, graphitized carbon black 
having  embedded  heteroatoms  such  as  oxygen  and  nitrogen  and  is 
produced from a polymer precursor. The embedded oxygen atoms have 
the potential to oxidize carbon atoms as the temperature is increased, 
decreasing  the  CO/CO2  ratio.  Although  Spherocarb  and  graphon  are 
graphitized carbons, they have low porosities and small pore sizes, the 
common characteristics of carbons having CO/CO2  ratios described by 
activation energies in the lower range, 25 - 35 kJ/mol. 

The data of Foord [177] (not shown) yielded activation energies for 
the CO/CO2  product ratio of 45 kJ/mol for a graphite sample and 38 
kJ/mol for a PVDC carbon, a porous carbon produced via carbonization 
of a polymer, polyvinylidene chloride. Like the cellulose char (dotted 
line 4 in Fig. 6) examined by Skokova [175], these activation energies 
fall into the range 35 - 45 kJ/mol, in between the high and low acti-
vation energy ranges already considered. There are few investigations of 
the product distribution during biomass char oxidation, hence the lack 
of results shown in Fig. 6 that potentially fall into this middle activation 
energy range. 

It  appears  that  the  activation  energies  that  describe  the  product 
distribution of the carbon oxidation reaction depend on a few charac-
teristics  of  the  carbonaceous  material,  amongst  them  the  extent  of 
graphitization, macro- and micro-porosity and pore size. Phillips et al. 
[131] hypothesized that the activation energy of the CO/CO2 ratio may 
be independent of the types of carbon, being governed by the difference 
in the activation energies of the reactions releasing CO and CO2 from the 
carbon surface. These researchers suggested that much of the observed 
variations in Arrhenius plots of the CO/CO2  ratio should lie in differ-
ences in the pre-exponential factor A, which depends on many factors, 
amongst  them  surface  oxide  formation  and  the  extent  of  conversion. 
This variation in A-factor is clearly demonstrated in the Arrhenius de-
scriptions shown in Fig. 6. 

Tests  with  Spherocarb  were  made  at  three  different  oxygen  levels 
and the results indicate that at fixed temperature, the CO/CO2 product 
ratio decreases with increasing oxygen concentration (see solid lines 8, 9 
and 10 in Fig. 6). The reaction order with respect to the oxygen con-
centration  was  found  to  be  0.21.  Reported  reaction  orders  are  in  the 

range 0.18 - 0.27 for all the carbonaceous materials examined. 

(cid:0) 4 bar

= k3/(k2PO2

Hurt  and  Calo  [172]  considered  a  semi-global,  three-step  adsorp-
tion/desorption reaction mechanism to describe CO and CO2 formation 
during  carbon  oxidation.  Reaction  rate  coefficients  were  adjusted  to 
provide predicted CO/CO2  ratios that agree closely with the measure-
ments of Arthur [129] as well as to provide a reasonable description of 
all the global behaviors of the CO/CO2 ratio. Assuming steady state for 
), 
adsorbed  oxygen,  their  mechanism  yields  NCO/NCO2
where k2  is the reaction rate constant for a complex-enhanced adsorp-
tion reaction (r2: C(O) + O2 → CO2 + C(O)) and k3 is the rate constant 
for the desorption reaction (r3: C(O) → CO). Arrhenius parameters for 
(cid:0) 1, E2 = 130 kJ/mol and E3 =
the rate coefficients are A2 = 5.7 ⋅ 10
180  kJ/mol,  all  normalized  to  A3  = 1.0.  Employing  the  Arrhenius 
expression  for the rate constants, the expression  derived by Hurt and 
= 103.24exp( (cid:0)
Calo 
(50 kJ /mol) /̂RuT)/PO2 ,  (with  the  oxygen  partial  pressure  in  bar), 
revealing that it yields predictions that fall into the high activation en-
ergy  range.  When  the  oxygen  partial  pressure  is  set  to  1  bar,  this 
mechanism  and  associate  kinetic  parameters  yields  predictions  of 
CO/CO2 ratios similar to those predicted using the expression of Arthur 
for  graphitizable  carbons.  However,  the  experiments  performed  by 
Arthur  [129]  were  at  oxygen  partial  pressures  of  0.05  and  0.25  atm. 
Consequently, in O2/N2 mixtures, the relation derived by Hurt and Calo 
[172] will yield CO/CO2 ratios that are too high. The dependency of this 
ratio on the oxygen partial pressure predicted employing their relation is 
much stronger than that observed experimentally. 

as NCO/NCO2

be  written 

[172] 

can 

Like  apparent  reaction  rate  models,  intrinsic  models  that  employ 
power-law  kinetics  are  most  accurate  in  conditions  of  temperature, 
pressure and composition similar to the ones used in obtaining the data 
needed to evaluate model parameters. The influence of temperature and 
reactive  gas  partial  pressure  on  reaction  rates  are  reasonable  well 
captured with such models but the separate effects of total pressure and 
reactive gas mole fraction are not. Power-law kinetics are not capable of 
describing the manner in which pressure alone controls chemical reac-
tion rates. A heterogeneous reaction mechanism is required to capture 
the effects of total pressure as well as temperature and gas composition 
on char conversion rates. 

3.2.2.3. Reaction  mechanism-based  intrinsic  chemical  reactivity  models. 
Many studies have been undertaken that have the goal of developing 
heterogeneous  reaction  mechanisms  that  accurately  describe  the 
intrinsic chemical reactivity of carbonaceous materials. With reaction 
mechanisms,  it  is  possible  to  account  for  the  inhibiting  effects  of  the 
reaction  products.  The  overall  reaction  pathways  for  consuming  the 
solid material, forming gaseous species, are 

R01: C(s) + H2O ⇄ CO + H2 
R02: C(s) + CO2 ⇄ 2 CO 
R03: C(s) + ½ O2 → CO 
R04: C(s) + O2 → CO2 
R05: C(s) + 2 H2 ⇄ CH4 

The  overall  reaction  mechanism  describing  the  conversion  of  the 
solid carbonaceous material to gaseous products involves the buildup of 
adsorbed  species on the solid surfaces, the  migration of  the adsorbed 
species  on  the  surfaces  and  the  desorption  of  these  adsorbed  species. 
Both the adsorption and desorption processes are characterized by broad 
distributions of activation energies, reflecting the heterogeneity of the 
surface sites. Inorganic material embedded in the solid has the potential 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099321N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

to catalyze the heterogeneous reactions that occur. No simple model is 
likely  to  capture  all  features  of  the  overall  process,  but  all  realistic 
models should involve adsorption and desorption reactions, as proposed 
by  Langmuir  [178].  An  example  of  such  a  heterogeneous  reaction 
mechanism is shown in Table 1, the result of investigations undertaken 
in  theses  supervised  by  Mitchell  [108,179,180]  having  the  goal  of 
deriving  a  heterogeneous  reaction  mechanism  applicable  to  coal  and 
biomass  chars  undergoing  conversion  in  combustion,  oxy-combustion 
and  gasification  environments.  This  type  of  model  is  oftentimes 
referred  to  as  a  turnover  model  [110],  a  model  in  which  desorbing 
species yield new free sites available for adsorption. It builds on many 
previous  mechanisms  suggested  for  describing  carbon  conversion  re-
actions, for example, see the review of Laurendeau [176]. The mecha-
nism  is  capable  of  predicting  overall  char  reactivity  and  off  gas 
composition  over  a  wide  range  of  temperatures,  pressures  and  gas 
compositions. In addition, the model is simple enough to be computa-
tionally tractable. Tilghman and Mitchell [181] present Arrhenius pa-
rameters  and  thermochemical  data  (ΔHR  and  ΔSR)  for  each  reaction 
listed in Table 1 for a coal char and for a biomass char. The thermo-
chemical data permit the calculation of reverse reaction rate coefficients 
that result in equilibrium at sufficiently long reaction times. 

In  Table  1,  the  species  C2(O2)  denotes  two  adjacent  carbon  sites 
having adsorbed oxygen atoms. Also, the molar reaction rate of reaction 
̂ℜi) is expressed in terms of the total surface concentration (ξn), the 
i (
forward and reverse reaction rate constants (kif and kir, respectively), the 
concentrations of reactive gas-phase species j ([Cj]), and the site frac-
tions  of  adsorbed  species  m  (θm),  either  O,  H,  OH,  or  CO.  Here,  θO2 
represents the fraction of adjacent sites having adsorbed oxygen atoms 
and  θf  represents  the  fraction  of  the  sites  that  are  free  and  hence, 
available for adsorption. A homogeneous reaction mechanism is used in 
conjunction with the heterogeneous reaction mechanism to determine 
the fates of the desorbed species and includes reactions leading to CH4 
from  desorbed  CH2  and  CH3  species  and  to  CO  from  desorbed  HCO 
species. 

Table 1 
Reaction mechanism for carbonaceous solids exposed to H2O, CO2 and O2 [107, 
108].   

Reaction 

2Cf + H2O ⇌ C(OH) + C(H) 
C(OH) + Cf ⇌ C(O) + C(H) 
C(H) + C(H) ⇌ H2 + 2Cf 
C(O) + Cb → CO + Cf 
C(OH) + Cb ⇌ HCO + Cf 
Cb + Cf + C(H) + H2O ⇌ CH3 + C 
(O) + Cf 
Cb + Cf + C(H) + H2 ⇌ CH3 + 2Cf 
Cf + C(H) + CO → HCO + 2Cf 
C(H) + C(H) → CH2 + Cf 
CO2 + Cf ⇌ C(O) + CO 

Cb + CO2 + C(O) → 2CO + C(O) 
CO + Cf ⇌ C(CO) 
CO + C(CO) → CO2 + Cf + Cb 
2Cf + O2 → C(O) + CO 
2Cf + O2 → C2(O2) 

Cf + Cb + C(O) + O2 → CO2 + C(O) 
+ Cf 
Cf + Cb + C(O) + O2 → CO + 2C(O) 
Cb + C2(O2) → CO2 + 2Cf 

R.1 

R.2 

R.3 

R.4 

R.5 

R.6 

R.7 

R.8 

R.9 

R.10 

R.11 

R.12 

R.13 

R.14 

R.15 

R.16 

R.17 

R.18 

f

(cid:0) k1rθOHθH}

Reaction rate (mol/m2-s) 
̂ℜ1 = (ξn)2{k1f [H2O]θ2
̂ℜ2 = (ξn)2{k2f θf θOH (cid:0) k2rθOθH}
̂ℜ3 = (ξn)2{k3f θ2
H (cid:0) k3r[H2]θ2
f }
̂ℜ4 = (ξn) k4f θO  
̂ℜ5 = (ξn) {k5f θOH (cid:0) k5r[HCO]θf }
̂ℜ6 = (ξn)2{k6f [H2O]θf θH (cid:0)
k6r[CH3]θf θO}
̂ℜ7 = (ξn)2{k7f [H2]θf θH (cid:0) k7r[CH3]θ2
f }
̂ℜ8 = (ξn)2 k8f [CO]θf θH  
̂ℜ9 = (ξn)2 k9f θ2
̂ℜ10 = (ξn) {k10f [CO2]θf (cid:0)
k10r[CO]θO}
̂ℜ11 = (ξn) k11f [CO2]θO  
̂ℜ12 = (ξn) {k12f [CO]θf (cid:0) k12rθCO}
̂ℜ13 = (ξn) k13f [CO]θCO  
̂ℜ14 = (ξn)2k14f [O2]θ2
̂ℜ15 = (ξn) {(ξn)k15f [O2]θ2
k15rθO2}
̂ℜ16 = (ξn)2{k16f [O2]θf θO (cid:0)
k16r[CO2]θf θO}
̂ℜ17 = (ξn)2k17f [O2]θf θO  
̂ℜ18 = (ξn) k18f θO2   

H  

f  

(cid:0)

f

3.2.2.3.1. Carbon  oxidation. Many  heterogeneous  reaction  mecha-
nisms have been proposed to describe the overall carbon oxidation re-
action, which leads to the formation of both CO and CO2  [92,95,108, 
130,147,155,180,182-193].  Blyholder  and  Eyring  [155]  were  among 
the first to apply dual-site adsorption to the carbon-oxygen system by 
considering  the  dissociative  chemisorption  of  O2  on  carbon  surfaces 
forming adsorbed oxygen atoms (C(O)) with the O-atoms able to migrate 
on  the  surface.  It  was  assumed  that  an  O-atom  would  hop  along  the 
surface  until it forms  a carbonyl type bond  with a carbon atom. This 
carbonyl surface oxide can decompose, producing CO. Ma and Haynes 
[186], Brown et al. [193] and Sendt and Haynes [187] also suggested 
that dual-site adsorption of O2 could result in the release of CO directly 
from the surface (see Reaction R.14 in Table 1). The work of Zhuang et 
al, [188] suggested that some carbon sites were more apt to desorb CO2 
rather than CO. Consequently, reactions involving the pseudo-adsorbed 
species C2(O2), representative of two adjacent C(O) species (formed via 
Reaction R.15), denote carbon sites that preferentially yield CO2  (see 
Reaction R.18). The work of Ahmed and Back [194], Du et al., [130,184, 
195], Zhuang et al. [189,190] and Haynes and Newbury [185] lead to 
the inclusion of complex-enhanced desorption reactions, resulting from 
the interaction of a gaseous reactant and an adsorbed species (see Re-
actions R.16 and R.17). Such reactions lead to higher conversion rates at 
low temperatures than could be achieved without them. Several other 
researchers  [130,179,180,184-187,  189,190,193]  have 
included 
complex-enhanced adsorption in their carbon-oxygen reaction mecha-
nisms. Migration of oxygen atoms has been demonstrated to take place 
on  carbonaceous  surfaces  [175,179,187],  however,  Campbell  [179] 
showed  that  neglecting  migration  did  not  significantly  change  calcu-
lated  results.  Consequently,  the  mechanism  presented  in  Table  1  ne-
glects migration with the benefit of reduced computational complexity. 
Reactions R.4 and R.14 - R.18 in Table 1 represent a carbon oxidation 
mechanism  that  predicts  all  experimental  observations.  In  particular, 
the mechanism predicts (a) carbon conversion rates that increase with 
increasing temperatures, pressures and oxygen concentrations and (b) 
CO contents of the off gases that increase with increasing temperature. 
The predicted temperature dependence of the CO/CO2 product ratio is in 
adequate agreement with previous determinations [129-132, 173-175, 
177,191]. 

3.2.2.3.2. Carbon-carbon  dioxide  gasification. The  heterogeneous 
reaction  between  carbon  and  carbon  dioxide  (C  + CO2  ⇌  2CO)  is 
commonly referred to as the Boudouard reaction, a reaction named after 
Octave  Leopold  Boudouard  who  studied  the  reaction  in  1905.  Many 
researchers [196-206] have proposed reaction mechanisms to describe 
the reaction pathways that reflect the Boudouard reaction, most notably 
Ergun [196,197] and Gadsby et al. [199]. Nearly all researchers propose 
oxygen exchange between CO2 and the carbon surface forming C(O) and 
CO as the initial step in the mechanism, reaction R.10 in Table 1. Note 
that  Reaction  R.10  is  reversible:  The  reaction  does  not  proceed  to 
completion but reaches an equilibrium state that depends on tempera-
ture and pressure. The adsorbed oxygen complexes desorb, forming CO 
(see reaction R.4). 

Reactions R.4 and R.10 cannot describe observed gasification rates 
alone;  consequently,  research  efforts  have  been  focused  on  better 
characterizing the effects of CO, a species that slows the gasification rate 
when present. Gadsby et al. [199] hypothesized that inhibition was a 
consequence  of  CO  molecules  being  adsorbed  at  sites  on  the  carbon 
surface,  preventing  these  sites  from  adsorbing  species  capable  of 
removing a carbon atom from the bulk carbon. This is reflected by Re-
action R.12 in Table 1. Many investigators support CO inhibition, and 
several reaction  pathways that slow down  carbon conversion rates in 
CO2 environments have been proposed [198,200-202, 204-206]. Ingeme 
and Blackwood [200] noted that conversion rates at elevated pressures 
were  better  predicted  if  the  concentration  of  adsorbed-CO  species 
decreased as pressure increased, leading to the inclusion of Reactions 
R.12 and R.13 in the C-CO2  mechanism. Laurendeau [176] and Shaw 
[205]  suggested  that  complex-enhanced  adsorption  would  lead  to  a 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099322N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

decrease in adsorbed-CO as pressure is increased, supporting the inclu-
sion of Reaction R.13. Reactions R.4 and R.10 - R.13 in Table 1 represent 
a comprehensive carbon-CO2 gasification mechanism that predicts all of 
the experimentally observed trends. 

3.2.2.3.3. Carbon-steam  gasification. The  carbon-steam  heteroge-
neous  reaction  has  received  considerable  attention  over  the  years 
[197-199,  203,207-212]  and  early  attempts  to  define  the  mechanism 
were analogous to the carbon-carbon dioxide mechanism: Oxygen ex-
change between H2O and the carbon surface forming C(O) and H2 in a 
reversible  reaction.  Reactions  R.1,  R.2  and  R.3  of  Table  1  reflect  the 
overall  result  of  these  early  investigations,  initiating  the  reaction 
sequence with the more likely dissociative chemisorption of H2O on the 
surface, leading to adsorbed-OH and adsorbed-H, which undergo further 
reactions that lead to adsorbed-O with the release of H2. Evidence for the 
existence of OH on carbonaceous surfaces was provided by Blackwood 
and McTaggart [213]. The adsorbed-OH can dissociate on the surface 
producing adsorbed-O and adsorbed-H (Reaction R.2) or desorb as HCO 
(after rearrangement), thereby removing a carbon atom from the bulk 
(Reaction  R.5).  Complexed-enhanced  desorption  of  H-atoms  can  also 
lead  to  HCO  formation  via  Reaction  R.8,  a  reaction  that  couples  the 
char-steam  and  char  CO2  systems  of  reaction.  Following  the  lead  of 
Laurendeau  [176],  adsorbed-H  can  result  in  methane  formation  (see 
Reactions  R.6,  R.7,  R.9).  Complex-enhanced  desorption  of  H-atoms 
(Reactions  R.6  and  R.7)  leads  to  increased  methane  production  as 
pressure is increased, an observation of Blackwood and McGrory [214]. 
Other mechanisms have been postulated for methane formation result-
ing  from  adsorbed-H  on  the  carbonaceous  surface  [215,216];  data 
validating such mechanisms are difficult to obtain. 

3.2.2.3.4. Distributed activation energy approach for modeling the rates 
of desorption reactions. Owing to the presence of impurities within the 
carbon matrix and the inhomogeneity of the carbonaceous surface itself, 
the  energies  that  bind  adsorbed  species  to  the  surface  differ  for  indi-
vidual adsorbed complexes rendering differences in the desorption rates 
of  similar  adsorbed  species.  Consider  adsorbed  oxygen  complexes  for 
example, which desorb, removing carbon atoms from the carbonaceous 
matrix  forming  gas  phase  CO  and  CO2.  Because  of  the  differences  in 
binding energies, under the same gas-phase conditions the desorption 
rates are not the same for each adsorbed oxygen complex. As a conse-
quence, the rate of the desorption reaction C(O) + Cb  → CO + Cf 
depends not on the average binding energy (i.e., d[C(O)]
∕= (cid:0) k[C(O)] = (cid:0)
A⋅exp( (cid:0) Eave /̂
energies. 

RuT)⋅[C(O)]), but depends on the distribution of binding 

dt

In  the  distributed  activation  energy  (DAE)  approach  in  modeling 
desorption reactions, each adsorbed species of binding energy E (CE(O)) 
is assumed to desorb via a first-order, irreversible reaction: 

CE(O) + Cb→CO + Cf  

Letting f(E, t) denote the distribution function describing the distri-
bution of adsorbed oxygen species on the carbonaceous surface at time t, 
(i.e., [CE(O)] = f(E, t) ⋅ [C(O)]), the above equation can be rewritten as 

∫∞

= (cid:0)

kE⋅f (E, t)⋅[C(O)]⋅dE

d[C(O)]
dt

0

or in terms of the Arrhenius parameters for kE 

d[C(O)]
dt

= (cid:0)

∫∞

0

AE⋅exp((cid:0) E / ̂RT)⋅f (E, t)⋅[C(O)]⋅dE.

(87)  

(88) 

At the initial time (t = 0), a Gaussian distribution function is assumed 

for the adsorbed-O distribution function: 
(

)

f (E, 0) =

1
√ ⋅exp
̅̅̅̅̅
2π

σd

(cid:0)

(E (cid:0) Eave)2
2σ2
d

.

(89)  

Here, Eave  is the mean value of the distribution and σd  is the standard 
deviation. The evolution of f(E, t) in oxygen-containing environments is 
quite  complex  and  has  not  yet  been  accurately  characterized.  As  the 
oxygen  complexes  desorb,  underlying  carbon  atoms  are  exposed  that 
differ in binding energy. Oxygen complexes adsorbed onto these newly 
formed carbon sites can have activation energies  that span the entire 
activation energy range. At any time, the adsorbed-O distribution will 
depend on both the oxygen atoms that have been adsorbed over the time 
as well as those that have been desorbed. In most applications of DAE 
models in combustion and gasification environments, the distribution of 
activation  energies  on  carbon  surfaces  is  assumed  to  be  invariant  in 
time.  Although  the  underlying  carbon  atom  may  not  have  the  same 
binding  energy  as  the  carbon  atom  that  desorbed,  over  the  entire 
carbonaceous surface the initial distribution of binding energies (f(E, t =
0))  is  assumed  to  be  preserved  as  the  adsorption/desorption  process 
progresses. In addition, the pre-exponential factor AE  is assumed to be 
the same for all desorption reactions, (i.e., AE  = A0) in DAE appli-
cations to desorption reactions. With these assumptions, Eq. (88) can be 
rewritten as 

d[C(O)]
dt

= (cid:0)

∫∞

0

A0⋅exp((cid:0) E / ̂RuT)⋅f (E, 0)⋅[C(O)]⋅dE.

(90) 

Employing the expression for the distribution function from Eq. (89) 

in the equation above results in 

d[C(O)]
dt

= (cid:0)

∫∞

0

A0⋅exp((cid:0) E / ̂RuT)⋅

(

1
√ ⋅exp
̅̅̅̅̅
2π

σd

(cid:0)

(E (cid:0) Eave)2
2σ2
d

)

⋅[C(O)]⋅dE

The desorption rate is given by 

d[CE(O)]
dt

= (cid:0) kE[CE(O)] = (cid:0) AE⋅exp((cid:0) E / ̂RuT)⋅[CE(O)]

Multiplying by dE and integrating over all E: 

∫∞

0

d[CE(O)]
dt

⋅dE = (cid:0)

∫∞

0

kE⋅[CE(O)]⋅dE

Defining an effective reaction rate coefficient as follows 

(84)  

keff =

A0⋅exp((cid:0) E / ̂RuT)⋅

σd

(

1
√ ⋅exp
̅̅̅̅̅
2π

(cid:0)

(E (cid:0) Eave)2
2σ2
d

)

⋅dE,

∫∞

0

the overall rate for the desorption reaction can be written as 

(85)  

d[C(O)]
dt

= (cid:0) keff ⋅[C(O)].

The left-hand-side of the above equation is the rate of change in the total 
adsorbed-O concentration; thus 

∫∞

= (cid:0)

kE⋅[CE(O)]⋅dE

d[C(O)]
dt

0

(86) 

Eq. (92) is used when determining the effective reaction rate coefficient 
for the desorption reaction when allowance is made for a distribution of 
energies binding adsorbed species to the carbonaceous surface. 

(91) 

(92)  

(93)  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099323N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

3.2.2.3.5. Reactivity. Based on the  reactions presented  in Table  1, 
the  following  expression  can  be  derived  for  the  intrinsic  chemical 
reactivity of the carbonaceous particle material: 

Rc = ̂M C{ ̂ℜ4 + ̂ℜ5 + ̂ℜ6 + ̂ℜ7 + ̂ℜ9 + ̂ℜ11 + ̂ℜ13 + ̂ℜ14 + ̂ℜ16 + ̂ℜ17 + ̂ℜ18}

(94)  

̂ℜk  is the net rate of Reaction R.k. In combustion environments, in 
Here, 
which contributions from carbon-steam and carbon-carbon dioxide re-
actions are insignificant, 

Rc = ̂M C{ ̂ℜ4 + ̂ℜ14 + ̂ℜ16 + ̂ℜ17 + ̂ℜ18}

(95) 

In oxy-combustion and gasification environments, all of the reactions 
should be considered in determining the conversion rate of the carbo-
naceous material. The high levels of CO2  in the oxy-combustion envi-
ronments enhances the importance of the carbon-carbon dioxide system 
of reactions and in gasification environments, the exothermicity of the 
carbon-oxygen system of reactions is key in providing sufficient energy 
as heat to drive the endothermic gasification reactions. 

Many  studies  concerned  with  predicting  carbon  combustion  and 
gasification  behavior  use  heterogeneous  reaction  mechanisms  that 
describe  conversion  rates  as  functions  of  oxidation  and  gasification 
conditions. In some of the studies, carbon conversion rate expressions 
were derived by assuming steady-state levels for the adsorbed species 
(see for example, [196-198, 200-203, 211,217-220]). In other studies, 
the laws of mass action as governed by the net rates of all the reactions in 
the proposed reaction mechanism are used to predict carbon conversion 
rates as reaction time progresses (for example, see [92,95,98,107,110, 
147,181,192,221,222]). Several of the proposed reaction mechanisms 
include  the  impact  of  thermal  annealing  [92,95,147,192].  Reaction 
order varies with temperature, ranging from zero (at low temperatures 
when desorption reactions control reaction rates) to one (at high tem-
peratures when adsorption reactions control reaction rates). Heteroge-
neous  reaction  mechanisms  properly  capture  this  change  in  reaction 
order as gas conditions change and hence, are deemed to be more reli-
able and accurate in predicting char conversion rates than power-law 
kinetic approaches in situations where gas conditions are expected to 
vary.  As  indicated  earlier,  heterogeneous  reaction  mechanisms  also 
permit reliable predictions in cases where total pressure varies. 

A  summary  of  the  different  definitions  used  for  apparent  and 
intrinsic reaction rates is provided in Appendix B. Relationships between 
the different reaction rate models are also provided. 

3.3. Sub-models for the point particle approach 

In this Section, sub-models required for the point particle approach 
(i.e., when the particle is not resolved) are presented. These models are 
needed  in  order  to  account  for  the  unresolved  spatial  gradients  both 
inside the particle itself and in the boundary layer around it. 

The gas concentration in and around a reactive particle will in gen-
eral not be spatially constant. Examples of the concentration profiles of 
carbon  dioxide and  steam  around a  gasifying particle  are  depicted in 
Fig. 8. Both steam and carbon dioxide are consumed by the gasifying 
char particle. In the example used for the figure, the concentration of 
steam in the bulk flow is higher, but due to the higher reactivity of char 
to steam, the concentration gradients of steam are steeper than the ones 
for carbon dioxide. This, together with the fact that the effective diffu-
sivity inside the particle is lower than the one outside, results in a faster 
decrease of the reactant concentrations inside the particle than in the gas 
film surrounding the particle. The effect of the reactions and diffusion 
inside the porous char is discussed in Section 3.3.1 while the heat and 
mass  transfer  in  the  gas  film  surrounding  the  particle  is  discussed  in 
Section 3.3.2. 

Fig. 7. Effective reaction rate coefficient for the desorption reaction C(O) + Cb 
→ CO + Cf. The solid line represents a distributed activation energy approach, 
calculated  using  Eq.  (92),  with  A0  = 1x1013,  Eave = 353 kJ
mol and  σd  =
. The dashed line represents the rate coefficient calculated employing the 
28 kJ
mol
average activation energy: k = A0⋅exp( (cid:0) Eave / ̂RuT). 

To help understand the consequences of the DAE approach, shown in 
Fig. 7 is a plot of keff versus temperature for the reaction C(O) + Cb → CO 
+ Cf  employing  kinetic  parameters  determined  by  Tilghman  and 
Mitchell [181] for the char of a bituminous coal: A0 = 1.0 × 1013, Eave =
353  kJ/mol  and  σd  = 28  kJ/mol.  For  comparison,  also  shown  is  the 
reaction rate coefficient calculated employing the single, average acti-
vation  energy  (k = A0 exp(Eave /̂
RuT)).  The  comparison  clearly  dem-
onstrates  that  at  all  temperatures  relevant  to  coal  and  biomass 
combustion, the DAE approach yields higher reaction rate coefficients 
and hence faster overall desorption rates when compared to the rates 
calculated assuming a single, average activation energy for the desorp-
tion reaction. This is a consequence of the faster release rates of adsor-
bed complexes having binding energies below Eave. The differences are 
larger the lower the temperature since the lower the temperature the 
more important is the low energy tail of the distribution. For very high 
temperatures, however, the term within the exponent ( (cid:0) E /̂
RuT) will be 
close to zero for the entire width of the distribution, such that there will 
be  no  difference  between  the  DAE  and  the  average activation  energy 
approach. The ratio keff/k decreases from 51.3 to 12.4 to 4.13 as tem-
perature is increased from 1200 to 1500 to 2000 K. Calculations indicate 
that the broader the initial activation energy distribution (i.e., the larger 
σd), the larger keff and hence, the faster the adsorbed-O desorption rate 
compared to the rate determined assuming a single, average activation 
energy for the desorption reaction. 

Accurate assessment of the rates of desorption reactions requires that 
account is made for a distribution of binding energies on the char sur-
face. When modeling char reactivity to oxygen, the DAE model should 
be applied to the adsorbed-O desorption reactions, C(O) + Cb → CO +
Cf and C2(O2) + Cb  → CO2 + Cf (see Table 1). When modeling char 
reactivity to steam, the DAE model should be applied to the adsorbed- 
OH  desorption  reaction,  C(OH)  + Cb  →  HCO  + Cf  and  when  consid-
ering CO inhibition in char reactivity to CO2, the DAE model should be 
applied to the reverse rate of the CO adsorption reaction, CO + Cf⇌C 
(CO). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099324N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

D pore,i,eff =

(

1
D i

+

1
D Kn,i

)(cid:0) 1

.

(97) 

In contrast to the expression for D i,eff  in Eq. (18), which considers the 
diffusivity of a porous structure, D pore,i,eff  represents the diffusivity along 
a single pore of constant cross section. Hence, the tortuosity, constric-
tion and porosity are not included in Eq. (97). From this, it is straight 
forward to calculate the difference in mass diffusion between two po-
sitions separated by Δz along the pore as 

Δ ˙mdiff ,i(z) = ˙mdiff ,i(z + Δz) (cid:0)

˙mdiff ,i(z) = AporeD pore,i,eff

̂M iCg

d2Xi
dz2 Δz.

(98) 

Let us now assume that all relevant reactions are first order and that 
the product of one reaction is never the reactant of another reaction. 
This assumption is fulfilled employing the following set of global char 
conversion reactions: 

R01: C(s) + H2O ⇄ CO + H2 
R02: C(s) + CO2 ⇄ 2 CO 
R03: 2C(s) + O2 → 2CO 

The mass consumption rate of reactant i (where i can refer to either 
CO2, H2O or O2) within a thin element Δz around position z is then given 
by 

Fig. 8. Concentration profiles in and around a reactive particle in an ambient 
gas containing carbon dioxide and water. 

˙mreac,i(z)=(cid:0) 2πrporeΔẑRi

̂M i=2πrporeΔz

∑Nreac

k=1

kkCgXi

̂M i=2πrporeΔzkk,iCgXi

̂M i

(99)  

3.3.1. Effectiveness factor 

We will now assume a solid slab of char with thickness 2zs, where the 
fluid  on  both  sides  of  the  slab  has  the  same  properties  (composition, 
pressure, temperature), and where the slab is penetrated by a straight 
pore of radius rpore, as shown in Fig. 9. [This is also identical to assuming 
a  slab  of  half  this  thickness  where  the  lower  boundary  of  the  slab  is 
sealed off.] The mass diffusion rate of reactant i along the length of the 
pore at position z is then given by 

˙mdiff ,i(z) = AporeD pore,i,eff Cg

dXi
dz

̂M i

(96)  

where Apore (= πr2

pore

) is the cross sectional area of the pore, Cg is the gas 

̂
concentration within the pore, Xi and 
Mi are the mole fraction and molar 
i and  D pore,i,eff  is  the  effective 
mass,  respectively, 
diffusivity of species i within the pore when account is made both for 
bulk and Knudsen diffusion. It is expressed as 

reactant

of

where kk is the rate constant of reaction k and kk,i = ̂
Ri/CgXi  is the rate 
constant of the reaction that has species i as its reactant. In deriving this 
expression, Eqs. (7) and (10) were used together with the fact that all 
reactions are first order and that none of the products are the reactant of 
any of the other reactions. Since in steady state, the difference in mass 
diffusion between the inlet and the outlet of the thin element Δz must be 
due to reactions within the element, Eqs. (98) and (99) can be equated to 
obtain 

d2Xi
dz2

=

2kk,i
rporeD pore,i,eff

Xi = h2

i Xi

where 
√

hi =

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2kk,i
rporeD pore,i,eff

.

(100)  

(101) 

Setting the  species  boundary condition  to Xi  = Xi,s  at  the external 
= 0 at its center (z = 0) (corresponding to the 
surface of the slab and dXi
dz
sealed off end for a slab with half thickness), integration of Eq. (100) 
yields 

Xi = Xi,s

cosh hiz
cosh hizs

,

(102)  

which gives the mole fraction of species i at position z in the pore. The 
total mass consumption rate of species i within the full half-length of the 
pore,  ˙mtot,i,  when  account  is  made  for  the  fact  that  the  reactant  con-
centration  decreases  towards  the  center  of  the  solid,  equals  the  total 
mass diffusion rate at the pore inlet; such that 

˙mtot,i = AporeD pore,i,eff

̂M iCghi Xi,stanh(hizs) .

(103) 

In order to obtain the above expression, Eq. (102) was used to find 

Fig. 9. Slab of char penetrated by a single straight pore.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099325N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

the gradient of the mole fraction before Eq. (96) was evaluated at the 
solid surface. If the reactant concentration within the solid had been the 
same as it is at the solid surface, the total mass consumption rate would 
have been 

˙mtot,i,max = 2πrporezs kk,i CgXi,s

̂M i.

(104) 

An effectiveness factor for reactant i can now be defined as the ratio 
between its real consumption rate (Eq. (103)) and the rate that would 
have  been  experienced  if  the  reactant  concentration  was  constant 
throughout the solid (Eq. (104)), i.e.; 

ηi =

˙mtot,i
˙mtot,i,max

=

tanh(hizs)
hizs

=

(cid:0)
tanh

ϕL,i

ϕL,i

)

.

(105) 

Since the effectiveness factor always contain the product of hi and zs, 
it is convenient to define the variable φL,i = hizs. This variable is called 
the  Thiele  modulus,  in  honor  of  E.  W.  Thiele  who  was  the  first  to 
calculate the effectiveness factor in a similar way in 1939 [141]. 

In the above calculation of the effectiveness factor, it was assumed 
that the solid contains one single pore with constant cross section that 
penetrates straight through the solid. What if this single pore were not 
straight but “tortuous” with a constant cross section and still penetrating 
the solid? The pore half-length in this configuration is L = τzs, where τ is 
the tortuosity, and the Thiele modulus becomes 

ϕL,i = hiτzs = τzs

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρcharSgkk,i
Θ(1 (cid:0) Θ)fr D pore,i,eff

= zs

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρcharSgkk,i
/
Θ D pore,i,eff

τ2

(cid:0)

)
,

where we have used Eq. (57) to replace rpore in Eq. (101). 

The final expression on the right-hand-side was derived assuming (1 
(cid:0) Θ)fr = 1. The denominator of the square root term indicates how the 
effective pore diffusion coefficient is modified due to the tortuous path 
through the single pore. Since τ > 1, this expression indicates that the 
tortuous path slows down the rate of diffusion in the pore, leading to a 
larger  value  of  the  Thiele  modulus.  A  larger  Thiele  modulus  yields  a 
smaller effectiveness factor rendering a lower reactive gas consumption 
rate in the pore and a corresponding lower char consumption rate. 

The  case  considered  above  is  not  reality,  however,  since  there  is 
typically a large network of pores that are not all straight and vary in 
cross-sectional area. In addition, the pores are inter-connected; a sche-
matic of this can be seen in Fig. 10. If an element of thickness Δz across 
the entire slab is considered at a distance z from the slab mid-plane, all 
pores  that  cross  the  plane  will  contribute  to  diffusive  flow  into  the 
elemental slab volume. The effective diffusion coefficient must reflect 
diffusion  through  all  the  pores  in  this  case  and  is  given  by  Eq.  (18). 
Equations (96) and (98) apply but with D pore,i,eff  replaced by D i,eff  and 
the cross-sectional area of the pore replaced by the cross-sectional area 

for diffusion into the slab (Aslab). Equation (99) also applies but with the 
surface of the pore wall within Δz replaced by the surface of all the pore 
walls of the slab within Δz (which equals AslabΔz Sv). This results in the 
following expression for the Thiele modulus for first-order reaction in a 
slab of thickness 2zs: 

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
kk,iSv
D i,eff

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρcharSgkk,i
D i,eff

.

ϕL,i = zs

= zs

The effectiveness factor given in Eq. (105) still applies. This permits 
determination of the reactive gas consumption rate when flow through 
all pores is considered, no matter the tortuous path or variations in pore 
cross sections. When the molar reactive gas reaction rate evaluated at 

√

conditions at zs is expressed as 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
̂Ri,sSgρchar
CgXi,sD i,eff

ϕL,i = zs

.

̂
Ri,s, the Thiele modulus becomes 

(106) 

The effectiveness factor used here is per reactant species. This means 
that the effectiveness factor will differ for oxygen and carbon dioxide, 
with the one for carbon dioxide being much closer to unity. Also, if a 
detailed reaction scheme is used, where the global reactions RO1-RO3 
mentioned  above  are  split  into  several  sub-reactions,  the  sum  of  all 
sub-reactions that combines into a single global reaction must be used. 
Finally, if the product of one global reaction is the reactant of another 
global reaction, the analysis above is no longer formally applicable. For 
example, this is the case for 

R04: C(s) + O2 → CO2 

where the product is the reactant of reaction RO2. Such issues can often 
be resolved by assuming that one of the reactions is much faster than the 
other. For example, reaction RO4 is much faster than reaction RO2. This 
means that as long as the effectiveness factor of oxygen is much smaller 
than  unity,  essentially  all  the  CO2  resulting  from  reaction  RO4  is 
released close to the surface, such that the surface concentration of CO2 
can be used to determine the effectiveness factor of carbon dioxide in the 
regular way. If, on the other hand, the effectiveness factor of oxygen is 
close to unity, meaning that oxygen reactions are slow, reactions with 
carbon dioxide will be so slow that they can be neglected. 

All of the above is for an infinitely large flat slab of char. Unlike coal- 
based  chars,  the  permeability  of  a  biomass  char  is  anisotropic.  The 
permeability  in  the  cross-grain  direction  of  a  biomass  char  is  much 
smaller than the permeability along the grains, such that the effective-
ness factor of a flat slab can be used to approximate the biomass char. 
For coal chars, however, the pore structure is roughly isotropic, and the 
typical  pulverized  char  particle  is  more  spherical.  By  assuming  a 
spherical geometry, the above exercise can be re-done to show that for 
spherical particles with isotropic permeabilities the effectiveness factor 
becomes 
(

)

ηi =

3
ϕL,i

1
(cid:0)
ϕL,i
tanh

) (cid:0)

1
ϕL,i

when zs in Eq. (106) is replaced by rp. 

(107)  

Fig. 10. Slab of char penetrated by multiple non-straight pores.  

(106) by 

The  effectiveness  factor  calculated  above  is  correct  only  for  first 
order  reactions  (m  = 1).  Mehta  and  Aris  [223]  have  shown  that 
approximate values of effectiveness factors for mth-order reactions can 
be obtained by multiplying the Thiele modulus expression given in Eq. 

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(m + 1)/2

to yield a modified Thiele modulus, φL,m,  i, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099326N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

ϕL,m,i = zs

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(m + 1)̂Ri,sSgρchar
2 CgXi,sD i,eff

,

(108)  

and  then  employing  this  modified  Thiele  modulus  in  the  following 
expression for the effectiveness factor: 

√

[

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2
(m + 1)

ηi =

(

3
ϕL,m,i

(cid:0)
tanh

1
ϕL,m,i

) (cid:0)

1
ϕL,m,i

)]

.

(109) 

For 0 < m < 2, the errors in ηi are less than about 6.5% for a specified 
value of φL,m, i and occur for values of φL,m, i less than 8. For zeroth-order 
reactions, the effectiveness factor is 1.0 whenever the reactant concen-
tration is finite at the particle center. Therefore, based on the numerical 
solution  to  the  governing  differential  equation  for  zeroth-order  re-
̅̅̅
, the effectiveness factor is 1.0.  For φL,m, i = 3, 
actions, when ϕL,m,i
6
Eq. (109) yields ηi = 0.95 for zeroth-order reactions, about 5% error. For 
large values of the Thiele modulus (φL,m,  i > 20), the expression agrees 
quite well with the numerical solutions for the φL,m, i-ηi relationship for 
zeroth and second order reactions. 

√

<

Hong et al. [224] derived a correction function that when multiplied 
by  Eq.  (109) yields an η-φL,m  relationship that agrees quite  well  with 
numerical  solutions  for  any  specified  value  of  reaction  order.  The 
correction  function  depends  on  the  Thiele  modulus  and  the  reaction 
order and is expressed as 

⎛

(cid:0)

fc

ϕL,m,i, m

)

=

⎝1 +

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
0.5

/

(

2 ϕ2

L,m,i + 1

2 ϕ2

L,m,i

⎞

0.5(1(cid:0) m)2

⎠

)

.

For first-order reactions (m = 1), the correction function equals 1.0. 
With this correction function, the effectiveness factor is predicted with 
errors  less  than  2%  when  compared  to  the  numerically  determined 
values for mth-order reactions. Equation (109) multiplied by the above 
correction function is recommended for determining the effectiveness 
factor when the intrinsic reactivity exhibits fractional order. 

In this section, the effectiveness factor is defined as the ratio of the 
real reactant consumption rate to the rate experienced if the reactant 
concentration within the particle equaled its surface concentration. In 
order  to  be  more  pedagogical,  however,  Wheeler  [80]  refers  to  the 
effectiveness factor as the normalized available surface area inside the 
particle,  while  Laurendeau  [176]  sees  it  as  the  normalized  average 
reactant concentration (which was also assumed in obtaining Eq. (30)). 
It is important to realize that these three definitions of the effectiveness 
factor are not equivalent if the reaction order differs from unity. 

As noted by others (see for example, Laurendeau [176]), under Zone 
I conditions, when diffusion through the particle pores is much faster 
than the kinetics such that the reactive gas concentration is fairly uni-
form inside particles, the Thiele modulus is small (φL,m, i < 0.5) and η ≈
1. It was also noted that under Zone II conditions when pore diffusion 
limitations  cause concentration  gradients  to  exist inside particles, the 
Thiele modulus is greater than 6 and η ≈ 3/φL,m,  i. 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  above  expression  for  the  effec-
tiveness factor assumes that the internal structure of the char particle is 
uniform.  However,  owing  to  variations  in  the  properties  of  different 
coals  and  biomass  materials  and  the  conditions  particles  experience 
during  devolatilization,  a  broad  range  of  possible  internal  structures 
exists inside char particles. Employing the three-category classification 
system put forth by Wu et al. [225] (which is based on the 12-category 
system proposed by Bailey, et al. [226]), highly porous, thin-walled char 
particles are group I type char particles. These particles fragment more 
frequently and burn faster than the other char types. Cenospheres fall 
into this group. Sahu et al. [165] found that the cenospheric char par-
ticles produced from the smaller coal particles were 10% to 15% more 
reactive than the char particles of equal size produced from the larger 
particles  of  the  same  coal.  Group  II  type  char  particles  have  medium 
porosity and thicker walls than group I particles and contain three or 

more relatively large cavities inside their outer surfaces. Group III type 
char particles are relatively dense with low porosity. They fragment less 
frequently and take longer to reach 100% conversion than the other char 
types. Ma and Mitchell [227] developed overall particle reaction rate 
expressions  and  Thiele-modulus-effectiveness  factor  relationships  for 
char particles in each group. Bailey et al., [226], Cloke et al. [228] and 
Wu  et  al.  [229]  have  also  developed  burnout  models  based  on  char 
morphology. 

Equations  (71),(73)  and  (78)  can  be  combined  to  show  that  the 
overall particle reaction rate (Rov) and the apparent (Ra) and intrinsic 
(RC,int) reactivities are related as follows: 

(cid:0)

Rov =

ρchardp

/

)
6

(cid:0)

R

′

a =

ρchardp

/

)
SgRc =

6

(cid:0)

ρchardp

/

)
SgηRc,s
6

(110)  

Thus, under Zone II conditions when η  = 3/φ, this can be written as 
follows when the intrinsic reactivity is expressed in power-law form 

(cid:0)

Rov =

ρchardp

/

)

6

R

′

a =

(

ρchardp
6

)

(

Sg

)

3
ϕ

Rc,s =

(

2 ̂M CDeff ρcharSg
̂RuTp
(m+1)νi

)1

2

1
2

intP

(m+1)
2
i,s

.

k

(111) 
In the final expression on the right-hand side, νi denotes the moles of 
reactant species i reacted per mole of char converted to gaseous species. 
Writing the overall reaction rate and apparent reactivity in power-law 
forms as given in Eqs. (72) and (74), the above equation becomes: 

Aovexp

(

(cid:0) Eov
̂RuTp

)

Pn
i,s =

(cid:0)

/
6

)
A

ρpdp

′

aexp

(

)

Pn′
i,s

(

′

a

(cid:0) E
̂RuTp
)1

2

1
2

intexp

A

(

=

2 ̂M CDeff ρcharSg
̂RuTp
(m + 1)νi

(112)  

)

(m+1)
2
i,s

P

(cid:0) Eint
2̂RuTp

Since the temperature and  pressure dependences  of the apparent  and 
intrinsic  rate  expressions  should  be  the  same,  the  following  relations 
between apparent and intrinsic (or true) kinetic parameters exist: 

/
′ = (m + 1)

n = n

2

and

Eov = E

′

a = Eint

/
2

(113) 

The relations for the activation energies were derived assuming that 
the  exponential  terms  in  Eq.  (112)  were  the  dominant  temperature- 
dependent terms. Note that an apparent reaction order of one-half im-
plies a true order of zero, a value that indicates that the reaction rate is 
independent  of  the  reactive  gas  concentration,  and  that  an  apparent 
reaction order of unity implies a reaction rate that is proportional to the 
reactive gas concentration. It should be emphasized that the relations 
given in Eq. (113) are only valid when the effects of pore diffusion are 
appreciable, when η = (3 /ϕL,m

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2/(m + 1)
. 

√
)

3.3.2. Heat and mass transfer between fluid and particle 

For the point particle approach, where the particle is significantly 
smaller than the size of the numerical mesh,  the transfer of heat and 
mass through the boundary layer around the particle must be modelled. 
Modeling heat and mass transfer is not a straightforward task, since a 
number of complicating factors may be present. The most relevant ex-
amples of such complications are: 1) homogeneous (gas-phase) reactions 
may occur within the boundary layer, 2) there is typically a net outward 
flow of gas from the particle surface (Stefan flow), 3) several reactant 
gases may be involved in the heterogeneous reactions and 4) there may 
be a non-zero relative velocity between the particle and the fluid. 

Over the years, the two most popular models developed to describe 
the  boundary  layer  of  a  burning  char  particle  are  the  single-film  and 
double-film  models.  In  the  single-film  model,  homogeneous  chemical 
reactions are assumed to be negligible in the boundary layer surround-
ing the particle. Oxygen diffuses from the surrounding gas towards the 
particle surface where reaction takes place, producing CO and CO2. The 
global reaction for char oxidation is characterized as 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099327N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

(

C +

1 (cid:0)

)

f
2

O2→f CO + (1 (cid:0)

f ) CO2  

where  f,  the  fraction  of  carbon  converted  to  CO,  increases  with  tem-
perature. In the single-film model, any CO diffusing from the particle 
escapes the boundary  layer before being converted to CO2  via homo-
geneous reactions in the far-field. Consequently, none of the energy from 
the exothermic oxidation of CO influences the carbon particle temper-
ature, directly. In the double-film model, as oxygen diffuses towards the 
particle  it  reacts  with  CO  at  a  diffusion  flame  established  in  the 
boundary  layer  of  the  particle,  producing  CO2.  The  overall  course  of 
reaction  at  the  diffusion  flame  surface  (modeled  as  an  infinitely  thin 
film) is CO + ½ O2 → CO2. All of the oxygen is consumed within the thin 
film; no oxygen reaches the carbon particle. The CO2  produced in the 
thin  film  diffuses  in  both  directions  from  the  film.  Due  to  this,  char 
conversion now proceeds through CO2 gasification. This means that the 
convective heat to the particle is less negative (or may even be positive) 
than for the single-film model. Hence, the essential differences between 
the two models are that for the single-film model: 1) the concentration of 
oxygen at the particle surface is higher, 2) the convective heat transfer 
from the particle to the fluid is higher and 3) the concentration of the 
gasifying agents at the surface (typically CO2) is lower. 

It is quite difficult to probe the small boundary layers surrounding 
oxidizing  carbon  particles  while  in  hot  environments  and  as  a  result, 
there is no direct evidence on the extent to which CO is oxidized in the 
boundary layers of pulverized coal or biomass char particles. Also, it is 
not  known  a  priori  how  far  from  the  particle  surface  the  flame  front 
should be placed. This means that even though there may indeed be a 
flame  within  the  boundary  layer  for  large  particles,  the  double-film 
model may not represent it in an accurate way. 

Studies  have  indicated  that  the  single-film  model  is  applicable  to 
particles less than about 100 µm in diameter and that the double-film 
model is applicable to particles larger than 1000 µm. Field et al. [230] 
reported results of calculations that indicate that for a 25-µm diameter 
carbon particle exposed to a gas containing 0.1 atm O2, 0.05 atm H2O 
and the balance N2  at 2000 K, about 8% of the CO is oxidized to CO2 
within a distance of two diameters from the particle’s surface and for a 
50 µm diameter particle, about 30% of the CO is converted to CO2 within 
this distance from the surface. A significant fraction of CO is converted 
to CO2 within a distance of two diameters from the surface of a 100 µm 
carbon particle. Sexana [231] reviewed several papers that considered 
the  applicability of single- and  double-film models to burning carbon 
particles,  and  most  of  these  papers  support  the  use  of  the  single-film 
model  for  particles  having  diameters  less  than  100  µm  undergoing 
oxidation at temperatures greater than about 1500 K. For particles larger 
than 100 µm exposed to high temperature oxidizing environments, CO 
oxidation occurs in the boundary layers surrounding the particles. The 
moving flame-front model developed by Zhang et al. [232] also supports 
the use of the single-film model for particles having diameters less than 
100 µm. A continuous-film model [e.g. [233-237]] is needed for accurate 
prediction of particle temperatures and hence, for accurate prediction of 
carbon particle oxidation behavior during conversion. The CO, O2  and 
CO2  concentration profiles across the boundary layer are calculated in 
continuous-film models. The model developed by Caram and Amundson 
[235]  supports  the  application  of  the  single-film  model  for  particles 
having diameters less than 50 µm and the application of the double-film 
model for particles having diameters greater than 5 mm. While studying 
anthracite particles in the range 60-1000 µm through detailed numerical 
simulations, Gonzalo-Tirado et al. [238] found the single-film model to 
fit the predictions reasonably well for all particle sizes (in particular for 
the  pulverized  size  range),  while  the  double-film  model  tended  to 
overestimate particle temperatures and hence, conversion rates. Also for 

the case of oxyfuel combustion, when the effect of gasification reactions 
may be significant, Geier et al. [239] showed that the single-film model 
gave good results. 

Based on the above, it is recommended to use the single-film model 
for all particles as long as they are not very large, say less than 250 µm in 
diameter. In the particular case when very large particles are of interest, 
i.e. when boundary layer flames are known to be controlling the het-
erogeneous reactions, the reader is advised to use the resolved particle 
approach  instead  of  the  point  particle  approach  with  the  double-film 
model. The reason for this is two-fold; first of all, large particles may 
not be considered as isothermal, since the Biot number may be larger 
than 0.1, such that the point particle approximation should not be used. 
Secondly, for resolved particles the boundary layer flame is automati-
cally correctly positioned. Note that for a large particle, both the particle 
and its boundary layer should be resolved. 

3.3.2.1. Heat  transfer. The heat transfer coefficient applicable for the 
single film model, which is required for Eq. (48), is given by [58] 

H = H0θtherm

(114)  

where H0,
a Stefan flow, is expressed as 

the heat transfer coefficient for a spherical particle without 

H0 =

Nu λgas
dp

(115)  

and θtherm, a correction term that accounts for the effects of Stefan flow, 
is given by 

θtherm =

ϕSte,t
.
eϕSte,t (cid:0) 1

The Stefan flow constant, φSte,t, is given by 

ϕSte,t =

1
H0

˙mcharcpg
πd2
p

(116)  

(117)  

where  ˙mchar is the consumption rate of char and cpg is the heat capacity of 
the gas in the Stefan flow. 

3.3.2.2. Mass transfer. The general multi-reactant form of mass transfer 
for the single film model is given as [107] 

˙ni (cid:0) Xi,s ˙ntotal = (cid:0) kim

(cid:0)

)

Xi,∞ (cid:0) Xi,s

(118)  

In  this  expression,  the  molar  flux  of  gaseous  species  i  at  the  external 
particle surface is expressed as 

˙ni =

∑Nr

k=1

˙ni,k,

where the molar flux of species i due to reaction k is given as 

)

̂ℜk,pSt

(

i,k (cid:0) ν′
ν′′
i,k
Ap

˙ni,k =

(119)  

(120)  

and Nr is the number of heterogeneous reactions occurring on the solid 
surface. 

Also, the mass transfer coefficient is expressed as 

kim =

CgD iSh
dp

(121)  

where Sh is the Sherwood number. The mole fractions of species i at the 
particle  surface  and  in  the  far  field  are  given  by  Xi,s  and  Xi,∞, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099328N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

respectively, while the net sum of all gaseous species being produced 
and consumed is given by 

the real particle Sherwood number and species diffusivities are readily 
evaluated,  the  more  accurate  Eq.  (121)  should  always  be  used  to 
determine the mass transfer coefficient instead of Eq. (129). 

˙ntotal =

∑Ns

i=1

˙ni

(122)  

3.3.3. Mode of conversion 

̂ℜk,p is a 
where Ns is the number of gas-phase species. Due to the fact that 
function of Ci,p and hence, Xi,s, the above set of equations is implicit and 
has to be solved numerically for Xi,s. This can be done by employing a 
Newton-Raphson solver, for example. 

In order to avoid having to solve the implicit equation for Xi,s, ac-
count  can  be  made  for  the  effect  of  the  Stefan  flow  by  the  use  of  a 
modified mass transfer coefficient, similar to what is done in Eq. (114). 
This means that Eq. (118) simplifies to 

˙ni = (cid:0) kim,corr

(cid:0)

)

Xi,∞ (cid:0) Xi,s

(123)  

When a char particle is converted due to combustion or gasification 
reactions,  this  inevitably  yields  a  reduction  in  its  mass.  Whether  this 
mass reduction comes from changes in its apparent density or its radius, 
depends  on the mode of  conversion. For a  particle that is reacting in 
Zone I, the mode of conversion will be to decrease its apparent density, 
while for Zone III the corresponding mode of conversion is a decrease in 
particle radius. For most cases, however, the process proceeds in Zone II, 
which means that the mode of conversion is non-trivial. A popular, but 
far from general, relation between apparent density (ρchar) and particle 
diameter (dp) as a function of total mass (mp), is given by 

where 

kim,corr = kim θspec,

θspec =

ϕSte,s
eϕSte,s (cid:0) 1

and 

ϕSte,s =

˙ntotal
kim

.

ρchar = ρchar,0

)α

(

mp
mp,0

(124)  

and 

(125)  

dp = dp,0

)β

(

mp
mp,0

(130)  

(131)  

where subscript 0 refers to the initial condition and the ash fraction of 
the particle is assumed to be zero. This approach is used in many char 
particle conversion models, for example [1,121,241-243]. For a spher-
ical particle, α must be between zero and one, while β = 1(cid:0) α
3 . Numerical 
approaches where these relations are used assume that both exponents 
are  constant  throughout  conversion.  This  is  typically  not  a  valid 
assumption. In order to allow α and β to vary with time, the two above 
expressions should be re-written in a piecewise form. By employing a 
Taylor expansion and re-organizing the equations, one then arrives at 
[244] 

Eq. (123) can now be turned into an algebraic expression for Xi,s as long 
as the properties of the previous time step is used to calculate  ˙ni  from 
Eqs. (119) and (120). 

By assuming only a single heterogeneous reaction where carbon is 
oxidized by O2, and by combining Eqs. (120) and (123) together with 
Eqs. (9) and (37) to solve for XO2,s, it can be shown that 

XO2,s =

kim,corrXO2,∞
kim,corr + kreac

where 

kreac =

kO2StPsη
̂RuTs
Ap

(126)  

dρchar
dt

=

α
Vp

dmp
dt

and 

(127)  

drp
dt

=

1 (cid:0) α
pρchar

4πr2

dmp
dt

(132)  

(133)  

The relation PO2,s = PsXO2,s  was also used when deriving the above result. 
With  the  above  expressions,  the  molar  reaction  rate  can  be  found 
analytically  (instead  of  numerically),  and  the  expression  of  Baum  & 
Street [240] can be recovered: 

˙nO2 = (cid:0)

kim,corrkreac
kim,corr + kreac

.

(128)  

The above expression is commonly only used with first-order, apparent 
reaction  models,  in  which  kreac  is  given  by  the  apparent  kinetic  rate 
instead of Eq. (102). 

For  single  heterogeneous  reactions,  a  number  of  simulation  tools 
approximate the mass transfer coefficient (Eq. (121)) with the approx-
imation of Smith [1]: 

kim,approx =

D i,0
dp

P0
P

)ζ

(

T
T0

(129)  

where the subscript 0 refers to the reference state. For this approxima-
tion, the Sherwood number has been assumed to be 2 (implying zero 
relative  velocity  between  particle  and  fluid)  and  the  temperature 
exponent ζ = 1.75 (although based on the Chapman-Enskog theory, it 
should be 3/2). For all DNS and most LES simulation tools, where both 

where rp is the radius of the particle. (Ash treatment will be discussed in 
Section 3.4.) In the limit of small time-steps and spherical particles, the 
above relations are general and exact. The issue is to find the correct 
value of α. It is clear that for the limiting cases of Zone I and Zone III 
conversion, α  = 1  and  α  →  0,  respectively.  Haugen  et  al.  [244]  have 
shown that these equations generally hold for all char conversion zones 
(Zones I, II and III), and for homogeneously porous particles 

α = η,

(134)  

where η is the effectiveness factor. As long as the effectiveness factor is 
known, the general approach of Haugen et al. [244], as presented by 
Eqs. (132)- (134), is just as straight forward and easy to calculate as the 
traditional, but not general, approach given by Eqs. (130) and (131). The 
reader is therefore advised to use the general approach of Haugen et al. 
[244]. The same authors also found that for Zone II conversion, it will 
always take some time before the external radius of the particle starts to 
decrease, i.e., one must wait some time before Eqs. (132)-(134) become 
active. The relevant time is large for large effectiveness factors and ap-
proaches zero for small effectiveness factors. (See Haugen et al [244] for 
more details.) 

For the special case of cenospheric particles, where the char particle 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099329N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

consists of a  thin carbonaceous  shell surrounding a gaseous void, Eq. 
(134)  is  not strictly  valid  since  a  cenosphere  is  not a  homogeneously 
porous  particle.  Since  all  the  carbonaceous  mass  of  a  cenosphere  is 
located  in  its  thin  outer  shell,  the  reactant  concentration  within  the 
pores  of  the  particle  will  be essentially  constant, which  yields  Zone I 
conversion and an effectiveness factor of unity. This means that it will 
always be the apparent density of the particle that is reduced, not its 
radius.  Based  on  this,  it  is  clear  that  Eq.  (134)  is  applicable  even  for 
cenospheres. 

For so-called mixed chars, which consist of solid carbonaceous ma-
terial with several large voids spread throughout, no theory for its mode 
of conversion exist. But, since this type of particle can be considered as 
in-between the two limiting cases of solid and cenospheric char, which 
both adhere to Eq. (134), it is reasonable to assume that Eq. (134) is 
valid also for mixed chars. 

It should be noted that Eq. (134) is only relevant for intrinsic reaction 
rate models. The effectiveness factor is not defined for apparent reaction 
rate models and hence, the value of α cannot be found. With apparent 
reaction rate models, it is customary to set α to unity for char conversion 
in the Zone I regime, to set α to a fraction for char conversion in the Zone 
II regime or to set α to zero for conversion in the Zone III regime. As 
examples,  from  observations  of  size  and  apparent  density  variations 
during char conversion in Zone II, several researchers [1,116,120,142, 
242]  set  α  in  the  range  0.25  to  0.7  for  reaction  in  oxygen; 
Gonzalo-Tirado et al. [245] set α to ~0.9 for reaction in CO2. 

3.4. Ash 

The mineral matter in coals and biomass is classified as being either 
inherent or adventitious, where the inherent mineral matter was part of 
the plant materials from which the coal and biomass were derived and 
the  adventitious  mineral  matter  is  from  sources  outside  the  decaying 
plants (e.g., from the minerals in the swamps in which plant materials 
were  submerged  or  from  the  sediments  that  deposited  on  coal  seams 
during coalification or from nutrients in the soil that plants absorbed). 
Most of the inherent mineral matter chemically or colloidally combined 
with the organic material during the time the coal and biomass were 
being formed, becoming mineral inclusions in the carbonaceous matrix. 
The adventitious mineral matter is mostly trapped inside particle pores, 
although some does combine chemically or colloidally with the organic 
material over time. Although some mineral matter is released from the 
coal and biomass particles during grinding and size reduction of the raw 
materials as well as during devolatilization, a significant portion of the 
mineral matter remains in the carbonaceous char matrix as mineral in-
clusions.  During  the  char  conversion  process,  the  mineral  inclusions 
either vaporize or become a part of the particle’s ash. Ash is the mineral 
matter residue remaining after complete conversion of the carbonaceous 
material. 

The major clay minerals in coals are calcite, chlorite, dolomite, illite, 
kaolinite, montmorillonite, pyrite, quartz, and siderite (see Table 2 for 
examples of chemical formulas). When modeling mineral matter effects 
during char conversion, the oxides of the major minerals (e.g., Al2O3, 
CaO, FeO, MgO, and SiO2) are taken to be representative of the mineral 
species in coal chars. The major minerals in biomass are albite, anhy-
drite, calcite, gehlenite, and sandidine (examples of chemical formulas 
are also shown in Table 2), and in modeling efforts, the oxides of the 
major minerals (e.g., Al2O3, CaO, K2O, MgO, Na2O, P2O5, and SiO2), are 
taken to be representative of the mineral species in biomass chars. 

There are wide variations in the mineral matter compositions of coals 
and  biomass.  For  most  coals,  the  alumino-silicate  clay  minerals  and 
quartz usually account for 60% to 90% of the total mineral matter in the 
coal. Silicon is generally the most abundant component of the mineral 
matter (ranging from 1 to 4% of the dry, whole coal weight), followed by 
aluminum  and  iron  (ranging  from  0.3  to  2.5%),  and  then  calcium 
(ranging  from  0.3  to  2.5%)  [246].  Less  abundant  components  are 
magnesium,  titanium  and  potassium.  The  concentration  of  inorganic 

Table 2 
Major minerals in coals and biomass.  

Coal Minerals 

Name 

Chemical Formula 

Mineral oxides 

Calcite/dolomite 
chlorite 

illite 

kaolinite 
montmorillonite 

pyrite 
quartz 
siderite 

CaCO3/CaMg(CO3)2 
(Mg,Fe)3(Si,Al)4O10(OH)2⋅ (Mg, 
Fe)3(OH)6 
(K,H3O)(Al,Mg,Fe)2(Si, 
Al)4O10[(OH)2,(H2O)] 
Al2Si2O5(OH)4 
(Na,Ca)0.33(Al,Mg)2(Si4O10) 
(OH)2⋅nH2O 
FeS2 
SiO2 
FeCO3 

Biomass Minerals 

CaO/MgO 
MgO, SiO2, FeO, K2O, 
Al2O3 
MgO, SiO2, FeO, K2O, 
Al2O3 
SiO2, Al2O3 
Na2O, CaO, Al2O3, 
MgO 
FeO 
SiO2 
FeO 

Name 

Chemical Formula 

Mineral oxides 

albite 
anhydrite 
Calcite, calcium 

oxalate 
gehlenite 
sanidine 

NaAlSi3O8 
CaSO4 
CaCO3, CaC2O4 

Ca2Al[AlSiO7] 
K(AlSi3O8) 

Na2O, Al2O3, SiO2 
CaO 
CaO 

CaO, SiO2, Al2O3 
K2O, Al2O3, SiO2  

sulfur ranges from trace amounts to 2% of the dry coal weight [246]. The 
mineral  matter  in  coal  is  highly  variable  with  many  trace  minerals 
having  concentrations  less  than  0.1%.  Many  of  the  trace  minerals 
dispersed in coals were brought into the coal seam by water flow. Coal 
seams laid down in areas subject to periodic flooding usually contain a 
great deal of mineral dispersion intimately mixed with the coal. 

For biomass, the alkali metals (Na and K), alkaline earth metals (Ca 
and Mg), P, S, and Cl constitute from 15 to 58% of the total weight of 
inorganics  in  the  solid,  depending  on  the  plant  type.  Some  biomass 
materials have from 50 to 93% silicon (e.g., barley straw, rice husks and 
switchgrass) whereas the silicon contents of wood, bark, twigs, needles, 
shoots, and leaves are generally less than 10%. The major ash-forming 
minerals typical in woody biomass, in order of abundance, are Ca, K, 
Si, and Mg. In typical herbaceous biomass, the major ash-forming min-
erals in order of abundance are Si, K, and Ca, [247]. 

During  char  conversion,  the  solid  mineral  inclusions  can  become 
vapors due to either high temperatures or chemical reaction. For min-
erals with low boiling points (high vapor pressures) (see Table 3), the 
char conversion temperature is high enough to melt and then vaporize 
the minerals. The oxides of such elements as As, Hg, K, P, and Na have 
low enough boiling points to readily vaporize in this way and escape the 
char particle early in the char conversion process. On the other hand, 
oxides that have high boiling points (low vapor pressures) such as those 
containing Al, Ca, Fe, Mg, and Si can become vapor through reactions in 
the carbonaceous matrix with a reducing gas (H2 or CO) to form reduced 
mineral  vapor  phase  species.  These  volatile  mineral  species  diffuse 
through the particle pores during the entire char conversion process. 

Table 3 
Melting (mp) and Boiling (bp) Points of Selected Metals and Mineral Oxides in 
Coal and Biomass.  

Species  mp (K) 

bp (K)  

Species  mp (K) 

bp (K) 

Al2O3 
As2O3 
CaO 
Ca 
Fe2O3 
FeO 
HgO 
Hg 
K2O 

2345 
585 
2845 
1115 
1838 
1650 
773 
234 
1010 

3250  
738  
3123  
1757  
N/A (decomposes)  
3687  
N/A (decomposes)  
630  
N/A (decomposes)  

K 
MgO 
Mg 
Na2O 
Na 
P2O5 
SiO2 
SiO 
TiO2 

336 
3073 
923 
1405 
371 
Sublimes 
1964 
1975 
2116 

1032 
3873 
1363 
2223 
1156 
633 
2503 
2150 
3245  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099330N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Evidence for the transport of volatile mineral species through char 
particle pores is provided in the HTREM images of Lunden [248]. The 
extent  of  nucleation,  condensation  and  coagulation  of  the  volatile 
mineral species inside char particles is unknown. In the high tempera-
ture  reducing  environments  inside  particles,  mineral  vapors  that  ho-
mogeneously  nucleate  and  condense  or  heterogeneously  condense  on 
mineral  inclusions  have  the  potential  to  re-vaporize  or  react  with 
reducing  gases  to  form  volatile  mineral  sub-oxides  and  metals.  The 
mineral vapors will undergo nucleation, condensation and coagulation 
processes that lead to the formation of ultra-fine particulate matter in 
the gaseous environment outside the char particle. 

Since the primary metals in coals and biomass are Al, Ca, Fe, Mg, and 
Si, whose oxides have low vapor pressures, only a small fraction of the 
total mineral matter content of coal and biomass chars vaporizes and 
leaves the particle; most of the mineral matter remains with the char 
particle  during  the  char  conversion  process  and  becomes  ash,  the 
oxidized form of the mineral matter. As the char particle size shrinks due 
to heterogeneous chemical reaction at the char particle periphery, the 
mineral matter in the receded particle volume can either (a) contribute 
to an ash layer that accumulates on the outer surface of the char particle, 
(b) diffuse back into the particle, or (c) be shed from the particle. Min-
eral matter shedding from char particles has been hypothesized to be a 
primary contributor to the particles in PM10 formation [249]. 

Mineral  matter  diffusion  and  accumulation  on  the  outer  particle 
surface can each reduce char conversion rates. The volatile minerals that 
diffuse into particle pores decreases the available carbon per unit surface 
area in the char thereby effectively reducing char conversion rates. This 
has  been  characterized  as  an  “ash  dilution”  effect  [55,97,163].  The 
mineral matter that accumulates on the particle outer surface can retard 
the diffusional rates of reactive gases to the internal surfaces of the char 
particles (an ash film effect), resulting in reduced char conversion rates. 
Except for the models developed by Shaddix and co-researchers [55,97, 
142,163,249] and Tian et al. [249], nearly all char conversion models 
have neglected mineral matter vaporization and diffusion effects. 

It is also possible for there to be catalytic effects, where some mineral 
components influence the rates of heterogeneous char reactions [101, 
250-254].  Ash  catalytic  effects  are  most  significant  at  low  reaction 
temperatures and with low rank coals and biomass. In combustion tests 
performed in 10 vol-% O2 at low temperatures (648 - 748 K), Cope et al. 
[255] found that the intrinsic oxidation rates of CaO-containing lignite 
char  particles  decreased  as  burnout  increased  and  that  increased 
burnout  resulted in  decreases in CaO  surface  areas, a  consequence of 
sintering. From this observation, it was hypothesized that the decreased 
burnout was a result of CaO sintering with increased time of exposure in 
the low-temperature environments. Evidence for a correlation between 
low-temperature char oxidation rates and CaO surface areas was pre-
sented. As noted by Cope et al. [255], there have been no reports of CaO 
sintering during the high-temperature oxidation of lignite char particles. 
The impact of mineral matter depends on its composition and as a 
consequence,  coal  and  biomass  char  conversion  rates  are  impacted 
differently  by  the  presence  of  mineral  matter.  Tomita  et  al.  [252] 
employed  acid  washing  to  demineralize  coals  in  order  to  investigate 
mineral catalytic effects and found both increases and decreases in the 
gasification rates  of the acid washed  coal chars. Although changes in 
gasification rates were noted, it is difficult to attribute these changes to 
catalytic effects. Zolin et al. [254] found that the presence of inorganic 
material  increases  coal  char  reactivity  significantly  at  heat  treatment 
temperatures up to 1273 K but that above this temperature the catalytic 
activity  of  the  inorganic  materials  is  severely  reduced.  It  is  usually 
concluded  that  minerals  in  coals  have  little  catalytic  effect  on  char 
reactivity  to  oxygen  at  high  temperatures  during  pulverized  coal 
combustion. 

Ash catalytic effects have the potential to become important in the 
late stages of char conversion as carbonaceous material becomes more 
and more surrounded by ash. Char conversion rates have been observed 
to decrease in the late stages of conversion, indicating that ash inhibits 

oxygen transport to the carbonaceous material during the late stages of 
the char conversion process. Catalytic effects are often neglected in char 
conversion models developed for use in pulverized fuel-fired entrained 
flow simulations, the mineral matter is treated as an inert solid having 
no direct impact on char conversion rates. It is likely that since kinetic 
parameters  are  extracted  from  experimental  data  employing  ash- 
containing  chars,  the  catalytic  effects  are  implicitly  accounted  for 
when  determining  reaction  rate  coefficients  for  the  specific  coal  or 
biomass char being considered. 

In gasifiers, catalytic effects may become significant as char particle 
temperatures  decrease  during  the  gasification  process  owing  to  the 
endothermic  char-H2O  and  char-CO2  reactions  that  become  effective 
after consumption of the oxygen in the gasifier. Account should be made 
for  such  catalytic  effects  for  accurate  prediction  of  overall  char  con-
version. It would be necessary to determine the reactivity of the ash-free 
carbonaceous  material  in  char  gasification  experiments  and  then 
determine how the reactivity is enhanced as the ash-content of the char 
is increased. Owing to the differences in catalytic activity of the various 
ash components, tests would need to be performed with individual ash 
components. A char reactivity sub-model would then have to be devel-
oped  that  reflects  the  increases  in  char  reactivity  as  functions  of  ash 
content and ash type. 

3.4.1. Modeling the mineral-containing char particle 

In char conversion models, the char particle is typically assumed to 
be spherical and initially to consist of a carbonaceous matrix containing 
mineral  matter  inclusions.  Owing  to  the  conditions  that  the  coal  and 
biomass particles undergo during devolatilization, the mineral matter is 
assumed  to  have  transformed  to  stable,  mineral  oxide  phases.  At  the 
high temperatures the char particles experience during heterogeneous 
reaction, some of the volatile matter vaporizes and escapes the particle. 
In addition, as the carbonaceous material is converted to gaseous species 
due to reaction, an ash layer accumulates at the particle periphery as the 
particle diameter recedes. The thickness of the ash layer depends on the 
extent to which the ash either diffuses back into the char particle core or 
is shed from the particle’s outer surface. At any particular time t during 
char conversion, the char particle of diameter dp,t is considered to consist 
of a carbonaceous core of diameter dpc,t  surrounded by an ash layer of 
thickness δt, where δt = (dp,t (cid:0) dpc,t)/2. 

The mineral oxide inclusions are assumed to be spherical and uni-
formly  distributed  within  the  core  particle  volume.  In  addition,  any 
volatile mineral species are assumed to be distributed within the pore 
volume of the carbonaceous matrix. While both the char and the mineral 
inclusions have true and apparent densities, only the true and apparent 
densities of the char and apparent density of the inclusions are needed in 
deriving  expressions  that  describe  the  internal  structure  of  the  char. 
Over the course of char oxidation, only a small fraction of the mass of 
mineral oxide inclusions vaporizes. Since the mineral oxide inclusions 
lose mass via vaporization from their outer surfaces, the porosities of the 
inclusions remain constant during the entire char conversion process. 
Thus,  both  the  true  and  apparent  densities  of  the  mineral  oxide  in-
clusions are assumed to remain constant during char conversion. 

The total volume of all the mineral oxide inclusions (VMO), the vol-
ume  occupied  by  the  solid  carbonaceous  material  (Vtrue,char)  and  the 
volume occupied by the pores in the char (Vchar pores) constitute the total 
particle core volume. The total mass of mineral oxide inclusions (mMO) 
and the mass of the char (mchar) constitute the total mass in the particle 
core (neglecting the mass of gas species in the char particle pores, which 
is insignificant when compared to that of the char and mineral oxide 
inclusions). Thus, at any time during the char conversion process, the 
volume and mass of material in the particle’s core are given by 

Vpc,t =Vtrue,char,t +VMO,t +Vchar pores,t =πd3

pc,t

6 and mpc,t =mchar,t +mMO,t

/

where the volume occupied by the solid carbonaceous material can be 

(135)  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099331N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

char =
expressed in terms of the true density of the char, ρtrue
mchar/ρtrue
char.  Furthermore,  the  apparent  densities  of  the  char  and 
mineral  oxide  inclusions  in  the  core  of  the  particle  at  time  t  can  be 
expressed as 
/

char: Vtrue

/

ρchar,t =mchar,t

Vpc,t and ρMO,t =mMO,t

VMO,t.

(136) 

The  above  relations  can  be  combined  to  show  that  the  apparent 
density of the ash-containing porous char particle core at any time sat-
isfies the following expression: 

ρpc,t =

mchar,t + mMO,t
Vpc,t

= ρchar,t +

mMO,t
Vpc,t

.

(137) 

Since  Vpc,t  = mchar,t/ρchar,t,  the  above  expression  for  the  apparent 

density of the particle at time t can be rewritten as 

ρpc,t = ρchar,t + ρchar,t

(

)

mMO,t
mchar,t

= ρchar,t

1 +

(cid:0)

YMO,t
1 (cid:0) YMO,t

)

=

(cid:0)

ρchar,t
1 (cid:0) YMO,t

)

(138)  

where YMO,t is the mass fraction of the mineral matter in the core of the 
particle at the time. The apparent density of the mineral oxide inclusions 
is assumed to be constant, and the apparent density of the char is gov-
erned by the mode of char particle conversion sub-model, discussed in 
Section 3.3.3. As indicated, by specifying the reactivity of the char and 
relations for the effectiveness factor, the apparent density, diameter and 
volume of the carbonaceous material in the core of the char particle can 
be followed in time. 

3.4.2. Ash layer thickness 

As  the  diameter  of  the  char  particle  core  decreases,  the  mineral 
matter in the receded core volume has the potential to add to an ash 
layer  on  the  char  particle’s  outer  surface.  Assuming  that  the  mineral 
inclusions  are  always  uniformly  distributed  within  the  carbonaceous 
core of the particle, the fraction of mineral oxide inclusions in the core at 
Vpc,t+δt
time t that are still in the core at time t + δt is given by the ratio 
Vpc,t 
(which equals d3
in the core at time t that were in the receded core volume is given by 1 (cid:0)
Vpc,t+δt
Vpc,t . The inclusions would have lost some of their mass over the time δt 
due to vaporization. The mass of mineral matter in the ash layer at time t 
+ δt must equal the mass of mineral matter already in the ash layer at 
time t plus the mass of that fraction of the un-vaporized mineral matter 
in the receded volume that adds to the ash layer. Thus, 

pc,t) and the fraction of mineral oxide inclusions 

pc,t+δt

/d3

mash layer, t+δt = mash layer, t
/
(cid:0)
1 (cid:0) Vpc,t+δt
+

Vpc,t

)[

ρpc,tVpc,tYMO,t (cid:0)

˙MMOvap,tδt

]
fMM

(139)  

˙
MMOvap,t  is  the  rate  at  which  all  the  vaporized  mineral  species 
where 
leave the char particle core at time t and fMM is the fraction of the mass of 
mineral matter in the receded core volume that adds to the ash layer. A 
fraction of this ash is shed from the particle, fshed, and a fraction diffuses 
back into the char particle core, (1 (cid:0)
fshed). The impact of fMM and 
fshed on ash layer development dynamics has yet to be addressed. These 
variables should be set to zero since there is no information available on 
their values. 

fMM (cid:0)

If the apparent density of the mineral matter in the ash layer is ρMM, 

then the mass of mineral matter in the ash layer at time t is 

mash layer, t = ρMMVash layer,t = ρMM

(

)

p,t (cid:0) d3
d3
pc,t

π
6

(140)  

and the mass of mineral matter in the ash layer of thickness δ at time t +
δt is 

mash layer, t+δt = ρMMVash layer,t+δt = ρMM

[(cid:0)

π
6

dpc,t+δt + 2δt+δt

)3 (cid:0) d3

pc,t+δt

]

.

(141) 

Expressing  all  volumes  in  terms  of  diameters,  the  above  three 
equations can be combined to yield the following expression for the ash 

layer thickness at time t + δt: 

2δt+δt +dpc,t+δt =
⎛

⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

pc,t+δt +d3
d3

p,t (cid:0) d3

pc,t +

(

6

1(cid:0)

)[

(

)

]

d3
pc,t+δt
d3
pc,t

ρpc,t

πd3
pc,t
6

YMO,t (cid:0)

˙MMOvap,tδt

fMM

πρMM

⎞

1
3

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

.

(142)  

In this approach, the char particle diameter includes the thickness of the 
ash layer. Consequently, the diameter of the char particle at time t + δt is 
given by 

dp,t+δt = dpc,t+δt + 2δt+δt.

(143)  

Similar  expressions  for  the  ash  layer  thickness  have  been  derived  by 
others [55,97,142,163]. 

3.4.3. Modeling reactive gas diffusion to the carbonaceous core of char 
particles 

Owing  to  the  ash  layer  surrounding  the  carbonaceous  core  of  the 
char particle, the fluxes of reactive gases to this core are decreased and 
the diffusional mass transfer coefficient is reduced. Accounting for Ste-
fan flow, the molar flux of reactive gas i (ji,rpc ) at the outer surface of the 
carbonaceous particle core can be expressed as follows: 

(

ji,rpc = (cid:0)

)

(cid:0)

D iP
γ ̂RuTBL
(

×ln

1 (cid:0) γPi,rpc
1 (cid:0) γPi,∞

(cid:0)

D i
)

.

1 +
/
/

P
P

(cid:0)

/

/

rpc
)(cid:0)

rp
D i,ash

/
)
(Sh/2 + 1)
/
/
δ
TBL
Tp

)(cid:0)

rpc
)
)
(Sh/2 + 1)
rpc

(144)  

In this equation, γ is the change in the volume of the gas upon reaction at 
the outer surface of the carbonaceous core, TBL is the effective boundary 
layer temperature, Sh is the Sherwood number, D i  and D i,ash  are the 
bulk diffusion coefficients of species i across the boundary layer and ash 
layer, respectively, and Pi,rpc  and Pi,∞ are the partial pressures of species i 
at  rpcand  in  the  free  stream,  respectively.  The Sherwood  number  was 
used to relate the thickness of the boundary layer to the particle diam-
eter (δ  = dp/Sh = 2rp/Sh). Chen and Kojima [256] recommend evalu-
ating D i,ash  via the expression D i,ash  = (Θash)2 D i, where Θash is the ash 
layer porosity. Others [166,257,258] have used similar expressions to 
determine  gas  diffusivities  in  ash  layers,  with  slightly  different  expo-
nents on the ash porosity term. The flux of species i at rpc  times 4πr2
pc 
yields the molar flow rate of species i into the carbonaceous core and 
must  equal  the  rate  that  the  species  is  consumed  via  heterogeneous 
chemical reaction. This determines the value of Pi,rpc . It is noted that the 
greater the ash layer thickness, the lower the flux of reactive gas to the 
carbonaceous particle core. 

3.4.4. Mineral matter vaporization rates 

Modeling  the  vaporization  of  the  mineral  inclusions  in  coals  and 
biomass  has  been  the  subject  of  numerous  investigations  (see  for 
example, references [259-271]). The mineral oxides within the carbo-
naceous  matrix  can  react  with  CO  to  form  volatile  metal-containing 
species. The rates at which these gaseous species are released from the 
mineral oxide inclusions are limited by the rates that the volatile oxide 
species can diffuse from the mineral inclusions, entering the carbona-
ceous matrix surrounding the mineral inclusions. In a char particle, the 
vaporization rates of individual inclusions are not independent since the 
inclusions influence each other via the mineral vapor field established 
within  the  pores  of  the  char  particle  as  the  mineral  species  diffuse. 
Employing the approach taken by Quann [260,261], the vaporization 
rate for a single inclusion of diameter dMO embedded in a carbon matrix 
having an established mineral vapor field is approximated as follows: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099332N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

˙MMOvap(dMO) =

2πdMO

̂M MSi D MSi,eff
̂RuTp

(cid:0)

Peq
MSi

(cid:0) PMSi

)

.

(145)  

̂
Here, 
MMSi  is  the  molecular  weight  of  the  volatile  mineral  species  i, 
D MSi,eff  is the effective diffusion coefficient of the volatile mineral spe-
̂
cies  in  the  pores  of  the  carbonaceous  matrix, 
Ru  is  the  universal  gas 
constant, Tp  is the particle temperature, Peq
MSi  is the equilibrium partial 
pressure  of  the  volatile  mineral  species  at  the  surface  of  the  mineral 
inclusion, and PMSi  is the partial pressure of the volatile mineral species 
at the location of the mineral inclusion. This expression indicates that 
the vaporization rate of a mineral inclusion depends upon its position in 
the char particle, as reflected through the local partial pressure of the 
mineral oxide vapor, which is influenced by the vaporization rates of all 
the inclusions. The adequacy of such a vaporization expression depends 
on  a  quasi-steady  reduced  mineral  oxide  concentration  profile  estab-
lished inside the char particle, a likely situation since the characteristic 
time for mineral matter diffusion is much shorter than the characteristic 
time  for  char  combustion.  Owing  to  the  low  volume  fraction  of  in-
clusions in the char, Quann [260] applied a mean field approximation 
[272] to evaluate the mole fraction profile of mineral vapors in a porous 
char particle that results from generation of mineral vapors from a group 
of uniformly distributed inclusions, and determined a relation for the 
total vaporization rate from the single char particle. In this mean field 
approximation, although there can be an ash film, most of the mineral 
matter is distributed throughout the carbonaceous core – the mean field 
approximation  approach  is  still  applicable.  Following  the  same 
approach, the instantaneous total vaporization rate (in kg/s) from a char 
particle having embedded mineral inclusions is given by 

˙MMOvap,t = ηvapNI

(cid:0)

˙MMOvap(dMO)

)isolated = ηvapNI

2πdMO

̂M MSi D MSi,eff
̂RuTp

Peq
MSi

(146)  

where NI is the total number of inclusions in the char particle and ηvap is 
an effectiveness factor for vaporization, defined as the ratio of the total 
vaporization  rate  of  a  matrix  of  uniform  inclusions  vaporing  under 
diffusion control with particles communicating (via mineral vapors in 
the  pores)  to  the  vaporization  rate  of  NI  isolated  inclusions.  It  is 
expressed as 

ηvap =

3
ϕI

[

1
tanh(ϕI)

][

1 (cid:0)

(cid:0)

1
ϕI

(D MSi /D O2 )
αI(Sh/2 + 1)

(

TBL
Tp

)(

ϕI
tanh(ϕI)

)](cid:0) 1

(cid:0) 1

.

(147)  

√

= ((dP /dI)

Here,  D MSi and D O2  are the bulk diffusivities of the diffusing mineral 
) is the Thiele 
species and oxygen, respectively, and ϕI
modulus, where dP and dI are the diameters of the char particle and 
the mineral inclusions, respectively, and ϕI is the total volume fraction of 
inclusions inside the particle. The parameter αI accounts for the effects of 
Stefan flow in the boundary layer surrounding the char particle and is 
expressed as follows: 
)/

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
3φI

)/(cid:0)

)]

[(cid:0)

/

(cid:0)

ln

1 (cid:0) γPO2

αI =

1 (cid:0) γPO2,∞

P

rp
P
1 (cid:0) exp(α′ )

where in this expression 

(

′ =

α

D O2 (Sh/2 + 1)
D MSi

)

[(cid:0)
[

ln

1 (cid:0) γPO2
(

(cid:0)

)/
rp
P
)(

)/(cid:0)

)(

1 (cid:0) γPO2,∞

)]
/
P
)] .

1 +

D O2
D O2 ,ash

Tp
TBL

δash (Sh/2+1)
rpc

The Thiele modulus φI  is dependent solely on the volume fraction of 
inclusions and inclusion size for a given char particle. The vaporization 
effectiveness factor (ηvap) as a function of φI is shown in Fig. 11. Note that 
increases,  ηvap  decreases.  Also  note  that  differences  in  the  ratio 
as  φI
/D O2  and the ash content of the char have relatively minor impact 
D MSi
on the ηvap-φI relationship. Over the temperature ranges of interest to coal 

(148)  

(149) 

Fig. 11. Vaporization effectiveness factor as a function of φI  calculated for a 
100 µm diameter char particle undergoing combustion in 5% and 20% oxygen 
at 1750 K. The mineral vapor-to-O2 diffusivity ratio, D MSi /D O2 , is a parameter. 

and biomass combustion processes, this ratio of diffusion coefficients is 
relatively insensitive to temperature and as such, the curves shown in the 
figure  change  little  with  change  in  temperature.  The  parameter  φI  in-
creases with increasing volume fraction of mineral inclusions in the char, 
which increases with ash content. Hence, the higher the ash content of the 
char, the lower the effectiveness factor for vaporization. The higher the 
ash  content  of  the  char,  the  higher  the  mole  fraction  of  the  diffusing 
mineral species in the pore volume, which reduces the vaporization rates 
of the individual inclusions (as reflected in Eq. (145)). 

For a given ash content, the parameter φI increases with increasing 
ratio  dP/dI.  Consequently,  the  vaporization  effectiveness  factor  de-
creases  with  a  decrease  in  inclusion  diameter.  This  is  because  the 
decreasing inclusion size increases the number of inclusions to maintain 
the given ash-content of the char particle. Smaller inclusion sizes result 
in higher overall vaporization rates for the char particle. As reported by 
Padia [265], the mineral matter in coals exists as either finely dissemi-
nated crystallites or inclusions nominally 2 µm or less in diameter. For 
char particle diameters in the range 50 to 100 µm having ash-contents in 
the range 5%-20%, values of φI  are in the range 5 to 40. Expressions 
analogous  to  those  above  for  the  total  mineral  vaporization  rate  and 
vaporization  effectiveness  factor  have  been  employed  by  others  to 
describe  mineral  inclusion  vaporization  rates  during  coal  char  com-
bustion  (e.g.,  [55,264,270,271]).  Equations  (146)  –  (149)  simplify  to 
the ηvap-φI relations derived by Quann [260] and employed by Niu et 
al.  [163]  when  it  is  assumed  that  (i)  char  burning  rates  are 
(rp) = 0),  (ii) CO is  the  sole product  of the  het-
diffusion-limited  (PO2
erogeneous reaction (γ = (cid:0) 1) and (iii) the boundary layer surrounding 
the particle is quite large compared to the particle diameter (Sh = 0). 
Since the apparent density of the mineral inclusion is assumed to be 
constant during vaporization, the diameter of the inclusion can be fol-
lowed as mineral vapors are released. Thus, 

(cid:0)

d
dt

mMO(dMO)

)

= (cid:0)

(cid:0)

πρMO
6

d
dt

)

d3
MO

= ˙MMOvap(dMO).

(150) 

Integrating from time t  to time t  + δt  and solving  for  the  mineral 

oxide particle diameter at time t + δt yields 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099333N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

(

dMO,t+δt =

d2
MO,t (cid:0)

4 ˙MMOvap(dMO)
πdMO,tρMO

)1

2

δt

.

(151)  

Note that since the coefficient of δt is not constant but depends on the 
size of the included particle, vaporization does not follow a d2
MO-power 
law relationship. 

The mineral species that leave the surfaces of the mineral inclusions 
transport  through  the  carbonaceous  matrix  via  diffusion.  Due  to  the 
small  diameters  of  the  pores,  Knudsen  diffusion  will  be  the  primary 
mode of diffusion in the porous structure. Hence, the approach of Sat-
terfield [50] can be used to determine the effective diffusion coefficient: 

D Kn,MSi,eff = θeff θcD Kn,i

τ

(

(

= θeff θc
τ
(

2θeff
Sg ρp

9, 700
) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√

) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√ )
Tp
̂M MSi

(152)  

= 19, 400

θcθ2
eff
τ Sg ρp

Tp
̂M MSi

.

When using this expression, the specific surface area (Sg) and apparent 
density (ρp) of the particle are in cm2/g and g/mol, respectively, and the 
particle temperature is in K. The effective porosity of the carbonaceous 
matrix including the mineral oxide inclusions is calculated based on the 
fractions of the core volume that the carbonaceous material and mineral 
matter occupy: 

θeff =

Vchar
Vpc

θchar +

VMO
Vpc

θMO.

(153)  

Here, θchar and θMO denote the porosities of the char and mineral oxide 
inclusions, respectively. The porosity of the char varies with char con-
version and is discussed in Section 3.1.1. Considering the ash in the core 
of  the  particle,  Eq.  (19)  should  be  modified,  as  follows,  when  deter-
mining  the  effective  diffusion  coefficient  of  any  species  i  diffusing 
through the pores of the particle: 
(

D Kn,i,eff = 19, 400

θc θ2
eff
τ Sg ρp

√
) ̅̅̅̅̅̅
Tp
̂M i

.

A linear mixing rule is assumed for the specific surface area of the 

particle [179]: 

Sg,p = YMOSg,MO + (1 (cid:0) YMO)Sg,char.

(154)  

Campbell [179] measured values of 5 ± 10 m2/g for the ashes of both 
coal  and  biomass  chars  considered  in  his  investigations.  The  specific 
surface area of the char also varies with char conversion and is discussed 
in Section 3.1.2. Often, the contribution of the specific surface area of 
the mineral matter is neglected in comparison to that of the char when 
determining the specific surface area of the particle. The question arises 
as to the extent to which mineral matter in the char impacts BET mea-
surements  of  char  specific  surface  area.  Do  BET  specific  surface  area 
measurements using CO2 or N2 as adsorption gases include the specific 
surface areas of both the mineral matter and the char? To what extent do 
these gases adsorb onto mineral matter components? Could the specific 
surface area measurements performed by Campbell [179] using coal and 
biomass ashes be indicative of the specific surface areas of any residual 
carbonaceous materials remaining in the ash? These questions have not 
yet been definitively answered. 

The  parameters  that  define  the  effective  diffusion  coefficient  for 
volatile mineral species transport through the carbonaceous matrix are 
evaluated at the conditions of the char at the time of interest. Similar 
approaches have been taken by others to determine the total mineral 
oxide vaporization rates from the mineral inclusions in the char when 
the  physical  characteristics  of  both  the  carbonaceous  matrix  and  the 
mineral matter are considered [179,271]. 

In order to evaluate mineral oxide vaporization rates, it is necessary 
to determine the partial pressure of the volatile mineral oxide species at 
the  surface  of  the  mineral  inclusion.  When  evaluating  mineral  oxide 

vaporization  rates  during  char  conversion,  it  is  assumed  that  vapor-
ization of isolated mineral inclusions (MOn) in the char matrix occurs by 
chemical reduction to form volatile metal sub-oxides or fully reduced 
metals (MOn-1). It is hypothesized that the mineral oxides are reduced by 
CO in the local conditions existing inside char particles via the following 
type reaction: 

MOn(s, l) + CO ↔ MOn(cid:0) 1(g) + CO2.

The equilibrium constant for this reaction can be expressed as 
)(

(

)

⎤

⎡

(

Kp = exp

(cid:0)

)

Δ ̂GR
̂RuTp

⎢
⎢
⎣

=

PCO2
Pref
(

PMOn(cid:0) 1
Pref

)

PCO
Pref

aMOn

⎥
⎥
⎦

eq

(155)  

where Δ ̂
GR  is the Gibbs function change for the reaction, aMOn 
is the 
activity of the solid (or liquid) mineral oxide and Pref  is the reference 
pressure (taken as 1 atm). Rearranging this expression, solving for the 
equilibrium partial pressure of the mineral sub-oxide yields 
(

(

)eq

PMOn(cid:0) 1
Pref

= aMOn Kp

)
.

PCO
PCO2

(156) 

Note that the reduced volatile species partial pressure at the surface 
of the mineral oxide inclusion depends on the CO-to-CO2 ratio in the gas 
phase at the position of the mineral inclusion. Also note that the larger 
the  equilibrium  constant  of  the  mineral  oxide  reducing  reaction,  the 
greater the partial pressure of the reduced species at the surface of the 
mineral  inclusion  and  hence,  the  faster  the  rate  of  vaporization.  The 
activity of the mineral oxide is taken as unity in nearly all char models 
that have considered ash vaporization; consequently, the mineral oxide 
partial pressures determined are maximum values, rendering maximum 
values calculated for the vaporization rates. As noted by Neville et al. 
[269], reactions between acidic and basic constituents in the mineral 
inclusions can influence the activity of the vaporizing species. 

Previous work by Quann and Sarofim [261] has indicated that the 
refractory oxides of aluminum, calcium, iron, magnesium, and silicon 
account for most of the submicron particulate matter formed during coal 
combustion. Modeling efforts indicated that at the high temperatures of 
interest, Ca, Fe, Mg, and Si vaporization is primarily in accord with the 
reduction reaction discussed above with the reactions being in equilib-
rium [261,273]. Key reactions are shown in Table 4 as reactions R.1 to 
R.4. Quann and Sarofim [261] considered other SiO2 reduction reactions 
but reaction R.4 was found to be dominant during coal combustion. This 
was also the findings of Xu et. al., [274], who considered SiO2 reduction 
via H2 and H2O as well. 

Table 4 
Equilibrium Constants for Mineral Oxide Reduction Reactions.   

CO Reduction reaction 

Equilibrium constant, Kp   

1800 K 

2000 K 

2200 K 

R.1 
R.2 
R.3 
R.4 
R.5 
R.6 
R.7 
R.8 

CaO(s) + CO↔Ca(g) + CO2 
FeO(l) + CO↔Fe(g) + CO2 
MgO(s) + CO↔Mg(g) + CO2 
SiO2(l) + CO↔SiO(g) + CO2 
Al2O3(s) + 2CO↔Al2O(g) + 2CO2 
FeS(l)↔Fe(g) + 0.5S2(g) 
K2O(l) + CO↔K2(g) + CO2 
Na2O(l) + CO↔Na2(g) + CO2 

(cid:0) 10 

(cid:0) 06 

(cid:0) 07 

(cid:0) 07 

(cid:0) 17 

(cid:0) 06 

+00 

(cid:0) 02 

9.19e
3.86e
1.78e
5.50e
5.89e
2.17e
2.70e
9.65e

(cid:0) 08 

(cid:0) 05 

(cid:0) 06 

(cid:0) 05 

(cid:0) 14 

(cid:0) 05 

+00 

(cid:0) 01 

2.78e
4.05e
3.57e
1.53e
1.80e
8.32e
5.95
2.72e

(cid:0) 07 

(cid:0) 04 

(cid:0) 05 

(cid:0) 04 

(cid:0) 13 

(cid:0) 03 

+01 

(cid:0) 01  

4.46e
2.70e
4.11e
2.26e
1.24e
1.61e
1.09e
6.07e

H2 Reduction reaction 

Equilibrium constant, Kp   

1800 K 

2000 K 

2200 K 

CaO(s) + H2↔Ca(g) + H2O 
FeO(l) + H2↔Fe(g) + H2O 

R.9 
R.10 
R.11  MgO(s) + H2↔Mg(g) + H2O 
SiO2(l) + H2↔SiO(g) + H2O 
R.12 
Al2O3(s) + 2H2↔Al2O(g) + H2O 
R.13 
K2O(l) + H2↔K2(g) + H2O 
R.14 
Na2O(l) + H2 ↔ Na2(g) + H2O 
R.15 

(cid:0) 10 

5.65
2.37e
1.09e
3.38e
4.72e
1.66e
5.93e

(cid:0) 06 

(cid:0) 07 

(cid:0) 07 

(cid:0) 18 

+00 

(cid:0) 02 

(cid:0) 08 

(cid:0) 05 

(cid:0) 06 

(cid:0) 05 

(cid:0) 15 

+00 

(cid:0) 01 

2.45e
3.56e
3.14e
1.35e
5.32e
5.25
2.39e

(cid:0) 07 

(cid:0) 04 

(cid:0) 05 

(cid:0) 04 

(cid:0) 12 

+01 

(cid:0) 01  

5.22e
3.16e
4.81e
2.65e
1.59e
1.28e
7.11e

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099334N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

With  aluminum  inclusions,  the  reaction  stoichiometry  is  slightly 
different with the likely vaporization reaction given by reaction R.5 in 
Table 4 [273]. The equilibrium partial pressure of the sub-oxide would 
be proportional to the square of the CO-to-CO2 ratio. 

With  iron,  there  is  uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  governing 
vaporization reaction owing largely to the different forms of iron in the 
coal:  siderite  (FeCO3),  pyrite  (FeS2)  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  rozenite 
(FeSO4⋅4H2O). The iron in both siderite and rozenite can likely be rep-
resented  by  FeO  after  heat  treatment.  Pyrite  transitions  at  high  tem-
peratures could proceed through molten pyrrhotite (FeS) that vaporizes, 
yielding gaseous iron (Fe) and sulfur (S2), as given by reaction R.6 in 
Table 4. For this reaction, the gaseous iron partial pressure at the surface 
of the molten pyrrhotite particle is inversely proportional to the square- 
root of the S2  partial pressure. The higher the S2  partial pressure, the 
lower  the  Fe  partial  pressure  at  the  pyrrhotite  inclusion  surface  and 
hence, the lower the pyrrhotite vaporization rate. 

For biomass, the vaporization of the oxides of alkali metals should 
also be considered (see reactions R.7 and R.8 in Table 4). The partial 
pressures of the volatilized alkali metals at the surfaces of the inclusions 
satisfy the generalized expression given by Eq. (156). 

Values of the equilibrium constants for reactions R.1 to R.8 at 1800, 
2000,  and  2200  K  are  shown  in  Table  4.  Thermodynamic  data  were 
obtained from the literature [275,276]. The relatively high values of the 
equilibrium constants of the alkali metal reactions suggest that prior to 
significant  char  conversion,  sodium  and  potassium  inclusions  would 
completely vaporize at such high temperatures. Aluminum inclusions, 
on the other hand, would hardly vaporize at all. All of the minerals in 
coals and biomass would vaporize to some extent over the course of char 
conversion owing to the high-temperature, reducing environments in-
side char particles. For multiple species vaporizing simultaneously, the 
total mineral matter vaporization rate as given by Eq. (146) would have 
to  be  modified  to  include  contributions  from  the  different  types  of 
mineral oxides present in the char. 

In gasifying conditions, it is possible for mineral oxide inclusions to 
be  reduced  via  reactions  with  hydrogen  since  the  H2  concentrations 
inside char particles may be significant, owing to the char-steam reac-
tion  (C  + H2O  ⇌  CO  + H2).  Mineral  oxide  reduction  reactions  that 
produce volatile sub-oxides or metals would have the form 

MOn(s) + H2 ⇌ MOn(cid:0) 1(g) + H2O.

Equilibration of these type of reactions leads to the following expression 
for the sub-oxide partial pressure at the surface of the reacting mineral 
inclusion 
(
)eq

)

(

= aMOn Kp,R.9

.

(157)  

PMOn(cid:0) 1
Pref

PH2
PH2O

It is noted that the higher the H2-to-H2O ratio during the char conversion 
process, the greater the mineral oxide vaporization rate. 

The equilibrium constants of mineral oxide reduction reactions with 
H2 are also shown in Table 4 at 1800, 2000, and 2200 K. Nearly all are 
comparable to their analogs with CO as the reducing agent. These re-
actions are unimportant during combustion in air owing to the much 
/PH2O  compared to PCO/PCO2  at combustion temper-
lower values of PH2
atures however in gasification conditions, these reactions are likely to be 
significant  contributors  to  mineral  oxide  vaporization  and  should  be 
considered in char models if mineral matter vaporization rates are to be 
accurately predicted. 

The impact of steam on mineral oxide vaporization rates during char 
combustion  in  O2/CO2  environments  was  demonstrated  by  Xu  et.  al., 
[274] who found that vaporization rates were enhanced by the addition 
of  steam.  These  investigators  considered  reactions  between  SiO2  and 
H2O and found that the equilibrium constants of all possible reactions 
were quite small. Based on the work of Filsinger and Bourrie [277] and 
Cheng  and  Cutler  [278],  the  most  likely  reaction  is  SiO2(s)  +
2 H2O⇌Si(OH)4(g),  and  the  equilibrium  constant  of  this  reaction  at 

(cid:0) 11, seven orders of magnitude smaller than the 
2000 K is of the order 10
equilibrium constants of SiO2  reduction via CO and H2. This suggests 
that SiO2  vaporization via reaction with H2O is negligible during char 
oxidation and can be neglected in char conversion models developed for 
oxidizing environments. However, as pointed out above, and also noted 
by Xu et al. [274] in O2/CO2/H2O environments, H2  produced via the 
char-H2O reaction promotes mineral oxide reduction, yielding volatile 
mineral sub-oxides and metals. 

Only  a  small  fraction  of  the  mineral  matter  in  chars  vaporizes.  In 
studies investigating ash vaporization during pulverized coal combus-
tion, Quann [260] observed that a greater amount and percentage of ash 
vaporized during combustion of the low rank coals examined than for 
the bituminous coals. From 1% to 2% of the ash vaporized with bitu-
minous  coals  and  about  5%  vaporized  with  low  rank  coals.  A  lignite 
from North Dakota exhibited the highest extent of ash vaporization with 
almost 9% of its ash vaporizing. The higher concentrations of the alka-
line earth metals in the lower rank coals explain these observations. 

Vaporization of the minerals in coals and biomass have been studied 
by many researchers. For examples of results employing several coals 
and  different  types  of  biomass,  see  references  [260,264,278-282]. 
Nearly all support chemical reduction of the included mineral oxides to 
volatile mineral sub-oxides or metals. All support equilibration of the 
governing chemical reactions when CO is the reducing agent. It is quite 
likely that in gasifiers, the governing chemical reactions when H2 is the 
reducing agent are also equilibrated. No char oxidation model has been 
developed to date that accounts for vaporization rates of different vol-
atile  mineral  sub-oxides  and  metals  released  from  different  types  of 
mineral inclusions as a consequence of their reactions with both CO and 
H2  during  the  char  conversion  process.  Multicomponent  effects  were 
discussed by Quann [260], who considered SiO2, MgO and CaO as iso-
lated pure phases existing inside the char particle. As noted, the equi-
librium partial pressures at the surface of one inclusion influences the 
equilibria  of  another  inclusion  of  different  composition  due  to  the 
products of the different mineral oxide reduction reactions. The partial 
pressures of CO2 and H2O will differ from their pure component cases. 

3.4.5. Modeling the impact of mineral matter on char particle temperature 
As  noted,  mineral  matter  vaporization,  diffusion  and  ash  layer 
buildup  can  influence char  reactivity, which  in  turn  will  impact  char 
particle temperatures. The char particle temperature is also impacted by 
the specific heat of the mineral matter in the char. Quite a few models 
include the impact of mineral matter on char particle temperature by 
accounting for the specific heats of the mineral oxides as well as that of 
the carbonaceous material when determining the effective specific heat 
of the particle (see for example, reference [179]): 

cp,p = YMOcp,MO + (1 (cid:0) YMO)cp,char

(158)  

where YMO is the mass fraction of the mineral oxides in the char particle 
at time t. The higher the ash content of the coal char particle, the lower 
the char particle temperature during char conversion. 

3.4.6. Modeling mineral matter nucleation, condensation and coagulation 
In the high-temperature reducing environments inside reacting char 
particles, the equilibrium partial pressures of the mineral sub-oxides and 
metals  produced  from  chemical  reduction  of  the  mineral  oxide  in-
clusions  are  higher  than  their  saturation  pressures.  This  means  that 
homogeneous  nucleation  is  possible.  The  nucleated  clusters  could 
collide with the pore walls and stick, potentially hiding carbon sites. It is 
quite likely, however, that inside the carbonaceous core, the nucleated 
clusters  re-vaporize  before  significant  growth.  Nucleation  and  re- 
vaporization rates are hypothesized to be nearly in balance inside char 
particles  at  high  temperatures.  In  most  char  conversion  models,  the 
mineral  matter  that  vaporizes  during  char  conversion  is  assumed  to 
escape the particle, leading to the formation of PM10 and smaller sized 
particles  in  the  reactor  volume.  Any  consequences  of  nucleation, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099335N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

condensation  and  coagulation  processes  inside  char  particles  during 
char conversion are usually neglected in char conversion models. 

As  the  volatile  reduced  mineral  vapors  escape  the  char  particle, 
diffusing  into  the  surrounding  environment,  they  react  with  gaseous 
species  in  the  environment  forming  volatile  mineral  oxides.  In  com-
bustors, the reduced mineral species react with oxygen and in gasifiers, 
with  steam  and  carbon  dioxide.  At  the  lower  temperatures  outside 
particles, the volatile mineral oxides can homogeneously nucleate and 
condense,  forming  nano-sized  particles  that  coagulate  and  coalesce. 
Since nano-size particle formation occurs outside of the char particle and 
does  not  significantly  impact  char  particle  conversion,  discussion  of 
modeling mineral matter nucleation,  condensation and coagulation is 
confined  to  the  Appendix,  (see  Appendix  C).  Niu  and  co-researchers 
[163,283,284]  have  developed  char  combustion  models  that  account 
for mineral matter vaporization and vapor transport inside char particles 
as  well  as  mineral  vapor  oxidation,  nucleation,  condensation,  and 
coagulation in the boundary layers outside particles leading to partic-
ulate matter in flue gases. 

3.5. Fragmentation 

During  the  char  conversion  process,  char  particles  fragment,  pro-
ducing  a  significant  number  of  small  particles  differing  in  size  and 
apparent density. Since char particle conversion rates depend on these 
physical properties, it is clear that fragmentation plays a role in deter-
mining  the  extent  of  overall  mass  loss  and  the  time  for  overall  char 
conversion to gaseous species during the char conversion process. 

Fragmentation patterns fall into three categories: attrition, breakage 
and percolation. During attrition, very small char particles are shed from 
the  peripheries  of  the  fragmenting  particles.  The  sizes  of  the  parent, 
fragmenting  particles  remain  relatively  unchanged  during  attrition 
events. During breakage, char particles break into a few parts, say two or 
three,  and  during  percolation,  a  distribution  of  fragment  sizes  are 
created, ranging from the smallest particles shed in attrition to nearly 
the sizes of the parent, fragmenting particles. 

The apparent densities of the fragments produced can be lower or 
higher than the apparent density of the parent particles. For accurate 
prediction of mass conversion rates and times for complete char con-
version, account must be made for the impact that fragmentation has on 
the variations in the size distribution and apparent densities of particles 
during the char conversion process. 

When accounting for char fragmentation, the numbers of particles of 
all sizes and apparent densities must be tracked during char conversion. 
Particle population balance models have been developed to implement 
the process [13,212,285-288]. In such population balance models, the 
particle size distribution is described by a number of size bins, where 
each size bin is characterized by its upper and lower size cutoffs. The 
largest  particles  in  the  size  distribution  are  contained  in  bin  1  (with 
upper and lower size cutoffs of d1 and d2, respectively) and the smallest 
particles in the size distribution are contained in bin n (with upper and 
lower size cutoffs of dn and 0, respectively). In most cases, the upper and 
lower cutoffs of bin i are determined from the following expression: 

γ =

di
di+1

.

(159)  

This  treatment  yields  evenly  spaced  size  intervals  in  the  log  domain, 
which effectively resolves the size distribution in the small size range 
where particle number densities are high. 

3.5.1. The fragmentation progeny matrix 

The fragmentation progeny matrix, which defines the fragment size 
distribution for each pattern of fragmentation, is based on the work of 
Austin [285] who simulated the grinding of particles using a ball mill. 
The  progeny  matrix  was  later  employed  by  Dunn-Rankin  [287]  in  a 
kinetic model for simulating the evolution of particle size distributions 

during  char  combustion.  The  elements  of  the  progeny  matrix  depend 
upon  the  type  of  fragmentation  and  are  denoted  by  bij,  where  frag-
menting particles in bin j produce fragments in bin i, where j ≤ i. The 
expressions  presented  below  for  the  elements  of  the  fragmentation 
progeny matrix were derived assuming that all fragments had the same 
apparent density as the fragmenting particle and hence, the volume of 
the fragmenting particle was conserved, i.e., 

d3
p,j =

∑n

i=j

bijd3

p,i.

(160)  

Here,  a  fragmenting  particle  of  diameter  dj  produces  fragments  of 
diameter di. 

Attrition. Only a small fraction f (say, 0.1%) of the mass of the particle is 
lost during an attrition event. The fragmenting particle remains in bin j 
but may fall into bin j+1 if the particle size was already near the lower 
size cutoff of the bin. The attrited fragments fall into bins mj to n, where 
the  sizes  of  the  largest  attrited  fragments  (those  falling  into  bin  mj) 
depend  on  the  size  of  the  fragmenting  particle,  the  larger  the  frag-
menting particle the larger the sizes of the attrited fragments. For char 
particles  in  the  pulverized  fuel  size-range  (say  100  μm),  bin  mj  may 
contain  attrited  particles  nominally  0.05  μm  in  diameter  whereas  for 
millimeter  size  char  particles,  bin  mj  may  contain  attrited  particles 
nominally  0.5  μm  in  diameter.  The  elements  of  the  attrition  progeny 
matrix are as follows: 

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

bij =

0

j + 2 ≤ i ≤ mj (cid:0) 1

f γ3(i(cid:0) j)
n (cid:0) mj + 1

mj ≤ i ≤ n

(1 (cid:0)

f )γ3 (cid:0) 1

γ3 (cid:0) 1

i = j

f γ3
γ3 (cid:0) 1

0

i = j + 1

i < j

(161)  

Breakage. Fragmenting particles only break into a few parts (say, two or 
three)  during  breakage  type  fragmentation,  yielding  relatively  large 
fragments. Assuming that fragments produced when particles break fall 
only into the next ml  lower size classes, particles fragmenting in bin j 
produce fragments in bins j+1 to j+ml. Care should be taken to ensure 
that  bin  j+ml  contains  the  smallest  expected  fragment  sizes  for  the 
breakage  of  particles  in  bin  j.  For  such  a  case,  the  elements  of  the 
breakage progeny matrix are as follows: 

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

bij =

0

i ≤ j

γ3(i(cid:0) j)
ml

0

i = j + 1, j + ml

i > j + 1

(162)  

Percolation. Percolation fragmentation produces a distribution of frag-
ment  sizes.  Austin  [285]  assumed  that  the  same  mass  fraction  of  a 
fragmenting particle would fall into each logarithmically-spaced size bin 
and  derived  the  following  expression  for  elements  of  the  percolation 
progeny matrix: 

⎧
⎪⎨

bij =

⎪⎩

γ3(i(cid:0) j)

n (cid:0)

j + 1

i ≥ j

0

otherwise

(163) 

The  elements  of  the  progeny  matrix,  bij,  represent  the  number  of 
fragments generated that fall into bin i per particle fragmenting in bin j, 
i.e., bij = ni/nj, where nj represents the number of fragmenting particles 
in bin j and ni, the number of fragments in bin i. It should be emphasized 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099336N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

the volume lost to attrition was specified to be 0.1% (i.e., f = 0.001) and 
the largest attrited fragment was specified to be 0.1 μm. The fragments 
generated  during  attrition  were  distributed  into  26  size  bins  ranging 
from 0.1 to 0.008 μm. With attrition fragmentation, only 4 of the 1000 
fragmenting particles in bin 1 lost sufficient volume to move to the next 
lower size bin, d2  = 91 μm. A large number of sub-micron fragments 
were generated, but not as many as with percolation fragmentation. This 
is because the sum of the volumes of all the particles generated during 
attrition was limited to represent only 0.1% of the volume of the frag-
menting particle. A larger fraction would yield a larger number of sub- 
micron size fragments. 

Since  there  is  relatively  little  mass  in  sub-micron  size  fragments, 
these results suggest that mass loss profiles calculated assuming attrition 
fragmentation during the char conversion process and neglecting frag-
mentation all together would yield similar mass loss profiles. However, 
since  mass  loss  rates  depend  on  particle  size,  mass  loss  calculations 
would  differ  assuming  percolation  or  breakage  fragmentation  (or 
neglecting fragmentation). Mitchell and Akanetuk [13] show agreement 
between measured and calculated cumulative number distributions and 
mass loss profiles when percolation fragmentation is assumed to occur 
during char oxidation under zone II conditions. These researchers noted 
that it was not possible to get such agreement when either breakage or 
attrition fragmentation was assumed to occur during char conversion. 
Employing chars differing in porosity, these researchers also found that 
fragmentation rates increased with increasing char particle porosity. 

To  account  for  the  different  apparent  densities  of  the  fragments 
produced during fragmentation, Tilghman and Mitchell [212] consid-
ered apparent density classes and defined the tensor P to describe the 
variations  in  the  apparent  density  distribution  with  fragmentation. 
Apparent density class k contained particles having an average apparent 
density of ρp,k. The elements of this tensor are Pi,j,k,m, where a particle in 
size bin j and apparent density class m fragments producing fragments in 
size bin i in apparent density class k. Assuming that most fragments will 
have  an  apparent  density  similar  to  that  of  their  parent,  fragmenting 
particle, a Gaussian distribution centered about the apparent density of 
the fragmenting particle was chosen to represent the fragment apparent 
density distribution. For such a scenario, elements of the P tensor are 
given by 

(

)

(ρp,m (cid:0) ρp,k)2
2(σij)2

.

Pi,j,k,m =

(cid:0)

e

√

1
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)2
(cid:0)
σij
2π

(164) 

In the work of Tilghman and Mitchell [212], the variance was taken 
as a piecewise factor having three values that depend on particle size, σ1, 
σ2  and σ3, which  were adjusted to provide  agreement with data.  The 
variance was calculated using the following relations 

⎧
⎨

σij =

⎩

σ1
σ2
σ3

i (cid:0)

j < Nsize/5

if
if Nsize/5 < i (cid:0)
if

i (cid:0)

j > Nsize/2

j < Nsize/2

(165)  

where Nsize  is the number of size bins considered when describing the 
size distribution. The three values determined for the standard variances 
were 0.05, 0.08 and 0.12 g/cm3  for σ1, σ2  and σ3, respectively, for the 
char particles of a sub-bituminous coal from Wyoming, Wyodak coal. 
The variance increases with decreasing particle size. 

As noted, the elements of the progeny matrix were determined under 
the assumption that all fragments produced by the fragmenting particles 
had the same apparent density as the fragmenting particle. This is valid 
for  non-porous  particles  but  becomes  increasing  less  accurate  as  the 
fragmenting  particle  becomes  more  porous.  The  expression  would 
violate the conservation of mass if the fragmenting particle had large 
voids within its outer surface or if it were a cenosphere. Since conser-
vation of mass is the underlying principle, the following expression is 
more accurate but has yet to be employed in any model of char frag-

Fig. 12. Number of fragments generated per 1000 fragmenting particles in bin 
1, with d1  = 100 µm. 

that bin j contains not only particles having diameter dj, but particles 
having diameters between dj and dj+1. Shown in Fig. 12 are the numbers 
of fragments generated in selected size ranges when 1000 particles in bin 
1, with d1  = 100 μm, undergo fragmentation under the three different 
fragmentation  scenarios,  percolation,  breakage  and  attrition.  In  the 
calculations, 100 size bins were considered (n = 100) with γ = 1.1, d2 ≈
91 µm and dn = 0.008 µm (di = γ(j (cid:0)
i)dj). Thus, the fragmenting particles 
were in the size range 91 – 100 μm. As noted in Fig. 12, when the 1000 
particles in bin 1 undergo percolation fragmentation, fragments of all 
sizes  are  generated,  and  the  number  of  particles  in  each  size  bin  in-
creases as the sizes of the fragments get smaller. Percolation results in 
quite  a  larger  number  of  sub-micron  size  fragments.  In  the  breakage 
fragmentation scenario, ml was set to 5, i.e., broken particles could yield 
fragments that fall into bins 2 to 5. Bin 5 has upper and lower size cutoffs 
of 68 and 62 μm, respectively, the expected size range for the smallest 
broken particles. With breakage fragmentation, the 1000 particles in bin 
1  generated  about  2,150  fragments,  1,365  of  these  having  diameters 
between  75  and  91  μm  and  the  remaining  785  fragments  having  di-
ameters between 62 and 75 µm. The total number of particles resulting 
after breakage suggests that most particles broke into two parts, with 
some (150 of the 1000) breaking into three. As mentioned above, with 
breakage  care  must  be  taken  in  selecting  ml,  the  bin  containing  the 
smallest  broken  pieces  for  fragmentation  in  bin  j.  The  larger  ml,  the 
smaller the fragments in bin j+ml  and hence, the larger the number of 
fragments in the bin. Thus, if the selected value of ml  is too large, par-
ticles  would  have  to  break  into  several  pieces,  more  than  the  two  or 
three parts assumed in breakage events. If the selected value is too small, 
then the total number of fragments generated would be less than twice 
the number of fragmenting particles in bin j, an impossibility since all of 
the particles in bin j are assumed to fragment into a smaller size range. 
With γ  = 1.1 and d1  = 100 µm, setting ml  to 6 would result in 2,555 
fragments, with the smallest fragments in the size range 56 to 62 μm. 
Setting ml to 4 would result in the generation of only 1,820 fragments, 
too few if all 1000 particles in bin 1 break into at least two parts. It is 
recommended to set ml to the smallest value that yields at least twice the 
number of fragments as there are particles fragmenting in bin 1, the bin 
containing the largest particle sizes considered. In addition, it should be 
assumed that sub-micron size particles do not break. The breakage of 
such  small  particles  are  of  little  consequence  and  will  not  impact 
calculated mass loss profiles. 

In the calculations assuming attrition fragmentation, the fraction of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099337N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

mentation: 

ρp,kd3

p,j =

∑n

∑Ndens

i=j

m=1

ρp,mPi,j,k,mbijd3

p,i.

(166) 

In this approach, a fragmenting particle of diameter dp,j and apparent 
density ρp,k  produces fragments of diameter dp,i  having apparent den-
sities ranging from ρ1 (the apparent density of the most dense particle in 
the population) to ρNdens  (the apparent density of the least dense particles 
in the population), where Ndens is the number of apparent density classes 
used to describe the particle apparent density distribution. 

3.5.2. The fragmentation rate 

The fraction per unit time of particles of size dp,i and apparent density 

ρp,k that fragment is denoted as Si,k, and is given by 

Si,k = kfrag

)ω

(

ρp,0
ρp,k

dω*
p,i ,

(167)  

where  ρp,0  is  the  mean  initial  density  of  all  the  particles,  kfrag  is  the 
fragmentation rate constant (which gives the frequency of fragmenta-
tion events), and ω* and ω define the dependency of the fragmentation 
rate on particle size and inverse density, respectively. Values for these 
parameters  are  adjusted  to  provide  agreement  between  experimental 
observations and calculations. For particles in the pulverized fuel size- 
range,  a  value  of  unity  was  used  for  ω*  when  all  fragments  were 
assumed to have the same apparent density (ω = 0) [285,286]. Tilgh-
man  and  Mitchell  [212]  employed  values  ω* = 2  and  ω  = 1,  when 
account was made for differences in the apparent densities of fragments. 
As noted by Kleinhans et al. [247], the fragmentation rate depends on 
a number of factors, amongst them the initial char structure and particle 
size. The size dependence is captured explicitly in Eq. (167) whereas the 
initial  char  structure  dependence  is  implicitly  contained  in  kfrag.  As 
indicated in the following section, it is the fragmentation rate that dis-
tinguishes the fragmentation patterns for a given char during conver-
sion;  the  elements  of  the  progeny  matrix  depend  primarily  on  the 
number of size bins used to describe the fragment distribution and apply 
to all types of char particles. It is expected that kfrag depends on pressure 
since char particle morphology depends on pressure and fragmentation 
rates  depend  on  char  particle  morphology  [227].  For  example,  ceno-
spheric type particles fragment more readily than low-porosity, dense 
char particles [225]. Kleinhans et al. [247] concluded that percolation 
was  the  primary  type  of  fragmentation  during  combustion,  that  the 
number  of fragments  increased with  particle  size, and  that char  frag-
mentation depends on the type of char and its mineral composition. 

A char fragmentation model has also been developed by Baxter [289] 
that relates the initial size distribution of the char to the final fly ash size 
distribution.  The extent  of  char  fragmentation  as  a  function  of  initial 
char  particle  size  was  investigated  using  the  model  for  char  particles 
burning in 4% oxygen, by volume, at 1573 K. Results indicated that the 
extent of fragmentation was dependent on the initial char particle size 
and coal rank. With bituminous coals, model calculations indicated over 
100 fragments per char particle for particles having initial sizes larger 
than about 80 µm and less than 10 fragments per particle for particles 
having initial sizes less than 20 µm. Lignite chars produced fewer frag-
ments, less than 5 fragments per char particle for particles of all sizes. 

3.5.3. Variations in particle size and apparent density distributions during 
char conversion 

As char conversion progresses, the numbers of particles of a partic-
ular  size  and  apparent  density  change  due  to  the  effects  of  heteroge-
neous  reaction  and  fragmentation.  The  differential  equation  that 
describes the temporal variations in the number of particles in each size- 
density bin, Ni,k, can be expressed as follows: 

dNi,k
dt

(cid:0)

= (cid:0)

Ci,k + Di,k + Si,k

)
Ni.k + Ci(cid:0) 1,kNi(cid:0) 1,k + Di,k(cid:0) 1Ni,k(cid:0) 1

+

∑i

∑Ndens

j=1

m=1

bijPi,j,k,mSj,mNj,m.

(168)  

Here, Ci,k denotes the fraction of particles that leave the size bin per unit 
time owing to a reduction in diameter below the lower bin cutoff due to 
char  reactivity,  Di,k  denotes  the  fraction  of  particles  that  leave  the 
apparent density class per unit time owing to a reduction in apparent 
density  due  to  char  reactivity,  and  Ndens  is  the  number  of  apparent 
density classes considered. Thus, the first bracketed term on the right- 
hand-side of the above equation represents the decrease in the number 
of  particles  in  the  size-density  bin  owing  to  char  reactivity  and  frag-
mentation. The next two terms represent the increase in the numbers of 
particles  as  particles  enter  the  bin  from  the  adjacent  bin  containing 
larger  diameter  particles  due  to  heterogeneous  reaction  at  the  outer 
surfaces of particles (which reduces particle diameter) and as particles 
enter the bin from the adjacent, higher density class due to heteroge-
neous reactions at the internal surfaces of particles (which reduces char 
apparent  density).  The  last  term  on  the  right-hand-side  of  the  above 
equation represents an increase in the number of particles in the size- 
density bin as a result of fragmentation of particles in larger size bins. 
The parameters Ci,k and Di,k are evaluated via the following relations: 

(

)

(

)

Ci,k =

1
(di (cid:0) di+1)

ddp
dt

=

i,k

1
(di (cid:0) di+1)

2Rext
ρp

i,k

Di,k =

(

1
(ρk (cid:0) ρk+1)

)

dρp
dt

=

i,k

1
(ρk (cid:0) ρk+1)

(

)

=

(cid:0)
ρk
(ρk (cid:0) ρk+1)

i,k

ηSgRext

)
i,k

6Rint
dp

(169)  

(170)  

where  Rext  is  the  intrinsic  char  reactivity  evaluated  at  the  conditions 
existing at the external surface of the char particle of diameter dp  and 
apparent density ρk and Rint is the intrinsic char reactivity evaluated at 
the conditions inside the particle, and expressed in terms of the effec-
tiveness factor and reactivity at the external surface of the particle. 

3.6. Modeling thermal annealing 

Thermal  annealing  (or  graphite  formation)  occurs  when  carbona-
ceous materials are subjected to high temperatures; it results in the loss 
in char reactivity under all combustion and gasification conditions. At 
high temperatures, edge carbons and dislocations in the carbon matrix 
(the most reactive of the carbon sites) can be lost due to surface reor-
ganization induced by carbonization. During heat treatment, hydrogen 
is released from the carbonaceous matrix, which induces reordering of 
the  turbostratic  structures  of  coals  and  biomass,  causing  the  char 
structures  to  become  more  graphitic  and  hence,  less  reactive  since 
graphitization hinders oxygen accessibility and prevents the formation 
of  surface  oxide  complexes.  Thermal  annealing  induces  sintering  and 
phase transformations that lead to reductions in catalytic activity. All 
coal and biomass chars created at high temperatures experience some 
degree  of  thermal  annealing  during  pyrolysis  and  devolatilization. 
During  char  conversion,  the  physical  structures  of  coal  and  biomass 
chars  change  continuously  owing  to  thermal  annealing,  adversely 
impacting char reactivity. 

Reactivity loss has been attributed to loss of active carbon sites [124, 
165,168,290,291],  loss  of  surface  area  [124,168,292],  structural  rear-
rangements  associated  with  graphitization  [104,105,125,145,146,157, 
159,291,293-296], and loss of catalytic activity [157,159,291,297]. Car-
bon and pyro-graphite rods [119,293,298], coal chars [105,114,124-128, 
138,143,145,146,157,159,165,290,294,297,299-301],  biomass  chars 
[150,302], cokes [128,300], and phenol-formaldehyde resin chars [127, 
168] have been investigated. Chars have been produced in heat treatment 
tests performed in thermogravimetric analyzers and heated strip reactors 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099338N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

tubular 

furnaces 

[105,124-126,  128,138,146,157,168,290,300,302],  electrically-heated 
wire-mesh  and  graphite  sheet  reactors  [104,127,294,303],  drop  tubes 
[105,150,165,192,299], 
and  electrically-heated 
entrained flow reactors [114,159,296] as well as in packed and fluidized 
bed reactors [157,297]. Shock tubes [299] and hot jets of oxygen/nitrogen 
mixtures impinging on carbon surfaces [119,298] have also been used as 
methods for heat treatment. When monitoring char reactivity, combustion 
[104,114,119,124,127,128,150,157,159,165,168,290,291,293,294,297, 
298,300,301,303],  dry  (CO2)  and  wet  (H2O)  gasification  [17,125,138, 
143,145,146,296,302]  and  oxy-combustion  [92,105,143,245,302]  envi-
ronments  have  been  considered  as  well  as  environments  established  in 
carbon-hydrogen-methane reacting systems [292]. Char precursors (e.g., 
the  type  coal  macerals,  the  nature  of  the  parent  material,  whether  a 
low-reactivity or high-reactivity char, type of inorganic matter present, as 
well as particle temperature-time history) were also found to impact the 
loss  in  reactivity  owing  to  heat  treatment  [104,127,295].  For  example, 
vitrinite-rich  fractions  of  coals  have  been  observed  to  deactivate  more 
readily than inertinite-rich fractions [104]. All studies suggest that when 
modeling char conversion, it is important to account for the impact that 
thermal annealing has on char reactivity for accurate predictions. 

Thermal  annealing  begins  during  the  devolatilization  process,  as 
coals and biomass are initially heated to high temperatures. The impact 
of  thermal  annealing  on  char  reactivity  starts  to  become  evident  at 
temperatures  higher  than  about  1000  K  [105,150,292,296,297]  and 
becomes increasingly important with increased temperature and dura-
tion  of  heat  treatment.  Several  researchers  [105,125,127,301]  have 
used  high-resolution  transmission  electron  microscopy  (HRTEM)  to 
investigate  the  loss  in  reactivity  and  the  development  of  structural 
anisotropy of char samples. It was noted that loss of char reactivity by 
thermal annealing and structural reorganization follow similar paths for 
coal  and  biomass  [105,125,301,302].  It  has  been  demonstrated  that 
thermal annealing resulting from heat treatment of chars significantly 
affects both the extent and the accessibility of active sites available for 
the formation of surface oxides. The longer the heat treatment time and 
the higher the heat treatment temperature, the less the oxygen uptake (i. 
e.,  the  less  oxygen  adsorption  at  active  carbon  sites)  by  chars  [290]. 
Nearly all studies conclude that the higher the peak temperature and the 
higher the heating rate and holding time at the peak temperature, the 
greater the adverse impact of thermal annealing on char reactivity. 

It has also been observed that the extent of thermal deactivation in 
oxygen  environments  is  more  severe  than  it  is  in  CO2  environments 
[125,144], especially at high heat treatment temperatures. As hypoth-
esized by Salatino and co-researchers [125,144], since CO2 has a lower 
propensity  to  undergo  micropore chemisorption  than O2  and  since  at 
high temperatures the accessibility of reactive sites is reduced by gra-
phene layer stacking and rearrangement, chemisorption within micro-
pores plays a more important role in gasification with oxygen than it 
does in gasification with CO2. 

Thermal annealing involves a number of individual processes having 
different temperature dependences that result in reactivity loss during coal 
and  biomass  combustion  and  gasification.  At  low  temperatures  (T  <
~1000 K), cross-linking phenomena associated with hydrogen loss occur 
in the carbonaceous matrix and at higher temperatures, carbon structure 
reordering occurs. The reordering is associated with defect losses between 
carbon layers at intermediate temperatures (~1000 K to ~1800 K), with 
in-plane defect losses at higher temperatures (~1800 K to ~2300 K) and 
with crystallite growth at even higher temperatures (T > 2300 K) [125]. 
Despite  the  different  temperature  dependences,  in  most  models 
developed to investigate thermal annealing, the overall process is lum-
ped into a single deactivation step. In addition, two types of carbon sites 
are assumed to exist in the char, reactive type-A sites and less reactive 

type-B sites. The type-B sites are presumed to have been impacted by 
thermal annealing and hence, adsorb reactive gases at slower rates than 
the type-A sites. During the char conversion process, a number of the 
type-A  sites  undergo  heterogeneous  oxidation  to  produce  gaseous 
product species while a number are converted to type-B sites, a conse-
quence of thermal annealing during char conversion. The type-B sites 
are also involved in heterogeneous reactions, producing gaseous product 
species. It is usually assumed that the annealing reaction is irreversible 
and independent of both pressure and the composition of the environ-
ment. The annealing step is also assumed to be first-order with respect to 
the  concentration  of  the  type-A  carbon  sites.  Many  researchers  [119, 
138,145,293,298] have used variations of the following three-step re-
action mechanism when accounting for thermal annealing: 

Untreated char ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅→

heterogeneous reactions

Gaseous products  

thermal annealing
Untreated char ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅→

Deactivated char  

Deactivated char ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅→

heterogeneous reactions

Gaseous products 

The rate coefficient for the thermal annealing reaction is expressed in 
Arrhenius form: kd = Ad
exp( (cid:0) Ed/RT). A very wide range of activation 
energies has been reported for the annealing activation energy, Ed, from 
a low value near 13 kJ/mol (for a sub-bituminous coal) to a value as high 
as 730 kJ/mol (for graphite and carbonized filaments) [119,145,293, 
297,298].  A  variety  of  chars  ranging  from  bituminous  coal  chars  to 
lignite chars to biomass chars have been examined; no trends in acti-
vation  energy  of  the  deactivation  reaction  with  char-type  have  been 
reported.  It  has  been  hypothesized  that  the  activation  energy  of  the 
deactivation reaction is independent of the carbon source [297], how-
ever, the available data found in the literature do not seem to support 
this hypothesis. Probably the most widely used value for the activation 
energy of the deactivation reaction is 97 kcal/mol (~407 kJ/mol), as 
found  by  Nagle  and  Strickland-Constable  [298].  How  the  activation 
energy depends on the coal type, coal morphology and coal chemistry 
are  still  open  questions.  Wide  variations  in  the  determination  of  the 
activation energy of the annealing reaction are expected owing not only 
to coal properties but also to differences in heat treatment conditions, 
specifically, in  coal particle heating rates,  peak temperatures reached 
and  residence  times  in  heat  treatment  environments.  These  factors 
impact char specific surface area, porosity, extent of graphitization, and 
crystallite size [293], all of which impact the activation energy of the 
annealing reaction in ways not fully understood. 

The pre-exponential factor of the annealing reaction depends on the 
particular char considered and the heat treatment conditions. Based on the 
results of Salatino et al., [138], the activation energy of the annealing re-
action is relatively constant for a variety of heat treatment conditions with 
the pre-exponential factor depending on heating rates and peak tempera-
tures  reached  and  the  time  the  char  spends  in  the  heat  treatment 
environments. 

Simulations of the thermal annealing process indicate that there is 
not a sharp transition from the reactivity of the untreated char to that of 
the  heat-treated  char  during  the  conversion  process  but  a  gradual 
transition.  This  could  be  a  consequence  of  the  time  span  over  which 
annealing  occurs  being  comparable  to  the  time  over  which  heteroge-
neous  reactions  consume  the  carbonaceous  material.  Early  in  char 
conversion,  heterogeneous  reaction  occurs  on  both  the  active  and 
deactivated  carbon  sites  but  once  the  active  sites  are  depleted,  char 
conversion rates are controlled by the conversion rates of the annealed 
char that was formed as the char conversion process proceeded. Senecca 
and Salatino [145] estimated a kinetic constant for annealing of 0.02 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099339N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

(cid:0) 1 at 1173 K for untreated South African coal chars exposed to en-
min
vironments  containing  O2  and  CO2.  At  temperatures  below  1173  K, 
annealing rates were found to be less than the heterogeneous reaction 
rates  with  O2  and  CO2.  At  about  1800  K,  the  rates  of  annealing  and 
heterogeneous reaction in O2 were observed to be comparable [304]. At 
higher particle temperatures, the time-scales for thermal annealing were 
found to be shorter than the characteristic time-scales for heterogeneous 
reaction, and at such high temperatures (>1800 K), it is quite likely that 
all  carbon  sites  are  impacted  by  thermal  annealing  before  full  char 
conversion.  Murty  et  al.  [267]  suggested  that  at  any  temperature, 
annealing takes place over multiple time-scales, which makes it difficult 
to assess asymptotic behaviors of the annealing process. 

In heat treatment studies with a lignin-rich biomass, Senecca et al. 
[302] observed that in oxy-combustion environments at temperatures 
exceeding 1473 K, the effects of thermal annealing are not monotonic. In 
the early stages of heat-treatment (t < 0.1 s), CO2 was found to promote 
thermal annealing whereas at longer times (t > 1s), CO2  was found to 
hamper thermal annealing. It appears that it is possible for some of the 
stable surface oxides that are formed on type-B carbon sites during the 
oxidation  process  to  desorb,  with  the  underlying  carbon  site  having 
higher reactivity than the desorbed carbon site. In order to capture all 
the experimental observations, when predicting the conversion of coal 
and biomass chars, a realistic thermal annealing model must assume the 
production of both type-A and type-B carbon sites when a carbon atom 
desorbs from an annealed site. Such an annealing model was proposed 
by Blyholder et al. [293]: 

Carbon (Type-A site) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅→

adsorption
desorption

reactions

Carbon (Type-A site) + Gaseous products    

thermal annealing
Carbon (Type-A site) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅→

Carbon (Type-B site)

Carbon (Type-B site) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅→

adsorption
desorption

reactions

Carbon (Type-A site) + Gaseous products  

Carbon (Type-B site) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅→

adsorption
desorption

reactions

Carbon (Type-B site) + Gaseous products 

A three-component annealing model has also been proposed [192]. A 
reactive,  hydrogenated  pseudo-component  of  the  char  (CHARH)  un-
dergoes  thermal  annealing  resulting  in  an  amorphous,  disorder  char 
structure (CHARC) and an ordered, graphitic char structure (CHARG). 
Both  CHARH  and  CHARC  are  formed  during  devolatilization  -  their 
relative  amounts  depending  on  coal  rank.  During  the  overall  thermal 
annealing process,  dehydrogenation reactions  convert CHARH  (a char 
having a molar C/H ratio of 2/1, e.g. coronene, C24H12) to CHARC and 
hydrogen (CHARH → 2CHARC + 0.5H2) and both CHARH and CHARC are 
converted to CHARG (CHARH → CHARG and CHARC → CHARG). Each of 
the char pseudo-components is involved in heterogeneous oxidation and 
gasification reactions, yielding gaseous products. In the heterogeneous 
reaction  mechanism  employed  [192],  CHARH  reacts  with  O2,  H2O  or 
CO2 to yield CHARC as well as gaseous CO and H2. Arrhenius parameters 
for the three annealing reactions were determined by comparing pre-
dictions and experimental data on char reactivity obtained under a va-
riety  of  test  conditions.  Overall,  model  predictions  were  in  good 
agreement with the experimental data in terms of char conversion times 
and surface temperatures for both the chars of the bituminous coal and 
lignite that were investigated. The relative reactivities of the three char 

reflecting 

components  at  1173  K  were  estimated  to  be  ~40:20:1  for  CHARH: 
CHARC:CHARG, 
the 
the 
hydrogen-containing  char  component  and  the  low  reactivity  of  the 
annealed  char  component.  Compared  to  two-component  annealing 
models, a three-component model can better reflect fast annealing rates 
early  in  char  conversion  with  slower  annealing  rates  during  the  later 
stages of char conversion, an experimental observation. 

reactivity 

high 

of 

Thermal annealing models have also been developed that use a dis-
tribution  of  activation  energies  to  describe  the  rate  of  the  annealing 
reaction  [114,128,143,168,291].  Such  an  approach is  consistent  with 
the viewpoint that thermal annealing involves numerous physical and 
chemical transformations having different temperature dependences. A 
continuous distribution of activation energies for the annealing reaction 
is  hypothesized  to better  characterize the  temperature dependence  of 
the  overall  annealing  process.  In  the  approach  pioneered  by  Suuberg 
[291], the number of active sites having activation energy in the range 
Ed  to  Ed  + dEd  is  F(Ed)dEd,  and  each  of  these  active  sites  decays  in 
accord with the first-order rate: dF/dt = (cid:0)
kdF, where (cid:0) kd is the rate 
coefficient for the annealing reaction: active sites →  deactivated sites. 
Integration yields the number of the active sites that are still active after 
annealing for time t: 

F(Ed)=F0(Ed)exp

⎞

⎛

((cid:0) kd)dt

⎠=F0(Ed)exp

⎝(cid:0)

∫t

⎛

⎝

0

(

Adexp

(cid:0)

∫t

0

⎞

)

⎠

dt

Ed
̂RuT

(171) 

In this approach, the initial distribution of the annealing activation 
energies is defined by the function f(Ed), which is a specified function 

∫∞

that  satisfies 

f(Ed)dEd = 1.  Letting  S0  denote  the  total  number  of 

(cid:0) ∞

active sites before significant annealing (or some measure of the initial 
number of active sites), the initial distribution of activation energies is 
given by 

F0(Ed) = S0f (Ed).

(172) 

The total number of active sites at any time can be found by inte-

grating F(Ed) over all activation energies; thus, 

∫∞

S =

F(Ed) dEd

0

Combining the above equations results in 

⎛

exp

⎝ (cid:0)

S
S0

=

∫∞

0

(

Adexp

(cid:0)

∫t

0

Ed
̂RuT

⎞

)

dt

⎠f (Ed) dEd,

(173)  

(174)  

which permits determination of the number of active sites that remain 
active after the char undergoes annealing for a time t from the onset of 
significant annealing, relative to an initial value for the number of active 
sites. 

Suuberg and co-workers [168,291] employed a Gaussian distribution 

function for f(Ed): 
[

f (Ed) =

1
√ exp
̅̅̅̅̅
2π

σ

]

(cid:0)

(Ed (cid:0) E0)2
2σ2

(175)  

where E0 and σ are the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of the 
distribution. 

As noted by Suuberg et al. [168,291], the difficulty in identifying the 
number of active sites at time zero is overcome by assuming that the 
ratio  expressed  in  Eq.  (174)  gives  the  number  of  active  sites  at  two 
different temperatures, with the denominator, S0, giving the number of 
sites at a temperature sufficiently low that thermal annealing is unim-
portant with respect to influencing char reactivity. Employing reactivity 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099340N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

data from a variety of coal chars, Suuberg et al. [168,291] searched the 
parameter space and found a best fit to the data: σ = 163 kJ/mol, E0 =
(cid:0) 1. The annealing pre-exponent factor Ad 
151 kJ/mol and Ad = 1 × 1013 s
was taken to be the same for all of the annealing reactions. 

Suuberg  and  co-workers  [168,291]  observed  that  only  the  high 
activation  energy  annealing  reactions  contributed  to  the  annealing 
process – annealing reactions having activation energies near the mean 
value  or  lower  were  essentially  irrelevant,  contributing  little  to 
annealing  behavior  at  long  times  and  high  temperatures.  They  found 
that  the  effective  annealing  reactions  have  activation  energies  in  the 
range  450  to  just  over  600  kJ/mol,  corresponding  roughly  with  the 
range of activation energies for aromatization and graphitization pro-
cesses.  Realizing  that  only  the  high  activation  energy  end  of  the 
Gaussian distribution was active in impacting reactivity loss, the need to 
consider other distribution functions that exhibit declining numbers of 
sites  with  increasing  activation  energy  for  the  initial  distribution  of 
active sites was emphasized. A log-normal distribution function [114, 
143]  and  a  shifted  gamma  distribution  function  [128]  have  been 
considered. All such distribution functions are suitable; Zolin et al, [128] 
found that a shifted gamma distribution function yielded slightly better 
fits to their deactivation data than a log-normal distribution function. 

Hurt et al. [114], slightly modified Suuberg‘s distributed activation 
thermal  annealing  model  by  incorporating  a  log-normal  distribution 
function for annealing activation energies and coupling the annealing 
model to a char reactivity model adequate for char oxidation in the Zone 
II combustion regime. The log-normal distribution was expressed as 

f (Ed, t0) =

[

(cid:0)

1
√ exp
̅̅̅̅̅
2π

σ

(ln(Ed) (cid:0)

ln(E0))2

]

2σ2

(176)  

where σ is the standard deviation of the ln(Ed) distribution. This is the 
initially assumed distribution of the number of active sites and has the 

∫∞

desired property, 

f(Ed, t0) dEd = 1. Since the active sites are lost at 

0

different rates due to differences in activation energies, the activation 
energy  distribution  function  varies  in  time.  By  defining  a  normalized 
frequency distribution function for active sites at time t as follows 

f (Ed, t) =

F(Ed, t)
,
S0

(177)  

and taking its time derivative, the following expression for the variation 
in the normalized frequency distribution function can be derived in light 
of Eq. (172) and the fact that dF/dt = -kd: 

df (Ed, t)
dt

= (cid:0) f (Ed, t)Adexp

(cid:0)

(

)

.

Ed
̂RuTp

Separating variables and integrating results in: 

⎛

f (Ed, t)
f (Ed, t0)

= exp

⎝ (cid:0)

(

Adexp

(cid:0)

∫t

0

⎞

)

⎠.

dt

Ed
̂RuTp

(178)  

(179)  

Eqs.  (173),(177)  and  (179)  can  be  combined  to  yield  the  following 
expression  for  the  total  number  of  active  sites  in  the  char  at  time  t 
relative to the total number of active sites in the char before significant 
annealing: 

S
S0

∫∞

=

f (Ed, t) dEd =

0

⎛

f (Ed, t0) exp

⎝ (cid:0)

∫∞

0

(

Adexp

(cid:0)

∫t

0

Ed
̂RuTp

⎞

)

dt

⎠ dEd

(180) 

For  char  particles  undergoing  oxidation  in  the  Zone  I  combustion 
regime, char reactivity is proportional to the number of active carbon 
sites.  Thus,  at  two  different  temperatures,  both  rendering  Zone  I 

conversion rates, the ratio of the overall particle reaction rates at the two 
temperatures is equal to the ratio of the number of active sites at the two 
temperatures,  i.e.,  Rov/Rov,0  = S/S0.  However,  as  noted  by  Hurt  et  al. 
[114], for char particles undergoing oxidation in the Zone II combustion 
regime, the classical Thiele theory predicts that char reactivity is pro-
portional to the square-root of the number of active sites i.e., Rov∝S
Thus, 

2. 

1

Rov
Rov,0

=

)m

(

S
S0

=

⎛

exp

⎝ (cid:0)

∫∞

⎛

⎝

0

∫t

0

(

Adexp

(cid:0)

Ed
̂RuT

⎞

)

⎞
m

dt

⎠f (Ed, t0) dEd

⎠

(181)  

where m = 1 for combustion in Zone I and m = 0.5 for combustion in 
Zone II, the regime in which thermal annealing is more significant. 

RuTp)Pn
O2

In the approach undertaken by Hurt and co-workers [114], for the 
Zone II combustion regime particle burning rates per unit external sur-
face  area  were  employed  as  measures  of  char  reactivity,  and  these 
apparent reactivities were expressed as Rov = A exp((cid:0) E /̂
. The 
pre-exponential  factor  was  treated  as  a  variable  dependent  on  char 
precursor and temperature-time history: A = f(precursor, T(t)). Based on 
data obtained in tests with ten vitrinite-rich coals of various ranks from 
the United States, Hurt et al. [114] determined rank-dependent corre-
lations for initial char reactivity as a function of the dry, ash-free carbon 
content  of  the  parent  coal.  The  three  parameters  that  define  the 
distributed  activation  energy  thermal  annealing  model  (the  natural 
logarithm of the pre-exponential factor, ln(Ad); the mean value of the ln 
(Ed) distribution,  ln(E0);  and  the standard  deviation  of the  ln(Ed)  dis-
tribution, σ) were also determined. The optimal parameters for the data 
(cid:0) 1), ln(E0) = 2.8 (ln kcal/mol), 
set were found to be: ln(Ad) = 18.3 (ln s
and σ = 0.46 (ln kcal/mol). 

Since chars inherently undergo some extent of heat treatment during 
their formation, values for Rov correspond to a hypothetical initial state. 
Hurt and co-workers [114] described a method for back-calculating Rov 
from measurements of Rov, knowing the temperature history the char 
particles experienced prior to and during the measurements. Employing 
apparent  reactivities,  their  approach  yields  an  initial  value  for  the 
pre-exponential factor, A0. Since prior heat treatment included pyroly-
sis, A0 is reported as the pre-exponential factor for conversion of the raw 
coal. 

Both  the  log-normal  and  gamma  distribution  functions  yield  low 
mean activation energies that result in considerable loss in char reac-
tivity at temperatures as low as room temperature in very short periods 
of time. The low annealing activation energies are hypothesized to be 
associated with annealing processes that do not lead to reactivity loss 
since  reactivity  loss  is  not  observed  at  such  low  temperatures.  These 
distribution functions should be truncated at the low activation energy 
end when used. Holland et al. [143] argued that since there are essen-
tially no data  on deactivation processes  that are  possible at  low tem-
peratures  that  can  be  used  to  fit  annealing  model  parameters,  all 
low-temperature annealing processes should be included in the trunca-
tion  of  the  activation  energy  distribution.  Variations  of  the  above 
distributed activation energy annealing model have been developed by 
others (e.g., [138,222,305,306]) and shown to adequately describe the 
loss in char reactivity during both coal combustion and gasification. 

As already discussed, when using the distributed activation energy 
annealing  models,  char  reactivity  loss  must  be  modeled  on  a  relative 
basis  owing  to  the  fact  that  there  is  no  “initial  char”  for  which  the 
number of active sites is known, i.e., S0 is unknown. By the time a char 
has reached a temperature sufficiently high to induce reaction, appre-
ciable  annealing  has  already  occurred.  Because  of  this,  in  agreement 
with the approach of Hurt et al., [114], Holland et al. [143] suggested 
that  the  annealing  model  be  used  in  concert  with  a  reactivity  model 
when determining model parameters. 

Holland  et  al.  [143]  extended  the  distributed  activation  energy 
annealing model pioneered by Suuberg [168,291] and modified by Hurt 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099341N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

in 

included 

the  optimization 

[114] to include the impact of coal type, heating rate, peak temperature 
reached during heat treatment, and reactive gas. An elaborate optimi-
zation scheme was employed to determine the pre-exponential factor for 
the annealing reactions and the mean value and standard deviation of 
the  distribution  of  annealing  activation  energies  as  functions  of  coal 
type, heating rate and peak temperature. In their approach the range of 
annealing activation energies considered was divided into a number of 
activation energy bins and Eq. (179) was used to determine f(Ed,t) for 
each Ed-bin at time t. Summing over all activation energy bins yields the 
fraction  of  remaining  reactivity.  This  fraction  is  initially  unity  and 
progressively decreases as the annealing time increases. At t = 0, f(Ed,t) 
for  each  activation  energy  bin  was  determined  from  the  log-normal 
distribution function, which was split into a bimodal distribution and 
renormalized  to maintain  the  total  number  of initial  active  sites.  The 
bimodal distribution reflected the low activation energies that were not 
associated with reactivity loss and the high activation energies that were 
associated with reactivity loss. Factors used to split the log-normal dis-
scheme.  The 
tribution  were 
pre-exponential factor for the annealing reaction was determined as a 
function of coal type (via an NMR-determined coal structural parameter) 
and heating rate (either greater than 104  K/s or less). A value for the 
structural parameter can be determined from correlations that employ 
the  elemental analysis  of the coal.  The mean  value of the  log-normal 
distribution was determined as a function of coal type and peak tem-
perature reached during annealing (either greater than 1500 K or less) 
and the standard deviation was determined as a function of coal type. A 
large experimental dataset for annealing effects on char reactivity in O2, 
CO2 and H2O was used to determine the functional relationships in the 
work  of  Holland  et  al.  [143].  Data  were  obtained  in  annealing  tests 
employing  several  coals  differing  in  rank,  and  reactivities  were 
measured for annealed chars prepared under a wide range of conditions. 
As in the approach of Hurt et al. [114], an apparent rate was used as a 
measure  of  char  reactivity.  Along  with  the  annealing  parameters,  an 
optimized value for the pre-exponential factor A was determined as a 
function of coal type and temperature history. The model put forth by 
Holland et al. [143] is the most sophisticated thermal annealing model 
developed to date. Considering all of the studies, thermal annealing is 
dependent on the time-temperature profile the char particle experiences 
during  annealing,  the  particle  heating  rate  and  the  peak  temperature 
reached during heating, and the chemical structure of the parent coal. 
This model accounts for all of these dependences. 

In char conversion models that use apparent rates as a measure of 
char reactivity, the effects of surface area changes are included in the 
rate.  Consequently,  the  effects  of  changes  in  specific  surface  area  are 
included  with  the  losses  in  carbon  and  catalytic  active  sites  in  the 
distributed activation thermal annealing models discussed above. 

No model has yet been developed that employs a distributed acti-
vation energy annealing sub-model coupled with a detailed heteroge-
neous  reaction  mechanism  that  describes  the  intrinsic  chemical 
reactivity of the carbonaceous particle material and a specific surface 
area model that describes how the specific surface area of the char varies 

with conversion. In such models, the product of specific surface area and 
intrinsic chemical reactivity is proportional to the total number of active 
sites and hence from Eq. (11), 
⎛

⎞

Sg ⋅Rc
Sg,0Rc,0

=

∫∞

∫t

(

)

exp

⎝ (cid:0)

Aexp

(cid:0)

0

0

Ed
̂RuT

dt

⎠f (Ed, t0) dEd

(182)  

where Sg is the mass specific surface area of the char at time t and Rc is 
the intrinsic chemical reactivity of the carbonaceous particle material at 
the time. Note that intrinsic chemical reactivities apply to all conversion 
regimes and therefore, m = 1. Employing the specific surface area model 
(see Section 3.1.2), the instantaneous chemical reactivity relative to an 
initial intrinsic chemical reactivity is given as follows: 
⎞

⎛

⎞

⎛

Rc
Rc,0

=

√

1
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1(cid:0) ψln(1(cid:0) X(t))

⎝

∫∞

∫t

(

)

exp

⎝(cid:0)

Aexp

(cid:0)

0

0

Ed
̂RuT

dt

⎠f (Ed,t0)dEd

⎠,

(183)  

where ψ is the surface area structural parameter and X is char conver-
sion.  Here,  the  effects  of  microstructural  changes  in  surface  area  on 
reactivity are included with the losses in carbon and catalytic active sites 
in the distributed activation thermal annealing sub-model. The effects of 
macrostructural changes in surface area associated with the opening of 
initially closed-off pores and pore coalescence are accounted for in the 
specific surface area sub-model. 

3.7. Modeling non-spherical particles 

Coal and biomass char particles are not spherical but have a variety 
of shapes. Since momentum, heat and mass transfer between gas and a 
particle are impacted by particle non-sphericity, so is the particle’s re-
action rate. Account is made for the effects of non-sphericity in many 
models by employing equivalent diameters and shape factors to describe 
the  flow  around  the  non-spherical  particle.  To  account  for  non- 
sphericity  effects  on  particle  fluid  dynamics,  Tabet  et  al.  [307] 
included a particle shape factor (defined as the ratio of the surface area 
of an equal-volume sphere to the actual surface area of the non-spherical 
particle) when defining the drag coefficient in the equation of motion for 
non-spherical coal and biomass particles in their CFD model for co-firing 
coal  and  biomass.  Non-spherical  particles  tend  to  have  larger  surface 
areas  and  more porosity  than spherical  particles, which  increases the 
oxygen  fluxes  inside  particles  and  hence,  enhances  char  particle  con-
version rates [307]. Yin et al. [308] introduced an enhancement factor 
into  the  diffusion  equation  that  was  intended  to  capture  this 
non-spherical effect. 

3.7.1. Volume-equivalent diameters for non-spherical particles 

Non-spherical  coal  and  biomass  particles  have  been  modeled  as 
either oblate or prolate spheroids, the solid bodies formed by rotating an 
ellipse about its minor and major axes, respectively (See Fig. 13). Oblate 
and prolate spheroids are pictured in the figure below. 

Fig. 13. (a) An ellipse of major principal semi-axis a and minor principal semi-axis b. (b) Rotation of the ellipse about its minor axis forms an oblate spheroid. (c) 
Rotation of the ellipse about its major axis forms a prolate spheroid. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099342N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Numerically obtained velocity and temperature profiles established 
during the steady laminar flow past single spherical and non-spherical 
droplets and particles were analyzed by Comer and Kleinstreuer [309] 
to determine mean Nusselt numbers as functions of Reynolds numbers 
and aspect ratios AR  (re-defined here, as the ratio of the lengths of the 
particle’s major (a) and minor (b) principal semi-axes (AR = a/b) instead 
of the ratio of minor to major axis as done in the paper). Results indi-
cated that for aspect ratios less than five, the average heat flux to the 
surface of a non-spherical particle that is modeled as an oblate spheroid 
is  the  same  as  the  average  heat  flux  to  a  sphere  having  the  volume 
equivalent diameter of the oblate spheroid when this diameter is used to 
evaluate  the  Reynolds  number,  the  drag  coefficient  and  the  Nusselt 
number. For an oblate spheroid having major principal semi-axis a and 
aspect ratio AR, the volume equivalent diameter is dequiv = 2a/(AR)1/3. A 
sphere having this diameter  will have the same volume as the oblate 
spheroid. Results also indicated that the non-spherical particle will have 
higher overall heat transfer rate (in comparison to a spherical particle 
having the volume equivalent diameter), since it has more surface area. 
In light of the similarity between heat and mass transfer, the average 
reactant  fluxes  to  the  surfaces  of  non-spherical  char  particles  will  be 
adequately  predicted  if  the  non-spherical  particles  were  modeled  as 
spheres having volume equivalent diameters. The external surface area 
of a spherical particle having diameter dequiv is smaller than the external 
surface  area  of  the  oblate  spheroid.  The  higher  the  aspect  ratio,  the 
lower the surface area of the equivalent-volume sphere to that of the 
oblate spheroid. For an aspect ratio of three, the external surface area of 
the equivalent-volume sphere is about 80% of the external surface area 
of the oblate spheroid and falls to 63% for an aspect ratio of five. 

While the previous paragraph was concerned with oblate spheroids, 
we will now focus on prolate spheroids. For a prolate spheroid having 
major principal semi-axis a and aspect ratio AR, the volume equivalent 
diameter is dequiv  = 2a/(AR)2/3  and consequently, a sphere having this 
diameter will have the same volume as the prolate spheroid. Extending 
the  results  of  Comer  and  Kleinstreuer  [309]  to  prolate  spheroids, the 
heat flux to the surface of a spherical particle having this diameter will 
be similar to the average heat flux to the surface of the prolate spheroid 
provided  the  Reynolds  number,  the  drag  coefficient  and  the  Nusselt 
number  are  calculated  using  the  volume  equivalent  diameter  as  the 
characteristic length. Again, in light of the similarities in mass and heat 
transfer,  the  average  mass  flux  to  the  surface  of  a  volume-equivalent 
diameter  sphere  will  be  similar  to  that  of  the  non-spherical  particle 
when  modeled  as  a  prolate  spheroid.  As  with  oblate  spheroids,  the 
surface area of the volume-equivalent sphere is less than the surface area 
of the prolate spheroid, and therefore the overall flow of reactive gas to 
the spherical particle will be less than that to the external surface of the 
prolate spheroid. For an aspect ratio of three, the external surface area of 
the equivalent-volume sphere is about 85% of the external surface area 
of the prolate spheroid and falls to 73% for an aspect ratio of five. Since 
the external surface areas of the prolate spheroid and the external sur-
face area of its equivalent-volume sphere are more nearly the same than 
the external surface area of the oblate spheroid and the external area of 
its equivalent-volume sphere, it is recommended to model non-spherical 
coal and biomass char particles as prolate spheroids. As evidenced by the 
particles in the SEM images shown in Fig. 1, prolate spheroids reflect the 
shapes of the char particles more so than oblate spheroids. Note that the 
aspect ratios of most of the particles are less than three. 

An external surface area ratio, Aex,ratio, can be defined as the ratio of 
the external surface area of a prolate spheroid (Aex,ps) to the external 
surface area of its volume-equivalent sphere (Aex,ves): Aex,ratio  ––– 
Aex,ps/ 
(cid:0) 1(ε)/ε), where ε is the eccentricity of 
Aex,ves = 0.5 (AR)
the prolate spheroid: ϵ =
a non-spherical particle as a prolate spheroid and treating the particle as 

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 (cid:0) (AR)(cid:0) 2

(1 + AR sin
√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 (cid:0) b2/a2

. When modeling 

(cid:0) 2/3

√

=

an equivalent-volume sphere, multiplying the external surface area of 
the  equivalent-volume  sphere  by  this  surface  area  ratio  will  result  in 
simulations having the correct average fluxes of heat and mass to the 
outer  surface  of  the  non-spherical  particle  and  the  correct  external 
surface area associated with these average fluxes. As a consequence, in 
the simulations the diffusive flows of reactive gases to the non-spherical 
particle will be accurately assessed. 

In a theoretical study on the combustion behaviors of non-spherical 
particles, Choi and Gavalas [310] found that when char conversion rates 
were diffusion-limited (the zone III conversion regime), pseudo-steady 
particle oxidation rates and temperatures are similar to those of spher-
ical particles of equal volume and surface area. Their analyses indicated 
that as the extent of char conversion increased, non-sphericity increased. 
In addition, the simulations performed demonstrated that non-spherical 
particles burn faster than spherical particles of the same initial volume. 
Differences  in  times  for  complete  conversion  were  less  than  20%  for 
initial  aspect  ratios  between  one  and  three.  This  finding  is  consistent 
with  the  results  of  Comer  and  Kleinstreuer  [309].  Overall  conversion 
times  should  scale  with  external  surface  area  for  diffusion-limited 
burning, and the external surface area of the spherical particle is from 
15% to 27% less than that of the non-spherical particle. 

3.7.2. Volume-equivalent shapes for non-spherical particles 

Other  approaches  in  modeling  heat  and  mass  transfer  to  non- 
spherical  particles  have  been  taken.  In  the  approach  taken  by  Baxter 
and  co-researchers  [311-313],  heat  and  mass  transfer  at  the  outer 
boundary of the non-spherical particle are assumed to increase relative 
to that of a basic shape by the ratio of the particle’s external surface area 
to  that  of  a  volume-equivalent  particle  of  specific-shape,  RSA.  For  a 
nearly spherical particle, the characteristic surface area is the external 
surface area of the volume-equivalent sphere of radius rp. Thus, for a 
near-spherical  particle  of  external  surface  area  Aex,p,  RSA =
Aex,p/(4πr2
). For a nearly cylindrical-shaped particle, the characteristic 
p
surface area is the external surface area of the volume-equivalent cyl-
inder  of  aspect  ratio  AR  and  radius  rp  and  therefore  for  such  a 
p AR). Flat plates of various aspect 
cylinder-like particle, RSA = Aex,p/(4πr2
ratios were also considered and for a nearly flat plate-shaped particle (a 
flake-like particle), RSA = Aex,p/(4r2
). These ratios were applied at the 
p A2
R
particle’s boundary conditions. For example, in the models developed by 
Baxter and co-researchers [311-313] the heat flux at the outer surface of 
the non-spherical particle is given by: 

λeff =

∂Tp
∂r

|r=t,rp θT hgasRSA

(cid:0)

)

Tgas (cid:0) Tp

(

+ RSAεpσ

w (cid:0) T 4
T 4

p

)
,

where λeff is the effective particle thermal conductivity, hgas is the heat 
transfer  coefficient,  θT  is  the  blowing  factor,  and  εp  is  the  particle 
emissivity. 

Mass and heat transfer coefficients developed for each specific shape 
(sphere, cylinder or flat plate) were employed in the model developed. 
Model  calculations  agreed  with  observations  with  respect  to  particle 
shape:  near-spherical  particles  burn  slower  than  less  symmetrically 
shaped  particles.  The  larger  external  surface  areas  and  smaller  thick-
nesses of cylinder-like and flake-like particles cause them to have higher 
heat and mass transfer rates. Calculations also indicated that the impact 
of  shape  on  char  particle  behavior  increases  as  the  particle  size  in-
creases. This model is claimed to be applicable to particles of all shapes. 

3.7.3. Effectiveness factors for non-spherical particles 

Aris [314] recommended calculating a characteristic dimension for 
the  non-spherical  particle  from  the  ratio  of  its  volume  to  its  external 
surface  area,  Vp/Ap,  when  determining  the  relationship  between  the 
effectiveness factor and Thiele modulus. For first-order reaction, it was 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099343N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

shown that steady state solutions to the conservation equation govern-
ing simultaneous diffusion and reaction are largely independent of the 
particle shape when the Thiele modulus is evaluated using Vp/Ap as the 
characteristic  dimension  of  a  non-spherical  particle.  Instead  of 
employing Eqs. (106) and (107) as expressions for the Thiele modulus 
for  species  i  and  its  effectiveness  factor,  respectively,  assuming 
first-order kinetics, Aris expressed the Thiele modulus for non-spherical 
particles (Λ) as 

(

√

) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ks,i Sg ρchar
Di,eff

Vp
Ap

Λi =

and the effectiveness factor as 

ηi =

3Λicoth(3Λi) (cid:0) 1
3(Λi)2

.

If the reaction rate is not first-order but mth-order, the above equa-
tions  for  the  Thiele  modulus  and  effectiveness  factor  for  the  non- 
spherical particles can be modified as follows: 
) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ks,i Sg ρcharC(m(cid:0) 1)
Di,eff

m + 1
2

Vp
Ap

Λi =

√

(

(

)

s

and 

ηi = fc(Λi, m)

( ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅

√

)(

)

2
m + 1

3Λicoth(3Λi) (cid:0) 1
3(Λi)2

where the correction function is expressed as 

(

fc(Λi, m) =

1 +

(cid:0)

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
0.5
/
i + 1

18 Λ2

)0.5(1(cid:0) m)2
)

.

18 Λ2
i

In  the  expression  for  the  Thiele  modulus,  ks,i  is  the  reaction  rate 
coefficient for the first-order reaction involving reactant species i. For 
spheres, employing the above equations yields the same value for the 
effectiveness factor when the sphere radius is used in Eq. (106) in the 
evaluation of the Thiele modulus and Eq. (107) is used when calculating 
the effectiveness factor. Consequently, as noted by Aris, there would be 
no dependence of the effectiveness factor on particle non-sphericity if 
only  the  volume-equivalent  diameter  were  used  as  the  characteristic 
dimension in the expression for the Thiele modulus. All non-spherical 
particles at the same temperature that have the same internal surface 
area and pore structure would have the same effectiveness factor. The 
penetration  of  reactive  gases  inside  particles  would  be  the  same  no 
matter the shapes of the particles, an unrealistic scenario. Table 5 shows 
values calculated for the effectiveness factor for various shaped particles 
for  selected  values  of  the  Thiele  modulus  (Λ)  employing  the  above 
equations. Particles are assumed to be in the shapes of prolate spheroids 
having semi-axis of 50 µm and aspect ratios ranging from one to five. 

The top row of the table shows values calculated for φL,m for spherical 
particles  using  Eq.  (106)  employing  selected  char  properties  and  gas 
conditions and the second row shows values calculated for the corre-
sponding value of η(φL,m) using Eq. (107). The same char properties and 
gas conditions used to determine each φL,m were used to calculate Λ for 
non-spherical  particles  having  selected  aspect  ratios;  corresponding 
values for η(Λ) were also calculated. Note that for the spherical particle 
(AR = 1), η(φL,m) = η(Λ). Values in the table indicate that for any selected 
value of φL,m, as the aspect ratio increases the Thiele modulus for the 
non-spherical particle (Λ) decreases and the effectiveness factor (η(Λ)), 
increases.  Higher  aspect  ratio  particles  are  thinner  and  as  such,  the 
penetration depth of reactive gases inside the particle increases (i.e., the 
effectiveness  factor  is  closer  to  unity).  Also  note  that  for  any  given 
particle shape, as φ increases, so does Λ, with corresponding decreases in 
η(Λ)– the higher the Thiele modulus, the lower the penetration depth of 
reactive gas no matter what the shape of the particle. 

The above expressions are recommended for use when calculating 
the effectiveness factor for non-spherical particles. However, Aris [314] 
acknowledged that use of Vp/Ap  as the characteristic dimension in the 
Thiele modulus expression is inadequate for transient problems. 

3.8. Modeling char conversion at elevated pressures 

Pressure influences overall char particle conversion rates primarily 
through  the  impact  of  pressure  on  species  concentrations  enhancing 
heterogeneous reaction rates and on coal and biomass devolatilization 
behaviors, which influences char particle morphology. The resistance to 
volatiles  release  increases  with  increased  pressure  and  the  effects  of 
secondary reactions are promoted. As a consequence, the total yields of 
volatile matter, tars and gases decrease and the total char yields increase 
with  increased  devolatilization  pressure.  Pressure  affects  the  thermo-
plastic properties  of the coal during heating, and thermoplastic prop-
erties are highly rank dependent. Therefore, the effect of pressure on the 
char produced depends on the rank of the coal, the swelling behaviors of 
bituminous  coals  being  the  most  impacted.  High  pressures  favor  the 
development of foam-type structures that lead to the formation of char 
particles having a variety of morphologies and apparent densities [315]. 
In  general,  if  the  coal  swells,  increasing  the  devolatilization  pressure 
increases the yield of low density, anisotropic char particles. 

At  elevated  pressures,  intrinsic  reaction  rates  are  enhanced  and 
diffusive transport rates in pores are decreased, and these influence char 
conversion  rates.  Whereas  bulk  diffusion  coefficients  decrease  with 
increased  pressure,  Knudsen  diffusion  coefficients  are  independent  of 
pressure. Consequently, Knudsen diffusion in pores becomes relatively 
more  important  as  pressure  is  increased.  Most  models  developed  to 
predict  the  effects  of  pressure  on  char  conversion  rates  accurately 
characterize  the  effects  of  pressure  on  transport  properties  and  use  a 
heterogeneous reaction mechanism to describe char reactivity [95,147, 

Table 5 
Thiele  moduli  (Λ)  and  effectiveness  factors  (η)  for  non-spherical  particles.  The  Thiele  modulus  for  spherical  particles  (φL,m)  is  calculated  based  on  the  volume- 
equivalent particle diameter.   

φL,m = 1.5 
η(φL,m) = 0.876 

φL,m = 2.0 
η(φL,m) = 0.806 

φL,m = 3.0 
η(φL,m) = 0.672 

φL,m = 5.0 
η(φL,m) = 0.480 

φL,m = 10.0 
η(φL,m) = 0.270 

φL,m = 20.0 
η(φL,m) = 0.143 

φL,m = 30.0  
η(φL,m) = 0.097 

AR 

1.0 
1.1 
1.3 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
4.2 
5.0 

Λ 

0.500 
0.499 
0.496 
0.464 
0.443 
0.423 
0.386 
0.366 

η(Λ) 

0.876 
0.877 
0.878 
0.891 
0.899 
0.907 
0.921 
0.928 

Λ 

0.667 
0.665 
0.661 
0.619 
0.590 
0.564 
0.515 
0.488 

η(Λ) 

0.806 
0.807 
0.808 
0.826 
0.839 
0.850 
0.870 
0.881 

Λ 

1.000 
0.998 
0.992 
0.929 
0.885 
0.846 
0.773 
0.732 

η(Λ) 

0.672 
0.672 
0.675 
0.698 
0.716 
0.731 
0.761 
0.778 

Λ 

1.667 
1.663 
1.653 
1.548 
1.475 
1.410 
1.288 
1.220 

η(Λ) 

0.480 
0.481 
0.483 
0.507 
0.525 
0.542 
0.576 
0.597 

Λ 

3.333 
3.327 
3.305 
3.096 
2.950 
2.820 
2.576 
2.440 

η(Λ) 

0.270 
0.270 
0.272 
0.288 
0.301 
0.313 
0.338 
0.354 

Λ 

6.667 
6.654 
6.610 
6.192 
5.901 
5.641 
5.152 
4.880 

η(Λ) 

0.143 
0.143 
0.144 
0.153 
0.160 
0.167 
0.182 
0.191 

Λ 

10.000 
9.981 
9.915 
9.287 
8.851 
8.461 
7.727 
7.321 

η(Λ) 

0.097 
0.097 
0.097 
0.104 
0.109 
0.114 
0.124 
0.130  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099344N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

222,227]. The impact of total pressure and reactive gas mole fraction on 
reactivity  can  be  accurately  characterized  in  this  manner.  This  was 
demonstrated  by  Niksa  et  al.,[222]  who  used  a  three-step  oxidation 
mechanism proposed by Hurt and Calo [172] to describe char oxidation 
kinetics  in the  model that was developed. Adjusting reaction  rate co-
efficients  to  describe  observed  reaction  conversion  rates  of  each  coal 
considered, the extent of char conversion at any selected reaction time 
and  char  particle  temperatures  were  both  predicted  to  increase  with 
increasing  pressure  when  burning  is  under  zone  II  conditions,  as 
experimentally observed with most coal chars. 

In  the  coal  combustion  model  developed  by  Niksa  et  al.  [222] 
(CBK/E), account is made for thermal annealing and the pre-exponential 
factor of the annealing reaction is correlated with the carbon content of 
the coal. In addition, account is made for coal swelling during heat-up 
and  devolatilization.  The  swelling  index is  correlated  with  total pres-
sure  and the  swelling  index  at one  atmosphere is  correlated  with the 
carbon content of the coal (see Section 4.2.5). This permits estimation of 
the  initial  size  of  the  char  particle  at  the  onset  of  char  conversion  at 
elevated pressures. 

Most  of  the  studies  that  use  power-law  kinetics  to  describe  high- 
pressure reaction rates have been concerned with char gasification at 
elevated pressures, with H2O and CO2 being the gasifying agents (see for 
example, references [93,94,164]). Roberts and Harris [164] found that 
activation energies were not significantly affected by pressure for the 
two  coals  investigated  in  their  combustion  and  gasification  studies, 
however, in other oxidation studies [162,316,317], activation energies 
were found to decrease with increased pressure. 

If a power-law kinetics model is to be used to describe char reactivity 
at an elevated pressure, it is best to derive kinetic parameters using data 
obtained at the pressure of interest. Power-law models lack the under-
lying science that governs the influence of pressure on both rates of mass 
transport and rates of chemical reaction. For accurate predictions of char 
conversion rates at elevated pressures, heterogeneous reaction mecha-
nisms are needed to accurately characterize the impact of total pressure 
on reaction rates. It is also necessary to accurately describe the pressure 
dependences of all diffusive mass transport coefficients. 

3.9. Selecting char conversion models 

The  first  step  that  must  be  taken  in  analyzing  experimental  char 
conversion data is the selection of an appropriate pore structure model, 
either the grain model, the random pore model or some other structural 
model.  Most  coal  and  biomass  chars  exhibit  conversion  rates  that 
decelerate in time and both the grain and random pore models predict 
such  behaviors.  With  proper  adjustment  of  model  parameters,  both 
models  can  describe  measured  conversion  rate  data  reasonably  well. 
Morin et al. [89] found that activation energies and reaction orders are 
similar for both models. Some biomass chars exhibit conversion rates 
that  initially  accelerate  with  conversion  and  then  decelerate,  and  for 
such  sigmoidal  behavior,  an  Avrami-Erofeev  type  model  should  be 
selected. It is up to the researcher analyzing the data to select the model 
that best describes the experimental observations. As already noted, the 
random  pore  model  is  recommended  since  it  accounts  for  the 
non-monotonic  evolution  of  the  internal  particle  surface  area,  a  phe-
nomenon observed with most coal and biomass char particles. 

When  simulating  thermochemical  conversion  of  char,  a  reaction 
model  has  to  be  used.  The  choice  of  reaction  model  depends  on  the 
desired fidelity of the results and on which models are available for the 
char of interest. The model to use for the simulations is therefore often in 
the hands of those developing the reaction models. When developing a 
char reaction model, whether to select an apparent reaction rate model 
or  an intrinsic reaction rate model depends  on the experimental data 
available. If only mass loss data are available for particles of a given size, 
there is no choice except to use an apparent reaction rate model for such 
models only require information on gaseous conditions and the initial 
particle  size.  If  initial  apparent  density  and  surface  area  data  are 

available as well as mass loss data, then there is the choice of using an 
intrinsic reaction rate model. 

Whether to employ power-law kinetics or a heterogeneous reaction 
mechanism is a choice that the researcher analyzing the data must make 
based on the experimental data available. The determination of reaction 
rate coefficients in heterogeneous reaction mechanisms requires more 
tests over a wider range of reaction conditions than the determination of 
power-law kinetic parameters. As noted previously, heterogeneous re-
action  mechanisms  are  applicable  over  wide  ranges  of  temperature, 
pressure and reactive gas mole fraction whereas power-law kinetics are 
most accurate in the environments in which the data were obtained. 

All char conversion models require information on the conditions of 
the char at the onset of char conversion, in particular information on the 
initial char particle size and apparent density. Initial char conditions are 
dependent on the properties of the parent material and on the particle’s 
behavior during devolatilization, which depends on the heating rate and 
the final temperature reached during volatiles release. Both the initial 
particle size and apparent density will depend on the extent of swelling 
that occurs. 

Char  particle  morphology  is  dependent  on  the  properties  of  the 
parent material, particle size and operating conditions. Hence, different 
chars will exhibit different morphological features under the same gas 
conditions  and  heating  rates.  No  two  coals  or  biomass  materials  will 
behave  in  exactly  the  same  manner.  Studies  have  shown  that  char 
burnout  profiles  and  temperature  histories  depend  upon  char 
morphology  (see  for  example,  [227,228]),  therefore  accurate  pre-
dictions  of  char-particle  behavior  will  depend  upon  knowing  the 
morphology of the particles being modeled. 

Macerals  are  the  microscopic  petrographic  units  in  coal  that  are 
related  to  the  coal’s  plant  origin  and  these  non-crystalline,  organic 
substances  play  a  role  in  establishing  char  particle  morphology.  The 
three  major maceral  groups are  vitrinite  (the most  reactive  units and 
derived  from  cell  walls  and  woody  plant  tissue),  liptinite  (formerly 
referred  to  as  exinite  and  derived  from  decayed  leaf  matter,  spores, 
pollen,  cuticle,  and  resin)  and  inertinite  (the  least  reactive  units  and 
derived  from  degraded  plant  material).  No  two  coals  have  the  same 
maceral  composition;  this  contributes  to  variations  in  coal  char  re-
activities. The vitrinite content of the coal determines its plastic prop-
erties and the plastic properties govern, in large part, whether the char 
produced during devolatilization will have low or high porosity. In the 
char morphology studies undertaken by Bailey et al. [226], bituminous 
coals  were  noted  to  produce  porous,  anisotropic  char  particles  while 
sub-bituminous  coals  were  noted  to  produce  mostly  isotropic  chars, 
almost exclusively at temperatures near 1273 K. Anisotropy is an indi-
cator of cavities in the central portions of particles and is suggestive of 
the  formation  of  medium-  to  high-porosity  char  particles.  Isotropic 
particles  are  more  uniform  with  thicker  walls  than  anisotropic  char 
particles  and  are  likely  to  have  lower  porosities.  The  results  of  these 
researchers  suggest that coals having high vitrinite  contents have the 
potential to swell during heating thereby producing high-porosity char 
particles and that coals having relatively high inertinite contents have 
the potential to form low-porosity chars. The higher the vitrinite content 
of  the  coal,  the  greater  the  potential  for  metaplast  formation  and 
swelling,  leading  to  the  formation  of  high-porosity,  low-density  char 
particles.  Low  rank  coals  and  biomass  exhibit  little  plasticity  during 
heating and hence, tend not to significantly swell. A commonly reported 
property of a coal is its swelling index (or swelling ratio), a measure of its 
increase in volume when the coal is heated under specified conditions. 
The higher the swelling index, the greater the potential for particles to 
swell during devolatilization producing high-porosity, low density char 
particles. The swelling index of most coals is equal to or greater than 1.0 
whereas the swelling index for most biomass materials is less than 1.0 
[2]. A correlation for the swelling index of a coal is presented in Section 
4.2.5. 

It should be emphasized that the impact of coal devolatilization on 
char morphology is quite important when there is particle swelling. The 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099345N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

extent  of  swelling  depends  not  only  on  the  rank  of  the  coal  and  the 
pressure that the coal particles experience while losing volatile matter 
but  also  on  the  rates  by  which  the  coal  particles  are  heated.  A  coal 
swelling model has been developed by Shurtz and co-workers [318,319] 
that predicts all of the trends observed during coal pyrolysis at atmo-
spheric pressure and high heating rates. Particle shrinkage is predicted 
for lignites, while increasing swelling ratios are predicted as coal rank is 
increased from sub-bituminous to bituminous, and decreasing swelling 
ratios are predicted as coal rank is increased from low volatile bitumi-
nous  to  anthracite.  The  chemical  structural  parameters  used  in  the 
swelling model depend on coal properties that are measured employing 
13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Correlations for 
these structural parameters have been developed by Genetti et al. [6] 
that  are  based  on  the  proximate  and  ultimate  analyses  of  the  coal  of 
interest. 

It is recommended to examine a scanning electron micrograph image 
of  the  char  particles  being  analyzed  to  determine  the  morphological 
category  in  which  the  particles  fall,  whether  group  I,  II  or  III  (i.e, 
whether particles are mostly cenospherical, mixed or dense) and then 
use a Thiele modulus-effectiveness factor correlation that is appropriate 
for the morphological category (see Ma and Mitchell [227]). Expecting 
wide variations in morphology for bituminous coal chars, perhaps more 
accurate agreement between model predictions and measurements can 
be  obtained  by  modeling  one-third  of  the  particles  as  cenospheres, 
one-third as mixed, medium porosity particles and one-third as dense, 
low-porosity particles. 

In combustion tests of the chars of five coals, Cai et al. [303] found (i) 
that  as  pyrolysis/devolatilization  temperatures  increased,  char  reac-
tivity decreased; (ii) that char reactivity increased with heating rate up 
to about 1000 K/s before leveling off at higher heating rates; (iii) that 
chars  produced  from  higher  rank  coals  were  relatively  insensitive  to 
heating rate; and (iv) that char reactivity decreased as hydropyrolysis 
pressure increased. Thus, devolatilization conditions impact char par-
ticle  initial conditions and the reactivity  of the carbonaceous particle 
material. 

Unfortunately, devolatilization models have not been improved  to 
the extent that they are capable of predicting not only char yields but 
also the initial sizes, apparent densities and specific surface areas of the 
chars produced. It is necessary to measure the particle size distribution, 
the apparent density and the specific surface area of the char extracted 
from reactors as soon after devolatilization as possible for use as initial 
conditions. Model parameters should be evaluated using the mean of the 
particle  size  distribution  as  the  characteristic  particle  diameter.  It  is 
recommended to perform sensitivity analyses to establish the sensitivity 
of kinetic parameters determined from conversion rate data to changes 
in initial char conditions. A particle population balance model should be 
employed to investigate the impact of the particle size distribution on 
the predicted overall char conversion rates. 

4. Rank-based correlations for char reaction rates 

No  two  coals  have  the  same  chemical  composition  or  chemical 
structure and owing to the differences in these coal properties, no two 
coals that experience the same devolatilization conditions will yield char 
particles that are identical in composition and physical structure. Even 
pulverized  particles  of  the  same  coal  will  produce  char  particles  that 
differ  in  chemical  and  physical  characteristics  owing  to  particle-to- 
particle variations in composition and ash content. Experimentally ob-
tained data will no doubt exhibit scatter, which may obscure trends in 
conversion  behavior,  making  it  difficult  to  formulate  rank-dependent 
correlations  that  accurately  describe  the  reactivities  of  a  variety  of 
coal chars. 

Since mass transport effects start to influence char conversion rates 
at temperatures as low as 1200 K [169], specifics of heterogeneous re-
action  rates cannot be determined directly at temperatures exceeding 
1200  K.  The  combined  effects  of  heterogeneous  reaction  and  pore 

diffusion limit overall reaction rates at such temperatures. Information 
on chemical kinetics must be back-calculated from experimental data 
after modeling mass transport effects. Uncertainties in the temperature 
dependences  of  transport  properties,  especially  that  of  the  effective 
diffusion  pore  coefficient,  lead  to  uncertainties  in  the  calculated 
high-temperature reaction rates and hence, uncertainties in activation 
energies determined for rate-limiting chemical reactions. Owing to (i) 
the influence of devolatilization on establishing the initial state of the 
char, (ii) the inherent differences in composition and physical structure 
of individual particles and (iii) the uncertainties associated with deter-
mining rates of rate-limiting heterogeneous reactions at high tempera-
tures, the correlations relating char kinetic parameters to properties of 
the parent coal yield predictions for char behaviors that are only mar-
ginal for the chars of coals that were not in the dataset used to establish 
the correlation. 

4.1. Inherent variations in coal and biomass char reactivities 

Intrinsic  reactivities  can  vary  by  several  orders  of  magnitude  for 
different types of carbons undergoing conversion in similar, high tem-
perature environments. In general, the lower the rank of the coal, the 
higher the reactivity of its char. Data have been correlated with a wide 
range  of  intrinsic  activation  energies  (from  100  to  289  kJ/mol)  and 
reaction orders (from 0 to 1). An Arrhenius fit to all the data obtained in 
the char oxidation studies considered by Mulcahy and Smith [160,169] 
yielded a mean activation energy of 179.4 kJ/mol for a variety of car-
bons  (petroleum  and  metallurgical  cokes,  lignite  and  coal  chars, 
anthracite, soot, graphon, catalyzed and purified carbons, and selected 
graphites). More recent studies have yielded intrinsic activation energies 
for  char  oxidation  that  are  within  the  above  range,  even  for  biomass 
chars. A relatively wide range of activation energies and reaction orders 
have been reported for the chars of coals having nearly the same rank 
undergoing  conversion  in  similar  environments  (for  example,  see 
reference [115]). As noted by Mulcahy and Smith [169], a number of 
interdependent factors make Arrhenius parameters and reaction orders 
(A, E and n) difficult to determine at combustion temperatures, amongst 
them the atomic structure of the carbon and catalytic impurities. The 
values  reported  also  depend  on  the  Arrhenius  parameters  used  to 
describe the CO/CO2 ratio. 

Consistent  with  the  wide  variations  observed  in  the  intrinsic  re-
activities of coal chars, there are wide variations in char apparent re-
action rates, and wide variations in the kinetic parameters that describe 
them. Apparent activation energies range from 64 to 130 kJ/mol for the 
chars of the low volatile and high volatile bituminous coals used in the 
study of Hurt and Mitchell [115]. In the gasification studies considered 
by Gonzalo-Tirado et al. [245], apparent activation energies ranged from 
97  to  236  kJ/mol  for  the  chars  of  lignite  and  bituminous  and 
sub-bituminous  coals  exposed  to  a  range  of  CO2  partial  pressures  at 
relatively high temperatures. Apparent reaction orders varied from 0.26 
to 1. Shurtz and Fletcher [147] also reported wide variations in reac-
tivity for chars produced from coals of similar ranks. 

Besides the chemical reactivity of the carbonaceous particle mate-
rial, a variety of factors can account for observed differences in coal and 
biomass  char  particle  reactivities  and  many  are  associated  with  phe-
nomena that occur during devolatilization. These factors influence the 
conditions  of  the  char  at  the  onset  of  heterogeneous  reaction.  In 
particular, the char particle’s initial porosity, specific surface area and 
pore size distribution as well as the char’s extent of thermal annealing 
are  established  during  devolatilization.  Along  with  variations  in  non- 
sphericity  and  ash  content  of  individual  coal  particles,  scatter  in 
experimental reactivity data is inevitable,  especially at high tempera-
tures and pressures. Owing to the variations in the physical and chemical 
properties of coals and biomass and the factors that cause variations in 
char particle properties during devolatilization, it has been difficult to 
correlate char conversion rates with properties of the parent solid fuel. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099346N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

4.2. Correlating char reactivities with properties of the parent material 

Predictions of char reactivity based on coal elemental composition 
are scarce. There is no obvious mechanistic link between char reactivity 
and  the  composition  of the  coal,  for coal  composition alone  does  not 
provide information on the chemical structure of the char. It has been 
reported that coals with nearly the same elemental composition have 
quite different chemical structures [143] and therefore, burn differently. 
Nevertheless, a few correlations are available for char reactivity based 
on coal elemental composition. 

4.2.1. Rank-dependent correlations for overall particle oxidation rates 

this  observation  has  guided 

Several  investigators  [114,115,143,149,157]  have  reported  that 
char reactivity decreases with increasing carbon content of the parent 
coal,  and 
the  development  of 
rank-dependent  char  conversion  models.  In  the  models  developed  by 
several  researchers,  the  pre-exponential  factor  is  correlated  with  the 
carbon content of the coal (see for example, references [114,143] and 
[147]). The adequacy of the correlation put forth by Hurt et al. [114] is 
demonstrated in the following paragraph. 

Overall char particle burning rates and temperatures predicted for 
chars derived from several coals, a petroleum coke and Spherocarb are 
shown in Fig. 14. The particle burning rate, oxygen partial pressure at 

the outer surface of the particle and temperature were calculated using 
expressions for the overall particle conversion rate in power-law form 
(Eq. (72)), boundary layer diffusion (Eq. (144), neglecting Stefan flow 
and  the  steady-state  form  of  the  particle’s  energy  balance  (Eq.  (45)). 
Kinetic parameters for the overall reaction rate coefficient and the CO/ 
CO2  ratio reported by the investigators for each char were used in the 
calculations.  As  noted  in  the  published  work,  the  kinetic  parameters 
reported  in  each  investigation  yielded  predictions  of  overall  particle 
conversion rates that agreed with measurements for each char under the 
conditions tested. 

The chars represented on the x-axis of Fig. 14 are arranged in the 
order of increasing rank of the char precursor: Char #1 was produced 
from a sub-bituminous coal and Char #12, from a petroleum coke. More 
information about the chars can be found in Table 6. The chars of the 
low rank coals are arranged in order of increasing heating value of the 
coal and the chars of the medium and high rank coals are arranged in 
order of increasing carbon content of the coal. Open symbols indicate 
calculations  made  assuming  6  vol-%  oxygen  at  1500  K  and  closed 
symbols indicated calculations made assuming 12 vol-% oxygen at 1500 
K. The calculations shown in the left panel of Fig. 14 indicate that the 
kinetic parameters determined for the different coal chars do reflect the 
experimental observation that under the same ambient conditions, char 
reactivity  decreases  with  increasing  rank  of  the  parent  coal.  The 

Fig. 14. Calculated overall particle conversion rates and temperatures for pulverized char particles exposed to 6% and 12% oxygen, by volume, at 1500 K with 
surrounding walls at 1000 K. Information about the different char particles (identified by the char number) is given in Table 6. 

Table 6 
Information about the different chars shown in Figure 14. Given the parameters in the table, the overall reaction rate of the individual chars are calculated as Rov  =
kovPn

O2 , when the rate coefficient is kov = Aov exp(Eov /̂RuTp). Furthermore, the CO to CO2 ratio is found as NCO/CO2
(cid:0) 2 s

EC(kJ/mol) 

n(-) 

Reference 

= AC exp(EC /̂RuTp).  

(cid:0) 1 atmn) 

Eov(kJ/mol) 

Precursor 

Aov(kg m

Char # 

AC(-) 

Char #1 
Char #2 
Char #3 
Char #4 
Char #5 
Char #6 
Char #7 
Char #8 
Char #9 
Char #10 
Char #11 
Char #12 

SUBC 
brown coal 
Millmerran char 
Low-rank, non-swelling 
HVCB 
HVCB 
HVAB 
LVB 
LVB 
Semi-anthracite 
Spherocarb 
pet coke: 

440 
378 
2590 
* 
38 
224 
290 
105 
1140 
200 
2000 
200 

†

CO assumed to be the sole reaction product; AC set to ∞ 

91.68 
56.50 
86.66 
* 
64.05 
94.2 
100.48 
85.82 
125.6 
79.54 
104.66 
76.19 

5.0 × 108 
∞†
∞†
∞†
3.0 × 108 
2.5 × 108 
4.0 × 104 
∞††
3.0 × 108 
∞†
∞†
∞†

251.2 
- 
- 
- 
251.2 
251.2 
125.6 
- 
251.2 
- 
- 
- 

0.5 
1.0 
0.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
1.0 
0.2 
1.0 

[115] 
[123] 
[118] 
[111] 
[115] 
[115] 
[115] 
[115] 
[115] 
[122] 
[120] 
[121]  

* kov = (cid:0) 0.09 (cid:0) 1.26 × 10

(cid:0) 4 Tp + 1.58 × 10

(cid:0) 7 T2
p 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099347N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

calculations shown in the right panel of Fig. 14 indicate that under the 
same ambient conditions, char particles produced from low rank coals 
will  attain  higher  temperatures  than  those  produced  from  high  rank 
coals.  Note  that  the  chars  produced  from  Spherocarb  (Char  11)  and 
petroleum coke (Char 12) do not follow the trends observed with the 
coal  chars.  The  high  overall  particle  conversion  rate  determined  for 
Spherocarb  is  quite  likely  a  consequence  of  its  much  higher  specific 
surface  area  compared  to  coal  char  particles.  Spherocarb  is  a  carbon 
molecular  sieve  and  as  such,  it  is  highly  porous  with  a  high  porosity 
(~0.8) and uniform internal structure, unlike coal chars. Not much was 
mentioned about the petroleum coke employed in the study undertaken 
by Smith [121] except for the fact that it had a high surface area that was 
independent  of  particle  size  and  extent  of  conversion,  a  feature  not 
characteristic  of coal  chars burning in  the  zone II conversion  regime. 
Smith [160] noted that at 1250 K, the intrinsic reactivity of the petro-
leum coke was 1000 times that of the brown coal (Char #2) examined. 
At 700 K, the reactivity of the petroleum coke particles was about 10 
times that of the brown coal char particles. 

The  trend  lines  shown  in  the  figures  were  determined  from  least- 
squares  fits  to  the  points  shown  for  all  the  coal  chars.  The  right- 
triangular points in the figure were calculated using the correlation of 
Hurt et al. [114], in which the activation energy is the same for all coal 
chars (Eov = 20 kcal/mol) and the pre-exponential factor depends on the 
carbon content of the parent coal. Elemental content was known for only 
six of the coals represented in the figure. Using the correlation, overall 
particle conversion rates and particle temperatures are predicted that 
are  in  reasonably  good  agreement  with  the  rates  and  temperatures 
calculated  using the  kinetic parameters  for each  of the  coal chars  for 
which  the  elemental  carbon  content  was  known.  In  the  absence  of 
measured conversion rate data, use of this rank-dependent correlation 
put forth by Hurt et al. [114], the Carbon Burnout Kinetics (CBK) model 
for char reactivity, is recommended. Expressions for the char oxidation 
rate and CO-to-CO2 ratio employed in the model are presented below. 

The CBK char oxidation model (uniform kinetics): 

Rov,O2 =(cid:0)

)

(

dm
dt

1
Ap

ov

=kovPn
O2

(cid:0)
, kov =Aovexp

/

(cid:0)

)
,

̂RuTp

Eov

Rov,O2 ingcm(cid:0) 2s(cid:0) 1

)

Eov = 20 kcal/mol,

n = 0.5  

(cid:0)

)

0.0714 Cfc,

Aov,O2 in g cm(cid:0) 2s(cid:0) 1 atm0.5

= 3 × 108exp(EC /̂

RuTp) with EC = 60 kcal/mol 

the fixed carbon fraction of the coal (daf basis) 

ln(Aov) = 10.82 (cid:0)
Cfc ––– 
NCO/CO2
Hurt et al. [114] indicate that the CBK model is applicable to chars 
whose parent coals are rich in vitrinite and have carbon contents from 
60% to 90%, daf. The above correlation is for uniform kinetics, where 
consumption of all the carbonaceous particle material is assumed to be 
uniform. Hurt et al. [114] also provide rank-dependent correlations for 
statistical kinetics, where there is preferential consumption of the more 
reactive  char  components  early  in  char  conversion  resulting  in  less 
reactive char later in conversion. These researchers also provide rank 
dependent correlations for the overall char conversion rate for use with a 
thermal annealing sub-model. In addition, the CBK model includes an 
ash inhibition sub-model option. 

provides an option for including thermal annealing in the predictions. 

4.2.2. Rank-dependent correlations for overall CO2  gasification rates 

Recent success in predicting devolatilization behavior is largely due 
to obtaining information about the chemical structure of the coal via 
NMR analyses. Such analyses have identified the size of aromatic clus-
ters as indicators of char reactivity, the larger the cluster size the lower 
the reactivity. Large cluster sizes have a smaller fraction of carbon atoms 
on the edges of the clusters. Since the carbon atoms on the edges are 
most  accessible  to  reactive  gases,  intrinsic  reactivity  should  correlate 
with the fraction of carbon atoms found in the edge structures of the 
aromatic  clusters.  As  noted  by  Shurtz  and  Fletcher  [147],  this  is  the 
closest mechanistic link between the C/O elemental ratio in the coal and 
the  gasification  reactivity  of  the  char.  As  such,  these  researchers 
developed  rank-dependent  correlations  for  CO2  gasification  rate  pa-
rameters based on the C/O ratio of the coal as well as on the aromatic 
cluster mass of the char produced, which requires NMR analysis of the 
char  for  relevant  chemical  properties.  However,  Shurtz  and  Fletcher 
[147]  used  correlations  developed  in  devolatilization  studies  relating 
13C-NMR parameters to coal composition and correlated the appropriate 
NMR property (aromatic cluster mass) to char reactivity. Employing this 
information,  the  Char  Conversion  Kinetics  (CCK)  model  for  char  CO2 
gasification  was  developed,  which  assumes  first-order  gasification 
kinetics. 

CCK char gasification model correlations (first-order kinetics): 

(

)

1
Ap

Rov,CO2 = (cid:0)

dm
dt
(cid:0)
kov,CO2 = Aov,CO2 exp

= kov,CO2 PCO2 ,

(cid:0)

Rov,CO2 in g cm(cid:0) 2 s(cid:0) 1

)

Eov,CO2

/

̂RuTp

)
/
, Eov,CO2 = 123 kJ

mol  

(cid:0)

ln

or 
(cid:0)

ln

Aov,CO2

Aov,CO2

)

)

= (cid:0) 0.51207(C / O) + 3.6505,

(cid:0)

Aov,CO2

in g cm(cid:0) 2 s(cid:0) 1 atm(cid:0) 1

)

= (cid:0) 0.039337(CharAr) + 8.3031,

(cid:0)

Aov,CO2

in g cm(cid:0) 2 s(cid:0) 1 atm(cid:0) 1

)

The  aromatic  cluster  parameter,  CharAr,  is  defined  as  CharAr  ––– 
Mcluster (cid:0) Mδ(σ + 1), where Mcluster is the average molecular weight per 
aromatic cluster, Mδ  is the average side-chain molecular weight and (σ 
+ 1)
is  the  average  number  of  attachments  per  cluster.  These  three 
chemical structure properties (Mcluster, Mδ and (σ + 1)) can be measured 
by subjecting the char’s precursor coal to 13C-NMR analyses or they can 
be estimated from the composition of the precursor coal employing the 
following correlations derived by Genetti et al. [6]. 

NMRproperty = c1 + c2 XC + c3 X2

C + c4 XH + c5 X2

H + c6 XO

+c7 X2

O + c8 XVM + c9 X2

VM  

Here, XC, XH and XO represent the coal’s carbon, hydrogen and oxygen 
contents on a dry, ash-free basis and XVM  is the ASTM volatile matter 
content (%) of the coal. Values for the coefficients in the equation are 
presented in Table 7. The better fit to the reaction rate parameters was 
obtained employing the correlation using the aromatic cluster param-
eter CharAr. 

There  have  been  several  modifications  to  the  CBK  model.  One 
version, the CBK8 [56], incorporates a rank-dependent correlation for 
the  initial  value  for  char  oxidation  reactivity  in  terms  of  the  carbon 
content  of  the  parent  coal.  In  another  version,  CBK/E  [222],  the 
power-law kinetic expression was replaced with a three-step oxidation 
mechanism that reflects the variations in reaction order with tempera-
ture. This version permits the effects of pressure on char reactivity to be 
investigated  (see  Section  3.8).  In  yet  another  version,  CBK/G  [95], 
heterogenous reaction mechanisms for char gasification in CO2 and H2O 
environments  were  included.  Each  of  these  versions  of  CBK  employs 
rank-dependent  correlations  for  char  kinetic  parameters  and  each 

Table 7 
Coefficients for 13C-NRM Chemical Structure Properties [6].   

c1 
c2 
c3 
c4 
c5 
c6 
c7 
c8 
c9 

Mδ 

4.220E+02 
-8.647E+00 
4.639E-02 
-8.473E+00 
1.182E+00 
1.154E+00 
-4.340E-02 
5.568E-01 
-6.546E-03 

Mcluster 

1.301E+03 
1.639E+01 
-1.875E-01 
-4.548E+02 
5.171E+01 
-1.007E+01 
7.608E-02 
1.360E+00 
-3.136E-02 

σ + 1 

5.2105E+01 
1.6387E+00 
-1.0755E-02 
1.2369E+00 
9.3194E-02 
-1.6567E-01 
4.0956E-03 
9.2610E-03 
-8.2672E-05  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099348N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

4.2.3. Rank- dependent correlations for intrinsic CO2  gasification rates 

An  mth-order  model  (CCKN)  was  also  developed  by  Shurtz  and 
Fletcher  [147]  that  better  described  gasification  rates  for  more  coal 
chars  than  the  CCK  model.  Finding  that  a  reaction  order  of  0.5  was 
adequate  for  all  coal  chars,  the  pre-exponential  factor  and  activation 
energy  were  correlated  with  the  C/O  ratio  and  the  aromatic  cluster 
parameter, CharAr. However, the pre-exponential factor did not correlate 
very  well  with  CharAr  for  this  model.  The  correlations  employing the 
C/O ratio are presented below [147]. 

CCKN char gasification model, C/O correlations: 

Rc,CO2 = (cid:0)

(

)

1
m

dm
dt

= kint,CO2
(cid:0)
kint,CO2 = Aint,CO2 exp

(cid:0)

/

PCO2

Eint,CO2

)0.5,
)
,

̂RuTp
/

̂RuTp

Expressions  equivalent  to  Eqs.  (108)  and  (109)  are  used  for  the 
Thiele  modulus  and  effectiveness  factor  in  CBK8.  Evaluation  of  the 
Thiele modulus requires knowledge of the effective diffusivity for mass 
transport inside the particle owing to the combined effects of bulk and 
Knudsen diffusion. Instead of employing Eqs. (18) and (19) to determine 
D eff ,  the  CBK8  model  expresses  the  effective  diffusivity  as  D eff =
D MΘ/(τ /f), where D M  is the molecular diffusivity, Θ is the porosity, τ 
is the tortuosity, and f is the fraction of the total porosity in the feeder 
pores.  The  ratio  τ/f  is  a  model  parameter  that  characterizes  pore 
structure, and it was observed that model predictions were sensitive to 
the value employed. Recommended parameters for the CBK8 model are 
presented below. 

(cid:0)

)

Rc,CO2 in s(cid:0) 1

The CBK8 char oxidation model: 

/

(cid:0) dmc

dt = Rint

ov,O2

(cid:0)
= η mc Sg Aint exp

(cid:0) Eint

/

)

̂RuTp

Pm

g,s  

Eint,CO2 = 27.016 + 3.7296 (C/O) (cid:0) 0.3754 (C/O)2,
in kcal

mol

/

)

(cid:0)

Eint,CO2

(cid:0)
ln

Aint,CO2

)

= 14.778 + 0.5306 (C/O) (cid:0) 0.0908 (C/O)2,
mol cm(cid:0) 3

)(cid:0) 0.5

s(cid:0) 1

in

)

(

Aint,CO2

(cid:0)

Shurtz and Fletcher [147] admit that the CCKN correlation based on the 
C/O ratio predicts the CO2 gasification rates of lower rank coals better 
than  those  of  higher  rank  coals.  Both  the  CCK  and  CCKN  models  are 
recommended for use in predicting CO2 gasification rates in the absence 
of gasification reactivity data for the coal char of interest. 

4.2.4. Rank-dependent correlation for overall intrinsic burning rates 

Enhancements  have  been  made  to  the  original  CBK  model  and  in 
version 8 (CBK8) [56], intrinsic reaction rates expressed in power-law 
form are employed instead of the apparent reaction rates employed in 
CBK. Equation (78) can be multiplied by the particle mass mc, to yield 
and expression for the overall mass loss rate of the particle in terms of 
the intrinsic reactivity of the char. Considering reaction on both external 
and internal surfaces of the particle yields the following expression for 
the overall intrinsic burning rate: 

Rint

ov,O2

= (cid:0) (dmc/dt)external (cid:0) (dmc/dt)internal
=

mc Sg Rc

mc Sg Rc

+

)

)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

external

internal  

Now, (mc Sg)external is the external surface area of the particle; thus, the 
above equation can be rewritten as 
(cid:0)

)

Rint

ov,O2

= Ap Rc,s +

mc Sg Rc

internal  

where Rc,s  is the intrinsic reactivity evaluated at conditions existing at 
the external surface of the particle. Employing the effectiveness factor to 
relate the reactivity on internal surfaces to that at the external particle 
surface results in the following expression: 

Rint

ov,O2

= Ap Rc,s + η mc Sg Rc,s  

Owing to the fact that Sg ≫ Ap, the mass loss rate at the external particle 
surface is negligible compared to the loss on internal surfaces, except for 
when the effectiveness factor is quite small, in which case burning rates 
are  diffusion-limited.  In  CBK8,  mass  loss  on  the  external  surface  is 
neglected and the overall intrinsic burning rate is expressed as 

Rint

ov,O2

(cid:0)
= η mc Sg Rc,s = η mc Sg Aint exp

(cid:0) Eint

/

)

̂RuTp

Pm

g,s  

where the intrinsic reactivity is written in power-law form. The product 
Sg Aint  is taken to be a single parameter in the model and is termed a 
mass-specific  intrinsic  reactivity.  A  rank-dependent  correlation  for  this 
product was determined from the same data used in the development of 
CBK. 

(cid:0)

)

log10

= 14.97 (cid:0) 0.0764 Cfc,
in cm(cid:0) 2g(cid:0) 1, Aint in g cm(cid:0) 2 s(cid:0) 1 atm(cid:0) m  

Sg Aint

Sg

where  Cfc ––– 
Eint = 35 kcal/mol, m = 0.5,

τ/f = 6  

wt-% carbon in the coal (daf basis) 

NCO/CO2 = 200exp

/

(cid:0)

EC

̂RuTp

)

with EC = 9 kcal

mol 

/

In  the  absence  of  char  intrinsic  reactivity  data,  CBK8  is  recom-
mended for estimation of the initial overall intrinsic oxidation rate for 
the chars of pulverized fuels. With knowledge of the initial mass specific 
surface area of the char, Sg0, the mass-specific intrinsic reactivity can be 
decomposed  to  obtain  the  pre-exponential  factor,  Aint.  Employing  Eq. 
(66) for the variation of specific surface area with conversion permits 
the determination of char conversion as a function of time, subject to the 
value employed for the char structural parameter, ψ, and values speci-
fied for the gaseous conditions. 

4.2.5. Rank-dependent correlation for coal swelling index 

In one of the versions of the Carbon Burnout Kinetics model for char 
reactivity,  CBK/E  [222],  a  rank-dependent  correlation  for  the  coal 
swelling index (SI) was introduced that permits the evaluation of this 
ratio as a function of the carbon content of the parent coal and the total 
pressure of the reacting system. The correlation is for pulverized coal 
particles  undergoing  devolatilization  under  high-temperature,  high--
heating rate conditions and hence, can be used to estimate char particle 
sizes  after  devolatilization  is  complete.  The  correlation  is  presented 
below. 
{

SI =

(SI1)(0.7143+2.857 P), 0.1 ≤ P ≤ 0.8
(SI1)(3.5(cid:0) 0.625 P), 0.8 ≤ P ≤ 4.0  

where P is the total pressure (in MPa) and SI1  is the swelling index at 
atmospheric pressure. It is correlated with the carbon content of the coal 
as follows: 

⎧
⎨

SI1 =

⎩

8.67 (cid:0) 0.0833 Cdaf ,
(cid:0) 0.0458 + 0.01459 Cdaf ,
1.0

89 ≤ Cdaf ≤ 92
72 ≤ Cdaf < 89
Cdaf < 72  

Here, Cdaf is the dry, ash-free carbon content of the coal (weight-%). The 
correlation indicates that at atmospheric pressure, as the carbon content 
of the coal increases from 72% to 89% the swelling index increases from 
1.0 to about 1.26 and then decreases to 1.0 as the carbon content in-
creases further to 92%. It also indicates that as the pressure is increased 
from  1  atm  to  7.9  atm  (~0.8  MPa),  the  swelling  index  increases, 
reaching a value about 3 times its atmospheric value at 7.9 atm. As the 
pressure is increased above 7.9 atm, the swelling index slowly decreases, 
falling to its atmospheric value at about 39.5 atm. As already noted, the 
swelling index is a measure of the increase in volume of the char after 
heating. Assuming that particles are spherical, the diameter of the char 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099349N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

particle formed subsequent to coal devolatilization can be approximated 
as dchar≅ SI(1/3)dcoal. 

4.2.6. Rank-dependent correlations for initial coal char surface areas 

When char conversion occurs under zone I or zone II conditions, the 
surface areas of char particles vary during char conversion and there-
fore, the approach taken in the development of CBK8 (which assumes 
that the product of the surface area and A-factor associated with power- 
law  kinetics  is  constant)  does  not  permit  heterogeneous  reaction  dy-
namics to be investigated.  For such investigations, intrinsic reactivity 
models need information on the initial surface area of the char. Williams 
et al. [320] considered the measured initial surface areas of a number of 
coal chars that were produced during the rapid heating of the coal and 
correlated the initial surface areas with the fixed carbon content of the 
parent coal. The correlations obtained for N2-BET and CO2-BET surface 
areas are presented below: 

N2 : Sg0 = 1546.3 C2

fc (cid:0) 2834.9 Cfc + 1301.7  

CO2 : Sg0 = 4764.2 C2

fc (cid:0) 7324.9 Cfc + 2912.9  

In the above expressions, Sg0 is the initial surface area of the char particle 
(in  m2/g)  and  Cfc  is  the  fixed  carbon  fraction  of  the  parent  coal  (dry 
basis), as determined by a proximate analysis. The correlations predict 
increasing initial surface area with increasing coal rank, ranging from 97 
m2/g for a low-volatile bituminous coal having a fixed carbon content of 
77%  (dry)  to  1020  m2/g  for  a  sub-bituminous  C  coal  having  a  fixed 
carbon content of 33% (dry). These values are representative of reported 
measurements of the mass specific surface areas of chars produced from 
high  rank  coals  undergoing  high  heating  rate  conditions.  Values  pre-
dicted for the chars of low rank coals are larger than measured values as 
are the values predicted for biomass chars. In the absence of surface area 
data, the above correlations can be used to estimate the surface area of 
the chars of high rank coals at the onset of char conversion. 

Such correlations for the apparent and intrinsic reaction rates and 
surface areas of biomass char particles are not yet available. The overall 
oxidation rates of biomass chars were found not to be described by the 
CBK model, their gasification rates are not described by the CCKN model, 
and their surface areas are not described by the correlations presented 
above for N2- and CO2-BET surface areas. 

5. Challenges and future research directions 

The  sections  above  demonstrate  that  many  of  the  processes  that 
govern the behaviors of coal and biomass chars when exposed to hot 
environments containing O2, CO2  and H2O have been characterized to 
the  extent  that  mass  loss  rates,  off-gas  composition  and  char  particle 
temperatures  can  be  accurately  predicted.  Sub-models  that  correctly 
describe the physical and chemical processes that control char particle 
size, apparent density and reactivity have been developed. Ash models 
have  been  created  that  permit  the  vaporization  rates  of  mineral  in-
clusions to be characterized, permitting the rates that mineral vapors 
leave particles and hence, permitting the formation rates and size dis-
tributions of particulate matter to be predicted. Fragmentation models 
have  been  developed  to  the  extent  that  the  size  distributions  of  char 
particles can be predicted when account is made for the combined ef-
fects of size reduction due to mass loss and fragmentation. Annealing 
models  have  also  been  developed  that  allow  the  prediction  of  the 
decrease in the reactivity of char exposed to high temperatures, which 
causes surface reorganization induced by carbonization. 

Despite  the  advances  made  in  modeling  char  particle  behaviors, 
there  are  research  areas  that  are  still  in  need  of  consideration.  Some 
challenges that remain to be overcome and future research directions 
aimed at extending char particle conversion modeling capabilities are 
indicated below, in no particular order of importance.  

• Presently, the various heterogeneous reaction mechanisms that have 
been  developed  to  describe  char  reactivity  all  differ  in  their  de-
scriptions of the key reaction pathways considered and all have used 
different coal and biomass chars in experiments undertaken to pro-
vide data needed to adjust rate coefficients. It has been difficult to 
obtain a full understanding of underlying rate-limiting processes that 
apply to all chars and to associate reaction rate coefficients with char 
properties. It would be quite useful if a single set of reaction path-
ways  that  govern  char  conversion  in  combustion  and  gasification 
environments were used to describe the reactivities for a variety of 
chars. The differences in the reactivities of different chars can then be 
associated with differences in the rate coefficients determined for the 
chars selected for examination. In this manner, it may be possible to 
associate rate coefficients with char properties, thereby enhancing 
model  predictive  capabilities.  Such  an  effort  has  the  potential  to 
provide  a  means  of  better  predicting  the  reactivities  of  untested 
chars.  

• In  most  char  heterogeneous  reaction  mechanisms  that  have  been 
developed, the distribution of activation energies for desorption re-
actions is assumed to be invariant throughout char conversion, being 
described by the distribution at the onset of char conversion. This 
assumption needs to be assessed.  

• Heterogeneous reaction rate models that allow for a distribution of 
activation  energies  for  the  adsorption  reactions  need  to  be 
considered.  

• Char annealing models require the extent of annealing at the onset of 
char conversion. This requires describing the consequences of ther-
mal annealing during coal/biomass particle heat-up and devolatili-
zation. With coals, char conversion follows devolatilization. Models 
developed  for  annealing  during  devolatilization  and  during  char 
conversion can be used without coupling. However with biomass, the 
potential for char conversion to start before the end of devolatiliza-
tion is quite likely, especially for particle sizes greater than about 250 
µm.  Annealing  models  that  are  applicable  to  both  devolatilization 
and  char  conversion  processes  need  to  be  developed  for  such 
situations.  

• Annealing models developed to date are useful in determining the 
decreases  in  char  mass  loss  rates  during  char  conversion  and  are 
adequate  for  use  in  point-particle  calculations.  However,  for  a 
complete understanding of  the principles governing reactivity loss 
due to thermal annealing, a detailed heterogeneous reaction mech-
anism that accounts for the rate-limiting reaction pathways is needed 
that  considers  a  distribution  of  activation  energies  for  the  carbon 
atoms that are  exposed when carbon atoms  desorb from annealed 
sites.  

• Nearly  all  char  conversion  models  have  neglected  mineral  matter 
vaporization and diffusion effects. Future studies should be under-
taken  that  include  calculations  of  the  release  of  mineral  vapors 
containing not only silicon and magnesium but also aluminum, iron 
and calcium.  

• Catalytic effects are important at low char particle temperatures and 
may become significant in gasifiers after oxygen consumption, when 
the  endothermic  char-H2O  and  char-CO2  reactions  govern  char 
conversion rates. Owing to the differences in catalytic activity of the 
various ash components, an ash-catalytic sub-model for use with a 
char gasification model needs to be developed that reflects the in-
creases in char reactivity as functions of ash content and ash type.  
• Besides  carbon  and  oxygen,  coal  and  biomass  chars  contain 
hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur, however, few char conversion models 
account for the release rates of the H-, N- and S-containing species 
during  the  char  conversion  process.  In  oxidizing  environments  at 
high temperatures, reducing conditions still exist inside particles and 
H2,  N2,  NHx,  HCN,  and  H2S  are  produced.  As  these  species  are 
released from the char particles, they are oxidized to H2O, NOx and 
SOx. In gasification environments, H2, N2, NHx, HCN, and H2S are 
produced  inside  the  particle,  and  undergo  further  reaction  when 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099350N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

released  from  the  particle  as  the  gas  phase  approaches  a  state  of 
equilibrium. More emphasis should be given to the development of 
char conversion models that predict pollutant formation during the 
conversion process.  

• Hydrogen released from char can react with mineral oxide inclusions 
to produce mineral vapors. Few char conversion models include ash 
vaporization models that consider both CO and H2 as reducing agents 
for  mineral oxide  inclusions.  Such  models should  be  developed  in 
order to assess ash vaporization rates under the reducing conditions 
that actually exist inside char particles.  

• To date, nearly all fragmentation models have been used in concert 
with particle population balance models. Point-particle calculations 
that include char particle fragmentation need to be undertaken.  
• Most  char  conversion  sub-models  for  point  particles  are  designed 
assuming  that  the  particles  are  spherical  and  isotropic.  This  is  a 
reasonable assumption for pulverized coal char particles, but not for 
biomass char particles, which have more elongated shapes and are 
highly anisotropic. Corresponding sub-models for the point particle 
approximation should be developed. 

6. Concluding remarks 

Thermochemical  char  conversion  is  a  collection  of  highly  inter-
connected multiphase processes that depend on multicomponent ther-
modynamic,  chemical  kinetic,  morphological  mechanisms  and 
parameters  in  addition  to  heat,  mass  and  momentum  transport.  This 
work comprehensively reviewed numerical models and related experi-
mental  results  involved  in  char  conversion  modeling.  In  addition  to 
presenting  the  governing  equations,  the  assumptions  and  boundary 
conditions underlying each model were examined. 

Attention was given to an entire spectrum of approaches, from the 
most detailed simulation approach of fully resolved gas and char par-
ticles, to other more simplified computational approaches for both the 
gas and solid phases. Various sub models of char conversion were dis-
cussed to account for effects of turbulence, ash behavior, mode of con-
version, particle fragmentation, and thermal annealing. Heterogeneous 
reaction kinetics were examined to find common ground, in principles 
and  terminology,  as  well  as  important  differences  between  the  vast 
number of reaction rate models in the present literature. General clas-
sifications  of  these  kinetic  models  were  made  for  the  reader  to  more 
clearly understand the various approaches surrounding apparent kinetic 
models and intrinsic mechanistic models. 

To encourage the reader to explore the more relevant models of char 
conversion for a general application of interest, the following scenarios 
are presented. If one were interested in predicting overall combustor or 
gasifier performance with pulverized coal feed, then one might opt for a 
point  particle  approach  with  an  apparent  reaction  rate  model for  the 

Appendix A. Char heterogeneous reaction mechanisms 

reacting particles. The fluid phase model, however, will depend on how 
the effects of turbulence are to be accounted for. The effects of turbu-
lence  are  accounted  for  naturally  if  the  relevant  turbulent  scales  are 
resolved on the numerical mesh, as is the case for DNS, however, the 
scale  of  industrial sized  operations  is  too large  for  a  DNS  simulation. 
Hence,  one  might  consider  a  well-resolved  LES  model  or  potentially 
RANS simulation so long as the effects of turbulence on mass transfer are 
accounted for appropriately with additional models. Such a model will 
not be prohibitively demanding in computation, but it will yield char 
particle  mass  loss,  off-gas  composition,  and  temperature  as  it  flows 
through the system. An ash model could be included if one wanted to 
predict ash vaporization rates so that particulate matter evolution inside 
the combustor could be characterized. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  resolved  particle  approach  with  a  detailed 
heterogeneous reaction mechanism may be appropriate if one is inter-
ested in char particle conversion dynamics with a focus on character-
izing  underlying  rate-limiting  processes.  Such  a  model  would  be 
extremely  limited  in  scale  but  would  provide  additional  information 
regarding particle density and radii evolution, rate-limiting reactions, 
concentration profiles within the particle, and details on the effective-
ness factor. Furthermore, the results from fully resolved models can be 
used to inform other less resolved models in terms of the chemical ki-
netics of the point particles. 

Ultimately, the present work aims to support the reader in under-
standing  and  development  of  future  models.  As  presented,  char  con-
version models must be designed based on the scope and scale of the 
system, including the most salient aspects to be modeled, and can be 
discretized  to  the  highest  degree  that  desired  resolution  or  computa-
tional requirements permit. This work will aid the reader in referencing 
the vast body of literature and serve as a point of common reference for 
the  principles  and  mathematics  that  have  been  developed  thus  far  in 
char conversion models. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgements 

The research leading to these results has received funding from the 
research projects: ‘CHEERS’, financed by the European Union’s Horizon 
2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement No. 764697) 
and the research project ‘Gaspro’, financed by the Research Council of 
Norway (267916). The authors would like to thank Ewa Karchniwy for 
valuable input on the manuscript.  

A heterogeneous reaction mechanism consists of a number of adsorption and desorption reactions that describe the key reaction paths that occur 
when a solid is exposed to reactive gases. Of interest to combustion and gasification are the key reaction pathways when chars are subjected to 
environments containing O2, H2O and CO2 as primary reactants. During combustion, the primary products are CO and CO2 and during gasification, the 
primary products are H2 and CO, with CH4 being a minor product. For an adsorption reaction to occur, a free carbon site must be available to attract 
the reactant gas, leading to the formation of an adsorbed species. For example, during char combustion, a possible adsorption reaction is Cf + O2 → C 
(O) + O, where Cf  represents the free carbon site and C(O) represents the adsorbed oxygen atom. When the adsorbed species leaving the carbon 
surface, extracting a carbon atom from the carbonaceous matrix in the process, a free carbon site is formed and the underlying bulk carbon atom is 
exposed. Such a desorption reaction is Cb + C(O) → CO + Cf, where Cf represents the exposed carbon atom (a free carbon site available for adsorption). 
By showing the bulk carbon on the reactants side of the reaction, the reaction is balanced. This bulk carbon does not participate in the reaction and is 
shown solely to indicate mass conservation. In gasification environments, adsorption reactions can result not only in the formation of adsorbed-O, but 
also in adsorbed-H (C(H)), adsorbed-OH (C(OH)) and even adsorbed-CO (C(CO)). The heterogeneous reaction mechanism contains reactions for the 
formation of all the adsorbed species and for all the species that desorb from the carbon surface during the char conversion process. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099351N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Char reactivity based on heterogeneous reaction rates 

Char reactivity is determined from the molar reaction rates of those reactions that release a gas phase species that contains a carbon atom extracted 

from the char surface. These are desorption reactions. If in desorption reaction k the molar mass of the desorbed species m is 

̂
Mm, the mass fraction of 

carbon in the desorbed species is 
̂ℜk
Rc,k = ( ̂M C / ̂M m)( ̂ℜk

̂M m) = ̂M C

̂
MC/ ̂

Mm  and therefore, the carbon mass loss rate due to reaction k (i.e., char reactivity due to reaction k) is 

where 

̂ℜkis the rate of reaction k (see (Eq. (7)). Summing over all desorption reactions yields overall char reactivity: 

Rc =

∑Nreac des

k=1

Rc,k = ̂M C

∑Nreac des

k=1

̂ℜk.

(184)  

(185) 

If all free and bulk carbons are shown in the heterogeneous reaction mechanism, then the desorption reaction will have a bulk carbon on the 
reactant side of the reaction. Since char reactivity is a measure of the rate that carbon atoms are removed from the carbonaceous matrix and for each 
carbon atom that is removed via desorption a bulk carbon is added as a reactant species to reflect mass conservation, it follows that char reactivity and 
the reactivity of the bulk carbons are the same. Thus, 

Rc = ̂M C

∑Nreac des

k=1

̂ℜk = (cid:0) ̂M C

̂RCb

(186)  

where the molar reactivity of the bulk carbons is determined via Eq. (10). 

The  molar  reactivities  of  all  the  species  involved  in  the  system  of  heterogeneous  reactions  must  satisfy  the  following  conservation  of  mass 

expression: 

∑Nspec

i=1

̂Ri

̂M i = 0

(187)  

̂
Mi is the molar mass of species i, and the summation is over all the species in the mechanism, including the free and bulk carbons. Separating the 

where 
summation into surface species (adsorbed species and free and bulk carbons) and gas-phase species yields 

∑Nspec

i=1

̂Ri

̂M i =

∑Nspec surf

∑Nspec gas

̂Ri

̂M i +

̂Ri

̂M i = 0.

i=1

i=1

(188)  

Expanding the summation over the surface species and rearranging results in the following relationship for the reactivities of the free and bulk 
carbons: 

̂RCf

̂M Cf + ̂RCb

̂M Cb = (cid:0)

(cid:0)

̂RC(O) ̂M C(O) + ̂RC(H) ̂M C(H) + ̂RC(OH) ̂M C(OH) + ̂RC(CO) ̂M C(CO)

∑Nspec gas

)

(cid:0)

̂Ri

̂M i.

i=1

Grouping the summation of the reactivities of adsorbed species in the parenthesis and solving for the reactivity of the bulk carbon yields 

̂RCb

̂M Cb = (cid:0) ̂RCf

̂M Cf (cid:0)

∑Nspec ads

̂Ri

̂M i (cid:0)

∑Nspec gas

̂Ri

̂M i.

i=1

i=1

Combining this equation with Eq. (186) yields the following expression for char reactivity: 

Rc = ̂RCf

̂M Cf +

∑Nspec ads

̂Ri

̂M i +

∑Nspec gas

̂Ri

̂M i.

i=1

i=1

Steady state 

(189)  

(190)  

(191)  

When during the course of reaction, an adsorbed species maintains a nearly constant concentration, the adsorbed species is said to be in “steady 
state.” The formation and consumption rates of the adsorbed species are nearly equal and as such, for this adsorbed species, its molar reactivity is zero. 
̂
Rj = 0. When all the adsorbed species reach steady-state levels, the 
Thus, for adsorbed species j in steady state during the course of char conversion, 
free carbon concentration also reaches a steady state. Thus, when all adsorbed species are at steady state, 

(Rc)ss =

∑Nspec gas

i=1

̂Ri

̂M i.

(192) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099352N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Many heterogeneous reaction mechanisms that have been developed support a quasi-steady state for adsorbed species, but unsteady calculations 
indicate that this occurs at char conversions greater than about 25%, after the adsorbed species have had sufficient time to build up to their steady- 
state concentrations. 

Char reactivity in terms of reaction rate kinetic parameters 

In order to demonstrate the above expressions for char reactivity, consider the following three-step adsorption/desorption reaction mechanism for 
carbon oxidation in which O-atoms are adsorbed via both an adsorption reaction (r1) and a complex enhanced adsorption reaction (r2). Both CO and 
CO2  are  released  from  the  surface,  CO2  via  the  complex  enhanced  adsorption  reaction  and  CO,  via  the  desorption  reaction,  r3.  This  three-step 
adsorption/desorption reaction mechanism for carbon oxidation is an analog of the semi-global mechanism discussed by Hurt and Calo [172]. In 
this modification, account is explicitly made for free and bulk carbons. 

r1: Cf + O2 → C(O) + O. 
r2: Cf + Cb + C(O) + O2 → CO2 + C(O) + Cf. 
r3: Cb + C(O) → CO + Cf. 

Based on this mechanism, the right-hand-side of Eq. (186) can be expanded to yield the following expression for char reactivity:  

Rc = ̂M C

∑Nreac des

k=1

̂ℜk = ̂M C ( ̂ℜ2 + ̂ℜ3).

The molar reaction rates of reactions r1, r2 and r3 are given by 

̂ℜ1 = k1 ξn (1 (cid:0) θo) [O2]

̂ℜ2 = k2 ξn

2 (1 (cid:0) θo) θo [O2]

̂ℜ3 = k3 ξn θo  

(193) 

where ξn is the total surface concentration of all carbon sites, θo is the fraction of the sites occupied by oxygen atoms and [O2] is the concentration of 
oxygen in the gas phase (in mol/m3). The surface concentration of adsorbed oxygen atoms, [C(O)], equals ξnθo  and since sites are either free or 
(1 (cid:0) θo). The carbonaceous solid material is assumed 
occupied by oxygen atoms, the surface concentration of free carbon sites, [Cf], equals ξnθf = ξn
to behave as an ideal solid; consequently, the activity of bulk carbon is taken to be unity. Employing these reaction rates in Eq. (193) yields: 
Rc = ̂M C

2 (1 (cid:0) θo) θo [O2] + k3 ξn θo

k2 ξn

}

{

.

(194) 

The steady-state concentration for adsorbed-O (or the adsorbed-O site fraction) is found by setting its rate of change to zero: 

dθO
dt

= ̂ℜ1 (cid:0) ̂ℜ3 = ̂RC(O) = ξn{k1[O2] (cid:0) (k1[O2] + k3)θo} = 0.

Solving for θO yields (θO)ss: 
k1[O2]
k1[O2] + k3

(θO)ss =

.

The fraction of free carbon sites at steady state is therefore 
(cid:0)

)

θf

ss

= 1 (cid:0) (θO)ss = 1 (cid:0)

k1[O2]
k1[O2] + k3

=

k3
k1[O2] + k3

.

Employing these steady-state relations in Eq. (194) yields the following expression for char reactivity assuming adsorbed species in steady state: 

Rc = ̂M C

∑Nreac,des

k=1

{

̂ℜk = ̂M C

2

k2 ξn

(

k3
k1[O2] + k3

)(

k1[O2]
k1[O2] + k3

)

[O2] + k3 ξn

}

.

k1[O2]
k1[O2] + k3

{

Simplifying results in 
k1k3ξn[O2]
(k1[O2] + k3)

Rc = ̂M C

(

1 +

k2ξn[O2]
(k1[O2] + k3)

)}
.

(195)  

The above equation gives char reactivity in terms of the reaction rate coefficients of the reactions in the mechanism. These are generally expressed in 
Arrhenius form. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099353N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Validation of Eq. (192) 

The summation on the right-hand-side of Eq. (192) can be expanded to yield 

(Rc)ss = (cid:0)

∑Nspec,gas

i=1

̂Ri

̂M i = ̂RO2

̂M O2 + ̂RCO2

̂M CO2 + ̂RCO

̂M CO + ̂RO

̂M O.

Based on the reaction mechanism, the molar reactivities of the species can be determined via Eq. (10). 
̂RO2 = (cid:0) ̂ℜ1 (cid:0) ̂ℜ2  

̂RCO = ̂ℜ3  

̂RCO2 = ̂ℜ2  

̂RO = ̂ℜ1  

Using these relations for species molar reactivity in the above expression for steady state char reactivity and simplifying results in 
(Rc)ss = ( (cid:0) ̂ℜ1 (cid:0) ̂ℜ2) ̂M O2 + ̂ℜ2

̂M CO2 + ̂ℜ3

̂M CO + ̂ℜ1

̂M O,

which can be rearranged to yield 
(Rc)ss = ̂ℜ1( (cid:0) ̂M O2 + ̂M O) + ̂ℜ2( (cid:0) ̂M O2 + ̂M CO2 ) + ̂ℜ3

̂M CO.

̂ℜ1 = ̂ℜ3,
Since at steady state 
(Rc)ss = ̂ℜ3( (cid:0) ̂M O2 + ̂M O + ̂M CO) + ̂ℜ2( (cid:0) ̂M O2 + ̂M CO2 ).

Realizing that each parenthesis equals MC, this expression can be rewritten as 
(Rc)ss = ̂ℜ3( ̂M C) + ̂ℜ2( ̂M C) = ̂M C( ̂ℜ3 + ̂ℜ2)

This agrees with Eq. (193), thereby validating Eq. (192) for the calculation of char reactivity when all adsorbed species are assumed to be in steady 
state. 

CO-to-CO2  product ratio 

The CO-to-CO2 product ratio can be calculated from the CO and CO2 molar reactivities. The molar reactivities of the species are calculated via Eq. 

(10). Based on the reaction mechanism, 
̂RCO = ̂ℜ3 = k3ξnθo  

̂RCO2 = ̂ℜ2 = k2(ξn)2(1 (cid:0) θo)θo[O2]

From the ratio of these reactivities, 

NCO
NCO2

=

̂RCO
̂RCO2

=

k3ξnθo
k2(ξn)2(1 (cid:0) θo)θo[O2]

=

k3ξn
k2(ξn)2(1 (cid:0) θo)[O2]

.

Employing the steady-state adsorbed-O site fraction: 

NCO
NCO2

=

(k1[O2] + k3)
k2ξn[O2]

In agreement with experimental observations, this expression reveals that at fixed temperature, as the oxygen concentration is increased, the CO-to- 
CO2 product ratio decreases, i.e., more CO2 is produced as the oxygen concentration is increased. 

Appendix B. Summary of reaction rate models and relationships between them 

The variety of models that have been developed to characterize the mass loss rates of char particles in oxidizing and reducing environments can be 
grouped into two categories: apparent reaction rate models and intrinsic reaction rate models. Apparent reaction rate models predict mass loss rates 
per unit external particle surface area (Ap) while intrinsic reaction rate models predict mass loss rates per unit internal surface area (mp ⋅ Sg) or per unit 
total surface area (internal plus external). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099354N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

I.  Overall/Apparent reaction rate models (see Section 3.2.1)  

A.  Overall particle reaction rate, Rov (in kg/m2/s) 

(

)

Rov ≡ (cid:0)

1
Ap

dm
dt

= (cid:0)

1
πd2
p

dm
dt  

Employing power-law kinetics, 

Rov = kov⋅Pn

g,s = Aov⋅exp( (cid:0) Eov / ̂RuTP)⋅Pn

g,s  

where kov is the overall reaction rate coefficient (in kg/m2/s/atmn), Eov is the overall activation energy and n is the apparent reaction order. The 
reactive gas partial pressure is evaluated at the conditions existing at the outer surface of the particle, which is determined from a balance 
between the diffusive rate of flow of the reactive gas to the particle surface and its consumption rate at the surface due to heterogeneous 
chemical reaction.  

B.  Apparent reaction rates, Ra and R

Ra ≡ (cid:0)

(

)

1
m0

dm
dt

or R

′

a ≡ (cid:0)

′

a  (in 1/s) 
dm
dt  

(

)

1
m

Employing power-law kinetics, 
Ra = ka⋅Pn′
̂RuTp

(cid:0)
g,s = Aa⋅exp

(cid:0) Ea

/

)
⋅Pn′
g,s  

and 

′

a = k
R

′

a⋅Pn′

g,s = A

′

(cid:0)
a⋅exp

′

(cid:0) E
a

/

̂RuTp

)
⋅Pn′
g,s  

where ka and k

′

a are apparent reaction rate coefficients (in 1/atmn/s), Ea and E

′

a are apparent activation energies, and n

′

is the order of reaction.  

C.  Relationships between overall and apparent reaction rates 
)2

/

/

/

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

′

Rov =

ρchar,0⋅dp,0

dp,0

dp

⋅Ra =

ρchar⋅dp

)
⋅R
6

a    

(cid:0)
)
⋅

6

II.  Intrinsic reaction rate models (see Sections 2.3 and 3.2.2) 

The mass loss rate is expressed in terms of the intrinsic reactivity of the carbonaceous material, Rc (in kg/m2/s). 
dmc
dt

= (cid:0) Sg⋅Rc    

1
mc

A.  Power law-based models 

Rc = kintPm

(cid:0)
g,s = Aint exp

(cid:0) Eint

/

)

̂RuTp

Pm

g,s  

where Eint is the intrinsic (or true) activation energy and m is the true reaction order.  

B.  Heterogeneous reaction mechanism-based models 

Consideration is given to a heterogeneous reaction mechanism consisting of Nreac chemical reactions, some of which are desorption reactions 
that result in the formation of Nspec gas-phase species. Each of these species extracts a carbon atom from the carbon matrix when formed. The 
intrinsic chemical reactivity of the particle is given by 

Rc,p = MC⋅

∑Nspec

i=1

̂Ri,p  

where the overall molar reactivity of species i for the entire particle is expressed as 

̂Ri,p =

(

̂ℜk,p

∑Nreac

k=1

ν′′
i,k (cid:0) ν

′
i,k

)

.

The particle-averaged reaction rate of reaction k (

̂ℜk,p, in mol/m2/s) is given by 

̂ℜk,p = kk,f ΠNs

i=1 C

′
ν
i,k
i,p

(cid:0) kk,rΠNs

i=1C

ν′′
i,k
i,p = η⋅

(
kk,f ΠNs

i=1 C

′
ν
i,k
i,s

(cid:0) kk,rΠNs

i=1C

)

ν′′
i,k
i,s

where the average reactant concentration in the particle (Ci,p, in mol/m3) is evaluated as 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099355N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Ci,p = η⋅Ci,s,

Ci,s being the reactant concentration at the surface of the particle.  

C.  Total char mass loss rate 
(

(

(

)

)

dmc
dt

=

total

dmc
dt

+

s

)

(

= (cid:0)

1 +

int

Sg⋅ρchar⋅dp⋅η
6

)

⋅Ap⋅Rc,s  

dmc
dt

where Rc,s is the intrinsic particle reactivity evaluated at conditions existing at the external surface of the particle.  

D.  Relationship between the overall particle reaction rate and the intrinsic particle reactivity 

Rov ≡ (cid:0)

1
Ap

dm
dt

(

=

1 +

Sg⋅ρchar⋅dp⋅η
6

)

⋅Rc,s   

Appendix C. Modeling mineral matter nucleation, condensation and coagulation 

As the volatile reduced mineral species escape the char particle, diffusing into the surrounding environment, they react with gaseous species in the 
environment forming volatile mineral oxides. In combustors, the reduced mineral species react with oxygen and in gasifiers, with steam and carbon 
dioxide: 

MOn(cid:0) 1(g) + O2 → MOn(g) + O  

MOn(cid:0) 1(g) + H2O → MOn(g) + H2  

MOn(cid:0) 1(g) + CO2 → MOn(g) + CO 

The rates of these bimolecular reactions are kinetically controlled. Globally, for reduced mineral species i: 

Rreaction,MOn = kO2 PO2 PMOn(cid:0) 1 + kH2OPH2OPMOn(cid:0) 1 + kCO2 PCO2 PMOn(cid:0) 1

(196)  

where the reaction rate coefficients (kO2 , kH2O  and kCO2 ) are each expressed in modified Arrhenius form: ATnexp( (cid:0) E/RT). When considering the 
oxidation of magnesium metal vapors under simulated pulverized coal combustion conditions, Neville [268] estimated the rate coefficient using 
collision theory, as described by Laidler [321], and reported for the magnesium metal vapor oxidation reaction rate coefficient, kO2 : A = 4.44 × 1018 
m3/mol/s, n = 0.5 and E = 1.28 × 105 J/mol. 

The partial pressure of the reduced mineral species at various distances outside the char particle are determined by integrating the following 

(

differential equation: 
r2D MOn(cid:0) 1
̂RuTBL

dPMOn(cid:0) 1
dr

d
dr

1
r2

)

= (cid:0)

˙Rreaction,MOn .

(197)  

Here, D MOn(cid:0) 1  is the diffusion coefficient of the reduced mineral species (MOn-1) in the boundary layer surrounding the particle and TBL is the effective 
temperature in the boundary layer. At the radius of the char particle (r = dp/2), PMOn(cid:0) 1
MOn(cid:0) 1 and as r→∞, PMOn(cid:0) 1 →0. Following the approach of 
Quann [260], the partial pressure of the reduced mineral oxide at the outer surface of the char particle is given by 

= Ps

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎦Peq

MOn(cid:0) 1

(198)  

⎡

(

)(

)(

)

Ps

MOn(cid:0) 1

=

⎢
⎢
⎣

1 +

D MOn(cid:0) 1
αI D O2
(

TBL
Tp
)(

1 (cid:0)
)(

ϕI
tanh(ϕI )

)

D MOn(cid:0) 1
αI D O2

TBL
Tp

1 (cid:0)

ϕI
tanh(ϕI )

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
3φI

= (dP /dI)

where φI is the Thiele modulus for vaporization (ϕI
, ϕI being the volume fraction of mineral inclusions inside the particle and dI being 
the mean inclusion diameter) and αI  is defined in Eq. (148). Employing the above expressions, Neville [268] predicted that the magnesium metal 
vapors escaping a nominally 40 μm diameter char particle in 20% oxygen at 1750 K were completely re-oxidized to metal oxide vapors before the 
metal vapor had diffused nine particle radii from the particle surface. The simulations performed by Neville [268] also indicated that the re-oxidation 
reactions of calcium and iron metal vapors that escape the char particle are also fast at the high temperatures outside char particle surfaces and as a 
result, their partial pressures are significantly reduced in the boundary layers surrounding particles. The loss of the metal vapors via condensation 
processes are predicted to be inconsequential compared to the rates that the metal vapors are oxidized to metal oxides. However, the simulations 
performed by Neville also indicated that the re-oxidation of reduced silicon oxide (SiO) is relatively slow compared to that of the metal vapors. The 
partial pressure of SiO was calculated to be higher than that of volatile silicon oxide (SiO2) as well as the SiO2 saturation vapor pressure at distances 
from the char surface as great as 17 particle radii. It is likely that with volatile silicon oxides, the condensation of both SiO and SiO2 need to be taken 
into account for accurate prediction of nanoparticle size distributions. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099356N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

The volatile mineral oxides (MOn) that are formed from the reduced metal oxides and metals can nucleate and then grow via heterogeneous 
) of volatile mineral oxide species at various distances from the char particle is governed by the 

condensation processes. The partial pressure (PMOn
following differential equation: 

= ( ˙Rreaction (cid:0)

˙Rnucleation (cid:0)

˙Rcondensation)MOn

.

(199)  

(

)

1
r2

d
dr

r2D MOn
̂RuTBL

dPMOn
dr

Here, D MOn  is the diffusion coefficient of the mineral oxide species in the gaseous mixture surrounding the char particle and the terms on the right- 
hand-side  represent  the  rates  of  change  (in  mol/m3/s)  in  the  concentrations  of  the  volatile  mineral  oxide  species  owing  to  chemical  reaction, 
nucleation and heterogeneous condensation processes. At the high temperatures near the char surface, the partial pressures of the volatile mineral 
species are greater than their saturation pressures; consequently, there can be significant nucleation and condensation as particles grow via coagu-
lation and coalescence processes. 

As volatilized mineral oxide species diffuse, they tend to cluster. Based on the classical nucleation theory (CNT) (see for example, Reiss [322] and 
Karthika et al. [323]), nucleation will occur spontaneously as soon as a certain supersaturation level is achieved. This critical cluster size for volatile 
mineral oxide species is given by 

dcrit,MOn =

4σMOn υMOn
/
(cid:0)
P*
PMOn
kBTln

MOn

)

(200)  

Here, σMOn  is the specific surface tension of a droplet of the mineral oxide species having a molecular volume of υMOn ; PMOn and P*
MOn  are the partial and 
saturation pressures of the mineral oxide species, respectively; and kB  is the Boltzmann constant. The saturation pressure is taken as the partial 
pressure of the condensable species for equilibrium between liquid mineral oxide species with a planar interface and gaseous mineral species at 
temperature T. The ratio PMn/P*
MOn ), there is no homogeneous 
nucleation. For supersaturation ratios greater than about 5, homogeneous nucleation of submicron particles takes place [324]. The greater the extent 
of supersaturation, the smaller the critical cluster size, the initial size of the nucleated particles. For clusters of the critical size, growth rates (which 
lead to macroscopic size nano-particles) and decay rates (which cause clusters to shrink to the sizes of their monomers) are equal. The addition of just 
one more vapor molecule to a cluster of the critical size will cause nucleation. Shown in Fig. 15 are critical cluster sizes calculated for mineral species 
that may condense in a char particle’s boundary layer for a supersaturation ratio of 5. 

MOn  is a measure of the extent of supersaturation. If there is no supersaturation (PMOn 

< P*

Fig. 15. Critical cluster diameter.  

For temperatures between 1700 and 2300 K, critical cluster diameters are in between 0.5 and 4 nm, with Al2O3 vapors yielding the largest sizes and 
MgO, the smallest. Note that critical cluster sizes decrease with increasing temperature for a fixed extent of reaction. Of course, since the vapor 
pressures of the mineral species depend upon temperature, the same extent of supersaturation for each temperature implies different partial pressures 
for the mineral species vapors at the different temperatures. For a supersaturation ratio of 10, critical cluster sizes are about 30% smaller than they are 
for a saturation ratio of 5. Other researchers [324-326] have derived analogous expressions for the critical cluster size of condensing vapors based on 
the CNT. 

The nucleation rate depends on the net number of clusters per unit time that grow larger than this critical size. Neville [268] applied the CNT to 
magnesium oxide vapors, and expressed the rate of homogeneous nucleation ( ˙rnucleation, in nuclei/m3/s) of a spherical liquid MgO droplet from MgO 
vapors as follows: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099357N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

˙rnucleation,MOn =

2 aC(PMOn )2(σMOn )0.5υMSi
(2πmMOn )0.5(kBT)2

where 

ΔGυ =

(cid:0)
ln

kBT
υMOn

/

)

P*

MOn

PMOn

(

exp

(cid:0) 16π(σMOn )3
3kBT(ΔGυ)2

)

(201) 

(202)  

Here, aC is the condensation coefficient (assumed to be unity), mMOn  is the molecular mass of the mineral oxide species (MgO), and ΔGυ is the change in 
the Gibbs free energy for droplet formation per unit volume. Note that the greater the extent of supersaturation, the greater ΔGυ and hence, the greater 
the mineral species nucleation rate. Analogous expressions for the rate of nucleation have been put forth by other researchers [324-326]. Shown in 
Fig. 16 are calculated nucleation rates for magnesium oxide and silicon oxide vapors as a function of temperature for specified values of the su-
persaturation ratio. 

Fig. 16. Mineral oxide nucleation rates.  

Nucleation rates are noted to increase with temperature, the rates being much more sensitive to temperature than to supersaturation ratio. For 
MgO vapors, at 2000 K, the nucleation rate is ~6.0 × 1011 nuclei/m3/s for a supersaturation ratio of 5 and increases to ~2.4 × 1012 nuclei/m3/s for a 
saturation ratio of 10, a factor of about four. The rate changes by over three orders of magnitude if the temperature is changed by only 50 K from 2000 
K. The nucleation rates of SiO2  vapors are not as sensitive to temperature as are the rates for MgO vapors. For a supersaturation ratio of 5, the 
nucleation rate of SiO2 vapors increase from ~4.6 × 1016 nuclei/m3/s at 2000 K to ~9.6 × 1019 nuclei/m3/s at 2200 K, an increase by a factor of only 
about 2100 over a 200 K increase in temperature. 

Initial droplet sizes could be as small as the critical cluster sizes. Helble and Sarofim [327] report that inorganic vapors homogeneously nucleate to 
form particles in the size range 0.01 to 0.03 μm (10 to 30 nm). It is quite likely that these particles could have already undergone some degree of 
coalescence. Assuming an initial mineral droplet size of dMOn,it the molar nucleation rate (in mol/m3/s) is given by 

˙Rnucleation,MOn =

πd3
MOn,init
6υMOn NAV

˙rnucleation,MOn

where NAV is Avogadro’s number. 

(203)  

The nucleated mineral clusters grow in size owing to condensation of vapor molecules that collide with them. The heterogeneous condensation rate 
of vapor mineral species i depends on the Knudsen range of the stable mineral clusters and for the cluster sizes expected, the Knudsen number is in the 
transition range between flow in the free molecular (Kn = λ/dcluster >> 1) and continuum (Kn ≪ 1) regimes. Shown in Fig. 17 are calculated Knudsen 
numbers as functions of temperature for Al2O3, MgO and SiO2, using the critical cluster size as the characteristic length. Note that Knudsen numbers 
increase  with  increasing  temperature,  especially  for  MgO,  which  exhibits  the  largest  Knudsen  numbers  at  temperatures  greater  than  1900  K. 
Aluminum oxide vapors, which have the largest critical cluster sizes have the smallest Knudsen numbers. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099358N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Fig. 17. Mineral oxide Knudsen numbers.  

When Knudsen numbers are in the range for free molecular flow, collisions between the vapor molecules and the clusters will be random as the 
molecules travel in straight lines until they encounter another particle or hit a wall. For such particles, the condensation rate can be calculated using 
results from the kinetic theory of gases (e.g., see Friedlander [328]): 
π(dMOn )2αc
(2πmMOn kBT)1/2

)free molecular
dMOn

˙rcondensation,MOn

PMOn (cid:0) P*

)
.

(204)  

MOn

=

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

. In the above expression, αc is a mass accommodation factor and is assumed to be equal to 
This is the condensation rate for a particle of diameter dMOn
unity. When Knudsen numbers are in the range for continuum flow, the vapor molecules are sufficiently large that they act as a continuous fluid 
flowing around each other and the clusters. Diffusion coefficients can be used to describe the relative motion between the vapors and clusters, and the 
condensation rate can be approximated using the following expression (e.g., see [328]): 
(cid:0)

(cid:0)

˙rcondensation,MOn

)continuum
dMOn

=

2πdMOn D MOn
̂RuT

PMOn (cid:0) P*

MOn

)
.

(205)  

In this expression, the diffusion coefficients are determined from D = λu/3 where u is the mean speed of the particle: u = (3

RuT/ ̂
̂

M)1/2. 

In the transition flow regime, Kn ~ 1, the forces that particles experience as they flow is quite complex, rendering it necessary to use semi-empirical 
relations for the condensation rates for particles that have sizes the same order as their mean free paths. The following interpolation expression, due to 
Fuchs and Sutugin [329], has been used to describe the condensation rate over the entire Knudsen range: 

⎛

⎞

(cid:0)

˙rcondensation,MOn

)

dMOn

(cid:0)

=

˙rcondensation,MOn

)continuum
dMOn

⎜
⎜
⎝

1 + Kn
1 + 0.377Kn + 4
3αc

(cid:0)

⎟
⎟
)
⎠.

Kn + Kn2

(206)  

The above expression yields rates that match those for both the free molecular and continuum regimes when the mass accommodation factor is set to 
0.461 and the Knudsen number is defined in terms of the particle diameter (Kn = λ/d), as in this work. When the Knudsen number is defined in terms of 
the particle radius (Kn = λ/d), as in the work of Fuchs and Sutugin [329], the accommodation factor takes the value 0.922, a value near their empirical 
value of unity. A graph showing the condensation rates for MgO particles at 2000 K for a supersaturation ratio of 5 is shown in Fig. 18. For Kn < 0.02, 
the condensation rates calculated via Eq. (206) are within 5% of the rates determined for the continuum regime and for Kn > 3, Eq. (206) yields rates 
(cid:0) 5 < Kn < 3.4 ×
that are within 5% of the rates determined for the free molecular regime. The range of Knudsen numbers covered in Fig. 18 (2 × 10
103) corresponds to MgO particles in the size range 0.2 to 100 nm. It is concluded that Eq. (206) yields accurate prediction of condensation rates for all 
mineral oxide particles, for those as small as 0.2 nm in diameter (free molecular flow) to those as large as several microns (continuum flow). 

Equation (206) gives the condensation rate per mineral oxide particle. It yields the flow of condensable mineral oxide vapors per unit time to the 
surface of a spherical mineral oxide particle of diameter dMOn . For MgO and SiO2 particles near their critical cluster sizes, at 2000 K condensation rates 
are of the order 105  to 106  mol/s when the supersaturation ratio is in the range 5 to 10. The rates increase with increasing temperature and with 
increasing supersaturation ratio. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099359N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Fig. 18. Condensation rate as a function of Knudsen number for MgO particles at 2000 K. The dashed line corresponds to the results obtained when employing αc =
0.461 in Eq. (206). 

The overall condensation rate is dependent on the number density and size distribution of the mineral oxide particles, and can be calculated as 

follows: 

˙Rcondensation,MOn =

∫∞

(cid:0)

0

˙rcondensation,MOn

)

dMOn

n(dMOn )ddMOn

(207)  

where in the above expression, n(dMOn
the extent of coagulation that occurs as the mineral oxides diffuse away from the outer surface of the char particle. 

) is the number of particles of diameter dMOn  at time t. As discussed below, the number distribution depends upon 

The above expressions for

˙
Rcondensation  are used in the governing differential equation for the partial pressure of the mineral 
oxide species outside the char particle surface, Eq. (199). When integrating, properties should be evaluated at the local gas temperature or some 
effective boundary layer temperature. The local gas temperature is estimated by solving the following differential equation governing heat conduction 
in the char particle’s boundary layer: 

˙
Rnucleation  and 

˙
Rreaction, 

= 0.

(208)  

(

)

1
r2

d
dr

r2λgas

dT
dr

Here, λgas is the effective thermal conductivity of the gas in the boundary layer. 

At the conditions of interest, the CNT predicts the formation of a large number of nuclei with critical diameters of the order 1 nm. As they diffuse 
away from the char particle surface, they collide and stick, resulting in the formation of a large number of spherical nano-particles. Coagulation of 
these  particles  accounts  for  the  reduction  in  their  total  numbers  and  coalescences  accounts  for  the  increase  in  the  average  size  of  the  particles 
produced. 

Many different approaches have been taken to account for coagulation of mineral vapors during char combustion (for example, see references 
[163,324]) or of aerosols (for example, see references: [325,328,330-335]). Following the lead of Friedlander [328], an expression for the rate of 
coagulation can be determined by considering the collision frequency of particles in Brownian motion in a uniform flow field, employing the results of 
kinetic theory to determine the collision frequency factor for collisions among molecules that behave as rigid, elastic (non-interacting) spheres. The 
number of collisions (zij) between particles having volumes u and v, per unit time per unit volume is given by 
zij = β(u, v)n(u)n(v)

(209)  

where the collision frequency function β(u, v) is the rate of collisions per particle per unit volume, n(u)) is the number of volatile mineral oxide 
particles per unit volume having volume u and n(v) is the number having volume v. These collisions result in the formation of new particles having 
volume u + v. The newly formed particles also undergo collisions with all the other particles. The net rate of change in the number of newly formed 
particles of volume v can be expressed as 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099360N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

∫v

∫∞

= 0.5

β(u, v (cid:0) u) n(u) n(v (cid:0) u)du (cid:0)

β(u, v) n(u) n(v)du

dn(v)
dt

0

0

(210) 

where the first term on the right-hand side represents the rate of formation of particles of volume v from collision between particles of volume u and 
smaller (i.e., particles having volumes v (cid:0) u) and the second term on the right represents the rate of loss of the newly formed particles of volume v due 
to collisions with all other particles. This is the partial integro-differential equation governing particle coagulation. Solutions yield the size distri-
butions of the mineral oxide particles in time. 

The form of the collision frequency function depends upon the flow regime, the limits being the continuum regime (Kn = λ/dp  ≪ 1) and free 
molecular regime (Kn >>1, dp ≪ λ). When particles are larger than the mean free path (Kn ≪ 1), a concentration gradient of condensable mineral 
species exists around each mineral oxide particle, rendering a diffusion-governed heterogeneous condensation rate. For the continuum regime, 

)

1

3 + (v)

1
3

(211)  

(u)

(

)

(

β(u, v) =

2kBT
3μ

1

1
3

(u)

+

1

1
3

(v)

where μ is the gas viscosity. When particles are much smaller than the mean free path, flow is in the free molecular regime and no steady concentration 
gradient is established around particles. For flow in the free molecular regime, 

β(u, v) =

)1

6

(

3
4π

(

6kBT
ρMO

(

)1

2

2(

)1
1
v

1
u

+

1

(u)

3 + (v)

)2

1
3

(212)  

where µ is the mass density of the condensing species, the volatile mineral oxide. In some approaches, the collision frequency in the free molecular 
regime is multiplied by a factor (taking a nominal value of 2), to account for the enhancement in the collision frequency due to dispersion forces (see 
for example Neville [268] and Graham and Homer [331]). 

Integration of Eq. (210) with collision frequency functions given by either Eq. (211) or (212) is rather complicated for a distribution of initially 
sized  particles.  However,  approximate  solutions  can  be  derived  by  assuming  that  the  evolving  particle  size  distribution  exhibits  self-preserving 
characteristics,  becoming  invariant  in  time  and  independent  of  the  initial  particle  size  distribution.  This  was  demonstrated  by  Friedlander  and 
Wang [330] for coagulation in the continuum regime and by Lai et. al [332] for coagulation in the free molecular regime. In the approach, the 
self-preserving particle size distribution function is expressed in terms of the variable η, defined as the ratio of the particle volume v to the average 
particle volume concentration v. This average volume concentration is calculated as the ratio of the total particle volume at time t per unit volume of 
gas, V (m3of particles)/(m3 of gas), to the particle number concentration, N (#particles/m3). Thus, at time t, 
η = v/v

v = V/N.

and

(213)  

where 
∫∞

∫∞

V =

v n(v) dv

and

N(t) =

n(v) dv.

0

0

In terms of η, the particle size distribution is defined in non-dimensional form as ψ(η), where 

ψ(η) = n(v)V

N2.

/

(214)  

(215)  

When these variables are employed in either Eq. (211) or (212), a solution to Eq. (210) for Brownian coagulation in either the continuum or free 
molecular regime can be obtained that is particle size distribution invariant in time and dependent only on the collision frequency function. The 
function ψ(η) is an asymptotic solution to Eq. (210) towards which all systems having homogeneous collision frequency functions converge. The 
collision frequency functions given in Eqs. (211) and (212) for the continuum and free molecular flow regimes are homogeneous functions of particle 
volume. Shown in Fig. 19 are curves obtained for the self-preserving number size distributions for particles in the continuum and free molecular 
regimes (see references [330] and [332], respectively). The curves were plotted from the numerical results provided in tables in the two publications. 
ends of the spectrum. For specified η, ψ(η) can be 
Analytical expressions are provided in the papers for the lower (η → 0) and upper (η → ∞)
obtained for each regime. Other researchers have shown that self-preserving distribution functions are also obtained for aerosol coagulation in the 
continuum and free molecular regimes even when expressed in the forms of logarithmic volume distribution functions (see Lehtinen and Zachariah 
[335], for example). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099361N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Fig. 19. Self-preserving particle number concentration distributions. The plots were prepared from data presented in the tables put forth by Friedlander and Wang 
[330] for the continuum regime and by Lai et al. [332] for the free molecular regime. 

For coagulation in the continuum regime, the total particle concentration is found by integration of the following differential equation: 

dN
dt

= (cid:0)

2kBT
3μ

(1 + ab)N2

The parameters a and b are defined as the following integrals: 

∫∞

∫∞

a =

η1
3ψ(η) dη

and

b =

η(cid:0) 1

3ψ(η) dη

0

0

(216)  

(217)  

and are constants obtained by integration of the self-preserving particle size distribution function in the continuum regime (see Friedlander and Wang 
[330]). Assuming constant properties in the char particle’s boundary layer over the time period t to t + δt, piecewise integration of Eq. (216) yields: 

(

(

Nt+δt = Nt

1 +

2(1 + ab)kBT
3μ

)

)(cid:0) 1

Ntδt

t

(218)  

where at time t = 0, the total particle number density takes its initial value of N0. Having determined the total number density at time t + δt, the 
particle size distribution at the time can be calculated via Eqs. (213) and (215) using the η- ψ(η) relationship for the self-preserving particle size 
distribution function determined for the continuum regime and the value of V calculated from the initial mineral oxide particle size distribution. This 
assumes that all of the mineral oxide particles remain in suspension from the time they escape the char particle up to time t + δt, rendering V constant. 
For coagulation in the free molecular regime, the total particle concentration is found by integration of the following equation put forth by Lai et al. 

[332]: 

dN
dt

= (cid:0)

(

)1

6

(

χ
2

3
4π

6kBT
ρMO

)1

2

1

6N

11
6

V

where the parameter χ is defined as the following double integral: 

χ =

∫∞

∫∞

0

0

(
η1
3 + ̃η

1
3

(

)2

2

)1
1
̃η

1
η

+

ψ(η)ψ(̃η)dη d̃η.

(219)  

(220) 

By integration of the η-ψ(η) relationship for the self-preserving particle size distribution function in the free molecular regime, Lai et al. [332] found 
χ to have the value 6.67. For constant properties in the char particle’s boundary layer over the time period t to t + δt, Eq. (219) can be integrated, 
assuming that all particles remain suspended, to yield: 

Nt+δt =

[

(

)(χ
5
6
2

)(

3
4π

1

5
6

(Nt)

+

((

)1

6

)1

2

1
6

V

6kBT
ρMO

)

](cid:0) 6

5

.

δt

t

(221)  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099362N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Having evaluated Nt + δt, the number of particles at time t + δt having volume v can be determined from Eqs. (213) and (215) and the self-preserving 
distribution function calculated for the free molecular regime along with the value of V determined from the initial size distribution. 

Since v = V/N, Eq. (221) can be rearranged to yield the following expression for the average particle volume at time t + δt in terms of the average 

particle volume at time t: 

[

vt+δt =

V
Nt+δt

=

5

(vt)

6 +

(

)(

)(χ
5
6
2

3
4π

(

)1

6

6kBT
ρMO

)1

2

]6

5

Vδt

.

The volume-mean particle diameter at time t + δt can therefore be expressed as 
)(χ
5
6
2

6vt+δt
π

dp,t+δt =

3
4π

)(

(vt)

Vδt

6 +

6
π

)1

)1

)1

)1

]2

=

(

(

(

(

[

.

5

3

3

5

6

2

6kBT
ρMO

(222)  

(223) 

Neville [268] showed that the primary submicron particles produced during combustion of nominally 50 μm diameter particles of Montana lignite 
at 1700 K in 15%, 20% and 40% oxygen were well represented by particle sizes calculated using an approximate form of the above equation. Samples 
of submicron particles were collected at selected distances from the point of coal injection. Measurements indicated rapid changes in particle number 
density and size as the small particles collide and coalesce, in agreement with the calculations. The number density decreased from 2.76 x 1011 
particles/cm3 at 3.81 cm from the injection point to 6.24 x 1010 particles/cm3 at 6.35 cm while the volume-mean diameter increased form 3.4 nm to 
13.9 nm. 

Recently, Niu and co-researchers [163,283,284] implemented versions of the above equations to predict the particle size distributions of par-
ticulate matter during coal combustion. In the models developed, account is made for re-oxidation of the mineral sub-oxides and metals that escape 
char particles and for nucleation, condensation, coagulation, and coalescence of these particles to form fine ash particles. 

In order to accurately predict the size distribution of the nano-sized particles produced during char oxidation and gasification, it is necessary to 
consider  vaporization  followed  by  nucleation,  condensation  and  coagulation  of  all  the  minerals  in  the  coal  and  biomass  chars.  In  nearly  all 
condensation and coagulation sub-models developed to date, the interactions of various kinds of vapor species originating from different mineral 
inclusions in the coal char are neglected. MgO and SiO2 have been taken to be representative of all types of mineral inclusions in the coal and biomass 
chars. Besides consideration of the refractory metals, account should also be made for the vaporization of mercury, arsenic and selenium species 
during coal char conversion and for sodium, potassium, and phosphorus species during biomass char conversion. Evidence exists for the deposition of 
such volatile mineral species on ash particles as they cool in exhaust gases [278]. 

References 

[1] Smith IW. The combustion rates of coal chars: a review. In: Nineteenth 

Symposium (International) on Combustion; 1982. p. 1045–65. 

[2] Li J, Paul MC, Younger PL, Watson I, Hossain M, Welch S. Prediction of high- 

temperature rapid combustion behaviour of woody biomass particles. Fuel 2016; 
165:205–14. 

[3] Anthony DB, Howard JB. Coal devolatilization and hydrogasification. AIChE 

Journal 1976;22:625–56. 

[4] Falcitelli M, Biagini E, Tognotti L. Development of the advanced biomass and coal 
devolatilization (ABCD) model. In: 10th Conference on Energy for a Clean 
Environment; 2009. 

[5] Fletcher TH, Kerstein AR, Pugmire RJ, Grant DM. Chemical Percolation Model for 
Devolatilization .2. Temperature and Heating Rate Effects on Product Yields. 
Energ Fuel 1990;4:54–60. 

[6] Genetti D, Fletcher TH, Pugmire RJ. Development and application of a correlation 
of C-13 NMR chemical structural analyses of coal based on elemental composition 
and volatile matter content. Energ Fuel 1999;13:60–8. 

[7] Kobayashi H, Howard JB, Sarofim A. Coal devolatilization at high temperatures. 

In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 16; 1976. p. 411–25. 

[8] Niksa S, Kerstein AR. Flashchain Theory for Rapid Coal Devolatilization Kinetics 

1. Formulation. Energ Fuel. 1991;5:647–65. 

[9] Sheng CD, Azevedo JLT. Modeling biomass devolatilization using the chemical 
percolation devolatilization model for the main components. In: Proceedings of 
the Combustion Institute. 29; 2002. p. 407–14. 

[10] Solomon PR, Hamblen DG, Carangelo R, Krause JL. Coal thermal decomposition 
in an entrained flow reactor: Experiments and theory. In: Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute. 19; 1982. p. 1139–49. 

[11] Sommariva S, Maffei T, Migliavacca G, Faravelli T, Ranzi E. A predictive multi- 

step kinetic model of coal devolatilization. Fuel 2010;89:318–28. 

[12] Xing JK, Wang HO, Luo K, Wang S, Bai Y, Fan JR. Predictive single-step kinetic 

model of biomass devolatilization for CFD applications: A comparison study of 
empirical correlations (EC), artificial neural networks (ANN) and random forest 
(RF). Renew Energ 2019;136:104–14. 

[13] Mitchell R, Akanetuk J. The impact of fragmentation on char conversion during 
pulverized coal combustion. In: Twenty-sixth symposium (International) on 
Combustion; 1996. p. 3137–44. 

[14] Mitchell RE, Hurt RH, Baxter LL, Hardesty DR. Compilation of Sandia coal char 
combustion data and kinetic analysis. Sandia National Laboratory Report; 1992. 
[15] Hirschfelder JO, Curtiss CF, Bird RB. Molecular Theory of Gases and Liquids. New 

York: Chapman & Hall, London: Wiley; 1954. 

[16] Chabane AM, Truffin K, Nicolle A, Nicoud F, Cabrit O, Angelberger C. Direct 

numerical simulation of combustion near a carbonaceous surface in a quiescent 
flow. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2015;84:130–48. 

[17] Dierich F, Richter A, Nikrityuk P. A fixed-grid model to track the interface and 
porosity of a chemically reacting moving char particle. Chem Eng Sci 2018;175: 
296–305. 

[18] Farazi S, Sadr M, Kang S, Schiemann M, Vorobiev N, Scherer V, et al. Resolved 
simulations of single char particle combustion in a laminar flow field. Fuel 2017; 
201:15–28. 

[19] Gomez MA, Porteiro J, Chapela S, Miguez JL. An Eulerian model for the 

simulation of the thermal conversion of a single large biomass particle. Fuel 2018; 
220:671–81. 

[20] Ha MY, Choi BR. A numerical study on the combustion of a single carbon particle 

entrained in a steady flow. Combust Flame 1994;97:1–16. 

[21] Jayawickrama T, Chishty MA, Babler M, Umeki K, Haugen NEL. The effect of 

Stefan flow on the drag coefficient of reactive spherical particles in a gas flow. 
International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2019;117:130–7. 

[22] Lee J, Tomboulides AG, Orszag SA, Yetter RA, Dryer FL. A transient two- 

dimensional chemically reactive flow model: Fuel particle combustion in a 
nonquiescent environment. Twenty-Sixth Symposium (International) on 
Combustion 1996;2:3059–65. 

[23] Luo K, Mao CL, Fan JR, Zhuang ZY, Haugen NEL. Fully resolved simulations of 
single char particle combustion using a ghost-cell immersed boundary method. 
Aiche Journal 2018;64:2851–63. 

[24] Nikrityuk PA, Gabner M, Kestel M, Meyer B. Numerical study of the influence of 
heterogeneous kinetics on the carbon consumption by oxidation of a single coal 
particle. Fuel 2013;114:88–98. 

[25] Pan YY, Kong SC. Simulation of biomass particle evolution under pyrolysis 

conditions using lattice Boltzmann method. Combust Flame 2017;178:21–34. 

[26] Richter A, Nikrityuk PA, Meyer B. Three-dimensional calculation of a chemically 

reacting porous particle moving in a hot O2/CO2  atmosphere. Int J Heat Mass 
Tran 2015;83:244–58. 

[27] Richter A, Vascellari M, Nikrityuk PA, Hasse C. Detailed analysis of reacting 

particles in an entrained-flow gasifier. Fuel Process Technol 2016;144:95–108. 
[28] Sayadi T, Farazi S, Kang S, Pitsch H. Transient multiple particle simulations of 

char particle combustion. Fuel 2017;199:289–98. 

[29] Schulze S, Kestel M, Nikrityuk PA, Safronov D. From detailed description of 

chemical reacting carbon particles to subgrid models for CFD. Oil Gas Sci Technol 
2013;68:1007–26. 

[30] Schulze S, Nikrityuk P, Compart F, Richter A, Meyer B. Particle-resolved 

numerical study of char conversion processes in packed beds. Fuel 2017;207: 
655–62. 

[31] Tufano GL, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, Frassoldati A, Faravelli T, Deng L, et al. 

Resolved flow simulation of pulverized coal particle devolatilization and ignition 
in air- and O2/CO2  atmospheres. Fuel 2016;186:285–92. 

[32] Tufano GL, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, Gentile G, Stagni A, Frassoldati A, et al. 

Fully-resolved simulations of coal particle combustion using a detailed multi-step 
approach for heterogeneous kinetics. Fuel 2019;240:75–83. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099363N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

[33] Tufano GL, Stein OT, Wang B, Kronenburg A, Rieth M, Kempf AM. Coal particle 

volatile combustion and flame interaction. Part II: Effects of particle Reynolds 
number and turbulence. Fuel 2018;234:723–31. 

[65] Farazi S, Hinrichs J, Davidovic M, Falkenstein T, Bode M, Kang S, et al. Numerical 
investigation of coal particle stream ignition in oxy-atmosphere. Fuel 2019;241: 
477–87. 

[34] Tufano GL, Stein OT, Wang B, Kronenburg A, Rieth M, Kempf AM. Coal particle 

[66] Rieth M, Kempf AM, Kronenburg A, Stein OT. Carrier-phase DNS of pulverized 

volatile combustion and flame interaction. Part I: Characterization of transient 
and group effects. Fuel 2018;229:262–9. 

coal particle ignition and volatile burning in a turbulent mixing layer. Fuel 2018; 
212:364–74. 

[35] Vascellari M, Xu H, Hasse C. Flamelet modeling of coal particle ignition. In: 

Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 34; 2013. p. 2445–52. 

[36] Wittig K, Nikrityuk PA, Schulze S, Richter A. Three-dimensional modeling of 

porosity development during the gasification of a char particle. AIChE Journal 
2017;63:1638–47. 

[37] Xue ZC, Guo QH, Gong Y, Xu JL, Yu GS. Numerical study of a reacting single coal 
char particle with different pore structures moving in a hot O2/CO2 atmosphere. 
Fuel 2017;206:381–9. 

[38] Zhang W, Tainaka K, Ahn S, Watanabe H, Kitagawa T. Experimental and 

numerical investigation of effects of particle shape and size distribution on 
particles’ dispersion in a coaxial jet flow. Adv Powder Technol 2018;29:2322–30. 
[39] Zhang W, Watanabe H, Kitagawa T. Direct numerical simulation of ignition of a 

single particle freely moving in a uniform flow. Adv Powder Technol 2017;28: 
2893–902. 

[40] Fong GH, Jorgensen S, Singer SL. Pore-resolving simulation of char particle 

gasification using micro-CT. Fuel 2018;224:752–63. 

[41] Lee JC, Yetter RA, Dryer FL. Transient numerical modeling of carbon particle 

ignition and oxidation. Combust Flame 1995;101:387–98. 

[42] Zhang H, Luo K, Haugen NEL, Mao C, Fan J. Drag force for a burning particle. 

Combust Flame 2020;217:188–99. 

[43] Zhang LH, Liu K, You CF. Fictitious domain method for fully resolved reacting 

gas-solid flow simulation. J Comput Phys 2015;299:215–28. 

[44] Hecht ES, Shaddix CR, Geier M, Molina A, Haynes BS. Effect of CO2  and steam 
gasification reactions on the oxy-combustion of pulverized coal char. Combust 
Flame 2012;159:3437–47. 

[45] Hecht ES, Shaddix CR, Molina A, Haynes BS. Effect of CO2 gasification reaction on 
oxy-combustion of pulverized coal char. In: Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute. 33; 2011. p. 1699–706. 

[67] Wan K, Vervisch L, Xia J, Domingo P, Wang Z, Liu Y, et al. Alkali metal emissions 
in an early-stage pulverized-coal flame: DNS analysis of reacting layers and 
chemistry tabulation. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 37; 2019. 
p. 2791–9. 

[68] Wen C, Luo K, Wang H, Luo Y, Fan J. Analysis of pulverized coal flame stabilized 

in a 3D laminar counterflow. Combust Flame 2018;189:106–25. 

[69] Kruger J, Haugen NEL, Lovas T. Correlation effects between turbulence and the 
conversion rate of pulverized char particles. Combust Flame 2017;185:160–72. 
[70] Rieth M, Proch F, Rabacal M, Franchetti BM, Cavallo Marincola F, Kempf AM. 

Flamelet LES of a semi-industrial pulverized coal furnace. Combust Flame 2016; 
173:39–56. 

[71] Karchniwy E, Haugen NEL, Klimanek A, Langørgen Ø. The effect of turbulence on 
mass transfer in solid fuel combustion: RANS model. Combust Flame 2021;227: 
65–78. 

[72] Haugen NEL, Kruger J, Mitra D, Lovas T. The effect of turbulence on mass transfer 
rates of small inertial particles with surface reactions. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 
2018;836:932–51. 

[73] Karchniwy E, Klimanek A, Haugen NEL. The effect of turbulence on mass transfer 

rates between inertial particles and fluid for polydisperse particle size 
distributions. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2019;874:1147–68. 

[74] Kruger J, Haugen NEL, Mitra D, Lovas T. The effect of turbulent clustering on 
particle reactivity. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 36; 2017. 
p. 2333–40. 

[75] Jayawickrama TR, Haugen NEL, Babler MU, Chishty MA, Umeki K. The effect of 
Stefan flow on Nusselt number and drag coefficient of spherical particles in non- 
isothermal gas flow. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2021:140. 

[76] Schiller L, Naumann A. Über die grundlegenden Berechnungen bei der 
Schwerkraft aufbereitung. Z Verein Deutsch Ing 1933;77:318–20. 

[46] Mitchell RE, Ma LQ, Kim B. On the burning behavior of pulverized coal chars. 

[77] Wen CY, Yu YH. Mechanics of Fluidization. Chemical Engineering Progress 1966; 

Combust Flame 2007;151:426–36. 

62:100–11. 

[47] Haberle I, Haugen NEL, Skreiberg O. Simulating thermal wood particle 

[78] Ming-yan G, Ming-chuan Z, Juan Y, Wei-dong F. Feng-guo T. Numerical study on 

conversion: Ash-layer modeling and parametric studies. Energ Fuel 2018;32: 
10668–82. 

[48] Haberle I, Haugen NEL, Skreiberg O. Combustion of thermally thick wood 
particles: A study on the influence of wood particle size on the combustion 
behavior. Energ Fuel 2018;32:6847–62. 

the spatial distribution of energy release during char combustion. Appl Energ 
2008;85:1060–70. 

[79] McConnell J, Goshayeshi B, Sutherland JC. An evaluation of the efficacy of 

various coal combustion models for predicting char burnout. Fuel 2017;201: 
53–64. 

[49] Hermansson S, Thunman H. CFD modelling of bed shrinkage and channelling in 

[80] Wheeler A. Reaction Rates and Selectivity in Catalyst Pores. Advances in Catalysis 

fixed-bed combustion. Combust Flame 2011;158:988–99. 

1951;3:249–327. 

[50] Satterfield CN. Mass transfer in heterogeneous catalysis. Cambridge 

[81] Bhatia SK, Perlmutter DD. A random pore model for fluid-solid reactions: 1. 

Massachusetts: MIT Press; 1970. 

Isothermal, kinetic control. AIChE Journal 1980;26:379. 

[51] Usseglio-Viretta FLE, Finegan DP, Colclasure A, Heenan TMM, Abraham D, 
Shearing P, et al. Quantitative Relationships Between Pore Tortuosity, Pore 
Topology, and Solid Particle Morphology Using a Novel Discrete Particle Size 
Algorithm. J Electrochem Soc 2020:167. 

[82] Mendoza E, Cunningham RE, Ronco JJ. Oxidation of zinc sulfide pellets - 

application of a model of diffusion with simultaneous reaction under effective 
diffusivity and surface area profiles. Journal of Catalysis 1970;17:277–86. 
[83] Gavalas GR. A random capillary model with applications to char gasification at 

[52] Hamann T, Zhang L, Gong YH, Godbey G, Gritton J, McOwen D, et al. The Effects 

chemically controlled rates. AIChE Journal 1980;26:577–85. 

of Constriction Factor and Geometric Tortuosity on Li-Ion Transport in Porous 
Solid-State Li-Ion Electrolytes. Adv Funct Mater 2020:30. 

[53] Münch B, Holzer L. Contradicting Geometrical Concepts in Pore Size Analysis 
Attained with Electron Microscopy and Mercury Intrusion. Journal of the 
American Ceramic Society 2008;91:4059–67. 

[54] Stenzel O, Pecho O, Holzer L, Neumann M, Schmidt V. Predicting Effective 

Conductivities Based on Geometric Microstructure Characteristics. Aiche Journal 
2016;62:1834–43. 

[84] Su J-L, Perlmutter DD. Effect of pore structure on char oxidation kinetics. AIChE 

Journal 1985;31:973–81. 

[85] Wang G, Zhang J, Geng W, Shao J. A modified random pore model for gasification 
kinetics of coal char and biomass char. In: TMS 2015 144th Annual Meeting & 
Exhibition; 2015. p. 841–8. 

[86] Ishida M, Wen CY. Comparison of zone-reaction model and unreacted-core 
shrinking model in solid-gas reactions—I Isothermal analysis. Chem Eng Sci 
1971;26:1031–41. 

[55] Niu YQ, Liu SQ, Shaddix CR, Hui SE. An intrinsic kinetics model to predict 

[87] Dutta S, Wen CY. Reactivity of coal and char. 2. In oxygen-nitrogen atmospheres. 

complex ash effects (ash film, dilution, and vaporization) on pulverized coal char 
burnout in air (O2/N2) and oxy-fuel (O2/CO2) atmospheres. In: Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute. 37; 2019. p. 2781–90. 

[56] Sun JK, Hurt RH. Mechanisms of extinction and near-extinction in pulverized 
solid fuel combustion. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 28; 2000. 
p. 2205–13. 

[57] Simons GA. The Role of Pore Structure in Coal Pyrolysis and Gasification. 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 1983;9:269–90. 

Ind Engng Chem Process Des Dev. 1977;16:31–7. 

[88] Dutta S, Wen CY, Belt RJ. Reactivity of coal and char. 1. In carbon dioxide 

atmospheres. Ind Engng Chem Process Des Dev. 1977;16:20–30. 

[89] Morin M, Pecate S, Masi E, Hemati M. Kinetic study and modelling of char 
combustion in TGA in isothermal conditions. Fuel 2017;203:522–36. 

[90] Raghunathan K, Yang RYK. Unification of coal-gasification data and its 

applications. Ind Eng Chem Res 1989;28:518–23. 

[91] Feng B, Bhatia SK. Variation of the pore structure of coal chars during 

[58] Bird RB, Stewart WE, Lightfoot EN. Transport Phenomena. New York: John Wiley 

gasification. Carbon 2003;41:507–23. 

and Sons; 1961. 

[59] Fatehi H, Bai XS. A comprehensive mathematical model for biomass combustion. 

Combustion Science and Technology 2014;186:574–93. 

[60] Haberle I, Skreiberg Ø, Lazar J, Haugen NEL. Numerical models for 

[92] Holland T, Fletcher TH. Global sensitivity analysis for a comprehensive char 
conversion model in oxy-fuel conditions. Energ Fuel 2016;30:9339–50. 
[93] Kajitani S, Hara S, Matsuda H. Gasification rate analysis of coal char with a 

pressurized drop tube furnace. Fuel 2002;81:539–46. 

thermochemical degradation of thermally thick woody biomass, and their 
application in domestic wood heating appliances and grate furnaces. Progress in 
Energy and Combustion Science 2017;63:204–52. 

[94] Kajitani S, Suzuki N, Ashizawa M, Hara S. CO2  gasification rate analysis of coal 

char in entrained flow coal gasifier. Fuel 2006;85:163–9. 

[95] Liu GS, Niksa S. Coal conversion submodels for design applications at elevated 

[61] Brosh T, Patel D, Wacks D, Chakraborty N. Numerical investigation of localised 

forced ignition of pulverised coal particle-laden mixtures: A direct numerical 
simulation (DNS) analysis. Fuel 2015;145:50–62. 

[62] Hara T, Muto M, Kitano T, Kurose R, Komori S. Direct numerical simulation of a 

pulverized coal jet flame employing a global volatile matter reaction scheme 
based on detailed reaction mechanism. Combust Flame 2015;162:4391–407. 
[63] Luo K, Wang HO, Fan JR, Yi FX. Direct numerical simulation of pulverized coal 

combustion in a hot vitiated co-flow. Energ Fuel 2012;26:6128–36. 

[64] Bai Y, Luo K, Qiu K, Fan J. Numerical investigation of two-phase flame structures 

in a simplified coal jet flame. Fuel 2016;182:944–57. 

pressures. Part II. Char gasification. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 
2004;30:679–717. 

[96] Mitchell RE. An intrinsic kinetics-based, particle-population balance model for 
char oxidation during pulverized coal combustion. In: Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute. 28; 2000. p. 2261–70. 

[97] Niu YQ, Shaddix CR. A sophisticated model to predict ash inhibition during 
combustion of pulverized char particles. In: Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute. 35; 2015. p. 561–9. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099364N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

[98] Tilghman MB, Haugen NEL, Mitchell RE. Comprehensive char particle 

[132] Tognotti L, Longwell JP, Sarofim A. The products of the high temperature 

gasification model adequate for entrained-flow and fluidized-bed gasifiers. Energ 
Fuel 2017;31:2164–74. 

oxidation of a single char particle in an electrodynamic balance. In: Proceedings 
of the Combustion Institute. 23; 1990. p. 1207–13. 

[99] Fermoso J, Arias B, Pevida C, Plaza MG, Rubiera F, Pis JJ. Kinetic models 

[133] Day RJ, Walker Jr PL, CC Wright. The carbon-oxygen reaction at high 

comparison for steam gasification of different nature fuel chars. J Therm Anal 
Calorim 2008;91:779–86. 

temperatures and high gas flow rates. In: Conference on Industrial Carbon & 
Graphite Soc Chem Ind (London); 1958. p. 348–70. 

[100] Lu GQ, Do DD. Comparison of structural models for high-ash char gasification. 

[134] Hamor RJ, Smith IW, Tyler RJ. Kinetics of combustion of a pulverized brown coal 

Carbon 1994;32:247–63. 

[101] Duman G, Uddin MA, Yanik J. The effect of char properties on gasification 

reactivity. Fuel Process Technol 2014;118:75–81. 

[102] Tsuge M, Hama T, Kimura Y, Kouchi A, Watanabe N. Interactions of Atomic and 

Molecular Hydrogen with a Diamond-like Carbon Surface: H-2 Formation and 
Desorption. Astrophys J 2019;878. 

[103] Brenner DW, Shenderova OA. Theory and modelling of diamond fracture from an 

atomic perspective. Philos T R Soc A 2015:373. 

[104] Beeley T, Crelling J, Gibbins J, Hurt R, Lunden M, Man C, et al. Transient high- 

temperature thermal deactivation of monomaceral-rich coal chars. In: Twenty- 
Sixth Symposium (International) on Combustion. 2; 1996. p. 3103–10. 
[105] Senneca O, Salatino P, Masi S. The influence of char surface oxidation on thermal 
annealing and loss of combustion reactivity. In: Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute. 30; 2005. p. 2223–30. 

[106] Ooi N, Rairkar A, Adams JB. Density functional study of graphite bulk and surface 

properties. Carbon 2006;44:231–42. 

char between 630 and 2200 K. Combust Flame 1973;21:153–62. 

[135] Harris DJ, Smith IW. Intrinsic reactivity of petroleum coke and brown coal char to 
carbon dioxide, steam and oxygen. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 
23; 1990. p. 1185–90. 

[136] Smith IW, Tyler RJ. The reactivity of a porous brown coal char to oxygen between 

630 and 1812 K. Combustion Science and Technology 1974;9:87–94. 
[137] Fletcher TH, Sawaya RJ, Allen JW, Hecker WC, Smoot LD. Kinetics of high- 

pressure char oxidation. Abstr Pap Am Chem S 1999;218:U641. 
[138] Salatino P, Senneca O, Masi S. Assessment of thermodeactivation during 
gasification of a bituminous coal char. Energ Fuel 1999;13:1154–9. 

[139] Smith IW, Tyler RJ. Internal burning of pulverized semianthracite: the relation 

between particle structure and reactivity. Fuel 1971;51:312–21. 
[140] Suuberg EM, Wojtowicz M, Calo JM. Reaction order for low temperature 

oxidation of carbon. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 22; 1988. 
p. 79–87. 

[141] Thiele EW. Relation between catalytic activity and size of particle. Ind Engng 

[107] Haugen NEL, Mitchell RE, Tilghman MB. A comprehensive model for char particle 

Chem 1939;31:916–20. 

conversion in environments containing O2  and CO2. Combust Flame 2015;162: 
1455–63. 

[142] Murphy JJ, Shaddix CR. Effect of reactivity loss on apparent reaction order of 

burning char particles. Combust Flame 2010;157:535–9. 

[108] Tilghman MB. A consistent reaction mechanism and model for the combustion 
and gasification of coal and biomass, and the co-firing thereof. Stanford 
University; 2017. 

[143] Holland T, Bhat S, Marcy P, Gattiker J, Kress JD, Fletcher TH. Modeling effects of 
annealing on coal char reactivity to O2 and CO2, based on preparation conditions. 
Energ Fuel 2017;31:10727–44. 

[109] Hurt RH, Haynes BS. On the origin of power-law kinetics in carbon oxidation. In: 

[144] Salatino P, Senneca O, Masi S. Gasification of a coal char by oxygen and carbon 

Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 30; 2005. p. 2161–8. 

dioxide. Carbon 1998;36:443–52. 

[110] Haynes BS. A turnover model for carbon reactivity I. Development. Combust 

[145] Senneca O, Russo P, Salatino P. The role of carbonization in the evolution of coal 

Flame. 2001;126:1421–32. 

char gasification reactivity. Abstr Pap Am Chem S 1996;211:11. Fuel. 

[111] Field MA. Rate of combustion of size-graded fractions of char from a low-rank 

[146] Senneca O, Russo P, Salatino P, Masi S. The relevance of thermal annealing to the 

coal between 1200 K and 2000 K. Combust Flame 1970;14:237–52. 

evolution of coal char gasification reactivity. Carbon 1997;35:141–51. 

[112] Field MA, Gill DW, Morgan BB, Hawksley PGW. Combustion of pulverised coal. 

[147] Shurtz RC, Fletcher TH. Coal char-CO2  gasification measurements and modeling 

Leatherhead: The British Coal Utilization Research Association; 1967. 
[113] Gulbransen EA, Andrew KF, Brassart FA. The oxidation of graphite at 

◦
temperatures of 600 to 1500
of Electrochemical Society 1963;110:476–83. 

C and at pressures of 2 to 76 torr of oxygen. Journal 

in a pressurized flat-flame burner. Energ Fuel 2013;27:3022–38. 

[148] Tremel A, Spliethoff H. Gasification kinetics during entrained flow gasification - 

Part I; devolatilisation and char deactivation. Fuel 2013;103:663–71. 

[149] Linares-Solano A, Mahajan OP, Walker Jr PL. Reactivity of heat-treated coals in 

[114] Hurt R, Sun JK, Lunden M. A kinetic model of carbon burnout in pulverized coal 

steam. Fuel 1979;58:327–32. 

combustion. Combust Flame 1998;113:181–97. 

[115] Hurt RH, Mitchell RE. Unified high-temperature char combustion kinetics for a 
suite of coals of various rank. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 24; 
1992. p. 1243–50. 

[116] Mitchell RE. On the products of the heterogeneous oxidation reaction at the 

surfaces of burning coal char particles. In: Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute. 22; 1988. p. 69–78. 

[117] Mitchell RE. Variations in the temperatures of coal-char particles during 

combustion: A consequence of particle-to-particle variations in ash-content. In: 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 23; 1990. p. 1297–304. 

[118] Mitchell RE, McLean WJ. On the temperature and reaction rate of burning 

pulverized fuels. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 19; 1982. 
p. 1113–22. 

[150] Septien S, Valin S, Peyrot M, Dupont C, Salvador S. Characterization of char and 
soot from millimetric wood particles pyrolysis in a drop tube reactor between 800 
degrees C and 1400 degrees C. Fuel 2014;121:216–24. 

[151] Ren LW, Wei RD, Zhu TC, Xin J. Novel Kinetic Model for Petcoke Gasification at 

High Temperature. Energ Fuel 2019;33:10638–50. 

[152] Vyazovkin S, Burnham AK, Criado JM, Perez-Maqueda LA, Popescu C, 

Sbirrazzuoli N. ICTAC Kinetics Committee recommendations for performing 
kinetic computations on thermal analysis data. Thermochim Acta 2011;520:1–19. 

[153] De Bruijn TJW, De Jong WA, Van Den Berg PJ. Kinetic parameters in Avrami- 
Erofeev type reactions from isothermal and non-isothermal expreiments. 
Thermochim Acta 1981;45:315–25. 

[154] Prestipino M, Galvagno A, Karlstrom O, Brink A. Energy conversion of 

agricultural biomass char: Steam gasification kinetics. Energy 2018;161:1055–63. 
[155] Blyholder G, Eyring H. Kinetics of graphite oxidation II. J Phys Chem 1959;63: 

[119] Walls JR, Strickland-Constable RF. Oxidation of carbon between 1000 and 2400 

◦

C. Carbon 1964;1:333–8. 

1004–8. 

[120] Waters BJ, Squires RG, Laurendeau NM, Mitchell RE. Evidence for formation of 
CO2 in the vicinity of burning pulverized carbon particles. Combust Flame 1988; 
74:91–106. 

[121] Smith IW. Kinetics of combustion of size-graded pulverized fuels in the 

temperature range 1200–2270 K. Combust Flame 1971;17:303–14. 
[122] Smith IW. The kinetics of combustion of pulverized semi-anthracite in the 
temperature range 1400 - 2000 K. Combust Flame 1971;17:421–8. 
[123] Thomas GR, Stevenson AJ, Evans DG. Ignition of coal particles without 

temperature jump. Combust Flame 1973;21:133–6. 

[124] Radovic LR, Walker PLJ, Jenkins RG. Importance of carbon active sites in the 

gasification of coal chars. Fuel 1983;62:849–56. 

[125] Senneca O, Salatino P. Loss of gasification reactivity toward O2  and CO2  upon 

heat treatment of carbons. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 29; 2002. 
p. 485–93. 

[156] Essenhigh RH. Chemistry of Coal Utilization. New York: John Wiley and Sons; 

1981. 

[157] Jenkins RG, Nandi SP, Walker Jr PL. Reactivity of heat-treated coals in air at 

◦
500

C. Fuel 1973;52:288–93. 

[158] Kurylko L, Essenhigh RH. Steady and unsteady combustion of carbon. In: 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 14; 1973. p. 1375–86. 

[159] Radovic LR, Walker PLJ, Jenkins RG. Effect of lignite pyrolysis conditions on 

calcium oxide dispersion and subsequent char reactivity. Fuel 1983;62:209–12. 
[160] Smith IW. The intrinsic reactivity of carbons to oxygen. Fuel 1978;57:409–14. 
[161] Young BC, Smith IW. The kinetics of combustion of petroleum coke particles at 
1000 to 1800 K: The reaction order. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 
18; 1981. p. 1249–55. 

[162] Monson CR, Germane GJ, Blackham AU, Smoot LD. Char oxidation at elevated 

pressures. Combust Flame 1995;100:669–83. 

[126] Senneca O, Salatino P. Overlapping of heterogeneous and purely thermally 

[163] Niu YQ, Wang S, Shaddix CR, Hui SE. Kinetic modeling of the formation and 

activated solid-state processes in the combustion of a bituminous coal. Combust 
Flame 2006;144:578–91. 

[127] Shim HS, Hurt RH. Thermal annealing of chars from diverse organic precursors 

under combustion-like conditions. Energ Fuel 2000;14:340–8. 

growth of inorganic nano-particles during pulverized coal char combustion in O2/ 
N2  and O2/CO2  atmospheres. Combust Flame 2016;173:195–207. 
[164] Roberts DG, Harris DJ. Char gasification with O2, CO2, and H2O: Effects of 
pressure on intrinsic reaction kinetics. Energ Fuel 2000;14:483–9. 

[128] Zolin A, Jensen A, Dam-Johansen K. Kinetic analysis of char thermal deactivation. 

[165] Sahu R, Levendis YA, Flagan RC, Gavalas GR. Physical properties and oxidation 

In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 28; 2000. p. 2181–8. 

rates of chars from three bituminous coals. Fuel 1988;67:275–83. 

[129] Arthur JR. Reactions between Carbon and Oxygen. Trans Faraday Soc 1951;47: 

164–78. 

[130] Du Z, Sarofim A, Longwell JP, Tognotti L. The CO/CO2 ratio in the products of the 
carbon-oxygen reaction. editors. In: Lahaye J, Ehrburger P, editors. Fundamental 
Issues in Control of Carbon Gasification Reactivity. Kluwer Academic Publishers; 
1991. p. 91–106. 

[131] Phillips R, Vastola FJ, Walker Jr PL. The effect of oxygen pressure and carbon 

burn-off on the product ratio of the carbon-oxygen reaction. Carbon 1969;7: 
479–85. 

[166] Sotirchos SV, Amundson NR. Dynamic behavior of a porous char particle burning 
in an oxygen-containing environment. AIChE Journal 1984;30:537–49. 
[167] Sotirchos SV, Amundson NR. Diffusion and reaction in a char particle and in the 

surrounding gas phase. Two limiting models. Ind Eng Chem Fundam 1984;23: 
180–91. 

[168] Suuberg EM, Wojtowicz M, Calo JM. Some aspects of the thermal annealing 
process in a phenol-formaldehyde resin char. Carbon 1989;27:431–40. 
[169] Mulcahy MFR, Smith IW. Kinetics of combustion of pulverized fuel: a review of 
theory and experiment. Reviews of Pure and Applied Chemistry 1969;19:81–108. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099365N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

[170] Zhang Z, Li ZS, Cai NS. Reduced-order model of char burning for CFD modeling. 

Combust Flame 2016;165:83–96. 

[171] Zhou ZJ, Chen LP, Guo LZ, Qian B, Wang ZH, Cen KF. Computational modeling of 

oxy-coal combustion with intrinsic heterogeneous char reaction models. Fuel 
Process Technol 2017;161:169–81. 

[172] Hurt RH, Calo JM. Semi-global intrinsic kinetics for char combustion modeling. 

Combust Flame 2001;125:1138–49. 

[173] Otterbein M, Bonnetain L. Combustion d’un carbone vitreux sous basses pressions 

d’oxugene. Carbon 1968;6:877–85. 

[174] Rossberg M. Experimentelle Ergebnisse über die Prim¨arreaktionen bei der 

Kohlenstoffverbrennung (Experimental results on the primary reactions in carbon 
combustion). Z Elektrochem 1956;60:952–6. 

[175] Skokova KA. Selectivity in the carbon-oxygen reaction: The Pennsylvania State 

University; 1997. 

[176] Laurendeau NM. Heterogeneous kinetics of coal char gasification and 

combustion. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 1978;4:221–70. 
[177] Foord AD. The carbon-oxygen reaction. University of Newcastle upon Tyne; 1972. 
[178] Langmuir I. The adsorption of gases on plane surfaces of glass, mica, and 

platinum. Journal of the American Ceramic Society 1918;40:1361–403. 
[179] Campbell PA. Investigation into the roles of surface oxide complexes and their 

distributions in the carbon-oxygen heterogeneous reaction mechanism. Stanford 
University; 2005. 

[180] Ma L. Combustion and gasification of chars in oxygen and carbon dioxide at 

elevated pressure. Stanford University; 2006. 

[181] Tilghman MB, Mitchell RE. Coal and biomass char reactivities in gasification and 

combustion environments. Combust Flame 2015;162:3220–35. 

[182] Laine NR, Vastola FJ, Walker Jr PL. The role of the surface complex in the carbon- 

oxygen reaction. In: Fifth Conference on Carbon; 1961. p. 211–7. 

[183] Walker Jr PL, Vastola FJ, Hart PJ. Oxygen-18 tracer studies on the carbon-oxygen 
reaction. New York: Fundamentals of Gas-Surface Interactions; 1967. p. 307–17. 
[184] Du ZY, Sarofim AF, Longwell JP, Mims CA. Kinetic measurement and modeling of 

carbon oxidation. Energ Fuel 1991;5:214–21. 

[185] Haynes BS, Newbury TG. Oxyreactivity of carbon surface oxides. In: Proceedings 

of the Combustion Institute. 28; 2000. p. 2197–203. 

[186] Ma MC, Haynes BS. Surface heterogeneity in the formation and decomposition of 

carbon surface oxides. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 26; 1996. 
p. 3119–25. 

[187] Sendt K, Haynes BS. Density functional study of the chemisorption of O2  on the 

armchair surface of graphite. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 30; 
2005. p. 2141–9. 

[188] Zhuang QL, Kyotani T, Tomita A. DRIFT and TK/TPD analyses of surface oxygen 
complexes formed during carbon gasification. Energ Fuel 1994;8:714–8. 
[189] Zhuang QL, Kyotani T, Tomita A. Desorption behavior of surface oxygen 

complexes on carbon in an inert gas and in O2-gasification atmosphere. Energ 
Fuel 1996;10:169–72. 

[190] Zhuang QL, Kyotani T, Tomita A. Dynamics of surface oxygen complexes during 

carbon gasification with oxygen. Energ Fuel 1995;9:630–4. 

[208] Bjerle I, Eklund H, Linne M, Svensson O. Thermogravimetric analysis of Swedish 
shale char. Kinetics of the steam-carbon and carbon dioxide-carbon reactions. Ind 
Eng Chem Process Des Dev. 1982;21:141–9. 

[209] Johnstone HF, Chen CY, Scott DS. Kinetics of the steam-carbon reaction in porous 

graphite tubes. Ind Eng Chem 1952;44:1564–9. 

[210] Schmal M, Montiero JLF, Toscani H. Gasification of high ash content coals with 
steam in a semibatch fluidized bed reactor. Ind Eng Chem Process Des Dev. 1983; 
22:563–70. 

[211] Strickland-Constable RF. Some comments on the work of Key on the reactions 
between coke and carbon dioxide and between coke and steam. J Chem Phys 
1950;47:356–60. 

[212] Tilghman MB, Mitchell RE. Characterizing char particle fragmentation during 
pulverized coal combustion. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 34; 
2013. p. 2461–9. 

[213] Blackwood JD, McTaggart FK. Reactions of carbon with atomic gases. Australian 

Journal of Chemistry 1959;12:533–42. 

[214] Blackwood JD, McGrory F. The carbon-steam reaction at high pressure. 

Australian Journal of Chemistry 1958;11:16–33. 

[215] Blackwood JD. The kinetics of the system carbon-hydrogen-methane. Australian 

Journal of Chemistry 1962;15:397–408. 

[216] Gorin E, Zielke C. Kinetics of carbon gasification - interaction of hydrogen with 
low temperature char at 1500 to 1700 F. Ind Eng Chem 1955;47:820–5. 
[217] Botero C, Field RP, Herzog HJ, Ghoniem AF. Impact of finite-rate kinetics on 

carbon conversion in a high-pressure, single-stage entrained flow gasifier with 
coal-CO2  slurry feed. Appl Energ 2013;104:408–17. 

[218] Hedden K, Lowe A. Uber die vergasung von reaktorgraphit mit kohlendioxid und 

wasserdampf. Carbon 1967;5:339–53. 

[219] Kapteijn F, Meijer R, Moulijn JA. Transient kinetic techniques for detailed insight 

in gas solid reactions. Energ Fuel 1992;6:494–7. 

[220] Muhlen H-J, van Heek KH, Juntgen H. Kinetic studies of steam gasification of char 
in the presence of hydrogen, carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide. Fuel 1985;64: 
944–9. 

[221] Campbell PA, Mitchell RE. The impact of the distributions of surface oxides and 
their migration on characterization of the heterogeneous carbon-oxygen reaction. 
Combust Flame 2008;154:47–66. 

[222] Niksa S, Liu GS, Hurt RH. Coal conversion submodels for design applications at 
elevated pressures. Part I. devolatilization and char oxidation. Progress in Energy 
and Combustion Science 2003;29:425–77. 

[223] Mehta BN, Aris R. Communications on the theory of diffusion and reaction - VII 

The isothermal pth order reaction. Chem Eng Sci 1971;26:1699. 
[224] Hong JH, Hecker WC, Fletcher TH. Improving the accuracy of predicting 

effectiveness factors for mth order and Langmuir rate equations in spherical 
coordinates. Energ Fuel 2000;14:663–70. 

[225] Wu HW, Wall T, Liu GS, Bryant G. Ash liberation from included minerals during 
combustion of pulverized coal: The relationship with char structure and burnout. 
Energ Fuel 1999;13:1197–202. 

[226] Bailey JG, Tate A, Diessel CFK, Wall TF. A char morphological system with 

[191] Bonnetain L, Duval X, Letort M. On the role of surface oxides in the graphite- 

applications to coal combustion. Fuel 1990;69:225–39. 

oxygen reaction. In: Proceedings of the Fourth Carbon Conference. Oxford: 
Pergamon Press; 1960. p. 107–14. 

[227] Ma LQ, Mitchell R. Modeling char oxidation behavior under Zone II burning 

conditions at elevated pressures. Combust Flame 2009;156:37–50. 

[192] Maffei T, Khatami R, Pierucci S, Faravelli T, Ranzi E, Levendis YA. Experimental 
and modeling study of single coal particle combustion in O2/N2 and oxy-fuel (O2/ 
CO2) atmospheres. Combust Flame 2013;160:2559–72. 

[193] Brown TC, Lear AE, Haynes BS. Oxygen chemisorption on carbon. In: Proceedings 

of the Combustion Institute. 24; 1992. p. 1199–206. 

[194] Ahmed S, Back MH. The role of the surface complex in the kinetics of the reaction 

of oxygen with carbon. Carbon 1985;23:513–24. 

[195] Du ZY, Sarofim AF, Longwell JP. Activation-energy distribution in temperature- 
programmed desorption - modeling and application to the soot-oxygen system. 
Energ Fuel 1990;4:296–302. 

[196] Ergun S. Kinetics of the reaction of carbon with carbon dioxide. Journal of Phys 

Chem 1956;60:480–5. 

[197] Ergun S. Kinetics of the reactions of carbon dioxide and steam with coke, 598. 

Bulletin: US Bureau of Mines; 1962. 

[198] Gadsby J, Hinshelwood CN, Sykes KW. The kinetics of the reactions of the steam- 
carbon system. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society. 187; 1946. p. 129–51. 
[199] Gadsby J, Long FJ, Sleightholm P. The mechanism of the carbon dioxide-carbon 
reaction. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society A. 193; 1948. p. 357–76. 
[200] Ingeme AJ, Blackwood JD. The reaction of carbon with carbon dioxide at high 

pressure. Australian Journal of Chemistry 1960;13:194–209. 

[201] Koenig PC, Squires RG, Laurendau NM. Evidence for two-site model of char 

gasification by carbon dioxide. Carbon 1985;23:531–6. 

[202] Koenig PC, Squires RG, Laurendau NM. Char gasification by carbon dioxide: 

Further evidence for a two-site model. Fuel 1986;65:412–6. 

[203] Long FJ, Sykes KW. The mechanism of the steam-carbon reaction. Proceedings of 

the Royal Society 1948;193:377–99. 

[204] Menster M, Ergun S. A study of the carbon dioxide-carbon reaction by oxygen 

exchange, 664. Bulletin: Bulletin of Bureau of Mines; 1973. p. 1–42. 

[205] Shaw JT. Theoretical work on reaction sequences in the gasification of coke by 
carbon dioxide and by steam in conditions remote from equilibrium. Fuel 1977; 
56:134–6. 

[206] Tsai NK. Influence of high carbon monoxide concentration on the carbon dioxide 

gasification of a selected coal char. Stanford University; 1999. 

[228] Cloke M, Wu T, Barranco R, Lester E. Char characterisation and its application in 

a coal burnout model. Fuel 2003;82:1989–2000. 

[229] Wu T, Lester E, Cloke M. A burnout prediction model based around char 

morphology. Energ Fuel 2006;20:1175–83. 

[230] Field MA, Gill DW, Morgan BB, Hawksley PGW. Combustion of pulverised coal. 

Leatherhead: The British Coal Utilization Research Association; 1967. 
[231] Saxena SC. Devolatilization and combustion characteristics of coal particles. 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 1990;16:55–94. 

[232] Zhang J, Zhang MC, Yu J. Extended Application of the Moving Flame Front Model 

for Combustion of a Carbon Particle with a Finite-Rate Homogenous Reaction. 
Energ Fuel 2010;24:871–9. 

[233] Annamalai K, Durbetaki P. Combustion behavior of char/carbon particles. In: 

Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 17; 1979. p. 169–78. 

[234] Basu P, Broughton J, Elliott DE. Combustion of single particles in fluidized beds. 

In: London: Inst. Fuel Symposium Series, Inst. of Fuel;; 1975. 

[235] Caram HS, Amundson NR. Diffusion and reaction in a stagnant boundary layer 

about a carbon particle. Ind Engng Chem Fund 1977;16:171–81. 

[236] Mitchell RE, Kee RJ, Glarborg P, Coltrin ME. The effect of CO conversion in the 
boundary layers surrounding pulverized-coal char particles. In: Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute. 23; 1990. p. 1169–76. 

[237] Makino A, Law CK. Quasi-steady and transient combustion of a carbon particle: 
theory and experimental comparisons. Proc Combust Inst 1986;21:183–91. 
[238] Gonzalo-Tirado C, Jimenez S, Johansson R, Ballester J. Comparative study of four 
alternative models for CO oxidation around a burning coal char particle. Combust 
Flame 2014;161:1085–95. 

[239] Geier M, Shaddix CR, Davis KA, Shim HS. On the use of single-film models to 
describe the oxy-fuel combustion of pulverized coal char. Appl Energ 2012;93: 
675–9. 

[240] Baum MM, Street PJ. Predicting the combustion behaviour of coal particles. 

Combustion Science and Technology 1971;3:231–43. 

[241] Essenhigh RH. An integration path for the carbon-oxygen reaction with internal 
reaction. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 22; 1988. p. 89–96. 
[242] Essenhigh RH. Influence of initial particle density on the reaction mode of porous 

[207] Biederman DL, Miles AJ, Vastola FJ, Walker Jr PL. Carbon-carbon dioxide 

carbon particles. Combust Flame 1994;99:269–79. 

reaction: kinetics at low pressures and hydrogen inhibition. Carbon 1976;14: 
351–6. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099366N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

[243] Hurt RH, Mitchell RE. On the combustion kinetics of heterogeneous char particle 

populations. In: Twenty-Fourth Symposium (International) on Combustion. 24; 
1992. p. 1233–41. 

[277] Filsinger DH, Bourrie DB. Silica to silicon - key carbothermic reactions and 
kinetics. Journal of the American Ceramic Society 1990;73:1726–32. 

[278] Cheng M-C, Cutler IB. Vaporization of silica in steam atmosphere. J Am Ceram 

[244] Haugen NEL, Tilghman MB, Mitchell RE. The conversion mode of a porous carbon 
particle during oxidation and gasification. Combust Flame 2014;161:612–9. 

[245] Gonzalo-Tirado C, Jimenez S, Ballester J. Gasification of a pulverized sub- 

bituminous coal in CO2 at atmospheric pressure in an entrained flow reactor. 
Combust Flame 2012;159:385–95. 

[246] Meyers RA. Coal Handbook. Inc. New York; 1981. 
[247] Kleinhans U, Wieland C, Frandsen FJ, Spliethoff H. Ash formation and deposition 
in coal and biomass fired combustion systems: Progress and challenges in the field 
of ash particle sticking and rebound behavior. Progress in Energy and Combustion 
Science 2018;68:65–168. 

[248] Lunden MM, Yang NYC, Headley TJ, Shaddix CR. Mineral-char interactions 

during char combustion of a high-volatile coal. In: Twenty-Seventh Symposium 
(International) on Combustion, Vols 1 and 2; 1998. p. 1695–702. 

[249] Tian C, Lu QY, Liu YX, Zeng HB, Zhao YC, Zhang JY, et al. Understanding of 

physicochemical properties and formation mechanisms of fine particular matter 
generated from Canadian coal combustion. Fuel 2016;165:224–34. 

[250] Degroot WF, Kannan MP, Richards GN, Theander O. Gasification of agricultural 
residues (biomass) - influence of inorganic constituents. J Agr Food Chem 1990; 
38:320–3. 

Soc 1979;62:593–6. 

[279] Haynes BS, Neville M, Quann RJ, Sarofim AF. Factors governing the surface 

enrichment of fly ash in volatile trace species. J Colloid Interface Sci 1982;87: 
266–78. 

[280] Senior CL, Flagan RC. Ash vaporization and condensation during combustion of a 

suspended coal particle. Aerosol Sci Tech 1982;1:371–83. 

[281] Wen C, Xu MH, Yu DX, Sheng CD, Wu HW, Zhang PA, et al. PM10 formation 

during the combustion of N2-char and CO2-char of Chinese coals. In: Proceedings 
of the Combustion Institute. 34; 2013. p. 2383–92. 

[282] Xu MH, Yu DX, Yao H, Liu XW, Qiao Y. Coal combustion-generated aerosols: 

Formation and properties. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 33; 2011. 
p. 1681–97. 

[283] Niu YQ, Liu X, Wang S, Hui SE, Shaddix CR. A numerical investigation of the 

effect of flue gas recirculation on the evolution of ultra-fine ash particles during 
pulverized coal char combustion. Combust Flame 2017;184:1–10. 

[284] Niu YQ, Yan BK, Liu SQ, Liang Y, Dong N, Hui SE. Ultra-fine particulate matters 
(PMs) formation during air and oxy-coal combustion: Kinetics study. Appl Energ 
2018;218:46–53. 

[285] Austin LG, Klimpel RR, Luckie PT. Process engineering of size reduction: Ball 

[251] Sekiguchi Y, Shafizadeh F. The effect of inorganic additives on the formation, 

milling. New York: Society of Mining Engineers; 1984. 

composition, and combustion of cellulose char. J Appl Polymer Sci 1984;29: 
1267–86. 

[286] Dunn-Rankin D, Kerstein AR. Numerical simulation of particle size distribution 
evolution during pulverized coal combustion. Combust Flame 1987;69:193–209. 

[252] Tomita A, Mahajan OP, Walker PLJ. Catalysis of char gasification by minerals. 
American Chemical Society, Division of Fuel Chemistry, Preprints 1977;22:4–6. 

[253] Umeki K, Moilanen A, Gomez-Barea A, Konttinen J. A model of biomass char 

[287] Dunn-Rankin D. Kinetic-Model for Simulating the Evolution of Particle-Size 
Distributions during Char Combustion. Combustion Science and Technology 
1988;58:297–314. 

gasification describing the change in catalytic activity of ash. Chem Eng J 2012; 
207:616–24. 

[254] Zolin A, Jensen A, Jensen PA, Frandsen F, Dam-Johansen K. The influence of 

inorganic materials on the thermal deactivation of fuel chars. Energ Fuel 2001;15: 
1110–22. 

[255] Cope RF, Arrington CB, Hecker WC. Effect of Cao Surface-Area on Intrinsic Char 

Oxidation Rates for Beulah Zap Chars. Energ Fuel 1994;8:1095–9. 

[256] Chen C, Kojima T. Single char particle combustion at moderate temperature: 

Effects of ash. Fuel Process Technol 1996;47:215–32. 

[257] Hampartsoumian E, Pourkashanian M, Williams A. Combustion rates of chars and 

carbonaceous residues. J I Energy 1989;62:48–56. 

[288] Syred N, Kurniawan K, Grifths T, Gralton T, Ray R. Development of fragmentation 
models for solid fuel combustion and gasification as subroutines for inclusion in 
CFD codes. Fuel 2007;86:2221–31. 

[289] Baxter LL. Char Fragmentation and Fly-Ash Formation during Pulverized-Coal 

Combustion. Combust Flame 1992;90:174–84. 

[290] Senneca O, Salatino P, Menghini D. The influence of thermal annealing on oxygen 
uptake and combustion rates of a bituminous coal char. Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2007;31:1889–95. 

[291] Suuberg EM. Thermally induced changes in reactivity of carbons. In: Lahaye J, 

Ehrburger P, editors. Fundamental Issues in Control of Carbon Gasification 
Reactivity. Dordrecht Kluwer Academic Publishers; 1991. 

[258] Sadhukhan AK, Gupta P, Saha RK. Analysis of the dynamics of coal char 

[292] Blackwood JS, Cullis BD, McCarthy DJ. Reactivity in the system carbon-hydrogen- 

combustion with ignition and extinction phenomena: Shrinking core model. Int J 
Chem Kinet 2008;40:569–82. 

[259] Yu D, Xu MH, Liu X, Huang J, Li G. Mechanisms of submicron and residual ash 
particle formation during pulverized coal combustion: A comprehensive review. 
Dev Chem Eng Mineral Process 2005;13:467–82. 

[260] Quann RJ. Ash vaporization under simulated pulverized coal combustion 

conditions. Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 1982. 

[261] Quann RJ, Sarofim A. Vaporization of refractory oxides during pulverized coal 
combustion. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 19; 1982. p. 1429–40. 
[262] Desrosiers RE, Riehl JW, Ulrich GD, Chiu AS. Submicron fly-ash formation in coal- 
fired boilers. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 17; 1979. p. 1395–403. 

[263] Flagan RC. Submicron particles from coal combustion. In: Proceedings of the 

Combustion Institute. 17; 1979. p. 97–104. 

[264] Kazanc F, Levendis YA, Maffei T. Chemical composition of submicrometer 

particulate matter (PM1) emitted from combustion of coals of various ranks in 
O2/N2  and O2/CO2  environments. Energ Fuel 2013;27:4984–98. 

[265] Padia A. The behavior of ash in pulverized coal under simulated combustion 

conditions. Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 1976. 

[266] Senior CL, Flagan RC. Synthetic chars for the study of ash vaporization. In: 

Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 20; 1984. p. 921–9. 

[267] Murty HN, Biederman DL, Heintz EA. Kinetics of graphitization – I. Activation 

energies. Carbon 1969;7:667–81. 

[268] Neville M. Formation of inorganic submicron particles under simulated 

pulverized coal combustion conditions. Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 
1982. 

[269] Neville M, Quann RJ, Haynes BS, Sarofim AF. Vaporization and condensation of 
mineral matter during pulverized coal combustion. In: Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute. 18; 1981. p. 1267–74. 

[270] Sui JC, Xu MH, Qiu JH, Qiao Y, Yu Y, Liu XW, et al. Numerical simulation of ash 

vaporization during pulverized coal combustion in the laboratory-scale single- 
burner furnace. Energ Fuel 2005;19:1536–41. 

[271] Zeng TF, Sarofim AF, Senior CL. Vaporization of arsenic, selenium and antimony 

during coal combustion. Combust Flame 2001;126:1714–24. 

[272] Felderhof BU, Deutch JM. Concentration dependence of the rate of diffusion- 

controlled reactions. J Chem Phys 1976;64:4551–8. 

[273] Lee CM, Davis KA, Heap MP, Eddings E, Sarofim A. Modeling the vaporization of 
ash constituents in a coal-fired boiler. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 
28; 2000. p. 2375–82. 

[274] Xu YS, Liu XW, Zhou ZJ, Sheng L, Wang C, Xu MH. The role of steam in silica 

vaporization and ultrafine particulate matter formation during wet oxy-coal 
combustion. Appl Energ 2014;133:144–51. 

methane. Australian Journal of Chemistry 1967;20:1561–70. 

[293] Blyholder G, Binford JS. Eyring H. A kinetic theory for the oxidation of 

carbonized filaments. J Phys Chem 1958;62:263–7. 

[294] Russell NV, Gibbins JR, Man CK, Williamson J. Coal char thermal deactivation 
under pulverized fuel combustion conditions. Energ Fuel 2000;14:883–8. 
[295] Senneca O, Salatino P, Masi S. Microstructural changes and loss of gasification 

reactivity of chars upon heat treatment. Fuel 1998;77:1483–93. 
[296] Weeda M, Rutte E, Kapteijn F, Moulijn JA. The development of coal char 

reactivity during CO2 gasification. In: Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Coal Science; 1991. p. 448–51. 

[297] McCarthy DJ. Changes in oxy-reactivity of carbons due to heat treatment and pre- 

hydrogenation. Carbon 1981;19:297–301. 

◦
[298] Nagle J, Strickland-Constable RF. Oxidation of carbon between 1000 and 2000

C. 

Proc Fifth Conf Carbon 1961;1:154–64. 

[299] Lightman P, Street PJ. Microscopical examination of heat treated pulverized coal 

particles. Fuel 1968;47:7–28. 

[300] McCarthy DJ. Some effects of overheating and carbon burn-off on the 
performance of fluidized-bed combustors. Fuel 1982;61:298–302. 
[301] Senneca O, Salatino P, Masi S. Heat treatment-induced loss of combustion 

reactivity of a coal char: The effect of exposure to oxygen. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 
2004;28:735–41. 

[302] Senneca O, Apicella B, Russo C, Cerciello F, Salatino P, Heuer S, et al. Pyrolysis 

and Thermal Annealing of Coal and Biomass in CO2-Rich Atmospheres. Energ 
Fuel 2018;32:10701–8. 

[303] Cai HY, Guell AJ, Chatzakis IN, Lim JY, Dugwell DR, Kandiyoti R. Combustion 

reactivity and morphological change in coal chars: Effect of pyrolysis 
temperature, heating rate and pressure. Fuel 1996;75:15–24. 

[304] Senneca O, Salatino P. A semi-detailed kinetic model of char combustion with 

consideration of thermal annealing. In: Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 
33; 2011. p. 1763–70. 

[305] Feng B, Jensen A, Bhatia SK, Dam-Johansen K. Activation energy distribution of 

thermal annealing of a bituminous coal. Energ Fuel 2003;17:399–404. 

[306] Zolin A, Jensen A, Dam-Johansen K. Coupling thermal deactivation with 

oxidation for predicting the combustion of a solid fuel. Combust Flame 2001;125: 
1341–60. 

[307] Tabet F, Gokalp I. Review on CFD based models for co-firing coal and biomass. 

Renew Sust Energ Rev 2015;51:1101–14. 

[308] Yin CG, Rosendahl L, Kaer SK, Condra TJ. Use of numerical modeling in design for 
co-firing biomass in wall-fired burners. Chem Eng Sci 2004;59:3281–92. 
[309] Comer JK, Kleinstreuer C. Computational Analysis of Convection Heat-Transfer to 

Nonspherical Particles. Int J Heat Mass Tran 1995;38:3171–80. 

[275] Barin I. Thermochemical Data of Pure Substances. VCH Verlagsgeselischaft mbH; 

[310] Chol MK, Gavalas GR. A Theoretical-Study of Combustion of Nonspherical 

1995. 

Particles. Combustion Science and Technology 1993;89:9–26. 

[276] Binnewies M, Milke E. Thermochemical Data of Elements and Compounds. Wiley- 

[311] Lu H, Ip E, Scott J, Foster P, Vickers M, Baxter LL. Effects of particle shape and 

VCH Verlag GmhH; 1999. 

size on devolatilization of biomass particle. Fuel 2010;89:1156–68. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099367N.E.L. Haugen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

[312] Lu H, Robert W, Peirce G, Ripa B, Baxter LL. Comprehensive study of Biomass 

particle combustion. Energ Fuel 2008;22:2826–39. 

[313] Lu H, Scott J, Echols K, Foster P, Ripa B, Farr R, et al. Effects of particle shape and 
size on black liquor and biomass reactivity. In: Proceedings of the 2004 
Conference on Science in Thermal and Chemical Biomass Conversion; 2004. 
[314] Aris R. On shape factors for irregular particles .1. The steady-state problem. 
Diffusion and reaction (Reprinted from Chem Engng Sci, vol 6, pg 262-268, 
1957). Chem Eng Sci. 1995;50:3899–903. 

[315] Yu JL, Lucas J, Wall T, Liu G, Sheng CD. Modeling the development of char 

structure during the rapid heating of pulverized coal. Combust Flame 2004;136: 
519–32. 

[316] Croiset E, Mallet C, Rouan JP, Richard JR. The influence of pressure on char 

combustion kinetics. In: Twenty-Sixth Symposium (International) on Combustion, 
Vols 1 and 2; 1996. p. 3095–102. 

[317] MacNeil S, Basu P. Effect of pressure on char combustion in a pressurized 

circulating fluidized bed boiler. Fuel 1998;77:269–75. 

[318] Shurtz RC, Hogge JW, Fowers KC, Sorensen GS, Fletcher TH. Coal Swelling Model 

for Pressurized High Particle Heating Rate Pyrolysis Applications. Energ Fuel 
2012;26:3612–27. 

[319] Shurtz RC, Kolste KK, Fletcher TH. A coal swelling model for CFD applications at 

high heating rates. Energ Fuel 2011;25:2163–73. 

[320] Williams A, Backreedy R, Habib R, Jones JM, Pourkashanian M. Modelling coal 

combustion: the current position. Fuel 2002;81:605–18. 
[321] Laidler KJ. Chemical Kinetics. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1965. 
[322] Reiss H. The statistical mechanical theory of irreversible condensation. I J Chem 

Phy 1952;20:1216–27. 

[323] Karthika S, Radhakrishnan TK, Kalaichelvi P. A review of classical and 

nonclassical nucleation theories. Cryst Growth Des 2016;16:6663–81. 
[324] McNallan MJ, Yurek GJ, Elliot JF. The formation of inorganic particulates by 

homogeneous nucleation in gases produced by the combustion of coal. Combust 
Flame 1981;42:45–60. 

[325] Mulholland GW, Samson RJ, Mountain RD, Ernst MH. Cluster size distribution for 

free molecular agglomeration. Energ Fuel 1988;2:481–6. 

[326] Zhang LF, Pluschkell W, Thomas BG. Nucleation and growth of alumina 
inclusions during steel deoxidation. Steel Proc 2002;85:463–76. 

[327] Helble JJ, Sarofim AF. Factors determining the primary particle-size of flame- 

generated inorganic aerosols. J Colloid Interf Sci 1989;128:348–62. 

[328] Smoke Friedlander SK. Dust and Haze, Fundamentals of Aerosol Behavior. New 

York: John Wiley and Sons; 1977. 

[329] Fuchs NA, Sutugin AG. Highly-Dispersed Aerosols. Topics in current aerosol 

research, international reviews in aerosol physics and chemistry. Ann Arbor 1971: 
1. 

[330] Friedlander SK, Wang CS. The self-preserving particle size distribution for 
coagulation by Brownian motion. J Colloid Interface Sci 1966;22:126–32. 
[331] Graham SC, Homer JB. Coagulation of molten lead aerosols. Faraday Symp 1973: 

85–96. 

[332] Lai FS, Friedlander SK, Pich J, Hidy GM. The self-preserving particle size 

distribution for Brownian coagulation in the free molecular regime. J Colloid 
Interface Sci 1972;39:395–405. 

[333] Lee KW, Chen H. Coagulation rate of polydisperse particles. Aerosol Sci Tech 

1984;3:327–34. 

[334] Lee KW, Chen J, Gieseke JA. Log-normally preserving size distribution for 

Brownian coagulation in the free-molecule regime. Aerosol Sci Tech 1984;3: 
53–62. 

[335] Lehtinen KEJ, Zachariah MR. Self-preserving theory for the volume distribution of 
particles undergoing Brownian coagulation. J Colloid Interf Sci 2001;242:314–8.  

Nils Erland L. Haugen Haugen is a senior research scientist at 
SINTEF Energy Research with more than 20 years of experience 
within numerical simulations of turbulent flows, both with and 
without reacting particles. He develops high fidelity CFD tools 
and  is  currently  the  chair  of  the  steering  committee  of  the 
Pencil Code, which is an open multi-purpose DNS code. Hau-
gen  has  supervised  a  number  of  PhD  and  master  students 
within  the  field  of  char  conversion.  Some  of  these  students 
were the first to show the effect of turbulence on pulverized 
char conversion. On the other side of the scientific spectrum, 
Haugen  is  the  leader  of  an  intercontinental  demonstration 
projects that is currently building the world’s largest Chemical  

Looping Combustion (CLC) demonstration plant.  

Brandon Ka Yan Loong Brandon Ka Yan Loong is a doctoral 
graduate student at Stanford University in the department of 
chemical  engineering.  His  research  experience  is  focused  in 
modeling the chemical dynamics of char particles and associ-
ated ash vaporization processes. He also has experience in new 
materials  development  for  novel  electrochemical  approaches 
to coal and biomass conversion. His graduate teaching expe-
rience includes courses in chemical kinetics, thermodynamics, 
and combustion science for both undergraduate and graduate 
students.  

Reginald  E.  Mitchell  Reginald  E.  Mitchell  is  a  Professor  of 
Mechanical  Engineering,  Emeritus  at  Stanford  University  in 
Palo  Alto,  California  and  has  over  45  years  of  experience 
dedicated  to  research  in  combustion  science,  focusing  on 
laminar methane/air diffusion flame chemistry and structure 
and  coal  and  biomass  char  reactivity.  His  experimental  and 
modeling  studies  have  provided  the  information  needed  to 
enhance our fundamental understanding of the chemical and 
physical processes that govern the rates of fuel consumption. 
Besides  studies  on  understanding  and  predicting  coal  and 
biomass combustion and gasification conversion phenomena, 
his studies have also involved research on the development of  

coal and biomass conversion technologies that facilitate CO2 capture. Of particular interest 
has been research devoted to developing fuel cells that run on coal and biomass. During 
Professor Mitchell’s twenty-nine years at Stanford, he taught undergraduate and graduate 
courses in thermodynamics, heat transfer and combustion fundamentals and applications 
and served as an advisor and mentor to many undergraduate and graduate students. He is 
the author of numerous technical papers and has given several presentations on the results 
of his research at universities, conferences, symposia, and other professional meetings. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099368