Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

CO2  hydrate properties and applications: A state of the art

Saeid Sinehbaghizadeh a, Agus Saptoro a,*, Amir H. Mohammadi b, *
a Department of Chemical and Energy Engineering, Curtin University, CDT 250, Miri, Sarawak 98009, Malaysia
b Discipline of Chemical Engineering, School of Engineering, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Howard College Campus, King George V Avenue, Durban 4041, South Africa

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
CO2  hydrate
Gas hydrate applications
CO2  sequestration
Hydrate-based carbon capture
Cold storage
CO2  separation
desalination
Hydrate promoters
CO2  hydrate properties
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations

Global warming is one of the most pressing environmental concerns which correlates strongly with anthropo-
genic  CO2  emissions  so  that  the  CO2  decreasing  strategies  have  been  meaningful  worldwide  attention.  As  an
option, natural gas hydrate reservoirs have steadily emerged as a potent source of energy which would simul-
taneously be the proper places for CO2 sequestration if the method of CO2/CH4 replacement could be developed.
On  the  flip  side,  CO2  hydrates  as  safe  and  non-flammable  solid  compounds  without  an  irreversible  chemical
reaction  would  contribute  to  different  industrial  processes  if  their  approaches  could  be  improved.  Toward
developing substantial applications of CO2  hydrates, laboratory experiments, process modelling, and molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations can aid to understand their characteristics and mechanisms involved. Therefore, the
current  review  has  been  organized  in  form  of  four  distinct  sections.  The  first  part  reviews  the  studies  on
sequestering  CO2  into  the  natural  gas  hydrate  reservoirs.  The  next  section  gives  an  overview  of  process  flow
diagrams of CO2  hydrate-based techniques in favour of CO2  Capture and Sequestration & Utilization (CCS&U).
The  third  section  summarizes  the  merits,  flaws,  and  different  effects  of  hydrate  promoters  as  well  as  porous
media  on  CO2  hydrate  systems  at  macroscopic  and  mesoscopic  levels,  and  also  how  these  components  can
improve CO2 hydrate properties, progressing toward the more feasibility of CO2 hydrate industrial applications.
The final sector recapitulates the MD frameworks of CO2  clathrate and semiclathrate hydrates in terms of new
insights and research findings to elucidate the fundamental properties of CO2  hydrates at the molecular level.

1. Introduction

Among the major contributors to global warming, CO2 accounts for
about 76% of total greenhouse gas emissions whereas the other partic-
ipants are CH4, 16%; Nitrous oxide, 6%; and F-gases, 2%, respectively.
The mitigation of CO2  emissions in the wake of the Kyoto protocol to
control  CO2  in  the  atmosphere  has  become  a  critical  objective.  The
concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere since the industrial revolution
has been unprecedentedly increased from 280 ppm to a high of 410 ppm
which has resulted in the 0.7
C global surface temperature rise. Addi-
tionally,  the  prediction  of  the  intergovernmental  panel  on  climate
change (IPCC) revealed that by 2100, the atmospheric CO2  concentra-
tion,  global  temperature,  and  sea  level  will  have  experienced  further
◦
increase  up  to  570  ppm,  2
C,  and  38  cm,  respectively,  [1].  Thereby,
evidence of CO2 catastrophic consequences indicates that CO2 capture,
sequester, or utilization methods are essential to be developed imme-
diately. Fig. 1 exhibits the carbon distributions released into the atmo-
sphere, ocean, and land. As is shown, CO2  in the atmosphere is being

◦

absorbed into the soils, terrestrial plants and dissolved into the ocean
which leads to altering the ocean chemistry like ocean acidification. This
phenomenon is being followed by detrimental effects on the environ-
ment like damage to aquatic habitats and marine ecosystems.

There  are  different  industrial  gas  emission  sources  such  as  the
steelmaking  industry,  coal  power  plant,  cement  industry,  refinery,
petrochemical  industries,  and  so  on,  a  sum  of  which  accounts  for
approximately 75% of anthropogenic CO2  emissions. Estimations indi-
cated that a range from 85% to 95% of this content can be eliminated
through carbon capture and sequestration & utilization (CCS&U) tech-
nologies [3]. To date, several reviews have been presented to evaluate
the  details  of  CCS  approaches  [4–7].  Broadly  speaking,  capturing
methods  in  the  industry  have  been  classified  into  post-combustion,
pre-combustion,  and  oxy-fuel  combustion,  whereas  mainly  industrial
separation  methods  have  been  distributed  into  four  main  technics:
adsorption [8], absorption [9–11], membrane [12], and cryogenic [13].
The process of flue gas treatment before being released into the atmo-
sphere is known as a post-combustion in which feed gas consists of CO2
ranging between 15% and 20% is being balanced with N2 and roughly

* Corresponding authors.

E-mail  addresses:  s.baghizadeh@postgrad.curtin.edu.my  (S.  Sinehbaghizadeh),  agus.saptoro@curtin.edu.my  (A.  Saptoro),  amir_h_mohammadi@yahoo.com

(A.H. Mohammadi).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101026
Received 3 July 2021; Received in revised form 12 June 2022; Accepted 4 July 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)101026Availableonline17August20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Nomenclature

thermodynamic/kinetic hydrate inhibitor
thermodynamic/kinetic hydrate promoter
large molecule guest substance
gas consumption
split fraction
separation factor
coefficient of performance
latent heat thermal storage
cold thermal energy storage
phase change materials
zero liquid discharge
hydrate-based pollutant removal
gas hydrate power generation system
ab initio molecular dynamics
tetra-iso-amyl ammonium bromide

Acronyms
global warming potential
GWP
integrated gasifier combined cycle
IGCC
carbon capture and storage/ sequestration
CCS
international panel on climate change
IPCC
gas initially in place
GIIP
hydrate-based gas separation
HBGS
hydrate-based carbon capture
HBCC
natural gas hydrate
NGH
interferometric synthetic aperture radar
InSAR
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
13CNMR  carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance
cyclic organic compounds
COC
CN
coordination number
gas hydrate stability zone
GHSZ
CSMHYD colorado school of mines hydrate
T/KHI
T/KHP
LMGS
G.C.
S.Fr.
S.F.
COP
LHTS
CTES
PCM
ZLD
HBPR
GGS
AIMD
TiAAB
HBPFD  hydrate-based process flow diagram
TBAPS
TBAF
TAAC
DTAC
TBMAC
TBANO3 tetra-n-butyl ammonium nitrate
TBAB
TBAC
TBPB
TBPC
MEG
GdmCl
NH4Cl
LAE2
[EMIM]BF4 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[C8min] BF4 1-methyl-3-octylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
PDMAEMA poly(di-methyl-amino-ethyl-meth-acrylate)
Gly-zw
DTACl
ENP
LABS
SDBS
DBSA
DTAC
DTAB

zwitterionic glycine
dodecyl-trimethyl-ammonium chloride
ethoxylated nonyl phenol
linear alkyl-benzene sulfonate
sodium dodecyl-benzene-sulfonate
dodecyl-benzene-sulfonic acid
dodecyl-trimethyl-ammonium chloride
dodecyl-trimethyl-ammonium bromide

tetra-n-butyl-ammonium bromide
tetra-n-butyl-ammonium chloride
tetra-n-butyl-phosphonium bromide
tetra-n-butyl-phosphonium chloride
mono-ethylene glycol
guanidinium chloride
ammonium chloride
lauryl alcohol ethoxylate-2

tri-butyl-ammonium-propyl-sulfonate
tetra-n-butyl-ammonium fluoride
tetra-amyl-ammonium chloride
dodecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride
tri-n-butyl-methyl-ammonium chloride

self-assembled monolayers
tetra-methylene sulfone
ethylene oxide
leonardite humic acid
tri-methylene-oxide
formaldehyde
cyclobutane

cetyl-trimethyl-ammonium bromide
CTAB
ethoxylated nonyl-phenol
ENP
dodecyl-amine hydrochloride
DAH
N-dodecylpropane-1,3-diamine hydrochloride
DN2Cl
hexadecyl-trimethyl-ammonium bromide
HTABr
nonyl phenol ethoxylates
NPE
lauryl alcohol ethoxylates
LAE
sodium dodecyl sulfate
SDS
sulfonated lignin
SL
sodium hexadecyl sulfate
SHS
sodium tetradecyl sulfate
STS
sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate
SDBS
di-methyl sulf-oxide
DMSO
tetra-methylene sulfone
TMS
SWNT
single-walled carbon nano-tube
MWCNT multi-walled carbon nano-tube
Na-MMT sodium mont-morillonite
SW-CNTs single-walled carbon nano-tubes
SAMs
TMS
EO
LHA
TMO
FA
CB
MWCNT multi-walled carbon nano-tube
tetrahydrothiophene
THT
tetrahydrofuran
THF
auto-correlation of the fluctuations
ACF
angular order parameter
AOP
angular probability distribution function
APDF
grand canonical Monte Carlo
CGMC
density functional theory
DFT
dodecahedral water cluster
DWC
FSICA
face-saturated incomplete cage analysis
HCACF  flux autocorrelation function
MCG-OP mutually coordinated guest order parameter
MCG
MSD
NEMD
PMF
OACF
QLD
TCF
VACF
RDF
RACF
RPMD
RMSF
RPMD
MFPT  mean first-passage time

mutually coordinated guest
mean square displacement
non-equilibrium molecular dynamics
potential of mean force
orientation auto-correlation function
quasi-harmonic lattice dynamics
time correlation function
velocity auto-correlation function
radial displacement function
rotational auto-correlation function
ring polymer molecular dynamics
root mean square fluctuation
ring polymer molecular dynamics

Subscripts & Superscripts
H
F
G
W
n

hydrate
feed
gas
water
molar number

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010262

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

5%  O2.  The pre-combustion  process  refers  to  the capturing  CO2  from
combusted fuel gas including CO2  and H2  with a proportion of about
40% and 60%, respectively. In this type of CO2  capture, the more the
content of CO2 in the fuel gas, the higher the efficiency can be achieved.
However, pre-combustion is more effective than post-combustion. Fig. 2
displays diverse CO2 removal methods.

Once CO2 is captured, transportation, sequestration/ utilization steps
must  be  implemented.  In  this  regard,  different  viable  approaches  for
CCS&U have been suggested. The captured CO2  can be indirectly uti-
lized  in  various  industries.  In  carbon  mineralization  technology,  CO2
reacts with industrial waste products or minerals to synthesize products
with enhanced properties [16,17]. In the concrete curing process, CO2 as
a  nonreactive  limestone  is  stored  within  the  concrete  to  cure  precast
concrete  [18].  As  a  soil  amendment  and  reclamation  of  aluminum
mines,  CO2  can  be  used  to  decrease  the  alkalinity  of  slurry  from  the
aluminum industry which is known as bauxite residue carbonation [19,
20]. Also, to produce biofuels through algae cultivation, microalgae can
absorb CO2 and then get converted into biomass fertilizers and proteins
[21,22]. In the liquid fuels-methanol approach which is useful for the
transportation industry, at moderate pressure and temperature, CO2 and
H2 can catalytically be converted to methanol as fuel by themselves, or
be blended with gasoline [23,24]. In electrochemical activation of CO2
using  metal-free  electrodes  and  metallic  modified  cathodes,  diverse
reduction products via different reaction pathways can be formed, the
most  substantial  of  which  is  formic  acid  [25,26].  In  the  Polymer-
s/Chemical  feedstock  technology,  by  employing  zinc-based  catalyst
polymer, CO2 can be transformed into polycarbonates [27]. In the steel
and  paper  &  pulp  industries,  using  basic  oxygen  furnace  and  pulp
washing operation technologies, CO2 can be, respectively, applied as a
bottom stirring agent in basic oxygen furnace [28] and be used to reduce
pH  during  pulp  washing  [29].  CO2  can  also  be  utilized  for  water
demineralization after reverse osmosis in the water purification industry
[30,31]. In chemical system processes to produce ester, sugar, alcohols,
acetic acid, etc., a wide range of chemicals with O and C as elements can

use CO2 as feedstock. In urea yield boosting, to convert ammonia to urea
and produce additional fertilizers, CO2 can also be utilized [32]. Besides
the aforementioned indirect CO2 utilization technologies, several direct
methods in various industries have also been suggested. Super critical
CO2 as solvent is one of them in which CO2 can be applied as a solvent to
isolate  targeted  entities  and  the  production  of  active  pharmaceutical
ingredients (API) in the pharma industry [33,34] or extract bioactive
compounds from plant matrices in food, and cosmetics industry [35]. In
enhanced  geothermal  systems  of  the  renewable  energy  industry,  su-
percritical  CO2  transfers  geothermal  heat  to  generate  power  through
turbines [36]. Enhanced coal bed CH4 [37,38] or oil recovery [39,40] in
coal & energy and oil & gas industries are the other direct methods. For
the former, CO2 is injected into partially depleted coal seams to displace
and  release  the  adsorbed  CH4  to  the  surface;  For  the  latter,  CO2  is
injected into a depleted oil well to increase the pressure and reduce the
oil  viscosity.  In  the  light  of  these  methods,  CO2  injection  into  the
geological formations such as depleted gas fields, and carbonate storage
to activate oil and gas wells and production enhancement would also be
an interesting alternative. On this wise, the CO2  sequestration and en-
ergy  production  can  simultaneously  be  accomplished.  Fig.  3  (I)  sche-
matically demonstrates the CO2 sequestration from the power plant into
depleted gas reservoirs and synchronously enhanced gas recovery. This
process is strongly dependent on the physical properties of CH4 and CO2.
As shown in the CO2  phase diagram of Fig. 3 (II), CO2  at supercritical
conditions  can  prevail  in  gas  reservoirs.  However,  limitations  of
CO2/CH4  mixing in the reservoir in terms of transport properties (i.e.
viscosity, density, diffusion coefficient, etc.) are substantial. As exhibi-
ted in Fig. 3 (III-a), the physical properties of CO2+CH4 mixture strongly
correlate with CH4 mole fraction. The density and viscosity of the mixed
gases can reduce with the increasing amount of CH4  mixed with CO2.
Apparently, temperature has notable effect on the physical properties of
CO2,  but  little  impact  on  those  of  CH4  as  is  evident  in  Fig.  3  (III-b).
Albeit, the changes in dynamic viscosity and density at higher temper-
atures are smaller. It is worth mentioning, CO2 undergoes a large change

Fig. 1. Anthropogenic activities of the carbon cycle in the atmosphere, ocean, and land. (Adopted from [2] with permission of the U.S. DOE biological and envi-
ronmental research information system and NASA Earth Observatory).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010263

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 2. Options for the CO2  capture and separation (data taken from) [14,15].

in density near its critical pressure. Large viscosity and density of CO2
relative to CH4  is the limitation of mixing both in the reservoir. These
differences are relevant to the pressure. Indeed, the higher the pressure,
the  more the  differences, especially beyond the CO2  critical pressure.
The mixture of supercritical CO2 and CH4 at constant volume may also
cause the pressurization of the reservoir which could offset the benefits
of the CO2 utilization. Some examples of coupling CO2 sequestration and
gas production are the injection of CO2 to the aquifer of the Sleipner field
located in the north sea [41], natural gas exploitation at Nankai, Japan
[42], and Mallik-Mackenzie Delta, Northern Canda [43]. With injecting
CO2 after the field abandonment, approximately 10% of gas initially in
place (GIIP) could be produced while in case of CO2 injection during the
lifetime of the field, the amount of recovery in comparison with con-
ventional production may be reduced.

To  mobilize the  microchannels,  super-critical  CO2  due  to  its  great
adsorption capacity in unconventional reservoirs like shale has received
much attention. However, under reservoir conditions, the low viscosity
of supercritical CO2 as a fracturing fluid (0.03(cid:0) 0.1 cP) may cause poor
proppant carrying capacity and suspended sand effect which influences
the production channels. It was demonstrated that a response of core
wettability  alteration  is  the  thickener  of  supercritical  CO2  fracturing
fluid which would impede the oil flow during the fracturing process [45,
46]. Hence, thickening agents and cosolvents e.g. surfactants, polymeric
viscosifiers, and salts are required to increase the viscosity and thicken
the CO2  [47]. Currently, no compound as a thickener can be precisely
utilized  and  it  is  still  in  the  process  of  exploring  environmental  and
efficient materials e.g. ultrashort and nanofibres [45].

Worth  highlighting  for  the  case  of  CO2  sequestration  through  gas
replacement in the natural gas hydrate (NGH) fields, the characteristics,
and  mechanisms  of  this  process  should  comprehensively  be  compre-
hended. Also, to cut down the risks, energy penalties, and costs associ-
ated  with  CCS&U  techniques,  or  even  find  new  approaches,  a  broad
range of processes have been suggested. In this regard, hydrate-based
CO2  utilization for different technologies has recently received world-
wide  scientific  attention,  and  subsequently  different  hydrate-based
CCS&U  processes  for  industrial  applications  have  been  developed/
proposed. Recently, to utilize natural gas hydrates as an energy resource,
CH4  hydrate R&D in Japan in the context of Japan’s evolving energy
policies was examined [48].

To  gain  a  deeper  insight  into  the  role  and  importance  of  CO2  hy-
drates,  this  review  is  arranged  into  four  separate  sections:  (1)  in-
vestigations of CO2 sequestration into NGH reservoirs (2) proposed CO2
hydrate-based process flow diagrams, suggested for different industrial
applications; (3) benefits, drawbacks and different impacts of additive
promoters and porous media on CO2  hydrate specifications at macro-
scopic and mesoscopic levels to improve the properties of gas hydrates,
progressing toward the more feasibility of their applications; finally (4)
to highlight the potency of MD simulations in manifesting different as-
pects of CO2 hydrates, molecular dynamic (MD) investigations limited to
the CO2  clathrate/ semiclathrate hydrates and revealed findings at the
molecular level will be overviewed.

2. Natural gas hydrates (NGH)

Since several overviews on prospects and challenges of gas produc-
tion from natural gas hydrates (NGH) as an energy resource have been
presented  [49,50],  the  following  Sections  consider  the  experimental
investigations of gas hydrate deposits and replacement phenomena.

2.1. Clathrate and semiclathrate hydrates

Clathrate hydrates are ice-like materials that can be formed where
water molecules as host in contact with guest gas species at prevailing
pressure-temperature conditions generate a crystalline lattice. Clathrate
hydrates  are  categorized  into  three  types.  Structure  I,  which  can  be
usually formed by small guest molecules (with a molecular diameter of
0.4-0.55 nm); structure II, which requires larger guest molecules (0.6-
0.7 nm); and structure H, which needs small guest molecules (as a help
gas)  like those  which  form sI  and  large molecule normally  liquid hy-
drocarbons  (0.75-0.9  nm)  simultaneously.  There  are,  however,  some
exceptions such as very small guest molecules like H2 and N2 which form
structure  II  clathrate  hydrates,  and  also  intermediate  guests  that
generate different structures (sI or sII) depending on pressure and tem-
perature conditions [51]. Besides the clathrate hydrate family, some gas
species  (e.g.  H2S,  H2,  N2,  CO2,  CH4)
the  presence  of
tetra-alkylammonium  salts/halides  (e.g.  tetra-nbutylammonium  bro-
mide (TBAB), tetra-n-butyl phosphonium chloride (TBPC), and bromide
form
(TBPB),

tetra-n-butylammonium

(TBAC))

chloride

can

in

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010264

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 3. Schematic of a coupled CO2 sequestration and enhanced gas reservoir for the power plant (I); phase diagram of CO2 in the natural gas reservoirs (II); density
and dynamic viscosity of CO2+CH4  mixtures at 303.15 K (III-a). Effect of temperature (III-b). (Reprinted from [44] with permission of ACS).

semiclathrate  hydrates  [52,53].  In  comparison  with  the  clathrate  hy-
drate family, the key feature of these crystals is their thermal stability at
atmospheric  pressure  or  ambient  temperature  conditions.  Two  main
structures of semiclathrate hydrates (reported for TBAB-H2O) are types
A and B [54–56]. The number of gas capture cavities per host molecule
for  sII,  sH,  and  semiclathrate  hydrates  is  found  to  be  0.18,  0.09, and
0.06/0.08 (type A/B), respectively. Fig. 4 displays the configuration of
cages, and unit cells of clathrate and semiclathrate hydrates [54]. A unit
cell of sI, sII, sH clathrate hydrates includes structure I, 2 (512).6 (51262):
46  H2O;  structure  II,  16  (512).8  (51264):136  H2O;  and  structure  H,  3
(512).2 (435663).1 (51268): 34 H2O, respectively.

2.2. Ocean and permafrost hydrate deposits

Evidence demonstrates a tremendous amount of natural gas in form
of hydrate exists in marine and permafrost-associated sediments. A good
example  of  this  is  the  natural  gas  hydrate  in  the  Alaska  North  Slope
which was confirmed by different well-log analysis [59]. In this regard,
researchers have revealed that gas reserves in the continental regions
and  marine  sediments  are  approximately  1  × 1017  m3  [60].  In  other
investigations, however, this value was reported 3 × 1015 m3 [61] which
was then verified based on drilling assessments [62,63]. Although there
is  no  consensus  on  the  NGH  estimations,  this  at  least  is  an  order  of

magnitude  greater  than  worldwide  conventional  natural  gas  reserves
which were determined about 196 × 1012 m3. Therefore, NGH reservoirs
could be a future source of energy and, in parallel, suitable sites for CO2
sequestration if the technology of CO2/CH4 gas hydrate exchange could
be developed. As an example, the capacity of the Alberta field for CO2
sequestration in form of the gas hydrate was determined at about 46 Gt
[64] whereas enhanced CH4 recovery can at least offset the cost impacts
of injected CO2 to those locations [65]. However, recent evidence warns
of widespread destabilization of climate-sensitive. NGH might liberate
large quantities of CH4 which is nearly 20 times more potent than CO2 as
a greenhouse gas [66]. Fig. 5 displays the gas hydrates that exist in five
geographic sectors and their response to climate change. From right to
left, respectively, these sectors of the gas hydrates realm are: in an area
of gas seeps, a deep-water marine, across a generic upper continental
slope,  shallow  offshore  subsea,  and  onshore  permafrost.  Except  in
permeable  sand
layers  (depicted  with  coarser-grained  texture),
ice-bonded permafrost and gas hydrate stability zone (GHSZ) sediments
typically have low CH4 hydrate saturations [67]. The volume of seafloor
gas  hydrates  is  not  major  within  the  global  reservoir,  even  so,  they
elucidate  how  migrate  across  the  water-sediment  interface.  Worth
highlighting that, seafloor gas hydrates, authigenic carbonates and CH4
seeps can be momentous habitats for chemosynthetic organisms reliant
on CH4 for their metabolic processes.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010265

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 4. Configurations of clathrate and semiclathrate hydrates. (Reprinted from [54,57,58] with permission of RSC, Wiley and Elsevier).

The concept of coupling both sequestering CO2 and CH4 production
can be achieved owing to the fact that the hydrate formation conditions
of CO2  are  more thermodynamically stable than that in CH4  hydrate.
Furthermore,  the  formation  enthalpy  of  CO2  hydrate  is  about  20%
greater than the dissociation enthalpy of CH4  hydrate. During produc-
tion and CO2 refilling pore space, it is expected to see that the hydrate
mechanical stability is kept constant. To date, a wide array of methods
has  been  created  aiming  at  producing  natural  gas  hydrate  reservoirs
which have been categorized into several mechanisms. The temperature
rising toward the above hydrate stability zone (HSZ) is called “thermal
stimulation”. In this case, different approaches such as electromagnetic
heating, fire flooding, and steam injection to the hydrate deposits may
be used [68]. The pressure decreasing below the HSZ is also known as
the “depressurization technique”. Injecting chemicals to make a change
in pressure and temperature is so-called “chemical injection” [69]. The
“gas  swapping”  method  refers  to  flue  gas  or  CO2  injection  into
hydrate-bearing sediments. By injecting CO2/N2  (14.6/85.4 mole%) at
typical  gas  hydrate  reservoir  conditions,  over  80  mole%  CH4  may  be
exploited [70]. The “Gas exchange” method is also referred to as the case
when CH4 in the hydrate phase is replaced with CO2 in the gas/ liquid
phase [71]. The replacement can also be implemented by a mixture of
CO2+H2.  Recently,  novel  NGH  exploitations  approached  by  either
CO2+H2  continuous  or  semi-continuous  injection-production  modes
accompanied by H2 generation were proposed [72,73]. Fig. 6 shows the

schematic diagram of the idea of the CO2/CH4 replacement mechanism.
Although depressurization between suggested approaches has been
determined  as  the  most  economic  technique,  a  combination  of  the
aforesaid  methods  would  be  a  promising  alternative.  As  an  example,
thermal  stimulation  in  conjunction  with  depressurization  has  been
successfully carried out in the Mallik field [75]. Also, a combination of
CO2  injection  and  inhibitors  (methanol/  NaCl/  MgCl2)  revealed  that
methanol can accelerate the hydrate decomposition rate more quickly
rather than an electrolyte solution [76] which can markedly reduce the
stability condition of CH4 hydrate containing ice in the low permeability
of sediments [77]. In this case, CH4 hydrate cages after having contact
with CO2 will become unstable which probably results in decomposing
CH4  hydrate [78]. In contrast, CO2  molecules penetrate the decompo-
sition site, leading to the replacement of the CH4  molecules in the hy-
drate  phase  [79,80].  Theoretically,  at  a  given  pressure,  CO2  hydrate
C,  than
formation  can  occur  at  a  higher  temperature,  as  much  as  35
what is required for CH4 dissociation [80] as depicted in Fig. 7.

◦

As shown in Fig. 7, the left side is the region in which CO2 and CH4
tend to remain in a gas phase whilst both guest molecules on the right
side of the curves tend to remain in the hydrate phase. The region among
both curves is where the thermal balancing method can be practical. The
higher steeper of the bottom line in comparison with the top line rep-
resents that the  kinetic rate of CO2  hydrate is  more than that of  CH4
hydrate [80].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010266

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 5. Schematic of CH4 hydrate dynamics and distributions in ocean and permafrost gas hydrate deposits. (Reprinted from [67] with permission of Wiley). White
material beneath mussel-coated carbonate rock shows the presence of NGH on the seafloor.

Fig. 6. CO2/CH4  exchange in the hydrate reservoir by either CO2  (left) [74] or CO2+H2  (right) [72]. (Reprinted with permission of Elsevier).

2.3. CO2  sequestration in reservoirs

To sequester CO2 in reservoirs, geologic formation assessments such
as capacity, injectivity, trapping mechanisms, and confinement aspects
would  be  the  initial  steps  of  CCS  projects.  Given  that,  four  trapping
mechanisms  (structural,  residual,  dissolution,  mineral)  may  cease  the
migration  of  CO2  plume  which  acts  on  different  timescales.  Hence,
leakages relevant to the mechanisms from the storage sites are the main
risk associated with every CCS project [81–83]. It was suggested that
CH4 recovery and storing CO2 in hydrate reservoirs without disturbing
geological  formation  can  be  achieved  by  the  usage  of  low  dosage,
bio-friendly, anti-agglomerate, and hydrate inhibition compounds [84].
Inhibitors like NaCl can also aid to increase the CO2 replacement process
by increasing the region existing between CO2 and CH4 curves, resulting
in  the  more  possibility  of  moving  thermodynamic  conditions  farther
from  CH4  hydrate  stability  zone  and  ensuring  the  possibility  of  CO2
hydrate formation [85]. Morphological data on the dissociation kinetics
of  the  mixed  CH4/CO2  hydrate  in  a  porous  medium  showed  that  the
multistep cyclic depressurization (MCD) method was found to improve
CH4 production and CO2 storage in bulk and unconsolidated coarse sand

[86].  Since  water  migration  in  hydrate  sediments  is  a  determinative
factor that affects NGH exploitation, recently, a combination mode of
depressurization  with  continuous  water  flow  in  natural  gas  hydrates
sediment  called  “water  flow  erosion”  has  been  proposed.  This  can
induce  hydrate  decomposition  and  take  the  advantage  of  using  vast
volumes of produced water [87,88]. Additionally, under the prevailing
thermodynamic conditions in the unlikely event of CO2 leakage through
the top seal overlying the CO2 injection goal, the CO2 can generate hy-
drate by reacting pore water. This implies that same as CO2 sequestra-
tion in shallow marine aquifers, the CO2 hydrate self-sealing can be used
for CO2 storage projects in permafrost settings. Technically speaking, the
key contributors of CO2  replacement efficiency for NGH would be the
rate and volume of injected CO2  besides the P-T conditions [83]. The
water phase migration process on the exploitation of NGH hydrates can
increase  the  water  permeability  and  local  hydrate  dissociation.  The
backpressure and seawater flow rate were also found to contribute to the
final efficiency [89]. To analyse the phase transition and hydrate dis-
tribution process in marine sediments, the nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) demonstrated that under the favourable pressure and tempera-
ture,  high  initial  water  saturation  can  be  conducive  to  higher  CO2

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010267

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 7. Phase equilibrium conditions of CH4  and CO2  [51].

storage efficiency. The pore water characteristics are barely influenced
by the presence of chemical additives but the water conversion can be
improved by nearly 50% (0.15 wt% SiO2) and 25% (0.05 wt% SDS) over
the  pure  seawater  case  [90].  An  in-situ  magnetic  resonance  imaging
(MRI)  displayed  that the  rate  of  hydrate  dissociation  in  bearing  sedi-
ments for the sample with 23% saturation can be four times more than
38%  saturation.  Based  on  the  saturation-permeability  analysis,  the
lower and higher hydrate-saturation samples were found to well-match
with the grain-coating and pore-filling approaches, respectively, [91].
During multicycle synthesis processes, the hydrate rate of the secondary
synthesis  can  be  about  9  times  higher  than  that  of  the  primary  stage
which proves the existence of the memory effect. CO2 molecules under
the primary synthesis mainly enter into small pores with a filling model,
however, they occupy both small and large pores with a coating model
as the secondary synthesis starts. For the pore filling model in the pri-
mary synthesis, the earlier formed CO2 hydrate in large pores can pre-
vent the water in small pores and participate in the formation of CO2
hydrate  whereas  this  blocking  effect  cannot  be  found  in  the  coating
model  [92].  CO2  hydrate  formation  in  the  company  of  frozen  quartz
sands depicted that the decrease of particle sizes can increase the gas
storage capacities. For example, with particle sizes of 500, 380, and 250
μm, the gas-storage hydrate capacity of 128, 144, and 153 L/L and the
conversion rate of 70%, 82%, and 91% can be attained [93]. Moreover,
the  hydrate  saturation  can  affect  the  morphology  of  hydrate  within
pores within which its increase would mechanically improve the stiff-
ness and strength of the sediments, leading to a decrease in the potential
risk of geological collapse. The morphology of CO2 hydrate during for-
mation  is  directly  dependent  on  the  sub-cooling.  For  example,  by
increasing ΔTsub. from 0.9 to 5.4K, the crystal shape would be poly-
hedral with facets, skeletal crystals, and dendrites [94]. Analysing the
effects of acid dissolvable organic matters including lignin and protei-
n/amino sugars on CO2 hydrate formation showed that the existence of
such components on the seafloor would kinetically induce water trans-
formation [95]. The self-preservation phenomenon of CO2 hydrate can
also help to reduce the risk of the geological setting for CO2 sequestra-
tion [96]. In comparison with pure water, the initial dissociation rate of
CO2 hydrate in the presence of silica gel powder, SDS, and a combination
of both can be reduced by 0.12, 0.12, and 0.16 mmole/min, respectively,
[97].

2.4. CO2/CH4  replacement in NGH reservoirs

Since experimental studies on gas replacement can offset the short-
comings involved in the required knowledge for improving the mecha-
nism of gas hydrate exchange, conducting such laboratory exploration
could  be  profitable.  Experimental  evidence  confirmed  the  selective
replacement of CH4  by CO2  in which the CH4  average distribution co-
efficient  between  gas  and  hydrate  states  was  determined  at  approxi-
mately 2.5 [98]. The CO2/CH4 replacement in sandstone core plugs was
also endorsed by MRI imaging [99]. Interferometric synthetic aperture
radar  (InSAR)  verified  that  supercritical  CO2  can  be  successfully
sequestered with the aim of enhanced oil recovery [100] but by using
water injections during CO2 sequestration, the rate of hydrate formation
can  be  upgraded  [101].  Besides,  at  hydrate  equilibrium  conditions
similar to the Alberta sedimentation, Canada, 40% to 60% of the original
water after injecting CO2  into a typical saline model reservoir sample
formed hydrate [102]. In the case of CO2  injection to the gas hydrate
reservoirs, CO2 breakthrough would be delayed by dissolving CO2 in the
formation  water  resulting  in  8%  to  11%  incremental  recovery  [103].
Also,  under  the  same  heating  power,  microwave  heating  showed  a
quicker decomposition of gas hydrate compared to hot water heating
[104].  Worth  noting  that  constructing  an  artificial  impermeable  CO2
hydrate  cap  seals  a  large  amount  of  CO2  and  protects  the  geological
stability of depleted CH4 hydrate zones [105]. The rate of replacement is
also related to different factors but a lower rate of injected CO2 provides
better sequestration in the reservoir. The  13C NMR spectroscopy after
the  replacement  process  confirmed  the  presence  of  CH4  molecules  in
most of the small cages of structure II whereas just a limited amount of
them was detected in that of structure I hydrate [106]. Captured CO2 in
the  hydrate  phase  is  dependent  on  hydrate  saturation  and  the
temperature-pressure  of  the  reservoir.  Gas  composition  analysis  of
reformed hydrate after dissociation indicated a large proportion of CO2
which can slightly be varied by the temperature [107]. However, the
replacement driving force is strongly affected by the differential fugacity
of  components  in  the  hydrate  and  fluid  phases.  The  pressure  of  the
injected CO2 is also another contributor that has a significant impact on
the  replacement  mechanism.  For  instance,  in  the  case  of  structure  II
CH4+C3H8  hydrate the more the injection pressure of CO2, the higher
the  replacement  rate  and  CH4  recovery  [106].  Based  on  the  other

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010268

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

experimental results, the initial pressure has a slight impact on the rate
of  gas  exchange  but  this  rate  tends  to  be  reduced  by  decreasing  the
temperature. In the early phase of the CH4/CO2  exchange, the rate of
replacement  is  almost  equal  to  the  CO2  hydrate  formation  rate  but
gradually decreases in the later phase. There is no significant relation
between  equilibrium  conditions and  the  rate of  gas exchange but the
fugacity difference between the formation of CO2  hydrate and decom-
position of CH4 hydrate is a crucial factor. Also, increasing the hydrate
saturation in the sediments grows the rate of replacement, and hydrate
layers can remain stable once it occurs. Liquid CO2  can penetrate the
hydrate phase and simultaneously on the opposite side, CH4 can release.
Indeed, for CH4  hydrate with considerable free water in the reservoir,
CO2  injection in  form of a  liquid  state is more  favoured than the  gas
phase. Evidence elucidated that under excess water conditions, injecting
CO2  into  hydrate  sediments  results  in  converting  CO2  to  either  CO2
hydrate or mixed gas hydrate. This phenomenon may be associated with
some negative implications. For example, the CH4 recovery can induce
shrinkage and CO2  injection may result in swelling as well as perme-
ability  loss.  Moreover,  although  researchers  have  confirmed  the
CO2/CH4  exchange  in  the  pore  space  and  mechanical  stability  of  the
reservoir during a relatively short time [108], the rate of gas exchange
over 24 h may not be considerable [109]. Attributed to wetting of the
unconsolidated-sediment  during  replacement,  the  combination  of
hydrate-sediment ratio and thermal stimulation on the rate of CH4  re-
covery can be enhanced from 28% for a pure hydrate core to 82% for a
hydrate-sediment core [110]. Since too much-injected CO2 gas in a short
time  may  cover  the  original  CH4  hydrate  and  block  channels  of  the
porous  medium,  recognizing  an  optimized  control  range  is  required.
Although  the  influence  of  CO2  injection  pressure  affects  the  critical
boundaries for hydrate stability, increasing the CO2 injection tempera-
ture exceeding the phase equilibrium of the CO2 hydrate induces higher
CH4  hydrate  dissociation.  Consistent  with  the  core-shrinking  hydrate
exchange approach, it was established that under constant temperature,
the exchange rate may drop after a 5 μm layer. Therefore, the exchange
progress  can  be  blocked  by  the  reformation  of  compact  CO2  hydrate
film. It was claimed that creating porous CO2 hydrate would overcome
this annoyance [111]. CO2  and CH4  formation hydrates is also depen-
dent  on  P-T  conditions  along  which  the  CO2  injection  is  performed
among the varying hydrate stability zones as shown in Fig. 8. Based on
the reported measurements, up to 52% and 71% CH4  recovery can be
achieved within the HSZ-I (permafrost) and HSZ-II, respectively, how-
ever, high water saturation would diminish the recovery by 9.3% [112].
The  presence  of  N2  can  also  boost  the  efficiency  of  the  exchange
mechanism  [113].  For  example,  the  ideal  replacement  efficiency  of
(CO2+N2) and CH4  was reported as nearly 85% [71]. A spectroscopic

Fig.  8. CO2+CH4  hydrate  phase  diagram  in  three  hydrate  stability  zones.
(Reprinted from [112] with permission of ACS).

analysis  displayed  that  the  rate  of  CH4  recovery  can  be  increased  by
attacking N2 molecules on the CH4 hydrate. Subsequently, over 40% of
CO2 from the flue gas by reaching the final pressure can be captured in
the  hydrate  phase  [114].  Compared  to  CO2+N2  injection,  however,
concentrated CO2  facilitates the formation of hydrate [115]. Injecting
CO2  plus  different  fractions  of  N2  into  the  depleted  reservoir  demon-
strated that although pure CO2 was detected as a peak efficient from a
long-term perspective, the addition of N2  enhances the hydrate forma-
tion more quickly [116]. The inclusion of N2  can increase the CH4  re-
covery from 64% to approximately 85% but the injection approach with
the  aim  of  ocean  storage  needs  pure  CO2  (without  N2)  [71].  For  the
fracture-filled hydrate, the important factors of gas replacement are gas
composition,  hydrate  morphology,  and  pressure  [117].  Experiments
suggest the maximum ratio of CO2 versus N2+CO2 in the hydrate phase
can  be  considered  as  optimum  reservoir  conditions  [118].  In  this
respect, CO2  composition  ranging  between 30%  to  40% in  the  mixed
CO2+N2  gas  injection  may  give  the  maximum  recovery  factor  [119].
In-situ Raman spectroscopy proved that structure and CO2 selectivity in
the  case  of  CO2+N2  hydrate  strongly  depend  on  composition.  For
example, 1% to 2% CO2 in a feed forms structure II while ranging from
2%  to  70%  generates  structure  I  with  higher  selectivity.  Besides,  the
selectivity of 20% CO2 is about 2 times higher than this content [120].
Based on the 13C NMR measurements during the replacement process,
N2  and CO2  occupy the small and large cavities of sI hydrate, respec-
tively,  [121].  The  spontaneous  structural  transition  during  the
replacement  process  was  also  detected  [71].  Researchers  have  shown
that,  unlike  pure  CO2,  the  CH4  recovery  rate  for  the  case  of  mixed
CO2+N2  was found to become dependent on the pressure and balance
between CO2/N2 [122–124]. The increment of pressure to the above 8.5
MPa  for  the  case  of  CO2  results  in  changing  contact  angle  from
water-wet to gas-wet whereas in the case of flue gas, with increasing
pressure above 10 MPa, it can be changed to intermediate-wet [125]. In
addition,  a  mixture  of  CO2  and  N2  in  contact  with  free  water  in  the
reservoir is more favoured than pure CO2 injection [126]. The CO2+H2
injection into the hydrate layer during the replacement and gas sweep
stages may  also  appropriately alter  the stability  condition of  CH4  hy-
drate to higher accumulative production. However, with a higher mole
fraction of H2, a higher accumulative gas production ratio but lower CO2
sequestration can be obtained. Therefore, the CO2 mole fraction ranging
between 55% and 72% in the feed would be the optimal case that allows
the system to achieve the equality of captured CO2  and produced CH4
[127]. At the high flow rate of injection, the efficiency of displacement is
slightly  affected  by  the  composition  of  the  injected  gas  [72]  while
semi-continuous gas injection dramatically enhances the CH4  recovery
in the case of low CO2 concentration [73].

2.5. Summary of the section

Since in doing CO2/CH4  exchange in reservoirs, CO2  hydrate prop-
erties  would  be  the  central  contributor,  their  analysis  has  been  the
critical  objective  of  many  types  of  research.  In  the  light  of  this,  the
following Sections present some CO2 hydrate characteristics.

2.5.1. Transport properties of CO2  hydrates

Rheology analysis of CO2 hydrate slurry to ensure an economical and
environmentally  safe  flow  through  HBCS&U  facilities  is  of  great
importance.  To  characterize  the  evolution  of  hydrate  slurry  during
emulsion, agglomeration, growth, deposition and after then, variables
such as relative viscosity as a function of shear rate/water conversion,
yield stress with different water-cut, change of fractal dimension with
time  and  shear  rate/strain  as  a  function  of  shear  stress  have  been
measured  [128–134].  In  this  regard,  a  high-pressure  autoclave  is  an
alternative way to reveal the effects of hydrate behaviours on the slurry
viscosity e.g. agglomerate breakage, fractal dimension, and morphology
[135]. By performing such tests, it was displayed that hydrate formation
steps  are  associated  with  a  jump  in  viscosity  [136].  During  hydrate

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010269

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

formation in the high-pressure flow loop, the slurry viscosity, and fric-
tion coefficient experience an abrupt increase from 50 mPa.s and 0.05 to
over 160 mPa.s and 0.45, respectively, as the water cut increases from
60% to 100% [137]. Also, the nature of the guest gas molecules (e.g.
CO2, CH4) has little effect on the viscosity of hydrate slurry whereas the
addition of SDS with a concentration below CMC possesses a pseudo-
plastic behaviour. However, the impacts of production mode e.g. stirred
tank reactor associated with the flow loop on slurry viscosity was found
to have several times higher than the presence of the additive [138]. The
rheological studies performed on CO2 hydrate slurries in a dynamic flow
loop are presented in Table S1 of the Supplementary Materials (SM). The
temperature difference between the CO2  hydrate mixture and the sur-
rounding area can also significantly affect the continuous hydrate for-
mation  properties.  The  experiments  demonstrated  that  pressure  drop
and heat transfer coefficient at various P-T conditions can be in a range
of  0.1  to  1  MPa  and  54  to  2883  W/m2.K,  respectively,  [139].  Addi-
tionally, increasing the volume fraction of CO2 hydrate slurry flow up to
14% can enhance the Nusselt number and heat transfer coefficient by
nearly 2.5 times greater than that of liquid water [140].

2.5.2.

Interfacial/surface tension and wettability

To prevent CO2 leakage in geological storage, the interfacial tension
(IFT)  between  supercritical  CO2  and  brine  is  critical.  In  addition,  the
molecular interfacial properties and environmental conditions would be
the  main contributors [141]. Due to the lower entropy difference be-
tween CO2 and CH4 hydrates, the imposed driving force for CO2 is lower
than  that  for  CH4.  Moreover,  since  the  lower  tension  can  reduce  the
barrier height, at the same subcooling, the CO2 barrier is lower than the
one for CH4. It was estimated that the hydrate–water interfacial tension
(cid:0) 2, respectively, [142].
for CO2  and CH4  are around 26 and 32 mJ/m
Conducted MRI study on the interfacial phase transitions of CO2 hydrate
also revealed that in terms of appearance, the formation morphologies at
the different interfaces with water (above and inside a water phase) are
quite  dissimilar.  Hence,  the  morphological  evolution  of  CO2  hydrate
during  formation  and  dissociation  can  correspond  to  a  wide  range  of
relevant  geometries  encompassing  a  gas-water  interface  [143,144].
Additionally,  a  large  number  of  nucleation  sites  and  strong  thermal
conductivity of nanofluids can accelerate the gas dissolution by reducing
the  surface  tension  and  accelerating  heat  transfer  during  the  hydrate
formation [145]. The presence of surfactant molecules can also improve
the water activity and water-to-gas contact, reduce the surface tension
and thus enhance the gas diffusion rate [146]. However, in an earlier
stage of hydrate formation, this property may block CO2  permeability
into  bulk  water  so  that  a  low  gas  uptake  can  be  achieved  [147].  By
adding 100 and 500 ppm SDS to the aqueous solution, the interfacial
tension at the gas-liquid interface can be decreased by 12% and 42%,
respectively, [148] while by reaching the CMC, surface tension cannot
significantly be altered [149]. Such additives may also increase the gas
solubility as well as diffusion coefficient in the liquid phase [150] and
drop the resistance of gas molecules for the entrance of the gas-liquid
interface  [151].  However,  in  the  salty  environment,  compounding
non-ionic and zwitterionic surfactants cannot diminish the surface ten-
sion [152]. An axisymmetric drop shape analysis also determined that
during  CO2  hydrate  formation,  the  increase  of  pressure  significantly
reduces  the  interfacial  tension  between  CO2  and  aqueous  solution
whereas the temperature impact seems to be not substantial. The sum-
mary of surface tension between the CO2  hydrate systems and the so-
lution is presented in Table S2 of SM. It is worth noting that, at the initial
stage of hydrate formation, the hydrate particles with the combination
of  NaCl  and  MEG  can  be  joined  less  tightly  with  each  other.  It  may
reduce the hydrate viscosity and boost the wettability of the solution on
the wall surface through the adhesion of hydrates on the reactor wall
[153].  The wettability of hydrate surfaces can also affect the hydrate
film growth and agglomeration in which increasing the annealing time
reduces the hydrate surface wettability [154].

2.5.3. CO2  solubility and dissociation enthalpy

The estimation of CO2 moles in the hydrate phase needs information
on the CO2 solubility. Due to the greater solubility and diffusion rate of
CO2 in liquid water, CO2 forms hydrate more quickly than CH4. Except
for  the  high-pressure  range,  the  increase  of  pressure  or  temperature
enhances the CO2  solubility in an aqueous solution [155], however, it
can be reduced by the salting-out effect of semiclathrate components.
For example, CO2 solubility for the case of 1 and 3mole% TBAB solution
at 290K and 6MPa was estimated at nearly 0.6 and 0.7 mole% which
shows the salting-out effect on the CO2  solubility at near hydrate for-
mation  conditions  would  be  less  sensitive  [147].  Also,  the  gas  con-
sumption  at  induction  time  can  be  mainly  caused  by  the  CO2/CH4
dissolution ratio in the liquid phase [156]. Measurements of CO2 solu-
bility in liquid water, THF, and THF+SDS solutions at 2.8MPa and room
temperature  (1.3,  1.5,  and  1.6  mole%,  respectively)  highlighted  that
although the presence of THF may reduce the CH4 solubility in the water
phase, it can improve the CO2 selectivity [157].

2.5.4. CO2  hydrate dissociation enthalpy

Dissociation enthalpy of CO2 hydrate systems as a working medium
would also be useful for hydrate applications. Using a modified Clausius-
Clapeyron  equation,  the  dissociation  enthalpy  during  phase  trans-
formation from the hydrate to vapor and the  aqueous solution of the
hydrate formers can be appropriately determined [158]. In this regard,
the dissociation  enthalpies of different CO2  hydrate  systems are  reca-
pitulated in Table S3 of SM. As is evident, the decomposition enthalpy of
sII and semiclathrate CO2 hydrates are considerably higher than sI or sH
CO2 hydrates.

2.5.5. Effects of particle size

Identifying  the  factors  affecting  the  stability  of  hydrate-bearing
sediments, strength, and stiffness of deep-ocean sediments e.g. specific
surface and shape of particles will increase the feasibility of performing
reservoir  reformation  by  CO2/CH4  exchange  [159–161].  The  dis-
tribution/variation  of  hydrate  particle  sizes  is  also  significant  for  the
dissociation rate of HBCS&U processes. Generally, hydrate particles by
forming  a  circular  distribution  law  tend  to  locate  near  the  pipe  wall
region.  Hydrate  particle  agglomeration  can  enlarge  the  particle  size,
further depositing to the pipe wall which is known as the segregation
phenomenon  [131,162].  It  was  indicated  that  the  higher  the  initial
pressure of CO2, the higher the final conversion rate [163]. The effect of
sediment particle size on the mechanical properties of the hydrate res-
ervoirs  can  also  seriously  affect  the  hydrate  stability  [164].  Uneven
distribution of pressure at the exploitation wellbore of hydrate-bearing
sediments  may  produce  the  widespread  gradation  of  sediment
matrices and lead to the failure strength of hydrate-bearing sediments.
On  this  issue,  a  bigger  proportion  of  large  particles  in  the  sediment
matrix,  higher  strain  rates,  and  lower  temperatures  may  be  the  main
contributors  to  such  engineering  hazards  [165].  The  CH4  and  CO2
hydrate-bearing  silty  sediments  possess  similar  compression  and
swelling indexes. However, weaker contraction behaviours for CO2 hy-
drate were recorded [166]. The accumulation mechanism of gas hydrate
is also relevant to the particle agglomeration which is a key parameter in
rheological models for optimizing fluid flow operations. The heteroge-
neity of the porous media induces water to be converted into hydrate in
the larger pore spaces, however, the smaller particle sizes provide the
higher gas consumption as well as the formation rate [167]. In addition,
the particle agglomeration by escalating the pressure drop can increase
the  risk  of  hydrate  plugging.  Particle  video  microscope  probe  and
focused beam reflectance measurement probe unveiled that the hydrate
dissociation appears in 3 dissociation stages: agglomeration, breakage,
and thorough dissociation [168,169].

2.5.6. CO2  hydrate cage occupancy

The fraction of CO2  adsorption into the cavities is of great impor-
tance for upgrading HBCS&U. Evidence suggests the occupancy of cage

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102610

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

types  is  not  the  same.  Gas  chromatography  and  NMR  analysis  for
CH2+CH4  hydrate  displayed  that  although  the  CO2  adsorption  in  the
large cages (0.67) is more than that of CH4  (0.31), the CO2  cage occu-
pancy in the small cages (0.1) is much lower than that of CH4  (0.66)
[170,171].  Also,  experimental  pieces  of  evidence  clarified  that  one
S-cage type of semiclathrate with the maximum fractional occupancy of
40% would be more effective for CO2 capture than the other S-cage type
[172,173]. Several parameters may contribute to the final occupation of
cavities. In the macroscopic measurement of CO2+TBAB semiclathrate,
the final volume ratio of CO2 to hydrate (v/v) and cage occupancy was
found to increase from 74.5 (v/v) and 57% to nearly 122 (v/v) and 94%
once  the  pressure  was  increased  from  1  to  2  MPa.  Meanwhile,  the
temperature increase was found to possess a negative impact [174]. The
occupancy  of  CO2+CH4  hydrate  by  adding  surfactants  can  also  be
changed from 22% to nearly 28% [175].

3. CO2  hydrate-based process flow diagrams

As  an  environmentally  friendly  option,  gas  hydrates  without  an
irreversible  chemical  reaction  have  the  potential  to  solve  energy
resource-related issues. Since different CO2 hydrate-based process flow
diagrams (HB-PFDs) or relevant applications for the aim of CCS&U in
the industry have been designed, in this section, intriguing suggested
HB-PFDs in the literature will be briefly overviewed.

3.1. Storage capacity and thermodynamic feasibility of HBGS

◦

Hydrate-based  separation  techniques  mostly  operate  at  medium
pressure  ranges  which  can  regenerate  to  separate  gas  mixtures  via  a
unique mechanism [51,176]. Estimations suggest a fully loaded sI CH4
hydrate can store 170 volumes of gas (STP) per volume of hydrate [177].
Also, the storage potential of sH CH4 hydrate was determined nearly 201
m3 which would be acceptable in comparison with the storage capacity
of LNG (600 m3  v/v at -160
C) [178,179]. However, according to the
recent evaluations of the gas to hydrate (GTH) method alongside five
other  technically  viable  gas  transformation  technologies,  this  method
may not be the best option for CH4 transformation [180]. Besides, due to
the concerns about energy availability and increasing energy costs, one
of the major areas of renewable energy has always been H2 storage and
the  hydrate approach could be a candidate [181]. On  this subject,  to
verify the stability of the THF+H2  hydrate, the Raman spectra in the
THF+H2  hydrate  (with  0.003  THF)  at  255  and  70  MPa  after  7  days
showed no decreasing trend in the cage occupancy of H2 which implies
the proper stability and capacity of clathrate hydrates for the aim of gas
transportation and storage [182].

Application  of  hydrates  in  strong  greenhouse  fluorinated  gases
capturing has also been suggested. It is conceivable that the lack of in-
dustrial  management  of  F-gases  e.g.  perfluorocarbons  (PFCs),  hydro-
fluorocarbons (HFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), NF3 (17,200
times  higher  global  warming  potential  (GWP)  than  CO2),  and  SF6
(23,900 times more GWP than CO2) without extreme caution results in
unfortunate  consequences  as  well  as  environmental  risks  [183].  To
reduce the emissions of these gas species, different technologies such as
liquefaction,  adsorption  [184],  and  membrane  separation  [185]  have
been proposed, however, since most F-gases can form clathrate hydrates
at very low stability conditions, applying a hydrate method would be a
safe  alternative  [186].  For  a  certain  feed,  the  hydrate-based  method
recovers  a  higher  concentration  of  HFC-134a  than  the  liquefaction
method and would be preferable for SF6  recovery [187]. Experimental
evidence  also showed  that  the  hydrate  phase  can  effectively  separate
various  F-gases  from  their  mixture  with  N2  gas.  In  addition,  experi-
mental evidence proved that CHF3 in the binary of CHF3 and N2 can be
concentrated from 40% to above 88% by just one stage of hydrate-based
capturing. Also, the separation of CHF3 from exhaust gas would be more
effective when a hybrid method is employed [188].

The stability condition of different gas species that contribute to the

gas mixture also plays a crucial role in gas separation through gas hy-
drates. The equilibrium phase diagram of diverse pure gas hydrates is
presented in Fig. 9 which exhibits the lower stability pressure conditions
for  H2S,  Xe,  R134a,  R-141b,  and  R22  hydrates  compared  to  the  CO2
hydrate are required. The equilibrium pressure and temperature ranges
of H2 hydrate were reported 220-234 K at 180-220 MPa [189]. Hence, at
a certain temperature, the corresponding pressure formation conditions
of N2, H2, and CH4  hydrates are higher than that in CO2  hydrate. This
circumstance can be the basis for the HBCC/HBGS processes. Thereby,
CO2  enrichment  by  hydrate  formation  from  the  gas  mixture  can  be
attained.  In  this  context,  the  higher  difference  between  the  hydrate
formation pressure of CO2  and other gas species in the mixture could
give greater separation efficiency. For example, at 276 K, the minimum
pressure to generate pure CO2 CH4, N2, and H2 hydrates are about 1.8,
3.6, 22, and 366 MPa, respectively, [190]. Accordingly, it is expected to
see better performance for the mixture of CO2 and H2.

3.2. Hydrate-based CO2  capture (HBCC) approaches

The processes of HBCC can be designed in form of single or multi-
stages  or  combined  with  other  approaches.  The  advantages  of  such
coupled  techniques  would  be  the  lower  costs  or  higher  efficiencies
compared to using standalone. As Fig. 10 displays, in the single-stage
HBCC, the gas mixture at the first step is fed to the hydrate formation
reactor, followed by the routing to the separator to split the associated
residual  gas  from  the  hydrate  slurry.  At  this  stage,  CO2  lean  gas  is
separated  whereas  rich  CO2  hydrate  is  entered  into  the  dissociation
reactor. Finally, by changing the operation condition where proper for
hydrate dissociation, the trapped gas mostly CO2 is released to produce
the rich CO2 [192]. Experiments have elucidated that the concentration
of CO2 in the released gas is at least 4 times higher than that in the feed.
The X-ray diffraction pattern and GC analysis of the mixed sI CO2+H2
hydrate formed from 80 mole% of H2 being in balance with CO2 showed
that  the  entrapped  amount  of  H2  and  CO2  in  the  hydrate  phase  are
appeared to be 7.5 and 92.5 mole%, respectively, however, some single
or  double  H2  molecules  were  enclathrated  in  small  cages  [194].  To
capture CO2 (and H2S) from syngas which are derived from natural gas
or  integrated  gasifier  combined  cycle  (IGCC)  power  plants,  the  SIM-
TECHE  conceived  the  low-temperature  HBCC  continuous  process  as
illustrated in Fig. 11. Based on this diagram, CO2 and H2S in the syngas
interact with water to generate hydrate. This is followed by the physical
separation of the associated H2 gas which cannot mostly be trapped by
hydrate  cavities.  Then,  at  elevated  temperature,  the  hydrate  slurry  is
melted to give acid gases and the water is recycled to the first step for the
next cycles. Ammonia refrigeration is also employed to cool the system
and  control  the  formation/  dissociation  conditions  of  the  hydrate.
Regarding  this  technique,  a  novel  set-up  to  reduce  the  energy  con-
sumption of CO2  hydrate using TBAB demonstrated that the CO2  sepa-
ration factor and split  fraction can reach  8.15 and  0.80, respectively,
[195].

The process of HBCC is sensitive to water saturation when the silica
sand bed is utilized. It was experimentally demonstrated that the rate of
water  conversion  to  hydrate  for  the  system  inclusion  of  100%  water
saturation in silica sand bed is approximately 3 times less than in the
case  when  50%  water  saturation  is  used  [197].  Based  on  the  experi-
mental investigations at the equilibrium condition of 274 K and 3 MPa,
the bubble method can change the rate of the CO2 separation from IGCC
in which the ideal condition for gas flow rate and bubble size is 6.75
mL/min/L  and  50  micro-meter,  respectively,  [198].  The  number  of
stages  is  also  a  key  parameter  that  must  be  optimized  based  on  the
components,  operation  conditions,  and  process  specifications.  For
example, a decrease in the number of stages is not efficient for CO2 and
H2S removal from natural gas while higher stages result in the loss of
valuable  gas  components  like  CH4,  C2H6,  and  C3H8.  In  general,
three-stage for the case of capturing CO2 and H2S from natural gas [199]
or four-stage for CO2 enrichment from 17% in the feed to more than 90%

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102611

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 9. The equilibrium phase diagrams of different gas hydrates [186,189,191].

Fig. 10. Flow diagram of the HBCC processing unit (data taken from [193]).

Fig. 11. Block flow diagram of the SIMTECHE CO2  capture process (data taken from [196]).

would  be  the  optimum  numbers  [200].  Also,  for  the  continuous  CO2
separation from CO2(40%)+H2(60%) at 277K via the HBCC method, the
same stages are needed to be designed [201]. In addition, the partial
pressure of gas species is the critical variable. The mixture of CH4/CO2

produced  from  the  Sabatier  process  showed  that  depending  on  the
methanation efficiency, through different conditions, both of them tend
to form hydrates [202].

To improve the CO2 recovery and eliminate the remaining CO2 in the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102612

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

lean  gas  outlet  from  the  HBCC  plant,  hybrid  techniques  have  been
suggested in which HBCC is coupled with the other conventional tech-
niques  (as  shown  in  Fig.  2  e.g.  membrane,  cryogenic,  absorption,  or
adsorption  approaches).  Fig.  12  depicts  a  hybrid  hydrate-membrane
process  where  after  three  stages  of  CO2  enrichment,  the  membrane
separates  the  remaining  CO2  content  from  N2.  The  CO2-rich  gas  for
further  process  is  also  recycled  into  the  first  or  second  stages  [203].
Synergy  analysis  for  post-combustion  CO2  capture  indicated  that  a
combination of hydrate-membrane separation technique decreases the
energy consumption compared to their standalone processes. Also, by
applying TBAB+DTAC promoters, the cost and energy consumption of
hybrid hydrate-membrane can be reduced [204].

As a well-established method, the cryogenic technique was patented
to purify the natural gas by condensing CO2. The combination of cryo-
genic  and  capturing  CO2  in  form  of  hydrate  has  been  satisfactorily
operated in the pilot phase [205] as schematically exhibited in Fig. 13.
◦
In this regard, CO2 is condensed at 5.3 MPa and -55
C to remove 75 mole
%  of  CO2.  The  residual  CO2  with  the  addition  of  promoter  forms  the
◦
synthetic hydrate at 5 MPa and 1
C which leads to reduce at least 7 mole
% of CO2. The benefits of the integrated cryogenic and hydrate method
are  the  higher  CO2  recovery,  lower  energy  demand,  as  well  as  costs
whereas  more  than  90%  H2  can  be  produced,  and  simultaneously
95-97% concentrated CO2 from the feed can be eliminated [205].

Energy and exergy analysis between MEA-based CO2 separation and
HBCC processes exhibited that, the first law efficiency for the former and
the  latter  is  88.19%  and  74.15%  while  the  second  law  efficiency  is
38.32%  and  38.85%,  respectively,  [206].  In  these  methods,  solvent
regeneration  and  refrigeration  processes  are  the  major  proportion  of
energy consumption of these techniques. To reduce the costs imposed,
the continuous separation of CO2 from IGCC syngas using the HBCC in
conjunction with the chemical absorption method can be also used. In
this case, the plant operates at least 30% lower cost than the cryogenic
technique  [196].  Fig.  14  represents  the  process  flow  diagram  of  the
hybrid two stages hydrate/ MEA-based to recover CO2  from IGCC syn-
thesis gas. The positive aspect of this combination is to offset the low
efficiency of the third stage of HBCC which was replaced by the chemical
absorption.  The  major  benefits  of  this  method  are  an  increase  in  gas
consumption as well as CO2 selectivity. The content of H2 released from

the current hybrid process and three stages of HBCC (almost 99.4 and 95
mole%,  respectively)  shows  the  proper  performance  of  hydrate-based
coupled approaches [207].

To separate CO2 from flue gas, there are some porous materials e.g.
activated carbons with an acceptable selective adsorption ability [208,
209]. Within the range where hydrates form, through dispersing water
in  these  materials,  CO2  can  be  captured  by  a  cooperative  effect  of
adsorption  and  hydration  [210].  Employing  a  hybrid  adsorption(cid:0) hy-
dration  method  by  dispersing  1.0  mole%  aqueous  THF  solution  into
activated carbons (at 2.3 MPa and 274 K) showed a recovery value of
90.3%. For the adsorption part of this process, 4 activated carbons as
dispersion media with diverse particle sizes need to be utilized to reach
the aforesaid recovery. Although the water content changes from 20.8 to
60.4 wt% cannot affect the adsorption process, excess water reduces the
separation efficiency of the hybrid process. Also, recycling wet-activated
carbons did not display any sign of deteriorated working capacity for
CO2 separation [211].

3.3. Hydrate-based CO2  sequestration and vital component production

So far, several hydrate-based processes for CO2  sequestration have
been conceived and some of them are in rapid development. Alterna-
tively, the CH4 hydrate (from seafloors) could be fed to produce an array
of  vital  industrial  compounds.  It  was  suggested  that  CH4  in  form  of
hydrate in the geological sites can be exploited on a floating platform
and  then  reformed  to  produce  H2.  Since  this  process  is  endothermic,
partial  CH4  to  supply  energy  demand  needs  to  be  burned.  In  the
reforming plant, CH4  combined with steam first passes to the primary
reformer which in the presence of a nickel catalyst (at approximately
800
C) can produce H2  and CO. The stream then routs to the CO shift
C and uses an iron oxide catalyst. The
converter which operates at 370
next  is  the  separation  stage  using  mono-ethylene  amine  (MEA)  and
cuprous ammonia acetate (CAA) systems by which the CO2 and CO are
absorbed, respectively, and the outlet stream including H2 is passed out
to  H2  storage  [212].  The  produced  CO/CO2  from  the  platform  is
sequestered in the sea sediments where CH4 deposits. Fig. 15 exhibits the
block flow diagram of simultaneous CO2  sequestration and H2  produc-
tion from the CH4 deposited site. By applying the current process, H2 as a

◦

◦

Fig. 12. A hybrid hydrate-membrane process for CO2  recovery from flue gas (data taken from [203]).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102613

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 13. Process flow diagram for integrated cryogenic and hydrate CO2  capture (data taken from [205]).

Fig. 14. Flow-chart for two-stages hydrate/ MEA hybrid CO2  separation process (data taken from [207]).

valuable  product  without  CO2  emission  to  the  atmosphere  can  be
generated and then transported to the market [213].

3.4. CO2  hydrate-based cooling systems

As  the world  becomes warmer,  demand for cooling is  expected  to
soar  in  major  developing  economies.  This  may  cause  a  surge  in
employing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and
hydrochlorofluorocarbons  (HCFCs),  which  may  hamper  managing
global warming. To reduce the concerns, the refrigeration industry has
been  led  to  minimize  the  use  of  greenhouse  F-gases  and  seek  novel
systems  of  refrigeration  that  have  a  less  destructive  impact  on  the
environment.  One  of  the  solutions  researchers  have  suggested  is

employing  cold  thermal  energy  storage  (CTES)  and  secondary  re-
frigerants supported by a closed refrigeration circuit. CTES refers to an
energy  storage  approach  such  as  phase  change  materials  (PCMs)  and
chilled  water  which  have  become  extensively applied  technologies  in
space cooling with both solar sorption and electric-driven chillers. CTES
conserves cooling capacity by extracting heat from a storage medium
[214]. Because of the large storage capacity available in a phase tran-
sition, among energy storage strategies, latent heat CTES is believed to
be superior [215]. In this regard, the melting enthalpy of pure CO2 hy-
drate and ice is 507 kJ/kg and 333 kJ/kg, respectively, [216]. Stem from
the  extra  latent  heat  of  CO2  hydrates  and  more  thermal  capacity  in
comparison  with  conventional  coolants  and  commonly-used  PCMs
showed  that  they  can  appear  to  have  obvious  advantages  and  better

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102614

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 15. Schematic diagram of the combination of H2  production and CO2  sequestration (data taken from [213]).

◦

energy  efficiency  over  many  other  types  of  PCM  [217].  Also,  having
C, CO2 hydrates suit
proper phase change temperature between 5 to 12
the  characteristics  of  practical  CTES  air  conditioning  systems  [218].
Using a process design with a combination of simultaneous cold and heat
storage, the latent heat of phase change resulting from the formation and
dissociation of refrigerant hydrates can be converted into cold and heat
energies for air conditioning. In this design, the formation characteris-
tics of CO2  hydrate and semi-hydrate plus promoters (e.g. THF, TBAB,

TBAF)  used  under  atmospheric  pressure  render  them  easier  for  cold
storage  applications  [219,220].  Operating  temperatures  above  the
freezing  point  of  water  [221]  and  proper  cold  storage  capacity  lead
hydrate-based methods to be an environmentally sustainable candidate
for  air-conditioning  and  refrigeration  systems  [222].  To  develop  a
hydrate-based  secondary  refrigerant,  several  studies  have  been  con-
ducted  on  the  rheological  and  thermo-physical  properties  of  hydrate
slurry  of  CO2  in  a  flow  loop  [223,224].  More  Recently  reviews  on

Fig. 16. Conceptual diagram of CO2  hydrate refrigeration system (data taken from [216]).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102615

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

hydrates for cold thermal energy storage and transport aims have been
presented  elsewhere  [225,226].  Fig.  16  shows  the  schematic  of
hydrate-based  secondary  refrigeration.  The  system  is  charged  by
gaseous  CO2  from  a  tank  gas  followed  by  gas  compression  through  a
compressor  to  pressurize  a  hydrate  formation  reactor.  Once,  the  CO2
hydrate slurry is generated, it will be conveyed to the user via a slurry
pump. After absorbing thermal energy from the surrounding, hydrate is
dissociated  into  liquid  and  gas  phases  which  can  be  separated  via  a
separator [216].

Investigation of the effects of heat transfer fluid (HTF) temperature
on the charging and discharging processes showed that HTF temperature
can enhance the discharge rate of CO2  semi-hydrates. Also, by varying
the  pressure of CO2  hydrate CTES, it offers an  adjustable discharging
rate  which  is  not  available  in  other  conventional  PCMs  [214].  Sub-
stantial subcooling increase and the external loop flow rate also play a
significant role in improving the hydrate storage capacity and the con-
vection  heat  transfer  between  CO2  and  water,  respectively,  which
contribute  to  the  effective  charge  of  the  CTES.  The  required  chilled
water  temperature  and  the  charged  capacity  of  using  “constant  pres-
sure” are greater than that of using “constant mass” so that they are more
practical  for  cold  storage  systems  [227].  The  system  composed  of  a
hydrate  slurry  storage  vessel  and  shell-and-tube  fluidized  bed  heat
exchanger to remove heat by circulating the hydrate slurry revealed that
the  coefficient  of  performance  (COP)  and  latent  heat  thermal  storage
(LHTS)  can be  23%  to  43%  more  than that  of  a  conventional  system
[228]. In addition, the increase of the initial pressure from 4.5 MPa to
6.0 MPa induces the hydrate growth, leading to 330% gas consumption
growth. However, it nearly triples the induction time [229]. Although
up to 2.4 MPa, for higher pressure and temperature, CO2  hydrate for-
mation occurs sooner with the shorter induction time, the increase of
initial pressure from 2.4 MPa to 3.2 MPa decreases the charging time by
a factor of 3. With an initial pressure of 3.2 MPa, the maximum energy
stored by CO2  hydrate slurries is up to 300% more than water which
allows users to decrease the size of the storage tank for the same amount
of  energy  [230].  Worth  noting  that  the  higher  flow  rate  leads  to  the
formation of larger-size hydrate particles which increases the pressure
drop  by  blocking  the  mass  transfer  between  phases  [229].  Despite  a
pressure drop (ΔP) in the recirculation of hydrate slurry due to its vis-
cosity, it is possible to achieve ΔP lower than water. For example, by
reducing  the  slurry  flowrate  and  fraction  to  25  kg/h  and  8  wt.%,  a
pressure drop can be two times less than water at 100 kg/h with higher
heat  exchange  [231].  Also,  there  is  a  close  relationship  between  the
system efficiency and types of working fluids. For example, the second
law efficiency of combined cooling and power system based on hydrate
using  pure  R22  or  R32  and  mixed  R22+R32  as  working  fluids  were
determined  0.48  and  0.57,  respectively,  [232].  A  recently  proposed
process  using  CO2+TBPB  hydrate  demonstrated  that  adding  vapor
compression  for  the  management  of  vapour  release  (after  the  heat
exchanger when the slurry and released gas enter a cyclone to separate
slurry from CO2  gas) can save up to 75% of the total storage volume
[233].  Besides,  for  the  district  cooling  system  of  51,600  refrigeration
tons, applying the CO2+1.5 mole% THF hydrate slurry at 1.5 Mpa can
reduce CO2 emissions by 20,684 tons per year. Accordingly, the COP of
11.55 for the cycle of hydrate cooling system can be obtained [234]. The
COP for the current hydrate system under the formation pressure of 0.4
MPa was also found to be over 7 [235]. Based on the service life of 20
years, the transportation distance of 10 km, and the cooling capacity of
5000  RT,  the  total  life-cycle  cost  (LCC)  consists  of  energy  cost  (EC),
maintenance cost (MC), and initial cost (IC) for the conventional district
cooling  system  (DCS)  is  2  times  more  than  the  CO2  hydrate  cooling
system which indicates an economical superiority of the latter over the
former [223]. For this case and by utilizing CO2+THF hydrate slurry, the
COP can be up to 14.3 [236].

3.5. Hydrate-based effluent/ heavy metal separation, and desalination

◦

There is an interest in effluent concentration arising from zero liquid
discharge (ZLD) operation as the ultimate technique for the prevention
of pollution. In the pulp and paper industry, recovering clean water or
removing dissolved materials from the effluent is an essential part of a
ZLD plant. Processes for water recovery can be carried out by membrane
separation,  crystallization,  and  evaporation  methods.  In  this  context,
generating  hydrate  crystals  followed  by  their physical  separation and
then  melting  formed  hydrate  has  been  suggested  as  a  freeze  concen-
tration method [237]. Owing to the fact that CO2 clathrate [238,239] or
semiclathrate  [240,241]  hydrate  formers  can  generate  hydrates  near
ambient temperature (e.g. CP (295 K) [242] and TBAF (302 K) [243]) or
atmospheric pressure (at temperatures below 7.7
C) [244], the required
energy  is  notably  lower  than  that  in  crystallization  method  which
operates at water freezing point. Also, these temperatures are not high
enough to cause loss of volatile components or corrosion scaling as is the
case  with  evaporation.  In  hydrate-based  desalination  (HBD)  or
hydrate-based  pollutant  removal  (HBPR)  processes,  water  molecules
encage the hydrate former molecules and generate the clathrate hydrate;
so that salts and other impurities become excluded. Crystalline hydrate
can then be decomposed into potable water and the hydrate former is
then recovered and recycled. The technologies of HBD are dependent on
the type of hydrate former. It has been suggested that C3H8 [245], CO2
[246,247], SF6 [248], cyclopentane [249], and refrigerant gases (HFC,
R141b,  R134a,  R410a,  R507,  R22)  [250–252]  have  a  potential  for
effluent concentration and desalination. Results of dissociation behav-
iour of brine on HFC-125a hydrate displayed that the existence of brine
substantially affects the gas consumption, formation rate, and stability
of  HFC-125a  hydrate.  However,  outcomes  of  the  hydrate  specimens
using powder X-ray diffraction evidently showed no structural change
[250]. Because of the lower global warming potential of HFC-152a and
HFE-254 [253] than other F-gases like HFC-125a, HFC-134a, and also
relatively less hydrate equilibrium pressures, they can be an alternative
hydrate former for HBD. The experimental measurements revealed that,
despite  31%  less  initial  driving  force  of  HFC-152a  compared  to
HFC-134a, it possesses higher hydrate conversion and formation kinetics
[254,255].  Also,
improve
salt-enrichment efficiency. The energy analysis of the developed process
flow sheet for producing freshwater for HBD highlighted that the salt
content, water recovery rate, and hydrate former recycling would be the
main contributors. Although the increase in water recovery rate from
30% to 50% raises the total energy consumed by 40%, it reduces the
specific energy consumption (SEC) (total energy consumed/volume of
water recovered) by 18%. However, the rise of NaCl concentration from
10% to 30% can increase the SEC by 5% [256]. Since CO2  possesses a
dual character, a coupled CO2  capture and HBD may become the right
choice for both global warming and desalination [257]. A hybrid process
for CO2 capture and seawater desalination is displayed in Fig. 17. In this
regard,  energy  consumption,  efficiency  as  well  as  process  safety  are
found to be the critical factors. Experimental investigations proved that
the  inclusion  of  CP  in  CO2  hydrate-based  desalination  can  positively
provoke  the  process  [258].  As  a  candidate  for  desalination,  commer-
cialization  perspectives  of  CP  have  been  discussed  elsewhere  [242].
Using 3 mole% CP, nearly 60% of the NaCl from the feed solution after
hydrate  formation  and  vacuum  filtering  can  be  removed  [259].  To
improve purification efficiency, if the vacuum-filtered hydrate crystals
are  subjected  to  centrifuging,  washing,  or  sweating,  the  salt  removal
efficiency  of  96%,  93%,  and  95%  can  be  accomplished,  respectively,
[260]. Recently, hybrid approaches based on reverse osmosis (RO)+CP
hydrate [261] and capacitive deionization (CDI)+CO2 hydrate [262] to
improve desalination performances were proposed in which the former
coupled process lowers the energy consumption whereas the latter im-
proves the ions removal efficiency.

subcooling  may

increase

the

in

Although  a  novel  apparatus  at  the  pilot  phase  for  hydrate-based
desalination in the ocean were successfully tested, this technology has

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102616

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 17. Block flow diagram of the hybrid process for CO2  capture and seawater desalination process (data taken from [263]).

yet to be commercialized. To become industrialized, the main barrier is
the  challenge  of  separating  hydrate-former  from  dissociated  water
[264].

formation or the hydrogen bonds between water molecules. Therefore,
the ionization of salts in the aqueous phase acts as a hydrate inhibitor
[278].

As a consequence of overconsumption or anthropogenic processes,
the quality of the groundwater or other water resources is receding at an
alarming  pace, the  effect of  which, trace  amounts of  heavy metals in
such resources are being increased. Besides, a large number of industries
before  adequate  treatment,  discharge  their  metal-containing  effluents
into  different  environmental  compartments.  As  a  kind  of  salt,  many
heavy metal ion solutions (e.g. selenium, zinc, cobalt, chromium, mer-
cury,  nickel,  cadmium,  arsenic,  lead)  are  toxic  even  at  very  low  con-
centrations  which  harm  human  beings  and  environments  [265].  To
remove  heavy  metal  ions,  the  methods  such  as  membrane  [266],  ion
exchange  [267],  adsorption  [268],  electrochemical  [269],  freezing/
thawing  [270],  and  chemical  precipitation  [271]  are  some  of  the
existing  techniques.  However,  they  carry  different  drawbacks.  The
negative  aspects  of  using  reverse  osmosis  (RO)  and  membrane  in
nanofiltration, ultrafiltration, or  microfiltration are a  large accumula-
tion  of  waste  throughout  the  cleaning  method,  the  requirements  for
intermittent washing, and significant membrane pre-treatment support,
replacement,  maintenance,  scaling,  and  fouling  of  the  membranes.
These  may  incur  massive  capital  investments.  In  the  same  vein,
multi-flash  distillation  can  be  an  energy-intensive  process.  Also,  the
aforesaid technologies for small scale e.g. rural applications may be very
exorbitant [272,273]. As a green process, a hydrate-based method for
removing  salt  ions  from  wastewater  without  producing  a  sludge  has
been  suggested  [274,275].  Experimental  investigations  showed  that
HCFCs,  HFCs,  and  CFCs  hydrate  formers  such  as  R141b,  R22,  and
CHClF2  because  of  their  proper  thermodynamic  stability  (they  can
operate  under  or  close  to  ambient  conditions),  non-toxicity,  and
immiscibility with water have a good potential to remove heavy metal
and  salt  in  wastewater.  In  this  respect,  Raman  spectroscopy  analysis
confirmed the removal efficiencies ranging between 88% and 91% for
Zn2+
ions in water using R141b hydrate. Also, a
higher  R141b–effluent  volume  ratio  contributes  to  a  higher  yield  of
dissociated water and enrichment factor but lower removal efficiency
[276,277]. Based on analysing the controlling factors of R141b hydrate
to  exclude  the  heavy  metal  ions  from  water,  the  increase  of  initial
concentration of Cu2+
from approximately 17 to 907 mg/L can improve
the removal efficiency from 72% to closely 90% whereas changes the
water  yield  from about  80%  to 72.5%  [277]. An  explanation  for  this
phenomenon  is  that  electrolytes  in  an  aqueous  solution  reduce  water
activity  and  prevent  the  linking  of  water  molecules  with  hydrogen
bonds. The ion-dipole interactions between water molecules and ionized
mineral salts become stronger than the van der Waals forces for hydrate

, and Cr3+

, Cu2+

, Ni2+

Due to being potent greenhouse gases and the high flammability of
HCFC,  HFC,  and  CFC  hydrate  formers,  they  are  not  environmentally
acceptable.  Gaseous  hydrate  formers  like  CH4  and  CO2  also  require
higher  operating  pressure  and  limited  water  conversion  to  hydrate
which is vital for maximizing freshwater recovery [279]. As a result of
the low hydrate formation pressure of CP and its immiscibility in water,
it  could  be  very  promising  [242].  Recently,  a  hybrid  process  of
hydrate-based desalination using CP and LNG cold energy to strengthen
the energy-water nexus was successfully designed [280]. However, CP
suffers from slow kinetics of hydrate growth in comparison with F-gas
hydrate formers. This restriction can be handled by the use of gaseous
hydrate former (e.g. CO2) and kinetic promoters in conjunction with CP.
as a result, gaseous guest plus bio-kinetic promoters induce the kinetics
of hydrate growth and CP enhances the hydrate nucleation and lowers
the formation pressure to milder equilibrium conditions [274].

3.6. Concentration or preservation of food through gas hydrates

The products and by-products of the citrus industry play a significant
role  in  the  global  economy.  It  was  determined  that  in  2018,  over  30
billion  litters of  fruit  juice were  related  to  concentrated  juices  [281].
However, the use of a wide array of conventional concentration methods
to remove water from fruit juices involves a high level of energy con-
sumption as well as equipment. In this regard, the evaporation method is
the one that has been applied to concentrate juices in many cases. To
remove extra water from juices at a degree of concentration up to 85%,
energy between 180 and 2160 kJ/kg of water should be provided [282].
For volatile compounds (e.g. aroma) or substances like polyphenols, and
heat-sensitive  vitamins,  evaporation  may  impair  product  quality.  The
membrane concentration method (MCM) is the other alternative but this
process technique is associated with the obstruction of the membrane
stops which can lead to a high cost for maintenance and a shortening of
the membrane’s life. Alternatively, gas hydrate technology such as CO2
hydrate in recent years has gained interest in the food industry [283,
284]. Because of the low temperature and moderate pressure condition
of CO2 hydrate and low energy consumption to concentrate juices by the
use of energy (approximately 252–360 kJ/kg of water), this approach
may  be  more  innovative  [285].  Regarding  this,  the  presence  of  food
ingredients,  juices,  or  sugars  (e.g.  glucose,  fructose  [286],  sucrose
[287])  have inhibitory  effects  on CO2  hydrate formation  kinetics and
equilibrium conditions. The preservation of CO2 clathrate hydrate in the
presence and absence of glucose or fructose (sugars) are different [288].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102617

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

It  came  to  light  that  under  atmospheric  pressure  at  238-258  K,  the
preservation of CO2 hydrate in the absence of those two monosaccharide
sugars is higher than CO2 hydrate with the sugars. The significant factors
in the preservation of CO2  hydrate were found to be the occurrence of
super-cooled water in the sample hydrate particles and the viscosity of
super-cooled sugar aqueous solution [289]. However, temperature and
pressure are the key factors in the concentration process. The case of
tomato juice concentration using CO2 hydrate showed that tomato juice
can accelerate the CO2 hydrate formation rate. Besides, with increasing
juice volume, the dehydration ratio first reached up to 65% and then
dropped to below 45% which indicated the insufficient mix of tomato
juice  and  CO2  gas  [290].  CO2  hydrate  in  the  presence  of  orange  and
apple  juices  manifested  that  the  concentration  factors  in  one  concen-
tration step were determined between 1.2 and 2.2. Besides, high pres-
sures  e.g.  over  4MPa  can  reduce  concentration  efficiency.  Hydrate
technology  during  the  concentration  of  fruit  juices  can  concentrate
betanin, vitamin C, carotenoids, and polyphenols. Due to the fact that
these components are too large to be part of the hydrate structure, the
remaining small amount of these substances in the hydrate phase is an
influence processing, particularly concerning the separation technique
[291]. Comparing hydrates of pure water and orange juice in the 10, 13
and 16 brix (the amount of solute sugar per 100 g of solution) showed
that impurities in juice disrupt the gas entry into the water cages. This
lowers the pressure drop in the reactor, resulting in the final pressure
increase. Indeed, a higher Brix extends the induction time. For example,
nucleation  time  for  brix=16  at  277K  and  2MPa  was  determined
approximately 3 min while it was less than that in brix=10 to 13. This
behaviour  is  valid  for  the  relaxation  time  but  the  initial  hydrate  for-
mation rate decreases with the increase of the brix. The interesting point
is that, in the atmospheric pressure, the relaxation times for various brix
and the pure water are almost identical [292]. Concerning the increase
of feed pressure from 2 to 4.1MPa, the formation rate can be enhanced
by  over  2.8  times  [293].  At  formation  pressures  and  induction  times
more than those required by the distilled water, xenon (Xe) in the coffee
solution can form hydrate but higher temperatures result in a larger size
of Xe hydrate [294]. With the increase of Xe gas dissolving in the so-
lution and temperature, the concentration efficiency may become less
[295]. Also, to prevent the deterioration of frozen agricultural products
(e.g. barley coleoptile cells), the freezing process can be replaced by Xe
hydrate which can form inside the intercellular spacing of cells [296]. By
employing  ethylene  hydrate  for  the  concentration  process,  although
orange juice slightly shifts the formation pressure of ethylene hydrate
higher  than  pure  water,  the  maximum  dehydration  ratio  of  92.8%  at
4.4MPa  feed  pressure  can  be  achieved  [297].  To  suppress  biological
activities such as respiration after harvest, preserving the freshness of
vegetables and fruits is an important consideration. A method to extend
the shelf life of these products is, reducing water mobility within the
living cell. Although, freezing process to inhibit the water mobility in the
tissues for food preservation is an effective method, controlling water
crystallization to prevent forming large ice crystals which bring about
damage to the tissues yet to be solved. In this context, the use of argon
(Ar) and Xe hydrates as a means of maintaining the quality of fruits and
vegetables has been suggested [298]. For processing carbonated frozen
food using CO2 hydrate, the water to CO2 hydrate transformation ratio
depending on the type of fresh produce are different. However, X-ray
diffraction  revealed  the  same  crystallographic  structure  with  pure
crystalline [299]. Also, to carbonate the dessert or ice cream, some or all
of the ice can be replaced by carbonated frozen dessert (CO2  hydrate
dessert)  which  has  greater CO2  concentration  than carbonated  bever-
ages, as a result, it is useful for the strong perception of CO2 [300]. To
form CO2 hydrate frozen dessert, a flash-freezing process was developed
which  involves  the  combining  liquid  dessert  with  liquid  CO2  at
high-pressure and then spraying the mixed fluids into a chamber at a
lower  pressure  for  being  freeze.  At  this  stage,  the  CO2  can  evaporate
once absorb the heat of vaporization from the dessert mixture. To avoid
ice formation, the mixture in fine droplets must be dispersed and the

emulsion to a pressure greater than 0.5 MPa should be flashed [301]. To
store the produced CO2 hydrate desserts, vendor freezers and standard
home  can  be  employed  but  to  stabilize  their  packing  pressure,  a  few
tenths of MPa more than a soda storage pressure must be used [302].
The list of experimental investigations on hydrate-based utilization for
the preservation of different food types is presented in Table S4 of SM.

3.7. Fire extinguishment using CO2  hydrate

It was suggested that hydrates utilizing non-flammable gases such as
CO2 can be employed as fire extinguishing agents. As previously stated,
the dissociation heat of hydrates is comparable to or even larger than
that in a fusion of ice [222]. Simultaneously, because of the release of
the non-flammable gases during hydrate dissociation in the combustion
field,  this  phenomenon  can  control  the  flames  by  reducing  the  fuel
concentration  and  preventing  the  supply  of  oxygen.  Additionally,  the
amount of CO2 hydrate would be much less than that of a conventional
fire  extinguishing  method  such  as  water  spraying.  Experimental  evi-
dence indicates a flame from container liquid methanol with a diameter
of 90 mm can gradually vanish from its centre to the periphery when
1.25g of CO2 hydrate reaches the flame. Also, for a methanol container
of 50 mm diameter, the critical mass of both the dry ice and the CO2
hydrate is 0.3g whereas the volume of gas released from 1 m3 CO2 hy-
drate and dry ice at STP are 122 m3 and 800 m3, respectively.

With  increasing  the  size  of  pole  flame  to  100  mm,  the  required
critical mass of dry ice can be less than CO2 hydrate whereas the volume
of CO2 released from the critical mass of dry ice would be higher. This
evidently  indicated  that  a  flame  with  less  value  of  CO2  can  be  extin-
guished  if  CO2  in  form  of  hydrate  instead  of  dry  ice  is  operated.
Therefore, by taking the advantages of CO2 hydrate, it could be a good
fire extinguishing agent [303]. According to the national fire protection
association (NFPA) standard, fire extinguishers have been classified into
5 fire classes; Class A: Fires in ordinary combustible materials (e.g. cloth,
wood,  plastics);  Class  B:  Fires  in  flammable/combustible  liquids  or
gases; Class C: Fires that involve energized electrical equipment; Class D:
Fires in combustible metals (such as zirconium, titanium, magnesium);
and  Class  K:  Fires  in  cooking  appliances  that  involve  combustible
cooking  media  (animal  oils,  fats  or  vegetable).  CO2  is  ineffective  at
extinguishing Class A fires because it may not be able to displace enough
oxygen  to  successfully  put  the  fire  out  (Class  A  materials  may  also
smoulder and reignite). Therefore, CO2 hydrate has a class B fire rating.
In challenging circumstances such as large fires in buildings or forests,
CO2  hydrate  in  comparison  with  the  fluid  or  conventional  fire  extin-
guishing  agents  (halon  gases  [304])  could  be  a  suitable  candidate.
However,  the  probable  alternatives  to  supply  CO2  hydrate  fire  extin-
guishers e.g. in-situ cooling need to be investigated.

3.8. Nuclear power plants using CO2  hydrate

Evidence suggests  a large amount  of waste heat  from nuclear and
thermal power plants is being disposed into oceans, rivers, lakes, and air.
On  the  basis  of  the  heat  generated  by  nuclear  reactors,  power  plants
typically  have  a  generation  end  efficiency  of  between  33%  and  35%
while over 60% of generated heat is being wasted. However, in a few
cases, such waste heat is used for seawater desalination, farm cultiva-
tion, fish farming, etc. Since the location of large-scale nuclear power
plants  (NPPs)  are  not  close  to  energy-consuming  areas,  the  effective
utilization  and  recovery  of  their  waste  heat  is  a  critical  objective.
Because small-scale organic Rankine cycle (ORC) power systems [305]
and  small  temperature  difference  power  generation  using  the  Carina
cycle  [306]  to  convert  the  waste  heat  of  NPPs  into  electricity  are
economically  difficult  to  install,  other  technologies  to  obtain  higher
conversion efficiency should be developed. Given that the efficiency of
the gas hydrate power generation system (GGS) is over 20%, it is capable
of small temperature difference power generation with energy storage
[307].  Recently,  the  performance  of  heat  cycling  with  CO2  hydrate

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102618

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

[308]  and  controlling  the  power  output  of  an  expander  using  the
expansion properties of hydrate dissociation [309] have been presented.
Fig.  18  displays  the  configuration  of  a  gas  hydrate  heat  cycle  (GHC)
where  the  waste  heat  is  obtained  from  the  condenser  by  an
absorption-refrigerator (an absorption chiller). Indeed, the waste heat of
a  pressurized-water  reactor  (PWR)  is  used  as  a  heat  source  for  the
dissociation  mode  of  the  GGS  and  the  absorption  chiller.  Seawater  is
used for cooling the buffer tank of the GGS, reactors, and the condenser
of  the absorption refrigerator. The cold heat of  the absorption chiller
provides a low-temperature heat source for the hydrate reactor. In the
GHC system, CO2  gas fills a reaction vessel at an initial pressure of 3
◦
MPa. Cooling the reactor to -5
C for the formation mode reduces the
pressure of the reactor and buffer tank to 2.1 MPa while heating up to
15
C for the dissociation mode increases the reactor pressure to 3.5 MPa.
Released  CO2  gas  from  dissociated  hydrate  after  passing  through  a
generator changes the pressure of reactor and buffer tank from 3.5 MPa
and  2.1  MPa,  respectively,  to  an  initial  pressure  which  provides  the
conditions for the next cycles. The proposed design showed that GGS can
improve  the  power  generation efficiency  by  8.7%  and  the generation
end efficiency of the GHC can be over 40% [310].

◦

3.9. Hydrate acidic gases

Same  as  CO2,  there  are  several  gas  species  like  hydrogen  sulfide
(H2S),  nitrogen  oxides  (NOx),  sulfur  oxides  (SO2  and  SO3),  hydrogen
fluoride (HF), and hydrogen chloride (HCI), which can be dissolved into
water and provide an acidic solution. Most of the above components can
often be found in natural gas. The presence of traces of such substances
despite purifying CO2 is unavoidable which changes the process of hy-
drate  formation  from  both  thermodynamic  and  kinetic  aspects.  For
example, unlike NO2, the presence of SO2 increases the conversion rate
of CO2 hydrate formation [311]. Between different acid gas components,
SO2 and H2S are stronger hydrate formers than CO2 [312]. Also, due to
the high solubility of H2S in water, its presence can enhance the kinetics
of CO2 hydrate growth [313].

3.10. Modelling approaches of CO2  hydrates

To represent the many different properties of clathrate hydrates in
terms  of  thermodynamics,  kinetics,  thermo-physical/mechanical,  and
heat/mass  transfer  characteristics,  prominent  frameworks  have  been
conducted. Historically, the development of phase equilibrium model-
ling of the clathrate hydrates was started when the basic solid solution
theory named “clathrate solutions” was disclosed by van der Waals and

Platteeuw [314]. Afterward, statistical thermodynamic models based on
this theory coupled with Kihara spherical-core potential function [315,
316],  Lennard-Jones-Devonshire  cell  model  [317–319],  the  effect  of
lattice stretching [320], the classical thermodynamic equations [321]
and  incorporating  the  spherical  asymmetry  [322]  were  established.
Fundamental  details  and  extensions  of  aforesaid  work  were  recently
overviewed elsewhere [323]. The basis for various modelling of reaction
regimes of the CH4/CO2 hydrate conversion mechanism is the difference
in thermodynamic characteristics. In addition, to determine the prop-
erties of CO2  hydrate such as enthalpy, diffusion coefficient, viscosity,
and  density  of  hydrate  suspension  in  a  solution,  different  models  or
correlations have been generated [324,325]. Since the latent heat of CH4
and CO2 hydrate dissociations are 427 and 414 kJ/kg, respectively, the
temperature of the injected CO2 to initiate the substitution reaction must
be  such  as  to  cause  CH4  hydrate  dissociation.  The  key  parameters
affecting this process were found to be the initial P-T condition, porosity,
and hydrate saturation. Although thermodynamics imposes several re-
strictions on permissible parameters of replacement reaction, hydrody-
namics plays a major role in the process and injection regime. Similarity
solution analysis showed that the dissociation of the CH4 hydrate may be
suppressed by the high injection pressure. This may be caused by the
dependency of the thermal energy of the physical system and the initial
temperature [326]. Broadly speaking, to explain the kinetics of hydrate
nucleation  and  growth,  three  key  controllers  have  been  introduced:
mass transfer resistance [327], heat transfer resistance [328], and the
intrinsic kinetics of water-guest molecules to form crystals [329]. The
proportion of mentioned resistances would be dependent on the oper-
ation conditions and configuration of the hydrate formation reactor. For
example,  using  stirred  reactors,  the  heat  transfer  resistance  can  be
ignored  [330].  Given  that  the  combination  of  mentioned  resistances
may  govern  the  growth  rate,  analytical/  numerical/  semi-empirical
models. By considering these controller mechanisms and the effects of
fluid flow, several models have been developed [331]. To model the gas
exchange
the
in  clathrates,  a  mathematical  description
non-equilibrium  binary  permeation  of  guest  molecules  based  on  the
microscopic diffusive mechanisms was introduced. This model involves
two-stage processes in which swapping can be initiated by instantaneous
mixed
smaller
permeation-controlled  process  [332].  Generally,  hydrate  distributions
within porous media can be categorized into three types: pore spaces
filled  with  hydrate  lumps,  grain  coating,  and  grain  bridging  between
sand  grains  by  hydrate.  A  proposed  model  to  investigate  the  perme-
ability decrease as CO2 hydrate forms in porous media confirmed that in
a case of CO2  leakage in the geological formation up to a depth where

formation,

followed

hydrate

very

for

by

a

Fig. 18. Power plant with exhaust-heat recovery by CO2  hydrate heat cycle. (Reprinted from [307] with permission of Elsevier).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102619

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

hydrate  is  formed,  the  hydrate  suppresses  or  even  block  the  outflow
[333]. An approach to explain the mechanical influence of generated
bubbles  from  the  dissociation  of  hydrate-bearing  particles  moved
through  the  water  on  the  drag  force  and  boundary  layer  disturbance
showed that the released gas increases the interaction forces between a
particle and the water [334]. To improve quantifying the CH4-(N2+CO2)
exchange  ratio  and  CH4  recovery,  governing  equations  composed  of
mass and energy conservation equations for the numerical simulation
were  developed  which  determined  that  the  CO2  concentration  in  the
range of 30-40 mole% can maximize the CH4 gas recovery factor [119].
Experiments indicate that a start-up of CO2  injection into depleted gas
fields  results  in  a  highly  transient  flow  phenomenon.  Therefore,  for
minimization  of  the  risks  associated  with  this  case,  a  homogeneous
relaxation model by considering the heat transfer between expanding
fluid, well layers, and gravitational field effects was proposed [335].

3.11. Simulations of CO2  hydrates

In academia and industry, there are several reservoir simulators to
predict  gas  hydrate  properties.  STOMP-HYD-KE  simulator  was  devel-
oped to study the kinetics and equilibrium of CH4/CO2 mixed hydrate.
Using the CMG Starts simulator, the feasibility of storing CO2 inside the
hydrate stability zone below the seafloor can be examined. By applying
this simulator, nearly 61 Mt of CO2 by decreasing the reservoir pressure
to  under  the  fracture  pressure  in  deep-water  aquifers  can  be  stored.
However, the main limitation would be the breakthrough of CO2 which
can be delayed by CO2 hydrate formation [336]. The third version of the
STOMP family (STOMP-HYDT-KE) can be used to simulate the kinetics
of mixed CH4/CO2/N2  ternary hydrates. For the hydrate-phase transi-
tions, TOUGH + HYDRATE has the ability to use for both equilibrium
and  kinetic  models.  The  Computer  Modelling  Group  (CMG)  has  also
developed  a  geomechanical  and  compositional  reservoir  simulator
named STARS. To simulate the conventional gas production from NGH
reservoirs through the injection of CO2  and N2  into the hydrate, Mix3-
HydrateResSim can also be applied. The MH21-HYDRES simulator has
been employed to reproduce the behaviour of NGH hydrate e.g. hydrate
dissociation/  formation  in  reservoirs.  However,  to  characterize  the
behaviour of hydrate in reservoirs, the coupled dynamic phase transi-
tions and local hydrate dissociation processes need to be comprehended
in more detail. By applying Retraso-Code-Bright (RCB) simulator pack-
age,
formation  and  dissociation
under/over-saturation  by  implementing  a  non-equilibrium  thermody-
namic module were also simulated which verified that the hydrate forms
at  stable  conditions,  so  that  gradually  plugs  the  fractures  [337].  The
relationship between particle size, porosity, and permeability in hydrate
sediments  by  employing  TOUGH2/EOSHYDR2  simulator  showed  that
under a specific water saturation, higher porosity induces a larger water
relative permeability and the percolation characteristics in hydrate can
be  affected  by  reservoir  composition  [338].  The  rapid  increase  and
decrease in the rate of permeability decline can also be caused by the
clogging and clumpy types of hydrate distribution [339]. Simulations
focusing  on  combined  CO2/N2  injection  and  depressurization  from
permafrost hydrate deposits determined that N2/CO2 injection with the
concentration of 50mole% at 5MPa can result in the most CH4 produc-
tion efficiency [340].

rates  of  CO2  hydrate

the

To simulate the process flow diagrams of HBCC&U technologies a
number of process simulators (e.g. HYSYS, Aspen Plus, Pro/II, ProMax)
can also be applied. Since the wasted cold energy at the LNG regasifi-
cation terminals around the world has been estimated to be 830 kJ/kg
[341], this energy wastage could be prevented by utilizing it in devel-
oped  cold  recovery  technologies.  By  applying  HYSYS  software  and
mathematical  programming  it  was  highlighted  that  for  an  optimized
hydrate-based  seawater  desalination  process  using  LNG  cold  energy
(ColdEn-HyDesal  process),  the  specific  energy  consumption  with  and
without  considering  hydrate  former  recycling  can  be  0.60  and  0.84
kWh/m3, respectively, [256,342]. Energy consumption, sensitivity, and

exergy analysis of CO2+THF/TBAB revealed that by increasing the ad-
ditive concentration from 1 to 3mole%, 10% of total electrical power
consumption  can  be  saved  [343].  Moreover,  a  model  in  Aspen  Plus
software  was  established  to  analyse  the  ability  of  two  stages
hydrate-based approach in purifying the biogas in the presence of 5wt%
TBAB.  By  evaluating  the  variables  such  as  the  process  reaction  time,
handing capacity, energy consumption, and recovery factor, the energy
cost  was  found  to  be  0.36-0.39  kWh/kg  biogas  while  more  purity
product gas for the lower gas-liquid volume ratio can be obtained [344].

3.12. CFD frameworks of CO2  hydrates

A computational fluid dynamics (CFD) method has been established
to estimate the flux of hydrate formation/ dissociation in different en-
vironments e.g. porous media, subsea,  and pipelines at a large/meso-
scale. These models have been developed based on the molar Gibbs free
energy difference/ free chemical energy difference (Δμ) as the driving
force  at  different  P-T  conditions,  flowrates,  and  concentrations  [345,
346]. On the basis of the finite volume method with unstructured mesh
and periodic boundary conditions, simultaneous analysis of momentum,
mass, and heat transfer for CO2 hydrate phenomena in liquid/gas phases
or homogeneous porous media have been carried out [347]. Analysing
the flow pattern of CO2 hydrate slurry determined that except near the
pipe wall, the mean viscosity of slurry flow, and pressure drop so that
energy loss can be reduced with particle dissociation [348]. CFD simu-
lation of the radial cross-section of the pipeline considering both hydrate
agglomeration and hydrate breakage showed that hydrate particles near
wall  and  center  regions  possess  larger  and  smaller  diameters,  respec-
tively, [349]. To understand heat transfer and flow of CO2 hydrate slurry
in  pipes,  a  coupled  non-isothermal  heat  transfer  and  turbulent  multi-
phase  model  by  analysing  phase  transition,  particle  distribution,  and
mixture  flow  in  COMSOL  Multiphysics  software  was  developed.  A
two-dimensional  CFD  approach  by  coupling  the  energy,  momentum,
and  mass  equations  for  CO2  hydrate  mixture  in  a  tube  specified  that
during flow even under high operational velocity, pressure drop can be
linearly increased whereas CO2  hydrate particles were found to settle
down [350]. Due to simultaneous effects of variables such as hydrate
deposition  onto  the  surface,  forces  (lift,  gravity,  drag,  and  adhesion),
molecular  diffusion,  particle-boundary  hydrodynamic,  and  colloidal
interactions,  slurry  flow  in  pipes  would  be  an  extremely  complicated
process.  In  addition,  the  adhesive  distance cannot be  calculated  from
theoretical considerations. In this regard, CFD models to simulate the
behaviours of hydrate particle motion and dissipation in flowlines were
proposed  [351,352].  Also,  to  study  the  hydrate  aggregation,  the
CFD-DEM coupling method based on CFD and discrete element method
(DEM) using Fluent and EDEM software was performed [353]. In the
interest of better insight into the process of hydrate slurry as a Bingham
fluid,  numerical  simulation  of  slurry  dynamics  can  be  suitably  incor-
porated  into  the  dynamic  multiphase  flow  simulator  named  OLGA.
Although it is unable to precisely reproduce the dependency of hydrate
viscosity in slurry flow and spatial distribution or mobility of particles,
by  coupling  the  semi-empirical  population  balance  model  (PBM)  and
CFD, such rheological patterns can be simulated [354]. CFD-modelling
investigations  of  CO2  hydrate  slurry  for  optimizing  HBCU  aims  e.g.
cooling systems as well as food industries would also be worthwhile. To
analyse the degree of concentration of orange and apple juices inside a
bubble column with the utilization of CO2 gas hydrate technology, CFD
calculations using Ansys software indicated that the juice concentration
process  by  more  mixing  the  gas  and  liquid  phases  can  be  markedly
accelerated once a bubble column is used [285].

3.13. Summary of the section

The CO2  hydrate growth rate is the critical objective of developing
the HBCC&U technologies. In this context, controlling kinetic mecha-
nisms, reactor types, and formation methods are found to be the main

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102620

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

contributors  whereas  evaluating  the  quantification  of  growth  rate  as
well  as  model  development  can  help  to  establish  their  approaches.
Moreover,  to  identify  the  improvements  and  limitations  of  HBCC&U
technologies,  evaluating  the  efficiency,  energy,  and  costs  of  these
methods would be particularly favourable. The critical performances of
HBCC&U  technologies  are  also  specified  in  Table  S5  of  SM.  Since
emerging  renewable  and  sustainable  technologies  have  created  a
competitive  circumstance,  before  being  industrialized,  hydrate-based
capturing (C), sequestration (S), or utilization (U) approaches (HBCC/
S/U)  must  primarily  answer  to  different  challenges.  Table  S6  of  SM
presents  the  sum  of  the  main  issues  associated  with  HBCC/S/U
technologies.

stochastic processes can be described by the probability function to the
theoretical  probability  distribution  function  which  is  fitted  with  the
induction time data for hydrates [359,360]. In the case of gas storage as
well as gas separation, lower induction time would be desirable but the
issues  associated  with  the  kinetics  of  hydrate  formation  hinder  the
developing  potential  of  hydrate-based  approaches  [361].  History  of
water, supercooling, and the interfacial area are also affecting variables
of the hydrate growth. Evidence suggests the impacts of additives are
dependent on gas species [362]. Worth noting that reaching constant
pressure for gas mixture systems cannot be independently considered as
a sign of thermodynamic equilibrium, and at the final pressure, further
changes in the composition of various phases occur [114].

4. The impacts of promoters on CO2  hydrates

4.2. The role of promoters on CO2  hydrates

Despite the benefits of HBCC technology namely the ease of recycling
aqueous  phase  and  low  energy  consumption  for  hydrate  dissociation
[355],  there are  several associated  limitations such as high induction
time  and  relatively  high  pressure  operating  conditions.  Therefore,  to
address the restrictions, the solutions should be both cost-effective and
technically efficient. In this regard, focusing on energy efficiency and
techno-economic  analyses,  process  simulation,  and  optimization  has
been encouraged. To empower the current technology for commercial
applications,  rapid  nucleation  coupled  with  proper  crystallization  ki-
netics at convenient thermodynamic conditions are mainly demanded.
To this end, understanding the mechanism of hydrate growth with the
utilization  of  thermodynamic  and  kinetic  promoters  at  macroscopic,
mesoscopic, and microscopic levels would be the fundamental objective
[356]. In this context, although, the impacts of some promoters on the
HBCC performance parameters of CO2 hydrate systems were previously
analysed  [357,358],  more and  different effects  of  single  and  synergic
thermodynamic and kinetic promoters on pure and mixed CO2 hydrates
are still needed to be overviewed. This section considers the effects of all
aforesaid CO2 hydrate systems uncovered from experiential exploration.

4.1. HBCC performance parameters

The efficiency of hydrate-based CO2 separation is often described by
five specific parameters: hydrate equilibrium pressure, hydrate induc-
tion time, gas consumption (G.C.) or Gas uptake, split fraction (S.Fr.), or
CO2  recovery  and  separation  factor  (S.F.)  as  formulated  in  equations
below:

G.C. =

S.Fr. =

nH
G
nW

nH
CO2
nF
CO2

S.F. =

nH
CO2 × nG
G2
nG
CO2 × nH
G2

(1)

(2)

(3)

The G.C. is the number of moles of gas in the hydrate phase (nH

G) over
the  number  of  moles  of  water  in  the  solution  (nW);  nF
CO2  denotes  the
number of moles of CO2 in the feed; nH
G2, nG
CO2  represent the
molar  numbers  of  other  gas  and  CO2  in  the  hydrate  and  gas  phases,
respectively.

CO2  and nG

G2, nH

The hydrate formation starts with dissolving gas in liquid followed
by a supersaturation stage before the formation of critical hydrate nuclei
in the course of the induction time. The next stage is the formation of
hydrate  nuclei  greater  than  the  critical  radii.  The  mass  and  energy
barriers at the interface of gas-liquid to form hydrate nuclei manage the
nucleation process. Indeed, the induction time is called the period be-
tween the times when the system pressure is increased or temperature is
lowered to the equilibrium T–P condition at the time of hydrate nucle-
ation [57]. Based on classical nucleation theory (CNT), the behaviour of

The major impediment to hydrate-based methods is the sluggish rate
of hydrate formation, which originates from the nature of hydrate in-
duction time. Also, the pressure of the system plays a crucial role in the
separation efficiency and the formation rate [363]. Problems plaguing
the development of these processes are influenced by operating condi-
tions,  formation  pathways,  guest  molecule  size,  and  formed  hydrate
structure. Constant interaction between gas and water is also extremely
vital for incessant hydrate formation. In this context, the solution would
be  the  mechanical  and  chemical  base.  Mixing  mechanisms  e.g.  gas
bubbling [364], spraying liquid by a nozzle [365], electrostatic spraying
[366], ultrasonic waves [367], stirring and agitating mechanisms [368])
can  help  to  break  mass  transfer  resistance  by  increasing  guest-host
contacts, dispersing the gas into water, and continuous regeneration of
water  and  gas  at  the  interface,  so  as  to  guest  molecules  get  rapidly
absorbed  into  the  water  cavities.  In  the  bubble  method,  due  to  the
buoyancy force, produced bubbles rise up and burst in the liquid phase
which  brings  about  higher  supersaturation.  Indeed,  bubbles  provide
higher gas solubility in liquid through the more specific surface area as
well as internal pressure [369]. Besides, the effects of configurations of
different impellers on kinetic analysis of CO2 hydrate formation showed
that Rushton turbine compared with other types possesses higher per-
formance for interaction between liquid and gas in radial flow [370].
Employing  water  spraying  in  the  gas  phase  and  water  and  liquid  hy-
drocarbon jets  impinging to enhance the  contact area have also been
favourably utilized [371]. Implementing these methods can reduce the
mass transfer resistance once the rate of dissolution by facilitating the
contact area is increased.

The  chemical  alternative  to  upgrading  the  HBCC  performance  pa-
rameters as well as hydrate-based utilization techniques is the addition
of promotion components which have been subdivided into kinetic hy-
drate promoters (KHPs) and thermodynamic hydrate promoters (THPs).
The former type mostly boosts gas consumption, rate of formation, and
induction  time  whereas  the  latter  induces  the  equilibrium  condition.
However, the utilization of both types can affect the split fraction as well
as the separation factor. To date, plenty of additives have been identi-
fied, with the addition of which, CO2 forms different hydrate structures
at various kinetics and phase equilibrium conditions [51]. The structural
transition or coexistence between sI, sII, sH clathrate, and semiclathrate
hydrates may also occur which is related to both equilibrium conditions
and hydrate formers. The utilization of thermodynamic models can aid
to determine the hydrate phase equilibrium and structure of different
guest  molecules  [372–375].  Fig.  19  displays  the  list  of  additive  pro-
moters which play a critical role in changing the properties of gas hy-
drates  in  the  interest  of  hydrate-based  capture,  sequestration,  and
utilization aims. Bearing in mind that the efficiency for each application
of gas hydrates relies on the quantity of water transformed to hydrate
and the kinetics of the hydrate formation.

4.2.1. CO2  hydrates in the presence of a single promoter

To achieve more efficient separation with less energy consumption,
as is exhibited in Fig. 19, the behaviour of a wide variety of additives

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102621

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 19. the role of additives in the HBCC/S/U processes. (THI: thermodynamic hydrate inhibitor; KHI: kinetic hydrate inhibitor; THP: thermodynamic hydrate
promoter; KHP: kinetic hydrate promoter).

ranging from large molecular guest substances (LMGSs), semiclathrate,
kinetics,  nanoparticles,  and  nanotubes  on  pure  and  mixed  hydrates
including CO2  has been experimentally examined. Empirical evidence
showed that using dry water (silica-stabilized free-flowing powder) and
without any mixing, gas uptake with the capacity of 175 v/v in 160 min
can  be  reached.  This  is  quite  close  to  the  180  v/v  at  STP (sI  hydrate

maximum  capacity)  if  CH4  molecules  occupy  all  the  small  and  large
cages  one  by  one  [376].  Researchers  have  certified  that  kinetic  pro-
moters  such  as  activated  carbon  [377],  synthetic  surfactants  [378],
carbon  nanotubes  [379],  glass  beads  and  porous  silica  [380],  nano-
particles [381],  and sand grains [382] through enhancing surface  ac-
tivity  can  improve  the  gas  molecules  to  resolve  or  disperse  in  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102622

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

solution. For instance, lowering the surface tensions of the solution af-
fects the wetting, spreadability, and detergency in the system. Among
the three major types of surfactants (anionic, cationic, and non-ionic),
anionic surfactants are the most effective in enhancing the rate of hy-
drate formation and/or reducing the induction time [383]. Between the
surfactants, the influence of non-ionic was found to be lesser, whereas,
the cationic at low and high concentrations may show behaviour exactly
opposite  to  that  of  the  anionic  [384].  Experiments  revealed  that
non-ionic surfactant promoters are found to be better than the cationic
ones [385]. A higher degree of rate improvement in stirred and unstirred
configurations was observed by anionic surfactants. Under similar for-
mation  conditions,  amongst  the  analysed  surfactants,  those  having
longer carbon chain lengths were found to be required in substantially
lower concentrations to show a similar promotion effect of SDS [386].
The enhancing liquid-gas contact is the dominant mechanism of SDS as
the surfactant promotes gas crystallization. The emergence of micelles in
the  liquid  phase  for  SDS  concentration  over  the  critical  micelle  con-
centration through dissolving guest molecules in the microdomains of
SDS micelles (known as the domain mechanism) increases the solubility
and removes gas diffusion hindrance into the liquid phase [387]. Con-
centrations higher  than 4–5  ppm SDS  can change  hydrate film  at the
liquid-gas  interface  to  hydrate  layers  on  the  reactor  sidewall  along
which  the hydrate layers then grow and the  capillary force sucks the
reaction solution to the hydrate surface to maintain liquid-gas contact
continuously.  The  critical  micellar  concentration  (CMC)  for  SDS  was
determined to be about 2350 ppm so that the higher concentrations can
be chosen to investigate the effect of micellization on the formation of
CO2 hydrate [155]. CMC with increasing the molecular size of surfactant
is decreased. For example, the CMC of SC10S, SC14S, and SC18S is 8600,
665, and 86 ppm, respectively, [388]. The SDS can also alter the hydrate
morphology through adsorbing onto the bubble surfaces leading to the
hydrate formation in the form of heterogeneous structures [389]. The
ion environment, carbon-chain, and headgroup of the surfactant struc-
ture as well as hydrate surface property play a crucial role in the sur-
factant  adsorption  [390].  This  produces  a  proper  wettability  on  the
reactor sidewall which may cause upward hydrate growth toward hy-
drate propagation [391]. Although most conventional surfactants from
environmental aspects are not acceptable, the use of bio-surfactants (e.g.
amino acids) possesses favourable characteristics such as better stability,
lower  cost,  less  toxicity,  and  biologically  degradable.  Generally
speaking,  amino acids comprise  amine groups, carboxylic acid, and a
side chain, ranging from a polar alkyl chain (hydrophobic) to a negative
or positive charge moiety (hydrophilic) with their physical and chemical
properties  vigorously  depending  on  the  particular  side  chain.  The
dual-functional behaviour of amino acids and their role in CO2 capture
and sequestration have already been reviewed [392]. The first research
which denoted the capability of natural amino acids (leucines) in pro-
moting CH4  hydrate at low concentrations (up to 1 wt%) amino acids
was  reported  in  2015  [393].  Compared  to  hydrophilic  amino  acids,
hydrophobic ones show stronger flue gas hydrate promotion capability
[394]. In this regard, hydrophobic amino acids e.g. L-valine, L methio-
nine, L-histidine, and L-arginine (3000 ppm concentrations) have near
similar promotion capabilities as SDS on flue gas [395]. These compo-
nents  depending  on  their  physical  and  chemical  properties  have  also
shown a large CO2  gas storage potential in the form of hydrates, even
under a non-stirred configuration [396]. Recent experiments exhibited
that 78% water conversion, an average CO2  uptake of 114 v/v, and a
significant decline of induction time with the utilization of only 300 ppm
l-tryptophan can be attained [397]. It was also clarified that a higher
increase  of  L-tryptophan  concentration  cannot  result  in  significant
additional  improvement.  Since  strong  polar  ionic  promoters  quickly
form dense hydrate layers, this phenomenon at the liquid-gas interface
hinders the gas diffusion from the gas phase to the bulk solution [398];
hence, polarity plays a critical role. It seems that most polar amino acids
such as serine, threonine, phenylalanine, and glutamine are generally
kinetic  hydrate  inhibitors  (KHIs)  [399].  Also,  the  gas  uptake  in  the

presence of weakly polar or non-polar promoters is dependent on the
dissolution  characteristics  between  the  different  components  in  the
system [398]. For a non-polar promoter or weak polar, the gas uptake
depends  on  the  dissolution  characteristics  among  the  different  sub-
stances in the system. Lower mutual solubility among the components
results in higher independence in which with small interactions, each
phase  has  an  equal  chance  to  fill  the  hydrate  cavities,  leading  to  a
the  exothermic  and
relatively  high  gas  uptake.  Regarding
thermal-inhibition properties of gas hydrate formation, researchers have
suggested the use of nanofluids (such as nano Al2O3, Ag, Cu, and so on)
with high thermal conductivity to promote gas hydrate formation. These
tiny particles by improving heat and mass transfers, providing numerous
hydrate  nucleation  sites,  decreasing  the  wetting  angle  and  interfacial
tension  of  the  hydrates  can  dramatically  decline  the  induction  time
along  with  upgrade  the  gas  consumption  [400].  Although  the  larger
particle  sizes  of  activated  carbon  (AC)  can  promote  the  CO2  hydrate
formation with shorter induction time, the synergistic of AC and SDS
compared  to  AC  can  increase  the  gas  uptake  more  effectively  [401].
Thermodynamic promoters depending on the gas species, by changing
the equilibrium pressure of hydrate formation to lower stability condi-
tions also play a crucial role. An experimental equilibrium study of pure/
binary  of  CO2  and  SF6  proved  the  promotion  potential  of  SF6  as  dis-
played in Fig. 20 [402]. This binary can be advantageous for the CO2
sequestration aim.

Some booster additives such as TBAB [192] and THF [403] act as
bifunctional promoters which intensely improve both thermodynamic
and kinetics of gas hydrates. Also, additives as a function of different
concentrations  mainly  show  dissimilar  behaviours.  The  impacts  of  a
single promoter on CO2 hydrates are recapitulated in Table S7 of SM.

4.2.2. CO2  hydrates in the presence of synergic promoters

Despite some positive impacts of single promoters, more improve-
ments in all aspects of performance parameters should be fulfilled. Be-
sides,  the  HBCC  separation  factor  could  not  be  evaluated  through
experiments  in  the  previous  section.  Hence,  to  find  a  proper  energy-
saving and time-efficient path, investigations on the synergic influence
of additives like those in the preceding part which have proved them-
selves  as  effective  promoters  would  be  beneficial.  In  this  regard,  the
coupled  promoters  can  be  classified  into  three  kinds:  KHP+THP,
THP+THP, and KHP+KHP. The combined promoters namely SDS (0.01
mole%) + THF (5.6 mole%) or SDS (0.01 mole%) + TBAB (0.1 mole%)
which could be options for the HBGS field, were found to show proper
results with around 10 mole% extra water conversion compared to the
existence of single THF, doubled the initial rate of hydrate formation for
single SDS and significantly increases the CO2 uptake [404]. Previously,
the synergic CP+THF impact occurring in promoted CO2  hydrate was
analysed. THF and CP are five-sided cyclic ether and five-sided cyclo--
alkane which show full and little miscibility in water, respectively. In
addition, THF and CP are the most efficient pressure reduction additives
but from a kinetics point of view, nucleation in THF often occurs rapidly.
Researchers revealed that although CP+CO2  equilibrium hydrate data
has  less  formation  pressure  conditions  than  THF+CO2  hydrate,  the
simultaneous utilization of CP (0.05 mole%)+THF (0.05 mole%) pro-
vides 20% enhanced thermodynamic promotion in comparison with CP
at similar temperatures [405]. Although CH4  hydrate is the same mo-
lecular structure (sI) as CO2 hydrate, the capillary phenomenon does not
occur during the CO2 hydrate formation with the use of SDS as it does for
CH4 hydrate [388,406]. For such cases, researchers have suggested the
inclusion of alongside materials, such as THF, porous silica, activated
carbon,  and  metal  nanoparticles,  to  promote  CO2  hydrate  formation
which  would  be  highly  effective  [407].  The  combinations  of  nano-
particles and surfactants have greater impacts on accelerating the hy-
drate formation process than in the case of employing them separately
[408]. Under such circumstances, the obstacle to applying nanoparticles
in  the  industry  is  the  difficulty  of  their  separation  for  reusing  them.
However, the magnetic field for the retrieval of magnetic nanoparticles

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102623

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 20. Phase equilibrium data of pure/binary CO2  and SF6  hydrates [402].

such as Fe3O4  would be a solution. The combination of nano CuO and
SDS was reported to complete hydrate formation within 40 min with a
storage capacity of over 170 v/v [409]. The induction time of hydrate
formation can also be reduced once synthesized copper nanofluids plus
CTAB  is  included  in  the  solution  [410].  Non-metal  nanoparticles  and
nanofluids e.g. silica, activated carbon, carbon nanotube, and graphene
oxide have also recently been introduced as impressive hydrate forma-
tion promoters which provide a large liquid-solid interface where the
hydrate  can  readily  nucleate;  They  can  also  serve  high  heat  transfer
efficiency [411]. Therefore, the coupling of the above-mentioned addi-
tives to elevate the efficiency of performance parameters would be the
desirable alternative. However, the combination of promoters may not
always  be  effective.  A  good  example  of  this  is  the  R-134a+CO2+SDS
hydrate in which although the presence of 2-8 mole% R-134a and SDS,
respectively, decline the CO2  hydrate equilibrium pressure and the in-
duction time by several times, the addition of SDS to CO2+R-134a hy-
drate unexpectedly does not affect the induction time [412]. To show
the more effectiveness of coupled promoters, Table S8 of SM summarizes
the impacts of synergic promoters on CO2 hydrates.

4.2.3. Mixed gas hydrates including CO2  in the presence of a single
promoter

Single promoters can manifest their separation performances when
they are employed to come in contact with the mixture of gas hydrates.
Investigations of these systems can help to determine the key control-
lers. Explorations indicate that in the existence of 0.29 mole% TBAB, the
CO2+H2 hydrate formation from the gas mixture can be instantaneously
accelerated by shortening the induction time to less than a second [413].
The comparison of gas uptake in the CO2+CH4+THF system at ΔP =2.5
and 4.0 MPa displayed that hydrate growth was improved as the driving
force was increased whereas CO2 recovery was halved. This implies the
hydrate phase traps more CH4 molecules with growing the driving force
[157].  The  induction  time  of  CO2+N2+DMB  sI  or  sH  hydrate  with
various  CO2:N2  compositions  showed  that  as  the  CO2  concentration
grows, the induction time declines. Also, the total gas uptake of sH hy-
drate  is  slightly  better  performance  than that  of  corresponding  sI  hy-
drate.  Although  the  differences  in  sI  and  sH  induction  times  are  not
substantial, the sH exhibits shorter induction times than sI once the CO2
concentration in the feed is reduced [414]. Generally, a longer induction
time causes higher gas uptake. However, large variations in the amount
of  that  mostly  originate  from  the  stochastic  nature  which  appears  to
markedly influence the induction time. For both sI and sH hydrates, the
S.F. parameter reduces sharply as the N2 concentration increases; also,
in terms of CO2 capture at CO2 compositions of more than 50%, the S.F.
in  the  sH  shows  gives  higher  performance  than  sI  [414].  Recently,

exploring the effect of normal liquid (NL) and pre-cooling liquid (PL) on
H2+CO2+CP hydrate  demonstrated that CO2  recovery  of hydrate  for-
mation  in  NL  and  PL  systems  can  be  81.8%  and  89.4%,  respectively.
Although less H2 molecules can be enclathrated in the PL hydrate system
and higher CO2 concentration in the residual gas phase. The gas-liquid
ratios (GLR) would also be determinative in either S.F. or S.Fr. param-
eters. Different CP concentrations  in the H2+CO2+CP hydrate system
indicated that by the addition of 23.4 vol% and GLR=5/6, the 98.8%
CO2  recovery  value  from  IGCC  syngas  by  just  a  single  stage  hydrate
formation  can  be  obtained.  Meanwhile,  X-ray  diffraction  and  Raman
spectroscopy detected the presence of some H2 molecules trapped in the
hydrate phase. In the other case, the use of 3.0 vol% and the same GLR
brought about the 90.9% CO2 recovery with no captured H2 molecules.
Thereby, the last case plus the PL method would be the optimum sce-
nario  for  the  current  system  through  just  a  single  HBCC  stage  [415].
Cage analysis of CO2+H2+CP and CH4+THF hydrates highlighted that
in the presence of CP (C5H10) with a molecular diameter of 6.7 Å [416],
CO2 molecules occupy both the large and small cages whereas the same
result was not obtained for the THF (C4H8O) with the molecular diam-
eter of 6.3 Å [417] which only offers small cavities for the CH4 molecules
[398].  Therefore,  the  real  mechanism  and  behaviour  of  promoters
affecting the gas uptake as well as selectivity are not as straightforward
as it seems. Since the behaviour of promoters in the existence of mixed
gas hydrates compared to pure CO2  is not the same, conducting such
experimental analysis can elucidate their potential. To understand the
influence of these hydrate systems, Table S9 of SM tabulates the impacts
of a single promoter on the mixed gas hydrates including CO2.

4.2.4. Mixed gas hydrates including CO2  in the presence of synergic
promoters

To overcome the HBCC barriers which are associated with the sys-
tems  of  previous  sections,  the  effectiveness  of  coupled  additives  on
mixed  CO2  hydrates  needs  to  be  analysed.  Such  combinations  have
shown a higher capability relative to using standalone. For example, gas
uptake for H2+CO2 hydrate in the presence of CP, TBAB, and CP+TBAB
at  275  K  and  4  MPa  were  determined  0.03,  0.13,  and  0.22  mole,
respectively,  [413]. Also,  compared to  the  utilization  of  CP  or  TBAB,
their mixture can reduce the induction time of either fresh or memory
solution by at least 10 times. In the other case, the synergy of TMS and
TBAB  declines  the  formation  pressure  of  biogas  (CO2+CH4+H2S)  hy-
drate  by  closely  80%  and  changed  the  induction  time  to  less  than  a
minute. Plus, the gas storage capability and gas consumed rate of 2 times
higher  than  TBAB  can  be  obtained  [418].  An  experimental  analysis
recently  revealed  that the combination  of cyclooctane  (as  sH  hydrate
former) and L-tryptophan amino acid can enhance the water conversion

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102624

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

and  gas  uptake  of  CO2+CH4  hydrate  by  roughly  210%  and  172%,
respectively. Also, the induction time can be dropped down close to zero
which  denotes the power of combining promoters  [419]. Researchers
have  reported  that  the  addition  of  SDS  to  CH4+CO2+TBAB  hydrate
system can reduce the time required to reach 90% of the total gas con-
sumption (t90) and induction time by 25%. However, the CO2  separa-
tion  factor  corresponding  to  the  presence  and  absence  of  SDS  were
determined around 15.3 and 36.4, respectively. This may be attributed
to  the  fact  that  hydrate  cages  trapped  more  CH4  molecules  with  the
addition of SDS which implies that the coupled promoters may not al-
ways  be  effective.  Applying  mixed  promoters  would  also  change  the
final structure of the formed hydrate. For instance, the PXRD patterns for
the CP+TBAB+H2+CO2  identified two coexistence structures of semi-
clathrate and sII clathrate hydrate [420]. To clarify further impacts of
such  hydrate  systems,  Table  S10  of  SM  reports  the  experimental
outcomes.

4.2.5.

. CO2  hydrates in the porous media

The  porous  media  like  (clay,  zeolite,  silica,  quartz  sand)  exhibits
various characteristics which significantly impress the hydrate forma-
tion  mechanism.  The  main  factors  affecting  the  kinetics  and  thermo-
dynamics of hydrate formation by using a porous medium are particle
size, bed height, water saturation, permeability, and Porosity [421]. The
effects of pore and particle size on the process of CO2 hydrate formation
have  been  discussed  elsewhere  [422].  Depending  on  the  amount  of
water content, liquid distribution within the bed exhibits diverse con-
figurations  which  determine  the  gas  flow  and  liquid-gas  interaction.
Moreover, sufficient  bed saturation results in efficient hydrate  forma-
tion.  Usually,  a  larger  surface  area  of  media  leads  to  higher  gas  con-
sumption and hydrate formation. However, the main difficulty of using
porous medium is the separation of porous medium from hydrate. In this
regard,  many  experiments  have  precisely  evaluated  the  CO2  hydrate
systems surrounded by porous media or in the sediments. It was proved
that liquid CO2 in the porous media can spontaneously be converted to
hydrate  but mass transfer  limitation  of  CO2  sequestration at  the field
scale  plays  a  significant  role.  The  Joule-Thomson  effect  of  the  water
zone in the near area of the well and the sealing mechanism near the gas
hydrate stability zone (GHSZ) are some of the flow hindrances of liquid
CO2  sequestration in the reservoirs. Also, applying emulsion of CO2  in
the  porous  media  is  more  favoured  than  liquid  CO2  for  CO2/CH4
replacement.  Free  water  in  the  pores  of  sediments  also  affects  the
replacement rate in which after 120 h, about 80% of the formation water
originally in the reservoir can form CO2 hydrate [423]. On this subject,
pore-filling  of  CO2  hydrate  at  different  saturations  of  water  was
acknowledged. Besides that, replacement efficiency conspicuously de-
pends  on  the  temperature  and  the  rate  of  CO2  injection  whereas  gas
mobility plays a major role in the process of CO2/CH4 hydrate conver-
sion. However, the concentration of brine water can delay the growth of
CO2  hydrate in sediments [424]. Apart from that, to upgrade the effi-
ciency  of  HBGS  processes,  new  approaches  to  improve  the  liquid-gas
contact such as the use of fixed bed reactors with porous medium, flu-
idized bed, and slurry bubble columns in recent years have been sug-
gested [425,426]. The most proportion of investigations on gas hydrates
in the porous environment e.g. aluminum foam [427], metallic packing
[428], silica gel [429], polyurethane foam [430], glass beads [431] has
been focused on kinetics as well as the storage capacity of gas hydrates.
The higher gas uptake and enrichment of CO2  in the fixed bed reactor
with  silica gel  compared to  the  stirred  tank  reactor  are  the  other  ad-
vantages of employing porous media which corresponds to the particle
size distribution and pore size [432]. Evidence suggests the rate of hy-
drate  formation  would  be  directly  proportional  to  the  driving  force
which can be affected by pore sizes in the porous medium environment
[433]. For example, the impact of the driving force on gas consumption
and  hydrate  formation rate  was more significant in  silica sand rather
than in silica gel beds. Also, silica gel particles with 100 nm provide a
higher water conversion rather than smaller particles [425]. The surface

of silica gel can act as a promoter in destroying the interfacial tension of
water [434]. Although, emerging CO2 capture technologies is dependent
on being able to consistently and reliably grow CO2  hydrate in packed
media, kinetic data for CO2 hydrates at this length scale are not plenty.
In  this  context,  conversion  and  propagation  rates  of  CO2  hydrate
through the microchannel were determined to be over 47% within 1 h
and 1000 mm/s which is approximately 5 times quicker than CH4  hy-
drates. This may be due to less enthalpy of crystallization for CO2  hy-
drate compared to CH4 [435]. The combination of porous environment
and promoters can also be profitable. For example, CO2+N2 hydrate in
the presence of coupled TBAB+THF+glass beads showed a large CO2
separation factor caused by little N2 enclathrated in hydrate cages [436].
The more pore size for the hydrate-based CO2+H2 gas separation in the
existence of THF+SDS+soda glass gives rise to the higher CO2 diffusion
and gas consumption [437]. To elucidate the influences of porous media
on  CO2  hydrates,  Table  S11  of  SM  summarizes  the  experimental out-
comes of such systems.

4.3. Summary of the section

The proportions of pure and mixed gas hydrates including CO2 in the
presence  of  single  or  synergic  promoters  studied  in  the  literature  are
presented in Fig. 21. As is shown, the largest percentage of experiments
has been focused on CO2+single promoters. The experimental analysis
of the mixed gas hydrates with the utilization of synergic promoters and
porous media needs to be further investigated.

Table S12 of SM also exhibits the classifications of empirical explo-
ration that have been carried out to realize the effects of different pro-
moters on pure and mixed CO2 hydrates. As shown, more analysis for the
synergic  promoters  + mixed  gas  hydrate  systems  should  be  imple-
mented. More importantly, since cyclodextrins as nucleation promoters
for accelerating hydrate formation have recently been introduced [438],
investigations  on  such  eco-friendly  or  green  promoters  could  be  the
priority in future research. Since comparing the effects of promoters on
CO2  hydrate may be beneficial, Table S13 of SM summarizes the per-
formance parameters  of the aforesaid systems. Also, the influences of
promoters on CO2  hydrate in terms of induction time, thermodynamic
improvement, and gas uptake is exhibited in Fig. 22. It is worth high-
lighting that to store CO2 in the hydrate phase, a theoretical sI hydrate
capacity  (CO2⋅5.75H2O)  can  be  up  to  425  mg/g  (174  mmoleCO2/
moleH2O) [439].

Kinetic performances of different promoters on mixed CO2+CH4/N2/
H2  hydrates are tabulated in Table S14 of SM. Based on these experi-
ments it can be concluded that the variables such as optimum concen-
tration  of  promoters  as  well  as  P-T  conditions,  the  driving  force
(subcooling), gas to liquid ratio (GLR), and fresh or memory condition of
the  sample  have  the  most  important  influences  on  the  performance
parameters of HBCC. With reference to Tables S13 and S14 of SM, the
maximum  enhancement  of  THP,  KHP,  and  THP+KHP  in  comparison
with the absence of these components is shown in Fig. 23.

5. Molecular dynamics simulations of gas hydrates

As  a  computational  framework  in  the  fields  of  science  and  engi-
neering, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have received attention
due to  their power in calculating  the details of  motions of  individual
molecules or atoms and relating these to equilibrium and kinetic prop-
erties  of  bulk  phases.  MD  simulations  at  the  molecular  scale  aid  to
achieve  knowledge  concerning  the  dynamical  as  well  as  structural
properties of components in either simple or mixture of gases and liq-
uids. In classical MD, the laws of mechanics are applied to predict the
equation of motions and energies of molecules under various thermo-
dynamic conditions. In molecular systems, the velocities and positions
are dependent on the chemical structure, pressure, and temperature of
the  simulated  system.  The  atomic  interactions  are  usually  described
using  empirical  interatomic  potentials,  which  include  a  short-range

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102625

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 21. Proportions of experimental investigations of pure and mixed gas hydrates including CO2  in the presence of single or synergic promoters.

Fig. 22. The most improvements of different THP, KHP, and THP+KHP types on pure CO2  hydrates.

repulsive/attractive force and a long-range Coulombic force. Ordinarily,
molecular dynamics can be conducted in two approaches. In the non-
equilibrium mode, the system is stimulated away from the equilibrium
and the system response is followed whereas, the macroscopic property
of interest in the equilibrium model is calculated from the time average
of that property during the simulation. The common applications of MD
are either to predict the properties of materials or provide explanations
by  determining  the  mechanisms  involved.  Understanding  different

specifications  of  clathrate  hydrate  phenomena  can  assist  the  applica-
tions  of  gas  hydrates  [440],  more  specifically  those  which  were  dis-
cussed  in  previous  sections.  To  provide  unique  insights  into  the
characteristics  of  hydrate  phenomena  at  an  exceedingly  small  time/-
length scales, atomistic simulators have been successfully applied. Pre-
viously,  exploration  of  hydrate  properties/  phenomena  e.g.
thermodynamics, nucleation, dissociation, energy storage, memory ef-
fect,  electromagnetic  and  external  electric  fields  using  molecular

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102626

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 23. Maximum improvments of THP, KHP and THP+KHP on performance parameters of mixed CO2  hydrates. (The ideal scenario could be: growth rate: 100
(mmole/ mole.min), gas uptake: 174 (mmoleCO2/moleH2O), IT: 0 min, S.F.: 250 for e.g. CO2(40%)+CH4(60%), and S.Fr.: 1).

simulations  were  reviewed  [441,442].  MD  findings  in  the  area  of
geological CO2  storage and sedimentary sites with the aim of environ-
mental  as  well  as  mechanical/  structural  analysis  such  as  swelling
properties, contact angle, interfacial tension, and sorption/diffusion of
gases  were  also  overviewed  elsewhere  [57,445–447].  Based  on  MD
simulations, it was shown that within brine aquifers, the intercalation of
CO2 in minerals can cause considerable changes in the spacing between
the  mineral  layers  and  modify  the  wetting  characteristics  of  the  clay
surfaces [443]. Also, formed hydrate inside the water layers nearest to
the  hematite  surface  is  unlike  the  liquid  water  which  would  be  ther-
modynamically  favoured  to  adsorb  on  hematite  as  it  possesses  lower
chemical potential [444].

Various  aspects  of  gas  hydrates  through  different  molecular-
simulation approaches e.g. potential models, classical MD, Free-energy
methods, MD simulation timescales, massively parallel MD, and ab ini-
tio calculations can be evaluated. Most investigations of MD simulations
in the scope of clathrate hydrates have been performed based on clas-
sical MD, DFT, ab initio calculations, and Monte Carlo simulations. It is
conceivable that the results of these studies can be worthwhile for either
HBCC/ HBGS or other applications of gas hydrates [448]. To elucidate
the CO2 hydrates phenomena/ properties in more detail, the following
Sections come up with a summary of MD approaches to analyse the CO2
hydrates.

Fig. 24. CH4/CO2+N2  replacement mechanism in naturally occurring hydrates.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102627

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

5.1. CO2/CH4  gas exchange phenomena

MD simulations revealed that the process of replacement can occur
by either a transient co-occupation of CO2 and CH4 in one cavity or via
direct swapping without a breakup of cages [449]. Fig. 24 presents the
schematic  of  the  CH4/CO2+N2  replacement  mechanism  in  naturally
occurring hydrates.

With reference to the MD results, it was found that the assumption of
vdWP theory which ignores the guest-guest interactions can contribute
to some deviation in predicting the Helmholtz free energy and subse-
quently hydrate equilibrium conditions. Also, the mass transfer, memory
effect, and chemical potential of guest molecules are the main control-
lers of CO2/CH4  replacement phenomena which represent the dissolu-
tion of CO2 molecules in the water phase and partial melting of hydrate
surface without structural change [450]. This phenomenon occurs first
in small cages, followed by partial collapse of hydrate in large cages at
the water-hydrate interface and entering CO2  molecules into the cages
[79].  It  is  worth  highlighting  that  a  significant  feature  during  the
replacement at the macro level is the free water [451,452]. Interfacial
properties  of  brine  water  and  CO2+CH4  mixture  showed  that  the
interfacial tension (IFT) of CH4+brine aqueous system in the existence
of CO2 decreases but consistent with experimental evidence, the degree
of decline is directly dependent on the CO2  concentration [453]. The
properties of spherical nanoclusters of CO2/CH4 hydrates and the effects
of surrounded water/gas/porous environment can also be analysed by
MD  [454,455].  Recent  MD  research  manifested  that  CO2+CH4  mole-
cules  in  the  existence  of  THF+DMSO  can  diffuse  into  the  hydrate
structure more easily which brings about a greater amount of enclath-
rated gas molecules than using a single THF [456]. Also, due to the very
strong  distortion  of  SDS  in  the  interaction  with  CO2,  SDS+CH4  and
SDS+CO2 behaviours consistent with experiments are entirely different
[457]. Probably, to face CO2 with both SDS apolar and polar ends, the
SDS molecule will lose its shape, and with respect to water molecules
will become unable to exert any substantial driving activity [458]. Given
that  to  promote  the  kinetics  and  thermodynamics of  gas  hydrates  for
suggested hydrate-based applications discussed in Section 4, identifying
the  key  controllers  is  particularly  critical.  The  replacement  process
elucidated that gas exchange phenomena take place at small and large
cage types with partially CH4 hydrate collapse, at the surface of which,
the hydrate is partially melted so that the interface becomes active [79].
It was also evidenced that considering the host-host/guest intermolec-
ular interactions, the process of CO2/CH4  replacement can be divided
into 3 steps: the breakup of the cage, scape of CH4, and cage occupation
by CO2 molecules [459]. In addition, the formation of CO2 amorphous
layer forms on the CH4 hydrate surfaces with utilizing MD was detected
as a barrier against mass transfer which leads to a slower replacement
rate [450]. Due to a larger size of CO2 relative to CH4, it has less stability
if  it  occupies  the  small  cages  [460].  During  the  gas  exchange,  CO2
molecules  in  the  mixed  bubble  environed  the  CH4  molecules  which
indicate a significant impact of bubble formation on gas exchange spe-
cifically  at  the  initial  stages  [461].  In  addition,  crystal  growth  of
CH4+CO2 hydrate showed that the concentration of CO2 plays a major
role  in  its  kinetics,  however,  maximizing  CO2  concentration  in  the
aqueous phase cannot give quicker growth [462]. The host and guest
rotational dynamics depicted that changing the proportion of each gust
molecule in mixed CO2+CH4  hydrate results in altering the rotational
motion  of  both  guests  and  water  molecules.  Also,  the  CO2  molecules
have a more rapid relaxation time than CH4 which promotes the motion
of  water  molecules  [463].  MD  simulations  suggest  the  most  stable
structure  can  be  attained  when  the  small  and  large  cages  are  fully
occupied by CH4  and CO2, respectively. Moreover, because of distinct
solubility conditions of CH4  and CO2  in water, the size of bubbles for
each guest molecule would be unique [464]. Also, CH4 hydrate in con-
tact with CO2 gas is more stable than with CO2 solution and nearly 20%
of  the  dissociated  CH4  hydrates  can  be  replaced  by  CO2  [465].  To
evaluate the reaction rate and diffusion control of CO2  hydrate in the

presence of Na2CO3, the AIMD and DFT calculations demonstrated that
the  kinetics  of  the  reaction  at  the  surface  is  not  a  controller  of  the
carbonation reaction of the Na2CO3  and the apparent reaction rate of
K2CO3  in comparison with Na2CO3  is significantly faster [466]. It was
also elucidated that the kinetic rate of CO2+CH4 hydrate dissociation in
the  presence  of  calcite  is  remarkably  lower  than  that  in  the  hydrate
formation
of
CO2+CH4+namontmorillonite clay to study the transport properties of
CH4  and  CO2  hydrates  in  clay,  increasing  CH4  and  CO2  molecules  in
namontmorillonite interlayers may result in a decrease of self-diffusion
coefficients [468].

simulations

[467].

Based

the

on

The role of N2 in the replacement process was discussed in Section 2.
Since N2 guests do not compete directly with CO2 during CH4 substitu-
tion, it may be used as a carrier gas. It was reported that the substitution
of  CH4  in  the  small  cavities  with  N2  has  positive  free  energy  [469].
Indeed, N2 helps CO2 diffuse into both small and large cages of the CH4
hydrate on a broader scale. However, this diffusion is sensitive to the
ratio of CO2 to N2 [449]. In addition, an MD study based on Gibbs free
energy calculations of CO2+ H2S/ SO2 showed that the presence of SO2
and  H2S  at  lower  concentrations  can  also  give  rise  to  better  hydrate
stability and the storage capacity of captured CO2 [470].

5.2. CO2  hydrate nucleation and growth

The main proposed hydrate nucleation molecular mechanisms have
been divided into the local structure hypothesis (LSH) and labile cluster
hypothesis (LCH). In the former, the guest molecules arrange themselves
in a structure and then water molecules rearrange  around the locally
ordered guest molecules whereas the latter describes the formation of
isolated cages followed by agglomerate to form a critical nucleus of the
hydrate. The basis of both, however, are hypotheses and any provided
mechanism cannot fully explain it [471]. In this context, MD suggested a
crystallization  pathway  of  hydrates  of  hydrophobic  guests  as  is  dis-
played in Fig. 25. Based on the findings of researchers, the crystalliza-
tion mechanism of clathrate hydrates is consisting of three steps. The
formation of blobs is the first step in which dilute solution is in equi-
librium  with  solvent-separated  guest  molecules  (the  blue  polygons
represent the half-cages). In the next step, clathrate cages are organized
by the water which leads to the formation of amorphous clathrate. In the
last  step,  the  crystalline  phase  is  formed  by  amorphous  maturation
[472].

In  addition,  the  hydrate  nucleation  and  growth  mechanisms  of
different guest molecules are dissimilar and the aggregation step is an
important controller of hydrate nucleation rate [473]. The CO2 clathrate
growth  using  TIP4P-Ew  and  EPM2  force  fields  to  describe  the  in-
teractions  of  water  and  CO2  molecules  at  260  K  revealed  that  with
increasing the pressure from 3 to 100 MPa, 37% decrease in the rate of
CO2  hydrate growth can be observed. In contrast, the increase in pres-
sure enhances the CH4  hydrate growth rate and unlike CO2, the solu-
bility of CH4  in water entirely depends on pressure [474]. Nucleation
and growth of CH4+CO2  hydrate manifested that the difference in hy-
drophobicity between CO2  and CH4  may influence the nucleation rate
and  stability  of  nanobubbles  in  the  water  phase.  Metastable  cages
(4151062,  4151063,  and  4151064)  during  hydrate  growth  were  also
observed [475]. In addition, during the crystal growth, 51263 cages were
formed  but  changed  into  51262  cavities  as  time  proceeded  [476].  To
identify  the  key  factor  which  governs  the  nucleation  of  CO2  hydrate
under the water freezing point (250 K and 50 MPa) it was acknowledged
that  using  TraPPE  and  TIP4P-Ice  models  for  CO2  and  water,  the
adsorption of CO2 molecules around the hydration shell (HS) is crucial to
stabilize  the  hydrogen  bonds  formed  therein  and  catalyse  the  trans-
formation of HS into the cavity [477]. Additionally, free energy barriers
are strongly dependent on guest size but equilibrium thermodynamics
govern the nucleation process. Also, 4151062  cavities during the nucle-
ation  stage  are  the  most  popular  cavity-type  [478].  Homogeneous
nucleation mechanism of CO2 hydrate at 260 to 273 K through transition

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102628

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Fig. 25. Multi-step blob mechanism of crystallization pathway of clathrate hydrates. (Reprinted from [472] with permission of ACS).

path sampling showed that amorphous structures at low temperature are
predominantly generated with 4151062  cavities but increasing temper-
ature changes them to 51262 so that form the sI crystalline [478]. With
reference to the relationship between hydrate nucleation and dynamical
properties,  the  hydration  shell  of  guest  molecules  can  become  more
ordered with increasing their concentration which leads to a decrease in
entropy and mobility [479]. In addition, the consistency of structural
biased dynamics and the rugged funnel-shaped potential-energy land-
scapes  associated  with  hydrate  nucleation  were  also  confirmed  else-
where [480,481].

5.3. CO2  hydrate stability and dissociation

To  utilize  CO2  hydrates  in  the  industrial  division,  identifying  the
molecular  elements  of  CO2  hydrate  stability  and  dissociation  mecha-
nisms would be substantial [482]. MD simulation results suggested that
to prevent the nucleation phenomenon, destabilizing the formation of
blobs  could  be  a  proper  strategy  [483,484].  Simulations  of  CO2/CH4
hydrates by applying SPC/E, EPM2, or TraPPE potential models for CO2
and  water  demonstrated  that  two-step  hydrate  dissociation  including
the break-up of cavities and escape of guest molecules is valid [485].
Also, hydrate stability is less sensitive to CO2  molecules in small cages
compared to CH4 [486]. Although CH4 hydrate can dissociate somewhat
above the bulk melting temperature, this is not the case for CO2 hydrate
which confirms that at the grain boundaries, the guest types and grain
boundary  structures  (both)  may  affect  the  thermal  stability  of  poly-
crystalline  hydrates  [487].  Decomposition  analysis  of  CO2  and  CH4
hydrates at 180-280 K and 0.1-10 MPa determined that hydrate stability
using  isochoric  conditions  is  lower  than  that  in  isobaric  conditions
[454].  A  faster  layer-by-layer  decomposition  rate  in  the  gas-solid
interface than in the liquid-solid interface during the CO2  decomposi-
tion cab also be observed. In this phenomenon, due to gas aggregation
and mass transfer barrier (e.g. the presence of water film and bubbles),
the dissociation difference can raise from 13% to 53%, however, drops
to  27%  as  the  interface  barriers  become  negligible  [488].  Moreover,
equilibrium and non-equilibrium MD simulations (EMD, NEMD) carried
out  on  the  thermal-driven breakup  of  CO2  hydrate  (at  300  to  320  K)
showed  that  fluctuations  in  the  equilibrium  state  decay  on  average
based on macroscopic laws (known as Onsager’s hypothesis) would be
applicable for an initial period of CO2 hydrate dissociation [489].

5.4. CO2  cage occupancy

The proposed MDs can confirm or complete the findings of most of
the previous experimental observations and theoretical simulations. The
relationship between CO2 occupancy and dissociation rate using TIP4P/
2005 and TraPPE potentials for water and CO2  molecules showed that
identical total occupancy cannot result in the same dissociation behav-
iour  and  the  surrounding  environment  of  crystals  as  well  as  whether
large  or  small  cavities  are  filled  or  empty,  are  the  main  contributors
[490]. The cage analysis for different types of cavities using quantum

calculations (MP2, M05-2X, and DFT-D) revealed that the maximum and
an  optimum  number  of  CO2  molecules  in  all  cavity  types  of  three
structures would be varied between one to even seven molecules [491].
Based on the simulations of CO2  storage in sH hydrate (CO2+LMGS),
although a single CO2 molecule can occupy the small and medium cages,
occupancy of 3 to 5 molecules in large cages would be the most favoured
case [492]. In addition, the rate of CO2 occupation in the small cavities
of sI hydrate at below 1 MPa is insignificant whereas with increasing the
pressure, the rate of CO2 fractional occupancy in large cages gradually
increases [493]. Also, to determine the reference chemical potential and
reference energy of sI CO2  hydrate, intermolecular potentials obtained
by  ab  initio  quantum  mechanical  and  the  VAS  model  estimated  that
fractional occupancy for small and large cavities can be approximately
32%  to  51%  and  98%,  respectively,  [494].  Structural  and  energetic
investigation  of  CO2  hydrate  using  DFT  methodology  illustrated  that
although the  cage  distortions  are  largely isotropic,  a  loss  in  the ideal
symmetry of the empty structure is caused by CO2 molecules, and they
also prefer to occupy the larger cages [495]. According to the mobility
analysis  of  CO2  hydrate,  the  negligible  change  in  a  cage  composition
leads  to  considerable  effects  on  the  mobility  of  CO2  molecules.  For
example,  altering  3%  cage  occupancy  would  give  rise  to  2  orders  of
magnitude change in the diffusion coefficient [496]. By comparing the
diffusion  barriers  of  CO2,  H2,  and  CH4  using  ab  initio  calculations,  it
became clear that both the overall occupancy and residence of specific
cavities  play  an  important  role  in  the  dissociation  of  CO2  hydrate.
Indeed,  CH4  and  CO2  molecules  can  penetrate  after  the  breakup  of
cavities while H2  molecules because of little penetration barrier, may
diffuse during the early stages [497].

5.5. Thermo-physical and mechanical properties of CO2  hydrate

Molecular  simulations  have  aided  to  investigate  the  CO2  hydrate
specifications e.g. specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity, and co-
efficient  of  thermal  expansion.  Previously,  first-principles  DFT  was
employed  to  determine  the  thermal  properties  of  gas  hydrates  which
bridged the gap that existed at very low temperatures/ high pressures,
that experiment is unable to get so close to [498]. It is worth mentioning
that at extremely low temperatures, replicating experiments by DFT will
outperform MD simulations. The evaluation of dynamical and structural
properties for CH4, CO2, and Xe encaged molecules demonstrated that
the  lattice  expansion  of  CO2  hydrate  by  elevating  the  temperature  is
higher  than  that  in  either  Xe  or  CH4  hydrates.  However,  the  thermal
conductivities of CO2 are less than that of those guests [499,500].

Identifying the key mechanical contributors to the geo-mechanical
stability  of  hydrate-bearing  sediments  would  also  be  substantial  to
control the implications of geological hazards. In this regard, a series of
compression tests revealed that in both brittle and ductile regions, gas
hydrate  has  a  measurably  different  strength  than  ice.  Fundamental
elastic  properties  of  CO2  hydrate  including  the  shear  modulus  and
Young’s modulus have also been recently studied [501,502]. In addi-
tion,  the  space  of  the  water-hosted  cages  at  low  temperatures  may

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102629

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

restrict the free-rotating motion of CO2 molecules. Whereas the stability
and mechanical stiffness of CO2 hydrate would be boosted by increasing
thermal  vibration  as  temperature  increases.  Also,  the  behavioural
analysis of CO2 and CH4 hydrate manifested that their shear modulus is
directly  and  inversely  dependent  on  temperature [503].  By  analysing
the mechanical properties of CO2 and CH4 hydrates, it was shown that
under a uniaxial mechanical load, the stability of gas hydrates is criti-
cally dependent on the guest molecules. Therefore, hydrate mechanical
properties may probably be related to the size, shape, and polarity of the
guest molecules [504]. Based on the mechanical and vibrational features
of  CO2+Neohexane  sH  hydrate  by  applying  ab  initio  DFT-based  IR
technique,  the  vibrational  frequencies  were  found  to  be  relatively
dependent on interatomic distances of hydrate and the pressure [505].

5.6. Thermodynamic and kinetic enhancement of CO2 hydrate formation

initial  stages,  MDs  can  be  an  effective  tool  to  analyse  the  kinetic
behaviour of CO2 hydrate growth in the existence of salts and some al-
cohols.  In  this  context,  the  influence  of  electrolyte  solutions  (NaCl,
MgCl2) on CO2 hydrate growth in terms of ions mobility and cage con-
tent was simulated which specified that the inhibition effect of MgCl2
compared  to  NaCl  is  higher.  To  explore  the  hydrogen  bonding  in
CO2+ethanol  hydrate  at  100-250  K,  MD  demonstrated  that  ethanol
forms long-lived proton-donating and accepting hydrogen bonds with
water molecules while maintaining the general cavity integrity of the sI
hydrate [517,518]. Kinetically speaking, the dissociation mechanisms of
CO2 hydrate in the presence of different inhibitors are quite dissimilar.
For example, MD simulations of CO2  hydrate + glucose/ glycine illus-
trated  that  the  ring-shaped  structure  of  glucose  accelerates  the  CO2
hydrate  dissociation  whereas  owing  to  the  aggregation  of  hydroxyl
(eOH) and amidogen (eNH2) with water hydrogen bond, glycine accu-
mulates on the solid-liquid surface and then destroys the cluster [519].

To comprehend the microscopic impacts of promoters discussed in
Section 3, some of such systems have been studied via MD. It is worth
highlighting that, at low temperatures, single-crystal X-ray diffraction
may  not  detect  the  hydrogen  bond  formed  between  water  and  THF
whereas a small percentage of hydrogen bond was confirmed through
MD.  The  existence  of  hydrogen  bonding  guests  also  increases  the
migration of CO2 and improves the kinetics of hydrate formation [506].
Analysing CO2 storage capacity at 269-289 K and 2.5 MPa revealed that
although THF markedly improves the CO2 diffusion at the liquid-hydrate
interface, preferential THF-water hydrogen bonds reduce CO2  storage
capacity  [507].  Moreover,  by  making  a  comparison  between  C3H8  +
CO2 and C3H8 + CH4 binary hydrates, it was elucidated that the specific
heat capacity and isothermal expansion coefficient of C3H8  + CO2  hy-
drate  are  somewhat  higher  than  that  in  THF+CO2  hydrate.  Besides,
dissimilar to CH4 binary hydrate, small cages occupied by CO2 molecules
can lead to an increase in compressibility and expansion coefficient but
decrease the heat capacity [508]. Although guests in the small cavity do
not  themselves  form  hydrogen  bonds  with  water,  the  THF  effects  on
hydrogen bonding occur, so that the nearest neighbour guest-guest in-
teractions can affect the stability and structure of the cluster [509]. MD
assessments demonstrated that with the utilization of CNT designed by
hydrogen
and
aquaporin-mimicking  peptide  ((cid:0) CONH2),  the  transport  properties  of
CO2  hydrate such as permeability and diffusion coefficient during for-
mation can be noticeably improved. This suggests the membrane as an
inexpensive, safe, and environmental-friendly approach has the poten-
tial for HBCC aims [510]. MD also confirmed the propensity of the CO2
cluster to generate clathrate hydrate in the presence of SDS [458]. In
addition, molecular investigation of the promotion mechanisms of urea
in the CO2 hydrate growth showed that urea increases the mass transfer
by catalysing the formation of cages at the solid-liquid interface [511].
Probably, the preference of urea surfaces to replace water molecules and
the  subtle  balance  between  urea-water  interactions  help  to  act  as  a
catalyst for the growth of CO2 hydrate layers [512]. MD exploration also
displayed how specific concentrations of the metal particles (e.g. Cu, Fe,
Ag)  can  accelerate  the  formation  of  CO2  hydrate,  however,  at  values
higher than those, because of strong Brownian motion in the solution,
they  may  act  as  an  inhibitor  for  the  CO2  hydrate  growth  [513,514].
Moreover,  the  effects  of  graphite  and  hydroxylated-silica  surfaces  on
CO2  hydrate  growth  revealed  that  hydrophobic  graphite  surfaces
strongly adsorb CO2  molecules while the silica surfaces by interacting
with CO2 hydrate solids (mainly via strong hydrogen bonds), may lead
to a critical role in promoting hydrate formation [515].

((cid:0) COOH),

((cid:0) H2O2),

peroxide

carboxyl

5.7. CO2  hydrate in the presence of inhibitors

The risk of pipeline plugging during CO2 injection for sequestration
requires developing cost-efficient and efficient hydrate inhibitors [516].
Since some CO2  utilization approaches e.g. hydrate-based desalination
requires understanding the microscopic processes involved during the

5.8. CO2  semi-clathrate hydrate

Aqueous solutions of quaternary ammonium salts through forming
semiclathrate hydrate at atmospheric pressure would be an option for
HBCC/HBGS or cold storage aims. The ionic guests such as TBAB can
form ionic semiclathrate hydrates which have two distinct types of D
cages (DA, DB) so that CO2 molecules can be entrapped with them [520].
Although these cages have nearly equal volume, the distorted DA and DB
cavities  have  individual  cage  occupancies  with  each  cavity  having
anisotropic  angular  distribution.  In  this  context,  the  RDF  results
demonstrated  that  CO2  molecules  prefer  the  elongated  and  distorted
aspherical DA cavity whereas CH4 molecules tend to occupy the regular
quasi-spherical DB  cavity. MD calculations can also predict the diverse
properties  of  semiclathrate  hydrates  such  as  equilibrium  conditions,
enthalpies, and densities. However, compared to clathrate hydrate sys-
tems,  very  few  studies  have  been  conducted  on  their  systems.  Previ-
ously, MD simulations of the rotation angle in two cavities of CO2+TBAB
semi-clathrate hydrate showed a new lattice structure of TBAB induced
by  CO2  molecules  which  were characterized  by NMR,  X-ray,  and  MD
simulations. It was also displayed that the lattice vibrations of Br
and
groups about their equilibrium positions are small and they are
[TBA]
kept in place by van der Waals and electrostatic interactions with the
neighbouring water molecules [172].

+

(cid:0)

5.9. Summary of the section

Using classical MD, large-scale simulations (i.e. thousands of parti-
cles)  for  multiple  phases  over  relatively  long  times  (i.e.  hundreds  to
thousands of nanoseconds) can be performed to investigate a wide va-
riety of physical and chemical processes associated with CO2 hydrates.
These  simulations  can  answer  many  different  questions  such  as  the
mechanisms of surface absorption, crystal growth, phase separation, etc.
The phenomena and properties associated with CO2 hydrates have been
extensively  explored  by  MD  (see, Fig.  S1  of  the  supplementary  mate-
rials). There are also different parameters that researchers have applied
to investigate the microscopic mechanisms/ phenomena, intermolecular
behaviours, and properties of CO2  hydrate crystals. Some examples of
these parameters are lattice parameter, potential energy, thermal con-
ductivity,  diffusion  coefficient,  surface  tension,  dissociation  enthalpy,
and heat capacity [521–523]; To exhibit the movement of guest/host
molecules  and  display  the  characteristics  of  structure  I/II/H  under
different thermodynamic conditions, mean square displacement (MSD)
and radial displacement function (RDF) can be, respectively, analysed.
The list of analysis parameters as well as software employed for a variety
of  hydrates  is  exhibited  in  Fig.  S2  of  SM.  Since  the  results  of  MD
exploration of other gas hydrates could be beneficial for further analysis
of  CO2  hydrates,  Table  S15  of  SM  classifies  such  carried  out  MD
simulations.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102630

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

6. Future directions

To address the fundamental issue of CO2 emissions, there has been an
increased call to develop novel technologies. To capture, sequester, or
utilization of CO2, different hydrate-based approaches have been sug-
gested. In this regard, the experimental measurements, process designs,
and MD simulations of previous research at macroscopic, mesoscopic,
and microscopic levels convey the message that, although an effectible
progress has been achieved, coordinated studies on different limitations
of  the  gas  hydrate  applications  to  find  feasible  approaches  are  still
required. Therefore, in the light of these investigations, the following
suggestions can be taken into consideration:

(i)  Commercial exploitation of natural gas hydrates in sediments and
reservoirs is still technologically challenging. Based on exhaus-
tive reviews focused on the interaction of climate change and CH4
hydrates in the sediments of marine continental, permafrost areas
[67], and the arctic ocean [524], the risk of collapse of marine
sediments  while  releasing  CH4  gases  under  harsh  engineering
conditions  can exacerbate greenhouse warming.  As  a  result,  to
avoid engineering failures that may lead to damaging the marine
ecosystem during the CO2 sequestration and CH4 production from
NGH, accurate strategies are needed to be implemented. Because
of the influences of fluid flow characteristics which can affect the
field  stability,  migration  in  reservoirs  must  be  attentively
analyzed. Also, comprehending hydrodynamics of CO2 injection
is highly crucial for CO2/CH4  replacement in NGH. To improve
the safety of operation, a risk assessment scheme by evaluating
mechanisms that may induce the generation of leakage paths in
CO2 geological sites must also be developed.

(ii)  The  use  of  hydrates  for  controlling  greenhouse  gases  and  CO2
separation  from  the  gas  mixtures,  as  an  alternative,  can  be  an
effective  method.  However,  despite  the  tremendous  efforts  of
researchers  to  improve  the  HBCC  performance  parameters,
making a breakthrough in providing a low-cost technology has
yet to be achieved and the bottlenecks like slow rate of hydrate
formation, designing continuous setups, and a type of reactor for
continuous operation are still needed to be developed. Toward
realistic  applications, developing an optimized  process, finding
environmentally-friendly promoters based on the important fac-
tors  of  non-toxicity,  stability,  eco-friendliness,  availability,  and
economic viability, and improving the cooling methods to make
convenient operating conditions can be favorable.

(iii)  Despite  many  efforts  on  seeking  effective  and  reliable  hydrate
promoters from the aspects of interfacial tension, the impact of
the number of hydrogen-bond, ion-specific effect, size of the ad-
ditive  molecule,  and  solution  activity,  lack  of  valid  screening
method is still a critical objective.

(iv)  The  formation  rate  of  gas  hydrate  without  active  agitation  to
boost  gas-liquid  mixing  is  not  appreciable.  Moreover,  the  per-
formance of promoters in the continuous operation in the static
reactors needs to be examined. Conclusively, to overcome these
shortcomings further investigations should be carried out.
(v) Toward energy-saving, hydrate-based hybrid technologies over-
viewed in section three have shown a good potential to become
industrialized but the industrial feasibility of such designs should
be examined.

(vi)  In the case of long distances between CO2 capture plants and CO2
sequestration sites, the costs of CO2 transportation may be higher
than capturing process. To facilitate CO2 transportation, various
aspects  associated  with  the  performance  and  safety  of  CO2
transportation  were  discussed  elsewhere  [525].  Thus,  in-
vestigations on the mobility and transport efficiency of hydrate
slurry in future explorations can be considered.

of  renewable  energy  techniques  and  hydrate  cold  storage  to
discover a competent process design in future exploration could
be implemented.

(viii)  Using  MD  simulations,  a  variety  of  gas  hydrate  characteristics
have  been  revealed  as  overviewed  in  section  five.  However,
additional  MD  studies  on  synergistic  impacts  of  different  pro-
moters  and  inhibitors  (such  as  KHP+THP  and  KHI+THI)  on
clathrate  or  semiclathrate  hydrates  to  clarify  the  relationship
between  hydrate  formation  and  additives  can  be  conducted.
These evaluations may aid to understand the specifications which
contribute to enhancing the performance parameters of HBCC/S/
U or other hydrate-relevant applications. Besides, MD simulation
studies on heterogeneous nucleation with fast mass transfer in the
hydrate  growth,  describing  memory  effects  and  the  role  of
nanobubbles in hydrate nucleation could be the further intriguing
aspects.

(ix)  To  analyze  the  effects  of  hydrate-formation  methods,  surface
tension, and grain wettability on permeability in hydrate-bearing
sediments, more research should be carried out.

(x)  CH4/CO2  replacement  mechanism  is  presently  hampered  by  a
lack  of  in-depth  understanding  of  the  insufficient  rate  of
replacement. Hence new chemical/mechanical methods need to
be provided.

(xi)  Considering  the  suggested  application  of  CO2  hydrate  as  a  fire
extinguishing  agent  and  the  high  dissociation  enthalpy  of  CO2
semiclathrate  (e.g.  CO2+TBAB),  new  investigations  should  be
conducted.  In  addition,  the  performance  of  CO2  hydrate  extin-
guishers in terms of operational design could be evaluated.

7. Final statement

Modren  industries  place  a  premium  on  environmentally  friendly
technologies. As was exposed, this review highlighted the extensive ef-
forts in the CO2  hydrates geological sequestration into natural gas hy-
drates, designed hydrate-based process flow diagrams for the industrial
applications, the role of promoters/ porous media on CO2 hydrates, and
MD simulations as effective frameworks for understanding fundamental
characteristics of CO2 hydrates. For a couple of decades, although a large
body of work on flow assurance and pipeline blockage had dominated
the early era of hydrate exploration, having innovative applications in a
wide range of sustainable chemistry revealed from experiments backed
by theoretical calculations, gas hydrates have received widespread sci-
entific  attention  toward  developing  different  capabilities  of  this  phe-
nomenon to support an economic, help to make a cleaner atmosphere,
and  sustainable  development.  However,  elucidating  a  modern  master
plan based on green industrial policies and making a cleaner atmosphere
needs to be created.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Saeid  Sinehbaghizadeh:  Conceptualization,  Investigation,  Meth-
odology,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Writing  –  review  &  editing.
Agus  Saptoro:  Conceptualization,  Investigation,  Writing  –  review  &
editing, Supervision. Amir H. Mohammadi: Conceptualization, Inves-
tigation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgment

(vii)  The coefficient of performance (COP) of the hydrate cold storage
exhibits a strong capacity but more analysis on the combination

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  Curtin  University  Malaysia  for
providing  Curtin  Malaysia  Postgraduate  Scholarship  (CMPRS)  for  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102631

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

first  author  and  necessary  resources  and  financial  support  for  this
project. Also, we would like to thank Dr. Saman Alavi for his valuable
suggestions and comments on this work.

Supplementary materials

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101026.

References

[1] V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. Connors, C. P ́ean, Y. Chen, et al.

“Climate change 2021: the physical science basis.” Contribution of working group
I to the sixth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change.
2021. 10.1017/9781009157896.

[2] Riebeek H. The carbon cycle. Earth Obs 2011. https://earthobservatory.nasa.

gov/features/CarbonCycle.

[3] Ma ZW, Zhang P, Bao HS, Deng S. Review of fundamental properties of CO2

hydrates and CO2 capture and separation using hydration method. Renew Sustain
Energy Rev 2016;53:1273–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.09.076.
[4] Wu F, Argyle MD, Dellenback PA, Fan M. Progress in O2  separation for oxy-fuel
combustion–A promising way for cost-effective CO2  capture: a review. Prog
Energy Combust Sci 2018;67:188–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2018.01.004.

[5] Wilberforce T, Olabi AG, Sayed ET, Elsaid K, Abdelkareem MA. Progress in

carbon capture technologies. Sci Total Environ 2021;761:143203. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143203.

[6] Younas M, Rezakazemi M, Daud M, Wazir MB, Ahmad S, Ullah N, et al. Recent
progress and remaining challenges in post-combustion CO2 capture using metal-
organic frameworks (MOFs). Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;80:100849. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2020.100849.

[7] Zheng J, Chong ZR, Qureshi MF, Linga P. Carbon dioxide sequestration via gas

hydrates: a potential pathway toward decarbonization. Energy Fuels 2020;34:
10529–46. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c02309.

[8] Li S, Deng S, Zhao L, Zhao R, Lin M, Du Y, et al. Mathematical modeling and

numerical investigation of carbon capture by adsorption: Literature review and
case study. Appl Energy 2018;221:437–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2018.03.093.

[9] Saptoro A, Huo KC. Influences of Indonesian coals on the performance of a coal-
fired power plant with an integrated post combustion CO2  removal system: a
comparative simulation study. Energy Convers Manag 2013;68:235–43. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2013.01.015.

[10] Ayittey FK, Obek CA, Saptoro A, Perumal K, Wong MK. Process modifications for
a hot potassium carbonate-based CO2  capture system: a comparative study.
Greenh Gases Sci Technol 2020;10:130–46. https://doi.org/10.1002/ghg.1953.
[11] Ayittey FK, Saptoro A, Kumar P, Wong MK. Energy-saving process configurations

for monoethanolamine-based CO2  capture system. Asia-Pac J Chem Eng 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1002/apj.2576.

[12] Lin H, He Z, Sun Z, Vu J, Ng A, Mohammed M, et al. CO2-selective membranes for
hydrogen production and CO2 capture – part I: membrane development. J Memb
Sci 2014;457:149–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2014.01.020.
[13] Song C, Liu Q, Deng S, Li H, Kitamura Y. Cryogenic-based CO2  capture

technologies: state-of-the-art developments and current challenges. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2019;101:265–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2018.11.018.

[14] D’Alessandro DM, Smit B, Long JR. Carbon dioxide capture: prospects for new
materials. Angew Chem Int Ed 2010;49:6058–82. https://doi.org/10.1002/
anie.201000431.

[15] Olajire AA. CO2 capture and separation technologies for end-of-pipe applications

– a review. Energy 2010;35:2610–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2010.02.030.

[16] Gadikota G. Carbon mineralization pathways for carbon capture, storage and
utilization. Commun Chem 2021;4:23. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42004-021-
00461-x.

[17] El-Naggar A, El-Naggar AH, Shaheen SM, Sarkar B, Chang SX, Tsang DCW, et al.

Biochar composition-dependent impacts on soil nutrient release, carbon
mineralization, and potential environmental risk: a review. J Environ Manag
2019;241:458–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.02.044.

[18] Liang C, Pan B, Ma Z, He Z, Duan Z. Utilization of CO2  curing to enhance the
properties of recycled aggregate and prepared concrete: a review. Cem Concr
Compos 2020;105:103446. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cemconcomp.2019.103446.

[19] Han YS, Ji S, Lee PK, Oh C. Bauxite residue neutralization with simultaneous
mineral carbonation using atmospheric CO2. J Hazard Mater 2017;326:87–93.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.12.020.

[20] Liu W, Aldahri T, Xu C, Li C, Rohani S. Synthesis of sole gismondine-type zeolite
from blast furnace slag during CO2  mineralization process. J Environ Chem Eng
2021;9:104652. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2020.104652.

[21] Alami AH, Alasad S, Ali M, Alshamsi M. Investigating algae for CO2 capture and
accumulation and simultaneous production of biomass for biodiesel production.
Sci Total Environ 2021;759:143529. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2020.143529.

[22] K ̈onst P, Mireles IH, van der Stel R, van Os P, Goetheer E. Integrated system for
capturing CO2  as feedstock for algae production. Energy Proced 2017;114:
7126–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.03.1856.

[23] Zhang C, Jun KW, Gao R, Kwak G, Park H-G. Carbon dioxide utilization in a gas-
to-methanol process combined with CO2/Steam-mixed reforming: techno-
economic analysis. Fuel 2017;190:303–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2016.11.008.

[24] Kar S, Goeppert A, Prakash GKS. Integrated CO2  capture and conversion to

formate and methanol: connecting two threads. Acc Chem Res 2019;52:
2892–903. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.9b00324.

[25] Lee CW, Cho NH, Yang KD, Nam KT. Reaction mechanisms of the electrochemical

conversion of carbon dioxide to formic acid on Tin oxide electrodes.
ChemElectroChem 2017;4:2130–6. https://doi.org/10.1002/celc.201700335.

[26] Wu D, Liu J, Liang Y, Xiang K, Fu X, Luo J. Electrochemical transformation of
facet-controlled BiOI into mesoporous bismuth nanosheets for selective
electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to formic acid. ChemSusChem 2019;12:4700–7.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.201901724.

[27] Muthuraj R, Mekonnen T. Recent progress in carbon dioxide (CO2) as feedstock
for sustainable materials development: Co-polymers and polymer blends. Polymer
2018;145:348–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2018.04.078 (Guildf).
[28] Naidu TS, Sheridan CM, van Dyk LD. Basic oxygen furnace slag: review of current
and potential uses. Miner Eng 2020;149:106234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mineng.2020.106234.

[29] Koytsoumpa EI, Bergins C, Kakaras E. The CO2  economy: review of CO2  capture
and reuse technologies. J Supercrit Fluids 2018;132:3–16. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.supflu.2017.07.029.

[30] Li X, Hasson D, Semiat R, Shemer H. Intermediate concentrate demineralization
techniques for enhanced brackish water reverse osmosis water recovery – a
review. Desalination 2019;466:24–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
desal.2019.05.004.

[31] Dong H, German M, Tian L, SenGupta AK. Multifunctional ion exchange

pretreatment driven by carbon dioxide for enhancing reverse osmosis recovery
during impaired water reuse. Desalination 2020;485:114459. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.desal.2020.114459.

[32] Koohestanian E, Sadeghi J, Mohebbi-Kalhori D, Shahraki F, Samimi A. A novel
process for CO2 capture from the flue gases to produce urea and ammonia. Energy
2018;144:279–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.12.034.

[33] Long B, Ryan KM, Padrela L. From batch to continuous — new opportunities for
supercritical CO2  technology in pharmaceutical manufacturing. Eur J Pharm Sci
2019;137:104971. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejps.2019.104971.

[34] Baldino L, Scognamiglio M, Reverchon E. Supercritical fluid technologies applied
to the extraction of compounds of industrial interest from Cannabis sativa L. and
to their pharmaceutical formulations: a review. J Supercrit Fluids 2020;165:
104960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2020.104960.

[35] Khaw KY, Parat MO, Shaw PN, Falconer JR. Solvent supercritical fluid

technologies to extract bioactive compounds from natural sources: a review.
Molecules 2017;22:1186. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules22071186.

[36] Xu R, Zhang L, Zhang F, Jiang P. A review on heat transfer and energy conversion
in the enhanced geothermal systems with water/CO2  as working fluid. Int J
Energy Res 2015;39:1722–41. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.3352.

[37] Liang W, Yan J, Zhang B, Hou D. Review on coal bed methane recovery theory
and technology: recent progress and perspectives. Energy Fuels 2021;35:
4633–43. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c04026.

[38] Mukherjee M, Misra S. A review of experimental research on enhanced coal bed
methane (ECBM) recovery via CO2  sequestration. Earth-Sci Rev 2018;179:
392–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2018.02.018.

[39] Kumar S, Mandal A. A comprehensive review on chemically enhanced water

alternating gas/CO2  (CEWAG) injection for enhanced oil recovery. J Pet Sci Eng
2017;157:696–715. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2017.07.066.

[40] Jia B, Tsau JS, Barati R. A review of the current progress of CO2 injection EOR and

carbon storage in shale oil reservoirs. Fuel 2019;236:404–27. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2018.08.103.

[41] Baklid A, Korbol R, Owren G. Sleipner vest CO2  disposal, CO2  injection into a
shallow underground aquifer. SPE Annu Tech Conf Exhi 1996:1–9. https://doi.
org/10.2118/36600-MS. ociety of Petroleum Engineers.

[42] Tsuji Y, Ishida H, Nakamizu M, Matsumoto R, Shimizu S. Overview of the MITI
Nankai trough wells: a milestone in the evaluation of methane hydrate resources.
Resour Geol 2004;54:3–10. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-3928.2004.tb00182.
x.

[43] Hauge LP, Birkedal KA, Ersland G, Graue A. Methane production from natural gas
hydrates by CO2  replacement; Review of lab experiments and field trial. Soc Pet
Eng - SPE Bergen One Day Semin 2014;2014:130–42. https://doi.org/10.2118/
169198-ms.

[44] Ma J, Li Q, Kempka T, Kühn M. Hydromechanical response and impact of gas

mixing behavior in subsurface CH4  storage with CO2  based cushion gas. Energy
Fuels 2019;33:6527–41. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b00518.
[45] Xie W, Chen S, Wang M, Yu Z, Wang H. Progress and prospects of supercritical
CO2 application in the exploitation of shale gas reservoirs. Energy Fuels 2021;35:
18370–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c02944.

[46] Sun X, Dai C, Sun Y, Du M, Wang T, Zou C, et al. Wettability alteration study of
supercritical CO2 fracturing fluid on low permeability oil reservoir. Energy Fuels
2017;31:13364–73. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b02534.
[47] Hopkins Hatzopoulos M, Eastoe J, Dowding PJ, Grillo I. Cylinder to sphere

transition in reverse microemulsions: The effect of hydrotropes. J Colloid
Interface Sci 2013;392:304–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2012.09.078.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102632

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

[48] Oyama A, Masutani S. A review of the methane hydrate program in Japan.

Energies 2017;10:1447. https://doi.org/10.3390/en10101447.

[49] Li XS, Xu CG, Zhang Y, Ruan XK, Li G, Wang Y. Investigation into gas production
from natural gas hydrate: a review. Appl Energy 2016;172:286–322. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.03.101.

[50] Chong ZR, Yang SHB, Babu P, Linga P, Li XS. Review of natural gas hydrates as an
energy resource: prospects and challenges. Appl Energy 2016;162:1633–52.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.12.061.

[51] Sloan ED, Koh CA. Clathrate hydrates of natural gases. 3rd Ed. Boca Raton: CRC

Press, Taylor & Francis Group; 2008.

[52] Suginaka T, Sakamoto H, Iino K, Sakakibara Y, Ohmura R. Phase equilibrium for

ionic semiclathrate hydrate formed with CO2, CH4, or N2  plus
tetrabutylphosphonium bromide. Fluid Phase Equilib 2013;344:108–11. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2013.01.018.

[53] Sakamoto J, Hashimoto S, Tsuda T, Sugahara T, Inoue Y, Ohgaki K.

Thermodynamic and Raman spectroscopic studies on hydrogen+tetra-n-butyl
ammonium fluoride semi-clathrate hydrates. Chem Eng Sci 2008;63:5789–94.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2008.08.026.

[54] Shimada W, Shiro M, Kondo H, Takeya S, Oyama H, Ebinuma T, et al. Tetra-n-

butylammonium bromide–water (1/38). Acta Crystallogr Sect C Cryst Struct
Commun 2005;61:65–6. https://doi.org/10.1107/S0108270104032743.
[55] Chazallon B, Ziskind M, Carpentier Y, Focsa C. CO2 capture using semi-clathrates
of quaternary ammonium salt: Structure change induced by CO2  and N2
enclathration. J Phys Chem B 2014;118:13440–52. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp507789z.

[56] Oshima M, Kida M, Nagao J. Hydration numbers and thermal properties of tetra-

n-butyl ammonium bromide semiclathrate hydrates determined by ion
chromatography and differential scanning calorimetry. J Chem Thermodyn 2018;
123:32–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2018.03.018.

[57] Hassanpouryouzband A, Joonaki E, Vasheghani Farahani M, Takeya S, Ruppel C,

Yang J, et al. Gas hydrates in sustainable chemistry. Chem Soc Rev 2020;49:
5225–309. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8CS00989A.

[58] Ripmeester JA, Alavi S. Some current challenges in clathrate hydrate science:

Nucleation, decomposition and the memory effect. Curr Opin Solid State Mater
Sci 2016;20:344–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cossms.2016.03.005.

[59] Winters W, Walker M, Hunter R, Collett T, Boswell R, Rose K, et al. Physical

properties of sediment from the mount Elbert gas hydrate stratigraphic test well,
Alaska north slope. Mar Pet Geol 2011;28:361–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpetgeo.2010.01.008.

[60] Klauda JB, Sandler SI. Global distribution of methane hydrate in ocean sediment.

Energy Fuels 2005;19:459–70. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef049798o.

[61] Milkov AV. Global estimates of hydrate-bound gas in marine sediments: how
much is really out there? Earth-Sci Rev 2004;66:183–97. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.earscirev.2003.11.002.

[62] Archer D, Buffett B, Brovkin V. Ocean methane hydrates as a slow tipping point in

the global carbon cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2009;106:20596–601. https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.0800885105.

[63] Boswell R, Collett TS. Current perspectives on gas hydrate resources. Energy
Environ Sci 2011;4:1206–15. https://doi.org/10.1039/C0EE00203H.

[64] Cote MM, Wright JF. Geological potential for sequestration of CO2 as gas hydrate

in the alberta portion of the western Canada sedimentary basin. In: Canadian
Unconventional Resources and International Petroleum Conference, Society
2010. 4; 2010. p. 2697–710. https://doi.org/10.2118/138121-ms.

[65] Oldenburg CM, Pruess K, Benson SM. Process modeling of CO2  injection into

natural gas reservoirs for carbon sequestration and enhanced gas recovery.
Energy Fuels 2001;15:293–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef000247h.

[66] Krey V, Canadell JG, Nakicenovic N, Abe Y, Andruleit H, Archer D, et al. Gas

hydrates: entrance to a methane age or climate threat? Environ Res Lett 2009;4:
34007. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/4/3/034007.

[67] Ruppel CD, Kessler JD. The interaction of climate change and methane hydrates.
Rev Geophys 2017;55:126–68. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016RG000534.

[68] Tang LG, Xiao R, Huang C, Feng ZP, Fan SS. Experimental investigation of

production behavior of gas hydrate under thermal stimulation in unconsolidated
sediment. Energy Fuels 2005;19:2402–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef050223g.
[69] Sun X, Nanchary N, Mohanty KK. 1-D Modeling of hydrate depressurization in
porous media. Transp Porous Media 2005;58:315–38. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11242-004-1410-x.

[70] Yang J, Okwananke A, Tohidi B, Chuvilin E, Maerle K, Istomin V, et al. Flue gas

injection into gas hydrate reservoirs for methane recovery and carbon dioxide
sequestration. Energy Convers Manag 2017;136:431–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enconman.2017.01.043.

[71] Park Y, Kim DY, Lee JW, Huh DG, Park KP, Lee J, et al. Sequestering carbon
dioxide into complex structures of naturally occurring gas hydrates. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 2006;103:12690–4. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0602251103.

[72] Sun YF, Zhong JR, Li R, Zhu T, Cao XY, Chen GJ, et al. Natural gas hydrate
exploitation by CO2/H2  continuous injection-production mode. Appl Energy
2018;226:10–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.05.098.

[73] Sun YF, Wang YF, Zhong JR, Li WZ, Li R, Cao BJ, et al. Gas hydrate exploitation
using CO2/H2  mixture gas by semi-continuous injection-production mode. Appl
Energy 2019;240:215–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.01.209.
[74] Koh DY, Kang H, Lee JW, Park Y, Kim SJ, Lee J, et al. Energy-efficient natural gas
hydrate production using gas exchange. Appl Energy 2016;162:114–30. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.10.082.

[75] B. McGrail, T. Zhu, T. Hunter, M. White, S. Patil, A. Kulkarni. A new method for
enhanced production of gas hydrates with CO2. Energy Resour. Potential Assoc.
Geol. Hazards, Vancouver, BC, Canada: 2004.

[76] Khlebnikov V, Antonov S, Mishin A, Bakulin D, Khamidullina I, Liang M, et al.
A new method for the replacement of CH4  with CO2  in natural gas hydrate
production. Nat Gas Ind B 2016;3:445–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ngib.2017.02.005.

[77] Li Y, Liu W, Zhu Y, Chen Y, Song Y, Li Q. Mechanical behaviors of permafrost-
associated methane hydrate-bearing sediments under different mining methods.
Appl Energy 2016;162:1627–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2015.04.065.

[78] Yoon JH, Kawamura T, Yamamoto Y, Komai T. Transformation of methane
hydrate to carbon dioxide hydrate: in situ raman spectroscopic observations.
J Phys Chem A 2004;108:5057–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp049683l.

[79] Iwai Y, Nakamura H, Hirata M. Molecular dynamics simulation of replacement of
methane hydrate with carbon dioxide. Mol Simul 2012;38:481–90. https://doi.
org/10.1080/08927022.2011.647817.

[80] Castaldi MJ, Zhou Y, Yegulalp TM. Down-hole combustion method for gas

production from methane hydrates. J Pet Sci Eng 2007;56:176–85. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.petrol.2006.03.031.

[81] Iglauer S, Pentland CH, Busch A. CO2 wettability of seal and reservoir rocks and
the implications for carbon geo-sequestration. Water Resour Res 2015;51:729–74.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2014WR015553.

[82] Iglauer S. CO2–water–rock wettability: variability, influencing factors, and

implications for CO2  geostorage. Acc Chem Res 2017;50:1134–42. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00602.

[83] Iglauer S. Optimum storage depths for structural CO2 trapping. Int J Greenh Gas

Control 2018;77:82–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2018.07.009.

[84] Pandey JS, Karantonidis C, Karcz AP, von Solms N. Enhanced CH4-CO2  hydrate
swapping in the presence of low dosage methanol. Energies 2020;13:5238.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en13205238.

[85] Gambelli AM, Castellani B, Nicolini A, Rossi F. Water salinity as potential aid for

improving the carbon dioxide replacement process effectiveness in natural gas
hydrate reservoirs. Processes 2020;8:1298. https://doi.org/10.3390/pr8101298.

[86] Pandey JS, Karantonidis C, Ouyang Q, von Solms N. Cyclic depressurization-

driven enhanced CH4  recovery after CH4–CO2  hydrate swapping. Energy Fuels
2021;35:9521–37. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c00685.

[87] Chen B, Sun H, Li K, Wang D, Yang M. Experimental investigation of natural gas

hydrate production characteristics via novel combination modes of
depressurization with water flow erosion. Fuel 2019;252:295–303. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.04.120.

[88] Chen B, Yang M, Sun H, Wang P, Wang D. Visualization study on the promotion of
natural gas hydrate production by water flow erosion. Fuel 2019;235:63–71.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.07.072.

[89] Chen B, Sun H, Zhou H, Yang M, Wang D. Effects of pressure and sea water flow
on natural gas hydrate production characteristics in marine sediment. Appl
Energy 2019;238:274–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.01.095.
[90] Song Y, Wang S, Cheng Z, Huang M, Zhang Y, Zheng J, et al. Dependence of the
hydrate-based CO2 storage process on the hydrate reservoir environment in high-
efficiency storage methods. Chem Eng J 2021;415:128937. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2021.128937.

[91] Chen B, Sun H, Zheng J, Yang M. New insights on water-gas flow and hydrate
decomposition behaviors in natural gas hydrates deposits with various
saturations. Appl Energy 2020;259:114185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2019.114185.

[92] Wen Z, Yao Y, Luo W, Lei X. Memory effect of CO2-hydrate formation in porous
media. Fuel 2021;299:120922. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120922.
[93] Zhang X, Li J, Wang J, Wu Q, Wang Y, Yao Z. Experimental study on formation

characteristics of carbon dioxide hydrate in frozen porous media. Int J Green
Energy 2021;18:687–96. https://doi.org/10.1080/15435075.2021.1875473.
[94] Shigehara S, Ohmura R. Investigation of crystal growth of CO2 hydrate in aqueous

fructose solution for the potential application in carbonated solid foods. Food
Chem 2022;371:131369. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.131369.
[95] Liu Y, Zhang L, Yang L, Dong H, Zhao J, Song Y. Behaviors of CO2  hydrate

formation in the presence of acid-dissolvable organic matters. Environ Sci
Technol 2021;55:6206–13. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c06407.

[96] Takeya S, Muromachi S, Yamamoto Y, Umeda H, Matsuo S. Preservation of CO2

hydrate under different atmospheric conditions. Fluid Phase Equilib 2016;413:
137–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2015.10.036.

[97] Chen X, Li S, Zhang P, Chen W, Wu Q, Zhan J, et al. Promoted disappearance of
CO2  hydrate self-preservation effect by surfactant SDS. Energies 2021;14:3909.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en14133909.

[98] Ohgaki K, Takano K, Sangawa H, Matsubara T, Nakano S. Methane exploitation
by carbon dioxide from gas hydrates - phase equilibria for CO2-CH4  mixed
hydrate system. J Chem Eng Jpn 1996;29:478–83. https://doi.org/10.1252/
jcej.29.478.

[99] Ersland G, Husebø J, Graue A, Kvamme B. Transport and storage of CO2 in natural
gas hydrate reservoirs. Energy Proced 2009;1:3477–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.egypro.2009.02.139.

[100] Yang Q, Zhao W, Dixon TH, Amelung F, Han WS, Li P. InSAR monitoring of

ground deformation due to CO2  injection at an enhanced oil recovery site, West
Texas. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2015;41:20–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijggc.2015.06.016.

[101] Liu Y, Wang P, Yang M, Zhao Y, Zhao J, Song Y. CO2  sequestration in depleted
methane hydrate sandy reservoirs. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2018;49:428–34. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2017.10.023.

[102] Sun D, Ripmeester J, Englezos P. Phase equilibria for the CO2/CH4/N2/H2O
system in the hydrate region under conditions relevant to storage of CO2  in

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102633

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

depleted natural gas reservoirs. J Chem Eng Data 2016;61:4061–7. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.jced.6b00547.

for CO2-CH4  exchange in gas hydrate reservoirs. Energy Fuels 2017;31:140–53.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b01909.

[103] A. Al-Hasami, S. Ren, B. Tohidi CO2 injection for enhanced gas recovery and geo-

storage: reservoir simulation and economics 2007. 10.2523/94129-ms.

[104] Li DL, Liang DQ, Fan SS, Sen LiX, Tang LG, Huang NS. In situ hydrate dissociation

using microwave heating: preliminary study. Energy Convers Manag 2008;49:
2207–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2008.01.031.

[105] Sun Z, Li N, Shuai C, Yuan J, Sun Q, Chen C. A novel method to enhance methane
hydrate exploitation efficiency via forming impermeable overlying CO2  hydrate
cap. Appl Energy 2019;240:842–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2019.02.022.

[106] Lee Y, Choi W, Shin K, Seo Y. CH4-CO2  replacement occurring in sII natural gas
hydrates for CH4  recovery and CO2  sequestration. Energy Convers Manag 2017;
150:356–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2017.08.023.

[107] Merkel FS, Schultz HJ. Methane extraction from natural gas hydrate reservoirs
with simultaneous storage of carbon dioxide. Chem Ing Tech 2015;87:475–83.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cite.201300164.

[108] Hyodo M, Li Y, Yoneda J, Nakata Y, Yoshimoto N, Kajiyama S, et al.

A comparative analysis of the mechanical behavior of carbon dioxide and
methane hydrate-bearing sediments. Am Mineral 2014;99:178–83. https://doi.
org/10.2138/am.2014.4620.

[109] Peter E, Messah M, Chau J. Gas recovery through the injection of carbon dioxide
or concentrated flue gas in a natural gas hydrate reservoir. In: Proceedings of the
Offshore Technology Conference Asia 2018, OTCA; 2018. https://doi.org/
10.4043/28374-ms. 2018.

[110] Stanwix P, Rathnayake N, de Obanos F, Johns M, Aman Z, May E. Characterising

thermally controlled CH4–CO2  hydrate exchange in unconsolidated sediments.
Energy Environ Sci 2018;11:1828–40. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8EE00139A.

[111] Xie Y, Zhu Y, Zheng TYQ, Sun C, Chen L. Replacement in CH4-CO2 hydrate below

freezing point based on abnormal self-preservation differences of CH4  hydrate.
Chem Eng J 2021;403:126283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.126283.

[112] Jadhawar P, Yang J, Chapoy A, Tohidi B. Subsurface carbon dioxide sequestration
and storage in methane hydrate reservoirs combined with clean methane energy
recovery. Energy Fuels 2021;35:1567–79. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.0c02839.

[113] Hassanpouryouzband A, Yang J, Okwananke A, Burgass R, Tohidi B, Chuvilin E,
et al. An experimental investigation on the kinetics of integrated methane
recovery and CO2 sequestration by injection of flue gas into permafrost methane
hydrate reservoirs. Sci Rep 2019;9:16206. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-
52745-x.

[114] Hassanpouryouzband A, Yang J, Tohidi B, Chuvilin E, Istomin V, Bukhanov B,
et al. Insights into CO2  capture by flue gas hydrate formation: gas composition
evolution in systems containing gas hydrates and gas mixtures at stable pressures.
ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2018;6:5732–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.8b00409.

[115] Li L, Fan S, Chen Q, Yang G, Zhao J, Wei N, et al. Experimental and modeling
phase equilibria of gas hydrate systems for post-combustion CO2  capture.
J Taiwan Inst Chem Eng 2019;96:35–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jtice.2018.11.007.

[116] Zhou H, Chen B, Wang S, Yang M. CO2/N2  mixture sequestration in depleted
natural gas hydrate reservoirs. J Pet Sci Eng 2019;175:72–82. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.petrol.2018.12.034.

[117] Li B, Xu T, Zhang G, Guo W, Liu H, Wang Q, et al. An experimental study on gas
production from fracture-filled hydrate by CO2 and CO2/N2 replacement. Energy
Convers Manag 2018;165:738–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2018.03.095.

[118] Hassanpouryouzband A, Yang J, Tohidi B, Chuvilin E, Istomin V, Bukhanov B,

et al. CO2  capture by injection of flue gas or CO2-N2  mixtures into hydrate
reservoirs: dependence of CO2  capture efficiency on gas hydrate reservoir
conditions. Environ Sci Technol 2018;52:4324–30. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
est.7b05784.

[119] Yasue M, Masuda Y, Liang Y. Estimation of methane recovery efficiency from
methane hydrate by the N2–CO2  gas mixture injection method. Energy Fuels
2020;34:5236–50. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b03898.

[120] Chazallon B, Pirim C. Selectivity and CO2  capture efficiency in CO2-N2  clathrate

hydrates investigated by in-situ Raman spectroscopy. Chem Eng J 2018;342:
171–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2018.01.116.

[121] Lim D, Ro H, Seo Y, ju Seo Y, Lee JY, Kim SJ, et al. Thermodynamic stability and
guest distribution of CH4/N2/CO2  mixed hydrates for methane hydrate
production using N2/CO2 injection. J Chem Thermodyn 2017;106:16–21. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2016.11.012.

[122] Zhou X, Liang D, Liang S, Yi L, Lin F. Recovering CH4 from natural gas hydrates

with the injection of CO2-N2  gas mixtures. Energy Fuels 2015;29:1099–106.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef5025824.

[123] Pandey JS, Khan S, Karcz AP, von Solms N. Chemically modified hydrate

swapping and hydrate stability during multistage CO2-N2 injection schemes. Fuel
2021;299:120711. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120711.

[124] Kvamme B. Feasibility of simultaneous CO2  storage and CH4  production from

natural gas hydrate using mixtures of CO2 and N2. Can J Chem 2015;93:897–905.
https://doi.org/10.1139/cjc-2014-0501.

[125] Shojai Kaveh N, Rudolph ESJ, Wolf K, Ashrafizadeh SN. Wettability

determination by contact angle measurements: hvbB coal-water system with
injection of synthetic flue gas and CO2. J Colloid Interface Sci 2011;364:237–47.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2011.07.091.

[126] Boswell R, Schoderbek D, Collett TS, Ohtsuki S, White M, Anderson BJ. The I  ̇gnik
Sikumi field experiment, Alaska North Slope: Design, operations, and implications

[127] Wang XH, Sun YF, Wang YF, Li N, Sun CY, Chen GJ, et al. Gas production from
hydrates by CH4-CO2/H2  replacement. Appl Energy 2017;188:305–14. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.12.021.

[128] Liu Z, Wang J, Liu W, Li Y, Lang C, Zhang M, et al. Effect of brine salinity on the
rheological properties of hydrate-in-oil slurries. J Pet Sci Eng 2022;208:109756.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2021.109756.

[129] Liu Z, Liu W, Lang C, Liu R, Song Y, Li Y. Viscosity investigation on metastable
hydrate suspension in oil-dominated systems. Chem Eng Sci 2021;238:116608.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2021.116608.

[130] Shi BH, Chai S, Wang LY, Lv X, Liu HS, Wu HH, et al. Viscosity investigation of

natural gas hydrate slurries with anti-agglomerants additives. Fuel 2016;185:
323–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.07.113.

[131] Ding L, Shi B, Liu Y, Song S, Wang W, Wu H, et al. Rheology of natural gas hydrate

slurry: effect of hydrate agglomeration and deposition. Fuel 2019;239:126–37.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.10.110.

[132] Chen Y, Shi B, Liu Y, Ma Q, Song S, Ding L, et al. In situ viscosity measurements of
a cyclopentane hydrate slurry in waxy water-in-oil emulsions. Energy Fuels 2019;
33:2915–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.8b04268.

[133] Mühlstedt G, Galdino JF, Andrade D, Negr ̃ao C. Rheological properties of hydrate
slurry in the water-based drilling fluid. Energy Fuels 2021;35:10488–97. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c00646.

[134] Kim S, Zadeh AH, Nole M, Daigle H, Huh C, Kim I. Spontaneous generation of

stable CO2 emulsions via the dissociation of nanoparticle-aided CO2 hydrate. J Pet
Sci Eng 2022;208:109203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2021.109203.
[135] Ahuja A, Lee R, Joshi YM. Advances and challenges in the high-pressure rheology
of complex fluids. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2021;294:102472. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cis.2021.102472.

[136] Sandoval G, Thompson R, Sad C, Teixeira A, Soares E. Influence of adding

asphaltenes and gas condensate on CO2  hydrate formation in water–CO2–oil
systems. Energy Fuels 2019;33:7138–46. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.9b01222.

[137] Zuo X, Liu J, Zhou Y, Lu S, Yan D, Shi K, Zhao B. Experimental study of growth
kinetics of CO2  hydrates and multiphase flow properties of slurries in high
pressure flow systems. RSC Adv 2019;9:32873–88. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C9RA06445A.

[138] Zhang S, Pan Z, Shang L, Zhou L. Analysis of influencing factors on the kinetics
characteristics of carbon dioxide hydrates in high pressure flow systems. Energy
Fuels 2021;35:16241–57. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c02060.

[139] Prah B, Yun R. Heat transfer and pressure drop of CO2  hydrate mixture in

pipeline. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2016;102:341–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2016.06.013.

[140] Oignet J, Hoang H, Osswald V, Delahaye A, Fournaison L, Haberschill P.

Experimental study of convective heat transfer coefficients of CO2 hydrate slurries
in a secondary refrigeration loop. Appl Therm Eng 2017;118:630–7. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.02.117.

[141] Ji J, Zhao L, Tao L, Lin S. Molecular gibbs surface excess and CO2 hydrate density
determine the strong temperature- and pressure dependent supercritical
CO2–brine interfacial tension. J Phys Chem B 2017;121:6200–7. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b03320.

[142] Arjun A, Bolhuis PG. Homogenous nucleation rate of CO2  hydrates using

transition interface sampling. J Chem Phys 2021;154:164507. https://doi.org/
10.1063/5.0044883.

[143] Zhao Y, Lei X, Zheng J, Li M, Johns ML, Huang M, et al. High resolution MRI

studies of CO2  hydrate formation and dissociation near the gas-water interface.
Chem Eng J 2021;425:131426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.131426.

[144] Xu N, Liu Y, Cheng Z, Wang S, Jiang L, Song Y. Morphology-based kinetic study of
the formation of carbon dioxide hydrates with promoters. Energy Fuels 2020;34:
7307–15. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c00773.

[145] Cheng Z, Zhao Y, Liu W, Liu Y, Jiang L, Song Y. Kinetic analysis of nano-SiO2

promoting methane hydrate formation in porous medium. J Nat Gas Sci Eng
2020;79:103375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2020.103375.

[146] Zhang F, Wang X, Lou X, Lipi ́nski W. The effect of sodium dodecyl sulfate and

dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride on the kinetics of CO2 hydrate formation in
the presence of tetra-n-butyl ammonium bromide for carbon capture applications.
Energy 2021;227:120424. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.120424.
[147] Babu P, Chin WI, Kumar R, Linga P. Systematic evaluation of tetra-n-butyl

ammonium bromide (TBAB) for carbon dioxide capture employing the clathrate
process. Ind Eng Chem Res 2014;53:4878–87. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie4043714.

[148] Chi Y, Xu Y, Zhao C, Zhang Y, Song Y. In-situ measurement of interfacial tension:
Further insights into effect of interfacial tension on the kinetics of CO2  hydrate
formation. Energy 2022;239:122143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2021.122143.

[149] Xie FM, Li XY, Zhong DL, Englezos P, Lu GX. A calorimetric study on the phase

behavior of Tetra-n-butyl phosphonium bromide + CO2  semiclathrate hydrate
and evaluation of CO2  consumption-impact of a surfactant. J Chem Eng Data
2021;66:4228–35. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jced.1c00399.
[150] Mohammadi A, Kamran-Pirzaman A, Rahmati N. The effect tetra butyl

ammonium hydroxide and tween on the kinetics of carbon dioxide hydrate
formation. Pet Sci Technol 2021:1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10916466.2021.1947321.

[151] Yue G, Liu Y, Luo Y, Liu AXX, Chen B, Sun Q, et al. Combining different additives

with TBAB on CO2  capture and CH4  purification from simulated biogas using

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102634

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

hydration method. J Chem Eng Data 2019;64:1622–31. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.jced.8b01188.

[152] Ren Z, Liu D, Liu Z, Pan Z. Influence of sodium chloride on the kinetics of methane

hydrate formation in the presence of surfactant. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2020;83:
103622. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2020.103622.

[153] Zeng X, Wu G, Wang J, Yang C, Meng Q, Chen G, et al. Effects of inhibitors on the
morphology and kinetics of hydrate growth on surface of bubble. J Nat Gas Sci
Eng 2020;74:103096. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2019.103096.
[154] Stoner HM, Phan A, Striolo A, Koh CA. Water wettability coupled with film

growth on realistic cyclopentane hydrate surfaces. Langmuir 2021;37:12447–56.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.1c02136.

[155] Molokitina NS, Nesterov AN, Podenko LS, Reshetnikov AM. Carbon dioxide

hydrate formation with SDS: Further insights into mechanism of gas hydrate
growth in the presence of surfactant. Fuel 2019;235:1400–11. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2018.08.126.

[156] Li Z, Zhong DL, Lu YY, Yan J, Zou ZL. Preferential enclathration of CO2 into tetra-

n-butyl phosphonium bromide semiclathrate hydrate in moderate operating
conditions: application for CO2  capture from shale gas. Appl Energy 2017;199:
370–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.05.043.

[157] Zhong DL, Li Z, Lu YY, Wang JL, Yan J. Evaluation of CO2 removal from a CO2+
CH4  gas mixture using gas hydrate formation in liquid water and THF solutions.
Appl Energy 2015;158:133–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2015.08.058.

[158] Sloan ED, Fleyfel F. Hydrate dissociation enthalpy and guest size. Fluid Phase

Equilib 1992;76:123–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-3812(92)85082-J.

[159] Li P, Zhang X, Lu X. Dissociation behaviors of CO2  hydrate-bearing sediment

particle during settling in water. Energies 2018;11:2896. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en11112896.

[160] Gambelli AM. Analyses on CH4 and CO2 hydrate formation to define the optimal
pressure for CO2 injection to maximize the replacement efficiency into natural gas
hydrate in presence of a silica-based natural porous medium, via depressurization
techniques. Chem Eng Process 2021;167:108512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cep.2021.108512.

[161] Zhong JR, Sun YF, Xie Y, Zhu YJ, Sun CY, Chen GJ, et al. CO2 Hydrate dissolution
rates in unsaturated water quantified with laboratory experiments. Chem Eng J
2022;430:133137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.133137.

[162] Ding L, Shi B, Lv X, Liu Y, Wu H, Wang W, et al. Hydrate formation and plugging

mechanisms in different gas–liquid flow patterns. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:
4173–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.6b02717.

[163] Zhang X, Li J, Wu Q, Wang Y, Wang J, Li Y. Effect of initial pressure on the

formation of carbon dioxide hydrate in frozen quartz sand. Energy Fuels 2019;33:
11346–52. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b01693.
[164] Xu K, Yang L, Liu J, Zhang Z, Wu J. Mechanical properties of CH4–CO2

heteroclathrate hydrates. Energy Fuels 2020;34:14368–78. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c02430.

[165] Cui JL, Sun ZF, Kan JY, Jia S, Sun CY, Chen GJ, et al. Study on the factors

affecting the sealing performance and mechanical stability of CO2  hydrate cap
during gas production from methane hydrate. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2021;93:104050.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2021.104050.

[166] Luo T, Li Y, Madhusudhan BN, Zhao J, Song Y. Comparative analysis of the

consolidation and shear behaviors of CH4  and CO2  hydrate-bearing silty
sediments. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2020;75:103157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jngse.2020.103157.

[167] Cheng Z, Wang S, Xu N, Liu W, Zhao Y, Zhao J, et al. Quantitative analysis of

methane hydrate formation in size-varied porous media for gas storage and
transportation application. Fuel 2021;301:121021. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2021.121021.

[168] Shi BH, Song SF, Lv XF, Li WQ, Wang Y, Ding L, et al. Investigation on natural gas
hydrate dissociation from a slurry to a water-in-oil emulsion in a high-pressure
flow loop. Fuel 2018;233:743–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.06.054.

[169] Misyura SY, Donskoy IG. Dissociation kinetics of methane hydrate and CO2

hydrate for different granular composition. Fuel 2020;262:116614. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.116614.

[170] Seol J, Lee JW, Kim DY, Takeya S, Ripmeester JA, Lee H. Molecular cage

occupancy of clathrate hydrates at infinite dilution: Experimental determination
and thermodynamic significance. J Phys Chem B 2010;114:804–8. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp909982n.

[171] Lim J, Choi W, Mok J, Seo Y. Clathrate-based CO2 capture from CO2-rich natural
gas and biogas. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2018;6:5627–35. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b00712.

[172] Muromachi S, Udachin A, Shin K, Alavi SMI, Ohmura R, Ripmeester J. Guest-
induced symmetry lowering of an ionic clathrate material for carbon capture.
Chem Commun 2014;50:11476–9. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4CC02111H.
[173] Komatsu H, Ota M, Sato Y, Watanabe M, Smith RL. Hydrogen and carbon dioxide
adsorption with tetra-n-butyl ammonium semi-clathrate hydrates for gas
separations. AIChE J 2015;61:992–1003. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.14689.

[174] Zhou X, Wan L, Long Z, Li D, Liang D. Kinetic measurements on CO2  adsorption

and release using TBAB⋅38H2O hydrates as adsorbents. Energy Fuels 2019;33:
6727–33. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b01122.

[175] Di Profio P, Canale V, D’Alessandro N, Germani R, Di Crescenzo A, Fontana A.

Separation of CO2  and CH4  from biogas by formation of clathrate hydrates:
Importance of the driving force and kinetic promoters. ACS Sustain Chem Eng
2017;5:1990–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b02832.

[176] Sloan ED. Gas hydrates: review of physical/chemical properties. Energy Fuels

1998;12:191–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef970164+.

[177] Strobel TA, Koh CA, Sloan ED. Hydrogen storage properties of clathrate hydrate
materials. Fluid Phase Equilib 2007;261:382–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fluid.2007.07.028.

[178] Javanmardi J, Kh N, Najibi S, Moshfeghian M. Economic evaluation of natural gas
hydrate as an alternative for natural gas transportation. Appl Therm Eng 2005;25:
1708–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2004.10.009.

[179] Khokhar AA, Gudmundsson JS, Sloan ED. Gas storage in structure H hydrates.

Fluid Phase Equilib 1998;150–151:383–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-3812
(98)00338-0.

[180] Jokar SM, Wood DA, Sinehbaghizadeh S, Parvasi P, Javanmardi J.

Transformation of associated natural gas into valuable products to avoid gas
wastage in the form of flaring. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2021:104078. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jngse.2021.104078.

[181] Li D, Wang S, Du Q, Huang R. How many hydrogen molecules (H2) can be stored
in a clathrate hydrate cage? J Renew Sustain Energy 2018;10:34902. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.5021311.

[182] Sugahara T, Haag J, Prasad P, Warntjes A, Sloan ED, Sum A, Koh C. Increasing

hydrogen storage capacity using tetrahydrofuran. J Am Chem Soc 2009;131:
14616–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja905819z.

[183] Kim E, Choi W, Seo Y. Thermodynamic phase equilibria and cage occupancy of

NF3  hydrate. Fluid Phase Equilib 2018;471:55–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fluid.2018.04.013.

[184] Du Z, Deng S, Bei Y, Huang Q, Wang B, Huang J, et al. Adsorption behavior and
mechanism of perfluorinated compounds on various adsorbents—a review.
J Hazard Mater 2014;274:443–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2014.04.038.

[185] Chung IJ, Lee KR, Hwang ST. Separation of CFC-12 from air by polyimide hollow-
fiber membrane module. J Memb Sci 1995;105:177–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0376-7388(95)00058-K.

[186] Hashemi H, Babaee S, Mohammadi AH, Naidoo P, Ramjugernath D. Experimental
measurements and thermodynamic modeling of refrigerant hydrates dissociation
conditions. J Chem Thermodyn 2015;80:30–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jct.2014.08.007.

[187] Nagata T, Tajima H, Yamasaki A, Kiyono F, Abe Y. An analysis of gas separation
processes of HFC-134a from gaseous mixtures with nitrogen-comparison of two
types of gas separation methods, liquefaction and hydrate-based methods, in
terms of the equilibrium recovery ratio. Sep Purif Technol 2009;64:351–6.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2008.10.023.

[188] Kim E, Ko G, Seo Y. Greenhouse gas (CHF3) separation by gas hydrate formation.

ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2017;5:5485–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.7b00821.

[189] Jhaveri J, Robinson DB. Hydrates in the methane-nitrogen system. Can J Chem

Eng 1965;43:75–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/cjce.5450430207.

[190] Dyadin YA, Larionov EG, Manakov AY, Zhurko FV, Aladko EY, Mikina TV, et al.
Clathrate hydrates of hydrogen and neon. Mendeleev Commun 1999;9:209–10.
https://doi.org/10.1070/MC1999v009n05ABEH001104.

[191] Ohgaki K, Sugahara T, Suzuki M, Jindai H. Phase behavior of xenon hydrate

system. Fluid Phase Equilib 2000;175:1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-3812
(00)00374-5.

[192] Duc NH, Chauvy F, Herri JMM. CO2  capture by hydrate crystallization – a
potential solution for gas emission of steelmaking industry. Energy Convers
Manag 2007;48:1313–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2006.09.024.

[193] Wang Y, Lang X, Fan S. Hydrate capture CO2 from shifted synthesis gas, flue gas
and sour natural gas or biogas. J Energy Chem 2013;22:39–47. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S2095-4956(13)60004-2.

[194] Kim DY, Lee H. Spectroscopic identification of the mixed hydrogen and carbon
dioxide clathrate hydrate. J Am Chem Soc 2005;127:9996–7. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ja0523183.

[195] Chen Z, Fang J, Xu C, Xia Z, Yan K, Li X. Carbon dioxide hydrate separation from

integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) syngas by a novel hydrate heat-
mass coupling method. Energy 2020;199:117420. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2020.117420.

[196] Xu CG, Yu YS, Xie WJ, Xia ZM, Chen ZY, Sen LiX. Study on developing a novel
continuous separation device and carbon dioxide separation by process of hydrate
combined with chemical absorption. Appl Energy 2019;255:113791. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113791.

[197] Babu P, Kumar R, Linga P. Medium pressure hydrate based gas separation (HBGS)
process for pre-combustion capture of carbon dioxide employing a novel fixed bed
reactor. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2013;17:206–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijggc.2013.05.010.

[198] Xu CG, Sen LiX, Lv QN, Chen ZY, Cai J. Hydrate-based CO2  (carbon dioxide)

capture from IGCC (integrated gasification combined cycle) synthesis gas using
bubble method with a set of visual equipment. Energy 2012;44:358–66. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2012.06.021.

[199] Akatsu S, Tomita S, Mori YH, Ohmura R. Thermodynamic simulations of hydrate-
based removal of carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide from low-quality natural
gas. Ind Eng Chem Res 2013;52:15165–76. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie402010p.
[200] Li L, Fan S, Chen Q, Yang G, Zhao J, Wei N, et al. Simulation of post-combustion

CO2  capture process by non-equilibrium stage hydrate-based gas separation
technology. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2018;79:25–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijggc.2018.10.004.

[201] Li L, Fan S, Yang G, Chen Q, Zhao J, Wei N, et al. Continuous simulation of the
separation process of CO2/H2  by forming hydrate. Chem Eng Sci X 2020;7:
100067. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cesx.2020.100067.

[202] Gambelli AM, Castellani B, Nicolini A, Rossi F. Gas hydrate formation as a
strategy for CH4/CO2  separation: Experimental study on gaseous mixtures

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102635

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

produced via Sabatier reaction. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2019;71:102985. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jngse.2019.102985.

[203] Linga P, Kumar R, Englezos P. The clathrate hydrate process for post and pre-

combustion capture of carbon dioxide. J Hazard Mater 2007;149:625–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.06.086.

[204] Feyzi V, Mohebbi V. Hybrid hydrate-membrane post-combustion CO2  Capture: a
conceptual process design and analyses. Ind Eng Chem Res 2020;59:13132–42.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.0c01177.

[205] Surovtseva D, Amin R, Barifcani A. Design and operation of pilot plant for CO2
capture from IGCC flue gases by combined cryogenic and hydrate method. Chem
Eng Res Des 2011;89:1752–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2010.08.016.

[206] N. Xie, B. Chen, C. Tan, Z. Liu Energy consumption and exergy analysis of MEA-
based and hydrate-based CO2 separation 2017. 10.1021/acs.iecr.7b03729.
[207] Xu C, Li X, Cai J, Chen Z. Hydrate-based carbon dioxide capture from simulated

integrated gasification combined cycle gas. J Nat Gas Chem 2012;21:501–7.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1003-9953(11)60397-6.

[208] Plaza MG, Pevida C, Martín CF, Fermoso J, Pis JJ, Rubiera F. Developing almond

shell-derived activated carbons as CO2  adsorbents. Sep Purif Technol 2010;71:
102–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2009.11.008.

[209] Plaza MG, García S, Rubiera F, Pis JJ, Pevida C. Post-combustion CO2  capture

with a commercial activated carbon: comparison of different regeneration
strategies. Chem Eng J 2010;163:41–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2010.07.030.

[210] Zhang XX, Liu H, Sun CY, Xiao P, Liu B, Yang LY, et al. Effect of water content on
separation of CO2/CH4  with active carbon by adsorption–hydration hybrid
method. Sep Purif Technol 2014;130:132–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
seppur.2014.04.028.

[211] Mu L, Zhang Q, Cui Q. Experimental study on CO2 capture from simulated flue gas

with an adsorption–hydration method. Ind Eng Chem Res 2021;60:3411–20.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.1c00379.

[212] Rice W. Hydrogen production from methane hydrate with sequestering of carbon

dioxide. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2006;31:1955–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2006.01.017.

[213] Rice W. Proposed system for hydrogen production from methane hydrate with
sequestering of carbon dioxide hydrate. J Energy Resour Technol Trans ASME
2003;125:253–7. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1615795.

[214] Wang X, Dennis M. Thermal energy harvest in the discharge of CO2 semi-clathrate
hydrate in an emulated cold storage system. Appl Therm Eng 2017;124:725–33.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.06.070.

[215] Wang X, Yang S, Zhang H, Xu X, Wood CD, Lipi ́nski W. Amine infused hydrogel-

based CO2  gas storage technology for CO2  hydrate-based cold thermal energy
storage. J CO2  Util 2021;53:101705. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcou.2021.101705.

[216] Xie N, Tan C, Yang S, Liu Z. Conceptual design and analysis of a novel CO2

hydrate-based refrigeration system with cold energy storage. ACS Sustain Chem
Eng 2019;7:1502–11. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b05255.
[217] Sun Q, Kang YT. Experimental correlation for the formation rate of CO2  hydrate
with THF (tetrahydrofuran) for cooling application. Energy 2015;91:712–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.08.089.

[218] Marinhas S, Delahaye A, Fournaison L, Dalmazzone D, Fürst W, Petitet J-P.

Modelling of the available latent heat of a CO2 hydrate slurry in an experimental
loop applied to secondary refrigeration. Chem Eng Process Process Intensif 2006;
45:184–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2005.08.002.

[219] Wang X, Dennis M. An experimental study on the formation behavior of single
and binary hydrates of TBAB, TBAF and TBPB for cold storage air conditioning
applications. Chem Eng Sci 2015;137:938–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2015.07.042.

[220] Mahmoudi B, Naeiji P, Varaminian F. Study of tetra-n-butylammonium bromide
and tetrahydrofuran hydrate formation kinetics as a cold storage material for air
conditioning system. J Mol Liq 2016;214:96–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2015.11.048.

[221] Wang X, Dennis M. Phase equilibrium and formation behaviour of CO2-TBAB
semi-clathrate hydrate at low pressures for cold storage air conditioning
applications. Chem Eng Sci 2016;155:294–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2016.08.020.

[222] Fournaison L, Delahaye A, Chatti I, Petitet JP. CO2  hydrates in refrigeration

processes. Ind Eng Chem Res 2004;43:6521–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie030861r.

[223] Choi JW, Kim S, Kang YT. CO2  hydrate cooling system and LCC analysis for

energy transportation application. Appl Therm Eng 2015;91:11–8. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.07.084.

[224] Oignet J, Delahaye A, Torr ́e JP, Dicharry C, Hoang HM, Clain P, et al. Rheological
study of CO2  hydrate slurry in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate in a
secondary refrigeration loop. Chem Eng Sci 2017;158:294–303. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ces.2016.10.018.

[225] Wang X, Zhang F, Lipi ́nski W. Carbon dioxide hydrates for cold thermal energy
storage: a review. Sol Energy 2020;211:11–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2020.09.035.

[226] Yin Z, Zheng J, Kim H, Seo Y, Linga P. Hydrates for cold energy storage and

transport: a Review. Adv Appl Energy 2021:100022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
adapen.2021.100022.

[227] Wang X, Dennis M. Charging performance of a CO2 semi-clathrate hydrate based
PCM in a lab-scale cold storage system. Appl Therm Eng 2017;126:762–73.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.07.201.

[228] Zhou H, de Sera I, Infante Ferreira C. Modelling and experimental validation of a

fluidized bed based CO2  hydrate cold storage system. Appl Energy 2015;158:
433–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.08.092.

[229] Zhou S, Yan H, Su D, Navaneethakannan S, Chi Y. Investigation on the kinetics of
carbon dioxide hydrate formation using flow loop testing. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2018;
49:385–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2017.10.022.

[230] Dufour T, Hoang HM, Oignet J, Osswald V, Clain P, Fournaison L, et al. Impact of
pressure on the dynamic behavior of CO2 hydrate slurry in a stirred tank reactor
applied to cold thermal energy storage. Appl Energy 2017;204:641–52. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.07.098.

[231] Dufour T, Hoang HM, Oignet J, Osswald V, Fournaison L, Delahaye A.

Experimental and modelling study of energy efficiency of CO2 hydrate slurry in a
coil heat exchanger. Appl Energy 2019;242:492–505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2019.03.009.

[232] Zhang Y, Deng S, Zhao L, Nie X, Xu W, He J. Exploring a potential application of

hydrate separation for composition adjustable combined cooling and power
system. Appl Energy 2020;268:115064. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2020.115064.

[233] Youssef Z, Fournaison L, Delahaye A, Pons M. Management of vapor release in

secondary refrigeration processes based on hydrates involving CO2  as guest
molecule. Int J Refrig 2019;98:202–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijrefrig.2018.11.017.

[234] Kim S, Lee SH, Kang YT. Characteristics of CO2 hydrate formation/dissociation in
H2O + THF aqueous solution and estimation of CO2 emission reduction by district
cooling application. Energy 2017;120:362–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2016.11.086.

[235] Choi S, Park J, Kang YT. Experimental investigation on CO2  hydrate formation/
dissociation for cold thermal energy harvest and transportation applications. Appl
Energy 2019;242:1358–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.03.141.

[236] Sun Q, Kim S, Kang YT. Study on dissociation characteristics of CO2 hydrate with

THF for cooling application. Appl Energy 2017;190:249–56. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.12.156.

[237] Ngan YT, Englezos P. Concentration of mechanical pulp mill effluents and NaCl
solutions through propane hydrate formation. Ind Eng Chem Res 1996;35:
1894–900. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie960001t.

[238] Babu P, Nambiar A, Chong ZR, Daraboina N, Albeirutty M, Bamaga OA, et al.

Hydrate-based desalination (HyDesal) process employing a novel prototype
design. Chem Eng Sci 2020;218:115563. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2020.115563.

[239] Chong ZR, He T, Babu P, Zheng J, Linga P. Economic evaluation of energy

efficient hydrate based desalination utilizing cold energy from liquefied natural
gas (LNG). Desalination 2019;463:69–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
desal.2019.04.015.

[240] Alhejaili A, Daraboina N. Response to comments on effect of Ssalts on TBAB semi
clathrate hydrate formation: application to produced water desalination. Energy
Fuels 2021. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c00255. acs.
energyfuels.1c00255.

[241] Lee W, Kang S-P. Comments on effect of salts on TBAB semi clathrate hydrate

formation: application to produced water desalination. Energy Fuels 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c04072. acs.energyfuels.0c04072.
[242] Ho-Van S, Bouillot B, Douzet J, Babakhani SM, Herri JM. Cyclopentane hydrates –
a candidate for desalination? J Environ Chem Eng 2019;7:103359. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jece.2019.103359.

[243] Shi L, Liang D. Semiclathrate hydrate phase behaviour and structure for CH4  in
the presence of tetrabutylammonium fluoride (TBAF). J Chem Thermodyn 2019;
135:252–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2019.04.004.

[244] Xu H, Khan MN, Peters CJ, Sloan ED, Koh CA. Hydrate-based desalination using
cyclopentane hydrates at atmospheric pressure. J Chem Eng Data 2018;63:
1081–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jced.7b00815.

[245] Nallakukkala S, Abulkhair H, Alsaiari A, Ahmad I, Almatrafi E, Bamaga O, et al.

Suitable binary and ternary thermodynamic conditions for hydrate mixtures of
CH4, CO2, and C3H8  for gas hydrate-based applications. ACS Omega 2022;7:
10877–89. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.1c06186.

[246] Yang M, Song Y, Jiang L, Liu Y, Li Y. CO2  hydrate formation characteristics in a
water/brine-saturated silica gel. Ind Eng Chem Res 2014;53:10753–61. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ie5012728.

[247] Kang KC, Linga P, Park K, Choi SJ, Lee JD. Seawater desalination by gas hydrate

process and removal characteristics of dissolved ions. Desalination 2014;353:
84–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2014.09.007.

[248] Seo Y, Moon D, Lee C, Park JW, Kim BS, Lee GW, et al. Equilibrium, kinetics, and

spectroscopic studies of SF6 hydrate in NaCl electrolyte solution. Environ Sci
Technol 2015;49:6045–50. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b00866.
[249] Nakajima M, Ohmura R, Mori YH. Clathrate hydrate formation from

cyclopentane-in-water emulsions. Ind Eng Chem Res 2008;47:8933–9. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ie800949k.

[250] Choi W, Lee Y, Mok J, Lee S, Lee JD, Seo Y. Thermodynamic and kinetic

influences of NaCl on HFC-125a hydrates and their significance in gas hydrate-
based desalination. Chem Eng J 2019;358:598–605. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2018.10.032.

[251] Ngema PT, Naidoo P, Mohammadi AH, Richon D, Ramjugernath D.

Thermodynamic stability conditions of clathrate hydrates for refrigerant (R134a
or R410a or R507) with MgCl2  aqueous solution. Fluid Phase Equilib 2016;413:
92–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2015.11.002.

[252] Pahlavanzadeh H, Javidani AM, Ganji H, Mohammadi A. Investigation of the
effect of NaCl on the kinetics of R410a hydrate formation in the presence and
absence of cyclopentane with potential application in hydrate-based desalination.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102636

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

Ind Eng Chem Res 2020;59:14115–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
iecr.0c02504.

[253] Song J, Sun ZG, Li R, Dai ML. Effect of HFE254 or cyclopentanone on phase

equilibrium dissociation conditions for carbon dioxide hydrate. J Chem Eng Data
2021;66:2177–81. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jced.1c00063.

[254] Mok J, Choi W, Seo Y. Evaluation of kinetic salt-enrichment behavior and
separation performance of HFC-152a hydrate-based desalination using an
experimental measurement and a thermodynamic correlation. Water Res 2021;
193:116882. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2021.116882.

[255] Truong-Lam HS, Seo SD, Jeon C, Lee JD. Dynamic analysis of growth of ice and
hydrate crystals by in situ raman and their significance in freezing desalination.
Cryst Growth Des 2021;21:6512–22. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.cgd.1c00952.

[256] Babu P, Bollineni C, Daraboina N. Energy analysis of methane-hydrate-based
produced water desalination. Energy Fuels 2021;35:2514–9. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c03550.

[257] Yang M, Song Y, Jiang L, Liu W, Dou B, Jing W. Effects of operating mode and
pressure on hydrate-based desalination and CO2  capture in porous media. Appl
Energy 2014;135:504–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.08.095.
[258] Zheng J, Yang M, Liu Y, Wang D, Song Y. Effects of cyclopentane on CO2 hydrate
formation and dissociation as a co-guest molecule for desalination. J Chem
Thermodyn 2017;104:9–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2016.09.006.

[259] Lee J, Kim KSS, Seo Y. Thermodynamic, structural, and kinetic studies of

cyclopentane + CO2  hydrates: applications for desalination and CO2  capture.
Chem Eng J 2019;375:121974. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.121974.

[260] Han S, Shin JY, Rhee YW, Kang S-P. Enhanced efficiency of salt removal from
brine for cyclopentane hydrates by washing, centrifuging, and sweating.
Desalination 2014;354:17–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2014.09.023.

[261] Lee H, Ryu H, Lim JH, Kim JO, Dong Lee J, Kim S. An optimal design approach of
gas hydrate and reverse osmosis hybrid system for seawater desalination. Desalin
Water Treat 2016;57:9009–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/
19443994.2015.1049405.

[277] Dong H, Zhang L, Ling Z, Zhao J, Song Y. The controlling factors and ion exclusion
mechanism of hydrate-based pollutant removal. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2019;7:
7932–40. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b00651.

[278] Fakharian H, Ganji H, Naderifar A. Desalination of high salinity produced water
using natural gas hydrate. J Taiwan Inst Chem Eng 2017;72:157–62. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jtice.2017.01.025.

[279] Sahu P, Krishnaswamy S, Ponnani K, Pande NK. A thermodynamic approach to

selection of suitable hydrate formers for seawater desalination. Desalination
2018;436:144–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2018.02.001.

[280] He T, Chong ZR, Babu P, Linga P. Techno-economic evaluation of cyclopentane

hydrate-based desalination with liquefied natural gas cold energy utilization.
Energy Technol 2020;8:1900212. https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.201900212.

[281] Neves MF, Trombin VG, Marques VN, Martinez LF. Global orange juice market: a
16-year summary and opportunities for creating value. Trop Plant Pathol 2020;
45:166–74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40858-020-00378-1.

[282] Adnan A, Mushtaq M, Islam T. Fruit juice concentrates. Fruit Juices. Elsevier;
2018. p. 217–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-802230-6.00012-6.
[283] Claßen T, Seidl P, Loekman S, Gatternig B, Rauh C, Delgado A. Review on the food
technological potentials of gas hydrate technology. Curr Opin Food Sci 2019;29:
48–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cofs.2019.08.005.

[284] Srivastava S, Hitzmann B, Zettel V. A future road map for carbon dioxide (CO2)
gas hydrate as an emerging technology in food research. Food Bioprocess Technol
2021;14:1758–62. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11947-021-02656-5.

[285] Seidl P, Loekman S, Sardogan M, Voigt E, Claßen T, Ha J, et al. Food technological
potentials of CO2 gas hydrate technology for the concentration of selected juices.
High Press Res 2019;39:344–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/
08957959.2019.1597077.

[286] Ghiasi MM, Mohammadi AH, Zendehboudi S. Clathrate hydrate based approach
for concentration of sugar aqueous solution, orange juice, and tomato juice: phase
equilibrium modeling using a thermodynamic framework. Fluid Phase Equilib
2020;512:112460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2020.112460.

[262] Maniavi Falahieh M, Bonyadi M, Lashanizadegan A. A new hybrid desalination

[287] Doubra P, Naidoo P, Nelson WM, Ramjugernath D. Gas hydrate concentration

method based on the CO2  gas hydrate and capacitive deionization processes.
Desalination 2021;502:114932. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2021.114932.

[263] Babu P, Nambiar A, He T, Karimi IA, Lee JD, Englezos P, et al. A review of
clathrate hydrate based desalination to strengthen energy–water nexus. ACS
Sustain Chem Eng 2018;6:8093–107. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.8b01616.

measurements on sucrose solutions using a new pilot test rig. AIChE J 2020;66.
https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.16281.

[288] Claßen T, Jaeger M, Loekman S, Gatternig B, Rauh C, Delgado A. Concentration of

apple juice using CO2  gas hydrate technology to higher sugar contents. Innov
Food Sci Emerg Technol 2020;65:102458. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ifset.2020.102458.

[264] Park K, Hong SY, Lee JW, Kang KC, Lee YC, Ha MG, et al. A new apparatus for

[289] Nagashima HD, Alavi S, Ohmura R. Preservation of carbon dioxide clathrate

seawater desalination by gas hydrate process and removal characteristics of
, B3+
). Desalination 2011;274:91–6.
dissolved minerals (Na
, K
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2011.01.084.

, Mg2+

, Ca2+

+

+

[265] Morillo Martín D, Faccini M, García MA, Amantia D. Highly efficient removal of
heavy metal ions from polluted water using ion-selective polyacrylonitrile
nanofibers. J Environ Chem Eng 2018;6:236–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jece.2017.11.073.

[266] Hosseini SM, Alibakhshi H, Jashni E, Parvizian F, Shen JN, Taheri M, et al.

A novel layer-by-layer heterogeneous cation exchange membrane for heavy metal
ions removal from water. J Hazard Mater 2020;381:120884. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.120884.

[267] Ibrahim Y, Naddeo V, Banat F, Hasan SW. Preparation of novel polyvinylidene

fluoride (PVDF)-Tin(IV) oxide (SnO2) ion exchange mixed matrix membranes for
the removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions. Sep Purif Technol 2020;250:
117250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2020.117250.

[268] Lin PY, Wu HM, Hsieh SL, Li JS, Dong C, Chen CW, et al. Preparation of vaterite
calcium carbonate granules from discarded oyster shells as an adsorbent for heavy
metal ions removal. Chemosphere 2020;254:126903. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2020.126903.

[269] Srimuk P, Su X, Yoon J, Aurbach D, Presser V. Charge-transfer materials for

electrochemical water desalination, ion separation and the recovery of elements.
Nat Rev Mater 2020;5:517–38. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41578-020-0193-1.
[270] Han TU, Kim J, Kim K. Freezing-accelerated removal of chromate by biochar

synthesized from waste rice husk. Sep Purif Technol 2020;250:117233. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2020.117233.

[271] Shrestha R, Ban S, Devkota S, Sharma S, Joshi R, Tiwari AP, et al. Technological
trends in heavy metals removal from industrial wastewater: a review. J Environ
Chem Eng 2021;9:105688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2021.105688.
[272] Nallakukkala S, Lal B. Seawater and produced water treatment via gas hydrate:
review. J Environ Chem Eng 2021;9:105053. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jece.2021.105053.

[273] Saidur R, Elcevvadi ET, Mekhilef S, Safari A, Mohammed HA. An overview of

different distillation methods for small scale applications. Renew Sustain Energy
Rev 2011;15:4756–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2011.07.077.

[274] Gaikwad N, Nakka R, Khavala V, Bhadani A, Mamane H, Kumar R. Gas hydrate-

based process for desalination of heavy metal ions from an aqueous solution:
kinetics and rate of recovery. ACS ES&T Water 2021;1:134–44. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsestwater.0c00025.

[275] Wu J, Kang M, Hu F, Yan Y, Hao L, Chen-Zhe C, Jun L, Zhi-Kai Z, Yao-Song J,
Jian-Hong D. Comparing hydrate-based method with freezing/thawing method
for chromium hydroxide sulfate removal close to the melting point of ice. Sep
Purif Technol 2021;266:118523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2021.118523.

[276] Song Y, Dong H, Yang LYM, Li Y, Ling Z, Zhao J. Hydrate-based heavy metal

hydrate in the presence of fructose or glucose and absence of sugars under freezer
conditions. J Ind Eng Chem 2017;54:332–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jiec.2017.06.011.

[290] Li S, Shen Y, Liu D, Fan L, Tan Z, Zhang Z, et al. Experimental study of

concentration of tomato juice by CO2  hydrate formation. Chem Ind Chem Eng Q
2015;21:441–6. https://doi.org/10.2298/CICEQ140730046L.

[291] Rudolph A, El-Mohamad A, McHardy C, Rauh C. Concentrating model solutions

and fruit jJuices using CO2  hydrate technology and its quantitative effect on
phenols, carotenoids, vitamin C and betanin. Foods 2021;10:626. https://doi.org/
10.3390/foods10030626.

[292] Safari S, Varaminian F. Study the kinetics and thermodynamics conditions for CO2
hydrate formation in orange juice concentration. Innov Food Sci Emerg Technol
2019;57:102155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifset.2019.04.008.

[293] Li S, Shen Y, Liu D, Fan L, Tan Z. Concentrating orange juice through CO2

clathrate hydrate technology. Chem Eng Res Des 2015;93:773–8. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cherd.2014.07.020.

[294] Purwanto YA, Oshita S, Seo Y, Kawagoe Y. Concentration of liquid foods by the
use of gas hydrate. J Food Eng 2001;47:133–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0260-
8774(00)00109-6.

[295] Purwanto YA, Oshita S, Seo Y, Kawagoe Y. Separation process of nonpolar gas
hydrate in food solution under high pressure apparatus. Int J Chem Eng 2014;
2014:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/262968.

[296] Arunyanart T, Siripatrawan U, Takeya S, Noritake H, Makino Y, Oshita S.
A combined method implementing both xenon hydrate formation and the
freezing process for the preservation of barley as a simulated food. J Food Eng
2015;165:104–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2015.05.017.

[297] Li S, Qi F, Du K, Shen Y, Liu D, Fan L. An energy-efficient juice concentration
technology by ethylene hydrate formation. Sep Purif Technol 2017;173:80–5.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2016.09.021.

[298] Arunyanart T, Siripatrawan U, Makino Y, Oshita S. A new approach for the
preservation of apple tissue by using a combined method of xenon hydrate
formation and freezing. Innov Food Sci Emerg Technol 2014;26:278–85. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ifset.2014.09.008.

[299] Takeya S, Nakano K, Thammawong M, Umeda H, Yoneyama A, Takeda T, et al.
CO2  processing and hydration of fruit and vegetable tissues by clathrate hydrate
formation. Food Chem 2016;205:122–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2016.03.010.

[300] Peters TB, Smith JL, Brisson JG. Transfer process limited models for CO2

perception in CO2  hydrate desserts. J Food Eng 2013;115:285–91. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2012.10.034.

[301] Peters TB, Smith JL, Brisson JG. Production of CO2  clathrate hydrate frozen

desserts by flash freezing. J Food Eng 2010;100:669–77. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2010.05.017.

separation from aqueous solution. Sci Rep 2016;6:21389. https://doi.org/
10.1038/srep21389.

[302] Peters TB, Smith JL, Brisson JG. Pressure variation due to heat shock of CO2

hydrate desserts. AIChE J 2012;58:957–66. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.12634.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102637

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

[303] Hatakeyama T, Aida E, Yokomori T, Ohmura R, Ueda T. Fire extinction using
carbon dioxide hydrate. Ind Eng Chem Res 2009;48:4083–7. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ie8019533.

[304] Kim J, Andrew K. Suppression of pool fires using halocarbon streaming agents.
Fire Technol 2002;38:7–32. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1013416414094.

[305] Hu S, Li J, Yang F, Yang Z, Duan Y. Multi-objective optimization of organic
Rankine cycle using hydrofluorolefins (HFOs) based on different target
preferences. Energy 2020;203:117848. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2020.117848.

[306] Wang E, Yu Z. A numerical analysis of a composition-adjustable Kalina cycle
power plant for power generation from low-temperature geothermal sources.
Appl Energy 2016;180:834–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2016.08.032.

[330] Feyzi V, Mohebbi V. Mixed CO2+CH4  hydrate formation kinetics: experimental
study and modeling. Energy Fuels 2021;35:1080–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.0c02988.

[331] Zerpa LE, Rao I, Aman ZM, Danielson TJ, Koh CA, Sloan ED, et al. Multiphase

flow modeling of gas hydrates with a simple hydrodynamic slug flow model.
Chem Eng Sci 2013;99:298–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2013.06.016.

[332] Salamatin AN, Falenty A, Kuhs WF. Diffusion model for gas replacement in an

isostructural CH4  –CO2  hydrate system. J Phys Chem C 2017;121:17603–16.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b04391.

[333] Yamaguchi AJ, Sato T, Nono A, Schneidereit SA, Tobase T. Mathematical

modelling of permeability reduction in porous media caused by CO2  hydrate
formation using microscopic phase-field model simulations. Mar Syst Ocean
Technol 2021;16:157–67. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40868-021-00099-3.

[307] Obara S, Tanaka R. Waste heat recovery system for nuclear power plants using the

[334] Li P, Liu D, Zhang X, Lu X. Effect of bubbles produced from hydrate-bearing

gas hydrate heat cycle. Appl Energy 2021:116667. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2021.116667.

particle dissociation on particle motion in water. Energy Fuels 2021;35:1371–80.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c03753.

[308] Kawasaki T, Obara S. CO2  hydrate heat cycle using a carbon fiber supported
catalyst for gas hydrate formation processes. Appl Energy 2020;269:115125.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115125.

[335] Sacconi A, Mahgerefteh H. Modelling start-up injection of CO2  into highly-

depleted gas fields. Energy 2020;191:116530. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2019.116530.

[309] Obara S, Mikawa D. Electric power control of a power generator using

[336] Zhang K, Lau HC. Sequestering CO2  as CO2  hydrate in an offshore saline aquifer

dissociation expansion of a gas hydrate. Appl Energy 2018;222:704–16. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.04.031.

by reservoir pressure management. Energy 2022;239:122231. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2021.122231.

[310] Uemura Y, Kawasaki T, Obara S. Analysis of the performance of an electricity

[337] Qorbani K, Kvamme B, Olsen R. Non-equilibrium simulation of hydrate formation

generation system using the CO2  hydrate formation and dissociation process for
heat recover. Energy 2021;218:119412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2020.119412.

[311] Beeskow-Strauch B, Schicks JM, Spangenberg E, Erzinger J. The influence of SO2

and NO2  impurities on CO2  gas hydrate formation and stability. Chem A Eur J
2011;17:4376–84. https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.201003262.

and dissociation from CO2  in the aqueous phase. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2016;35:
1555–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2016.03.093.

[338] Wang J, Zhao J, Zhang Y, Wang D, Li Y, Song Y. Analysis of the effect of particle
size on permeability in hydrate-bearing porous media using pore network models
combined with CT. Fuel 2016;163:34–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2015.09.044.

[312] Kvamme B, Iden E, Tveit J, Veland V, Zarifi M, Qorbani K. Effect of H2S content

[339] Kou X, Li XS, Wang Y, Liu JW, Chen ZY. Heterogeneity of hydrate-bearing

on thermodynamic stability of hydrate formed from CO2/N2 mixtures. J Chem
Eng Data 2017;62:1645–58. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jced.7b00027.
[313] Kvamme B, Kuznetsova T, Jensen B, Stensholt S, Bauman J, Sjøblom S, et al.

Consequences of CO2  solubility for hydrate formation from carbon dioxide
containing water and other impurities. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2014;16:8623–38.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C3CP53858C.

sediments: definition and effects on fluid flow properties. Energy 2021;229:
120736. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.120736.

[340] Kan JY, Sun YF, Dong BC, Yuan Q, Liu B, Sun CY, et al. Numerical simulation of
gas production from permafrost hydrate deposits enhanced with CO2/N2
injection. Energy 2021;221:119919. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2021.119919.

[314] van der Waals JH, Platteeuw CJ. Clathrate solutions. Adv Chem Phys 1959;2:

[341] He T, Chong ZR, Zheng J, Ju Y, Linga P. LNG cold energy utilization: prospects

1–57. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470143483.ch17.

[315] Parrish WR, Prausnitz JM. Dissociation pressures of gas hydrates formed by gas
mixtures. Ind Eng Chem Process Des Dev 1972;11:26–35. https://doi.org/
10.1021/i260041a006.

[316] Holder GD, Corbin G, Papadopoulos KD. Thermodynamic and molecular

properties of gas hydrates from mixtures containing methane, argon, and krypton.
Ind Eng Chem Fundam 1980;19:282–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/i160075a008.
[317] McKoy V, Sinano ̆glu O. Theory of dissociation pressures of some gas hydrates.
J Chem Phys 1963;38:2946–56. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1733625.
[318] John VT, Holder GD. Langmuir constants for spherical and linear molecules in
clathrate hydrates. Validity of the cell theory. J Phys Chem 1985;89:3279–85.
https://doi.org/10.1021/j100261a023.

[319] Anderson BJ, Bazant MZ, Tester JW, Trout BL. Application of the cell potential

method to predict phase equilibria of multicomponent gas hydrate systems.
J Phys Chem B 2005;109:8153–63. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp045551g.
[320] Zele SR, Lee SY, Holder GD. A theory of lattice distortion in gas hydrates. J Phys

Chem B 1999;103:10250–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp9917704.

[321] Chapoy A, Mohammadi AH, Richon D, Tohidi B. Gas solubility measurement and

modeling for methane–water and methane–ethane–n-butane–water systems at
low temperature conditions. Fluid Phase Equilib 2004;220:113–21. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fluid.2004.02.010.

and challenges. Energy 2019;170:557–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2018.12.170.

[342] He T, Nair SK, Babu P, Linga P, Karimi IA. A novel conceptual design of hydrate
based desalination (HyDesal) process by utilizing LNG cold energy. Appl Energy
2018;222:13–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.04.006.

[343] Xie N, Liu Z, Yang S, Tan C. Energy efficiency a of postcombustion hydrate-based
CO2 capture with tetrahydrofuran and tetra-n-butylammonium bromide. Ind Eng
Chem Res 2020;59:802–13. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.9b04744.

[344] Li Q, Fan S, Chen Q, Yang G, Chen Y, Li L, et al. Experimental and process

simulation of hydrate-based CO2 capture from biogas. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2019;72:
103008. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2019.103008.

[345] Sean WY, Sato T, Yamasaki A, Kiyono F. CFD and experimental study on methane

hydrate dissociation Part I. Dissociation under water flow. AIChE J 2007;53:
262–74. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.11060.

[346] Odukoya A, Naterer GF. Heat transfer and multiphase flow with hydrate

formation in subsea pipelines. Heat Mass Transf 2015;51:901–9. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00231-014-1457-3.

[347] Jeong SM, Chiang Hsieh LH, Huang CY, Sean WY. Direct numerical simulation of
CO2  hydrate dissociation in pore-scale flow by applying CFD method. Int J Heat
Mass Transf 2017;107:300–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2016.10.115.

[322] John VT, Papadopoulos KD, Holder GD. A generalized model for predicting

[348] Cao X, Yang K, Bian J. Investigation of CO2  hydrate slurry flow characteristics

equilibrium conditions for gas hydrates. AIChE J 1985;31:252–9. https://doi.org/
10.1002/aic.690310212.

with particle dissociation for carbon storage and transportation. Process Saf
Environ Prot 2021;152:427–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2021.06.032.

[323] Medeiros F de A, Segtovich ISV, Tavares FW, Sum AK. Sixty years of the van der
Waals and Platteeuw model for clathrate hydrates. Chem Rev 2020;120:
13349–81. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00494.

[349] Song G, Li Y, Wang W, Jiang K, Shi Z, Yao S. Hydrate agglomeration modeling and
pipeline hydrate slurry flow behavior simulation. Chinese J Chem Eng 2019;27:
32–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjche.2018.04.004.

[324] Rao Y, Liu Z, Wang S, Li L, Sun Q. Numerical simulation of swirl flow

characteristics of CO2 hydrate slurry by short twisted band. Entropy 2021;23:913.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e23070913.

[325] Sakurai S, Hoskin B, Choi J, Nonoue T, May EF, Kumar A, et al. Investigating
hydrate formation rate and the viscosity of hydrate slurries in water-dominant
flow: Flowloop experiments and modelling. Fuel 2021;292:120193. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120193.

[326] Tsypkin G. Analytical study of CO2–CH4  exchange in hydrate at high rates of
carbon dioxide injection into a reservoir saturated with methane hydrate and
gaseous methane. Energy 2021;233:121115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2021.121115.

[327] Turner DJ, Miller KT, Dendy Sloan E. Methane hydrate formation and an inward
growing shell model in water-in-oil dispersions. Chem Eng Sci 2009;64:
3996–4004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2009.05.051.

[328] Yang D, Le LA, Martinez RJ, Currier RP, Spencer DF. Kinetics of CO2  hydrate

formation in a continuous flow reactor. Chem Eng J 2011;172:144–57. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2011.05.082.

[329] Ke W, Svartaas TM, Chen D. A review of gas hydrate nucleation theories and

growth models. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2019;61:169–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jngse.2018.10.021.

[350] Prah B, Yun R. Heat transfer and pressure drop simulation of CO2 hydrate mixture
in tube. Int J Air Cond Refrig 2017;25:1750005. https://doi.org/10.1142/
S2010132517500055.

[351] Jassim E, Abdi MA, Muzychka Y. A new approach to investigate hydrate

deposition in gas-dominated flowlines. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2010;2:163–77. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2010.05.005.

[352] Balakin BV, Hoffmann AC, Kosinski P, Høiland S. Turbulent flow of hydrates in a
pipeline of complex configuration. Chem Eng Sci 2010;65:5007–17. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ces.2010.06.005.

[353] Duan X, Shi B, Wang J, Song S, Liu H, Li X, et al. Simulation of the hydrate

blockage process in a water-dominated system via the CFD-DEM method. J Nat
Gas Sci Eng 2021;96:104241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2021.104241.

[354] Balakin BV, Lo S, Kosinski P, Hoffmann AC. Modelling agglomeration and
deposition of gas hydrates in industrial pipelines with combined CFD-PBM
technique. Chem Eng Sci 2016;153:45–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2016.07.010.

[355] Kang SP, Lee H. Recovery of CO2 from flue gas using gas hydrate: thermodynamic
verification through phase equilibrium measurements. Environ Sci Technol 2000;
34:4397–400. https://doi.org/10.1021/es001148l.

[356] Li A, Wang J, Bao B. High-efficiency CO2 capture and separation based on hydrate
technology: a review. Greenh Gases Sci Technol 2019;9:175–93. https://doi.org/
10.1002/ghg.1861.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102638

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

[357] Babu P, Linga P, Kumar R, Englezos P. A review of the hydrate based gas

[383] Nashed O, Partoon B, Lal B, Sabil KM, Shariff AM. Review the impact of

separation (HBGS) process for carbon dioxide pre-combustion capture. Energy
2015;85:261–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.03.103.

[358] Wang X, Zhang F, Lipi ́nski W. Research progress and challenges in hydrate-based
carbon dioxide capture applications. Appl Energy 2020;269:114928. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114928.

nanoparticles on the thermodynamics and kinetics of gas hydrate formation. J Nat
Gas Sci Eng 2018;55:452–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2018.05.022.
[384] Karaaslan U, Parlaktuna M. Promotion effect of polymers and surfactants on

hydrate formation rate. Energy Fuels 2002;16:1413–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef020023u.

[359] Metaxas PJ, Lim V, Booth C, Zhen J, Stanwix PL, Johns ML, et al. Gas hydrate

[385] Kumar A, Sakpal T, Linga P, Kumar R. Influence of contact medium and

formation probability distributions: Induction times, rates of nucleation and
growth. Fuel 2019;252:448–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.04.131.

surfactants on carbon dioxide clathrate hydrate kinetics. Fuel 2013;105:664–71.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2012.10.031.

[360] Moudrakovski IL, McLaurin GE, Ratcliffe CI, Ripmeester JA. Methane and carbon

[386] Okutani K, Kuwabara Y, Mori YsH. Surfactant effects on hydrate formation in an

dioxide hydrate formation in water droplets: spatially resolved measurements
from magnetic resonance microimaging. J Phys Chem B 2004;108:17591–5.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0473220.

[361] Eslamimanesh A, Mohammadi AH, Richon D, Naidoo P, Ramjugernath D.
Application of gas hydrate formation in separation processes: a review of
experimental studies. J Chem Thermodyn 2012;46:62–71. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jct.2011.10.006.

[362] Sinehbaghizadeh S, Javanmardi J, Mohammadi AH. Phase stability conditions of
clathrate hydrates in the (methane + 3-methyl-1-butanol + water), (methane +
3,3-dimethyl-2-butanone + water) and (methane + 2,3-dimethyl-2-butene +
water) systems: Experimental measurements and thermodynamic modeling.
J Chem Thermodyn 2018;125:64–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2018.05.006.
[363] Partoon B, Sabil KM, Keong LK. Capturing carbon dioxide through a gas hydrate-

based process. Chem Eng Trans 2015;45:1867–72. https://doi.org/10.3303/
CET1545312.

[364] Yu L, Charlton TB, Aman ZM, Wu DT, Koh CA. Hydrate growth on methane gas
bubbles in the presence of salt. Langmuir 2020;36:84–95. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b03451.

[365] Tian Y, Li Y, An H, Ren J, Su J. Kinetics of methane hydrate formation in an
aqueous solution with and without kinetic promoter (SDS) by spray reactor.
J Chem 2017;2017:1–5. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/5208915.

unstirred gas/liquid system: An experimental study using methane and sodium
alkyl sulfates. Chem Eng Sci 2008;63:183–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2007.09.012.

[387] Zhong Y, Rogers R. Surfactant effects on gas hydrate formation. Chem Eng Sci
2000;55:4175–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-2509(00)00072-5.

[388] Dicharry C, Diaz J, Torr ́e JP, Ricaurte M. Influence of the carbon chain length of a
sulfate-based surfactant on the formation of CO2, CH4 and CO2–CH4 gas hydrates.
Chem Eng Sci 2016;152:736–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2016.06.034.

[389] Liu Z, Li Y, Wang W, Song G, Lu Z, Ning Y, et al. Experimental investigation on the
micro-morphologies and growing process of methane hydrate formation in SDS
solution. Fuel 2021;293:120320. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120320.

[390] Salako O, Lo C, Couzis A, Somasundaran P, Lee JW. Adsorption of gemini

surfactants onto clathrate hydrates. J Colloid Interface Sci 2013;412:1–6. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2013.09.007.

[391] Hayama H, Mitarai M, Mori H, Verrett J, Servio P, Ohmura R. Surfactant effects
on crystal growth dynamics and crystal morphology of methane hydrate formed
at gas/liquid interface. Cryst Growth Des 2016;16:6084–8. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.cgd.6b01124.

[392] Bhattacharjee G, Linga P. Amino acids as kinetic promoters for gas hydrate

applications: A mini review. Energy Fuels 2021;35:7553–71. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c00502.

[366] Wang L, Zhang Y, Xie H, Lu X, Wen X, Liu Z, et al. Effect of voltage and initial

[393] Liu Y, Chen B, Chen Y, Zhang S, Guo W, Cai Y, et al. Methane storage in a

temperature on thermodynamics and kinetics of CO2  hydrate formation in an
electrostatic spraying reactor. Energy 2022;239:122384. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2021.122384.

[367] Park SS, Kim NJ. Study on methane hydrate formation using ultrasonic waves.
J Ind Eng Chem 2013;19:1668–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2013.02.004.
[368] Li A, Jiang L, Tang S. An experimental study on carbon dioxide hydrate formation
using a gas-inducing agitated reactor. Energy 2017;134:629–37. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2017.06.023.

[369] Takahashi M, Kawamura T, Yamamoto Y, Ohnari H, Himuro S, Shakutsui H.

Effect of shrinking microbubble on gas hydrate formation. J Phys Chem B 2003;
107:2171–3. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp022210z.

[370] Longinos SN, Parlaktuna M. Kinetic analysis of CO2 hydrate formation by the use

of different impellers. React Kinet Mech Catal 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11144-021-01968-z.

[371] Murakami T, Kuritsuka H, Fujii H, Mori YssH. Forming a structure-hydrate using
water and methylcyclohexane jets impinging on each other in a methane
atmosphere. Energy Fuels 2009;23:1619–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef800880f.
[372] Klauda JB, Sandler SI. A fugacity model for gas hydrate phase equilibria. Ind Eng

Chem Res 2000;39:3377–86. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie000322b.

[373] Sinehbaghizadeh S, Javanmardi J, Roosta A, Mohammadi AH. Estimation of the

dissociation conditions and storage capacities of various sH clathrate hydrate
systems using effective deterministic frameworks. Fuel 2019;247:272–86.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.01.189.

[374] Sinehbaghizadeh S, Roosta A, Rezaei N, Ghiasi MM, Javanmardi J,

hydrated form as promoted by leucines for possible application to natural gas
transportation and storage. Energy Technol 2015;3:815–9. https://doi.org/
10.1002/ente.201500048.

[394] Veluswamy HP, Lee PY, Premasinghe K, Linga P. Effect of biofriendly amino acids
on the kinetics of methane hydrate formation and dissociation. Ind Eng Chem Res
2017;56:6145–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.7b00427.

[395] Pandey D, Solms PJS, Daas YJ, von Solms N, et al. Screening of amino acids and
surfactant as hydrate promoter for CO2  capture from flue gas. Processes 2020;8:
124. https://doi.org/10.3390/pr8010124.

[396] Cai Y, Chen Y, Li Q, Li L, Huang H, Wang S, et al. CO2  hydrate formation

promoted by a natural amino acid l-methionine for possible application to CO2
capture and storage. Energy Technol 2017;5:1195–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ente.201600731.

[397] Khandelwal H, Qureshi M, Zheng J, Venkataraman P, Barckholtz T,

Mhadeshwar A, Linga P. Effect of L-tryptophan in promoting the kinetics of
carbon dioxide hydrate formation. Energy Fuels 2021;35:649–58. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c03709.

[398] Xu CG, Yu YS, Ding YL, Cai J, Li XS. The effect of hydrate promoters on gas
uptake. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2017;19:21769–76. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C7CP02173A.

[399] Pires JP, Ramos A da S, Mattos CF, Ketzer M, Lourega RV. Analysis of the effect of

organic salts derived from l-phenylalanine amino acid as kinetic promoters/
inhibitors of CO2  hydrates. Energy Fuels 2021;35:8095–101. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c00140.

Zendehboudi S. Evaluation of phase equilibrium conditions of clathrate hydrates
using connectionist modeling strategies. Fuel 2019;255:115649. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2019.115649.

[400] Rahmati-Abkenar M, Manteghian M, Pahlavanzadeh H. Nucleation of ethane
hydrate in water containing silver nanoparticles. Mater Des 2017;126:190–6.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2017.04.051.

[375] Sinehbaghizadeh S, Javanmardi J, Roosta A, Mohammadi AH. A fugacity

approach for prediction of phase equilibria of methane clathrate hydrate in
structure H. Phys Chem Res 2017;5:465–81. https://doi.org/10.22036/
pcr.2017.69958.1334.

[401] Inkong K, Anh LT, Yodpetch V, Kulprathipanja S, Rangsunvigit P. An insight on
effects of activated carbon and a co-promoter on carbon dioxide hydrate
formation and dissociation. Chem Eng Sci 2022;248:117100. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ces.2021.117100.

[376] Wang W, Bray CL, Adams DJ, Cooper AI. Methane storage in dry water gas

[402] Sa J, Kwak G, Lee B, Han K, Cho S, Jun L, Ju Dong L. Phase equilibria and

hydrates. J Am Chem Soc 2008;130:11608–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja8048173.

[377] Govindaraj V, Mech D, Pandey G, Nagarajan R, Sangwai JS. Kinetics of methane
hydrate formation in the presence of activated carbon and nano-silica suspensions
in pure water. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2015;26:810–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jngse.2015.07.011.

[378] Palodkar AV, Jana AK. Clathrate hydrate dynamics with synthetic- and bio-

surfactant in porous media: model formulation and validation. Chem Eng Sci
2020;213:115386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2019.115386.

[379] Song YM, Liang RQ, Wang F, Zhang DH, Yang L, Zhang DB. Enhanced methane

hydrate formation in the highly dispersed carbon nanotubes-based nanofluid.
Fuel 2021;285:119234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119234.

[380] Zhang X, Li J, Wu Q, Wang J, Wang Y, Li Y. Influence of pressure on the formation
process of CH4 hydrate in porous media below the freezing point. Environ Prog
Sustain Energy 2021. https://doi.org/10.1002/ep.13601.

[381] Wang R, Liu T, Ning F, Ou W, Zhang L, Wang Z, et al. Effect of hydrophilic silica
nanoparticles on hydrate formation: Insight from the experimental study.
J Energy Chem 2019;30:90–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jechem.2018.02.021.
[382] Hyodo M, Wu Y, Nakashima K, Kajiyama S, Nakata Y. Influence of fines content

on the mechanical behavior of methane hydrate-bearing sediments. J Geophys
Res Solid Earth 2017;122:7511–24. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017JB014154.

characterization of CO2  and SF6  binary hydrates for CO2  sequestration. Energy
2017;126:306–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.03.039.

[403] Sabil K, Witkamp GJ, Peters CJ. Phase equilibria in ternary (carbon dioxide +
tetrahydrofuran + water) system in hydrate-forming region: effects of carbon
dioxide concentration and the occurrence of pseudo-retrograde hydrate
phenomenon. J Chem Thermodyn 2010;42:8–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jct.2009.06.025.

[404] Abu Hassan MH, Sher F, Zarren G, Suleiman N, Tahir AA, Snape CE. Kinetic and

thermodynamic evaluation of effective combined promoters for CO2  hydrate
formation. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2020;78:103313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jngse.2020.103313.

[405] Herslund PJ, Daraboina N, Thomsen K, Abildskov J, von Solms N. Measuring and
modelling of the combined thermodynamic promoting effect of tetrahydrofuran
and cyclopentane on carbon dioxide hydrates. Fluid Phase Equilib 2014;381:
20–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2014.08.015.

[406] Daniel-David D, Guerton F, Dicharry C, Torr ́e JP, Broseta D. Hydrate growth at

the interface between water and pure or mixed CO2/CH4 gases: influence of
pressure, temperature, gas composition and water-soluble surfactants. Chem Eng
Sci 2015;132:118–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2015.04.015.

[407] Torr ́e JH, Rigal de Souza Lima RC. Dicharry P. 1,3 Dioxolane versus

tetrahydrofuran as promoters for CO2  hydrate formation: Thermodynamics

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102639

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

properties, and kinetics in presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate. Chem Eng Sci
2015;126:688–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2015.01.018.

[408] Rajabi Firoozabadi S, Bonyadi M. A comparative study on the effects of Fe3O4

nanofluid, SDS and CTAB aqueous solutions on the CO2 hydrate formation. J Mol
Liq 2020;300:112251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2019.112251.

[409] Najibi H, Mirzaee Shayegan M, Heidary H. Experimental investigation of methane
hydrate formation in the presence of copper oxide nanoparticles and SDS. J Nat
Gas Sci Eng 2015;23:315–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2015.02.009.

[410] Pahlavanzadeh H, Rezaei S, Khanlarkhani M, Manteghian M, Mohammadi AH.
Kinetic study of methane hydrate formation in the presence of copper
nanoparticles and CTAB. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2016;34:803–10. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jngse.2016.07.001.

[411] Song Y, Wang F, Liu G, Luo S, Guo R. Promotion effect of carbon nanotubes-doped
SDS on methane hydrate formation. Energy Fuels 2017;31:1850–7. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b02418.

[412] Nesterov AN, Reshetnikov AM. New combination of thermodynamic and kinetic
promoters to enhance carbon dioxide hydrate formation under static conditions.
Chem Eng J 2019;378:122165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.122165.

[413] Li XS, Xu CG, Chen ZY, Wu HJ. Hydrate-based pre-combustion carbon dioxide

capture process in the system with tetra-n-butyl ammonium bromide solution in
the presence of cyclopentane. Energy 2011;36:1394–403. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2011.01.034.

[414] Lee Y, Moon S, Hong S, Lee S, Park Y. Observation of distinct structural

transformation between sI and sH gas hydrates and their kinetic properties during
CO2  capture from N2  + CO2. Chem Eng J 2020;389:123749. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2019.123749.

[415] Yu YS, Zhang QZ, Sen LiX, Chen C, Zhou SD. Kinetics, compositions and structures
of carbon dioxide/hydrogen hydrate formation in the presence of cyclopentane.
Appl Energy 2020;265:114808. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2020.114808.

[416] Ripmeester JA, Ratcliffe CI. Xenon-129 NMR studies of clathrate hydrates: new
guests for structure II and structure H. J Phys Chem 1990;94:8773–6. https://doi.
org/10.1021/j100388a006.

[417] Lee JY, Yun TS, Santamarina JC, Ruppel C. Observations related to

tetrahydrofuran and methane hydrates for laboratory studies of hydrate-bearing
sediments. Geochem Geophys Geosyst 2007;8. https://doi.org/10.1029/
2006GC001531. n/a–n/a.

[418] Xia Z, Li X, Chen Z, Li G, Cai J, Wang Y. Hydrate-based acidic gases capture for
clean methane with new synergic additives. Appl Energy 2017;207:584–93.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.06.017.

[419] Gaikwad N, Bhattacharjee G, Kushwaha OS, Sangwai JS, Linga P, Kumar R. Effect
of cyclooctane and L-tryptophan on hydrate formation from an equimolar
CO2–CH4  gas mixture employing a horizontal-tray packed bed reactor. Energy
Fuels 2020;34:9840–51. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c01511.
[420] Li XS, Xu CG, Chen ZY, Cai J. Synergic effect of cyclopentane and tetra-n-butyl
ammonium bromide on hydrate-based carbon dioxide separation from fuel gas
mixture by measurements of gas uptake and X-ray diffraction patterns. Int J
Hydrog Energy 2012;37:720–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.09.053.
[421] Yang S, Babu H, Sam F, Linga P. Carbon dioxide hydrate kinetics in porous media
with and without salts. Appl Energy 2016;162:1131–40. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.11.052.

[422] H. Ghaedi, M. Ayoub, A.H. Bhat, S.M. Mahmood, S. Akbari, G. Murshid The

effects of salt, particle and pore size on the process of carbon dioxide hydrate
formation: a critical review, 2016, p. 60001. 10.1063/1.4968128.

[423] Sun D, Englezos P. Determination of CO2  storage density in a partially water-

saturated lab reservoir containing CH4 from injection of captured flue gas by gas
hydrate crystallization. Can J Chem Eng 2017;95:69–76. https://doi.org/
10.1002/cjce.22655.

[424] Gauteplass J, Almenningen S, Ersland G, Barth T. Hydrate seal formation during

laboratory CO2  injection in a cold aquifer. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2018;78:
21–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2018.07.017.

[425] Babu P, Kumar R, Linga P. Pre-combustion capture of carbon dioxide in a fixed
bed reactor using the clathrate hydrate process. Energy 2013;50:364–73. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2012.10.046.

[426] Kang SP, Lee J, Seo Y. Pre-combustion capture of CO2 by gas hydrate formation in
silica gel pore structure. Chem Eng J 2013;218:126–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cej.2012.11.131.

[427] Fan S, Yang L, Lang X, Wang Y, Xie D. Kinetics and thermal analysis of methane

hydrate formation in aluminum foam. Chem Eng Sci 2012;82:185–93. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2012.07.040.

[428] Kumar A, Sakpal T, Linga P, Kumar R. Enhanced carbon dioxide hydrate

formation kinetics in a fixed bed reactor filled with metallic packing. Chem Eng
Sci 2015;122:78–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2014.09.019.

[429] Smith DH, Wilder JW, Seshadri K. Methane hydrate equilibria in silica gels with
broad pore-size distributions. AIChE J 2002;48:393–400. https://doi.org/
10.1002/aic.690480222.

[430] Babu P, Yee D, Linga P, Palmer A, Khoo B, Cheong T, Thiam S, Rangsunvigit P.
Morphology of methane hydrate formation in porous media. Energy Fuels 2013;
27:3364–72. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef4004818.

[431] Kono HO, Narasimhan S, Song F, Smith DH. Synthesis of methane gas hydrate in
porous sediments and its dissociation by depressurizing. Powder Technol 2002;
122:239–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-5910(01)00420-X.

[432] Park S, Lee S, Lee Y, Lee Y, Seo Y. Hydrate-based pre-combustion capture of

carbon dioxide in the presence of a thermodynamic promoter and porous silica
gels. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2013;14:193–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijggc.2013.01.026.

[433] Kang SP, Seo Y, Jang W. Kinetics of methane and carbon dioxide hydrate

formation in silica gel pores. Energy Fuels 2009;23:3711–5. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef900256f.

[434] Liu J, Ding JX, Liang DQ. Experimental study on hydrate-based gas separation of

mixed CH4/CO2  using unstable ice in a silica gel bed. Energy 2018;157:54–64.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.05.124.

[435] Wells JD, Chen W, Hartman RL, Koh CA. Carbon dioxide hydrate in a microfluidic

device: Phase boundary and crystallization kinetics measurements with micro-
Raman spectroscopy. J Chem Phys 2021;154:114710. https://doi.org/10.1063/
5.0039533.

[436] Yang M, Jing W, Zhao J, Ling Z, Song Y. Promotion of hydrate-based CO2 capture
from flue gas by additive mixtures (THF (tetrahydrofuran) + TBAB (tetra-n-butyl
ammonium bromide)). Energy 2016;106:546–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2016.03.092.

[437] Song Y, Wang X, Yang M, Jiang L, Liu Y, Dou B, Zhao J, Wang S. Study of selected
factors affecting hydrate-based carbon dioxide separation from simulated fuel gas
in porous media. Energy Fuels 2013;27:3341–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef400257a.

[438] Asadi F, Metaxas P, Lim V, Nguyen T, Aman Z, May E, Nguyen A. Cyclodextrins as
eco-friendly nucleation promoters for methane hydrate. Chem Eng J 2021;417:
127932. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.127932.

[439] Circone S, Stern L, Kirby S, Durham W, Chakoumakos B, Rawn C, Rondinone A,
Ishii Y. CO2 hydrate: Synthesis, composition, structure, dissociation behavior, and
a comparison to structure I CH4  hydrate. J Phys Chem B 2003;107:5529–39.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp027391j.

[440] Ripmeester JA, Alavi S. Molecular simulations of methane hydrate nucleation.

ChemPhysChem 2010;11:978–80. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.201000024.
[441] English NJ, Waldron CJ. Perspectives on external electric fields in molecular

simulation: progress, prospects and challenges. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2015;17:
12407–40. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5cp00629e.

[442] Alavi S, Ripmeester JA. Simulations of hydrogen gas in clathrate hydrates. Mol

Simul 2017;43:808–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/08927022.2017.1295456.

[443] Myshakin EM, Saidi WA, Romanov VN, Cygan RT, Jordan KD. Molecular

dynamics simulations of carbon dioxide intercalation in hydrated Na-
montmorillonite. J Phys Chem C 2013;117:11028–39. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp312589s.

[444] Kuznetsova T, Jensen B, Kvamme B, Sjøblom S. Water-wetting surfaces as hydrate
promoters during transport of carbon dioxide with impurities. Phys Chem Chem
Phys 2015;17:12683–97. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5CP00660K.

[445] Ma Z, Ranjith PG. Review of application of molecular dynamics simulations in
geological sequestration of carbon dioxide. Fuel 2019;255:115644. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.115644.

[446] Kondori J, Zendehboudi S, Hossain ME. A review on simulation of methane

production from gas hydrate reservoirs: Molecular dynamics prospective. J Pet Sci
Eng 2017;159:754–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2017.09.073.

[447] Ning F, Yu Y, Kjelstrup S, Vlugt T, Glavatskiy K. Mechanical properties of

clathrate hydrates: status and perspectives. Energy Environ Sci 2012;5:6779.
https://doi.org/10.1039/c2ee03435b.

[448] Michalis VK, Tsimpanogiannis IN, Stubos AK, Economou IG. Direct phase

coexistence molecular dynamics study of the phase equilibria of the ternary
methane–carbon dioxide–water hydrate system. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2016;18:
23538–48. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6CP04647A.

[449] Matsui H, Jia J, Tsuji T, Liang Y, Masuda Y. Microsecond simulation study on the

replacement of methane in methane hydrate by carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and
carbon dioxide – nitrogen mixtures. Fuel 2019:116640. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.fuel.2019.116640.

[450] Bai D, Zhang X, Chen G, Wang W. Replacement mechanism of methane hydrate
with carbon dioxide from microsecond molecular dynamics simulations. Energy
Environ Sci 2012;5:7033. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2ee21189k.

[451] Xu CG, Cai J, Yu YS, Chen ZY, Li XS. Research on micro-mechanism and efficiency

of CH4  exploitation via CH4-CO2  replacement from natural gas hydrates. Fuel
2018;216:255–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.12.022.

[452] Klapproth A, Piltz RO, Kennedy SJ, Kozielski KA. Kinetics of sII and mixed sI/sII,

gas hydrate growth for a methane/propane mixture using neutron diffraction.
J Phys Chem C 2019;123:2703–15. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06693.

[453] Yang Y, Narayanan Nair AK, Sun S. Molecular dynamics simulation study of

carbon dioxide, methane, and their mixture in the presence of brine. J Phys Chem
B 2017;121:9688–98. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b08118.

[454] Sizova A, Sizov V, Brodskaya E. Molecular dynamics simulation of the stability of
spherical nanoclusters of methane and carbon dioxide hydrates. Colloid J 2020;
82:180–7. https://doi.org/10.1134/S1061933X2002012X.

[455] Costandy J, Michalis VK, Tsimpanogiannis IN, Stubos AK, Economou IG.

Molecular dynamics simulations of pure methane and carbon dioxide hydrates:
lattice constants and derivative properties. Mol Phys 2016;114:2672–87. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00268976.2016.1241442.

[456] Castillo-Borja F, Bravo-S ́anchez UI, V ́azquez-Rom ́an R, Díaz-Ovalle CO. Biogas

purification via sII hydrates in the presence of THF and DMSO solutions using MD
simulations. J Mol Liq 2020;297:111904. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2019.111904.

[457] Torr ́e JP, Ricaurte M, Dicharry C, Broseta D. CO2 enclathration in the presence of
water-soluble hydrate promoters: hydrate phase equilibria and kinetic studies in
quiescent conditions. Chem Eng Sci 2012;82:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2012.07.025.

[458] Albertí M, Pirani F, Laganaì A. Carbon dioxide clathrate hydrates: selective role of
intermolecular interactions and action of the SDS catalyst. J Phys Chem A 2013;
117:6991–7000. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp3126158.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102640

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

[459] Qi Y, Ota M, Zhang H. Molecular dynamics simulation of replacement of CH4  in

[487] Zhang Z, Kusalik PG, Guo GJ, Ning F, Wu N. Insight on the stability of

hydrate with CO2. Energy Convers Manag 2011;52:2682–7. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2011.01.020.

polycrystalline natural gas hydrates by molecular dynamics simulations. Fuel
2021;289:119946. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119946.

[460] Geng C, Wen H, Zhou H. Molecular simulation of the potential of methane

[488] Jiao L, Wang Z, Li J, Zhao P, Wan R. Stability and dissociation studies of CO2

reoccupation during the replacement of methane hydrate by CO2. J Phys Chem A
2009;113:5463–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp811474m.

hydrate under different systems using molecular dynamic simulations. J Mol Liq
2021;338:116788. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2021.116788.

[461] Liu Y, Zhao L, Deng S, Bai D. Evolution of bubbles in decomposition and

replacement process of methane hydrate. Mol Simul 2017;7022:1–13. https://doi.
org/10.1080/08927022.2017.1359745.

[462] Nakate P, Ghosh B, Das S, Roy S, Kumar R. Molecular dynamics study on growth

of carbon dioxide and methane hydrate from a seed crystal. Chin J Chem Eng
2019;27:2074–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjche.2019.02.006.

[463] B.R. Cladek, S.M. Everett, M.T. Mcdonnell, M.G. Tucker, D.J. Ke, C.J. Rawn
Molecular rotational dynamics in mixed CH4(cid:0) CO2 hydrates: insights from
molecular dynamics simulations 2019. 10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b06242.
[464] Kondori J, James L, Zendehboudi S. Molecular scale modeling approach to

evaluate stability and dissociation of methane and carbon dioxide hydrates. J Mol
Liq 2020;297:111503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2019.111503.
[465] Wu G, Tian L, Chen D, Niu M, Ji H. CO2  and CH4  hydrates: replacement or
cogrowth? J Phys Chem C 2019;123:13401–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpcc.9b00579.

[466] Cai T, Johnson JK, Wu Y, Chen X. Toward understanding the kinetics of CO2
capture on sodium carbonate. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11:9033–41.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b20000.

[467] Kvamme B, Graue A, Buanes T, Kuznetsova T, Ersland G. Storage of CO2 in natural
gas hydrate reservoirs and the effect of hydrate as an extra sealing in cold
aquifers. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2007;1:236–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1750-5836(06)00002-8.

[468] Kadoura A, Narayanan Nair AK, Sun S. Molecular dynamics simulations of carbon

dioxide, methane, and their mixture in montmorillonite clay hydrates. J Phys
Chem C 2016;120:12517–29. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b02748.
[469] Dornan P, Alavi S, Woo TK. Free energies of carbon dioxide sequestration and

methane recovery in clathrate hydrates. J Chem Phys 2007;127:124510. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.2769634.

[470] Nohra M, Woo TK, Alavi S, Ripmeester JA. Molecular dynamics Gibbs free energy
calculations for CO2  capture and storage in structure I clathrate hydrates in the
presence of SO2, CH4, N2, and H2S impurities. J Chem Thermodyn 2012;44:5–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2011.08.025.

[471] Sloan ED, Fleyfel F. A molecular mechanism for gas hydrate nucleation from ice.

AIChE J 1991;37:1281–92. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690370902.

[472] Jacobson LC, Hujo W, Molinero V. Nucleation pathways of clathrate hydrates:

effect of guest size and solubility. J Phys Chem B 2010;114:13796–807. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp107269q.

[473] Sarupria S, Debenedetti PG. Homogeneous nucleation of methane hydrate in

microsecond molecular dynamics simulations. J Phys Chem Lett 2012;3:2942–7.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jz3012113.

[489] English NJ, Clarke ET. Molecular dynamics study of CO2  hydrate dissociation:
fluctuation-dissipation and non-equilibrium analysis. J Chem Phys 2013;139:
94701. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4819269.

[490] Sarupria S, Debenedetti PG. Molecular dynamics study of carbon dioxide hydrate
dissociation. J Phys Chem A 2011;115:6102–11. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp110868t.

[491] Srivastava HK, Sastry GN. Viability of clathrate hydrates as CO2 capturing agents:
A theoretical study. J Phys Chem A 2011;115:7633–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp203599g.

[492] Alavi S, Woo TK. How much carbon dioxide can be stored in the structure H

clathrate hydrates?: A molecular dynamics study. J Chem Phys 2007;126:44703.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2424936.

[493] Matsuo M, Takii Y, Matsumoto M, Tanaka H. On the occupancy of carbon dioxide

clathrate hydrates: Grandcanonical monte carlo simulations. J Phys Soc Japan
2012;81:SA027. https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJS.81SA.SA027.

[494] Velaga SC, Anderson BJ. Carbon dioxide hydrate phase equilibrium and cage

occupancy calculations using Ab initio intermolecular potentials. J Phys Chem B
2014;118:577–89. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp410306v.

[495] Izquierdo-Ruiz F, Otero-de-la-Roza A, Contreras-García J, Prieto-Ballesteros O,

Recio JM. Effects of the CO2 guest molecule on the sI clathrate hydrate structure.
Materials (Basel) 2016;9:777. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma9090777.

[496] Jendi ZM, Servio P, Rey AD. Molecular mobility in carbon dioxide hydrates. Mol

Syst Des Eng 2017;2:500–6. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7ME00041C.
[497] Liu Y, Zhao J, Xu J. Dissociation mechanism of carbon dioxide hydrate by

molecular dynamic simulation and ab initio calculation. Comput Theor Chem
2012;991:165–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comptc.2012.04.016.

[498] Izquierdo-Ruiz F, Recio JM, Prieto-Ballesteros O. Theoretical characterization of
the high pressure nonclathrate CO2 hydrate. ACS Earth Sp Chem 2020;4:2121–8.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsearthspacechem.0c00198.

[499] Jiang H, Jordan KD. Comparison of the properties of xenon, methane, and carbon

dioxide hydrates from equilibrium and nonequilibrium molecular dynamics
simulations. J Phys Chem C 2010;114:5555–64. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp9063406.

[500] Mathews SL, Servio PD, Rey AD. Heat capacity, thermal expansion coefficient,

and grüneisen parameter of CH4, CO2, and C2H6  hydrates and ice Ih via density
functional theory and phonon calculations. Cryst Growth Des 2020;20:5947–55.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.cgd.0c00630.

[501] Vlasic TM, Servio PD, Rey AD. Effect of guest size on the mechanical properties
and molecular structure of gas hydrates from first-principles. Cryst Growth Des
2017;17:6407–16. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.cgd.7b01072.

[474] Tung Y, Chen LJ, Chen Y, Lin S. Growth of structure I carbon dioxide hydrate from
molecular dynamics simulations. J Phys Chem C 2011;115:7504–15. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp112205x.

[502] Zong X, Cheng G, Qiu N, Huang Q, He J, Du S, et al. Structures and mechanical
properties of CH4, SO2, and H2S hydrates from density function theory
calculations. Chem Lett 2017;46:1141–4. https://doi.org/10.1246/cl.170333.

[475] He Z, Gupta KM, Linga P, Jiang J. Molecular insights into the nucleation and
growth of CH4  and CO2  mixed hydrates from microsecond simulations. J Phys
Chem C 2016;120:25225–36. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b07780.
[476] Yi L, Liang D, Zhou X, Li D, Wang J. Molecular dynamics simulations of carbon

dioxide hydrate growth in electrolyte solutions of NaCl and MgCl2. Mol Phys
2014;112:3127–37. https://doi.org/10.1080/00268976.2014.932454.

[477] He Z, Linga P, Jiang J. What are the key factors governing the nucleation of CO2

hydrate? Phys Chem Chem Phys 2017;19:15657–61. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C7CP01350G.

[478] Arjun A, Bolhuis PG. Molecular understanding of homogeneous nucleation of CO2
hydrates using transition path sampling. J Phys Chem B 2021;125:338–49.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.0c09915.

[479] Zhang Z, Kusalik P, Guo GJ. Bridging solution properties to gas hydrate

nucleation through guest dynamics. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2018;20:24535–8.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C8CP04466J.

[480] Hall KW, Carpendale S, Kusalik PG. Evidence from mixed hydrate nucleation for a
funnel model of crystallization. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2016;113:12041–6. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1610437113.

[481] Hall KW, Zhang Z, Burnham CJ, Guo GJ, Carpendale S, English NJ. Does local
structure bias how a crystal nucleus evolves? J Phys Chem Lett 2018;9:6991–8.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b03115.

[482] Ferdows M, Ota M. Molecular simulation study for CO2  clathrate hydrate. Chem
Eng Technol 2005;28:168–73. https://doi.org/10.1002/ceat.200407056.
[483] Jacobson LC, Hujo W, Molinero V. Amorphous precursors in the nucleation of
clathrate hydrates. J Am Chem Soc 2010;132:11806–11. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ja1051445.

[484] Sun R, Duan Z. Prediction of CH4  and CO2  hydrate phase equilibrium and cage
occupancy from ab initio intermolecular potentials. Geochim Cosmochim Acta
2005;69:4411–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2005.05.012.

[485] Iwai Y, Nakamura H, Arai Y, Shimoyama Y. Analysis of dissociation process for

gas hydrates by molecular dynamics simulation. Mol Simul 2010;36:246–53.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08927020903307529.

[503] Jia J, Liang Y, Tsuji T, Murata S, Matsuoka T. Elasticity and stability of clathrate
hydrate: role of guest molecule motions. Sci Rep 2017;7:1290. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-017-01369-0.

[504] Shi Q, Cao P, Han Z, Ning F, Gong H, Xin Y, et al. Role of guest molecules in the
mechanical properties of clathrate hydrates. Cryst Growth Des 2018;18:6729–41.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.cgd.8b01017.

[505] Daghash SM, Servio P, Rey AD. From infrared spectra to macroscopic mechanical
properties of sH gas hydrates through atomistic calculations. Molecules 2020;25:
5568. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules25235568.

[506] Moudrakovski IL, Udachin KA, Alavi S, Ratcliffe CI, Ripmeester JA. Facilitating
guest transport in clathrate hydrates by tuning guest-host interactions. J Chem
Phys 2015;142:74705. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4907720.

[507] Phan A, Schl ̈osser H, Striolo A. Molecular mechanisms by which tetrahydrofuran
affects CO2  hydrate growth: implications for carbon storage. Chem Eng J 2021:
129423. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.129423.

[508] Fang B, Ning F, Cao P, Peng L, Wu J, Zhang Z, et al. Modeling thermodynamic

properties of propane or tetrahydrofuran mixed with carbon dioxide or methane
in structure-II clathrate hydrates. J Phys Chem C 2017;121:23911–25. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b06623.

[509] Alavi S, Ripmeester JA. Effect of small cage guests on hydrogen bonding of

tetrahydrofuran in binary structure II clathrate hydrates. J Chem Phys 2012;137:
54712. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4739928.

[510] Shahbabaei M, Kim D. Assessment of hydrate formation, storage capacity, and

transport properties of methane and carbon dioxide through functionalized
carbon nanotube membranes. J Phys Chem C 2021;125:10011–26. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.1c00337.

[511] Wang PW, Wu DT, Lin ST. Promotion mechanism for the growth of CO2 hydrate
with urea using molecular dynamics simulations. Chem Commun 2021. https://
doi.org/10.1039/D0CC06165D.

[512] Lim LHV, Lloren AV, Lamorena RB. The effect of urea in the nucleation process of
CO2  clathrate hydrates. J Mol Liq 2014;194:245–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molliq.2014.03.003.

[486] Sun ZZ, Wang H, Yao J, Bongole K, Zhu X, Liu L, et al. Effect of cage-specific

[513] Liu N, Zhu H, Zhou J, Yang L, Liu D. Molecular dynamics simulations on

occupancy on the dissociation rate of a three-phase coexistence methane hydrate
system: a molecular dynamics simulation study. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2018;55:
235–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2018.05.004.

formation of CO2 hydrate in the presence of metal particles. J Mol Liq 2021;331:
115793. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2021.115793.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102641

S. Sinehbaghizadeh et al.

[514] Mahmoodi MH, Manteghian M, Naeiji P. Study the effect of Ag nanoparticles on
the kinetics of CO2 hydrate growth by molecular dynamics simulation. J Mol Liq
2021;343:117668. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2021.117668.

[525] Han C, Zahid U, An J, Kim K, Kim C. CO2  transport: design considerations and
project outlook. Curr Opin Chem Eng 2015;10:42–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
coche.2015.08.001.

[515] He Z, Mi F, Ning F. Molecular insights into CO2 hydrate formation in the presence
of hydrophilic and hydrophobic solid surfaces. Energy 2021;234:121260. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.121260.

[516] Saikia T, Al-Jaberi J, Sultan A. Synthesis and testing of monoethylene glycol

carbon quantum dots for inhibition of hydrates in CO2 sequestration. ACS Omega
2021;6:15136–46. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.1c01355.

[517] Alavi S, Ohmura R, Ripmeester JA. A molecular dynamics study of ethanol–water
hydrogen bonding in binary structure I clathrate hydrate with CO2. J Chem Phys
2011;134:54702. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3548868.

[518] Makiya T, Murakami T, Takeya S, Sum AK, Alavi S, Ohmura R. Synthesis and
characterization of clathrate hydrates containing carbon dioxide and ethanol.
Phys Chem Chem Phys 2010;12:9927. https://doi.org/10.1039/c002187c.
[519] Liu N, Zhou J, Hong C. Molecular dynamics simulations on dissociation of CO2
hydrate in the presence of inhibitor. Chem Phys 2020;538:110894. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemphys.2020.110894.

[520] Muromachi S, Udachin KA, Alavi S, Ohmura R, Ripmeester JA. Selective

occupancy of methane by cage symmetry in TBAB ionic clathrate hydrate. Chem
Commun 2016;52:5621–4. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6CC00264A.

[521] Naeiji P, Varaminian F, Rahmati M. Thermodynamic and structural properties of
methane/water systems at the threshold of hydrate formation predicted by
molecular dynamic simulations. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2016. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jngse.2016.03.044.

[522] Reshadi P, Modarress H, Dabir B. Amjad-iranagh S. Molecular dynamics

simulation for studying the stability of structure H clathrate-hydrates of argon
and large guest molecules. J Dispers Sci Technol 2018;0:1–10. https://doi.org/
10.1080/01932691.2018.1446145.

[523] Adibi N, Mohammadi M, Ehsani MR, Khanmohammadian E. Experimental

investigation of using combined CH4/CO2  replacement and thermal stimulation
methods for methane production from gas hydrate in the presence of SiO2 and
ZnO nanoparticles. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2020:103690. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jngse.2020.103690.

[524] James RH, Bousquet P, Bussmann I, Haeckel M, Kipfer R, Leifer I, et al. Effects of
climate change on methane emissions from seafloor sediments in the arctic ocean:
a review. Limnol Oceanogr 2016;61:S283–99. https://doi.org/10.1002/
lno.10307.

Saeed Sinehbaghizadeh is a Ph.D. student at Curtin University (Malaysia), department of
chemical  engineering.  He  is  currently  investigating  the  formation  and  dissociation
mechanisms of pure and mixed CO2 hydrates in the presence of promoters using molecular
dynamics simulation. He obtained his master’s degree in chemical engineering from Shiraz
University of Technology. As a senior process engineer, he has 8 years’ experience in oil &
gas refining and petrochemical industries. The work focused on the process simulation of
oil and gas treatment, distillation, extraction, absorption, adsorption, purification, reactor,
and polymerization. He is also experienced in phase equilibrium calculations for precip-
itation of  hydrates,  asphaltenes,  waxes, and  CO2  separation/  conversion  methods from
industrial gas flaring.

Agus  Saptoro  is  currently  a  Professor  at  Curtin  University  (Malaysia).  He  received
Bachelor of Engineering (First Class Honours) in chemical engineering from Gadjah Mada
University Indonesia and obtained his PhD in chemical engineering (process system en-
gineering) from Curtin University Australia. He has been a Visiting Professor/Academic for
University  of  Hyogo,  Japan,  National  Institute  of  Technology  (ITENAS),  Bandung,
Indonesia, and University of Aberdeen, UK. His research expertise and interest include
energy  efficient  CO2  capture  processes,  intelligent  data  and  image  analysis,  process
modelling, simulation and optimisation, and thermal engineering especially microwave
technology. He is a Chartered Professional Engineer with Engineers Australia.

Amir H. Mohammadi has academic qualifications from Universit ́e Paris XIII (Universit ́e
Sorbonne, Paris Cit ́e),   ́Ecole Nationale Sup ́erieure des Mines de Paris, Heriot-Watt Uni-
versity  and  the  University  of  Tehran,  known  for  pioneering  research.  He  has  been  a
Visiting Professor/Professeur Invit ́e at the University of Calgary and Universit ́e Laval, an
Adjunct Lecturer at  ́Ecole des Mines de Nantes and  ́Ecole Nationale Sup ́erieure de Tech-
niques Avanc ́ees, a Visiting Scholar at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), University
of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN), Instituto Polit ́ecnico Nacional (IPN), Planta Piloto de Ingeniería
Química (PLAPIQUI) and Tomsk Polytechnic University and an Honorary Research Pro-
fessor at Durban University of Technology (DUT). He is the recipient of a prize from the
Institute  of  Materials,  Minerals  &  Mining  and  Outstanding  Research  Awards  from  the
University of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102642
