Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Laser processing of graphene and related materials for energy storage: State 
of the art and future prospects 

Rajesh Kumar a,b, *, Angel P´erez del Pino c,*, Sumanta Sahoo d, Rajesh Kumar Singh e, 
Wai Kian Tan f, Kamal K. Kar a,g, Atsunori Matsuda b, Ednan Joanni h, * 
a Advanced Nanoengineering Materials Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India 
b Department of Electrical and Electronic Information Engineering, Toyohashi University of Technology, 1-1 Hibarigaoka, Tempaku-cho, Toyohashi, Aichi, 441-8580, 
Japan 
c Institute of Materials Science of Barcelona, ICMAB-CSIC, Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain 
d Department of Chemistry, Madanapalle Institute of Technology and Science, Madanapalle, Andhra Pradesh, 517325, India 
e School of Physical and Material Sciences, Central University of Himachal Pradesh (CUHP), Kangra, Dharamshala 176215, HP, India 
f Institute of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Toyohashi University of Technology, 1-1 Hibarigaoka, Tempaku-cho, Toyohashi, Aichi, 441-8580, Japan 
g Advanced Nanoengineering Materials Laboratory, Materials Science Programme, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, 208016, India 
h Centre for Information Technology Renato Archer (CTI), Campinas 13069-901, Brazil   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Laser processing 
Controlled manipulation 
Thermochemical/ Photochemical effect 
Graphene-based materials 
Energy storage 

Laser-based methodologies for synthesis, reduction, modification and assembly of graphene-based materials are 
highly  demanded  for  energy-related  electrodes  and  devices  for  portable  electronics.  Laser  technologies  for 
graphene synthesis and modification exhibit several advantages when compared to alternative methods. They are 
fast,  low-cost  and  energy  saving,  allowing  selective  heating  and  programmable  processing,  with  controlled 
manipulation over the main experimental parameters. In this review, we summarize the most recent studies on 
laser-assisted synthesis of graphene-based materials, as well as their modification and application as electrodes 
for supercapacitor and battery applications. After a brief introduction to the physical properties of graphene and 
a discussion of the different types of laser processing operations, the practical uses of laser techniques for the 
fabrication of electrode materials are discussed in detail. Finally, the review is concluded with a brief discussion 
of  some of  the outstanding problems  and possible directions for research in  the area  of laser-based graphene 
materials for energy storage devices.   

1. Introduction 

Over  the  past  several  years,  worldwide  public  opinion  has  been 
focused  on  the  prevention  of  global  warming  and  the  promotion  of 
renewable  energy.  As  expected  from  previous  experience,  scientific 
research  has  closely  followed  global  expectations  [1–3].  Generally 
speaking, some of the main reasons for global warming are the emission 
of  CO2  from  industries,  consumption  of  fossil  fuels  in  vehicles,  and 
dumping of untreated waste in open spaces [4–7]. In order to minimize 

CO2  emissions,  different  approaches  are  being  pursued  by  different 
countries,  such  as  energy  substitution  programs,  investment  in  clean 
energy technologies, and various energy-efficiency initiatives. Clean and 
renewable  energy  sources,  such  as  solar  energy  and  wind  power,  are 
intrinsically intermittent. Since these energy sources cannot be activated 
on demand, and they may not be available when needed, they must rely 
on energy storage devices for achieving full time availability [8–11]. On 
the other hand, with the rapid growth of portable electronics and elec-
tric vehicles, the demand for high-performance energy storage devices 

Abbreviations:  SCs,  supercapacitors;  μSCs,  Micro-supercapacitors;  CNT,  Carbon  nanotube;  GO,  Graphene  oxide;  rGO,  Reduced  graphene  oxide;  LrGO,  Laser 
reduced graphene oxide; GOQDs, Graphene oxide quantum dots; GQDs, graphene quantum dots; CNTs, Carbon nanotubes; MWCNTs, Multi-walled carbon nanotubes; 
HOPG,  Highly  ordered  pyrolytic  graphite;  MOFs,  Metal  organic  frameworks;  LCVD,  Laser  chemical  vapor deposition;  ALD,  Atomic  layer  deposition;  LIG,  Laser- 
induced graphene; LSG, Laser-scribed graphene; PLD, Pulsed laser deposition; MAPLE, Matrix-assisted pulsed laser evaporation; RIMAPLE, Reactive inverse matrix- 
assisted pulsed laser evaporation; LIFT, Laser-induced forward transfer; LIBT, Laser-induced backward transfer; LIPSS, Laser induced periodic surface structures; PET, 
Poly(ethylene terephthalate); PVDF, Polyvinylidene fluoride; PI, Polyimide; LFP, Lithium iron phosphate. 

* Corresponding authors 

E-mail addresses: rajeshbhu1@gmail.com (R. Kumar), aperez@icmab.es (A. P´erez del Pino), ednan.joanni@gmail.com (E. Joanni).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100981 
Received 6 July 2021; Received in revised form 29 November 2021; Accepted 19 December 2021   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100981Availableonline10January20220360-1285/©2021ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

with  high  energy  and  power  densities,  as  well  as  long  term  cycling 
stability is becoming more and most pressing [12–16]. 

Among the electrochemical energy storage devices, supercapacitors 
(SCs)/ micro-supercapacitors (μSCs) and batteries have received much 
attention  owing  to  their  charge/discharge  rates,  power  and  energy 
densities, eco-friendly nature and long term cycling stability [17–21]. In 
their present development stages, SCs can deliver high power densities, 
but their energy densities are usually not satisfactory, whereas batteries 
can deliver high energy densities, but normally suffer from low power 
densities [22–24]. 

The limitations of these charge storage devices are highly dependent 
on the properties of their electrode materials, such as their conductivity, 
active specific surface area and porosity. Recently, carbon-based mate-
rials  with  different  structures  and  morphologies,  obtained  through 
various  synthesis  approaches,  have  been  applied  in  electrodes  for 
energy-related devices [25–28]. Among several other candidates for SC 
and battery electrodes, carbon materials are frequently chosen due to 
their low production cost, high specific surface area, wide working po-
tential  window,  good  chemical  stability  and  electrical  conductivity 
[29–31].  In  hybrid  electrodes,  carbon  materials  provide  a  conductive 
framework, helping to avoid the agglomeration of metal oxides loaded 
on their surface [32]. Examples of carbon-based materials successfully 
applied in energy-related devices are carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [33–35], 
carbon spheres [36,37], carbon nanofibers [38], hollow carbon spheres 
[39,40], hollow carbon nanorods [41,42], and porous carbon [43–45]. 
Among the carbon materials, graphene has been widely studied due 
to  its  exceptional  properties,  such  as  high  surface  area,  intrinsic 
mobility,  Young’s  modulus,  electrical  conductivity  and  thermal  con-
ductivity [46–50]. Also, graphene oxide (GO), reduced graphene oxide 
(rGO),  graphene  hydrogel,  graphene  aerogel,  graphene  quantum  dots 
(GQDs),  GO  quantum  dots  (GOQDs),  and  doped  graphene,  which  are 
graphene  derivatives,  are  highly  demanded  for  electrodes,  especially 
due  to  their  favorable  electrochemical  properties,  high  surface  area, 
light weight, and a wide range of electrical conductivity values [51–53]. 
Graphene-based  materials  have  demonstrated  enough  outstanding 
properties  at  the  laboratory  scale  to  be  considered  crucial  in  future 
technologies, acting as either primary components or additives [54,55]. 
Many  applications  such  as  environmental,  structural,  electrical  and 
optoelectronic  technologies,  and  particularly  energy  storage,  are 
revealing substantial progress with the use of graphene-based materials, 
being  close  to  production  levels  in  many  cases  [56–59].  As  expected 
from the variety of materials and morphologies, several methods have 
already been reported for synthesizing graphene and its derivatives for 
application  in  energy  storage  devices  [60,61].  Among  the  synthetic 
approaches, laser irradiation is one of the most powerful tools for con-
trollably  providing  the  designed  materials  and  even  full  device  elec-
trodes in a single, fast, flexible, scalable, and energy efficient process. 
Furthermore,  laser  processing  can  be  applied  to  flexible  substrates, 
preserving their structural integrity, something which is not possible (or 
very difficult) when using other synthesis routes [62]. 

During  laser  processing,  the  material  is  suddenly  exposed  to  high 
levels  of  concentrated  energy.  The  electrons  from  the  material  that 
absorb the incident photons become excited, interacting through com-
plex  dynamics  with  the  atomic  lattice  in  a  characteristic  timescale. 
Depending on the nature of the radiation and the electronic relaxation 
time, the irradiated material can assume conditions out of electronic and 
thermodynamic equilibrium, leading to the creation of heat waves that 
can be localized in space and time, thus triggering homogeneous and 
heterogeneous  reactions  that  can  be  activated  by  photochemical  in-
teractions (photolytic reactions) and/or photothermal mechanisms [63, 
64]. In this manner, laser irradiated materials can be selectively heated 
to extreme temperatures, and may experience heating and cooling rates 
(cid:0) 1, which are orders of magnitude higher 
in the range of 106-1012  K s
than the rates of conventional systems [63–67]. Some emerging tech-
niques  with  great  promise  are  the  laser-induced  ultrafast  growth  and 
assembly of different types of functional nanomaterials [68–76] and the 

laser-based printing of nanomaterials, circuits and micro-devices for the 
fabrication  of  highly-integrated  flexible  electronics  [77–80].  Further-
more,  laser  radiation  is  also ideal  for  micro/nanofabrication of  struc-
tures  and  devices  by  selective  photo-induced  chemical  reactions, 
heating, melting or ablation mechanisms [81–86]. 

In this article, we review the state of the art regarding the application 
of laser technology to the synthesis and modification of graphene-based 
materials for use in electrodes of energy storage devices. After a brief 
introduction, and a summary of the thermal and optical characteristics 
of graphene and GO, we discuss the effects of the main laser processing 
parameters and the various laser processes that have been applied for 
synthesis  and  modification  of  graphene  and  related  materials.  In  the 
remaining text we discuss some of the recent, most promising research 
on  energy  storage  device  electrodes  obtained  with  the  help  of  laser 
processing.  We  conclude  the  review  with  a  discussion  of  the  more 
pressing challenges and opportunities for laser technology in the fields 
of graphene processing and energy device fabrication. 

The image in Fig. 1 shows a schematic representation of the various 
approaches for laser synthesis and modification of graphene and related 
materials, as well as the main processing parameters. For a given energy 
storage device (SC or battery), once the fabrication technique is selected, 
the process is optimized by changing the laser and processing parame-
ters. More than one type of laser processing method can be applied in the 
device fabrication sequence. 

2. Graphene and graphene oxide: Optical and thermal 
properties 

Pristine single layer graphene exhibits less than 0.1% reflectance in 
the visible region, increasing to approximately 2% for ten layer flakes 
[87,88]. For real samples these values are larger, especially for rough 
surfaces and defective materials. Higher values of reflectance have been 
reported, for example, by Bellucci et al. [89]. Despite its one-atom layer 
thickness,  the  optical  absorption  is  about  2.3%  over  the  visible  spec-
trum, increasing proportionally to the number of layers. The absorption 
spectrum of graphene is actually quite smooth over a wider wavelength 
range (300 - 2500 nm), with an absorption peak near 270 nm from the 
π-π*  interband  transition  of  conjugated  electrons  [90].  In  few-layer 
graphene  sheets,  additional  absorption  bands  appear  at  lower  en-
ergies,  caused  by  Van  Hove  singularities  in  the  density  of  states  and 
interband coupling [91,92]. Moderate doping of graphene with either N 
or B does not significantly affect its absorption spectrum, though highly 
co-doped (B/N) graphene exhibits a significant red shift in the absorp-
tion bands [93]. It should be noticed that the dissociation energy of the 
C=C sp2  bonds is 6.4 eV, corresponding to the wavelength of 195 nm 
[94]. Hence, illumination of graphene with more energetic photons may 
induce its extensive decomposition through photolytic processes. Car-
bon atoms located in structural defects, having lower dissociation en-
ergies,  may  undergo  photoinduced  chemical  reactions  even  when 
irradiated with larger wavelength light. GO can be regarded as a gra-
phene sheet decorated with a large number of disordered nanoregions 
with  oxygen-containing 
functional  groups  (epoxide,  hydroxide, 
carbonyl, carboxyl etc.), in addition to impurities (from chemical syn-
thesis)  and  crystalline  defects  [95,96].  Accordingly,  the  optical  prop-
erties  of  GO  shows  different  features  when  compared  to  those  of 
graphene. Smirnov et al. studied the photoreduction of GO during UV 
illumination and observed the evolution of absorption in GO films and 
aqueous dispersions during the reduction process [97]. The spectrum of 
GO  reveals  a  monotonic  increase  of  absorbance  with  photon  energy, 
showing high absorption in the UV region. As the photoreduction of GO 
proceeds, an increase of absorption in the 285-400 nm wavelength range 
takes place, until the characteristic absorbance of graphite is reached. 
The  thermal  properties  of  graphene-based  materials  are  also 
remarkable. Single layer graphene displays high thermal conductivity 
(cid:0) 1), a specific heat similar to that of graphite, and a 
(up to ~5000 WmK
very  high  melting  temperature  of  about  4500-5000  K  [98–102].  The 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009812R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of laser irradiation-assisted methods for synthesis and modification of graphene materials and their application as electrodes in SC 
devices and batteries. 

case of GO is more complex, due to its variable and disordered consti-
tution,  besides  its  chemical  reactivity.  When  heated,  deoxygenation 
processes  take  place,  leading  to  the  formation  of  different  carbon 
structures and structural defects, depending on the particular chemical 
path followed [103–105]. The evolution of chemical composition and 
structural  defects  can  be  quantitatively  studied  through  X-ray  photo-
electron and Raman spectroscopies [106,107]. Thus, the thermal prop-
erties of GO would depend  on its original composition  and structural 
configuration. For instance, when compared to graphene, the presence 
of oxygen chemical groups and crystalline defects in GO significantly 
reduce its thermal conductivity by means of phonon scattering, though 
the conductivity increases with the degree of GO reduction [108–110]. It 
should be pointed out that the number of layers and the amount of de-
fects  markedly  influence  the  thermophysical  properties  of  graphene 
materials [111–114]. Besides, comparable thermal properties are also 
found in other graphitic nanocarbon materials, such as CNTs [111,115]. 

3. Laser treatments 

The outcome of any laser treatment, besides being dependent on the 
properties  of  the  material  itself,  is  strongly  determined  by  the 

characteristics of the laser, the optical components, the whole system 
setup and the immediate environment where the treatment is performed 
[62]. This suggests the need to control a series of experimental condi-
tions. On the other hand, it provides a rich experimental field for syn-
thesis and modification of materials. 

From the point of view of materials science, the laser-matter inter-
action,  when  exploited to  its  full  potential,  is  an  extremely  attractive 
approach for synthesis and modification of materials. It can provide very 
fast, very clean and flexible processing; localized treatments with full 
control (over a wide range) of both the energy transferred to the ma-
terial and the time elapsed in the interaction. Under the proper condi-
tions,  computer-controlled  laser  treatments  can  even  be  applied  for 
direct  device  building,  including  the  possibility  of  fast  roll-to-roll 
processing. 

3.1. Laser and processing parameters 

The application of laser irradiation to the synthesis and modification 
of graphene and related materials has been the focus of two recent re-
views [62,116]. The processing parameters affecting the results of laser 
treatments have already been discussed in detail in those publications. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009813R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

The  main  variables  are  the  laser  wavelength,  the  laser  power,  the 
duration of the laser pulses, the fluence (energy/surface area), the en-
ergy profile of the laser beam, the degree of focusing, and the writing 
speed.  Table  1  summarizes  the  essential  points,  especially  for  the 
readers  without  previous  experience  with  laser  processing.  A  more 
detailed discussion can be found in previous study [62]. 

3.2. Laser treatment of graphene and related materials 

Taking into account the laser characteristics and processing param-
eters already discussed, many types of laser treatment operations can be 
performed, depending on the configuration of the system and the optical 
components.  Table  2  summarizes  the  main  processes  which  can  be 
carried out for synthesis and modification of materials, fabrication  of 
components  and,  in  some  cases,  even  “direct  writing”  of  working 
devices. 

3.2.1. Treatments based on laser-activated reactions 

Restricting the discussion of laser processing methods to the mate-
rials and devices in the scope of this review, a good starting point is the 
laser  synthesis  of  graphene  from  carbon-containing  substances.  The 
highly  confined  nature  of  laser  treatments  allows  localized  graphene 
formation according to pre-defined patterns. The laser chemical vapor 
deposition (LCVD) process, based on small hydrocarbon molecules, is 
the most obvious example of laser-assisted graphene synthesis, although 
the method has also been performed using liquid and solid precursors 
[117–121]. The high cost and hazardous nature of some precursors are 
problems yet to be solved for this technology. Alternative methods based 
on the catalyst-assisted laser formation of graphene materials are being 
developed, showing new ways for avoiding such drawbacks [122,123]. 
CVD is the method of choice for synthesis of high quality monolayer 
or  few-layer graphene.  Laser synthesis of graphene  (as in Laser CVD) 
presents further opportunities for development, especially in a variation 
of the method, laser ALD. By selectively growing atomic layers only in 
the laser-irradiated regions of the substrate (or vice versa) one could, in 
principle, build complex devices using relatively simple equipment. This 
is an attractive idea still waiting for more fundamental research (and a 
few technological solutions). 

Some  thermally  activated  chemical  reactions  taking  place  under 
extreme conditions can be triggered on the surface of nanocarbon ma-
terials. As an example, the growth of inorganic nanostructures on CNT 
and rGO surfaces by direct laser irradiation of nanocarbon mixed with 
other precursors has been reported, leading to the formation of hybrid 
materials  [124–129].  The  laser-induced  creation  of  structural  defects 
and open-ended carbon atoms has allowed the nanowelding of graphene 
sheets  to  gold  metal  contacts  at  laser  fluences  below  the  ablation 
threshold  of  graphene  [130].  After  subsequent  thermal  annealing, 
graphene-metal  junctions  with  ultra-low  contact  resistance  were  ob-
tained  in  a  precise  manner,  enabling  a  substantial  performance 
enhancement  in  suspended  graphene  photodetectors.  Graphene  has 
of 
been 
fluoropolymer-covered graphene [131]. The fluorine radicals generated 
by decomposition of the polymer in the laser-treated region react with 
the sp2-hybrized carbon, and C(cid:0) F bond formation leads to a dramatic 
increase in the resistance of graphene, while avoiding degradation of the 
carbon network. 

fluorinated 

irradiation 

selectively 

laser 

by 

Laser-activated  reactions  in  graphene  have  been  reported,  as  dis-
cussed,  and  applications  have  been  proposed,  but  the  scope  for  new 
developments in this field are still huge, especially when graphene de-
rivatives are considered. Along this area of research, short wavelength 
lasers  might  be  be  more  flexible  when  applied  to  selective  bond 
breaking.  They  could  be  used  to  trigger  specific  reactions,  exploiting 
both photochemical and photothermal effects for reaching the intended 
results. 

Laser  reduction  of  GO  has  become  one  of  the  most  popular  tech-
niques for the fabrication of graphene-based materials and devices. GO 

Table 1 
Main experimental  variables  for laser  processing  and  their effect  on  the final 
results obtained with the treatments.  

Process Variable 

Effects on Laser Treatment 

The smaller the laser wavelength, the smaller 
the laser penetration in the material 
The smaller the laser wavelength, the better 
the beam can be focused (smaller spot size) 
For longer laser wavelengths, heating 
(thermochemical effect) is predominant, 
while for shorter wavelengths, bond breaking 
(photochemical effect) may prevail, 
depending on the material 

The higher the laser power, the larger the 
amount of energy transferred to the material 
(higher temperature) 
Most lasers operate at constant pulse energy, 
so the power is actually modified by changing 
pulse frequency 
Changing the pulse frequency of a laser beam 
scanning the sample also changes the spot 
overlap of consecutive laser pulses 

The smaller the laser pulse width, the smaller 
the heat-affected zone around the treated 
region  
Determined by laser choice, since most lasers 
operate with nearly constant pulse widths 
Ultra-short pulses (in the fs range) 
concentrate high energy and may induce 
non-linear processes in the material, enabling 
cleaner ablation results 

The more uniform the beam energy profile, 
the more uniform the result of the laser 
treatment applied to the material  
Most lasers types have a beam with a 
Gaussian profile, where the energy decreases 
towards the borders of the laser spot 
The energy profile can be “flattened” with 
pinholes or combinations of optical elements, 
but Gaussian profiles can also be exploited to 
“write” features smaller than the actual laser 
spot size 

Beam focusing is used for controlling the 
laser spot size, which determines the 
minimum feature size for the treatment 
The higher the degree of focusing, the higher 
the laser fluence (energy/spot area)  
Laser fluence is one of the most important 
parameters for controlling and comparing 
different processes 

Writing speed has a direct effect on spot 
overlap. If we consider a combination of 
fluence and overlap, we can make an analogy 
with ionizing radiation and the effect of 
cumulative doses 
The lower the writing speed, the higher the 
“dose” of laser irradiation provided to a 
region of the material 
The laser “dose” provided during the 
treatment can be controlled by changing 
laser power or writing speed  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009814R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Table 2 
Main types of laser treatments for synthesis and modification of graphene materials for application in energy storage devices.  

Treatment 

Description 

Applications/Comments 

Synthesis is the localized formation of graphene induced by laser 
irradiation of substrates in the presence of carbon or carbon-containing 
raw materials 
Can be performed with gaseous, liquid or solid precursors 
The synthesis, as defined, should include many instances of carbonization 
(or graphitization), but these have been treated as a separate operation 
due to the wide range of practical applications 

The most relevant example is the LCVD process for growing high 
quality graphene films over metal catalyst-coated substrates 
Can be applied to the growth of films under a liquid environment 
Can be used (with adaptations) for direct growth of doped or 
decorated graphene 

Reactions might be activated by photochemical and/or thermochemical 
mechanisms upon laser irradiation 
The reactions may involve only solids, as in the case of a film over a 
substrate, or they might occur in the interface with a fluid (a powder in 
suspension, for example) 
Strictly speaking, synthesis, reduction, doping, etc. are (or at least include) 
reactions, but here these operations were discussed separately, due to their 
technological relevance 

Thermally activated reactions can be used for modifying graphene 
and its derivatives 
Attachment of chemical groups for local functionalization 
Can be performed in liquid or gaseous media 
Reactions between a graphene material and its supporting 
substrate are also possible 

Reduction, in this context, is a term referring to the removal of oxygen (or 
oxygen-containing chemical groups) from graphene materials upon laser 
irradiation 
The laser reduction of GO is predominantly a photothermal process, well 
suited to IR lasers, but can also be performed with visible and UV lasers 
May be carried out in liquid media, including solutions 

The laser reduction of GO is a very interesting process for 
obtaining rGO, with properties similar to graphene 
The process can be directly applied to device fabrication for SCs 
and battery electrodes 
Doping and decoration can be performed simultaneously with 
reduction 
Local control over the degree of GO reduction is very convenient 
for energy storage devices 

Carbonization is the thermal decomposition of an organic material under 
low oxygen ambient conditions. Carbon is the only chemical element left 
upon complete carbonization of the material 
Graphite and/or graphene flakes might be the resulting structures, in 
which case the process has been named “graphitization” 
Taking advantage of the short interaction times normally used in laser 
irradiation, under the right set of processing parameters, the operation 
may be carried out in ambient conditions 

The material resulting from polymer graphitization has been 
named “laser-induced graphene” (LIG) 
Laser carbonization of polymers is a very attractive method for 
making graphene-based flexible devices 
The method can be used for direct writing of electrodes for SCs 
and batteries 
Simultaneous doping and graphitization is possible, using 
deposited films, liquids and gases 

Doping, in this context, is the inclusion of heteroatoms in the material 
structure 
The doping process may proceed according to a number of different 
pathways, but in any case the process involves bond breaking, diffusion 
and reaction 
The dopants may occupy different positions in the material structure, 
depending on their nature, the chemical groups replaced and the 
treatment conditions 

Laser doping of graphene has been widely explored in several 
applications, including energy storage devices 
Simultaneous doping and reduction is a very convenient way of 
obtaining doped rGO 
Possibility of doping materials deposited over heat-sensitive 
substrates 
Decoration of doped rGO with metal or metal oxide nanoparticles 
can be achieved in the same process 

Ablation is the removal of material following the incidence of laser pulses 
with intensity above a minimum value 
The ablation threshold (more accurately expressed in terms of laser 
fluence) is strongly dependent on the material being treated and the laser 
wavelength 
Upon the sudden supply of concentrated energy, the surface layers are 
vaporized and ejected at supersonic speeds, perpendicular to the 
illuminated surface 

This is the main mechanism for laser micromachining operations, 
which can be used for device fabrication 
Ablation can be used for sculpting bulk materials, cutting 
substrates, making holes, and also for selective film removal 
operations 
Controlled laser ablation can be performed on multilayer 
graphene for “thinning” (decreasing the number of layers) 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009815R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Table 2 (continued ) 

Treatment 

Description 

Applications/Comments 

Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is a thin film deposition method which 
uses as source the material ejected by the laser ablation of a solid target 
The substrate is placed facing the target in a controlled environment (gas 
pressure and composition) 
The ionized material in the plume is condensed on the substrate, gradually 
building up a deposited film 

The method can be used for the synthesis of graphene from carbon 
targets 
Control over the deposition atmosphere (pressure, composition) 
can be exploited for in-situ doping 
Possibility to deposit successive films from different carbon 
materials (by changing targets) 

Matrix-assisted pulsed laser evaporation (MAPLE) is a variant of the 
PLD process, where the solid target is replaced by a suspension of the 
material to be deposited in a volatile substance kept at cryogenic 
temperatures 
The expansion of the vaporized matrix upon fast laser heating carries the 
material towards the substrate 

The method was devised for depositing sensitive or fragile 
materials that would otherwise be destroyed by the laser 
Can be used to deposit any type of layered carbon materials, 
including GO 
Can be used for making hybrid electrodes incorporating different 
forms of nanostructured carbon materials 

Laser-induced forward transfer (LIFT) is a process where the laser beam 
is used to cause local ablation of a film deposited on a transparent 
substrate, with the ejected material being deposited on another (parallel) 
substrate in close proximity 
The film working as the source for deposition (the “donor” film) is ablated 
by the laser illumination from the back 
For this reason, the substrate must be transparent at the wavelength of the 
laser radiation 

A variation of this method, using laser-induced backwards 
transfer (LIBT), places the donor substrate after the (transparent) 
substrate that will receive the film 
Can be used for direct device writing on any type of substrate 
Can be used as a layer-by-layer additive printing technique for 
building 3D electrodes 

Exfoliation is a nomenclature reserved for layered materials, referring to 
the process of separating individual layers from the originally stacked 
sheets 
The exfoliation relies on the sudden evaporation of molecules intercalated 
between the layers causing their separation from the bulk 
This is distinct from laser thinning, which takes place by ablation of the 
surface layers 

Laser exfoliation is used for isolating individual graphene layers 
(or groups of layers) from graphite 
The operation can be performed in air, under a controlled 
atmosphere, or with the material immersed in a liquid 
Powders can be exfoliated while suspended in a liquid/solution 

Texturing is a broad categorization, covering structural and 
morphological changes brought about by laser-treatments 
Shorter laser wavelengths and pulse widths are, broadly speaking, more 
adequate for direct texturing/structuring of surfaces 
Structuring can be accomplished by direct surface illumination or by 
carefully controlled manipulation of laser interference fringes formed in 
the material surface 

Roughening of graphene and its derivatives for increased surface 
area 
Formation of laser-induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS) in 
graphene 
Unzipping of carbon nanotubes to obtain graphene nanoribbons 
Patterning of graphene materials or selective reduction of GO by 
exposure to laser fringes generated through interference 

Annealing is another wide ranging term, covering any process in which a 
localized thermal treatment is applied with the laser beam 
Depending on the material and the specific situation, possible outcomes 
are: structural relaxation, partial decomposition, phase change, etc. 
Annealing processes are also applied for changing the values of specific 
properties 

Laser annealing can increase the conductivity of graphene and its 
derivatives 
The process can be applied after other laser operations for 
achieving a relaxed (closer to equilibrium) structural state 
Annealing can be used to improve electrical contacts between 
graphene and metals 
Annealing can be applied to remove volatile contaminants or 
synthetic residues  

can experience loss of oxygen-containing groups when exposed to laser 
radiation, leading to the formation of rGO [97,132,133]. Laser reduced 
GO  (LrGO)  can  be  easily  obtained  using  different  types  of  lasers  and 
system setups [115,134-137]. The results of the laser-induced reduction 

are  strongly  dependent  on  the  initial  composition  of  GO,  the  charac-
teristics of the laser irradiation, and the composition and reactivity of 
the environment. This complex scenario leads to a rich phenomenology, 
and has generated an interesting debate over process mechanisms and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009816R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

reduction  pathways  [138].  Excluding  multiphoton  absorption,  the 
photochemical  reduction  of  GO  can  only  achieved  by  lasers  having 
photon energies of at least 3.2 eV. On the other hand, deoxygenation 
reactions can always be triggered by heat, regardless of the source. This 
indicates that photothermal mechanisms are not restricted to infrared 
lasers. They should play a big role even when visible or ultraviolet lasers 
are  used,  as  long  as  the  processing  conditions  generate  enough  local 
heating. Due to the partial restoration of the graphene network during 
GO reduction, the low conductivity p-type semiconductor turns into a 
highly conductive material [139,140]. Enhanced structural healing has 
been  reported in laser-reduced GO. The authors observed a markedly 
lower  electric  resistivity,  when  compared  with  materials  obtained  by 
chemical and thermal routes [141]. One area attracting particular in-
terest in the last few years is the manufacture of flexible devices based on 
LrGO. Examples include various chemical, humidity and strain sensors 
as  well  as  electrical  circuit  boards  for  healthcare  portable  electronics 
[142–146].  Different  approaches  have  been  reported  for  limiting  the 
exposure  to  oxygen  atoms  from  air  during  LrGO  synthesis,  with  the 
intent of avoiding undue combustion. Examples are the laser irradiation 
of  GO  under  inert/vacuum  conditions  or  its  confinement  between 
transparent  slices  [136,147,148].  On  the  other  hand,  there  are 
numerous reports of laser-induced reduction of GO in air without sig-
nificant carbon loss [139,140]. Self-standing LrGO films can be fabri-
cated by laser irradiation of GO membranes or even GO flakes contained 
in liquids. For instance, Shi et al. developed humidity sensors by irra-
diation of self-assembled GO sheets on the surface of liquids [134]. The 
fabricated porous LrGO films exhibited significant changes in electrical 
resistance with humidity. 

The  laser  reduction  of  GO  has  been  a  fertile  ground  for  new  de-
velopments  (particularly  in  the  energy  storage  field),  drawing  the 
concerted effort of many researchers. In spite of the significant progress 
already achieved, further applications of laser reduction should be seen 
in the near future, with strong emphasis in hybrid materials combining 
rGO, conductive polymers, oxides and other inorganic compounds. Laser 
treatments  (maybe  with  designed  additives  or  precursors)  capable  of 
generating a better interface between rGO and these other components 
(in terms of both mechanical and electrical characteristics) could be a 
profitable topic for investigation. 

Carbonization, the process used in the method developed by Tour 
and his co-workers for laser graphitization of polymers, has turned into a 
highly  valued  technique  for  fabrication  of  flexible  devices  based  on 
graphene-like materials. This laser-induced graphene (LIG), due to the 
facile, single-step, fast and cost-effective processing, has proved to be 
very  adaptable  and  well  suited  for  many  types  of  devices  [149].  LIG 
comprehends a family of 3D porous materials exhibiting high surface 
area,  high thermal stability, and remarkable  conductivity. In the  first 
reported studies, LIG was synthesized by processing commercial films of 
polyimide (PI) and polyetherimide, which contain aromatic and imide 
repeating  units,  using  a  CO2  infrared  laser  in  ambient  air  [150,151]. 
Indeed,  this  particular  method  is  still  used  for  the  development  of 
innovative  materials  and  devices,  often  in  combination  with  other 
techniques [152]. However, subsequent research proved that LIG could 
also be obtained by irradiating a great variety of materials with different 
types of laser sources, from IR to UV radiation. For instance, LIG has 
been  successfully  obtained  by  laser  processing  of  different  types  of 
polymers,  resins,  as  well  as  natural  materials,  such  as  wood,  cotton 
fabrics, paper, and even food and waste materials [153–156]. Of tech-
nological relevance is the fact that LIG morphology can be adjusted by 
choosing  different  laser  parameters,  by  modifying  the  environment 
where the treatment is performed, or through changes in the structure or 
composition of the target material [157–161]. Porous LIG membranes 
have shown notable performance in a variety of applications, such as in 
the separation of liquid phases based on polarity, antifouling and anti-
bacterial  action  in  water  purification,  as  well  as  Joule  heating 
[162–164].  LIG  is  also  revealing  a  great  potential  for  application  in 
resistive  sensors.  Stanford  et  al.  used  a  405  nm  low  power  laser  to 

convert PI into LIG features with micrometric resolution, enabling the 
fabrication of a flexible humidity sensor that could detect human breath 
with a response time of 250 ms [165]. Carvalho et al. developed elec-
tromechanical strain sensors through UV laser irradiation of PI [156]. In 
this  way,  a  low-cost  arterial  pulse  monitor  was  assembled,  revealing 
sensitive  response.  The  use  of  shorter  radiation  wavelength  allowed 
higher  spatial  resolution  when  compared  to  IR  treatments,  enabling 
device miniaturization. Yang et al. implemented an innovative approach 
for the fabrication of smart structural components with self-monitoring 
ability by combining 3D printing and laser carbonization technologies 
[166]. Structural components were fabricated through fused deposition 
modelling using polyetheretherketone filaments. The parts were subse-
quently processed by a CO2  laser for surface patterning of sensors that 
were used to self-monitor the deformation (bending and stretching) of 
the  fabricated  components.  Energy  applications  have  also  benefited 
from the introduction of LIG technology. Triboelectric nanogenerators 
incorporating  LIG  electrodes  [167],  and  fuel  cells  with  proton 
exchanging membranes using LIG loaded with platinum catalyst [168] 
are some of the examples of LIG in energy conversion devices. However, 
the most studied applications based on LIG are in energy storage. 

The LIG technique is well suited for creation of flexible devices, and 
different methods are being developed for continuous, multiplexed and/ 
or roll-to-roll mass fabrication. The use of waste materials for production 
of  graphene-based  devices  has  increased  significantly,  and  this  trend 
will probably continue in the near future, based on cost and environ-
mental concerns. Some of the unsolved problems of the technique are 
the  inevitable  shrinkage  of  the  laser  carbonized  regions  (which  can 
cause deformation, or even a degradation of the mechanical properties) 
and the residues of pyrolysis, which may interfere in the performance of 
some devices. These issues have not yet been sufficiently studied and 
discussed in the scientific literature. 

Direct functionalization of graphene (doping) is something very hard 
to  achieve,  since  the  material  exhibits  great  chemical  stability  [169]. 
Nevertheless, laser treatments have been recently used for the synthesis 
of N-doped GQDs with enhanced optical properties [170]. In this work, 
graphite  flakes  were  laser  ablated  while  immersed  in  ethanol  and 
diethylenetriamine solutions, obtaining CQDs functionalized with pyr-
idinic, pyrrolic, and graphitic nitrogen. N-doped GQDs have also been 
synthesized  from  carbon  nano-onions  ablated  in  aqueous  solutions 
containing ammonia, ethylenediamine and pyridine compounds [171]. 
In  view  of  its  versatility  and  low  cost,  the  laser  treatment  of  carbon 
sources in reactive environments is foreseen as a valuable methodology 
for obtaining a wide variety of doped graphene derivatives. As a matter 
of fact, doping of graphene materials is usually achieved in an easier and 
more  convenient  way  as  a  secondary  process  taking  place  during  the 
laser reduction of GO [95,172]. Most studies on laser functionalization 
of rGO refer to nitrogen doping, since this is a good method for tuning 
the electron transport and electrochemical properties of graphene ma-
terials [173–176]. GO thin films or dispersed flakes irradiated with a 
laser in either gaseous or liquid environments with N-containing mole-
cules  undergo  simultaneous  reduction  and  N-doping  [177–179]. 
Enhanced  functionality  has  also  been  obtained  by  the  simultaneous 
reduction  and  N-doping  of  GO  through  laser  processing  of  films 
composed  of  mixtures  of  GO  sheets  and  metal  or  metal  oxide  nano-
particles [128,180]. In these cases, the N-rGO sheets become decorated 
with electronically active metal or metal oxide nanostructures, leading 
to hybrid materials. Ingenious strategies have also being demonstrated 
for the synthesis of doped LIG designed for specific applications. Apart 
from the possibility to vary the dopant concentration of LIG by manip-
ulation of the lasing parameters [150,158], doping can also be accom-
plished  by  irradiating  compositionally  modified  substrates  or  by 
performing the process in chemically reactive environments [159]. For 
instance, S-doped porous LIG has been fabricated by irradiation of pol-
ysulfone, poly(ethersulfone) and polyphenylsulfone polymers, resulting 
in conformal graphene embedded in the polymer substrates [181]. The 
obtained  materials  exhibited  good  electrocatalytic  hydrogen  peroxide 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009817R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

generation, besides remarkable antifouling and antimicrobial activity. 
Additionally, S- and N-doped graphene patterns were laser written on 
different  substrates  by  photochemical  decomposition  of  an  organic 
polybenzimidazole ink [182]. The use of a picosecond pulsed UV laser 
source reduced the heat load on the substrates, allowing the fast fabri-
cation of highly conductive and adherent LIG tracks on glass, as well as 
on  thermally  sensitive  poly(ethylene  terephthalate)  (PET)  substrates. 
The  synthesis  of  LIG-based  composites  containing  inorganic  nano-
structures that synergistically combine their functional properties rep-
resents a significant advance. Accordingly, LIG containing Ag, Pt and Au 
nanoparticles has been obtained through a single-step laser processing 
of  PI  films  coated  with  metal  precursor  hydrogel  inks  [183].  Electro-
chemical  devices  based  on  the  resulting  materials  (porous  3D  LIG 
decorated with a dense and uniform distribution of metal nanoparticles) 
showed excellent performance as immunosensors. In a similar way, LIG 
with  embedded  Ag  nanoparticles  was  directly  obtained  by  laser  pro-
cessing of AgNO3–dispersed polyethersulfone polymer substrates [184]. 
Photoanodes  composed  of  LIG  containing  CdS  and  PbS  nanoparticles 
have been obtained on ITO-glass substrates by CO2  laser irradiation of 
polyethersulfone films containing metal-complexes [185]. In this case, 
polyethersulfone provides not only the carbon for LIG growth, but also 
the sulphur that reacts with Cd and Pb for creating the metal sulphide 
nanoparticles. 

Although laser processing has allowed the fabrication of a variety of 
devices  based  on  doped  graphene  and  hybrid  materials,  the  develop-
ment  of  laser  treatments  capable  of  delivering  reproducible,  precise 
doping levels has not yet been satisfactorily demonstrated. Another goal, 
even more difficult to achieve, is the laser activation of a particular type 
of bonding configuration for the dopant. This fine control of the doping 
process would be very valuable for improving the performance of many 
types of products (including energy storage devices). 

3.2.2. Treatments based on laser ablation 

(sub-micron 

Besides heating, the extreme thermodynamic conditions driven by 
intense laser radiation can provoke ablation processes in carbon mate-
rials  [186–189].  Selective  ablation  provides  a  powerful  tool  for 
subtractive  patterning  of 
scale) 
high-resolution 
graphene-based  layers  in  a  rapid  and  versatile  way  [190–196]. 
Graphene-based  films,  even  with  micrometric  thicknesses,  can  be 
laser-patterned  for  the  fabrication  of  electrode  structures  that  can  be 
used  in  a  wide  variety  of  apparatus,  such  as  microheaters,  thermal 
sensors,  and  thermostatic  devices  [197]. For  obtaining  accurate abla-
tion,  with  minimal  impact  on  the  substrate  or  any  underlying  layers, 
femtosecond laser patterning has proved to be more appropriate than 
processing  using  longer  laser  pulses.  This  is  a  consequence  of  the 
reduced thermal diffusion and more efficient ablation process due to the 
incidence of laser energy in a restricted volume triggering photochem-
ical  processes  (multiphoton  absorption,  direct  photodissociation  of 
atomic bonds, etc.) [198–200]. The presence of graphene wrinkles in-
creases  the  ablation  probability  due  to  the  concomitant  reduction  of 
electrical and thermal conductivities leading to increased energy accu-
mulation  [201]. Studies  on  femtosecond  laser  patterning  of  graphene 
electrodes  for  thin-film  transistors  showed  that  the  quality  of  the 
patterned  electrodes  was  enhanced  by  ablation  in  vacuum  conditions 
due  to  debris  reduction  [202].  Femtosecond  laser  ablation  has  been 
adopted  by  Maurice  et  al.  for  obtaining  nanogaps  in  monolayer  gra-
phene,  opening  a  promising  path  for  development  of  graphene-based 
nanogap systems for molecular electronics, memories and nanodevices 
[203]. Laser treatments performed under conditions slightly above the 
ablation threshold have been used for accurate laser-induced thinning of 
multilayer  graphene,  enabling  precise  control  over  the  number  of 
stacked sheets (up to single layers) [204,205]. Ablation processes can 
also be conducted in liquid media for obtaining graphene-based mate-
rials.  Bilayer  and  few-layer  graphene  nanowalls  and  carbon  nano-
particles  have  been  achieved  by  laser  ablation  of  graphite  targets 
immersed in liquids such as water and dimethylformamide [206–208]. 

GQDs  have  also  been  synthesized  by  pulsed  laser  ablation  of  carbon 
nano-onions  immersed  in  distilled  water  [209].  The  obtained  GQDs 
show smaller sizes and blue shifted absorbance and emissive properties 
when compared to GQDs synthesized by other methods. Interestingly, 
Kang et al. demonstrated that pulsed laser treatment of graphite flakes 
dispersed in ethanol combined with high-power sonication leads to the 
formation  of  GQDs,  whereas  in  the  absence  of  sonication,  the  laser 
treatment generates oxygen-rich GOQDs [210]. 

When  the  ablation  process  is  a  result  of  high  power  pulsed  laser 
irradiation, the ejected material can be deposited in a substrate facing 
the  irradiated  target.  This  process,  which  gradually  forms  a  thin  film 
layer on the substrate, is fittingly named pulsed laser deposition (PLD). 
The ablated material exhibits high kinetic energy (up to a few keV) and 
its high mobility allows growing adherent films with high crystallinity. 
Though high vacuum is necessary, the method is theoretically simple, 
flexible, fast, and allows good control over morphology and thickness. 
The PLD growth of graphene onto different types of substrates has been 
accomplished by ablation of pyrolytic carbon, graphite and HOPG tar-
gets (with or without metal catalysts) [211,212]. Mostly, few-layer and 
multi-layer graphene deposits have been obtained, though single layers 
and bilayers have also been recently reported [213–215]. Different laser 
sources (excimer lasers, Nd:YAG, CO2) have been used, and the substrate 
is typically maintained at RT or a few hundred degrees during deposi-
tion. One of the more interesting characteristics of the PLD method is the 
possibility  to  perform  the  depositions  under  a  controlled  atmosphere 
(pressure and composition), opening the way for reactive depositions. As 
an example, the growth of N-doped graphene thin film layers was ach-
ieved by PLD in the presence of N2  gas during the deposition process 
[216].  Pyridinic  and  pyrrolic  N-doping  groups  were  observed  in  the 
graphene  structure  and  the  nitrogen  content  could  be  controlled  by 
adjusting the N2  gas pressure. Juvaid et al. have recently reported the 
PLD growth of wafer-scale p‑type rGO with superior optical and elec-
trical  properties  by  UV  laser  ablation  of  glassy  carbon  targets  in  an 
oxidizing  environment  (O2  + Ar)  [217].  Uniform  thin  films  with 
ultra-smooth  surfaces  were  obtained,  exhibiting  high  optical  trans-
mittance, low refractive index and low sheet resistance. 

The matrix-assisted pulsed laser evaporation (MAPLE) is a technique 
for carrying out the controlled deposition of graphene materials using 
frozen  dispersions  of  nanocarbon  entities.  The  methodology  is  very 
similar to PLD, and the laser radiation can be either absorbed directly by 
the  frozen  solvent  (matrix)  or  by  the  carbon  nanoentities  (inverse 
MAPLE) leading to the explosive boiling of the matrix in a rapid and 
energetic way. The generated vapor carries the nanoentities towards a 
facing  substrate  leading  to  the  deposition  of  nanocarbon  films.  Thin 
coatings of single wall CNTs functionalized with carboxylic groups, as 
well as multiwall CNTs (MWCNTs) and GO sheets have been deposited 
in a controlled way by MAPLE [218–220]. The transferred CNTs main-
tained their structure, exhibiting low amount of laser-induced defects 
when irradiated with moderate laser fluences, whereas the GO sheets 
underwent reduction processes and even N-doping during the deposition 
in N2  gas ambient. Furthermore, hybrid thin films constituted by rGO 
decorated  with  metal  and  transition  metal  oxide  nanostructures  have 
also been fabricated through irradiation of frozen dispersions containing 
GO flakes, nanoparticles and even precursors for attaining the N-doping 
of rGO [128,221-224]. 

Apart from normal laser cutting and drilling operations, laser pro-
cessing methods based on ablation have not been as widely explored in 
energy  storage  applications  as  the  methods  based  on  laser-activated 
reactions. Pulsed laser deposition and MAPLE have been used for gra-
phene synthesis, and in some cases even for device creation, but both 
methods are unable to accomplish deposition over large substrate areas. 
It is very difficult, at this moment, to imagine a large scale production 
operation using PLD or any of its variants. 

Laser-induced  forward  transfer  (LIFT)  is  another  direct-writing 
technique  based  on  ablation,  where  the  action  of  a  laser  is  used  to 
transfer material from thin donor layers onto arbitrary substrates [225]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009818R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

The  donor  layer  must  be  on  a  transparent  substrate,  placed  in  close 
proximity to the receiving substrate. Solid donor films have been used 
since the origins of the method [226], but the same operating principle 
works for liquid films and mixtures [227]. LIFT is a versatile means for 
direct printing of devices using functional materials. It can be seen as a 
nozzle-free printing technique with almost no restrictions in the particle 
size, composition and viscosity of the ink to be printed [228]. Depending 
on  the  material  to  be  transferred,  a  sacrificial  release  layer  may  be 
deposited on the transparent substrate before the layer to be printed. 
This release layer is either a polymer with high absorption at the laser 
wavelength (vaporized upon irradiation) or a metal film which is locally 
deformed (blistered), impelling the overlying film [229]. LIFT process-
ing has proven to be well suited for writing graphene patterns and, in 
some cases, even full carbon-based working devices [230–233]. 

Both LIFT and LIBT are less expensive than other methods based on 
ablation.  They  can  be  seen  as  simplified  versions  of  PLD,  where  the 
requirement of low pressure is circumvented by the proximity between 
target and substrate. One of the strongest points of these laser methods is 
their flexibility, which could, in principle, be used for depositing layers 
with arbitrary composition and thickness. However, the relatively low 
quality of the deposited layers and the poor resolution afforded by these 
techniques  are  stumbling  blocks  preventing  their  wider  acceptance. 
Maybe this picture can be gradually transformed after more studies are 
conducted.  Automated  equipment  capable  of  precise,  independent 
positioning of both donor and receiver substrates could ignite renewed 
interest in these methods. Very little research has been published on the 
effect of putting the two substrates in contact during the laser irradiation 
(this is true for both LIFT and LIBT). 

3.2.3. Other laser treatments 

Laser exfoliation is an interesting alternative for obtaining few-layer 
graphene deposits. The technique can be performed at room tempera-
ture without the need for metal catalysts. The resulting materials display 
some advantages when compared to CVD-synthesized graphene, since 
the method is clean, fast, and the deposits are free from contamination. 
Qian  et  al.  studied  the  laser  exfoliation  of  highly  ordered  pyrolytic 
graphite (HOPG) in 1 Torr Ar using a Nd:YAG pulsed laser at different 
laser fluences and distances between the target and the collecting sub-
strate [234]. Three different phases, amorphous carbon, few-layer gra-
phene sheets and thin graphite films were deposited as the laser fluence 
increased, while the target-substrate distance did not have a significant 
effect on the results. Graphene sheets a few nanometers thick and tens of 
micrometers in size were obtained at intermediate fluences. Under the 
same processing conditions, amorphous carbon was the only product of 
the deposition when compressed graphite tablets were used instead of 
HOPG.  Few-layer  graphene  deposits  have  also  been  obtained  by  per-
forming the laser exfoliation with the graphite target immersed in water 
or in liquid nitrogen [235,236]. Laser exfoliation, like other exfoliation 
methods,  can  be  enhanced  by  previous  intercalation  of  compounds 
which are easily vaporized upon heating. As an example, Carotenuto and 
co-workers investigated the sulfuric acid-intercalated graphite exfolia-
tion  process  using  a  simple  technique  based  on  the  continuous-wave 
infrared laser irradiation of graphite flakes [237]. The threshold tem-
◦
perature  for  the  process  was  found  to  be  about  140
C,  with  the  fast 
heating causing the sudden volatilization of the intercalate species on a 
time scale of the order of 0.2 s. 

Laser exfoliation of graphene (or derivatives), when performed in a 
liquid medium, can be used to simultaneously trigger graphene doping 
(or other chemical reactions). However, like other exfoliation methods 
carried out in liquids, the random nature of the process implies that the 
final result of laser processing is a mixture of graphene flakes having 
different numbers of layers. A further problem of the laser exfoliation is 
the low process yield. 

Localized  laser  radiation  can  generate  very  intense  heating  (or 
trigger  photochemical  processes)  which  can  drive  mechanisms  pro-
moting  atomic  mobility,  creation  of  defects  and,  ultimately,  the 

structural modification of materials. Laser texturing, one of the possible 
outcomes  of  these  processes,  has  enabled  the  development  of  new 
fabrication strategies. For instance, the formation of LIPSS in graphene 
under the effect of ultrafast laser irradiation has been reported by Bel-
taos et al. [238]. The creation of these nano-scaled “surface ripples” has 
been attributed to the interference between the incident femtosecond 
laser  beam  and  the  excited  surface  plasmon  polariton  in  graphene, 
leading to a periodic spatial energy distribution and subsequent struc-
tural transformation of the graphene layer. In this way, high resolution 
patterning of graphene, exhibiting nanostructures smaller than the laser 
wavelength could be obtained. LIPSS has also been reported after exci-
mer  laser  irradiation  of  polystyrene  -  graphene  composites  [239], 
complex 
increasing 
graphene-containing  materials.  High-resolution  patterning  over  large 
areas can be attained by two-beam laser interference. In this way, pe-
riodic  patterns  composed  of  micro/nano  structures  are  formed  where 
the accumulated laser energy exceeds the material conversion threshold. 
An application of particular interest is the simultaneous reduction and 
structural  patterning  of  GO  layers  for  the  fabrication  of  hierarchical 
nanostructures  over  large  areas,  enabling  anisotropic  control  of  elec-
trical,  mechanical,  and  chemical  properties  [240–243].  As  another 
example of texturing, graphene nanoribbons have been obtained by the 
unzipping of CNTs using different types of lasers [244,245]. 

structuring  of 

the  prospects 

laser 

for 

Laser annealing is a general term, comprehending fast and locally 
confined heat treatments which can be performed under a wide range of 
conditions. As an example, the process has been applied for improving 
the  electrical  and  thermal  conduction  between  graphene  and  metal 
contacts by Ermakov et al. [246,247]. The enhanced contacts (to initially 
rough metal electrodes) were attributed to the local melting of the metal 
surface  under  laser  heating,  and  to  the  increase  in  the  actual  metal-
–graphene  contact  areas.  Laser  annealing  treatments  have  also  been 
used by Bhaumik et al. for changing the electrical transport properties of 
rGO  layers  obtained  by  a  modified  PLD  method  [248].  The  normally 
p-type  as-fabricated  rGO  films  were  converted  to  n-type  after  being 
subjected (in air) to single pulses (20 ns) of a KrF excimer laser in the 
(cid:0) 2. A marked decrease in the 
range of fluences between 0.6 and 1 J cm
degree  of  wrinkling  of  the  rGO  sheets  comprising  the  films  has  been 
observed,  as  well  as  an  increase  in  the  C/O  ratio,  indicating  further 
material reduction upon laser irradiation. The deformation of graphene 
and the changes in its electrical properties upon laser annealing have 
also  been  reported  [249].  The  benefits  of  laser  annealing  have  been 
confirmed by the results reported by Del and co-workers in the case of 
graphene  inks  deposited  by  drop  casting  [250].  Using  a  continuous 
(cid:0) 2 for 
green laser (532 nm, 500 mW) with a power density of 55 mW cm
1–4  ms,  the  authors  observed  an  obvious  decrease  in  the  surface 
roughness of the treated regions, as well as remarkable improvements in 
conductivity  (up  to  four  orders  of  magnitude),  and  optical  trans-
mittance. The results were attributed to the flattening of the graphene 
layers and the decomposition of ink residues (mainly ethyl cellulose). 
Laser annealing (KrF laser, H2/Ar atmosphere) has also been used for 
removing PMMA residues remaining in graphene patterns after common 
substrate-transfer operations [251]. 

the 

Recently, very interesting research work on laser-based fabrication 
of flexible electronic devices has been published by Sheremet’s group 
[252,253]. Instead of following the usual graphene-GO-rGO route, the 
laser  conversion  of  single-layer  diazo-
authors  exploited 
nium-functionalized graphene. Using this innovative approach, flexible 
chemiresistors  were  fabricated,  showing  high  sensitivity  for  breath 
(water vapor and CO2) and C2H5OH detection [252]. By laser-treating 
PET substrates coated with Al nanoparticles, the same research group 
developed  LIG/Al  nanoparticle/polymer  composites  with  high  me-
chanical  resistance  and  high  electrical  conductivity.  The  Al  nano-
particles were integrated into the PET substrate by the laser treatment, 
intensifying  the electromagnetic  field through plasmonic  effects. As  a 
consequence, LIG could be achieved from PET and the Al nanoparticles 
became covered by a shell of Al4C3 [253]. The composite exhibited high 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009819R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

resistance against bending (>10000 cycles), impact and abrasion, be-
sides being chemically stable when in contact with C2H5OH, H2O, and 
aqueous electrolytes. 

4. Laser-processing of graphene and related materials for energy 
storage 

Currently,  many  researchers  working  in  materials  engineering  are 
highly  focused  on  the  development  of  techniques  for  achieving  fast, 
versatile,  scalable  and  cost-effective  fabrication  of  high  performance 
electrochemical energy storage devices. Highly conductive, stable and 
large surface area graphene-based electrodes exhibit promising features 
for electric double layer SCs. In addition, the porous graphene structures 
can  simultaneously  act  as  scaffolds  and  electron  collectors  for  nano-
materials undergoing faradaic charge storage. Herein we focus on the 
different technologies that are being developed for the laser fabrication 
of  energy  storage  devices,  essentially  EDL  and  hybrid  SCs,  as  well  as 
batteries.  The  reviewed  works  are  divided  into  two  groups:  methods 
based  on  laser-induced  chemical  transformation  and  those  involving 
ablation processes. 

Different approaches for assessing the energy storage performance of 
SCs can be found in the scientific literature. Before comparing the results 
of measurements reported by different authors, readers should be aware 
that  capacitance  measurements  can  be  performed  on  individual  elec-
trodes or, conversely, on a complete device (which can be symmetric or 
asymmetric). By using a simple model, which considers a SC device as 
two capacitors in series (the electrodes), it is easy to conclude that the 
device  capacitance  will  be  always  lower  than  that  of  the  individual 
electrodes. As an example, if we consider the relationship between cell 
specific capacitance (Ccell) and material specific capacitance (electrode 
specific  capacitance,  Cs)  for  a  symmetric  device,  then  Ccell  can  be 
calculated  as  Ccell  = Cs/4  [254].  As  a  further  complication,  electrode 
(cid:0) 2) or 
capacitance can be normalized in terms of mass (F.g
(cid:0) 3)  of  the  electrode,  and  the  mass  (or  volume)  may  be 
volume  (F.cm
related to the active material or to the total material of the electrode 
(including active material, substrate, etc.). Moreover, the thickness of 
the active material is a crucial parameter in the following cases: (i) when 
electrode  or  SC  areal  capacitance  is  provided,  since  the  thickness  (or 
density) will account for the loading of material per unit area; and (ii) 
when  thin  electrodes  are  developed,  since  their  functional  properties 
cannot  be  linearly  extrapolated  to  thicker  electrodes  due  to  possible 
changes  in  microstructure  which  may  influence  the  diffusion  of  the 
electrolyte ions and their interaction with the active material [255]. 

(cid:0) 1), area (F.cm

Taking into account the widely different methods for SC performance 
evaluation, as well as the diverse measurement conditions which might 
have  been  applied  in  each  case,  the  readers  should  be  careful  when 
comparing the results obtained by different authors, reproduced as re-
ported, and discussed in the following sections. 

4.1. Laser-induced chemical transformation 

4.1.1. Supercapacitors 

Despite the presence of oxygenated groups in the basal plane of GO 
which  disrupts  the  π–π  conjugation,  strongly  lowering  the  electrical 
conductivity,  laser  processing  of  GO  films  allows  easy  fabrication  of 
highly  conductive  rGO  electrodes  for  electrochemical  energy  storage 
applications. Gao et al. have demonstrated the direct laser reduction of 
GO for the versatile creation of SCs by processing freestanding GO films 
with a  CO2  laser printer [137]. Conductive LrGO patterns were sepa-
rated by non-irradiated GO gaps working as solid electrolytes, due to the 
porosity  and  large  amount  of  trapped  water  imparting  ionic  conduc-
tance to GO. Several research groups have since studied the laser pro-
cessing of SCs based on the LrGO/GO/LrGO architecture, however using 
different  materials,  device  configurations  and  laser  types  [148, 
256-262]. Kaner and co-workers have developed pioneering work on the 
low-cost production of SCs by performing the laser reduction of GO films 

using  a  DVD  writing  technology.  The  resulting  rGO  has  been  named 
laser-scribed graphene (LSG) [263,264]. In their method, GO/polymer 
films are deposited on DVD discs, which are subsequently processed in a 
DVD optical drive, leading to the generation of LrGO electrodes [263]. 
This convenient approach has enabled the fabrication of several devices, 
from interdigitated μSCs to hybrid SCs [264–266]. 

High-throughput laser reduction of GO for fabrication of electrodes 
that can be implemented in sandwiched SCs has been achieved through 
CO2  laser processing  [136]. This  technology allows the  fabrication of 
complex  devices,  such  as  potassium-ion  hybrid  capacitors  and 
self-charging power packs consisting of a solar cell and a laser-scribed 
graphene SC, showing excellent energy storage capability, energy den-
sity, and stability over thousands of charge-discharge cycles [267–269]. 
Often,  weak  adhesion  may  cause  delamination  of  the  rGO  layers 
deposited  on  flexible  polymeric  substrates.  An  interesting  strategy  to 
overcome this limitation is the laser irradiation through the substrate, 
resulting in “welding” of rGO to the polymer [270,271]. 

The synthesis of LrGO-based electrodes by mixing the GO flakes with 
other compounds or even with other types of nanostructures has also 
prompted  the  performance  enhancement  of  energy  devices.  For 
instance,  the  addition  of  MWCNTs  prevents  the  aggregation  of  rGO 
sheets, leading to an increase in porosity, thus enhancing ionic transport 
within  the  electrode  material  [272].  Similarly,  the  incorporation  of 
carbon nanodots into LrGO films has been recently reported as a valu-
able strategy for significantly enhancing the active surface area and the 
conductivity  of  SC  electrodes  [273].  Wang  et  al.  developed  N-doped 
porous  LrGO  electrodes  by  picosecond  laser  processing  of  GO/urea 
mixed films in ambient air [274]. Through this simple method, hierar-
chically structured porous LrGO materials containing pyridinic, pyrro-
lic, graphitic and oxidized N groups as well as structural defects were 
obtained. The electrodes with larger amounts of pyrrolic functionaliza-
(cid:0) 2,  which  is  nearly 
tion  exhibited  capacitance values  up  to 61  mF  cm
three times higher than similar undoped electrodes. 

Femtosecond laser sources have proved to be particularly interesting 
for the versatile fabrication of highly integrated energy storage systems. 
Shen  et  al.  have  demonstrated  the  high-resolution  femtosecond  laser 
reduction and patterning of GO films for the production of ultraminia-
ture μSCs [275]. Fig. 2a shows the processing steps for fabrication of the 
μSC devices, starting with the deposition (and drying) of aqueous GO 
dispersions on SiO2/Si substrates, followed by femtosecond laser writing 
of  high  resolution  LrGO  interdigitated  patterns  (Figs.  2b,  c).  Micro-
droplets of PVA-H2SO4  electrolyte gel are then accurately placed over 
the electrodes by the LIFT method using the same laser source (Figs. 2a, 
d-f).  Full  working  devices  are  obtained  after the  gel  is  dried at  room 
temperature for a few hours in order to remove extra water. In this way, 
high performance μSCs and even RC filter circuits containing μSCs and 
LGO  resistors  were  produced  in  a  rapid,  easy  and  cost-effective  way, 
avoiding cross-contamination of the electronic components by the μSC 
electrolyte.  Femtosecond  laser  processing  has  also  been  used  for  the 
high-precision  fabrication  of  Au-loaded  LrGO  SCs  showing  excellent 
conductivity  and  capacitive  behaviour  at  high  charge/discharge  rates 
[276]. 

The  performance  of  electrodes  for  energy  storage  devices  can  be 
further  improved  by  synthesizing  LrGO  containing  electrochemically 
active  functional  groups.  The  coexistence  of  carbon  electric  double 
layers and pseudocapacitive species allows an enhancement of capaci-
tance without a substantial loss of power delivery and cycling stability. 
As a recent example of this approach, Van Ngo et al. developed a method 
for obtaining composite 3D-structured carbon electrodes by combining 
LrGO and carbonized HKUST-1 metalorganic framework (LrGO-C-MOF) 
microrods  [277].  As  shown  in  Fig.  2g,  an  aqueous  dispersion  of 
HKUST-1 and GO sheets was deposited and dried, resulting in the for-
mation of a composite film where the HKUST-1 microrods were inter-
calated between GO sheets. The film was then treated with a CO2 laser 
under  ambient  conditions,  leading  to  the  formation  of  a  high  surface 
area, conductive, highly porous carbon material at both micro and meso 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098110R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Fig. 2. (a) Schematic process for fabrication of integrated μSCs using femtosecond laser processing. (b, c) High-resolution patterned LrGO microelectrode arrays with 
a spacing of about 2 μm between individual fingers. (d) Electrolyte microdroplets covering the electrodes. (e) μSCs immediately after electrolyte transfer, and (f) after 
overnight drying. Reproduced from [275] with permission of  ACS. (g) Schematic synthesis of laser reduced GO-carbonized HKUST-1 metal organic frameworks 
(LrGO-C-MOFs). (h, i) SEM pictures of LrGO-C-MOF composite. (j) Cyclic voltammetry of LrGO-C-MOF at different sweep rates. (k) A comparison of specific ca-
pacitances of LrGO-C-MOF and LrGO at different scan rates. Reproduced from [277] with permission of Elsevier. 

(cid:0) 1  at  5  mV  s

scales (Figs. 2h, i). The shape of the cyclic voltammetry (CV, Fig. 2j) 
and  galvanostatic  charge-discharge  (not  shown)  plots  revealed  some 
features  related  to  resistive  effects.  Besides  EDL  charge  storage,  the 
contributions of faradaic reactions were also detected, being attributed 
to embedded Cu2O among the rGO sheets. The LrGO-C-MOF electrodes 
(cid:0) 1),  more  than 
exhibited  good  capacitance  (ca.  390  F  g
double the value for similar LrGO electrodes synthesized without MOFs 
(Fig. 2k), and a significant capacitance retention after 5000 cycles. A 
large  number  of  high-performance  electrode  films  composed  of  LrGO 
decorated with pseudocapacitive oxides, such as oxygen-deficient TiO2, 
MnO2 or RuO2 nanoparticles have already been produced using the laser 
scribing  technique  [124,278,279].  LrGO-based  electrodes  can  be  also 
synthesized by laser irradiation of GO liquid dispersions followed by the 
deposition  of  the  resulting  material  as  a  film.  Indeed,  even  hybrid 
electrodes have been developed in this way. As an example, UV pulsed 
laser irradiation of aqueous dispersions of GO-WO3 nanoparticles have 

been carried out for the simultaneous reduction of GO and the anchoring 
of nanostructured WO3  on the rGO surfaces [280]. Subsequent deposi-
tion  of  the  suspension  by  spray  coating  led  to  porous  electrodes  and 
symmetric SCs with capacitance values reaching 577 F g

(cid:0) 1. 

Besides graphene, other 2D layered materials, like the MXenes and 
the  transition  metal  dichalcogenides  (TMDs)  are  also  attracting  high 
interest  for  application  in  high-performance  energy  storage  devices 
[281–284].  Accordingly,  MoS2  decorated  LrGO  electrodes  and  inter-
digitated μSCs have been synthesized by laser scribing of nanocomposite 
films  deposited  from  GO-MoS2-dimethylformamide  dispersions  [285]. 
The obtained flexible light-scribed electrodes and devices showed ca. 60 
(cid:0) 3 capacitances, respectively, notably higher values 
mF g
than those obtained with pure LrGO materials. Though the improvement 
of  capacitance  was  attributed  to  increased  surface  area,  the  waves 
observed  in  the  CV  curves  may  indicate  important  pseudocapacitive 
contributions. 

(cid:0) 1 and 8 F cm

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098111R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

4.1.2. Battery electrodes 

The  incorporation  of  a  graphene  network  in  battery  electrodes  is 
being  thoroughly  investigated  due  to  a  number  of  practical  benefits. 
Electrochemical  performance  improvements  arise  from  (i)  bigger 
porosity,  enabling  more  efficient  ionic  transport  and  increasing  the 
active surface area, (ii) enhanced structural stability through buffering 
of volume changes caused during ionic insertion and extraction cycles, 
(iii) increase in the electronic conductivity of the overall material, and 
(iv) synergistic effects which lead to performance improvements which 
are bigger than what would be expected from a mere addition of indi-
vidual contributions [286–288]. 

+

(cid:0) 1  retained  after  tens  of  cycles  at  100  mA  g

Hybrid LrGO-SnO2 anodes for Li ion batteries have been prepared by 
IR fibre laser conversion of binder-free mixtures of GO and stannic oxide 
coated  on  Cu  substrates  [289].  The  electrodes,  composed  of  layered 
LrGO decorated with SnO2 nanoparticles, revealed low sheet resistance 
(cid:0) 1),  high Li  storage  capacity  and  good cycling  stability  (700 
(28  Ω  sq
(cid:0) 1).  Lithium  iron 
mAh  g
phosphate (LiFePO4, LFP) is widely used as a cathode material in Li ion 
batteries. However, this material suffers from poor electronic conduc-
tivity and limited Li
ionic conductivity due to its olivine structure with 
1D channels. Tang et al. have circumvented this problem by carrying out 
in-situ laser reduction of GO sheets added to LFP material [290]. Fig. 3a 
displays  the  synthesis  procedure. First,  a  slurry  composed  of  LiFePO4 
particles, GO powder, polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and 1-methyl-2--
pyrrolidinone solvent was coated onto an Al foil and dried. The com-
posite  film  was  then  irradiated  with  a  pulsed  fibre  laser  (1064  nm 
wavelength),  leading  to  total  reduction  of  the  GO  sheets  without 
damaging the LFP particles. The electrode structure consisted of a hi-
erarchical  conductive  network  containing  large  graphene-like  layers 
covering the top of the electrode, and small LrGO pieces inserted be-
tween the LFP particles (Figs. 3b, c). The obtained LrGO-LFP electrodes 
show great enhancement of the rate capability and cycling performance 
when compared to electrodes composed of LFP and conductive carbon 
black particles. 

Supercapacitive charge storage, which includes EDL and pseudoca-
pacitive  processes,  is  intrinsically  reversible,  fast  and  superficial, 
whereas battery-like materials are characterized by slow and diffusive 
mechanisms.  However,  advances  in  the  synthesis  of  nanosized  and 
hybrid  materials  are  blurring  the  conceptual  boundaries  between 
supercapacitive  and  battery-like  behaviours.  Accordingly,  the  expres-
sion “supercapattery”  has been coined for systems combining features 

from both types of materials [291–293]. Li et al. fabricated electrodes by 
CO2  laser processing of films containing GO mixed with Co3O4  nano-
boxes  that  were  obtained  by  calcination  of  precipitated  cobalt  pre-
cursors  [294].  Co3O4  is  a  material  with  high  theoretical  capacity,  is 
abundant  and  cost-effective,  however  it  suffers  from  limited  cycling 
stability  and  low  electronic  conductivity.  As  observed  in  Figs.  3d,  e, 
electrodes composed of hollow Co3O4  reveal typical faradaic peaks in 
the  CV  curves,  besides  higher  electrochemical  activity  than  LSG. 
Nevertheless,  the  combination  of  reduced  GO  and  Co3O4  nanoboxes 
reveals synergistic effects, since the measured capacity of the composite 
is  much  higher  than  the  sum  of  those  of  LSG  and  Co3O4  nanoboxes 
(cid:0) 1). As seen in Fig. 3d, the CV curve of the 
(about 60 mC cm
composite  material  is  more  rectangular-shaped,  with  hidden  faradaic 
peaks,  indicating the EDL  contribution from LSG to  the total current. 
Such  electrodes  revealed  outstanding  electrochemical  performance, 
with  large  surface  area,  good  ionic  diffusion,  fast  charge  transfer,  ul-
trahigh  specific  capacity, 
internal  resistance,  and  notable 
charge-discharge stability up to thousands of cycles. 

(cid:0) 2 at 2 mV s

low 

4.2. Laser-induced graphene 

4.2.1. Flexible micro-supercapacitors 

LIG  material,  with  its  conductive,  highly  porous  and  conformable 
structure, holds great promise for the capacitive electrochemical storage 
of charge, either by EDL (when pure) or by faradaic mechanisms (when 
combined with other compounds). Therefore, laser induced graphitiza-
tion of different types of organic compounds for the low-cost and large- 
scale fabrication of SCs has become a hot research topic. Zhang et al. 
fabricated  interdigital  electrochemical  SCs  by  processing  FeCl3-doped 
phenolic resins with an inexpensive 405 nm semiconductor laser [153]. 
In this work, the FeCl3 dopant was added for enhancing the visible light 
absorption, helping to convert the phenolic resin into highly conductive 
and  porous  LIG.  Flexible  SCs  were  manufactured  revealing  an  areal 
(cid:0) 2  and  excellent  capacitance  retention 
capacitance  of  about  1  mF  cm
(cid:0) 2. 
over 2000 charge-discharge cycles at a current density of 1 mA cm
Similarly,  LIG-based  SCs  with  various  in-plane  geometries  have  been 
produced by 450 nm laser irradiation of PI [295]. In this way, serial/-
parallel  arrays  of  flexible  μSCs  showing  high  electrochemical  and 
cycling  performance  have  been  demonstrated.  By  using  infrared  CO2 
lasers,  and  by  optimizing  the  graphenization  process,  Liu  et  al.  suc-
ceeded in carbonizing the phenolic resins for fabrication of SCs without 

Fig.  3. (a)  Schematic in-situ  fabrication of  LrGO-LFP  electrodes,  (b) Schematic  structural  illustration and (c)  SEM  picture of  a hierarchical  LrGO-LFP structure. 
(cid:0) 1. (e) Comparison of areal 
Reproduced from [290] with permission of Elsevier. (d) CV plots of Co3O4-LSG composite, LSG, and pure Co3O4 at a sweep rate of 20 mV s
capacity of the Co3O4/LSG composite, LSG, and pure Co3O4  at different sweep rates. Reproduced from [294] with permission of Springer. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098112R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

the aid of optical absorbers [296]. Conductive foam-like LIG electrodes 
have  also been  developed  by  CO2  laser irradiation  of  sulfonated poly 
(ether-ether-ketone) films [297]. The obtained conductive porous ma-
terial, containing needle-like structures, displayed a maximum capaci-
(cid:0) 1 sweep rate. Flexible solid 
tance of 3.4 F g
(cid:0) 1 
state SCs with maximum areal capacitance of 18 mF cm
were 
charge-discharge cycling and repetitive bending. 

(cid:0) 2 at 3 mV s
stability  upon 

(cid:0) 1 and 30 mF cm

(cid:0) 2 at 3 mV s

remarkable 

fabricated, 

showing 

also 

Undoubtedly, technologies aiming the production of energy storage 
devices  by  using  biomass  or  industrial  waste  materials  hold  great 
promise for developing sustainable fabrication approaches. Zhang et al. 
fabricated  on-chip  μSCs  by  CO2  laser  processing  of  films  mainly 
composed of lignin material, which is a by-product from the cellulose 
and paper industry [298]. As displayed in Fig. 4a, the method consists in 
the  laser  irradiation  of  lignin/polyvinyl  alcohol  films  for  patterning 
highly  porous  LIG  interdigitated  electrodes,  followed  by  water 

dissolution of the non-exposed material. Alternatively, a thin Au coating 
was deposited onto the LIG patterns prior to the water dissolution step, 
(cid:0) 2  (Fig.  4b). 
yielding  devices  with  areal  capacitances  near  10  mF  cm
However, their performance was degraded at elevated current densities, 
probably  due  to  the  Au  deposited  blocking  part  of  the  LIG  surface 
macropores.  Nonetheless,  the  Au-coated  device  showed  excellent  sta-
bility  when  subjected  to  12000  charge/discharge  cycles,  with  99% 
capacitance retention (Fig. 4c). With a similar reasoning, 3D LIG elec-
trodes containing meso- and macro-pores have been fabricated by CO2 
laser treatment using glucose as the starting material [299]. Glucose was 
hydrothermally transformed to carbon nanospheres, which were further 
graphitized  to  LIG  leading  to  the  formation  of  a  conductive, 
well-interconnected  3D  carbon  framework.  Symmetric  SCs  assembled 
(cid:0) 2 at 
with an organic electrolyte disclosed areal capacitance of 1 mF cm
(cid:0) 1 and high rate capability, with capacitance retention of about 
100 mV s
(cid:0) 1.  The laser  graphitization  of 
28%  at  sweep  rates  as  high  as  100  V  s

Fig. 4. (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the lignin-based laser graphitization technique: 1) Deposition of lignin/PVA film on substrate, 2) Laser processing for LIG 
patterned μSC electrodes, 3) Obtained LIG pattern showing a typical microstructure, 4) Water lift-off to remove unexposed lignin material. An alternative processing 
path with additional Au deposition is shown in images 2a-4a. (b) Areal capacitance of LIG (LSG-P36) and LIG-Au (LSG-P36-Au) μSCs versus charge–discharge current 
(cid:0) 2 current density. Reproduced from [298] 
density. Inset: image of a LSG-P36-Au μSC device. (c) Charge-discharge cycling of LSG-36-Au μSCs recorded at 2 mA cm
with permission of WILEY-VCH Verlag. (d) Image showing wearable SCs printed on polyurethane foil and a demonstration of stretching performance. Reproduced 
from  [304]  with  permission  of  WILEY-VCH  Verlag.  (e)  SEM  images  of  needle-,  sheet-  and  porous-like  LIG  electrodes.  (f)  SC  capacitance  calculated  from  cyclic 
voltammetry at several sweep rates. Inset: picture of a fabricated SC. Reproduced from [158] with permission of IOP. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098113R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

biomass  and  waste  materials  is  currently  attracting  great  attention, 
being responsible for the development of a variety of inexpensive SCs 
with increasing degree of sophistication [154,300-303]. 

(cid:0) 2 at 5 mV s

Tehrani et al. took a different approach, using LIG as a precursor for 
the  synthesis  of  graphene  conductive  inks  which  were  subsequently 
printed for manufacturing flexible SCs [304]. The method consisted in 
the CO2  laser conversion of PI films to LIG powder, which was further 
mixed  with  conductive  poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene 
sulfonate  and  polyester-polyurethane  composites  leading  to  conduc-
tive ink formulations. Micro-SCs were fabricated by screen printing the 
ink  onto  flexible  and  intrinsically  stretchable  polymer  substrates.  As 
shown  in  Fig.  4d,  the  resulting  μSCs  are  fully  wearable  devices,  dis-
playing outstanding mechanical resistance and stretchability. Moreover, 
the  devices  exhibited  good  electrochemical  performance,  with  high 
(cid:0) 1), and significant sta-
areal capacitance (about 23 mF cm
bility over repeated stretching-releasing cycles. It is important to notice 
that LIG morphology strongly depends on the parent material and on the 
laser-writing parameters used for the graphenization process. Lamberti 
et  al.  obtained  LIG  foam  electrodes  with  diverse  compositions  and 
nanostructural morphologies (needle, sheet, or porous-like) upon CO2 
laser  processing  of  PI  with  different  repetition  rates  and  laser  scan 
speeds  (Fig.  4e)  [158].  The  structural  rearrangements  arise  from  dy-
namic coupling between photo-induced heating, chemical reactions ki-
netics and evolution of gas release during polymer decomposition. As 
shown  in  Fig.  4f,  the  needle-like  material  exhibited  the  best  electro-
chemical  performance,  with  larger  areal  capacitance  (maximum  of 
(cid:0) 2), being less susceptible to fading at higher 
approximately 230 μF cm
sweep rates. This has been attributed to better access of electrolyte ions 
to the active surfaces. Needle-shaped LIG represents a good compromise 
between  composition  (largest  amount  of  nitrogen  groups),  structural 
cohesion and electric conductivity. 

in 

the  LIG 

structure,  as  well  as  contributing 

As  previously  substantiated  in  different  application  fields,  the 
compositional  transformation  of  LIG electrodes,  either by  heteroatom 
doping or by decoration with electrochemically active nanostructures, 
leads to a significant enhancement of energy storage performance. For 
instance, Peng et al. demonstrated that doping of LIG with boron allows 
fabricating  interdigitated  μSCs  with  an  effective  areal  capacitance  of 
(cid:0) 2, which is three times higher than similar undoped LIG- 
16.5 mF cm
based devices, with energy density increasing up to tenfold [305]. The 
CO2  laser processing of H3BO3-PI films led to the formation of doped 
porous graphene structures with high effective surface area, owing to 
the presence of nanoscale ridges and wrinkles. Boron doping shifts the 
Fermi  level  towards  the  valence  band,  improving  charge  storage  and 
transfer 
to 
space-charge-layer capacitance and pseudocapacitance [306–311]. Cai 
et al. recently developed boron, phosphorus and fluorine-doped LIG by 
405  nm  continuous-wave  diode  laser  irradiation  of  PI  films  incorpo-
rating  H3BO3,  H3PO4  and  NaBF4  compounds,  respectively  [312]. 
Relying on XPS analyses, they concluded that the B-doped LIG contained 
both  C–B  bonds  (B4C,  BC2O)  as  well  as  B–O  bonds  (BCO2  and  B–O). 
P-doped LIG revealed similar carbon structures, exhibiting C-P, and P-O 
bonding, whereas F-doped LIG displayed larger porosity, with the for-
mation of C–F bonds having a partially ionic character. All the flexible 
μSCs with B-doped LIG disclosed good areal capacitances (up to 65.7 mF 
(cid:0) 2),  with  significant  stability  over  50000 
cm
charge-discharge cycles. Interestingly, P- and F-doped LIG devices also 
(cid:0) 2 at 0.05 mA 
revealed impressive areal capacitances (74 and 58 mF cm
(cid:0) 2, respectively), though no data about cycling performance has been 
cm
reported. 

(cid:0) 2  at  0.05  mA  cm

The  synthesis of  hybrid  electrodes composed  of LIG  material  with 
embedded  pseudocapacitive  nanostructures  from  metal  oxides,  sul-
phides  or  carbides is  a key  strategy  for enhancing  the  charge storage 
performance of SCs. In this approach, the carbon source is mixed with 
metalorganic precursors in order to simultaneously induce the graphe-
nization of the carbon precursor and the crystallization of the inorganic 
nanostructures. In a recent publication, Wang et al. have described the 

synthesis of Co3O4-LIG composites through the CO2 laser irradiation of 
PI coated with a film of CoCl2 dissolved in gelatine derived from porcine 
skin [313]. Highly porous structures with different morphologies were 
obtained, depending on the lasing parameters. Thus, a LIG morpholog-
ical  transition from 3D  porous  matrix to  lamellar  layers was  attained 
with the increase of the accumulated laser fluence. Simultaneously, the 
formation of Co3O4 nanostructures progressively evolved from the sur-
face into the inner regions of the LIG framework, with the crystals also 
revealing a change of shape (from spherical to whisker-like). The highest 
(cid:0) 2. Stretchable 
areal capacitance for these electrodes was 22.3 mF cm
μSCs  with  charge/discharge  and  bending  stability  over  10000  cycles 
were  obtained,  showing  also  good  performance  when  subjected  to 
stretching and twisting cycles. The authors have also published similar 
studies in which NiO-Co3O4-LIG composite electrodes were fabricated 
by using a gelatine coating containing both NiCl2  and CoCl2  dissolved 
salts  [314].  The  electrodes  were  transferred  to  biodegradable  water-
borne  polyurethane  substrates  with  excellent  stretchability.  Although 
the authors have postulated a synergistic effect between NiO and Co3O4 
nanoparticles,  in  fact  these  electrodes  displayed  similar  areal  capaci-
tances when compared to Co3O4-LIG. 

Finally, it is worth mentioning some interesting research published 
by  Zang  et  al.  [315]  in  which  foldable  paper  electronic  devices  were 
obtained by CO2 laser processing of fibrous paper substrates soaked with 
gelatine-based  inks  containing  molybdenum  ions.  The  infrared  laser 
radiation  led  to  the  carbonization  of  the  paper  and  the  simultaneous 
+5  ions,  forming  hierarchically  porous  molybdenum 
reaction  of  Mo
carbide-graphene  composites  with  remarkable  electrical  conductivity. 
In addition to sensing and piezoelectric energy harvesting applications, 
the  pseudocapacitive  Mo3C2-loaded  graphene  composites  were  also 
tested  as  electrodes in  paper-based hybrid  SCs,  showing up  to 14  mF 
(cid:0) 1. 
cm

(cid:0) 2 areal capacitance at 1 mV s

4.2.2. Battery electrodes 

The high porosity, electrical conductivity, chemical and mechanical 
stability have turned LIG into a very attractive alternative for exploita-
tion in battery electrodes. In addition to the promising features of these 
materials, the facile, versatile, cost-effective and large-scale synthesis of 
LIG-based composites could pave the way for the industrial fabrication 
of new generations of rechargeable batteries. Very promising systems 
have  recently  been  investigated,  pointing  to  major  advances  in  LIG- 
based battery technology. Yi et al. studied the fabrication of LIG-based 
anodes  for  Li-metal  batteries  as  an  alternative  to  conventional 
graphite and Li metal anodes, which suffer from several technological 
drawbacks  [316].  The  authors  presented  a  novel  3D  electrode  archi-
tecture  consisting  of  a  conductive  copper  substrate  with  an  array  of 
flexible  PI  pillars  having  LIG  grown  on  the  vertical  pillar  walls.  The 
structure was developed by direct scribing a grid in the thick PI films 
using a 532 nm laser engraving system (Figs. 5a, b). Li metal was then 
electrodeposited onto the fabricated structures, with the highly defec-
tive and porous structure of LIG providing fast Li nucleation kinetics. In 
this  electrode  system,  the  Cu  substrate  acts  as  a  macroscopic  current 
collector, whereas the flexible PI pillars help the release of stress during 
Li  deposition.  As  shown  in  Fig.  5c,  full  Li-metal  battery  cells  using 
(cid:0) 1, 
LiFePO4  cathodes exhibited a specific capacity of about 120 mAh g
with very high coulombic efficiency over 250 cycles and much-extended 
cycle life when compared to copper anodes. 

′

′
-(m-phenylen)(cid:0) 5,5

Hybrid  LIG  composites  have  also  been  studied  in  the  search  for 
enhanced battery performance, as demonstrated by Huang et al., who 
developed S- and N-doped LIG decorated with MoS2  nanoparticles for 
application as cathodes in Li-S batteries [317]. In this work, a layer of 
poly[2,2
-bibenzimidazole]  dissolved  in  dimethyl 
sulfoxide  and  containing  MoS2  micro-particles  was  irradiated  with  a 
high repetition rate 10 ps pulsed UV laser source (355 nm wavelength). 
The energetic pulsed radiation led to ablation of the embedded MoS2 
micro-particles,  forming  confined  plasmas  which  were  subsequently 
recrystallized  as  nanoparticles  decorating  the  high  surface  area  LIG 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098114R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Fig. 5. (a) Diagram of the Li nucleation and growth in LIG-containing PI structures on a Cu substrate (LIGHS@Cu). (b) SEM image of LIGHS@Cu structures prior to Li 
(cid:0) 2. Reproduced from [316] with 
electrodeposition.  (c) Cyclic performance of  Li-metal battery  based on LFP cathode  with a practical mass loading of 15 mg cm
permission of Wiley-VCH Verlag. (d) Rate capacities of N/S-doped LIG with and without MoS2 particles. Reproduced from [317] with permission of Springer Nature. 
(e) TEM image displaying MnO/Mn3O4  nanoparticles (dark color) and the background LIG. (f) HRTEM image of few-layer graphene with different interlayer dis-
tances, as well as MnO and Mn3O4  with respective 0.22 nm and, 0.29 nm interlayer distances. Reproduced from [318] with permission of Elsevier. (g) Schematic 
structure of a flexible Zn-air battery supported on carbon cloth in which MnNiFe-LIG acts as the air cathode and Zn plate as the anode. (h) Photograph of a LED driven 
by the serial connection of two flexible batteries. Reproduced from [326] with permission of ACS. 

generated from graphitization of the polymer. As shown in Fig. 5d, the 
fabricated Li-S batteries revealed a stable, high gravimetric capacity of 
(cid:0) 1  at  0.1  C,  significantly  greater  than  reference  LIG  and 
1150  mAh  g
graphene cathodes used for comparison. A steady capacity of 445 mAh 
(cid:0) 1 at the high current density of 3 C was obtained, and the initial values 
g
were recovered when the current density returned to 0.1 C. The elec-
trochemical performance of the system was stable over 500 cycles. Zhou 
et  al.  developed  hybrid  anodes  for  Li  ion  batteries  consisting  of 
MnO/Mn3O4/N-doped-LIG  materials  directly  bonded  to  a  copper  cur-
rent collector [318]. In this work, a biomass gelatine matrix containing 
manganese (II) phthalocyanine was used as precursor layer, processed 
via CO2 laser irradiation at room temperature. N-doped LIG frameworks 
decorated with MnO and Mn3O4 nanocrystals were obtained (Figs. 5e, 
f), displaying high porosity and a large amount of electrochemical active 
sites provided by MnO/Mn3O4 nanostructures and N-containing groups 
in  the  carbon  material  [319–323].  The  electrodes  showed  a  high 
(cid:0) 1 current density, 
reversible capacity of about 992 mAh g
(cid:0) 1, and a high cycling 
retaining a notable rate of 365 mAh g
(cid:0) 1) when assembled 
stability (ca. 700 mAh g
in coin-type half-cells. The versatility of laser-induced graphene com-
bined with Mn oxides has recently being highlighted in the work of Ren 
et al. They developed MnO2-LIG cathode catalysts for Li-O2 batteries by a 
four-step method consisting in: (i) CO2 laser processing of PI films, (ii) 
Oxygen  plasma  treatment  of  the  obtained  LIG  for  enhancing 

(cid:0) 1 after 400 cycles at 0.2 A g

(cid:0) 1 at 0.2 A g
(cid:0) 1 at 2 A g

hydrophobicity, (iii) soaking of LIG layer in aqueous solution of MnSO4, 
and (iv) additional laser processing for crystallization of catalytic MnO2 
nanostructures on the porous LIG [324]. The obtained MnO2-LIG cath-
ode  catalyst  displayed  stable  galvanostatic  charge-discharge  for  more 
(cid:0) 2 (over 50 cycles 
than 200 cycles using a cut-off capacity of 0.4 mAh cm
(cid:0) 2). In a similar fashion, ternary metal oxide-LIG com-
with 2 mAh cm
posites  have  been  synthesized  for  application  as  cathode  catalysts  in 
both Li–O2 and Li–air batteries [325]. MnNiFe-LIG composites with Mn: 
Ni:Fe elemental ratios of 1:1:1 and 3:1:1 were synthesized by CO2 laser 
processing of PI films using aqueous precursor solutions of MnSO4, Ni 
(NO3)2, and Fe(NO3)3. Both hybrid composites behaved as efficient and 
durable  cathode  catalysts  for  Li–O2  batteries.  The  batteries  disclosed 
reversible cycling performance for more than 100 cycles with a cut-off 
(cid:0) 2. The highest capacity was attained with the 
capacity of 0.4 mAh cm
(cid:0) 2 at 2 V. Likewise, MnNiFe-LIG 
Mn-rich cathode, showing 26.3 mAh cm
and CoNiFe-LIG composite cathodes with 1:1:1 and 3:1:1 atomic ratios 
have also been developed by the authors for Zn-Air batteries [326]. The 
uniform distribution of anchored ternary metal oxide nanoparticles in a 
well-interconnected porous LIG matrix was achieved, without formation 
of large particle aggregates. Both Co- and Mn-based catalysts revealed 
notable activity for oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution reactions, 
but  the  Mn  species  provided  a  more  balanced  bi-functionality.  Thus, 
liquid Zn-air batteries as well as flexible Zn-air battery prototypes were 
fabricated, showing practical applications (Figs. 5g, h). The batteries 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098115R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

displayed significant stability for more than 500 cycles, despite a minor 
increase of the charge-discharge voltage gap over 350 h. Ren et al. have 
also researched Co3O4-LIG catalyst cathodes for Zn-Air and Li–O2  bat-
teries through the multistep method previously described, but this time 
soaking LIG in Co(NO3)2  solutions [327]. The obtained Co3O4-LIG cat-
alysts  also  revealed  good  efficiency  for  oxygen  reduction  and  oxygen 
evolution reactions, which are necessary for inducing faster kinetics in 
charge-discharge  processes,  increasing  stability  and  decreasing  un-
wanted side reactions. Accordingly, the assembled batteries exhibited 
low  overpotentials  during  charge/discharge,  besides  stability  during 
hundreds of cycles. 

LIG has also been investigated for manufacturing electrodes for other 
types of metal-air batteries, besides Li- and Zn-based technologies. As a 
remarkable example, Zhang et al. have developed N-doped LIG anodes 
for  Na-ion  batteries,  which  are  a  promising  alternative  to  avoid  the 
dependence  on  scarce  and  expensive  lithium  [321].  In  this  work,  a 
single-step process for direct CO2  laser carbonization of urea-doped PI 
sheets was developed for the synthesis of highly corrugated and porous 
3D LIG structures, which were mainly doped with pyrrolic N, besides 
graphitic  an  pyridinic  groups.  The  best  anodes  were  those  with  the 
largest  amount  of  nitrogen  and  lowest  oxygen  content,  exhibiting 
(cid:0) 1 at a current density of 
outstanding Na-ion capacity, up to 425 mAh g
(cid:0) 1, with exceptional rate capabilities. Additionally, a capacity 
100 mA g
(cid:0) 1 was obtained with excellent stability over 
of 148 mAh g

(cid:0) 1 at 10 A g

100 cycles. Nitrogen doping tends to enhance the surface wettability and 
the electrical conductivity of LIG electrodes, whereas its porosity and 
mechanical stability help the structure to withstand the large volume 
changes during charge and discharge processes, which may lead to the 
complete failure of conventional electrodes. 

4.3. Techniques based on laser ablation 

4.3.1. Flexible micro-supercapacitor devices 

Although  less  investigated  than  the  laser-driven  direct  chemical 
transformation  methods  previously  described,  laser-induced  vapor-
ization also enables the innovative fabrication of graphene-based energy 
storage devices via direct ablation and/or deposition methods. As the 
predominant  approach,  the  manufacture  of  graphene-based  SCs  via 
high-resolution maskless laser etching is being explored for a few years 
with  promising  results  [328–333].  In  a  remarkable  work,  Ye  et  al. 
developed the fabrication of interdigitated μSCs by direct laser ablation 
of multi-layered graphene films made via industry-scale CVD synthesis 
[334]. The method consisted in the large area CVD growth of monolayer 
graphene films on Cu foils which were repeatedly transferred to flexible 
PET-Au  substrates  for  obtaining  multi-layered  graphene.  Afterwards, 
ultraviolet laser processing led to the local ablation and patterning of 
interdigitated  electrodes  with  micrometric  resolution  (Figs.  6a-e).  In 
this  way,  dense  arrays  of  highly  bendable  ultrathin  μSCs  were 

Fig. 6. (a, b) Optical images of micropatterned SC arrays with different geometries on PET substrates. Photographs of interdigital SC on (c) PET and on (d) more 
flexible PTFE foils. (e) Magnified optical image from (c) showing the machined electrodes. (f) Evolution of areal and volumetric capacitances with sweep rate and 
type of electrolyte. Reproduced from [334] with permission of WILEY-VCH Verlag. (g, h) 2D μSC before and after stretching. (i) CV curves of the 2D μSC before and 
after stretching. (j, k) 3D μSC before and after stretching. (l) CV curves of the 3D μSC before and after stretching. Scale bars in (g, h, j, k) correspond to 1 cm. 
Reproduced from [338] with permission of ACS. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098116R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

fabricated.  As  observed  in  Fig.  6f,  SCs  assembled  with  PVA/H2SO4 
(cid:0) 2 at 10 mV 
hydrogel exhibited a maximum capacitance of ca. 63 μF cm
(cid:0) 1. Their capacitance increased with the number of stacked graphene 
s
layers,  due  to  the  extra  contribution  from  the  edges  of  the  graphene 
monolayers. The μSCs displayed double-layer charge storage behaviour, 
(cid:0) 1), and 
fast ionic diffusion at extremely high sweep rates (up to 500 V s
(cid:0) 1. 
remarkable stability over 20000 charge-discharge cycles at 100 V s
Based on this fast SC technology, AC line-filtering devices, flexible in-
tegrated circuits comprising a diode bridge rectifier, a line-filter system 
containing fast μSCs, an array of hybrid graphene-PANI μSCs for energy 
harvesting,  and  pressure/gas  sensors  were  all  successfully  fabricated. 
Despite the outstanding performance of the devices, one should notice 
that  large-scale  laser  micromachining  of  CVD-grown  graphene  still 
presents important drawbacks such as the modest throughput and high 
costs involved. 

layers  and 

laser-assisted 

reduction  of  GO 

(cid:0) 2  at a 10 mV s

When compared to graphene, the laser processing of GO materials 
provides some benefits due to the lower cost and extensive industrial 
production, even if the electrical conductivity of rGO is lower than CVD- 
grown graphene. As a notable example, Kwon et al. demonstrated the 
laser fabrication of high quality graphene-based μSCs by photothermal 
CO2 
subsequent 
photochemically-driven UV pulsed laser ablation of the resulting LrGO 
[335]. As a result, the laser-patterned interdigitated electrodes exhibited 
larger  specific  surface  area  and  better  capacitive  properties  than 
chemically reduced GO electrodes used as reference. Flexible SCs with 
different  electrode  configurations  were  also  created,  revealing  a 
(cid:0) 1  sweep 
maximum areal capacitance of ca. 44 mF cm
rate.  In  a  more  recent  work,  Kamboj  et  al.  have  adopted  a  similar 
strategy  for  the  development  of  on-chip  flexible  μSCs  composed  of 
highly  conductive  graphene  foam  [336].  Firstly,  a  layer  of  electro-
chemically  reduced  GO  sheets  deposited  on  PET  substrates  was  sub-
mitted  to  CO2  laser  irradiation  for  increasing  the  degree  of  rGO 
reduction as well as achieving partial edge fusion interconnection be-
tween rGO sheets, which led to an enhancement of the structural and 
electrical  properties.  Interdigitated  electrodes  were  then  machined  in 
the  rGO  foam  via  localized  ablation  using  a  near-IR  (1.06  μm)  laser 
source.  Programmable  laser  writing  allowed  the  fast  and  versatile 
patterning  of  electrodes  and  devices  with  different  geometries.  The 
(cid:0) 2 of areal capacitance at 10 mA 
fabricated μSCs revealed ca. 2.3 mF cm
(cid:0) 2  current  density,  a  working  voltage  of  1.2  V  in  aqueous  solid 
cm
electrolyte,  as  well  as  outstanding  cycling  stability  over  100000 
continuous  charge-discharge  cycles.  Arrays  of  SC  devices  were  also 
created,  exhibiting  a  cell  voltage  of  10.8  V  and  significant  capacitive 
performance, even when subjected to a sweep rate of 100 V s

(cid:0) 1. 

Besides the laser patterning of graphene-based films for their phys-
ical isolation and definition of independent planar SC electrodes, sub-
tractive  laser  fabrication  methods  have  also  been  used  for  attaining 
other technological improvements. Thereby, 3D micromachining of rGO 
films enabled the fabrication of flexible SCs with excellent adherence to 
a polymeric substrate [337]. In this approach, LrGO patterns growing 
perpendicular  to  the  substrate  were  obtained  by  high-repetition-rate 
femtosecond  pulsed  laser  irradiation.  The  rGO  vertical  structures, 
sharing a common rGO basal layer, were further coated with a thin gold 
film and embedded into a PDMS matrix. The vertical structures fixed to 
the PDMS substrate operated as hooks, providing well-adhered, highly 
elastic  and  conductive  rGO  electrodes  and  fully  wearable  SC  devices. 
Using a different strategy, Gao et al. fabricated extremely elastic multi-
dimensional  μSCs  by  laser  cutting  of  full  solid  state  macroscopic  SCs 
[338].  Sandwiched sheet-like SC structures were assembled by chem-
ical/calcination  methods  using  carbon  paper  coated  with  ionic 
liquid-modified rGO as electrodes and filter papers covered with carbon 
paste as separators. Afterwards, the SCs were patterned into several 2D 
and 3D designs with the help of a 355 nm ultraviolet laser. The μSCs 
were  mechanically  robust,  showing  no  cracks  after  the  laser  cutting 
(cid:0) 2), 
process. The devices exhibited good areal capacitance (27.4 mF cm
(cid:0) 2),  and  wide  operating  voltage 
high  energy  density  (32.1  μWh  cm

window  (0(cid:0) 3 V). As  observed  in Figs.  6g-l,  as-fabricated 2D  and  3D 
tensile μSCs did not show noticeable variation of their charge storage 
properties while enduring substantial stretching deformation. Hondred 
et  al.  developed  highly  porous  graphene-based  electrodes  and  SCs  by 
CO2  laser  processing  of  films  obtained  from  rGO  inks  incorporating 
micron sized salt crystals (as porogens) [339]. The salt crystals gener-
ated micrometric pores into the rGO during the ink drying step. Further 
laser  irradiation  simultaneously  improved  the  welding  among  rGO 
flakes, increasing film conductivity, and etched the rGO sheets, facili-
tating the formation of micropores and additional edge defects, which 
augmented the electroactive surface area. The salt crystals were subse-
quently  removed  by  washing  with  water,  leaving  a  highly  porous 
structure.  Consequently,  the  electrodes  obtained  with  salt-generated 
pores displayed enhanced double layer capacitance when compared to 
those obtained without salt, due to the larger surface-electrolyte contact, 
enabling the fabrication of SCs with higher energy density. 

4.3.2. MAPLE for supercapacitor electrodes 

Laser-driven evaporation has been investigated for the deposition of 
graphene-based SC electrodes via the reactive inverse MAPLE technique 
(RIMAPLE).  Inverse  MAPLE  of  nanoentities  allows  their  deposition 
through  the  pulsed  laser  irradiation  of  frozen  dispersions.  Flexible 
composite  electrodes  constituted  by  N-doped  rGO  with  and  without 
decoration  by  NiO  nanostructures  have  been  obtained  by  UV  laser 
reactive  deposition  of  GO  flakes  and  NiO  nanoparticles  dispersed  in 
frozen aqueous targets containing ammonia, urea or melamine molec-
ular compounds [340]. As depicted in Figs. 7a, b, the 266 nm nano-
second  pulsed  laser  radiation  is  absorbed  by  the  GO  flakes  and  NiO 
nanoparticles,  leading  to  their  fast  heating  up  to  hundreds  or  even 
thousands of degrees for GO flakes and nanoparticles, respectively. GO 
flakes, whose temperature increases with the number of sheets, become 
reduced by both photochemical and photothermal mechanisms. In the 
targets  containing  NiO  nanoparticles,  the  nanoparticles  reach  their 
melting  temperature  and  undergo  de-wetting  processes.  The  GO  and 
NiO  nanoentities  lead  to  the  fast  heating  of  the  surrounding  frozen 
matrix,  triggering  the  decomposition  of  the  N-containing  molecules 
which react with GO, leading to N-doping, as well as sublimation and 
explosive  boiling  of  water  vapor  which  transports  the  nanomaterials 
towards the facing substrate. The end result of the laser processing is a 
porous  coating  consisting  of  rGO  flakes  with  nanometre-sized  NiO 
(cid:0) 3  at 10 mV 
crystals. A maximum volumetric capacitance of 350 F cm
(cid:0) 1, was obtained using the mel-
(cid:0) 1, corresponding to roughly 1000 F g
s
amine  precursor  (Fig.  7c).  The  electrodes  containing  NiO  nano-
structures revealed higher thicknesses (tens of μm) and robustness, but 
(cid:0) 3), 
about  one  order  of  magnitude  lower  capacitance  (up  to  13  F  cm
probably due to the low active surface area of the film and the low de-
gree  of  GO  reduction.  SCs  fabricated  with  these  electrodes  revealed 
excellent cycling stability at high current densities (up to 50000 cycles at 
(cid:0) 1).  In  a  similar  work,  citric  acid,  ascorbic  acid  and 
hundreds  of  A  g
imidazole precursors, easily reacted with GO during laser irradiation, 
were  used  for  tailoring  the  reduction  and  N-doping  processes  of  GO 
during MAPLE [341]. Depending on the precursor, the rGO sheets dis-
played dissimilar amounts of nanoholes and furrows, besides differences 
in composition. The formation of nanoholes, which are  important for 
increasing the electrochemically active surface sites, has been related to 
the reduction process of GO in the presence of water [342]. The imid-
azole precursor promoted the synthesis of N-doped rGO with the higher 
degree of reduction and N-doping, leading to the formation of electrodes 
(cid:0) 1). 
with the largest volumetric capacitance (114 F cm
Symmetric and asymmetric electrochemical capacitors were fabricated, 
displaying  good  performance  over  10000  charge-discharge  cycles  at 
high specific currents. 

(cid:0) 3  at 10 mV cm

By adopting the MAPLE methodology, there is a great flexibility in 
the  synthesis  of  complex  compounds  and  the  activation  of  coupled 
physical mechanisms between the reactants. In this context, the incor-
poration  of  MWCNTs  in  the  targets  allowed  the  deposition  of  GO- 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098117R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Fig. 7. (a) Schematic representation of the RIMAPLE process. (b) Simulated temperature of GO flakes and NiO nanoparticles subjected to one UV laser pulse of 400 
(cid:0) 2. Insets: temperature distribution maps in a 50 nm NiO NP and a 10 nm thick GO flake after 3 ns. (c) Volumetric capacitance of GO-NiO electrodes versus 
mJ cm
sweep rate. The open symbols denote the samples synthesized with NiO nanoparticles. Reproduced from [340] with permission of RSC. High-resolution SEM images 
of GO–CNT–NiO samples with (d) (5/0/5) and (e) (5/1/5) relative wt.% concentrations. (f) Volumetric capacitance of GO–CNT–NiO samples obtained with different 
relative concentrations. Reproduced from [343] with permission of RSC. 

MWCNT-NiO  composite  films  with  increased  porosity  [343].  As  dis-
played 
in  Figs.  7d-f,  homogeneous  composites  constituted  by 
NiO-coated rGO and MMWCNTs were obtained in a simple way, leading 
(cid:0) 3 at 10 
to a substantial enhancement of capacitance (from 4 to 20 F cm
(cid:0) 1  by  adding  just  1  wt.%  of  MWCNTs).  Electrochemical  in-
mV  s
vestigations  indicated  that  N-containing  groups  in  rGO  and  MWCNTs 
mainly added EDL charge storage, probably due to an increase of ma-
terial  porosity  and  edge  defects,  whereas  redox  reactions  represented 
only a minor contribution. Due to the creation of meso-macropores that 
harbour NiO aggregates, the loading of MWCNTs led to an increase in 
the  diffusion-controlled  charge  storage  mechanisms  versus  capacitive 
ones in rGO-based electrodes. Analogous studies carried out using gra-
phene sheets instead of GO flakes revealed comparable electrochemical 
performance  of  the  graphene  electrodes.  Other  works  reported  the 
fabrication  of  electrochemical  energy  storage  electrodes  composed  of 
rGO decorated with Fe3O4 nanostructures as well as rGO-MWCNT-ZnO 
and  rGO-MWCNT-CeOx-MnOx  composites  [344–346].  It  is  worth 
mentioning the distinct approach adopted by Ajnsztajn et al. in which 
the fabrication of transparent supercapacitive electrodes incorporating 
2D  MXene  nanomaterials  has  recently  been  accomplished  using  the 
resonant infrared MAPLE deposition [347]. In conclusion, the reported 
works  indicate  that,  although the  MAPLE technology  is  still  in  its  in-
fancy,  it  is  a  highly  versatile  and  easy  route  for  the  fabrication  of 
graphene-based  energy  storage  electrodes  with  high  innovation 
potential. 

4.3.3. LIFT and related techniques for energy storage devices 

LIFT and LIBT are deposition/transfer methods which have already 
been studied by several groups and applied to a variety of functional 
devices  [348–351],  however  their  use  in  energy  storage  applications 
has,  so  far,  been  very  restricted,  and  the  few  examples  of 
carbon-containing  LIFT  electrodes  for  batteries  have  been  largely 
concentrated  in  the  same  research  group.  This  is  actually  surprising, 
given  the  large  volume  of  research  on  electronic  and  optical  devices 

relying on these laser transfer techniques. 

In the pioneering work of Piqu´e and co-workers, published almost 20 
years ago, the use of LIFT for the fabrication of energy storage devices 
has been investigated. The authors used a thick film made from a paste 
consisting  of  hydrous  ruthenium  oxide  and  5M  sulphuric  acid  (the 
electrolyte)  as  the  donor  film  for  their  capacitors,  and  defined  the 
boundaries of the device by laser micromachining [352]. Shortly after 
this work, they reported the fabrication of Li-ion microbatteries by LIFT 
[353].  This  was  an  impressive  development,  since  they  succeeded  to 
deposit the whole multilayer device using LIFT. A battery having a 40 
µm thick LiCoO2/carbon/PVDF composite cathode, and a 60 µm thick 
mesoporous  carbon  microbeads/carbon  composite  anode  exhibited  a 
specific capacity of 97.8 mAh/g. Slight changes to the basic character-
istics  of  the  batteries,  such  as  composition  [354]  were  reported  in 
another  publication,  and,  in  another  article,  laser  structuring  of  the 
LIFT-deposited  layers  [355]  has  been  studied,  with  mixed  results  (a 
slight decrease in capacitance and an improvement in cyclic stability). 
Fig. 8 shows a cross-sectional view of a LIFT-fabricated microbattery, 
both schematically (Fig. 8a) and in a SEM image taken from a real de-
vice (Fig. 8b). 

Praeger et al. [356] have recently demonstrated LIBT of monolayer 
CVD grown graphene using single femtosecond laser pulses. They used a 
digital micromirror device for spatial modulation of the irradiation in-
tensity across a spot in the donor film, attenuating the laser intensity (by 
digital dithering) in the circle interior, while applying the full level of 
fluence to the perimeter of the region to be transferred. The authors have 
also  performed  graphene  LIBT  under  reduced  pressures,  and  in  both 
strategies, their idea was to accomplish better detachment of the donor 
layer and preservation of the original shape in the receiving substrate. 
Carbon  nanowalls  [357]  and  carbon  nanowall/SnO2  hybrid  materials 
[232]  have  also  been  deposited  by  Dinescu  and  co-workers  through 
LIFT.  In  spite  of  the  clear  applicability  of  these  carbon  materials  as 
electrochemical electrodes due to their high conductivity, large surface 
area, and even incorporating the pseudocapacitive tin oxide, the authors 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098118R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

2.  Impurity-free:  For  the  construction  of  3D  porous  graphene  nano- 
architectures,  laser  processing  is  more  favourable  than  the  wet- 
chemical  synthetic  routes,  as  well  as  high-temperature  growth 
processes.  

3.  Local  heating:  The  ability  of  the  laser  techniques  to  induce  site- 
specific  thermal  effects  is  exceedingly  beneficial  for  tailoring  the 
structural  features  of  graphene  without  negatively  affecting  heat- 
sensitive substrates  

4.  Multiple effects: Laser methods allow more than one operation to be 
performed during a single processing step. Thus synthesis, deposi-
tion, patterning, reduction, doping, etc. are some of the technologi-
cally  relevant  processes  that  can  be  induced  to  take  place 
simultaneously, for faster and cheaper fabrication of energy storage 
devices. 

In spite of the rapid progress of laser technologies for processing of 
graphene materials, a few challenges should still be properly addressed 
for the widespread commercialization of graphene-based devices. Some 
of the most pressing issues are: 

1. Direct laser writing of graphene (as in LIG) can be successfully ach-
ieved only in a very few types of substrates (normally polymers with 
six-membered rings in their basic structure). As a whole, this pro-
cessing technique suffers from low fabrication efficiency. In this re-
gard,  more  research  (and  practical  demonstrations)  on  parallel 
processing methods would be highly desirable for achieving viable, 
wide scale production of graphene devices.  

2.  Although numerous investigations using different laser technologies 
have  already  been  carried out,  the exact  mechanisms for  accurate 
property tuning of graphene materials through laser processing have 
not  yet  been  clearly  understood.  Even  if  the  good  results  already 
reported indicate some directions, or general trends.  

3.  The  results  of  some  of  the  laser  processing  techniques  are  highly 
sensitive  to  small  changes  in  the  processing  parameters  (narrow 
“processing  windows”).  From  a  commercial  point  of  view,  these 
techniques should be optimized for achieving a more robust fabri-
cation which would ensure higher yields. 

4. For  many  of  the  practical  energy  storage  applications,  the  capaci-
tance  of  µSCs  based  on  laser-induced  graphene  should  be  further 
enhanced.  The  combination  of  graphene  materials  with  pseudoca-
pacitive  materials  and  other  forms  of  carbon  nanostructures  still 
needs more research, especially focusing on building specific archi-
tectures  which  are  more  favourable  for  high  performance  device 
operation.  

5.  Some key issues related to the laser processing of graphene, like the 
recovery  of  the  sp2  network  in  GO,  the  synthesis  of  less  defective 
laser-induced  graphene,  etc.  are  still  not  fully  understood,  and 
therefore, they cannot be satisfactorily controlled.  

6.  The relationship between the characteristics of the laser irradiation 
and the functionalization of graphene has not yet been systematically 
investigated. This knowledge will be beneficial for linking structure- 
property relations to the variables of laser processing. 

Regarding  the  possible  directions  for  future  research:  Laser-based 
additive manufacturing methods (laser stereolithography, laser sinter-
ing, laser melting) have been increasingly applied to the fabrication of 
functional devices, including SCs and batteries. 3D printing associated 
with  laser  carbonization  has  a  huge  potential  for  fabrication  of  func-
tional polymer parts, including sensors or other electronic components. 
Microfluidics  and  lab-on-a-chip  devices  are  some  of  the  additively 
manufactured products which could also benefit from the inclusion of 
easily fabricated conductive carbon electrodes and even fully-functional 
electrical and electronic devices. 

Maybe  some  more  research  effort  should  be  shifted  towards  the 
application  of  laser-driven  deposition  approaches,  such  as  LIFT  and 
LIBT.  These  direct-writing  (or  transfer)  techniques  have  already  been 

Fig.  8. (a)  Schematic  cross-sectional  structure  of  a  LIFT-fabricated  micro-
battery; (b) SEM image of a real battery showing the layers corresponding to the 
drawing in (a). Reproduced from [354] with permission from Elsevier. 

did not evaluate the performance of the resulting materials as electrodes 
in energy storage devices. 

5. Conclusions and outlook 

In  summary, the current review article  provided an  outline of the 
recent progress in laser-based synthesis and modification of graphene 
and related materials, discussing the most important techniques applied 
to energy storage devices. For the fabrication of graphene-based elec-
tronics,  laser processing is  highly beneficial due to the  short reaction 
times, area-selective modification, and generation of high-quality (im-
purity-free) graphene materials at low thermal budgets. For graphene 
patterning,  laser  ablation  is  arguably  the  most  favourable  route,  but 
direct  laser  writing  (graphitization)  of  flexible  substrates  is  very 
attractive  for  future  application  purposes.  Moreover,  laser-irradiation 
assisted reduction of GO, as well as rGO doping, are also quite popular 
for the development of flexible electronics. 

Laser-based  techniques  have  been  widely  applied  for  developing 
sensing  devices,  actuators,  flexible  optoelectronic  devices  as  well  as 
integrated smart devices. For a summary of additional research on laser 
processing of graphene and related materials (not covered in the main 
text), the reader can refer to the table in the supplementary information. 
It is important to mention that apart from energy storage, the successful 
conversion of carbon-based natural resources into graphene materials 
through laser processing has accelerated the progress of bio-compatible 
electronics. 

Laser-based technologies exhibit some unique characteristics which 
make them uniquely suited for the fabrication of graphene-based energy 
storage devices:  

1.  Fast  processing:  Laser  thinning  of  graphene  layers,  precise  local 
cutting  and  material  removal,  selective  heteroatom-doping,  and 
synthesis of high-purity graphene materials, all of these operations 
can be performed within extremely short times.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098119R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

adequately  studied  (especially  LIFT),  and  used  for  depositing  carbon 
materials (including graphene by LIBT). They have also been applied to 
electronic  devices,  including  batteries.  However,  the  storage  devices 
based on graphene materials are still a wide open field for both tech-
niques.  With the  possibility of  sequentially  depositing  different  solids 
and  liquids,  and  in  some  cases,  even  building  hybrid  3D  electrodes 
incorporating  higher  amounts  of  pseudocapacitive  materials,  these 
techniques  should  provide  ample  ground  for  experimentation  and 
development of charge storage devices. 

We  finish  this  survey  with  a  reminder  about  the  importance  of 
properly  describing  laser-based  treatments.  Unfortunately,  some  re-
searchers  (especially  those  using  CO2  laser  engraving  or  cutting  ma-
chines)  are  still  oblivious  to  the  negative  aspects  of  reporting  their 
experiments using terms which are borrowed from traditional printing 
practices. Although they might be conveying an accurate description of 
the parameters, as they appear in the machine display, the conditions 
are not defined in a physically meaningful way, and can only be repli-
cated by using the same type of equipment. This is a serious problem, but 
it  is  not  the  only  detrimental  aspect,  since  researchers  should  always 
plan  their  experiments  taking  into  consideration  the  light-matter  in-
teractions, and these are actually ruled by the variables described at the 
beginning  of  this  review  (laser  power,  wavelength,  pulse  width  and 
repetition  rate,  spot  size  and  writing  speed).  The  results  should, 
accordingly, be analysed taking into consideration parameters such as 
the fluence of radiation and the degree of laser spot overlap as the beam 
is scanned on the material, for example. Reviewers of research articles 
describing laser-based work could also play a bigger role, remembering 
the authors that the adequate reporting of laser treatment conditions is 
an essential step for keeping the pace of ongoing advances in the laser 
processing of graphene and its derivatives. 

A practical problem, which is present in most laser methods, is the 
accurate measurement of temperatures during (and immediately after) 
laser irradiation. Several factors contribute to this difficulty, including 
the short duration of laser pulses, the high temperatures, and the very 
high  heating  and  cooling  rates  involved,  in  part  due  to  the  extreme 
physical  properties  of  graphene.  A  cheap,  reliable  and  easy  to  use 
method  for  performing  these  measurements  could  provide  further  in-
sights  on  the  chemical  and  physical  phenomena,  broadening  our  un-
derstanding of the processes at work. 

Although the laser-based approaches are quite new in the processing 
of graphene materials, when compared to other methods, we anticipate 
the  technology  to  become  invaluable  for  the  fabrication  of  advanced 
devices in the near future. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgements 

This  research  was  supported  by  the  financial  assistance  from  the 
Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science 
&  Technology (DST), New Delhi under Ramanujan Fellowship Award 
(SB/S2/RJN-159/2017)  and  JSPS  KAKENHI  Grant  JP-18F18063.  The 
author  (A.P.  Pino)  thanks  the  financial  support  of  MCIN/AEI/ 
10.13039/501100011033  under  the  project  PID2020-116612RB-C31 
and  support  from  AGAUR  of  Generalitat  de  Catalunya  through  pro-
jects  2017  SGR  1086  and  2017  SGR  1771.  ICMAB  acknowledges 
financial support from MCIN/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033, through 
Severo Ochoa FUNFUTURE grant (CEX2019-000917-S). 

Supplementary materials 

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100981. 

References 

[1] Liang K, Li L, Yang Y. Inorganic porous films for renewable energy storage. ACS 

Energy Letters 2017;2:373–90. 

[2] Yu G, Hu L, Vosgueritchian M, Wang H, Xie X, McDonough JR, et al. Solution- 

processed graphene/MnO2  nanostructured textiles for high-performance 
electrochemical capacitors. Nano Letters 2011;11:2905–11. 

[3] Afzal S, Sengupta D, Sarkar A, El-Halwagi M, Elbashir N. Optimization approach 
to the reduction of CO2 emissions for syngas production involving dry reforming. 
ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 2018;6:7532–44. 

[4] Günther A, Barthelmes A, Huth V, Joosten H, Jurasinski G, Koebsch F, et al. 

Prompt rewetting of drained peatlands reduces climate warming despite methane 
emissions. Nature Communications 2020:11. 

[5] Adedoyin F, Ozturk I, Abubakar I, Kumeka T, Folarin O, Bekun FV. Structural 
breaks in CO2  emissions: Are they caused by climate change protests or other 
factors? Journal of Environmental Management 2020;266:110628. 

[6] Fan J, Hong H, Jin H. Life cycle global warming impact of CO2 capture by in-situ 
gasification chemical looping combustion using ilmenite oxygen carriers. Journal 
of Cleaner Production 2019;234:568–78. 

[7] Soutter ARB, M˜ottus R. “Global warming” versus “climate change”: A replication 
on the association between political self-identification, question wording, and 
environmental beliefs. Journal of Environmental Psychology 2020;69:101413. 
[8] Li C, Zhang Q, E S, Li T, Zhu Z, He B, et al. An ultra-high endurance and high- 
performance quasi-solid-state fiber-shaped Zn–Ag2O battery to harvest wind 
energy. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2019;7:2034–40. 

[9] Gao T, Liao J, Wang J, Qiu Y, Yang Q, Zhang M, et al. Highly oriented BaTiO3 film 
self-assembled using an interfacial strategy and its application as a flexible 
piezoelectric generator for wind energy harvesting. Journal of Materials 
Chemistry A 2015;3:9965–71. 

[10] Prabhu K, Chandiran AK. Solar energy storage in a Cs2AgBiBr6  halide double 

perovskite photoelectrochemical cell. Chemical Communications 2020;56: 
7329–32. 

[11] Lin Y, Feng H, Chen R, Zhang B, An L. One-dimensional TiO2  nanotube array 

photoanode for a microfluidic all-vanadium photoelectrochemical cell for solar 
energy storage. Catalysis Science & Technology 2020;10:4352–61. 

[12] Hossain MS, Pandey AK, Rahim NA, Selvaraj J, Tyagi VV, Islam MM. Self-cleaning 

assisted photovoltaic system with thermal energy storage: Design and 
performance evaluation. Solar Energy 2020;206:487–98. 

[13] Kumar R, Singh RK, Vaz AR, Savu R, Moshkalev SA. Self-assembled and one-step 
synthesis of interconnected 3D network of Fe3O4/reduced graphene oxide 
nanosheets hybrid for high-performance supercapacitor electrode. ACS Applied 
Materials & Interfaces 2017;9:8880–90. 

[14] Li M, Addad A, Roussel P, Szunerits S, Boukherroub R. High performance flexible 

hybrid supercapacitors based on nickel hydroxide deposited on copper oxide 
supported by copper foam for a sunlight-powered rechargeable energy storage 
system. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 2020;579:520–30. 

[15] Kumar R, Singh RK, Dubey PK, Singh DP, Yadav RM. Self-assembled hierarchical 
formation of conjugated 3D cobalt oxide nanobead–CNT–graphene nanostructure 
using microwaves for high-performance supercapacitor electrode. ACS Applied 
Materials & Interfaces 2015;7:15042–51. 

[16] Zhang Y, Liu J, Li S-L, Su Z-M, Lan Y-Q. Polyoxometalate-based materials for 

sustainable and clean energy conversion and storage. EnergyChem 2019;1: 
100021. 

[17] Kumar R, Sahoo S, Tan WK, Kawamura G, Matsuda A, Kar KK. Microwave- 

assisted thin reduced graphene oxide-cobalt oxide nanoparticles as hybrids for 
electrode materials in supercapacitor. Journal of Energy Storage 2021;40: 
102724. 

[18] Park SH, Goodall G, Kim WS. Perspective on 3D-designed micro-supercapacitors. 

Materials & Design 2020;193:108797. 

[19] Kumar R, Joanni E, Singh RK, da Silva ETSG, Savu R, Kubota LT, et al. Direct laser 

writing of micro-supercapacitors on thick graphite oxide films and their 
electrochemical properties in different liquid inorganic electrolytes. Journal of 
Colloid and Interface Science 2017;507:271–8. 

[20] Wang X, Yushin G. Chemical vapor deposition and atomic layer deposition for 
advanced lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors. Energy & Environmental 
Science 2015;8:1889–904. 

[21] Kumar R, Youssry SM, Soe HM, Abdel-Galeil MM, Kawamura G, Matsuda A. 

Honeycomb-like open-edged reduced-graphene-oxide-enclosed transition metal 
oxides (NiO/Co3O4) as improved electrode materials for high-performance 
supercapacitor. Journal of Energy Storage 2020;30:101539. 

[22] Kumar R, Sahoo S, Joanni E, Singh RK, Yadav RM, Verma RK, et al. A review on 

synthesis of graphene, h-BN and MoS2  for energy storage applications: Recent 
progress and perspectives. Nano Research 2019;12:2655–94. 

[23] Noori A, El-Kady MF, Rahmanifar MS, Kaner RB, Mousavi MF. Towards 

establishing standard performance metrics for batteries, supercapacitors and 
beyond. Chemical Society Reviews 2019;48:1272–341. 

[24] El-Hallag IS, El-Nahass MN, Youssry SM, Kumar R, Abdel-Galeil MM, Matsuda A. 
Facile in-situ simultaneous electrochemical reduction and deposition of reduced 
graphene oxide embedded palladium nanoparticles as high performance 
electrode materials for supercapacitor with excellent rate capability. 
Electrochimica Acta 2019;314:124–34. 

[25] Kumar N S, Grekov D, Pr´e P, Alappat BJ. Microwave mode of heating in the 

preparation of porous carbon materials for adsorption and energy storage 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098120R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

applications – An overview. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2020; 
124:109743. 

[26] Shanmuga Priya M, Divya P, Rajalakshmi R. A review status on characterization 

and electrochemical behaviour of biomass derived carbon materials for energy 
storage supercapacitors. Sustainable Chemistry and Pharmacy 2020;16:100243. 

[27] Thomas P, Lai CW. Bin Johan MR. Recent developments in biomass-derived 
carbon as a potential sustainable material for super-capacitor-based energy 
storage and environmental applications. Journal of Analytical and Applied 
Pyrolysis 2019;140:54–85. 

[28] Wang J, Zhang X, Li Z, Ma Y, Ma L. Recent progress of biomass-derived carbon 
materials for supercapacitors. Journal of Power Sources 2020;451:227794. 
[29] Zhao X, Chen H, Kong F, Zhang Y, Wang S, Liu S, et al. Fabrication, characteristics 

and applications of carbon materials with different morphologies and porous 
structures produced from wood liquefaction: A review. Chemical Engineering 
Journal 2019;364:226–43. 

[30] Yuan K, Hu T, Xu Y, Graf R, Brunklaus G, Forster M, et al. Engineering the 

morphology of carbon materials: 2D porous carbon nanosheets for high- 
performance supercapacitors. ChemElectroChem 2016;3:822–8. 

[31] Hurs´an D, Samu AA, Janov´ak L, Artyushkova K, Asset T, Atanassov P, et al. 
Morphological attributes govern carbon doxide reduction on N-doped carbon 
electrodes. Joule 2019;3:1719–33. 

[32] Samdani KJ, Kim SH, Park JH, Hong SH, Lee KT. Morphology-controlled synthesis 

of Co3O4  composites with bio-inspired carbons as high-performance 
supercapacitor electrode materials. Journal of Industrial and Engineering 
Chemistry 2019;74:96–102. 

[33] Kumar R, Singh RK, Tiwari VS, Yadav A, Savu R, Vaz AR, et al. Enhanced 

magnetic performance of iron oxide nanoparticles anchored pristine/N-doped 
multi-walled carbon nanotubes by microwave-assisted approach. Journal of 
Alloys and Compounds 2017;695:1793–801. 

[34] Kumar R, Singh RK, Tiwari RS. Growth analysis and high-yield synthesis of 

aligned-stacked branched nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes using sesame oil as a 
natural botanical hydrocarbon precursor. Materials & Design 2016;94:166–75. 

[53] Ambrosi A, Chua CK, Latiff NM, Loo AH, Wong CHA, Eng AYS, et al. Graphene 
and its electrochemistry – an update. Chemical Society Reviews 2016;45: 
2458–93. 

[54] Reiss T, Hjelt K, Ferrari AC. Graphene is on track to deliver on its promises. 

Nature Nanotechnology 2019;14:907–10. 

[55] Ferrari AC, Bonaccorso F, Fal’ko V, Novoselov KS, Roche S, Bøggild P, et al. 

Science and technology roadmap for graphene, related two-dimensional crystals, 
and hybrid systems. Nanoscale 2015;7:4598–810. 

′
[56] Novoselov KS, Fal

ko VI, Colombo L, Gellert PR, Schwab MG, Kim K. A roadmap 

for graphene. Nature 2012;490:192–200. 

[57] Shivananju BN, Yu W, Liu Y, Zhang Y, Lin B, Li S, et al. The roadmap of graphene- 
based optical biochemical Sensors. Advanced Functional Materials 2017;27: 
1603918. 

[58] Huo P, Zhao P, Wang Y, Liu B, Yin G, Dong M. A roadmap for achieving 

sustainable energy conversion and storage: Graphene-based composites used both 
as an electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reactions and an electrode material for 
a supercapacitor. Energies 2018;11:167. 

[59] Tsang CHA, Huang H, Xuan J, Wang H, Leung DYC. Graphene materials in green 
energy applications: Recent development and future perspective. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews 2020;120:109656. 

[60] Solís-Fern´andez P, Bissett M, Ago H. Synthesis, structure and applications of 
graphene-based 2D heterostructures. Chemical Society Reviews 2017;46: 
4572–613. 

[61] Kumar R, Singh RK, Singh DP. Natural and waste hydrocarbon precursors for the 

synthesis of carbon based nanomaterials: Graphene and CNTs. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews 2016;58:976–1006. 

[62] Kumar R, Singh RK, Singh DP, Joanni E, Yadav RM, Moshkalev SA. Laser-assisted 
synthesis, reduction and micro-patterning of graphene: Recent progress and 
applications. Coordination Chemistry Reviews 2017;342:34–79. 

[63] Bauerle D. Laser processing and chemistry. Forth ed. Heilderberg: Springer; 2011. 
[64] Gamaly EG. The physics of ultra-short laser interaction with solids at non- 

relativistic intensities. Physics Reports 2011;508:91–243. 

[35] Kumar R, Sahoo S, Joanni E, Singh RK, Kar KK. Microwave as a tool for synthesis 
of carbon-based electrodes for energy storage. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 
2021. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c15934. 

[65] Maechling CR, Clemett SJ, Engelke F, Zare RN. Evidence for thermalization of 

surface-desorbed molecules at heating rates of 108 K/s. The Journal of Chemical 
Physics 1996;104:8768–76. 

[36] Xu M, Yu Q, Liu Z, Lv J, Lian S, Hu B, et al. Tailoring porous carbon spheres for 

[66] Liu N, Ma T, Liao C, Liu G, Mota RMO, Liu J, et al. Combinatorial measurement of 

supercapacitors. Nanoscale 2018;10:21604–16. 

[37] Ye J, Zang J, Tian Z, Zheng M, Dong Q. Sulfur and nitrogen co-doped hollow 

carbon spheres for sodium-ion batteries with superior cyclic and rate 
performance. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2016;4:13223–7. 

[38] Peng S, Li L, Kong Yoong Lee J, Tian L, Srinivasan M, Adams S, et al. Electrospun 
carbon nanofibers and their hybrid composites as advanced materials for energy 
conversion and storage. Nano Energy 2016;22:361–95. 

[39] Liu Y, Jiang G, Huang Z, Lu Q, Yu B, Evariste U, et al. Decoration of hollow 

mesoporous carbon spheres by NiCo2S4  nanoparticles as electrode materials for 
asymmetric supercapacitors. ACS Applied Energy Materials 2019;2:8079–89. 
[40] Ding J, Zhang H, Zhou H, Feng J, Zheng X, Zhong C, et al. Sulfur-grafted hollow 
carbon spheres for potassium-ion battery anodes. Advanced Materials 2019;31: 
1900429. 

[41] Fu X, Liu L, Yu Y, Lv H, Zhang Y, Hou S, et al. Hollow carbon spheres/hollow 

carbon nanorods composites as electrode materials for supercapacitor. Journal of 
the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers 2019;101:244–50. 

[42] Wang X, Wang S, Shen K, He S, Hou X, Chen F. Phosphorus-doped porous hollow 
carbon nanorods for high-performance sodium-based dual-ion batteries. Journal 
of Materials Chemistry A 2020;8:4007–16. 

[43] Li Z, Guo D, Liu Y, Wang H, Wang L. Recent advances and challenges in biomass- 
derived porous carbon nanomaterials for supercapacitors. Chemical Engineering 
Journal 2020;397:125418. 

[44] Liu P, Wang Y, Liu J. Biomass-derived porous carbon materials for advanced 
lithium sulfur batteries. Journal of Energy Chemistry 2019;34:171–85. 

[45] Benzigar MR, Talapaneni SN, Joseph S, Ramadass K, Singh G, Scaranto J, et al. 
Recent advances in functionalized micro and mesoporous carbon materials: 
synthesis and applications. Chemical Society Reviews 2018;47:2680–721. 
[46] Geim AK, Novoselov KS. The rise of graphene. Nature Materials 2007;6:183–91. 
[47] Kumar R, Joanni E, Singh RK, Singh DP, Moshkalev SA. Recent advances in the 
synthesis and modification of carbon-based 2D materials for application in energy 
conversion and storage. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2018;67: 
115–57. 

[48] Singh RK, Kumar R, Singh DP. Graphene oxide: strategies for synthesis, reduction 

and frontier applications. RSC Advances 2016;6:64993–5011. 

[49] Nardecchia S, Carriazo D, Ferrer ML, Guti´errez MC, del Monte F. Three 

dimensional macroporous architectures and aerogels built of carbon nanotubes 
and/or graphene: synthesis and applications. Chemical Society Reviews 2013;42: 
794–830. 

[50] Kumar R, Singh RK, Dubey PK, Kumar P, Tiwari RS. Pressure-dependent synthesis 
of high-quality few-layer graphene by plasma-enhanced arc discharge and their 
thermal stability. Journal of Nanoparticle Research 2013;15:1847. 

[51] Kumar R, Sahoo S, Joanni E, Singh RK, Maegawa K, Tan WK, et al. Heteroatom 
doped graphene engineering for energy storage and conversion. Materials Today 
2020;39:47–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2020.04.010. 

[52] Kumar R, Sahoo S, Joanni E, Singh RK, Tan WK, Kar KK, et al. Recent progress in 
the synthesis of graphene and derived materials for next generation electrodes of 
high performance lithium ion batteries. Progress in Energy and Combustion 
Science 2019;75:100786. 

critical cooling rates in aluminum-base metallic glass forming alloys. Scientific 
Reports 2021;11:3903. 

[67] Bordeenithikasem P, Liu J, Kube SA, Li Y, Ma T, Scanley BE, et al. Determination 

of critical cooling rates in metallic glass forming alloy libraries through laser 
spike annealing. Scientific Reports 2017;7:7155. 

[68] Huang X, Guo Q, Yang D, Xiao X, Liu X, Xia Z, et al. Reversible 3D laser printing 
of perovskite quantum dots inside a transparent medium. Nature Photonics 2020; 
14:82–8. 

[69] Liu H, Liu Y, Guo W, Zhou X, Lin L, Peng P. Laser assisted ink-printing of copper 
oxide nanoplates for memory device. Materials Letters 2020;261:127097. 
[70] Jin HM, Lee SH, Kim JY, Son S-W, Kim BH, Lee HK, et al. Laser writing block 

copolymer self-assembly on graphene light-absorbing layer. ACS Nano 2016;10: 
3435–42. 

[71] Kabashin AV, Singh A, Swihart MT, Zavestovskaya IN, Prasad PN. Laser-processed 
nanosilicon: A multifunctional nanomaterial for energy and healthcare. ACS Nano 
2019;13:9841–67. 

[72] Esqueda-Barr´on Y, Herrera M, Camacho-L´opez S. ZnO synthesized in air by fs 
laser irradiation on metallic Zn thin films. Applied Surface Science 2018;439: 
681–8. 

[73] Queralt´o A, P´erez del Pino A, de la Mata M, Arbiol J, Tristany M, Obradors X, 
et al. Ultrafast epitaxial growth kinetics in functional oxide thin films grown by 
pulsed laser annealing of chemical solutions. Chemistry of Materials 2016;28: 
6136–45. 

[74] Palneedi H, Park JH, Maurya D, Peddigari M, Hwang G-T, Annapureddy V, et al. 
Laser irradiation of metal oxide films and nanostructures: Applications and 
advances. Advanced Materials 2018;30:1705148. 

[75] Sun X, Ehrhardt M, Lotnyk A, Lorenz P, Thelander E, Gerlach JW, et al. 

Crystallization of Ge2Sb2Te5  thin films by nano- and femtosecond single laser 
pulse irradiation. Scientific Reports 2016;6:28246. 

[76] Lee J, Seok JY, Son S, Yang M, Kang B. High-energy, flexible micro- 

supercapacitors by one-step laser fabrication of a self-generated nanoporous 
metal/oxide electrode. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2017;5:24585–93. 
[77] Wang G, Zhang Y, Yang H, Wang W, Dai Y-Z, Niu L-G, et al. Fast-response 

humidity sensor based on laser printing for respiration monitoring. RSC Advances 
2020;10:8910–6. 

[78] Kaidarova A, Alsharif N, Oliveira BNM, Marengo M, Geraldi NR, Duarte CM, et al. 

Laser-printed, flexible graphene pressure sensors. Global Challenges. 2020;4. 
2000001. 

[79] Huang G-W, Feng Q-P, Xiao H-M, Li N, Fu S-Y. Rapid laser printing of paper-based 

multilayer circuits. ACS Nano 2016;10:8895–903. 

[80] Li Q, Grojo D, Alloncle A-P, Chichkov B, Delaporte P. Digital laser micro- and 

nanoprinting. Nanophotonics 2018;8:27–44. 

[81] Yu Y, Bai S, Wang S, Hu A. Ultra-short pulsed laser manufacturing and surface 

processing of microdevices. Engineering 2018;4:779–86. 

[82] Wang X, Xu B, Chen Y, Ma C, Huang Y. Fabrication of micro/nano-hierarchical 
structures for droplet manipulation via velocity-controlled picosecond laser 
surface texturing. Optics and Lasers in Engineering 2019;122:319–27. 

[83] Xiong W, Zhou Y, Hou W, Jiang L, Mahjouri-Samani M, Park J, et al. Laser-based 

micro/nanofabrication in one, two and three dimensions. Frontiers of 
Optoelectronics 2015;8:351–78. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098121R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

[84] Reyes-Contreras A, Camacho-L´opez M, Camacho-L´opez S, Olea-Mejía O, Esparza- 
García A, Ba˜nuelos-Mu˜net´on JG, et al. Laser-induced periodic surface structures 
on bismuth thin films with ns laser pulses below ablation threshold. Opt Mater 
Express 2017;7:1777–86. 

[85] Yang L, Wei J, Ma Z, Song P, Ma J, Zhao Y, et al. The fabrication of micro/nano 
structures by laser machining. Nanomaterials (Basel, Switzerland) 2019:9. 
[86] Heiskanen S, Geng Z, Mastom¨aki J, Maasilta IJ. Nanofabrication on 2D and 3D 

topography via positive-tone direct-write laser lithography. Advanced 
Engineering Materials 2020;22:1901290. 

[87] Casiraghi C, Hartschuh A, Lidorikis E, Qian H, Harutyunyan H, Gokus T, et al. 

Rayleigh imaging of graphene and graphene layers. Nano Letters 2007;7:2711–7. 
[88] Nair RR, Blake P, Grigorenko AN, Novoselov KS, Booth TJ, Stauber T, et al. Fine 

structure constant defines visual transparency of graphene. Science 2008;320: 
1308. 

[89] Bellucci S, Bovesecchi G, Cataldo A, Coppa P, Corasaniti S, Potenza M. 

Transmittance and reflectance effects during thermal diffusivity measurements of 
GNP samples with the flash method. Materials 2019;12:696. 

[90] Djuriˇsi´c AB, Li EH. Optical properties of graphite. Journal of Applied Physics 

1999;85:7404–10. 

[91] Wang F, Zhang Y, Tian C, Girit C, Zettl A, Crommie M, et al. Gate-variable optical 

transitions in graphene. Science 2008;320:206–9. 

[92] Mak KF, Shan J, Heinz TF. Electronic structure of few-layer graphene: 

Experimental demonstration of strong dependence on stacking sequence. Physical 
Review Letters 2010;104:176404. 

[93] Rani P, Dubey GS, Jindal VK. DFT study of optical properties of pure and doped 

graphene. Physica E: Low-dimensional Systems and Nanostructures 2014;62: 
28–35. 

[94] Vogel A, Venugopalan V. Mechanisms of pulsed laser ablation of biological 

tissues. Chemical Reviews 2003;103:577–644. 

[95] Dreyer DR, Park S, Bielawski CW, Ruoff RS. The chemistry of graphene oxide. 

Chemical Society Reviews 2010;39:228–40. 

[96] Erickson K, Erni R, Lee Z, Alem N, Gannett W, Zettl A. Determination of the local 

chemical structure of graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide. Advanced 
Materials 2010;22:4467–72. 

[97] Smirnov VA, Arbuzov AA, Shul’ga YM, Baskakov SA, Martynenko VM, 

Muradyan VE, et al. Photoreduction of graphite oxide. High Energy Chemistry 
2011;45:57–61. 

[118] Park JB, Xiong W, Gao Y, Qian M, Xie ZQ, Mitchell M, et al. Fast growth of 
graphene patterns by laser direct writing. Applied Physics Letters 2011;98: 
123109. 

[119] Kumar P. Laser flash synthesis of graphene and its inorganic analogues: An 

innovative breakthrough with immense promise. RSC Advances 2013;3: 
11987–2002. 

[120] Zhou YS, Xiong W, Park J, Qian M, Mahjouri-Samani M, Gao Y, et al. Laser- 

assisted nanofabrication of carbon nanostructures. Journal of Laser Applications 
2012;24:042007. 

[121] Tu R, Liang Y, Zhang C, Li J, Zhang S, Yang M, et al. Fast synthesis of high-quality 

large-area graphene by laser CVD. Applied Surface Science 2018;445:204–10. 

[122] Peng P, Li L, He P, Zhu Y, Fu J, Huang Y, et al. One-step selective laser patterning 
of copper/graphene flexible electrodes. Nanotechnology 2019;30:185301. 
[123] Sha J, Li Y, Villegas Salvatierra R, Wang T, Dong P, Ji Y, et al. Three-dimensional 

printed graphene foams. ACS Nano 2017;11:6860–7. 

[124] Chen Y, Xu J, Yang Y, Zhao Y, Yang W, He X, et al. Enhanced electrochemical 
performance of laser scribed graphene films decorated with manganese dioxide 
nanoparticles. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics 2016;27: 
2564–73. 

[125] Sandoval S, Kepi´c D, P´erez del Pino 

´
A, Gy¨orgy E, G´omez A, Pfannmoeller M, et al. 

Selective laser-assisted synthesis of tubular van der Waals heterostructures of 
single-layered PbI2  within carbon nanotubes exhibiting carrier photogeneration. 
ACS Nano 2018;12:6648–56. 

[126] P´erez del Pino A, Gy¨orgy E, Alshaikh I, Pantoja-Su´arez F, Andújar JL, Pascual E, 
et al. Laser-driven coating of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes with manganese 
oxide from metal organic precursors for energy storage. Nanotechnology 2017;28: 
395405. 

[127] P´erez del Pino A, Gyorgy E, Hussain S, Andújar JL, Pascual E, Amade R, et al. 
Laser-induced nanostructuration of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes coated 
with nickel oxide nanoparticles. Journal of Materials Science 2017;52:4002–15. 
[128] Gy¨orgy E, del Pino AP, Datcu A, Duta L, Logofatu C, Iordache I, et al. Titanium 

oxide – reduced graphene oxide – silver composite layers synthesized by laser 
technique: Wetting and electrical properties. Ceramics International 2016;42: 
16191–7. 

[129] P´erez del Pino A, Gy¨orgy E, Logofatu C, Puigmartí-Luis J, Gao W. Laser-induced 
chemical transformation of graphene oxide–iron oxide nanoparticles composites 
deposited on polymer substrates. Carbon 2015;93:373–83. 

[98] Pop E, Varshney V, Roy AK. Thermal properties of graphene: Fundamentals and 

[130] Keramatnejad K, Zhou YS, Li DW, Golgir HR, Huang X, Zhou QM, et al. Laser- 

applications. MRS Bulletin 2012;37:1273–81. 

[99] Balandin AA, Ghosh S, Bao W, Calizo I, Teweldebrhan D, Miao F, et al. Superior 
thermal conductivity of single-layer graphene. Nano Letters 2008;8:902–7. 
[100] Ganz E, Ganz AB, Yang L-M, Dornfeld M. The initial stages of melting of graphene 

between 4000 K and 6000 K. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2017;19: 
3756–62. 

[101] Zakharchenko KV, Fasolino A, Los JH, Katsnelson MI. Melting of graphene: from 

two to one dimension. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 2011;23:202202. 
[102] Los JH, Zakharchenko KV, Katsnelson MI, Fasolino A. Melting temperature of 

graphene. Physical Review B 2015;91:045415. 

[103] Larciprete R, Fabris S, Sun T, Lacovig P, Baraldi A, Lizzit S. Dual path mechanism 

in the thermal reduction of graphene oxide. Journal of the American Chemical 
Society 2011;133:17315–21. 

assisted nanowelding of graphene to metals: An optical approach toward ultralow 
contact resistance. Advanced Materials Interfaces 2017;4:1700294. 

[131] Lee WH, Suk JW, Chou H, Lee J, Hao Y, Wu Y, et al. Selective-area fluorination of 
graphene with fluoropolymer and laser irradiation. Nano Letters 2012;12:2374–8. 
[132] Matsumoto Y, Koinuma M, Ida S, Hayami S, Taniguchi T, Hatakeyama K, et al. 
Photoreaction of graphene oxide nanosheets in water. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry C 2011;115:19280–6. 

[133] Hou W-C, Chowdhury I, Goodwin DG, Henderson WM, Fairbrother DH, 

Bouchard D, et al. Photochemical transformation of graphene oxide in sunlight. 
Environmental Science & Technology 2015;49:3435–43. 

[134] Shi HH, Jang S, Naguib HE. Freestanding laser-assisted reduced graphene oxide 
microribbon textile electrode fabricated on a liquid surface for supercapacitors 
and breath sensors. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2019;11:27183–91. 

[104] Dave SH, Gong C, Robertson AW, Warner JH, Grossman JC. Chemistry and 

[135] Zhang Y, Guo L, Wei S, He Y, Xia H, Chen Q, et al. Direct imprinting of 

structure of graphene oxide via direct imaging. ACS Nano 2016;10:7515–22. 

[105] Lazauskas A, Baltrusaitis J, Grigali¯unas V, Guobien ˙e A, Prosyˇcevas I, 

Narmontas P, et al. Thermally-driven structural changes of graphene oxide 
multilayer films deposited on glass substrate. Superlattices and Microstructures 
2014;75:461–7. 

[106] Ganguly A, Sharma S, Papakonstantinou P, Hamilton J. Probing the thermal 

deoxygenation of graphene oxide using high-resolution in situ X-ray-based 
Spectroscopies. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2011;115:17009–19. 
[107] Ferrari AC, Basko DM. Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool for studying the 

properties of graphene. Nature Nanotechnology 2013;8:235–46. 

[108] Yang Y, Cao J, Wei N, Meng D, Wang L, Ren G, et al. Thermal conductivity of 
defective graphene oxide: A molecular dynamic study. Molecules (Basel, 
Switzerland) 2019:24. 

[109] Mu X, Wu X, Zhang T, Go DB, Luo T. Thermal transport in graphene oxide – From 

ballistic extreme to amorphous limit. Scientific Reports 2014;4:3909. 
[110] Kim CB, Lee J, Cho J, Goh M. Thermal conductivity enhancement of reduced 

graphene oxide via chemical defect healing for efficient heat dissipation. Carbon 
2018;139:386–92. 

[111] Balandin AA. Thermal properties of graphene and nanostructured carbon 

materials. Nature Materials 2011;10:569–81. 

[112] Hao F, Fang D, Xu Z. Mechanical and thermal transport properties of graphene 

with defects. Applied Physics Letters 2011;99:041901. 

[113] Ghosh S, Bao W, Nika DL, Subrina S, Pokatilov EP, Lau CN, et al. Dimensional 
crossover of thermal transport in few-layer graphene. Nature Materials 2010;9: 
555–8. 

[114] Zhong W-R, Zhang M-P, Ai B-Q, Zheng D-Q. Chirality and thickness-dependent 

thermal conductivity of few-layer graphene: A molecular dynamics study. Applied 
Physics Letters 2011;98:113107. 

[115] Huang X, Wang J, Eres G, Wang X. Thermophysical properties of multi-wall 

carbon nanotube bundles at elevated temperatures up to 830K. Carbon 2011;49: 
1680–91. 

[116] You R, Liu Y-Q, Hao Y-L, Han D-D, Zhang Y-L, You Z. Laser fabrication of 
graphene-based flexible electronics. Advanced Materials 2020;32:1901981. 
[117] Fauzi F. Direct laser writing of graphene on nickel and platinum (Thesis). 2017. 

microcircuits on graphene oxides film by femtosecond laser reduction. Nano 
Today 2010;5:15–20. 

[136] Tran TX, Choi H, Che CH, Sul JH, Kim IG, Lee S-M, et al. Laser-induced reduction 
of graphene oxide by intensity-modulated line beam for supercapacitor 
applications. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2018;10:39777–84. 
[137] Gao W, Singh N, Song L, Liu Z, Reddy ALM, Ci L, et al. Direct laser writing of 

micro-supercapacitors on hydrated graphite oxide films. Nature Nanotechnology 
2011;6:496–500. 

[138] Wan Z, Streed EW, Lobino M, Wang S, Sang RT, Cole IS, et al. Laser-reduced 
graphene: Synthesis, properties, and applications. Advanced Materials 
Technologies 2018;3:1700315. 

[139] Wan Z, Wang S, Haylock B, Kaur J, Tanner P, Thiel D, et al. Tuning the sub- 

processes in laser reduction of graphene oxide by adjusting the power and 
scanning speed of laser. Carbon 2019;141:83–91. 

[140] Yang C-R, Tseng S-F, Chen Y-T. Laser-induced reduction of graphene oxide 

powders by high pulsed ultraviolet laser irradiations. Applied Surface Science 
2018;444:578–83. 

[141] Antonelou A, Sygellou L, Vrettos K, Georgakilas V, Yannopoulos SN. Efficient 

defect healing and ultralow sheet resistance of laser-assisted reduced graphene 
oxide at ambient conditions. Carbon 2018;139:492–9. 

[142] Park R, Kim H, Lone S, Jeon S, Kwon YW, Shin B, et al. One-step laser patterned 
highly uniform reduced graphene oxide thin films for circuit-enabled tattoo and 
flexible humidity sensor application. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 2018;18. 

´
Alvarez-Diduk R, Testolin A, Merkoçi A. Selective stamping of laser 
scribed rGO nanofilms: from sensing to multiple applications. 2D Materials 2020; 
7. 024006. 

[143] Giacomelli C, 

[144] Cai J, Lv C, Watanabe A. Laser direct writing and selective metallization of 

metallic circuits for integrated wireless devices. ACS Applied Materials & 
Interfaces 2018;10:915–24. 

[145] Mao L, Gong T, Ai Q, Hong Y, Guo J, He Y, et al. Morphologically modulated 
laser-patterned reduced graphene oxide strain sensors for human fatigue 
recognition. Smart Materials and Structures 2019;29. 015009. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098122R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

[146] Strong V, Dubin S, El-Kady MF, Lech A, Wang Y, Weiller BH, et al. Patterning and 

[176] Lin T, Chen I-W, Liu F, Yang C, Bi H, Xu F, et al. Nitrogen-doped mesoporous 

electronic tuning of laser scribed graphene for flexible all-carbon devices. ACS 
Nano 2012;6:1395–403. 

[147] Torrisi L, Cutroneo M, Silipigni L, Fazio M, Torrisi A. Effects of the laser 

irradiation on graphene oxide foils in vacuum and air. Physics of the Solid State 
2019;61:1327–31. 

[148] Chuquitarqui A, Cotet LC, Baia M, Gy¨orgy E, Magyari K, Barbu-Tudoran L, et al. 
New fabrication method for producing reduced graphene oxide flexible electrodes 
by using a low-power visible laser diode engraving system. Nanotechnology 2020; 
31:325402. 

[149] Ye R, James DK, Tour JM. Laser-induced graphene: From discovery to translation. 

Advanced Materials 2019;31:1803621. 

[150] Lin J, Peng Z, Liu Y, Ruiz-Zepeda F, Ye R, Samuel ELG, et al. Laser-induced porous 
graphene films from commercial polymers. Nature Communications 2014;5:5714. 

[151] Luo S, Hoang PT, Liu T. Direct laser writing for creating porous graphitic 

structures and their use for flexible and highly sensitive sensor and sensor arrays. 
Carbon 2016;96:522–31. 

[152] Ruan X, Luo J, Wang R, Yao Y, Guan J, Liu T. Microcontact printing with laser 
direct writing carbonization for facile fabrication of carbon-based ultrathin disk 
arrays and ordered holey films. Small 2019;15:1902819. 

[153] Zhang Z, Song M, Hao J, Wu K, Li C, Hu C. Visible light laser-induced graphene 
from phenolic resin: A new approach for directly writing graphene-based 
electrochemical devices on various substrates. Carbon 2018;127:287–96. 
[154] Ye R, Chyan Y, Zhang J, Li Y, Han X, Kittrell C, et al. Laser-induced graphene 

formation on wood. Advanced Materials 2017;29:1702211. 

[155] Chyan Y, Ye R, Li Y, Singh SP, Arnusch CJ, Tour JM. Laser-induced graphene by 
multiple lasing: Toward electronics on cloth, paper, and food. ACS Nano 2018;12: 
2176–83. 

[156] Carvalho AF, Fernandes AJS, Leit˜ao C, Deuermeier J, Marques AC, Martins R, 

et al. Laser-induced graphene strain sensors produced by ultraviolet irradiation of 
polyimide. Advanced Functional Materials 2018;28:1805271. 

[157] Duy LX, Peng Z, Li Y, Zhang J, Ji Y, Tour JM. Laser-induced graphene fibers. 

Carbon 2018;126:472–9. 

[158] Lamberti A, Perrucci F, Caprioli M, Serrapede M, Fontana M, Bianco S, et al. New 
insights on laser-induced graphene electrodes for flexible supercapacitors: 
tunable morphology and physical properties. Nanotechnology 2017;28:174002. 

[159] Li Y, Luong DX, Zhang J, Tarkunde YR, Kittrell C, Sargunaraj F, et al. Laser- 
induced graphene in controlled atmospheres: from superhydrophilic to 
superhydrophobic surfaces. Advanced Materials 2017;29:1700496. 

[160] Tiliakos A, Ceaus C, Iordache SM, Vasile E, Stamatin I. Morphic transitions of 
nanocarbons via laser pyrolysis of polyimide films. Journal of Analytical and 
Applied Pyrolysis 2016;121:275–86. 

[161] Tan KW, Jung B, Werner JG, Rhoades ER, Thompson MO, Wiesner U. Transient 

laser heating induced hierarchical porous structures from block 
copolymer–directed self-assembly. Science 2015;349:54–8. 

[162] Singh SP, Li Y, Be’er A, Oren Y, Tour JM, Arnusch CJ. Laser-induced graphene 
layers and electrodes prevents microbial fouling and exerts antimicrobial action. 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2017;9:18238–47. 

[163] Luong DX, Yang K, Yoon J, Singh SP, Wang T, Arnusch CJ, et al. Laser-induced 
graphene composites as multifunctional surfaces. ACS Nano 2019;13:2579–86. 

[164] Bayati M, Peng H, Deng H, Lin J, Fidalgo de Cortalezzi M. Laser induced graphene 

/ceramic membrane composite: Preparation and characterization. Journal of 
Membrane Science 2020;595:117537. 

[165] Stanford MG, Zhang C, Fowlkes JD, Hoffman A, Ivanov IN, Rack PD, et al. High- 
resolution laser-induced graphene. Flexible electronics beyond the visible limit. 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2020;12:10902–7. 

[166] Yang W, Zhao W, Li Q, Li H, Wang Y, Li Y, et al. Fabrication of smart components 
by 3D printing and laser-scribing technologies. ACS Applied Materials & 
Interfaces 2020;12:3928–35. 

[167] Dong K, Peng X, Wang ZL. Fiber/fabric-based piezoelectric and triboelectric 

nanogenerators for flexible/stretchable and wearable electronics and artificial 
Intelligence. Advanced Materials 2020;32:1902549. 

[168] Tiliakos A, Trefilov AMI, Tanas˘a E, Balan A, Stamatin I. Laser-induced graphene 
as the microporous layer in proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Applied 
Surface Science 2020;504:144096. 

[169] Loh KP, Bao Q, Ang PK, Yang J. The chemistry of graphene. Journal of Materials 

Chemistry 2010;20:2277–89. 

[170] Kang S, Jeong YK, Ryu JH, Son Y, Kim WR, Lee B, et al. Pulsed laser ablation 

based synthetic route for nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots using graphite 
flakes. Applied Surface Science 2020;506:144998. 

[171] Calabro RL, Yang D-S, Kim DY. Controlled nitrogen doping of graphene quantum 

dots through laser ablation in aqueous solutions for photoluminescence and 
electrocatalytic applications. ACS Applied Nano Materials 2019;2:6948–59. 
[172] Yeh T-F, Chen S-J, Yeh C-S, Teng H. Tuning the electronic structure of graphite 

oxide through ammonia treatment for photocatalytic generation of H2  and O2 
from water splitting. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2013;117:6516–24. 

[173] Hulicova-Jurcakova D, Seredych M, Lu GQ, Bandosz TJ. Combined Effect of 
nitrogen- and oxygen-containing functional groups of microporous activated 
carbon on its electrochemical performance in supercapacitors. Advanced 
Functional Materials 2009;19:438–47. 

[174] Seredych M, Hulicova-Jurcakova D, Lu GQ, Bandosz TJ. Surface functional groups 
of carbons and the effects of their chemical character, density and accessibility to 
ions on electrochemical performance. Carbon 2008;46:1475–88. 
[175] Su F, Poh CK, Chen JS, Xu G, Wang D, Li Q, et al. Nitrogen-containing 

microporous carbon nanospheres with improved capacitive properties. Energy & 
Environmental Science 2011;4:717–24. 

carbon of extraordinary capacitance for electrochemical energy storage. Science 
2015;350:1508–13. 
[177] Kepi´c D, Sandoval S, 

´
APd Pino, Gy¨orgy E, Cabana L, Ballesteros B, et al. 
Nanosecond laser-assisted nitrogen doping of graphene oxide dispersions. 
ChemPhysChem 2017;18:935–41. 

[178] P´erez del Pino A, Gonz´alez-Campo A, Giraldo S, Peral J, Gy¨orgy E, Logofatu C, 

et al. Synthesis of graphene-based photocatalysts for water splitting by laser- 
induced doping with ionic liquids. Carbon 2018;130:48–58. 

[179] P´erez del Pino A, Gy¨orgy E, Cotet C, Baia L, Logofatu C. Laser-induced chemical 

transformation of free-standing graphene oxide membranes in liquid and gas 
ammonia environments. RSC Advances 2016;6:50034–42. 

[180] Datcu A, Duta L, P´erez del Pino A, Logofatu C, Luculescu C, Duta A, et al. One-step 
preparation of nitrogen doped titanium oxide/Au/reduced graphene oxide 
composite thin films for photocatalytic applications. RSC Advances 2015;5: 
49771–9. 

[181] Singh SP, Li Y, Zhang J, Tour JM, Arnusch CJ. Sulfur-doped laser-induced porous 

graphene derived from polysulfone-class polymers and membranes. ACS Nano 
2018;12:289–97. 

[182] Huang Y, Zeng L, Liu C, Zeng D, Liu Z, Liu X, et al. Laser direct writing of 

heteroatom (N and S)-doped graphene from a polybenzimidazole Ink donor on 
polyethylene terephthalate polymer and glass substrates. Small 2018;14: 
1803143. 

[183] You Z, Qiu Q, Chen H, Feng Y, Wang X, Wang Y, et al. Laser-induced noble metal 
nanoparticle-graphene composites enabled flexible biosensor for pathogen 
detection. Biosensors & bioelectronics 2020;150:111896. 

[184] Gupta A, Holoidovsky L, Thamaraiselvan C, Thakur AK, Singh SP, Meijler MM, 

et al. Silver-doped laser-induced graphene for potent surface antibacterial activity 
and anti-biofilm action. Chemical Communications 2019;55:6890–3. 
[185] Ge L, Hong Q, Li H, Liu C, Li F. Direct-laser-writing of metal sulfide-graphene 
nanocomposite photoelectrode toward sensitive photoelectrochemical sensing. 
Advanced Functional Materials 2019;29:1904000. 

[186] Wu X, Yin H, Li Q. Ablation and patterning of carbon nanotube film by 

femtosecond laser irradiation. Applied Sciences 2019;9:3045. 

[187] Vasquez A, Samolis P, Zeng J, Sander MY. Micro-structuring, ablation, and defect 
generation in graphene with femtosecond pulses. OSA Continuum 2019;2: 
2925–34. 

[188] Liu Z-B, Li L, Xu Y-F, Liang J-J, Zhao X, Chen S-Q, et al. Direct patterning on 

reduced graphene oxide nanosheets using femtosecond laser pulses. Journal of 
Optics 2011;13:085601. 

[189] Kiisk V, Kahro T, Kozlova J, Matisen L, Alles H. Nanosecond laser treatment of 

graphene. Applied Surface Science 2013;276:133–7. 

[190] Kovalchuk NG, Niherysh KA, Felsharuk AV, Svito IA, Tamuleviˇcius T, 

Tamuleviˇcius S, et al. Direct patterning of nitrogen-doped chemical vapor 
deposited graphene-based microstructures for charge carrier measurements 
employing femtosecond laser ablation. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 
2019;52:30LT01. 
´
Alvarez P, Campos N, G´omez D, Men´endez R. Graphene 

[191] P´erez-Mas AM, 

patterning by nanosecond laser ablation: the effect of the substrate interaction 
with graphene. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 2016;49:305301. 
[192] Rodriguez RD, Murastov GV, Lipovka A, Fatkullin MI, Nozdrina O, Pavlov SK, 
et al. High-power laser-patterning graphene oxide: A new approach to making 
arbitrarily-shaped self-aligned electrodes. Carbon 2019;151:148–55. 

[193] Sahin R, Simsek E, Akturk S. Nanoscale patterning of graphene through 

femtosecond laser ablation. Applied Physics Letters 2014;104:053118. 

[194] Zhou Y, Bao Q, Varghese B, Tang LAL, Tan CK, Sow C-H, et al. Microstructuring of 
graphene oxide nanosheets using direct laser writing. Advanced Materials 2010; 
22:67–71. 

[195] Park JB, Yoo J-H, Grigoropoulos CP. Multi-scale graphene patterns on arbitrary 

substrates via laser-assisted transfer-printing process. Applied Physics Letters 
2012;101:043110. 

[196] Lin L, Li J, Li W, Yogeesh MN, Shi J, Peng X, et al. Optothermoplasmonic 

nanolithography for on-demand patterning of 2D materials. Advanced Functional 
Materials 2018;28:1803990. 

[197] Tseng S-F, Cheng P-Y, Hsiao W-T, Chen M-F, Chung C-K, Wang P-H. High- 

performance graphene-based heaters fabricated using maskless ultraviolet laser 
patterning. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 
2019;102:3011–20. 

[198] Bobrinetskiy I, Emelianov A, Nasibulin A, Komarov I, Otero N, Romero PM. 
Photophysical and photochemical effects in ultrafast laser patterning of CVD 
graphene. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 2016;49:41LT01. 

[199] Yoo J-H, Kim E, Hwang DJ. Femtosecond laser patterning, synthesis, defect 

formation, and structural modification of atomic layered materials. MRS Bulletin 
2016;41:1002–8. 

[200] Mendoza ME, Ferreira EHM, Kuznetsov A, Achete CA, Aumanen J, Myllyperki¨o P, 
et al. Revealing lattice disorder, oxygen incorporation and pore formation in laser 
induced two-photon oxidized graphene. Carbon 2019;143:720–7. 

[201] Gil-Villalba A, Meyer R, Giust R, Rapp L, Billet C, Courvoisier F. Single shot 

femtosecond laser nano-ablation of CVD monolayer graphene. Scientific Reports 
2018;8:14601. 

[202] Kasischke M, Subas¸ı E, Bock C, Pham D-V, Gurevich EL, Kunze U, et al. 

Femtosecond laser patterning of graphene electrodes for thin-film transistors. 
Applied Surface Science 2019;478:299–303. 

[203] Maurice A, Bodelot L, Tay BK, Controlled Lebental B. Low-temperature nanogap 

propagation in graphene using femtosecond laser patterning. Small 2018;14: 
1801348. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098123R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

[204] Lin Z, Ye X, Han J, Chen Q, Fan P, Zhang H, et al. Precise control of the number of 
layers of graphene by picosecond laser thinning. Scientific Reports 2015;5:11662. 

[205] Han GH, Chae SJ, Kim ES, Günes¸  F, Lee IH, Lee SW, et al. Laser thinning for 
monolayer graphene formation: Heat sink and interference effect. ACS Nano 
2011;5:263–8. 

[206] Pramanik A, Karmakar S, Kumbhakar P, Biswas S, Sarkar R, Kumbhakar P. 

Synthesis of bilayer graphene nanosheets by pulsed laser ablation in liquid and 
observation of its tunable nonlinearity. Applied Surface Science 2020;499: 
143902. 

[207] Compagnini G, Sinatra M, Russo P, Messina GC, Puglisi O, Scalese S. Deposition of 
few layer graphene nanowalls at the electrodes during electric field-assisted laser 
ablation of carbon in water. Carbon 2012;50:2362–5. 

[208] Thongpool V, Phunpueok A, Piriyawong V, Limsuwan S, Limsuwan P. Pulsed laser 

ablation of graphite target in dimethyformamide. Energy Procedia 2013;34: 
610–6. 

[209] Calabro RL, Yang D-S, Kim DY. Liquid-phase laser ablation synthesis of graphene 

quantum dots from carbon nano-onions: Comparison with chemical oxidation. 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 2018;527:132–40. 

[210] Kang S, Jeong YK, Jung KH, Son Y, Choi S-C, An GS, et al. Simple preparation of 
graphene quantum dots with controllable surface states from graphite. RSC 
Advances 2019;9:38447–53. 

[211] Bleu Y, Bourquard F, Tite T, Loir A-S, Maddi C, Donnet C, et al. Review of 

graphene growth from a solid carbon source by pulsed laser deposition (PLD). 
Frontiers in Chemistry 2018;6. 

[212] Larki F, Kameli P, Nikmanesh H, Jafari M, Salamati H. The influence of external 
magnetic field on the pulsed laser deposition growth of graphene on nickel 
substrate at room temperature. Diamond and Related Materials 2019;93:233–40. 
[213] Wang J, Fan L, Wang X, Xiao T, Peng L, Wang X, et al. Pulsed laser deposition of 
monolayer and bilayer graphene. Applied Surface Science 2019;494:651–8. 
[214] Bleu Y, Bourquard F, Gartiser V, Loir A-S, Caja-Munoz B, Avila J, et al. Graphene 

synthesis on SiO2 using pulsed laser deposition with bilayer predominance. 
Materials Chemistry and Physics 2019;238:121905. 

[233] Smits ECP, Walter A, DMd Leeuw. Asadi K. Laser induced forward transfer of 

graphene. Applied Physics Letters 2017;111:173101. 

[234] Qian M, Zhou YS, Gao Y, Park JB, Feng T, Huang SM, et al. Formation of graphene 

sheets through laser exfoliation of highly ordered pyrolytic graphite. Applied 
Physics Letters 2011;98:173108. 

[235] Qian M, Zhou YS, Gao Y, Feng T, Sun Z, Jiang L, et al. Production of few-layer 
graphene through liquid-phase pulsed laser exfoliation of highly ordered 
pyrolytic graphite. Applied Surface Science 2012;258:9092–5. 

[236] Mortazavi SZ, Parvin P, Reyhani A. Fabrication of graphene based on Q-switched 
Nd:YAG laser ablation of graphite target in liquid nitrogen. Laser Physics Letters 
2012;9:547–52. 

[237] Carotenuto G, Longo A, Nicolais L, De Nicola S, Pugliese E, Ciofini M, et al. Laser- 
induced thermal expansion of H2SO4-intercalated graphite lattice. The Journal of 
Physical Chemistry C 2015;119:15942–7. 

[238] Beltaos A, Kovaˇcevi´c AG, Matkovi´c A, Ralevi´c U, Savi´c-

ˇ
Sevi´c S, Jovanovi´c D, et al. 
Femtosecond laser induced periodic surface structures on multi-layer graphene. 
Journal of Applied Physics 2014;116:204306. 

[239] Fajstavr D, Neznalov´a K, 

ˇ
Svorˇcík V, Slepiˇcka P. LIPSS structures induced on 

graphene-polystyrene composite. Materials. 2019;12:3460. 

[240] Guo L, Jiang H-B, Shao R-Q, Zhang Y-L, Xie S-Y, Wang J-N, et al. Two-beam-laser 

interference mediated reduction, patterning and nanostructuring of graphene 
oxide for the production of a flexible humidity sensing device. Carbon 2012;50: 
1667–73. 

[241] Jiang H-B, Liu Y-Q, Zhang Y-L, Liu Y, Fu X-Y, Han D-D, et al. Reed leaf-inspired 
graphene films with anisotropic superhydrophobicity. ACS Applied Materials & 
Interfaces 2018;10:18416–25. 

[242] Jiang HB, Liu Y, Liu J, Li SY, Song YY, Han DD, et al. Moisture-responsive 

graphene actuators prepared by two-beam laser interference of graphene oxide 
paper. Front Chem 2019;7:464. 

[243] Guo L, Hao Y-W, Li P-L, Song J-F, Yang R-Z, Fu X-Y, et al. Improved NO2  gas 
sensing properties of graphene oxide reduced by two-beam-laser interference. 
Scientific Reports 2018;8:4918. 

[215] Wang J, Wang X, Yu J, Xiao T, Peng L, Fan L, et al. Tailoring the grain size of bi- 

[244] Van HH, Badura K, Zhang M. Laser-induced transformation of freestanding 

layer graphene by pulsed laser deposition. Nanomaterials (Basel, Switzerland) 
2018;8:885. 

[216] Ren P, Pu E, Liu D, Wang Y, Xiang B, Ren X. Fabrication of nitrogen-doped 

graphenes by pulsed laser deposition and improved chemical enhancement for 
Raman spectroscopy. Materials Letters 2017;204:65–8. 

[217] Juvaid MM, Sarkar S, Gogoi PK, Ghosh S, Annamalai M, Lin Y-C, et al. Direct 

growth of wafer-scale, transparent, p-type reduced-graphene-oxide-like thin films 
by pulsed laser deposition. ACS Nano 2020;14:3290–8. 

[218] P´erez del Pino 

´
A, Gy¨orgy E, Cabana L, Ballesteros B, Tobias G. Deposition of 

functionalized single wall carbon nanotubes through matrix assisted pulsed laser 
evaporation. Carbon 2012;50:4450–8. 

[219] Gy¨orgy E, P´erez del Pino 

´
A, Roqueta J, Ballesteros B, Cabana L, Tobias G. Effect of 

[220]

laser radiation on multi-wall carbon nanotubes: study of shell structure and 
immobilization process. Journal of Nanoparticle Research 2013;15:1852. 
´
APd Pino, Gy¨orgy E, Logofatu C, Duta A. Study of the deposition of graphene 
oxide by matrix-assisted pulsed laser evaporation. Journal of Physics D: Applied 
Physics 2013;46:505309. 

[221] O’Malley SM, Tomko J, APd Pino, Logofatu C, Gy¨orgy E. Resonant infrared and 
ultraviolet matrix-assisted pulsed laser evaporation of titanium oxide/graphene 
oxide composites: A comparative study. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 
2014;118:27911–9. 
[222] Queralt´o A, P´erez del Pino 

´
A, Logofatu C, Calota A, Amade R, Alshaikh I, et al. 

MAPLE synthesis of reduced graphene oxide/silver nanocomposite electrodes: 
Influence of target composition and gas ambience. Journal of Alloys and 
Compounds 2017;726:1003–13. 
[223] Gy¨orgy E, Logofatu C, P´erez del Pino 

´
A, Datcu A, Pascu O, Ivan R. Enhanced UV- 
and visible-light driven photocatalytic performances and recycling properties of 
graphene oxide/ZnO hybrid layers. Ceramics International 2018;44:1826–35. 
[224] Ivan R, Popescu C, del Pino AP, Yousef I, Logofatu C, Gy¨orgy E. Laser-induced 
synthesis and photocatalytic properties of hybrid organic–inorganic composite 
layers. Journal of Materials Science 2019;54:3927–41. 

[225] Fern´andez-Pradas JM, Serra P. Laser-induced forward transfer: A method for 

printing functional Inks. Crystals 2020;10:651. 

[226] Bohandy J, Kim BF, Adrian FJ. Metal deposition from a supported metal film 
using an excimer laser. Journal of Applied Physics 1986;60:1538–9. 

[227] Fern´andez-Pradas JM, Sope˜na P, Gonz´alez-Torres S, Arrese J, Cirera A, Serra P. 
Laser-induced forward transfer for printed electronics applications. Applied 
Physics A 2018;124:214. 

[228] Papazoglou S, Zergioti I. Laser induced forward transfer (LIFT) of nano-micro 
patterns for sensor applications. Microelectronic Engineering 2017;182:25–34. 

[229] Fardel R, Nagel M, Nüesch F, Lippert T, Wokaun A. Laser forward transfer using a 

sacrificial layer: Influence of the material properties. Applied Surface Science 
2007;254:1322–6. 

[230] Papazoglou S, Raptis YS, Chatzandroulis S, Zergioti I. A study on the pulsed laser 

printing of liquid-phase exfoliated graphene for organic electronics. Applied 
Physics A 2014;117:301–6. 

[231] Komlenok MS, Pivovarov PA, Dezhkina MA, Rybin MG, Savin SS, Obraztsova ED, 
et al. Printing of crumpled CVD graphene via blister-based laser-induced forward 
transfer. Nanomaterials 2020;10:1103. 

[232] Palla-Papavlu A, Filipescu M, Vizireanu S, Vogt L, Antohe S, Dinescu M, et al. 

Laser-induced forward transfer of hybrid carbon nanostructures. Applied Surface 
Science 2016;374:312–7. 

carbon nanotubes into graphene nanoribbons. RSC Advances 2015;5:44183–91. 

[245] Kumar P, Panchakarla LS, Rao CNR. Laser-induced unzipping of carbon 

nanotubes to yield graphene nanoribbons. Nanoscale 2011;3:2127–9. 

[246] Ermakov VA, Alaferdov AV, Vaz AR, Baranov AV, Moshkalev SA. Nonlocal laser 
annealing to improve thermal contacts between multi-layer graphene and metals. 
Nanotechnology 2013;24:155301. 

[247] Moshkalev SA, Ermakov VA, Vaz AR, Alaferdov AV, Savu R, Silveira JV, et al. 

Formation of reliable electrical and thermal contacts between graphene and metal 
electrodes by laser annealing. Microelectronic Engineering 2014;121:55–8. 
[248] Bhaumik A, Narayan J. Conversion of p to n-type reduced graphene oxide by laser 

annealing at room temperature and pressure. Journal of Applied Physics 2017; 
121:125303. 

[249] Coleman C, Erasmus R, Bhattacharyya S. Nanoscale deformations in graphene by 

laser annealing. Applied Physics Letters 2016;109:253102. 

[250] Del SK, Bornemann R, Bablich A, Sch¨afer-Eberwein H, Li J, Kowald T, et al. 
Optimizing the optical and electrical properties of graphene ink thin films by 
laser-annealing. 2D. Materials 2015;2:011003. 

[251] Hwang HJ, Lee Y, Cho C, Lee BH. Facile process to clean PMMA residue on 
graphene using KrF laser annealing. AIP Advances 2018;8:105326. 

[252] Rodriguez RD, Khalelov A, Postnikov PS, Lipovka A, Dorozhko E, Amin I, et al. 

Beyond graphene oxide: laser engineering functionalized graphene for flexible 
electronics. Materials Horizons 2020;7:1030–41. 

[253] Rodriguez RD, Shchadenko S, Murastov G, Lipovka A, Fatkullin M, Petrov I, et al. 

Ultra-robust flexible electronics by laser-driven polymer-nanomaterials 
integration. Advanced Functional Materials 2021;31. 2008818. 

[254] Stoller MD, Ruoff RS. Best practice methods for determining an electrode 

material’s performance for ultracapacitors. Energy & Environmental Science 
2010;3:1294–301. 

[255] Chmiola J, Largeot C, Taberna PL, Simon P, Gogotsi Y. Monolithic carbide- 

derived carbon films for micro-supercapacitors. Science 2010;328:480–3. 
[256] Pan Q, Tong N, He N, Liu Y, Shim E, Pourdeyhimi B, et al. Electrospun mat of poly 
(vinyl alcohol)/graphene oxide for superior electrolyte performance. ACS Applied 
Materials & Interfaces 2018;10:7927–34. 

[257] Kumar R, Savu R, Joanni E, Vaz AR, Canesqui MA, Singh RK, et al. Fabrication of 

interdigitated micro-supercapacitor devices by direct laser writing onto ultra- 
thin, flexible and free-standing graphite oxide films. RSC Advances 2016;6: 
84769–76. 

[258] Wang G, Babaahmadi V, He N, Liu Y, Pan Q, Montazer M, et al. Wearable 

supercapacitors on polyethylene terephthalate fabrics with good wash fastness 
and high flexibility. Journal of Power Sources 2017;367:34–41. 

[259] Kumar R, Joanni E, Singh RK, da Silva E, Savu R, Kubota LT, et al. Direct laser 
writing of micro-supercapacitors on thick graphite oxide films and their 
electrochemical properties in different liquid inorganic electrolytes. J Colloid 
Interface Sci 2017;507:271–8. 

[260] Shao C, Xu T, Gao J, Liang Y, Zhao Y, Qu L. Flexible and integrated supercapacitor 

with tunable energy storage. Nanoscale 2017;9:12324–9. 

[261] Kumar R, Joanni E, Savu R, Pereira MS, Singh RK, Constantino CJL, et al. 

Fabrication and electrochemical evaluation of micro-supercapacitors prepared by 
direct laser writing on free-standing graphite oxide paper. Energy 2019;179: 
676–84. 

[262] Ladr´on-de-Guevara A, Bosc´a A, Pedr´os J, Climent-Pascual E, de Andr´es A, Calle F, 
et al. Reduced graphene oxide/polyaniline electrochemical supercapacitors 
fabricated by laser. Applied Surface Science 2019;467-468:691–7. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098124R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

[263] El-Kady MF, Kaner RB. Scalable fabrication of high-power graphene micro- 

[293] Yu L, Chen GZ. Supercapatteries as high-performance electrochemical energy 

supercapacitors for flexible and on-chip energy storage. Nature Communications 
2013;4:1475. 

[264] El-Kady MF, Strong V, Dubin S, Kaner RB. Laser scribing of high-performance and 
flexible graphene-based electrochemical capacitors. Science 2012;335:1326–30. 
[265] Lee S-H, Kim JH, Yoon J-R. Laser scribed graphene cathode for next generation of 
high performance hybrid supercapacitors. Scientific Reports 2018;8:8179. 
[266] Velasco A, Ryu YK, Bosc´a A, Ladr´on-de-Guevara A, Hunt E, Zuo J, et al. Recent 

trends in graphene supercapacitors: from large area to microsupercapacitors. 
Sustainable Energy & Fuels 2021;5:1235–54. 

storage devices. Electrochemical Energy Reviews 2020;3:271–85. 

[294] Li M, El-Kady MF, Hwang JY, Kowal MD, Marsh K, Wang H, et al. Embedding 
hollow Co3O4  nanoboxes into a three-dimensional macroporous graphene 
framework for high-performance energy storage devices. Nano Research 2018;11: 
2836–46. 

[295] Shi X, Zhou F, Peng J, Ra Wu, Wu Z-S, Bao X. One-step ccalable fabrication of 

graphene-integrated micro-supercapacitors with remarkable flexibility and 
exceptional performance uniformity. Advanced Functional Materials 2019;29: 
1902860. 

[267] Thekkekara LV, Gu M. Large-scale waterproof and stretchable textile-integrated 
laser- printed graphene energy storages. Scientific Reports 2019;9:11822. 
[268] Moussa M, SA Al-Bataineh, Losic D, Dubal DP. Engineering of high-performance 

[296] Liu J, Zhang L, Yang C, Tao S. Preparation of multifunctional porous carbon 

electrodes through direct laser writing on a phenolic resin film. Journal of 
Materials Chemistry A 2019;7:21168–75. 

potassium-ion capacitors using polyaniline-derived N-doped carbon nanotubes 
anode and laser scribed graphene oxide cathode. Applied Materials Today 2019; 
16:425–34. 

[297] Lamberti A, Serrapede M, Ferraro G, Fontana M, Perrucci F, Bianco S, et al. All- 
SPEEK flexible supercapacitor exploiting laser-induced graphenization. 2D 
Materials 2017;4:035012. 

[269] Liu H, Li M, Kaner RB, Chen S, Pei Q. Monolithically integrated self-charging 
power pack consisting of a silicon nanowire array/conductive polymer hybrid 
solar cell and a laser-scribed graphene supercapacitor. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
2018;10:15609–15. 

[270] Oh J-S, Kim S-H, Hwang T, Kwon H-Y, Lee TH, Bae A-H, et al. Laser-assisted 

simultaneous patterning and transferring of graphene. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry C 2013;117:663–8. 

[271] Choi H, Nguyen PT. In JB. Laser transmission welding and surface modification of 
graphene film for flexible supercapacitor applications. Applied Surface Science. 
2019;483:481–8. 

[272] Mao X, Xu J, He X, Yang W, Yang Y, Xu L, et al. All-solid-state flexible 

microsupercapacitors based on reduced graphene oxide/multi-walled carbon 
nanotube composite electrodes. Applied Surface Science 2018;435:1228–36. 

[273] Strauss V, Muni M, Borenstein A, Badamdorj B, Heil T, Kowal MD, et al. Patching 
laser-reduced graphene oxide with carbon nanodots. Nanoscale 2019;11: 
12712–9. 

[274] Wang F, Dong X, Wang K, Duan W, Gao M, Zhai Z, et al. Laser-induced nitrogen- 
doped hierarchically porous graphene for advanced electrochemical energy 
storage. Carbon 2019;150:396–407. 

[275] Shen D, Zou G, Liu L, Zhao W, Wu A, Duley WW, et al. Scalable high-performance 
ultraminiature graphene micro-supercapacitors by a hybrid technique combining 
direct writing and controllable microdroplet transfer. ACS Applied Materials & 
Interfaces 2018;10:5404–12. 

[276] Li RZ, Peng R, Kihm KD, Bai S, Bridges D, Tumuluri U, et al. High-rate in-plane 
micro-supercapacitors scribed onto photo paper using in situ femtolaser-reduced 
graphene oxide/Au nanoparticle microelectrodes. Energy & Environmental 
Science 2016;9:1458–67. 

[277] Van Ngo T, Moussa M, Tung TT, Coghlan C, Losic D. Hybridization of MOFs and 
graphene: A new strategy for the synthesis of porous 3D carbon composites for 
high performing supercapacitors. Electrochimica Acta 2020;329:135104. 
[278] Yang S, Li Y, Sun J, Cao B. Laser induced oxygen-deficient TiO2/graphene hybrid 
for high-performance supercapacitor. Journal of Power Sources 2019;431:220–5. 

[298] Zhang W, Lei Y, Ming F, Jiang Q, Costa PMFJ, Alshareef HN. Lignin laser 

lithography: A direct-write method for fabricating 3D graphene electrodes for 
microsupercapacitors. Advanced Energy Materials 2018;8:1801840. 

[299] Zhang W, Lei Y, Jiang Q, Ming F, Costa PMFJ, Alshareef HN. 3D laser scribed 
graphene derived from carbon nanospheres: An ultrahigh-power electrode for 
supercapacitors. Small Methods 2019;3:1900005. 

[300] Mahmood F, Zhang C, Xie Y, Stalla D, Lin J, Wan C. Transforming lignin into 

porous graphene via direct laser writing for solid-state supercapacitors. RSC 
Advances 2019;9:22713–20. 

[301] Hawes GF, Yilman D, Noremberg BS, Pope MA. Supercapacitors fabricated via 

laser-induced carbonization of biomass-derived poly(furfuryl alcohol)/graphene 
oxide composites. ACS Applied Nano Materials 2019;2:6312–24. 

[302] Le T-SD, Park S, An J, Lee PS, Kim Y-J. Ultrafast laser pulses enable one-step 

graphene patterning on woods and leaves for green electronics. Advanced 
Functional Materials 2019;29:1902771. 

[303] Wang S, Yu Y, Luo S, Cheng X, Feng G, Zhang Y, et al. All-solid-state 

supercapacitors from natural lignin-based composite film by laser direct writing. 
Applied Physics Letters 2019;115:083904. 

[304] Tehrani F, Beltr´an-Gast´elum M, Sheth K, Karajic A, Yin L, Kumar R, et al. Laser- 
induced graphene composites for printed, stretchable, and wearable electronics. 
Advanced Materials Technologies 2019;4:1900162. 

[305] Peng Z, Ye R, Mann JA, Zakhidov D, Li Y, Smalley PR, et al. Flexible boron-doped 
laser-induced graphene microsupercapacitors. ACS Nano 2015;9:5868–75. 
[306] Zuo Z, Jiang Z, Manthiram A. Porous B-doped graphene inspired by Fried-Ice for 
supercapacitors and metal-free catalysts. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2013; 
1:13476–83. 

[307] Han J, Zhang LL, Lee S, Oh J, Lee K-S, Potts JR, et al. Generation of B-doped 

graphene nanoplatelets using a solution process and their supercapacitor 
applications. ACS Nano 2013;7:19–26. 

[308] Niu L, Li Z, Hong W, Sun J, Wang Z, Ma L, et al. Pyrolytic synthesis of boron- 
doped graphene and its application as electrode material for supercapacitors. 
Electrochimica Acta 2013;108:666–73. 

[279] Hwang JY, El-Kady MF, Wang Y, Wang L, Shao Y, Marsh K, et al. Direct 

[309] Wang D-W, Li F, Chen Z-G, Lu GQ, Cheng H-M. Synthesis and electrochemical 

preparation and processing of graphene/RuO2 nanocomposite electrodes for high- 
performance capacitive energy storage. Nano Energy 2015;18:57–70. 

property of boron-doped mesoporous carbon in supercapacitor. Chemistry of 
Materials 2008;20:7195–200. 

[280] Ibrahim YO, Gondal MA, Alaswad A, Moqbel RA, Hassan M, Cevik E, et al. Laser- 

[310] Shiraishi S, Kibe M, Yokoyama T, Kurihara H, Patel N, Oya A, et al. Electric 

induced anchoring of WO3  nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide sheets for 
photocatalytic water decontamination and energy storage. Ceramics International 
2020;46:444–51. 

double layer capacitance of multi-walled carbon nanotubes and B-doping effect. 
Applied Physics A 2006;82:585–91. 

[311] Kwon T, Nishihara H, Itoi H, Yang Q-H, Kyotani T. Enhancement mechanism of 

[281] Pang J, Mendes RG, Bachmatiuk A, Zhao L, Ta HQ, Gemming T, et al. 

Applications of 2D MXenes in energy conversion and storage systems. Chemical 
Society Reviews 2019;48:72–133. 

[282] Tang H, Hu Q, Zheng M, Chi Y, Qin X, Pang H, et al. MXene–2D layered electrode 
materials for energy storage. Progress in Natural Science: Materials International 
2018;28:133–47. 

[283] Anasori B, Lukatskaya MR. Gogotsi Y. 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) 

for energy storage. Nature Reviews Materials 2017;2:16098. 

[284] Han Y, Ge Y, Chao Y, Wang C, Wallace GG. Recent progress in 2D materials for 

flexible supercapacitors. Journal of Energy Chemistry 2018;27:57–72. 

[285] Khameneh Asl S, Namdar Habashi M, Kianvash A, Alipour A, Mohini S, 

Asgharzadeh H. Fabrication of graphene/MoS2 nanocomposite for flexible energy 
storage. Journal of Nanostructures 2019;9:21–8. 

[286] Raccichini R, Varzi A, Passerini S, Scrosati B. The role of graphene for 
electrochemical energy storage. Nature Materials 2015;14:271–9. 

[287] Fan X, Chen X, Dai L. 3D graphene based materials for energy storage. Current 

Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science 2015;20:429–38. 

[288] Georgakilas V, Tiwari JN, Kemp KC, Perman JA, Bourlinos AB, Kim KS, et al. 

Noncovalent functionalization of graphene and graphene oxide for energy 
materials, biosensing, catalytic, and biomedical applications. Chemical Reviews 
2016;116:5464–519. 

[289] Lu X, Wu G, Xiong Q, Qin H, Wang W, Luo F. Fabrication of binder-free graphene- 
SnO2  electrodes by laser introduced conversion of precursors for lithium 
secondary batteries. Applied Surface Science 2017;406:265–73. 

[290] Tang J, Zhong X, Li H, Li Y, Pan F, Xu B. In-situ and selectively laser reduced 
graphene oxide sheets as excellent conductive additive for high rate capability 
LiFePO4  lithium ion batteries. Journal of Power Sources 2019;412:677–82. 
[291] Yu L, Chen GZ. Redox electrode materials for supercapatteries. Journal of Power 

Sources 2016;326:604–12. 

electrochemical capacitance in nitrogen-/boron-doped carbons with uniform 
straight nanochannels. Langmuir 2009;25:11961–8. 

[312] Cai J, Lv C, Hu C, Luo J, Liu S, Song J, et al. Laser direct writing of heteroatom- 
doped porous carbon for high-performance micro-supercapacitors. Energy 
Storage Materials 2020;25:404–15. 

[313] Wang W, Lu L, Xie Y, Mei X, Tang Y, Wu W, et al. Tailoring the surface 

morphology and nanoparticle distribution of laser-induced graphene/Co3O4  for 
high-performance flexible microsupercapacitors. Applied Surface Science 2020; 
504:144487. 

[314] Wang W, Lu L, Xie Y, Yuan W, Wan Z, Tang Y, et al. A highly stretchable 

microsupercapacitor using laser-induced graphene/NiO/Co3O4  electrodes on a 
biodegradable waterborne polyurethane substrate. Advanced Materials 
Technologies 2020;5:1900903. 

[315] Zang X, Shen C, Chu Y, Li B, Wei M, Zhong J, et al. Laser-induced molybdenum 
carbide–graphene composites for 3D foldable paper electronics. Advanced 
Materials 2018;30:1800062. 

[316] Yi J, Chen J, Yang Z, Dai Y, Li W, Cui J, et al. Facile patterning of laser-induced 
graphene with tailored Li nucleation kinetics for stable lithium-metal batteries. 
Advanced Energy Materials 2019;9:1901796. 

[317] Huang Y, Field R, Chen Q, Peng Y, Walczak MS, Zhao H, et al. Laser induced 

molybdenum sulphide loading on doped graphene cathode for highly stable 
lithium sulphur battery. Communications Chemistry 2019;2:138. 

[318] Zhou C, Zhang K, Hong M, Yang Y, Hu N, Su Y, et al. Laser-induced MnO/Mn3O4/ 
N-doped-graphene hybrid as binder-free anodes for lithium ion batteries. 
Chemical Engineering Journal 2020;385:123720. 

[319] Jiang Y, Yue J-L, Guo Q, Xia Q, Zhou C, Feng T, et al. Highly porous Mn3O4 

micro/nanocuboids with in situ coated carbon as advanced anode material for 
lithium-ion batteries. Small 2018;14:1704296. 

[320] Zou Y, Zhang W, Chen N, Chen S, Xu W, Cai R, et al. Generating oxygen vacancies 

[292] Chen GZ. Supercapacitor and supercapattery as emerging electrochemical energy 

stores. International Materials Reviews 2017;62:173–202. 

in MnO hexagonal sheets for ultralong life lithium storage with high capacity. 
ACS Nano 2019;13:2062–71. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098125R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

[321] Zhang F, Alhajji E, Lei Y, Kurra N, Alshareef HN. Highly doped 3D graphene Na- 
ion battery anode by laser scribing polyimide films in nitrogen ambient. 
Advanced Energy Materials 2018;8:1800353. 

[322] Chu Y, Guo L, Xi B, Feng Z, Wu F, Lin Y, et al. Embedding MnO@Mn3O4 

nanoparticles in an N-doped-carbon framework derived from Mn-organic clusters 
for efficient lithium storage. Advanced Materials 2018;30:1704244. 

[323] Xiao Y-C, Xu C-Y, Sun X-Y, Pei Y, Wang P-P, Ma F-X, et al. Constructing yolk-shell 

MnO@C nanodiscs through a carbothermal reduction process for highly stable 
lithium storage. Chemical Engineering Journal 2018;336:427–35. 

[324] Ren M, Zhang J, Zhang C, Stanford MG, Chyan Y, Yao Y, et al. Quasi-solid-state 
Li–O2  batteries with laser-induced graphene cathode catalysts. ACS Applied 
Energy Materials 2020;3:1702–9. 

[325] Ren M, Zhang J, Fan M, Ajayan PM, Tour JM. Li-breathing air batteries catalyzed 

by MnNiFe/laser-induced graphene catalysts. Advanced Materials Interfaces 
2019;6:1901035. 

[326] Ren M, Zhang J, Tour JM. Laser-induced graphene hybrid catalysts for 

rechargeable Zn-air batteries. ACS Applied Energy Materials 2019;2:1460–8. 

[327] Ren M, Zhang J, Tour JM. Laser-induced graphene synthesis of Co3O4 in graphene 

for oxygen electrocatalysis and metal-air batteries. Carbon 2018;139:880–7. 

[328] Djuric SM, Kitic G, Dubourg G, Gajic R, Tomasevic-Ilic T, Minic V, et al. Miniature 

graphene-based supercapacitors fabricated by laser ablation. Microelectronic 
Engineering 2017;182:1–7. 

[348] Bian J, Zhou L, Wan X, Zhu C, Yang B, Huang Y. Laser transfer, printing, and 

assembly techniques for flexible electronics. Advanced Electronic Materials 2019; 
5:1800900. 

[349] Wang X, Zhang J, Mei X, Xu B, Miao J. Laser fabrication of fully printed graphene 
oxide microsensor. Optics and Lasers in Engineering 2021;140:106520. 
[350] Sope˜na P, Arrese J, Gonz´alez-Torres S, Fern´andez-Pradas JM, Cirera A, Serra P. 

Low-cost fabrication of printed electronics devices through continuous wave 
laser-induced forward transfer. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2017;9: 
29412–7. 

[351] Auyeung RCY, Kim H, Mathews S, Piqu´e A. Spatially modulated laser pulses for 

printing electronics. Appl Opt 2015;54. F70-F7. 

[352] Arnold CB, Wartena RC, Swider-Lyons KE, Pique A. Direct-write planar 

microultracapacitors by laser engineering. Journal of The Electrochemical Society 
2003;150:A571. 

[353] Wartena R, Curtright AE, Arnold CB, Piqu´e A. Swider-Lyons KE. Li-ion 

microbatteries generated by a laser direct-write method. Journal of Power 
Sources 2004;126:193–202. 

[354] Kim H, Auyeung RCY, Piqu´e A. Laser-printed thick-film electrodes for solid-state 

rechargeable Li-ion microbatteries. Journal of Power Sources 2007;165:413–9. 

[355] Kim H, Proell J, Kohler R, Pfleging W, Piqu´e A. Laser-printed and processed 
LiCoO2  cathode thick films for Li-ion microbatteries. Journal of Laser Micro 
Nanoengineering 2012;7:320–5. 

[329] Liu Y, Weng B, Xu Q, Hou Y, Zhao C, Beirne S, et al. Facile fabrication of flexible 
microsupercapacitor with high energy density. Advanced Materials Technologies 
2016;1:1600166. 

[356] Praeger M, Papazoglou S, Pesquera A, Zurutuza A, Levi A, Naveh D, et al. Laser- 
induced backward transfer of monolayer graphene. Applied Surface Science 2020; 
533:147488. 

[330] Yun X, Xiong Z, Tu L, Bai L, Wang X. Hierarchical porous graphene film: An ideal 
material for laser-carving fabrication of flexible micro-supercapacitors with high 
specific capacitance. Carbon 2017;125:308–17. 

[331] Wu M, Li Y, Yao B, Chen J, Li C, Shi G. A high-performance current collector-free 

flexible in-plane micro-supercapacitor based on a highly conductive reduced 
graphene oxide film. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2016;4:16213–8. 
[332] Xie B, Wang Y, Lai W, Lin W, Lin Z, Zhang Z, et al. Laser-processed graphene 

based micro-supercapacitors for ultrathin, rollable, compact and designable 
energy storage components. Nano Energy 2016;26:276–85. 

[333] Shao Y, Li J, Li Y, Wang H, Zhang Q, Kaner RB. Flexible quasi-solid-state planar 
micro-supercapacitor based on cellular graphene films. Materials Horizons 2017; 
4:1145–50. 

[334] Ye J, Tan H, Wu S, Ni K, Pan F, Liu J, et al. Direct laser writing of graphene made 
from chemical vapor deposition for flexible, Integratable micro-supercapacitors 
with ultrahigh power output. Advanced Materials 2018;30:1801384. 

[335] Kwon S, Yoon Y, Ahn J, Lim H, Kim G, Kim J-H, et al. Facile laser fabrication of 
high quality graphene-based microsupercapacitors with large capacitance. 
Carbon 2018;137:136–45. 

[336] Kamboj N, Purkait T, Das M, Sarkar S, Hazra KS, Dey RS. Ultralong cycle life and 
outstanding capacitive performance of a 10.8 V metal free micro-supercapacitor 
with highly conducting and robust laser-irradiated graphene for an integrated 
storage device. Energy & Environmental Science 2019;12:2507–17. 

[337] Park S, Lee H, Kim Y-J, Lee PS. Fully laser-patterned stretchable 

microsupercapacitors integrated with soft electronic circuit components. NPG 
Asia Materials 2018;10:959–69. 

[338] Gao J, Shao C, Shao S, Bai C, Khalil UR, Zhao Y, et al. Laser-assisted multiscale 

fabrication of configuration-editable supercapacitors with high energy density. 
ACS Nano 2019;13:7463–70. 

[339] Hondred JA, Medintz IL, Claussen JC. Enhanced electrochemical biosensor and 
supercapacitor with 3D porous architectured graphene via salt impregnated inkjet 
maskless lithography. Nanoscale Horizons 2019;4:735–46. 

[340] P´erez del Pino 

´
A, Martínez Villarroya A, Chuquitarqui A, Logofatu C, Tonti D, 

[341] P´erez del Pino 

Gy¨orgy E. Reactive laser synthesis of nitrogen-doped hybrid graphene-based 
electrodes for energy storage. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2018;6: 
16074–86. 

´
A, Ramadan MA, Garcia Lebi`ere P, Ivan R, Logofatu C, Yousef I, 
et al. Fabrication of graphene-based electrochemical capacitors through reactive 
inverse matrix assisted pulsed laser evaporation. Applied Surface Science 2019; 
484:245–56. 

[342] Acik M, Mattevi C, Gong C, Lee G, Cho K, Chhowalla M, et al. The role of 

intercalated water in multilayered graphene oxide. ACS Nano 2010;4:5861–8. 

[343] P´erez del Pino 

´
A, Rodríguez L´opez M, Ramadan MA, García Lebi`ere P, Logofatu C, 
Martínez-Rovira I, et al. Enhancement of the supercapacitive properties of laser 
deposited graphene-based electrodes through carbon nanotube loading and 
nitrogen doping. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2019;21:25175–86. 
[344] Queralt´o A, del Pino AP, Logofatu C, Datcu A, Amade R, Bertran-Serra E, et al. 

Reduced graphene oxide/iron oxide nanohybrid flexible electrodes grown by 
laser-based technique for energy storage applications. Ceramics International 
2018;44:20409–16. 

[345] Ivan R, Popescu C, P´erez del Pino A, Logofatu C, Gy¨orgy E. Carbon-based 

[346] García Lebi`ere P, P´erez del Pino 

nanomaterials and ZnO ternary compound layers grown by laser technique for 
environmental and energy storage applications. Applied Surface Science 2020; 
509:145359. 

´
A, Dom`enech Domingo G, Logofatu C, et al. Laser 
fabrication of hybrid electrodes composed of nanocarbons mixed with cerium and 
manganese oxides for supercapacitive energy storage. Journal of Materials 
Chemistry A 2021;9:1192–206. 

[347] Ajnsztajn A, Ferguson S, Thostenson JO, Ngaboyamahina E, Parker CB, Glass JT, 

et al. Transparent MXene-polymer supercapacitive film deposited using RIR- 
MAPLE. Crystals 2020;10:152. 

[357] Constantinescu C, Vizireanu S, Ion V, Aldica G, Stoica SD, Lazea-Stoyanova A, 

et al. Laser-induced forward transfer of carbon nanowalls for soft electrodes 
fabrication. Applied Surface Science 2016;374:49–55.  

Rajesh  Kumar  is  recipient  of  Ramanujan  fellowship  award 
from Department of Science and Technology (DST), New Delhi, 
India to work in Indian Institute of Technology (I.I.T.), Kanpur, 
India. He earned his PhD degree in Physics from Department of 
Physics, Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Varanasi, India. He 
is recipient of prestigious JSPS (Japan Society for the Promo-
tion of Science) fellowship to work in Toyohashi University of 
Technology  (TUT)  (Department  of  electrical  and  electronic 
information  engineering;  JSPS  (standard)  fellow:  FY  2018- 
2020), Toyohashi, Aichi, Japan. He has worked in State Uni-
versity of Sao Paulo (UNESP) (Department of physics; FAPESP 
Postdoctoral fellow: 2018), Presidente Prudente and University  

of  Campinas  (UNICAMP)  (Centre  for  semiconductor  components  and  nanotechnology; 
CNPq postdoctoral fellow/ visiting scientist: 2015-2017), Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil. He 
has also worked in Yonsei University (Department of materials science and engineering; 
Research Professor: 2014), Seoul and Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
(KAIST) (Graphene research centre; Postdoctoral researcher: 2012-2014), Daejeon, South 
Korea. His main research interests are the synthesis, characterization, properties, modi-
fications  and  assemblies  of  carbon  nanomaterials  with  different  dimensionalities  (gra-
phene derivatives, graphene-based materials, and CNTs) and inorganic layered materials 
for application in energy, electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding, sensors etc. He has 
published over 85 articles/reviews and book chapters in the peer-reviewed international highly- 
ranked journals.  

Angel P´erez del Pino obtained Physics Degree at the Univer-
sity  of  Barcelona  (1999),  and  got  the  PhD  in  the  Applied 
Physics  and  Optics  Department,  University  of  Barcelona 
(2003). The thesis work was based on the laser processing of 
titanium. Later, the researcher joined ICMAB-CSIC as research 
laboratory  technician  (2004)  being  the  responsible  of  the 
scanning  probe  microscopy  scientific-technical  service.  In 
2009, he got a tenured scientist position at ICMAB and created 
the laser processing research group (2010). The current areas 
of work are: (1) Laser processing of nanocomposites based on 
carbon nanostructures (nanotubes, graphene derivatives): The 
group  has  succeeded  for  the  first  time  in  the  international 
research  scenario  synthesizing  hybrid  nanocomposites  based 
on vertically aligned carbon nanotubes, graphene nanowalls and reduced graphene oxide 
with transition metal oxides nanostructures by direct laser irradiation. (2) Deposition of 
complex nanocomposites by MAPLE technique: The group was one of the first in the in-
ternational  framework  achieving  the  controlled  deposition  of  nanoparticles  thin  films, 
RNA,  proteins,  quantum  dots,  carbon  nanotubes,  and  graphene-based  compounds  by 
MAPLE. He has published more than 90 articles/reviews and book chapters in highly-ranked 
journals.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098126R. Kumar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Sumanta Sahoo is currently working as a Research Professor 
in  School  of  Chemical  Engineering,  Yeungnam  University, 
South Korea. Before joining to his current institute, he worked 
as an Assistant Professor in Madanapalle Institute of Technol-
ogy & Science, Andhra Pradesh, India. Previously he was Na-
tional  Postdoctoral  Fellow  in  the  Department  of  Chemistry, 
Indian  Institute  of  Technology  (Indian  School  of  Mines), 
Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India (2018-2019). He got his PhD de-
gree in Materials Science from Materials Science Centre, Indian 
Institute  of  Technology  Kharagpur  (IIT  Kharagpur),  West 
Bengal, India. He has worked in Korea Advanced Institute of 
Science  and  Technology  (KAIST),  (Postdoctoral  Researcher: 
2013-2014)  and  Yeungnam  University  (Research  Professor: 
2015-2017),  South  Korea.  His  main  research  work  are  synthesis  of  graphene  through 
chemical  routes,  fabrication  of  supercapacitor  electrodes  based  on  graphene  and  con-
ducting polymer,  synthesis for ternary nanohydrids through  hydrothermal route, fabri-
cation  of  binder-free  supercapacitor  electrodes,  ternary  nanocomposites  for  Li-ion 
batteries  and  fabrication  of  MXene-based  asymmetric  supercapacitor  devices.  He  has 
published more than 60 articles/reviews and book chapters in the refereed journals.  

Rajesh  Kumar  Singh  is  an  Asst.  Professor  in  the  School  of 
Physical and Material Sciences, Central University of Himachal 
Pradesh,  India.  He  obtained  his  PhD  degree  in  Physics  from 
Institute  of  Sciences,  Banaras  Hindu  University  (BHU)  Vara-
nasi, India. He then spent 4 years (2011–2015) at the Indian 
Institute  of  Technology  (BHU)  Varanasi  as  a  postdoctoral 
fellow. His current research interests include hydrogen storage, 
solid  oxide  fuel  cells,  synthesis  of  carbon  nanostructures- 
metal/metal  oxide  self-assembly  and  their  applications  in 
different areas. He has published more than 80 peer reviewed in-
ternational  research  articles  including  book  chapters  and  review 
articles.  

Wai Kian Tan is currently an Asst. Professor in the Institute of 
Liberal Arts & Sciences of Toyohashi University of Technology 
(TUT), Toyohashi, Aichi, Japan and belongs to the Processing 
and Instrumental Mechanics Laboratory (Muto Laboratory). He 
obtained his PhD degree at Toyohashi University of Technol-
ogy,  Toyohashi,  Aichi,  Japan  under  a  full  scholarship  from 
Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA). He received 
his Master and Bachelor degree from Universiti Sains Malaysia, 
Malaysia. His research interests and specialties are in (1) the 
development  of  ceramic  composite  materials,  (2)  advanced 
functional oxide materials, (3) hybrid materials as well as (4) 
renewable  energy  materials.  Dr.  Tan  has  more  than  90  peer 
reviewed  publications  and  9  book  chapters  to  his  name  and  is 
continuously  striving  for  a  more  sustainable  and  newer  breakthrough  in  advanced  materials 
development towards the achievement of the global sustainable development goals.  

Kamal  K.  Kar  is  Champa  Devi  Gangwal  Institute  Chair  Pro-
fessor,  Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering  and  Inter- 
disciplinary  Programme  in  Materials  Science  at  the  Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kanpur (IIT Kanpur), India. Prof. Kar is 
an active researcher in the area of nanostructured carbon ma-
terials, nanocomposites, functionally graded materials, nano-
polymers, and smart materials for structural, energy, water and 
biomedical applications. Prof. Kar has published more than 250 
papers in international referred journals, 135 conference papers, 
10 books on nanomaterials and their nanocomposites, 35 review 
articles/book  chapters  and  more  than  55  national  and  interna-
tional patents.  

Atsunori  Matsuda is a  Professor  in the Department  of Elec-
trical  and  Electronic  Information  Engineering,  Toyohashi 
University of Technology, Toyohashi, Japan. He received his 
PhD,  Master,  and  Bachelor  degrees  from  Osaka  Prefecture 
University.  His  research  interests  include  (1)  ionics  for  all- 
solid-state batteries such as Li ion battery and for next gener-
ation fuel cell, (2) micro-optics, photonics, and multiferroics, 
(3) functional coatings, (4) electrochemical sensors etc. He has 
received several national/ international research awards and is 
an active member of Japan research funding agencies. He has 
more than published 405 peer reviewed international research ar-
ticles including book chapters and review articles.  

Ednan  Joanni  is  a  materials  engineer  and  currently  a 
researcher at Center for Information Technology (CTI) Renato 
Archer, Campinas, Brazil. He received his PhD degree from the 
University  of  Sheffield,  UK.  in  1990.  His  main  research  in-
terests are micro and nanofabrication, thin film nanostructures 
deposition and laser processing applied to optical and electrical 
devices. He has published more than 66 research articles in peer- 
reviewed international journals. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098127