Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Methods for the conversion of biomass waste into value-added carbon 
nanomaterials: Recent progress and applications 

Santosh K. Tiwari a, b, *, Michał Bystrzejewski a,**, Amrita De Adhikari c, Andrzej Huczko a, 
Nannan Wang b, ** 
a Faculty of Chemistry, Warsaw University, 1 Pasteur Str., Warsaw 02-093, Poland 
b Key Laboratory of New Processing Technology for Nonferrous Metals and Materials, Guangxi Institute Fullerene Technology (GIFT), Ministry of Education, School of 
Resources, Environment and Materials, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, China 
c Department of Chemistry, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 8410501, Israel   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Biomass 
Synthetic approaches 
Biomass based carbon nanomaterials 
Surface properties and graphene like 
nanocarbons 

Herein, we deliberate the recent progress and innovative modifications which were carried out during the last ten 
years as commonly employed methods for the conversion of biomass and related feedstocks into carbon nano-
systems. Several highlighted methods are described in individual sections comprising: the type of nanomaterial 
processing, experimental conditions and factors affecting the yield and the characteristics of the final product. 
We have reconnoitred the applicability of specific feedstocks, advantages and drawbacks of the methods used for 
the  conversion  of  biomass  waste.  A  remarkable  focus  has  been  made  to  explore  synthesis  of  graphene  and 
(cid:0) 1) which were derived from 
graphene-like porous materials (with specific surface area greater than 1000 m2  g
biomass.  Their  prospective  applications  dedicated  to  smart  materials  and  cutting-edge  technologies  are  also 
described  in  each  section.  To  maintain  the  readability  and  cover  the  previous  stimulating  works  on  carbon 
nanomaterials derived from biomass, the first section of this review recaps the present status of carbon nano-
materials derived from biomass and related precursors, chiefly for the application in electrochemical devices, 
catalysis, sensing, absorbent along with an ample bibliography for further reading. We believe that vast scientific 
data in this state-of-the-art, simple explanations with schematic diagrams and key future challenges will provide 
a solid platform to readers about the update in carbon materials derived from biomass waste.   

1. Introduction 

Biomass waste management is a critical challenge for every country 
and at present the global biomass waste production is estimated to be 
around  250–280  Gt.  Dumping  of  the  large  portion  of  these  biomass 
waste daily to the earth and in the ocean is becoming the utmost threat 
for  human  survival  particularly  for  our  next  generations  [1,2].  It  is 
predicted that within the next 50 years, dumping at the current speed 

would cause us to lose more than ~5–8% of our fertile agricultural land, 
as  well  as  new  diseases,  food  poisoning,  respiratory  issues,  genetic 
mutation,  and  drinking  water  crisis  [1–3].  The  condition  of  biomass 
waste management becomes debauched due to the rapid increase in the 
global population (at present it is ~8 billion and likely to reach around 
11  billion  up  to  2050)  and  the  improvement  in  quality  of  life  again 
boosts the problem, making the biomass residues a global issue for the 
both economic and environmental viewpoints [4]. Therefore, it is high 

′
Abbreviations:  AFM,  Atomic  force  microscopy;  ATR,  Attenuated  total  reflection;  BC, Biocarbon;  BN,  Boron  nitride;  BPA,  Bisphenol  A  (4,4

-(propane-2,2-diyl) 
diphenol); BET, Brunauer-Emmett-Teller; CNTs, Carbon Nanotubes; CNs, Cellulose nanocrystals; CFP, Carbon fibre paper; CVD, Chemical vapour deposition; CQD, 
Carbon Quantum Dot; CDPAC, Cow dung based porous activated carbon; ChNFs, Chitin nanofibers; 0D, 1D, 2D & 3D, Dimension factor; 3DGF, Three-dimensional 
graphene foam; ECDs, Electrochemical devices; FESEM, Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope; FTIR, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy; GR, Graphene; 
GNR, Graphene nanoribbon; HMF, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural; HRTEM, High-resolution transmission electron microscopy; MCNTs, Multiwall carbon nanotubes; NC, 
Nanocarbon;  ORR, Oxygen reduction reaction; PANI, Polyaniline; PET, Polyethylene terephthalate; PTFE, Polytetrafluoroethylene; PP, Polypropylene; PMS, Per-
oxymonosulfate;  PLA,  Polylactic  acid;  SCs,  Supercapacitor;  TGA,  Thermogravimetric  analysis;  TEMPO,  2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)  oxidanyl;  XPS,  X-Ray 
Photoelectron Spectroscopy; XRD, X-ray diffraction analysis. 

* Corresponding author at: Faculty of Chemistry, Warsaw University, 1 Pasteur Str., Warsaw 02-093, Poland. 
** Corresponding authors. 

E-mail addresses: s.tiwari@chem.uw.edu.pl (S.K. Tiwari), mibys@chem.uw.edu.pl (M. Bystrzejewski), wangnannan@gxu.edu.cn (N. Wang).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101023 
Received 15 January 2022; Received in revised form 13 June 2022; Accepted 21 June 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101023Availableonline18July20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

time  that  governments  of  each  country  and  global  organisations  like 
European  Research  Council  (ERC),  Environmental  Protection  Agency 
(EPA), World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations (UN), World 
Bank etc., must take some necessary measures for pollution & popula-
tion control as well as allocate the big funding for the research works 
related to the conversion of biomass waste to the value-added products. 
Fortunately, the  world’s most  reputed universities  and  research orga-
nisations  are  actively  working  on  various  aspects  of  biomass  waste 
valorisation and providing futuristic outcomes [3–7]. It includes, con-
version of biomass waste and related materials to biochar, nano/micro 
nanomaterials  and  bio(nano)  materials  for  various  commercial  appli-
cations as discussed in the cited papers [3–7]. That is why, during the 
last  ten  years,  researchers  around  the  globe  have  produced  excellent 
ideas  for  the  fabrication  of  value-added  end  products  using  biomass 
waste [4,6,7]. Likewise, the recent advances in nanotechnology enabled 
researchers  to  convert  liquid,  solid  and  even  gaseous  biomass  waste 
either to value-added materials or materials with minimum hazardous 
consequence [5–7]. In contrast, during the 1970s mechanical recycling 
and  energy  recovery  paths  were  merely  used  for  the  management  of 
biomass  waste  owing  to  the  low  investment  and  involvement  of  un-
skilled  labour [6]. However,  within the  last two  decades several new 
processing  routes  have  been  introduced  to  reduce  cost,  hazardous  ef-
fects, boost efficiency of recycling and upsurge significance of the end 
product derived from biomass waste and related materials [7]. Due to 
such rapid innovative progress nowadays; several European countries, 
USA, UK, China, India, Japan and few other countries obtained a sig-
nificant  quantity  of  fuel,  gas,  bioplastics  carbonaceous  materials  etc. 
from biomass waste [8]. 

In this way, owing to the growing applications of valued carbona-
ceous  materials  derived  from  biomass,  it’s  conversion  into  different 
kinds of nanomaterials caught huge attention of the scientific commu-
nity. The carbon nanomaterials derived from biomass have been used 
widely  in  supercapacitors  [6,10],  batteries  [10],  fuel  cells  [11], 
sensing/bio-imaging [12], catalysis[13], polymer processing (as nano-
fillers) [14], drug delivery systems [15], water purification [16], ther-
mal insulation materials[17], electro-catalysis [18] and many more [19, 
20].  Recently,  Szczę´sniak  et  al.  published  an  excellent  review  which 
covers the end product and processing of poultry based biomass waste 
[21]. They pointed out that proper management and further research on 
the same could enhance the productiveness and sustainability of poultry 
business along with easy disposal of waste [21]. Chunping et al. pub-
lished  a  very  detailed  and  comprehensive  review  on  translation  of 
biomass  residues  from  different  food  segments  into  valuable  nano-
materials  [4].  Xu  et  al.  tried  to  recap  the  different  applications  of 
biomass  waste  especially  from  the  sources  like  fish/shrimp  waste, 
lignocellulosic  food  derived  waste,  cattle  manure,  pig  bristles  and 
household waste [4]. Szczę´sniak et al. summarised nanostructured car-
bon  materials  with  uniform  porosity  derived  from  biomass  and 
emphasized  their  application  for  energy  and  environmental  concerns 
[21,22]. In the same line, Rudra et al. reviewed the recent progress in 
different kinds of rechargeable batteries, fuel cells and supercapacitors, 
fabricated  using  biomass-derived  nanomaterials  [22].  Thus,  several 
state-of-arts on various aspects of biomass have been published. How-
ever, to the best of our knowledge, there is no comprehensive review on 
current  progress  in  methodologies  and  techniques  (of  course,  several 
individual techniques for the conversion of a particular biomass to value 
added products have been reviewed by researchers [4,18,20,22]) used 
for  conversion  of  biomass/biomass  waste  to  functional  carbon  nano-
materials. Also, there is an urgent need for an update about the status 
and forecasts of graphitic and carbonaceous nanomaterials derived from 
biomass. 

Herein,  we  deliberate  the  current  progress  in  frequently  used 
methods  (i.e.,  Microwave  assisted pyrolysis,  Hydrothermal  carboniza-
tion,  Molten  salt  process,  Ball  milling  method,  Single  step  pyrolysis 
under inert atmosphere including some miscellaneous approaches) for 
the conversion of biomass waste to carbon nanomaterials. Each method 

is discussed in detail with proper examples and deep analysis. Likewise, 
we  have  explored  the  applicability  of  specific  feedstock,  benefits  and 
drawbacks of the routes used for transformation of biomass waste into 
carbon  nanomaterials.  More  importantly,  a  particular  emphasis  has 
been made to deliberate the surface morphology, mechanism of carbon 
nanomaterials  formation  from  biomass,  new  applications  and  factors 
affecting  productivity  of  nanomaterials  derived  from  biomass  waste. 
Lastly, the challenges that remain to be talked about are scrutinized, and 
a  viewpoint  for  the  future  research  on  nanomaterials  derived  from 
biomass is described. 

2. Current status of nanomaterials derived from biomass and 
their utilizations 

The conversion of biomass waste into the value-added products such 
as gases, oil and powdered carbonaceous materials is a multi-step and 
complex process. It provides mainly three different components as solid, 
liquid, and gas depending on the type of biomass feedstock used and the 
procedure adopted for the conversion of the same (Fig. 1a). The relative 
content of carbon micro/nano materials is around ~3–5% of the total 
value-added  products  extracted  from  biomass  waste  as  per  Scopus 
database.  Though,  during  the  last  two  decades  biochar  and  carbon 
nanomaterials  are  getting  more  attention  and  also  production  of  the 
same  has  increased  drastically  owing  to  the  involvement  of  cyclic 
economy,  the  present  scenario  and  commercial  possibilities  of  this 
~3–5%  powdered  materials  derived  from  biomass  are  significantly 
changing  the  prospect  of  biomass  waste  as  depicted  in  Fig.  1b.  The 
growing  potential  of  agricultural  biomass  residues  in  the  top  five 
countries of the world is tabulated in Fig. 1a which could be used as a 
source  of  renewable  energy  and  new  materials  with  unique  surface 
morphologies [9]. China has reported the highest utilization of biomass 
and related waste as the reusable product since 2015, while India ach-
ieved a milestone in biofuels (Ethanol and other alcohols as fuels) pro-
duction from biomass during 2014–2019 [10]. Thus, the biomass waste 
management initially started to maintain hygiene, for the cleanliness of 
environment and to minimise the land occupation due to the dumping of 
biomass waste and now, it is becoming a source of renewable energy and 
new  carbon  materials  [4,5,9,10].  Notably,  from  the  early  stages  of 
industrialization  the  scientific  community  has  been  trying  to  convert 
various  kinds  of  waste  materials  including  metallic,  plastics,  biomass 
etc. into valuable products. In this regard, conversion of biomass waste 
and related materials into reusable products caught a proper attention 
during the 1970s. As per literature, during the 1980 to 2008, most of the 
work dealt with conversion of biomass waste to biofuels, biogas, coal 
and organic manures (micro and macro systems). Also, during the same 
period,  excellent  technologies  were  developed  linked  to  the  bulk 
biomass  conversion.  However,  during  2008–2017  scientists  typically 
indulged  on  conversion  of  biomass  and  related  materials  into  nano-
systems for electrochemical energies, sensing and other applications as 
elaborated in this manuscript with proper citations. So, several reviews 
and  state-of-the  art  have  been  published  from  time  to  time  on  the 
aforementioned topics as discussed in the next sections of this manu-
script. Thus, Table 1 summarises an overview about on the important 
previous  works  (synthesis  and  application  of  carbon  nanomaterials 
derived from biomass) until 2017; while our review provides a progress 
and  update  in  methods  used  for  conversion  of  biomass  into  carbon 
nanomaterials along with several new citations. Herein, Table 1 could be 
used as the database for the beginners working on conversion of biomass 
waste to nanomaterials. However, the status and prospect of the biomass 
derived  functional  carbon  nanomaterials  and  their  applications  since 
2018 and onward are deliberated in the next pages for the comparative 
study. 

From the block diagrams and the associated table in the Fig. 1a, b, it 
is clear that use of biomass and related waste as a potential source of 
sustainable materials for renewable energy and other useful products is 
thriving  and  new  possibilities  of  functional  carbon  nanomaterials 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010232S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 1. (a) Block diagram for the key value-added products (an approximate percentage) derived from biomass waste and table depicting cumulative generation 
potential of agricultural residues of top five countries (b) Schematic diagram for cyclic economy in terms of biomass waste management using innovative approaches 
for the conversion of biochar and related materials into carbon nanomaterials. Carbon nanostructures derived from biochar are very appropriate for environmental 
remediation (water purification, CO2  fixation and as nanofertilizers for soil) sensing, coating and as reinforcement for the polymeric materials. Moreover, desired 
surface functionalisation of carbon nanomaterials derived from biochar for potential finding applications in renewable energy, catalysis, oxygen reduction reactions 
and neat biochar itself can be used as a carrier for carbon storage. 

derived  from  biomass  waste  open  several  new  egresses.  The  key  ad-
vantages of using biomass waste in the production of value-added ma-
terials include their low cost and a wide availability along with zero or 
negative greenhouse gas effect. On the other hand, the main drawbacks 
and  challenges  cover  moderate  or  low  processing  yield,  low  specific 
energy content and low bulk density of biomass. Herein, our analysis 
based  on the  literature  survey  shows  that  ~10–15% of  the  published 
papers and patents have a potential for the commercial implementation 
and  further  realistic  applications.  Interestingly,  some  of  them  are 
already  in  the  market  (For  example:  biochar,  nanofertilizers,  nano-
materials,  biofuel,  biogas  etc.)  for  common  uses  and  engineering  ap-
plications  [23,24].  Indeed,  recently  developed  methods,  prototype 
devices and nanomaterials have been produced in a milligram and gram 
scale, which can be up-scaled in the near future. So, big funding, intense 
basic  and  applied  research  on  nanomaterials  derived  from  biomass 

waste is needed. For example, the first nanomaterials derived from the 
biomass were greatly suffering with low surface area and low porosity 
owing to the huge aggregation and agglomeration of particles as the end 
product. But, these problems are now solved and nanomaterials derived 
from biomass with ultra-high surface area have become a reality. For 
example; Zhao et al. fabricated a very porous nanomaterial using peanut 
meal (Fig. 2d) containing N, P, and S along with a high percentage of 
carbon as depicted in elemental mapping Fig. 2c. This newly obtained 
carbon nanomaterial resembles the multi-layered graphene as shown in 
the FESEM and HRTEM images in Fig. 2a,b and has exceptionally high 
(cid:0)
specific  surface  area  (2090  m2  g 
1),  which  is  very  difficult  and 
expensive  to  achieve  from  other  sources  [25].  In  the  absence  of  any 
heteroatoms,  the  carbonized  peanut  meal  depicts  a  block-like  rough 
structure instead of porous nanostructure owing to the absence of pore 
and low exfoliation [25]. Thus, the strategic doping of the heteroatoms 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010233Exfoliated biochar Nano sheets 

Electrochemical performance 
(2015) 

S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 1 
Recent progress and milestone achievements during 2012–2017 in fabrication of different varieties of carbon based nanostructures from biomass and their applications 
for new technologies.  

Sources of Biomass 

Conversion Method 

Type of Nanostructure 

Application and year 

Agricultural residue, coconut coir dust 

Hydrothermal carbonization 

Hollow carbon nanostructures 

S. 
N 

1 

2 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

8 

10 

11 

12 

Gelatine containing biomass waste 

Pyrolysis and Melt-diffusion method 

Animal based natural gelatine 

Evaporative crystallisation 

Sugarcane bagasse ash 

Tree-bark biomass waste 

Sawdust 

Crude plant materials and cellulose 

Lignocellulosic biomass and most food- 
waste 
Bio-waste shrimp shells 

Lignocellulosic biomass or other 
biological products derived from food or 
agricultural waste 
Corn cob based biomass waste 

Chemical activation using KOH and 
ZnCl2 
Optimized carbonization approach 
using KOH pellets 
Carbonization, activation and then 
hydrolysis 
Hydrothermal carbonization using 
sodium salt 
Hydrothermal carbonization 

6 M KOH + solution carbonization in 
Ar atmosphere. 
Carbothermal synthesis 

nitrogen pyrolysis, and high 
temperature thermal–chemical flash 
exfoliation 
Molten-salt treatment 

13 

Precursory boiled coffee bean 

14 

Dried sugarcane bagasse 

Activation of KOH followed by a high- 
temperature carbonization 

15 

High-ash-content sewage sludge 

fly-silicon process 

16 

Beer waste 

Hydrothermal carbonization 

17 

Low-cost biomass, melamine, & 
iron salt 

Novel Solid Solution approach 

18 

Lignocellulosic biomass 

One-pot fast pyrolysis 

19 

Soybean residue 

Facile carbonization and activation 

20  Waste Slop Oil and Ferrocene 

Co-Pyrolysis 

21 

22 
23 

Biomass waste +an iron–tannin 
framework + dicyandiamide as a nitrogen 
source. 
Tea waste biomass 
Biomass waste 

Simple solution phase reactions and 
shaking 

Chemical and thermal modification 
Thermo-chemical process 

24 

Dead Pine Needles 

Facile one-step carbonization 

Highly ordered nitrogen-rich 
mesoporous carbon 
B/N Co-Doped Carbon 
Nanosheets 
Nitrogen-Rich nanostructures 

Porous network like carbon 
nanostructures 
Microporous Carbons 

Carbon microparticles 

Carbon Quantum Dot 

N-doped porous carbon 

Metal-functionalized 
nanostructures 

Hierarchical nanostructures 

Carbon/silicon three- 
dimensional hierarchical 
nanostructure 
3D honeycomb-like 
hierarchically structured carbon 
Carbon nanoparticles 

3D N-doped carbon nanotube/ 
porous carbon 
hybrid 
Biochar Stabilized Ru–Cu 
Nanoalloys 
Honeycomb-like nitrogen and 
oxygen dual-doped porous 
carbon 
Carbon Nanoparticles (graphitic 
nanostructure) 
Carbide/Fe-N-Carbon 
nanostructure 

Microporous activated carbon 
Series of nanomaterials with 
different morphologies 
N&O Co-doped Nano structures 

Layered nanostructured carbon 

Carbon dots 
Bulk amount mesoporous carbon 

25 

Sorghum stalk 

26 
27 

28 
29 

Sago waste 
Pine wood chips, banana peels & pine 
leaves 
Plant based biomass waste 
Leather scraps 

A new synthesis protocol using ZnCl2 
as activation reagent 
Thermal pyrolysis approach 
Molten-salt process 

One step solvothermal route 
Controlled pyrolysis 

C/Fe3O4/Bi2O3 composite 
Novel metal-free electrocatalysts 

30  Wheat flour+ KOH 

Facile one–step pyrolysis 

31 

Agricultural biomass 

32 

Lignin waste 

33 

Shaddock peel 

34 

Low temperature Hydrothermal 
reaction 
Hydrothermal carbonization 

One-step pyrolysis under an inert 
atmosphere 
Pyrolysis and partial oxidation 

Nitrogen–doped nanostructured 
carbon 
Magnetic adsorbents 

Carbon materials with well- 
ordered micropores 
Honeycomb-like morphology of 
carbon nanosystem 
Carbon nanomaterials 

Effect of clays and minerals on 
carbonization 
(2014) 
Cathode material in lithium–sulphur 
batteries (2015) 
High-Performance Supercapacitors 
(2016) 
Supercapacitors 
(2016) 
Enhanced electrochemical response 
(2017) 
Hydrogen storage performance (2008) 

Electrode material for lithium-ion 
battery (2013) 
Solid-State Nanostructured Solar Cells 
(2015) 
Lithium ion batteries and 
supercapacitors (2017) 
Energy and environmental applications 
(2015) 

Surface properties and electrocatalytic 
activity for oxygen reduction 
(2016) 
Lithium ion batteries (2017) 

Supercapacitor 
(2015) 
Cheap and sustainable membranes for 
gas separation 
(2013) 
Effective oxidative activities (2017) 

Highly Efficient and Durable Catalyst 
(2017) 
Lithium-sulphur batteries (2016) 

Fundamental Properties examination 
(2015) 
Efficient Catalysts for Oxygen 
reduction (2015) 

Removal of Cr(VI) and fluoride 
For efficient adsorption of CO2 (2016) 

Chemical and physical properties 
(2017) 
Adsorption and purification processes 
(2017) 
Metal ions sensing 
Effective Adsorption (2016) 

Application as photocatalyst (2016) 
Physicochemical properties and 
Productive Oxygen Reduction Reaction 
(2016) 
Electrocatalytic for conversion of CO2 
to CO (2017) 
Application for heavy metals(Ni, Cd, 
Pb, and As) removal (2017) 
CO2 and Hydrogen Storage (2015) 

Carbon anode materials for sodium ion 
batteries (2015) 

Refs. 

[36] 

[37] 

[38] 

[39] 

[40] 

[41] 

[42] 

[43] 

[44] 

[45] 

[46] 

[47] 

[48] 

[49] 

[50] 

[51] 

[52] 

[53] 

[54] 

[55] 

[56] 
[57] 

[58] 

[59] 

[60] 
[61] 

[62] 
[63] 

[64] 

[65] 

[66] 

[67] 

[68] 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010234S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 1 (continued ) 

Sources of Biomass 

Conversion Method 

Type of Nanostructure 

Application and year 

Refs. 

S. 
N 

35 

Sugar cane bagasse, corn residues, scrap 
tire chips, postconsumer PP+ (PET) bottle 
Agricultural and industrial waste 

36 

Fish scale based waste 

◦

One-step acid-assisted hydrothermal 
treatment (200 
C) 
Chemical treatment and partial 
oxidation 

Fluorescent carbon dots 

P&N-co-doped porous carbon 
nanostructure 

37 

Biochar from lignocellulosic biomass, 
sugarcane bagasse 
38  Watermelon waste 

Microwave assisted pyrolysis using Fe 
and Co as subsectors 
Hydrothermal Process 

Carbon nanostructures 

Magnetic Carbon Nanostructures 

39 

Bamboo shells 

40  Melaleuca bark 

One step molten carbonates 
carbonization 
Solution activation using potassium 
hydroxide 

Ultra-pure Carbon 
nanostructures 
Highly porous carbons 
nanostructures 

Synthetic approach for the bulk 
production (2012) 
Highly active carbocatalysts (2015) 

Electrochemical performance in both 
aqueous & ionic liquid electrolytes 
(2015) 
Production of high quality Bio-oil & 
Bases (2017) 
Removal of heavy metals from drinking 
(2017) water 
Electrochemical Performance (2016) 

Hydrogen storage 

[69] 

[70] 

[71] 

[72] 

[73] 

[74]  

(cid:0) 1 (at 1 A g

(N,P&S) within the peanut meal matrices, a 3D network-like structure 
was  observed  which  nearly  resembled  transparent  graphene  sheets 
(Fig. 2e), a prerequisite for better ion transport. The HRTEM (Fig. 2b,e) 
study further confirmed the transparent sheets of carbon are very similar 
to  graphene  nano-sheets.  The  presence  of  heteroatoms  in  the  carbon 
based  electrodes  materials  reduces  the  charge  transfer  resistance  and 
water contact angle (Fig. 2f, water contact angles for undoped and bulk 
peanut meal showed much higher water contact angle as described in 
[25]) along with the maximum electrolyte accessibility within the car-
bon  matrix,  benefitting  the  electrochemical  performance  of  the  elec-
trode as presented in the graph Fig. 2g. The presence of heteroatoms in 
electrode materials contributes to the pseudocapacitive behaviour and 
therefore  upsurges  in  overall  capacitance  (electrical  double  layer  & 
pseudo-capacitance). The fabricated electrodes were electrochemically 
(cid:0) 1) for 
active and displayed a specific capacitance of 525 F g
an asymmetric supercapacitor device [25]. Likewise, heteroatoms doped 
porous  carbons  (with  large specific  surface  area &  interconnected  hi-
erarchical  pores)  derived  from  widely  accessible, low-cost  of  biomass 
lettuce  are  used  in  fabrication  of  highly  biocompatible  electrode  for 
next-generation  supercapacitors  [9].  The  unique  surface  morphology 
with the interconnected hierarchical pores owing to N, P, and S in-situ 
doping are presented in SEM micrographs, Fig. 2h-i. It is believed, the 
typical surface morphology attributed to multi heteroatom greatly assist 
accessibility of electrolyte as discussed by Liu et al. and a portion of SEM 
images  shown  in  Fig.  2h.  For  the  fabrication  of  asymmetric  super-
capacitor (Fig. 2k) Liu et al. used this biomass derived (via freeze-dried 
technique)  slice  of  a  typical  thickness  1000 μm  with  abundant  pores 
across the entire slice as shown in TEM image, Fig. 2j [9]. Brito et al. 
developed  a  commercially  applicable  one-step  route  to  produce 
bio-carbons from agricultural biomass waste, which is a cheap precur-
sor. They synthesised activated bio-carbons with high specific surface 
area (mainly microporous in nature) in a single step using three different 
agricultural biomass wastes (sugarcane bagasse, coconut shell & endo-
carp of coconut) and pointed it as a cheap and highly porous adsorbents 
for the real time practice [26]. They addressed the common issues of 
saving water, energy and time through a single step method of synthesis. 
Some  important  parameters  like  heat,  water  injection,  residence  & 
activation time amount, were controlled for obtaining the end products. 
Herein, the biomass obtained from babassu coconut acted as the most 
attractive precursor for the synthesis of activated bio-carbon compared 
to  non-lignocellulosic  biomass  in  terms  of  porosity  and  surface  area. 
Baysal et al. successfully produced highly porous carbon (surface area: 
(cid:0) 1) from sunflower pith and they employed the same carbon 
2690 m2 g
for the removal of a dye (e.g. azo, sulfur, nitrp, nitroso dyes etc.) from 
aqueous  solutions  [27].  Sunflower  pith  is  often  obtained  as  an 
agro-waste, so its productive use is explored. Naturally, it has a highly 
porous  and  flaky  architecture,  which  is  also  confirmed  via  Micro-CT 
examination. After carbonization, the piths formed 200 nm thick flake 

nanocarbons.  Chemical  activation  using  KOH  and  NaOH  was  used  to 
develop porosity. It was observed that activated porous sunflower piths 
possess activation sites which increases the surface area and prompts the 
adsorption capacity of hazardous compounds from water. These exam-
ples show that the processing of biomass waste can result in promising 
carbon-based nanomaterials. 

3. Nanomaterials derived from biomass waste for 
electrochemical devices: a brief overview 

lack  of  proper  protection,  flexibility, 

Supercapacitors  (SCs)  are  one  of  the  most  evolving  and  efficient 
devices amongst the many other energy storage devices. SCs store the 
electrical charge in an electric double layer at the interface of electrode 
and electrolyte (EDLC) and also via the redox reactions (referred as the 
pseudocapacitance). The SCs global market was estimated at $1.2 billion 
in 2015, and their demand, uninterruptedly increasing, will be doubled 
over the coming years (probably within 2025). During the last 10 years 
several electrode materials were fabricated for SCs using nanomaterials 
derived from biomass waste including flexible and wearable SCs [8–10, 
17,20].  Meanwhile,  rechargeable  batteries  are  amongst  the  most 
broadly used energy storage devices in electronic gadgets of this cen-
tury. Because of their unique properties, secondary batteries are playing 
an essential role in our daily life, and batteries (Li-air battery and Li-ion 
battery) are widely used due to their very slow self-discharge, high en-
ergy  density,  low  maintenance  and  obtainability  in  numerous  cate-
gories.  However,  these  batteries  may  suffer  from  problems  including 
ageing, 
transportation, 
self-ignition, and high cost due to the limited availability of lithium in 
the earth crust and also because they cannot be completely discharged 
even  during  transportation  (thereby  increasing  the  transport  costs). 
These  above  listed  issues  force  the  material  science  researchers  to 
develop alternative products to be used in cost-effective batteries pro-
duced  in  bulk.  These  challenges  stimulated  researchers  to  obtain 
different types of materials from biomass waste [10,17,20]. Therefore, 
several research articles and assessments have been published time to 
time  and  here,  we  will  make  a  brief  outlook  in  progress  of  electro-
chemical devices based on biomass waste derived carbon nanomaterials 
[8–10,17,25].  In  addition,  sodium  has  been  tested  as  a  substitute  of 
lithium, and biomass-derived products have been widely investigated as 
a green source of activated carbon because of their renewable, plentiful, 
inexpensive and eco-friendly features [17–25]. In the same line, other 
carbon  materials,  i.e.  carbon  fibres,  carbon  nanotubes,  mesoporous 
carbon, graphene and biomass derived carbons have been well explored 
and reviewed by the reputed research groups [11,17,20,23]. Notably, 
high surface area and uniform porosity are essential for most of elec-
trochemical  devices  such  as  batteries,  supercapacitors  and  sensors. 
Therefore,  researchers  adopted  the  following  synthetic  steps  for  pro-
duction of hybrid electrode materials via carbonization of biomass waste 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010235S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 2. Image (a) FESEM and (b) HRTEM of carbon nanomaterial with ultra-high surface area derived from peanut meal. Micrograph (c) shows chemical composition 
and elemental mapping of the same (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [25]). (d) Peanut meal (e) HRTEM image (of porous nanomaterial derived from peanut 
shell) resembling graphene sheets. SEM micrograph (h) & (i) are showing the interconnected hierarchical pores in N, P, and S doped carbon nanomaterials derived 
from lettuce while TEM image (j) shows the thickness of carbon matrix used for the fabrication electrodes (k) for high performance supercapacitors (Reproduced with 
permission from Ref. [9]). 

using  available  methods,  especially  hydrothermal  route  and  then 
hetero-atoms doping (N, S, P etc.) to improve the electrochemical per-
formance of porous carbon. The purification and activation protocols of 
these porous carbons were developed by treatment with simple chem-
icals  such  as  H3PO4  etc.  [17–23,25].  The  porous  carbons  doped  with 
heteroatoms  were  then  integrated  with  metal  oxides  and  sulfides  to 
fabricate  nanocomposites  via  green  chemical  routes  such  as  hydro-
thermal/solvothermal  process,  layer  by  layer  deposition  process  and 
drop  casting  methods  for  the  fabrication  of  flexible  electrode  using 
polymeric template in the presence of functional 2D nanomaterials like 

graphene,  MXene,  few  layer  BN  etc.  Moreover,  functionalization  of 
porous  nanomaterials  has  also  been  intensively  studied  to  further  in-
crease  the  efficiencies  of  electrochemical  devices  [20–25].  In  recent 
years,  functional  3D  electrode  materials  for  batteries  and  super-
capacitors caught prodigious attention and they have been achieved by 
incorporating 2D nanomaterials like graphene, BN and MXene into 3D 
architectures  derived  from  biomass  waste  to  create  functional  porous 
films,  scaffolds  and  networks  that  are  suitable  for  the  fabrication  of 
high-performance electrochemical devices [17,23,24]. Usually, Nafion 
solution, PVDF, Kynar, Flex or other better alternatives are commonly 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010236S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

used as binders for assembling conventional electrochemical capacitor 
cells.  However,  several  green  and  even  binder  free  advanced  super-
capacitors  have  been  innovated  via  novel  chemical  modifications  of 
carbon materials obtained from biomass or by direct growth of electrode 
materials on the substrate (current collector) [18,22] Thus, several re-
views  and  state-of-the-art  related  to  surface  morphology,  functional 
aspect, inside chemistry of nanomaterials derived from biomass waste 
are available. The procedures for incorporation of metal oxides, metal 
sulphides, halides, metal cations etc. into carbon nanomaterials derived 
from biomass have been also reviewed and presented by several reputed 
research groups along with working mechanism and performance [11, 
17,20,23–25]. Similarly, several reviews and articles on integration of 
2D  layered  nanomaterials  with  nanostructures  derived  from  biomass, 
involving new physics, chemistry and materials engineering, have also 
been published concerning the unique structural properties and biode-
gradability  along  with  great  potential  to  improve  the  performance  of 
high performance next generation energy storage devices [11, 17–18, 
20,].  However,  no  critical  reviews  on  recent  innovations  in  different 
methodologies,  associated  with  conversion  of  biomass  waste  into 
various types of nanostructures in a single platform have been published 
so far and in this review we will present the same along with application 
of  biomass  waste  based  nanomaterials  for  intelligent  materials  and 
devices. 

Sekar et al. fabricated nanocomposites of activated-carbon decorated 
with silicon nanocrystals using rice husks based biomass in a single step 
for lithium-ion battery application [28]. They simply applied calcination 
along with the magnesiothermic reduction process to modify the sur-
faces  of  the  nanocomposite  for  the  end  product  effectiveness.  This 
innovative approach for green energy-storage is schematically presented 
elsewhere [28]. A step ahead, Huang et al. fabricated an aerogel using 
polyaniline  into  bacterial  cellulose  and  chitosan  derived  from  the 
biomass waste. They predicted its application in piezoresistive sensors 
for wearable devices, to detect human motions and several other health 
monitoring  schemes  [29].  Moreover,  the  developed  compressible  in 
piezoresistive sensor based on polyaniline/bacterial cellulose/chitosan 
(PANI/BC/CH)  based  aerogels  (Fig.  3d)  was  simply  produced  via 
freeze-drying method which could be possible in any ordinary lab. This 
research  opens  a  new  prospect  for  the  development  of  several  other 
piezoresistive pressure sensors with ultra-high sensitivity, a wide range 
of pressure/strain deformations, and admirable repeatability using other 
biomass materials. The facile preparation approach (Fig. 3a), mechani-
cal  robust  and  highly  flexible  surface  morphology  (Fig.  3b,  c)  and 
application of fabricated composite as the strain sensors in monitoring 
various human motions in the real time is presented in Fig. 3e, f. In this 
work,  the  use  of  as  fabricated  composite  as  strain  sensors  has  been 
observed at different human motion in the real time along with resis-
tance  response  of  the  strain  sensor  in  monitoring  finger  bending  and 
releasing as presented in graph Fig. 3e, f. Interestingly, in 2021 we have 
fabricated  similar  biomass  waste  derived  aerogel  via  freeze  drying 
technique and then Zn/Co-ZIF hybrid nanoparticles were loaded onto 
the  same  [30].  As  fabricated  gel-nanocomposite  performs  excellent 
peroxymonosulfate (PMS) activation reactivity to degrade Rhodamine B 
(RhB)  with  approximate  100%  removal  rate  in  30  min  along  with 
enhanced  water  stability  [30].  Capabilities  of  newly  designed 
gel-nanocomposite schematically presented in the Fig. 3g. The hetero 
atom  doped  carbon  nanomaterials  are  much  better  in  performance 
(which facilitate charge transfer and better electrolyte accessibility in 
electrode  material  along  with  benefitting  the  electrochemical  perfor-
mance) especially for the energy storage applications and amongst the 
same N-doping porous carbon are perfect for Li-ion capacitors (due to 
high energy density, great cyclic performance and cheap availability). 
Definitely, several  routes have  been  developed  to obtain  hetero  atom 
doped carbon nanomaterials but most of them are onerous, expensive 
and have low yield. Considering these challenges Zou et al. proposed a 
new  path  for  highly  effective,  green,  cheap  and  high  yield  N-doping 
porous  carbon,  using  biomass  waste  as  the  carbon  source  and  a  new 

eutectic  salt  as  the  activation  negotiator  and  claimed  it  to  be  an 
approach to produce hetero atom doped carbon nanomaterials in a ki-
logram scale [30]. Sequences of controlled experiments were performed 
and it was found that the eutectic salt increases the yield of the final 
product,  the  effective  surface  area  and  the  N-doping  of  the  sample. 
Bagasse was opted as a precursor for carbon owing to its large avail-
ability and low cost. The prepared samples have nitrogen doping and 
possess numerous active sites for redox active reactions, responsible for 
the  pseudo-capacitance,  and  overall  specific  capacity  behaviour.  The 
highly porous architecture with high surface area poses the material to 
be employed as cathode and anode in lithium ion capacitor devices. The 
(cid:0) 1 at a power density of 
device delivered an energy density of 87.7 Wh kg
10,000 W kg

(cid:0) 1. 

In addition to energy storage and smart materials fabrication using 
biomass  waste,  scientists  use  biomass  waste  based  nanomaterials  as 
catalysts  for  organic  transformations.  Recently,  Ding  et  al.  utilised  a 
waste eggshell based Au/CaCO3 nanocomposite for 4-nitrophenol elec-
trochemical  detection  and  conversion  [31].  The  group  has  chosen  an 
easily  available  and  cheap  material, eggshell.  Eggshells  are  discarded 
and therefore, its conversion into an effective material can be a novel 
approach  along  with  operative  waste  management.  The  naturally 
available  eggshells  have  porous  structure  (also  confirmed  by  SEM 
analysis) and therefore can adsorb Au ions easily and on calcination, it 
can  form  Au nanoparticles,  generating  the  composite  Au/CaCO3.  The 
composite  was  found  to  be  highly  stable  and  effectively  selective  in 
detection of 4-nitrophenol. The catalytic efficiency of the composite is 
exceptionally high with a conversion rate of 97% in 3 min along with its 
stability for more than 5 cycles. Thus, this cost-effective, facile waste to 
wealth strategy will provide a green pathway in the lights of sustain-
ability. The most rapid and bulk use of biomass waste from cow, buffalo, 
goat, camel etc. dung and urine as organic fertiliser (also called organic 
manure) becomes very beneficial for the chemical free agricultural ac-
tivities (Fig. 4a–c). The demand for these organic fertilisers is rapidly 
growing  due  to  several  hazardous  effects  of  synthetic  fertilisers  [32]. 
Organic manures derived from cow dung were first ever used in human 
history for the production of grains and vegetables as discussed in Vedic 
Literature. Indeed, it could be a matter of further research. [33]. Nearly, 
120  years  ago  when  British  were  ruling  India,  English  administrators 
forced  Indian  farmers  to  stop  these  green  fertilizers  for  agricultural 
activites due to unawareness of the benefits of cow dung based fertil-
izers. The strange discussion is that now they are projecting themselves 
as leader and foremost promoter of organic manures. Authors observed 
that organic manures derived from cow dungs comprise several bacte-
rium (macro/micro, as symbolised in the Fig. 4b) and they converted 
manures into smaller particles therefore, nanosizing effects and possi-
bilities of various nanostructures within these organic manures need to 
be explored and established. 

At present, the main source of organic manures are from the sugar-
cane industries because of the limited availability of animal dung based 
organic fertilizers. That is why, the top sugarcane producing countries- 
India, Brazil and China are prominently using sugarcane based organic 
fertilizers for the agricultural activities and it is emerging as green fer-
tilizer [35]. Dotaniya et al. recently reviewed the status of by-products 
obtained  from  sugarcane  industries  as  waste.  In  their  review,  they 
deeply examined different aspects of by-products obtained from sugar-
cane industries for the improvement of sugarcane productivity and soil 
health  [35].  In  addition,  numerous  nanotechnological  applications  of 
cow dung have also been explored in recent years discussed by Raja-
bathar et al. [28]. The cow dung based porous activated carbon (CDPAC) 
can be a cost-effective and facile strategy to synthesize electrode mate-
rials for energy storage devices. The vast availability of cow dung will be 
an advantage for preparing the electrodes. The CDPAC can be prepared 
via two step process-precarbonization followed by chemical activation 
step.  The  morphological  study  revealed  that  the  material  resembled 
graphitic architecture and comprised micro and mesopores. Therefore, 
these materials will be a highly suitable candidate for the energy storage 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010237S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 3. (a) Scheme of fabrication process for polyaniline/bacterial cellulose/chitosan based aerogels, (b&c) SEM images of bacterial cellulose based aerogel; (d) 
bacterial  cellulose/chitosan  based  aerogels;  (e)  use  of  as  fabricated  composite  as  strain  sensors  in  observing  various  human  motion  in  real  time.  (f)  Resistance 
response of the strain sensor in monitoring finger bending and releasing (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [29]). (g) Schematic presentation of capabilities of 
sugarcane-based carbon aerogel loaded with Zn/Co-ZIF nanoparticles [30]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010238S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig.  4. (a)  Photograph  showing  efficacy  of  cow  dung  based  manures  over  chemical  fertilizer  free  forming  (b)  worms  and  bacteria  present  in  organic  manures 
enhanced fertility of soil and (c) SEM image of cow dung based manures showing its texture and internal porosity (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [34]). (e, f) 
SEM  images  in  different  magnifications  of  carbon  dervied  from  cow  dung  and  (g)  Pore  width  distribution  graph  showing  influence  of  incorporation  of  Fe3O4 
nanoparticles on porous carbon [35]. 

applications  as  they  possess  high  surface  area.  The  electrochemical 
study of the cow dung based electrode showed high specific capacitance. 
A  flexible  symmetric  supercapacitor  device  assembled  out  of  these 
(cid:0) 1. Jia et al. 
electrode materials offered a specific capacitance of 208 F g
recently examined Fe3O4 nanoparticles loaded activated carbon dervied 
from  cow  dung  and  they  have  repored  highly  porous  surface 
morphology as depicted in Fig. 4e, f (SEM images in different magnifi-
cations) [35]. The uniform dispersion of Fe3O4  nanoparticles onto the 
utrahigh surface of carbon derived from cow dung as shown in the high 

magnification SEM micrograph (inset Fig. 4f). In addition, incorporation 
of Fe3O4  nanoparticles within the carbon greatly enhances pore width 
distribution which is very clear from the pore distribution graph, Fig. 4g. 

4. Recent trends in commonly used methods for conversion of 
biomass to carbon nanostructures 

Carbon  based  nanomaterials  derived  from  biomass  and  related 
wastes  are  getting  tremendous  attention  due  to  easy  availability  and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010239S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

their  miscellaneous  applications  including  energy,  human  health 
monitoring, intelligent materials, smart devices, human-machine inter-
action  and  wearable  electronics  as  discussed  in  the  previous  sections 
[29,30,40–45]. However, most of the conventional methods e.g. pyrol-
ysis,  combustion,  hydrothermal,  thermo-chemical,  chemical  routes 
involve  more  than  two  steps  (gasification,  anaerobic  fermentation, 
aerobic fermentation, oxidation–reduction of biomass waste etc.). They 
are either unable to produce nanostructures or produce nanomaterials at 
very low yields [75]. Also, these routes for conversion of biomass into 
value-added products require multi-steps processing and tedious puri-
fication [40,45,75]. The numerous existing methods for production of 
carbon  nanostructures  using  biomass  are  expensive  and  mostly  inap-
plicable for the real times utilities, and require advanced lab setup as 

well. Likewise, these methods are not very efficient for production of 
nanomaterials with high surface area along with uniform porosity [45, 
49,50,55,67]. Considering all these challenges during the last ten years 
some very productive and efficient routes for the conversion of biomass 
and related materials into carbon nanostructures caught great attention. 
These methods are listed as block diagram in Fig. 5 along with the key 
content deliberated in this review about the same. Herein, we summa-
rise  various  aspects  of  methodologies,  advantages  and  limitations  of 
very  frequently  used  methods  for  conversion  of  biomass  waste  into 
carbon nanomaterials (Fig. 5b, c). Furthermore, recent modifications in 
the existing methods to improve efficiency and newly designed routes 
for conversion  of biomass into carbon nanomaterials will also be dis-
cussed  in  detail.  In  the  last  section,  we  have  chosen  to  prepare  a 

Fig. 5. (a) Boxes depicting the proficiencies of conventional and innovative approaches used for the conversion of biomass and related materials into different kinds 
of new materials (b) selected sustainable routes for the transformation of biomass and related waste into carbon nanomaterials and (c) block diagram showing the key 
content deliberated in this section of our review linked to methods shown in figure b. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102310S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

discussion on some very recent techniques and methods invented for the 
conversion of biomass waste into carbon nanomaterials with high pro-
ductivity, time efficiency and environment friendly nature. These new 
paths attract huge attention and since 2017 > 30–35% of publications 
(as  per  Scopus-Google  scholar)  which  directly  or  indirectly  have 
revolved  around  these  methods  for  conversion  of  biomass  waste  to 
carbon nanomaterials [57,64,72,73]. We think that the description of 
these  routes  could  be  useful  for  the  beginners  and  researchers  to  un-
derstand the implication of the same. Owing to the development of such 
facile  methods  there  has  been  an  increasing  attention  in  recent years 
around the globe (mainly in highly populated countries) in investments 
related to renewable energy and materials sources. Interestingly, it has 
been shown that Poland needs to secure around 15% share of renewable 
energy sources in the total energy consumption up to the end of 2020 
and we expect that different kinds of biomass waste could be one of the 
major  sources  for  the  same  [76].  Correspondingly,  USA,  Germany, 
France, Sweden and other technology driven countries achieved several 
milestones  in  the  production  of  value-added  nanomaterials  from 

biomass waste and they are in the process of commercialization despite 
several challenges [77]. 

4.1. Microwave assisted pyrolysis 

Microwaves play an important role in our daily life, because we can 
easily  warm  up  food  and  meals.  Microwave  radiations  as  a  source  of 
energy can be used in the so-called microwave supported pyrolysis and 
convert  biomass  consisting  of  lignocellulosic  biomass,  cellulose  bio- 
waste  to  different  valued  products.  Microwave  assisted  pyrolysis  is  a 
time tested approach and efficacious technique. Its use reduces the time 
of pyrolysis and upsurges the superiority of the end product [78,79]. The 
key  advantage  of  microwave  assisted  heating  over  the  conventional 
heating  comprises  handy  start-up  and  shut  down,  quick,  controlled, 
non-contact and volumetric heating, little heat losses, time efficiency, 
high energy efficiency, uniform temperature distribution and low pro-
cessing costs [80,81]. Furthermore, this procedure offers other benefits, 
e.g.  controlling  the  extent  of  reaction  by  varying  various  operational 

Fig. 6. (a) Schematic diagram showing rotational transition and heating mechanism of microwaves oven and (b) block diagram of a modern microwave heater used 
for conversion of biomass into different valuable products as described in the [79–84]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102311S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

parameters, i.e. the type of microwave delivery, the type of microwave 
absorber, microwave power, mass of the feedstock and nature of sup-
plied  gas  (say,  N2,  CH4,  CO2  etc.).  The  above  listed  parameters  are 
essential  and  drive  the  yield  and  quality  of  the  gases,  oil  and  solid 
pulverised materials obtained from biomass waste [80,81]. The micro-
wave assisted pyrolysis of biomass enables the study of novel chemical 
routes owing to internal heating phenomenon where high productivity 
of desired products is anticipated. In this section, first we briefly discuss 
the operation of modern microwave heaters (used for biomass pyrolysis) 
and then the recent progress made in microwave assisted pyrolysis to 
produce advanced carbon nanomaterials from biomass waste. 

American  inventor,  Percy  Spencer  was  the  first  researcher  who 
discovered (1925) heating of materials using microwaves. His-discovery 
was later polished by Westinghouse and Bell Laboratories. The micro-
wave  assisted  chemical  synthesis  using  commercial  microwave  ovens 
was first reported by Giguere et al. for the Diels-Alder, Claisen, and the 
Ene reactions in 1986 [82]. Heating of materials using microwaves is 
basically due to the resonant excitation of rotational levels in the mol-
ecules that form the exact materials. The fundamental of biomass py-
rolysis  through  microwaves  (microwave  heater  consists  of  the  device 
which converts electricity into microwaves) is schematically presented 
in Fig. 6a as described in the technical article published by Lam et al. 
[81]. The microwave radiation penetrates the biomass in bulk, where 
the  microwave  energy  is  absorbed,  and  finally  is  converted  into  heat 
inside the biomass/or subjected materials. Because of the heat loss effect 
of the particle surface, heat constantly accumulates inside the feedstock 
and is relocated outwards as shown in Fig. 6a. The detailed mechanism 
of dielectric heating is well explored elsewhere and there is no need to 
explain again in this review [83,84]. Nonetheless it is important to note, 
in case of traditional pyrolysis, the transfer of heat occurs from surface to 
centre  of  material  through  radiation,  convection  or  conduction  phe-
nomenon. That is why; it is slower than microwave assisted pyrolysis. In 
contrast, microwaves used in microwave assisted pyrolysis infiltrate the 
matter  and  release  energy,  thereby;  heat  gets  created  all  through  the 
volume of material i.e. in-core volumetric heating as shown in Fig. 6a. 
On  the  basis  of  the  interactions  of  microwave  radiation  with  the 
matter, all materials can be divided into three categories: (I) microwave- 
transparent  material  where  microwaves  pass  through  without  any 
interaction and therefore no heating (II) microwaves cannot penetrate 
metals and other conductors and resulting reflection takes place and (III) 
materials containing water, oils, food stuffs, honey, carbon based com-
posites  etc.  which  can  absorb  microwaves  are  called  microwave  di-
electrics [82,83]. In general, most of the microwave heaters and reactors 
for chemical synthesis and other domestic uses operate at ~2.45 GHz 
frequency, which corresponds to a wavelength of 12.25 cm [84]. Indeed, 
the microwave reactor could be easily tuned if obligatory in the case of 
special  requirements.  It  should  be  noticed  that  microwave  based  py-
rolysis  is  mainly  used  for  the  production  of  bio-fuels  and  gases  from 
biomass. However, in recent years several researchers used microwave 
techniques along with novel modifications for production of high quality 
carbon nanomaterials [71]. The flow chart for the conversion of biomass 
into  value-added  products  using  microwave  reactor  is  depicted  in 
Fig.  6b.  Notably,  the  quality  and  yield  of  the  carbon  nanomaterials 
produced using microwave heating were influenced by various param-
eters which include reaction temperature, time, moisture content, type 
of biomass, catalyst, flow rate of gas, reactor design and microwave size. 
For example, the increase in temperature enhances the surface area and 
pore volume of the pyrolyzed biomass, while increase of temperature 
and reaction time upsurge the yield of volatile materials in the case of 
sawdust  pellets  of  Douglas  fir  recently  used  for  the  production  of 
nanomaterials [71–75]. To explain the effect of catalysts in the process 
of biomass conversion under microwave heating, Chen et al. employed 
different  inorganic  additives  (Na2CO3,  NaOH,  H3PO4,  NaCl,  HZSM-5, 
Na2SiO3, Fe2(SO4)3  and TiO2) for the pyrolysis of pine wood sawdust 
using SiC as absorber under microwave irradiation at 470 
C with flow 
of N2  at a rate of 0.2 m3/h for 15 min to eject air from reactor and its 

◦

effect on surface morphology, size of particle and productivity have been 
examined [75,76]. They found that the solid product yield increased on 
adding each additive, but yields of gaseous and liquid product decreased 
and did not show any change, respectively. It was also studied that the 
effect 
of 
NaOH≻Na2CO3≈Na2SiO3≻NaCl.  The  influence  of  microwave  heating 
time, exit power and the dosage of catalyst have shown great effect on 
the yield of the end products [76]. 

additives 

followed 

order 

the 

of 

Debalina  et  al.,  produced  nanoparticles  from  sugarcane  bagasse, 
lignocellulosic biomass through the microwave assisted pyrolysis using 
iron and cobalt particles as susceptor [71]. They performed experiments 
in  a  bench  scale  pyrolysis  reactor  at  600  W  microwave  power  and 
◦
temperature up to 500 
C. They reported that incorporation of Fe and Co 
as  susceptors  led  to  the  formation  of  small  graphitic  flakes  and  fine 
nanotubes. However, the individual susceptor gives different morpho-
logical  output.  Thus,  the  microwave  pyrolysis  was  shown  to  be  a 
promising technique to tailor the morphological features of biochar with 
the used metallic susceptors, and simultaneously produced bio-oil and 
gas of a good quality. The experimental procedures of this conversion 
were well  outlined by  Dai et al.  and  schematically presented in cited 
paper [85]. Noraini et al. synthesised iron nanoparticles-based carbo-
naceous catalyst via combining pyrolysis and hydrothermal carboniza-
tion route and first used it in the catalytic microwave-assisted pyrolysis 
of terrified corn cob for the large-scale production of phenols. The study 
presented the impact of temperature and other conditions on the effi-
ciency of the catalyst. Sintering and oxidation of the different phases of 
Fe3C and α-Fe, reducing the porosity, are the causes of the decrease of 
the catalytic efficiency. The phenol selectivity was as high as 91.07% 
◦
and the net yield was 18,706.6 µg/ml bio-oil at a temperature of 450 
C. 
Noraini et al. produced magnetic biochar from sugarcane bagasse using 
microwave-assisted pyrolysis (power of 600 W) [87]. They reported the 
optimum yield of 69%, using microwave heating of 30 min. The pro-
duced magnetic biochar improved the adsorptive removal of ca. 96% of 
cadmium ions from aqueous solutions. The time of radiation was also 
responsible for the synthesis of the biochar. The attraction of Cd2+
on 
the biochar is due to its adsorption affinity and takes place through a 
cation exchange mechanism which is dependant on its ionic property. 
This technique is suitable for the adsorption of metal ions at pH 6. Mi-
crowave absorption by neat biomass and related waste is a big concern 
to commercialize this technique for the biomass management because 
several biomass feedstock are reluctant or very slow in absorbing mi-
crowave radiation. To resolve this issue Wei et al. utilised nickel nitrate 
for  the  in-situ  (key  steps  involved  in  this  work  is  presented  diagram-
matically  in  the  Fig.  7a)  growth  strategy  of  nickel  nanoparticles  (di-
ameters  of  nanoparticles  50  to  100  nm)  onto  the  surface  of  porous 
carbon derived waste cotton. These well-dispersed nickel nanoparticles 
greatly  enhanced  microwave  absorption  and  allowed  for  the  in-situ 
production of magnetic porous carbon nanomaterials. It is stated that 
the distinction of complex permittivity amongst different components 
and  the  expanded  interface  in  the  nickel-carbon  heterostructure 
(Selected  SEM  images  in  different  magnifications  Fig.  7b–d)  could 
advance  the  interfacial  polarization  relaxation,  which  lead  to  the 
increased  dielectric  loss  and  EM  absorbing  competence.  The  EM 
absorbing competence of the as-prepared nickel-carbon heterostructure 
has been verified by making paraffin based composite as shown in 3D 
contour  map  of  RL  performance  (Fig.  7a).  In  this  way,  Wei  et  al. 
examined a facile and cost-effective tactic for lightweight and excellent 
microwave  absorption,  which  also  significantly eases  the  recycling  of 
biomass (waste cotton) [88]. In this same line, Fakhrhoseini et al. re-
ported  ultrafast  microwave  assisted  magnetic  carbon  microtube  syn-
thesis  using  cotton  based  waste  for  contaminated  water  purification. 
They claimed that the developed technique could be used for scalable 
production of magnetic carbon microtube [89]. The scheme of this route 
with  key  steps  (Fig.  7e)  and  selected  SEM  images  in  horizontal  and 
vertical views (Fig. 7f, g) of the products confirming tubular structure of 
the  end  product  [89].  The  microtubes  are  observed  to  be  uniformly 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102312S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 7. (a) Procedure for the conversion of cotton waste into magnetic nanomaterials along with SEM images (b–d) in different magnifications (Reproduced with 
permission from Ref. [88]) (e) Steps for the conversion of cotton fibres into magnetised carbon microtubes and (f, g) its SEM images at low and high magnification 
(Reproduced with permission from Ref. [89]). 

covered with spherical Fe3O4  nanoparticles (Fig. 7g). The synthesized 
magnetic microtubes were utilised for the removal of Bisphenol A (BPA), 
both in the dark adsorption and under UV–Vis irradiation. On 60 min 
irradiation, 10% BPA can be removed and on 30 min irradiation, 80% 
BPA can be removed. However, only 4% BPA can be adsorbed in the 
dark environment. Thus, this work offers a low-cost purification for the 
efficient photo degradation of Bisphenol A. A pseudo-first order reaction 
is  followed  for  the  removal  of  BPA.  The  microtubes  decorated  with 

nanoparticles  produced  via  microwave  technique  have  been  used  for 
water purification. 

Zhao et al. contrived honey-comb carbon nanostructures from peach 
gum  via  hydrothermal  carbonization.  They  also  elucidated  a  detailed 
mechanism  of  microwave  absorption  on  the  produced  carbon  nano-
structure [90]. The diameter of carbon nanoparticles which make up the 
honeycomb  architecture  was  around  40  nm.  The  architectures  were 
(cid:0) 1
carbonized at 850 
.  The 

C having a large surface area of 1401.7 m2 g

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102313S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

effective absorption bandwidth and the reflection loss were calculated to 
be 4.1 GHz and (cid:0) 59.4 dB, respectively. The absorption mechanism of 
the honey-comb structure is related to the loss in electric conductivity. 
The incident wave energy will be expended by numerous scatterings and 
reflections by the fluffy highly porous nanostructure. Also, the relaxa-
tion  loss  due  to  polarization  will  be  induced  at  the  surface  of  the 

nanoparticles  that  can  convert  to  heat  dissipation  energy.  Further, 
proper  doping  and  creating  defects  within  the  graphitic  carbon  can 
enhance  the  absorption  ability  of  electromagnetic  waves  owing  to 
induced polarization. Such lightweight materials with great capabilities 
of microwave absorption are becoming crucial due the rapid growth in 
information technology. In this view, the nanomaterials derived from 

Fig. 8. (a) Essential conditions for multiple scattering and multiple reflections and (b) smooth electron hoping phenomenon. Biomass derived carbon nanomaterials, 
(c) N-doped graphene like structure and (d) which comprises dipole polarization diagrammatically presented in figure (e). Schematic presentation (f) of microwave 
absorption mechanism in the case nitrogen doped  carbon nanomaterials (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [90]). (g, h) SEM images of heteroatom doped 
carbon  nanomaterials  responsible  for  superior  microwave  absorption  owing  to  high  surface  area  and  unique  texture  as  described  [90,92]  (Reproduced  with 
permission from Ref. [90,92]). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102314S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

biomass waste are cheap and have ideal resistance loss-type microwave 
absorbers along with ultra-lightweight characteristics [90,91]. Qiu et al. 
have reported a walnut shell based material that was effective for mi-
crowave absorption. The obtained nano-porous carbon owned a large 
(cid:0) 1).  Such  3D  porous  structure,  polarization 
surface  area  (736.2  m2  g
relaxation  loss,  dipolar  relaxation,  can  offer  superior  absorption  phe-
nomenon.  They  also  proved  that  KOH  can  be  a  very  good  activation 
agent  for  the  synthesis  of  the  material  close  to  walnut.  An  optimum 
◦
temperature of 600 
C exhibits highest absorption, with a reflection loss 
of (cid:0) 42.4 dB at a bandwidth of 1.76 GHz [91]. The microwave absorp-
tion characteristics of heteroatoms doped (N, S & P) nanomaterials were 
discussed  by  several  researchers  and  it  has  been  proved  that  such 
nanostructures  show  superior  absorbing  capabilities,  especially  at 
thinner  thickness  and  lower  mass  loading.  We  have  tried  to  explain 
reasons of such superiority of biomass derived heteroatoms doped car-
bon  nanomaterials  using  schematic  diagram  (Fig.  8a–e)  and  SEM  im-
ages. Multiple scattering and multiple reflections process (Fig. 8a) are 
responsible for an effective absorption of microwave radiations by any 
substrate along with feasibility of smooth electron transfer and electron 
hoping phenomenon (Fig. 8b). Biomass derived carbon nanomaterials 
(Fig. 8c) mostly comprises of five and six (or both together) membered 
ring  systems  as  symbolised  in  N  doped  graphene  like  structure 
(Fig.  11d).  Such  structural  pattern  in  biomass  derived  carbon  nano-
structure  behaves  as  a  strong  ideal  dipole  (Fig.  8e)  and  its  strong 
attenuation  capability,  high  porosity,  wide  impedance  and  interfacial 
polarization creates suitable resonance and result excellent microwave 
absorption  [89–92].  Identical  logic  and  reasons  behind  the  amazing 
microwave absorption in the case of peach gum derived nanostructure 
was examined, described and shown in Fig. 8g-h [90–92]. Guan et al. 
derived  carbon  nanostructures 
fruit  peel  by 
carbonization-activation  [92].  After  activation  of  the  carbonaceous 
(cid:0) 1). The incor-
material, a high surface area was achieved (1602 m2  g
poration  of  Ni(OH)2,  enhanced  the  absorption  performance  based  on 
polarization,  defects  and  conductivity.  Again,  the  highly  porous 
morphology is responsible for the catering and reflections of the incident 
microwaves. So, we can say the greater the surface area, the higher will 
be  the  sites  for  the  Ni(OH)2  attachments.  Numerous  mathematical 
models  and  theories  have  been  developed  to  explain  the  dielectric 
properties  of  composites  in  numerical  fits,  analytic  derivations,  and 
stochastic methods and also to explain microwaves absorption by het-
eroatom doped porous carbons [93–95]. Therefore, it is widely accepted 
that porous materials could be regarded as a composite, consisting of 
host (solid media) and guest (air) [94]. Different categories in micro-
waves  assisted  pyrolysis  such  as  activation  method,  template  method 
and direct pyrolysis method were recently reviewed and published so 
there is no need to repeat the same here [94]. Thus, our literature survey 
and prospective bridges the research gap in the area of pyrolysis process 
parameters, biomass waste recycling using microwave-assisted pyroly-
sis,  co-pyrolysis,  and  catalytic  co-pyrolysis  methods  by  citing  the 
recently published research works linked to the same [86]. 

from 

jack 

the 

4.1.1. Limitation of microwave assisted pyrolysis 

We have discussed the importance of microwave assisted pyrolysis 
for conversion of biomass to carbon based valued products with several 
examples and technical details. However,  each technique has its  own 
merits and demerits. The key shortcomings of microwave assisted py-
rolysis are listed below point by point:  

i  Microwave assisted pyrolysis suffers, as compared to conventional 
pyrolysis due to the lack of uniformity within the feedstock which are 
considered as its inherent problems. 

ii Feedstock  and  starting  materials  needs  pre-treatment  and  condi-
tioning  steps  such  as  crushing,  chipping,  grinding  etc.,  sometimes 
washing is also needed and it makes it tedious and time- and energy- 
consuming.  

iii  Instrumental  costs,  associated  investment  and  scaling  up  of  the 
technology for microwave assisted pyrolysis still pose a big challenge 
which is a foremost shortcoming of this approach.  

iv  Low depth penetration capacity of microwaves. This complicates the 

reactor design for selected utilization.  

v  It  is  difficult  to  achieve  desired  nanostructures  in  a  controlled 
manner through this kind of pyrolysis because of the restriction of 
several solvents.  

vi  Commercial  reproducibility  in  products  using  microwave  assisted 
pyrolysis due to non-uniform heat distribution is also an issue. 

From the above discussions, it is clear that there are many challenges 
that must be taken into consideration for the conversion of biomass into 
micro/nano  carbon  nanomaterials  using  microwave  technique.  How-
ever, in recent years the key technical success has been achieved in the 
development  of  accurate  temperature  sensors  and  high  quality  ther-
mocouple  probes  which  could  improve  commercial  viability  of  this 
technique  for  conversion  of  biomass  to  nanomaterials.  For  example, 
metallic shielded thermocouples are a part of microwave pyrolytic sys-
tems and used for the conversion of biomass to carbon materials because 
these  robotic  thermocouples  do  not  react  in  the  reaction  medium.  IR 
optical pyrometers along with grounded thermocouples have also been 
commercialized  which  improves  the  monitoring  of  temperature  and 
consequently quality of carbon nanomaterials. 

4.2. Hydrothermal carbonation 

Hydrothermal  carbonation  includes  chemical  processes  which  un-
dergo in liquid phase at increased temperature and pressure. Such pro-
cess  in  which  organic  reactants  are  used  is  also  called  solvothermal 
carbonization, (it involves dehydration and decarboxylation) or hydrous 
or wet pyrolysis process. It is a very old and commonly used method for 
the  coalification  of  the  different  carbon  based  materials.  The  simple 
handling  and  cost  effectiveness  of  hydrothermal  carbonization  has 
attracted  its  great  interest  for  the  synthesis  of  desired  nanomaterials 
from biomass [96]. The process involves the conversion of wet biomass 
and related materials into chemicals and energy without any pre drying. 
It  has  been  used  in  variety  of  biomass  waste  like,  algae,  sludge  and 
numerous solid biomass wastes. During the conversion process of the 
biomass,  a  solid  lignite-like  porous  carbon  material  is  formed,  which 
acts as precursors of various carbonaceous nanostructures [97–99]. In 
general, most of the hydrothermal processes for biomass require tem-
◦
peratures of 160–250 
C, pressure at least 0.1–0.3 MPa and reaction time 
of 10–50 h, depending on the nature of feedstock [96,100–102]. Thus, 
decarboxylation  and  dehydration  are  the  key  chemical  reactions 
involved in the hydrothermal carbonation of biomass, whilst tempera-
ture, pressure, pH and residence time are important parameters for the 
hydrothermal  process  that  determines  the  severity  of  the  reaction, 
coalification  degree  of  the  biomass  and  nature  end  product  [96, 
100–102]. The hydrothermal carbonization of biomass along with key 
factors affecting the final product is schematically presented in Fig. 9 for 
the lucid understanding of readers. 

As  mentioned  above,  a  certain  temperature  is  needed  for  hydro-
thermal carbonizations for a typical feedstock where reaction shifts to 
free  radical  reaction  from  ionic  reactions,  beyond  a  critical  point.  In 
ionic controlled reactions, the viscosity of water changes with temper-
ature, thereby providing an easy infiltration through permeable medium 
which degrades the biomass [96,97]. Also as the temperature surpasses 
the energy of activation, the breaking of macromolecular bonds of the 
biomass occurs [96–99]. When temperature reaches to certain intensity, 
various other hydrolysis reactions are influenced like, decarboxylation, 
condensation and dehydration. The residence time is responsible for the 
formation  of  hydrochar  and  consequently  its  conversion  into  nano-
materials. It has been studied that at shorter residence time, the content 
of solid hydrochar was high and get reduced with increased residence 
time. However, an extended  residence time ensued polymerization of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102315S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 9. Outline of hydrothermal carbonation and key parameters affecting properties of produced carbon materials from biomass waste (steps derived from the 
cited papers). 

fragments in the liquid phase, resulting in a secondary hydrochar for-
mation having polyaromatic structure [98]. Researches have revealed 
that small residence time resulted in channels and cracks on the surface 
of the hydrochar and formation of microspheres were not observed till 
the residence time was increased up to an optimal point [96–98]. pH is 
also an important factor for the formation of valuable carbon materials 
and  decomposition  of  the  biomass.  Varying  pH  during  the  process  of 
hydrothermal reactions, significantly impacts the formation of carbon 
materials. Hydrothermal process is known as an autocatalytic process 
which produces organic acids, like acetic, formic, levulinic, lactic acid 
etc. Such formation of organic acids reduces the pH during the hydro-
thermal process and aids as an essential intermediate for decomposing 
the bio-macromolecules [97,98]. Addition of alkali or acids also cata-
lyzes  the  reaction  process  (frequently  used  to  achieve  desired  end 
products)  generating  hydroxide  or  proton  which  increases  the  ionic 
strength  to  obtain  the  required  hydrochar  [98–102].  These  outcomes 
focus on the effect of basic and acidic additives to the feed water, which 
greatly  influences the  composition  and  surface  morphology  of  hydro-
char  and  other  reaction  mechanisms  taking  place  during  the  process. 
Another factor which impacts the hydrothermal process is the heating 
rate. In general, a high heating rate does not favour the formation of 
biochar  and  consequently  nano-hydrochar.  Few  such  studies  demon-
(cid:0) 1, there 
◦
strated that when the heating rate varies from 5 to 140  
is a decrease in the yield of the nano-hydrochar [96–103]. Employing a 
high  heating  rate,  the  secondary  reactions  that  lead  to  intermediate 
products can be reduced [96–103]. Thus, the studies show that a suit-
(cid:0) 1)  heating  rate  during  hydrothermal  process  can 
able  (5–10  
regulate  the  formation  of  liquid  products  and  hydrochar.  Numerous 
excellent  reviews  and  summaries  on  different  aspect  of  hydrothermal 
methods for conversion of biomass to nano/micro carbon materials have 
been  published  and  they  comprise  many  advances  linked  to  hydro-
thermal carbonization [96–103]. Herein in this review, we will consider 
the  most  recent  work  related  to  production  of  carbon  nanomaterials 
from  biomass  via  innovative  hydrothermal  process.  Additionally, 

C  min

C min

◦

shortcomings  of  hydrothermal  carbonization  for  the  biomass  valor-
isation will be deliberated in the last part of this section. 

◦

Currently, the nanocontainers with very well controlled shape, size, 
along  with  captivating  morphologies  have  been  considered  as  an 
imperative family member of carbon functional materials and several 
cutting  edge  applications  especially  in  the  fields  of  bioimaging,  drug 
sensors delivery,  and  gene  delivery  have  been discussed  [104]. Thus, 
such nanosystems have engrossed a significant attention of the scientific 
community but their fabrication is very expensive and hazardous [104]. 
To overcome this issue, Chen et al. derived asymmetric spherical and 
bowl-like  carbonaceous  nanomaterials  from  biomass  through  hydro-
thermal carbonization as a simple solvent-induced buckling strategy. In 
C with 
this work, they carried out hydrothermal carbonization at 170 
sucrose (inexpensive and renewable feedstock) as a carbon source and 
poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene 
glycol) = (EO20–PO70–EO20, P123) and sodium dodecyl sulphate as the 
double templating materials for 12 h. The authors postulated that the 
post-treatment  with  a  solvent  after  completion  of  hydrothermal 
carbonization  is  decisive  for  the  generation  of  diverse  and  unique 
morphologies, as shown in the microscopic images along with the size 
distribution  plots,  (Fig.  10a-e)  [105].  They  proposed  the  formation 
mechanism  of  carbon  nanobowls  and  nanospheres  during  the  hydro-
thermal carbonization reaction and postulated the importance of degree 
of polymerization of (EO20–PO70–EO20, P123), time and solvent used. 
Moreover,  the  prepared  nanospheres  and  nanobowls  were  used  with 
CoS2 in heterogeneous catalysis for the selective hydrogenation of aro-
matic  nitro  compounds.  Similarly,  Ni-Pd  nanoparticles  templated  on 
biomass-derived carbon spheres were fabricated for hydrogen produc-
(cid:0) 1 
tion  from  ammonia borane  with  turnover  of ca.  182  mol  H2  mol  g
(cid:0) 1 at room temperature [106]. The synergism between the metal and 
min
carbon  framework  have  a  good  catalytic  effect  because  of  good  dis-
persibility of Ni-Pd nanoparticles. In the current work, the morphology 
of the end product is controlled by conditions applied during the hy-
drothermal carbonization. The bimetallic nanoparticle is arrested on the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102316S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 10. SEM (a &d) and TEM (b &e) micrographs of as synthesised non-centrosymmetric nanospheres (a, b) and nanobowls (d, e). Statistical distributions of the 
shell diameters (D-shell) and cavity diameters (D-cavity) of nanospheres (c) and nanobowls (f). Flow chart to exemplify evolution of the different shapes of biomass 
derived nanostructures through post-treatment with different solvents (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [105]). 

carbon spheres by a co-reduction method. The results showed carbon 
nanospheres to be a capable catalyst support in case of heterogeneous 
catalysts.  O˜na  and  Fullana  synthesised  carbon  nanomaterials  using  a 
hydrothermal  carbonization  under 
the  unique  combination  of 
water-organic solvent like ethanol [107]. They highlighted the low cost, 
easy  handling,  time  efficient  and  easy  purification  of  the  developed 
process. Moreover, they found that the fabricated carbon nanomaterials 
will cross from the water into the organic solvent inside the reactor and 
thus, its mass yield can be enhanced keeping the unique properties of 
nanostructures [107]. Herein, by employing different organic solvents 
along with the glucose precursor (D-(+)-Glucose) and different reaction 
time,  the  yield  of  the  nanoparticle  was  improved.  However,  it  was 
observed that the particle size is independent of the reaction conditions. 
It was observed that with the increase in polarity of the solvent, the yield 
of nanoparticle increases. Since, hydrothermal carbonization has high 

heterogeneity; the solvent extraction method allows the separation of 
the nanoparticles according to the chemical affinity. Therefore, using a 
blend of organic solvent-water, the production of the nanoparticle in-
creases. Also, it was studied that when the solvent is butyl acetate, the 
degree  of  dehydration  is  highest.  Furthermore,  the  synthesized  nano-
particle can be preserved for months without losing its optical proper-
´
ties. 
Alvarez  et  al.  reported  for  the  first  time  the  production  of  iron 
oxide-carbon  composites  with  high  porosity  using  biomass  waste  as 
feedstock via hydrothermal carbonization and utilised it for removing 
heavy metals from aqueous solutions [108]. They have used two vari-
eties of Fe oxide based composites by impregnating salts of ferric sul-
phate  and  pyrolysis  for  5  h  at  550  
C.  In  the  pyrolysis  process,  the 
carbonization in  the  presence  of Fe  increases forming  biochar having 
less H/C values. It was observed that the final product has higher content 
of  Fe  than  the  initial  material.  The  obtained  iron  (Fe)  based  biochar 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102317S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

depends on the type of feedstock. The enhanced surface area and high 
content  of  oxygen  is  useful  for  the  water  purification  and  soils  by 
removing harmful metal ions. 

◦

◦

◦

◦

Putra et al. described an efficient and mild hydrothermal process for 
the conversion of biomass waste to nanocarbons under low temperature 
conditions along with very high carbonization yield [109]. They used 
banana peels to produce carbon char and estimated its calorific value. 
Hydrothermal carbonization process was carried out in a batch reactor. 
Different  conditions (temperature,  time,  solvent  ratio  etc.)  for  the  re-
actions were maintained. Different temperatures 190, 210, and 230 
C, 
time 30 and 60 min were employed with various feed to water ratios and 
C. All the reactions were 
it was found that the hydrolysis starts at 180 
carried out in N2  atmosphere fitted with an agitator and heater. Three 
products were obtained and the solid phase was analysed by the ultimate 
and proximate analysis and as well as calorific values. Banana peel is 
composed of hemicellulose which decomposes during the carbonization 
process. Therefore, in this process the carbon content and calorific value 
increases.  Within  the  temperature  180–220 
C,  the  decomposition  of 
hemicellulose starts at 180 
C and the hydrolysis of the biomass starts 
◦
whereas the decomposition of the lignin start below 250 
C. The studies 
demonstrated that with the increase in temperature and time, the carbon 
content increases. Increased temperature and decreased polarity is the 
cause for the molecular decomposition. Rebling et al. carried out theo-
retical investigations linked to the parameters affecting hydrothermal 
carbonization  and  presented  a  combination  of  theoretical  estimation 
and experimental determination of the heat of reaction during the hy-
drothermal carbonization [110–113]. The study presented a new setup 
with  DSC  as  temperature  scanning  mode.  A  comparison  between  the 
estimated  and  measured  values  has  been  carried  out.  The  theoretical 
calculations explain a wide range of values as reported in the literature. 
Ziegler  et  al.  predicted  the  calorimetric  value  during  hydrothermal 
carbonization by considering different parameters related to differential 
calorimetric setup [113]. From theoretical calculations and reviews, the 
heat released in hydrothermal carbonization is comparable to the en-
ergetic effect of strong carbonization. The experimental results obtained 
were half of the theoretical value. The autocatalysis reaction is feasible 
at a pH around 3 and not above during the entire process of carbon-
ization. The results also indicate that the heat produced during the re-
action has very little influence on the overall energy of the entire process 
of conversion. A unique work was carried out linked to the anaerobic 
digestion of sludge using hydrothermal carbonization for reducing CO2 
emission.  This  innovative  sludge  management  deals  with  three  key 
challenges (a) examine the role of temperature on the percolation and 
dewatering  acts,  (b)  advance  the  fuel  qualities  of  the  hydrothermal 
product gained via anaerobic digestion of sludge, and (c) investigate the 
optimal  reaction  temperature  of  the  carbonization  process  [114]. 
Sewage sludge contains a high percentage of moisture and therefore, the 
isolation of it as solid matrix is quite challenging. The water present can 
be categorized in four different forms. The sludge flocks surrounded by 
the  free  water  can  be  removed  very  easily.  The  water  that  is  present 
interstitially can be detained by the forces due to capillary action. As the 
flocks  break  the  detained  interstitial  water  gets  separated.  The  water 
present  at  the  surface  is  detained  by  the  strong  surface  forces  and 
therefore, cannot be removed by mechanical forces. Also, some water is 
also stored within the particles itself and is bound chemically and is hard 
to  remove.  For  obtaining  the  sludge  free  of  water,  the  bonded  water 
must  be  transformed  into  free  water.  The  kinetics  of  hydrothermal 
carbonization  of  biomass  waste  was  recently  investigated  by  Balasu-
bramanian et al. and the fuel properties of the produced char material 
were assessed along with practical validation [115]. In this effort it was 
found that carbonization of bio-waste obeyed 1st order reaction kinetics 
with the deceptive activation energy of 67.41 & 179.54 kJ/mol for co-
conut  fibre  and  59.18  &173.70  kJ/mol  for  eucalyptus  leaves  in  the 
temperature ranges of 150–300 
C, respectively. The 
yield  of  hydrochar  depends  on  the  temperature  of  the  hydrothermal 
reaction. With the increase in temperature in the range (150–300) 
C, 

C and 300–375 

◦

◦

◦

the yield of hydrochar decreases rapidly. A gradual decrease to 35.3% in 
case of coconut fibre and 28.1% in case of eucalyptus leaves was ob-
◦
C. Different phenomena take 
tained when temperature increased to 375 
place during the hydrothermal treatment; like depolymerisation occurs 
at  low  temperature  and  polymerization  and  aromatization  occurs  at 
elevated  temperature.  As  a  result,  the  activation  energy  varies  at 
different  temperatures.  Such  behaviour  of  combustion  concludes  that 
the hydrochars are suitable for co-combustion in coal-fired boilers. 

◦

Grape  marc is an another residual lignocellulosic by-product from 
the alcohol and wine industries, which is produced in various part of the 
world.  To  utilise  the  same,  Basso  et  al.  have  chosen  hydrothermal 
carbonization (herein they tried three different temperatures (180, 220 
&  250 
C) and residence time (1, 3 &  8 h) to optimise the result) for 
conversion  of  grapes  waste  to  valued  energy  product  [116].  This  ex-
amination strongly supports the option of upgrading grape marc toward 
its  energetic  valorisation  along  with  some  possibility  to  obtain  nano-
materials. Thus, it signifies a stimulating result and prosperous future 
when  considering  ecological  alteration.  In  recent  years  several  inter-
esting  nanostructures  were  produced  from  biomass  via  hydrothermal 
carbonization  for  different  applications.  Therefore,  it  is  difficult  to 
include all of them in one review. However, some very unique nano-
materials produced (in the recent years) by hydrothermal carbonization 
of  biomass  are  listed  in  Table  2  along  with  the  respective  reaction 
conditions and other important details. 

All  these  works  showed  that  the  importance  of  hydrothermal 
carbonization is growing worldwide owing to its great competences. In a 
very  innovative  approach  Heidar  et  al.  introduced  a  new  semi- 
continuous  scheme  to  feed  the  biomass  slurry  to  the  hydrothermal 
carbonization  reactor  and  consequently  production  of  valued  carbon 
materials [128]. They reported higher degrees of carbonization, lower 
cellulose  crystallinity,  improved  hexagonal  graphene  sheets,  surface 

Table 2 
Experimental conditions and other important details of selected nanomaterials 
formed via hydrothermal carbonization of biomass.  

S. 
N 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

Biomass 

Cellulose & 
birchwood 

Time 
(h) 

0.5 

Temp. 
( 
C) 

◦

280 

◦

C, 

Wheat 
straw 
Sugar Cane 

25 

4 

180–260 

160 

Wood Meal 

20 

265 

Corn Stalk 

40 

200 

4 

180 

Olive oil 
waste and 
hazel 
nutshell 
Lignin 

Bamboo 
sawdust 

Woody 
biomass 

Rubber 
wood fibre 
Glucose 

7 

7 

1 

7 

5 

Biomass 
slurry 

38 
min 

270 

200 

240 

250 

180 

260 

Morphology 
and Carbon (%) 

Size 

Refs. 

Thermally 
recalcitrant & 
high energy- 
dense material 
(~10) 
Porous 
hydrochar (55) 
Disordered 
carbon spheres 
(~65) 
Porous Carbon 
material (65) 
Hydro chars 
microspheres 
(~57) 
carbon spheres 
in nanoscale 
(~59) 

carbon spheres 
(~50) 
Engineered 
hydrochar 
(~64) 
Organic 
Compounds 
(~13) 
Micro-spheres 
(~68) 
Nanospheres 
(~63) 
Fibrous 
Hydrochars 
(~62) 

—- 

[117] 

1–3 μm 

[118] 

~100 nm 

[119] 

~200 nm 

[120] 

—– 

[121] 

200–500 
nm 

[122] 

~5 μm 

[123] 

—– 

—– 

[124] 

[125] 

500 nm 

[126] 

~100 nm 

[127] 

~5 μm 

[128]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102318S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

hydrophobic characteristics, and higher thermal stability in comparison 
to  conventional  carbonization  routes  [128].  Different  reaction  routes 
were  suggested  depending  on  the  results  from  chemical  and  physical 
◦
analysis. It was observed that on carbonization at 260 
C, more than 3% 
carbon  content  is  obtained.  Two  major  goals  of  this  study  are,  to 
simultaneously develop and examine the reactor and also to correlate 
the hydrochars from batch operated and semi-continuous processes. The 
final product obtained exhibited enhanced thermal stability, increased 
content  of  carbon  with  quite  amorphous  nature.  Another  innovative 
carbonization was adopted by Evcil et al. where they first time examined 
the collective effect (high productivity and use of low temp) of Brønsted 
and Lewis acids as catalysts in hydrothermal carbonization of lignocel-
lulosic  biomass  [129].  The  researchers  carried  out  the  hydrothermal 
◦
carbonization of firewood at temperatures of 225, 250 and 275 
C, and 
for the residence time of 6, 12 and 24 h, respectively. They have found 
that continuous temperature increase results in a decrease in hydrochar 
yields along with marked increase of the carbon content. In this study, 
the  fire  wood  was  subjected  to  hydrothermal  carbonization  in  the 
presence and absence of a catalyst. In the absence of the catalyst, the 
temperature  affected  the  yield  of  the  hydrochar  but  it  had  not  have 
much effected by the residence time. On gradually increasing the tem-
perature,  the  yield  of  the  hydrochar  decreases  but  its  carbon  content 
increases. In the presence of the catalyst, the heating value decreases. 

Mainly the hydrochars are categorized as lignite coal, but the one that is 
◦
C for a residence time of 12 h generates 
obtained at a temperature 275 
bituminous  coal.  The  morphology  of  the  carbonaceous  products  also 
varies according to the use of catalysts. In the presence of a catalyst, 
spherical morphologies are obtained whereas in the absence of a catalyst 
no spheres are obtained. The SEM micrographs of hydrochar was ob-
tained through the catalytic hydrothermal carbonization of fire wood 
◦
with AlCl3–HCl catalyst at (a) 225 
C along with 
effect of (d) temperature and (e) residence time on the hydrochar pro-
duction (Fig. 11a–e). Moreover, this work also reports the formation of 
the  secondary  char  (macro  particles)  due  to  the  combined  effect  of 
Brønsted and Lewis acid catalysts. 

◦
C, (b) 250 

◦
C, (c) 275 

4.2.1. Limitation of hydrothermal carbonization 

In  the  above  section  we  have  presented  the  recent  advances  in 
carbonaceous  nanomaterials  derived  from  biomass  via  hydrothermal 
carbonization. It is well clear that this route has a great impact on the 
production of anticipated nanostructures from biomass. This method is 
considered  as  an  ideal  route  for  the  production  of  functional  nano-
materials  for  energy,  biomedical  and  engineering  applications.  How-
ever, similar to other methods, it also has some shortcomings as listed 
below [130–132]:  

Fig. 11. SEM images (a-c) of hydrochar from fir wood and effect of (d) temperature and (e) residence time on the hydrochar yields (Reproduced with permission 
from Ref. [129]). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102319S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

i  In most cases, it is a very time consuming process and the average 
time  required  for  production  of  nanomaterials  by  this  method  is 
more than ~10 h [118,119–124].  

ii  In some cases, it uses hazardous chemicals as solvent and activating 
agent therefore it can cause water and soil pollution. Of course, new 
hydrothermal carbonization strategies have recently been coined for 
nanomaterials eco-friendly steps, too.  

iii  Indeed, hydrothermal carbonization reaction involves dehydration, 
decarboxylation, condensation polymerization, hydrolysis, aromati-
zation etc., but not in the sequential reaction steps. Therefore it is 
accomplished in a parallel network of different reaction routes. So, it 
is difficult to control the morphology and the yield in every feedstock 
feeding.  

iv  It is relatively high risk methods which may not be proficient at large 
scale. Furthermore, it’s planning and procurement time is greater in 
comparison to the conventional incineration plants.  

v  Wide range commercial application of hydrothermal carbonization is 
still a challenge because of big investment and operational costs. It is 
mainly  due  to  logistics  of  waste  transport  and  the  associated  cost 
which directly controls the output. Thus, the cost of nanomaterial 
production is quite competitive.  

vi  There  is  an  uncertainty  in  producing  anticipated  nanomaterials 
attributed to the intricacy of different biomass sources used and the 
great  probability  of  contamination  into  it.  Thus,  it  requires  pre- 
screening of the processed feedstock. 

4.3. Molten salt process 

Molten  salt  pyrolysis  is  a  process  which  involves  thermochemical 
conversion of biomass to valued materials by heating in a bath of molten 
salt. The molten salts possess good thermal stability, electrical conduc-
tivity, solubility and heat transfer properties, which serves as catalysts 
and excellent reaction medium for liquefaction and cracking of macro-
molecules  in  biomass  feedstocks.  Molten  salt  process  was  developed 
mainly for the extraction of metals (Li, Al etc.), which are hard to obtain 
by conventional methods. However, during the last 25 years this method 
is becoming popular for processing of many other materials especially 
for conversion of biomass and related carbonaceous waste into carbon 
materials [133]. In brief, it involves thermal disintegration of biomass in 
a molten salt container under suitable temperatures and pressure (where 
needed). The molten salt is simultaneously utilised as the catalyst, sol-
vent and more importantly as the uniform heat carrier. The molten salt 
process for biomass processing is presented in a general schematic form 

in Fig. 12. The molten salt mixture can be prepared by mixing powders 
of inorganic salts (like nitrates, alkali metal halides, other metal halides, 
alkali metal carbonates etc.) in particular ratios. These mixtures were 
◦
then put in a bed and heated at high temperature (~700 
C or as needed 
for  a typical  biomass feedstock) under inert atmosphere  for about 30 
min till the salts melts completely and mixed, which can then be cooled 
down and stored for future use. Some toxic impurities are present in the 
melt;  therefore  by  thermochemical  conversion  these  wastes  can  be 
destroyed and converted into useful fuel or other chemicals. Molten salt 
pyrolysis  has  shown  to  be  a  very  efficient  method  for  high  yield  of 
synthetic gas instead of carbon nanomaterials. It should be highlighted 
that the nature and amount of salt used primarily determine the quality, 
yield and morphology of carbonaceous material derived from biomass. 
Also,  molten  salts  give  higher  heating  rates  during  the  conversion  of 
biomass waste in comparison to other conventional approaches. 

◦

Several works, discussed technical aspects of the molten salt process 
for the conversion of biomass [133,134,135]. Here, we will discuss most 
of the cutting-edge research work in production of nanomaterials from 
biomass through the molten salt method and their different applications. 
Moreover, recent advances in the molten salt method for conversion of 
biomass also have been explored in details [136]. In this line Cao et al., 
produced porous carbon with well-defined mesopores and macropores 
from soybean straw using molten KOH at 800 
C [136]. They claimed 
that the use of high-temperature in the presence of molten KOH assist in 
rapid release of generated gases during the pyrolysis of soybean straw 
which  leads  to  a  rigorous  bubbling  phenomenon,  responsible  for  the 
construction of well-defined beehive-like morphology of product along 
(cid:0) 1).  The straws  get  converted  to 
with  a  high  surface  area  (1615  m2  g
graphitized carbons with multiple pores. The porosity and surface area 
are further enhanced due to the K
ions intercalation that is responsible 
for the lattice expansion and physicochemical activation. The structure 
so formed possess multiple pores that results in low resistance to the ions 
and hence can be a suitable material for SCs and lithium ion batteries. 
Furthermore,  the  intercalated  K
ions  trigger  the  process  of  graphiti-
zation  that  also  makes  the  carbonaceous  material  highly  conducting. 
The material offered a good capacitance and high cyclic stability. This 
soybean  straw-derived  nanostructure  displays  a  high  specific  capaci-
(cid:0) 1  in 1 M 
tance of 140 F g
H2SO4.  Using  the  same  route  Zeng  et  al.  synthesised  nitrogen-doped 
carbon  materials  from  an  abundant  biomass  waste,  wool  fibre  [137]. 
The  carbonization  was  carried  out  at  700 
C  in  the  presence  of 
KCl/KNO3/LiCl molten salt mixture. The content of nitrogen was 2.6 wt 
%  in  the  product  that  was  reported  along  with  the  honeycomb-like 

(cid:0) 1  even at a high current density of 10 A g

+

+

◦

Fig. 12. Typical steps involved in modern molten salt pyrolysis system for carbonization of biomass (as described in the cited papers).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102320S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

(cid:0) 1 at 0.25A g

(cid:0) 1 at a power density of 202 W kg

surface morphology and the ultra-high specific surface area. The wool 
fibre  used,  acted  as  a  precursor  for  nitrogen  and  was  converted  to 
carbonaceous  material  by  carbonization  method.  BET  isotherm  study 
revealed that the fibre derived from direct pyrolysis method has a sur-
(cid:0) 1  which  is  very  less  than  that obtained  via 
face  area  of  36.586  m2  g
(cid:0) 1). Also, the net pore volume 
molten salt carbonization (787.079 m2 g
in carbonization method is higher than conventional pyrolysis. There-
fore, the study showed that the molten salt carbonization produces much 
more porous structure from wool precursors. The synthesized materials 
were  characterized  for  supercapacitor  application,  which  offered  a 
(cid:0) 1 with a cyclic stability up 
specific capacitance of 318.2 F g
to 5000 cycles. A symmetric supercapacitor device was assembled out of 
these electrode materials which exhibited a specific energy of 20.2 Wh 
(cid:0) 1 and it can be operated in a wide 
kg
potential window of 1.8 V in Na2SO4 electrolyte. Shang et al. reported 
the  conversion  of  peanut  shells  into  highly  porous  carbon  materials 
(Fig.  13a&b)  through  a  facile  ZnCl2  molten  salt  process  [138].  They 
reported carbonization as well as activation in a single step accompa-
nying  a  significant  decrease  in  carbonization  time  and  temperature 
during the experiment. In this molten salt process, ZnCl2 was used as a 
molten salt that can convert the peanut shells into carbonaceous mate-
rial at 480 
C in nitrogen atmosphere. Zinc chloride plays a role of the 
dehydrating agent which reduces the formation of tar and increases the 
yield of carbon. Moreover, this molten salt has a low melting tempera-
ture  which  is  favourable  for  the  solubility  and  diffusibility  of  the  re-
actions. Also, the process is facile, time efficient and cost effective. In 
their  work  a  hierarchical  porous  carbon  material  with  high  specific 
(cid:0) 1  was  reported  (Fig.  13c).  Moreover,  this 
surface  area  of  1642  m2  g
porous material can be used to remove certain dyes which explain its 
adsorption property. During adsorption of a dye (methylene blue), the 
(cid:0) 1 was obtained. The current prog-
adsorption capacity of 876.35 mg g
ress in homogeneous metal salt solutions for the biomass conversion was 
discussed by Quiroz et al., especially in terms of spectroscopic, compu-
tational techniques and experimental kinetics [139]. According to Shang 
et al.; the very method is challenging because of their wide applications 
as  Lewis  and  Brønsted  acids,  salting  agents  and  solvents.  The  study 
focussed on few aspects (i) the specification of metal salts in aqueous 
solutions  during  conversion  of  glucose  to  5-hydroxymethylfurfural 

◦

(HMF),  (ii)  the  interactions  between  salt-solvent  and  salt-substrate 
during the extraction of HMF and furfural, (iii) ionic interactions and 
salt-substrate  interaction  during  the  solubilisation  of  biomass  in  salt 
hydrates,  (iv)  the  movement  of  ions  in  solution,  different  pH  and  in 
presence  of  salt  hydrates,  (v)  different  reactions  associated  with  the 
conversion of sugars to HMF, (vi) various reactions where the metal salts 
are  employed  e.g.  Diels-Alder  reaction.  Lastly,  they  discussed  their 
application in homogenous and heterogeneous catalysis. Layered carbon 
nanostructures  (Fig.  13e-TEM,  Fig.  13f-SEM,)  with  ultra-high  surface 
(cid:0) 1) were produced in single step from glucose as pre-
area (2000 m2  g
cursor in presence of molten LiCl/KCl dissolved in the oxysalts [140]. 

Table 3 
Examples of molten salt systems for conversion of biomass into nanomaterials.  

S. 
N 

1 

2 

3 

4 
5 
6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

Molten Salt 

(Li2CO3–Na2CO3- 
K2CO3) 

Working 
Temperature 

650- 850  

◦

C 

Na2CO3-K2CO3 

700–850 

◦

C 

LiCl-KCl in oxysalts 
media 

50 

◦

C 

Ni-Al2O3 
NaOH–Na2CO3 
NaCl-CaCl 

◦

C 
◦
C 

550–600 
350- 500 
◦
800 

C 

ZnCl2-KCl 

400–600 

◦

C 

NaNO3- KNO3 

Soluble NaVO3 in 
carbonate molten salt 
Li2CO3–Na2CO3 

500 

◦

C 

200 

◦

C 

700 

◦

C 

11 

NaNO2–NaNO3 

12 

Na2HPO4, H3BO3, 
Al2O3, etc. 

700–800 

◦

C 

700–1000 

◦

C 

Key Features 

Minimises gas formation along 
with increase in polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons 
Unique catalytic behaviour and 
enhanced dissolution capability 
Formation of porous carbons 
with great porosity & diverse 
microstructures 
High-quality syngas production 
Absorption of CO2, CO 
Nanostructuring & self- 
purification 
Co-production of bio-oil and 
activated carbon 
Time efficiency and 
Productivity 
Electrochemical graphitization 

High percentage of carbon and 
easy purification 
Chemical catalytic and electric 
conductivity 
Acts as Solvent and attain high 
temperature in short time  

Fig. 13. SEM micrograph of electrode material derived from wool fibre (a-b), Nitrogen adsorption isotherm along with pore size distribution (c) and thermogra-
vimetric curve (d). (e) and (f) images are TEM (Scale: 50 nm, single-layer thickness ~0.5 nm) and SEM (Scale: 10 μm.) image of prepared carbon nano-sheets. 
(Reproduced with permission from Ref. [140]). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102321S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

The most frequently used molten salts or their combinations for the 
conversion of biomass waste into valued products are listed in Table 3 
along with their processing temperature [140–146]. 

In  the  recent  years,  several  groups  used  molten  salts  to  produce 

desirable micro/nanomaterials using biomass and related materials as a 
carbon  precursor  [140–146].  In  this  line,  fabrication  of  carbon  nano-
wires for CO2  photoreduction applications from rice husks via molten 
salt carbonization was presented by Weng et al. The novel procedure 

Fig.  14. (a)  Closed-loop  carbon  cycle  diagram,(b)  molten-salt-assisted  electrochemical  transformation  of  biomass  to  nanostructured  SiC/C  for  carbon  dioxide 
photoreduction and (c-e) SEM images of nanostructured SiC/C in different magnifications (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [144]). The SEM (f) &TEM (g) 
images  of  N-doped  carbon  nanosheets  derived  from  Candida  utilis  based  biomass  and  (h)  is  probable  mechanism  for  pollutant  degradation  (Reproduced  with 
permission from Ref. [149]). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102322S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

adopted  by  Weng  et  al.  diagrammatically  shown  in  the  Fig.  14a,  b, 
where they first time extensively studies role of salt, electrolysis time, 
reaction medium and temperature on surface morphology and width of 
carbon nanowires as shown in the SEM micrographs Fig. 14c–e [144]. 
The  SEM  images  depict  that  the  nanowires  produced  fall  within  the 
dimension range of 10–30 nm. Such architecture revealed that there is 
existence of an interconnected network of nanowires and each nanowire 
can  be  separated  individually  under  suitable  reaction  conditions. 
Herein, Weng et al. postulated that this process could be used to bridge a 
closed-loop  carbon  cycle  (as  depicted  in  Fig.  14a)  for  the  pro-
duction–utilization of biomass owing to uniform heat transfer charac-
teristics [144]. Notably, the interaction of molten salts with solid matter 
(especially with various biomass feedstocks) and their role in the surface 
controlling  is  still  a  matter  of  further  investigation  because  similar 
molten salts under identical conditions can yield different nanomaterials 
[144–147].  Moreover,  the  dispersion  of  energy  during  pyrolysis  of 
biomass in the presence of molten salts also needs to be explored in a 
systematic way. The proposed scheme involves multiple simultaneous 
steps, viz. electrooxidation, carbonization, nanostructuring and purifi-
cation  [144].  The  conversion  of  rice  husks  to  SiC  based  nanohybrids 
involves  the assimilation of SiC nanowires within  the nitrogen doped 
graphite-like carbon network via strong coupling. Such nanoassembly 
creates  effective  adsorption  of  CO2  and  quick  transfer  of  charge. 
Therefore, the hybrid suppose to be a potential material for the photo-
reduction  process during the  conversion to CO from CO2  without the 
assistance  of any external co-catalysts or agents. The as-produced CO 
acts  as  a  fuel  to  power  the  electrolyser.  Recently,  solar  pyrolysis  of 
biomass was carried out by Xie et al. in the presence of molten salt and 
high  quality  products  in  good  yield  were  reported.  More  detailed 
chemistry studies suggested that catalytic reactions which occur in the 
solar  reactor  results  in  the  degradation  of  the  reaction  intermediates 
[147].  Solar  pyrolysis  trials  were  carried  out  where  the  reactor  was 
heated by a solar simulator of 4 kW. The use of a natural source as sun, 
helps to irradicate the natural problems associated with the real sun like 
continuity, power and randomness. A simulator fitted with three xenon 
lamps  of  5  kW  along  with  parabolic  concentrators  were  adjusted 
accordingly  for  the  experimental  procedure.  During  the  pyrolysis, 
molten salt is used as a medium that can increase the yield of gas. The 
increase of the reaction yield occurs owing to the catalytic effect of the 
alkali elements present in the molten salt. The rapid heat transfer along 
with  the  enhanced  thermal conductivity  occurred  in  the  process.  The 
reaction  between  the  molten  salt  and  char  generated  more  gas  at 
elevated  temperature  (>700  
C,  the  syngas  (CO+H2) 
increased upto 82.57 wt%. The authors produced ultrapure biochar with 
the surface area of 973 m2 g
C. In another work, they gasified 
C in argon and in the molten salt using 
biomass with steam at ~930 
solar radiation [148]. The proposed method is intended to utilize the 
solar radiation as a heat source in order to carry out the endothermic 
reaction for syngas production [148]. The use of gasification method in 
molten salt increases the yield upto 25% and the formation of the sec-
ondary  products  is  reduced  by  77%.  The  molten  salt  was  a  eutectic 
mixture of lithium, sodium and potassium carbonate.The combination 
of this mixture has a melting temperature of 670 K and also the presence 
of  lithium  reduces  the  corrosion  of  the  surfaces  of  the  stainless  steel. 
Weng  et  al.  very  latestly  reported  an  outstanding  work  dealing  with 
molten  salt  induced  N-doped  carbon  nanosheets  fabrication  using 
Candida utilis (biomass) as a precursor for organic pollutant degradation 
through peroxymonosulfate (PMS) activation [149]. Xie el at. reported 
that,  utilised  molten  salt  approach  endorse  formation  of  N-doped 
graphitic nanocarbon which could be efficiently used for the degrada-
-(propane-2,2-diyl)diphenol) via non-radical & 
tion of Bisphenol A (4,4
radical mechanism as diagramticlly shown in the Fig. 14h. 

(cid:0) 1 at 850  

C).  At  850 

◦

◦

◦

◦

′

The SEM image (Fig. 14f) of N-doped carbon nanosheets produced 
via innovated molten salt approach, can be seen as highly agglomerated 
N-doped nanosheets is well-ordered strips into a layered structure. The 
matching  TEM  micrograph  (Fig.  14g)  of  N-doped  nanosheets  also 

that 

confirms  a  typical  graphene-like  morphology  as  examined  by  several 
other researchers [149]. Xie el at. stated that the precise mechanism for 
graphene like system formation from used feedstock is not clear but they 
thought 
the  molten  salt  process  plays  a  key  role  of 
structure-directing for ultrathin carbon layers gathering [149]. Thus, the 
cost-effective, green and facile approaches hold a countless potential for 
value-added conversion of heteroatoms-rich biomass waste to various 
functional  nanomaterials  especially  for  the  environment  remediation 
and  biodiversity.  These  works  led  to  advanced  low-cost,  eco-friendly 
and  simple  strategy  to  produce  value  added  carbon  nanomaterials 
(including N,S or P doped carbon) for energy storage, catalysis, nano-
filler and many other applications [144–149]. Moreover, such strategies 
also  bring  valuable  insights  for  the  fabrication  of  new  materials  and 
circular economy [147–149]. 

4.3.1. Limitations of molten salt process 

Molten salt processing has also its advantages and limitations, which 

are briefly presented below:  

1  Generation of highly volatile, high-valence state chemical moieties, 
insoluble cluster-type compounds and disproportionation reactions 
creates complexity. 

+

, Mg2+
+

, Li

etc. in final nano-

2 Incorporation of metal ions like Na
structures is frequently observed. 

3 Aggregation  of  nanoparticles  is  often  reported  in  the  case  of  con-

version of biomass into nanomaterials.  

4  Non-predictable reaction mechanism with several by-products.  
5  Conversion of some biomass feedstock at high temperature cannot be 

possible due to rapid degradation of carbon components. 

4.4. Ball milling method 

The ball milling approach is considered as a green and sustainable 
process which has been utilised by many researchers for conversion of 
biomass to nanomaterials [150–152]. This mechano-chemical route for 
production of micro/nano biochar via ball-milling is getting attention 
due to its low-cost, green nature and non-/less-solvent utilisation. It is a 
route, in which the moving balls apply their kinetic energy to the milled 
feedstock, break chemical bonds and yield new surface morphologies by 
fracturing  dried  biomass  [151].  It  has  been  examined  that  dangling 
bonds on the freshly twisted surfaces are typically chemically reactive 
and milling introduces several peculiarities on the surfaces of materials. 
High  kinetic  energy  and  strong  ball  impacts  is  the  key  of  this 
mechano-chemical  technique  for  the  conversion  of  biomass  feedstock 
into micro/nanomaterials as shown in Fig. 15 [151,152]. However, the 
size of balls, vibrational amplitude, type of rotation, longitudinal axis, 
milling  medium,  speed,  time  and  ratio  of  ball  and  feedstock  are  also 
important  to  achieve  the  desired  end  product  [152–154].  Thus,  both 
macroscopic  and  microscopic  properties  influence  the  nature  of  end 
product during the ball milling. In addition, the impact of a high-energy 
ball  milling  process  sometimes  can  create  locally  high  temperatures 
above 100 
C along with local high pressure up to several MPa [152]. 
Such high temperature and pressure can be utilised for production of 
micro & nanoparticles from solid wood based biomass and timbers. The 
mechanistic pathway of particle breakdown in ball milling has been well 
discussed elsewhere and schematically presented in the Fig. 15 (inset) 
along  with  key  steps  involved  during  the  milling  of  feedstock  [153]. 
Remarkably, it have been estimated that ball milling can increase the 
yield  of  valued  product  derived  from  biomass  by  1.1–14.8  times  in 
comparison to the untreated samples and also in the case of use of other 
conversion method. 

◦

An excellent review was published in 2020 by Manish et al. in which 
the authors summarised the recent progress in ball milling fabrication of 
biochar and other products from biomass. They reviewed different pa-
rameters affecting shape, size and type of ball mill machine and type of 
products which were produced from biomass. The authors, however, did 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102323S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 15. General layout and steps involved in ball milling approach for conversion of biomass to nanomaterials.  

not review the fabrication of carbon nanomaterials and their applica-
tions  from  biomass  using  ball  milling  [154].  In  this  section  we  will 
discuss  the  current  progress  in  fabrication  of  nanomaterials  recently 
derived from biomass via ball milling. 

Tran et al. reported the production of high quality chitin nanofibers 
through ball-milling and modified the surface of the same with acetic 
anhydride for its homogenous dispersion in hydrophobic solvents and 
into  polymer  matrices  as  well  [155].  To  test  the  applicability  of  the 
prepared  nanofibers  as  a  nanofiller  they  mechanically  dispersed  the 
same into poly(l‑lactic acid) matrix and fabricated the polymer nano-
composite.  They  claimed,  high  mechanical  strength  of  the  composite 
along with very low cytotoxicity due to incorporation of chitin nano-
fiber.  They  proposed  a  common  procedure  for  the  top-down  ChNFs 
(chitin nanofibers) synthesis where the chitin biomass disintegrates to 
form  nanofibers.  The process  involves  two  steps:  deacetylation  at the 
surface and then mechanical homogenization. The ChNFs aggregates via 
hydrogen bonds, as this is thermodynamically favourable process and in 
the ambient atmosphere, the lumps of chitin get aggregated making it 
insoluble  in  solvents.  Therefore,  to  use  these  fibers  in  polymer  com-
posites, chemical modification was carried out to convert them into a 
dispersible form. The morphological study revealed that the widths of 
ChNFs are within the range of 20–44 nm with micro voids. The group 
proposed a single step transformation of chitin to ChNFs via ball-milling 
by employing less harmful acetic acid and the resulting product obtained 
was dispersed in chloroform and then mixed with PLA which is effective 
in  increasing  the  mechanical  property  of  the  polymer  matrices.  Yuan 
et  al.  observed  an  improvement  in  degradation  of  lignocellulosic 
biomass  (cellulose)  in  hot-water  compressed  CO2,  pre-treatment  of 
camphorwood sawdust by motorized activation by means of 3D ball mill 
machine  along  with  specific  types  of  ball  [156].  Three  important  pa-
rameters in the ball-milling process i.e., activation time, ball to biomass 
mass ratio and the speed of the ball-milling process influences the par-
ticle size, surface area, structure and crystallinity of the camphorwood. 
All the parameters were optimized accordingly in order to obtain the 

◦

desired product. The effect of the parameters on the process of hydro-
lysis can be ranked as: speed > time of activation > ball to biomass mass 
ration. It was found that the optimum speed was 450 rpm for a time of 2 
h  maintain  the  mass  ratio  to  30:1.  The  surface  morphology  of  the 
product was related to the ball milling parameters. The authors claimed 
that milling can greatly worsen the crystallinity of cellulose and promote 
its degradation for the various value added products. Guo et al. fabri-
cated  N-doped  carbon  nanostructure  based  catalyst  for  the  oxygen 
reduction without any metal from protein-rich mushroom (as biomass 
C  with  CNTs  as  a  conductive  agent  using  ball  milling 
waste)  at  900 
technique [157]. They proposed this auspicious and sustainable path to 
be used for the commercial production of nanomaterials as highly active 
and  metal-free  catalysts  for  oxygen  reduction.  Enoki  mushrooms  are 
known to be one of the famous fungi and very edible. Pyrolysis process 
was  adopted  by  the  researchers  to  obtain  the  N-doped  carbon  nano-
material from Enoki mushrooms. The as obtained product was tested for 
ORR (oxygen reduction reaction) activity in both acidic and as well as 
alkaline  medium.  Two  types  of  nitrogen  have  their  roles  to  play,  the 
pyrrolic-N is essential to increase the activity of ORR and the graphitic-N 
is vital to maintain the effective ORR activity. The morphology study 
showed the size of the particles is almost 2.8 μm. The irregular structures 
of the particles are associated with ball milling. The result also explained 
that  addition  of  CNTs  can  restrict  the  agglomeration  of  the  particles. 
Moreover, the onset potential for ORR was about 0.94 V which is almost 
close to Pt/C catalyst and therefore, is a potential candidate for the ORR 
reactions.  For  the  similar  applications  lignocellulose  nanofibers  were 
produced  from sunflower  stalks using  ultrasound-assisted  ball  milling 
machine in diluted sulfuric acid and exceptional thermal properties of 
the produced nanomaterials were reported [158]. The sunflower stalks 
were not pre-treated by any methods and therefore, the lignin content in 
the cellulosic fibers were very high. The morphological study showed 
that  the  fibers  were  interconnected  with  spherical  nanoparticles 
distributed within the matrix; these particles can be designated as the 
lignin.  They  are  of  different  sizes  and  tend  to  be  bigger  in  high 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102324S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

concentration of sulphuric acid. The FE-SEM study also depicted that the 
sunflower stalks have clusters of fibers aggregated together. The formed 
aggregates looked like ‘jelly’ when the suspension was freeze dried. Such 
nanofibers can be used in different electronics and other applications. 
Highly porous ZnO nanostructures with photocatalytic properties were 
obtained  from  biomass  using  ball  milling  technique  as  the  nature 

inspired smart materials [159]. The nanocrystals of ZnO of various di-
mensions as presented in the SEM images (Fig. 16a, b) along with high 
resolution TEM image (Fig. 16b inset) of a single nanocrystal from ex. 
agar ZnO were synthesized via simple and efficient ball milling method 
with Zn(NO3)2  as the precursor using different sacrificial templates of 
polysaccharides.  Francavilla  et  al.  confirmed  a  new  protocol  for 

Fig. 16. (a &b) SEM images of biomass derived porous ZnO nanoparticles and (c) biomass derived porous ZnO for phenol degradation capability (Reproduced with 
permission from Ref. [159]). Effect of incorporation of cellulose nanofibers as nanofiller on thermo-mechanical (d)TGA and (e) tensile properties of as synthesised 
epoxy nanocomposite (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [160]). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102325S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

fabrication  of  highly  porous  ZnO  with  different  shapes  and  sizes 
(50–100 nm) which were found to have outstanding photocatalytic ac-
tivities for aqueous phenol degradation as depicted in graph, Fig. 16c 
[159]. The optimization of different reaction parameters like size of ball, 
time,  speed  etc.  is  required  to  obtain  the  desired  product.  The 
morphological study shows that direct calcination offered a chunk-like 
morphology  in  absence  of  polymer,  but  in  presence  of  polymer, 
flower-like and hexagonal-like morphology was observed. The creden-
tial of developed hybrid nanostructure has been discussed in terms of 
economic  and  environmental  points.  Recently,  Nagarajan  et  al.  fabri-
cated epoxy-based nanocomposites reinforced with cellulose nanofibers 
derived from the biomass waste with the help of ball milling combined 
with  chemical  treatment  [160]. The  work  relates  to  the  extraction  of 
cellulose nanofibers from peduncles. The SEM study depicted that the 
width of the nanofibers ranges from 55 to 64 nm and also possess rough 
and irregular surfaces. A significant increase in thermal resistance (TGA 
curve, Fig. 16d) and mechanical performance (tensile strength, Fig. 16e) 
was reported when 2 wt% of cellulose nanofibers were incorporated into 
the epoxy matrix as presented in Fig. 16. The weight loss occurred in two 
steps, at first the bounded moisture gets removed which was around 5% 
within  temperature  60
C.  The  second  occurs  within  the  tem-
perature range 250
C, and there is the major weight loss up to 
50–60%  as  presented  in  the  TGA  thermogram  [160].  A  combined 
method including ball milling followed by chemical treatment increases 
the α–cellulose content, also eliminates the silicon (Si), wax and rest of 
the non–cellulosic matters. Therefore, this method helps in increasing 
the adhesive behaviour of the fibers within the matrix of the polymer. 
The  nanofibers  obtained  can  be  very  potentially  reinforced  materials 
with enhanced tensile strength and elastic modulus by 37% and 28%, 
respectively. 

◦(cid:0) 100 
◦

◦(cid:0) 350 

◦

It should be mentioned that the ball milling route for the conversion 
of  biomass  into  nanomaterials  at  large  scale  is  implemented  in  many 
countries. However, in most cases it is assisted by chemical route and 
pyrolysis  for  the  high  yield  and  better  quality  of  nanomaterials  pro-
duced. For example, Naghdi et al. obtained nanobiochar from pine wood 
using  a  planetary  ball  mill  assisted  with  pyrolysis  [161].  Indeed,  the 
surface characteristics mainly depended on ball milling parameters like 
rotational  speed,  time,  type  of  ball  and  ball  to  powder  mass  ratio  to 
produce nanomaterials. After optimizing the parameters and factors, the 
carbonaceous  material  was  obtained  via  an  energy-efficient  process 
which involves low temperature and small energy consumption. Zhang 
et al. linked ball milling technique with hydrothermal process for syn-
thesis  of  desired  nanochar  containing  nitrogen  as  heteroatom  using 
plant biomass waste, H2O2  and NH4OH [162]. The as-prepared nano-
material  was  further  employed  for  the  adsorption  of  phenyl-related 
volatile organic compounds and excellent adsorption performance was 
examined. In this work, the main target of the study was to estimate if 
the  performance  of  the  ball  milling  process  in  presence  of  chemical 
modifiers  can  enhance  the  adsorption  capacity  of  biochar  to  volatile 
organic  compounds.  Furthermore,  NH4OH  and  H2O2  were  used  to 
modify  corn  stalk  biochar  obtaining  N  and  O-doped  biochars  corre-
spondingly. Different volatile organic compounds were chosen in order 
to determine the adsorption efficacy of biochars. The surface area of the 
biochars is enhanced ~2.5 times and the pore size decreases after the 
ball milling process. The SEM study also showed that ultrafine particles 
with smooth surfaces are obtained after ball milling. The ball mill based 
carbon  nanomaterial derived  from Chinese  medicinal  plants  was  pro-
duced and utilised for the removal of tetracycline from water along with 
operative adsorption and desorption phenomenon even after consecu-
tive five cycles [163].The role of pH and other parameters affecting the 
efficacy of the produced biochar was discussed in detail. Bulk bio-chars 
have  been  subjected  to  ball  milling  to  form  sub-micron  particles  and 
their adsorption properties were characterized. From the kinetics study 
it  was  found  that  the  tetracycline  adsorption  was  heterogeneous  and 
non-linear.  Such  heterogeneous  kinetics  suggests  that  the  process  in-
volves  several  mechanisms  like,  π-π  interaction,  pore  filling  and 

H-bonding. Maximum adsorption takes place between pH 5–7 because it 
was  found  that  the  positively  charged  species  undergo  electrostatic 
repulsion  below  pH-3  whereas  the  negatively  charged  species  at  pH 
greater than 7. Additionally, the adsorption decreases with increasing 
ion concentration and bivalent ions. Reducing the size of the bio-
Na
chars  by  ball  milling  increases  the  active  surface  area  to  adsorb  the 
tetracycline. 

+

4.4.1. Limitation of ball milling method 

Ball  milling  is  an  auxiliary  process  for  the  micro/nanomaterials 
production in large scale using biomass waste as the feedstock. There are 
no major drawbacks of this method in terms of nanomaterials produc-
tion from biomass. However, some of the selected shortcomings of ball 
milling route are listed below:  

1  Probability of contaminations and tedious separation process (fine 

particles released from milling balls).  

2  Long processing time and difficulty in the case when solvent is used.  
3  Uncontrolled particle morphology, agglomerates, and residual strain 
in case of crystalline nanoparticles especially when high-energy ball 
milling is carried out.  

4  High probability for the loss or alteration in crystallinity.  
5  Difficult  to  measure  the  exact  temperature,  pressure  and  friction 
between the ball and feedstock during the processing is still left for 
theoretical studies. 

4.5. Single Step pyrolysis under inert atmosphere 

Single step pyrolysis involves thermal decomposition of biomass at 
◦
550–1000 
C under suitable conditions (in the presence of air, catalyst, 
activator, moderator etc.) for its conversion into oil, gases and biochar. 
Nevertheless, there are many similar routes (slow pyrolysis, fast pyrol-
ysis,  flash  pyrolysis,  co-pyrolysis,  single  step  pyrolysis,  multistep  py-
rolysis  etc.)  and  specific  experimental  conditions  determine  the 
properties  of  the  final  product.  All  kinds  of  biomass  pyrolysis  yield 
biochar (powdered micro/nanocarbons), bio-oil and biogases (mainly, 
CH4, H2, CO, & CO2) depending on the thermal environment and reac-
tion  conditions.  In  recent  years  several  biomass  based  nanomaterials 
were produced via single step pyrolysis under an inert gas environment. 
This  section  briefly  discusses  the  progress  in  carbon  nanomaterials 
derived from biomass via single step pyrolysis. The general procedure 
involved  in  a  single  step  pyrolysis  under  an  inert  atmosphere  is  pre-
sented in Fig. 17. 

Recently, single step pyrolysis under an inert atmosphere has been 
used  to  produce  novel  magnetic  nanoparticles  using  Tucum˜a  seed, 
nickel chloride and zinc chloride (in different ratios of the precursor and 
metal salts). The as-synthesised magnetic nanoparticles were applied for 
the  removal  of  nicotinamide  and  propanol  from  aqueous  solutions 
[164]. Different kinetic models were used to study the adsorption pro-
cess,  like,  pseudo-first  order  and  second  order  and  Avrami  fractional 
order.  It  was  found  that  the  use  of  ZnCl2  can  help  to  manipulate  the 
particle  size  and  pore  size,  leading  to  a  high  surface  area  of  1281 
(cid:0) 1[165]. He et al.’s model of isotherm was used to fit the experi-
m2g
(cid:0) 1  for nicotin-
mental data which showed a Qmax  value of 199.3 mg g
(cid:0) 1 for propranolol. The process of adsorption was 
amide and 335.4 mg g
spontaneous and  exothermic at  all temperature and  reaction involves 
the π-π and donor-acceptor interactions. The pyrolysis was carried out in 
◦
a conventional tube furnace at 600 
C under N2 atmosphere to produce 
three dissimilar magnetic hybrid carbon nanomaterials. The as-prepared 
(cid:0) 1) and con-
carbon nanomaterial showed high surface area (1281 m2g
tained nickel particles of average crystallite size less than 33 nm. Due to 
its high surface and metallic core this hybrid nanomaterial could be used 
for the removal and purification of pharmaceutical industry effluents up 
to 99.1% efficiency. Similarly, hierarchical hollow carbon nanospheres 
(HCNSs) with high specific surface area (1984 m2/g) were synthesized 
directly from biomass waste (green plant woods) in a single step in the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102326S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 17. Schematic diagrams showing typical unit operations involved in single step pyrolysis under inert atmosphere.  

presence of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) polymer [165]. The authors 
claimed their approach as a facile, green, direct and efficient route for 
production of hollow carbon nanospheres in large scale from the raw 
biomass. In the method of synthesis, the role of PTFE in HCNSs forma-
tion  was  very  crucial  however,  shape  and  size  slightly  changed  with 
types of biomass feedstock (for example, rice husk, reed rod, flax fibre, 
fruit  fibers  and  walnut  shell).  The  applicability  of  the  as-synthesised 
nanomaterial  was  tested  as  electrode  materials  for  high  performance 
supercapacitors. In addition, their study shows that (PTFE) acted as the 
pore creation and nucleating agent and played a vital role to achieve 
high surface area. Magnetic composite nanoparticles were synthesised 
through similar route using biomass waste derived from cocoa husks, 
sugarcane bagasse, peanut shells and coconut mesocarp as noted in the 
cited  paper  [68].  The  magnetic  measurements  of  the  synthesized 
nanoparticles showed saturation magnetization greatly decreased along 
with increasing the carbon content. Morin et al. explored the influence 
of experimental conditions of pyrolysis and the nature of the biomass 
feedstock  on  the  physicochemical  properties  and  the  reactivity  of 
derived product [167]. The influence of the process temperature (850, 
650  &  450 
C)  on  the  properties  of  produced  char  was  optimized  in 
terms  of  reactivity  and  nature  of  the  biomass  waste.  Of  course,  the 
quality of the nanomaterials produced could be tuned as in the case of 
single step pyrolysis under inert atmosphere. This in turn may not be 
possible in the multistep pyrolysis approach because multistep pyrolysis 
suffers with low productivity and high cost [164–167]. The reason for 
the low yield are (i) the product stream is more complex than for many 
of the alternative treatments, (ii) the produced gases cannot be vented 
directly in the chamber without further treatment because of the high 
CO  concentrations  in  the  case  of  single  step  pyrolysis  along  with 
mechanism involved was discussed in details elsewhere [168]. 

◦

The catalysts and activators are also frequently used in the produc-
tion  of  high  surface  area  carbon  nanomaterials  from  biomass  waste. 
These additives play a vital role in the effective conversion of biomass 
waste into various nanocarbons in terms of degree of exfoliation, deep 
penetration,  quantified  energy  distribution  and  uniform  dispersion  of 
heat into the molecular system of a feedstock. The use of a catalyst and 
an activator  in a single  step pyrolysis could cause a  great increase in 
crystallinity of nanomaterials; however, it further depends on the per-
centage of carbon present in biomass feedstock [168]. Chen et al. pro-
duced cellulose based novel nanomaterials with network-like structure 
derived from red algae (found in the ocean) with crystallinity more than 
73%. [169].The extraction of the nanocellulose based biomass consists 
of three steps: alkalization, bleaching and acid hydrolysis. The purifi-
cation of the biomass occurs by dewaxing method via a Soxhlet appa-
ratus in toluene/ethanol (2:1) solvent up to 7 h. In the alkalization step, 
the sample obtained after dewaxing was subjected to 2% NaOH for 2 h at 
80 
C. This was then followed by the bleaching process using 30% of 
◦
H2O2 for 1.5 h at 80 
C. After repeating the process for two consecutive 
time  snowy-white  product  was  obtained.  Nanocellulose  fibre  was 
further obtained by treating the snowy-white product with 64% H2SO4 
◦
at 45 
C for 4 hrs. After the completion of the reaction, the product was 
centrifuged  to  remove  the  excess  acid  and  the  residue  obtained  was 

◦

treated  with  1%  of  NaOH  till  the  pH  is  maintained  around  6–7.  The 
extracted crystalline nanocellulose (CNs) has a diameter of ~22–12 nm 
along  with  a  crystallinity  index  of  73%  and  aspect  ratio  25.  The 
extracted CNs also has high thermal stability as observed from the TGA 
study.  The  authors  fabricated  nanocomposite  using  CNs  as  nanofiller 
with polymer matrices and measured its thermo-mechanical properties 
for structural applications [169]. In another similar work, Huang et al. 
reported  the  synthesis  of  carbon  nanoparticles  using  bamboo  based 
biomass waste as precursor for the sensing application and advancing 
green chemistry (where impact of iodine-catalysed butyrate esterifica-
tion  on  CNs  has  been  evaluated).  The  surface  morphology  (b-c)  SEM 
images,  (d)  AFM  image,  and  (e)  TEM  image  of  CNs  with  wire 
morphology  were  derived  from  bamboo  based  biomass  (a)  waste  are 
presented in Fig. 18 [170]. The hydrophobic and thermal properties of 
the synthesised carbon nanowires were examined and various industrial 
and medical applications of the same have been proposed by different 
research  groups  [170–175].  Teresa  et  al.  was  one  of  the  few  early 
researcher who focused on the transformation of biomass (Luk Bamboo) 
to  biomorphic  composites  comprising  significant  amount  of  silica  & 
silicon  carbide  nanowires  via  single  step  pyrolysis  (sintering  process 
◦
C as described elsewhere [175]. 
without any catalyst) at 1200
The SEM images of the raw biochar and nanowires reported by Teresa 
et al. are presented in the Fig. 18 (a, f &g). 

- 1400 

◦

4.6. Miscellaneous methods 

This section will discuss some unique combinations of two or more 
routes (i.e. combination of thermo-chemical flash exfoliation, bacterial 
decay,  thermolysis  under  high-pressure  reactor,  solvothermal  &  mild 
activation  etc.)  for  synthesis  of  nanomaterials  derived  from  biomass 
waste. Moreover, this part of the review also covers the innovative ap-
proaches and novel modifications in conventional methods for synthesis 
of  desired  nanostructures  derived  from  biomass  and  related  waste. 
Zhang et al. proposed a green method for transformation of lignocellu-
losic biomass waste  (bamboo) into  high quality totally biodegradable 
nanocomposite (using formic acid rapid fractionation for the fabrication 
of  multifunctional  nanocomposite  films)  consisting  nanocellulose  and 
lignin nanoparticles in different ratio as described elsewhere [171]. In 
brief, nanocellulose and lignin nanoparticles with controlled shape and 
size were synthesized and utilized for the preparation of a biodegradable 
nanocomposite  which  is  characterized  by  a  multilayer  network 
morphology (Fig. 19d,e). The SEM images evidence that the prepared 
bio-nanoparticles can be uniformly dispersed in the polymer matrices 
without  significant  aggregations.  The  compactness  of  multilayer 
network  directly  depends  on  ratio  of  nanocellulose  and  lignin  nano-
particles  used  during  rapid  fractionation  process  using  formic  acid 
[171]. The cellulose originated from the bamboo was converted into fine 
nanocrystals 
oxidanyl 
(TEMPO) as the oxidizing agent. The crystalline nature of as fabricated 
nanocrystals  is  shown  in  the  TEM  images,  Fig.  19a.  The  lignin  nano-
particles  from  biomass  were  obtained  through  simple  acid-base  re-
actions and uniform and spherical in shape lignin nanoparticles can be 

2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl) 

using 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102327S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 18. SEM micrograph (a) cross-section in low and high magnifications of the raw bamboo biochar after pyrolysis while (f) and (g) are SEM and HRTEM images of 
◦
C and SiC nanowire with a catalytic droplet tip, respectively(Reproduced with permission from Ref. [175]). SEM images (b& c), AFM image 
biochar sintered at 1400 
(d) and TEM image (e) of highly crystalline nanomaterial derived from bamboo based biomass waste (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [170]). 

also observed, Fig. 19b. Thus, it is a complete and inclusive process for 
the  conversion  of  lignocellulosic  biomass  into  industrially  important 
biodegradable nanocomposites. Also, this work could play a significant 
role in production of typical versatile materials platform as an efficiently 
engineered  product  to  meet  the  green  chemistry  principles  and  the 
profitable cost target. In comparison to the recent trends, researchers are 
keen to produce carbon nanofiber, nanocellulose, lignin nanoparticles 
etc.  using  agricultural  waste  through  CVD  process  and  related  tech-
niques. But use of high temperature, pressure and catalyst bottleneck the 
process [167–175]. Indeed, Chen et al. was one of the first researchers 
who tried to produced carbon nanofiber (Fig. 19f, SEM and TEM images 
showing partially crystalline morphology) through CVD using biomass 
as  precursor  without  any  additional  catalyst  [173].  However,  this 
approach suffered with low yield and poor crystallinity. 

In  the  same  line,  several  application  orientated  works  were  per-
formed and they were linked to the conversion of agricultural biomass 
waste  to  high  quality  nanomaterials  and  hydrogels  [172,173].  Addi-
tionally,  such  adaptations  were  also  utilised  for  production  of  nano-
materials  with  different  dimensions  and  morphologies  for  energy 
storage, catalytic activities, biomedical, high performance polymers and 
so  on  [172–175].  Bian  et  al.  reported  the  synthesis  of  wood-based 
nanomaterial  (highly  fibrous  in  nature)  via  quick  fractionation  of 
wood feedstock [176]. In this research work Zhang et al. used 85% of the 
◦
wood solubilizes (Wood decay enzymes) at 80 
C for 20 min. Herein, the 
synthesized wood fibers can be fractionated leading to the formation of 
hydrophobic solid which is rich in carbohydrates. The water insoluble 

solid can be dialysed to form some little portion of cellulose nanofibrils 
and  a  major  portion  of  solid  residue  of  lignocellulose,  which  further 
formed nanofibrils of lignocellulose. The soluble lignin was separated 
via precipitation technique and then converted into nanoparticles. The 
implication of this work demonstrates the use of cheap lignocellulose for 
the  bulk  production  of  nanofibrils.  Up  to  here,  we  have  presented 
various  investigations  for  the  production  of  renewable  energies  and 
chemicals using biomass waste via different facile approaches in high 
yield and low costs for the wide range of applications. However, very 
recently  Shun  et  al.  designed  an  innovative  pyrolysis  strategy  for  the 
sustainable assembly of high-quality three-dimensional graphene foam 
(3DGF)  [174].  In  this  new  strategy  it  was  tried  to  stimulate  the 
marketable  use  of  the  green  energy  created  from  biomass  waste  by 
means of pyrolytic gases and waste heat to produce functional carbon 
nanostructures. Firstly, they demonstrated the viability of applying such 
a workable path to prepare 3D graphene foams and carbon nanotube 
fibres with the help of fast pyrolysis of cellulose, lignin, sawdust and 
wheat straw based biomass and consequently fabrication of 3D graphene 
foams (Fig. 20a FESEM image along with key steps) by uniting fast py-
rolysis and atmospheric-pressure CVD [174]. In the next steps, using the 
as-prepared 3D nanocarbons system Shun et al. experimentally scruti-
nized its applicability for energy storage and environmental remediation 
devices. The I–V curve of the 3DGF measured using the device is pre-
sented at the bottom of Fig. 20a. From this curve the electrical resistance 
of 3DGFs can be obtained in terms of its electrical-transport capabilities. 
Herein, the 3DGF based device had the electrical conductivity of ~14.7 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102328S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

(b) 

Fig. 19. (a) TEM image of highly crys-
spherical 
talline  nanocellulose, 
lignin  nanoparticles  derived 
from 
bamboo  and  (c)  SEM  image  of  pure 
cellulose  nanocrystals  film.  (d)  SEM 
images  of  nanocellulose  and  lignin 
nanoparticles (5:1 and 2:1 ratio) based 
biodegradable  nanocomposites  (Repro-
duced with permission from Ref. [171]). 
(f)  Facile  route  for  fabrication  of  high 
quality carbon nanofiller via CVD using 
iron  as  catalyst  biologically  present  in 
activated  carbon  derived  from  biomass 
from 
(Reproduced  with  permission 
Ref. [173]).   

(cid:0) 1, which is much better than similar graphene composites [174]. 
S m
Similar  3D  graphene  layers  and  carbon  nanotube  coated  with  cobalt 
nanoparticles  was  produced  via  one  step  pyrolysis  for  ultra-high  ca-
pacity lithium–sulfur battery as discussed by Zhang et al. They stated 
that  durable  chemical  interaction  between  Co  nanoparticles  and  S 
element  in  graphene  nano-sheets  is  the  backbone  for  the  robust  per-
formance of fabricated lithium–sulfur batteries [179]. In the same way, 
Feng et al. tried to utilise oxygen-rich highly hierarchical porous carbon 
(as  shown  in  Fig.  20b,  SEM  image)  derived  from  waste-kapok  flower 
[177].  They  produced  highly  hierarchical  porous  carbon  via  simple 
combustion and activation by KOH solution as presented in Fig. 20b. The 
galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the electrodes fabricated using 
porous carbon at various current densities are shown at the bottom of 
Fig.  20b.Recently,  Deepak 
simplistic 
carbonization-activation process for biomass waste (almond shells). The 
key steps presented in Fig. 20c for the production of two types of carbon 
materials (I) hard carbon and (II) graphene-like nanosheets are shown in 
the  SEM  image  [178].  The  hard  carbon  &  graphene-like  nanosheets 
display excellent electrochemical credibility as the negative and positive 
electrodes  in  a  potassium-ion  battery,  respectively,  owing  to  unique 
surface properties including high surface area, high porosity and great 
compatibility  with  electrolytes.  Deepak  et  al.  also  reported  that  the 
as-fabricated potassium-ion battery showed specific energy of 105 Wh 
(cid:0) 1  and  brilliant  cycling  stability  with  negligible capacitance  fading 
kg
over 10,000 cycles (Fig. 20c). 

introduced  a 

et  al. 

Quantum  dots  (synthetic  semiconducting  nanoparticles  which  can 
transport electrons and emit light of various colours whenever treated 
with UV light) are a new class of nanomaterials with a high scientific 
credibility due to their diverse applications. Most of the quantum dots 

were  derived  via  synthetic  routes  and  very  few  from  natural  sources 
(coals, cokes, etc.). In recent years, several carbon quantum dots have 
been produced in high yield from biomass waste. These biomass waste 
resulting carbon quantum dots possess unique properties such as cata-
lytic,  photoluminescence,  bio-compatibility,  and  high  stability 
[180–190]. Table 4 summarizes recently studied precursors, synthetic 
methods, size and applications of quantum dots derived from biomass. It 
is worth to note that in comparison to semiconductors, carbon quantum 
dots  are  more  substantial  in  terms  of  brilliant  biocompatibility, 
photo-stability,  low  cytotoxicity  and  lucid  surface  functionalization 
[180–190].  Thus,  the  biomass  wastes  are  good  choice  and  affordable 
precursor for the synthesis of carbon quantum dots for various cutting 
edge technologies. For deep study about internal structure and proper-
ties of carbon quantum dots derived from biomass waste, the readers 
could see a few outstanding reviews published earlier [180–190]. 

The synthesis of molecular systems resembling the natural molecular 
organizations is considered as a very challenging and significant task for 
human welfare. Nowadays, synthetic organic compounds (as artificial 
hormones) are utilised to duplicate the roles of natural hormones. In this 
line, hexestrol is one of the synthetic hormones which belong to a class 
of non-steroidal oestrogen hormones. It is mainly used to increase milk 
production, feed efficiency and reduction of fat for lean muscles in cows 
and other animals. The deficiency of oestrogen causes carcinogenic ef-
fects  in  animals  therefore,  its  accurate  detection  is  very  crucial.  To 
overcome  this  issue,  Chaudhary  et  al.  developed  an  efficient  electro-
chemical  sensor  to  perceive  this  compound  even  at  very  low  concen-
trations using nanomaterials derived from leftover Citrus limetta pulp 
and  immobilized  ruthenium  oxide  nanoparticles  [191].  Various  elec-
trochemical examinations like, cyclic voltammetry, pulse voltammetry 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102329S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig.  20. (a)  Steps  for  the  production  of  3DGF  using  biomass  waste,  SEM  image  of  3DGF  and  its  application  for  environmental  remediation  (Reproduced  with 
permission from Ref. [174]). (b) Oxygen rich carbon nanomaterial derived from kapok flower, SEM image of nanomaterial and its application in fabrication of SC 
devices (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [177]). (c) Facile carbonization-activation almond shells and its application for as negative and positive electrodes in 
a potassium-ion battery (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [178]). 

and chronoamperometry have been carried out in order to obtain the 
final conclusion. Also, real-time analysis of the samples was carried out 
to  estimate the  performance  of the  detector  in  different experimental 
conditions.  The  TEM  micrographs  depict  the  overlapped  sheet  like 
structure with mesoporous carbon matrix. The low temperature nitrogen 
adsorption studies showed that RuO2@PCB has a specific surface area of 
(cid:0) 1  and the mean pore size of 1.7 nm [191]. The presence of 
245 m2  g
RuO2  creates  more  active  sites  and  hence  more  sensitivity  to  detect 
hexestrol (even in the case of very low concertation). The RuO2@PCB 

(cid:0) 7–2 × 10

based ITO electrode has excellent performance with a detection ranging 
(cid:0) 5 M along with recovery up to 96.28% [191]. 
from 1 × 10
Similarly,  few  other  hormones  and  bioactive  molecules  have  also 
been detected using nanomaterials derived from biomass based on this 
concept [192]. Not only bioinspired molecules could be detected but it is 
equally effective for the synthetic chemicals. For instance, MgO/Fe3O4 
nanoparticles encapsulated in carbon shells derived from biomass have 
been  synthesised  for  the  efficient  removal  of  malachite  green  from 
different solutions with high selectivity [192]. Herein, MgCl2⋅6H2O was 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102330S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 4 
Carbon quantum dots from biomass sources: yields, synthetic route, size, along with their applications.  

S.N 

Precursor Biomass 

Method 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 

Sweet potato 
Banana peal 
Cabbage 
Sugarcane bagasse 
Garlic peels 
Taro peels 
Vegetables waste 
Tomato/ Urea 
Rice husk 
Fruits juice 
Sugarcane stalk /NaOH 
Plats Leaves 

Hydrothermal Carbonization 
Microwave Pyrolysis 
Low-temperature carbonization 
Ultrasonic assisted wet-chemical oxidation 
Green synthesis 
Green synthesis 
Refluxing process 
Microwave- pyrolysis 
Facile carbonization 
Hydrothermal Carbonization 
Hydrothermal carbonization 
Hydrothermal treatment 

sensing and cell imaging 

Application 
Fe3+
Determination of colitoxin DNA in human serum 
Cellular imaging 
Fluoride ion detection in water 
Fluorescent 
Fluorescent 
Greener synthesis 
Bioimaging of pathogens 
Photoluminescent 
Bio-imaging of mycobacterium and fungal cells 
Multicolour biolabeling and bioimaging in cancer cells 
Selective photoluminescence 

Size (nm) 

Yield (%) 

Refs. 

1–5 
5–15 
2–6 
8–11 
8–11 
8–11 
3–5 
4–40 
5–10 
3.6–5.5 
0.3–3.6 
5–10 

~8.6 
~16 
~16.5 
~4.45 
~26.2 
~13.8 
~10 
~8.5 
~10 
4.27 
12 
2 

[180] 
[181] 
[182] 
[183] 
[184] 
[184] 
[185] 
[186] 
[187] 
[188] 
[189] 
[190]  

added to produce Fe–Mg BACs using MgCl2  and FeCl3,  that act as acti-
vating  agents  and  peanut  shells  are  used  as  the  biomass  precursors. 
Introduction  of  Fe3O4/MgO  nanoparticles  as  core  into  carbon  matrix 
was a single step process and chemical reaction (it is spontaneous pro-
cess  and  endothermic  in  nature)  was  carried  out  in  CO2  atmosphere. 
Thermodynamic studies along with adsorption kinetics were analysed to 
know the working mechanism. It is examined that H-bonding between N 
atoms in MG and Mg-OH greatly enhances the active sites which in-turn 
increases  adsorption  capacity  of  as  fabricated  nanocomposite  [192]. 
Carbon  nano-spheres  (CNSs)  derived  from  Areca  catechu  biomass 
decorated with Pd nanoparticles and covered with carbon fibre paper 
(CFP)  were  employed  for  electro-oxidation  of  pyridyl  carbinol  in 
aqueous  acidic  solutions.  The  adsorbents  supported  with  MgO  were 
prepared via calcination of MgCl2⋅6H2O and then deposited on carbon 
derived from several biomass waste including sugarcane bagasse, coffee 
grounds, rice husk, and saw dust [193]. The obtained composites have a 
potential  for  the  adsorptive  removal  of  carbon  dioxide.  The  modified 
Avrami fractional kinetic model was adopted to correlate the CO2  up-
takes and to evaluate the CO2  adsorption kinetic performance. The ki-
netics of CO2  adsorption is dependant on the amount of MgO content. 
With  the  increase  in  MgO  content,  the  diffusion  resistance  increases, 
thereby decreasing the utilization of MgO. An optimum loading of 20 wt 
% MgO, can exhibit a 4.56 mmol of CO2  uptake per gm. Amongst the 
prepared MgO adsorbents, the rice husk ash supported sample (MgO--
RHA)  featured  high  CO2  adsorption  capacity,  due  to  good  textural 
properties, nano-crystallization of MgO particles, the uniform dispersion 
of active components and the enriched surface basicity. 

◦

A fixed-bead reactor attached with an IR analyser has been engaged 
for the adsorption and desorption of CO2. Briefly, the adsorption test can 
be demonstrated, where the reactor was packed with 0.1 g adsorbent 
C  in  N2  atmosphere  for  the  removal  of 
and  it  was  heated  at  200  
moisture. Then, after maintaining the temperature of the reactor, a gas 
stream with a flow rate 100 ml/min was passed through. The concen-
tration of CO2  as a function of time was recorded at the outlet. In the 
◦
desorption test, the temperature is raised to 400  
C at a heating rate of 
◦
10  
C/min. The monitoring of the CO2 is carried out till it becomes zero. 
Further, a mixture of CO2/N2  gas mixture was used in the adsorption 
test.  So,  in  this  fashion,  the  working  stability  was  determined  by 
repeated cycles of adsorption and desorption. It was claimed that recy-
clability  of  fabricated  adsorbents  offers  extraordinary  economic  and 
environmental  implications  in  terms  of  CO2  emission  mitigation  and 
waste management [193]. Osman et al. adopted an innovative method 
for  conversion  of  Miscanthus × giganteus  lignocellulosic  biomass  into 
activated carbon and then into multiwall carbon nanotubes (MCNTs). 
They  successfully  produced  activated  carbon  with  ultra-high  surface 
(cid:0) 1) and uniform pore size. Activated carbon produced 
area (1368 m2  g
via chemical activation involves two step pyrolysis (firstly under N2  at 
600 
C) as discussed elsewhere [194]. In 
brief,  the  first  step  of  activation  was  carried  out  in  the  presence  of 
(cid:0) 1).  In the 
phosphoric  acid which  offers  moderate  porosity  (676  m2  g
second step of activation, potassium hydroxide was used to activate the 

C and then for 3 hrs at 900 

◦

◦

biomass material, which further increased the surface area up to 833 m2 
(cid:0) 1. It was found that the activation was carried out using potassium 
g
hydroxide,  lead  multi-walled  CNTs  with  superior  hydrophilicity  and 
◦
The water contact angle examina-
high contact angle of around 14.97
tion was carried out to analyse the hydrophilicity of the intermediate 
and finally produced CNTs as revealed in Fig. 24a–d. The wettability of 
either the lignocellulosic waste or CNTs showed by the contact angle in θ 
of the water droplet is presumed by Young’s equation (Eq. (1)) 

cosθ =

γSV (cid:0) γSL
γLV

(1)  

where, γSV, γSL and γLV  stand for the interfacial surface tension of solid 
(S), liquid (L) and gas vapour (V), respectively. 

The as-synthesized CNTs were studied as the potential adsorbent for 
the removal of heavy metal ions. They were capable to remove ca. 84% 
of Pb2+
in an hour. In addition, such highly porous and hydrophilic CNTs 
can be subjected to a wide variety of applications like tissue engineering, 
water purification, energy storage devices, microelectronics etc. [194, 
195]. Surface morphologies of as prepared CNTs are presented in Fig. 21 
along with effectiveness of activated carbon and CNTs for the removal of 
Pb(II) ions [195]. Likewise, CNTs with ultra-high electrical conductivity, 
have proved themselves to beat the silicon based semiconductors that 
are conventionally utilized in microelectronics. Besides, CNTs are made 
of  carbonaceous  framework,  they  are  quite  compatible  with  organic 
materials  and  biological  systems.  Therefore,  CNTs  can  be  utilised  to 
mimic  biomaterials  and  future  technologies  related  to  genetic  engi-
neering.  This  work  not  only  opens  a  door  for  conversion  of  biomass 
waste to CNTs and other analogies but provides an idea for multistep 
processing  of  biomass  which  could  yield  different  functional  carbon 
materials  for  miscellaneous  applications.  Additionally,  such  efficient 
conversion of biomass waste into useful products solves real challenges 
and will be an example to endorse the sustainable economy by valorising 
biomass  waste.  In  this  work  for  the  production  of  hydrophilic 
multi-walled  CNTs  does  not  involve  any  harsh  chemicals  like  HNO3, 
H2SO4  etc. and expensive devices like lithography or CVD therefore it 
offers a green route for large scale production of CNTs. 

5. Biomass derived CNTs, graphene, and other nanostructures 

Carbon is an unique element. It astonishes the scientific fraternity 
time and time again. From the early benzene rings and complex poly-
mers to the all-carbon caged fullerenes and tubular nanotubes, and even 
to the current miracle material graphene. Graphene, the single 2D layer 
of  graphite,  is  considered  as  the  mother  of  all  nano-allotropes.  It  has 
attracted huge attention from the scientific community and more than 
300,000 research articles and thousands of patents have been published 
so far. Several precursors and starting reactants such as graphite, coal, 
polymers, petroleum waste, carbon waste, palm oil, sugar, soybean oil 
CO2, activated carbon, waste zinc batteries, biomass and so on have been 
used for the synthesis of graphene and graphene like nanosystem. The 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102331S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 21. SEM images of (a-c) activated carbon and MWCNTs. TEM (b-d) images of activated carbon and MWCNTs (c) Effectiveness of activated carbon and CNTs for 
Pb(II) removal (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [195]). 

key  nano-allotropes  of  carbon  (similar  nanostructures)  have  recently 
been  derived  using  biomass  resources  are  schematically  presented  in 
Fig. 22. These nanocarbons have been explored a lot in the recent years 
(especially for renewable energy, biomedical, smart devices and quan-
tum computing applications) owing to their exceptional chemical and 
physical  properties  [10,17,20,25].  The  diverse  properties  of  carbon 
virtually exist in every phase of matter that is why; it is playing a sig-
nificant role in every aspect of our daily life as discussed in the first two 
sections  of  the  review.  Remarkably,  nano-allotropes  (e.g.  graphene, 
CNTs,  fullerenes,  carbon  onion  etc.)  change  their  physio-chemical 
properties with change in thickness, size and aspect ratio of the same. 
Similarly,  band  structure,  electron  hopping,  molecular  dynamics, 
quantum  tunnelling  and  quantum  hall  properties  of  nano-allotropes 
directly  depend  on  thickness  and  number  of  carbon  layers  present  in 
the  nanosystem  [181,185].  Therefore,  finding  a  cost-effective  way  to 
create high-quality 2D and 3D graphene and its derivatives and further 
to explore their properties is of importance [186,191–193]. Compared 
to  their  pure  carbon  forms,  N-containing  2D  and  3D  graphene  and 

graphene-like materials are more attractive, as the N involvement could 
allow tuning the electronic, catalytic and mechanical properties of the 
material. Most of the existing methods and precursors to produce gra-
phene,  heteroatom  doped  graphene  and  their  3D  analogues  require 
several tedious steps involving the use of hazardous chemicals like nitric 
acid, hydrazine, NH3 etc. [10,17,20,25]. Low-cost polymers and similar 
precursors  as  raw  material  have  been  pyrolyzed  for  the  synthesis  of 
carbon nanomaterials including graphene, and pyrolysis of N-containing 
polymers led to N-containing graphene-like structures [147]. However, 
the key is to identify an appropriate, low-cost, N- containing polymeric 
precursor that is suitable for easy processing. In all these aspects several 
review and  state-of-the-art  have  been  published [196,200,201].  Simi-
larly, different forms of graphene, graphene nanoribbon, graphene with 
hetero  atoms,  graphene  nano-plates,  graphene  quantum  dots  etc. 
(numerous analogues of these nanocarbons consisting boron, silicon and 
other  elements  have  also  been  developed  for  specific  engineering  ap-
plications but no need to discuss it in this review) have also been derived 
from  different  sources  as  presented  elsewhere  [196,197].  However, 

Fig. 22. Diagram probability for the conversion of biochar derived from biomass into graphitic nanocarbons under nanosizing conditions.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102332S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

biomass  wastes  are  most  affordable  and  eco-friendly  sources  for  the 
fabrication  of  such  nanosystems  including  N/S-  containing  carbon 
nano-sheets [196,197]. Thus, a brief summary linked to graphene, CNTs 
and analogues carbon nanostructures derived from biomass is needed. 
This inspires us to carry out a systematic discussion on this topic and to 
explore the possibilities which will be useful for the readers. During the 
last  ten  years,  various  biomass  precursors  have  been  used  for  the 
fabrication  of  graphene/oxide,  CNTs,  fullerenes,  carbon  quantum  dot 
and several other carbon nanostructures as diagrammatically shown in 
Fig. 22 [174,199,202]. 

Zhao et al. proposed a simplistic hydrothermal and then single step 
carbonization process to obtain two dimensional graphene-like carbon 
nanostructure from pomelo peel (biomass waste) as the precursor [199]. 
In that work is it pointed out that the synergistic combination of H2O2 
and acetic acid is very important parameter which defines the thickness 
of the final product i.e. graphene-like carbon and its porosity. Zhao et al. 
also  proved  that  acetic  acid  is  chiefly  accountable  for  decreasing  the 
thickness  of  nano-sheets  while  H2O2  is  accomplished  in  producing 
enormous pores as well as it also assists the peeling effect of acetic acid. 
Thus,  using  different  concertation  ratio  of  H2O2  and  acetic  acid, 
graphene-like carbon nanostructure with diverse thickness (5–11 nm) of 
pores  has  been  synthesized.  To  test  the  applicability  of  the 
as-synthesised  graphene-like  nanocarbons,  microwave  absorption  and 
thermal insulation properties have been assessed. And it is stated that, 
the  studied  graphene-like  nanocarbons  showed  effective  absorption 
bandwidth up to 6.4 GHz along with reflection loss of (cid:0) 56.5 dB even in 
the case of low loading (4 wt%). Currently the conversion of solar energy 
into  chemical energy  (in the  form  of  hydrogen gas)  is  one  of  the  hot 
research  topics.  To  achieve  the  same  several  strategies  have  been 
developed and utilised for the different applications [202]. In this line, 
photo-catalytic  water  splitting  has  been  projected  as  one  of  the  most 

Table 5 
Biomass derived graphene, carbon nanotubes and like nanomaterials.  

significant  methods  for  workable  and  clean  hydrocarbon  fabrication. 
Mateo et al. fabricated high quality N-doped graphene nanosheets via 
pyrolysis  of  biomass  waste  (derived  from  chitosan)  and  then  treated 
with RhCrOx/STO:Al nanoparticles (acting as the co-catalyst), showing 
a photocatalytic efficacy of around 153 mmol of hydrogen per g of entire 
photo-catalyst &  74 mmol/g of oxygen in the case of 24 h irradiation 
with  UV–Vis  light  [199].  Mateo  et  al.  characterised  the  as-prepared 
nanocomposites using XPS, Raman, XRD, HRTEM and temporal evolu-
tion of hydrogen to support the results. Furthermore, Xie et al. devel-
oped  a  facile  cyclic  oxidation  route  for  the  production  of  carbon 
nanotubes  directly  derived  from  biomass  waste.  They  studied  six 
different  plant  based  materials  (wood  fibre,  Thermomechanical  pulp, 
Dried bamboo, Ashless filter paper and alpha cellulose) which have been 
used  as  precursors  for  the  production  of CNTs.  Xie  et  al.  first treated 
◦
C for several hours to 
aforementioned biomass waste in air to about 240 
remove moistures along with partial carbonization. After this process, 
the percentage of each material underwent for the cyclic heating process 
at 400 
C, while the remaining percentage pre-treated  biomass waste 
was exposed to a continuous heating process in air at 400 
C for 8 h 
under ambient pressure. In the next step final product was washed with 
a  15%  HCl  solution  assisted  with  sonic  pulsation.  Finally,  carbon 
◦
nanotubes were dried at 110 
C for 12 h and examined using a HRTEM 
and XRD [199]. 

◦

◦

It is  difficult to recap  almost all research  articles published in the 
recent years dealing with conversion of biomass into graphene and alike 
nanocarbons  in  this  review.  Thus  herein  we  try  to  summarise  the 
research work (Table 5) carried out in the recent years related to pro-
duction of graphene, carbon nanotubes and similar nanocarbons from 
biomass along with synthetic methods used and their applications. This 
collected  data  provide  an  ample  set  of  new  references  that  could  be 
useful  for  further  reading  for  the  researchers  working  in  the  related 

Biomass Sources & Year  Methods and conditions 

Product 

Applications 

S. 
N 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 
6 
7 

8 

9 

Wheat straw & sawdust 

Utilizing waste pyrolysis gases and waste heat 

3D graphene foams 

Waste pomelo peel 

Hydrothermal process 

Graphene-like nano- sheets 

Biomass-loofah 

Chemical activation and graphitization 

Agricultural Waste 

Chemical synthesis 

Pyrolysis at 900 
Pyrolysis at 1100 
Chemical synthesis 

◦

C in Ar atm 
◦
C 

Chitosan 
Alginic acid & chitosan 
Pear waste 

Guanine and colloidal 
silica 
Populus wood biomass 

Hydrothermal carbonization 

Graphene-like carbons 

Chemical activation using KOH and carbonization  Highly porous graphene 

N-doped graphene like 
nanomaterials 
Amine- functionalized bio 
graphene 
N-doped, defective graphene 
Few-layers graphene 
Graphene-based aerogels 

10 

Kelp 

Facile chemical synthesis 

11 
12 
13 
14 

15 
16 
17 
18 

Rice husk and Jute 
Natural humic acid 
Rice straw 
Plant 
Materials 
Chlorella 
Chitosan 
Bacterial cellulose 
Chitosan &leaves 

Hemp Stem 

19 
20  Wood tracheids 
Palm Oil 
21 

Carbonization 
Two step chemical synthesis 
Chemical vapour deposition 
Oxidative carbonization in air @240 

◦

C 

Chemical synthesis 
Cobalt catalysed carbonization 
One-step carbonization 
Self-assembly & ice template method without any 
activation 
Carbon activation 
Salvo-thermal method 
Pyrolysis 

21  Wood waste 
22 
23 

Natural Plant biomass 
Apple 

Microwave activation 
Hydrothermal 
Liquid-phase microextraction 

Cobalt encapsulated multilayer- 
graphene 
Graphene-like activated carbon 
Graphene nanosheets 
Carbon nanotubes 
Carbon 
nanotubes 
N-doped carbon nanotube 
N-doped carbon nanotube 
N-doped carbon network 
N-Self-doped carbon framework 

Nanowire 
Carbon nanotubes 
Carbon nanotube elongated 
fullerene 
Fullerene-like soot particles 
Porous N-doped carbon sheet 
Carbonaceous aerogel 

Environmental &energy-storage 
applications. 
Microwave absorption & thermal infrared 
properties 
Asymmetric supercapacitors 

Ciprofloxacin adsorption in water- 
modelling 
Catalyst for conversion CO2 to methane 
Hydrogen generation 
Environmental remediation & energy 
storage 
Electrocatalytic oxygen reduction 

Cost effective CO2 capture at atmospheric 
pressure 
Electrocatalyst for versatile renewable 
energy 
Supercapacitors 
Supercapacitors 
Novel Synthesis 
Mechanical properties 

Oxygen reduction 
Oxygen reduction reaction 
Asymmetric supercapacitor 
Supercapacitance 

Supercapacitance 
Supercapacitors 
Facile synthesis 

Facile synthesis & New Chemistry 
Rechargeable Li/Na batteries 
Sensing 

Refs. 

[174] 

[199] 

[200] 

[201] 

[202] 
[203] 
[204] 

[205] 

[206] 

[207] 

[208] 
[209] 
[210] 
[211] 

[212] 
[213] 
[214] 
[215] 

[216] 
[217] 
[218] 

[219] 
[220] 
[221]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102333S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 23. General steps involves in conversion of different biomass feedstocks into biochar network (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [173]).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102334S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 23. (continued). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102335S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

fields  especially  beginners  working  on  biomass  based  carbon 
nanomaterials. 

5.1. Mechanism of carbon nanostructures formation (nano-biochar) from 
biomass 

Up  to  here, we can see  that biomass and  related materials  can be 
converted  into  a  wide  variety  of  carbon  materials  with  different 
morphology  and  properties.  Hence,  it  is  important  to  discuss  the 
mechanistic  path  involved  in  biochar  formation  and  consequently  its 
conversion  into,  graphitic  nanocarbons  (carbon  nanotubes,  carbon 
quantum dots graphene oxide, graphene and graphene etc.). The exact 
mechanism involved in carbon nanostructures formation from biomass 
is necessary to tune the surface properties, functionalisation and thermo- 
mechanical  stability  of  the  resulting  functional  materials.  The  afore-
mentioned biomass feedstock is primarily composed of lignin, cellulose 
and hemicelluloses, and each constituent is pyrolyzed via different re-
action mechanistic path and at different rates, and degree of decompo-
sition of these constituents as analysed by Liu et al. and others. [173, 
221–228].  However,  rate  of  reaction  and  nature  of  the  end  product 
including  surface  morphology  are  directly  affected  by  the  procedure 
parameters, like temperature, pressure, gaseous environment, particle 
size, heating rates and type of reactor which were well discussed in the 

previous sections of this review. 

The  reaction  mechanism  of  biochar  formation  from  pyrolysis  of 
biomass consisting hemicellulose is presented in the Fig. 23a. It begins 
with  depolymerization  to  produce  oligosaccharides  followed  by 
breaking  of  the  glycosidic  bond  of  the  xylan  polymeric  chain  and 
consequently  rearrangement  of  the  depolymerized  molecules  to  form 
1,4-anhydro-D-xylopyranose  as  descried  in  the  cited  paper  [222]. 
Furthermore,  1,4-anhydro-D-xylopyranose  function  as  the  transitional 
product  in  the  case  of  hemicellulose  pyrolysis  and  biochar  formation 
[223,224].  The  mechanism  of  biomass  comprising  lignin  as  key 
component is quite different than that of hemicelluloses and cellulose 
because  of  its  complex  molecular  structure.  It  is  believed  that  free 
radical reactions are mainly responsible for the biochar formation dur-
ing  the  pyrolysis  of  lignin  based  biomass  as  discussed  in  details  else-
where  and  presented  in  the  Fig.  23b.  [225,226].  The  reaction 
mechanism involved in the formation of biochar during the pyrolysis of 
biomass consisting cellulose is close to hemicellulose because of struc-
tural  similarities.  The  key  steps  of  pyrolysis  of  cellulosic  biomass  are 
presented  in  the  Fig.  23c.  It  is  interesting  to  note,  there  are  several 
inorganic chemical moieties in biomass instead of lignin, cellulose and 
hemicelluloses that can also badly affect the biochar development. It is 
examined  that  while  pyrolysis,  chemical  species  like  Cl  and  K  are 
extremely  mobile  and  can  evaporate  at  lower  temperatures  in 

Fig. 24. (Left) Outline about the cutting edge research and innovative applications of biomass derived nanomaterials for next-generation multifunctional devices and 
multidisciplinary  research.  (Right)  Diagrammatic  representation  of  roadmap  for  the  opportunities  using  carbon  nanomaterials  derived  from  biomass  as  major 
constituent for the development of new hybrid nanomaterials and nanocomposites. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102336S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

comparison  to Mg and Ca  [227]. In addition, biomass having  hetero-
atoms  during  the  pyrolysis  process  can  show  autocatalytic  process  as 
discussed in details elsewhere [221–227] Similarly, biomass feedstocks 
consist nitrogen, sulphur, phosphor etc. in the form of complex organic 
molecules within the cells of plants and they radially decompose at low 
temperatures which could influence mechanistic path of biomass as well 
[228]. In the same line, several biomass consists phenol and aniline like 
chemical  moieties  and  authors  believed  that  these  biomass  feedstock 
may undergo Friedel Crafts Acylation type reaction during the pyrolysis 
and lead biochar network formation as presented in the Fig. 23d. 

The mechanism of biochar network formation divided into the main 
crucial  steps  (decomposition,  rapid  volatilization,  polymerization- 
depolymerized,  dehydration,  intramolecular  rearrangement,  intra-
molecular  condensation  and  aromatization)  is  presented  in  Fig.  23. 
These steps are based on particular reaction conditions as discussed in 
the original cited papers. The steps are not universal and constant and 
may  vary  with  the  changes  of  reaction  conditions  in  a  particular  py-
rolysis process.  However, this general mechanism of biochar network 
formation during the biomass pyrolysis is sufficient to understand the 
internal  chemistry  and  changes  in  the  molecular  structure  of  compo-
nents present in the biomass. The biochar network (1), (2), (3) and (4) 
obtained  from  various  biomass  can  be  transformed  into  graphitic 
nanocarbons as shown in Fig. 22 under nanosizing conditions involving 
dehydration,  decarboxylation,  rearrangements,  aromatization,  and 
intramolecular condensation to form 0D, 1D, 2D nanostructures or it can 
be  converted  to  the  low  molecular  3D  carbon  nanomaterials.  In  this 
review we have presented ample of examples regarding conversion of 
biochar to graphitic nanocarbons along with huge recent bibliography 
for further regrading [189–221]. 

6. Porous materials with surface area exceeding 1000 m2  g
derived from biomass 

¡1 

Texture, surface morphology and surface composition characterize 
the  fundamental  properties  of  all  kinds  of  materials  (including  nano, 
macro and mesophases). They primarily depend on chemical structure 
and  processing  method  [174,195].  Peculiarity  and  applicability  of 
nanomaterials is mostly determined by surface area, chemical compo-
sition  and  their  surface  morphologies,  which  directly  influences  the 
surface characteristics such as roughness, wettability, particles size, di-
mensions, adhesiveness and corresponding potential use for adsorption, 
electrocatalysis, printing, dying, catalysis, lamination, water repellence 
and biocompatible processes [202–207,220,221]. Thus, the proper un-
derstanding of internal morphology, topography and surface properties 
of materials is crucial for their utilisation in numerous industrial areas 
like coating, packaging defence, automotive, energy storage, aerospace, 
construction,  textile,  and  healthcare.  It  is  notable  that  different  cate-
gories of materials have diverse nature and physical conformations that 
are responsible for their resulting morphologies and surface properties. 
However, the parameters like composition, molecular weight, crystal-
linity, melting point, grain size and dimensions directly affect the sur-
face  properties  and  surface  area  of  a  particular  material  [27–33, 
136–140]. In addition, we have discussed in the previous sections the 
significance  of  surface  morphologies  in  the  case  of  nanomaterials 
derived from biomass waste with examples for different applications. It 
has been found that the high surface area of materials derived from the 
biomass play a  vital role in energy storage, water  purification, heavy 
metal removal, oxygen reduction reaction and as catalyst supports. For 
instance,  Peng  et  al.  fabricated  hierarchically  porous  carbon  nano-
(cid:0) 1) from biomass 
materials having  ultra-high surface area (3557 m2  g
waste  of  rice  husks  and  crab  shells  through  a  facile  hydrothermal 
strategy and then activation of the same using KOH. Peters explained the 
reason of large specific surface area along with high porosity in terms of 
organic-inorganic association between the materials derived from rice 
husks and crab shells. The as fabricated nanosystem was used as elec-
trode materials for ultracapacitors, which exhibit capacitance of around 

(cid:0) 1  along  with  exceptional  cyclic  stability  with  capacitance 
474  F  g
retention  of  95.6%  over  20,000  charge-discharge  cycles  in  6M-KOH 
solution  as  electrolyte  [223].  Likewise,  Ma  et  al.  developed  a  novel 
path  for the extraction of microporous  layered carbon from kiwi-skin 
biomass and then constructed an electrochemical device for very accu-
rate detection of ascorbic acid (detection limit: 0.02 μM), dopamine (dl: 
0.16  μM)  and  uric  acid  (dl:  0.11  μM)  in  human  urine  [231].  The 
as-fabricated microporous layered carbon system exhibits high surface 
(cid:0) 1) and efficiently supports electroactive processes and 
area (1256 m2 g
endorses the oxygen reduction reaction [231]. Keeping such importance 
in mind, Table 6 summarizes solid materials derived from biomass with 
(cid:0) 1. The table could play significant 
specific surface area above 1000 m2 g
role for the reader to develop newer applications  and new science as 
well. 

Last  but  not  the  least,  the  presented  set  of  surface  area  of  carbon 
nanomaterials  (0D,  1D,  2D,  3D  etc.)  derived  from  different  types  of 
biomass having different morphologies could be used for implementa-
tion  in  advanced  technologies  (e.g.  supercapacitor,  batteries,  coating, 
fuel cells, nano-mechatronics etc.). Moreover, Table 6 also indicates the 
cutting  edge  applications  of  developed  carbon  structures  to  tackle 
several  challenges  in  human  connection  [238,241,243].  Similarly, 
focused research on materials with high surface is very obligatory for the 
multidisciplinary  studies,  especially  for  the  quantum  physics,  electro-
dynamics, and electronics and so on. Of course, the bulk synthesis of 
nanomaterials derived from biomass with high surface area and uniform 
porosity is still a great challenge. Moreover, most of the methods need 
optimization and commercialization [221,236–238]. 

6.1. Reasons of high surface area of nano-biochar derived from biomass 

During the pyrolysis of the biomass, there occurs loss of water and 
escaping of the volatile materials from the carbon skeleton (as shown in 
the mechanism of biochar formation. Fig. 23a-d), which results in the 
generation of the pores within the biochar. In other word biochar for-
mation involves exfoliation of layers which is mainly responsible or the 
high specific surface area (a property of solids defined as the total sur-
face area of a material per unit of mass. It defines the type and properties 

Table 6 
High and ultra-high specific surface area of some selected carbon nanostructures 
derived from biomass.  

Sources of Biomass 

Surface area 
(cid:0) 1) 
(m2 g

Application 

Refs. 

S. 
N 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

6 

7 

8 
9 
10 

Sunflower piths 
Soybean straw 
Peanut shells 
Glucose 
Lignocellulosic 
biomass 
Arundo donax Linn & 
Pomelo peel 
Crab shells & rice 
husks 
Potato waste residue 
Aloe peel 
Oil Palm Leaf & Palm 
Kernel Shell 
Silkworm cocoon 

11 
12  Waste pomelo peels 
Loofah sponge 
13 
Soybean 
14 

15 
16 
16 
18 
19 
20 
21 

Arundo donax 
Parinari curatellifolia 
Rice husk 
Kiwi skin 
Oleana leaves 
Chitosan 
Biomass Waste 

2690 
1615 
1642 
2000 
1368 

1252 

3557 

1052 
1286 
1324 

3386 
2167 
1531 
1749 

3298 
1898 
2943 
1226 
1218 
1510 
3560 

Dye removal 
Capacitors 
Water Purification 
Facile Synthesis 
Wastewater treatment 

Kinetics studies 

Energy Storage 

Supercapacitor 
New energy devices 
Energy Storage 

Supercapacitors 
Energy storage 
Supercapacitor 
Oxygen reduction & 
Supercapacitor 
CO2 Adsorption 
Supercapacitor 
Electrically conductive 
Sensing devices 
Supercapacitor 
Oxygen Reduction 
Supercapacitor 

[27] 
[136] 
[138] 
[140] 
[194] 

[229] 

[230] 

[231] 
[232] 
[233] 

[234] 
[235] 
[236] 
[237] 

[238] 
[239] 
[240] 
[241] 
[242] 
[243] 
[244]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102337S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

of a material) and excellent surface properties of carbon nanomaterials 
derived from biomass. The porosity (the volumetric fraction of pores in 
the material) of the biochar ranges from micro to macro and the surface 
area of the biochar is deeply associated with the porosity. These pores 
may be onto the surface or in internal structure of materials. Generation 
of pores in-turn depends on density and constituents of a material. High 
specific surface area leading to highly porous morphologies (as shown in 
SEM and TEM images in previous sections) creates impacts on various 
biochar properties and applications. Uniform pore size (average diam-
eter in the most of cases ~ 17–20 nm) distribution in the case of nano-
materials derived from biochar further enhances potential applications. 
Porosity and surface area are the essential physicochemical character-
istics of the biochar. The biomass composition and temperature at which 
pyrolysis occurs are the factors responsible for the pore structure for-
mation.  Barrett-Joyner-Halenda  (BJH)  and  Brunauer-Emmett-Teller 
(BET) academic models widely used to evaluate surface properties like 
specific surface area, porosity and pore diameter [245–249]. In addition, 
XRD,  TEM  and  SEM  techniques  are  complimentary  of  BET  and  gives 
crucial  information  about  surface  properties  of  carbon  nanomaterials 
[245–249]. The surface charges and the cationic exchange depend on 
the  surface  area  [245].  The  water  retention  capacity  of  the  biochar 
derived nanomaterials is also enhanced with increased porosity and high 
surface area interconnected structure [246]. Interestingly, biochar have 
been found to be a good sorbent and this is strongly dependant on the 
area and the porous nature that can be employed for wastewater man-
agement [247]. Ultra-high surface area results in enhanced active sites 
that can influence the reactivity and applicability of the biochar derived 
carbon nanostructures [248]. Again the pore shapes have been observed 
to play an important role in hydrogen storage capacity. The difference in 
surface-to-volume  ratio  and  the  concavity  affects  the  capability  of 
hydrogen storage [249]. The pores within the biochar also act as shelters 
housing ample of microorganisms (bacteria, fungi, protozoa etc.) that 
protects them from predators and toxins. Therefore, it is essential for the 
upcoming research to focus on the upgradation and development of the 
high surface area porous structure of the biochar. 

7. Future challenges 

The  last  two  decades  have  shown  examples  of  numerous  carbon 
nanomaterials  which  were  derived  from  biomass  waste  and  some  of 
them are available in the market for daily use. Likewise, at present we 
know the methods for synthesis of desired carbon nanomaterials using 
biomass  as  precursor  for  various  applications.  However,  some  chal-
lenges related to conversion, processing and commercial uses of carbon 
nanomaterials derived from biomass waste are still the bottleneck in its 
real growth as listed below:  

I  Huge amounts of biomass waste (solid, powder, semisolid, liquid 
etc.  derived  from  different  sources)  are  produced  as  domestic 
waste.  Only  a  few  countries  are  strictly  focusing  on  proper 
management and collection of different kinds of biomass waste 
separately. Therefore, due to the lack of suitable collection sys-
tems  nearly  65  to  70%  of  domestic  biomass  waste  cannot  be 
transformed into value-added nanosystems. It is a big challenge 
for our policy makers which have to be worked on.  

II  Conversion  of  biomass  to  carbon  nanomaterials  mostly  takes 
place  at  high  temperature  (ranging  from  450  to  1200 
C)  and 
under  applied pressure  for  a  long duration of  processing. Such 
harsh conditions greatly minimise the yield of nanomaterials due 
to  rapid  degradation  of  carbon  nanostructure  as  charted  in 
Table 3.  

◦

III  Most of the proposed routes for synthesis of carbon nanomaterials 
from biomass involve the use of hazardous chemicals like H2SO4, 
H3PO4, ZnCl2, heavy metal catalysts, NaOH, KMnO4  etc. which 
are not neutral to the environment. Thus such recycling could be 

irrelevant  if  we  will  not  consider  these  challenges  in  the  near 
future.  

IV  Certainly, several routes have been developed for the conversion 
of biomass waste into valued products but owing to high oper-
ating  expenditures  only  few  of  them  are  competitive  at  com-
mercial scale. Therefore, new energy policies and tax relaxation 
could solve this problem.  

V  Nanotechnologies  enabled  large  scale  production  of  different 
value-added  nanomaterials  from  biomass  waste  for  several  ap-
plications like renewable energy, sensing, diagnosing, catalysis, 
intelligent  devices  etc.  which  can  never  be  achieved  by  bulk 
materials.  However,  the  practical  implementation  of  these  ap-
plications in everyday life is still limited due to the high cost and 
hazardous effect on human health which needs to be resolved.  
VI  Nanomaterials  derived  from  biomass  need  to  be  tested  and 
examined  for  biomedical,  tissue  engineering,  as  nanofiller  for 
composites,  self-healing  and  for  smart  devices  at  commercial 
scale.  

VII  The authors suggest that the wide range commercial applicability 
of biomass derived carbon nanomaterials can be achieved if re-
searchers and research granting agencies work toward the real 
times applications of these materials. Our expectations about the 
progress and future perspectives for biochar derived functional 
carbon nanomaterials are illustrated in the Fig. 22.  

VIII  Fabrication  of  hybrid  3D  nanocomposites  (tetrapod  and  alike 
nanomaterials) derived from biomass mass which could facilitate 
wastewater decontamination using photocatalytic technology for 
various advanced applications [250,251]. 

8. Summary and closing remarks 

Rapid population growth, industrialization and demanding lifestyle 
are  the  key  factors  continuously  boosting  the  production  of  biomass 
waste. The mismanagement of biomass waste becomes a threat for hu-
manity and will be responsible for several fatal diseases including air, 
water and food poisoning. Thus, massive accumulation of biomass waste 
is a big challenge for the scientific fraternity and policymakers. How-
ever, during the last 30–35 years several efforts have been paved to solve 
these critical issues in terms of conversion of biomass waste into valued 
products  (say,  biogas,  biofuel  and  reusable  materials/nanomaterials). 
And nowadays, the technology driven countries like the USA, UK, Ger-
many, Sweden, Japan etc. are converting biomass waste into big busi-
ness.  Remarkably,  during  the  last  10–15  years  several  productive 
engineering approaches have been developed for the transformation of 
biomass  waste  into  carbon  nanomaterials.  In  this  review,  we  have 
focused on recent innovations linked to the methods used for conversion 
of biomass into carbon nanomaterials and their application in different 
research fields. 

The first section of the review comprises most of the discoveries since 
2010 related to synthesis of carbon nanomaterials from biomass waste 
for  electrochemical  devices  such  as  supercapacitors,  batteries,  super-
capatteries,  sensors  etc.  It  provides  current  updates  in  methodologies 
and strategies for the development of high performance and affordable 
electrochemical  devices  using  carbon  nanomaterials  derived  from the 
biomass waste. Moreover, we have added important data in the form of 
Table 1 along with plentiful references associated with the cutting-edge 
research going on worldwide linked to the biomass based nanomaterials 
and their application for electrochemical devices. 

The second section covers the basic principles, methodologies, recent 
innovations  and  applicability  of  microwave  assisted  pyrolysis,  hydro-
thermal  carbonation,  molten  salt  process,  ball  milling  method,  single 
step pyrolysis under inert atmosphere for conversion of biomass waste 
into valued carbon nanomaterials. For the better understanding, merits 
and demerits of each presented method have been discussed point by 
point.  Moreover,  some  miscellaneous  routes  have  been  added  which 
cover  several  strategies for  synthesis  of desired  carbon  nanomaterials 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102338S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

with special morphologies by combining steps that are involved in more 
than  one  method.  The  authors  believe  that,  in-depth  discussion  with 
numerous examples explored in this section, evidently highlights how a 
selected conversion method could be appropriate for a particular type of 
carbon nanomaterials using a specific feedstock. 

The last section of this review covers the recent progress in synthesis 
of  graphene,  carbon  nanotubes  and  similar  carbon  nanomaterials 
derived from biomass precursors. In this section, we have also presented 
(Table  5)  lately  developed  carbon  nanomaterials  having  surface  area 
(cid:0) 1  derived  from  biomass  waste.  The  materials 
higher  than  1000  m2  g
with such a high surface area are getting huge attention because large 
surface  area  determines  the  contact  with  surroundings,  exceptional 
change in reactivity and materials properties. Hence, this data could be 
utilised for synthesis of new nanomaterials with high surface area from 
biomass and for newer applications as well. It is challenging to discuss in 
detail about all new discoveries, innovations and outstanding achieve-
ments related to the topic during the last ten years. Therefore, in each 
section of this review we did our best to supplement some essential data, 
resources,  parameters,  properties  and  applications  in  a  form  of 
Tables (Tables 1–6). In this way, this state-of-the-arts not only demon-
strates the recent progress in common methodologies for production of 
nanomaterials  using  biomass  waste  and  their  applications,  but  also 
different aspects of biomass derived nanomaterials for the development 
of new and sustainable technologies. 

We anticipate that the efforts which have been made to accumulate 
the data, evaluate the results, demonstrate the theories as well as the 
lucid explanations of scientific results could be advantageous not only 
for academic researchers, graduate students and engineers sharing in-
terests  in  carbon  nanomaterials  (derived  from  biomass),  but  also  to 
encourage industrialist and policy makers to think about the productive 
conversion  and  wide  range  applications  of  carbon  nanomaterials 
derived from biomass waste. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Santosh  K.  Tiwari:  Conceptualization,  Formal  analysis,  Funding 
acquisition,  Investigation,  Methodology,  Resources,  Software,  Valida-
tion, Writing – original draft. Michał Bystrzejewski: Formal analysis, 
Methodology, Supervision, Validation, Writing – original draft. Amrita 
De  Adhikari:  Writing  –  review  &  editing.  Andrzej  Huczko:  Formal 
analysis, Methodology, Resources. Nannan Wang: Funding acquisition, 
Investigation, Methodology, Resources. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The  authors  declare  no  conflict  of  interest  associated  with  this 

manuscript. 

Acknowledgement 

SKT would like to thank the Polish National Agency for Academic 
Exchange  (NAWA)  research  grant  (PPN/ULM/2019/1/00008/DEC/2) 
to  make  this  work  possible  by  supporting  it  as  part  of  its  proposed 
research  work.  SKT  wants  to  thanks  Prof.  Yanqiu  Zhu,  University  of 
Exeter, UK for his valuable suggestion during the 3rd revision. More-
over, we are very grateful to the researchers and scientific community 
whose work directly or indirectly cited in this review article. 

References 

[1] Shortle JS, Abler DG. Environmental policies for agricultural pollution control. 

CABI; 2001. 

[2] Lee KK, Miller MR, Shah AS. Air pollution and stroke. J Stroke 2018;20(1):2. 
[3] Sha T, Liu J, Sun M, Li L, Bai J, Hu Z, Zhou M. Green and low-cost synthesis of 
nitrogen-doped graphene-like mesoporous nanosheets from the biomass waste of 
okara for the amperometric detection of vitamin C in real samples. Talanta 2019; 
200:300–6. 

[4] Xu C, Nasrollahzadeh M, Selva M, Issaabadi Z, Luque R. Waste-to-wealth: 

biowaste valorization into valuable bio (nano) materials. Chem Soc Rev 2019;48 
(18):4791–822. 

[5] Morganti P. Saving the environment by nanotechnology and waste raw materials: 
use of chitin nanofibrils by EU research projects. J Appl Cosmetol 2013;31:89–96. 

[6] Samaddar P, Ok YS, Kim KH, Kwon EE, Tsang DC. Synthesis of nanomaterials 
from various wasteand their new age applications. J Clean Prod 2018;197: 
1190–209. 

[7] Acharya B, Sule I, Dutta A. A review on advances of torrefaction technologies for 

biomass processing. Biomass Convers Biorefinery 2012;2(4):349–69. 

[8] Perea-Moreno MA, Samer´on-Manzano E, Perea-Moreno AJ. Biomass as renewable 

energy: worldwide research trends. Sustainability 2019;11(3):863. 

[9] Liu J, Min S, Wang F, Zhang Z. High-performance aqueous supercapacitors based 
on biomass-derived multiheteroatom self-doped porous carbon membranes. 
Energy Technol 2020;8(9):2000391. 

[10] Kang Y, Yang Q, Bartocci P, Wei H, Liu SS, Wu Z, et al. Bioenergy in China: 
evaluation of domestic biomass resources and the associated greenhouse gas 
mitigation potentials. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2020;127:109842. 

[11] Xuan J, Leung MK, Leung DY, Ni M. A review of biomass-derived fuel processors 
for fuel cell systems. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2009;13(6–7):1301–13. 

[12] Su R, Wang D, Liu M, Yan J, Wang JX, Zhan Q, Pu Y, Foster NR, Chen JF. 

Subgram-scale synthesis of biomass waste-derived fluorescent carbon dots in 
subcritical water for bioimaging, sensing, and solid-state patterning. ACS Omega 
2018;3(10):13211–8. 

[13] Foong SY, Liew RK, Yang Y, Cheng YW, Yek PNY, Mahari WAW, Lee XY, Han CS, 

Vo DVN, Van Le Q, Aghbashlo M. Valorization of biomass waste to engineered 
activated biochar by microwave pyrolysis: progress, challenges, and future 
directions. Chem Eng J 2020;389:124401. 

[14] Noushad M, Ab Rahman I, Husein A, Mohamad D. Nanohybrid dental composite 

using silica from biomass waste. Powder Technol 2016;299:19–25. 

[15] Pachuau L, Dutta RS, Hauzel L, Devi TB, Deka D. Evaluation of novel 

microcrystalline cellulose from Ensete glaucum (Roxb.) Cheesman biomass as 
sustainable drug delivery biomaterial. Carbohydr Polym 2019;206:336–43. 
[16] Bhatnagar A, Sillanp¨a¨a M, Witek-Krowiak A. Agricultural waste peels as versatile 
biomass for water purification–a review. Chem Eng J 2015;270:244–71. 
[17] Sha T, Li X, Liu J, Sun M, Wang N, Bo X, Guo Y, Hu Z, Zhou M. Biomass waste 
derived carbon nanoballs aggregation networks-based aerogels as electrode 
material for electrochemical sensing. Sens Actuators B 2018;277:195–204. 
[18] Wu D, Zhu C, Shi Y, Jing H, Hu J, Song X, Si D, Liang S, Hao C. Biomass-derived 
multilayer-graphene-encapsulated cobalt nanoparticles as efficient electrocatalyst 
for versatile renewable energy applications. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2018;7(1): 
1137–45. 

[19] Ali HR, Hassaan MA. Applications of bio-waste materials as green synthesis of 

nanoparticles and water purification. Adv Mater 2017;6(5):85. 

[20] Pourhosseini SEM, Norouzi O, Salimi P, Naderi HR. Synthesis of a novel 

interconnected 3D pore network algal biochar constituting iron nanoparticles 
derived from a harmful marine biomass as high-performance asymmetric 
supercapacitor electrodes. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2018;6(4):4746–58. 

[21] Szczę´sniak B, Phuriragpitikhon J, Choma J, Jaroniec M. Recent advances in the 
development and applications of biomass-derived carbons with uniform porosity. 
J Mater Chem A 2020;8(36):18464–91. 

[22] Rudra S, Janani K, Thamizharasan G, Pradhan M, Rani B, Sahu NK, Nayak AK. 
Fabrication of Mn3O4-WO3  nanoparticles based nanocomposites symmetric 
supercapacitor device for enhanced energy storage performance under neutral 
electrolyte. Electrochim. Acta 2022:139870. 

[23] Yang H, Huan B, Chen Y, Gao Y, Li J, Chen H. Biomass-based pyrolytic 

polygeneration system for bamboo industry waste: evolution of the char structure 
and the pyrolysis mechanism. Energy Fuels 2016;30(8):6430–9. 

[24] Bhalamurugan GL, Valerie O, Mark L. Valuable bioproducts obtained from 

microalgal biomass and their commercial applications: a review. Environ Eng Res 
2018;23(3):229–41. 

[25] Zhao G, Li Y, Zhu G, Shi J, Lu T, Pan L. Biomass-based N, P, and S self-doped 

porous carbon for high-performance supercapacitors. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 
2019;7(14):12052–60. 

[26] Brito GM, Cipriano DF, Schettino M

ˆ
A, Cunha AG, Coelho ERC, Freitas JCC. One- 
step methodology for preparing physically activated biocarbons from agricultural 
biomass waste. J Environ Chem Eng 2019;7(3):103113. 

[27] Baysal M, Bilge K, Yılmaz B, Papila M, Yürüm Y. Preparation of high surface area 
activated carbon from waste-biomass of sunflower piths: kinetics and equilibrium 
studies on the dye removal. J Environ Chem Eng 2018;6(2):1702–13. 

[28] Rajabathar JR, Sivachidambaram M, Vijaya JJ, Al-Lohedan HA, Aldhayan DM. 
Flexible type symmetric supercapacitor electrode fabrication using phosphoric 
acid-activated carbon nanomaterials derived from cow dung for renewable 
energy applications. ACS Omega 2020;5(25):15028–38. 

[29] Huang J, Li D, Zhao M, Ke H, Mensah A, Lv P, Tian X, Wei Q. Flexible electrically 

conductive biomass-based aerogels for piezoresistive pressure/strain sensors. 
Chem Eng J 2019;373:1357–66. 

[30] Lei Y, Sun W, Tiwari SK, Thummavichai K, Oluwafunmilola O, Qin X, et al. Zn/ 
Co-ZIF reinforced sugarcane bagasse aerogel for highly efficient catalytic 
activation of peroxymonosulfate. J Environ Chem Eng 2021;9:106885. 

[31] Ding Q, Kang Z, Cao L, Lin M, Lin H, Yang DP. Conversion of waste eggshell into 

difunctional au/caco3 nanocomposite for 4-nitrophenol electrochemical 
detection and catalytic reduction. Appl Surf Sci 2020;510:145526. 

[32] Babu S, Marimuthu R, Manivannan V, Rameshkumar S. Effect of organic and 

inorganic manures on growth and yield of rice. Agric Sci Dig 2001;21(4):232–4. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102339S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

[33] Chadha S, Saini JP, Paul YS. Vedic Krishi: Sustainable livelihood option for small 
and marginal farmers. Indian J Tradit Knowl 2012;11(3):480–6.http://nopr. 
niscpr.res.in/handle/123456789/14389. 

[34] Zafari A, Kianmehr M. Management and Reduction of Chemical Nitrogen 

Consumption in Agriculture. Am J Plant Sci 2012;3:1827–34. https://doi.org/ 
10.4236/ajps.2012.312A224. 12A. 

[35] Hou S, Jia S, Jia J, He Z, Li G, Zuo Q, Zhuang H. Fe3O4 nanoparticles loading on 
cow dung based activated carbon as an efficient catalyst for catalytic microbubble 
ozonation of biologically pretreated coal gasification wastewater. J Environ 
Manag 2020;267:110615. 

[36] Barin GB, de F´atima Gimenez I, da Costa LP, Souza Filho AG, Barreto LS. Hollow 

carbon nanostructures obtained from hydrothermal carbonization of 
lignocellulosic biomass. J Mater Sci 2014;49(2):665–72. 

[37] Qu Y, Zhang Z, Zhang X, Ren G, Lai Y, Liu Y, Li J. Highly ordered nitrogen-rich 

mesoporous carbon derived from biomass waste for high-performance 
lithium–sulfur batteries. Carbon 2015;84:399–408. N Y. 

[38] Ling Z, Wang Z, Zhang M, Yu C, Wang G, Dong Y, Liu S, Wang Y, Qiu J. 

Sustainable synthesis and assembly of biomass-derived B/N co-doped carbon 
nanosheets with ultrahigh aspect ratio for high-performance supercapacitors. Adv 
Funct Mater 2016;26(1):111–9. 

[39] Liu J, Deng Y, Li X, Wang L. Promising nitrogen-rich porous carbons derived from 

one-step calcium chloride activation of biomass-based waste for high 
performance supercapacitors. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2016;4(1):177–87. 

[40] Momodu D, Bello A, Oyedotun K, Ochai-Ejeh F, Dangbegnon J, Madito M, 
Manyala N. Enhanced electrochemical response of activated carbon 
nanostructures from tree-bark biomass waste in polymer-gel active electrolytes. 
RSC Adv 2017;7(59):37286–95. 

[41] Cheng F, Liang J, Zhao J, Tao Z, Chen J. Biomass waste-derived microporous 
carbons with controlled texture and enhanced hydrogen uptake. Chem Mater 
2008;20(5):1889–95. 

[42] Ming J, Wu Y, Liang G, Park JB, Zhao F, Sun YK. Sodium salt effect on 
hydrothermal carbonization of biomass: a catalyst for carbon-based 
nanostructured materials for lithium-ion battery applications. Green Chem 2013; 
15(10):2722–6. 

[43] Briscoe J, Marinovic A, Sevilla M, Dunn S, Titirici M. Biomass-derived carbon 

quantum dot sensitizers for solid-state nanostructured solar cells. Angew Chem 
Int Ed 2015;54(15):4463–8. 

[44] Mondal AK, Kretschmer K, Zhao Y, Liu H, Fan H, Wang G. Naturally nitrogen 
doped porous carbon derived from waste shrimp shells for high-performance 
lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2017; 
246:72–80. 

[45] Shen Y. Carbothermal synthesis of metal-functionalized nanostructures for energy 
and environmental applications. J Mater Chem A 2015;3(25):13114–88. 
[46] Genovese M, Jiang J, Lian K, Holm N. High capacitive performance of exfoliated 

biochar nanosheets from biomass waste corn cob. J Mater Chem A 2015;3(6): 
2903–13. 

[47] Lu B, Zhou J, Song Y, Wang H, Xiao W, Wang D. Molten-salt treatment of waste 
biomass for preparation of carbon with enhanced capacitive properties and 
electrocatalytic activity towards oxygen reduction. Faraday Discuss 2016;190: 
147–59. 

[48] Shen T, Xie D, Tang W, Wang D, Zhang X, Xia X, Wang X, Tu J. Biomass-derived 

carbon/silicon three-dimensional hierarchical nanostructure as anode material 
for lithium ion batteries. Mater Res Bull 2017;96:340–6. 

[49] Feng H, Zheng M, Dong H, Xiao Y, Hu H, Sun Z, Long C, Cai Y, Zhao X, Zhang H, 

Lei B. Three-dimensional honeycomb-like hierarchically structured carbon for 
high-performance supercapacitors derived from high-ash-content sewage sludge. 
J Mater Chem A 2015;3(29):15225–34. 

[58] Leng C, Sun K, Li J, Jiang J. From dead pine needles to O, N codoped activated 
carbons by a one-step carbonization for high rate performance supercapacitors. 
ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2017;5(11):10474–82. 

[59] Khalil KM, Allam OA, Khairy M, Mohammed KM, Elkhatib RM, Hamed MA. High 
surface area nanostructured activated carbons derived from sustainable sorghum 
stalk. J Mol Liq 2017;247:386–96. 

[60] Tan XW, Romainor ANB, Chin SF, Ng SM. Carbon dots production via pyrolysis of 
sago waste as potential probe for metal ions sensing. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2014; 
105:157–65. 

[61] Kong W, Zhao F, Guan H, Zhao Y, Zhang H, Zhang B. Highly adsorptive 

mesoporous carbon from biomass using molten-salt route. J Mater Sci 2016;51 
(14):6793–800. 

[62] Gao N, Lu Z, Zhao X, Zhu Z, Wang Y, Wang D, Hua Z, Li C, Huo P, Song M. 
Enhanced photocatalytic activity of a double conductive C/Fe3O4/Bi2O3 
composite photocatalyst based on biomass. Chem Eng J 2016;304:351–61. 
[63] Alonso-Lemus IL, Rodriguez-Varela FJ, Figueroa-Torres MZ, Sanchez-Castro ME, 

Hernandez-Ramírez A, Lardizabal-Gutierrez D, Quintana-Owen P. Novel self- 
nitrogen-doped porous carbon from waste leather as highly active metal-free 
electrocatalyst for the ORR. Int J Hydrog Energy 2016;41(48):23409–16. 

[64] Li F, Xue M, Knowles GP, Chen L, MacFarlane DR, Zhang J. Porous 

nitrogen–doped carbon derived from biomass for electrocatalytic reduction of 
CO2  to CO. Electrochim. Acta 2017;245:561–8. 

[65] Noor NM, Othman R, Mubarak NM, Abdullah EC. Agricultural biomass-derived 

magnetic adsorbents: preparation and application for heavy metals removal. 
J Taiwan Inst Chem Eng 2017;78:168–77. 

[66] Sangchoom W, Mokaya R. Valorization of lignin waste: carbons from 

hydrothermal carbonization of renewable lignin as superior sorbents for CO2 and 
hydrogen storage. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2015;3(7):1658–67. 

[67] Sun N, Liu H, Xu B. Facile synthesis of high performance hard carbon anode 
materials for sodium ion batteries. J Mater Chem A 2015;3(41):20560–6. 
[68] Zhuo C, Alves JO, Tenorio JA, Levendis YA. Synthesis of carbon nanomaterials 

through up-cycling agricultural and municipal solid waste. Ind Eng Chem Res 
2012;51(7):2922–30. 

[69] Wang H, Zhuang J, Velado D, Wei Z, Matsui H, Zhou S. Near-infrared-and visible- 
light-enhanced metal-free catalytic degradation of organic pollutants over 
carbon-dot-based carbocatalysts synthesized from biomass. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 2015;7(50):27703–12. 

[70] Wang J, Shen L, Xu Y, Dou H, Zhang X. Lamellar-structured biomass-derived 
phosphorus-and nitrogen-co-doped porous carbon for high-performance 
supercapacitors. New J Chem 2015;39(12):9497–503. 

[71] Debalina B, Reddy RB, Vinu R. Production of carbon nanostructures in biochar, 
bio-oil and gases from bagasse via microwave assisted pyrolysis using Fe and Co 
as susceptors. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2017;124:310–8. 

[72] Muneeb Ur Rahman Khattak M, Zahoor M, Muhammad B, Khan FA, Ullah R, 

AbdEI-Salam NM. Removal of Heavy Metals from Drinking Water by Magnetic 
Carbon Nanostructures Prepared from Biomass. J Nanomaterials 2017;2017:10. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/5670371. 5670371. 

[73] Lu B, Hu L, Yin H, Mao X, Xiao W, Wang D. Preparation and application of 
capacitive carbon from bamboo shells by one step molten carbonates 
carbonization. Int J Hydrog Energy 2016;41(41):18713–20. 

[74] Xiao Y, Dong H, Long C, Zheng M, Lei B, Zhang H, Liu Y. Melaleuca bark based 
porous carbons for hydrogen storage. Int J Hydrog Energy 2014;39(22):11661–7. 

[75] Zhao X, Wang M, Liu H, Li L, Ma C, Song Z. A microwave reactor for 

characterization of pyrolyzed biomass. Bioresour. Technol. 2012;104:673–8. 
[76] Chen MQ, Wang J, Zhang MX, Chen MG, Zhu XF, Min FF, Tan ZC. Catalytic effects 

of eight inorganic additives on pyrolysis of pine wood sawdust by microwave 
heating. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2008;82(1):145–50. 

[50] El Korhani O, Zaouk D, Cerneaux S, Khoury R, Khoury A, Cornu D. Synthesis and 

[77] Palanivelu K, Ramachandran A, Raghavan V. Biochar from biomass waste as a 

performances of bio-sourced nanostructured carbon membranes elaborated by 
hydrothermal conversion of beer industry waste. Nanoscale Res Lett 2013;8(1): 
121. 

[51] Yao Y, Zhang J, Wu G, Wang S, Hu Y, Su C, Xu T. Iron encapsulated in 3D N- 

doped carbon nanotube/porous carbon hybrid from waste biomass for enhanced 
oxidative activity. Environ Sci Pollut Res 2017;24(8):7679–92. 

[52] Chen SQ, Ling LL, Zhang S, Jiang SF, Xu Z, Liu WJ, Jiang H. Sustainable in situ 
carbothermal reduction route to biochar stabilized ru–cu nanoalloys from 
lignocellulosic biomass as a highly efficient and durable catalyst. Adv Sustain Syst 
2017;1(12):1700102. 

[53] Chen F, Yang J, Bai T, Long B, Zhou X. Biomass waste-derived honeycomb-like 

renewable carbon material for climate change mitigation in reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions–a review. Biomass Convers Biorefinery 2020;11:1–21. 

[78] Lam SS, Liew RK, Jusoh A, Chong CT, Ani FN, Chase HA. Progress in waste oil to 
sustainable energy, with emphasis on pyrolysis techniques. Renew Sustain Energy 
Rev 2016;53:741–53. 

[79] Lam SS, Liew RK, Lim XY, Ani FN, Jusoh A. Fruit waste as feedstock for recovery 

by pyrolysis technique. Int Biodeterior Biodegrad 2016;113:325–33. 

[80] Motasemi F, Afzal MT. A review on the microwave-assisted pyrolysis technique. 

Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2013;28:317–30. 

[81] Lam SS, Chase HA. A review on waste to energy processes using microwave 

pyrolysis. Energies 2012;5(10):4209–32. 

nitrogen and oxygen dual-doped porous carbon for high performance lithium- 
sulfur batteries. Electrochim. Acta 2016;192:99–109. 

[82] Giguere RJ, Bray TL, Duncan SM, Majetich G. Application of commercial 

microwave ovens to organic synthesis. Tetrahedron Lett 1986;27(41):4945–8. 

[54] Chaiwat W, Janjarasskul T, Eiad-Ua A, Viriya-Empikul N, Charinpanitkul T, 

[83] Jia Z, Lan D, Lin K, Qin M, Kou K, Wu G, Wu H. Progress in low-frequency 

Suttiponpanit K. Synthesis of carbon nanoparticles via Co-pyrolysis of waste slop 
oil and ferrocene. Advanced materials research, 1103. Trans Tech Publications 
Ltd; 2015. p. 97–103. 

microwave absorbing materials. J Mater Sci Mater Electron 2018;29(20): 
17122–36. 

[84] Nüchter M, Ondruschka B, Bonrath W, Gum A. Microwave assisted synthesis–a 

[55] Wei J, Liang Y, Hu Y, Kong B, Simon GP, Zhang J, Jiang SP, Wang H. A versatile 

iron–tannin-framework ink coating strategy to fabricate biomass-derived iron 
carbide/Fe-N-carbon catalysts for efficient oxygen reduction. Angew Chem Int Ed 
2016;55(4):1355–9. 

[56] Gaikwad MS, Balomajumder C. Tea waste biomass activated carbon electrode for 
simultaneous removal of Cr (VI) and fluoride by capacitive deionization. 
Chemosphere, 2017;184:1141–9. 

[57] Calvo-Mu˜noz EM, García-Mateos FJ, Rosas JM, Rodríguez-Mirasol J, Cordero T. 
Biomass waste carbon materials as adsorbents for CO2  capture under post- 
combustion conditions. Front Mater 2016;3:23. 

critical technology overview. Green Chem 2004;6(3):128–41. 

[85] Dai L, Zeng Z, Yang Q, Yang S, Wang Y, Liu Y, Ruan R, He C, Yu Z, Jiang L. 
Synthesis of iron nanoparticles-based hydrochar catalyst for ex-situ catalytic 
microwave-assisted pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass to renewable phenols. 
Fuel 2020;279:118532. 

[86] Suriapparao DV, Tejasvi R. A review on role of process parameters on pyrolysis of 
biomass and plastics: present scope and future opportunities in conventional and 
microwave-assisted pyrolysis technologies. Process Saf Environ Prot 2022;162: 
435–62. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102340S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

[87] Noraini MN, Abdullah EC, Othman R, Mubarak NM. Single-route synthesis of 

[118] Zhang X, Gao B, Zhao S, Wu P, Han L, Liu X. Optimization of a “coal-like” 

magnetic biochar from sugarcane bagasse by microwave-assisted pyrolysis. Mater 
Lett 2016;184:315–9. 

pelletization technique based on the sustainable biomass fuel of hydrothermal 
carbonization of wheat straw. J Clean Prod 2020;242:118426. 

[88] Wei Y, Liu H, Liu S, Zhang M, Shi Y, Zhang J, Zhang L, Gong C. Waste cotton- 
derived magnetic porous carbon for high-efficiency microwave absorption. 
Compos Commun 2018;9:70–5. 

[89] Fakhrhoseini SM, Czech B, Shirvanimoghaddam K, Naebe M. Ultrafast microwave 
assisted development of magnetic carbon microtube from cotton waste for 
wastewater treatment. Colloids Surf A 2020;606:125449. 

[90] Zhao D, Zhao Q, Feng L, Yuan X, Liu Y, Zhang J, et al. Honey-comb carbon 
nanostructure derived from peach gum to yield high microwave absorption. 
J Mater Sci: Mater Electron 2020;32:1–11. 

[91] Qiu X, Wang L, Zhu H, Guan Y, Zhang Q. Lightweight and efficient microwave 
absorbing materials based on walnut shell-derived nano-porous carbon. 
Nanoscale 2017;9(22):7408–18. 

[92] Guan H, Wang H, Zhang Y, Dong C, Chen G, Wang Y, Xie J. Microwave absorption 
performance of Ni (OH) 2 decorating biomass carbon composites from Jackfruit 
peel. Appl Surf Sci 2018;447:261–8. 

[93] Liu Q, Zhang D, Fan T. Electromagnetic wave absorption properties of porous 

carbon/Co nanocomposites. Appl Phys Lett 2008;93(1):013110. 

[94] Zhao H, Cheng Y, Liu W, Yang L, Zhang B, Wang LP, Ji G, Xu ZJ. Biomass-derived 
porous carbon-based nanostructures for microwave absorption. Nano Micro Lett 
2019;11(1):24. 

[95] Cheng Y, Li Z, Li Y, Dai S, Ji G, Zhao H, Cao J, Du Y. Rationally regulating 

complex dielectric parameters of mesoporous carbon hollow spheres to carry out 
efficient microwave absorption. Carbon, 2018;127:643–52. 

[96] Funke A, Ziegler F. Hydrothermal carbonization of biomass: a summary and 

discussion of chemical mechanisms for process engineering. Biofuels, Bioprod 
Biorefin 2010;4(2):160–77. 

[97] Krylova AY, Zaitchenko VM. Hydrothermal carbonization of biomass: a review. 

Solid Fuel Chem 2018;52(2):91–103. 

[98] Sharma R, Jasrotia K, Singh N, Ghosh P, Sharma NR, Singh J, Kanwar R, Kumar A. 
A comprehensive review on hydrothermal carbonization of biomass and its 
applications. Chem Afr 2020;3(1):1–19. 

[99] Khan TA, Saud AS, Jamari SS, Ab Rahim MH, Park JW, Kim HJ. Hydrothermal 
carbonization of lignocellulosic biomass for carbon rich material preparation: a 
review. Biomass Bioenergy 2019;130:105384. 

[100] Wang T, Zhai Y, Zhu Y, Li C, Zeng G. A review of the hydrothermal carbonization 
of biomass waste for hydrochar formation: process conditions, fundamentals, and 
physicochemical properties. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;90:223–47. 
[101] Shen Y. A review on hydrothermal carbonization of biomass and plastic Wasteto 

energy products. Biomass Bioenergy 2020;134:105479. 

[102] Wang L, Chang Y, Li A. Hydrothermal carbonization for energy-efficient 

processing of sewage sludge: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;108: 
423–40. 

[119] Qi X, Lian Y, Yan L, Smith RL. One-step preparation of carbonaceous solid acid 
catalysts by hydrothermal carbonization of glucose for cellulose hydrolysis. Catal 
Commun 2014;57:50–4. 

[120] Kang S, Li X, Fan J, Chang J. Characterization of hydrochars produced by 

hydrothermal carbonization of lignin, cellulose, D-xylose, and wood meal. Ind Eng 
Chem Res 2012;51(26):9023–31. 

[121] Lei Y, Su H, Tian R. Morphology evolution, formation mechanism and adsorption 
properties of hydrochars prepared by hydrothermal carbonization of corn stalk. 
RSC Adv 2016;6(109):107829–35. 

[122] Aydıncak K, Yumak T, Sına˘g A, Esen B. Synthesis and characterization of 

carbonaceous materials from saccharides (glucose and lactose) and two waste 
biomass by hydrothermal carbonization. Ind Eng Chem Res 2012;51(26): 
9145–52. 

[123] Mao H, Chen X, Huang R, Chen M, Yang R, Lan P, Zhou M, Zhang F, Yang Y, 
Zhou X. Fast preparation of carbon spheres from enzymatic hydrolysis lignin: 
effects of hydrothermal carbonization conditions. Sci Rep 2018;8(1):1–10. 
[124] Li F, Zimmerman AR, Hu X, Yu Z, Huang J, Gao B. One-pot synthesis and 

characterization of engineered hydrochar by hydrothermal carbonization of 
biomass with ZnCl2. Chemosphere 2020:126866. 

[125] Ghaziaskar A, McRae GA, Mackintosh A, Lai EP, Basu OD. Production of organic 

compounds through catalyzed hydrothermal carbonization of woody biomass. 
Energy Fuels 2019;33(10):9879–85. 

[126] Ahmed Khan T, Kim HJ, Gupta A, Jamari SS, Jose R. Synthesis and 

characterization of carbon microspheres from rubber wood by hydrothermal 
carbonization. J Chem Technol Biotechnol 2019;94(5):1374–83. 

[127] Qi X, Lian Y, Yan L, Smith RL. One-step preparation of carbonaceous solid acid 
catalysts by hydrothermal carbonization of glucose for cellulose hydrolysis. Catal 
Commun 2014;57:50–4. 

[128] Heidari M, Norouzi O, MacDermid-Watts K, Acharya B, Zhang Y, Dutta A. Product 
evaluation of hydrothermal carbonization of biomass: semi-continuous vs. batch 
feeding. Biomass Convers Biorefinery 2020:1–11. 

[129] Evcil T, Simsir H, Ucar S, Tekin K, Karagoz S. Hydrothermal carbonization of 

lignocellulosic biomass and effects of combined Lewis and Brønsted acid catalysts. 
Fuel 2020;279:118458. 

[130] Bevan E, Fu J, Zheng Y. Challenges and opportunities of hydrothermal 

carbonisation in the UK; case study in Chirnside. RSC Adv 2020;10(52): 
31586–610. 

[131] Pecchi M, Baratieri M. Coupling anaerobic digestion with gasification, pyrolysis 
or hydrothermal carbonization: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;105: 
462–75. 

[132] Gong J, Chen X, Tang T. Recent progress in controlled carbonization of (waste) 

polymers. Prog Polym Sci 2019;94:1–32. 

[103] Leng S, Leng L, Chen L, Chen J, Chen J, Zhou W. The effect of aqueous phase 

[133] Nygård HS, Olsen E. Review of thermal processing of biomass and waste in 

recirculation on hydrothermal liquefaction/carbonization of biomass: a review. 
Bioresour. Technol. 2020;318:124081. 

molten salts for production of renewable fuels and chemicals. Int J Low Carbon 
Technol 2012;7(4):318–24. 

[104] Chatterjee K, Sarkar S, Rao KJ, Paria S. Core/shell nanoparticles in biomedical 

applications. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2014;209:8–39. 

[105] Chen C, Li X, Deng J, Wang Z, Wang Y. Shape engineering of biomass-derived 
nanoparticles from hollow spheres to bowls through solvent-induced buckling. 
ChemSusChem 2018;11(15):2540–6. 

[106] Shang N, Zhou X, Feng C, Gao S, Wu Q, Wang C. Synergetic catalysis of NiPd 

nanoparticles supported on biomass-derived carbon spheres for hydrogen 
production from ammonia borane at room temperature. Int J Hydrog Energy 
2017;42(9):5733–40. 

[107] O˜na DF, Fullana A. Carbon nanoparticles production using solvent assisted 

[108]

hydrothermal carbonization. Diam Relat Mater 2020:107960. 
´
Alvarez ML, Gasc´o G, Palacios T, Paz-Ferreiro J, M´endez A. Fe oxides-biochar 
composites produced by hydrothermal carbonization and pyrolysis of biomass 
waste. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2020;151:104893. 

[134] Yin H, Lu B, Xu Y, Tang D, Mao X, Xiao W, Wang D, Alshawabkeh AN. Harvesting 
capacitive carbon by carbonization of waste biomass in molten salts. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 2014;48(14):8101–8. 

[135] Knez ˇZ, Markoˇciˇc E, Hrnˇciˇc MK, Ravber M, 

ˇ
Skerget M. High pressure water 

reforming of biomass for energy and chemicals: a short review. J Supercrit Fluids 
2015;96:46–52. 

[136] Cao J, Luo J, Wang P, Wang X, Weng W. Biomass-based porous carbon beehive 

prepared in molten KOH for capacitors. Mater Technol 2020;35(9–10):522–8. 

[137] Zeng D, Dou Y, Li M, Zhou M, Li H, Jiang K, Yang F, Peng J. Wool fiber-derived 
nitrogen-doped porous carbon prepared from molten salt carbonization method 
for supercapacitor application. J Mater Sci 2018;53(11):8372–84. 

[138] Shang H, Lu Y, Zhao F, Chao C, Zhang B, Zhang H. Preparing high surface area 
porous carbon from biomass by carbonization in a molten salt medium. RSC Adv 
2015;5(92):75728–34. 

[109] Putra HE, Damanhuri E, Dewi K, Pasek AD. Hydrothermal carbonization of 

[139] Quiroz R, Natalia, Norton AM, Nguyen H, Vasileiadou E, Vlachos DG. 

biomass waste under low temperature condition. In: Proceedings of the MATEC 
Web of Conferences. 154. EDP Sciences; 2018. p. 01025. 

Homogeneous metal salt solutions for biomass upgrading and other select organic 
reactions. ACS Catal 2019;9(11):9923–52. 

[110] Rebling T, von Frieling P, Buchholz J, Greve T. Hydrothermal carbonization: 

[140] Liu X, Antonietti M. Molten salt activation for synthesis of porous carbon 

combination of heat of reaction measurements and theoretical estimations. 
J Therm Anal Calorim 2015;119(3):1941–53. 

[111] Wang T, Zhai Y, Zhu Y, Li C, Zeng G. A review of the hydrothermal carbonization 
of biomass waste for hydrochar formation: process conditions, fundamentals, and 
physicochemical properties. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;90:223–47. 
[112] Pecchi M, Patuzzi F, Basso D, Baratieri M. Enthalpy change during hydrothermal 
carbonization of biomass: a critical review. J Therm Anal Calorim 2020;141(4): 
1251–62. 

[113] Funke A, Ziegler F. Heat of reaction measurements for hydrothermal 
carbonization of biomass. Bioresour. Technol. 2011;102(16):7595–8. 
[114] Kim D, Lee K, Park KY. Hydrothermal carbonization of anaerobically digested 

sludge for solid fuel production and energy recovery. Fuel 2014;130:120–5. 
[115] Liu Z, Balasubramanian R. Hydrothermal carbonization of waste biomass for 

energy generation. Proced Environ Sci 2012;16:159–66. 

nanostructures and carbon sheets. Carbon 2014;69:460–6. N Y. 

[141] Xu M, Hu H, Yang F, Yang Y, Jiang L, Tang H, Li X, Xu K, Yao H. Novel findings in 

conversion mechanism of toluene as model compound of biomass waste tar in 
molten salt. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2018;134:274–80. 

[142] Ratchahat S, Kodama S, Tanthapanichakoon W, Sekiguchi H. Combined molten 
salt–Ni/Al2O3  as synergistic medium for high-quality syngas production. Chem 
Eng J 2015;278:224–33. 

[143] Wang X, Liu A, Zhao Z, Li H. Experimental and model study on raw biomass 
gasification syngas conditioning in a molten NaOH-Na2CO3  mixture. Energies 
2020;13(14):3668. 

[144] Weng W, Wang S, Xiao W, Lou XW. Direct conversion of rice husks to 

nanostructured SiC/C for CO2  photoreduction. Adv Mater 2020;32:2001560. 

[145] Lantelme F, Groult H. Molten salts chemistry: from lab to applications. Newnes; 

2013. 

[116] Basso D, Patuzzi F, Castello D, Baratieri M, Rada EC, Weiss-Hortala E, Fiori L. 

[146] Chuayboon S, Abanades S, Rodat S. Comprehensive performance assessment of a 

Agro-industrial waste to solid biofuel through hydrothermal carbonization. Waste 
Manag 2016;47:114–21 (Oxford). 

[117] Volpe M, Messineo A, M¨akel¨a M, Barr MR, Volpe R, Corrado C, Fiori L. Reactivity 
of cellulose during hydrothermal carbonization of lignocellulosic biomass. Fuel 
Process Technol 2020;206:106456. 

continuous solar-driven biomass gasifier. Fuel Process Technol 2018;182:1–14. 

[147] Xie Y, Zeng K, Flamant G, Yang H, Liu N, He X, Yang X, Nzihou A, Chen H. Solar 
pyrolysis of cotton stalk in molten salt for bio-fuel production. Energy 2019;179: 
1124–32. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102341S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

[148] Hathaway BJ, Honda M, Kittelson DB, Davidson JH. Steam gasification of plant 

biomass using molten carbonate salts. Energy 2013;49:211–7. 

[149] Xie Y, Hu W, Wang X, Tong W, Li P, Zhou H, Wang Y, Zhang Y. Molten salt 

induced nitrogen-doped biochar nanosheets as highly efficient 
peroxymonosulfate catalyst for organic pollutant degradation. Environ Pollut 
2020;260:114053. 

[150] Ullah M, Eaqub Ali M, Bee Abd Hamid S. Structure-controlled nanomaterial 

synthesis using surfactant-assisted ball milling-a review. Curr Nanosci 2014;10 
(3):344–54. 

[151] Lyu H, Gao B, He F, Ding C, Tang J, Crittenden JC. Ball-milled carbon 

nanomaterials for energy and environmental applications. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 
2017;5(11):9568–85. 

[152] Xing T, Sunarso J, Yang W, Yin Y, Glushenkov AM, Li LH, Howlett PC, Chen Y. 
Ball milling: a green mechanochemical approach for synthesis of nitrogen doped 
carbon nanoparticles. Nanoscale 2013;5(17):7970–6. 

[153] Li YB, Wei BQ, Liang J, Yu Q, Wu DH. Transformation of carbon nanotubes to 
nanoparticles by ball milling process. Carbon 1999;37(3):493–7. N Y. 
[154] Kumar M, Xiong X, Wan Z, Sun Y, Tsang DC, Gupta J, et al. Ball milling as a 
mechanochemical technology for fabrication of novel biochar nanomaterials. 
Bioresour. Technol. 2020;312:123613. 

[155] Tran TH, Nguyen HL, Hao LT, Kong H, Park JM, Jung SH, Cha HG, Lee JY, Kim H, 
Hwang SY, Park J. A ball milling-based one-step transformation of chitin biomass 
to organo-dispersible strong nanofibers passing highly time and energy 
consuming processes. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2019;125:660–7. 

[174] Zhang S, Jiang SF, Huang BC, Shen XC, Chen WJ, Zhou TP, et al. Sustainable 
production of value-added carbon nanomaterials from biomass pyrolysis. Nat 
Sustain 2020;3:1–8. 

[175] Cheung TL, Ng DH. Conversion of bamboo to biomorphic composites containing 
silica and silicon carbide nanowires. J Am Ceram Soc 2007;90(2):559–64. 
[176] Bian H, Chen L, Gleisner R, Dai H, Zhu JY. Producing wood-based nanomaterials 
by rapid fractionation of wood at 80 C using a recyclable acid hydrotrope. Green 
Chem 2017;19(14):3370–9. 

[177] Zheng LH, Chen MH, Liang SX, Lü QF. Oxygen-rich hierarchical porous carbon 

derived from biomass waste-kapok flower for supercapacitor electrode. Diam 
Relat Mater 2021;113:108267. 

[178] Pham HD, Mahale K, Hoang TML, Mundree SG, Gomez-Romero P, Dubal DP. Dual 
carbon potassium-ion capacitors: biomass-derived graphene-like carbon 
nanosheet cathodes. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12(43):48518–25. 
[179] Zhang Z, Kong LL, Liu S, Li GR, Gao XP. A high-efficiency sulfur/carbon 

composite based on 3D graphene nanosheet@ carbon nanotube matrix as cathode 
for lithium–sulfur battery. Adv Energy Mater 2017;7(11):1602543. 

[180] Shen J, Shang S, Chen X, Wang D, Cai Y. Facile synthesis of fluorescence carbon 
dots from sweet potato for Fe3+ sensing and cell imaging. Mater Sci Eng C 2017; 
76:856–64. 

[181] Huang Q, Lin X, Zhu JJ, Tong QX. Pd-Au@ carbon dots nanocomposite: facile 

synthesis and application as an ultrasensitive electrochemical biosensor for 
determination of colitoxin DNA in human serum. Biosens Bioelectron 2017;94: 
507–12. 

[156] Yuan X, Liu S, Feng G, Liu Y, Li Y, Lu H, Liang B. Effects of ball milling on 

[182] Alam AM, Park BY, Ghouri ZK, Park M, Kim HY. Synthesis of carbon quantum 

structural changes and hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass in liquid hot-water 
compressed carbon dioxide. Korean J Chem Eng 2016;33(7):2134–41. 

[157] Guo C, Liao W, Li Z, Sun L, Chen C. Easy conversion of protein-rich enoki 

mushroom biomass to a nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterial as a promising 
metal-free catalyst for oxygen reduction reaction. Nanoscale 2015;7(38): 
15990–8. 

[158] Ewulonu CM, Liu X, Wu M, Huang Y. Ultrasound-assisted mild sulphuric acid ball 

dots from cabbage with down-and up-conversion photoluminescence properties: 
excellent imaging agent for biomedical applications. Green Chem 2015;17(7): 
3791–7. 

[183] Boruah A, Saikia M, Das T, Goswamee RL, Saikia BK. Blue-emitting fluorescent 
carbon quantum dots from waste biomass sources and their application in fluoride 
ion detection in water. J Photochem Photobiol, B 2020;209:111940. 
[184] Himaja AL, Karthik PS, Sreedhar B, Singh SP. Synthesis of carbon dots from 

milling preparation of lignocellulose nanofibers (LCNFs) from sunflower stalks 
(SFS). Cellulose 2019;26(7):4371–89. 

kitchen waste: conversion of waste to value added product. J Fluoresc 2014;24 
(6):1767–73. 

[159] Francavilla M, Pineda A, Romero AA, Colmenares JC, Vargas C, Monteleone M, 
Luque R. Efficient and simple reactive milling preparation of photocatalytically 
active porous ZnO nanostructures using biomass derived polysaccharides. Green 
Chem 2014;16(5):2876–85. 

[160] Nagarajan KJ, Balaji AN, Ramanujam NR. Extraction of cellulose nanofibers from 
cocos nucifera var aurantiaca peduncle by ball milling combined with chemical 
treatment. Carbohydr Polym 2019;212:312–22. 

[161] Naghdi M, Taheran M, Brar SK, Rouissi T, Verma M, Surampalli RY, Valero JR. 
A green method for production of nanobiochar by ball milling-optimization and 
characterization. J Clean Prod 2017;164:1394–405. 

[162] Zhang X, Miao X, Xiang W, Zhang J, Cao C, Wang H, Hu X, Gao B. Ball milling 
biochar with ammonia hydroxide or hydrogen peroxide enhances its adsorption 
of phenyl volatile organic compounds (VOCs). J Hazard Mater 2020;403:123540. 

[163] Ma X, Xin Y, Yan Q, Pan X, Xin S, Huang X, Chen Q, Liu G. Adsorption 

characteristics of tetracycline onto biochars as affected by solution chemistry 
conditions and ball milling treatment. Water Air Soil Pollut 2020;231(8):1–15. 

[164] Thue PS, Umpierres CS, Lima EC, Lima DR, Machado FM, dos Reis GS, et al. 
Single-step pyrolysis for producing magnetic activated carbon from tucum˜a 
(Astrocaryum aculeatum) seed and nickel (II) chloride and zinc (II) chloride. 
Application for removal of nicotinamide and propanolol. J Hazard Mater 2020; 
398:122903. 

[165] He D, Gao Y, Wang Z, Yao Y, Wu L, Zhang J, Huang ZH, Wang MX. One-step green 

fabrication of hierarchically porous hollow carbon nanospheres (HCNSs) from 
raw biomass: formation mechanisms and supercapacitor applications. J Colloid 
Interface Sci 2020;581:238–50. 

[166] Lima GL, Oliveira RW, de Jesus, Neto RM, Gomes AMDS, Junior RAF, et al. Single 
step synthesis of magnetic materials derived from biomass residues. Waste 
Biomass Valorization 2020;10:1–12. 

[167] Morin M, P´ecate S, Hemati M, Kara Y. Pyrolysis of biomass in a batch fluidized 
bed reactor: effect of the pyrolysis conditions and the nature of the biomass on the 
physicochemical properties and the reactivity of char. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2016; 
122:511–23. 

[168] Warhurst AM, McConnachie GL, Pollard SJ. Characterisation and applications of 
activated carbon produced from Moringa oleifera seed husks by single-step steam 
pyrolysis. Water Res 1997;31(4):759–66. A Prototype Pyrolyzer for Solid Waste 
Resource Recovery in Space. 

[185] Wang Z, Liu J, Wang W, Wei Z, Wang F, Gong P, Wang J, Li N, Liu B, Zhang Z, 

Wang W. Photoluminescent carbon quantum dot grafted silica nanoparticles 
directly synthesized from rice husk biomass. J Mater Chem B 2017;5(24): 
4679–89. 

[186] Mehta VN, Jha S, Basu H, Singhal RK, Kailasa SK. One-step hydrothermal 

approach to fabricate carbon dots from apple juice for imaging of mycobacterium 
and fungal cells. Sens Actuators B 2015;213:434–43. 

[187] Du F, Zhang M, Li X, Li J, Jiang X, Li Z, Hua Y, Shao G, Jin J, Shao Q, Zhou M. 

Economical and green synthesis of bagasse-derived fluorescent carbon dots for 
biomedical applications. Nanotechnology 2014;25(31):315702. 

[188] Suryawanshi A, Biswal M, Mhamane D, Gokhale R, Patil S, Guin D, Ogale S. Large 
scale synthesis of graphene quantum dots (GQDs) from waste biomass and their 
use as an efficient and selective photoluminescence on–off–on probe for Ag+ ions. 
Nanoscale 2014;6(20):11664–70. 

[189] Kang C, Huang Y, Yang H, Yan XF, Chen ZP. A review of carbon dots produced 

from biomass waste. Nanomaterials 2020;10(11):2316. 

[190] Arumugham T, Alagumuthu M, Amimodu RG, Munusamy S, Iyer SK. 

A sustainable synthesis of green carbon quantum dot (CQD) from Catharanthus 
roseus (white flowering plant) leaves and investigation of its dual fluorescence 
responsive behavior in multi-ion detection and biological applications. Sustain 
Mater Technol 2020;23:e00138. 

[191] Chaudhary K, Mogha NK, Lalwani S, Sharma RK, Masram DT. Ruthenium oxide 
nanoparticles immobilized over Citrus limetta waste derived carbon material for 
electrochemical detection of hexestrol. J Mater Chem B 2020;8(35):7956–65. 

[192] Guo F, Jiang X, Li X, Jia X, Liang S, Qian L. Synthesis of MgO/Fe3O4 nanoparticles 
embedded activated carbon from biomass for high-efficient adsorption of 
malachite green. Mater Chem Phys 2020;240:122240. 

[193] Guo Y, Tan C, Sun J, Li W, Zhang J, Zhao C. Biomass ash stabilized MgO 

adsorbents for CO2  capture application. Fuel 2020;259:116298. 

[194] Osman AI, Blewitt J, Abu-Dahrieh JK, Farrell C, Ala’a H, Harrison J, Rooney DW. 
Production and characterisation of activated carbon and carbon nanotubes from 
potato peel waste and their application in heavy metal removal. Environ Sci 
Pollut Res 2019;26(36):37228–41. 

[195] Osman AI, Farrell C, Ala’a H, Harrison J, Rooney DW. The production and 

application of carbon nanomaterials from high alkali silicate herbaceous biomass. 
Sci Rep 2020;10(1):1–13. 

[169] Chen YW, Lee HV, Juan JC, Phang SM. Production of new cellulose nanomaterial 

[196] Tiwari SK, Kumar V, Huczko A, Oraon R, Adhikari AD, Nayak GC. Magical 

from red algae marine biomass Gelidium elegans. Carbohydr Polym 2016;151: 
1210–9. 

allotropes of carbon: prospects and applications. Crit Rev Solid State Mater Sci 
2016;41(4):257–317. 

[170] Abraham E, Nevo Y, Slattegard R, Attias N, Sharon S, Lapidot S, Shoseyov O. 

Highly hydrophobic thermally stable liquid crystalline cellulosic nanomaterials. 
ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2016;4(3):1338–46. 

[197] Tiwari SK, Mishra RK, Ha SK, Huczko A. Evolution of graphene oxide and 
graphene: from imagination to industrialization. ChemNanoMat 2018;4(7): 
598–620. 

[171] Zhang Y, Xu W, Wang X, Ni S, Rosqvist E, Smått JH, Peltonen J, Hou Q, Qin M, 
Willf¨or S, Xu C. From biomass to nanomaterials: a green procedure for 
preparation of holistic bamboo multifunctional nanocomposites based on formic 
acid rapid fractionation. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2019;7(7):6592–600. 

[172] Nascimento DM, Nunes YL, Figueirˆedo MC, de Azeredo HM, Aouada FA, 

Feitosa JP, Rosa MF, Dufresne A. Nanocellulose nanocomposite hydrogels: 
technological and environmental issues. Green Chem 2018;20(11):2428–48. 
[173] Liu WJ, Jiang H, Yu HQ. Development of biochar-based functional materials: 

[198] Tiwari SK, Sahoo S, Wang N, Huczko A. Graphene research and their outputs: 

status and prospect. J Sci Adv Mater Devices 2020;5(1):10–29. 

[199] Zhao H, Cheng Y, Zhang Z, Zhang B, Pei C, Fan F, Ji G. Biomass-derived graphene- 

like porous carbon nanosheets towards ultralight microwave absorption and 
excellent thermal infrared properties. Carbon 2022;173:501–11. N Y. 
[200] Zhang M, Song Z, Liu H, Ma T. Biomass-derived highly porous nitrogen-doped 

graphene orderly supported NiMn2O4 nanocrystals as efficient electrode materials 
for asymmetric supercapacitors. Appl Surf Sci 2020;507:145065. 

toward a sustainable platform carbon material. Chem Rev 2015;115(22): 
12251–85. 

[201] Ghadiri SK, Alidadi H, Tavakkoli Nezhad N, Javid A, Roudbari A, Talebi SS, 

Mohammadi AA, Shams M, Rezania S. Valorization of biomass into amine- 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102342S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

functionalized bio graphene for efficient ciprofloxacin adsorption in water- 
modeling and optimization study. PLoS One 2020;15(4):e0231045. 
[202] Jurca B, Bucur C, Primo A, Concepci´on P, Parvulescu VI, García H. N-doped 

defective graphene from biomass as catalyst for CO2  hydrogenation to methane. 
ChemCatChem 2019;11(3):985–90. 

[203] He J, Anouar A, Primo A, García H. Quality improvement of few-layers defective 
graphene from biomass and application for H2 generation. Nanomaterials 2019;9 
(6):895. 

[204] Myung Y, Jung S, Tung TT, Tripathi KM, Kim T. Graphene-based aerogels derived 

from biomass for energy storage and environmental remediation. ACS Sustain 
Chem Eng 2019;7(4):3772–82. 

[205] Huang B, Xia M, Qiu J, Xie Z. Biomass derived graphene-like carbons for 

electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction. ChemNanoMat 2019;5(5):682–9. 

[206] Ekhlasi L, Younesi H, Rashidi A, Bahramifar N. Populus wood biomass-derived 

graphene for high CO2  capture at atmospheric pressure and estimated cost of 
production. Process Saf Environ Prot 2018;113:97–108. 

[230] Peng L, Liang Y, Huang J, Xing L, Hu H, Xiao Y, Dong H, Liu Y, Zheng M. Mixed- 
biomass waste derived hierarchically porous carbons for high-performance 
electrochemical energy storage. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2019;7(12):10393–402. 
[231] Ma G, Yang Q, Sun K, Peng H, Ran F, Zhao X, Lei Z. Nitrogen-doped porous carbon 

derived from biomass waste for high-performance supercapacitor. Bioresour. 
Technol. 2015;197:137–42. 

[232] Wang Z, Yun S, Wang X, Wang C, Si Y, Zhang Y, Xu H. Aloe peel-derived 

honeycomb-like bio-based carbon with controllable morphology and its superior 
electrochemical properties for new energy devices. Ceram Int 2019;45(4): 
4208–18. 

[233] Nasir S, Hussein MZ, Zainal Z, Yusof NA, Mohd Zobir SA. Electrochemical energy 
storage potentials of waste biomass: oil palm leaf-and palm kernel shell-derived 
activated carbons. Energies 2018;11(12):3410. 

[234] Sun J, Niu J, Liu M, Ji J, Dou M, Wang F. Biomass-derived nitrogen-doped porous 
carbons with tailored hierarchical porosity and high specific surface area for high 
energy and power density supercapacitors. Appl Surf Sci 2018;427:807–13. 

[207] Wu D, Zhu C, Shi Y, Jing H, Hu J, Song X, Si D, Liang S, Hao C. Biomass-Derived 

[235] Sun F, Wang L, Peng Y, Gao J, Pi X, Qu Z, Zhao G, Qin Y. Converting biomass 

Multilayer-Graphene-Encapsulated Cobalt Nanoparticles as Efficient 
Electrocatalyst for Versatile Renewable Energy Applications. ACS Sustain Chem 
Eng 2018;7(1):1137–45. 

[208] Ojha K, Kumar B, Ganguli AK. Biomass derived graphene-like activated and non- 
activated porous carbon for advanced supercapacitors. J Chem Sci 2017;129(3): 
397–404. 

[209] Xing B, Yuan R, Zhang C, Huang G, Guo H, Chen Z, Chen L, Yi G, Zhang Y, Yu J. 
Facile synthesis of graphene nanosheets from humic acid for supercapacitors. Fuel 
Process Technol 2017;165:112–22. 

[210] Fathy NA. Carbon nanotubes synthesis using carbonization of pretreated rice 

straw through chemical vapor deposition of camphor. RSC Adv 2017;7(45): 
28535–41. 

[211] Xie X, Goodell B, Qian Y, Daniel G, Zhang D, Nagle DC, et al. A method for 

producing carbon nanotubes directly from plant materials. For Prod J 2009;59: 
26–8. 

[212] Wang G, Deng Y, Yu J, Zheng L, Du L, Song H, Liao S. From chlorella to nestlike 
framework constructed with doped carbon nanotubes: a biomass-derived, high- 
performance, bifunctional oxygen reduction/evolution catalyst. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 2017;9(37):32168–78. 

[213] Zhang Y, Lu L, Zhang S, Lv Z, Yang D, Liu J, Chen Y, Tian X, Jin H, Song W. 

Biomass chitosan derived cobalt/nitrogen doped carbon nanotubes for the 
electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction. J Mater Chem A 2018;6(14):5740–5. 
[214] Lai F, Miao YE, Zuo L, Lu H, Huang Y, Liu T. Supercapacitors: biomass-derived 

nitrogen-doped carbon nanofiber network: a facile template for decoration of 
ultrathin nickel-cobalt layered double hydroxide nanosheets as high-performance 
asymmetric supercapacitor electrode (Small 24/2016). Small 2016;12(24):3199. 

[215] Hu Y, Tong X, Zhuo H, Zhong L, Peng X. Biomass-based porous N-self-doped 
carbon framework/polyaniline composite with outstanding supercapacitance. 
ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2017;5(10):8663–74. 

[216] Yang M, Kim DS, Hong SB, Sim JW, Kim J, Kim SS, Choi BG. MnO2  nanowire/ 
biomass-derived carbon from hemp stem for high-performance supercapacitors. 
Langmuir 2017;33(21):5140–7. 

[217] Wu C, Zhang S, Wu W, Xi Z, Zhou C, Wang X, Deng Y, Bai Y, Liu G, Zhang X, Li X. 
Carbon nanotubes grown on the inner wall of carbonized wood tracheids for high- 
performance supercapacitors. Carbon, 2019;150:311–8. 

[218] Azira AA, Zainal NFA, Nik SF, Mohamed F, Soga T, Abdullah S, Rusop M. 
Malaysian palm oil for carbon nanotubes preparation. Advanced materials 
research, 667. Trans Tech Publications Ltd; 2013. p. 343–8. 

[219] Trubetskaya A, Hunt AJ, Budarin VL, Attard TM, Kling J, Surup GR, Arshadi M, 

Umeki K. Supercritical extraction and microwave activation of wood Wastefor 
enhanced syngas production and generation of fullerene-like soot particles. Fuel 
Process Technol 2020;212:106633. 

[220] Yan L, Yu J, Houston J, Flores N, Luo H. Biomass derived porous nitrogen doped 

carbon for electrochemical devices. Green Energy Environ 2017;2(2):84–99. 

[221] Mohammadi V, Jafari MT, Saraji M. Solvent holder-assisted liquid-phase 

microextraction using nano-structure biomass-derived carbonaceous aerogel 
combined with ion mobility spectrometry for simultaneous determination of 
ethion and chlorpyrifos. Microchim Acta 2020;187(4):1–10. 

[222] Shen DK, Gu S, Bridgwater AV. Study on the pyrolytic behaviour of xylan-based 
hemicellulose using TG–FTIR and Py–GC–FTIR. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2010;87(2): 
199–206. 

[223] Peters B. Prediction of pyrolysis of pistachio shells based on its components 

hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin. Fuel Process Technol 2011;92(10):1993–8. 

[224] Patwardhan PR, Brown RC, Shanks BH. Product distribution from the fast 

pyrolysis of hemicellulose. ChemSusChem 2011;4(5):636. 

[225] Chu S, Subrahmanyam AV, Huber GW. The pyrolysis chemistry of a β-O-4 type 

oligomeric lignin model compound. Green Chem 2013;15(1):125–36. 
[226] Mu W, Ben H, Ragauskas A, Deng Y. Lignin pyrolysis components and 

upgrading–technology review. Bioenergy Res 2013;6(4):1183–204. 

[227] Bourke J, Manley-Harris M, Fushimi C, Dowaki K, Nunoura T, Antal MJ. Do all 
carbonized charcoals have the same chemical structure? 2. A model of the 
chemical structure of carbonized charcoal. Ind Eng Chem Res 2007;46(18): 
5954–67. 

[228] Lambdon PW, Hassall M, Boar RR, Mithen R. Asynchrony in the nitrogen and 
glucosinolate leaf-age profiles of Brassica: is this a defensive strategy against 
generalist herbivores? Agric Ecosyst Environ 2003;97(1–3):205–14. 
[229] Sun Y, Li H, Li G, Gao B, Yue Q, Li X. Characterization and ciprofloxacin 

adsorption properties of activated carbons prepared from biomass wasteby H3PO4 
activation. Bioresour. Technol. 2016;217:239–44. 

waste into microporous carbon with simultaneously high surface area and carbon 
purity as advanced electrochemical energy storage materials. Appl Surf Sci 2018; 
436:486–94. 

[236] Su XL, Chen JR, Zheng GP, Yang JH, Guan XX, Liu P, Zheng XC. Three- 

dimensional porous activated carbon derived from loofah sponge biomass for 
supercapacitor applications. Appl Surf Sci 2018;436:327–36. 

[237] Lin G, Ma R, Zhou Y, Liu Q, Dong X, Wang J. KOH activation of biomass-derived 
nitrogen-doped carbons for supercapacitor and electrocatalytic oxygen reduction. 
Electrochim. Acta 2018;261:49–57. 

[238] Singh G, Lakhi KS, Kim IY, Kim S, Srivastava P, Naidu R, Vinu A. Highly efficient 
method for the synthesis of activated mesoporous biocarbons with extremely high 
surface area for high-pressure CO2 adsorption. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2017;9 
(35):29782–93. 

[239] Kibona TE, Achola L, Kerns P, Macharia J, King’ondu CK, Suib SL. Highly 

microporous Parinari Curatellifolia carbon nanomaterials for supercapacitors. 
Nano-Structures & Nano-Objects 2020;22:100445. 

[240] Rhee I, Lee JS, Kim YA, Kim JH, Kim JH. Electrically conductive cement mortar: 
incorporating rice husk-derived high-surface-area graphene. Constr Build Mater 
2016;125:632–42. 

[241] Zhang W, Liu L, Li Y, Wang D, Ma H, Ren H, Shi Y, Han Y, Ye BC. Electrochemical 
sensing platform based on the biomass-derived microporous carbons for 
simultaneous determination of ascorbic acid, dopamine, and uric acid. Biosens 
Bioelectron 2018;121:96–103. 

[242] Taer E, Apriwandi A, Taslim R, Agutino A, Yusra DA. Conversion Syzygium 

oleana leaves biomass waste to porous activated carbon nanosheet for boosting 
supercapacitor performances. J Mater Res Technol 2020;9(6):13332–40. 
[243] Liu Q, Duan Y, Zhao Q, Pan F, Zhang B, Zhang J. Direct synthesis of nitrogen- 

doped carbon nanosheets with high surface area and excellent oxygen reduction 
performance. Langmuir 2014;30(27):8238–45. 

[244] Zhu Z, Liu Y, Ju Z, Luo J, Sheng O, Nai J, Liu T, Zhou Y, Wang Y, Tao X. Synthesis 

of diverse green carbon nanomaterials through fully utilizing biomass carbon 
source assisted by KOH. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11(27):24205–11. 

[245] Trasatti S, Petrii OA. Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry. 

J Electroanal Chem 1992;327(1–2):353–76. 

[246] Leng L, Xiong Q, Yang L, Li H, Zhou Y, Zhang W, et al. An overview on 

engineering the surface area and porosity of biochar. Sci Total Environ 2020;763: 
144204. 

[247] Zhang C, Zeng G, Huang D, Lai C, Chen M, Cheng M, Tang W, Tang L, Dong H, 
Huang B, Tan X. Biochar for environmental management: mitigating greenhouse 
gas emissions, contaminant treatment, and potential negative impacts. Chem Eng 
J 2019;373:902–22. 

[248] Kathrin W, Peter Q. Properties of biochar [J]. Fuel 2018;217:240–61. 
[249] Weber K, Quicker P. Properties of biochar. Fuel 2018;217:240–61. 
[250] Park SJ, Das GS, Schütt F, Adelung R, Mishra YK, Tripathi KM, Kim T. Visible- 
light photocatalysis by carbon-nano-onion-functionalized ZnO tetrapods: 
degradation of 2, 4-dinitrophenol and a plant-model-based ecological assessment. 
NPG Asia Mater 2019;11(1):1–13. 

[251] Sharma M, Joshi M, Nigam S, Shree S, Avasthi DK, Adelung R, Srivastava SK, 
Mishra YK. ZnO tetrapods and activated carbon based hybrid composite: 
adsorbents for enhanced decontamination of hexavalent chromium from aqueous 
solution. Chem Eng J 2019;358:540–51.  

Dr.  Santosh  K.  Tiwari  received  his  PhD  (2017)  from  IIT 
Dhanbad,  India  in  Graphene  based  Polymer  nanocomposites 
and then worked with HSCL, Hanyang University, Seoul, South 
Korea  for  1.5  years.  In  2019,  he  joined  the  University  of 
Guangxi, Nanning, China as a research faculty and then moved 
to  Poland where  he  got  NAWA  research grant  from  Govt.  of 
Poland  and  is  presently  working  as  scientist  at  Faculty  of 
Chemistry,  University  of  Warsaw,  Poland.  He  has  published 
more  than  55  research  articles  in  reputed  scientific  journals 
and  has  presented  his  works  as  invited  speaker  in  different 
countries.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102343S.K. Tiwari et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Prof.  Michał  Bystrzejewski  is  a  professor  at  the  Faculty  of 
Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Poland. He has deep research 
interest  in  synthesis  and  characterizations  of  carbon  nano-
materials, carbon nanocomposites, magnetic nanoparticles and 
adsorption and surface phenomena. He received his M.Sc. and 
PhD  from  University  of  Warsaw,  Poland  and  postdoctoral 
training from IFW Dresden (Germany) as Marie Curie Fellow. 
He  has  published  more  than  130  research  articles  related  to 
nanomaterials and carbon nanostructures. He has finished  

Prof.  Andrzej  Huczko  (1949–2021)  was  a  full  professor  in 
Dept. of Chemistry, Warsaw University, Poland with speciali-
zation  in  ceramics  and  composite  materials.  In  1977  he 
defended  his  doctoral  thesis  on  plasma  synthesis  of  silicon 
nitride.  And  continuing  further  work  at  the  University  of 
Warsaw  as  a  lecturer.  In  the  years  1979–1992  he  spent  five 
years  working  scientifically  in  Canadian  universities  in  the 
field  of  thermal  plasma  physics  and  chemistry,  worked  on 
plasma chlorination and fluorination of niobium and uranium 
ores.  In  1996 he  was  awarded with  D.Sc.  from  Warsaw Uni-
versity  on  the  thesis  devoted  to  heterogeneous  reactions  in 
thermal plasma. Since 1993 he’s been a head of the Laboratory  

Dr. Nannan Wang received his PhD from University of Exeter 
in Advanced Functional Materials. And he had the postdoctoral 
experience for Joint-Supervision project between Guangxi and 
Tsinghua University. Now, he works in University of Guangxi 
as an assistant professor at School of Resource, Environment 
and  Materials.  His-main  researches  covered  experimental 
synthesis  and  characterization  of  carbon  functional  nano-
materials  and their applications.  He published  more than 40 
research  articles  in  reputed  scientific  journals  and  presented 
his work as speaker in several international meetings.  

Dr. Amrita De Adhikari is currently working as a postdoctoral 
fellow in the Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engi-
neering,  IIT  Roorkee,  India.  She  has  also  worked  as  a  Post-
doctoral  fellow  in  Ben-Gurion  University  of  the  Negev,  Beer 
Sheva, Israel. She obtained her Ph.D. and M.Sc. from Depart-
ment of Chemistry, IIT (ISM) Dhanbad and Bachelor degree (B. 
Sc. Hons. in Chemistry) from University of Burdwan, India. Her 
research  interest  includes  synthesis  of  2D  and  3D  materials 
(Graphene,  dichalcogenides,  Mxenes,  MOFs  etc.)  and  also 
various organic and inorganic nanostructures for energy stor-
age  application.  Till  date  she  has  23  publications  in  Peer 
reviewed Journals, 1 book chapter (in press) and would like to  

of  Plasma  Chemistry  (now  Laboratory  of  Physical  Chemistry  of  Nanomaterials),  while 
since  2010  he’s  has  become  a  full  professor  at  Warsaw  University.  He  worked  with 
different kinds of nanomaterials including fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, Nano capsules 
and ceramic. He published more than 300 very scientifically sounded articles as well as 7 
books  and  monographs.  He  was  editor  of  the  monograph  series  “The  World  of  Nano-
technology” published by the Warsaw University Publishing House.  

contribute more for the betterment of the scientific community. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10102344