Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Progress in in-situ CO2-sorption for enhanced hydrogen production 

Vineet Singh Sikarwar a,b, c,*, Christoph Pfeifer d, Frederik Ronsse c, Michael Pohoˇrelý b,e, 
Erik Meers c, Ajay Kumar Kaviti f, Michal Jeremi´aˇs a 
a Institute of Plasma Physics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, v. v. i., Za Slovankou 1782/3, 182 00 Prague 8, Czech Republic 
b Department of Power Engineering, University of Chemistry and Technology, Technick´a 5, 166 28 Prague 6, Czech Republic 
c Department of Green Chemistry and Technology, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium 
d Institute for Chemical and Energy Engineering, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, 1180 Wien, Austria 
e Institute of Chemical Process Fundamentals of the Czech Academy of Sciences, v. v. i., Rozvojov´a 2, 165 02 Praha 6, Czech Republic 
f VNR VJIET, Nizampet, Hyderabad, Telangana 500090, India   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
CO2  capture 
Economics 
Hydrogen 
Modeling 
Solid sorbents 

Abbreviations  

ACB 
ANN 
BFB 
CB 
CCUS 
CFB 
CFD 
DEA 
DFB 
ECM 
EDX 
GFM 
GHG 
IPCC 
LDH 
MB 
MCN 

Deployment of fossil fuels to quench the energy demand of the world’s rising population results in elevated levels 
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, especially CO2, which in turn is responsible for undesirable climate change. 
This necessitates a shift toward cleaner energy resources such as hydrogen. Enhanced hydrogen production via 
steam reforming of diverse fuels (methane, biomass, organic wastes, etc.) with in-situ CO2-sorption seems to be a 
promising  alternative.  Leading-edge,  innovative  and  eco-friendly  pathways  coupled  with  high  process  effi-
ciencies  are  needed  for  the  development  and  growth  of  this  technology.  This  review  article  evaluates  the 
fundamental concepts such as criteria for CO2  uptake, mechanisms, thermodynamics and kinetics of the water 
gas shift reaction along with different modeling methods for sorption enhanced processes. Moreover, research 
works carried out worldwide at lab-scale coupled with process development and demonstration units are dis-
cussed as a means to encourage this pathway for H2 generation. Furthermore, light is shed on techno-economics 
as  an  approach  to  improve  the  viability  and  sustainability  of  the  proposed  technology.  This  paper  analyzes 
different dimensions of the CO2-sorption enhanced process to promote it as a potentially carbon-neutral and eco- 
friendly pathway for hydrogen production.   

(continued ) 

MEA 
MOF 
NOAA 
PDU 
RCP 
S:C 
SEM 
S:F 
SorE 
TD 
TGA 
WGS 
WHSV 

Monoethanolamine; 
Metal organic framework; 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; 
Process development unit; 
Representative concentration pathway; 
Steam-to-carbon 
Scanning electron microscope; 
Steam-to-feedstock; 
Sorption enhanced; 
Thermodynamic; 
Thermogravimetric analysis; 
Water gas shift; 
Weight hourly space velocity.  

Alkali ceramic based; 
Artificial neural network; 
Bubbling fluidized bed; 
Calcium based; 
Carbon Capture, Usage and Storage; 
Circulating fluidized bed; 
Computational fluid dynamics; 
Diethanolamine; 
Dual fluidized bed; 
Equilibrium constants method; 
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy; 
Gibbs free energy minimization; 
Greenhouse gas; 
Intergovernmental panel on climate change; 
Layered double hydroxide; 
Magnesium based; 
Multi-walled carbon nanotube; 

(continued on next column)  

* Corresponding Author 

E-mail address: sikarwar@ipp.cas.cz (V.S. Sikarwar).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101008 
Received 15 June 2021; Received in revised form 21 March 2022; Accepted 24 March 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)101008Availableonline31March20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

1. Introduction 

Table 1 
Outline of large stationary CO2 emitters (greater than 0.1 Mt CO2/year) [3, 11].  

The growing global population leads to an ever increasing demand of 
energy.  A  large  fraction  of  which  is  significantly  quenched  by  (non)- 
conventional  fossil  fuels.  The  deployment  of  fossil  fuels  results  in  a 
constant rise in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions which in turn causes 
adverse climate change. It should be noted that around half of the total 
CO2 emissions are from industries and power plants burning fossil fuels 
(such as coal, oil, and natural gas) [1, 2]. Elevated sea levels on account 
of  melting  polar  ice  sheets  coupled  with  disasters  such  as  floods, 
draughts,  wildfires,  cyclones,  extinction  of  species,  food  uncertainty, 
etc…  are some of the existing and potential threats of climate change 
[3]. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has set the 
strategy known as the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP2.6) 
which aims to attain an atmospheric CO2-eq concentration of 450 ppm 
by the end of 21st  century through joint efforts to decrease GHG emis-
sions by 40 to 70 % by 2050 vis-`a-vis 2010 [4, 5]. 

As  per  reports  by  the  U.S.  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA), the concentration of atmospheric CO2 reached 
414.7 ppm in summer of 2019 (~ 40 Gt annual emissions) as compared 
to 400 ppm at the same time in 2016. The thought provoking point is, at 
this rate, that the CO2  levels are estimated to touch 500 ppm by 2050 
[6]. A fact worth emphasizing here is that the transportation sector is 
also  a  key  contributor  in  CO2  emissions.  For  example,  around  1  Gt 
CO2-eq per year is emitted by the transport sector in Europe [7]. Amidst 
the  GHG  emissions  by  transportation,  around  70  %  is  contributed  by 
road  transport [8]. This  has led to the  evolution of numerous  carbon 
dioxide technologies to decrease CO2 emissions by capturing it pre and 
post combustion and to store/utilize it to mitigate climate change due to 
global warming as depicted in Fig. 1. 

Carbon Capture Utilization and Storage popularly known as CCUS is 
one of those technologies to aid in the reduction of CO2 emissions (CO2 
capture from the sources of large CO2  releases such as power plants of 
which some major sources are depicted in Table 1), CO2  storage (high 
pressure storage for long duration) and/or CO2 utilization (to generate 
valuable products and chemicals). The key limitation of CCUS deploy-
ment at large or commercial scale are the expenses related to CO2 cap-
ture. Still, CCUS has been implemented in many nations in the world. 
There are some excellent works depicting the status of CCUS around the 
world  such  as  by  Fennell  and  co-authors  [9]  and  Mac  Dowell  and 
co-authors [10]. The U.S. leads the world in CO2 capture by CCUS with 7 
to 8.4 Mt CO2 annually. China is second in position with 0.4 to 2 Mt CO2 

Industry/ 
process 

Sources 

Fossil derived 

power 

Petrochemical 

Natural gas 

sweetening 

Cement 

production 
Iron and steel 

Refineries 

Coal boiler 
Natural gas 
boiler 
Natural gas 
turbine 
NH3 
synthesis 
C2H4 
synthesis 

- 

- 

Combined 
steel mills 
Other 
processes 
- 

Net CO2 
discharges (% 
of global 
emissions) 

Average CO2 
discharges (Mt 
CO2/source) 

CO2 
vol.% 
(in 
flue 
gas) 

12-15 
7-10 

59.69 
5.62 

3 

5.68 

100 

0.84 

3.94 
1.01 

0.77 

0.58 

12 

1.93 

1.08     

- 

20 

15 

- 

0.37 

6.97 

4.71 

0.12 

- 

0.79 

3.5 

0.17 

3-13 

5.97 

1.25  

per year followed by Europe with 0.7 to 1 Mt CO2 per year [10]. 

Post-combustion  and  pre-combustion  carbon  capture  are  two  key 
methods to capture carbon dioxide as shown in Fig. 2. The former deals 
with the low pressure CO2 capture from flue gas after combustion from 
point  sources  with  large  CO2  discharge  (for  example  thermal  power 
plants, etc.) usually employing either amine solutions (MEA and DEA) or 
calcium looping. The latter is high pressure CO2  capture prior to com-
bustion such as in integrated gasification combined cycle or natural gas 
combined cycle employing solid sorbents [12]. The third type is oxy-fuel 
combustion, which includes the combustion of feedstock with oxygen 
and carbon dioxide, with the capture of CO2 from the flue gas which is a 
mixture only composed of CO2 and steam [13]. 

The major challenges associated with amine solutions are corrosion, 
toxic  byproducts,  loss  of  solvents  coupled  with  huge  energy  re-
quirements for regeneration [14]. This has shifted the focus on physical 
sorption  of  CO2  by  porous  solid  sorbents,  especially  materials  with 
nano-sized pores. The cardinal benefits include high sorption capacity, 
regulate  properties  and 
good 

selectivity  and  flexibility 

to 

Fig. 1. Diverse CO2  capture, storage and utilization pathways  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010082V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Fig. 2. Pre and post combustion CO2  capture  

cost-effectiveness [15]. Materials with micro, meso and nano sized pores 
have been explored such as metal organic frameworks (MOF) [16], ze-
olites  [17],  zeolitic  imidazole  frameworks  [18],  porous  activated 
bio-carbons [19], porous polymers [20], porous polymer foams [21] and 
mesoporous  carbon  nitrides  [12].  Calcium  based  (CB),  magnesium 
based (MB), layered double hydroxide (LDH) and alkali ceramic based 
(ACB)  sorbents  are  commonly  employed  solid  sorbents  (detailed 
description in the subsequent sections). 

In  the  wake  of  the  current  climate  change  scenarios  due  to  rising 
GHG  emissions  and  increasing  energy  requirements,  along  with  CO2 
capture  strategies,  there  is  a  direct  need  to  shift  toward  a  clean  and 
efficient fuel. Hydrogen has a remarkable high energy content (120 MJ/ 
kg) which is almost thrice that of gasoline’s energy content on a mass 
basis, and thus can be one of the viable options in this regard. Hydrogen 
cannot only be employed for power generation, chemical synthesis, etc., 
it can also be used in fuel cell driven electric vehicles. There are many 
hydrogen generation methods which are depicted in Table 2. It is worth 
stressing that among all the listed pathways, electrolysis and photolysis 
can  directly  produce  pure  hydrogen  whereas  all  the  other  processes 
produce a hydrogen containing gas mixture that has to be concentrated 
and cleaned. Apart from these mentioned pathways for H2 production, 
there  are  some  emerging  routes  namely  anion  exchange  membrane 
assisted H2 generation, membraneless electrolysis, membrane reactors, 
photocatalysis,  dark  fermentation  coupled  with  photo-fermentation, 
unitized  regenerative  method,  plasma  arc  decomposition,  etc.  [22, 
23].  Some  of  these  production  routes  have  high  potential  such  as 
membrane  reactor  technology  and  plasma  arc  decomposition  with 
maximum reported hydrogen production efficiencies as 90 and 85 %, 
respectively [23]. 

A high energy density coupled with its carbon-neutral nature makes 
hydrogen an attractive substitute to fossil fuels. It can be employed to 
fulfill domestic requirements as well as to accomplish various needs in 
industries  such  as  the  fertilizer  industry  (ammonia  production),  re-
fineries, the steel industry (as reducing agent) and power generation. As 
aforementioned, it can be employed in the transportation sector either 
as a direct fuel to internal combustion (IC) engines or as a feedstock to 
fuel cells in electric vehicles. It has a potential to propel around 20 to 25 
% of road and shipping industries [39]. It should be stressed that H2 can 
contribute to about 18 % of the net energy requirements by decreasing 
CO2  emissions  by  about  6  Gt  per  year  [40].  Estimates  reveal  that 
developing a H2 economy can create around 30 million jobs by the end 
of 2050 [41]. The right perspective should be to view hydrogen as an 

energy  vector  which  needs  significant  infrastructure.  Despite  being  a 
high energy-containing fuel with carbon neutral nature, the generation, 
storage and transportation of hydrogen is not yet cost-effective. Table 3 
reflects investment costs and efficiencies of diverse hydrogen generation 
pathways. It is clear that the investment costs will reduce in 2030 with a 
further  decrease  in  2050  as  the  technologies  will  eventually  mature 
which can be seen by an opposite trend followed by the efficiencies for 
different H2 generation technologies. 

Among  all  the  hydrogen  generation  pathways,  most  commonly 
employed  routes  are  steam  reforming,  partial  oxidation,  and  auto- 
thermal  reforming.  On  account  of  minimum  capital  requirement  and 
maximum  efficiency,  steam  methane  reforming  is  most  cost-effective 
and  therefore,  commercially  deployed  [49].  It  is  worth  noting  that 
extra purification of H2 (for example, chemisorption or PSA) is needed 
[50]. Another pathway is to combine the aforementioned processes with 
in-situ CO2  capture via solid sorbents during reforming which in turn 
would  enhance  H2  production  (in  the  syngas)  [51].  This  concept  is 
known as sorption enhanced (hereafter referred to as SorE) reforming. 
This process has the flexibility to deploy a wide variety of feedstocks 
ranging from biomass to wastes to natural gas. It is worth noting that 
hydrogen rich syngas needs further processing to obtain pure hydrogen. 
Recently, this route has been widely explored employing different sor-
bents with diverse feedstocks. This technology paves a way to capture 
CO2  in pre-combustion processes under CCS schemes and to generate 
high purity H2 to quench the world’s energy thirst. 

The history of SorE processes dates back to 1868 when Motay and 
Marechal deployed calcium oxide to carry out steam reforming of coal 
and filed patents [52–54]. The pace of research on these lines increased 
in the mid of 20th  century. Everett Gorin explored diverse fuels (both 
solids and gases) in the presence of lime to generate hydrogen and filed 
many patents in 1949 [55, 56]. After about two decades, Curran and 
co-authors  [57]  discovered  a  method  to  generate  constant  supply  of 
syngas (H2:CO = 3) via so called ‘carbon dioxide acceptor gasification’ 
from coal employing two integrated fluidized beds working at 20 bar in 
the presence of a sorbent. Some scientists [58, 59] developed a novel 
gasification process to produce H2 (80 vol.% dry basis) in Japan around 
two  decades  back  and  called  it  HyPr-RING.  Moreover,  some  in-
vestigations  examined  different  configurations  to  generate  H2  from 
carbon-rich feedstocks [60, 61] whereas others assessed H2 production 
from  biomass  [62].  Vienna  University  of  Technology  (TU  Wien)  in 
Austria employed a dual fluidized bed to test a SorE process and realized 
H2  generation with high chemical efficiency [63, 64]. Later, ZSW and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010083V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Table 2 
Different H2 generation pathways with respective efficiencies and maturity levels [23–38].  

Process 

Thermolysis 

Radiolysis 
Electrolysis 

Biolysis 

Bio-electrolysis 
Chemical 
Thermo-electrolysis 
Bio-photolysis 

Electro-photolysis 
Photolysis 

Technical route 

Input energy 

Efficiency (%) 

Maturity level 

H2O thermolysis 
Pyrolysis 
Gasification 
Coal gasification 
Steam reforming 
Membrane reactors 
Partial oxidation 
Autothermal 
CO2 dry reforming 
Hydrothermal 
Aqueous phase reforming 
Radiolysis 
AE 
PEM 
SOC 
Chlor-alkali 
Dark fermentation 
Hydrolysis 
Biological reaction 
Co-fermentation 
Microbial electrolysis 
Redox 
Plasma reforming 
Photo-fermentation 
Algal H2 
Photo-electrochemical 
Photosynthesis 

Thermal energy 
Thermal energy 
Thermal energy 
Thermal energy 
Thermal energy 
Thermal energy 
Thermal energy 
Thermal energy 
Thermal energy 
Bioenergy + thermal energy 
Bioenergy 
Radiation 
Electrical energy 
Electrical energy 
Electrical energy 
Electrical energy 
Bioenergy 
Bioenergy 
Bioenergy 
Bioenergy + thermal energy 
Bioenergy + electrical energy 
Chemical reaction 
Thermal + electrical energy 
Bioenergy + Photonic 
Bioenergy + Photonic 
Electro-photonic 
Photonic 

20-55 
35-50 
35-50 
74-85 
60-85 
64-90 
60-75 
60-75 
- 
35-45 
35-55 
- 
62-82 
67-84 
75-90 
- 
60-80 
- 
- 
- 
70-80 
3-5 
9-85 
< 1 
1-3 
0.5-12 
1.6-5 

1-3 
8-10 
10 
10 
10 
7-9 
7-9 
6-8 
- 
1-3 
5-7 
1-3 
9-10 
7-9 
3-5 
2-4 
3-5 
2-4 
2-4 
2-4 
1-3 
4-6 
1-3 
1-3 
1-3 
1-2 
1-3 

Note: The values of maturity level ranges from 1 to 10 where 1 denotes a basic technology at the level of research and 10 reflects the bankable asset class. 

IFK Germany among many other research groups worldwide conducted 
many lab and pilot-scale investigations [65]. 

The objective of this review article is to assess diverse dimensions of 
in-situ  CO2  capture  employing  solid  sorbents  namely,  calcium  based, 
magnesium based, layered double hydroxide and alkali ceramic based in 
pre-combustion  carbon  capture  for  enhanced  hydrogen  production  in 
SorE reforming of gaseous hydrocarbons, SorE gasification of solid fuels 
and SorE WGS employing a variety of feedstocks. It is worth noting that 
the current work is focused on pre-combustion CO2 capture, however in 
few  places,  post-combustion capture  results  are  commented,  with the 
sole objective of strengthening a particular concept discussed there. In 
general,  the  fundamental  aspects  of  SorE  processes  are  discussed  and 
applied  aspects  such  as  energy/exergy  analysis,  energy  integration, 
reactor configurations etc. are outside the scope of current work. In the 
next section, fundamentals related to sorption enhanced processes are 
discussed. In Section 3, diverse modeling investigations via thermody-
namic (TD), kinetic, CFD and ANN approaches are explored. Section 4 
elucidates different lab-scale tests conducted worldwide. This study also 
sheds light on the various process development and demonstration units 
worldwide. It is followed, in Section 6, by a discussion about economic 
viability  of  the  proposed  process.  The  challenges  and  future  research 

2. Fundamentals of sorption enhanced gasification 

2.1. Criterion for CO2  capture 

The prime objective to capture maximum carbon dioxide led to the 
development of diverse sorbents keeping in view the sorption conditions 
namely,  post combustion or  pre  combustion. As  far  as  history is  con-
cerned, zeolites and activated carbons were the first deployed sorbents. 
Lately, many sorbents such as metal based (Ca based, Mg based, etc.), 
layered  double  hydroxide  (LDH),  alkali  ceramic  (AC)  based,  metal- 
organic  framework  (MOFs)  sorbents  among  others  have  been  devel-
oped  with  the  cardinal  goal  to  enhance  CO2  uptake  efficacy,  sorbent 
durability and economic performance. CO2 capture by solid sorbents can 
be assessed based on selectivity, regenerability and working carbon di-
oxide uptake capacity as depicted in Eq. (1), (2) and (3), respectively 
[66, 67]: 

Selectivity = S = (x1 / x2)/(y1 / y2)

Regenerability = R(%) = (ΔACO2 / ΔACO2

sor ) × 100

WorkingCO2capacity = ΔACO2 = ΔACO2

sor (cid:0) ΔACO2

desor = CO2loadingatsorptionpressure (cid:0) CO2loadingatdesorptionpressure

directions are discussed in Section 7. Conclusions are drawn and per-
spectives for future applications are given in the last section. Despite the 
fact  that a  large number  of research  and  development activities  have 
been conducted in the above-mentioned areas, there is no all-inclusive 
review on sorption enhanced processes for H2  production highlighting 
the related areas. This article will be an aid to research efforts and will be 
helpful in the scale-up of in-situ CO2-sorption enhanced H2  generation 
plants. A cartoon (Fig. 3) reflects the idea of the proposed process for a 
carbon-neutral pathway to produce useful energy. 

sor, A1

sor  is adsorbed CO2, A2

sor  is 
where CO2  sorption capacity is ACO2
adsorbed CH4 (or N2), x1 is the CO2 mole fraction in adsorbed phase, x2 
is the CH4  (or N2) mole fraction in adsorbed phase, y1 is the CO2 mole 
fraction in gas phase and y2 is the CH4 (or N2) mole fraction in gas phase. 
As  aforementioned,  Le  Chatelier’s  principle  is  governing  the  CO2- 
sorption enhanced gasification where CO2  is selectively removed shift-
ing the equilibrium toward the formation of the other reaction product 
which  is  hydrogen.  By  the  sorption  of  CO2  from  the  gaseous  product 

(1)  

(2)    

(3)   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010084V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Table 3 
Summary of investment costs and efficiencies of diverse H2 generation pathways in 2016 as compared to predictions for 2030 and 2050 [8, 42-48].  

Pathway 

Investment cost(€/GJ.y) 

Conventional natural gas steam reforming 
CO2-sorption enhanced natural gas steam reforming 
Conventional biofuels steam reforming 
Conventional coal gasification 
CO2-sorption enhanced coal gasification 
Conventional biomass gasification 
Electrolysis 

Note: Conventional reflects without CO2 capture. 

2016 

8.75 
14.50 
30.75 
9.10 
53.75 
48.27 
36.76 

2030 

7.33 
11.10 
25.77 
7.63 
41.15 
21.10 
15.86 

2050 

7.33 
9.44 
23.19 
7.63 
34.98 
17.94 
6.10 

Efficiency (%) 

2016 

2030 

76 
65 
69 
60 
56 
43 
67 

85 
70 
72 
70 
60 
46 
85 

Fig.  3. A  schematic  representing  a  carbon-neutral  or  carbon-negative  energy  scenario  employing  SorE  processes  (the  carbon  balance  being  zero  or  negative 
depending on the carbon footprint of the fuel used) 

species employing a solid sorbent, the normal equilibrium limit of the 
reforming reaction is extended beyond the thermodynamic limitation of 
the original system without the CO2  removal [68]. Table 4 reflects an 
evaluation of reaction enthalpies in the SorE process (using CaO) (Eq. 
(4))  with  an  ideal  global  reaction  (traditional  H2  generation  process) 

Table 4 
Comparative  assessment  of  reaction  enthalpies  (at  298  K,  1  bar)  in  sorption 
enhanced reaction and global reaction for hydrogen production using different 
feedstocks [69, 70].  

Feedstocks 

Chemical 
formula 

Values of x, 
y and z 

Reaction enthalpy (ΔH0) (kJ/ 
mol) 

SorE 
process 

Conventional 
process 

Methanol 

CH3OH 

Ethanol 

C2H5OH 

1-Butanol 

C4H10O 

Propane 

C3H8 

Natural gas 

CH4 

CO (in 

syngas) 

Glycerol 

- 

C3H8O3 

x=1, y=4, 
z=1 
x=2, y=6, 
z=1 
x=4, y=10, 
z=1 
x=3, y=8, 
z=0 
x=1, y=4, 
z=0 
x=1, y=0, 
z=1 
x=3, y=8, 
z=3 

-92 

-186 

-325 

-137 

-13 

-219 

-411 

+49 

+226 

+445 

+398 

+178 

-41 

+219  

(Eq. (5)) employing diverse feedstocks. 

CxHyOz + (2x (cid:0) z)H2O + xCaO→xCaCO3 + (2x (cid:0) z + 0.5y)H2

CxHyOz + (2x (cid:0) z)H2O ↔ (2x (cid:0) z + 0.5y)H2 + xCO2

(4)  

(5) 

As  can  be  noticed  from  Table  4,  the  conventional  hydrogen  pro-
duction process is endothermic in nature employing different feedstocks 
with an exception of syngas which is mildly exothermic. However, the 
SorE  process is  exothermic with the  formation of relevant carbonates 
(CaCO3 in the given example as the deployed sorbent is CaO). It is worth 
noting that heat would be required in calcination reactions to regenerate 
the sorbent along with CO2 which may either be geologically stored or 
employed as a feedstock for chemical synthesis. 

2.2. Concept of bed usage 

There  is  a  slow  loss  of  carbon  dioxide  sorption  capacity  by  solid 
sorbents with the advancement of carbonate formation (carbonation of 
sorbent with the capture of CO2) during CO2  sorption. De-carbonation 
by means of regeneration is therefore necessary to restore the sorption 
capacity. It leads to a cycle of carbonation and de-carbonation which in 
turn induces disruption in the process coupled with an enhancement in 
complexity.  An  optimal  sorbent by  definition  should last for  a  longer 
time  during  CO2  capture  (carbonation)  than  in  regeneration  (decar-
bonation)  which  would  decrease  the  frequency  of  shifting  between 
carbonation and decarbonation [71]. If the entire capacity of a sorbent is 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010085V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Fig. 4. Product gas versus time from a fixed bed reactor with CO2  sorption  

used during CO2 sorption, it is highly probable that a sorbent with high 
capacity would increase the duration of carbonation. It is worth noting 
that in real world scenarios, the capacity of the sorbent bed cannot be 
completely exploited. When the rate of CO2  production is greater than 
the  rate  of  CO2  sorption,  the  sorbent  bed  needs  to  be  shifted  from 
carbonation  to  de-carbonation  in  in-situ  sorption  enhanced  processes 
(pre-combustion scenario). It is on account of CO2 breakthrough which 
takes place after this point and consequently, the purity of hydrogen is 
compromised  due  to  non-adsorbed  CO2  occurring  in  the  outlet  gas 
stream. On the other hand, when the rate of CO2 sorption is lower than 
the  CO2  feeding  rate  in  the  flue  gas,  the  sorbent  bed  requires 
de-carbonation in post-combustion environment. 

The significance of bed utilization can be understood by taking an 
example in post-combustion carbon capture as depicted in Fig. 4. In the 
beginning, the sorbent has ample sites to capture CO2 (from the flue gas) 
coupled with reasonably fast kinetics which results in nearly maximal 
thermodynamically possible CO2 capture at the given temperature and 
pressure with mostly nitrogen passing through the sorbent bed. A drop 
in the rate of CO2 sorption is noticed with respect to time when a fraction 
of the sorbent’s sites is occupied with CO2 and the kinetics becomes the 
limiting  factor  for  the  sorption  reactions.  Therefore,  when  the  CO2 
feeding rate to the bed surpasses the CO2 sorption rate, the sorbent is not 
able to adsorb all CO2 resulting in an increasing amount of CO2 flowing 
with the N2 stream. It should be noted that the total capacity of a sorbent 
can be defined as the total amount of CO2  captured by a sorbent bed 
(area underneath Cp + Cb), however, the actual or effective capacity is 
the  area  with  complete  CO2  capture  (Cp)  [71].  The  average  trans-
formation of a sorbent when the breakthrough takes place is known as 
bed usage. It can also be termed as the ratio of actual to total capacity. It 
is worth remembering that sorption kinetics is equally significant as the 
capacity  of  a  sorbent.  The  breakthrough  takes  place  when  the  CO2 

feeding rate is higher than the CO2  sorption rate. Therefore, a sorbent 
with a high capacity and slower kinetics would have a low actual ca-
pacity on account of early breakthrough due to slow sorption kinetics. 
This inherently reflects that an optimal sorbent should keep its capture 
rate above the CO2 feeding rate for an extended duration. 

Two  most  widely  employed  configurations  are  fluidized  beds  and 
packed beds for SorE processes. In fluidized beds, high gas velocities are 
employed to achieve fluidization of solids with the disadvantage being 
the very small gas residence times in the bed. This results in a very short 
duration of several seconds of contact between the sorbent and CO2 thus 
necessitating faster sorption kinetics [72, 73]. This explains the need to 
have stringent prerequisites of capture kinetics in fluidized beds vis-`a-vis 
packed beds. There can be two possible regimes of operating a fluidized 
bed for carbonation. The carbonator is either designed as a circulating 
fluidized bed, therefore there must be a constant minimal velocity of the 
fluidizing gas so that the particles are entrained and leave the reactor 
after having adsorbed CO2 from the passing gas. Normally, the residence 
time of the particles is determined by the length of the reactor to get 
maximal use of the first (kinetically driven) stage, however, extending 
the length of the reactor further would not be effective with respect to 
adsorption  efficiency.  The  other  regime  is  when  the  carbonator  is  a 
bubbling fluidized bed (as in the case of FICFB). In this case, the fluid-
izing gas passes through the bed at a lower velocity in order to keep the 
solid particles within the reactor. As such, the gas residence time can be 
prolonged by increasing the mass of sorbent in the reactor, but only to a 
limited extent. The total capacity of sorbent employed in a fluidized bed 
is not significant in view of the small residence time which allows only a 
fraction of the sorbent to capture CO2. Therefore, whether it is a packed 
bed or a fluidized bed, the role of CO2 sorption kinetics is crucial. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010086V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Fig. 5. Types of WGS reactions  

2.3. Significance of water gas shift reaction (WGS) 

In  later  part  of  18th  century,  Italian  physicist  Felice  Fontana 
described the water gas shift reaction [74]. WGS plays a crucial role in 
many processes including CO2-sorption enhanced gasification. Carbon 
monoxide and steam react to form hydrogen and carbon dioxide with a 
release of a small amount of heat (41.1 kJ/mol) in WGS as expressed in 
Eq. (6). 

CO + H2O ↔ H2 + CO2 + 41.1kJ/mol

(6) 

WGS is a redox reversible reaction with a mild exothermic nature and 
is  deployed  in  industries  such  as  in  the  Haber-Bosch  process  for 
ammonia synthesis [75]. It is also commonly found in blast furnaces [76, 
77],  Fischer  Tropsch  synthesis  [78],  gasification  [79,  80],  steam 
reforming [81, 82], auto-thermal reforming [83, 84], partial oxidation 
[85,  86],  methanol  synthesis  and  DME  synthesis  [87,  88]  amongst 
others.  In  general,  WGS  can  be  categorized  into  two  classes  namely, 
catalytic WGS and non-catalytic WGS based on the presence or absence 
of  a  catalyst.  Detailed  classification  of  WGS  pathways  is  depicted  in 
Fig. 5. In general, non-catalytic WGS is termed non-conventional WGS 
and  is usually executed in supercritical  water [89] and steam plasma 
torch systems [90] whereas catalytic WGS is known as the conventional 
WGS system and it can be powered in a number of ways such as pho-
tocatalytic [91], microwave assisted heating [92], heat circulation [93] 
or high gravity environment [94]. More importantly, WGS is employed 
in SorE gasification/pyrolysis in the presence of a sorbent to capture CO2 
in-situ inducing enhanced H2 yields. 

WGS  is  equilibrium-limited  and  its  behavior  is  a  function  of  tem-
perature which necessitates the development of insights about the re-
action  thermodynamics  to  enable  optimal  design  and  operation  of 
reactors.  In  practical  applications  in  industry,  catalysts  are  usually 
employed and consequently, an understanding of kinetics is also needed. 

2.3.1. Thermodynamics of WGS 

Equilibrium constants vis-`a-vis thermodynamics not only define the 
concentrations of gases but also the chemical kinetics for WGS [95–97]. 
This clearly stresses the significance of equilibrium constants as far as 
WGS is concerned. The equilibrium constant in WGS is dependent upon 
temperature and can be deduced employing Eq. (7) [98]. 
)
(Patm)ΣN
j=1

(cid:0)
KP = exp

R (cid:0) ΔH0

j (cid:0) v

ΔS0

RT

v′′

/

/

)

(cid:0)

j

′

(7)  

where ΔS0  is the change in total entropy (standard conditions), ΔH0  is 

the change in total enthalpy (standard conditions), R is the universal gas 
constant, T is the absolute temperature, Patm is the ambient pressure, N is 
the  number  of  species  and  vj  is  the  stoichiometric  coefficient.  The 
equilibrium constant is inversely related to temperature. In other words, 
a drop in temperature raises the value of the equilibrium constant. For 
example, when the reaction temperature is below 100 
C, the value of 
the equilibrium constant is in the order of 103  whereas when the tem-
◦
perature is increased to 500 
C, the equilibrium constant reduces to ~5. 
Thermodynamically speaking, the forward reaction (Eq. (6)) is favored 
at lower temperatures. In 1962, Moe [99] developed a simple equation 
(as mentioned in Eq. (8)) to deduce the equilibrium constant for WGS as 
a function of temperature. 

◦

KP = exp[(4577.8 / T) (cid:0) 4.33]

(8)  

◦

where T is the absolute temperature. As mentioned before, the forward 
WGS  reaction  is  favored  at  lower  reaction  temperatures,  however,  at 
higher temperatures (~ 1000 
C), CO transformation becomes a func-
tion of steam-to-CO molar ratio and is in the range of 43.5 to 83.5 % [96, 
100]. With an increase in this molar ratio or with an elevation in reac-
tion  temperature,  the  heat  of  reaction  enhances.  At  higher  values  of 
steam-to-CO molar ratio at elevated temperatures, the rate of conversion 
of CO improves albeit at a cost of higher energy requirement to propel 
the  reaction.  On  the  other  hand,  at  lower  temperatures  (~200 
C), 
almost no energy is needed to drive the reaction. In a real world sce-
nario, at lower temperatures, the rate of reaction is very slow necessi-
tating  a  huge  reactor  to  acquire  equilibrium  whereas  at  higher 
temperatures (although not optimal), the rate of reaction is fast. 

◦

2.3.2. Kinetics of WGS 

An understanding of WGS kinetics is needed to utilize it optimally in 
different processes. It also aids in deploying catalysts in WGS. The cat-
alysts  decrease  the  activation  energy  of  the  reaction  and  facilitate  to 
initiate  it. Water  gas  shift  reaction  can  be  broadly  classified  into  low 
temperature water gas shift (LT-WGS) and high temperature water gas 
shift  (HT-WGS)  based  on  the  temperature  (and  catalysts  used).  The 
temperature ranges and catalysts employed in the former category are 
respectively,  150  to  250 
C  and  Cu-Zn  (and  Au/Pt)  based  catalysts 
whereas  the  latter  group  employs  350  to  500 
C  and  Fe-Cr  (and  Ni) 
based catalysts [101]. It should be noted that the Arrhenius principle 
reflects  the  importance  of  elevated  reaction  temperature  for  an 
enhanced  reaction  rate  whereas  Le  Chatelier’s  principle  recommends 
lower  reaction  temperature  for  higher  CO  conversion  which  in  turn 

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010087V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

leads to increased H2 amounts. For the same reason, HT-WGS is steered 
by kinetics and LT-WGS is propelled by TD. Therefore, in practice, WGS 
is  implemented  in  two  stages  where  HT-WGS  is  followed  by  LT-WGS 
[96]. 

The investigations [102, 103] reveal that improvements can be made 
in existing commercialized HT catalysts (Ni based or Fe-Cr based) either 
by doping them with alkalis or by substituting part of the metals with a 
modifier. The limitations in LT catalysts can be overcome by namely (i) 
the application of an electric field and (ii) the addition of alkalis [104, 
105].  The  impact  of  structure,  support  and  size  of  the  catalyst  on  its 
efficacy  have  also  been  evaluated  in  numerous  studies.  Lately,  noble 
metal catalysts such as Au, Pt, Pd and Rh have been explored. On ac-
count of remarkable kinetics shown by noble metal catalysts, they have 
been deployed as both HT and LT catalysts in diverse assessments [106, 
107]. In addition, they do not degrade in atmospheric conditions. Ki-
netic rate expressions of diverse HT, LT and other noble metal catalysts 
along with significant investigations can be found in the excellent re-
views by Chen and co-authors [100], Smith and co-authors [108] and 
Mendes and co-authors [75]. 

3. Mathematical modeling studies 

General  efficacy  considerations  in  SorE  processes  such  as  energy 
efficiency, economics, etc. are functions of numerous variables such as 
type of reactor, choice of feedstock and sorbent (or bi-functional mate-
rial), operating conditions, etc. All these variables should be optimized 
in order to attain the anticipated output. Generally, experimental works 
are conducted to assess and deduce the optimal values. The flip side with 
experiments  are  the  expenses  and  the  time  associated  with  them.  A 
partial solution to this issue can be mathematical modeling which can 
provide qualitative data for practical operational conditions in a swift 

and  cost-efficient  manner  although  not  as  accurate  as  experiments 
[109]. In addition, these models are very useful to examine the reactor 
behavior  without  actually  constructing  it.  Four  commonly  employed 
modeling approaches are thermodynamic, kinetic, computational fluid 
dynamics  (CFD)  and  artificial  neural  network  (ANN)  models.  A  sche-
matic depicting all the modeling approaches with regard to SorE pro-
cesses is given in Fig. 6. 

It  should  be  emphasized  here  that  kinetic,  TD  and  CFD  are  not 
competing modeling methodologies, but they are mostly distinguished 
based  on the scale  they intend to model. Kinetic and  thermodynamic 
models  are  designed  to  model  reaction  rates  and  conversion  extents 
which may be applied onto single particles provided there are no mass 
and heat transfer limitations. Given that on a larger scale, i.e. the reactor 
scale, there is a certain spatial distribution within the parameters that 
define the reaction (i.e. T, concentration) and that even within particles 
of solid-gas systems, there are heat and mass transfer limitations, one 
needs to apply models that can cope with both kinetics, heat and mass 
transfer, and fluid flow. The latter is typical the domain of CFD models. 
CFD models may be applied to single particles, for detailed description 
of phenomena taking place within a single particle and do take a kinetic 
model into consideration to describe the reaction rate of the chemical 
reactions  taking  place.  On  a  large  scale,  CFD  models  may  be  used  to 
model complete reactors, and typically use simplified kinetic models to 
describe  the  behavior  in  the  modeled  particles  (either  as  a  granular 
phase or as a discrete phase) – the latter models are also referred to as 
multiscale models. It is worth noting that the models need to be vali-
dated before they are applied to a wide range of conditions. 

3.1. Kinetic models 

Thermo-gravimetric  Analysis  commonly  known  as  TGA  is  usually 

Fig. 6. Types of modeling approaches vis-`a-vis SorE process  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010088V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

employed  to  assess  the  sorbent  reaction  rate  whereas  Derivative 
Thermo-gravimetry is used to evaluate the kinetics. The carbon dioxide 
capture kinetics are associated to the models or reaction mechanisms. 
Solid reaction models or mechanisms govern the rate of sorbent-carbon 
dioxide (solid-gas) reactions. In solids involving processes (for example, 
sludge  pyrolysis/gasification,  coal  gasification,  biomass  degradation, 
etc.), the loss of mass in solids is computed employing these mechanisms 
[110]. In principle, these mechanisms can be applied to mass-accretion 
processes such as carbon dioxide sorption by a solid sorbent [111, 112]. 
In  general, the  conversion  of solid (α) vis-`a-vis  time (t) is  termed the 
reaction rate and is depicted in Eq. (9). 

dα/dt = ⋅k⋅f (α)

(9)  

where f(α) and k are the reaction model and rate constant, respectively. f 
(α) is a function of the reaction mechanism. In the sorption of carbon 
dioxide by a solid sorbent, α is deduced using Eq. (10). 
)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

α⋅ = ⋅

mt⋅ (cid:0)

⋅mf

mc⋅ (cid:0)

⋅mf

/
)
⋅
⋅

(10)  

where mt  is the mass of sorbent at time t, mf  is the fresh sorbent mass 
before sorption and mc is the mass of sorbent after complete carbonation. 
It is worth noting that the value of k enhances vis-`a-vis temperature in 
accordance with the Arrhenius equation (Eq. (11)). Furthermore, it is 
should be remembered to keep the temperature within the limit where 
sorption of CO2 is preferred over desorption. 

k⋅ = ⋅A⋅exp⋅( (cid:0) E/RT)

(11) 

The shape of the kinetic profile can be used to assess the reaction 
model for the CO2 capture reaction. A systematic account of solid state 
reaction models is listed in Table 5 where each model relates to a re-
action mechanism. 

As the name suggests, nucleation forms the foundation of nucleation 
and nuclei growth models. They fall under the classification of A-series 
models. The sorption of CO2  by a solid sorbent to form the respective 
carbonate  is  basically  nucleation  and  nuclei  growth.  With  respect  to 
time,  the  nucleus  is  developed  in  the  bulk  where  bulk  is  the  un- 
carbonated reactant and the nucleus is the carbonate (product of CO2 
adsorbed  and  reacted  in  the  sorbent)  [49].  The  development  of  the 
nucleus is hindered on account of surface tension over the nucleus. In 
addition, this surface tension can cause the fusion of some nuclei back to 
the bulk leading to a low sorption rate at the initial stage. It should be 
stressed that blockage of nucleation is a function of the surface of the 
nucleus whereas the propelling force of nucleation is a function of the 
volume of the nucleus, where the former opposes the latter. The domi-
nance of surface tension decreases with respect to bulk propelling force 
with an increasing size of the nucleus which in turn supports the nucleus 

Table 5 
A systematic account of solid state reaction models [71, 112-117].  

Model name 

Code 

f(α) 

g(α) 

Avrami-Erofeev 
Avrami-Erofeev 
Avrami-Erofeev 
Avrami-Erofeev 
Diffusion (1-D) 
Diffusion (2-D) 
Diffusion (3-D) 
Zero order 
First order 
Second order 
Third order 
nth order 
Power law 
Power law 
Power law 
Power law 
Shrinking area 
Shrinking volume 

A2 
A3 
A4 
An 
D1 
D2 
D3 
F0 
F1 
F2 
F3 
Fn 
P2/3 
P2 
P3 
P4 
R2 
R3 

2(1-α)[-ln(1-α)]1/2 
3(1-α)[-ln(1-α)]2/3 
4(1-α)[-ln(1-α)]3/4 
n(1-α)[-ln(1-α)]n-1/n 
1/(2α) 
-[1/ln(1-α)] 
[3(1-α)2/3]/[2(1-(1-α)1/3)] 
1 
(1-α) 
(1-α)2 
(1-α)3 
(1-α)n 
2/3 α(cid:0) 1/2 
2 α1/2 
3α2/3 
4α3/4 
2(1-α)1/2 
3(1-α)2/3 

[-ln(1-α)]1/2 
[-ln(1-α)]1/3 
[-ln(1-α)]1/4 
[-ln(1-α)]1/n 
α2 
(1-α)ln(1-α) + α 
1-(2/3)α-(1-α)2/3 
α 
-ln(1-α) 
[1/(1-α)]-1 
(1/2)[(1-α)
[1/(n-1)][(1-α)
α3/2 
α1/2 
α1/3 
α1/4 
1-(1-α)1/2 
1-(1-α)1/3  

(cid:0) 2-1] 

(cid:0) n+1-1] 

development.  As  a  result  of  spontaneous  nucleus  growth,  the  rate  of 
reaction enhances significantly. As the nuclei grow larger, they overlap 
with other nuclei leading to an inhibition which results in a slow-down 
of the reaction rate. Therefore, in A-series models for CO2  sorption by 
solid sorbents, the rate of reaction speeds up, reaches a peak and then 
slows down and it is defined by the Avrami-Erofeev model [111]. The 
CO2  capture by solid sorbents such as alkali ceramic sorbents (sodium 
zirconate,  lithium  orthosilicate)  are  governed  by  the  A-series  mecha-
nism [112, 113, 117]. 

The diffusion limited models under the category of D-series models 
consider the reaction as diffusion limited. These models presume that 
the rate of reaction is much higher vis-`a-vis the rate of mass transfer. At 
zero conversion, the complete sorbent is exposed to carbon dioxide thus 
eliminating the need of mass transfer to establish contact between the 
former and latter. This leads to the intrinsic reaction rate as the only key 
factor regulating the CO2  sorption rate. Carbon dioxide is required to 
diffuse  through  the  product  layer  (i.e.  saturated  sorbent)  once  it  is 
developed to establish contact with the unreacted sorbent. Therefore, 
the rate of carbon dioxide sorption seemingly becomes a function of the 
diffusion rate [71]. With the progress of the reaction, thickening of the 
product layer occurs extending the path for CO2 diffusion. It should be 
emphasized  that  in  case  of  lower  molar  volume  of  fresh  sorbent 
compared to carbonated sorbent, CO2  diffusion becomes harder on ac-
count  of  obstructed  gas  diffusion  channels  due  to  volume  expansion 
upon carbonation. As a result of slower diffusion, the rate of reaction 
drops. This explains the reason of a constant decrease in reaction rate in 
this type of models [115]. The sorption mechanisms by solid sorbents 
such as calcium-based and magnesium-based sorbents are usually gov-
erned by these models [114]. 

The  reaction  limited  models  or  F-series  models  consider  uniform 
kinetics all over the particle. It is because they hypothesize that the rate 
of carbon dioxide diffusion is much higher compared to the rate of re-
action. Here in these models, the total kinetics are equal to the intrinsic 
kinetics.  The  rate  of  reaction  is  a  function  of  the  concentration  of 
remaining  reactants  (or  a  power  to  the  concentration).  This  power  is 
termed as the order of reaction [116]. This type of model is commonly 
employed to compute carbon dioxide capture via liquid (and not solid) 
sorbents [118, 119]. 

Power  law  models  or  P-series  models  are  developed  in  the  same 
manner as the nucleation and nuclei growth models with the exception 
of  excluding  growth  restrictions.  Power  law  models  do  not  take  into 
account the growth constraints. It is believed that the reaction proceeds 
with  spontaneous  nucleation  without  any  obstruction  between  the 
expanding  nuclei  [71].  In  these  type  of  models,  the  rate  of  reaction 
constantly increases vis-`a-vis time on account of the absence of growth 
constraints. Consequently, these models are not frequently employed to 
fit the whole kinetics of reactions involving solids. 

Shrinking or contracting models derive their name from a shrinking 
unreacted core and they fall under the classification of R-series models 
[115]. It is deemed that the reaction takes place at the boundary of an 
unreacted core and reaction product. In addition, it is presumed that the 
reacted product shell and the boundary advances at a steady velocity in 
the direction of the center of the solid. When the shrinkage occurs in two 
dimensions,  it  is  known  as  shrinking  area  model  whereas  when  the 
shrinkage  is  in three  dimensions, it  is  called shrinking volume  model 
[120]. 

The  history  of  assessing  carbonation  reaction  kinetics  employing 
CaO (Eq. (12)) goes back to 1960s [121, 122]. Eq. (12) represents CO2 
sorption and reaction by pure calcium oxide to adsorb around 78 wt.% 
carbon dioxide [123, 124]. 

CaO⋅ + ⋅CO2⋅→⋅CaCO3⋅ + ⋅179⋅kJ/mol

(12) 

Later, more work was done by Barker in early the 1970s [125]. They 
deduced  that  CO2  sorption  proceeds  at  a  faster  rate  in  the  beginning 
followed by a considerably slower rate. In early 1980s, deep insights into 
CO2  sorption kinetics were developed by Bhatia and Perlmutter [126, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010089V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Fig. 7. (a) Sodium zirconate reaction with carbon dioxide; (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of sodium zirconate after long carbonation of 25 min duration at 
◦
700 
C (upper side) and Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy of the surface of carbonated sodium zirconate (lower side); (c) Sorption rate and carbon dioxide uptake 
by sodium zirconate [113, 130] 

127] through their modeling work which paved the way for theoretical 
investigations using CB sorbents. A first order reaction mechanism was 
employed  to  build  a  random  pore  model  to  evaluate  solid-fluid  in-
teractions coupled with pore size development in the system (calcium 
oxide-carbon  dioxide-calcium  carbonate).  The  chemical  interactions 
and species diffusion were completely represented by the model. The 
surface reaction controlled mechanism was designated as the reason for 
the  high  initial  reaction  rates  whereas  the  product  layer  diffusion 
controlled  mechanism  was  denoted  as  the  driver  for  the  later  stages 
implying slower kinetics. It should be stressed that there is a difference 
in  the molar  volumes of  calcium oxide (16.79 cm3/mol)  and calcium 
carbonate (36.93 cm3/mol) which restricts diffusion in the product layer 
[128]. The hindered contact between CO2  and (fresh) CaO was due to 
the increase in volume which occupied the intra and interparticle space. 
The  assumption  that  carbon  dioxide  sorption  by  Ca  based  sorbents 
usually  follows  the  diffusion-controlled  regime  was  strengthened  by 
another  assessment.  In  this  investigation,  grain  movement  was  taken 
into  account  in  the  CO2  sorption  process  to  form  calcium  carbonate 
employing the principle of diffusion control [129]. The results from a 
theoretical  study  were  in  close  agreement  with  the  experimental 
findings. 

The sorption of CO2  by Na2ZrO3  is governed by the nucleation and 
growth model. As shown in Fig. 7(a), the curve dα/dt with respect to α 
slowly raised forming an arch followed by a decline [113]. This contour 
is a distinctive characteristic of the nucleation and growth mechanism 
and consequently, this profile fits the Avrami-Erofeev model. A rise in 
the  reaction  rate  is  triggered  by  nucleation  and  growth  whereas  the 
decline  is  ascribed  to  overlapping  of  large  nuclei.  The  non-uniform 
spread of sodium carbonate and zirconium oxide can be found in SEM 
and  EDX  images  in  Fig.  7(b).  In  an  interesting  investigation  [130],  a 
surprising  kinetic  profile  was  noticed  for  Na2ZrO3  when  two  peaks 
appeared  (Fig.  7(c)).  The  first  peak  was  unpredicted  however,  the 

second peak was in accordance to the  nucleation and  growth mecha-
nism. A fast surface interaction between the sorbent and CO2 during the 
initial stage was assumed as the cause of the first peak. Although, there 
should  be  a  steady  drop  in  the  reaction  rate  if  the  reaction  is  a  fast 
surface reaction. The reason of a rise in reaction rate prior to the first 
peak was finally deduced as an increase in CO2  concentration when a 
change to carbonation took place from regeneration. 

It should be emphasized that sometimes, two or more modeling ap-
proaches  are  combined  to  develop  a  kinetic  model  to  represent  the 
sorption  process  more  accurately  as  aforementioned  in  the  in-
vestigations  carried  out  by  Bhatia  and  co-authors  [126,  127].  In  a 
comparative  modeling  study  employing  three  different  approaches 
namely, shrinking core, double exponential, and Avrami-Erofeev, CO2 
capture  and  release  kinetics  of  Li4SiO4  were  examined  [131].  As  dis-
cussed before, the Avrami-Erofeev mechanism is best suited to describe 
sorption onto alkali ceramic sorbents. The authors found it most favor-
able  to  explain  CO2  capture  over  a  large  temperature  range.  This 
modeling  approach  was  able  to  characterize  the  fast  initial  reaction 
stage  unlike  the  other  two  modeling  pathways.  The  Avrami-Erofeev 
approach along with the double-shell mechanism illustrated the com-
plete reaction mechanism. The CO2  capture process was a function of 
generation  and  development  of  Li2CO3  and  Li2SiO3  crystals.  On  the 
other hand, CO2  release from the sorbent was governed by the rate of 
generation and development of Li4SiO4  crystals and was described by 
the  Avrami-Erofeev  model.  In  addition,  the  presence  of  steam  was 
evaluated and it was reported to have positive impact on the rate of the 
diffusion controlled phase on account of increased movement of Li
ions 
due to steam. 

+

Rout and co-authors [132], in an important study, developed kinetic 
models to compare conventional CH4  reforming and CH4  reforming in 
the presence of CaO as a function of diverse parameters such as velocity, 
mass  diffusion  flux,  species  mass  fraction,  pressure  and  density. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100810V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Moreover, the efficacies of random pore, multi-grain and parallel-pore 
approaches  were  examined.  The  SorE  process  was  governed  by  ki-
netics where efficiency factors (ratio of actual overall rate of reaction to 
the rate of reaction with surface conditions) were reported to be ~1 and 
~0.02  respectively  for  sorption  and  desorption.  It  was  realized  that 
diffusion fluxes prevailed over convective fluxes. In addition, the tem-
perature was found to be uniform throughout the pellet with less than 1 
◦
C difference between the surface and the center of the pellet which in 
turn was in accordance with the conventional model assumptions. Both 
processes were explicitly described by the multi grain approach and a 
marginal  difference  in  predictions  were  noted  with  the  parallel  pore 
pathway employing an average size of the micro particle. 

◦

Wang and co-authors [133] developed a steady state kinetic frame-
work for SorE coal gasification using a continuous flow reactor with the 
objective to deduce the optimal operating conditions. They reported a 
H2 concentration of around 84 vol.% when the gasifier was operated in 
◦
C and 10 to 45 bar, 
the temperature and pressure ranges of 675 to 840 
respectively. Moreover, the maximum wt.% of CaCO3  in the solid was 
realized  at  25  bar  and  850  to  875 
C.  Solsvik  and  co-authors  [134] 
conducted an investigation to assess the use of CaO/Ca12Al14O33 (75/25 
by wt.) as sorbent and Ni-Al as catalyst in steam methane reforming. 
Parallel pore and random pore approaches were employed to describe 
diffusivities whereas Maxwell-Stefan and dusty gas pathways were used 
to  characterize  mass  diffusion  fluxes.  Reaction  kinetics,  CO2  sorption 
capacity and cycle life time were significantly impacted by the decrease 
in  void  fraction  with  respect  to  CaO  conversion  (carbonation),  the 
development  of  the  product  layer  and  sintering  occurring  with 
increasing  sorption/desorption  cycles.  In  a  recent  investigation,  a  ki-
netic  model  was  formulated  to  assess  the  CO2-sorbent  interaction  for 
NaNO2  doped MgO at 300 
C [135]. The authors discovered that the 
CO2-MgO interaction initiated with a rapid surface sorption followed by 
chemical  interaction  related  to  carbonate  generation  and  a  relatively 
slower diffusion at the end which was rate limiting. There are far less 
modeling studies as compared to experimental studies vis-`a-vis kinetics. 
The latter can be explained by the ability of experimental work to give 
deeper  insights  in  a  more  accurate  and  more  direct  manner  for 
real-world scenarios. A similar discussion and conclusion can be found 
in Section 4 with respect to the development of suitable sorbents. 

◦

3.2. Thermodynamic (TD) models 

As aforementioned, thermodynamics of sorption enhanced reform-
ing  play  a  vital  role  along  with  the  kinetics  of  CO2  capture.  Diverse 
feedstocks  such  as  biomass,  waste,  glycerol,  methane,  methanol, 
ethanol, etc. have been employed to evaluate the thermodynamics of the 
SorE  process.  It  should  be  emphasized  that  thermodynamics  can  be 
assessed  by  employing  two  methods  namely,  equilibrium  constants 
method (ECM) and Gibbs free energy minimization (GFM). 

Equilibrium  constants  method  or  ECM  utilizes  the  reactions  in 
sorption enhanced reforming to deduce the findings and therefore, it is a 
stoichiometric  method.  In  this  approach,  all  feasible  reactions  in  the 
process are conveyed via a linear sum of these basic reactions which in 
turn aid in building up a set of self-governing reactions thus, describing 
the reaction pattern or scheme [136]. This pathway therefore necessi-
tates  an  elaborate  assessment  of  the  reaction  scheme  regarding  SorE 
systems which can help in gauging the chemical equilibrium [70]. This 
explains  the  reason  of  late  deployment  of  the  ECM  approach  for  TD 
studies which only began in recent years. 

Usually the feedstocks such as biomass or organic wastes to the SorE 
process are complex in nature. In addition, there are numerous chemical 
interactions which take place inside the reactor making it very difficult 
to assess each and every reaction. The other modelling method which is 
based  on  Gibbs  free  energy  (G)  minimization  is  used  to  negate  the 
aforementioned  issues  and  deduce  the  product  distribution.  GFM  is  a 
non-stoichiometric approach which is employed in most of the studies 
carried  out  so  far.  The  selection  of  species  to  be  considered,  is 

determined based on the findings of prior conducted experiments. The 
interactions  of  commonly  employed  solid  adsorbents  (CaO,  MgO, 
Na2ZrO3,  Li4SiO4  and  Li2ZrO3)  in  pre-combustion  CO2  capture  for 
sorption enhanced H2 production are reflected in Eqs. (12), (13), (14), 
(15) and (16) [71]. 

MgO + ⋅CO2⋅→⋅MgCO3⋅ + ⋅117.9⋅kJ/mol

Na2ZrO3⋅ + ⋅CO2⋅→⋅Na2CO3⋅ + ⋅ZrO2⋅ + ⋅149⋅kJ/mol

Li4SiO4⋅ + ⋅CO2⋅→⋅Li2SiO3⋅ + ⋅Li2CO3⋅ + ⋅142⋅kJ/mol

Li2ZrO3⋅ + ⋅CO2⋅→⋅Li2CO3⋅ + ⋅ZrO2⋅ + ⋅160⋅kJ/mol

(13)  

(14)  

(15)  

(16) 

At a constant pressure and temperature, the Gibbs free energy, G can 

be deduced employing Eq. (17) [137]. 

∑Ni=1

G(ni)⋅ = ⋅

⋅μini

(17)  

where i, varies from 1 to N, the latter being the total number of chemical 
species considered. μi is the chemical potential and ni  is the number of 
moles of species i. The thermodynamic function G needs to be minimized 
and constrained to the elemental balance: 

ΣN
i=1niaij = Aj

(18)  

where j varies from 1 to M, aij is the number of atoms j in the molecule i 
and Aj is the total number of atoms j in the system. 

Coke formation is generally seen in gasification which is considered 
as one of the cardinal causes of catalyst deactivation. Incorporating CO2 
sorption employing CO2 adsorbents aid in avoiding this issue. It is worth 
noting that usually SorE reforming is performed at ambient pressure on 
account of higher H2  generation due to the volume increase by the re-
actants in the reforming reactions [70]. However, high pressure helps in 
CO2 sorption as depicted in Eqs. (12) to (16). Also, a decrease in CO and 
CH4  fractions is desired in the final product which can be obtained by 
employing higher steam-to-carbon ratios as compared to the stoichio-
metric value. Higher steam-to-carbon ratios also favor the generation of 
product  gas  with  higher  H2  concentration.  Although,  an  increase  in 
steam-to-carbon  ratio  beyond  the  threshold  would  have  an  adverse 
impact on the energy efficiency of the process on account of additional 
latent heat requirements in producing steam. This led to the concept of 
heat energy efficiency to examine the SorE reforming process (Eq. (19)) 
[138]. Some of the investigations [139] used this concept to assess the 
feasibility of the process. 
/[(cid:0)

)]

)

ηSotE⋅ = ⋅(ηH2⋅ × ⋅LHVH2)

ηf⋅LHVf

ηinput ⋅ΔHlatent

(19)  

(cid:0)
⋅ + ⋅(Qi)⋅ + ⋅

where ηH2, ηf, ηinput, LHVH2, LHVf, Qi and ΔHlatent are respectively the H2 
molar fraction, feedstock molar fraction, molar amount of total input 
(feedstock + steam), lower heating value of H2, lower heating value of 
feedstock, energy required for the process and latent energy of steam 
fed. Qi can be deduced by taking into account CO2 sorption and reaction 
enthalpy as shown in Eq. (20) [70]. 

Qi = ⋅H0(T)⋅⋅Hi(T)⋅ = Σi⋅niHi(T)⋅ (cid:0)

⋅Σi⋅niHi(T)⋅ + ⋅ΔHreg

(20)  

where Ho(T) is the enthalpy of outlet stream and Hi(T) is the enthalpy of 
inlet  stream  at  temperature T  and  subscript  i  denotes  species  i  in  the 
respective streams. ΔHreg is the heat needed for sorbent regeneration. 
As previously mentioned, the optimal temperature for SorE reform-
ing is a function of type of solid adsorbent employed. In some of the 
studies  [136,  140],  the  theoretical  carbon  dioxide  removal  ratio  was 
used  to  carry  out  TD  assessments.  In  general,  a  large  number  of  in-
vestigations reported CB sorbents to have the best efficacy as compared 
to  other  sorbents  examined  above  500 
C.  The  heat  required  by  the 
endothermic  steam  reforming  reaction  can  be  supplied  by  the 
exothermic carbonation reaction (Eq. (12)) [141]. The flip side is the 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100811V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Table 6 
Some important thermodynamic studies for H2 generation via SorE reforming of diverse feedstocks.  

Feedstock 

Appro- 
ach 

Steam-to- 
carbon ratio 

Sorbent 

◦
T (

C) 

P 
(bar) 

Findings 

Glycerol 

GFM 

1.3-4 

CO2 removal ratio 

Glycerol 

Glycerol 

GFM/ 
ECM 
GFM 

0-3.3 

0.33-3 

CaO 

CaO 

Glycerol 

GFM 

1-4 

CO2 removal ratio 

Glycerol 

GFM 

0-3.3 

Propane 

GFM 

0.3-6 

Methane 

ECM 

Methane 

GFM/ 
ECM 

3 

5 

Methane 

GFM 

1-4 

CaO/ 
LDH 
CaO 

CaO 

CaO/ 
Li2ZrO3/ 
KLiZrO3/Na2ZrO3/ 
Li4SiO4 
CaO 

Ethanol 

GFM 

0.25-4.5 

CaO 

Ethanol 

GFM 

1.5-4 

CaO 

Ethanol 

GFM 

1.5-10 

Ethanol 

GFM 

1-5 

Ethanol 

GFM 

1-2.5 

- 

- 

GFM 

1-5 

GFM 

1.4, 2.1 

Butanol 

GFM 

0-3.75 

Methanol/ 
ethanol 

GFM 

1-6 

GFM 

1-14 

Methanol/ 
ethanol/ 
glycerol/ 
n- 
butanol 

CaO/ 
LDH/ 
Li2ZrO3 
CaO 

CO2 removal 
ratio 
CaO 

26 metal oxides/4 
silicates/3zirconat-es/4 
titanates 
CaO 

CaO/ 
CaO.MgO/ 
Na2ZrO3/ 
Li2ZrO3/ 
Li4SiO4 
CaO 

350- 
650 
225- 
1225 
200- 
700 
325- 
725 
300- 
1000 
425- 
825 
450- 
850 
450- 
725 

600- 
800 
450- 
750 

500- 
900 

300- 
700 

500- 
900 
300- 
600 
450- 
1000 
200- 
1000 

225- 
1225 

300- 
800 

1-4 

Optimal steam-to-carbon ratio was found as 3. 

1-50 

1-5 

1-4 

1 

1-5 

1 

10 

◦

C, 

C, P as 1 bar and steam:carbon as 2.67 

96.8 vol.% H2 with 100 % feedstock conversion was reported at 625 
ambient P, CaO:feedstock as 10 and steam:carbon as 4:3. 
◦
~100% pure H2 (dry basis) at 420 
was noted. 
H2 production in mol/mol of feedstock was enhanced from 6 to 7 by CO2 
sorption. 
H2 output was highest between 350 and 450 
steam:carbon > 1. 
High H2 (10 mol/mol of feedstock) with 99 % purity was noticed at 425 
◦
C. 
Heat requirement for reforming reactions were fulfilled to a vital extent by 
the carbonation reaction. 
Best sorbents were discovered in the order CaO followed by KLiZrO3 
followed by Na2ZrO3 followed by Li2ZrO3 with Li4SiO4 as the worst. 

C with LDH sorbent and 

◦

1 

High H2 molar % of 98 was realized at 600 

◦

C and steam:carbon as 4. 

[150] 

1-20 

1-25 

1-5 

Steam:carbon was decreased to 1 with CaO and for the conventional 
reforming process this value was reported as >1.5, for zero carbon 
formation. 
H2 amounts were raised by 19 % coupled with 50.2 % drop in CO2 yield for 
SorE process compared to the conventional reforming process at 700 
C, 
steam:carbon as 2 and P as 1 bar. 
High purity H2 was realized with CO less than 100 ppm at 500 
steam:carbon greater than or equal to 5 for LDH sorbent. 

C and 

◦

◦

[69] 

[151] 

[152] 

1-25 

◦
Optimal conditions were reported as 700 

C, 1 bar and steam:carbon as 2. 

[153] 

1-10 

1 

1-60 

1-100 

1 

C). 
C, CO conversion was found to be more than 98 % 

H2 yield was noted to increase with a drop in graphite formation when CO2 
sorption was allowed. 
At 80 % N2 (as inert gas) and steam:carbon as 3, rate of CO conversion 
reduced from 94.6 to 67.6 % with a rise in temperature (450 to 100 
◦
At T greater than 400 
with around 98 % carbon elimination with CaO, MgO, BaTiO3, BaSiO3, 
BaZrO3, Li2ZrO3 and CaZrO3. 
At 525 
pure H2 with 0.05 vol.% CO2 coupled with complete conversion of 
feedstock was reported. 
◦
For both the feedstocks, H2 purity of 99 % was realized at 500 
steam:carbon ≥ 6 with CaO, Na2ZrO3 and CaO.MgO. 

C, ambient P, steam:carbon as 2.5 and CaO:feedstock as 8, 97 % 

C, 1 bar and 

◦

◦

Refer- 
ence 

[142] 

[143] 

[144] 

[145] 

[146] 

[147] 

[148] 

[149] 

[140] 

[154] 

[155] 

[156] 

[141] 

[157]  

-45- 
900 

1-5 

◦

C, P as 5 bar and CaO:C in stoichiometric ratio, optimal steam: 

At 500 
carbon was noted as 3, 3, 3 and 4 respectively for n-butanol, ethanol, 
glycerol and methanol. 

inhibition of  H2  generation on account  of heat provided  to the endo-
thermic reverse WGS reaction (Eq. (6) in the opposite direction). Some 
of the important TD studies are listed in Table 6. 

Few researchers [146, 152] used other low temperature adsorbents 
referred to as layered double hydroxides (LDHs). They are hydrotalcite 
like compounds (HTlc) with the CO2  sorption temperature ranging be-
◦
tween 200 to 400 
C [158]. It was found that CO2 sorption took place at 
◦
C using LDH as the sorbent with glycerol as the feedstock. Wu and 
350 
co-authors [152] realized high purity H2 with CO fraction less than 10 
ppm employing C2H5OH as the feedstock. Therefore, the resulting gas 
can be used for fuel cell applications as the requirements for fuel cells is 
H2 with negligible CO (< 30 ppm) [159]. Here, it is worth emphasizing 
that  glycerol  seems  a  promising,  cost-effective  and  amply  available 
feedstock to explore SorE H2 generation. Glycerol is basically derived as 
a byproduct from the transesterification of vegetable oils and animal fat 
oils  to  produce  biodiesel.  Significant  quantities  of  around  10  %  of 
glycerol are produced vis-`a-vis the final product (biodiesel) and there-
fore, a remarkable increase in biodiesel production would lead to rapid 

increases in glycerol waste feedstock available on the market [160]. 

A large number of investigations have been performed worldwide to 
evaluate  the  thermodynamics  of  the  SorE  process.  Diverse  feedstocks 
were employed such as CH4 [161, 162], C3H8 [147], bio-oil and biogas 
[163], urea [164], oxygenated hydrocarbons [145, 157], coke oven gas 
[165], etc. In an important study, Adiya and co-authors [166] evaluated 
the impact of four different compositions of shale gas on H2  yield and 
purity by developing a TD model for CaO assisted SorE reforming. They 
noted  that  the  H2  yield  and  purity  were  not  only  functions  of  the 
steam-to-carbon ratio but were also dependent upon hydrocarbon con-
tent of the feedstock. A feedstock with higher hydrocarbons resulted in 
higher  purity  and  higher  H2  yield  although  at  an  increased  energetic 
◦
expenditure. Temperatures between 525 and 625 
C with 1 bar pressure 
and a steam-to-carbon ratio of 3 were reported as optimal with around 
90 % CO2 sorption efficiency at 625 
C. More importantly, it was real-
ized that H2 yield and purity are independent of alkane (C1 - C3) and CO2 
(0.1  -  10  vol%)  present  in  the  feedstock.  The  presence  of  N2  in  the 
feedstock  (0.4  -  70  vol%)  supported  steam  reforming  reactions  by 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100812V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

reducing the partial pressure of the reactants however it was at the cost 
of increasing the operational costs. 

A novel study was conducted at the Institute of Plasma Physics in 
which a rigorous two-stage equilibrium model was developed using RDF 
as a model compound for thermal plasma gasification coupled with CO2- 
sorption enhanced reforming to assess the proposed process in gener-
ating  H2  rich  syngas  employing  three  different  categories  of  sorbents 
namely, a high temperature sorbent (CaO), an intermediate temperature 
sorbent (Li4SiO4) and a low temperature sorbent (MgO) [167]. Highest 
H2 fractions were reported for CaO, MgO and Li4SiO4 as 79 vol.% 29 vol. 
%,  55  vol.%  respectively.  Moreover,  the  optimal  sorbent-to-feedstock 
ratios  were  realized  to  be  1.5  for  CaO,  1.0  for  MgO  and  2.5  for 
Li4SiO4. This study reflected a better control on the entire process with 
individual sub-processes working at their favorable temperature range 
thus  generating  more  H2  than  conventional  steam  gasification.  In  a 
similar  investigation,  Li  and  co-authors  [168]  studied  a  two  stage 

process (steam gasification of corn stalk followed by CaO assisted steam 
reforming) for H2 generation. They reported a H2 yield of 142.8 g/kg of 
feedstock (daf) with a volume fraction of 99.7%. These investigations 
where  a  two-stage  operation  (conventional  steam  or  thermal  plasma 
gasification followed by SorE reforming) was explored pave a way to 
deploy many other sorbents (including MgO) which have low sorption 
temperatures and therefore, are incompatible with higher gasification 
temperatures  when  gasification  and  reforming  take  place  in  a  single 
stage. There is a need to conduct such studies at pilot scale to assess the 
two-stage concept’s feasibility at industrial scale. 

Thermodynamics  of  two  different  fast  pyrolysis  derived  bio-oils 
(spruce  and  wheat)  were  assessed  via  minimization  of  the  Gibbs  free 
energy approach using CaO sorbents in a temperature range of 450 to 
700 
C  [169].  The  authors  of  that  study  evaluated  the  H2  yield  at 
sorbent-to-feedstock molar ratios of 2 and 5. Maximum H2 yield for the 
former  sorbent-to-feedstock  ratio  was  found  as  3.87  mol  H2/mol  of 

◦

Table 7 
Some important CFD studies about SorE processes.  

Authors 

Approach 

Feedstock 

Catalyst/sorbent 

Important findings 

Aloisi and co- 

authors [173] 

Particle grain + axial dispersion 
plug flow reactor 

Methane 

Ni/CaO 

Di Carlo and co- 
authors [174] 

Di Carlo and co- 
authors [175] 

Herce and co- 

authors [176] 

2D Eulerian-Eulerian 

Methane 

10% Ni + 60% CaO supported 
by CaAl2O4 

Eulerian-Eulerian 

Methane 

Ni/calcined dolomite 

Two fluid + particle drag 

Methane 

33.3 % NiO supported in 
alumina and 66.6 % dolomite 
(CaO:MgO = 1:1) 

Herce and co- 

authors [177] 

Granular Eulerian-Eulerian +
Kinetic Theory of Granular Flow +
gas-particle drag 

Methane 

Naturally occurring dolomite 
and synthetic CaO-Ca12Al14O33 

Lindborg and co- 
authors [178] 

2D Eulerian 

Methane 

-/Li2ZrO3 

Phuakpunk and 
co-authors  
[179] 

2D Euler-Euler + kinetic theory of 
granular flows (2k full factorial 
design approach) 

Ethanol 

Ni/dolomite 

Wang and co- 

authors [180] 

Hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian 
(Dense discrete phase model) 

Ethanol 

-/LDH 

Yang and co- 

Dense discrete phase model 

Ethanol 

-/LDH 

authors [181] 

Wang and co- 

authors [182] 

3D multi-fluid + kinetic theory of 
granular flow 

Glycerol 

-/CaO and Li4SiO4 

C and at higher Ni weight hourly space velocity 

A decrease in the beginning followed by gaining stability in CO2 
capture with continuous carbonation/de-carbonation cycles vis-`a-vis 
CaO grain size. Equilibrium concentrations in product stream were 
◦
not acquired at 650 
as the reactor was kinetically governed. 
H2 concentration was found to be 95 and 85 vol.% at complete 
sorbent conversion and 50 % CaO conversion, respectively, at all the 
values of superficial velocity. CO2 capture reaction favored crucially 
in acquiring uniform bed temperature. 
◦
At T = 625 
H2 was 93 mol.%. Heat from sorption reaction nearly satisfied the 
heat for reforming reactions at sorbent:Ni > 2. Bubble generation in 
the bed affected products and caused product variations.  

C, superficial gas velocity = 0.3 m/s and sorbent:Ni > 2, 

◦

◦

A bubbling fluidized bed was explored at lab and industrial scale. H2 
dry mol.% was found to be 90-96. Optimal temperature was noticed 
◦
as 625 
C. Particle drag approach was found promising for deductions 
at low computing costs employing a coarse grid. 
C, 1 bar, 
The optimal operational conditions were found to be 625 
0.25 mm particle diameter, 0.5 m static bed height and 0.2 m/s gas 
velocity, to produce highest H2. The effect of type of sorbent used was 
reported to be minimal. Heat and mass transfer mechanisms along 
with the presence of sorbent/catalyst were found to have profound 
impact on the process. 
Reactors with large width were suggested to get maximum mass 
throughputs. Bed diameter was found to have minimal impact on H2 
generation. Also, bed heights needed to be enhanced to increase the 
mass throughput via elevated pressures and enhanced fluidization 
velocities. Internal gas circulation was recommended with Li2ZrO3 on 
account of extended residence time provided incoming reactants did 
not blend with outgoing products. 
It was realized that solid flux and riser diameter have highest 
influence on H2 purity and flux. The optimal conditions were found as 
600 
2.54 kg/kg catalyst-to-sorbent ratio and 200 kg/(m2‧s) solid flux 
generating a hydrogen flux of 0.147 kg/(m2‧s) with 91.3 % purity. 
Hydrotalcite or LDH sorbents were found to significantly enhance H2 
production (19 to 33 mol.%) coupled with supply of heat through 
carbonation reaction. An adverse impact of raising the pressure and 
catalyst-to-sorbent ratio on H2 generation was noted. 
The solid circulation rate and gas leakage were evaluated as a 
function of solid loading and regenerator velocity in an internally 
circulating fluidized bed. The enhancement in solid loading and 
regenerator velocity was noted as advantageous to increase solid 
circulation rates. The gas leakage was raised by 46.6 % when 
regenerator gas velocity was increased from 1.8 to 2.4 m/s thus 
reducing H2 yield. A trade-off between gas leakage and circulation 
flow was recommended. 
The presence of C2H5OH enhanced the H2 yield on account of higher 
reaction rate of C2H5OH. H2 generation and feedstock conversion was 
most sensitive to temperature. H2 fraction enhanced to 0.41 from 0.28 
and feedstock conversion raised to 70 % from 52 % when the 
temperature was increased from 550 to 600 

C inlet temperature, 0.2 m riser diameter, 3 m/s gas velocity, 

C.  

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100813V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

◦

bio-oil whereas for the latter, it was 10.17 mol H2/mol of bio-oil, both at 
450 
C.  In  another  study  employing  bio-oil  as  the  feedstock,  product 
composition  at  equilibrium  was  deduced  along  with  the  energy  re-
quirements for SorE compared to conventional steam reforming [170]. 
Hydrogen yield and concentration were much higher for the former. In 
addition, the energy requirement for SorE was lower than the conven-
tional  process to  generate  equal  H2  yield.  For SorE,  the  H2  yield was 
noted as 4 mol/mol of bio-oil for a temperature range between 500 and 
C. Also, it was realized that bio-oil and energy inputs for the SorE 
600 
process  were  reduced  by  20  and  30  %  respectively  compared  to  the 
◦
conventional process at optimal operating conditions (T = 500 - 600 
C; 
steam-to-carbon ratio = 3). 

◦

◦

Iruretagoyena and co-authors [137] investigated SorE reforming of 
the effluent from a steam methane reformer. It was coupled with feeding 
methanol to a WGS reactor and capturing CO2 in-situ via a LDH sorbent. 
It was reported that CH3OH increases H2 yield considerably along with 
helping the shift unit to gain auto-thermal operation for a temperature 
C. The heat required for the reforming of CH3OH 
range of 250 to 320 
was supplied by the heat from the exothermic WGS and CO2  sorption 
reactions. Auto-thermal operation for the system was acquired when the 
ratio of converted CO to converted CH3OH was 0.83 implying a heat of 
sorption  of  17  kJ/mol  CO2.  In  another  investigation,  Abbas  and 
co-authors  [171]  explored  the  effect  of  catalyst-sorbent  (18  wt.%  of 
Ni/Al2O3 + CaO) mixture for steam methane reforming in an adiabatic 
packed  bed  reactor  at  low  pressures  (2  to  7  bar).  Mass,  energy  and 
momentum  equations  were  developed  to  examine the  impact  of  tem-
perature, pressure, steam-to-carbon ratio and gas mass flow rate. They 
noticed a methane conversion of 89 % with a H2 purity of 86 %. On the 
other hand, CH4 conversion and H2 purity of 44% and 63% respectively 
were found in the conventional process at 3 bar and 650 
C with a gas 
flow rate of 3.5 kg/(m2‧s) and S/C of 3. 

◦

The concept of co-gasification employing more than one feedstock 
was also assessed for enhanced H2 production with in-situ CO2 capture. 
Sikarwar  and  co-authors  [172]  examined 
feasibility  of 
co-gasification of wood and sewage sludge in the presence of CaO. The 
influence of temperature from 600 to 900 
C and varying sludge con-
centrations from 0 to 100 wt.% (in the inlet feed stream) were explored. 
Maximum  H2  yield  of  0.0239  kg/h  with  maximum  total  gas  yield  of 
◦
0.526 kg/h was realized at 900 
C at 30 wt.% sludge fraction in the feed. 
This study emphasized the possibility of employing a blend of wet and 
dry wastes for H2 generation. 

the 

◦

3.3. CFD Models 

Computational  fluid  dynamics  or  CFD  has  been  developed  as  a 
formidable and useful tool in modeling thermochemical reactors. The 
modelling method is employed to assess the hydrodynamics of the re-
actors coupled with optimal process parameters, geometry, and heat and 
mass  transfer  quite  accurately  especially  in  fluidized  bed  reactors.  In 
addition, the capability of CFD to explain the behavior of bed particles 
can be very useful in exploring diverse materials as sorbents/catalysts. 
Some of the CFD investigations related to SorE reforming for enhanced 
H2 production are summarized in Table 7. 

Aloisi  and  co-authors  [173]  employed the  particle  grain  approach 
coupled with the axial dispersion plug flow reactor method to assess the 
catalytic  and  sorption  efficacy  of  bi-functional  materials  (Ni  impreg-
nated CaO) for SorE steam methane reforming. The impact of changing 
the sorbent grain size was reported to cause a drop in CO2  capture ca-
pacity in the beginning followed by gaining stability in CO2 capture with 
continuous  carbonation/de-carbonation  cycles.  It  was  noted  that  Ni 
addition to the sorbent did not alter the particle structure of CaO. A close 
agreement  was  reported  in  the  tendency  of  the  sorbent  grain  size 
vis-`a-vis  number  of  cycles  with  the  empirical  sorption  trend  of  the 
bi-functional material. In addition, the reactor was steered by kinetics 
and did not obtain equilibrium concentrations in the product stream at a 
comparatively  lower  temperature  of  650 
C  and  elevated  Ni  weight 

◦

hourly  space  velocity.  The  modeling  computations  were  validated 
against  the  experiments  and  were  found  in  good  agreement.  In  an 
important study, Di Carlo and co-authors [174] evaluated the perfor-
mance of a pilot scale bubbling fluidized bed for SorE CH4 reforming for 
H2  generation  via  the  2D  Eulerian-Eulerian  approach.  They  used  a 
bi-functional material (10% Ni with 60% CaO by weight supported by 
CaAl2O4) with good  stability over  carbonation/de-carbonation cycles. 
The hydrogen concentration was found to be 95 vol.% (with methane 
between 1 and 2 vol.%) with complete sorbent conversion and less than 
85 vol.% with 50 % CaO conversion, at all the values of superficial gas 
velocity.  In  addition,  it  was  realized  that  the  carbonation  reaction 
contributed  considerably  in  acquiring  a  uniform  temperature  of  the 
adiabatic reactor bed albeit not sufficient for auto-thermal operation. 

Few investigations [175] explored the hydrodynamic behavior of the 
fluidized  bed  employing  an  Eulerian-Eulerian  framework  for  CH4 
reforming coupled with CO2  capture. The internal diameter of the bed 
was 10 cm with a static height of 20 cm. A blend of calcined dolomite 
and Ni whose ratio was changed from zero to 5, was used. The assess-
ment was carried out for intra and extra-particle influence coupled with 
◦
the kinetics of the process. At 625 
C with a superficial gas velocity of 0.3 
m/s and sorbent-to-Ni ratio greater than 2, H2 production was noted as 
93  mol.%.  Moreover,  it  was  deduced  that  heat  generated  from  the 
carbonation  reactions  was  almost  sufficient  for  the  endothermal 
reforming reactions at dolomite-to-Ni ratio > 2. Product output was also 
found  to  be  impacted  by  bubble  generation  in  the  bed  which  in  turn 
produced product fluctuations. 

◦

In an elaborative investigation, Herce and co-authors [176] exam-
ined  H2  production  via  steam  methane  reforming  coupled  with  CO2 
sorption  employing  the  two  fluid  approach.  The  two  fluid  modeling 
methodology was coupled with a newly derived particle drag approach 
with the objective to decrease computing costs. A bubbling fluidized bed 
was  used  for  the  examination  at  two  scales  namely,  lab-scale  and 
semi-industrial scale. At both scales, H2 dry mol.% was found to be 90 to 
96 and, 76 to 78 respectively with and without the application of sor-
bent/catalyst.  The  bifunctional  bed  material  contained  one-third  of 
catalyst (NiO supported on alumina) and two-third of dolomite (CaO: 
MgO = 1:1). Temperature was noticed as the cardinal governing vari-
able  especially  at  large  scale  with  625 
C  as  the  optimal  value.  The 
developed drag model approach came up as a better approach vis-`a-vis 
other  conventional  approaches  to  assess  the  bubbling  bed  at  low 
computing  costs  employing  a  coarse  grid.  These  studies  contribute 
significantly in moving a step forward in the effort to scale-up. In an 
another study by Herce and co-authors [177], the hydrodynamics of a 
500  kWth  bubbling  fluidized  bed  reactor  installed  in  the  ZECOMIX 
research  infrastructure  of  the  Italian  National  Agency  for  New  Tech-
nologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development, were exam-
ined via an Eulerian-Eulerian framework coupled with the kinetic theory 
of granular flow and gas-particle drag approaches. Conventional dolo-
mite  and  synthetic  CaO-Ca12Al14O33  were  employed  as  sorbents  for 
in-situ CO2 sorption. At large scale, the impact of the type of sorbent used 
was reported to be minimal albeit heat and mass transfer mechanisms 
played  key  roles  coupled  with  the  presence  of  sorbent/catalyst. 
◦
Maximum H2 was realized at optimal operational conditions (625 
C, 1 
bar, 0.25 mm particle diameter, 0.5 m static bed height and 0.2 m/s gas 
velocity). 

Apart from methane, other feedstocks such as ethanol and glycerol 
were also used in some of the studies. Phuakpunk and co-authors [179], 
explored a circulating fluidized bed riser for a continuous and higher H2 
production via SorE ethanol reforming with Ni-dolomite bi-functional 
material. A 2D Euler-Euler approach was incorporated along with the 
kinetic theory of granular flow. Hydrogen purity and flux were assessed 
as  a  function  of  five  operational  variables  (the  riser  diameter,  inlet 
temperature, catalyst-to-sorbent ratio, solid flux, and inlet gas velocity) 
via  2k  full  factorial  design.  They  realized  that  solid  flux  and  riser 
diameter have maximum impact on the response variables. The optimal 
◦
conditions were found as 600 
C inlet temperature, 0.2 m riser diameter, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100814V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

3 m/s gas velocity, 2.54 kg/kg catalyst-to-sorbent ratio and 200 kg/(m2‧ 
s) solid flux generating a hydrogen flux of 0.147 kg/(m2‧s) with 91.3 % 
purity. It should be stressed that the process attained breakthrough in 
the bottom dense zone. Moreover, the presence of a diluted bed in the 
riser core resulted in incomplete conversion. Wang and co-authors [182] 
examined  glycerol  reforming  in  the  presence  of  sorbents  (CaO  and 
Li4SiO4)  in  a  fluidized  bed  through  3D  multi-fluid  approach  coupled 
with the kinetic theory of granular flow. The presence of C2H5OH (as 
impurity) in crude glycerol was also studied vis-`a-vis process efficacy. It 
was noted that the presence of C2H5OH enhanced the H2  yield on ac-
count of the higher reaction rate of C2H5OH. The influence of both the 
sorbents was assessed and it was reported that they have a similar effect. 
However,  CaO  was  found  to  be  better  at  elevated  temperatures. 
Importantly,  temperature  was  realized  as  the  most  crucial  parameter 
with reforming favored at higher temperature which in turn produced 
increased concentrations of H2. The hydrogen fraction enhanced to 0.41 
from 0.28 and feedstock conversion raised to 70 % from 52 % when the 
temperature was increased from 550 to 600 

C. 

◦

CFD investigations clearly reflect an enhanced degree of uniformity 
in  temperature  distribution  in  SorE  reactors  as  compared  to  conven-
tional  reactors.  It  is  on  account  of  closely  tied  carbonation  reactions 
which  are  exothermic  in  nature  and  reforming  reactions  which  are 
endothermic. CFD modeling approaches can be very useful to design and 
optimize large scale reactors for SorE processes especially at preliminary 
stage. The ability of the particle grain approach to deduce the ageing of 
diverse bed inventories can be very helpful in computing the reactor’s 
efficacy over many cycles with increasing time. It should be stressed that 
there are very limited number of research groups worldwide working on 
CFD  investigations  of  SorE  processes.  In  addition,  more  number  of 
studies are needed to explore diverse feedstocks with different sorbents 
(especially LDHs) and a wide variety of bi-functional materials. 

3.4. ANN models 

Artificial  Neural  Networks,  commonly  known  as  ANN,  are  a  rela-
tively  novel  modeling  tool  and  are  comparable  to  machine  learning. 
Modeling deductions are produced when the data from experiments is 
provided to the model and the model learns by itself. It is quite useful in 
modeling  complex  systems  such  as  gasification  or  reforming  [68].  Its 
application in dry reforming of methane [183], post-combustion carbon 
dioxide capture [184–190], H2 generation via dark fermentation [191], 
CO2 sorption by nano-fluids [192] and O2 carrier materials in chemical 
looping [193] have been explored worldwide. However, there is only 
one study in the published literature where ANN modeling methodology 
was used for pre-combustion CO2  capture for enhanced H2  production 
[194]. 

Nkulikiyinka and co-authors [194] developed an ANN model to aid 
in  the  scale-up  of  SorE  steam  methane  reforming.  Two  soft  sensor 
models (ANN model and random forest model (RFM)) were developed 
and used to forecast and evaluate variables that were hard to quantify. 
Four  operating  process  variables  such  as  temperature,  pressure, 
steam-to-carbon ratio and sorbent-to-carbon ratio were fed as inputs and 
gas amounts in the reformer and regenerator were deduced. Both the 
models reflected high accuracy (R2 > 98 %). Both ANN and RFM were 
compared and RFM was deemed as more precise with a lower value of 
the  mean  absolute  error  (0.002  -  0.014)  compared  to  the  ANN 
(0.005-0.024). 

It should be noted that data guided soft sensor models are better than 
equilibrium models on account of their potential to provide real time 
information as a function of actual operating conditions. ANN models 
are independent of complex mathematical equations unlike TD, kinetic 
or  CFD  approaches.  ANN  models  can  learn  and  recognize  non-linear 
equations themselves. Therefore, the ANN modeling pathway can be a 
viable  and  promising  approach  to  examine  SorE  processes  where 
complicated nonlinearities arise in the data-set. 

4. Sorbents and sorbent development 

Generally, two different approaches are available to select a suitable 
sorbent  material:  (i)  naturally  occurring  materials  and  (ii)  synthetic 
sorbents.  For  economically  feasible  commercial  operation,  a  cheap 
material which can be easily disposed of is considered a prudent choice. 
However,  natural  minerals  have  been  widely  evaluated  [195]  and  it 
turned  out that each  material  has to be tested  prior  to application  in 
large scale since cycle efficiency and attrition tendency is only partly 
independent  from the overall composition. Comprehensive  studies on 
calcination and carbonation cycles in laboratory units of a high number 
of natural materials are available [196–198]. Synthetic materials offer 
the advantage of designed properties but cause high variable costs and 
eventually disposal issues. Both types of materials need a proper selec-
tion to ensure high cycling efficiency, a minimum attrition tendency and 
high efficiency. 

Four  commonly  employed  solid  sorbents  for  pre-combustion  (and 
post-combustion) carbon dioxide capture are calcium based, magnesium 
based, alkali ceramic based and layered double hydroxide. They adsorb 
CO2, react and produce respective carbonates. Although, CO2 sorption is 
more  feasible  at  lower  temperatures  as  far  as  thermodynamics  are 
concerned (as reflected in Fig. 8), the sorbent materials are implemented 
at elevated temperatures because of the increased sorbent-CO2 interac-
tion  rates  at  higher  temperatures.  This  is  compatible  with  both  pre- 
combustion  and  post-combustion  CO2  capture  as  in  the  former,  SorE 
reforming (and hence, in-situ CO2  sorption) takes place at higher tem-
perature and in the latter, despite having the independence to operate at 
lower temperatures, sorption is made to occur at elevated temperatures 
due to enhanced kinetics. 

Another important consideration while deploying a sorbent for CO2 
capture to generate H2 is cost (detailed discussion can be found in Sec-
tion 6). Although zirconates of alkali metals such as sodium and lithium 
zirconates have been explored to capture CO2 in-situ, they are costly. It 
was contended that Li based sorbents should have favorable economics 
as compared to naturally occurring sorbents (such as limestone) by their 
assessment up to 10000 cycles of operation [199]. This is the reason in 
the first place that limestone has been widely investigated for in-situ CO2 
capture  coupled  with  enhanced  H2  production  although  with  the 
inherent  limitation  of  decaying  capture  capacity  and  instability  with 
increasing cycle number due to sintering. In addition, sintering of cat-
alysts induces a drop in their activity at elevated temperatures (> 850 
◦
C) when a blend of catalyst-sorbent is employed [196]. The key findings 
(advantages, limitations and improvement techniques) with respect to 
the four sorbents under consideration are shown in Table 8. 

The phenomenon of blending catalyst and sorbent for SorE reforming 
has been widely examined around the globe. Physical blending of sor-
bent and catalyst is cost effective and time-efficient. The downside is the 
need to refill sorbent or catalysts if the lifespan of both are not the same. 
In addition, it is tedious to clear out/fill in sorbent or catalyst separately 
in the blend provided the size and weight distribution are alike [200]. 
Consequently, it is desirable to synthesize a hybrid material in a single 
pellet which improves mass transfer and suppresses mass diffusion is-
sues [201]. Moreover, it streamlines both the steam reforming reactions 
and CO2  separation employing diverse feedstocks. Some of the impor-
tant  studies  with  relevant  details  are  summarized  in  Table  9.  The 
following sections give a comprehensive overview about different ma-
terials (natural minerals as well as synthetic sorbents). The final decision 
on  the  selection  of  a  sorbent  material  is  dependent  on  the  sorbents 
properties (adsorption potential, cycling efficiency, attrition behavior, 
…)  and  on  the  boundary  conditions  (type  of  process,  location  of  the 
plant, …). 

4.1. Calcium based sorbents 

As  aforementioned,  calcium  oxide  based  sorbents  are  easily  avail-
able, economical with high carbon dioxide capture capacity. These are 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100815V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

the reasons for their extensive deployment in research and commercial 
work globally. The disadvantage of CaO is its susceptibility to sintering 
at elevated temperatures coupled with attrition (especially in fluidized 
bed reactors). This necessitates its blending with inert or polymorphic 
stabilizers. However, this blending lowers the CO2 capture ability of the 
sorbent [227]. The values of carbon dioxide capture versus time for a 
wide  variety  of  Ca  based  sorbents  along  with  respective  synthesis 
pathways and operating conditions are listed in Table 10. 

Temperature is found to be a key factor in the CO2-sorption enhanced 
reforming  process.  As  demonstrated  in  the  Arrhenius  equation  (Eq. 
(11)), the rate constant of the reaction is a function of temperature and 
increases with a rise in temperature. It should be stressed that the effect 
of  temperature  on  the  thermodynamically  favored  end  state  (as  pre-
dicted by Gibbs free energy) is also dependent on temperature. If the 
Gibbs free energy increases at elevated temperature, then decarbonation 
would  be  favored.  In  few  studies  about  CaO  carbonation,  it  was 
demonstrated that raising the temperature has an adverse impact on the 
total reaction rate on account of increasing the Gibbs free energy which 
in turn reduces the reaction propelling force. Consequently, it can be 
inferred that the reaction rate cannot always be increased by raising the 
temperature. Manovic and Anthony [238] evaluated the rate of reaction 
with respect to temperature with the help of TGA. They used Kelly rock 
◦
lime for CO2 capture from 350 to 800 
C and reported the reaction rate 
◦
as a direct function of temperature. Few researchers [229] noted 520 
C 
as the ideal temperature for highest sorption rate when zirconium sta-
bilized  calcium  oxide  (synthesized  via  surfactant  template-ultrasound 
pathway) was tested from ambient temperature to 745 
C. Apparently, 
520 
C can be taken as the optimal temperature, however it is worth 
emphasizing  that  in  this  study,  the  amount  of  fresh  or  unconverted 
calcium oxide was variable during heating. Therefore, it may be possible 
to achieve higher rates of CO2  capture at even higher temperatures (>
◦
C) provided ample calcium oxide reactant is available. On the other 
520 
hand, this study also revealed an enhancement in the rate of CO2 sorp-
◦
tion below 520 
C. In a recent investigation by Martinez and co-authors 
[204], a parametric study was carried out to assess the syngas compo-
sition and char conversion as a function of diverse operating variables 
such as CO2 capture capacity, steam-to-carbon and sorbent-to-feedstock 
ratios.  A  bubbling  fluidized  bed  was  employed  in  the  presence  of 
calcined  limestone  with  grape  seeds  as  biomass  feedstock.  Optimal 
gasification  temperature  and  steam-to-carbon  ratio  were  realized 

◦

◦

◦
C and 1.5 to obtain a negligible concentration 
respectively at 700 - 740 
(dry basis) of higher hydrocarbons (C3-C4 and unsaturated C2 < 1 vol.%) 
in  the  product  gas.  The  ratio  (H2-CO2)/(CO  + CO2)  was  reported  to 
range between 1.2 and 3 by regulating the temperature and/or sorption 
attributes of the limestone. 

As  aforementioned,  CB  sorbents  suffer  from  deactivation  due  to 
sintering. There are various ways to minimize this behavior. One of them 
is to blend them with some kind of inert stabilizer [234]. This mixing 
results  in  two  important changes  in  the  characteristics of  the  sorbent 
namely,  enhancing  the  stability  and  altered  sorption  kinetics.  In  an 
interesting  investigation,  Zhang  and  co-authors  [230]  carried  out  a 
comparative study to assess the sorption kinetics of CaO stabilized with 
Al2O3  and natural CaO using TGA over 100 cycles. It was noticed that 
the non-stabilized sorbent showed better kinetics than the blended CaO 
during the initial period dominated by the surface reaction mechanism 
whereas the opposite trend was found in the later period governed by 
the diffusion mechanism. This observation was explained by the reac-
tion rate being dependent on the amount of sorbent during the initial 
period  ruled  by  the  surface  reaction  mechanism  where  there  was  a 
higher concentration of CaO in the non-stabilized (non-blended) CaO. 
However, in the later period, the reaction rate and mass transfer were a 
function of the porous texture of the sorbent which had been improved 
in  the  blended  sorbent  (BET  surface  area  and  pore  volume  of  CaO 
blended with Al2O3  were 15 m2/g and 0.12 cm3/g against 5 m2/g and 
0.03 cm3/g for untreated CaO, respectively). In addition, it was found 
that the stabilized sorbent was considerably less sintered coupled with 
the  availability  of  more  pores  for  diffusion  which  in  turn  resulted  in 
enhanced  kinetics.  Continuous  SorE  reforming  was  examined  by  Dou 
and  co-authors  [203]  with  glycerol  as  feedstock  and  a  bi-functional 
material  (NiO/NiAl2O4  + CaO)  serving  as  catalyst  and  sorbent 
employing two moving bed reactors. Hydrogen generation was assessed 
in the presence and absence of the material at two different tempera-
tures  (500  and  600 
C).  The  bi-functional  material  was  continuously 
◦
regenerated at 900 
C with the aid of nitrogen and steam blend. During 
pre-breakthrough of CO2 (within 10 min), the molar fraction of H2 was 
found to increase acutely coupled with a drop in CO2, CO and CH4  at 
both temperatures. Hydrogen with high purity of 96.1 % was obtained at 
C. More impor-
600 
tantly,  any  loss  in  the  activity  of  the  bi-functional  material  was  not 
noticed with increasing cycles of operation. 

C whereas of 93.9 % purity was observed at 500 

◦

◦

◦

Fig. 8. Thermodynamic characteristics of carbonation reactions [71, 136, 142, 143, 146, 148]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100816V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Table 8 
Summary of CB, MB, ACB and LDH sorbents.  

Sorbents 

Sorption 
temperature(

◦

C) 

Desorption 
temperature(

◦

C) 

Ca based 

500 to 650 

750 to 1000 

Mg based 

275 to 350 

450 to 600 

Alkali ceramic 

500 to 700 

650 to 900 

Effective CO2 sorption 

based 

LDH 

300 to 600 

500 to 800 

Large surface area 
Ample sorption sites 

Advantages 

Limitations 

Improvement strategies 

Economical 
Easily and amply 
available 
High CO2 capture 
capacity 
Cost-effective 
High theoretical CO2 
sorption capacity 

Sintering 
Attrition 

Blending with inert polymorphic spacers such 
as Al2O3, NiO/NiAl2O4, mayenite, etc. 

Low CO2 sorption 
Poor kinetics 

Costly 
Li2ZrO3 has very low sorption 
capacity 
Improvement techniques are 
needed for optimal sorption 

Doping with metal salts and oxides (such as 
carbonates and nitrates of alkalis) 
Loading sorbent on porous material 
Increasing CO2 partial pressure 
Adding dopants such as K2CO3, Ni/Al2O3, etc. 
Deploying smaller particles 
Presence of steam 
Anion exchange 
Adding dopants/MCN  

Table 9 
Summary of investigations employing diverse feedstocks and bi-functional materials for H2 generation via the SorE process.  

Feedstock 

Bi-functional material 

Sorption parameters 

Desorption parameters 

Cycles  H2 molar 

Reference 

Ethanol 
Ethanol 

Ethanol 

Glycerol 
Glycerol 
Grape seeds 
Enteromorpha prolifera 

char 

Wood sawdust 
Methanol 

Methanol 
Methane 
Methane 

Methane 
Methane 

Methane 

Methane 

Methane 

Methane 
Methane 
Methane 

Methane 
Methane 
Methane 
Methane 

Methane 
Methane 
Methane 
Methane 
Methane 

Methane 

Methane 

Methane 

Ni/Al2O3/CaO 
Ni/Al2O3/ 
CaO.MgO 
Ni/Al2O3/ 
Na2ZrO3 
NiO/NiAl2O4/CaO 
NiO/NiAl2O4/CaO 
CaO/MgO/Al2O3 
CeO2/CaO 

CaO 
Mesoporous MCM-41/CuO, ZnO,CeO2, 
ZrO2/Li-Na-K)NO3•MgO 
Cu-MgO/Al2O3 
Ni/dolomite 
Ni/CaO 

NiO/CaO 
Ni/CaO/ 
Ca12Al14O33 
Ni/dolomite 

Ni/CaO/ 
Ca12Al14O33 
NiO/CaO/ 
Ca12Al14O33 
Ni/CaO/ Ca12Al14O33 
NiO/LDH (Al-Mg)/ Al-improved CaO 
ZrO2/NiO/CaO/ 
Al2O3 
NiO/CaO/LDH (Al-Mg) 
Ni/Li2ZrO3 
NiO/LDH (Al-Mg)/ CaO/Ca9Al6O18 
La2O3/NiO/CaO/ 
Al2O3 
NiO/Na2ZrO3 
NiO/LDH (Al-Mg)/ Li2ZrO3 
NiO/LDH (Al-Mg)/ Na2ZrO3 
NiO-γ-Al2O3/CaO/ Ca9Al6O18 
Ni/MgAlO/CaO/ 
Ca9Al6O18 
Ni/LDH/CaO/ 
Ca12Al14O33 
NiO/CaO/ 
Ca9Al6O18 
CaO/Zr/NiO 

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

600 
600 

600 

500 
600 
740 
650 

C; 15 bar; S:F=6:1 
C; 15 bar; S:F=6:1 

C; 15 bar; S:F=6:1 

C; 1 bar; S:C=3:1 
C; 1 bar; S:C=3:1 
C; S:C=1.5:1 
C; Sor:C=1.5:1 

- 
- 

- 

◦

◦

◦

900 
900 
- 
800 

C; Mixture of N2 and steam 
C; Mixture of N2 and steam 

C; 95% steam and 5% O2 

◦

C; Sor:F=2:1 

650 
300 oC; S:F=2:1 

◦

C; S:F=1.3:1 
C; 1 bar; S:C=3:1 

C; 15 bar; S: 

◦

◦

220 
600 
450 to 750 
C=3:1 to 5:1 
600 
630 

◦

◦

C; 1 bar; S:C=3:1 
C; 1 bar; S:C=5:1 

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

650 

650 

650 

630 
550 
600 

550 
505 
550 
600 

600 
575 
575 
650 
600 

550 

650 

650 

C; 15 bar; S:C=4:1 

C; 1 bar; S:C=3.4:1 

C; 1 bar; S:C=3.4:1 

C; S:C=3:1 
C; 1 bar; S:C=4:1 
C; 1 bar; S:C=4:1 

C; 1 bar; S:C=4:1 
C; 1 bar; S:C=4:1 
C; 1 bar; S:C=4.2:1 
C; 1 bar; S:C=4:1 

C; 1 bar; S:C=4:1 
C; 5 bar; S:C=5:1 
C; 5 bar; S:C=5:1 
C; 5 bar; S:C=2.85:1 
C; 1 bar; S:C=4:1 

C; S:C=4:1 

C; 1 bar; S:C=4:1 

C; 1 bar; S:C=4:1 

900 oC 
400 oC; 100 % N2 

◦

◦

330 
850 
- 

- 
850 

◦

C; 100 % N2 
C; 100 % N2 

C; 100 % Ar 

C; 100 % N2; 4% O2/ 

◦

800 to 950 
N2; 100 % CO2 
850 

C; 100 % He 

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

850 

780 
750 
800 

750 
- 
800 
800 

- 
650 
750 
850 
800 

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

750 

800 

800 

C; 100 % He 

C; 100 % N2 
C; 100 % N2 
C; 100 % N2 

C; 100 % N2 

C; 20 % H2; 80 % N2 
C; 100 % N2 

C; 100 % Ar 
C; 100 % Ar 
C; 100 % N2 
C; 20 % H2; 80 % N2 

C; 100 % N2 

C; 11.1 % H2 (in Ar) 

C; 11.1 % H2 (in Ar) 

% 

96.6 
94.1 

92.2 

94 
96 
55.2 
77.8 

81 
99.8 

99.3 
> 98 
> 95 

80 
> 90 

> 95 

> 92 

90 

95 
99 
> 90 

99 
85 
97 
> 92 

97 
68 
97 
89 
98 

99 

> 95 

> 95 

1 
1 

1 

1 
1 
1 
20 

- 
10 

10 
4 
1 

1 
12 

25 

13 

1 

4 
10 
20 

10 
1 
1 
30 

1 
1 
1 
1 
35 

10 

30 

10 

[202] 
[202] 

[202] 

[203] 
[203] 
[204] 
[205] 

[206] 
[207] 

[208] 
[209] 
[60] 

[210] 
[211] 

[212] 

[213] 

[214] 

[200] 
[215] 
[216] 

[217] 
[218] 
[219] 
[220] 

[218] 
[221] 
[221] 
[222] 
[223] 

[224] 

[225] 

[226]  

It should be emphasized that in real world scenarios, Ca based sor-
bents are employed in the presence of steam to adsorb CO2. The steam 
exists as a gasifying agent in pre-combustion capture (such as in sorption 
enhanced  reforming)  or  as  a  constituent  in  the  flue  gas  in  post- 

combustion capture. This necessitates an examination of CO2  sorption 
kinetics in the presence of steam. Some important investigations were 
carried out by Donat and co-authors [235] and by Manovic and Anthony 
[238]. In the former study, a fluidized bed was employed to carry out a 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100817V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Table 10 
Values of carbon dioxide capture versus time for different Ca based sorbents.  

Authors 

◦
Temperature (

C) 

Capture rate (g CO2/(g‧‧min)) 

Preparation route 

CO2 concentration (%) 

Dedman and co-authors [121] 
Gupta and co-authors [228] 
Radfarnia and co-authors [229] 
Xu and co-authors [223] 
Zhang and co-authors [230] 
Valverde and co-authors [231] 
Valverde and co-authors [231] 
Zhao and co-authors [232] 
Zhao and co-authors [232] 
Radfarnia and co-authors [233] 
Radfarnia and co-authors [233] 
Angeli and co-authors [234] 
Donat and co-authors [235] 
Li and co-authors [236] 
Li and co-authors [237] 
Manovic and co-authors [238] 
Nitsch and co-authors [122] 

600 
650 
650 
650 
650 
650 
650 
650 
650 
650 
650 
690 
700 
700 
758 
800 
800 

0.134 
0.234 
0.186 
0.301 
0.192v 
0.047w 
0.154x 
0.071y 
0.196z 
0.389 
0.099 
0.124 
0.168 
0.112 
0.139 
0.116 
0.131 

Calcining natural lime 
Calcining Ca(OH)2 
Soft chemistry (improved by Zr) 
Sol-gel 
Soft chemistry 
Calcining natural lime 
Calcining natural lime 
Wet chemical (improved by CaZrO3) 
Wet chemical (improved by CaZrO3) 
Sol-gel (improved by tricalcium aluminate) 
Sol-gel (improved by tricalcium aluminate) 
Soft chemistry 
Calcining natural lime 
Calcining natural lime 
Solid-state (improved by MgO) 
Calcining Kelly rock lime 
Calcining natural calcite 

100 
100 
100 
30 
20 
15 
15 
15 
15 
100 
100 
15 
15 
15 
100 
20 
34 

v is the best instantaneous sorption rate whereas w, x, y and z respectively denote the values from the first, second, thirtieth and thirty first cycle. 

comparative assessment of carbon dioxide capture by limestone in the 
presence (1 - 20 %) and absence of steam. The rate of CO2 sorption (in 
the first 100 s) in the presence of steam (~10 %) was realized to be twice 
compared to the rate in the absence of steam, which strengthened the 
idea  of  a  decreasing  resistance  to  diffusion  in  the  presence  of  steam. 
Same findings were reported in the latter study. Acharya and co-authors 
[206]  employed a  circulating fluidized  bed  for  wood  saw  dust  gasifi-
cation in the presence of CaO. The tests were conducted for 2 hours with 
a steam flow rate of 1.5 kg/h where saturated steam was superheated 
prior to feeding into the reactor. The obtained H2 concentration was 81 
vol.% with around 5 vol.% CO2. The exergetic efficiency of the system 
was reported to be around 79 %. 

In real applications, like with any other sorbent, CB sorbents are to be 
employed in numerous cycles of CO2  capture and release (carbonation 
and regeneration). It was noted that the kinetics of carbon dioxide up-
take with increasing cycle numbers do change. In a significant investi-
gation by Radfarnia and co-authors [229], CaO was blended with a Zr 
based  stabilizer  and was  studied for 15 cycles  of sorption-desorption. 
They  found  interesting  results  which  revealed  an  increase  in  capture 
rate in the last cycle as compared to the first cycle. This was due to the 
increased contact of carbon dioxide into the active sites which led to 
structural readjustment of the sorbent particles coupled with improved 
distribution  of  CaZrO3  in  the  CaO  particles  which  in  turn  avoided 
structural  failure  and  particle sintering.  The optimal  ratio of  Zr-to-Ca 
was observed to be 0.303 for best cyclic stability and capture capacity. 
The same trend in the increase in CO2 capture rates was also noticed in 
other research works with inert materials as stabilizers [232, 239]. It is 
worth noting that this improvement was found only in the early cycles 
with a drop in capture rate if the cycles were carried further. In addition, 
only some improvement in sintering was realized. In another study by 
Muller and co-authors [240], four different CaO based sorbents (lime-
stone, dolomite, calcium magnesium acetate and CaO-mayenite) were 
employed to assess their impact on WGS and H2  production. Calcium 
magnesium  acetate  was  deemed  as  the  best  sorbent  in  terms  of  H2 
generation after five cycles. With increasing sorption/desorption cycles, 
the  other  sorbents  degenerated  especially  limestone  which  in  turn 
reduced  H2  production.  In  an  interesting  study,  green  algae  (Enter-
omorpha  prolifera)  and  derived  char  were  examined  as  feedstocks  for 
SorE gasification to generate H2  in the presence of Ce doped CaO in a 
dual fixed bed [205]. Catalyst doping of 10 % by mass CeO2 in CaO was 
seen as optimal to catalyze and boost tar and char reforming which in 
turn produced a maximum H2 concentration of 79 vol.%. The presence 
of the dopant improved cyclic stability along with H2 yield (141.8 mL/g) 
during sorption/desorption (post 20 cycles) with char gasification. CeO2 
doping not only improved the porous morphology, it also enhanced WGS 

and reforming reactions, thus aiding in greater H2 production. 

Li and co-authors [237] blended calcium oxide with mayenite in a 
ratio of 75 to 25 wt.%. They carried out TGA investigations and found 
enhanced CO2 capture kinetics vis-`a-vis the number of cycles. However, 
the increase in CO2 capture rate was significant in the initial three cycles 
followed by a minor enhancement. In addition, an improvement in cy-
clic stability was noted. In an another examination [236], two different 
types  of  limestone  (natural  limestone  and  limestone  treated  by  pyro-
ligneous acid) were investigated to evaluate CO2 sorption kinetics using 
TGA and a dual fixed bed reactor. It was noted that with an increase in 
the  number  of  cycles,  the  rate  of  CO2  sorption  dropped  for  both  the 
sorbents for up to a maximum of 100 cycles, albeit the drop was lower 
for the pyroligneous acid treated limestone. The optimal ratio of pyro-
ligneous acid-to-limestone was considered as 20 mL/g. The same trend 
in the decrease of kinetic rates vis-`a-vis increasing cycles was also re-
ported in other stabilized CB sorbents such as calcium oxide stabilized 
by aluminum oxide and calcium oxide stabilized by tricalcium alumi-
nate [230]. Good sorption characteristics coupled with easy availability 
and  cost  effectiveness  has  led  to  the  deployment  of  CB  sorbents  in 
numerous  process  development  units  and  demonstration  plants 
[241–244] worldwide as will be further discussed in Section 5. 

4.2. Magnesium based sorbents 

Magnesium  based  sorbents  emerged  as  an  encouraging  choice  in 
SorE reforming for in-situ CO2 capture along with hydrogen production. 
It is on account of its cost-effectiveness, ample availability, good sorp-
◦
tion capability coupled with low sorption temperature (< 400 
C) [71]. 
Eq. (13) reflects CO2 sorption by MgO. 

In real world conditions however, MB sorbents have demonstrated a 
low  carbon  dioxide  capture  capacity  coupled  with  low  kinetic  rates 
despite  having  a  high  theoretical  capacity.  Two  reasons  explain  this, 
namely (i) reduced interaction between the sorbent and gas due to low 
surface  area  of  around  8  to  35  m2/g  and  (ii)  decreased  (or  blocked) 
contact between the sorbent and CO2 when MgCO3 (whose volume en-
larges by a factor of two and a half compared to MgO) encapsulates fresh 
MgO [114]. In order to overcome these challenges and enhance the CO2 
capture characteristics, some potential solutions (for example, doping 
with metal salts and oxides, generating pores, loading sorbent on porous 
material, etc.) have been assessed. 

The history of exploring MgO as CO2 sorbent goes back to early 70s 
when  Gregg  and  Ramsay  [245]  assessed  CO2  sorption  by  MgO  via 
physical  adsorption  and  chemisorption  pathways.  They  examined  the 
impact of temperature on CO2  capture for a range of -98.5 to 500 
C. 
They noted an increase in chemisorption with rising temperature and an 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100818V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

◦

opposite trend for physical adsorption. A low total carbon dioxide ca-
pacity (0.572 wt.%) for MgO was found at 500 
C. In another investi-
gation [246], a fixed bed was employed to assess MgO/Al2O3. At 10 wt. 
% MgO, the sorbent reflected the highest sorption capacity stemming 
from a proper balance between chemisorption and physical sorption. A 
considerable  influence  of  steam  was  noted  with  a  maximum  capture 
capacity of 1.36 mmol/g at 13 vol.% steam (and 0.97 mmol/g in the 
◦
absence of steam) at 60
C. Enhanced CO2 capacity was due to improved 
sorbent  reactivity  on  account  of  steam  before  sorption  was  initiated. 
Here, it should be stressed that Mg based sorbents are free from sintering 
as  they  require  lower  regeneration  temperatures  as  compared  to  CB 
sorbents. The values of carbon dioxide capture versus time for a wide 
variety  of  Mg  based  sorbents  along  with  their  synthesis  methods  and 
temperatures, as reported in the literature, are listed in Table 11. 

◦

Among all the dopants employed to increase the efficacy of Mg based 
sorbents, carbonates and nitrates of alkali metals have been extensively 
researched. Xiao and co-authors [258] examined the CO2  capture effi-
cacy using MgO modified with Mg(NO3)2•6H2O and K2CO3 at variable 
◦
temperatures (300, 350, 375, 400 
C). They realized an enhanced rate of 
capture coupled with improved cyclic stability. The maximum sorption 
◦
(0.00395 g CO2/g) was found at 375 
C. The maximum decay in capacity 
was only 5.1 % post 17 cycles. Lee and co-authors [257] assessed the 
C by doping it with Mg(NO3)2•6H2O and 
sorption rate of MgO at 350 
K2CO3.  They  reported  an  enhancement  in  carbon  dioxide  capture  ca-
pacity  to 7.084 wt.% for Mg(NO3)2•6H2O and 1.716 wt.% for K2CO3 
with an initial value of 0.352 wt.%. At the beginning, the kinetics were 
slow  for  about  a  minute  followed  by  fast  sorption  kinetics  (0.011  g 
CO2/(g‧min)) succeeded by a slow and stable phase for a longer dura-
tion.  This  trend  was  reflected  by  all  the  tested  sorbents.  In  a  recent 
investigation, Hosseini and co-authors [207] produced high purity H2 
employing catalyst-sorbent (mesoporous MCM-41 supported CuO, ZnO, 
CeO2, ZrO2 as catalyst and (Li-Na-K) NO3•MgO as sorbent) in a fixed bed 
reactor with CH3OH as feedstock. A substantial rise of 25 % was noted in 
H2 production as compared to conventional CH3OH reforming. Around 
99.8  %  H2  generation  was  observed  at  optimal  operating  conditions 
which were 300 
C, H2O:CH3OH as 2:1 and sorbent:catalyst as 8:1. In 
addition,  the  deployed  bi-functional  material  revealed  good  cyclic 
stability. 

◦

◦

In  an  important  study  [251],  it  was  observed  that  sodium  nitrate 
served as the best dopant when compared to nitrates of potassium or 
lithium. In addition, it was reported that the binary blending of KNO3 
and LiNO3  obtained the same impact as by unary addition of NaNO3. 
Maximum  rate  of  CO2  capture  and  capacity  was  found  with  ternary 
doping (KNO3, NaNO3 and LiNO3) although the improvement was minor 
compared to unary addition of NaNO3. Some research works also have 
focused on evaluating the influence of doping CaCO3 on Mg based sor-
bents. Yang and co-authors [255] assessed sorption attributes of NaNO3 
modified  MgO  with  or  without  calcium  carbonate.  They  reported  an 
enhancement in effective temperature in calcium carbonate doped Mg 
sorbent which enabled it to adsorb CO2  at 400 
C. In another investi-
gation [256], it was found that CaCO3  doping improved CO2  sorption 
rate and sorption stability in a Mg based sorbent. The authors suggested 
an  increment  to  0.131  g  CO2/(g‧min)  when  CaCO3  was  added  in  a 
quantity of 2 wt.% as compared to 0.0571 g CO2/(g‧min) when CaCO3 
was absent during the first five minutes of the run. In a recent investi-
gation  by  Gao  and  co-authors  [135],  evaluation  of  sorption  sites  by 
adding molten salts was conducted in order to optimize a MgO sorbent. 
They carried out a transient kinetic study to recognize and describe the 
alterations in the CO2 molecular capture route as a function of NaNO2 as 
a dopant. They realized a maximum CO2 uptake (15.7 mmol/g) at 350
C 
when 10 mol.% NaNO2  was added versus 0.1 mmol/g for the sorbent 
without  doping.  Yang  and  co-authors  [259]  conducted  acetic  acid 
reforming with MgO/Ni bi-functional material for H2 generation. Three 
different 
synthesized  namely, 
co-precipitation of Ni(NO3)2  and Mg(NO3)2, impregnation of Ni(NO3)2 
on MgO and impregnation of Ni(NO3)2 on mesoporous MgO designated 

sorbent-catalyst  mixtures  were 

◦

respectively  as  SC-1,  SC-2  and  SC-3.  It  was  demonstrated  that  SC-3 
yielded maximum H2  which was 160 % higher than what was gained 
in the process in the absence of a bi-functional material. The improve-
ment can be explained on the basis of increased BET surface area of SC-3 
which was three times higher than SC-1 and 2.3 times more than SC-2. 
Moreover, there was no drop in the activity of SC-3 in 20 h of operation. 
Exploring  other  dimensions  of  Mg  based  sorbents,  some  studies 
assessed the CO2  sorption characteristics with respect to the blending 
ratio  of  dopants.  In  an  elaborative  study  by  Harada  and  co-authors 
[252],  nitrates  of  K,  Li  and  Na  were  doped  through  wet  chemistry 
preparation methods to obtain a modified sorbent. They performed ex-
periments  with  varying  blending  ratios  and  reported  the  ratio 
0.52:0.30:0.18 for [K]:[Li]:[Na] as optimal for CO2 sorption. The impact 
of total nitrate amount on the kinetics was also examined. The highest 
rate  of  sorption  in  the  first  fifteen  minutes  was  found  with  15  mol% 
doping of nitrates among a studied range of nitrate loadings between 2 
and  25  mol%.  Joo  and  co-authors  [253]  varied  Na2CO3  and  NaNO3 
loading  to  test  the  sorption  rate  constant  in  MgO.  They  obtained  the 
highest rate constant of 0.811 per min and a CO2  capture capacity of 
19.9 wt.% at 18 % NaNO3 and 19 % Na2CO3. Several different types of 
nanosheet MgO based sorbents with variable blending ratios of nitrates 
of  Li  and  K  and,  carbonates  of  Na  and  K  synthesized  by  a 
precipitation-deposition method were explored using TGA by Wang and 
co-authors  [249].  They  reported  a  maximum  initial  sorption  rate  of 
0.0190  g  CO2/(g‧min)  with  a  capture  capacity  of  40  wt.%  at 
0.85:0.056:0.044:0.025:0.025 (MgO:KNO3:LiNO3:K2CO3:Na2CO3). In a 
recent  assessment,  Li  and  co-authors  [208]  synthesized  bi-functional 
materials  (Cu-MgO/Al2O3)  with  a  Cu  content  varying  between  0  and 
10 % by mass, to evaluate steam reforming of CH3OH for H2 generation. 
Copper co-existed in the ionic and metallic forms on the bi-functional 
material.  The  presence  of  ionic  Cu  in  MgO  aided  in  sorption  and 
desorption of CO2 whereas metallic Cu provided active sites for CH3OH 
reforming. A strong bonding between Cu-MgO prevented Cu sintering 
coupled with inhibition of CO production by MgO due to generation of 
formate species. In a duration of 10 cycles, an optimal ratio of 8 wt.% 
was reported for Cu in Cu-MgO/Al2O3 for maximum sorption cum cat-
alytic activities which generated a maximum H2  selectivity of 99.3 % 
with minimum CO selectivity (< 0.15 %). 

and CO3

(cid:0) 2 with O2(cid:0)

The mechanism by which an increase in CO2  sorption by doping in 
MB sorbents takes place is depicted in Fig. 9. The dopant is changed to 
the  liquid  phase  at  the  operational  temperature  where  MgO  is  partly 
liquefied and dissociated into [Mg2+…O2(cid:0)
]. The bonding in the latter is 
weak vis-`a-vis MgO in the solid phase. Carbon dioxide in the gas phase 
. This is followed 
diffuses into the molten salt to generate CO3
by the synthesis of MgCO3 out of Mg2+
2- which disperses in the 
liquid phase. A drop in the sorption rate is noticed when the liquid phase 
is entirely enclosed by the product, i.e. MgCO3 [252]. The binary dop-
ants (for  example, alkali nitrates  and carbonates)  form a eutectic  fol-
lowed by dissolution of CO2  in the liquid phase. The liquefying A2CO3 
along with CO2  forms A2C2O5  where A is the alkali metal. Now, MgO 
interacts with A2C2O5 and A2Mg(CO3)2 is synthesized [249]. It is worth 
emphasizing that the improvement of Mg based sorbents is not a func-
tion of textural characteristics unlike other sorbents where sorption ef-
ficacy is a function of surface area. This was proven in a recent study 
[247]  where  an  enhancement  in  sorption  capacity  was  noticed  when 
pure MgO (1.28 wt.%) was doped with NaNO3/NaNO2  (87.12 wt.%), 
although the pore volume and surface area of the former (0.49 cm3/g 
and 230 m2/g) were much higher than that of the latter (0.073 cm3/g 
and 23 m2/g). 

Another key factor in CO2 sorption by sorbents is partial pressure. A 
rise in the rate of CO2 capture was noted from zero to 0.052 g CO2/(g‧ 
min) by Wang and co-authors [249] when the CO2 partial pressure was 
raised from 0.2 to 0.8 bar. In another study [254], a drop in the tem-
perature of CO2  capture peak was observed with a drop in CO2  partial 
pressure.  In  an  interesting  study  by  Zhao  and  co-authors  [247],  the 
impact of CO2 partial pressure and temperature on sorption activity was 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100819V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Table 11 
Values of carbon dioxide capture versus time for different Mg based sorbents.  

Authors 

Temperature 
◦
(

C) 

Capture rate (g CO2/g/ 
min) 

Preparation route 

CO2 concentration 
(%) 

Zhao and co-authors [247] 
Wang and co-authors [248] 
Wang and co-authors [249] 
Zhao and co-authors [247] 
Wang and co-authors [248] 
Lee and co-authors [250] 

Dal-Pozzo and co-authors  

[251] 

Wang and co-authors [248] 
Harada and co-authors [252] 
Joo and co-authors [253] 
Wang and co-authors [248] 
Wang and co-authors [248] 
Zhao and co-authors [247] 
Lee and co-authors [254] 
Wang and co-authors [248] 
Yang and co-authors [255] 
Cui and co-authors [256] 
Lee and co-authors [254] 
Cui and co-authors [256] 
Cui and co-authors [256] 
Lee and co-authors [257] 
Wang and co-authors [249] 
Cui and co-authors [256] 
Cui and co-authors [256] 
Cui and co-authors [256] 
Xiao and co-authors [258] 
Xiao and co-authors [258] 
Lee and co-authors [254] 
Zhao and co-authors [247] 

275 
280 
300 
300 
300 
300 

300 

300 
300 
300 
320 
320 
325 
325 
340 
350 
350 
350 
350 
350 
350 
350 
350 
350 
350 
375 
375 
375 
375 

0.0202 
0.00454 
0.0365 
0.0333 
0.0303 
0.00568 

0.0100 

0.0115 
0.00395 
0.00733 
0.0304 
0.00805 
0.0431 
0.0297 
0.0142 
0.142 
0.0335 
0.0355w 
0.131x 
0.110y 
0.011 (5 min) 
0.0190 
0.0571x 
0.0511y 
0.1080w 
0.00395x 
0.00375z 
0.0233 
0.0124 

Hydrothermal + Calcining (improved by NaNO2 and NaNO3) 
Calcining C4H4Mg5O15 + Solid state blend (NaNO3) 
Precipitation- deposition (improved by Na, K, Li) 
Hydrothermal + Calcining (improved by NaNO2 and NaNO3) 
Calcining C4H4Mg5O15 + Solid state blend (NaNO2) 
Impregnation of commercial MgO (improved by NaNO3, 
Na2CO3) 
Wet blending + Calcining MgCO3 (LiNO3) 

Calcining C4H4Mg5O15 + Solid state blend (NaNO3) 
Wet chemical ((Li-Na-K)NO3)doped 
Wet chemical 
Calcining C4H4Mg5O15 + Solid state blend (NaNO2) 
Calcining C4H4Mg5O15 + Solid state blend (NaNO3) 
Hydrothermal + Calcining (improved by NaNO2, NaNO3) 
Solid state blend (improved by KMO3, LiNO3) 
Calcining C4H4Mg5O15 + Solid state blend (NaNO2) 
Wet chemical (improved by NaNO3) 
Soft chemical 
Solid state blend (improved by KMO3, LiNO3) 
Soft chemical (Mg98Ca2) 
Soft chemical (Mg98Ca2) 
pH regulated precipitation (improved by K2CO3, KNO3) 
Precipitation-deposition (improved by Na, K, Li) 
Soft chemical 
Soft chemical 
Soft Chemical (Mg98Ca2) 
Wet chemical (improved by K2CO3) 
Wet chemical (K2CO3) 
Solid state blend (improved by KMO3, LiNO3) 
Hydrothermal + Calcining (improved NaNO2, NaNO3) 

85 
100 
100 
85 
100 
10 (10 % water) 

100 

100 
100 
15 
100 
100 
85 
100 
100 
80 (20 % water) 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
85 

w, x, y and z respectively denote the values from the twenty fifth, first, fiftieth and seventeenth. 

examined in binary doping by NaNO2/NaNO3. They evidenced a zero 
◦
sorption activity at 350 
C when pressure was reduced to 0.3 bar from 1 
C  at  the 
bar.  However,  when  the  temperature  was  dropped  to  325 
reduced  pressure,  the  capture  activity  was  resumed.  They  reported  a 
capture capacity of 26.4 wt.% after 1 h 10 min. 

◦

4.3. Alkali ceramic based sorbents 

Alkali ceramic based sorbents are considered as one of the promising 
sorbents  for  carbon  dioxide  capture  because  of  effective  sorption 
coupled with regeneration strength. Alkali ceramic based sorbents are 
◦
usually employed to adsorb CO2 in a temperature range beyond 500 
C. 
Most commonly used alkali metal based ceramics are sodium based and 
lithium based such as sodium zirconate (Na2ZrO3), lithium orthosilicate 
(Li4SiO4) and lithium zirconate (Li2ZrO3). The carbonation of sodium 
zirconate is depicted in Eq. (14). 

The partial pressure of carbon dioxide is a key factor in CO2-sorption 
enhanced processes as it directly affects CO2 capture. Larger amounts of 
CO2 increase the capture rate on account of greater propelling force for 
the sorption reaction. Barraza and co-authors [260] assessed the impact 
of varying CO2 concentrations (40, 60, 80 %) on the sorption attributes 
of Na2ZrO3. They reported an enhancement of 2.14 and 2.68 times in the 
CO2 capture rate for gas concentrations of 60 and 80 % CO2 respectively 
when  compared  to  40  %  CO2.  The  global  carbonation  reaction  was 
considered as first order and the reaction rate was a function of tem-
perature. In another important work [130], the CO2  gas concentration 
was raised from 15 to 50 % and its effect on the sorption behavior was 
examined by TGA. It was observed that when CO2 was increased from 15 
to 50 % (~3.33 times), the maximum capture rate jumped from 0.0144 
to  0.0552  g  CO2/(g‧min)  (3.8  times)  and  from  0.0312  to  0.0912  g 
CO2/(g‧min) (2.9 times) respectively in the surface reaction phase and 
nucleation phase. It is worth noting that higher amounts of carbon di-
oxide  not  only  contributed  to  enhancing  the  capture  rate  but  also 

decreased the duration to acquire maximum capture rate. 

◦

The carbon capture behavior of Na2ZrO3  is a function of tempera-
ture. Consequently, some investigations [261, 262] were performed to 
evaluate the impact of temperature on the capture rate. With reference 
to the Arrhenius equation (Eq. (11)), it can be said that the rate constant 
is a function of temperature. Many studies [260, 263, 264] were per-
formed in a wide temperature range (300 to 800 
C) and verified the 
assertion.  An  exception  to  this  claim  was  found  for  Na2ZrO3  for  the 
C where the rate of CO2 capture was 
temperature range of 200 to 300 
higher at the former temperature [261, 265]. This was explained on the 
basis  of  two  different  mechanisms  which  govern  CO2  sorption  by 
Na2ZrO3. At elevated temperature, CO2 capture is governed by diffusion 
which is higher at increased temperature. However, at lower tempera-
ture,  CO2  sorption  depends  upon  surface  interaction  whose  rate  is  a 
function of the surface exposed to CO2 [130]. It was noted that sintering 
began at 300 
C leading to a decrease in surface area whereas sodium 
diffusion had not yet started. Therefore, the most adverse temperature 
C. 
for Na2ZrO3 is considered as 300 

◦

◦

◦

Another key factor which has an impact on CO2 capture attributes of 
Na2ZrO3 is the addition of some material to the sorbent. CO2 sorption by 
Na2ZrO3  is governed by the nucleation and growth model and the ex-
istence of varied sites in the sorbent can decrease the energy barrier for 
nucleation, which reflects the usage of certain doping materials in the 
sorbent [266, 267]. Sanchez-Camacho and co-authors [262] evaluated 
this concept by incorporating 5 wt.% K2CO3 in the sorbent and found an 
◦
enhanced carbonation rate at 400 
C. They suggested the molten phase 
of  K2CO3  as  the  reason  for  the  improved  capture  rate.  In  an  another 
study, Na2ZrO3  was prepared with exchanged secondary phases of so-
dium  in  the  sodium  zirconate  matrix.  The  authors  demonstrated  an 
enhanced CO2  capture rate in the temperature range of 400 to 600 
C 
compared to conventional (unmodified) Na2ZrO3. Olivas and co-authors 
[202]  conducted  experimental  work  to  assess  Na2ZrO3  coupled  with 
Ni/Al2O3 for ethanol reforming. Conventional steam ethanol reforming 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100820V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

revealed a maximum of 60 % of H2 concentration. However, when the 
bi-functional material was added, a considerable rise in H2  production 
C, 1 bar 
was noticed. A H2 concentration of 90 % was reported at 600 
with  a  steam-to-feedstock-to-material  ratio  of  6:1:2.5  (molar).  These 
results  were  in  accordance  with  the  thermodynamic  findings  which 
deduced  a  H2  concentration  of  92  vol.%.  In  a  recent  study  [268], 
Na2ZrO3  was gauged as a sorbent with sawdust as the feedstock. The 
sorbent revealed a largely increased H2  generation in the temperature 
◦
C with a H2 yield of 13.67 mmol/g as compared to 
range of 450 to 650 
5.73 mmol/g in the absence of the sorbent. 

◦

The  CO2  sorption  behavior  of  Na2ZrO3  is  also  a  function  of  the 
preparation method. Two commonly employed pathways to synthesize 
Na2ZrO3  from precursors are namely soft chemistry and solid state. It 
was discovered that sol-gel derived Na2ZrO3 has better kinetics than the 
solid state derived counterpart because of a larger surface area (5.36 m2/ 
g) in the former compared to the latter (1.51 m2/g) [264]. Bamiduro and 
co-authors [113] reported the sol-gel method to produce sorbent with 
better CO2  capture rates as compared to the sorbent prepared by solid 
blending.  This  was  explained  on  the  basis  of  uniform  mixing  in  the 
former pathway which in turn supported the interactions between pre-
cursors. On the other hand, the latter method induced some problems in 
diffusion  which  led  to  the  creation  of  unreacted  cores  of  precursors. 
Furthermore, the sol-gel method produced a sorbent with a much larger 
surface area (20.5 m2/g) than the one obtained from the solid-mixing 
method (1.8 m2/g) which in turn aided in the carbonation reaction. In 
an  interesting  investigation,  Wang  and  co-authors  [269]  derived 
Na2ZrO3  from dental waste and assessed its efficacy in H2  production 
using diverse feedstocks (municipal sludge, spirulina, and methylcellu-
lose). They realized the highest CO2 uptake of 0.195 g CO2/g-sorbent in 
thirtieth cycle with a total CO2 uptake in all thirty cycles reaching nearly 
82%  of  the  theoretical  CO2  uptake.  Maximum  hydrogen  yield  of  205 
ml/g was demonstrated by Spirulina and the least by municipal sludge 
(142 ml/g) with methylcellulose having a yield of 197 ml/g. 

Lithium orthosilicate (Li4SiO4) is another promising sorbent in the 
ACB sorbents category which can adsorb CO2 at elevated temperatures 
[270]. Fixation of CO2  by Li4SiO4  can be well represented in Eq. (15) 
which  is  steered  by  the  nucleation  and  growth  mechanism.  A  linear 
correlation between ln[(cid:0) ln(1 (cid:0) α)] and ln(t) can be realized for nucle-
ation  through  mathematical  rearrangement  of  the  Avrami-Erofeev 
model  [271].  The  reaction  kinetics  are  a  function  of  both  the  rate  of 
nuclei expansion and the dimensions of growth. Therefore, a growth in 
three dimensions is more rapid than in two dimensions and so on. In an 
interesting investigation, Zhao and co-authors used six types of Si pre-
cursors to prepare Li4SiO4 to assess the impact on nucleation growth and 
dimensions.  They  found  that  the  specimen  with  most  4  nm  pores  re-
flected a maximum CO2  capture rate coupled with optimal nuclei pro-
gression  and  dimensionality [112]. It  is  worth stressing  here  that the 
beginning of CO2 capture by the sorbent is dominated by the nucleation 
mechanism  and  after  the  development  of  a  thick  product  layer,  it  is 
governed by the diffusion controlled mechanism. 

◦
C. It was evidenced that 700 

The impact of temperature on sorption rate has been examined in 
several  studies.  A  common  conclusion  drawn  by  many  investigations 
[272, 273] is a direct relation between CO2  capture rate and tempera-
ture as the CO2 capture reaction rate increases in a temperature range of 
◦
350 to 700 
C was not only the maximum 
capture  temperature  but  also  the  optimal  sorption  temperature. 
Regeneration of the sorbent took place beyond this temperature limit. 
The claim that increasing temperature would increase the sorption rate 
was countered by some investigations. Hu and co-authors [274] realized 
◦
a better sorption rate at 550 
C by decreasing the 
partial pressure of carbon dioxide to 0.15 atm. Zhang and co-authors 
[273] reported the same trend and found higher capture rates at 525 
◦
C  than  at  575 
C  at  a  CO2  partial  pressure  of  0.50  atm.  It  must  be 
emphasized  that  these  controversial  results  were  on  account  of 
decreased  CO2  amounts  in  the  gas  phase  which  in  turn  reduced  the 
switching temperature between CO2  capture and release [275]. Essaki 

◦
C as compared to 600 

◦

Fig. 9. Mechanism of carbon dioxide capture by MgO (improved by the addi-
tion of alkali nitrate) [252] 

and co-authors [276] employed a packed bed reactor for SorE methane 
reforming with bi-functional material which was a blend of Ni/Al2O3 
and commercial Li4SiO4. Temperature was noticed as a key parameter to 
impact the equilibrium. The molar percentages of H2 in the product gas 
stream increased significantly to 93.6 and 89.4 % respectively at 550 
and 500 
C as compared to 65 mol% at both temperatures for conven-
tional steam methane reforming. Furthermore, the deployment of the 
bi-functional  material  considerably  improved  methane  conversion  at 
550 

C with a very low CO output (< 0.2 vol.%). 

◦

◦

There is a clear positive influence of particle size, presence of water 
vapor and doping with certain materials on the carbon dioxide capture 
rate. Venegas and co-authors [277] decreased the particle size to 3 μm 
from  36  μm  and  observed  an  increase  in  CO2  capture  rate  to  0.20  g 
◦
CO2/(g‧min) from 0.15 g CO2/(g‧min) at 600 
C with 100 % CO2 coupled 
with an enhancement in the surface area to 1.6683 m2/g from 0.3421 
m2/g. The impact of water vapor on sorption behavior was assessed by 
◦
Quinn and co-authors [278]. They evaluated capture kinetics at 550 
C 
in dry (0 % H2O) and wet condition (2.6 % H2O) in 14.7 % CO2. A rise in 
CO2 capture rate was noted from 0.025 g CO2/(g‧min) in dry condition 
to 0.070 g CO2/(g‧min) in wet condition. Seggiani and co-authors [275] 
examined the change in capture attributes by incorporating K2CO3 in the 
sorbent at 580 
C with 4 % CO2. The modified Li4SiO4  by doping re-
flected much improved kinetics (0.038 g CO2/(g‧min)) as compared to 
pure  sorbent  (0.002  g  CO2/(g‧min)).  In  a  significant  investigation  by 
Shan and co-authors [279], two specimens of Li4SiO4 were prepared by 
respectively pure silica precursor and diatomite silica precursor. At 620 
◦
C and 50 % CO2, in the first five minutes, the latter reflected increased 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100821V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

CO2 capture rate of 0.035 g CO2/(g‧min) vis-`a-vis 0.014 g CO2/(g‧min) 
for  the  former.  This  was  due  to  the  presence  of  several  species  such 
aluminum  oxide,  ferric  oxide,  calcium  oxide  and  other  metal  oxides 
present  in  the  diatomite  which  served  as  a  dopant  and  increased  the 
reaction  rate.  In  an  important  study,  K2CO3-modified  Li4SiO4  was 
evaluated for methane reforming in the presence of Ni/γ-Al2O3 catalyst 
in a bench scale fixed bed reactor [280]. A high purity hydrogen yield of 
◦
more than 95 % was realized at a temperature range of 500 - 550 
C. It is 
◦
C 
worth emphasizing that this temperature range is around 100 to 150 
lower than that of Ca based sorbents. Also, moderate particle sizes (20 to 
40  mesh)  were  found  advantageous  for  the  process  as  these  sizes 
diminished  the  resistance  to  diffusion.  Furthermore,  the  presence  of 
steam increased the sorbent regeneration rate with negligible impact on 
the bi-functional material. In another assessment, Zhao and co-authors 
[268]  evaluated  H2  production  in  the  presence  of  Li4SiO4.  A  remark-
able enhancement in H2  yield was noted above 500 
C which reached 
15.85 mmol/g from 5.73 mmol/g without Li4SiO4 employing sawdust as 
feedstock. The increased rate can be explained by the carbonation re-
action  which  in  turn  strengthened  WGS  coupled  with  increased  tar 
cracking that culminated in a rise in H2 yield. 

◦

Lithium zirconate or Li2ZrO3 is another popular lithium based alkali 
ceramic sorbent. It has tremendous capture capacity of around 28 wt.% 
coupled  with  good  resistance  to  volume  change  while  undergoing 
carbonation/de-carbonation [281]. CO2 capture by Li2ZrO3 is depicted 
in Eq. (16). Few investigations demonstrated that Li2ZrO3 has the lowest 
CO2  capture  rate  as  compared  to  Na2ZrO3  and  Li4SiO4  [281,  282]. 
Carbon dioxide capture rates of all three commonly employed sorbents 
were assessed in a series of experiments. It was deemed that Na2ZrO3 
was the best sorbent followed by Li4SiO4 and Li2ZrO3 with 0.023, 0.010 
and 0.0003971 g CO2/(g‧min) as the respective sorption rates [283]. A 
slight raise in H2  yield from 5.73 mmol/g (SD) to 8.87 mmol/g in the 
presence  of  Li2ZrO3  was  observed  in  a  recent  assessment  [268].  The 
authors  attributed  this  enhancement  to  the  presence  of  Li  more  as  a 
catalyst  and  less  as  a  sorbent.  A  summary  of  values  of  CO2  sorption 
versus  time  for  alkali  ceramic  sorbents  together  with  their  respective 
preparation routes and operating conditions, as found in literature, is 
listed in Table 12. 

Like other sorbents, temperature plays a vital role in the CO2 capture 
kinetics of Li2ZrO3. Yi and co-authors [298] assessed sorption kinetics 
◦
for a temperature range of 450 to 600 
C employing Li2ZrO3 synthesized 
via co-precipitation. An improvement in sorption from 0.015 to 0.044 g 
◦
CO2/(g‧min) was reported going from 450 to 550 
C. However, a drop in 
◦
the capture rate to 0.039 g CO2/(g‧min) was noted at 600 
C. Wang and 
co-authors  [297]  examined  the  efficacy  of  CO2  capture  by  solid  state 
derived Li2ZrO3  at 15 % CO2  for two different temperatures (450 and 
C). They observed a faster kinetics (0.004316 g CO2/(g‧min)) at 
525 
525 
C compared to 450 

C (0.001504 g CO2/(g‧min)). 

◦

◦

◦

Some assessments have been carried out to explore the impact of the 
sorbent  synthesis  method  on  the  performance  of  CO2  capture.  In  an 
interesting study conducted by Nair and co-authors [296], three types of 
Li2ZrO3  differing  in  their  synthesis  pathway  were  evaluated  under  a 
non-isothermal  operating  environment  with  pure  CO2.  The  sorption 
behavior  of  solid  state  derived  Li2ZrO3  was  the  best  with  0.0058  g 
CO2/(g‧min)  followed  by  the  sol-gel  derived  sorbent  with  0.0028  g 
CO2/(g‧min)  and  with  the  lowest  capture  rate  demonstrated  by  the 
commercial  grade  sorbent  (0.00016  g  CO2/(g‧min)).  The  influence  of 
doping  was  also  examined  by  Khokhani  and  co-authors  [301].  They 
synthesized Li2ZrO3 employing a sodium dopant and tested the kinetics 
◦
under pure CO2  conditions at 650 
C. A considerable increase in CO2 
sorption  rate  was  observed  at  0.018  g  CO2/(g‧min)  for  the  Na-doped 
sorbent as compared to the pure sorbent (0.002 g CO2/(g‧min)). 

On  the  basis  of  diverse  studies  conducted  in  different  domains  to 
evaluate ACB sorbents, it can be deduced that sodium zirconate is most 
promising vis-`a-vis industrial applications. It is on account of its ability 
to  adsorb  CO2  at  elevated  temperatures  coupled  with  its  favorable 
capture rate. More importantly, it retains its stability during multiple 

cycles  of  carbonation/de-carbonation.  These  characteristics  reflect  its 
potential despite having a low theoretical CO2  capacity being equal to 
23.8 %. Till now, no industrial/pilot plant has been set up employing 
Na2ZrO3  as  sorbent.  Numerous  lab-scale  investigations  reflect  its  po-
tential for in-situ CO2 capture with an increase in hydrogen concentra-
tion in the product gas using diverse feedstocks such as CH4 and C2H5OH 
[202, 221]. 

4.4. Layered double hydroxide (LDH) sorbents 

, Fe2+

, Zn2+

Ax/n
, etc.), M2+

is a divalent cation (Mg2+

(OH)2]x+
3+
2+
Mx
, Cr3+
, Fe3+

is a non-framework charge-compensating anion such as CO3
, etc. [302]. 

Hydrotalcite-like  compounds,  popularly  called  as  layered  double 
hydroxides are also employed as carbon dioxide sorbents. It is on ac-
count of ample availability of sorption sites coupled with a large surface 
area.  A  basic  structure  of  an  LDH  is  reflected  in  Fig.  10.  LDH  is  a 
fabricated  material  in  2D  space  with  the  general  composition 
n(cid:0) •mH2O  where  M3+
[M1-x
is  a  trivalent  cation 
(Al3+
, etc.) 
and An(cid:0)
2(cid:0)
, 
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
Cl
, OH
The  sorption  attributes  of  LDHs  as  a  function  of  composition  and 
doping were assessed in many investigations. Yong and co-authors [302] 
reported a higher sorption efficacy for LDHs with carbonate anions as 
compared to hydroxide anions which was due to a larger gap between 
the  layers  in  the  former  category  of  LDHs.  The  sorption  efficacy  was 
positively influenced by a low amount of H2O. Three cardinal parame-
ters having the most significant impact on the sorption performance of 
LDH are layer charge density, volume of pores and gaps between the 
layers. The impact of diverse anions on the CO2 capture kinetics of LDHs 
has  also  been  explored  by  Hutson  and  co-authors  [303].  The  lowest 
kinetics were found in ClO4(cid:0)
with the 
and Fe(CN)6
best  sorption  kinetics  by  CO3
.  The  authors  observed  [Mg0.75Al0.25 
(OH)2](CO3)0.125  having the highest rate of CO2  capture as 0.00104 g 
CO2/(g‧min). Van Selow and co-authors [304] carried out experimental 
work for sorption enhanced WGS in the presence of a Fe-Cr high tem-
perature shift catalyst and K promoted LDH in a fixed bed reactor. Actual 
breakthrough  of  CO2  was  observed  13  min  post  feeding  however,  a 
negligible amount of CO2 was reported after 7 min which was explained 
by carbonate dissociation generating CO2 stemming from the tempera-
ture rise induced by exothermic reactions. The breakthrough capacity 
was  1.35  mmol/g,  whereas  the  total  capacity  was  10  mmol/g.  A  po-
tential of cent percent conversion of CO was demonstrated coupled with 
almost  completely  pure  H2  downstream  for  some  time  before  it  was 
contaminated  by  CO2  at  breakthrough.  Importantly,  the  measured 
temperature did not drop after CO2 breakthrough clearly reflecting the 
continuation of WGS post breakthrough. 

followed by Cl
2(cid:0)

4(cid:0)

(cid:0)

In  a  significant  study,  Li  and  co-authors  [305]  prepared  K2CO3 
modified  LDH  (stearate  pillared)  from  commercial  LDH.  The  pillared 
stearate significantly increased the thickness of the interstitial volume in 
between two layers from 0.28 nm for commercial LDH to a more spatial 
3.4 nm for the modified LDH, as reflected in the diffraction peaks in the 
powder  X-ray  diffraction  pattern.  The  authors  realized  a  171.8  %  in-
crease  in  sorption  capacity  (82.9  wt.%)  with  200  %  enhancement  in 
sorption rate (0.0095 g CO2/(g‧min)). In another study [306] employing 
K2CO3 modified LDH with carbonate anion (K-Mg3Al-CO3 LDH), an in-
◦
crease in CO2 sorption vis-`a-vis rising temperature (from 300 to 400 
C) 
was noted. However, for the same operational conditions, an opposite 
trend  was  observed  with  K2CO3  doped  n-caprylate  (CH3(CH2)6COO
) 
(cid:0)
LDH  and  K2CO3  doped  stearate  (CH3(CH2)16COO
)  LDH.  Broda  and 
co-authors [217] synthesized LDH using a co-precipitation method. A 
bi-functional material was produced where Ni and Ca were embedded in 
the LDH matrix comprising of Al and Mg. Hydrogen production and CO2 
sorption  were  examined  for  SorE  steam  methane  reforming.  High 
hydrogen generation of 99 vol.% (dry basis) along with good thermal 
cyclic stability were achieved on account of a high sorbent’s surface area 
of 54 m2/g coupled with adequate dispersal of Ca and Ni in the LDH 
matrix. The purity of the obtained H2 was higher than in a process which 

(cid:0)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100822V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

employed a blend of limestone and Ni-SiO2. 

Glycerol was also explored as a feedstock for hydrogen production in 
the  presence of Co-Ni  LDH with calcined dolomite prepared  from co- 
precipitation synthesis [138]. The operating variables such as temper-
ature,  steam-to-feedstock  ratio  and  composition  of  the  bi-functional 
material were varied from 500 to 650 
C, 3 to 9 and 25 % Co with 15 
% Ni/LDH and 30 % Co with 10 % Ni/LDH, respectively. A very high H2 
◦
purity of 99 % was realized at T > 575 
C and steam-to-feedstock ratio of 
9. High purity H2 stemmed from enhanced WGS and reforming reactions 
coupled with inhibition of non-catalytic interactions. On the other hand, 
H2 generation was reduced at lower values of temperatures (< 550 
C) 
and  steam-to-feedstock  ratios  (< 3)  due  to  decreased  reforming  re-
actions with increased affinity toward pyrolysis. 

◦

◦

In  an  interesting  study,  Qin  and  co-authors  [307]  performed  a 
detailed  investigation  on  the  impact  of  carbon  chain  length  of  the 
intercalated carboxylic anions on the efficacy of CO2 sorption of Mg-Al 
LDH. It was concluded that there was a marginal influence on sorption 
efficacy  when  the  number  of  carbon  atoms  was  less  than  10.  On  the 
contrary,  carbon  dioxide  sorption  capacity  constantly  enhanced  with 
rising  carbon  number  if  the  latter  was  more  than  10.  Moreover,  the 
addition of LiNO3\NaNO3\KNO3  as dopants improved CO2  capture ca-
(cid:0) 3g CO2/(g‧min). The 
pacity by 844.1% with a sorption rate of 3.73 × 10
values of carbon dioxide capture versus time for different LDHs as re-
ported  in  the  literature,  along  with  their  synthesis  methods  and 
respective temperatures are listed in Table 13. 

Few  research  works  were  carried  out  using  multi  walled  carbon 
nanotubes  (MCN)  as  a  support  to  LDH.  In  a  cutting-edge  research 

Table 12 
Values of carbon dioxide capture versus time for alkali ceramic based sorbents.  

investigation, Garcia-Gallaste and co-authors [310] assessed the effect 
of deploying MCN in LDH on CO2 capture efficacy. The addition of MCN 
resulted in an enhancement in textural characteristics (change in BET 
surface area to 180 m2/g from 64 m2/g) of LDH which culminated in a 
rise of 80 % of the CO2 capture capacity. Furthermore, the observed rate 
of CO2 sorption in the first five minutes was equal to 0.00252 g CO2/(g‧ 
min). It should be noted that MCN deployment also impacted the cyclic 
sorption-regeneration  stability  of  LDH.  The  cyclic  stability  was 
enhanced when the MCN content was less than 40%, however, stability 
dropped  with  increasing  MCN  content.  Bhatta  and  co-authors  [309] 
used four different specimens namely, Mg-Al LDH, Mg-Al LDH modified 
by K2CO3, Mg-Al LDH with MCN support and Mg-Al LDH modified by 
K2CO3  (and supported by MCN). A considerable enhancement in sorp-
tion kinetics was realized with the usage of MCN. The best CO2 sorption 
◦
rate was shown by the latter sorbent at 0.1 bar and 300 
C and was equal 
to 0.00563 g CO2/(g‧min). De Marco and co-authors [308] tested the 
stability of LDH doped with K2CO3 and supported by a blend of MCN and 
graphene  oxide  (GrO).  Surprisingly,  96  %  of  CO2  capture  capacity 
remained versus 50 % capacity for LDH without support, after 20 cycles 
of sorption-regeneration. 

For  pre-combustion  carbon capture  with enhanced  H2  production, 
four commonly employed solid sorbents namely, CB, MB, ACB and LDH 
were  thoroughly  discussed  vis-`a-vis  efficacy  and  stability  to  develop 
some insights into the SorE process and to compare the advantages and 
limitations.  More  importantly,  the  comparison  of  sorbent  materials 
allowed to assess the challenges to be solved which would pave the path 
for future research. The sorption rate of a sorbent is a function of diverse 

Authors 

Ji and co-authors [130] 
Jo and co-authors [264] 
Ooi and co-authors [284] 
Zhao and co-authors [285] 
Radfarnia and co-authors [286] 
Zhao and co-authors [287] 
Lopez and co-authors [283] 
Barraza and co-authors [260] 
Castillo and co-authors [288] 
Bamiduro and co-authors [113] 
Alcerreca and co-authors [263] 
Kato and co-authors [282] 
Hu and co-authors [274] 
Xinwei and co-authors [289] 
Quinn and co-authors [278] 
Rodriguez and co-authors [290] 
Zhang and co-authors [131] 
Seggiani and co-authors [275] 
Romero and co-authors [291] 
Venegas and co-authors [277] 
Shan and co-authors [279] 
Wang and co-authors [292] 
Zhang and co-authors [273] 
Lope and co-authors [293] 
Wang and co-authors [294] 
Chen and co-authors [295] 
Chen and co-authors [295] 
Nair and co-authors [296] 
118 
Nair and co-authors [296] 
Nair and co-authors [296] 
Wang and co-authors [297] 
Wang and co-authors [297] 
Yi and co-authors [298] 
Ochoa and co-authors [299] 
Ochoa and co-authors [300] 
Yi and co-authors [298] 
Khokhani and co-authors [301] 
Khokhani and co-authors [301] 

Sorbent 

Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Na2ZrO3 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li4SiO4 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 
Li2ZrO3 

◦
Temperature (

C) 

Capture rate (g CO2/g/min) 

Preparation route 

CO2 concentration (%) 

500 
550 
550 
575 
575 
575 
600 
600 
600 
700 
700 
500 
550 
550 
550 
560 
575 
580 
600 
600 
620 
625 
625 
650 
680 
700 
700 
450 
450 
450 
450 
450 
525 
550 
575 
575 
600 
650 
650 

0.145x 
0.032w 
0.023w 
0.175 
0.151 
0.171 
0.038w 
0.158 
0.033 
0.020w 
0.192 
0.046w 
0.021w 
0.027w 
0.070y 
0.012w 
0.012 
0.938 
0.022w 
1.139w 
0.035 
0.089 
0.012w 
0.170 
0.057w 
0.046w 
0.061w 
0.00016 
0.015w 
0.0028 
0.0058 
0.001504 
0.004316 
0.044w 
0.093 
0.108 
0.039w 
0.002z 
0.018z 

Soft chemistry 
Sol-gel 
Liquid phase preparation 
Solid state 
Soft chemistry (with surfactant) 
Soft chemistry 
Solid state 
Solid state 
Soft chemistry 
Soft chemistry + spray drying 
Solid state 
Solid state 
Soft chemistry 
Sol-gel (improved by Na) 
Commercial grade (Toshiba) 
Solid state 
Commercial grade (Alta Aesar) 
Solid state (improved by K) 
Wet blending 
Sol-gel 
Solid state 
Solid state (gluconic acid with C coating) 
Solid state 
Impregnated suspension 
Sol-gel with C coating 
Solid state 
Solid state (improved by Ca) 
Commercial grade (Aldrich) 
Co-precipitation 
Sol-gel 
Solid state 
Solid state 
Solid state 
Co-precipitation 
Soft chemistry 
Soft chemistry 
Co-precipitation 
Soft chemistry 
Soft chemistry 

50 
100 
100 
100 
100 
50 
100 
80 
80 
15 
100 
20 
15 
15 
14.7 
100 
100 
4 
100 
100 
50 
100 
100 
80 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
15 
15 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 

w denotes the average capture rate over first five minutes, x reflects the best instantaneous capture rate, y shows the value under wet operating conditions (2.6 % water) 
and z denotes the average capture rate over first ten minutes. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100823V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

parameters such as operational variables, chemical characteristics and 
morphology of the material, mass transfer mechanisms, etc. The cardinal 
reason for swift sorption of carbon dioxide by CB is a higher effective 
sorption temperature as compared to other sorbents. These sorbents are 
governed  by  the  diffusion  limited  regime  resulting  from  the  develop-
ment of a calcium carbonate layer. Enhancement in kinetics because of 
improved mass transfer and suppression of sintering can be achieved by 
incorporating inert spacers in CB sorbents. Despite having an exemplary 
theoretical capture efficiency, MB sorbents are  not very  influential in 
real life scenarios as their capture rate is restricted by slow diffusion in 
the  magnesium  carbonate  layer.  This  limitation  can  be  dealt  with  by 
enhancing the mass transfer by inducing molten carriers in the form of 
nitrates or carbonates of alkalis. As far as ACB sorbents are concerned 
which follow the nucleation and nuclei growth mechanism, addition of 
foreign material can enhance the CO2 sorption by facilitating more seeds 
and  decreasing  the  sorption  energy  barrier.  LDH  sorbents  with  large 
surface area and ample sites have come up as a promising alternative for 
CO2 sorption. Anion exchange can be employed to increase the spacing 
between layers or MCN can be used to enlarge the area of LDHs which in 
turn can enhance the rate of carbon dioxide sorption. 

5. Process development and demonstration units 

Sorption  enhanced gasification  respectively  reforming  is, as  previ-
ously  described,  comprehensively  investigated  in  laboratory  scale 
equipment  to  screen  material,  determine  optimal  process  conditions, 
study carbonization/calcination cycles, etc. [314, 315]. For this, typi-
cally electrically heated fixed, moving or fluidized bed reactors are in 
operation.  Additionally,  numerous  groups  work  on  modelling  of  the 
reactions  (see  Section  3).  However,  experiments  under  real  process 
conditions  and  process  design  is  inevitable.  This  section  presents  ex-
periments in process development and demonstration scale units under 
real  world  process  conditions.  All  systems  are  composed  of  inter-
connected moving or fluidized bed reactors to allow heat integration, 
sorbent regeneration and high throughputs. The most promising systems 
are designed as so called dual fluidized bed (DFB) systems. The majority 
of  the  “classical”  DFB  gasification  systems  without  significant  CO2 
transport  from  the  gasification  section  to  the  combustion  section  are 
comprised  of  a  bubbling  fluidized  bed  (BFB)  gasification  zone  and  a 
circulating  fluidized  bed  (CFB)  combustion  zone  [316]  or  vice  versa 
such as the so called “MILENA gasifier” developed by ECN (now part of 
TNO) [317]. All those systems have in common that the bed material 
acts as heat carrier to provide the heat for the endothermic gasification 
reactions by circulation from the combustion to the gasification section. 
Unless specifically stated, the gasification section is fluidized with steam 
and the combustion section with air. For the SorE reforming, the bed 
material has to selectively and efficiently sorb/desorb CO2  to allow a 
CO2  transport from the gasification to the combustion unit. Therefore, 
gasification  (sorption/carbonation)  temperatures  below  700
C  and 
combustion (desorption/calcination) temperatures above 800
C have to 
be adjusted. This leads to the necessity to apply measures to increase the 
residence  time  in  the  2  main  reactor  sections.  Finally,  reducing  the 
◦
gasification temperature to temperatures lower than 800
C usually in-
creases the tar loads in the producer gas exponentially. However, due to 
catalytic effects of the CaO even lower tar loads have been measured 
[318]. 

◦

◦

5.1. Process development units 

At TU Wien, Austria a 100 kW (fuel input) pilot plant for dual flu-
idized bed gasification was adapted to allow SEG, the adaption refer to 
the heat exchanger and expansion in the gasification section to reduce 
the temperature and increase the residence time. Furthermore, the bed 
material was changed from olivine to calcite and the particle size was 
increased from 0.4 - 0.6 mm to >1 mm. The process development unit 
(PDU) consisted of a bubbling fluidized bed gasification section and a 

Fig. 10. Structural framework for LDH [302]  

circulating fluidized bed combustion section interconnected with loop 
seals. Hydrogen volume fractions up to 75 vol.% and tar levels between 
0.5 and 3.5 g/Nm3 could be achieved [319, 320]. The major limitation 
of the described process design is the selection of the bed material size. 
For BFB reactors, typical particle sizes of 1 mm and larger apply and for 
CFB reactors, particles are typically smaller than 0.2 mm. The typical 
selection of approximately 0.5 mm as applied for the majority of DFB 
systems  is  therefore  a  compromise.  This  leads  to  major  attrition  phe-
nomena of the bed material, especially for CB materials, and abrasion in 
the riser and cyclone after the riser. Therefore, an advanced system has 
been developed at TU Wien using the combination of 2 CFB reactors. The 
gasification section consists of a BFB section at the bottom and a CFB 
section at the top with constrictions to create sections with increased 
particle residence time [321]. The overall flow in the gasification zone is 
a counter-current flow of bed material and gasification gas. This leads to 
an excellent gas-solid contact and high sorption rates of CO2. Due to the 
combination of 2 CFB reactors, the bed material size can be significantly 
reduced, leading to significantly reduced attrition and therefore loss of 
bed material. Experiments with a 100 kW PDU with this novel design 
demonstrated a proof of concept [242]. As expected, the gas quality is 
significantly  improved  and  all  performance  indicators  (chemical  effi-
ciency, hydrogen content, etc.) have been increased. 

Based  on  the  classical  DFB  principle  as  described  above,  several 
research plants were built and are in operation. At the Center for Solar 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100824V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Table 13 
Values of carbon dioxide capture w.r.t. time for different LDHs.  

Authors 

◦
Temperature (

C) 

Capture rate (g CO2/(g‧‧min)) 

Preparation route 

CO2 concentration (%) 

Qin and co-authors [307] 
Li and co-authors [305] 
De-Marco and co-authors [308] 
Bhatta and co-authors 
De-Marco and co-authors [308] 
Bhatta and co-authors [309] 
Bhatta and co-authors [309] 
Bhatta and co-authors [309] 
De-Marco and co-authors [308] 
Li and co-authors [306] 
Garcia and co-authors [310] 
Hutson and co-authors [303] 
De-Marco and co-authors [308] 
Jiang and co-authors [311] 
Chang and co-authors [312] 
Kou and co-authors [313] 
Chang and co-authors [312] 

200 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
400 
600 
600 
600 

0.00373 
0.00950 
0.00298 
0.00416 
0.00140 
0.00380 
0.00482 
0.00563 
0.00183 
0.00903 
0.00251 
0.00104 
0.00110 
0.00324 
0.0463 
0.199 
0.0507 

Co-precipitation 
Wet-chemical + wet impregnation (improved by K2CO3) 
Co-precipitation (GrO/MCN) 
Co-precipitation (improved by K2CO3) 
Co-precipitation (MCN) 
Co-precipitation 
Co-precipitation (MCN) 
Co-precipitation (MCN) + improved by K2CO3 
Co-precipitation (GrO) 
Wet chemical + wet impregnation (improved by K2CO3) 
Co-precipitation (MCN) 
Wet chemical 
Co-precipitation 
Co-precipitation (from slag leachate) 
Co-precipitation 
Low saturated co-precipitation 
Co-precipitation 

100 
100 
20 
10 
20 
10 
10 
10 
20 
100 
20 
100 
20 
100 
30 
50 
10  

Energy and Hydrogen Research Baden-Württemberg, Germany (ZSW) a 
20 kW (fuel input, biomass) DFB plant is in operation to test different 
bed materials as well as fuels. During operation, bed material samples 
can be taken to analyze the grade of calcination/carbonation [195, 322]. 
At the Institute of Combustion and Power Plant Technology, University 
of Stuttgart, Germany 2 PDUs are in operation – a 20 kW and a 200 kW 
plant for SorE gasification [323]. Both systems use a CFB combustor and 
a BFB gasifier. The smaller plant is operated in semi-continuous mode 
and the larger one in continuous mode. Both provide high quality pro-
ducer (syn) gas with hydrogen contents above 70 vol.%. Wood is the 
main  feedstock  for  the  experiments  although  wastes  including  solid 
recovered fuels have been investigated as well. A plant based on sorption 
enhanced methane reforming has been constructed by Gas Technology 
Institute (GTI) in California, USA of 71 kWth [324]. This system utilized 
a bubbling fluidized bed reactor for the reformer (that simultaneously 
acted as a carbonator), and an entrained flow reactor for the calciner 
while producing H2 with more than 80% purity. In this process, an 18% 
reduction in CO2  emissions with respect to the conventional SMR pro-
cess have been reported. All described plants above use natural minerals 
(limestone,  calcite,  etc.)  as  bed  material.  A  special  applied  process 
configuration  is  the  so-called  Oxy-SEG  (oxygen  sorption  enhanced 
gasification)  where  the  combustor  is  operated  with  oxygen-flue  gas 
mixtures to gain almost pure CO2 in the off-gas of the combustor. 

Sorption enhanced water gas shift in combination with a water gas 
shift step has been demonstrated in a pilot scale unit at the Swerea Mefos 
facilities in Luleå, Sweden that provide a H2-rich as well as a CO2-rich 
product out of a blast furnace gas from the steel industry. 800 Nm3/h 
were fed first into a WGS reactor followed by a SEWGS unit designed as 
multi-column  reactive  hot  PSA  (pressure  swing  adsorption)  process 
[325, 326]. Sorption enhanced reforming of biogas has been established 
in  a pilot scale  unit at  the Institute for Energy Technology in Kjeller, 
Norway.  A dual  fluidized bed  reformer  was installed  with a  reformer 
◦
operated  at  600
C,  a  riser  to  lift  up  the  particles  and  a  regenerator 
◦
C.  The  reformer  and  the  regenerator  were  set-up  as 
operated  at  850
bubbling fluidized beds with bed diameters of 0.25 resp. 0.45 m, bed 
height of 0.59 resp. 0.73 m and expanded freeboards [327]. 

5.2. Demonstration scale units 

No demonstration scale units designed for the purpose of SER/SEG 
have been reported. However, 3 test runs with wood chips were reported 
within the scientific literature with “classical” DFB gasifiers which were 
adapted to demonstrate the in-situ CO2 capture during gasification. The 
first test was done with a thermally pretreated calcite in the 8 MW fuel 
input plant in Güssing, Austria [328]. Prior to applying the bed material, 
◦
it  was  calcined in  a rotary  kiln at  temperatures up  to  1100
C.  It was 

difficult to maintain the needed, reduced bed material circulation and 
therefore to control the temperatures in the gasification and combustion 
section. Nevertheless, increased  hydrogen contents of about 52 vol.% 
could  be  achieved.  During  the  test  run  in  the  gasification  plant  in 
Oberwart, Austria [329] even higher hydrogen contents of about 57 vol. 
% could be achieved with untreated calcite as bed material. However, 
the tests in Oberwart gained higher CO2 and lower CO contents than the 
tests in Güssing (19 vol.% vs 12.5 vol.% CO2, 11.8 vol.% vs. 16.8 vol.% 
CO) which might be due to catalytic activity of the used bed material 
[65]. The third industrial scale test run has been reported for a 6 MW 
fuel input gasifier of the company Bauer, Germany [330]. The plant used 
bark and tree-top wood. The plant itself is a combination of 2 BFB re-
actors with a riser for the bed material transport. The gasification section 
is fluidized with producer gas which is transported into the riser. The 
calcined bed material from the combustion BFB is transported by the 
producer gas. Limestone with a mean particle size of 1.4 mm was used as 
bed material. Continuous operation over several days could be accom-
plished with a significant CO2 and CO (due to homogeneous water gas 
shift reaction) removal from the producer gas. In a latest development, 
Cranfield University in collaboration with GTI, Doosan Babcock and the 
UK  Department  for  Business,  Energy  and  Industrial  Strategy’s  Energy 
Innovation program are currently constructing a 1.5 MWth  plant con-
sisting of a bubbling fluidized bed reactor as reformer and an entrained 
flow  reactor  as  calciner  to  further  develop  the  process  (with  system 
configuration similar to 71 kWth plant in California, USA), aiming to lift 
the TRL up to 6. With regard to the commercialized processes with a CCS 
unit at the tail end operating at 24 bar absolute, the constructed system 
is  speculated  to  achieve  a  ~20%  reduction  in  the  levelized  cost  of 
hydrogen with a H2 purity of around 96% [331]. 

6. Economics of Sorption enhanced process 

Techno-economic evaluation is a tool to assess any new (or potential) 
technology vis-`a-vis economic concerns and therefore, it takes into ac-
count several parameters such as expenses, profits, risks, uncertainties, 
time lines, etc. Basically, it is a subclass of economic philosophy popu-
larly  called  as  economic  paradigm  which  was  conceived  by  Chris 
Freeman and later developed by Carlota Perez [332, 333]. The funda-
mental principles behind this economic thought is that any technology 
has  a  significant  impact  on  the  economic  development  and  conse-
quently, technology and economy evolve simultaneously. 

Despite the significance of economic evaluations of any technology, 
there  are  very  few  techno-economic  studies  related  to  CO2  sorption 
enhanced processes for H2 generation in pre-combustion CO2 capture. A 
recent  investigation  by  Buiteveld  [334]  assessed  a  novel  technology 
(known  as  pyro-gasification  combined  with  sorption-shift)  for  high 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100825V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

purity  H2  and char production with regard to economics. The system 
comprised of a pyrolyzer followed by a catalytic steam reformer which 
in  turn  was  connected  to  a  sorption-shift  reactor  (in  the  presence  of 
CaO). A cash-flow strategy was employed to develop an economic model 
which demonstrated that H2 and biochar levelized generation costs were 
functions  of  feedstock  and  investment  cost.  Thorough  analysis  for  a 
period  of  15  years  (3  years  of  construction  followed  by  12  years  of 
operation) revealed around 24 % and 76 % costs were respectively on 
account  of  initial  CAPEX  and  OPEX.  When  extra  contingency  was 
considered,  contribution  to  CAPEX  rose  to  32  %  and  inputs  to  OPEX 
dropped to 68 %. The levelized costs of H2 and biochar were realized as € 
4.01/kg and €  668/ton when the size of the heat exchanger was opti-
mized vis-`a-vis financial efficiency. In addition, a thermal efficiency of 
71.4 % was reported. The deduced costs for the proposed technology 
were considerably less than electrolysis for high purity H2 generation. 
A similar trend in identifying the major drivers was found in another 
study by Schweitzer and co-authors [335] where a bubbling fluidized 
bed with limestone as bed material was considered to compute the cost 
of  H2  production  via  SorE  reforming. Investment  expenses, especially 
the gasifier costs, were reported to contribute maximally in CAPEX costs 
which in turn raises the net cost of H2 generation. Plant availability was 
the other factor responsible in affecting the net H2 production cost which 
ultimately  was  calculated  to  be  €  6  to  10/kg  which  was  deemed 
reasonable in light of the H2 production costs via electrolysis. However, 
this computed cost is far greater than the conventional H2  generation 
using steam reforming of natural gas which generates H2 at around € 2 to 
3/kg. Integration of conventional steam CH4  reforming for H2  genera-
tion with some other technology such as fuel cells has the potential to 
improve  the  economics  of  the  process.  It  is  interesting  to  assess  the 
economic  viability  of  coupling  CO2  sorption  assisted  steam  CH4 
reforming (in a series of eight fixed beds) with solid oxide fuel cells to 
generate  electricity  [336].  The  levelized  cost  of  H2  without  fuel  cell 
coupling was reported to be € 1.6 per kg of H2 whereas the cost of carbon 
dioxide avoided was € 29.9 per ton CO2. When a fuel cell was integrated, 
€ 0.078 per kWh was deduced as the levelized electricity cost with € 36.9 
per  ton  CO2  as  the  cost  of  CO2  avoided.  The  cardinal  factors  which 
adversely impacted the economics were the specific cost of fuel and the 
expenses of the solid oxide fuel cell respectively, for both the scenarios. 
More  importantly,  the  proposed  integrated  system  generated  higher 
daily revenue as compared to natural gas fed power plants provided the 
difference between carbon tax and carbon dioxide cost (transport and 
storage) was more than € 6 per ton CO2. 

Heffels  and  co-authors  [337]  assessed  the  feasibility  in  terms  of 
economic and environmental impact of CO2-sorption assisted gasifica-
tion employing two-coupled fluidized beds in a German scenario. They 
examined  three  different  configurations  for  the  application  of  the 
generated syngas namely, combined heat and power generation, SNG 
generation  and  hydrogen  generation.  They  revealed  investments  and 
biomass costs as the cardinal inputs contributing respectively 37 to 40 % 
and 27 to 32 % to net generation cost. The study concluded unfavorable 
economics for all the three scenarios unless very supportive site-specific 
conditions  were  met.  However,  the  SorE  process  was  found  to  be 
environmental-friendly for being less carbon intensive, reducing around 
800 g CO2-eq/kWh electricity. 

Very few published studies on the economic feasibility of in-situ SorE 
processes for superior hydrogen production have been published which 
makes it difficult to reach definitive conclusions as far as finances are 
concerned.  Huge  uncertainties  in  diverse  factors  (feedstock,  sorbent, 
operating  cost,  etc.)  render  obstacles  to  carry  out  precise  economic 
evaluations which in turn would hinder the upscaling process. Economic 
efficacy of any plant depends upon these factors and a small variation in 
them  may  lead  to  significant  influences  on  the  economics.  From  the 
studies conducted so far, it can be deduced that the costs of H2 generated 
from  the  SorE  process  is  on  par  with  the  electrolysis  derived  H2  and 
much higher than the conventional steam reforming process. Supportive 
policies coupled with government subsidies can make the prices more 

competitive.  Consequently,  more  comprehensive  economic 
in-
vestigations are needed to gain deeper insights into the commercial scale 
feasibility. 

7. Challenges and potential research directions 

The WGS reaction forms the fundamental basis of SorE reforming. 
The  evolution  of  WGS  research  in  more  than  a  century  suggests  two 
reaction  regimes which  are the  redox mechanism and the association 
mechanism which are widely discussed in a large number of publica-
tions.  Some  other  less  commonly  used  mechanisms  have  also  been 
explored  in  few  investigations.  However,  the  most  significant  mecha-
nism which governs WGS is unidentified hitherto. In addition, the role 
and  applicability  of  each  catalyst  vis-`a-vis  reaction  mechanism  is  un-
known  and  therefore  necessitates  deep  insights  via  theoretical  and 
experimental assessments. In conventional systems, the captured CO2 is 
usually stored in geological sites. Research needs to be carried out to use 
CO2  instead, for instance as a chemical feedstock are as a nutrient in 
biomass production, e.g. in growing microalgae which in turn can be 
used feedstock for biofuel synthesis. A cartoon depicting the potential 
research directions in SorE is shown in Fig. 11. 

In in-situ CO2 capture, the choice of an optimal sorbent/bi-functional 
material  is  a  major  challenge.  High  reactivity  and  CO2  selectivity 
coupled with resistance to physical degeneration, high cyclic stability 
and  resistance  to  catalytic  deactivation  at  elevated  de-carbonation 
temperatures  are  some  of  the  strict  requirements  amongst  others.  In 
SorE reforming with in-situ CO2 capture, bi-functional material which is 
a blend of a sorbent and a catalyst should be employed. Therefore, any 
particle of this material is comprised of catalytic and sorption sites close 
together  which  results  in  a  quicker  CO2  capture  when  compared  to 
separate  deployment  of  sorbent  and  catalyst.  The  catalyst  may  have 
influence on the surface area, grain size, pore volume and/or exposure of 
the  sorbent  which  in  turn  may  affect  the  CO2  capture  kinetics.  The 
impact of catalytic species present in bi-functional material on the sor-
bent  species  has  not  been  investigated  hitherto.  Research  works  are 
needed on this topic to develop deeper insights into the efficacy of bi- 
functional materials. 

Calcium oxide based sorbents have been most widely explored and 
used  in  SorE  processes  at  different  scales  due  to  reasons  previously 
mentioned. A drop in sorbent efficacy with increasing number of cycles 
on account of sintering necessitates regular replenishment of fresh sor-
bent  to  maintain  the  capture  capacity.  This  not  only  increases  the 
complexity of operation but also elevates the process costs. This prompts 
to explore more dopants and support materials to synthesize stable Ca- 
based  bi-functional  materials.  Recently,  many  alkali  ceramic  based 
sorbents have been evaluated in SorE processes. As far as Li based sor-
bents are concerned, a large fraction of studies has been conducted vis- 
`a-vis improvement in CO2  capture capacity although very little works 
have  been  performed  to  improve  cyclic  stability  and  regeneration  at-
tributes.  In  addition,  pathways  have  to  be  developed  to  increase  me-
chanical strength and thermal stability w.r.t. sorption/desorption and 
volume shrinkage due to variation in operational temperature. 

A large fraction of SorE processes has been assessed using TGA to 
explore the kinetics on account of high precision coupled with a highly 
reproducible  procedure.  Albeit,  the  sorbent  efficacy  cannot  be 
completely assessed by TGA for real world scenarios. Bed utilization and 
heat as well as mass transfer impacts cannot be examined fully in TGA. 
Packed beds or fluidized beds are required to connect the lab-scale in-
vestigations to practical applications. This necessitates more number of 
reactor  based  investigations  to  deeply  study  the  sorbent  efficacy.  In 
addition, more studies on de-carbonation of sorbents are needed. There 
are a large number of studies towards sorption (or carbonation) how-
ever, there is a lack of understanding de-carbonation which as a matter 
of fact is equally crucial in SorE processes both in parallel packed beds 
and dual circulating fluidized beds. Moreover, theoretical investigations 
employing  CFD  to  examine  the  hydrodynamics  and  geometry  of  a 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100826V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

reactor  favorable  to  enhance  H2  generation  with  in-situ  CO2  capture 
which in turn would assist in designing an optimal reactor system, are 
recommended. Furthermore, the characteristics of H2  and the sorbent 
material  hamper  the  ability  to  swiftly  upscale  SorE  steam  methane 
reforming, thus the deployment of the ANN approach would be a crucial 
aid  in  order  to  assist  scale  up.  However,  there  is  only  one  published 
study hitherto. 

Until now, methane and high grade biomass have been employed as 
feedstocks for H2 production with in-situ CO2 sorption. To evaluate the 
viability  of  the  SorE  pathway  for  waste-to-energy  and  recycling  con-
cepts, it is very essential to examine fuel flexibility. Consequently, more 
attention  should  be  given  to  low  grade  fuels  such  as  different  MSWs 
especially plastic rich MSW, different sludges, etc. Nevertheless, utili-
zation of such materials can be a source of deactivation of active sites 
due to impurities such as S, K, Na, etc. In addition, co-gasification of a 
dry fuel with a wet fuel in the presence of a bi-functional material should 
be assessed as potential pathway to utilize difficult waste streams (RDF, 
sewage sludge, plastic-rich waste) to generate H2. More importantly, a 
thorough  economic  assessment  deploying  diverse  sorbents  should  be 
performed  to  determine  their  feasibility  at  different  scales  and  possi-
bility of commercial scale production. 

The storage and utilization of produced hydrogen in a safe and eco- 
friendly manner to obtain carbon neutrality is also a major challenge. 
Usually onsite H2 generation is a solution for this issue for example, in 
ammonia  plants.  Employing  hydrogen  to  generate  power  safely  (via 
combustion, fuel cells, etc.) has been explored for about three decades. 
Hydrogen can be combusted to generate power however it is associated 
with NOx production on account of elevated combustion temperatures. 
This issue can be overcome by blending the hydrogen gas with N2  or 
steam but again there is a flip side of increased costs. A potential solution 
can be premixing H2 with air but it can cause safety problems (risk for 
flashback)  on  account  of  low  ignition  temperature  and  high  flamma-
bility. The cardinal issue with hydrogen driven fuel cells are high costs, 
requirement  of  very  high  purity  hydrogen,  safety  and  storage.  These 
challenges need to be addressed to utilize H2 in an economical manner. 

8. Conclusions and perspectives 

Many  significant  research  works  at  different  scales  reveal  the 
promising  aspects  of  CO2  sorption  enhanced  processes  to  produce 
hydrogen. Remarkable developments in in-situ CO2 sorption technology 
especially in the field of solid sorbents have made it a potentially feasible 
and useful pathway to produce high purity hydrogen in an eco-friendly 
and  economic  manner.  High  purity  H2  generation  enables  its  deploy-
ment even in applications with stringent requirements such as in fuel 
cells without the need for a purification step. 

The  importance  of  the  water  gas  shift  (WGS)  reaction  is  clearly 
realized in sorption enhanced reforming with a deep understanding of 
its thermodynamics and kinetics. WGS is favored at lower temperatures 
with raised CO conversion on account of its exothermic nature whereas 
reaction rate is improved at elevated temperatures. The cardinal issue 
with  the  former  is  a  requirement  of  a  large  reactor  which  in  turn 
adversely impacts the process economics. On the other hand, a major 
issue with the latter is poor CO conversion. A possible solution can be the 
deployment  of  an  appropriate  catalyst  which  can  aid  in  achieving  a 
trade-off. 

Various  modeling  assessments  in  the  area  of  thermodynamics,  ki-
netics,  computational  fluid  dynamics  (CFD)  and  artificial  neural  net-
works  (ANN)  have  proven  to  be  very  useful  in  developing  deeper 
insights  into  the  sorption  enhanced  process.  More  theoretical  in-
vestigations based on the CFD approach are needed specially to evaluate 
fluidized  beds  w.r.t.  diverse  adsorbents,  catalysts,  bi-functional  mate-
rials,  cyclic  deterioration,  etc.  at  different  operational  scenarios.  Ma-
chine learning approaches such as ANNs should be exploited to compute 
sorption behavior when ample data about sorption efficacy and struc-
ture is accessible. More importantly, ANN pathways are useful to swiftly 

upscale sorption enhanced processes (such as sorption enhanced steam 
methane reforming) which are otherwise difficult to upscale rapidly on 
account of the characteristics of adsorbent and H2. 

Solid sorbents play a key role in in-situ CO2  capture which in turn 
increase the H2 generation in accordance with Le Chatelier’s principle. 
Carbon  dioxide  sorption  efficiency  was  thoroughly  investigated  for 
commonly  deployed  solid  sorbents  in  pre-combustion  CO2  capture 
namely,  calcium  based  (CB),  magnesium  based  (MB),  alkali  ceramic 
based (ACB) and layered double hydroxide (LDH) sorbents. The sorption 
rate  was  found  to  be  a  function  of  heat  and  mass  transfer,  chemical 
characteristics,  morphology  of  sorbents  and  operational  variables. CB 
sorbents are the most widely researched sorbents due to their ability to 
operate  at  elevated  temperatures,  cost-effectiveness  and  availability. 
The problem of sintering can be countered by adding inert spacers to 
them.  MB  sorbents  did  not  reflect  good  capture  capacity  however, 
doping alkali nitrates or carbonates showed a significant improvement. 
Same  solution  of  doping  was  recognized  as  useful  for  ACB  sorbents 
where the addition of foreign matter improves the kinetics by decreasing 
the  energy  barrier.  Moreover,  LDH  emerged  as  highly  promising  sor-
bents because of their large surface area and ample basic sites. Further 
enhancement in CO2 capture of LDH can be done by increasing the space 
between layers through anion exchange. More explorations concerning 
novel  bi-functional/hybrid  materials  to  have  better  process  efficacy 
coupled with enhanced cyclic stability and kinetics is currently needed. 
The selection of the sorbent material is crucial whereas price, cycling 
efficiency, availability and disposal limitations play an important role 
and thus favor naturally occurring minerals. 

Energy  and  power  generation  via  fossil  fuels  are  adversely  influ-
encing the environment in all four compartments of land, water, air and 
soil. This necessitates a substitution of conventional fuels and technol-
ogies  by  eco-friendly,  economical  and  more  importantly,  sustainable 
fuels  (biomass  and  organic  wastes).  In  principle,  the  CO2  sorption- 
enhanced  route  employing  biomass  and  organic  wastes  to  generate 
high quality energy in the form of pure H2 fulfills all these requirements. 
The cardinal obstacles to implement this technology at wider scales are 
poor planning along with unproductive policies and incompetent prac-
tices.  These  hurdles  should  not  be  permitted  to  discourage  us  from 
taking  requisite  measures  to  implement  this  technology  for  H2 
production. 

There  exist  some  process  development  and  demonstration  units 
worldwide, however no commercial plant employing biomass or organic 
wastes is in operation. It is worth emphasizing that the key challenge in 
large scale implementation is the higher cost of H2  production against 
established pathways. Insightful and in-depth economic assessments are 
highly  desirable  to  help  in  upscaling.  The  cost  of  sorption  enhanced 
process derived H2  is competitive with electrolysis derived H2  but it is 
almost  2-3  times  that  of  steam  reforming  of  natural  gas  derived  H2. 
Although, the rising costs of fossil derived fuels justifies the production 
of renewable hydrogen. In addition, the impact of lessons learned from 
already  existing  plants  can  help  in  cost  reductions  for  future  plants. 
Other solution for cost cutting may include polygeneration strategies as 
explored in the BioZEG-50 kW (30 kW H2 sorption enhanced system and 
20 kWel  solid oxide fuel cell) prototype plant in the city of Lillestrøm, 
Norway. More importantly, the upcoming economic studies should take 
into account the synergistic effects of learning and economies of scale. 
The  challenges  should  be  considered  as  inspiration  to  discover 
innovative  pathways  for  high  purity  H2  generation  via  solid  sorbent 
assisted  sorption  enhanced  reforming  technology.  It  is  important  to 
analyze  and  implement  the  scale-up  of  the  existing  plants  employing 
novel technologies. It is also the duty of different governments to sup-
port  these  efforts  by  favorable  policies,  incentives  and  essential  in-
frastructures. This necessitates a joint endeavor by engineers, scientists 
and policy-makers to productively incorporate H2  infrastructure for a 
carbon-neutral and energy-abundant future. This study presents a pos-
itive case for sorption enhanced process derived hydrogen as a prom-
ising, eco-friendly and more importantly, carbon-neutral technology to 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100827V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Fig. 11. A cartoon depicting potential research directions associated with SorE process  

deal  with  the  dual  challenge  of  rising  CO2  emissions  and  the  energy 
crisis. 

Following points may be noted  

(1)  All  the  authors  have  made  substantial  contributions  as 

aforementioned.  

(2)  All the authors have given their approval of the manuscript to be 

initially submitted and any revisions thereafter. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Vineet Singh Sikarwar: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing – 
original  draft,  Visualization.  Christoph  Pfeifer:  Conceptualization, 
Writing  –  review  &  editing.  Frederik  Ronsse:  Conceptualization, 
Writing  –  review  &  editing.  Michael  Pohoˇrelý:  Conceptualization, 
Funding acquisition. Erik Meers: Conceptualization, Supervision. Ajay 
Kumar Kaviti: Resources, Investigation. Michal Jeremi´aˇs: Conceptu-
alization, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgments 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Ministry  of  Education  Youth and 
research) 
Sports  of 
[A1_FTOP_2022_001],  and  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  Czech  Re-
public [AV 21 – Efficient energy transformation and storage]. 

the  Czech  Republic 

(Specific  university 

References 

[1] Lee S-Y, Park S-J. A review on solid adsorbents for carbon dioxide capture. J Ind 

Eng Chem 2015;23:1–11. 

[2] Akkala SR, Kaviti AK, ArunKumar T, Sikarwar VS. Progress on suspended 

nanostructured engineering materials powered solar distillation-a review. Renew 
Sust Energy Rev 2021;143:110848. 

[3] Ghiat I, Al-Ansari T. A review of carbon capture and utilisation as a CO2 

abatement opportunity within the EWF nexus. J CO2 Util 2021;45:101432. 

[4] Calvin K, Edmonds J, Bond-Lamberty B, Clarke L, Kim SH, Kyle P, et al. 2.6: 

Limiting climate change to 450 ppm CO2 equivalent in the 21st century. Energy 
Econ 2009;31:S107–SS20. 

[5] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Synthesis Report titled Contribution 

of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2014 [accessed: February 2021]. 

[6] Dlugokencky E, Tans P. Trends in atmospheric carbon dioxide. National Oceanic 
& Atmospheric Administration, Earth System Research Laboratory (NOAA/ESRL; 
2018. 

[7] European Commission. A European strategy for low-emission mobility. April 

2021. https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/transport_en [accessed:]. 

[8] Navas-Anguita Z, García-Gusano D, Dufour J, Iribarren D. Prospective techno- 

economic and environmental assessment of a national hydrogen production mix 
for road transport. Appl Energy 2020;259:114121. 

[9] Boot-Handford ME, Abanades JC, Anthony EJ, Blunt MJ, Brandani S, Mac 

Dowell N, et al. Carbon capture and storage update. Energy Environ Sci 2014;7: 
130–89. 

[10] Bui M, Adjiman CS, Bardow A, Anthony EJ, Boston A, Brown S, et al. Carbon 
capture and storage (CCS): the way forward. Energy Environ Sci 2018;11: 
1062–176. 

[11] Rubin E, De Coninck H. IPCC Special report on carbon dioxide capture and 

storage, 2. UK: Cambridge University Press TNO: Cost Curves for CO2 Storage, 
Part; 2005. p. 14. 

[12] Singh G, Lee J, Karakoti A, Bahadur R, Yi J, Zhao D, et al. Emerging trends in 
porous materials for CO2 capture and conversion. Chem Soc Rev 2020;49: 
4360–404. 

[13] Wang W, Zhou M, Yuan D. Carbon dioxide capture in amorphous porous organic 

polymers. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:1334–47. 

[14] Gao W, Liang S, Wang R, Jiang Q, Zhang Y, Zheng Q, et al. Industrial carbon 

dioxide capture and utilization: state of the art and future challenges. Chem Soc 
Rev 2020;49:8584–686. 

[15] Chang X, Wang T, Gong J. CO2 photo-reduction: insights into CO2 activation and 
reaction on surfaces of photocatalysts. Energy Environ Sci 2016;9:2177–96. 
[16] Li N, Chang Z, Huang H, Feng R, He WW, Zhong M, et al. Specific K+ binding sites 
as CO2 traps in a porous MOF for enhanced CO2 selective sorption. Small 2019; 
15:1900426. 

[17] Xu M, Chen S, Seo D-K, Deng S. Evaluation and optimization of VPSA processes 
with nanostructured zeolite NaX for post-combustion CO2 capture. Chem Eng J 
2019;371:693–705. 

[18] Yan S, Zhu D, Zhang Z, Li H, Chen G, Liu B. A pilot-scale experimental study on 
CO2 capture using Zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 slurry under normal 
pressure. Appl Energy 2019;248:104–14. 

[19] Singh G, Kim IY, Lakhi KS, Srivastava P, Naidu R, Vinu A. Single step synthesis of 
activated bio-carbons with a high surface area and their excellent CO2 adsorption 
capacity. Carbon 2017;116:448–55. 

[20] Liang J, Huang Y-B, Cao R. Metal–organic frameworks and porous organic 

polymers for sustainable fixation of carbon dioxide into cyclic carbonates. Coord 
Chem Rev 2019;378:32–65. 

[21] Deng J, Liu Z, Du Z, Zou W, Zhang C. Fabrication of PEI-grafted porous polymer 

foam for CO2 capture. J Appl Poly Sci 2019;136:47844. 

[22] Abdin Z, Zafaranloo A, Rafiee A, M´erida W, Lipi´nski W, Khalilpour KR. Hydrogen 
as an energy vector. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2020;120:109620. 

[23] Dawood F, Anda M, Shafiullah GM. Hydrogen production for energy: An 

overview. Int J Hydrogen Energ 2020;45:3847–69. 

[24] Alanne K, Cao S. An overview of the concept and technology of ubiquitous 

energy. Appl Energy 2019;238:284–302. 

[25] Boudellal M. Power-to-gas: Renewable hydrogen economy for the energy 

transition. Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG; 2018. 

[26] El-Emam RS, 

¨
Ozcan H. Comprehensive review on the techno-economics of 

sustainable large-scale clean hydrogen production. J Cleaner Prod 2019;220: 
593–609. 

[27] El-Shafie M, Kambara S, Hayakawa Y. Hydrogen production technologies 

overview. J Power Energy Eng 2019;7:107. 

[28] Esswein AJ, Nocera DG. Hydrogen production by molecular photocatalysis. Chem 

Rev 2007;107:4022–47. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100828V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

[29] Jang W-J, Shim J-O, Kim H-M, Yoo S-Y, Roh H-S. A review on dry reforming of 
methane in aspect of catalytic properties. Catal Today 2019;324:15–26. 
[30] Lin R, Cheng J, Murphy JD. Unexpectedly low biohydrogen yields in co- 

fermentation of acid pretreated cassava residue and swine manure. Energy 
Convers Manage 2017;151:553–61. 

[31] Maˇsl´ani A, Hrabovský M, Kˇrenek P, Hlína M, Raman S, Sikarwar VS, et al. 

Pyrolysis of methane via thermal steam plasma for the production of hydrogen 
and carbon black. Int J Hydrogen Energ 2021;46:1605–14. 

[32] Parra D, Valverde L, Pino FJ, Patel MK. A review on the role, cost and value of 
hydrogen energy systems for deep decarbonisation. Renewable Sustainable Energ 
Rev 2019;101:279–94. 

[33] Sharma A, Arya SK. Hydrogen from algal biomass: a review of production process. 

Biotechnol Reports 2017;15:63–9. 

[34] Sikarwar VS, Hrabovský M, Van Oost G, Pohoˇrelý M, Jeremi´aˇs M. Progress in 

waste utilization via thermal plasma. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;81:100873. 
[35] Sikarwar VS, Pohoˇrelý M, Meers E, Skoblia S, Moˇsko J, Jeremi´aˇs M. Potential of 
coupling anaerobic digestion with thermochemical technologies for waste 
valorization. Fuel 2021;294:120533. 

[36] Sikarwar VS, Zhao M. Biomass Gasification. In: Abraham MA, editor. 

Encyclopedia of Sustainable Technologies. Oxford: Elsevier; 2017. p. 205–16. 

Hydrogen Energy Progress XIII. In: Proceedings of 13th World Hydrogen Energy 
Conference; 2000. 

[62] Specht M, Bandi A, Weimer T. Verfahren und Vorrichtung zur Erzeugung eines 
kohlendioxidarmen, wasserstoffreichen Gases oder eines konditionierten 
Synthesegases und Verwendung derselben. US Patent 1999;19946381(A1). 

[63] Bolhar-Nordenkampf M, Rauch R, Bosch K, Aichernig C, Hofbauer H. Biomass 
CHP plant Güssing-Using gasification for power generation: Proceeding of the 
2nd Regional. In: Conference on Energy Technology Towards a Clean 
Environment 12-14 February 2003, Phuket, Thailand; 2003. 

[64] Fercher E, Hofbauer H, Fleck T, Rauch R, Veronik G. Two years experience with 
the FICFB-gasification process. 1998. https://pivotalirm.com/files/tech/016.pdf 
[accessed: June 2021]. 

[65] Fuchs J, Schmid JC, Müller S, Hofbauer H. Dual fluidized bed gasification of 

biomass with selective carbon dioxide removal and limestone as bed material: A 
review. Renewable Sustainable Energ Rev 2019;107:212–31. 

[66] Bae YS, Snurr RQ. Development and evaluation of porous materials for carbon 
dioxide separation and capture. Angewandte Chemie Int Ed 2011;50:11586–96. 
[67] Pardakhti M, Jafari T, Tobin Z, Dutta B, Moharreri E, Shemshaki NS, et al. Trends 

in Solid Adsorbent Materials Development for CO2 Capture. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 2019;11:34533–59. 

[37] Wang Y, Yao L, Wang S, Mao D, Hu C. Low-temperature catalytic CO2 dry 

[68] Sikarwar VS, Zhao M, Clough P, Yao J, Zhong X, Memon MZ, et al. An overview of 

reforming of methane on Ni-based catalysts: a review. Fuel Process Technol 2018; 
169:199–206. 

[38] Sankir Mehmet, Eds Nurdan Demirci Sankir. Hydrogen Production Technologies. 

The Unites States. John Wiley & Sons; 2017. 

[39] Mostafaeipour A, Khayyami M, Sedaghat A, Mohammadi K, Shamshirband S, 

Sehati M-A, et al. Evaluating the wind energy potential for hydrogen production: 
a case study. Int. J Hydrogen Energ 2016;41:6200–10. 

[40] Qyyum MA, Dickson R, Ali Shah SF, Niaz H, Khan A, Liu JJ, et al. Availability, 

versatility, and viability of feedstocks for hydrogen production: Product space 
perspective. Renewable Sustainable Energ Rev 2021;145:110843. 

[41] Mathiesen BV, Lund H, Connolly D, Wenzel H, Østergaard PA, M¨oller B, et al. 
Smart Energy Systems for coherent 100% renewable energy and transport 
solutions. Appl Energy 2015;145:139–54. 

[42] Collodi G, Azzaro G, Ferrari N, Santos S. Techno-economic evaluation of 

deploying CCS in SMR based merchant H2 production with NG as feedstock and 
fuel. Energy Procedia 2017;114:2690–712. 

[43] Dodds PE, McDowall W. A review of hydrogen production technologies for energy 
system models, 6. UCL Energy Institute, University College London; 2012. 
p. 1–22. 

[44] US Department of Energy. Hydrogen: a clean, flexible energy carrier. 2017. https: 

//www.energy.gov/eere/articles/hydrogen-clean-flexible-energy-carrier 
[accessed: May 2021]. 

[45] Keipi T, Tolvanen H, Konttinen J. Economic analysis of hydrogen production by 
methane thermal decomposition: Comparison to competing technologies. Energy 
Convers Manage 2018;159:264–73. 

[46] National Energy Technology Laboratory. Technology Readiness Assessment 

Report - A Chekpoint along a Challenging Journey. Albany, DOE/NETL; 2015. 
2014. 

[47] Sikarwar VS, Zhao M, Fennell PS, Shah N, Anthony EJ. Progress in biofuel 
production from gasification. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;61:189–248. 
[48] Song H, Ozkan US. Economic analysis of hydrogen production through a bio- 

ethanol steam reforming process: Sensitivity analyses and cost estimations. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:127–34. 

[49] Shokrollahi Yancheshmeh M, Radfarnia HR, Iliuta MC. High temperature CO2 
sorbents and their application for hydrogen production by sorption enhanced 
steam reforming process. Chem Eng J 2016;283:420–44. 

[50] Go KS, Son SR, Kim SD, Kang KS, Park CS. Hydrogen production from two-step 
steam methane reforming in a fluidized bed reactor. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2009; 
34:1301–9. 

[51] Sircar S, Anand M, Carvill B. Sorption enhanced reaction process (SERP) for 

production of hydrogen. Golden, COUnited States: National Renewable Energy 
Lab; 1995. 

[52] Tessie Du Motay, Marechal M. Improved mode of producing hydrogen gas. US 

Patent US70704 A, 1867. 

[53] Tessi´e du Motay. Process and apparatus for producing hydrogen gas. US Patent 

US229338 A , 1879. 

[54] Tessi´e du Motay C, Mar´echal C. Industrial preparation of hydrogen. Bull Mensuel 

de La Soci´et´e Chimique de Paris 1868;9:334. 

[55] Gorin E. Manufacture of hydrogen. US Patent US2781248 A, 1957. 
[56] Gorin E. Gasification of carbonaceous solid fuels [Two reaction zones]. US Patent 

US 2654662, 1953. 

[57] Curran GP, Fink CE, Gorin E, Gorin E. CO2 acceptor gasification process: Studies 
of acceptor properties. Fuel Gasification, ACS Publications; 1967. p. 141–65. 
editor. 

[58] Lin S, Harada M, Suzuki Y, Hatano H. Process analysis for hydrogen production 
by reaction integrated novel gasification (HyPr-RING). Energy Convers Manage 
2005;46:869–80. 

[59] Lin S-Y, Suzuki Y, Hatano H, Harada M. Developing an innovative method, HyPr- 
RING, to produce hydrogen from hydrocarbons. Energy Convers Manage 2002; 
43:1283–90. 

[60] Balasubramanian B, Ortiz AL, Kaytakoglu S, Harrison D. Hydrogen from methane 

in a single-step process. Chem Eng Sci 1999;54:3543–52. 

[61] Specht M, Bandi A, Baumgart F, Moellenstedt T, Textor O, Weimer T. Enhanced 
reforming reaction for hydrogen production from carbonaceous feedstock. 

advances in biomass gasification. Energy Environ Sci 2016;9:2939–77. 
[69] He L, Berntsen H, Chen D. Approaching sustainable H2 production: sorption 

enhanced steam reforming of ethanol. J Phys Chem A 2010;114:3834–44. 
[70] Wu Y-J, Li P, Yu J-G, Cunha AF, Rodrigues AE. Progress on sorption-enhanced 

reaction process for hydrogen production. Rev Chem Eng 2016;32:271–303. 
[71] Ji G, Yang H, Memon MZ, Gao Y, Qu B, Fu W, et al. Recent advances on kinetics of 
carbon dioxide capture using solid sorbents at elevated temperatures. Appl 
Energy 2020;267:114874. 

[72] Ju Y, Lee C-H. Dynamic modeling of a dual fluidized-bed system with the 
circulation of dry sorbent for CO2 capture. Appl Energy 2019;241:640–51. 
[73] Ju Y, Oh H-T, Lee C-H. Sensitivity analysis of CO2 capture process in cyclic 

fluidized-bed with regeneration of solid sorbent. Chem Eng J 2020;379:122291. 
[74] Lee D-W, Lee MS, Lee JY, Kim S, Eom H-J, Moon DJ, et al. The review of Cr-free 

Fe-based catalysts for high-temperature water-gas shift reactions. Catal Today 
2013;210:2–9. 

[75] Mendes D, Mendes A, Madeira L, Iulianelli A, Sousa J, Basile A. The water-gas 
shift reaction: from conventional catalytic systems to Pd-based membrane 
reactors—a review. Asia-Pacific J Chem Eng 2010;5:111–37. 

[76] Chen WH, Lin MR, Yu A, Du SW, Leu TS. Hydrogen production from steam 

reforming of coke oven gas and its utility for indirect reduction of iron oxides in 
blast furnace. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37:11748–58. 

[77] Nogami H, Chu M, Yagi J-i. Multi-dimensional transient mathematical simulator 

of blast furnace process based on multi-fluid and kinetic theories. Comp Chem 
Eng 2005;29:2438–48. 

[78] Van der Laan GP, Beenackers AA. Intrinsic kinetics of the gas–solid 

Fischer–Tropsch and water gas shift reactions over a precipitated iron catalyst. 
Appl Catal A 2000;193:39–53. 

[79] Lu X, Wang T. Water–gas shift modeling in coal gasification in an entrained-flow 

gasifier–Part 2: Gasification application. Fuel 2013;108:620–8. 

[80] Umeki K, Yamamoto K, Namioka T, Yoshikawa K. High temperature steam-only 

gasification of woody biomass. Appl Energy 2010;87:791–8. 

[81] Chein R, Chen Y-C, Chung J. Numerical study of methanol–steam reforming and 
methanol–air catalytic combustion in annulus reactors for hydrogen production. 
Appl Energy 2013;102:1022–34. 

[82] Peppley BA, Amphlett JC, Kearns LM, Mann RF. Methanol–steam reforming on 
Cu/ZnO/Al2O3. Part 1: the reaction network. Appl Catal A 1999;179:21–9. 
[83] Deluga G, Salge J, Schmidt L, Verykios X. Renewable hydrogen from ethanol by 

autothermal reforming. Science 2004;303:993–7. 

[84] Pasel J, Samsun RC, Tschauder A, Peters R, Stolten D. A novel reactor type for 
autothermal reforming of diesel fuel and kerosene. Appl Energy 2015;150: 
176–84. 

[85] Agrell J, Boutonnet M, Fierro JL. Production of hydrogen from methanol over 

binary Cu/ZnO catalysts: Part II. Catalytic activity and reaction pathways. Appl 
Catal A 2003;253:213–23. 

[86] Chen WH, Shen CT, Lin BJ, Liu SC. Hydrogen production from methanol partial 
oxidation over Pt/Al2O3 catalyst with low Pt content. Energy 2015;88:399–407. 

[87] Graaf G, Sijtsema P, Stamhuis E, Joosten G. Chemical equilibria in methanol 

synthesis. Chem Eng Sci 1986;41:2883–90. 

[88] Huang MH, Lee HM, Liang KC, Tzeng CC, Chen WH. An experimental study on 
single-step dimethyl ether (DME) synthesis from hydrogen and carbon monoxide 
under various catalysts. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2015;40:13583–93. 

[89] Araki K, Fujiwara H, Sugimoto K, Oshima Y, Koda S. Kinetics of water-gas shift 

reaction in supercritical water. J Chem Eng Japan 2004;37:443–8. 

[90] Ma SH, Choi DH, Chun SM, Yang SS, Hong YC. Hydrogen production by the 

water–gas shift reaction using an atmospheric steam plasma torch system with a 
reverse vortex reactor. Energy Fuel 2014;28:7721–5. 

[91] Millard L, Bowker M. Photocatalytic water-gas shift reaction at ambient 

temperature. J Photochem Photobiol A 2002;148:91–5. 

[92] Chen WH, Jheng JG, Yu A. Hydrogen generation from a catalytic water gas shift 
reaction under microwave irradiation. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2008;33:4789–97. 
[93] Chen WH, Cheng YC, Hung CI. Transient reaction and exergy analysis of catalytic 
partial oxidation of methane in a Swiss-roll reactor for hydrogen production. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2012;37:6608–19. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100829V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

[94] Chen WH, Syu YJ. Hydrogen production from water gas shift reaction in a high 
gravity (Higee) environment using a rotating packed bed. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2010;35:10179–89. 

[95] Chein R, Chen YC, Chung J. Parametric study of membrane reactors for hydrogen 
production via high-temperature water gas shift reaction. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2013;38:2292–305. 

[96] Chen WH, Lin MR, Jiang TL, Chen MH. Modeling and simulation of hydrogen 

generation from high-temperature and low-temperature water gas shift reactions. 
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2008;33:6644–56. 

[97] Seo YS, Seo DJ, Seo YT, Yoon WL. Investigation of the characteristics of a compact 
steam reformer integrated with a water-gas shift reactor. J Power Sour 2006;161: 
1208–16. 

[98] Chen WH, Chiu TW, Hung CI. Hysteresis loops of methane catalytic partial 

oxidation for hydrogen production under the effects of varied Reynolds number 
and Damk¨ohler number. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:6291–302. 
[99] Moe JM. Design of water-gas shift reactors. Chem Eng Prog 1962;58:33–6. 

[127] Bhatia SK, Perlmutter D. A random pore model for fluid-solid reactions: I. 

Isothermal, kinetic control. AIChE J 1980;26:379–86. 

[128] Patnaik P. Handbook of inorganic chemicals. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2003. 
[129] Dennis J, Pacciani R. The rate and extent of uptake of CO2 by a synthetic, CaO- 

containing sorbent. Chem Eng Sci 2009;64:2147–57. 

[130] Ji G, Memon MZ, Zhuo H, Zhao M. Experimental study on CO2 capture 

mechanisms using Na2ZrO3 sorbents synthesized by soft chemistry method. 
Chem Eng J 2017;313:646–54. 

[131] Qi Z, Daying H, Yang L, Qian Y, Zibin Z. Analysis of CO2 sorption/desorption 

kinetic behaviors and reaction mechanisms on Li4SiO4. AIChE J 2013;59:901–11. 

[132] Rout KR, Solsvik J, Nayak AK, Jakobsen HA. A numerical study of 

multicomponent mass diffusion and convection in porous pellets for the sorption- 
enhanced steam methane reforming and desorption processes. Chem Eng Sci 
2011;66:4111–26. 

[133] Xun W. Hydrogen Production by Coal Gasification Coupled with in Situ CO2 

Capture. Energy Power Eng 2012:2012. 

[100] Chen WH, Chen CY. Water gas shift reaction for hydrogen production and carbon 

[134] Solsvik J, Jakobsen HA. A numerical study of a two property catalyst/sorbent 

dioxide capture: A review. Appl Energy 2020;258:114078. 

[101] Batista MS, Assaf EM, Assaf JM, Ticianelli EA. Double bed reactor for the 

simultaneous steam reforming of ethanol and water gas shift reactions. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2006;31:1204–9. 

[102] Damma D, Boningari T, Smirniotis PG. High-temperature water-gas shift over Fe/ 
Ce/Co spinel catalysts: Study of the promotional effect of Ce and Co. Mol Catal 
2018;451:20–32. 

[103] Park D, Duffy G, Edwards J, Roberts D, Ilyushechkin A, Morpeth L, et al. Kinetics 

of high-temperature water-gas shift reaction over two iron-based commercial 
catalysts using simulated coal-derived syngases. Chem Eng J 2009;146:148–54. 

[104] Hossain MM, Ahmed S. Cu-based mixed metal oxide catalysts for WGSR: 

Reduction kinetics and catalytic activity. Canadian J Chem Eng 2013;91:1450–8. 

[105] Mendes D, Vn Chibante, Al Mendes, Madeira LM. Determination of the low- 

temperature water(cid:0) gas shift reaction kinetics using a Cu-based catalyst. Ind Eng 
Chem Res 2010;49:11269–79. 

[106] Cornaglia CA, Munera JF, Lombardo EA. Kinetic study of a novel active and stable 

catalyst for the water gas shift reaction. Ind Eng Chem Res 2011;50:4381–9. 

[107] Lei Y, Cant NW, Trimm DL. The origin of rhodium promotion of Fe3O4–Cr2O3 

catalysts for the high-temperature water–gas shift reaction. J Catal 2006;239: 
227–36. 

[108] Byron Smith RJ, Loganathan M, Shantha MS. A review of the water gas shift 

reaction kinetics. Int J Chem React Eng 2010;8. 

[109] Sikarwar VS, Reichert A, Pohorely M, Meers E, Ferreira NL, Jeremias M. 

Equilibrium modeling of thermal plasma assisted co-valorization of difficult waste 
streams for syngas production. Sustain Energy Fuel 2021;5:4650–60. 

[110] Vyazovkin S, Burnham AK, Criado JM, P´erez-Maqueda LA, Popescu C, 

pellet design for the sorption-enhanced steam–methane reforming process: 
Modeling complexity and parameter sensitivity study. Chem Eng J 2011;178: 
407–22. 

[135] Gao W, Vasiliades MA, Damaskinos CM, Zhao M, Fan W, Wang Q, et al. Molten 

Salt-Promoted MgO Adsorbents for CO2 Capture: Transient Kinetic Studies. 
Environ Sci Technol 2021;55:4513–21. 

[136] Li M. Equilibrium calculation of gaseous reactive systems with simultaneous 

species adsorption. Ind Eng Chem Res 2008;47:9263–71. 

[137] Iruretagoyena D, Hellgardt K, Chadwick D. Towards autothermal hydrogen 

production by sorption-enhanced water gas shift and methanol reforming: A 
thermodynamic analysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:4211–22. 

[138] He L, Parra JMS, Blekkan EA, Chen D. Towards efficient hydrogen production 

from glycerol by sorption enhanced steam reforming. Energy Environ Sci 2010;3: 
1046–56. 

[139] Wu YJ, Li P, Yu JG, Cunha AF, Rodrigues AE. Sorption-enhanced steam reforming 
of ethanol for continuous high-purity hydrogen production: 2D adsorptive reactor 
dynamics and process design. Chem Eng Sci 2014;118:83–93. 

[140] Li M. Thermodynamic analysis of adsorption enhanced reforming of ethanol. Int J 

Hydrogen Energy 2009;34:9362–72. 

[141] Collins-Martinez V, Bretado ME, Zaragoza MM, Guti´errez JS, Ortiz AL. Absorption 
enhanced reforming of light alcohols (methanol and ethanol) for the production 
of hydrogen: thermodynamic modeling. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38: 
12539–53. 

[142] Chen H, Ding Y, Cong NT, Dou B, Dupont V, Ghadiri M, et al. A comparative study 

on hydrogen production from steam-glycerol reforming: thermodynamics and 
experimental. Renew Energy 2011;36:779–88. 

Sbirrazzuoli N. ICTAC Kinetics Committee recommendations for performing 
kinetic computations on thermal analysis data. Thermochimica Acta 2011;520: 
1–19. 

[143] Li Y, Wang W, Chen B, Cao Y. Thermodynamic analysis of hydrogen production 
via glycerol steam reforming with CO2 adsorption. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010; 
35:7768–77. 

[111] Zagorowsky G, Prikhod’ko G, Ogenko V, Koval’chuk G. Investigation of kinetics 
of solid-phase synthesis of lithium orthosilicate. J Thermal Anal Calori 1999;55: 
699–705. 

[144] Wess R, Nores-Pondal F, Laborde M, Giunta P. Single stage H2 production, 

purification and heat supply by means of sorption-enhanced steam reforming of 
glycerol. A thermodynamic analysis. Chem Eng Sci 2015;134:86–95. 

[112] Zhao M, Fan H, Yan F, Song Y, He X, Memon MZ, et al. Kinetic analysis for cyclic 
CO 2 capture using lithium orthosilicate sorbents derived from different silicon 
precursors. Dalton Trans 2018;47:9038–50. 

[145] Chen H, Zhang T, Dou B, Dupont V, Williams P, Ghadiri M, et al. Thermodynamic 
analyses of adsorption-enhanced steam reforming of glycerol for hydrogen 
production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2009;34:7208–22. 

[113] Bamiduro F, Ji G, Brown AP, Dupont VA, Zhao M, Milne SJ. Spray-Dried Sodium 

[146] Alvarado FD, Gracia F. Oxidative steam reforming of glycerol for hydrogen 

Zirconate: A Rapid Absorption Powder for CO2 Capture with Enhanced Cyclic 
Stability. ChemSusChem 2017;10:2059–67. 

production: thermodynamic analysis including different carbon deposits 
representation and CO2 adsorption. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37:14820–30. 

[114] Hu Y, Guo Y, Sun J, Li H, Liu W. Progress in MgO sorbents for cyclic CO 2 capture: 

a comprehensive review. J Mater Chem A 2019;7:20103–20. 

[115] Khawam A, Flanagan DR. Solid-state kinetic models: basics and mathematical 

fundamentals. J Phys Chem B 2006;110:17315–28. 

[116] Raganati F, Alfe M, Gargiulo V, Chirone R, Ammendola P. Kinetic study and 

breakthrough analysis of the hybrid physical/chemical CO2 adsorption/ 
desorption behavior of a magnetite-based sorbent. Chem Eng J 2019;372:526–35. 
[117] Zhang M, Xue W, Su B, Bao Z, Wen G, Xing H, et al. Conversion of glycerol into 

syngas by rotating DC arc plasma. Energy 2017;123:1–8. 

[147] Wang X, Wang N, Wang L. Hydrogen production by sorption enhanced steam 
reforming of propane: a thermodynamic investigation. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2011;36:466–72. 

[148] Barelli L, Bidini G, Gallorini F, Servili S. Hydrogen production through sorption- 
enhanced steam methane reforming and membrane technology: a review. Energy 
2008;33:554–70. 

[149] Ochoa-Fern´andez E, Haugen G, Zhao T, Rønning M, Aartun I, Børresen B, et al. 
Process design simulation of H 2 production by sorption enhanced steam methane 
reforming: evaluation of potential CO2 acceptors. Green Chem 2007;9:654–62. 

[118] Haider MB, Hussain Z, Kumar R. CO2 absorption and kinetic study in ionic liquid 

[150] Da Silva AL, Müller IL. Towards H2-rich gas production from unmixed steam 

amine blends. J Mole Liquid 2016;224:1025–31. 

[119] S´anchez LG, Meindersma G, De Haan A. Kinetics of absorption of CO2 in amino- 

functionalized ionic liquids. Chem Eng J 2011;166:1104–15. 

[120] Khawam A, Flanagan DR. Basics and applications of solid-state kinetics: a 

pharmaceutical perspective. J Pharma Sci 2006;95:472–98. 

[121] Dedman A, Owen A. Calcium cyanamide synthesis. Part 4. – the reaction CaO +

CO2 = CaCo 3. Trans Faraday Soc 1962;58:2027–35. 

[122] Nitsch W. Über die Druckabh¨angigkeit der CaCO3-Bildung aus dem Oxyd. 

Zeitschrift für Elektrochemie, Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische 
Chemie 1962;66:703–8. 

[123] Xie H, Yu Q, Lu H, Ji L, Chen H, Qin Q. Selection and preparation of CO2 sorbent 

for sorption-enhanced steam reforming process of raw coke oven gas. Environ 
Prog Sustain Energy 2019;38:89–97. 

[124] Zhang Y, Gong X, Peng Y, Leng E, Li Y, Li X. Experimental and Kinetic Study on 

CaO-based CO2 Sorbent Pellets with Different Binders. Energy Fuel 2020;34: 
2028–34. 

[125] Barker R. The reversibility of the reaction CaCO3 ⇄ CaO + CO2. J Appl Chem 

Biotechnol 1973;23:733–42. 

[126] Bhatia S, Perlmutter D. A random pore model for fluid-solid reactions: II. 

Diffusion and transport effects. AIChE J 1981;27:247–54. 

reforming of methane: Thermodynamic modeling. J Power Sour 2011;196: 
8568–82. 

[151] Mahishi MR, Sadrameli MS, Vijayaraghavan S, Goswami DY. Hydrogen 

production from ethanol: a thermodynamic analysis of a novel sorbent enhanced 
gasification process. ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and 
Exposition 2005:455–63. 

[152] Wu YJ, Diaz Alvarado F, Santos JC, Gracia F, Cunha AF, Rodrigues AE. Sorption- 

Enhanced Steam Reforming of Ethanol: Thermodynamic Comparison of CO2 
Sorbents. Chem Eng Technol 2012;35:847–58. 

[153] Comas J, Laborde M, Amadeo N. Thermodynamic analysis of hydrogen 

production from ethanol using CaO as a CO2 sorbent. J Power Sour 2004;138: 
61–7. 

[154] Li B, Wei L, Yang H, Wang X, Chen H. The enhancing mechanism of calcium oxide 

on water gas shift reaction for hydrogen production. Energy 2014;68:248–54. 

[155] Lu H, Lu Y, Rostam-Abadi M. CO2 sorbents for a sorption-enhanced water–gas- 
shift process in IGCC plants: A thermodynamic analysis and process simulation 
study. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38:6663–72. 

[156] Wang W, Cao Y. Hydrogen production via sorption enhanced steam reforming of 

butanol: Thermodynamic analysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2011;36:2887–95. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100830V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

[157] Da Silva AL, Müller IL. Hydrogen production by sorption enhanced steam 

[184] Helei L, Tantikhajorngosol P, Chan C, Tontiwachwuthikul P. Technology 

reforming of oxygenated hydrocarbons (ethanol, glycerol, n-butanol and 
methanol): thermodynamic modelling. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2011;36:2057–75. 
[158] Wang J, Huang L, Yang R, Zhang Z, Wu J, Gao Y, et al. Recent advances in solid 
sorbents for CO2 capture and new development trends. Energy Environ Sci 2014; 
7:3478–518. 

[159] Rohland B, Plzak V. The PEMFC-integrated CO oxidation—a novel method of 

simplifying the fuel cell plant. J Power Sour 1999;84:183–6. 

development and applications of artificial intelligence for post-combustion 
carbon dioxide capture: Critical literature review and perspectives. Int J 
Greenhouse Gas Control 2021;108:103307. 

[185] Li F, Zhang J, Oko E, Wang M. Modelling of a post-combustion CO2 capture 

process using neural networks. Fuel 2015;151:156–63. 

[186] Li Z, Ding Z, Wang M, Oko E. Model-free adaptive control for MEA-based post- 

combustion carbon capture processes. Fuel 2018;224:637–43. 

[160] Wang X, Li M, Li S, Wang H, Wang S, Ma X. Hydrogen production by glycerol 
steam reforming with/without calcium oxide sorbent: A comparative study of 
thermodynamic and experimental work. Fuel Process Technol 2010;91:1812–8. 

[187] Rahimi M, Moosavi SM, Smit B, Hatton TA. Toward smart carbon capture with 

machine learning. Cell Rep Phys Sci 2021;2:100396. 

[188] Sip¨ocz N, Tobiesen FA, Assadi M. The use of Artificial Neural Network models for 

[161] Anderson DM, Kottke PA, Fedorov AG. Thermodynamic analysis of hydrogen 
production via sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming in a new class of 
variable volume batch-membrane reactor. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39: 
17985–97. 

CO2 capture plants. Appl Energy 2011;88:2368–76. 

[189] Vo ND, Oh DH, Kang J-H, Oh M, Lee C-H. Dynamic-model-based artificial neural 
network for H2 recovery and CO2 capture from hydrogen tail gas. Appl Energy 
2020;273:115263. 

[162] Reijers HTJ, Valster-Schiermeier SE, Cobden PD, van den Brink RW. Hydrotalcite 
as CO2 sorbent for sorption-enhanced steam reforming of methane. Ind Eng Chem 
Res 2006;45:2522–30. 

[190] Wu X, Shen J, Wang M, Lee KY. Intelligent predictive control of large-scale 
solvent-based CO2 capture plant using artificial neural network and particle 
swarm optimization. Energy 2020;196:117070. 

[163] Iordanidis A, Kechagiopoulos P, Voutetakis S, Lemonidou A, Vasalos I. 

[191] Nasr N, Hafez H, El Naggar MH, Nakhla G. Application of artificial neural 

Autothermal sorption-enhanced steam reforming of bio-oil/biogas mixture and 
energy generation by fuel cells: concept analysis and process simulation. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2006;31:1058–65. 

[164] Dupont V, Twigg MV, Rollinson AN, Jones JM. Thermodynamics of hydrogen 

production from urea by steam reforming with and without in situ carbon dioxide 
sorption. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38:10260–9. 

[165] Yang S, Xu X, Tian W. Simulation for hydrogen production from sorption 

enhanced coke oven gas steam reforming based on chemical looping combustion. 
J Chem Ind Eng China 2007;58:2363. 

[166] SG Adiya ZI, Dupont V, Mahmud T. Effect of hydrocarbon fractions, N2 and CO2 

in feed gas on hydrogen production using sorption enhanced steam reforming: 
Thermodynamic analysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:21704–18. 

[167] Sikarwar VS, Peela NR, Vuppaladadiyam AK, Ferreira NL, Maˇsl´ani A, Tomar R, 
Pohorely M, Meers E, Jeremi´aˇs M. Thermal plasma gasification of organic waste 
stream coupled with CO2-sorption enhanced reforming employing different 
sorbents for enhanced hydrogen production. RSC Adv 2022;12:6122–32. 

networks for modeling of biohydrogen production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013; 
38:3189–95. 

[192] Sodeifian G, Niazi Z. Prediction of CO2 absorption by nanofluids using artificial 
neural network modeling. Int Comm Heat Mass Transfe 2021;123:105193. 
[193] Yan Y, Mattisson T, Moldenhauer P, Anthony EJ, Clough PT. Applying machine 

learning algorithms in estimating the performance of heterogeneous, multi- 
component materials as oxygen carriers for chemical-looping processes. Chem 
Eng J 2020;387:124072. 

[194] Nkulikiyinka P, Yan Y, Güleç F, Manovic V, Clough PT. Prediction of sorption 

enhanced steam methane reforming products from machine learning based soft- 
sensor models. Energy AI 2020;2:100037. 

[195] Brellochs J, Schnepf J, Marquard-M¨ollenstedt T, Steiert S, Sichler P, Dürrbeck M, 

Specht M. DGMK Meeting Report. 2014. 

[196] Florin NH, Harris AT. Enhanced hydrogen production from biomass with in situ 

carbon dioxide capture using calcium oxide sorbents. Chem Eng Sci 2008;63: 
287–316. 

[168] Li B, Fabrice Magoua Mbeugang C, Liu D, Zhang S, Wang S, Wang Q, et al. 

[197] Harrison Douglas P. Sorption-enhanced hydrogen production: a review. Ind Eng 

Simulation of sorption enhanced staged gasification of biomass for hydrogen 
production in the presence of calcium oxide. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45: 
26855–64. 

[169] Soria MA, Barros D, Madeira LM. Hydrogen production through steam reforming 
of bio-oils derived from biomass pyrolysis: Thermodynamic analysis including in 
situ CO2 and/or H2 separation. Fuel 2019;244:184–95. 

[170] Xie H, Yu Q, Lu H, Zhang Y, Zhang J, Qin Q. Thermodynamic study for hydrogen 
production from bio-oil via sorption-enhanced steam reforming: Comparison with 
conventional steam reforming. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:28718–31. 
[171] Abbas SZ, Dupont V, Mahmud T. Modelling of H2 production via sorption 

enhanced steam methane reforming at reduced pressures for small scale 
applications. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:1505–13. 

[172] Sikarwar VS, Ji G, Zhao M, Wang Y. Equilibrium Modeling of Sorption-Enhanced 

Cogasification of Sewage Sludge and Wood for Hydrogen-Rich Gas Production 
with in Situ Carbon Dioxide Capture. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:5993–6001. 

[173] Aloisi I, Di Giuliano A, Di Carlo A, Foscolo PU, Courson C, Gallucci K. Sorption 
enhanced catalytic Steam Methane Reforming: Experimental data and simulations 
describing the behaviour of bi-functional particles. Chem Eng J 2017;314:570–82. 
[174] Di Carlo A, Aloisi I, Jand N, Stendardo S, Foscolo PU. Sorption enhanced steam 
methane reforming on catalyst-sorbent bifunctional particles: A CFD fluidized bed 
reactor model. Chem Eng Sci 2017;173:428–42. 

[175] Di Carlo A, Bocci E, Zuccari F, Dell’Era A. Numerical Investigation of Sorption 
Enhanced Steam Methane Reforming Process Using Computational Fluid 
Dynamics Eulerian-Eulerian Code. Ind Eng Chem Res 2010;49:1561–76. 
[176] Herce C, Cort´es C, Stendardo S. Computationally efficient CFD model for scale-up 
of bubbling fluidized bed reactors applied to sorption-enhanced steam methane 
reforming. Fuel Process Technol 2017;167:747–61. 

[177] Herce C, Cort´es C, Stendardo S. Numerical simulation of a bubbling fluidized bed 
reactor for sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming under industrially 
relevant conditions: Effect of sorbent (dolomite and CaO-Ca12Al14O33) and 
operational parameters. Fuel Process Technol 2019;186:137–48. 

[178] Lindborg H, Jakobsen HA. Sorption Enhanced Steam Methane Reforming Process 

Performance and Bubbling Fluidized Bed Reactor Design Analysis by Use of a 
Two-Fluid Model. Ind Eng Chem Res 2009;48:1332–42. 

[179] Phuakpunk K, Chalermsinsuwan B, Putivisutisak S, Assabumrungrat S. Factorial 

design analysis of parameters for the sorption-enhanced steam reforming of 
ethanol in a circulating fluidized bed riser using CFD. RSC Adv 2018;8:24209–30. 
[180] Wang S, Xu S, Liu S, Hu B. Prediction of sorption-enhanced reforming process on 
hydrotalcite sorbent in a fluidized bed reactor. Energy Conver Manage 2019;180: 
924–30. 

Chem Res 2008;47:6486–501. 

[198] Stanmore BR, Gilot P. Calcination and carbonation of limestone during thermal 
cycling for CO2 sequestration. Fuel Process Technol 2005;86:1707–43. 
[199] Dou B, Song Y, Liu Y, Feng C. High temperature CO2 capture using calcium oxide 

sorbent in a fixed-bed reactor. J Hazard Mater 2010;183:759–65. 

[200] Kim J-N, Ko CH, Yi KB. Sorption enhanced hydrogen production using one-body 
CaO–Ca12Al14O33–Ni composite as catalytic absorbent. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2013;38:6072–8. 

[201] Dou B, Zhang H, Song Y, Zhao L, Jiang B, He M, et al. Hydrogen production from 

the thermochemical conversion of biomass: issues and challenges. Sustainable 
Energy Fuels 2019;3:314–42. 

[202] Olivas DA, Guerrero MB, Bretado ME, da Silva Paula MM, Guti´errez JS, 

Velderrain VG, et al. Enhanced ethanol steam reforming by CO2 absorption using 
CaO, CaO* MgO or Na2ZrO3. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39:16595–607. 

[203] Dou B, Wang C, Chen H, Song Y, Xie B. Continuous sorption-enhanced steam 

reforming of glycerol to high-purity hydrogen production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2013;38:11902–9. 

[204] Martínez I, Kulakova V, Grasa G, Murillo R. Experimental investigation on 

sorption enhanced gasification (SEG) of biomass in a fluidized bed reactor for 
producing a tailored syngas. Fuel 2020;259:116252. 

[205] Yan X, Li Y, Sun C, Wang Z. Hydrogen production from absorption-enhanced 

steam gasification of Enteromorpha prolifera and its char using Ce-doped CaO 
material. Fuel 2021;287:119554. 

[206] Acharya B, Dutta A, Basu P. Gasification of biomass in a circulating fluidized bed 

based calcium looping gasifier for hydrogen-enriched gas production: 
experimental studies. Biofuels 2017;8:643–50. 

[207] Hosseini Abbandanak M, Taghizadeh M, Fallah N. High-purity hydrogen 

production by sorption-enhanced methanol steam reforming over a combination 
of Cu–Zn–CeO2–ZrO2/MCM-41 catalyst and (Li–Na–K) NO3•MgO adsorbent. Int 
J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:7099–112. 

[208] Li H, Tian H, Chen S, Sun Z, Liu T, Liu R, et al. Sorption enhanced steam reforming 

of methanol for high-purity hydrogen production over Cu-MgO/Al2O3 
bifunctional catalysts. Appl Catal B 2020;276:119052. 

[209] Johnsen K, Ryu H, Grace J, Lim C. Sorption-enhanced steam reforming of 

methane in a fluidized bed reactor with dolomite as CO2-acceptor. Chem Eng Sci 
2006;61:1195–202. 

[210] Chanburanasiri N, Ribeiro AM, Rodrigues AE, Arpornwichanop A, 

Laosiripojana N, Praserthdam P, et al. Hydrogen production via sorption 
enhanced steam methane reforming process using Ni/CaO multifunctional 
catalyst. Ind Eng Chem Res 2011;50:13662–71. 

[181] Yang X, Wang S, Li B, Liu H, He Y. Evaluation of sorption-enhanced reforming 

[211] Z-s Li, N-s Cai, J-b Yang. Continuous production of hydrogen from sorption- 

over catalyst-sorbent bi-functional particles in an internally circulating fluidized 
bed. Adv Powder Technol 2020;31:2566–72. 

enhanced steam methane reforming in two parallel fixed-bed reactors operated in 
a cyclic manner. Ind Eng Chem Res 2006;45:8788–93. 

[182] Wang S, Yang X, Xu S, Zhang K, Li B. Assessment of sorption-enhanced crude 
glycerol steam reforming process via CFD simulation. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2018;43:14996–5004. 

[183] Ayodele BV, Cheng CK. Modelling and optimization of syngas production from 

methane dry reforming over ceria-supported cobalt catalyst using artificial neural 
networks and Box–Behnken design. J Ind Eng Chem 2015;32:246–58. 

[212] Lopez Ortiz A, Harrison DP. Hydrogen production using sorption-enhanced 

reaction. Ind Eng Chem Res 2001;40:5102–9. 

[213] Martavaltzi CS, Pampaka EP, Korkakaki ES, Lemonidou AA. Hydrogen production 
via steam reforming of methane with simultaneous CO2 capture over CaO(cid:0)
Ca12Al14O33. Energy Fuel 2010;24:2589–95. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100831V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

[214] Martavaltzi CS, Lemonidou AA. Hydrogen production via sorption enhanced 
reforming of methane: Development of a novel hybrid material—reforming 
catalyst and CO2 sorbent. Chem Eng Sci 2010;65:4134–40. 

[244] Yang Y, Zhai R, Duan L, Kavosh M, Patchigolla K, Oakey J. Integration and 

evaluation of a power plant with a CaO-based CO2 capture system. Int J 
Greenhouse Gas Control 2010;4:603–12. 

[215] Broda M, Manovic V, Imtiaz Q, Kierzkowska AM, Anthony EJ, Müller CR. High- 

[245] Gregg S, Ramsay J. Adsorption of carbon dioxide by magnesia studied by use of 

purity hydrogen via the sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming reaction 
over a synthetic CaO-based sorbent and a Ni catalyst. Environ Sci Technol 2013; 
47:6007–14. 

[216] Wu S, Wang L. Improvement of the stability of a ZrO2-modified Ni–nano-CaO 

sorption complex catalyst for ReSER hydrogen production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2010;35:6518–24. 

[217] Broda M, Kierzkowska AM, Baudouin D, Imtiaz Q, Cop´eret C, Müller CR. Sorbent- 
Enhanced Methane Reforming over a Ni–Ca-Based, Bifunctional Catalyst Sorbent. 
ACS Catal 2012;2:1635–46. 

[218] Yi K, Meyer J, Eriksen D. Selection, Preparation and study of high temperature 
novel CO2 sorbents for sorption enhanced SMR. Nordic H2-Seminar. Oslo 2006. 

[219] Xie M, Zhou Z, Qi Y, Cheng Z, Yuan W. Sorption-enhanced steam methane 

reforming by in situ CO2 capture on a CaO–Ca9Al6O18 sorbent. Chem Eng J 
2012;207:142–50. 

[220] Feng H, Lan P, Wu S. A study on the stability of a NiO–CaO/Al2O3 complex 

catalyst by La2O3 modification for hydrogen production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2012;37:14161–6. 

[221] Ochoa-Fern´andez E, Lacalle-Vil`a C, Zhao T, Rønning M, Chen D. Experimental 

demonstration of H2 production by CO2 sorption enhanced steam methane 
reforming using ceramic acceptors. Studies in surface science and catalysis: 
Elsevier; 2007. p. 159-64. 

[222] Barelli L, Bidini G, Di Michele A, Gallorini F, Petrillo C, Sacchetti F. Synthesis and 
test of sorbents based on calcium aluminates for SE-SR. Appl Energy 2014;127: 
81–92. 

[223] Xu P, Xie M, Cheng Z, Zhou Z. CO2 capture performance of CaO-based sorbents 

prepared by a sol–gel method. Ind Eng Chem Res 2013;52:12161–9. 
[224] Broda M, Kierzkowska AM, Mueller CR. Sorbent-Enhanced Steam Methane 

Reforming Reaction Studied over a Ca-Based CO2 Sorbent and Ni Catalyst. Chem 
Eng Technol 2013;36:1496–502. 

infrared and isotherm measurements. J Chem Soc A 1970:2784–7. 

[246] Li L, Wen X, Fu X, Wang F, Zhao N, Xiao F, et al. MgO/Al2O3 sorbent for CO2 

capture. Energy Fuel 2010;24:5773–80. 

[247] Zhao X, Ji G, Liu W, He X, Anthony EJ, Zhao M. Mesoporous MgO promoted with 

NaNO3/NaNO2 for rapid and high-capacity CO2 capture at moderate 
temperatures. Chem Eng J 2018;332:216–26. 

[248] Wang K, Zhao Y, Clough PT, Zhao P, Anthony EJ. Structural and kinetic analysis 
of CO2 sorption on NaNO2-promoted MgO at moderate temperatures. Chem Eng 
J 2019;372:886–95. 

[249] Wang L, Zhou Z, Hu Y, Cheng Z, Fang X. Nanosheet MgO-based CO2 sorbent 

promoted by mixed-alkali-metal nitrate and carbonate: performance and 
mechanism. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:5802–12. 

[250] Lee SC, Cha SH, Kwon YM, Park MG, Hwang BW, Park YK, et al. Effects of alkali- 

metal carbonates and nitrates on the CO 2 sorption and regeneration of MgO- 
based sorbents at intermediate temperatures. Korean J Chem Eng 2016;33: 
3448–55. 

[251] Dal Pozzo A, Armutlulu A, Rekhtina M, Abdala PM, Müller CR. CO2 uptake and 
cyclic stability of MgO-based CO2 sorbents promoted with alkali metal nitrates 
and their eutectic mixtures. ACS Appl Energy Mater 2019;2:1295–307. 
[252] Harada T, Simeon F, Hamad EZ, Hatton TA. Alkali metal nitrate-promoted high- 
capacity MgO adsorbents for regenerable CO2 capture at moderate temperatures. 
Chem Mater 2015;27:1943–9. 

[253] Joo H, Cho SJ, Na K. Control of CO2 absorption capacity and kinetics by MgO- 
based dry sorbents promoted with carbonate and nitrate salts. J CO2 Util 2017; 
19:194–201. 

[254] Lee H, Trivi˜no MLT, Hwang S, Kwon SH, Lee SG, Moon JH, et al. In situ 
observation of carbon dioxide capture on pseudo-liquid eutectic mixture- 
promoted magnesium oxide. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:2414–22. 
[255] Yang X, Zhao L, Liu Y, Sun Z, Xiao Y. Carbonation performance of NaNO3 

[225] Radfarnia HR, Iliuta MC. Development of Al-stabilized CaO–nickel hybrid 

modified MgO sorbents. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:342–50. 

sorbent–catalyst for sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming. Chem Eng Sci 
2014;109:212–9. 

[226] Radfarnia HR, Iliuta MC. Hydrogen production by sorption-enhanced steam 

methane reforming process using CaO-Zr/Ni bifunctional sorbent–catalyst. Chem 
Eng Process 2014;86:96–103. 

[227] Zhao M, Shi J, Zhong X, Tian S, Blamey J, Jiang J, et al. A novel calcium looping 
absorbent incorporated with polymorphic spacers for hydrogen production and 
CO 2 capture. Energy Environ Sci 2014;7:3291–5. 

[228] Gupta H, Fan L-S. Carbonation(cid:0) calcination cycle using high reactivity calcium 
oxide for carbon dioxide separation from flue gas. Ind Eng Chem Res 2002;41: 
4035–42. 

[229] Radfarnia HR, Iliuta MC. Development of zirconium-stabilized calcium oxide 

absorbent for cyclic high-temperature CO2 capture. Ind Eng Chem Res 2012;51: 
10390–8. 

[230] Zhang M, Peng Y, Sun Y, Li P, Yu J. Preparation of CaO–Al2O3 sorbent and CO2 

capture performance at high temperature. Fuel 2013;111:636–42. 

[231] Valverde J, Sanchez-Jimenez P, Perez-Maqueda LA. High and stable CO2 capture 
capacity of natural limestone at Ca-looping conditions by heat pretreatment and 
recarbonation synergy. Fuel 2014;123:79–85. 

[232] Zhao C, Zhou Z, Cheng Z. Sol–gel-derived synthetic CaO-based CO2 sorbents 

incorporated with different inert materials. Ind Eng Chem Res 2014;53:14065–74. 
[233] Radfarnia HR, Sayari A. A highly efficient CaO-based CO2 sorbent prepared by a 

citrate-assisted sol–gel technique. Chem Eng J 2015;262:913–20. 

[234] Angeli SD, Martavaltzi CS, Lemonidou AA. Development of a novel-synthesized 
Ca-based CO2 sorbent for multicycle operation: Parametric study of sorption. Fuel 
2014;127:62–9. 

[235] Donat F, Florin NH, Anthony EJ, Fennell PS. Influence of high-temperature steam 
on the reactivity of CaO sorbent for CO2 capture. Environ Sci Technol 2012;46: 
1262–9. 

[236] Li Y, Sun R, Liu H, Lu C. Cyclic CO2 capture behavior of limestone modified with 
pyroligneous acid (PA) during calcium looping cycles. Ind Eng Chem Res 2011; 
50:10222–8. 

[237] Li Z-s, Cai N-s, Huang Y-y, Han H-j. Synthesis, experimental studies, and analysis 
of a new calcium-based carbon dioxide absorbent. Energy Fuel 2005;19:1447–52. 
[238] Manovic V, Anthony EJ. Carbonation of CaO-based sorbents enhanced by steam 

addition. Ind Eng Chem Res 2010;49:9105–10. 

[256] Cui H, Zhang Q, Hu Y, Peng C, Fang X, Cheng Z, et al. Ultrafast and stable CO2 
capture using alkali metal salt-promoted MgO–CaCO3 sorbents. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 2018;10:20611–20. 

[257] Lee CH, Kwon HJ, Lee HC, Kwon S, Jeon SG, Lee KB. Effect of pH-controlled 

synthesis on the physical properties and intermediate-temperature CO2 sorption 
behaviors of K–Mg double salt-based sorbents. Chem Eng J 2016;294:439–46. 

[258] Xiao G, Singh R, Chaffee A, Webley P. Advanced adsorbents based on MgO and 
K2CO3 for capture of CO2 at elevated temperatures. Int J Greenhouse Gas Control 
2011;5:634–9. 

[259] Yang X, Wang Y, Li M, Sun B, Li Y, Wang Y. Enhanced Hydrogen Production by 

Steam Reforming of Acetic Acid over a Ni Catalyst Supported on Mesoporous 
MgO. Energy Fuel 2016;30:2198–203. 

[260] D Barraza Jim´enez, Bretado E, MLb Guti´errez, Salinas Guti´errez J, L´opez Ortiz A, 

Collins-Martínez V. Kinetic study and modeling of the high temperature CO2 
capture by Na2ZrO3 solid absorbent. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38:2557–64. 
[261] Alc´antar-V´azquez B, Diaz C, Romero-Ibarra IC, Lima E, Pfeiffer H. Structural and 

CO2 Chemisorption Analyses on Na2 (Zr1–x Al x) O3 Solid Solutions. J Phys 
Chem C 2013;117:16483–91. 

[262] S´anchez-Camacho P, Romero-Ibarra IC, Pfeiffer H. Thermokinetic and 

microstructural analyses of the CO2 chemisorption on K2CO3–Na2ZrO3. J CO2 
Util 2013;3:14–20. 

[263] Alcerreca-Corte I, Fregoso-Israel E, Pfeiffer H. CO2 absorption on Na2ZrO3: a 
kinetic analysis of the chemisorption and diffusion processes. J Phys Chem C 
2008;112:6520–5. 

[264] Jo HG, Yoon HJ, Lee CH, Lee KB. Citrate sol–gel method for the preparation of 
sodium zirconate for high-temperature CO2 sorption. Ind Eng Chem Res 2016;55: 
3833–9. 

[265] Martínez-dlCruz L, Pfeiffer H. Microstructural thermal evolution of the Na2CO3 
phase produced during a Na2ZrO3–CO2 chemisorption process. J Phys Chem C 
2012;116:9675–80. 

[266] Fletcher NH. Size effect in heterogeneous nucleation. J Chem Phys 1958;29: 

572–6. 

[267] Turnbull D. Kinetics of heterogeneous nucleation. J Chem Phys 1950;18:198–203. 
[268] Zhao M, Memon MZ, Ji G, Yang X, Vuppaladadiyam AK, Song Y, et al. Alkali 

metal bifunctional catalyst-sorbents enabled biomass pyrolysis for enhanced 
hydrogen production. Renew Energy 2020;148:168–75. 

[239] Zhao M, Bilton M, Brown AP, Cunliffe AM, Dvininov E, Dupont V, et al. Durability 

of CaO–CaZrO3 sorbents for high-temperature CO2 capture prepared by a wet 
chemical method. Energy Fuel 2014;28:1275–83. 

[269] Wang F, Wang P, Raheem A, Ji G, Memon MZ, Song Y, et al. Enhancing hydrogen 
production from biomass pyrolysis by dental-wastes-derived sodium zirconate. Int 
J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:23846–55. 

[240] Müller CR, Pacciani R, Bohn CD, Scott SA, Dennis JS. Investigation of the 

[270] Ma L, Qin C, Pi S, Cui H. Fabrication of efficient and stable Li4SiO4-based sorbent 

enhanced water gas shift reaction using natural and synthetic sorbents for the 
capture of CO2. Ind Eng Chem Res 2009;48:10284–91. 

pellets via extrusion-spheronization for cyclic CO2 capture. Chem Eng J 2020; 
379:122385. 

[241] Hawthorne C, Poboss N, Dieter H, Gredinger A, Zieba M, Scheffknecht G. 

Operation and results of a 200-kW th dual fluidized bed pilot plant gasifier with 
adsorption-enhanced reforming. Biomass Conv Bioref 2012;2:217–27. 

[242] Müller S, Fuchs J, Schmid J, Benedikt F, Hofbauer H. Experimental development 
of sorption enhanced reforming by the use of an advanced gasification test plant. 
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:29694–707. 

[243] Romeo LM, Abanades JC, Escosa JM, Pa˜no J, Gim´enez A, S´anchez-Biezma A, et al. 
Oxyfuel carbonation/calcination cycle for low cost CO2 capture in existing power 
plants. Energy Convers Manage 2008;49:2809–14. 

[271] Young DA. Decomposition of solids: Pergamon. 1966. 
[272] Dur´an-Mu˜noz F, Romero-Ibarra IC, Pfeiffer H. Analysis of the CO 2 chemisorption 

reaction mechanism in lithium oxosilicate (Li 8 SiO 6): a new option for high- 
temperature CO 2 capture. J Mater Chem A 2013;1:3919–25. 

[273] Zhang Q, Peng D, Zhang S, Ye Q, Wu Y, Ni Y. Behaviors and kinetic models 

analysis of Li4SiO4 under various CO2 partial pressures. AIChE J 2017;63: 
2153–64. 

[274] Hu Y, Liu W, Zhou Z, Yang Y. Preparation of Li4SiO4 sorbents for carbon dioxide 

capture via a spray-drying technique. Energy Fuel 2017;32:4521–7. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100832V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

[275] Seggiani M, Puccini M, Vitolo S. High-temperature and low concentration CO2 

sorption on Li4SiO4 based sorbents: Study of the used silica and doping method 
effects. Int J Greenhouse Gas Control 2011;5:741–8. 

[276] Essaki K, Muramatsu T, Kato M. Effect of equilibrium shift by using lithium 
silicate pellets in methane steam reforming. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2008;33: 
4555–9. 

[304] Van Selow E, Cobden P, Verbraeken P, Hufton J. Van den Brink R. Carbon capture 
by sorption-enhanced water(cid:0) gas shift reaction process using hydrotalcite-based 
material. Ind Eng Chem Res 2009;48:4184–93. 

[305] Li S, Shi Y, Yang Y, Zheng Y, Cai N. High-performance CO2 adsorbent from 

interlayer potassium-promoted stearate-pillared hydrotalcite precursors. Energy 
Fuel 2013;27:5352–8. 

[277] Venegas MJ, Fregoso-Israel E, Escamilla R, Pfeiffer H. Kinetic and reaction 

[306] Li S, Shi Y, Zeng H, Cai N. Development of carboxyl-layered double hydrotalcites 

mechanism of CO2 sorption on Li4SiO4: study of the particle size effect. Ind Eng 
Chem Res 2007;46:2407–12. 

of enhanced CO2 capture capacity by K2CO3 promotion. Adsorption 2017;23: 
239–48. 

[278] Quinn R, Kitzhoffer RJ, Hufton JR, Golden TC. A high temperature lithium 

orthosilicate-based solid absorbent for post combustion CO2 capture. Ind Eng 
Chem Res 2012;51:9320–7. 

[279] Shan S, Jia Q, Jiang L, Li Q, Wang Y, Peng J. Preparation and kinetic analysis of Li 
4 SiO 4 sorbents with different silicon sources for high temperature CO 2 capture. 
Chinese Sci Bulletin 2012;57:2475–9. 

[280] Zhang Q, Shen C, Zhang S, Wu Y. Steam methane reforming reaction enhanced by 
a novel K2CO3-Doped Li4SiO4 sorbent: Investigations on the sorbent and catalyst 
coupling behaviors and sorbent regeneration strategy. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2016;41:4831–42. 

[281] Nair B, Burwood R, Goh V, Nakagawa K, Yamaguchi T. Lithium based ceramic 
materials and membranes for high temperature CO2 separation. Prog Mater Sci 
2009;54:511–41. 

[282] Kato M, Yoshikawa S, Nakagawa K. Carbon dioxide absorption by lithium 

orthosilicate in a wide range of temperature and carbon dioxide concentrations. 
J Mater Sci Lett 2002;21:485–7. 

[283] L´opez-Ortiz A, Rivera NP, Rojas AR, Gutierrez DL. Novel carbon dioxide solid 
acceptors using sodium containing oxides. Sep Sci Technol 2005;39:3559–72. 

[284] Ooi KM, Chai SP, Mohamed AR, Mohammadi M. Effects of sodium precursors and 
gelling agents on CO2 sorption performance of sodium zirconate. Asia-Pacific J 
Chem Eng 2015;10:565–79. 

[285] Zhao T, Rønning M, Chen D. Preparation of nanocrystalline Na2ZrO3 for high- 

temperature CO2 acceptors: chemistry and mechanism. J Energy Chem 2013;22: 
387–93. 

[286] Radfarnia HR, Iliuta MC. Application of surfactant-template technique for 

preparation of sodium zirconate as high temperature CO2 sorbent. Sep 
Purification Technol 2012;93:98–106. 

[287] Zhao T, Ochoa-Fern´andez E, Rønning M, Chen D. Preparation and high- 

temperature CO2 capture properties of nanocrystalline Na2ZrO3. Chem Mater 
2007;19:3294–301. 

[288] Villa AC, Guti´errez JS, G´omez CN, De los Rios GA, Villalobos MR, Palacios LC, 
et al. Kinetic study of the CO2 desorption process by carbonated Na2ZrO3 solid 
absorbent. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2015;40:17338–43. 

[289] Yang X, Liu W, Sun J, Hu Y, Wang W, Chen H, et al. Alkali-Doped Lithium 
Orthosilicate Sorbents for Carbon Dioxide Capture. ChemSusChem 2016;9: 
2480–7. 

[290] Rodríguez-Mosqueda R, Pfeiffer H. Thermokinetic analysis of the CO2 

chemisorption on Li4SiO4 by using different gas flow rates and particle sizes. 
J Phys Chem A 2010;114:4535–41. 

[291] Romero-Ibarra IC, Ortiz-Landeros J, Pfeiffer H. Microstructural and CO2 

chemisorption analyses of Li4SiO4: effect of surface modification by the ball 
milling process. Thermochimica Acta 2013;567:118–24. 

[292] Wang K, Zhou Z, Zhao P, Yin Z, Su Z, Sun J. Synthesis of a highly efficient Li4SiO4 
ceramic modified with a gluconic acid-based carbon coating for high-temperature 
CO2 capture. Appl Energy 2016;183:1418–27. 

[293] L´opez Ortiz A, Bretado E, Guzm´an Velderrain V, Mel´endez Zaragoza M, Salinas 

Guti´errez J, Lardiz´abal Guti´errez D, et al. Experimental and modeling kinetic 
study of the CO. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39:16656–66. 

[294] Wang K, Yin Z, Zhao P. Synthesis of macroporous Li4SiO4 via a citric acid-based 
sol–gel route coupled with carbon coating and its CO2 chemisorption properties. 
Ceramic Int 2016;42:2990–9. 

[295] Chen X, Xiong Z, Qin Y, Gong B, Tian C, Zhao Y, et al. High-temperature CO2 
sorption by Ca-doped Li4SiO4 sorbents. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2016;41: 
13077–85. 

[296] Nair BN, Yamaguchi T, Kawamura H, Nakao SI, Nakagawa K. Processing of 

lithium zirconate for applications in carbon dioxide separation: structure and 
properties of the powders. J American Ceramic Soc 2004;87:68–74. 

[297] Wang C, Dou B, Song Y, Chen H, Xu Y, Xie B. High temperature CO2 sorption on 

Li2ZrO3 based sorbents. Ind Eng Chem Res 2014;53:12744–52. 

[298] Yi KB, Eriksen DØ. Low temperature liquid state synthesis of lithium zirconate 
and its characteristics as a CO2 sorbent. Sep Sci Technol 2006;41:283–96. 

[299] Ochoa-Fern´andez E, Rønning M, Grande T, Chen D. Nanocrystalline lithium 

zirconate with improved kinetics for high-temperature CO2 capture. Chem Mater 
2006;18:1383–5. 

[300] Ochoa-Fern´andez E, Rusten HK, Jakobsen HA, Rønning M, Holmen A, Chen D. 

Sorption enhanced hydrogen production by steam methane reforming using 
Li2ZrO3 as sorbent: sorption kinetics and reactor simulation. Catal Today 2005; 
106:41–6. 

[301] Khokhani M, Khomane RB, Kulkarni BD. Sodium-doped lithium zirconate nano 

squares: synthesis, characterization and applications for CO 2 sequestration. J Sol- 
gel Sci Technol 2012;61:316–20. 

[302] Yong Z, Mata V, Rodrigues AE. Adsorption of carbon dioxide onto hydrotalcite- 
like compounds (HTlcs) at high temperatures. Ind Eng Chem Res 2001;40:204–9. 

[303] Hutson ND, Attwood BC. High temperature adsorption of CO 2 on various 

hydrotalcite-like compounds. Adsorption 2008;14:781–9. 

[307] Qin Q, Wang J, Zhou T, Zheng Q, Huang L, Zhang Y, et al. Impact of organic 
interlayer anions on the CO2 adsorption performance of Mg-Al layered double 
hydroxides derived mixed oxides. J Energy Chem 2017;26:346–53. 

[308] De Marco M, Menzel R, Bawaked SM, Mokhtar M, Obaid AY, Basahel SN, et al. 

Hybrid effects in graphene oxide/carbon nanotube-supported layered double 
hydroxides: enhancing the CO2 sorption properties. Carbon 2017;123:616–27. 
[309] Bhatta LKG, Subramanyam S, Chengala MD, Bhatta UM, Guha P, Dinakar RPH, 
et al. Layered double hydroxides/multiwalled carbon nanotubes-based composite 
for high-temperature CO2 adsorption. Energy Fuel 2016;30:4244–50. 

[310] Garcia-Gallastegui A, Iruretagoyena D, Mokhtar M, Asiri AM, Basahel SN, SA Al- 

Thabaiti, et al. Layered double hydroxides supported on multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes: preparation and CO2 adsorption characteristics. J Mater Chem 2012; 
22:13932–40. 

[311] Jiang H, Guo H, Li P, Li Y, Yan B. Preparation of CaMgAl-LDHs and mesoporous 
silica sorbents derived from blast furnace slag for CO2 capture. RSC Adv 2019;9: 
6054–63. 

[312] Chang PH, Chang YP, Chen SY, Yu CT, Chyou YP. Ca-rich Ca–Al-oxide, high- 
temperature-stable sorbents prepared from hydrotalcite precursors: synthesis, 
characterization, and CO2 capture capacity. ChemSusChem 2011;4:1844–51. 

[313] Kou X, Li C, Zhao Y, Wang S, Ma X. CO2 sorbents derived from capsule-connected 

Ca-Al hydrotalcite-like via low-saturated coprecipitation. Fuel Process Technol 
2018;177:210–8. 

[314] Han L, Wang Q, Yang Y, Yu C, Fang M, Luo Z. Hydrogen production via CaO 

sorption enhanced anaerobic gasification of sawdust in a bubbling fluidized bed. 
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2011;36:4820–9. 

[315] Martínez I, Call´en MS, Grasa G, L´opez JM, Murillo R. Sorption-enhanced 

gasification (SEG) of agroforestry residues: Influence of feedstock and main 
operating variables on product gas quality. Fuel Process Technol 2022;226: 
107074. 

[316] Pfeifer C, Koppatz S, Hofbauer H. Steam gasification of various feedstocks at a 
dual fluidised bed gasifier: Impacts of operation conditions and bed materials. 
Biomass Convers Bioref 2011;1:39–53. 

[317] Liakakou E, Infantes A, Neumann A, Vreugdenhil B. Connecting gasification with 
syngas fermentation: comparison of the performance of lignin and beech wood. 
Fuel 2021;290:120054. 

[318] Pfeifer C, Koppatz S, Hofbauer H. Catalysts for dual fluidised bed biomass 

gasification—an experimental study at the pilot plant scale. Biomass Convers 
Bioref 2011;1:63–74. 

[319] Pfeifer C, Puchner B, Hofbauer H. Comparison of dual fluidized bed steam 

gasification of biomass with and without selective transport of CO2. Chem Eng Sci 
2009;64:5073–83. 

[320] Soukup G. PhD Thesis (in German). Vienna University of Technology; 2009. 
[321] Schmid JC, Pr¨oll T, Kitzler H, Pfeifer C, Hofbauer H. Cold flow model 

investigations of the countercurrent flow of a dual circulating fluidized bed 
gasifier. Biomass Convers Bioref 2012;2:229–44. 

[322] Brellochs J. PhD Thesis (in German). University of Stuttgart; 2014. 
[323] Parvez AM, Hafner S, Hornberger M, Schmid M, Scheffknecht G. Sorption 

enhanced gasification (SEG) of biomass for tailored syngas production with in-situ 
CO2 capture: Current status, process scale-up experiences and outlook. 
Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2021;141:110756. 

[324] Mays Jeff. One Step Hydrogen Generation Through Sorption Enhanced 

Reforming. No. DOE-GTI-05770-1. Gas Technology Inst., Des Plaines, IL (United 
States) 2017. 

[325] Cobden PD, Lukashuk L, de Water LV, Lundqvist M, Manzolini G, Cormos CC, 
Bellqvist D. Stepwise project: Sorption-enhanced water-gas shift technology to 
reduce carbon footprint in the iron and steel industry. 2018. p. 395–402. 

[326] Manzolini G, Giuffrida A, Cobden PD, van Dijk HAJ, Ruggeri F, Consonni F. 

Techno-economic assessment of SEWGS technology when applied to integrated 
steel-plant for CO2 emission mitigation. Int J Greenhouse Gas Cont 2020;94: 
102935. 

[327] Meyer J, Mastin J, Pinilla CS. Sustainable hydrogen production from biogas using 

sorption-enhanced reforming. Energy Proc 2014;63:6800–14. 

[328] Koppatz S, Pfeifer C, Rauch R, Hofbauer H, Marquard-Moellenstedt T, Specht M. 
H2 rich product gas by steam gasification of biomass with in situ CO2 absorption 
in a dual fluidized bed system of 8 MW fuel input. Fuel Process Technol 2009;90: 
914–21. 

[329] Wilk V, Hofbauer H. Analysis of optimization potential in commercial biomass 

gasification plants using process simulation. Fuel Process Technol 2016;141: 
138–47. 

[330] Marquard-M¨ollenstedt T, Brellochs J, Specht M, Bauer B, Bauer M. Testing of 

limestone in a 6 MW wood gasification plant. DGMK Meeting Report 2016. 
[331] Soltani SM, Lahiri A, Bahzad H, Clough P, Gorbounov M, Yan Y. Sorption- 

enhanced Steam Methane Reforming for Combined CO2 Capture and Hydrogen 
Production: A State-of-the-Art Review. Carbon Capture Sci Technol 2021;1: 
100003. 

[332] Freeman C. Innovation, changes of techno-economic paradigm and biological 

analogies in economics. Revue Economique 1991:211–31. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100833V.S. Sikarwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

[333] Perez C. Technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms. Cambridge J 

Econ 2010;34:185–202. 

[334] Buiteveld J. Masters Thesis. University of Twente; 2021. 
[335] Schweitzer D, Albrecht FG, Schmid M, Beirow M, Sp¨orl R, Dietrich R-U, et al. 

Process simulation and techno-economic assessment of SER steam gasification for 
hydrogen production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:569–79. 

[336] Diglio G, Hanak DP, Bareschino P, Mancusi E, Pepe F, Montagnaro F, et al. 

Techno-economic analysis of sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming in a 
fixed bed reactor network integrated with fuel cell. J Power Sour 2017;364: 
41–51. 

[337] Heffels T, McKenna R, Fichtner W. An ecological and economic assessment of 

absorption-enhanced-reforming (AER) biomass gasification. Energy Convers 
Manage 2014;77:535–44.  

Vineet  Singh  Sikarwar  Vineet  Singh  Sikarwar  is  a  joint 
researcher  at  the  Institute  of  Plasma  Physics  of  the  Czech 
Academy  of Sciences in Prague, Czech  Republic,  the Depart-
ment of Power Engineering of the University of Chemistry and 
Technology in Prague, Czech Republic and the Department of 
Green  Chemistry  and  Technology  of  the  Ghent  University  in 
Belgium.  He  is  working  on  the  experimental  and  theoretical 
investigations  of  thermal  plasma  assisted  waste  valorization 
with the recovery of useful energy and value added materials. 
His  other  research  interests  include  carbon  capture,  biofuels 
synthesis and solar desalination systems. He has published his 
works in journals such as Energy and Environmental Science, 
Progress in Energy and Combustion Science among others. He 
is a regular reviewer for several prestigious scientific journals (e.g. Environmental Science 
and Technology, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Environment Development 
and Sustainability, International Journal of Chemical Reactor Engineering, …). Prior to his 
career  in  research,  he  served  as  a  Project  Engineer  in  a  leading  heat  exchanger 
manufacturing industry in India.  

Christoph  Pfeifer  Christoph  Pfeifer  is  a  full  professor  for 
Process Engineering of Renewable Resources at the University 
of  Natural  Resources  and  Life  Sciences,  Vienna  (BOKU).  His 
ongoing research focuses on thermo-chemical fuel conversion 
ranging  from  hydrothermal  carbonization  and  pyrolysis  to 
provide biochar for soil applications to fluidized bed gasifica-
tion of biomass and waste. He is experienced in catalytic pro-
cesses for gas cleaning and in operation of fluidized bed cold 
flow models as well as in high temperature laboratory units of 
different sizes. He also represents Austria in the IEA Bioenergy 
Task  33  on  Biomass  Gasification.  He  is  a  member  of  several 
high level international scientific conferences (e.g. Conference 
on Fluidized Bed Technology, Fluidization, …), associate edi-
tor of “Carbon Resources Conversion Journal” and regular reviewer for several high level 
scientific journals (e.g. Energy & Fuels, Fuel, Chemical Engineering, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res, 
…).  

Frederik Ronsse Frederik Ronsse is the principal investigator 
in the “Thermochemical Conversion of Biomass” research unit 
within  the  Department  of  Green  Chemistry  and  Technology 
and  is  responsible  for  managing  a  team  with  expertise  in 
thermochemical  conversion  of  biomass  (including  residual 
biomass  waste),  including  techniques  such  as  fast  and  slow 
pyrolysis,  gasification,  torrefaction  and  hydrothermal  lique-
faction. A major focus is on slow and (catalytic) fast pyrolysis 
for the production of biochar and bio-oil using biomass con-
taining residue streams of agriculture and biorefineries. Up to 
now, he has 112 publications indexed in Web of Science with 
2444  times  cited,  with  an  H-index  of  24.  In  addition  to  the 
research activities, he is also a lecturer of several undergrad-
uate and graduate-level courses at the Bioscience Engineering Faculty of the Ghent Uni-
versity.  Course 
include  biomass  conversion,  process  engineering  and 
thermodynamics.  

topics 

Michael Pohorely Michael Pohoˇrelý is an Associate Professor 
at the Department of Power Engineering, University of Chem-
istry and Technology (UCT), Prague. His research focuses on 
biomass  and  waste  gasification  and  pyrolysis,  material  and 
energy  utilization  of  stabilized  sewage  sludge,  gas  cleaning 
systems,  fluidized  bed  processes,  analytics  of  solid  fuels  and 
waste, and on the technologies for the production of biochar. 
He  defended  his  master  diploma  (2004)  and  PhD  (2010)  in 
Energetics at UCT. He defended the title of associate professor 
at  UCT  in  2015.  He  is  the  head  of  the  Czech  Pyrolysis  and 
Gasification  Association.  He  has  published  more  than  80 
research papers listed in the Scopus database (> 1100 citations, 
h-index - 20). He participates as a coordinator or a partner in 

several national and international projects (e.g. RFCS).  

Erik Meers Erik Meers is a Professor at the faculty of Biosci-
ence  Engineering  of  Ghent  University  where  he  coordinates 
research  in  resource  recovery,  with  specific  attention  for 
nutrient  recycling.  His  group  is  currently  involved  in  20 
actively running projects of which 15 are European projects. 
He has published over 400 publications and presentations as 
well as 3 patents with a Web of Science citation h-index of 43 
(WoS) / 50 (Google Scholar). He is founder of the EU project 
cluster  Biorefine  Cluster  Europe.  He  also  coordinated  the 
Flemish biogas association from 2012-2016 and is currently a 
board  member  in  this  local  association  representing  Ghent 
University. He is a Chairman to the European Biogas Associa 
tion scientific advisory council. He has created and coordinates 
the UGent Business Development Platform “End-of-Waste” and the scientific community 
RE-SOURCE.BIO and has started the European Sustainable Nutrient Initiative. He has a 
strong applied research development profile in which  he annually  acquires on average 
22,5 million €, of which 3-4 million €/y for own affiliations (Ghent University and asso-
ciated spin-offs). Over the last 12 years, he successfully launched 8 technological research 
spin-off companies and associations active in environmental technology.  

Ajay Kumar Kaviti Ajay Kumar Kaviti is an Associate Profes-
sor and the head of Renewable and Sustainable Energies Lab-
oratory in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at VNR 
Vignana  Jyothi  Institute  of  Engineering  &  Technology, 
Hyderabad, India. He received his doctorial and master degrees 
from Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, Bhopal, 
India.  He  has  more  than  seventeen  years  of  experience  in 
teaching  and  research.  He  has  received  the  best  researcher 
award thrice from the Indian Society for Mechanical Engineers. 
He  has  multi-disciplinary  research  interests  in  the  areas  of 
renewable energy, mechanics of materials and finite element 
analysis. He guided 16 master’s degree projects and currently 
guiding  PhD  students.  He  received  research  grants  from 
reputed research funding agencies (DST, DRDO, etc.). He has 50+ publications to his credit 
in prestigious international journals. He has written 4 books in the areas of renewable 
energy and mechanics of composites. He is on the editorial board and review board of 
many reputed national and international journals.  

Michal Jeremias Michal Jeremias is a scientist and the head of 
the Department of Plasma Chemical Technologies at the Insti-
tute of Plasma Physics of the Czech Academy of Sciences (CAS). 
He received his doctoral and master degrees from the Depart-
ment of Power Engineering of the University of Chemistry and 
Technology in Prague (UCT). During his master and doctoral 
studies,  he  was  also  employed  at  the  Institute  of  Chemical 
Process Fundamentals of CAS, where he worked on the oxyfuel 
gasification of coal, biomass and wastes in fluidized bed in the 
framework  of  several  international  projects.  He  gained  his 
postdoctoral experience at Cranfield University (UK) where he 
worked on a series of combustion and gasification projects, and 
in particular on Ca looping project where he designed, devel-
oped and commissioned a 25 kW pilot plant. His current research at the Institute of Plasma 
Physics CAS focuses on the utilization of natural gas and plastic waste via thermal plasma 
pyrolysis to produce carbon black and hydrogen within P2X scheme. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100834