Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

MXene-based heterostructures: Current trend and development in
electrochemical energy storage devices

Iftikhar Hussain a, b, Charmaine Lamiel c, Muhammad Sufyan Javed d, Muhammad Ahmad a,
Sumanta Sahoo e, Xi Chen a, Ning Qin a, Sarmad Iqbal f, Shuai Gu a, Yuxiang Li a,
Christodoulos Chatzichristodoulou f, Kaili Zhang a,*
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong
b A. J. Drexel Nanomaterials Institute and Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, United States
c School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, 4072, Australia
d School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 730000, China
e School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, Gyeongbuk, 38541, Republic of Korea
f Department of Energy Conversion and Storage Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Building 310, Fysikvej, Lyngby, DK-2800, Denmark

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
MXene
Heterostructures
Electrode
Energy density
Capacity

MXene  (two-dimensional  transition  metal  carbide,  nitrides,  and/or  carbonitrides)  has  shown  considerable  in-
terest  in  a  variety  of  research  fields  due  to  its  excellent  conductivity,  hydrophilicity,  and  abundant  surface
functional groups. However, MXene’s challenges in aggregation and low stability, severely limit its applicability.
MXenes can be prepared by a variety of techniques, including exfoliation of MAX phases assisted by HF and non-
HF materials, and bottom-up approaches utilizing vapor deposition and templating methods. The preparation of
MXene-based heterostructures composite has been recently investigated as a potential nanomaterial in energy
storage. Herein, we provided an  overview of MXene synthesis and current developments in the MXene-based
heterostructure  composites  for  electrochemical  energy  storage  devices.  Moreover,  the  challenges  and  diffi-
culties  for  MXene-based  heterostructure  composites  in  the  future  MXene-based  structural  design  have  been
described.

1. Introduction

The development  of  novel materials  for  high-performance  electro-
chemical energy storage received a lot of attention as the demand for
sustainable  energy  continuously  grows  [1–3].  Two-dimensional  (2D)
materials  have  been  the  subject  of  extensive  research  and  have  been
regarded as superior candidates for electrochemical energy storage due
to their unique physical and chemical properties. Over the past 15 years,
2D  structures  have  been  explored  in  transition  metal  oxides  [4],  gra-
phene  [5],  hexagonal  boron  nitrides  [6],  phosphorene  [7],  transition
metal  dichalcogenides  (TMDs)  [8],  and  metal-organic  frameworks
(MOFs)  [9,10].  Pioneered  by  Gogotsi  and  colleagues,  MXenes  (pro-
nounced  as  “maxene”)  are  new  emerging  materials  of  2D  layered
structures consisting of early transition metal carbides, nitrides, and/or
carbonitrides.  MXenes  are  obtained  after  the  selective  etching  of  A
layers from the MAX phase precursors, and they have recently attracted
a lot of academic attention because of their amazing physical/chemical

[18–24].  Though

features  [11–15].  The  first  and  most  commonly  studied  MXene  is
Ti3C2Tx obtained from the selective exfoliation of A-layers from Ti3AlC2
[16]. Since the first discovery of MXene, more than 30 distinct MXene
compositions have been synthesized, with more than hundreds expected
in the future [17]. In addition to Ti3C2Tx-based MXene, numerous other
MXene families have been investigated, resulting in a vast class of 2D
materials
titanium-based  MXene  has  been
well-evaluated  thus  laying  a  concrete  foundation  in  the  study  of  2D
MXenes,  less-evaluated  M-MXene,  where  M  represents  other  non-Ti
transitional metals (M = Sc, V, Cr, Y, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta, W, and Lu),
are recently given attention as well [25–28]. The general chemical for-
mula of MXenes is presented as Mn+1XnTx where M denotes early tran-
sition metal, n varies from 1 to 4, X represents carbon and/or nitrogen,
and Tx  denotes surface termination groups (–OH, –F, –O, etc.) as spec-
ified in Fig. 1a.

MXenes  are  most  notable  for  their  tunable  properties  such  as  hy-
drophilicity catered by their hydroxyl oxygen-terminated surfaces, good

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: ihussaintoori1@gmail.com (I. Hussain), kaizhang@cityu.edu.hk (K. Zhang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101097
Received 3 November 2022; Received in revised form 2 May 2023; Accepted 8 May 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)101097Availableonline22May20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

I. Hussain et al.

mechanical  strength,  and  metallic  conductivity  [11].  Such  novel  2D
materials  have  shown  great  potential  in  a  variety  of  applications,
including electrochemical energy storage, such as batteries and super-
capacitors  (SCs)  [29–33],  sensors  [34–37],  biomedical  applications
[38–40],  thermoelectric  [41–44],  electromagnetic  shielding  [45–48],
and  toxic  removal  applications  [49–52].  However,  like  any  other  2D
materials,  the  restacking  of  MXene  nanosheets  has  been  a  huge  chal-
lenge  wherein  the  effective  surface  area  is  greatly  reduced,  hence,
affecting  the  performance  of  MXene-based  electrodes  by  obstructing
electrolyte  accessibility  and  ion  transport.  Furthermore,  the  electro-
chemical characteristics of MXenes are greatly influenced by their sur-
face chemistry, thus, surface terminations must be carefully managed to
avoid irreversible capacity [53–55]. One of the most promising ways to
fully  utilize  MXenes’  energy storage  capability  is  to  combine  MXenes
with  other  nanomaterials  to  construct  hybrid  composites  or  hetero-
structure architectures, which would inherit the benefits of individual
building  blocks  while  minimizing  their  limitations  [56].  Such  impor-
tance  of  MXene-based  heterostructures  is  also  evaluated  in  literature
pertaining  to  various  applications  [57],  such  as  energy  storage  appli-
cations [58,59] – batteries [60], SCs [61], electrochemical water split-
ting  [62],  water  treatment  development  [63],  and  gas  sensing
applications [64].

To date, enormous effort has been made into developing new syn-
thetic methods for new MXenes, as well as existing MXenes and their
derivatives. The degree of exfoliation of MAX phases and the resulting
structure,  quality,  surface  termination,  and  characteristics  of  MXenes
are all affected by several factors such as the type of MAX phases used, as
well  as  the  synthesis  circumstances  or  etching  solution  conditions
(temperature, concentration, and etching time) [65]. So far, HF etching
[66,67], acid/fluoride salt or hydrofluoride etching for in-situ produc-
tion of HF [68–71], alkali etching [72], electrochemical etching [73],
molten salt etching [74], chemical vapor deposition, and atomic layer
deposition [75] have been utilized to prepare MXene. Varied approaches
may  result  in  different  MXene  structures  and  surface  chemical  states
which may have a significant impact on the electrochemical behavior
and  performance  of  MXenes  [76].  As  a  result,  it  is  critical  to  use  the
appropriate  process  for  the  synthesis  of  MXenes  to  provide  the  best
material possible for the final purpose.

Although  MXenes  are  relatively  new  2D  materials,  research  on

MXenes and their composites (Fig. 1b) is rapidly growing year by year.
In the last four years, the number of MXene-based articles increased by
more  than  400%  (2019–2022).  Many  researchers  combine  different
materials with MXene nanosheets to create MXene composites and/or
heterostructures that form heterogeneous composite materials. Then, in
recent years, researchers made use of the synergistic impact between the
components within the heterostructure to improve energy storage per-
formance  [77–80].  For  example,  a  variety  of  carbon  nanomaterials
[81–83],  oxides  [84–86],  sulfides  [87–89],  phosphides  [90,91],
metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) [92,93], hydroxides/layered double

Fig.  2. (a)  Schematic
heterostructure.

illustration  of  MXene  and

their  composites/

Fig. 1. (a) Periodic table summarizing MAX and MXene details and (b) current trends on published studies related to MXene composites (from Scopus).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010972

I. Hussain et al.

hydroxides  [94–96], polymers  molecules  [94,97,98], and other nano-
materials have been integrated with MXene as schematically shown in
Fig.  2.  In  particular,  MXene  heterostructures  are  highly  evaluated
through  their  synergistic  effects  that  benefit  energy  storage  systems,
such as batteries and SCs [99]. Not only do they provide a variety of
materials, but also induce improvement in electrochemical properties in
terms  of increased  electrolyte  accessibility, higher  conductivity, addi-
tional redox activities, and longer cycle life [60,100]. As a result, the
power densities and energy densities are also improved which represents
the  main  bottleneck  of  electrodes  in  their  commercialization  towards
battery  and  SC  applications.  According  to  these  findings,  building
MXene  hybrid  composites  and/or  heterostructures  to  boost  energy
storage performance is a highly effective method.

In  this  review,  MXene  heterostructures  and  hybrid  materials  are
evaluated and summarized. We also reviewed the current methodologies
to prepare MXene, as well as their advantages and challenges. We briefly
grouped the synthesis as top-down approach (HF-assisted and HF-free
synthesis),  and  bottom-up  approach.  Moreover,  we  discussed  the  po-
tential development of MXene hybrid materials in the field of energy
storage,  specifically  SCs.  The  integration  of  other  nanomaterials  to
MXene  may  form  new  and  novel  composites  and/or  heterostructures
which may exhibit unusual cyclic voltammograms (CVs) and galvano-
static  charge-discharge  (GCDs)  depending  on  the  nature  of  nano-
materials.  Finally,  to  assist  further  studies  of  this  intriguing  and  fast-
developing family of materials, we describe the challenges and future
aspects of the MXene composites and/or heterostructures.

2. Importance of heterostructures in MXene-based hybrid
materials

Since MXenes are commonly prepared with 2D structures, MXenes
are ideal scaffolds to grow 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D structures. Unique hybrid
MXene heterostructures (Table 1) have been evaluated such as 0D/2D in
graphene quantum dots/MXene nanosheets [101], 1D/2D in TiO2/Ti3C
[102], 2D/2D in MXene/reduced graphene oxide [103], and 3D/2D in
CdS nanoflower/Ti3C2 MXene [104]. Similarly, 0D MXene quantum dots
can also grow on another 2D interface, such as MOFs [105], SiC [106],
and  graphene  [107],  as  well  as  multijunctional  heterostructures
involving MXenes [108]. When a secondary material is combined with
MXenes to form hybrid materials, the synergy between the hybrid ma-
terials is important to understand in order to maximize its properties.
MXene-based heterostructures and hybrid structures should promote the
overall  enhancement  of  physical,  chemical,  mechanical,  and  electro-
chemical  properties  suitable  for  energy  storage  applications  [57,60,
109]. For instance, Chen et al. [110] addressed the poor cycle stability
and rate capability of pure MoS2  electrodes by preparing MoS2-on-M-
Xene heterostructures that delivered exceptional metallic properties. In
another  example,  Wang  et  al.  [111]  worked  on  resolving  the  severe
restacking,  weak  chemical  immobilization  ability,  and  poor  catalytic
effect of pure MXene by utilizing heterostructures based on Ti3C2Tx-TiN.
Hence, there is a need to assess MXenes in hybrid materials in promoting
their synergy while delivering exceptional properties.

As discussed in our previous review [112], the mechanisms involved
in anchoring MXenes in hybrid structures, such as in core-shell struc-
tures,  involves  electrostatic  interactions,  hydrogen  bonding,  covalent
bonding, and hybrid forces. These interactions aid the better anchoring
of  MXenes  with  hybrid  materials.  Though  essential  synergy  between
heterostructures of MXenes and secondary materials is important, other
factors in its assembly affect the overall performance of electrodes in
general, such as the choice of precursors, electrolytes, substrates, reac-
tion parameters, synthesis techniques, etc. [113–115].

3. Synthesis techniques for few-layer MXenes

MXenes,  unlike  the  majority  of  other  2D  materials  like  graphene,
phosphorene,  and  MoS2,  have  special  and  improved  characteristics

Table 1
MXene-based  heterostructures  and  their  applications  in  energy  storage  and
conversion systems.

Heterostructures  Material

Application

0D/2D

0D/2D

0D/2D/0D

0D/2D

0D/2D

1D/2D

1D/2D

1D/2D

2D/2D

2D/2D

graphene quantum dots/
MXene nanosheets
bimetallic selenides on
nitrogen-doped MXene
(CoZn–Se@N-MX)
MXene/NiFe2O4 and
MXene/Fe3O4

SnO2 Quantum Dots/
Ti3C2TxMXene
MXene Quantum Dot/
Ni-MOF Ultrathin
Nanosheets
TiO2/Ti3C2

CdS/Ti3C2 MXene

polyaniline/titanium
carbide (MXene)
Fe–N–C/MXene

MXene-COF

2D/2D/2D

CoAl-LDH/g-C3N4/RGO

2D/2D/2D

2D/2D

2D/3D

Ti3C2 MXene/MoS2
nanosheets/TiO2
nanosheets
Ti2C3/ZnIn2S4

Ti3C2 MXene@CdS
nanoflower

3D/2D

2D-2D-3D

CeO2/Ultrathin MXene
Nanosheets
g-C3N4@Ti3C2T@WO3

Catalysts for hydrogen
evolution reaction
Catalysts for lithium
polysulfide conversion
reaction
Catalysts for oxygen
evolution reaction and
electrodes for SC
Anodes for lithium-ion
batteries (LIBs)
Photocatalysts for
nitrogen reduction
reaction
Electrode for capacitive
deionization
Catalysts for hydrogen
evolution reaction
electrodes for SC

Catalysts for oxygen
reduction reaction
Photocatalyst for
antibacterial application
under visible light
Photocatalyst for the
elimination of dye and
antibiotic pollutants
Photocatalysts for
hydrogen production
activity
Photocatalytic for
hydrogen generation
Photocatalysts for
hydrogen production
activity
Photocatalysts for
hydrogen production
photoelectrochemical and
photocatalytic properties

Ref.

[101]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[105]

[102]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[104]

[126]

[108]

related  to  electrical  conductivity,  hydrophilicity,  and  redox  activity.
These  distinct  characteristics  provide  MXenes  promising  results  in
catalysis and energy storage, protection against electromagnetic inter-
ference,  and  many  other  applications  [112].  Despite  the  exceptional
electronic properties of pure MXene [127], certain challenges involving,
stability in colloidal suspensions, stacking and aggregation, and prop-
erties  related  to  thermal,  mechanical,  and  oxidative  stabilities  are
known to impede their applications addressed in our previous review
[112]. The inherent characteristics of MXenes can be traced back to their
synthesis method,  hence, creating structural features  and defects  that
can result in unique properties are highly essential. Functional groups
can be introduced in MXenes which can induce ‘anchor sites’ that can be
beneficial when MXenes are further prepared for hybrid materials.

Typically,  MAX  phases  serve  as  the  raw  precursors  for  MXene
(Fig. 3). For instance, MAX layers having different configurations such
as  211  (Ti2AlC,  Ti2AlN,  Ti2GaC,  Cr2GaC,  Cr2AlC,  etc.),  312  (Ti3AlC2,
Ti3SiC2, etc.), and 413 (Nb4AlC3) MAX phases have yielded to tailored
structure as well as metallic and ceramic properties [128,129]. Fig. 3
shows the representative atomic structure of 211, 312, and 413 MAX
phases  consisting  of  hexagonal  crystal  systems  in  the  P63/mmc  space
group. In the selective etching of the A layer, HF is commonly used to
particularly attack the weaker bond of M-A. Meanwhile, M-X bonds are
remarkably tough due to their mixed metallic-covalent nature, hence,
leaving a 2D layered structure after selectively removing the A layer. To
date, several other etchants and their unique combinations have been
investigated  aside  from  HF  [130],  including  the  use  of  HCl–LiF,
HCl–NaF,  NH4HF2,  NaOH,  and  tetramethylammonium  hydroxide

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010973

I. Hussain et al.

only main difference is that the interlayer distance of multilayer MXene
appeared to be larger for NH4HF2 due to the intercalation of ammonia
ions than HF. Typically, the use of NH4HF2 replaces the risk brought by
HF  while  providing  NH3/NH4+
ions  as  intercalants  that  enter  MXene
layers [144]. This resulted in the formation of (NH4)3AlF6 as by-products
which are then washed away through the rinsing process. A comparison
of the HF and LiF/HCl etching is depicted in Fig. 4b–d. Initially, the A
layers were exfoliated from their exposure to the etchants through edge
sites  and  defects  (voids  and  cracks).  In  the  case  of  LiF/HCl,  only  the
exposed A layer was initially etched, and the inner region was mostly left
unetched due to insufficient space and poor accessibility for the reaction
to  occur. Though the  delamination  of MXene occurred  spontaneously
with Li
cations and water molecules intercalating the MXene sheets,
the process still resulted in incomplete exfoliation and the formation of
impurities (TiO2, TiF4, and AlF3). Meanwhile, HF obtained a fully etched
multilayer  due  to  HF’s  capability  to  attack  the  grain  boundaries  of
polycrystalline  MAX  particles,  hence  exposing  and  propagating  the
exfoliation of A layers with a high yield and quicker rate than LiF/HCl.
However,  multi-layer  MXene  was  obtained
remained
and
un-delaminated due to the absence of intercalating agents.

+

The concept of intercalation relies on the structure of the cation that
penetrates the available spaces in between MXene sheets. These cations
affect the d-spacings of MXene, as depicted in Fig. 4e and f [147]. The
appearance  of  (002)  peak  towards  lower  diffraction  angles  (Fig.  4f)
depicted  the  change  in  the  c  lattice  parameter  (c-LP)  consistent  for
multilayer- and/or delaminated MXenes. Originally, the evaluated MAX
phase, (V2/3Sc)2AlC, had a d-spacing of 6.6 Å and expanded to 19.4 Å
after  HF  treatment.  Further  delamination  with  TBAOH  (tetrabuty-
lammonium hydroxide) increased the d-spacing to 30.3 Å. Meanwhile,
LiF + HCl still depicted a high-intensity peak related to its MAX phase,
with  a  low  appearance  of  intercalated  MXene.  Hence,  the  effect  of
different fluoride salt intercalants can effectively control the d-spacing
of as-formed MXenes, as depicted in Fig. 4g. Wang et al. [148] evaluated
the  effect  of  fluoride  salts
in  HCl  mixed  solution  using  a
hydrothermal-assisted method. It was found that NH4F with HCl yielded
a  large  electrochemically  active  surface,  lower  resistance,  and  higher
specific capacitance compared to other samples. Liu et al. [70] evaluated
the effect of MXene prepared with LiF, NaF, KF, and NH4F in HCl. For
instance, MXene  synthesized from LiF  and  NH4F can absorb methane
under  high  pressure  and  can  retain  methane  under  normal  pressure
which can be advantageous in capturing methane or other hazardous gas
molecules. Meanwhile, MXene synthesized from NaF and KF can absorb
methane under high pressure and release methane under low pressure,
rendering importance in the storage of natural gas. Such intercalation
techniques have shown favorable diffusion kinetics on MXene/graphene
heterostructures. Demiroglu et al. [149] evaluated the lowering of en-
ergy barriers in the heterostructure by intercalating Na and K ions are
found  to  be  beneficial  for  fast  charge/discharge  rates  in  battery
applications.

3.2. Fluorine-free synthesis

It is known that the purpose of HF has been established as a common
way  to  derive  MXene.  However,  aside  from  the  adverse  health  effect
associated  with  the  use  of  HF  [150],  it  was  also  found  that
HF-terminated  MXene  also  affects  the  theoretical  and  experimental
calculation  of  the  lithium  storage  capacity  [151–153].  Knowing  the
indifference between materials may serve as a guide in the removal of
one material over the other [114]. For MXene, the A layer has always
been the target of removal. For instance, M-A bonds are weaker than
M-X bonds [154], hence HF has been successful in the removal of the A
layer. Similarly, the appropriate voltage range for the electrochemical
etching of Al from Ti2AlC in an aqueous electrolyte can be determined
[155,156]. In this section, HF-free methods for preparing MXenes will be
discussed  which  can  also  benefit  few  layers  MXene  and  their  use  in
hybrid materials.

Fig.  3. MAX  phases  with  different  configurations  (yellow  dashed  lines  are
symmetry guides).

(TMAOH) [68,72,131], and other HF-free methods.

3.1. Fluorine-assisted etching

Aqueous  HF  acid.  To  understand  the  structure  of  MAX  phases,
Fig. 4a shows the crystalline configuration of a typical M2AX wherein
two layers of metal sandwich a carbon layer, and this structure is then
interleaved  with  the  A  layer.  Upon  etching  with  HF,  the  A  layer  is
selectively removed from the structure without affecting the M layer.
The spontaneous dissociation of HF leads to the opening of an interlayer
gap along the formation of AlF3 and H2 which eventually leaves the MAX
system [132]. In this process under the presence of HF and H2O, func-
tionalized MXene with surface terminations (O, OH, and F) are formed,
hence  giving  unique  and  tailored  structural  and  electronic  properties
[133]. Ever since then, HF has been utilized in many MAX phases with
selective removal of A layers in the commonly reported 211, 312, and
413  MAX  configurations,  such  as  Ti2AlC,  Ti3AlCN,  and  Ta4AlC3,
respectively  [134].  For  much  more  complicated  MAX-like  structures,
such as Hf-Al-C, Y–Al–C, and Zr–Al–C systems, Al–C is removed instead
of the typical Al layer [135–137].

Hence, HF-assisted synthesis of few-layered MXene with –OH, –O,
and –F functionality is beneficial in preparing MXene heterostructures.
For instance, the biofungi adsorption strategy was utilized by Cao et al.
[138]  in  preparing  fungi-derived  N-rich  carbonaceous  nanoribbon
(NCRib) on MXene to form 2D/1D MXene@NCRib heterostructures. It
was mentioned that the hydroxide and amino functional groups present
in  the  chitin  of  the  nanoribbon-like  fungus  showed  high  chemical af-
finity towards the –OH surface groups of Ti3C2Tx  nanosheets. Though
the use of HF has been established for the general synthesis of MXene
[66],  challenges  pertaining  to  uncontrolled  F-termination,  multi-step
synthesis,  difficulty  to  form  stable  colloids,  oxidation  stability,  and
toxicity eventually led to seeking HF-free methods [139]. Hence, syn-
thesis  process  requiring  HF  entails  long  etching  time  and  aggressive
etching conditions which requires detailed protective procedures [140,
141].

Fluoride-salt etchants and cation intercalation. Similar to the effect
of HF, fluoride salt-containing solutions can form an in-situ HF solution
liable in etching the A layer, and/or utilize cations to intercalate and
weaken  in  between  sheets.  Such  solutions  are  reported  in  solutions
containing  cobalt  fluoride/HCl  [142],  FeF3/HCl  [143],  bifluorides
(NaHF2, KHF2, NH4HF2 in water) [144,145], and LiF, NaF, KF or NH4F
in HCl [70]. However, the main difference in the effect of exfoliation has
been observed when compared to HF. Kim et al. [146] evaluated the
etching mechanism of aluminum layers during MXene synthesis using
HF,  NH4HF2,  and  LiF/HCl  solution.  In  their  study,  HF  and  NH4HF2
resulted  in  almost  similar  effects  wherein  the  grain  boundaries  of
polycrystal MAX particles exposed more edge sites to the etchant. The

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010974

I. Hussain et al.

Fig. 4. (a) Schematic illustration of the HF-assisted exfoliation of MAX phase to derive 2D MXene. Illustration of the Al etching mechanism for LiF/HCl and HF
solutions: (b) Polycrystal particle of the pristine Ti3AlC2 MAX phase before the etching process. The etching mechanism for polycrystal MAX particles in (c) LiF/HCl
and (d) HF solutions. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [146]. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (e) Full range XRD pattern of (V2/3Sc1/2)2AlCmix
before etching, after etching in HF, after etching in HF followed by TBAOH intercalation and delamination, and after etching in LiF + HCl. (f) Same as (e) but focusing
on 5–15
range showing shift in c-LP. High-intensity peaks of V2AlC in (a) are marked with a dashed line, and peaks originating from ScF3, an impurity after etching,
are marked with a star. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [147]. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) The XRD patterns of V2CTx synthesized by
◦
etching V2AlC with LiF, NaF, KF, and NH4F at 90
C for five days. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [148]. Copyright 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier
B.V.

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010975

I. Hussain et al.

Alkali  treatment.  To  better  know  the  property  of  an  A  layer,
aluminum, an amphoteric element, is a common component employed
as an A phase with certain reactivity within an acidic and basic envi-
ronment  [157].  Certain  reports  have  utilized  alkali  etchants,  such  as
KOH  [158]  and  NaOH  [159].  Xue  et  al.  [160]  combined  ball-milling
with TMAOH and LiCl solution to etch Ti3AlC2  in a one-step method.
The  resulting  fluoride-free  MXene,  P–Ti3C2,  revealed  a  successful
etching of the MAX phase (Fig. 5a) and obtained a higher surface area
than HF-treated (HF–Ti3C2) and pristine Ti3AlC2  (Fig. 5b). Such struc-
(cid:0) 1) gained the advantage of ~3
tural properties of P–Ti3C2 (310 mAh g
times  lithium  storage  performance  compared  to  HF–Ti3C2  (110  mAh
(cid:0) 1).
g

Halogen-based  etching.  Interestingly,  targeting  Al  to  form  by-
products  that  are  easy  to  remove  has  been  one  of  the  effective  ap-
proaches  to  selectively  remove  Al  layers.  Shi  et  al.  [161]evaluated  a
fluoride-free,  iodine  (I2)  assisted  etching  technique  for  preparing  2D

in  water  for  at

MXene. The etching technique offered oxygen-rich MXene sheets with
high yield (71%), thinner sheets (~5 nm) with moderate sizes (ca. 1.8
μm),  and  great  stability
least  2  weeks.  A
room-temperature  etching  method  utilizing  halogens  (Br2,  I2)  and
interhalogen (ICl, IBr) etchants in anhydrous media is used by Jawaid
et al. [162] to fabricate MXene. For instance, in their initial work, Br2 is
added and reacts with Ti3AlC2, resulting in the formation of AlBr3. The
AlBr3  are rendered inert through the addition of a stabilizer, tetrabu-
tylammonium  bromide,  TBAX.  Meanwhile,  etching  with  I2  yields  the
formation of AlI3, which may also be removed by the addition of TBAX.
The purification was pursued in a non-polar solvent and can be redis-
persed  forming  stable  colloidal  suspension  in  low  dielectric  organic
solvents (tetrahydrofuran, acetonitrile, and chloroform). Fig. 5c shows
the  changes  in  the  crystallinity  of  the  MAX  phases  upon  altering  the
halogen  etching  conditions  wherein  the  interlayer  spacing  increases
with  the  atomic  radius  of  the  halogen.  Though  halogen-etching  is  an

Fig. 5. (a) XRD and (b) N2 adsorption-desorption isotherms of Ti3AlC2, HF–Ti3C2, and P–Ti3C2, respectively. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [160]. Copyright
2020  American  Chemical  Society.  (c)  Interlayer  spacing  of  Ti3AlC2  and  various  halogen-terminated  MXenes.  Layer  spacing  increases  with  the  atomic  radius  of
halogen.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Ref.  [162].  Copyright  2021  American  Chemical  Society.  (d)  Preparation  of  Ti3C2–Cu/Co  hybrids.  Reproduced  with
permission from Ref. [163]. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) XRD patterns of pristine Ti3AlC2  before (black line) and after (red line) reaction with CuCl2,
multilayered  MS-Ti3C2Tx  (blue  line),  and  e-MS-Ti3C2Tx  (green  line)  TBAOH  treatment.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Ref.  [164].  Copyright  2021  American
Chemical Society. (f) Al 2p and (g) F 1s spectra of E-etched and HF-etched Nb2CTxnanosheets. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [168]. Copyright 2020 The
Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. XRD Patterns of Ti3C2Tz synthesized in organic solvents (h) after washing, drying, and grinding of filtered films, (i) Same as
(h) but focused on low angles. Patterns are shifted vertically for clarity. The molecular structure of the organic solvents used is shown right above the corresponding
XRD pattern. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [139]. Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010976

I. Hussain et al.

interesting  approach,  limited  studies  have  been  evaluated,  hence,
requiring further exploration of other MAX phases.

(cid:0)

/Cu2+

Molten salt. The use of molten salt allows Cl-containing compounds
to react with the MAX phase, as schematically shown in Fig. 5d [163]. As
depicted  in  Fig.  5d,  the  Al  layer  was  initially  oxidized  to  form  Al3+
concurrently with the reduction of metals Co2+
, a Lewis acid, to
Co/Cu.  As  a  product,  AlCl3  gas  was  formed,  further  expanding  the
MXene layer. Meanwhile, metallic Co/Cu clusters can be formed from
the  partial  reaction  of  excess  Co/Cu  with  exposed  Ti  atoms  while
charged Cl
anions terminated the surface of MXene. At the same time,
these metal clusters are highly valuable in energy storage where redox
activity  is  highly  desirable.  The  formation  of  metal  clusters  can  also
provide  enhanced  stability  and  improved  charge  transfer  by  being
sandwiched  in  between  lamellar  structures  of  MXene  through  their
successful  connection  from  O-terminated  groups  [163].  On  the  other
hand, metallic particles can be removed by using ammonium persulfate
(APS)  which  is  used  as  an  oxidizing  solution  and  can  further  render
O-termination on the MXene [164]. Fig. 5e shows the XRD patterns of a
MAX  phase  before  and  after  removal  from  the  molten  salt  bath  (red
plot), after washing in APS to remove Cu (blue plot), and the MXene
after TBAOH exfoliation treatment (green). The immense reduction of
the  peaks  from  the  MAX  strongly  suggests  that  the  etching  was  suc-
◦
cessful, but the presence of distinct peaks (2θ angles = 43.29
,
◦
and 74.13
) also suggested the presence of metallic Cu. After washing
with APS, Cu was successfully removed. Finally, after further TBAOH
treatment and freeze-drying, the XRD revealed broadened and shifted
peaks  suggesting  an  expanded  interlayer  and  smaller  flake  size  of
MXene.  Molten  salts  also  showed  success  in  exfoliating  other  MAX
phases, such as using CuCl2 in Ti3SiC2 [165], ZnCl2 in (Ti3AlC2, Ti2AlC,
Ti2AlN,  and  V2AlC)  [166],  and  LiCl–KCl  in  Ti3AlC2  assisted  through
electrochemical etching method [167].

, 50.43

◦

Electrochemical  etching.  Acid-assisted  [155],  molten  salt-assisted
[167],  and  thermal-assisted  [150]  (Fig.  5f)  electrochemical  etching
was also established to synthesize fluorine-free MXenes with low cyto-
toxicity, high porosity, good chemical stability, and excellent conduc-
tivity  [168].  The  advantage  of  using  electrochemical  etching  on  the
properties  of  the  exfoliated  MXene  was  shown  through  the  complete
absence of Al and F (Fig. 5f and g). In this case, the absence of Al showed
that the MAX phase is clearly exfoliated. Meanwhile, E-etched MXenes
showed  no presence of F.  It has been noted that HF-etched  MXene is
prone to oxidation [140], hence inducing instability and limited success
in biomedical, energy storage, and oxygen reduction reaction applica-
tions  [58,168–170]. Sun et al. [171] coupled electrochemical etching
with the lithium intercalation process, allowing Li
ions from the elec-
trolyte to intercalate into Al layers and expand Ti–C layers. Under the
action  of  an electric  field  force, single  or  bilayer  fluorine-free MXene
sheets were successfully prepared in a facile and rapid manner.

+

Organic solvents. Water-free methods are also available to produce
MXene, especially for highly water-sensitive nanomaterial fabrication,
such  as  MXene-reinforced  polymeric  nanocomposites  and  energy-
storage  electrodes  [172].  The  dispersion  and  colloidal  stability  of
MXenes  were  initially  studied  in  many  polar  organic  solvents  [173].
While  the  earlier  reported  process  of  synthesizing  MXene  requires
multi-step approaches, such as exfoliation followed by delamination, the
use of organic solvents may cut the process into one step [172]. Natu
et al. [139] developed a water-free method of fabricating MXene with
high F-termination using organic polar solvents (PC, NMP, DMSO, DMF,
DXN,  and  ACN)  in  the  presence  of  ammonium  dihydrogen  fluoride.
When NH4HF2 dissociates in the polar solvents, the solution yields NH4F
and  HF,  with  HF  performing  similarly  to  the  concept  of  typical  HF
etching. During this etching condition, the interlayer between MXene
sheets was mostly occupied by NH4+
cation complexes. The formation of
AlF3 and (NH4)3AlF6 before washing was also observed, suggesting that
the Al layer was etched out. Fig. 5h and i shows the XRD of the MXene
(denoted  as  MX)  after  washing, drying,  and  grinding  of  filtered  films
under  each  organic  solvent.  Except  for  DXN-MX  with  a  small  peak

◦
2θ representing unetched or partially etched MAX particles,
around 9
all the other organic solvent-assisted etching showed a high success rate.
It  was  observed  that  the  changes  in  the  d-spacing  may  reflect  the
intercalation of the organic solvent between the MXene layers. Such an
approach  can  be  beneficial  in  producing  water-sensitive  MXenes  in
reusable and easy-to-recover solvents.

4. Preparation methods for MXene heterostructures

With each of the synthesis methods gaining beneficial outcomes, the
fabrication of MXenes can tailor unique properties needed for specific
applications. Thus, the quality, properties, and other characteristics of
MXene  as  how  it  is  produced  may  significantly  influence  its  further
preparation  with  hybrid  materials.  Table  2  shows  the  preparation  of
MXenes  from  their  parent  MAX  phases  where  typical  MXenes  are
terminated by functional groups, Tx, as –OH, –O, and –F. In line with
this,  fluorine  or  non-fluorine  synthesis  are  combined  with  techniques
that can aid better exfoliations of layers while inducing surface charges
or functional terminations on few-layer MXenes. The possible anchoring
mechanism  and  linkage  of  MXene-based  heterostructures  are  summa-
rized  in  Table  2  and  Fig.  6.  For  instance,  Jiao  et  al.  [174]  evaluated
TiO2-MXene heterostructures by controlling the hydrothermal oxidation
time,  hence,  replacing  the  F-groups  by  the  O-  groups  on  the  surface
MXene. Amination of MXenes modifies surface functional groups to be
hydrophilic, hence, weakening the van der Waals and hydrogen bonding
forces of MXene [175]. Through this process, the oxidation of MXene
can  be  inhibited  while  still  allowing  the  accordion-like  structure  to
exfoliate, leading to its excellent dispersity in water [175,176]. Mean-
while, surface charges aid electrostatic interaction between MXene and
secondary components. For instance, the opposite charges between the
surface of Ti3C2Tx and V2CTx and further aid from saturated alkali salt
solutions can form 2D heterostructures [177]. In another work [178],
self-assembly  via  hydrogen  bonding  helped
the  anchoring  of
nitrogen-containing  phenol–melamine–formaldehyde  resin-  Pluronic
P123 (PMF/P123) micelles on MXene surface. Upon its transformation
to  N-doped  mesoporous  carbon–MXene,  the  hybrid  architecture  con-
sisting of MXene layers in the carbon matrix not only avoided MXene
sheet restacking but also provided high specific surface area with good
conductivity  and  pseudocapacitive  properties.  Such  unique  hetero-
structures made from MXenes empower new and enhanced electrical,
mechanical, and electrochemical features.

For energy storage devices, the synergy between the materials serve
as one of the important factors to be considered when preparing hybrid
materials  [179–182].  For  instance,  3D  interconnected  networks  of
1T-MoS2/Ti3C2
by
magneto-hydrothermal  synthesis  provided  enhancement  in  electro-
chemical properties in SC applications [183]. While the 2D structure of
Ti3C2  MXene  can  facilitate  rapid  electron  transport,  the  resulting  3D
network  of  1T-MoS2/Ti3C2  heterostructures  provided  larger  interface
with the electrolyte hence, fast-tracking the ion-diffusion.

heterostructures

prepared

MXene

While many factors are yet to be considered, such as compatibility
and  synergy  of  MXene  with  the  secondary  material,  simple  and  safe
preparations, availability of materials, etc., there are still many oppor-
tunities  to  be  explored  for  MXene-based  heterostructures.  Hence,  the
properties and functional groups present in MXene can play a big role in
the development and preparation of MXene-based heterostructures and
hybrid materials.

5. MXene-based heterostructure composites

With  the  established  guideline  in  preparing  MXene  with  surface
functionalization and distinct properties, novel and hybrid MXene-based
nanomaterials  are  continuously  sought  in  electrode  material  develop-
ment.  Combining  MXene  with  other  materials,  particularly  polymer-,
carbon- and transition metal-based materials, is an easy and widely used
method  to  prevent  the  aggregation,  restacking,  oxidation,  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010977

I. Hussain et al.

Table 2
Preparation of MXenes and their synthesis towards MXene-based heterostructures.

MAX
phase

Etchant

MXene (Tx represents different
surface functional groups)

Source of secondary/hybrid
materials

Method for inducing
heterostructures

As-formed
MXene-based
heterostructure

Possible linkage

Ref.

Mo3AlC2

NaOH
+ Na2S

Mo2CTx where Tx is OH, O, or S

Sonication with TAA as second
step sulfidation

Ti3AlC2

V2AlC
Mo2TiAlC2

Ti3AlC2

Ti3AlC2

Ti3AlC2

LiF +
HCl
HF
HF

LiF +
HCl

LiF +
HCl

LiF +
HCl

Ti3C2Tx

V2CTx
Mo2TiC2Tx

–

Sulfur powder

Ti3C2Tx followed by further
amination with
aminopropyltriethoxysilane
(APTES)

organic linkers: 1,3,5-trifor-
mylbenzene (TFB), and p-
phenylenediamine (PDA) in
1,4-dioxane

Ti3C2Tx

–

Ti3C2Tx (Tx = –OH, –O, –F, and
(cid:0) Cl)

Fe3O4 nanodots

Ti3AlC2

HCl/LiF

Ti3C2Tx (Tx = ((cid:0) F, –OH, (cid:0) Cl, –O,
etc.)

3,4,9,10-
perylenetetracarboxylic
dianhydride (PTCDA)

Microwave-assisted
hydrothermal
treatment
Simple colloidal
mixing

Liquid mixing
process
Schiff base
condensation

MoS2/Mo2CTx

Mo–S bonds

Ti3C2Tx-V2CTx

Electrostatic self-
assembly

MoS2-on-MXene

MXene@COF

Controlled in situ
oxidation using
hydrothermal
process
Ultrasonic
treatment

TiO2-MXene
(Ti3C2Tx)

Fe3O4/Ti3C2Tx

Simple mixing

MXene/Organics

[184]

[177]

[110]

[185]

[174]

[186]

[187]

Transformation of
Mo–O motifs to MoS2
condensation between
the aldehydes and
amino groups in the
presence of catalysts
(acetic acid)
conversion of Ti3C2Tx to
TiO2

van der Waals
interaction-facilitated
self-assembly process
electrostatic self-
assembly

alcohol  (PVA),  both  hydrophilic  polymers,  resulting  in  the  first  MXe-
ne/polymer composite. PDDA was chosen because of its cationic poly-
mer  and  the  Ti3C2Tx  flakes  are  negatively  charged,  and  the  PVA  was
preferred  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  including  its  water  solubility,  high
concentration of hydroxyl groups along its backbone, and widespread
use in gel electrolytes and composites [198–200]. An illustration of the
properties of conductive, flexible, and free-standing Ti3C2Tx/PDDA and
Ti3C2Tx/PVA composite films are depicted in Fig. 7a. Vacuum-assisted
filtration (VAF) was utilized to make Ti3C2Tx/PDDA and Ti3C2Tx/PVA
composite films that were extremely flexible. The as-produced Ti3C2Tx
colloidal  solution  measured  a  negative  zeta-potential  ((cid:0) 39.5  mV),
hence, the Ti3C2Tx  surfaces were negatively charged. Thus, PDDA as a
cationic polymer was used in nanocomposites. The Ti3C2Tx/PVA com-
posites exhibited considerably improved tensile strength compared with
bare  Ti3C2Tx  or  PVA  film.  Much  higher  volumetric  capacitance  was
achieved for all three samples (Fig. 7b) compared to activated graphene
[201] and graphene gel films [202]. In 2015, Boota et al. [203] reported
electrochemically  active,  aligned,  and  metal-free  polymerization  of
polypyrrole (PPy) as a conductive polymer, which can be intercalated
between Ti3C2Tx MXene sheets and can provide fast charge transport as
shown  in  Fig.  7c.  The  PPy/Ti3C2Tx  composite  yielded  volumetric
(cid:0) 3 and capacitance retention of 92% after 25,
capacitance of ≈1000 F cm
000 cycles in 1 m H2SO4. The self-assembled layered architecture with
aligned PPy was confined between the conductive Ti3C2Tx monolayers,
which exhibited high electronic conductivity, fast reversible redox re-
actions, and better ion transport due to short diffusion pathways, cred-
iting high electrochemical performance and excellent cycle life. In the
following  year,  Zhu  et  al.  [204]  also  obtained  a  composite  by  inter-
calating PPy into layered Ti3C2Tx MXene sheets. The as-prepared free--
standing and flexible composite electrode exhibited enhancement in the
(cid:0) 3) and
capacitance from 150 (300 F cm
surprisingly did not lose any capacitance even after 20,000 charging/-
discharging cycles in 0.5 m H2SO4. In 2017, Qin et al. [205] reported
Mo1.33C  MXene  with  vacancy  ordering  in  an  aligned  layer  structure
MXene/poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene): poly(styrene sulfonic acid)
(PEDOT:  PSS)  as  shown  schematically  in  Fig.  7d.  Further,  the
free-standing  flexible  composite  was  post-treated  with  concentrated
H2SO4,  exhibiting  enhanced  conductivity  and  capacity  over  pristine
Mo1.33C  MXene  and  the  nontreated  Mo1.33C/PEDOT:  PSS  composite
films. The optimized and treated Mo1.33C/PEDOT: PSS composite film

(cid:0) 3) to 203 mF cm

(cid:0) 2 (406 F cm

Fig.  6. Possible  anchoring  mechanism  of  secondary  materials  on  the  surface
of MXene.

degradation  of  MXene  nanosheets.  To  avoid  the  restacking  of  MXene
nanosheets in MXene-carbon NCP, polymer and carbon nanomaterials,
in particular carbon nanotubes (CNTs), activated carbon (AC), and Gr,
are  used  as  spacers  [188].  Similarly,  to  enhance  the  electrochemical
characteristics  of  MXene  for  a  specific  electrochemical  application,
conducting  polymers  and  transition  metal-based  compounds,  such  as
metal oxides, sulfides, and phosphides, are mixed with MXene [189].
There are several review articles on MXene and carbon-based compos-
ites  synthesis  which  are  evaluated  in  applications  including  electro-
chemical  sensors,  anodes  for  Na  and  K-ion  storage,  catalysts,
electrochemical capacitor electrodes, etc. [190–196]. Thus, in this re-
view, we focused on the electrochemical electrode materials based on
MXene heterostructures and hybrid materials.

5.1. MXene and polymer-based heterostructure composites

For the first time in 2014, Gogotsi and his co-workers [197] com-
bined the most researched MXene, Ti3C2Tx, with poly-diallyl dimethy-
lammonium  chloride  (PDDA)  and  an  electrically  neutral  polyvinyl

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010978

I. Hussain et al.

Fig. 7. (a) Schematic illustration of MXene-based functional films with adjustable properties, (b) volumetric capacitances performance of Ti3C2Tx, Ti3C2Tx/PDDA,
and Ti3C2Tx/PVA-KOH films at different scan rates. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [197]. Copyright 2014, PNAS. (c) Heterocyclic pyrrole molecules are in
situ aligned and polymerized in the absence of an oxidant between layers of the 2D Ti3C2Tx. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [203]. Copyright 2015, Wiley. (d)
Schematic  illustration  of  the  preparation  of  composite  films  and  the  fabrication  of  a  solid-state  supercapacitor.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Ref.  [205].
Copyright 2017, Wiley. (e) Schematic illustrating nucleation and growth of PEDOT on the surface and in the top few Ti3C2Tx  layers. (f) Cross-sectional scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) image of PEDOT deposited on Ti3C2Tx, (g) magnified view of PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx  interface, (h) Schematic of PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx  symmetric
micro-supercapacitor (MSC). Reproduced with permission from Ref. [208]. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (i) Schematic illustration. (i) The scheme for electrochemical
(cid:0) 1. Inset: Optical
polymerization of conjugated polymer-MXene composite nanospheres, and (j) CV curves of the AMSCs device bent with different angles at 100 mV s
image of the flexible AMSCs. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [210]. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.

(cid:0) 1  1  m
exhibited  a  large  areal  capacitance  of  1310  F  cm
H2SO4. Finally, the Mo1.33C/PEDOT: PSS composite was used as flexible
electrode materials SC device. The flexible solid-state SCs exhibited a
(cid:0) 3, a power density of 19,470 mW
maximum capacitance of 568 F cm
(cid:0) 3 in PVA/H2SO4
cm
gel  electrolyte.  To  maximize  the  energy  density  (E=1/2CV2),  a  wide

(cid:0) 3, and an ultrahigh energy density of 33.2 mWh cm

(cid:0) 3  at  2  mV  s

voltage  window  is  critically  important  in  SC  devices.  In  2018,  Boota
et al. [206] fabricated three different asymmetric SC devices by using
Ti3C2Tx  MXene  as  cathode  and  [polyaniline, polypyrrole,  and  poly(3,
4-ethylene  dioxythiophene)  deposited  on  reduced  graphene  oxide
(rGO)  sheets  (rGO–polymer)]  anodes  as  materials.  Such  ASC  device’s
voltage window was extended to 1.45 V in 0.3 m H2SO4. In the same

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010979

I. Hussain et al.

year, Armin et al. [207] reported Ti3C2Tx and polyaniline (PANI) hybrid
materials based on free-standing films with various thicknesses through
oxidant-free in-situ polymerizations. The optimized thin film Ti3C2Tx/-
(cid:0) 1) and volu-
PANI composites exhibited excellent gravimetric (503 F g
(cid:0) 3) capacitances. In the next year, the same group
metric  (1682 F cm
[208]  reported  micro-supercapacitor  (MSC)  based  on  Ti3C2Tx/PEDOT
heterostructures.  Such  heterostructured  composite  was  fabricated
through electrodeposition using a non-aqueous monomeric electrolytic
bath. The PEDOT/MXene heterostructure is shown in Fig. 7e, where the
close  connection  between  top  MXene  layers  and  PEDOT  chains  was
advantageous for the synergistic enhancement of electrochemical per-
formance.  PEDOT  has  the  appearance  of  little  fibroid-like  particles
attached to the MXene surface as shown in the SEM image (Fig. 7 f-g).
The PEDOT layer thickness ranged from 70 to 100 nm, depending on the
deposition time. The intrinsic electrical conductivity of PEDOT depos-
ited  during  this  procedure  also  influenced  the  dense  deposition  of
PEDOT  on  top  of  the  MXene  surface  and  the  overall  conductivity  of
PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx.  The  PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx  MSC  device  was  fabricated  as
shown schematically in Fig. 7h. Herein, the design was created using an
automated  scalpel  lithography  process.  As  un-doped  PEDOT  was  less
conductive than doped PEDOT, the conductivity of pure MXene film (40
(cid:0) 1,  whereas  the  conductivity  of
nm)  investigated  was  2500  S  cm
(cid:0) 1. Based on CV curves, the
PEDOT-MXene film (100 nm) was 1000 S cm
PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx (100 nm) MSC attained a high areal capacitance of 2.4
(cid:0) 1, while retaining 1.4 mF cm
(cid:0) 2  at
mF cm
1000  mV  s
the  electrochromic  behavior  of

(cid:0) 2  at a scan rate of 10 mV s

Interestingly,

(cid:0) 1.

PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx  MSC was also studied using resonant Raman spectros-
copies  and  in-situ  UV–vis.  Qin  et  al.  [209]  reported  PEDOT/Mo1.33C
composite  by  electrochemical  in-situ  polymerization  (EP)  from  the
mixture  of  MXene  and  organic  monomers  without  additional  electro-
lytes.  During  this  process,  the  colloidal  solution  of  MXene  not  only
served as a highly conductive solvent, but also self-assembled into the
polymer  film  during  the  polymerization  process,  resulting
in
molecular-level conjugated polymer-MXene composite films with a high
doping  content  compared  to  conventional  electrolytes  (Fig.  7i).  This
composite was used  as a negative  electrode  and MnO2  was used  as a
positive  electrode  for  the  fabrication  of  flexible  MSC  device,  thus
exhibiting excellent rate performance, ultrahigh-energy density (250.1
(cid:0) 3), and great cycling stability (92%, after 10000 charge/di-
mWh cm
scharge cycles). Interestingly, the flexible MSC device exhibited almost
the same capacitance at a wide voltage (1.6 V) as well as at different bent
angles at the same scan rate (Fig. 7j).

Recently, Li et al. [97] reported a wavy Ti3C2Tx  negative electrode
through a polystyrene (PS) template approach and exhibited volumetric
(cid:0) 1), and a significantly enhanced
(cid:0) 3 at 10 mV s
capacitance (1277 F cm
(cid:0) 1)  in  3  m  H2SO4  medium.  The
rate  capability  (89%  at  1000  mV  s
capacitance of wavy electrodes was higher than simply aligned electrode
materials. Covering the Ti3C2Tx surface with an oxidation-resistant layer
was a simple way to improve Ti3C2Tx MXenes electrochemical stability
and allowed it to function at a positive potential. PANI, having a posi-
tively  charged  surface,  aggressively  adhered  to  MXene’s  negatively
charged surface. Furthermore, in the positive potentials window, PANI

Fig.  8. Schematic  diagram  of  the  preparation  of  compressed  PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx  electrode  and  morphology  structure  of  the  corresponding  products.  (a)  Uniform
colloidal solution of Ti3C2Tx  flakes and PS spheres. (b) Freestanding Ti3C2Tx@PS film formed by filtration. (c) After removing PS spheres by annealing, a 3D M-
Ti3C2Tx film was obtained. (d) 3D PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx film formed by dropping PANI solution onto 3D M-Ti3C2Tx and drying, (e) A compressed PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx film.
f) Schematic illustration of PANI deposited on the two sides of Ti3C2Tx. Cross-sectional. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [212]. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (g)
Schematic representation of the designed all-pseudocapacitive asymmetric device in which PANI0.7/MXene and MXene electrodes serve as the cathode and anode,
(cid:0) 2), and the asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous
respectively. (h) CV curves of PANI/MXene electrode (1 mg cm
electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s

(cid:0) 1. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [213]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.

(cid:0) 2), MXene electrode (1.8 mg cm

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109710

I. Hussain et al.

has a large theoretical specific capacitance.

Integrating 2D materials into a 3D porous framework is a successful
way of creating a more open structure with a greater specific surface
area, which is advantageous for producing nanocomposites with other
materials. Furthermore, ionic and electrical transport in electrode ma-
terials  can  also  be  facilitated  by  the  3D  intercalated  structure  [211].
Inspired  by  these  findings,  Li  et  al.  [212]  reported  ultrafast  poly-
aniline@MXene  electrode  by  casting  a  homogenous  polyaniline  layer

onto a 3D porous Ti3C2Tx MXene obtained through a PS template (Fig. 8
a-f). Initially, the authors dispersed negatively charged Ti3C2Tx  MXene
with  negatively  charged  3D  PS  spheres  as  a  template.  The  homoge-
neously  dispersed  solution  was  transformed  into  a  film  through  VAF.
The  3D  PS  spheres  were  uniformly  wrapped  with  Ti3C2Tx  MXene
nanosheets.  To  obtain  an  open,  interconnected  as  well  as  retained
free-standing  structure,  the  PS  spheres  as  templates  were  removed
◦
through  annealing  in  argon  at  450
C.  The  resulting  3D  microporous

Fig. 9. (a) Schematic diagram of the formation and (b) cycling performance of WO3–Ti3C2  hybrids and composites. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [225].
Copyright  2018,  Wiley.  (c)  schematic  illustration  for  the  synthesis  process  of  NiMoO4/M10  hybrids  and  (d)  Schematic  illustration  of  the  advantages  of  2D/2D
heterostructure and the interaction between NiMoO4 and Ti3C2Tx. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web
version  of  this  article.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Ref.  [227].  Copyright  2019,  Elsevier.  (e)  the  process  used  for  the  synthesis  of  RuO2⋅xH2O@MXene
nanocomposite, and (f) the fabrication processes for screen-printed flexible MSC devices. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [230]. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (g)
Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of M/MoO3  hybrid films and (h) corresponding volumetric specific capacitance of various electrodes. Reproduced
with permission from Ref. [85]. Copyright 2020, Springer.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109711

I. Hussain et al.

(cid:0) 3  at  10  mV  s

(cid:0) 3  up to 5000 mV s

(cid:0) 1) was
Ti3C2Tx (3D M-Ti3C2Tx) film’s electrical conductivity (600 S cm
(cid:0) 1)  with  a  comparable
much  higher  than  3D  graphene  film  (12  S  cm
structure [211,212]. Further, 3D PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx film was obtained by
the  introduction  of  PANI  into  the  3D  M-Ti3C2Tx  through  a  facile
drop-and-dry method. A compact film was obtained by applying under
10 MPa and used as electrode materials for electrochemical measure-
ments. The 3D PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx film as a positive electrode exhibited a
(cid:0) 1)  and  high
high  volumetric  capacitance  (1632  F  cm
(cid:0) 1) in 3 m H2SO4.
capacitance retention (827 F cm
Recently,  Wang  et  al.  [213]  used  carbon  cloth  as  a  current  collector
claiming  that  VAF  can  be  time-consuming,  energy  consumption,  and
subject to filter membrane size for large-scale production processes for
the  fabrication  of  electrode  materials.  Thus,  they  designed  PAN-
I@Ti3C2Tx film as a positive ((cid:0) 0.2–0.8 V) and bare Ti3C2Tx as a negative
((cid:0) 0.6–0.3 V) electrode material through the blade coating process and
then engineered a flexible ASC device (Fig. 8g and h). The device was
successfully operated in a wide voltage window of 1.4 V, exhibiting a
(cid:0) 1 at a power density of 1687.3
maximum energy density of 65.6 Wh L
(cid:0) 1.  Moreover,  mechanical  stability  was  checked  by  bending  the
W  L
device at various angles. Number of other MXene/polymer composites
were reported for various applications [214–223].

5.2. MXene and oxide -based heterostructure composites

Transition metal oxides (TMOs) with good redox behavior or pseu-
docapacitive are combined with MXene to develop electrode materials
with  synergetic  architectures  to  improve  the  electrochemical  perfor-
mance of energy storage devices [224]. There are four primary routes for
the  synthesis  of  MXene-metal  oxide  composites:  i)  Ex-situ  mixing,  ii)
one-step  in-situ  growth,  iii)  multistep  in-situ  synthesis,  and  (iv)
self-oxidation. In this section, we will summarize the recently developed
MXene metal oxide composites for SC electrode materials.

In 2018, Ambade et al. [225] reported a composite based on Ti3C2
MXene  and  WO3  through  a  hydrothermal  approach.  Initially,  Ti3C2
MXene nanosheets were fabricated through etching of the A layer in the
MAX  phase  as  reported  elsewhere  [226].  The  as-obtained  Ti3C2Tx
MXene was mixed with WO3 precursors, and the pH was altered by using
two different acids as shown schematically in Fig. 9a. The monoclinic
and hexagonal phases were obtained through pH 5 and pH 2 by using
HCl  and  HNO3  during  hydrothermal  reactions,  respectively.  Interest-
ingly, the electrodes of 2D synergetic Ti3C2/WO3  hybrid architectures
virtually doubled the specific capacitance as compared to bare mono-
clinic phase WO3 (Mono WO3) and hexagonal polymorph of WO3 (Hexa
(cid:0) 1) with an
WO3) electrodes and demonstrated the greatest Csp (566 F g
outstanding life cycle (92%) of the original after 5000 cycles as shown in
Fig. 9b. With such exceptional performance, the following factors were
responsible  for  the  improved  electrochemical  performance  of  Hexa
Ti3C2/WO3 composite architectures over Mono Ti3C2/WO3 and pristine
WO3:  (i)  the  formation  of  a  2D  nanoparticulate  textured  sheet-like
structure  contributed  to  short  ion  diffusion  paths  and  promotes  fast
electronic  transport,  (ii)  the  addition  of  MXene  to  form  the  hybrid
favored electrical conductivity and aided in the rapid transfer of ions
while lowering internal resistance, and (iii) the formation of a 2D syn-
ergetic  architecture  of  Hexa  Ti3C2/WO3  composite  architectures  pro-
vided more active sites for charge storage. In 2019, Wang et al. [227]
reported  2D/2D  NiMoO4/Ti3C2Tx  heterostructure  via  hydrothermal
method and post-calcination. Similarly, the MAX phase was converted to
Ti3C2Tx  MXene  and  then  sonicated  to  obtain  well-dispersed  flakes  of
MXene.  The  final  heterostructure  was  optimized  by  using  different
amounts (0 mg, 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, and 20 mg) of MXene flakes in the
hydrothermal approach. The detailed synthesis approach is summarized
schematically in Fig. 9c. Among all, the 10 mg Ti3C2Tx  with NiMoO4
heterostructure  composite  exhibited  superior  specific  capacity,  and
stability as well as other electrochemical performance. The synergistic
impact between Ti3C2Tx with NiMoO4 heterostructure was achieved for
multiple  reasons  (Fig.  9d).  First,  the  NiMoO4  offered  several  redox

reactions  and  Ti3C2Tx  offered  excellent  conductivity  and  improved
wettability  due  to  the  presence  of  functional  groups.  Second,  the
particular flower-like laminar morphology offered a larger surface area
and  more  active  sites  for  redox  reactions.  Lastly,  the  2D/2D  hetero-
structure  composite  not  only  provided  shorter  electrolyte  migration
paths and quicker ion diffusion but also created more diffusion channels
for electrolyte transportation. In the same year, Li et al. [228] reported
fully printable, flexible MSCs based on RuO2@MXene nanosheets asso-
ciated  with  the  Ag  nanowires.  The  campsite  was  prepared  through  a
simple  aqueous-phase  synthetic  process.  RuO2  was  used  not  only
because of its high pseudocapacitive nature but also served as a spacer to
effectively  support  adjacent  Ti3C2Tx  MXene  nanosheets.  Such  process
will  not  only  promote  charge/ion  transport  but  also  minimize  the
restacking  of  MXene  nanosheets.  Initially,  Ti3C2Tx  MXene  nanosheets
were obtained, and then RuO2  was deposited on it via electrostatic in-
teractions  between  negatively  charged  MXene  surface  and  positively
charged Ru ions (Fig. 9e). The in-situ growth, which limits the agglom-
eration of RuO2  nanoparticles, was achieved due to the van der Waals
interaction  between  the  nanoparticles  and  MXene.  The  resulting
RuO2@MXene  nanocomposite  was  then  combined  with  an  AgNW  so-
lution  to  produce  a  gel-like,  printable  ink.  The  flexible  MSCs  were
constructed  by  direct  screen  printing  the  electrode  inks  onto  a  paper
substrate through a precise stainless-steel screen mesh (Fig. 9f). In the
final stage, PVA–KOH gel electrolyte was dropped onto the project area
of the microelectrodes. Thus, the MSCs printed with nanocomposite inks
(cid:0) 3 at 1 mV
resulted in an excellent volumetric capacitance (864.2 F cm
(cid:0) 1),  long-term  cycling  performance  (90%  after  10,000  cycles),  good
s
(cid:0) 1), exceptional flexibility,
(cid:0) 3  at 2000 mV s
rate capability (304.0 F cm
(cid:0) 3), and energy density (13.5 mWh
and tremendous power (48.5 W cm
cm

(cid:0) 3).
MoO3  has  been  greatly  investigated  pseudocapacitive  electrode
material due to its excellent mechanical properties [229]. For instance,
Wang et al. [85] integrated hydrothermally designed MoO3 (10%, 20%,
and 30%) with Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets, thus, obtaining free-standing
film  via  VAF  (Fig.  9g).  Both  Ti3C2Tx  MXene  nanosheets  and  MoO3
nanobelt dispersions have hydrophilic properties and can be quite stable
in  aqueous  conditions.  Compared  to  pristine  MXene  and  other  MXe-
ne/MoO3  hybrid electrode materials, 20% MoO3  belt and MXene com-
(cid:0) 3
posite  exhibited  superior  volumetric  capacitance  of  1817  F  cm
(Fig. 9h). The excellent electrochemical performance was attributed to
multiple reasons: (i) both MoO3  and MXene showed pseudocapacitive
features  in  an  acidic  electrolyte  in  the  potential  of  (cid:0) 0.6–0.3  V,  (ii)
MXene did not only play a role in enhancing conductivity but also used
as a flexible, free-standing, and self-supporting electrode materials, and
(iii)  in  addition,  MoO3  was  not only  used as  a  high pseudocapacitive
material  but  also  function  as  a  spacer  to  avoid  restacking  of  MXene
nanosheets.

Using  the  same  strategy,  Ma  et  al.  [231]  enhanced  the  electro-
chemically active sites of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets by anchoring Fe2O3
nanoparticles over MXene nanosheets via electrostatic self-assembly and
annealing treatments (Fig. 10a). The negatively charged based Ti3C2Tx
MXene nanosheets and positively charged based FeOOH nanoparticles
composite was sonicated at room temperature and then it was achieved
in paper form via VAF. Finally, the composite was annealed to get the
desired  hybrid  Ti3C2Tx/Fe2O3  paper.  The  composite-based  paper  was
immersed in 3 m H2SO4  for 24 h to obtain better wettability. Finally,
flexible symmetric SC was engineered by using Ti3C2Tx/Fe2O3 paper as a
negative electrode as well as positive electrode material in a 3 m H2SO4
medium, exhibiting 95.8% stability after 10,000 cycles. Such facile, low
cost, room temperature, and safe synthesis of flexible hybrid Ti3C2Tx/-
Fe2O3  composite not only avoided MXene oxidation but also exhibited
(cid:0) 3.  Recently,
ultra-high  volumetric  capacitance  of  ~2607  F  cm
sandwich-like  MXene/Fe3O4/MXene  film  was  designed  with  a  porous
layer of Fe3O4 as flexible electrode materials for SC applications [232].
Ni tape as a substrate was cleaned with plasma under vacuum and made
hydrophilic. Initially, MXene ink was drop-casted on Ni tape and dried.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109712

I. Hussain et al.

Fig.  10. (a)  Schematic  illustration  of  the  fabrication  process  of  Fe2O3  NPs@MX-based  flexible  supercapacitors.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Ref.  [240].
(cid:0) 2. (c) Rate per-
Copyright 2020, ACS Publications. (b) GCD curves of the Fe3O4/MXene and MXene/Fe3O4/MXene electrodes at the current density of 8 mA cm
(cid:0) 2. (d) Ion transport inside the Fe3O4/MXene electrode. (e) Ion
formance of the Fe3O4/MXene and MXene/Fe3O4/MXene electrodes from 0.5 mA cm
transport inside the MXene/Fe3O4/MXene electrode. (f) Electron transfer inside the Fe3O4/MXene electrode. (g) Electron transfer inside the MXene/Fe3O4/MXene
electrode. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [232]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (h) The schematic representation of the fabrication process of the nitrogen-doped
porous MXene/TiO2  heterogeneous film. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [233]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.

(cid:0) 2 to 8 mA cm

Further,  Fe3O4  was  deposited  through  drop-casting  followed  by  heat
treatment in a nitrogen environment. After that, the top Fe3O4 thin layer
was crystallized through laser treatment. Finally, MXene ink was drop-
ped onto the MXene/Fe3O4  thin film to create a flexible sandwich-like
MXene/Fe3O4/MXene  electrode.  The  flexible  sandwich-like  MXene/-
Fe3O4/MXene electrode exhibited lower IR drop (Fig. 10b) and much
higher  areal  capacitance  and  rate  capability  (Fig.  10c)  compared  to
MXene/Fe3O4  in 1 M aqueous Li2SO4  electrolyte. The superior perfor-
mance  was  attributed  to  multiple  reasons  as  schematically  shown  in
Fig. 10d–g. First, both upper and lower MXene layers provided a shorter
diffusion  distance  for  electrolyte  ions  to  reach  the  middle  Fe3O4  thin
film. Second, porous and interconnected Fe3O4  offered multiple chan-
nels for ions/electrons to pass through. Lastly, the thin sandwich-like
structure exhibited fast transport due to the conductive MXene sheets
and also offered strong interactions. Previously, the restacking of MXene
sheets was avoided by introducing spacers in between sheets. However,
it was difficult to guarantee that the implanted nanoparticles will have
even distribution across the MXenes sheets. Further, weak intrinsic in-
teractions between particles and MXenes may generate detachments and
separations,  resulting in electrical contact isolation. Inspired by  these
findings, Yu et al. [233] recently reported N-doped porous MXene/TiO2
heterogeneous  film  by  a  one-pot  procedure,  i.e.,  a  protective  hydro-
thermal  treatment  approach.  During  this  approach,  the  oxidation  of
MXene  was  controlled  and  N  atoms  were  doped  into  the  MXene
framework (Fig. 10h). Interestingly, 14 times higher areal capacitance
was achieved for doped porous MXene/TiO2 heterogeneous compared to
pristine  MXene.  Numerous  other  metal  oxide  and  MXene  composites
have been reported for several applications [84,196,234–239].

5.3. MXene and chalcogenide-based heterostructure composites

The restacking propensity and aggregation of the 2D structure are
suboptimal to the direct utilization of MXenes for energy storage and
conversion. To address these difficulties, MXenes are typically hybrid-
ized with other active materials to produce hierarchical MXene-based
heterostructures.  Hybridization  not only  prevents  MXenes  from  being

restacked by other active  materials but also improves heterostructure
performance. Among various materials, transition metal chalcogenides
consisting  of  transition  metal  sulfides  (TMS),  selenides  and  tellurides
have  sparked  a  lot  of  interest  because  of  their  abundance,  cost-
effectiveness,  modest  overpotentials,  and  distinctive  structures  [115].
Though few reports have  been investigated in the  heterostructures of
MXene-selenides [241] and MXene-tellurides [242], a lot of attention
has been given to MXene-TMS which will be discussed in this section.
Nonetheless,  the  intercalation/extraction process,  the  low  conduc-
tivity, and the large volume change of TMSs materials such as SnS, SnS2,
CoSe,  NiSe2,  and  MoSe2  can  cause  rapid  capacity  fading,  poor  rate
performances, and short cycle lifetimes [243]. Hence, MXenes and TMSs
heterostructures/composites may address these difficulties and improve
their overall performance. Based on these findings for both MXenes and
metal  sulfide,  Lu  et  al.  [88]  reported  a  Ni–S/d-Ti3C2  nanohybrid  via
etching of MAX phase, delamination of MXene, and then followed by
solvothermal  approach  (Fig.  11a  and  b).  Based  on  the  GCD  curves
(cid:0) 1, the specific capacity of the
(Fig. 11c) at a current density of 1 A g
(cid:0) 1, and a 117.0 C
d-Ti3C2 film electrode was determined to be 153.9 C g
(cid:0) 1  with a high retention rate of
(cid:0) 1  capacity can still be kept at 10 A g
g
(cid:0) 1 was used to assess the d-Ti3C2 film
76%. Repeated GCD tests at 5 A g
electrode’s long-term cycling stability. The d-Ti3C2  film electrode has
strong cyclic stability (Fig. 11d) with no substantial capacity loss after
10,000  cycles.  It  can  be  shown  that  the  d-Ti3C2  nanosheets  were  a
suitable  2D  conductive  support  for  the  production  of  improved
Ni–S/d-Ti3C2  nanohybrid  electrode  materials  due  to  their  high  rate
capability, electronic and ionic conductivity, and electrochemical sta-
bility.  Furthermore,  in  an  alkaline  electrolyte,  the  flexible  and
free-standing d-Ti3C2  film may be used as an alternate capacitive elec-
trode material. In another report, Pan et al. [244] integrated the etched
and  delaminated  Ti3C2  with  CuS  through  a  hydrothermal  approach
(Fig.  11e).  The  positively  charged  Cu2+
ions  were  adsorbed  on  the
interlayer and the surface of the Ti3C2 sheets due to the negative charge
acquainted to Ti3C2 sheets. Finally, the Ti3C2 sheets were adorned with
CuS,  resulting  in  Ti3C2/CuS  composites,  thus,  exhibiting  as  high  as
(cid:0) 1, which was about 5 times that of bare Ti3C2. Fu
169.5 C g

(cid:0) 1 at 1 A g

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109713

I. Hussain et al.

Fig.  11. (a)  Schematic  illustration  of  the  preparation  processes  of  the  d-  Ti3C2  nanosheets,  (b)  Ni–S/d-Ti3C2  nanohybrids,  (c)  GCD  curves  at  different  current
(cid:0) 1. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [88]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e)
densities, and (d) cycling stability and coulombic efficiency at a current density of 5 A g
Scheme illustration of the synthesis route of the Ti3C2/CuS composites. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [244]. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.
(cid:0) 1  of MXene suspension, (i) cycling stability of
Zeta potential at pH of 7 for the (f) 2.5 mg mL
(cid:0) 1  for 5000 cycles, and (h)schematic of the structural advantage of the NiCo2S4/MXene for the elec-
NiCo2S4/MXene-2 and NiCo2S4  at a current density of 5 A g
trochemical  performance.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Ref.  [245].  Copyright  2019,  Elsevier.  (k)  schematic  diagram  of  the  synthetic  process  of  the
1T-MoS2/Ti3C2  MXene  and  2H–MoS2/Ti3C2  MXene  3D  heterostructures,  and  the  crystal  structure  and  d-spacing  of  2H–MoS2  and  1T-MoS2.  Morphologies  of
2H–MoS2/Ti3C2  MXene and 1T-MoS2/Ti3C2  MXene heterostructure. (l–n) SEM images of 2H–MoS2/Ti3C2  MXene with inset showing SEM image of Ti3C2  MXene.
(o–q) SEM images of the 1T-MoS2/Ti3C2  MXene heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [183]. Copyright 2020, Wiley.

(cid:0) 1  of CTAB-NiCo2S4, (h) 0.25 mg mL

(cid:0) 1  of NiCo2S4, (g) 2.5 mg mL

et  al.  [245]  reported  an  optimized  composite  based  on  battery-type
NiCo2S4  and  pseudocapacitive-type  MXene.  Due  to  the  electrostatic
interaction  between
the  oppositely  charged  components,  NiC-
o2S4/MXene  was  effectively  produced  using electrostatic  assembly by
mixing negatively charged delaminated titanium carbide (MXene) with
positively charged sisal-like NiCo2S4. The positively charged sisal-like
NiCo2S4  was obtained through cationic CTAB molecules as stabilizing
agents. The bare MXene, NiCo2S4, and NiCo2S4/MXene composite were
characterized through the determination of zeta potential (Fig. 11f–h).
At  a  pH  of  7,  the  clean  NiCo2S4  displayed  a  slightly  positive  charge
(~4.477 mV). Surprisingly, the zeta potential of NiCo2S4 became more
positive (28.44 mV) following the CTAB alteration. The MXene nano-
sheets, on the other hand, possessed a negative surface charge ((cid:0) 21.91
mV). As a result of the electrostatic interaction between the oppositely
charged  components,  NiCo2S4/MXene  composites  architecture  was
formed  following  this  spontaneous  process.  Compared  to  the  other
electrodes,  the  optimized  NiCo2S4/MXene  composite  demonstrated  a
(cid:0) 1.  In  addition,  NiCo2S4/MXene
much  higher  capacity  of  1028  C  g
composite exhibited superior capacity retention of 94.2%, then that of

NiCo2S4  (83.33%)  (Fig.  11i).  The  outstanding  electrochemical  perfor-
mance  of  the  optimized  NiCo2S4/MXene  electrode  was  due  to  the
following advantages (Fig. 11j): first, the battery-like NiCo2S4 served as
an energy source, while the sisal-like structure served as a foundation for
the 2D MXene. Second, the delaminated MXene nanosheet adhered to
the sisal-like NiCo2S4 with excellent conductivity and plentiful edge sites
promoting  quick  reaction  kinetics,  reducing  NiCo2S4  volumetric
expansion, and improving electrochemical performance.

MoS2  has been studied extensively as a typical 2D transition metal
dichalcogenide (TMD). MoS2 exists in a variety of polymorphs, with the
metastable 1T phase (1T-MoS2) and the stable 2H phase (2H–MoS2 with
a monolayer bandgap of 1.9 eV, making it semiconductor-like being the
most common. Importantly, 1T-MoS2  is considered one of the many to
have an outstanding high-capacitance SC electrode material. As shown
in Fig. 11k, two types of one-pot hydrothermal routes were successfully
used to synthesize 1T-MoS2/Ti3C2 and 2H–MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructures
with  3D  interconnected  network  microstructures  under  a  9T  applied
magnetic  field  magneto-hydrothermal  and  hydrothermal  synthesis,
respectively. The results demonstrated that the d-spacing for MoS2  on

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109714

I. Hussain et al.

Ti3C2 MXene produced in a zero magnetic field and a 9T magnetic field
was 6.3 and 9.4, respectively. The pure 2H–MoS2 and 1T-MoS2 samples
were  composed  of  nanosheets  exhibiting  graphene-like  morphologies
with corrugations and ripples. Surprisingly, as illustrated in Fig. 11l–q,
both 2H–MoS2  and 1T-MoS2/Ti3C2  nanosheets were evenly developed
on the surface of the micron-scaled Ti3C2 MXene with 3D interconnected
network microstructures. The majority of MoS2 nanosheets grew verti-
cally on the MXene surface, with a few MoS2 nanosheets coated on the
surface. Surprisingly, the 1T-MoS2/Ti3C2  MXene heterostructure resul-
ted in superior specific capacitance as well as good rate performance.
The synergistically interplayed impact in heterostructure contributed to
the  superior  electrochemical  performance  of  1T-MoS2/Ti3C2  MXene
electrodes. To put it in another way, the Ti3C2 MXene can support ultra-
fast electron transport while the 3D network offers a greater contact area
with  the  electrolyte,  speeding  up  ion  diffusion.  Recently,  numerous
other metal sulfide and MXene composites electrodes were prepared for
SC  applications  such  as  NiCoS/d-Ti3C2  [87],  CoS@MXene/CF  hybrid
aerogel [246], novel organ-like Ti3C2Tx/CuCo2S4  composite [247], 3D
heterostructure MoS2@MXene [248], etc. Moreover, metal sulfide and
MXene-based  composites  have  also  been  explored  for  various  other
applications,  such  as  electrocatalysis,  photocatalysis,  batteries,  etc.
[249–255].

5.4. MXene and layered double hydroxides (LDHs)-based heterostructure
composites

Enormous research has been carried out to investigate effective, safe,
and sustainable energy storage devices [2,3,256–259]. Layered double
hydroxide  (LDH)  is  a  battery-type  electrode  material  that  has  been
effectively  studied  due  to  its  fast  and  efficient  electron  transport  and
high surface-to-volume ratio [260]. Their uses, however, are limited by
their poor conductivity and short cycle life [261,262]. MXenes with a
variety of structural and physicochemical properties enable the creation
of unique hybrid hierarchies with a selection of materials. According to
Wang et al. [94], a composite based on arbitrarily generated arrays of
Ni–Al–LDH  platelets  on  the  exfoliated-MXene  (e-MXene)  sheets  sub-
strate,  which  was  conducive  to  exposing  the  active  sites  of  LDH  and
promoting  electrolyte  penetration,  can  reduce  the  volume  change  of
LDH even further. The SEM images (Fig. 12a–c) show the Al layer etched
MXene and both cross-sectional side- and top-view of the e-MXene/LDH
composite.  These  images  demonstrated  that  LDH  platelets  were  pro-
duced  on  both  sides  of  e-MXene  sheets,  thus  preventing  individual
e-MXene  sheets  from aggregating.  The optimized  e-MXene/LDH  com-
posite exhibited a much larger integrated area (Fig. 12d) compared to
bare  e-MXene  and  LDH,  resulting  in  superior  specific  capacitance.
Nonetheless,  because  this  composite  was  based  on  arbitrarily  grown

Fig. 12. SEM images of (a) m-MXene plates, (b) M30/LDH, (c) cross-section SEM image of M30/LDH, (d) CV curves of e-MXene, LDH, and the M30/LDH at a scan
(cid:0) 1  in 6 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [94]. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (e) Charge-transfer mechanism and (f) cycling stability of
rate of 5 mV s
Ti3C2/Ni–Co–Al-LDH nanosheet heterostructure electrode. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [263]. Copyright 2018, ACS Publications. (g–h) Schematic diagram
of  the  synthetic  process  of  the  NiCoAl-LDH/V4C3Tx  composite.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Ref.  [80].  Copyright  2019,  Royal  Society  of  Chemistry.  (i)
Schematic illustration of the self-assembly process of the F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi LDH through electrostatic interaction. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [277].
Copyright 2020 ACS Publications. (j) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of FeNi-LDH/Ti3C2Tx-MXene nanohybrids. Reproduced with permission from
Ref. [268]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109715

I. Hussain et al.

arrays  of  layered  double  hydroxide  on  Ti3C2  MXene,  the  real  hetero-
structure between Ti3C2  and LDH was not realized, and sufficient con-
tact in this composite was not achieved. Additionally, the wall thickness
of  LDH  was  still  relatively  large.  In  another  study,  Zhao  et  al.  [263]
reported  novel  layered  Ti3C2/Ni–Co–Al  LDH  heterostructures  alter-
nately stacked with molecular-level nanosheets created using a simple
liquid-phase  co-feeding  and  electrostatic  attraction  hetero-assemble
strategy  between  positively  charged  Ni–Co–Al–LDH  nanosheets  and
negatively  charged  Ti3C2.  The  Ti3C2/Ni–Co–Al  LDH  heterostructures
(cid:0) 1  than  bare
exhibited  much  higher  specific  capacitance  of  748  F  g
(cid:0) 1) in the basic electrolyte. The superior electrochemical
MXene (440 F g
results were attributed to the following aspects: (i) nanosheets consisted
of a molecular-scale thickness, exposing almost all active sites on the
surface,  (ii)  electrons  were  predicted  to  go  through  Ti3C2  layers  and
subsequently  through  the  contact  region  to  Ni–Co–Al–LDH  layers.
Because of the 2D characteristic, both types of nanosheets may make
face-to-face  contact,  ensuring  efficient  electron
to
Ni–Co–Al–LDH  nanosheets,  (iii)  the  2D  Ti3C2/Ni–Co–Al–LDH  hetero-
structure channel overcame the size and charge limitations of electro-
chemically  cycled  ions,  allowing  for  fast  ion  transport  dynamics
(Fig. 12e). Moreover, not only capacitance but also superior cycle life of
cycling  life  Ti3C2/Ni–Co–Al–LDH  heterostructure  (Fig.  12f)  was
achieved.

transport

,  Al3+

,  Co2+

Previously, bare Ti3C2 and its composites with numerous other ma-
terials were discussed earlier. In 2018, Wang et al. [264] reported novel
electrode  materials  based  on  Ni–Co–Al-LDH  and  a  chemically  stable
V4C3Tx. Employing vanadium, on the other hand, has a wide range of
valence  states  ranging  from  +2  to  +5,  which  is  beneficial  to  electro-
chemical performance and may result in increased capacity. The fabri-
cation  of  the  NiCoAl-LDH/V4C3Tx  composite  with  3D  interconnected
porous  network  microstructures  is  depicted  in  Fig.  12g  and  h.  The
etching of V4C3Tx  MXene in HF solution containing functional groups
such as OH, O, and/or F aided the nucleation of NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets
and  firmly  bound  them  to  the  V4C3  MXene  sheets.  The  3D  inter-
connected porous NiCoAlLDH/V4C3Tx composite was prepared through
a hydrothermal approach by dispersing V4C3 MXene sheets and C6H8O7.
H2O  in  a  solution  comprising  Ni2+
,  and  urea.  The  NiC-
oAl-LDH/V4C3Tx  heterostructure  composite  electrodes  exhibited  an
(cid:0) 1 at a low current density of 1 A
outstanding specific capacity of 627 C g
(cid:0) 1 in 1 M KOH. In 2020, Wu et al. [265] reported MXene/NiCo-LDHs
g
(cid:0) 1.  In  the
campsite  which  exhibited  a  high  capacitance  of  1207  F  g
same year, Sun et al. [266] reported the synthesis of Ti3C2Tx/F–ZnMnNi
LDH van der Waals heterostructures by combining the separately pre-
pared  positively  charged  F-MXene  and  the  negatively  charged
F–ZnMnNi LDH suspension through stirring for 24 h. The MXene and
LDH  heterostructure  was  combined  through  self-assembly  as  shown
schematically  in  Fig.  12i.  Recently,  Zhang  et  al.  [267]  reported
Co-doped Ni–Mn-LDH/V2CTx MXene composite as a positive and V2C as
a negative electrode material for ASC device, exhibiting a high energy
(cid:0) 1.  In  2022,  synergistically
(cid:0) 1  at  0.7  kW  kg
density  of  30.16  Wh  kg
coupled 3D FeNi-LDH arrays with Ti3C2Tx  MXene nanosheets were re-
ported for SSC device application [268]. As illustrated in Fig. 12j, the
FeNi-LDH/Ti3C2Tx  MXene nanohybrids were created in three steps: (i)
etching,  (ii)  detachment,  and  (iii)  hydrothermal  growth.  Briefly,  the
Ti3C2Tx  powders  were  first  etched  with  Ni2F/HCl  solution  at  various
periods.  Interestingly,  it  was  discovered  that  increasing  the  reaction
time  improves  the  phase  transition  from  MAX  to  MXene.  The
FeNi-LDH/Ti3C2Tx  MXene  nanohybrids  composite-based  SSC  device
(cid:0) 1  at a power density of
exhibited a high energy density of 4.1 Wh kg
(cid:0) 1.  Several  other  LDH  and  MXene  composites  have  been
802.4  W  kg
reported  for  other  applications,  including  electrocatalysis,  sensor,
coating, and electromagnetic wave absorber [269–276].

5.5. MXene and phosphide/phosphate-based heterostructure composites

Combining MXene with other materials is a basic and easy technique

that has been widely used to minimize aggregation, restacking, oxida-
tion, and degradation of MXene sheets. Though this concept may sound
easy, the compatibility between MXene and other nanomaterials should
be  thoroughly  investigated.  Polymer  and  carbon  nanomaterials,
including  carbon  nanotubes  (CNTs)  and  activated  carbon  (AC),  were
used  as  spacers  to  prevent  MXene  NSs  from  restacking  [278–280].
Conducting polymers and transition metal-based compounds including
metal oxides, sulfides, and phosphides, on the other hand, have been
coupled with MXene to increase its electrochemical characteristics for a
specific electrochemical application [281]. The purpose or application
of the materials determines which materials should be combined with
MXene. As a result, the development of MXene and its composite allows
these  materials  to  reach  their  full  potential  in  practical  applications.
Transition metal phosphates (TMPs) have been widely recognized as one
of  the  best  candidate  electrode  materials  for  SCs  due  to  their  high
theoretical specific capacitance, natural abundance, and, most impor-
tantly, environmental and biological safety [3,282]. TMPs also exhibit
exceptional stability and applicability due to the presence of the robust
P–O tetrahedral in the structure [282,283]. For instance, Yu et al. [90]
reported  a  composite  of  3D-printed  NiCoP/MXene.  Initially,  MXene
flakes were etched from the MAX phase through a wet etching process by
using  HF  and  HCl.  The  MXene  flakes  were  negatively  charged  with
terminal  groups  (–F,  –OH,  –O,  etc.)  that  might  be  ideal  for  binding
positively  charged  metal  ions.  Ni  and  Co-based  phosphate  were  inte-
grated through a hydrothermal procedure followed by phosphorization,
thus,  producing  NiCoP/MXene  (NCPM)  heterostructure  (Fig.  13a).
Then, a NCPM-based ink for 3D printing was fabricated by combining
the  resulting  NCPM  with  CNT  dispersion  at  an  ideal  mass  ratio.  The
high-magnification SEM images revealed the presence of both CNTs and
NCPM CNT in the ink without any apparent aggregation (Fig. 13b and
c). The porous architecture and CNT acting as a binder and conductor in
the  ink  may  enhance  ion  diffusion  and  electrolyte  penetration.  Addi-
tionally, it is possible to print hollow square lattices with progressively
thicker  walls  (Fig.  13d),  illustrating  how  versatile  3D  printing  is  in
creating a variety of designs with excellent precision and productivity.
The  electrochemical  properties  of  3D-printed  NCPM  electrodes  with
varying  layer  thicknesses  at  0.5,  1.0,  and  1.5  mm,  referred  to  as
NCPM/CNT-1,  NCPM/CNT-2,  and  NCPM/CNT-3,  respectively,  were
studied. The GCD curves of NCPM/CNT-1 recorded between 0.1 and 0.4
(cid:0) 2  are
V  at  various  current  densities  ranging  from  10  to  160  mA  cm
shown in Fig. 13e. It is possible to see symmetric GCD patterns, which
suggests simple charge transport kinetics and good Coulombic efficiency
(cid:0) 2, the NCPM/CNT
of the devices. At a current density of 100 mA cm
electrode exhibited good cyclic stability with capacitance retention of
over 90% after 5000 cycles (Fig. 13f). An ASC device (NCPM/CNT//AC)
was constructed and was able to deliver high energy densities of 0.89
(cid:0) 3,  respectively.  Building  a  robust,
mWh  cm
electrolyte-accessible, porous but dense architecture for the electrodes is
a crucial design problem for realizing high-volumetric-performance SCs
because it allows for a high-ion-accessible surface and quick ion diffu-
sion. Recently, Pan et al. [284] investigated the black phosphorus (BP)
@MXene  compact  film  based  on  a  3D  porous  network  through  the
etching  method  (Fig.  13g)  and  then  mixed  it  with  sodium  hydroxide
(NaOH) solution at ambient temperature. Because of the significant pH
value, NaOH may successfully drive the Ti3C2Tx flakes to quickly floc-
culate  in  the  alkali-induced  process.  In  the  meanwhile,  the  terminal
surface  functional  groups  (-O  and  –F)  of  Ti3C2Tx  were  replaced  by
concentrated  OH  in  solution  with  significant  chemical  reactivity.
Finally, BP nanoparticles were formed on the surface of the 3D crinkled
Ti3C2(OH)x flakes from Red phosphorus (RP) by high-temperature heat
treatment, resulting in the chemically attached BP@MXene (BP@Ti3C2)
composites. It was interesting to note that during the in-situ reaction at a
high  temperature,  the  alkali-induced  MXene  nanoflakes  did  not  only
maintain the 3D interconnected crinkled architecture but also supply a
large number of OH groups to build Ti–O–P bonds at the interface of the
heterostructured BP@MXene composites. Impressively, the BP@MXene

(cid:0) 2  and  2.2  mWh  cm

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109716

I. Hussain et al.

Fig. 13. (a) Schematic illustration showing the  NCPM synthesis and the 3D printing process,  (b–c) SEM images of  the NCPM composite ink,  (d) Digital photos
showing printed hollow square lattices with increasing wall thickness. Scale bar: 8 mm. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [90]. Copyright 2020, Springer. (e)
GCD curves of printed NCPM/CNT electrode at different current densities. (f) Cycling performance of printed NCPM/CNT electrode, (g) Schematic illustration for the
(cid:0) 1 of MXene and BP@MXene-SCs in 1.0
synthesis of crumbled BP@MXene (BP@Ti3C2) composites with strong Ti–O–P bonds, (h) CV curves at a scan rate of 2.0 mV s
M Na2SO4  electrolyte. (i) Calculated volumetric capacitances versus the current densities of the BP@MXene film. Reproduced with permission from  Ref. [284].
Copyright 2021, ACS Publications. (j) the synthetic illustration of the MOFs-CoP@MXene composites. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [285]. Copyright 2021,
Elsevier. (k) Scheme illustration of the synthesis route to the MXene-NPO. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [286]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.

film  gave a  larger integral area than the bare  MXene film  (Fig.  13h),
indicating better ion diffusion and improved energy storage in SCs. The
calculated  volumetric  capacitance  (Cvol.)  values  in  1  M  Na2SO4  elec-
trolyte of bare MXene and BP@MXene film electrodes at various scan
rates were summarized in Fig. 13i. It is noteworthy that the BP@MXene
(cid:0) 3 at a scan rate of
film provided a high Cvol. the electrode of 780.6 F cm
(cid:0) 1, which is 1.7 times higher than that of the bare MXene film
2.0 V s
(cid:0) 3).  The  excellent  capacitance  and  stability  of  the  3D
(452.3  F  cm
network in the compact film morphology were attributed to the strong
Ti–O–P bonds generated between the BP nanoparticles and MXene and
the  ideal  porosity  shape  for  electrolyte  ion  transport.  Recently,  Zong
et al. [285] reported a composite of MOF-derived Co–P and MXene for
(cid:0) 1 after 200
lithium-ion storage offering a high capacity of 706.5 mAh g
(cid:0) 1. To create Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets, the Ti3AlC2 MAX
cycles at 0.2 A g
precursor was first incubated in a LiF and HCl solution for 24 h (Fig. 13j).
The MXene nanosheets were then incorporated into a 2-methylimida-
zole  and  Co2+
and
the  adsorption  of  surface  oxygen  functional  groups  on  the  material

solution  in  methanol.  The  complexation  of  Co2+

allowed ZIF-67 to grow uniformly and attach to the MXene sheets. After
carbonization  and  phosphorization  treatments,  MOFs-CoP@MXene
composite  was  obtained.  Moreover,  very  recently,  Zhang  et  al.  [286]
anchored  Ni-MOF  amorphous  nanospheres  on  MXene  nanosheets
through in-situ growth. Finally, the obtained Ni-MOF on MXene sheets
was  transformed  to  nickel  phosphate  in-situ  decorated  on  MXene
(MXene-NPO) as shown in Fig. 13k. The MXene-NPO electrode material
exhibited exceptional cycling stability with 85% capacity retention after
(cid:0) 1. The
10,000 cycles and a high specific capacity of 639 C g
exceptional electrochemical performance of MXene-NPO was primarily
due  to  the  synergistic  interaction  between  in-situ  nickel  phosphate
ornamentation  produced  from  MOFs  and  MXene.  The  transport  of
electrons was improved by the presence of MXene nanosheets. Nickel
phosphate grew within the layers which also significantly increased the
specific surface area and provided a large number of electrochemically
active sites. Electron diffusion was facilitated by the decorating of in-situ
MOFs generated nickel phosphate which strengthened the links between
MXene  and  nickel  phosphate.  Additionally,  the  expansion  of  nickel

(cid:0) 1 at 0.5 A g

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109717

I. Hussain et al.

phosphate  increased  the  MXene’s  layer  spacing  and  gave  it  pillars,
which  improved  stability,  electrolyte  penetration,  and  electrolyte  ion
transport.

5.6. MXene and MOF-based heterostructure composites

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), also known as porous coordina-
tion  polymers,  metal-organic  coordination  polymers,  and  inorganic-
organic hybrid materials, self-assemble from metal ions or metal clus-
ters [287–289]. High specific surface area, ultrahigh porosity, variable
pore size, numerous functions, and variety in redox metal centers are
some  of  the  benefits  of  MOFs  [290,291].  However,  the  inferior  con-
ductivity of traditional MOFs prevents them from being used for energy
storage applications [292,293]. It has been shown that the production of
composites  using  one  or  more  functional  materials  preserves  the
fundamental  qualities  of  MOFs  (flexibility,  high  porosity,  and  large
specific  surface  area)  while  utilizing  the  highly  functional  materials
(electrical,  magnetic, optical, and catalytic properties)  [294]. To deal
with  the  bulk  and  traditional  unoriented  MOF,  MOFs were  grown  on
solution-free  metal  oxide  nanowires  for  energy  storage  applications
[287,289]. However, the performance of electrodes materials is still not
satisfactory  [295–298].  Recently,  Liu  et  al.  [92]  reported  a  flexible
technique for making homogeneous three-dimensional (3D) metal car-
bides, nitrides, and carbonitrides (MXenes)/metal-organic frameworks
(MOFs)  composites  (Ti3C2TX/Fe,  Co-PBA,  Ti3C2TX/ZIF-67,  Ti3C2TX/-
ZIF-8, and Ti3C2TX/Cu-BTC) that combined the benefits of MOFs with
MXenes. TheTi3C2TX  was prepared through an etching process in HCl
and  HF.  The  designed  3D  Ti3C2TX/Fe,  Co-PBA,  Ti3C2TX/ZIF-67,
Ti3C2TX/ZIF-8, and Ti3C2TX/Cu-BTC composites were prepared through
the  cross-linked  metal-ions  with  the  surface  termination  groups  of
Ti3C2TX nanosheets. This broke the electrostatic repulsion between the
nanosheets and served as a nucleation site for the in-situ growth of MOF
particles  as  shown  schematically  in  Fig.  14a.  Compared  to  all,
Ti3C2TX/ZIF-67  electrode  exhibited  excellent  specific  capacitance  of
(cid:0) 1.  Furthermore,  they  also  transformed  this
129.5  F  g
Ti3C2TX/ZIF-67 to metal oxide and MXene composites. Recently, Kshetri
et al. [299] proposed freestanding electrodes made of Co-MOF@MXene
and  carbon  nanofiber for a  stretchable and wearable  quasi-solid-state
SC.  The  detailed  synthesis  approach  is  exhibited  in  Fig.  14b.  First,
using  an  etching  solution  of  HCl/LiF,  the  aluminum  layer  from  the
Ti3AlC2  MAX  phase  was  removed  to  produce  delaminated  Ti3C2TX
MXene flakes. Second, the electrospinning method was used to create a
flexible  MX-CNF conducting substrate, which was then stabilized and
carbonized  thereafter.  Further,  utilizing  the  flexible  Co-PC@MX-CNF
electrode  material,  the  author  produced  Co-MOF  structures  on  the

(cid:0) 1  at  1  A  g

flexible MX-CNF mat using an aqueous technique as reported elsewhere
[300].  Finally,  the  MOF  was  transformed  to  the  corresponding  oxide
(Co3O4-PC@MX-CNF)  with  and  without  MnO2.  Specific  capacitance
(cid:0) 1 was 426.7 A
measurements for the Co-PC@MX-CNF electrode at 1 A g
(cid:0) 1.  Interestingly,  Wu  et  al.  [301]  utilized  V2CTx  MXene  as  a  metal
g
precursor to fabricate 2D MOF nanosheets. With such a unique strategy,
there will be a great avenue to produce MOFs with MXene-like proper-
ties suitable for the next-generation nanomaterials. Table 3 summarizes
the MXene-based heterostructures performance in other energy storage
applications.

6. Conclusion and future aspects

MXene, supported by its synthesis techniques, distinctive combina-
tion, and customizable nature of attributes for individual applications,
has become an inescapable hotspot in the field of energy storage and
supercapacitors,  in  particular,  during  the  past  ten  years.  This  review
organized the well-known methodology to produce high-quality MXenes
with  surface  terminations  and  functionalities.  We  also  discussed  the
importance  of  MXenes  in  building  synergetic  bonds  with  secondary
materials in forming hybrid materials. The achievements of innovative
MXene-based heterostructures and hybrid materials were evaluated for
MXene-based energy storage devices, including batteries and SCs. Every
MXene nanocomposite and heterostructure with various potential ma-
terials has unique benefits with a particular necessity for composition
adjustment for reliable SC performance. A fundamental investigation of
the structure-composition-property correlation of the MXene 2D mate-
rials  towards  enhanced  performance  becomes  necessary  when  taking
into account the large number of heterostructures reported with various
compositions. Hence, this study is highly necessary to obtain an opti-
mized interfacial nanocomposite relevant to supercapacitor application.
Due  to  their  high  conductivity,  high  volumetric  capacitance,
simplicity  of  manufacturing,  and  superior  mechanical  flexibility,
MXenes exhibit prospective benefits over other 2D structures and other
electrode  materials  utilized  in  SC  devices.  However,  achieving  high
energy and power densities in a specific footprint area is still difficult for
practical  usage.  The  fabrication  of  MXene  SCs  has  advanced  signifi-
cantly, thanks to the exploration of a variety of fabrication techniques.
However,  it  should  be  noted  that  this  technology  is  still  in  its  early
stages, and further research into the development of the material and
device optimization is still needed. Some of the future aspects are sug-
gested below as well as shown in Fig. 15.

a.  First and foremost, it will be ideal to find secure ways to make high-
quality  MXenes  with  high  yield  rates,  stable  and  safer  methods,

Fig.  14. (a)  Schematic  of  the  synthesis  of  Ti3C2TX/Cu-BTC,  Ti3C2TX/Fe,  Co-PBA,  Ti3C2TX/ZIF-8,  Ti3C2TX/ZIF-67.  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Ref.  [92].
Copyright 2020, Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of procedures for preparing MX-CNF, Co-PC@MX-CNF, MnO2@Co3O4-PC@MXene-CNF, and FW-QSS-HSC device.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [299]. Copyright 2022 Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109718

I. Hussain et al.

Table 3
MXene-based heterostructures in energy storage applications.

MXene-based heterostructure

Preparation technique

Application

Key findings

S/SnS2-MXene

hydrothermal

3D highly dense Ti3C2Tx MXene and

graphene dual-encapsulated Si monolith
architecture
NiCo2Se4/f-Ti3C2

in-situ electrostatic adsorption followed
by self-assembly, air drying, and
annealing
solvothermal

SnO2 QDs on d-Ti3C2Tx

ultrasound irradiation method

Co–MoSe2/MXene

one-step hydrothermal strategy

N-doped mesoporous carbon–MXene

1T-VS2(cid:0) MXene

CuxCoP1(cid:0) x/MXene

sulfiphilic NbB2-MXene

Ti3C2@CoO/ZnO

hydrothermal process and calcination
treatment
one-step hydrothermal reaction

hydrothermal reaction and followed by
phosphorization
one-step borothermal reduction strategy
followed by calcination

hydrothermal treatment followed by
annealing

Li–S batteries
(LSB)
LIB

SIB

LIB

LSB

SC

LSB

LSB

LSB

LIB

V2CTx MXene/NiV LDH
Ti3C2Tx MXene/ZnMnNi LDH

hydrothermal method
self-assembly through long-time stirring

SC
SC

(cid:0) 1 at 0.2C

• 1,188.5 mAh g
• 500 cycles (≈82.7% retention at 1.0C)
• 5206 mAh cm

(cid:0) 3 (gravimetric capacity: 2892 mAh g

(cid:0) 1) at

0.1 A g

(cid:0) 1

(cid:0) 1 after 100 cycles at 100 mA g

(cid:0) 1

• 379.2 mAh g
• high-rate capability (289.1 mAh g
• 390 mAh g

(cid:0) 1 with a capacity recovery after 100 cycles at

(cid:0) 1 at 5000 mA g

(cid:0) 1)

current density of 1000 mA g

(cid:0) 1

• high reversible specific capacity of 1454 mAh g

(cid:0) 1 and

volumetric energy density of 3659 Wh L
(cid:0) 1

• 393 F g

(cid:0) 1 at 1 A g

(cid:0) 1 at 0.1C

Ref.

[302]

[303]

[241]

[304]

[305]

[178]

• 1571 Ah L

(cid:0) 1 (gravimetric capacity: ~1430 mAh g

(cid:0) 1 based

[306]

on sulfur) at 0.1C

• 1664 Ah L

(cid:0) 1 (1443 mAh g

(cid:0) 1 based on S for gravimetric

capacity) at 0.1C

• 1310.1 mAh g(cid:0) 1 at 0.1C
• stable long-term lifespan with 500 cycles (0.076% capac-

[307]

[308]

ity decay per cycle) at 1 C

• reversible capacity (1069 mA h g

(cid:0) 1 at 0.2 A g

(cid:0) 1 for over

[309]

120 cycles)

(cid:0) 1 at 0.5 A g
(cid:0) 1 at 1 A g

• cyclability (1052 mA h g
cycles, and 627 mA h g
• rate capacity (498 mA h g

(cid:0) 1 for over 200
(cid:0) 1 for over 300 cycles)
(cid:0) 1, and holds 794.3
(cid:0) 1 at 3 A g
(cid:0) 1 after 110 cycles when the current is controlled at
(cid:0) 1 again)

mA h g
0.1 A g
• 1658.19 F g
• 2065 F g
• 99.8% retention after 100,000 (1 A g

(cid:0) 1 at 1 A g
(cid:0) 1 at 5 mV s

(cid:0) 1)

(cid:0) 1

(cid:0) 1

[310]
[266]

only Ti3C2Tx  has been thoroughly investigated as an SC electrode.
Hence, there is a great possibility for finding novel MXenes that are
yet to be discovered and evaluated in energy storage applications.
Similarly, unique heterostructures from the combinations of 0D, 1D,
2D, and 3D structures with MXenes should also be investigated and
explored. There is also a great opportunity to develop novel hybrid
materials  combining  MXenes  with  transition  metal  oxides,  chalco-
genides (S, Se, Te), LDHs, carbon, MOFs/COFs, polymers, and other
MXenes.  While  a  lot  of  lists  can  suffice  the  choice  for  secondary
materials  with  MXene,  challenges  are  to  be  encountered.  These
challenges  can  include  cost-effective  preparation  techniques,  the
synergy, stability and compatibility between the materials, and new
and unknown properties, are yet to be discovered. Especially in the
field of energy storage devices, such as battery and supercapacitor
electrodes,  such  novel  structures  will  play  an  important  role  in
determining their electrochemical properties.

c.  Advanced  operando  in-situ  and  ex-situ  characterization  techniques
are  high  necessary  to  understand  the  multi-functionalities  of  2D
MXene-based  heterostructures.  Likely,  theoretical  and  computa-
tional methods will also be helpful in understanding the properties
and  energy  storage  mechanisms  involved  in  novel  MXene-based
heterostructures  and  hybrid  materials.  Such  theoretical  approach
can  help  understand  the  intercalation  processes,  electronic  struc-
tures, charge storage mechanisms, and other physicochemical char-
acteristics of MXene-based heterostructures.

d.  For energy storage devices, further explorations on challenging the
limits of MXenes from using traditional conditions should be inves-
tigated. Opportunities on using various electrolytes (organic, ionic,
and gel electrolytes) should be investigated to widen the operating
potential windows of MXene-based electrodes. For a deeper under-
standing of the basics of EDLC-, pseudocapacitive-, and battery-type
electrode  materials,  a  few  previous  reports  are  suggested  to  be
explored Still, correct interpretation of charge storage mechanisms in
electrode  materials  should  be  carefully  considered  (battery-type,
EDLC-type, and pseudocapacitive-type) [311–320].

Fig. 15. Future aspects of MXenes and their composites.

affordable  prices,  and  regulated  surface  terminations.  Such  termi-
nation  groups  and  surface  functionalities  are  high  valuable  when
preparing MXene heterostructures and hybrid materials.

b.  Since its first discovery in 2011, MXene has developed and expanded
in  many  other  transitional  metals  and  other  carbides/nitrides.
Despite the experimental synthesis of more than 20 distinct MXenes,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109719

I. Hussain et al.

e.  Fabrication  of  supercapacitor  devices  (hybrid,  symmetric,  and
asymmetric)  should  be  investigated  for  its  practical  applications.
Predictive analysis such as the use of artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML), should be considered for the long-term and
sustainable applications of energy storage devices in the future.

Overall, this review emphasizes MXene-based heterostructures and
their prospects in energy storage devices. More MXene heterostructure
are yet to be explored soon, and it will have a lot of potentials not only in
energy storage devices but also to various applications, including drug
delivery, water treatment, carbon capture, membranes, and many more.
Finally, we believe that this study can serve as a significant reference
point for the development of innovative 2D heterostructures based on
MXenes and other recently discovered materials.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council

(project number CityU 11201522).

References

[1] Luo J, Matios E, Wang H, Tao X, Li W. Interfacial structure design of MXene-based
nanomaterials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion. InfoMat 2020;
2:1057–76.

[2] Hussain I, Ali A, Lamiel C, Mohamed SG, Sahoo S, Shim J-J. A 3D walking palm-
like core–shell CoMoO 4@ NiCo 2 S 4@ nickel foam composite for high-
performance supercapacitors. Dalton Trans 2019;48:3853–61.

[3] Hussain I, Hussain T, Ahmed SB, Kaewmaraya T, Ahmad M, Chen X, Javed MS,
Lamiel C, Zhang K. Binder-free trimetallic phosphate nanosheets as an electrode:
theoretical and experimental investigation. J Power Sources 2021;513:230556.

[4] Yang T, Song TT, Callsen M, Zhou J, Chai JW, Feng YP, Wang SJ, Yang M.

Atomically thin 2D transition metal oxides: structural reconstruction, interaction
with substrates, and potential applications. Adv Mater Interfac 2019;6:1801160.

[5] Novoselov KS, Geim AK, Morozov SV, Jiang D, Zhang Y, Dubonos SV,

Grigorieva IV, Firsov AA. Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films.
Science 2004;306:666–9.

[6] Zhang K, Feng Y, Wang F, Yang Z, Wang J. Two dimensional hexagonal boron

nitride (2D-hBN): synthesis, properties and applications. J Mater Chem C 2017;5:
11992–2022.

[7] Liu H, Neal AT, Zhu Z, Luo Z, Xu X, Tom ́anek D, Ye PD. Phosphorene: an

unexplored 2D semiconductor with a high hole mobility. ACS Nano 2014;8:
4033–41.

[8] Manzeli S, Ovchinnikov D, Pasquier D, Yazyev OV, Kis A. 2D transition metal

dichalcogenides. Nat Rev Mater 2017;2:1–15.

[9] Zheng Y, Sun FZ, Han X, Xu J, Bu XH. Recent progress in 2D metal-organic
frameworks for optical applications. Adv Opt Mater 2020;8:2000110.

[10] Zhang H. Ultrathin two-dimensional nanomaterials. ACS Nano 2015;9:9451–69.
[11] Anasori B, Lukatskaya MR, Gogotsi Y. 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes)

for energy storage. Nat Rev Mater 2017;2:1–17.

[12] Gogotsi Y, Anasori B. The rise of MXenes. ACS Publications; 2019. p. 8491–4.
[13] Naguib M, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y. Ten years of progress in the synthesis and

development of MXenes. Adv Mater 2021;33:2103393.

[14] Naguib M, Mochalin VN, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y. 25th anniversary article:

MXenes: a new family of two-dimensional materials. Adv Mater 2014;26:
992–1005.

[15] Pang J, Mendes RG, Bachmatiuk A, Zhao L, Ta HQ, Gemming T, Liu H, Liu Z,

Rummeli MH. Applications of 2D MXenes in energy conversion and storage
systems. Chem Soc Rev 2019;48:72–133.

[16] Naguib M, Kurtoglu M, Presser V, Lu J, Niu J, Heon M, Hultman L, Gogotsi Y,

Barsoum MW. Two-dimensional nanocrystals produced by exfoliation of Ti3AlC2.
Adv Mater 2011;23:4248–53.

[17] VahidMohammadi A, Rosen J, Gogotsi Y. The world of two-dimensional carbides

and nitrides (MXenes). Science 2021;372:eabf1581.

[18] Deysher G, Shuck CE, Hantanasirisakul K, Frey NC, Foucher AC, Maleski K,

Sarycheva A, Shenoy VB, Stach EA, Anasori B, Gogotsi Y. Synthesis of Mo4VAlC4

MAX phase and two-dimensional Mo4VC4 MXene with five atomic layers of
transition metals. ACS Nano 2020;14:204–17.

[19] Gao Y, Cao Y, Zhuo H, Sun X, Gu Y, Zhuang G, Deng S, Zhong X, Wei Z, Li X.
Mo2TiC2 MXene: a promising catalyst for electrocatalytic ammonia synthesis.
Catal Today 2020;339:120–6.

[20] Maughan PA, Bouscarrat L, Seymour VR, Shao S, Haigh SJ, Dawson R, Tapia-

Ruiz N, Bimbo N. Pillared Mo2TiC2 MXene for high-power and long-life lithium
and sodium-ion batteries. Nanoscale Adv 2021;3:3145–58.

[21] Seh ZW, Fredrickson KD, Anasori B, Kibsgaard J, Strickler AL, Lukatskaya MR,

Gogotsi Y, Jaramillo TF, Vojvodic A. Two-dimensional molybdenum carbide
(MXene) as an efficient electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution. ACS Energy Lett
2016;1:589–94.

[22] Sun D, Hu Q, Chen J, Zhang X, Wang L, Wu Q, Zhou A. Structural transformation
of MXene (V2C, Cr2C, and Ta2C) with O groups during lithiation: a first-
principles investigation. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2016;8:74–81.

[23] Talib SH, Baskaran S, Yu X, Yu Q, Bashir B, Muhammad S, Hussain S, Chen X, Li J.
Non-noble metal single-atom catalyst of Co1/MXene (Mo2CS2) for CO oxidation.
Sci China Mater 2021;64:651–63.

[24] Wang G, Liao Y. Theoretical prediction of robust and intrinsic half-metallicity in
Ni2N MXene with different types of surface terminations. Appl Surf Sci 2017;426:
804–11.

[25] Lamiel C, Hussain I, Warner JH, Zhang K. Beyond Ti-based MXenes: a review of
emerging non-Ti based metal-MXene structure, properties, and applications.
Mater Today 2023;63:313–38.

[26] Tan Z-L, Wei J-X, Liu Y, Zaman Fu, Rehman W, Hou L-R, Yuan C-Z. V2CTx MXene
and its derivatives: synthesis and recent progress in electrochemical energy
storage applications. Rare Met 2022;41:775–97.

[27] Rasheed PA, Pandey RP, Banat F, Hasan SW. Recent advances in niobium

MXenes: synthesis, properties, and emerging applications. Matter 2022;5:546–72.

[28] Qureshi A, Abdelhay AH, Zaidi SA, Tariq H, Sadasivuni KK, Sheikh H,

Mohamed M. Emerging trends in niobium, vanadium, and molybdenum based
MXenes applications. Crit Rev Solid State Mater Sci 2022:1–22.

[29] Couly C, Alhabeb M, Van Aken KL, Kurra N, Gomes L, Navarro-Su ́arez AM,

Anasori B, Alshareef HN, Gogotsi Y. Asymmetric flexible MXene-reduced
graphene oxide micro-supercapacitor. Adv Electron Mater 2018;4:1700339.

[30] Jiang Q, Kurra N, Alhabeb M, Gogotsi Y, Alshareef HN. All pseudocapacitive

MXene-RuO2 asymmetric supercapacitors. Adv Energy Mater 2018;8:1703043.
[31] Levitt AS, Alhabeb M, Hatter CB, Sarycheva A, Dion G, Gogotsi Y. Electrospun
MXene/carbon nanofibers as supercapacitor electrodes. J Mater Chem 2019;7:
269–77.

[32] Tang J, Mathis T, Zhong X, Xiao X, Wang H, Anayee M, Pan F, Xu B, Gogotsi Y.
Optimizing ion pathway in titanium carbide MXene for practical high-rate
supercapacitor. Adv Energy Mater 2021;11:2003025.

[33] Hu X, Li R, Zhao S, Xing Y. Microwave-assisted preparation of flower-like cobalt
phosphate and its application as a new heterogeneous Fenton–like catalyst. Appl
Surf Sci 2017;396:1393–402.

[34] Kim SJ, Koh H-J, Ren CE, Kwon O, Maleski K, Cho S-Y, Anasori B, Kim C-K,

Choi Y-K, Kim J, Gogotsi Y, Jung H-T. Metallic Ti3C2Tx MXene gas sensors with
ultrahigh signal-to-noise ratio. ACS Nano 2018;12:986–93.

[35] Pei Y, Zhang X, Hui Z, Zhou J, Huang X, Sun G, Huang W. Ti3C2TX MXene for
sensing applications: recent progress, design principles, and future perspectives.
ACS Nano 2021;15:3996–4017.

[36] Riazi H, Taghizadeh G, Soroush M. MXene-based nanocomposite sensors. ACS

Omega 2021;6:11103–12.

[37] Sinha A, Zhao H, Huang Y, Lu X, Chen J, Jain R. MXene: an emerging material for

sensing and biosensing. TrAC, Trends Anal Chem 2018;105:424–35.
[38] Huang H, Jiang R, Feng Y, Ouyang H, Zhou N, Zhang X, Wei Y. Recent

development and prospects of surface modification and biomedical applications
of MXenes. Nanoscale 2020;12:1325–38.

[39] Huang K, Li Z, Lin J, Han G, Huang P. Two-dimensional transition metal carbides
and nitrides (MXenes) for biomedical applications. Chem Soc Rev 2018;47:
5109–24.

[40] Lin H, Chen Y, Shi J. Insights into 2D MXenes for versatile biomedical

applications: current advances and challenges ahead. Adv Sci 2018;5:1800518.
[41] Gandi AN, Alshareef HN, Schwingenschl ̈ogl U. Thermoelectric performance of the

mxenes M2Co2 (M= Ti, Zr, or Hf). Chem Mater 2016;28:1647–52.

[42] Khazaei M, Arai M, Sasaki T, Estili M, Sakka Y. Two-dimensional molybdenum

carbides: potential thermoelectric materials of the MXene family. Phys Chem
Chem Phys 2014;16:7841–9.

[43] Kim H, Anasori B, Gogotsi Y, Alshareef HN. Thermoelectric properties of two-
dimensional molybdenum-based MXenes. Chem Mater 2017;29:6472–9.
[44] Lu X, Zhang Q, Liao J, Chen H, Fan Y, Xing J, Gu S, Huang J, Ma J, Wang J. High-

efficiency thermoelectric power generation enabled by homogeneous
incorporation of MXene in (Bi, Sb) 2Te3 matrix. Adv Energy Mater 2020;10:
1902986.

[45] Iqbal A, Sambyal P, Koo CM. 2D MXenes for electromagnetic shielding: a review.

Adv Funct Mater 2020;30:2000883.

[46] Liu J, Zhang HB, Sun R, Liu Y, Liu Z, Zhou A, Yu ZZ. Hydrophobic, flexible, and
lightweight MXene foams for high-performance electromagnetic-interference
shielding. Adv Mater 2017;29:1702367.

[47] Shahzad F, Alhabeb M, Hatter CB, Anasori B, Man Hong S, Koo CM, Gogotsi Y.
Electromagnetic interference shielding with 2D transition metal carbides
(MXenes). Science 2016;353:1137–40.

[48] Yun T, Kim H, Iqbal A, Cho YS, Lee GS, Kim MK, Kim SJ, Kim D, Gogotsi Y,

Kim SO. Electromagnetic shielding of monolayer MXene assemblies. Adv Mater
2020;32:1906769.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109720

I. Hussain et al.

[49] Chen J, Huang Q, Huang H, Mao L, Liu M, Zhang X, Wei Y. Recent progress and

[77] Chen C, Xie X, Anasori B, Sarycheva A, Makaryan T, Zhao M, Urbankowski P,

advances in the environmental applications of MXene related materials.
Nanoscale 2020;12:3574–92.

[50] Hwang SK, Kang S-M, Rethinasabapathy M, Roh C, Huh YS. MXene: an emerging

Miao L, Jiang J, Gogotsi Y. MoS2-on-MXene heterostructures as highly reversible
anode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Angew Chem Int Ed 2018;57:1846–50.

[78] Du Y-T, Kan X, Yang F, Gan L-Y, Schwingenschl ̈ogl U. MXene/graphene

two-dimensional layered material for removal of radioactive pollutants. Chem
Eng J 2020;397:125428.

heterostructures as high-performance electrodes for Li-ion batteries. ACS Appl
Mater Interfaces 2018;10:32867–73.

[51] Rasool K, Pandey RP, Rasheed PA, Buczek S, Gogotsi Y, Mahmoud KA. Water

[79] Guo X, Zhang W, Zhang J, Zhou D, Tang X, Xu X, Li B, Liu H, Wang G. Boosting

treatment and environmental remediation applications of two-dimensional metal
carbides (MXenes). Mater Today 2019;30:80–102.

sodium storage in two-dimensional phosphorene/Ti3C2Tx MXene
nanoarchitectures with stable fluorinated interphase. ACS Nano 2020;14:3651–9.

[52] Zhao Q, Seredych M, Precetti E, Shuck CE, Harhay M, Pang R, Shan C-X,

[80] Wang X, Li H, Li H, Lin S, Bai J, Dai J, Liang C, Zhu X, Sun Y, Dou S.

Gogotsi Y. Adsorption of uremic toxins using Ti3C2Tx MXene for dialysate
regeneration. ACS Nano 2020;14:11787–98.

[53] Mashtalir O, Lukatskaya MR, Kolesnikov AI, Raymundo-Pinero E, Naguib M,

Barsoum M, Gogotsi Y. The effect of hydrazine intercalation on the structure and
capacitance of 2D titanium carbide (MXene). Nanoscale 2016;8:9128–33.
[54] Rakhi RB, Ahmed B, Hedhili MN, Anjum DH, Alshareef HN. Effect of postetch
annealing gas composition on the structural and electrochemical properties of
Ti2CT x MXene electrodes for supercapacitor applications. Chem Mater 2015;27:
5314–23.

[55] Xie Y, Naguib M, Mochalin VN, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y, Yu X, Nam K-W, Yang X-

Q, Kolesnikov AI, Kent PR. Role of surface structure on Li-ion energy storage
capacity of two-dimensional transition-metal carbides. aa 2014;136:6385–94.

[56] Zhao MQ, Trainor N, Ren CE, Torelli M, Anasori B, Gogotsi Y. Scalable

manufacturing of large and flexible sheets of MXene/graphene heterostructures.
Adv Mater Technol 2019;4:1800639.

[57] Mahmud ST, Hasan MM, Bain S, Rahman ST, Rhaman M, Hossain MM, Ordu M.

Multilayer MXene heterostructures and nanohybrids for multifunctional
applications: a review. ACS Mater Lett 2022;4:1174–206.

[58] Bhat A, Anwer S, Bhat KS, Mohideen MIH, Liao K, Qurashi A. Prospects challenges
and stability of 2D MXenes for clean energy conversion and storage applications.
npj 2D Mater Appl 2021;5:61.

[59] Qiu Z-M, Bai Y, Gao Y-D, Liu C-L, Ru Y, Pi Y-C, Zhang Y-Z, Luo Y-S, Pang H.

MXenes nanocomposites for energy storage and conversion. Rare Met 2022;41:
1101–28.

[60] Shanto MAH, Chowdhury MI, Antu AB, Niloy NR, Alam N, Ullah MA, Anowar MS.
MXene based Heterostructures for electrode materials of Batteries: a Review. IOP
Conf Ser Mater Sci Eng 2022;1225:012018.

[61] Nasrin K, Sudharshan V, Subramani K, Sathish M. Insights into 2D/2D MXene

heterostructures for improved synergy in structure toward next-generation
supercapacitors: a review. Adv Funct Mater 2022;32:2110267.

[62] Zubair M, Ul Hassan MM, Mehran MT, Baig MM, Hussain S, Shahzad F. 2D

MXenes and their heterostructures for HER, OER and overall water splitting: a
review. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2022;47:2794–818.

[63] Xi W, Jin J, Zhang Y, Wang R, Gong Y, He B, Wang H. Hierarchical MXene/

transition metal oxide heterostructures for rechargeable batteries, capacitors, and
capacitive deionization. Nanoscale 2022;14:11923–44.

Heterostructures of Ni–Co–Al layered double hydroxide assembled on V 4 C 3
MXene for high-energy hybrid supercapacitors. J Mater Chem 2019;7:2291–300.
[81] Liang X, Rangom Y, Kwok CY, Pang Q, Nazar LF. Interwoven MXene nanosheet/
carbon-nanotube composites as Li–S cathode hosts. Adv Mater 2017;29:1603040.

[82] Torkamanzadeh M, Wang L, Zhang Y, Budak O, Srimuk P, Presser V. MXene/

activated-carbon hybrid capacitive deionization for permselective ion removal at
low and high salinity. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12:26013–25.

[83] Zhou Z, Panatdasirisuk W, Mathis TS, Anasori B, Lu C, Zhang X, Liao Z, Gogotsi Y,
Yang S. Layer-by-layer assembly of MXene and carbon nanotubes on electrospun
polymer films for flexible energy storage. Nanoscale 2018;10:6005–13.
[84] Ali A, Hantanasirisakul K, Abdala A, Urbankowski P, Zhao M-Q, Anasori B,

Gogotsi Y, Aïssa B, Mahmoud KA. Effect of synthesis on performance of MXene/
iron oxide anode material for lithium-ion batteries. Langmuir 2018;34:11325–34.
[85] Wang Y, Wang X, Li X, Liu R, Bai Y, Xiao H, Liu Y, Yuan G. Intercalating ultrathin

MoO3 nanobelts into MXene film with ultrahigh volumetric capacitance and
excellent deformation for high-energy-density devices. Nano-Micro Lett 2020;12:
115.

[86] Zheng W, Halim J, Sun Z, Rosen J, Barsoum MW. MXene—manganese oxides

aqueous asymmetric supercapacitors with high mass loadings, high cell voltages
and slow self-discharge. Energy Storage Mater 2021;38:438–46.

[87] Luo Y, Tian Y, Tang Y, Yin X, Que W. 2D hierarchical nickel cobalt sulfides
coupled with ultrathin titanium carbide (MXene) nanosheets for hybrid
supercapacitors. J Power Sources 2021;482:228961.

[88] Luo Y, Yang C, Tian Y, Tang Y, Yin X, Que W. A long cycle life asymmetric
supercapacitor based on advanced nickel-sulfide/titanium carbide (MXene)
nanohybrid and MXene electrodes. J Power Sources 2020;450:227694.
[89] Nasrin K, Sudharshan V, Subramani K, Sathish M. Insights into 2D/2D MXene

heterostructures for improved synergy in structure toward next-generation
supercapacitors: a review. Adv Funct Mater 2022:2110267.

[90] Yu L, Li W, Wei C, Yang Q, Shao Y, Sun J. 3D printing of NiCoP/Ti3C2 MXene
architectures for energy storage devices with high areal and volumetric energy
density. Nano-Micro Lett 2020;12:143.

[91] Zhao D, Zhao R, Dong S, Miao X, Zhang Z, Wang C, Yin L. Alkali-induced 3D
crinkled porous Ti 3 C 2 MXene architectures coupled with NiCoP bimetallic
phosphide nanoparticles as anodes for high-performance sodium-ion batteries.
Energy Environ Sci 2019;12:2422–32.

[64] Nahirniak S, Saruhan B. MXene heterostructures as perspective materials for gas

[92] Liu C, Bai Y, Li W, Yang F, Zhang G, Pang H. In situ growth of three-dimensional

sensing applications. Sensors 2022, 22(3), 972.

[65] Mashtalir O, Naguib M, Dyatkin B, Gogotsi Y, Barsoum MW. Kinetics of aluminum
extraction from Ti3AlC2 in hydrofluoric acid. Mater Chem Phys 2013;139:
147–52.

[66] Alhabeb M, Maleski K, Anasori B, Lelyukh P, Clark L, Sin S, Gogotsi Y. Guidelines
for synthesis and processing of two-dimensional titanium carbide (Ti3C2T x
MXene). Chem Mater 2017;29:7633–44.

[67] Verger L, Xu C, Natu V, Cheng H-M, Ren W, Barsoum MW. Overview of the

synthesis of MXenes and other ultrathin 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides.
Curr Opin Solid State Mater Sci 2019;23:149–63.

[68] Ghidiu M, Lukatskaya MR, Zhao M-Q, Gogotsi Y, Barsoum MW. Conductive two-
dimensional titanium carbide ‘clay’with high volumetric capacitance. Nature
2014;516:78–81.

[69] Halim J, Lukatskaya MR, Cook KM, Lu J, Smith CR, N ̈aslund L-Å, May SJ,
Hultman L, Gogotsi Y, Eklund P. Transparent conductive two-dimensional
titanium carbide epitaxial thin films. Chem Mater 2014;26:2374–81.

[70] Liu F, Zhou A, Chen J, Jia J, Zhou W, Wang L, Hu Q. Preparation of Ti3C2 and
Ti2C MXenes by fluoride salts etching and methane adsorptive properties. Appl
Surf Sci 2017;416:781–9.

MXene/metal–organic framework composites for high-performance
supercapacitors. Angew Chem 2022;134:e202116282.

[93] Wang Y, Liu Y, Wang C, Liu H, Zhang J, Lin J, Fan J, Ding T, Ryu JE, Guo Z.

Significantly enhanced ultrathin NiCo-based MOF nanosheet electrodes hybrided
with Ti3C2Tx MXene for high performance asymmetric supercapacitor. Eng Sci
2020;9:50–9.

[94] Wang Y, Dou H, Wang J, Ding B, Xu Y, Chang Z, Hao X. Three-dimensional porous

MXene/layered double hydroxide composite for high performance
supercapacitors. J Power Sources 2016;327:221–8.

[95] Zhang D, Cao J, Zhang X, Insin N, Liu R, Qin J. NiMn layered double hydroxide

nanosheets in-situ anchored on Ti3C2 MXene via chemical bonds for superior
supercapacitors. ACS Appl Energy Mater 2020;3:5949–64.

[96] Zhao R, Wang M, Zhao D, Li H, Wang C, Yin L. Molecular-level heterostructures
assembled from titanium carbide MXene and Ni–Co–Al layered double-hydroxide
nanosheets for all-solid-state flexible asymmetric high-energy supercapacitors.
ACS Energy Lett 2017;3:132–40.

[97] Li K, Wang X, Wang X, Liang M, Nicolosi V, Xu Y, Gogotsi Y. All-pseudocapacitive

asymmetric MXene-carbon-conducting polymer supercapacitors. Nano Energy
2020;75:104971.

[71] Wang X, Garnero C, Rochard G, Magne D, Morisset S, Hurand S, Chartier P,

[98] Zhu M, Huang Y, Deng Q, Zhou J, Pei Z, Xue Q, Huang Y, Wang Z, Li H, Huang Q.

Rousseau J, Cabioc’h T, Coutanceau C. A new etching environment (FeF 3/HCl)
for the synthesis of two-dimensional titanium carbide MXenes: a route towards
selective reactivity vs. water. J Mater Chem 2017;5:22012–23.

Highly flexible, freestanding supercapacitor electrode with enhanced
performance obtained by hybridizing polypyrrole chains with MXene. Adv
Energy Mater 2016;6:1600969.

[72] Xuan J, Wang Z, Chen Y, Liang D, Cheng L, Yang X, Liu Z, Ma R, Sasaki T, Geng F.
Organic-base-driven intercalation and delamination for the production of
functionalized titanium carbide nanosheets with superior photothermal
therapeutic performance. Angew Chem 2016;128:14789–94.

[73] Sun W, Shah S, Chen Y, Tan Z, Gao H, Habib T, Radovic M, Green M.

[99] Liu F, Jin S, Xia Q, Zhou A, Fan L-Z. Research progress on construction and energy
storage performance of MXene heterostructures. J Energy Chem 2021;62:220–42.

[100] Nahirniak S, Ray A, Saruhan B. Challenges and future prospects of the MXene-
based materials for energy storage applications. Batteries 2023 9(2), 12.
[101] Xue Y, Xie Y, Xu C, He H, Jiang Q, Ying G, Huang H. 0D/2D heterojunction of

Electrochemical etching of Ti 2 AlC to Ti 2 CT x (MXene) in low-concentration
hydrochloric acid solution. J Mater Chem 2017;5:21663–8.

graphene quantum dots/MXene nanosheets for boosted hydrogen evolution
reaction. Surface Interfac 2022;30:101907.

[74] Urbankowski P, Anasori B, Makaryan T, Er D, Kota S, Walsh PL, Zhao M,

Shenoy VB, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y. Synthesis of two-dimensional titanium
nitride Ti 4 N 3 (MXene). Nanoscale 2016;8:11385–91.

[75] Gogotsi Y. Transition metal carbides go 2D. Nat Mater 2015;14:1079–80.
[76] Hu M, Zhang H, Hu T, Fan B, Wang X, Li Z. Emerging 2D MXenes for

supercapacitors: status, challenges and prospects. Chem Soc Rev 2020;49:
6666–93.

[102] Liu N, Yu L, Liu B, Yu F, Li L, Xiao Y, Yang J, Ma J. Ti3C2-MXene partially derived
hierarchical 1D/2D TiO2/Ti3C2 heterostructure electrode for high-performance
capacitive deionization. Adv Sci 2023;10:2204041.

[103] Thirumal V, Yuvakkumar R, Kumar PS, Ravi G, Arun A, Guduru RK,

Velauthapillai D. Heterostructured two dimensional materials of MXene and
graphene by hydrothermal method for efficient hydrogen production and HER
activities. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2023;48:6478–87.

[104] Wang Y, Wang X, Ji Y, Bian R, Li J, Zhang X, Tian J, Yang Q, Shi F. Ti3C2 MXene
coupled with CdS nanoflowers as 2D/3D heterostructures for enhanced

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109721

I. Hussain et al.

photocatalytic hydrogen production activity. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2022;47:
22045–53.

[105] Qin J, Liu B, Lam K-H, Song S, Li X, Hu X. 0D/2D MXene quantum dot/Ni-MOF
ultrathin nanosheets for enhanced N2 photoreduction. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng
2020;8:17791–9.

[106] Wang H, Zhao R, Hu H, Fan X, Zhang D, Wang D. 0D/2D heterojunctions of Ti3C2
MXene QDs/SiC as an efficient and robust photocatalyst for boosting the visible
photocatalytic NO pollutant removal ability. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12:
40176–85.

[107] Kong Q, An X, Huang L, Wang X, Feng W, Qiu S, Wang Q, Sun C. A DFT study of

Ti3C2O2 MXenes quantum dots supported on single layer graphene: electronic
structure an hydrogen evolution performance. Front Phys 2021;16:53506.
[108] Makola LC, Moeno S, Ouma CNM, Dlamini LN. MXene mediated layered 2D-2D-
3D g-C3N4@Ti3C2T@WO3 multijunctional heterostructure with enhanced
photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic properties. Nano-Struct Nano-Obj 2023;
33:100934.

[131] Li T, Yao L, Liu Q, Gu J, Luo R, Li J, Yan X, Wang W, Liu P, Chen B. Fluorine-free
synthesis of high-purity Ti3C2Tx (T= OH, O) via alkali treatment. Angew Chem
Int Ed 2018;57:6115–9.

[132] Srivastava P, Mishra A, Mizuseki H, Lee K-R, Singh AK. Mechanistic insight into
the chemical exfoliation and functionalization of Ti3C2 MXene. ACS Appl Mater
Interfaces 2016;8:24256–64.

[133] Wyatt BC, Rosenkranz A, Anasori B. 2D MXenes: tunable mechanical and

tribological properties. Adv Mater 2021;33:2007973.

[134] Naguib M, Mashtalir O, Carle J, Presser V, Lu J, Hultman L, Gogotsi Y,

Barsoum MW. Two-dimensional transition metal carbides. ACS Nano 2012;6:
1322–31.

[135] Zhou J, Zha X, Chen FY, Ye Q, Eklund P, Du S, Huang Q. A two-dimensional

zirconium carbide by selective etching of Al3C3 from nanolaminated Zr3Al3C5.
Angew Chem Int Ed 2016;55:5008–13.

[136] Fukuda K, Hisamura M. Crystal structure and thermoelectric properties of

YAl3C3. J Am Ceram Soc 2007;90:3299–302.

[109] Pang J, Chang B, Liu H, Zhou W. Potential of MXene-based heterostructures for

[137] Jayaseelan DD, Pramana S, Grasso S, Bai Y, Skinner S, Reece M, Lee W.

energy conversion and storage. ACS Energy Lett 2022;7:78–96.

[110] Chen C, Xie X, Anasori B, Sarycheva A, Makaryan T, Zhao M, Urbankowski P,

Miao L, Jiang J, Gogotsi Y. MoS2-on-MXene heterostructures as highly reversible
anode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Angew Chem Int Ed 2018;57:1846–50.

[111] Wang H, Cui Z, He S-A, Zhu J, Luo W, Liu Q, Zou R. Construction of ultrathin

layered MXene-TiN heterostructure enabling favorable catalytic ability for high-
areal-capacity lithium–sulfur batteries. Nano-Micro Lett 2022;14:189.
[112] Lamiel C, Hussain I, Ogunsakin OR, Zhang K. MXene in core–shell structures:

research progress and future prospects. J Mater Chem 2022;10:14247–72.
[113] Hussain I, Lamiel C, Sahoo S, Ahmad M, Chen X, Javed MS, Qin N, Gu S, Li Y,

Nawaz T. Factors affecting the growth formation of nanostructures and their
impact on electrode materials: a systematic review. Mater Today Phys 2022:
100844.

[114] Lamiel C, Hussain I, Ma X, Zhang K. Properties, functions, and challenges: current

collectors. Mater Today Chem 2022;26:101152.

[115] Lamiel C, Hussain I, Rabiee H, Ogunsakin OR, Zhang K. Metal-organic framework-
derived transition metal chalcogenides (S, Se, and Te): challenges, recent
progress, and future directions in electrochemical energy storage and conversion
systems. Coord Chem Rev 2023;480:215030.

[116] Ye Z, Jiang Y, Li L, Wu F, Chen R. Self-assembly of 0D–2D heterostructure

electrocatalyst from MOF and MXene for boosted lithium polysulfide conversion
reaction. Adv Mater 2021;33:2101204.

[117] Xue S, Wu G, Li M, Liu Z, Deng Y, Han W, Lv X, Wan S, Xi X, Yang D, Dong A.
Generalized assembly of sandwich-like 0D/2D/0D heterostructures with highly
exposed surfaces toward superior electrochemical performances. Nano Res 2022;
15:255–63.

[118] Liu H, Zhang X, Zhu Y, Cao B, Zhu Q, Zhang P, Xu B, Wu F, Chen R. Electrostatic
self-assembly of 0D–2D SnO2 quantum dots/Ti3C2Tx MXene hybrids as anode for
lithium-ion batteries. Nano-Micro Lett 2019;11:65.

[119] Xiao R, Zhao C, Zou Z, Chen Z, Tian L, Xu H, Tang H, Liu Q, Lin Z, Yang X. In situ

fabrication of 1D CdS nanorod/2D Ti3C2 MXene nanosheet Schottky
heterojunction toward enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Appl Catal B
Environ 2020;268:118382.

[120] Zhou J, Kang Q, Xu S, Li X, Liu C, Ni L, Chen N, Lu C, Wang X, Peng L, Guo X,
Ding W, Hou W. Ultrahigh rate capability of 1D/2D polyaniline/titanium carbide
(MXene) nanohybrid for advanced asymmetric supercapacitors. Nano Res 2022;
15:285–95.

[121] Jiang L, Duan J, Zhu J, Chen S, Antonietti M. Iron-cluster-directed synthesis of
2D/2D Fe–N–C/MXene superlattice-like heterostructure with enhanced oxygen
reduction electrocatalysis. ACS Nano 2020;14:2436–44.

[122] Wang W, Liu C, Zhang M, Zhang C, Cao L, Zhang C, Liu T, Kong D, Li W, Chen S.
In situ synthesis of 2D/2D MXene-COF heterostructure anchored with Ag
nanoparticles for enhancing Schottky photocatalytic antibacterial efficiency
under visible light. J Colloid Interface Sci 2022;608:735–48.

Fabrication and characterisation of single-phase Hf2Al4C5 ceramics. J Eur Ceram
Soc 2022;42:1292–301.

[138] Cao J, Sun Z, Li J, Zhu Y, Yuan Z, Zhang Y, Li D, Wang L, Han W. Microbe-assisted

assembly of Ti3C2Tx MXene on fungi-derived nanoribbon heterostructures for
ultrastable sodium and potassium ion storage. ACS Nano 2021;15:3423–33.

[139] Natu V, Pai R, Sokol M, Carey M, Kalra V, Barsoum MW. 2D Ti3C2Tz MXene
synthesized by water-free etching of Ti3AlC2 in polar organic solvents. Chem
2020;6:616–30.

[140] Song M, Pang SY, Guo F, Wong MC, Hao J. Fluoride-free 2D niobium carbide
MXenes as stable and biocompatible nanoplatforms for electrochemical
biosensors with ultrahigh sensitivity. Adv Sci 2020;7:2001546.

[141] Sarfraz B, Mehran MT, Baig MM, Naqvi SR, Khoja AH, Shahzad F. HF free greener
Cl-terminated MXene as novel electrocatalyst for overall water splitting in
alkaline media. Int J Energy Res 2022;46:10942–54.

[142] Cockreham CB, Zhang X, Li H, Hammond-Pereira E, Sun J, Saunders SR, Wang Y,

Xu H, Wu D. Inhibition of AlF3⋅3H2O impurity formation in Ti3C2Tx MXene
synthesis under a unique CoFx/HCl etching environment. ACS Appl Energy Mater
2019;2:8145–52.

[143] Wang X, Garnero C, Rochard G, Magne D, Morisset S, Hurand S, Chartier P,

Rousseau J, Cabioc’h T, Coutanceau C, Mauchamp V, C ́el ́erier S. A new etching
environment (FeF3/HCl) for the synthesis of two-dimensional titanium carbide
MXenes: a route towards selective reactivity vs. water. J Mater Chem 2017;5:
22012–23.

[144] Halim J, Lukatskaya MR, Cook KM, Lu J, Smith CR, N ̈aslund L-Å, May SJ,

Hultman L, Gogotsi Y, Eklund P, Barsoum MW. Transparent conductive two-
dimensional titanium carbide epitaxial thin films. Chem Mater 2014;26:2374–81.

[145] Feng A, Yu Y, Wang Y, Jiang F, Yu Y, Mi L, Song L. Two-dimensional MXene
Ti3C2 produced by exfoliation of Ti3AlC2. Mater Des 2017;114:161–6.
[146] Kim Y-J, Kim SJ, Seo D, Chae Y, Anayee M, Lee Y, Gogotsi Y, Ahn CW, Jung H-T.

Etching mechanism of monoatomic aluminum layers during MXene synthesis.
Chem Mater 2021;33:6346–55.

[147] Th ̈ornberg J, Halim J, Lu J, Meshkian R, Palisaitis J, Hultman L, Persson POÅ,
Rosen J. Synthesis of (V2/3Sc1/3)2AlC i-MAX phase and V2(cid:0) xC MXene scrolls.
Nanoscale 2019;11:14720–6.

[148] Wang L, Liu D, Lian W, Hu Q, Liu X, Zhou A. The preparation of V2CTx by facile

hydrothermal-assisted etching processing and its performance in lithium-ion
battery. J Mater Res Technol 2020;9:984–93.

[149] Demiroglu I, Peeters FM, Gülseren O, Çakır D, Sevik C. Alkali metal intercalation
in MXene/graphene heterostructures: a new platform for ion battery applications.
J Phys Chem Lett 2019;10:727–34.

[150] Pang S-Y, Wong Y-T, Yuan S, Liu Y, Tsang M-K, Yang Z, Huang H, Wong W-T,
Hao J. Universal strategy for HF-free facile and rapid synthesis of two-
dimensional MXenes as multifunctional energy materials. J Am Chem Soc 2019;
141:9610–6.

[123] Jo W-K, Tonda S. Novel CoAl-LDH/g-C3N4/RGO ternary heterojunction with

[151] Tang Q, Zhou Z, Shen P. Are MXenes promising anode materials for Li ion

notable 2D/2D/2D configuration for highly efficient visible-light-induced
photocatalytic elimination of dye and antibiotic pollutants. J Hazard Mater 2019;
368:778–87.

batteries? Computational studies on electronic properties and Li storage
capability of Ti3C2 and Ti3C2X2 (X= F, OH) monolayer. J Am Chem Soc 2012;
134:16909–16.

[124] Li Y, Yin Z, Ji G, Liang Z, Xue Y, Guo Y, Tian J, Wang X, Cui H. 2D/2D/2D

[152] Anasori B, Lukatskaya MR, Gogotsi Y. 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes)

heterojunction of Ti3C2 MXene/MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanosheets with exposed
(001) facets toward enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production activity. Appl
Catal B Environ 2019;246:12–20.

[125] Chen Y, Ge Y, Wu C, Tang H, Luo X, He J, et al. Facile synthesis of 2D/2D Ti2C3/
ZnIn2S4 heterostructure for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Int J
Mol Sci 2023  24(4), 3936.

[126] Zhu H, Fu X, Zhou Z. 3D/2D heterojunction of CeO2/ultrathin MXene nanosheets
for photocatalytic hydrogen production. ACS Omega 2022;7:21684–93.
[127] Khazaei M, Ranjbar A, Arai M, Sasaki T, Yunoki S. Electronic properties and

applications of MXenes: a theoretical review. J Mater Chem C 2017;5:2488–503.
[128] Ghosh NC, Harimkar SP. 3 - consolidation and synthesis of MAX phases by spark

plasma sintering (SPS): a review. In: Low IM, editor. Advances in science and
technology of Mn+1AXn phases. Woodhead Publishing; 2012. p. 47–80.

[129] Deshmukh K, Muzaffar A, Kov ́aˇrík T, Ahamed MB, Pasha SKK. Chapter 1 -
introduction to 2D MXenes: fundamental aspects, MAX phases and MXene
derivatives, current challenges, and future prospects. In: Sadasivuni KK,
Deshmukh K, Pasha SKK, Kov ́aˇrík T, editors. Mxenes and their composites.
Elsevier; 2022. p. 1–47.

[130] Kurra N, Ahmed B, Gogotsi Y, Alshareef HN. MXene-on-paper coplanar

microsupercapacitors. Adv Energy Mater 2016;6:1601372.

for energy storage. Nat Rev Mater 2017;2:16098.

[153] Zhu J, Chroneos A, Eppinger J, Schwingenschl ̈ogl U. S-functionalized MXenes as
electrode materials for Li-ion batteries. Appl Mater Today 2016;5:19–24.
[154] Radovic M, Barsoum MW. MAX phases: bridging the gap between metals and

ceramics. Am Ceram Soc Bull 2013;92:20–7.

[155] Sun W, Shah SA, Chen Y, Tan Z, Gao H, Habib T, Radovic M, Green MJ.

Electrochemical etching of Ti2AlC to Ti2CTx (MXene) in low-concentration
hydrochloric acid solution. J Mater Chem 2017;5:21663–8.

[156] Pang SY, Io WF, Wong LW, Zhao J, Hao J. Efficient energy conversion and storage
based on robust fluoride-free self-assembled 1D niobium carbide in 3D nanowire
network. Adv Sci 2020;7:1903680.

[157] Bernard J, Chatenet M, Dalard F. Understanding aluminum behaviour in aqueous

alkaline solution using coupled techniques: Part I. Rotating ring-disk study.
Electrochim Acta 2006;52:86–93.

[158] Lian P, Dong Y, Wu Z-S, Zheng S, Wang X, Sen W, Sun C, Qin J, Shi X, Bao X.

Alkalized Ti3C2 MXene nanoribbons with expanded interlayer spacing for high-
capacity sodium and potassium ion batteries. Nano Energy 2017;40:1–8.
[159] Ning J, Wang D, Zhang J, Feng X, Zhong R, Chen J, Dong J, Guo L, Hao Y. One-
step synthesis of novel snowflake-like Si-O/Si-C nanostructures on 3D graphene/
Cu foam by chemical vapor deposition. Nano Res 2018;11:1861–72.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109722

I. Hussain et al.

[160] Xue N, Li X, Zhang M, Han L, Liu Y, Tao X. Chemical-combined ball-milling

[186] Zhang P, Sun N, Soomro RA, Yue S, Zhu Q, Xu B. Interface-engineered Fe3O4/

synthesis of fluorine-free porous MXene for high-performance lithium ion
batteries. ACS Appl Energy Mater 2020;3:10234–41.

MXene heterostructures for enhanced lithium-ion storage. ACS Appl Energy Mater
2021;4:11844–53.

[161] Shi H, Zhang P, Liu Z, Park S, Lohe MR, Wu Y, Shaygan Nia A, Yang S, Feng X.

[187] Wei C, Tan L, Zhang Y, Xi B, Xiong S, Feng J. MXene/organics heterostructures

Ambient-stable two-dimensional titanium carbide (MXene) enabled by iodine
etching. Angew Chem Int Ed 2021;60:8689–93.

enable ultrastable and high-rate lithium/sodium batteries. ACS Appl Mater
Interfaces 2022;14:2979–88.

[162] Jawaid A, Hassan A, Neher G, Nepal D, Pachter R, Kennedy WJ, Ramakrishnan S,
Vaia RA. Halogen etch of Ti3AlC2 MAX phase for MXene fabrication. ACS Nano
2021;15:2771–7.

[163] Bai Y, Liu C, Chen T, Li W, Zheng S, Pi Y, Luo Y, Pang H. MXene-copper/cobalt

hybrids via Lewis acidic molten salts etching for high performance symmetric
supercapacitors. Angew Chem Int Ed 2021;60:25318–22.

[164] Liu L, Orbay M, Luo S, Duluard S, Shao H, Harmel J, Rozier P, Taberna P-L,

Simon P. Exfoliation and delamination of Ti3C2Tx MXene prepared via molten
salt etching route. ACS Nano 2022;16:111–8.

[165] Li Y, Shao H, Lin Z, Lu J, Liu L, Duployer B, Persson POÅ, Eklund P, Hultman L,
Li M, Chen K, Zha X-H, Du S, Rozier P, Chai Z, Raymundo-Pi ̃nero E, Taberna P-L,
Simon P, Huang Q. A general Lewis acidic etching route for preparing MXenes
with enhanced electrochemical performance in non-aqueous electrolyte. Nat
Mater 2020;19:894–9.

[166] Li M, Lu J, Luo K, Li Y, Chang K, Chen K, Zhou J, Rosen J, Hultman L, Eklund P,
Persson POÅ, Du S, Chai Z, Huang Z, Huang Q. Element replacement approach by
reaction with Lewis acidic molten salts to synthesize nanolaminated MAX phases
and MXenes. J Am Chem Soc 2019;141:4730–7.

[188] Bao W, Su D, Zhang W, Guo X, Wang G. 3D metal carbide@ mesoporous carbon
hybrid architecture as a new polysulfide reservoir for lithium-sulfur batteries. Adv
Funct Mater 2016;26:8746–56.

[189] Kshetri T, Tran DT, Le HT, Nguyen DC, Van Hoa H, Kim NH, Lee JH. Recent
advances in MXene-based nanocomposites for electrochemical energy storage
applications. Prog Mater Sci 2021;117:100733.

[190] Gui J-C, Han L, Cao W-y. Lamellar MXene: a novel 2D nanomaterial for
electrochemical sensors. J Appl Electrochem 2021;51:1509–22.

[191] Hong Z, Maleki H, Ludwig T, Zhen Y, Wilhelm M, Lee D, Kim K-H, Mathur S. New
insights into carbon-based and MXene anodes for Na and K-ion storage: a review.
J Energy Chem 2021;62:660–91.

[192] Hussain I, Hussain T, Yang S, Chen Y, Zhou J, Ma X, Abbas N, Lamiel C, Zhang K.

Integration of CuO nanosheets to Zn-Ni-Co oxide nanowire arrays for energy
storage applications. Chem Eng J 2021;413:127570.

[193] Liu A, Liang X, Ren X, Guan W, Gao M, Yang Y, Yang Q, Gao L, Li Y, Ma T. Recent
progress in MXene-based materials: potential high-performance electrocatalysts.
Adv Funct Mater 2020;30:2003437.

[194] Yoon Y, Lee K, Lee H. Low-dimensional carbon and MXene-based electrochemical

[167] Shen M, Jiang W, Liang K, Zhao S, Tang R, Zhang L, Wang JQ. One-pot green

capacitor electrodes. Nanotechnology 2016;27:172001.

process to synthesize MXene with controllable surface terminations using molten
salts. Angew Chem 2021;133:27219–24.

[195] Yu LP, Zhou XH, Lu L, Xu L, Wang FJ. MXene/carbon nanotube hybrids: synthesis,
structures, properties, and applications. ChemSusChem 2021;14:5079–111.

[168] Song M, Pang S-Y, Guo F, Wong M-C, Hao J. Fluoride-free 2D niobium carbide
MXenes as stable and biocompatible nanoplatforms for electrochemical
biosensors with ultrahigh sensitivity. Adv Sci 2020;7:2001546.

[169] Ostadhossein A, Guo J, Simeski F, Ihme M. Functionalization of 2D materials for

enhancing OER/ORR catalytic activity in Li–oxygen batteries. Commun Chem
2019;2:95.

[170] Yorulmaz U, Demiro ̆glu  ̇I, Çakir D, Gülseren O, Sevik C. A systematical ab-initio
review of promising 2D MXene monolayers towards Li-ion battery applications.
J Phys: Energy 2020;2:032006.

[171] Sun Z, Yuan M, Lin L, Yang H, Nan C, Li H, Sun G, Yang X. Selective

lithiation–expansion–microexplosion synthesis of two-dimensional fluoride-free
mxene. ACS Mater Lett 2019;1:628–32.

[172] Zhao X, Radovic M, Green MJ. Synthesizing MXene nanosheets by water-free

etching. Chem 2020;6:544–6.

[173] Maleski K, Mochalin VN, Gogotsi Y. Dispersions of two-dimensional titanium

carbide MXene in organic solvents. Chem Mater 2017;29:1632–40.

[174] Jiao L, Zhang C, Geng C, Wu S, Li H, Lv W, Tao Y, Chen Z, Zhou G, Li J, Ling G,
Wan Y, Yang Q-H. Capture and catalytic conversion of polysulfides by in situ built
TiO2-MXene heterostructures for lithium–sulfur batteries. Adv Energy Mater
2019;9:1900219.

[175] Yue L, Chen L, Wang X, Lu D, Zhou W, Shen D, Yang Q, Xiao S, Li Y. Ni/Co-MOF@
aminated MXene hierarchical electrodes for high-stability supercapacitors. Chem
Eng J 2023;451:138687.

[176] Peng M, Dong M, Wei W, Xu H, Liu C, Shen C. The introduction of amino

termination on Ti3C2 MXene surface for its flexible film with excellent property.
Carbon 2021;179:400–7.

[177] VahidMohammadi A, Liang W, Mojtabavi M, Wanunu M, Beidaghi M. 2D

titanium and vanadium carbide MXene heterostructures for electrochemical
energy storage. Energy Storage Mater 2021;41:554–62.

[178] Enaiet Allah A. Three-dimensional N-doped mesoporous carbon–MXene hybrid
architecture for supercapacitor applications. RSC Adv 2023;13:9983–97.
[179] Hussain I, Ansari MZ, Lamiel C, Hussain T, Javed MS, Kaewmaraya T, Ahmad M,

Qin N, Zhang K. In situ grown heterostructure based on MOF-derived carbon
containing n-type Zn–in–S and dry-oxidative p-type CuO as pseudocapacitive
electrode materials. ACS Energy Lett 2023;8:1887–95.

[180] Hussain I, Sahoo S, Hussain T, Ahmad M, Javed MS, Lamiel C, Gu S,

Kaewmaraya T, Sayed MS, Zhang K. Theoretical and experimental investigation
of in situ grown MOF-derived oriented Zr-Mn-oxide and solution-free CuO as
hybrid electrode for supercapacitors. Adv Funct Mater 2023;33:2210002.
[181] Javed MS, Asim S, Najam T, Khalid M, Hussain I, Ahmad A, Assiri MA, Han W.
Recent progress in flexible Zn-ion hybrid supercapacitors: fundamentals,
fabrication designs, and applications. Carbon Energy 2023;5:e271.

[182] Javed MS, Najam T, Hussain I, Idrees M, Ahmad A, Imran M, Shah SSA, Luque R,

Han W. Fundamentals and scientific challenges in structural design of cathode
materials for zinc-ion hybrid supercapacitors. Adv Energy Mater 2023;13:
2202303.

[183] Wang X, Li H, Li H, Lin S, Ding W, Zhu X, Sheng Z, Wang H, Zhu X, Sun Y. 2D/2D

1T-MoS2/Ti3C2 MXene heterostructure with excellent supercapacitor
performance. Adv Funct Mater 2020;30:0190302.

[184] Unnikrishnan B, Wu C-W, Sangili A, Hsu Y-J, Tseng Y-T, Pandey JS, Chang H-T,
Huang C-C. Synthesis and in situ sulfidation of molybdenum carbide MXene using
fluorine-free etchant for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions. J Colloid
Interface Sci 2022;628:849–57.

[185] Guo D, Ming F, Shinde DB, Cao L, Huang G, Li C, Li Z, Yuan Y, Hedhili MN,

Alshareef HN, Lai Z. Covalent assembly of two-dimensional COF-on-MXene
heterostructures enables fast charging lithium hosts. Adv Funct Mater 2021;31:
2101194.

[196] Zhan X, Si C, Zhou J, Sun Z. MXene and MXene-based composites: synthesis,

properties and environment-related applications. Nanoscale Horiz. 2020;5:
235–58.

[197] Ling Z, Ren CE, Zhao M-Q, Yang J, Giammarco JM, Qiu J, Barsoum MW,

Gogotsi Y. Flexible and conductive MXene films and nanocomposites with high
capacitance. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014;111:16676–81.

[198] Liu L, Gao Y, Liu Q, Kuang J, Zhou D, Ju S, Han B, Zhang Z. High mechanical

performance of layered graphene oxide/poly (vinyl alcohol) nanocomposite films.
Small 2013;9:2466–72.

[199] Podsiadlo P, Kaushik AK, Arruda EM, Waas AM, Shim BS, Xu J, Nandivada H,
Pumplin BG, Lahann J, Ramamoorthy A. Ultrastrong and stiff layered polymer
nanocomposites. Science 2007;318:80–3.

[200] Walther A, Bjurhager I, Malho J-M, Pere J, Ruokolainen J, Berglund LA, Ikkala O.
Large-area, lightweight and thick biomimetic composites with superior material
properties via fast, economic, and green pathways. Nano Lett 2010;10:2742–8.
[201] Zhu Y, Murali S, Stoller MD, Ganesh KJ, Cai W, Ferreira PJ, Pirkle A, Wallace RM,

Cychosz KA, Thommes M, Su D, Stach EA, Ruoff RS. Carbon-based
supercapacitors produced by activation of graphene. Science 2011;332:1537–41.

[202] Yang X, Cheng C, Wang Y, Qiu L, Li D. Liquid-Mediated dense integration of
graphene materials for compact capacitive energy storage. Science 2013;341:
534–7.

[203] Boota M, Anasori B, Voigt C, Zhao M-Q, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y.

Pseudocapacitive electrodes produced by oxidant-free polymerization of pyrrole
between the layers of 2D titanium carbide (MXene). Adv Mater 2016;28:1517–22.
[204] Zhu M, Huang Y, Deng Q, Zhou J, Pei Z, Xue Q, Huang Y, Wang Z, Li H, Huang Q,

Zhi C. Highly flexible, freestanding supercapacitor electrode with enhanced
performance obtained by hybridizing polypyrrole chains with MXene. Adv Energy
Mater 2016;6:1600969.

[205] Qin L, Tao Q, El Ghazaly A, Fernandez-Rodriguez J, Persson PO, Rosen J, Zhang F.
High-performance ultrathin flexible solid-state supercapacitors based on solution
processable Mo1. 33C MXene and PEDOT: PSS. Adv Funct Mater 2018;28:
1703808.

[206] Boota M, Gogotsi Y. MXene—conducting polymer asymmetric pseudocapacitors.

Adv Energy Mater 2019;9:1802917.

[207] VahidMohammadi A, Moncada J, Chen H, Kayali E, Orangi J, Carrero CA,

Beidaghi M. Thick and freestanding MXene/PANI pseudocapacitive electrodes
with ultrahigh specific capacitance. J Mater Chem 2018;6:22123–33.

[208] Li J, Levitt A, Kurra N, Juan K, Noriega N, Xiao X, Wang X, Wang H, Alshareef HN,

Gogotsi Y. MXene-conducting polymer electrochromic microsupercapacitors.
Energy Storage Mater 2019;20:455–61.

[209] Qin L, Tao Q, Liu X, Fahlman M, Halim J, Persson POÅ, Rosen J, Zhang F.

Polymer-MXene composite films formed by MXene-facilitated electrochemical
polymerization for flexible solid-state microsupercapacitors. Nano Energy 2019;
60:734–42.

[210] Qin L, Tao Q, Liu X, Fahlman M, Halim J, Persson PO, Rosen J, Zhang F. Polymer-

MXene composite films formed by MXene-facilitated electrochemical
polymerization for flexible solid-state microsupercapacitors. Nano Energy 2019;
60:734–42.

[211] Choi BG, Yang M, Hong WH, Choi JW, Huh YS. 3D macroporous graphene

frameworks for supercapacitors with high energy and power densities. ACS Nano
2012;6:4020–8.

[212] Li K, Wang X, Li S, Urbankowski P, Li J, Xu Y, Gogotsi Y. An ultrafast conducting
polymer@ MXene positive electrode with high volumetric capacitance for
advanced asymmetric supercapacitors. Small 2020;16:1906851.

[213] Wang Y, Wang X, Li X, Bai Y, Xiao H, Liu Y, Yuan G. Scalable fabrication of

polyaniline nanodots decorated MXene film electrodes enabled by viscous
functional inks for high-energy-density asymmetric supercapacitors. Chem Eng J
2021;405:126664.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109723

I. Hussain et al.

[214] Carey M, Barsoum M. MXene polymer nanocomposites: a review. Materi Today

[242] Samal R, Debbarma C, Rout CS. Transition metal tellurides/2D Ti3C2Tx MXene:

Adv 2021;9:100120.

[215] Chen X, Zhao Y, Li L, Wang Y, Wang J, Xiong J, Du S, Zhang P, Shi X, Yu J.

MXene/polymer nanocomposites: preparation, properties, and applications.
Polym Rev 2021;61:80–115.

[216] Gao L, Li C, Huang W, Mei S, Lin H, Ou Q, Zhang Y, Guo J, Zhang F, Xu S. MXene/

polymer membranes: synthesis, properties, and emerging applications. Chem
Mater 2020;32:1703–47.

[217] George SM, Kandasubramanian B. Advancements in MXene-Polymer composites

for various biomedical applications. Ceram Int 2020;46:8522–35.

[218] Mazhar S, Qarni AA, Haq YU, Haq ZU, Murtaza I. Promising PVC/MXene based
flexible thin film nanocomposites with excellent dielectric, thermal and
mechanical properties. Ceram Int 2020;46:12593–605.

[219] Rajavel K, Luo S, Wan Y, Yu X, Hu Y, Zhu P, Sun R, Wong C. 2D Ti3C2Tx MXene/

polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) nanocomposites for attenuation of
electromagnetic radiation with excellent heat dissipation. Compos Appl Sci Manuf
2020;129:105693.

[220] Tanvir A, Sobolˇciak P, Popelka A, Mrlik M, Spitalsky Z, Micusik M, Prokes J,

Krupa I. Electrically conductive, transparent polymeric nanocomposites modified
by 2D Ti3C2Tx (MXene). Polymers 2019;11:1272.

[221] Tu S, Jiang Q, Zhang J, He X, Hedhili MN, Zhang X, Alshareef HN. Enhancement
of dielectric permittivity of Ti3C2Tx MXene/polymer composites by controlling
flake size and surface termination. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11:27358–62.

[222] Wang D, Lin Y, Hu D, Jiang P, Huang X. Multifunctional 3D-MXene/PDMS

nanocomposites for electrical, thermal and triboelectric applications. Compos
Appl Sci Manuf 2020;130:105754.

investigation towards active alkaline hydrogen evolution reaction. Catal Today
2022.

[243] Jin J, Xiao T, Zhang Y-f, Zheng H, Wang H, Wang R, Gong Y, He B, Liu X, Zhou K.

Hierarchical MXene/transition metal chalcogenide heterostructures for
electrochemical energy storage and conversion. Nanoscale 2021;13:19740–70.

[244] Pan Z, Cao F, Hu X, Ji X. A facile method for synthesizing CuS decorated Ti 3 C 2

MXene with enhanced performance for asymmetric supercapacitors. J Mater
Chem 2019;7:8984–92.

[245] Fu J, Li L, Yun JM, Lee D, Ryu BK, Kim KH. Two-dimensional titanium carbide
(MXene)-wrapped sisal-Like NiCo2S4 as positive electrode for High-performance
hybrid pouch-type asymmetric supercapacitor. Chem Eng J 2019;375:121939.
[246] Liao L, Zhang A, Zheng K, Liu R, Cheng Y, Wang L, Li A, Liu J. Fabrication of

cobaltous sulfide nanoparticle-modified 3D MXene/carbon foam hybrid aerogels
for all-solid-state supercapacitors. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2021;13:28222–30.

[247] Chen X, Ding Z, Yu H, Ge H, Liu W, Sun S. Facile fabrication of CuCo2S4

nanoparticles/MXene composite as anode for high-performance asymmetric
supercapacitor. Mater Chem Front 2021;5:7606–16.

[248] Cai Y, Wang Y, Zhang L, Fang R, Wang J. 3D heterostructure constructed by few-

layered MXenes with a MoS2 layer as the shielding shell for excellent hybrid
capacitive deionization and enhanced structural stability. ACS Appl Mater
Interfaces 2022;14:2833–47.

[249] Li Q, Song T, Wang Z, Wang X, Zhou X, Wang Q, Yang Y. A general strategy

toward metal sulfide nanoparticles confined in a sulfur-doped Ti3C2Tx MXene 3D
porous aerogel for efficient ambient N2 electroreduction. Small 2021;17:
2103305.

[223] Zhang H, Wang L, Chen Q, Li P, Zhou A, Cao X, Hu Q. Preparation, mechanical
and anti-friction performance of MXene/polymer composites. Mater Des 2016;92:
682–9.

[250] Ran J, Gao G, Li F-T, Ma T-Y, Du A, Qiao S-Z. Ti3C2 MXene co-catalyst on metal
sulfide photo-absorbers for enhanced visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen
production. Nat Commun 2017;8:13907.

[224] Kshetri T, Tran DT, Le HT, Nguyen DC, Hoa HV, Kim NH, Lee JH. Recent advances
in MXene-based nanocomposites for electrochemical energy storage applications.
Prog Mater Sci 2021;117:100733.

[225] Ambade SB, Ambade RB, Eom W, Noh SH, Kim SH, Han TH. 2D Ti3C2 MXene/
WO3 hybrid architectures for high-rate supercapacitors. Adv Mater Interfac 2018;
5:1801361.

[226] Hantanasirisakul K, Zhao MQ, Urbankowski P, Halim J, Anasori B, Kota S,

Ren CE, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y. Fabrication of Ti3C2Tx MXene transparent thin
films with tunable optoelectronic properties. Adv Electron Mater 2016;2:
1600050.

[227] Wang Y, Sun J, Qian X, Zhang Y, Yu L, Niu R, Zhao H, Zhu J. 2D/2D

heterostructures of nickel molybdate and MXene with strong coupled synergistic
effect towards enhanced supercapacitor performance. J Power Sources 2019;414:
540–6.

[228] Li H, Li X, Liang J, Chen Y. Hydrous RuO2-decorated MXene coordinating with
silver nanowire inks enabling fully printed micro-supercapacitors with
extraordinary volumetric performance. Adv Energy Mater 2019;9:1803987.
[229] Wu Q-L, Zhao S-X, Yu L, Zheng X-X, Wang Y-F, Yu L-Q, Nan C-W, Cao G. Oxygen
vacancy-enriched MoO 3(cid:0) x nanobelts for asymmetric supercapacitors with
excellent room/low temperature performance. J Mater Chem 2019;7:13205–14.
[230] Li H, Li X, Liang J, Chen Y. Hydrous RuO2-decorated MXene coordinating with
silver nanowire inks enabling fully printed micro-supercapacitors with
extraordinary volumetric performance. Adv Energy Mater 2019;9:1803987.

[231] Ma Y, Sheng H, Dou W, Su Q, Zhou J, Xie E, Lan W. Fe2O3 nanoparticles
anchored on the Ti3C2T x MXene paper for flexible supercapacitors with
ultrahigh volumetric capacitance. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12:41410–8.
[232] Li H, Liu Y, Lin S, Li H, Wu Z, Zhu L, Li C, Wang X, Zhu X, Sun Y. Laser crystallized

sandwich-like MXene/Fe3O4/MXene thin film electrodes for flexible
supercapacitors. J Power Sources 2021;497:229882.

[233] Yu J, Zeng M, Zhou J, Chen H, Cong G, Liu H, Ji M, Zhu C, Xu J. A one-pot

synthesis of nitrogen doped porous MXene/TiO2 heterogeneous film for high-
performance flexible energy storage. Chem Eng J 2021;426:130765.

[251] Yu L, Liu B, Wang Y, Yu F, Ma J. Recent progress on MXene-Derived material and
its’ application in energy and environment. J Power Sources 2021;490:229250.
[252] Zhang Y, Zhan R, Xu Q, Liu H, Tao M, Luo Y, Bao S, Li C, Xu M. Circuit board-like
CoS/MXene composite with superior performance for sodium storage. Chem Eng
J 2019;357:220–5.

[253] Zheng R, Shu C, Chen X, Yan Y, He M, Du D, Ren L, Hu A, Long J. Unique

intermediate adsorption enabled by anion vacancies in metal sulfide embedded
MXene nanosheets overcoming kinetic barriers of oxygen electrode reactions in
lithium-oxygen batteries. Energy Storage Mater 2021;40:41–50.
[254] Zou H, He B, Kuang P, Yu J, Fan K. Metal–organic framework-derived

nickel–cobalt sulfide on ultrathin mxene nanosheets for electrocatalytic oxygen
evolution. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:22311–9.

[255] Zou Z, Wang Q, Yan J, Zhu K, Ye K, Wang G, Cao D. Versatile interfacial self-

assembly of Ti3C2Tx MXene based composites with enhanced kinetics for
superior lithium and sodium storage. ACS Nano 2021;15:12140–50.

[256] Hussain I, Mohapatra D, Lamiel C, Ahmad M, Ashraf MA, Chen Y, Gu S, Javed MS,
Zhang K. Phosphorus containing layered quadruple hydroxide electrode materials
on lab waste recycled flexible current collector. J Colloid Interface Sci 2022;609:
566–74.

[257] Javed MS, Najim T, Hussain I, Batool S, Idrees M, Mehmood A, Imran M,

Assiri MA, Ahmad A, Ahmad Shah SS. 2D V2O5 nanoflakes as a binder-free
electrode material for high-performance pseudocapacitor. Ceram Int 2021;47:
25152–7.

[258] Hussain I, Mak T, Zhang K. Boron-doped trimetallic Cu-Ni-Co oxide nanoneedles

for supercapacitor application. ACS Appl Nano Mater 2021;4:129–41.
[259] Ahmad M, Hussain I, Nawaz T, Li Y, Chen X, Ali S, Imran M, Ma X, Zhang K.

Comparative study of ternary metal chalcogenides (MX; M= Zn–Co–Ni; X= S, Se,
Te): formation process, charge storage mechanism and hybrid supercapacitor.
J Power Sources 2022;534:231414.

[260] Lamiel C, Hussain I, Shim J-J. Enhancement of electrochemical performance of
nickel cobalt layered double hydroxide@ nickel foam with potassium ferricyanide
auxiliary electrolyte. Energy 2017;140:901–11.

[234] Byeon A, Hatter C, Park JH, Ahn CW, Gogotsi Y, Lee JW. Molybdenum oxide/

[261] Peng W, Li H, Song S. Synthesis of fluorinated graphene/CoAl-layered double

carbon composites derived from the CO2 oxidation of Mo2CTx (MXene) for
lithium ion battery anodes. Electrochim Acta 2017;258:979–87.

hydroxide composites as electrode materials for supercapacitors. ACS Appl Mater
Interfaces 2017;9:5204–12.

[235] Fang Y, Hu R, Liu B, Zhang Y, Zhu K, Yan J, Ye K, Cheng K, Wang G, Cao D.

[262] Zhang L, Zhang X, Shen L, Gao B, Hao L, Lu X, Zhang F, Ding B, Yuan C. Enhanced

MXene-derived TiO 2/reduced graphene oxide composite with an enhanced
capacitive capacity for Li-ion and K-ion batteries. J Mater Chem 2019;7:5363–72.

[236] Habib T, Zhao X, Shah SA, Chen Y, Sun W, An H, Lutkenhaus JL, Radovic M,

Green MJ. Oxidation stability of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets in solvents and
composite films. npj 2D Mater Appl 2019;3:1–6.

[237] Liu YT, Zhang P, Sun N, Anasori B, Zhu QZ, Liu H, Gogotsi Y, Xu B. Self-assembly
of transition metal oxide nanostructures on MXene nanosheets for fast and stable
lithium storage. Adv Mater 2018;30:1707334.

[238] Song C, Yan Q, Zhang T, Lin H, Ye H, Yao Q, Zhang S, Li Y, Wang G, Lee JY.

Enhanced polysulfide conversion through metal oxide-support interaction in
MnOx/MXene. Chem Eng J 2021;420:130452.

[239] Wei A, Wang L, Li Z. Metal-organic framework derived binary-metal oxide/

MXene composite as sulfur host for high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries.
J Alloys Compd 2022;899:163369.

[240] Chen T, Li M, Song S, Kim P, Bae J. Biotemplate preparation of multilayered TiC
nanoflakes for high performance symmetric supercapacitor. Nano Energy 2020;
71:104549.

high-current capacitive behavior of graphene/CoAl-layered double hydroxide
composites as electrode material for supercapacitors. J Power Sources 2012;199:
395–401.

[263] Zhao R, Wang M, Zhao D, Li H, Wang C, Yin L. Molecular-level heterostructures
assembled from titanium carbide MXene and Ni–Co–Al layered double-hydroxide
nanosheets for all-solid-state flexible asymmetric high-energy supercapacitors.
ACS Energy Lett 2018;3:132–40.

[264] Wang X, Li H, Li H, Lin S, Bai J, Dai J, Liang C, Zhu X, Sun Y, Dou S.

Heterostructures of Ni–Co–Al layered double hydroxide assembled on V4C3
MXene for high-energy hybrid supercapacitors. J Mater Chem 2019;7:2291–300.

[265] Wu X, Huang B, Wang Q, Wang Y. High energy density of two-dimensional

MXene/NiCo-LDHs interstratification assembly electrode: understanding the role
of interlayer ions and hydration. Chem Eng J 2020;380:122456.

[266] Sun C, Zuo P, Sun W, Xia R, Dong Z, Zhu L, Lv J, Deng G, Tan L, Dai Y. Self-
assembly of alternating stacked 2D/2D Ti3C2Tx MXene/ZnMnNi LDH van der
Waals heterostructures with ultrahigh supercapacitive performance. ACS Appl
Energy Mater 2020;3:10242–54.

[241] Huang P, Zhang S, Ying H, Zhang Z, Han W. Few-layered Ti3C2 MXene anchoring

[267] Zhang Y, Cao J, Li J, Yuan Z, Li D, Wang L, Han W. Self-assembled Cobalt-doped

bimetallic selenide NiCo2Se4 nanoparticles for superior Sodium-ion batteries.
Chem Eng J 2021;417:129161.

NiMn-layered double hydroxide (LDH)/V2CTx MXene hybrids for advanced
aqueous electrochemical energy storage properties. Chem Eng J 2022;430:
132992.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109724

I. Hussain et al.

[268] Zhang R, Dong J, Zhang W, Ma L, Jiang Z, Wang J, Huang Y. Synergistically

[296] Hussain I, Shaheen I, Ahmad R, Ali I, Hussain K, Hussain SS, Alsaiari NS,

coupling of 3D FeNi-LDH arrays with Ti3C2Tx-MXene nanosheets toward
superior symmetric supercapacitor. Nano Energy 2022;91:106633.

[269] Cai M, Fan X, Yan H, Li Y, Song S, Li W, Li H, Lu Z, Zhu M. In situ assemble

Ti3C2Tx MXene@ MgAl-LDH heterostructure towards anticorrosion and antiwear
application. Chem Eng J 2021;419:130050.

[270] Chen Y, Yao H, Kong F, Tian H, Meng G, Wang S, Mao X, Cui X, Hou X, Shi J. V2C
MXene synergistically coupling FeNi LDH nanosheets for boosting oxygen
evolution reaction. Appl Catal B Environ 2021;297:120474.

[271] Gao X, Jia Z, Wang B, Wu X, Sun T, Liu X, Chi Q, Wu G. Synthesis of NiCo-LDH/

MXene hybrids with abundant heterojunction surfaces as a lightweight
electromagnetic wave absorber. Chem Eng J 2021;419:130019.

[272] Hao C, Wu Y, An Y, Cui B, Lin J, Li X, Wang D, Jiang M, Cheng Z, Hu S. Interface-
coupling of CoFe-LDH on MXene as high-performance oxygen evolution catalyst.
Mater Today Energy 2019;12:453–62.

[273] Hu L, Li M, Wei X, Wang H, Wu Y, Wen J, Gu W, Zhu C. Modulating interfacial
electronic structure of CoNi LDH nanosheets with Ti3C2Tx MXene for enhancing
water oxidation catalysis. Chem Eng J 2020;398:125605.

[274] Li H, Wen Y, Zhu X, Wang J, Zhang L, Sun B. Novel heterostructure of a MXene@
NiFe-LDH nanohybrid with superior peroxidase-like activity for sensitive
colorimetric detection of glutathione. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng 2019;8:520–6.

[275] Li M, Fang L, Zhou H, Wu F, Lu Y, Luo H, Zhang Y, Hu B. Three-dimensional

porous MXene/NiCo-LDH composite for high performance non-enzymatic glucose
sensor. Appl Surf Sci 2019;495:143554.

[276] Yu M, Zhou S, Wang Z, Zhao J, Qiu J. Boosting electrocatalytic oxygen evolution
by synergistically coupling layered double hydroxide with MXene. Nano Energy
2018;44:181–90.

[277] Sun C, Zuo P, Sun W, Xia R, Dong Z, Zhu L, Lv J, Deng G, Tan L, Dai Y. Self-

assembly of alternating stacked 2D/2D Ti3C2T x MXene/ZnMnNi LDH van der
Waals heterostructures with ultrahigh supercapacitive performance. ACS Appl
Energy Mater 2020;3:10242–54.

[278] Yang X, Zhu J, Qiu L, Li D. Bioinspired effective prevention of restacking in

multilayered graphene films: towards the next generation of high-performance
supercapacitors. Adv Mater 2011;23:2833–8.

[279] Lee E, Yoon YS, Kim D-J. Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides and

metal oxide hybrids for gas sensing. ACS Sens 2018;3:2045–60.

[280] Wang Y, Wu Y, Huang Y, Zhang F, Yang X, Ma Y, Chen Y. Preventing graphene
sheets from restacking for high-capacitance performance. J Phys Chem C 2011;
115:23192–7.

[281] Lin Z, Sun D, Huang Q, Yang J, Barsoum MW, Yan X. Carbon nanofiber bridged
two-dimensional titanium carbide as a superior anode for lithium-ion batteries.
J Mater Chem 2015;3:14096–100.

[282] Li X, Xiao X, Li Q, Wei J, Xue H, Pang H. Metal (M= Co, Ni) phosphate based

materials for high-performance supercapacitors. Inorg Chem Front 2018;5:11–28.

[283] Chen HC, Jiang S, Xu B, Huang C, Hu Y, Qin Y, He M, Cao H. Sea-urchin-like

nickel–cobalt phosphide/phosphate composites as advanced battery materials for
hybrid supercapacitors. J Mater Chem 2019;7:6241–9.

[284] Pan Z, Kang L, Li T, Waqar M, Yang J, Gu Q, Liu X, Kou Z, Wang Z, Zheng L,

Wang J. Black phosphorus@Ti3C2Tx MXene composites with engineered
chemical bonds for commercial-level capacitive energy storage. ACS Nano 2021;
15:12975–87.

[285] Zong H, Hu L, Wang Z, Qi R, Yu K, Zhu Z. Metal-organic frameworks-derived CoP

anchored on MXene toward an efficient bifunctional electrode with enhanced
lithium storage. Chem Eng J 2021;416:129102.

[286] Zhang H, Li Z, Hou Z, Mei H, Feng Y, Xu B, Sun D. Self-assembly of MOF on

MXene nanosheets and in-situ conversion into superior nickel phosphates/MXene
battery-type electrode. Chem Eng J 2021;425:130602.

[287] Hussain I, Iqbal S, Hussain T, Chen Y, Ahmad M, Javed MS, AlFantazi A, Zhang K.
An oriented Ni–Co-MOF anchored on solution-free 1D CuO: ap–n heterojunction
for supercapacitive energy storage. J Mater Chem 2021;9:17790–800.
[288] Hussain I, Iqbal S, Lamiel C, Alfantazi A, Zhang K. Recent advances in oriented

metal–organic frameworks for supercapacitive energy storage. J Mater Chem
2022;10:4475–88.

[289] Hussain I, Iqbal S, Hussain T, Cheung WL, Khan SA, Zhou J, Ahmad M, Khan SA,

Lamiel C, Imran M, AlFantazi A, Zhang K. Zn–Co-MOF on solution-free CuO
nanowires for flexible hybrid energy storage devices. Mater Today Phys 2022;23:
100655.

Katubi KM, Eldin SM, Ansari MZ. Binder-free cupric-ion containing zinc sulfide
nanoplates-like structure for flexible energy storage devices. Chemosphere 2023;
314:137660.

[297] Javed MS, Mateen A, Hussain I, Ali S, Asim S, Ahmad A, tag Eldin E, Bajaber MA,
Najam T, Han W. The quest for negative electrode materials for Supercapacitors:
2D materials as a promising family. Chem Eng J 2023;452:139455.
[298] Mateen A, Ansari MZ, Hussain I, Eldin SM, Albaqami MD, Bahajjaj AAA,

Javed MS, Peng K-Q. Ti2CTx–MXene aerogel based ultra–stable Zn–ion
supercapacitor. Compos Commun 2023:101493.

[299] Kshetri T, Khumujam DD, Singh TI, Lee YS, Kim NH, Lee JH. Co-MOF@MXene-
carbon nanofiber-based freestanding electrodes for a flexible and wearable quasi-
solid-state supercapacitor. Chem Eng J 2022;437:135338.

[300] Kshetri T, Singh TI, Lee YS, Khumujam DD, Kim NH, Lee JH. Metal organic

framework-derived cobalt telluride-carbon porous structured composites for high-
performance supercapacitor. Compos B Eng 2021;211:108624.

[301] Wu H, Almalki M, Xu X, Lei Y, Ming F, Mallick A, Roddatis V, Lopatin S,

Shekhah O, Eddaoudi M, Alshareef HN. MXene derived metal–organic
frameworks. J Am Chem Soc 2019;141:20037–42.

[302] Chen L, Yue L, Wang X, Wu S, Wang W, Lu D, Liu X, Zhou W, Li Y. Synergistically

accelerating adsorption-electrocataysis of sulfur species via interfacial built-in
electric field of SnS2-MXene mott–Schottky heterojunction in Li-S batteries. Small
2023;19:2206462.

[303] Liu Z, Lu D, Wang W, Yue L, Zhu J, Zhao L, Zheng H, Wang J, Li Y. Integrating
dually encapsulated Si architecture and dense structural engineering for ultrahigh
volumetric and areal capacity of lithium storage. ACS Nano 2022;16:4642–53.
[304] Wang L, He Y, Liu D, Liu L, Chen H, Hu Q, Liu X, Zhou A. SnO2 quantum dots
interspersed d-Ti3C2Tx MXene heterostructure with enhanced performance for
lithium ion battery. J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:116522.

[305] Wang W, Huai L, Wu S, Shan J, Zhu J, Liu Z, Yue L, Li Y. Ultrahigh-volumetric-
energy-density lithium–sulfur batteries with lean electrolyte enabled by cobalt-
doped MoSe2/Ti3C2Tx MXene bifunctional catalyst. ACS Nano 2021;15:
11619–33.

[306] Wu S, Wang W, Shan J, Wang X, Lu D, Zhu J, Liu Z, Yue L, Li Y. Conductive 1T-
VS2(cid:0) MXene heterostructured bidirectional electrocatalyst enabling compact Li-S
batteries with high volumetric and areal capacity. Energy Storage Mater 2022;49:
153–63.

[307] Shan J, Wang W, Zhang B, Wang X, Zhou W, Yue L, Li Y. Unraveling the atomic-
level manipulation mechanism of Li2S redox kinetics via electron-donor doping
for designing high-volumetric-energy-density, lean-electrolyte lithium–sulfur
batteries. Adv Sci 2022;9:2204192.

[308] Lu D, Wang X, Hu Y, Yue L, Shao Z, Zhou W, Chen L, Wang W, Li Y. Expediting

stepwise sulfur conversion via spontaneous built-in electric field and binary
sulfiphilic effect of conductive NbB2-MXene heterostructure in lithium–sulfur
batteries. Adv Funct Mater 2023;33:2212689.

[309] Tang H, Jiang M, Ren E, Zhang Y, Lai X, Cui C, Jiang S, Zhou M, Qin Q, Guo R.
Integrate electrical conductivity and Li+ ion mobility into hierarchical
heterostructure Ti3C2@CoO/ZnO composites toward high-performance lithium
ion storage. Energy 2020;212:118696.

[310] Pan J, Li S, Zhang L, Li F, Zhang Z, Yu T, Zhang D. Designed formation of 2D/2D

hierarchical V2CTx MXene/NiV layered double hydroxide heterostructure with
boosted electrochemical performance for asymmetric supercapacitors. J Energy
Storage 2022;55:105415.

[311] Mathis TS, Kurra N, Wang X, Pinto D, Simon P, Gogotsi Y. Energy storage data
reporting in perspective—guidelines for interpreting the performance of
electrochemical energy storage systems. Adv Energy Mater 2019;9:1902007.

[312] Jiang Y, Liu J. Definitions of pseudocapacitive materials: a brief review. Energy &

Environ Mater 2019;2:30–7.

[313] Conway BE. Electrochemical supercapacitors: scientific fundamentals and

technological applications. Springer Science & Business Media; 2013.
[314] Gogotsi Y, Penner RM. Energy storage in nanomaterials – capacitive,
pseudocapacitive, or battery-like? ACS Nano 2018;12:2081–3.

[315] Gogotsi Y, Simon P. True performance metrics in electrochemical energy storage.

Science 2011;334:917–8.

[316] Simon P, Gogotsi Y. Materials for electrochemical capacitors, Nanoscience and

technology: a collection of reviews from Nature journals. World Scientific; 2010.
p. 320–9.

[290] Chen Z, Wang R, Ma T, Wang JL, Duan Y, Dai ZZ, Xu J, Wang HJ, Yuan J,

[317] Simon P, Gogotsi Y, Dunn B. Where do batteries end and supercapacitors begin?

Jiang HL. Large-area crystalline zeolitic imidazolate framework thin films. Angew
Chem Int Ed 2021;60:14124–30.

Science 2014;343:1210–1.

[318] Zuo W, Li R, Zhou C, Li Y, Xia J, Liu J. Battery-supercapacitor hybrid devices:

[291] Du M, Li Q, Zhao Y, Liu C-S, Pang H. A review of electrochemical energy storage

recent progress and future prospects. Adv Sci 2017;4:1600539.

behaviors based on pristine metal–organic frameworks and their composites.
Coord Chem Rev 2020;416:213341.

[292] Sheberla D, Bachman JC, Elias JS, Sun C-J, Shao-Horn Y, Dinc ̆a M. Conductive
MOF electrodes for stable supercapacitors with high areal capacitance. Nat Mater
2017;16:220–4.

[293] Xiong D, Deng X, Cao Z, Tao S, Song Z, Xiao X, Deng W, Hou H, Zou G, Ji X. 2D
metal–organic frameworks for electrochemical energy storage. Energy & Environ
Mater 2022:e12521. n/a.

[294] Bai Y, Liu C, Shan Y, Chen T, Zhao Y, Yu C, Pang H. Metal-organic frameworks
nanocomposites with different dimensionalities for energy conversion and
storage. Adv Energy Mater 2022;12:2100346.

[295] Hussain I, Lamiel C, Javed MS, Ahmad M, Chen X, Sahoo S, Ma X, Bajaber MA,
Ansari MZ, Zhang K. Earth-and marine-life-resembling nanostructures for
electrochemical energy storage. Chem Eng J 2023;454:140313.

[319] Tang X, Liu D, Wang Y-J, Cui L, Ignaszak A, Yu Y, Zhang J. Research advances in
biomass-derived nanostructured carbons and their composite materials for
electrochemical energy technologies. Prog Mater Sci 2020:100770.

[320] Hussain I, Sahoo S, Mohapatra D, Ahmad M, Iqbal S, Javed MS, Gu S, Qin N,
Lamiel C, Zhang K. Recent progress in trimetallic/ternary-metal oxides
nanostructures: misinterpretation/misconception of electrochemical data and
devices. Appl Mater Today 2022;26:101297.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109725

I. Hussain et al.

Mr. Hussain is currently a Ph.D. student in the City University
of Hong Kong under the supervision of Prof. Kaili Zhang. He
received  his  M.S.  degree  from  Yeungnam  University,  South
Korea. He also went as a visiting researcher at Drexel Univer-
sity,  USA  under  the  supervision  of  Prof.  Yury  Gogotsi.  His
current research focuses on the development of electrode ma-
terials for energy storage/conversions. He has published more
than 70 research/review articles in the refereed journals such
as  Advanced  Materials,  Advanced  Energy  Materials,  Advanced
Functional  Materials,  ACS  Energy  Letters,  Materials  Today,  Co-
ordination  Chemistry  Review,  Energy  Storage  Materials,  Small,
Carbon Energy, Nano-Micro Letters, Journal of Materials Chem-
istry A, ACS Applied & Materials interfaces, Chemical Engineering

Journal, Journal of Power Sources etc.

Ms. Xi received her master’s degree from Shandong University,
and then she Joined Amperex Technology Limited (ATL) as a
research  and  development  engineer  (R&D  engineer),  mainly
worked on cathodes for lithium-ion batteries. She is currently
enrolled as a Ph.D. student in the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, City University of Hong Kong under the supervi-
sion  of  professor  Zhang  Kaili.  Her  research  focus  is  Single
Crystalline  Ni-rich  cathodes  for  lithium  ion  battery  and  the
synthesis  of  Metal  organic
for
supercapacitors.

frameworks

(MOF)

Dr. Lamiel received her master degree from Yeungnam Uni-
versity,  South  Korea  where  she  studied  supercapacitors.  She
went  to  pursue  her  doctorate  degree  from  University  of
Queensland,  Australia  where  she  focused  on  membranes  for
desalination.  Currently,  she  is  working  in  USA  as  a  battery
scientist. Her research interests include metal oxides/sulfides/
and
selenides/tellurides/phosphates,  LDHs,  MOFs/ZIFs
MXenes for high-performance supercapacitor and other energy
storage  applications.  She  has  published  more  than  45  articles/
reviews in the refereed journals.

Mr. Qin received his Master’s degree in Physical Chemistry at
the Department of Chemistry from Tongji University in 2014.
He  completed  his  Ph.D.  under  the  supervision  of  Prof.  Kaili
Zhang at the Department of Mechanical Engineering from City
University of Hong Kong in 2023. He conducts research work
on electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology,
with  main  focus  on  high-voltage  cathode  materials  and  fast-
charging anode materials for lithium-ion batteries.

Dr.  Javed  received  his  B.S.  (2012)  and  M.S.  (2014)  from
COMSATS University Islamabad, Lahore Campus Pakistan. He
completed  his  M.S. research  work in fuel  cells under  the su-
pervision of Prof. Rizwan Raza. He received his Ph.D. degree
(2017) from Chongqing University, China under the supervi-
sion  of  Prof.  Chenguo  Hu.  He  has  published  more  than  200
research papers in well-reputed journals in the field of mate-
rials  science,  energy  conversion  and  storage  with  over  6000
citations. He has completed a postdoctoral research in Prof. W.
J.  Mai  group  at  Jinan  University,  China.  Currently,  he  is
working as a Young Researcher at Lanzhou University, China.
His current research interests include the synthesis and direct
growth  of  novel  hierarchical  nanostructured  materials  for
electrochemical  energy  storage  and  conversion  devices  such  as  supercapacitors  multi-
cation batteries and fuel cells.

Mr.  Ahmad  received  his  Master’s  degree  from  the  Beijing
University of Chemical Technology (BUCT), China in 2020. He
has been granted CSC scholarship for his Master’s studies and
worked  on  the  synthesis  of  polyphosphazenes  micro/nano-
sized  materials  with  well-defined  morphologies  for  catalysis
and dye adsorption application. He joined Department of Me-
chanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong in 2020 to
pursue  his  Doctorate  degree  under  the  supervision  of  Prof.
Zhang Kaili. His current research is focused on the synthesis of
various  metal  hybrid  nanostructures  for  energy  storage
devices.

Dr.  Sahoo  is  currently  working  as  a  Research  Professor  in
School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, South
Korea.  He  also  worked  in  various  institutes  like  Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Indian Institute
of Technology (Indian School of Mines) Dhanbad, and Mada-
napalle Institute of Technology &  Science. His main research
work is synthesis of graphene through chemical routes, fabri-
cation  of  supercapacitor  electrodes  based  on  graphene  and
conducting polymer, synthesis of ternary nanohydrids through
hydrothermal route, fabrication of binder-free supercapacitor
electrodes  and  MXene-based  asymmetric  supercapacitor  de-
vices. He has published more than 85 articles/reviews and book
chapters in the refereed journals.

Mr.  Iqbal  is  currently  enrolled  as  a  Ph.D.  student  in  the
Department  of  Energy  Conversion  and  Storage,  Technical
University  of  Denmark  under  the  supervision  of  Senior
Researcher Christodoulos Chatzichristodoulou. He received his
Master’s  degree  in  Chemical  Engineering  from  Yeungnam
University, South Korea. His current research interests include
development of electrode materials for electrochemical energy
conversion and storage devices.

Mr. Gu obtained his B.S. and M.S degree from Central South
University  in  2014  and  2017,  respectively.  Then,  he  joined
Southern Univeristy of Science and Technology as a research
assistant under the supervision of Prof. Zhouguang Lu in 2017.
He is currently pursuing his PhD degree at the City University
of Hong Kong under the supervision of Prof. Kaili Zhang. His
research interests mainly focus on the redox and stabilization
mechanism  of  organic  electrode  materials  for  rechargeable
batteries.

Mr. Li is currently a Ph.D. student at the Department of Me-
chanical  Engineering,  City  University  of  Hong  Kong.  He
received his B.S. degree in chemistry from Shandong University
of  China  in  2014,  and  obtained  his  M.E.  degr  ee  in  applied
chemistry  from  Institute  of  Chemical  Materials  at  China
Academy of Engineering Physics (CAEP) of China in 2017. He
joined Prof. Kaili Zhang’s group in 2019. His current research
focuses  on  the  development  of  energetic  materials,  energy
storage, and energetics-on-a-chip.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109726

I. Hussain et al.

Dr. Chatzichristodoulou obtained his B.Sc. (2003) and M.Sc.
(2005)  from  the  University  of  Athens,  Greece,  and  his  Ph.D.
(2010)  from  the  University  of  Copenhagen,  Denmark.  He  is
currently a senior scientist at the Department of Energy Con-
version  and  Storage,  Technical  University  of  Denmark.  His
research  interests  include  materials  development  for  electro-
chemical  applications,  as well  as  design,  fabrication,  testing,
and  modeling  of  electrodes  and  electrochemical  cells.  Main
applications include solid oxide electrolysis cells and alkaline
electrolysis  cells,  with  emphasis  on  high  temperature  and
pressure operation.

Prof.  Zhang  is a  Professor  in  the Department  of  Mechanical
Engineering at City University of Hong Kong. He received his
Ph.D.  degree  from  the  National  University  of  Singapore  in
2006. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at French
National Center for Scientific Research (LAASCNRS) and Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETH Zurich). He joined
the City University of Hong Kong as an assistant professor in
2009. His research interests include nanomaterials for energy
storage/conversions, energetic materials, energetics-on-a-chip.
He has published more than 200 peer-reviewed papers/reviews
in reputed journal.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109727
