Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Reduction in greenhouse gas and other emissions from ship engines:
Current trends and future options

P ̈aivi T. Aakko-Saksa a, *, Kati Lehtoranta a, Niina Kuittinen b, Anssi J ̈arvinen a,
Jukka-Pekka Jalkanen c, Kent Johnson d, Heejung Jung d, Leonidas Ntziachristos e,
St ́ephanie Gagn ́e f, Chiori Takahashi g, Panu Karjalainen b, Topi R ̈onkk ̈o b, Hilkka Timonen c
a VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, PO Box 1000, 02044 VTT, Finland
b Tampere University, Tampere, 33101, Finland
c Finnish Meteorological Institute, Helsinki, 00560, Finland
d University of California Riverside, CA, 92521, United States
e Mechanical Engineering Department, Aristotle University Thessaloniki, PO Box 458, GR 541 24, Thessaloniki Greece
f National Research Council Canada, 1200 Montreal Road, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0R6, Canada
g National Maritime Research Institute, Japan

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

The  impact  of  ship  emission  reductions  can  be  maximised  by  considering  climate,  health  and  environmental
effects simultaneously and using solutions fitting into existing marine engines and infrastructure. Several options
available  enable  selecting  optimum  solutions  for  different  ships,  routes  and  regions.  Carbon-neutral  fuels,
including low-carbon and carbon-negative fuels, from biogenic or non-biogenic origin (biomass, waste, renew-
able hydrogen) could resemble current marine fuels (diesel-type, methane and methanol). The carbon-neutrality
of fuels depends on their Well-to-Wake (WtW) emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG) including carbon dioxide
(CO2), methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide emissions (N2O). Additionally, non-gaseous black carbon (BC) emis-
sions have high global warming potential (GWP). Exhaust emissions which are harmful to health or the envi-
ronment need to be equally removed using emission control achieved by fuel, engine or exhaust aftertreatment
technologies. Harmful emission species include nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulphur oxides (SOx), ammonia (NH3),
formaldehyde, particle mass (PM) and number emissions (PN). Particles may carry polyaromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) and heavy metals, which cause serious adverse health issues. Carbon-neutral fuels are typically sulphur-
free  enabling  negligible  SOx  emissions  and  efficient  exhaust  aftertreatment  technologies,  such  as  particle
filtration. The combinations of carbon-neutral drop-in fuels and efficient emission control technologies would
enable (near-)zero-emission shipping and these could be adaptable in the short- to mid-term. Substantial savings
in external costs on society caused by ship emissions give arguments for regulations, policies and investments
needed to support this development.

Keywords:
Marine engines
Carbon-neutral fuels
Exhaust aftertreatment
Emission control
Exhaust
Greenhouse gases
Climate
Warming
Health
Environment
CO2
NOx
SOx
Methane
CH4
Black carbon
BC
Particulate matter
PM
Particle number
PN
Ammonia
NH3
N2O
PAHs
Heavy metals
Formaldehyde
External costs

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: paivi.aakko-saksa@vtt.fi (P.T. Aakko-Saksa).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101055
Received 5 January 2022; Received in revised form 21 October 2022; Accepted 29 October 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)101055Availableonline24November20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

Nomenclature and abbreviations

%S
BC
Bio-FA
BrC
BT
BTL
CCS
CCU
CII
CNG
CO2eq
Cslip
DF
DM
DME
DOC
DPF
EC
EEDI
EEXI
EGR
ESP
ETS
EV
FAME
FC
FSN
FT
GHG
Gt
GTL
GWP
HP DF
HSD
HVO
ICCT
ICE

sulphur content in percent
black carbon
non-esterified fatty acid biofuel
brown carbon
bubble towers
biomass-to-liquids
carbon capture and storage
carbon capture and utilization
carbon intensity indicator
compressed natural gas
carbon dioxide equivalent
emissions of the fuel lost as fugitive emissions;
dual-fuel
distillate marine fuels
dimethyl ether
diesel oxidation catalyst
diesel particulate filter
elemental carbon
energy efficiency design index
energy efficiency existing ship index
exhaust gas recirculation
electrostatic precipitators
emission trading system
electric vehicle
fatty acid methyl ester
fuel cell
filter smoke number
Fischer-Tropsch liquefaction
greenhouse gases
gigatons
gas-to-liquids
global warming potential
high-pressure DF
high-speed diesel
hydrotreated oils and fats
International Council on Clean Transportation
internal combustion engines

International Maritime Organisation
liquid biogas
low carbon fuel standard
laser-induced incandescence
liquefied natural gas
liquid organic hydrogen carriers
low-pressure DF

IMO
LBG
LCFS
LII
LNG
LOHC
LPDF
MAAP  multiangle absorption photometry
maximum continuous rating
MCR
marine diesel oil
MDO
marine gas oil
MGO
methane oxidation catalysts
MOC
medium speed diesel
MSD
natural gas
NG
non- hydrocarbons
NMHC
NOx
nitrogen oxides
polyaromatic hydrocarbons
PAH
PAS
photoacoustic spectroscopy
PEMFC  proton exchange membrane fuel cells
particulate matter emission
PM
particle number emission
PN
solid, non-volatile particle number
PNnv
total particle number
PNtot
Sub-Committee on Pollution Prevention and Response
PPR
polyvinyl chloride
PVC
refractory BC
rBC
renewable energy directive
RED
selective catalytic reduction
SCR
emission control areas for SOx
SECA
solid oxide fuel cells
SOFC
SOx
sulphur oxides
slow speed diesel
SSD
thermal-optical analysis
TOA
tank-to-wheel
TtW
wet electrostatic scrubber
WES
water-in-diesel fuel emulsions
WiFE
very low sulfur fuel oil
VLSFO
well-to-wake
WtW

1. Background

Warning  messages  on  climate  change  are  becoming  ever  more
serious and all possible actions are necessary for the shared endeavour to
mitigate this threat. This also involves the maritime shipping sector. Of
global trade, shipping represents approx. 80% by volume, and 70% by
value [1]. In 2018, the global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions of ship-
ping amounted to 1.06 gigatons (Gt) representing a share of 2.89% of
global anthropogenic CO2  emissions. Since 2008, the volume and CO2
emissions from shipping have decoupled along with improved carbon
intensity (mainly in attempts to save on fuel costs). However, in a range
of scenarios, CO2 emissions from shipping could increase in the absence
of preventive actions [2,3]. An ambitious greenhouse gas (GHG) strat-
egy by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) aims to cut the
shipping sector’s carbon intensity by up to 40% by 2030 and 70% by
2050  compared  to  2008.  An  even  more  challenging  goal  to  achieve
100% carbon emission reduction by 2050 across sectors globally was set
at  the  United  Nations  Climate  Change  Conference  in  2021  [4].  In
COP26, the Clydebank Declaration initiative was signed by 19 countries
to  build  at  least  six  decarbonised  “green  corridors”  for  zero-emission
vessels  by  2025  [5].  The  IMO  aims  to  help  increase  the  energy  effi-
ciency of ships by measures such as an Energy Efficiency Design Index
(EEDI),  Energy  Efficiency  Existing  Ship  Index  (EEXI)  and  carbon

intensity indicator (CII). Regional targets and regulations have also been
set, for example, the FuelEU Maritime Initiative in the EU Green Deal
“Fit for 55” package (14 July 2021) proposing a maximum limit on the
GHG intensity of energy used on-board by ships. The Fit for 55 package
also  suggests  shipping  to  be  included  in  the  EU’s  Emission  Trading
System (ETS) [6]. Investments in climate-neutral shipping are supported
by  the  Poseidon  Principles,  Getting  to  Zero  Coalition  (deep-sea
zero-emission vessels and infrastructure), and the European Sustainable
Shipping Forum (greener technologies). The European Commission has
also introduced the Inducement Prize for the Promotion of Renewable
fuels in retrofitted container ships [7].

Of GHG emissions, CO2  is the most important contributor to global
warming,  while important  gaseous  contributors  also include methane
(CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions with 100-year global warming
potentials  (GWP100)  of  28  and  265  times  higher  than  that  of  CO2,
respectively [8]. However, the second important anthropogenic species
contributing to global warming after CO2 emission is non-gaseous black
carbon (BC) emission with a GWP100 of 900 [9]. With the inclusion of
BC emissions, the CO2 equivalent (CO2eq) emissions of shipping increase
by  7% [3].  BC, and to a  lesser extent brown carbon (BrC), is dark in
colour and strongly absorbs light, thus warming the atmosphere as the
light energy is converted to heat. The warming impact of BC emissions is
significant, and especially so in the Arctic through its deposition on ice

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010552

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

and snow as the ice-free sailing season lengthens and allows a rise in ship
traffic [10,11,12]. The residence time of BC in the atmosphere averaging
around 7.3 days allows ship plumes to travel and to have an effect at a
distance from the source [13]. The overall impact of shipping emissions
on  global  warming  will  increase  along  with  reducing  sulphur  oxide
(SOx) emissions and cooling aerosol species (sulphates and organics) if
the climate-warming BC emissions remain [14–16]. The IMO has been
working on BC emissions from international shipping since 2011 (MEPC
68).

Ship emissions are harmful, not only to climate but also to air quality,
human health and the environment. Air pollution alone is estimated to
cause approx. 6.5 million deaths annually [17]. Despite the 2020 marine
fuel sulphur limit of 0.5%, shipping is estimated to account for approx.
250,000  premature  deaths  and  6.4  million  childhood  asthma  cases
annually [14] and also earlier evaluations estimated a high number of
premature deaths caused by shipping annually [18–20]. Notably, ships
sail and manoeuvre near densely inhabited coastal areas and cause local
air quality problems near the coastline. Approx. 70% of ship emissions
occur within 400 km of coastlines, and ship emissions further travel in
the  atmosphere  over  several  hundreds  of  kilometres  [21].  Shipping
represents approx. 15% and 13% of global anthropogenic nitrogen oxide
(NOx)  and  SOx  emissions.  Particulate  matter  (PM2.5)  emissions  from
ships vary regionally, representing 7% of  the regional total in Africa,
4.4% in Europe, 4.2% in North America, 3.4% in South-East Asia and
22% in Oceania [22].

The IMO controls SOx  and NOx  emissions of ships and regional or
global regulations are anticipated for BC (PM and PN indirectly linked)
and CH4 emissions. SOx emissions are decreasing along with the IMO’s
global fuel sulphur limit of 0.5% in 2020 (or SOx scrubbers to be used),
reduced  from  4.5%  to  3.5%  already  in  2012.  The  IMO  has  also  set
regional  emission  control  areas  for  SOx  (SECA,  0.1%  sulphur  limit  in
2015) and NOx (NECA, in force from 2021 for new-builds).

Ship emissions to air are products of the complete combustion of fuel
(e.g.,  CO2  and  SOx),  or  oxidation  of  intake  air  nitrogen  (NOx),  while
some  are  products  of  the  incomplete  combustion  of  fuel,  such  as  hy-
drocarbons  (HCs,  including  CH4),  carbon  monoxide  (CO),  formalde-
hyde, PM and its constituents (BC, polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs))
and particle number (PN) emissions. Some pollutants form in exhaust
aftertreatment  systems,  such  as  nitrogen  dioxide  (NO2),  ammonia
(NH3), and N2O. Heavy metal emissions may originate also from fuel,
lubricating oil and engine wear.

SOx  and  NOx  emissions  affect  terrestrial  and  aquatic  ecosystems
through  acid  rain  and  the  eutrophication  of  waters  by  nitrogen-
containing  nutrients.  NOx  emissions  in  the  atmosphere  form  ground-
level ozone in combination with organic compounds in the presence of
heat and sunlight. Additionally, engine-out NO gradually oxidises in the
atmosphere  to  become  NO2,  which  causes  adverse  respiratory  effects
and further reacts to nitric acid (HNO3) and other compounds. The NO2
share  in  engine-out  emissions  is  low,  but  increased  NO2  formation  is
known from oxidative aftertreatment devices such as diesel particulate
filters (DPFs) and catalysts [23], which must be taken into account if
these  technologies  are  adopted  in  ships.  Shipping  substantially  con-
tributes to overall NOx emissions, and specifically in harbours leading to
high NOx concentrations in the ambient air near port communities and
also in the centers of cities away from the port [24].

Concerning human health, PM, PN and BC emissions are particularly
harmful. Particle emissions are linked to heart and pulmonary diseases
and recently Alzheimer’s disease [25,26]. Particles may carry species,
such as PAHs related to carcinogenic and mutagenic activity [27–33].
Reactive  compounds  and  metals  potentially  cause  inflammation  and
tissue  damage  [34–36].  Notably,  priority  PAHs  as  mobile-source  air
toxics are defined, including benzo(a)pyrene [37,38] . The residual fuel
use in diesel engines emits exhaust particles with marked oxidative ac-
tivity on the epithelial lining fluid in the lungs [39]. Ship PM2.5 emis-
sions near port communities [40] contribute to a health risk disparity
based  on  ethnicity  and  income  since  low-income  households  are

overrepresented in the affected populations near harbours [41].

Other  emission  species  considered  for  their  adverse  health  and
environmental  impacts  include  NH3  and  formaldehyde.  In  the  atmo-
sphere,  NH3  and  ammonium  aerosols  adversely  affect  health,  vegeta-
tion,  climate,  and  visibility.  In  urban  areas,  NH3  is  an  important
secondary aerosol source in the presence of PM and NOx [42]. Formal-
dehyde is present predominantly indoors, but transport is also a source
of increased ambient concentrations from the combustion of fuels and
secondary  photochemical  reactions.  Formaldehyde  is  carcinogenic
(IARC Group 1), [33] an irritant to the eyes, skin, and respiratory tract in
humans  [43]  and  contributes  to  the  formation  of  tropospheric  ozone
[44].  CH4  and  N2O  are  typically  not  recognized  as  air  pollutants.
However,  CH4  contributes  to  the  formation  of  tropospheric  ozone  in
regions  where  background  CH4  dominates  [45–47],  while  the
ozone-forming potential of CH4  is low when compared to many other
volatile organic compounds present in polluted urban areas [48]. N2O
emissions contribute to depleting the stratospheric ozone and its role as
an anthropogenic contributor is increasing along with decreasing halo-
carbon  emissions  [49].  CH4  emissions  are  of  concern  from  LNG  use,
while N2O emissions are not emitted by marine engines today, but may
become  relevant  emissions  due  to  possibly  introduced  ammonia  as
marine  fuel  since  its  combustion  forms  N2O  emission.  Some  exhaust
aftertreatment technologies may also induce N2O [50], which needs to
be removed.

This review examines possibilities to mitigate ship emissions in the
atmosphere, focusing on 1) emissions contributing to global warming,
and 2) emissions to air with detrimental impacts on human health and
the environment. Marine engines and carbon-neutral fuel options and
emission control choices are introduced, and emission factors are pre-
sented for large engines at engine loads above 40%. Some of these so-
lutions fit with existing ships and infrastructure, while others require
new-builds  and  are  long-term  options.  Technologies  considered  to  fit
in  the  existing  ship  fleet  (retrofittable)  are  in  focus  in  this  review.
Carbon-neutral fuels here refer to a variety of fuels from low-carbon to
carbon-negative, balancing the emissions of the fuel pool. These can be
non-fossil fuels produced from renewable sources, waste, or hydrogen
and  captured  (circular)  CO2,  which  does  not  increase  the  balance  of
atmospheric  CO2  emissions,  although  CO2  is  the  main  product  of  the
combustion of carbonaceous fuels in oxygen. These principles are often
discussed with carbon capture and storage (CCS) or utilization (CCU).
The burden of ship emissions could be reduced also by switching to non-
carbon  or  non-fuel  energy,  shore  power  at  berth,  or  fuel  cells  (FCs),
batteries, wind, solar, or nuclear power (or hybrid solutions).

The synthesis and discussion part of this paper considers the pros and
cons of carbon-neutral, clean fuels and emission reduction technologies
to understand possible ways to mitigate the adverse effects of shipping
on  the  climate,  health,  and  the  environment  simultaneously  (Fig.  1).
Knowledge of the solutions presented are combined to evaluate possi-
bilities to reduce adverse climate, environment and health impacts of
the  marine  sector  effectively  and  simultaneously  in  the  near  future.
External costs of emissions for selected technologies are calculated to
provide arguments for financial support instruments and investments.
This  combined  view  increases  the  understanding  of  the  effects  of  the

Fig.  1. A  combination  of  carbon-neutral  fuels  and  emission-reduction  tech-
nologies is needed for (near-to-) zero-emission shipping.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010553

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

identified  technologies  to  reduce  ship  emissions  harmful  to  climate,
health and environment, which is a particularly complex combination as
reducing one emission may cause an increase of another emission.

The emission factors are given in the figures as the mass per MJ of
fuel, while in the text as the mass per kWh. The emissions presented per
fuel  energy  content  enable  comparisons  between  sectors,  while  emis-
sions per engine output energy compensate for possible changes in en-
gine efficiencies. Numerical emission factors are given in supplementary
material.

2. Ships fleet and engine sizes

There  are  over  128,000  IMO  registered  vessels  in  the  global  fleet
with engines of many sizes [51]. The main engines are commonly in the
size class of 1–10 MW, while the sizes of auxiliary engines are typically
around  1  MW  (Fig.  2).  Engines  above  20  MW  are  mainly  slow-speed
diesel (SSD) 2-stroke engines, which are typical in large ships such as
container ships, bulk carriers, and oil tankers, but their number is low.
These SSD engines consume over 70% of marine fuels and they emit a
major  part  of  global  ship  emissions.  Medium-speed  diesel  (MSD)
four-stroke engines consume 19% of marine fuels globally, mostly dis-
tillates.  In  the  Arctic,  smaller  fishing  and  supply  vessels  may  use
high-speed diesel (HSD) engines [51], which are not the topic of this
review which focuses on MSD and SSD engines.

The fuel type, engine size and load affect emissions from traditional
marine  engines.  The  load  dependence  of  emissions  from  incomplete
combustion (e.g., BC in Fig. 3) is of special concern when travelling at
low speeds in regions with intense traffic, for instance, while manoeu-
vring in harbour areas [52–54]. Slow steaming is one option to reduce
fuel  consumption  and  CO2  emissions  of  ships  that  otherwise  tend  to
operate at high speeds (e.g., container ships). A reduced speed could be
18–20 knots [55]. However, this may lead to increases in some exhaust
emissions, since marine engines are typically optimised for operation at
high loads to achieve efficient combustion and to minimise emissions
from incomplete combustion. Hence, engines need to be “de-rated”  to
perform  optimally  at  lower  loads.  Another  option  is  to  maintain  the
recommended load range by selecting suitable routes, or by adjusting
the  number  of  engines  running  in  regions  where  the  speed  of  ships
changes frequently, or by using hybrid systems.

The load dependence of incomplete combustion is less pronounced
for modern marine engines than for older engines and so are the overall
emissions [60]. The age of the fleet affects the emission level and the
load dependence  of the emissions. The fleet of large ships is younger
(24–28% built within 0–4 years, 16–22% older than 15 years) than the
fleet of medium and small ships (only 12–17% are new, while 39% are

Fig.  2. The  number  of  main  and  auxiliary  engines  in  different  sizes  (AIS
database accessed by FMI) and the fuel consumed (grey line) annually in SSD,
MSD  and  HDS  engines  [51]  with  the  distribution  in  engine  size  classes.  (For
interpretation  of  the  references  to  colour  in  this  figure  legend,  the  reader  is
referred to the web version of this article.).

Fig.  3. Relationship  between  BC  emissions  and  engine  load  for  four  marine
engines with maximum continuous power of 54.84 MW 94 1/min Miller et al.
[56] 68.5 MW, 97 1/min Khan et al. [57] 6.7 MW 512 1/min Gysel et al. [58]
and 15.5 MW 88 1/min Zhao et al. [59]. All engines were operating with high
sulphur  residual  fuel  except  in  Gysel  et  al.  [58]  with  low  sulphur  (0.009%)
residual fuel.

older than 15 years). Approximately 61% of small ships are older than
15 years [61]. The non-optimised use of engines is anticipated to further
diminish  along  with  energy  efficiency  targets,  hybridisation  [62–64]
and  controlled  operations  in  harbour  regions,  such  as  California’s
“At-Berth  Regulation”  [65]  and  proposed  maritime  zero-emissions  at
berth  in  the  EU  [6].  Hence  the  reviewed  literature  here  is  limited  to
engine loads above 40%.

3. Carbon-neutral and low-carbon fuels to reduce climate
change impact of shipping

3.1. GHG WtW emissions for fuel alternatives

Fossil marine fuels can be switched to non-fossil counterparts that
are chemically similar but produced differently (Table 1). These “drop-
in” fuels resemble diesel, LNG or methanol. However, such fuels are not
much currently used in shipping: less than 1% of marine fuels today are
biofuels and even less meet the stringent criteria such as the Renewable
Energy Directive update (RED II).

Fuels  carbon-neutrality means that the  fuel’s WtW  net  GHG emis-
sions  are  negligible,  viz.  carbon  is  not  added  to  the  atmosphere
regardless of the carbon content of the fuel. This is the case for example
when  using  biogenic  or  “circulated,  reused,  recycled”  carbon  in  fuel
production. Not all renewable fuels are carbon-neutral since for some
fuels only modest WtW carbon reductions are achieved when compared
to  fossil  fuels.  On  the  other  hand,  some  renewable  fuels  can  even  be
carbon-negative, if the raw materials would otherwise degrade to CH4
and CO2 or if carbonaceous side-products are stored permanently to be
removed  from  the  carbon  cycle.  The  WtW  GHG  emissions  include
emissions of producing, distributing and consuming fuels. WtW  emis-
sions for fuels mainly depend on the upstream emissions of production,
for which case-specific and regional aspects need consideration, e.g., the
availability of excess heat or the use of by-products. GHG evaluations
focusing  on  marine  fuels  are  still  limited,  while  many  studies  are
available  for  road  transport,  one  example  reports  approximately  73
gCO2eq/MJ  for  diesel  cars  using  fossil  fuel  [72,73],  which  is  lower
emission than reported for fossil marine HFO in Table 1. Examples of
WtW GHG emissions (CO2eq on GWP100) are given in Table 1 indicating
variations depending on the assumptions made.

Regulations on measures to meet the carbon intensity targets of the
fuel pool vary. For example, in Europe, stringent GHG criteria for each

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010554

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

Table 1
Marine fuel options and their renewable or carbon-neutral counterparts.

Engine

Carbon-neutral “drop-
in” (fossil as
reference)

State

WtW gCO2eq/MJ

Diesel

HFO fossil reference

Liquid

99 (**) a; 97 b; 87 c

engine

Waste oils, fats
HVO*/FAME*

BTL, e-diesel
Pyrolysis oil,
upgraded (plastics,
cellulosic)
LNG fossil

LBG*, biomethane

Gas

engines

Alcohol

engines

e-methane*
Biomethanol/e-
methanol

Liquid
Liquid

Liquid
Liquid

2 (waste) d
14–17 (used oil) d, 41 (waste oil)
c; 23 e
5–20 d; 21 (wood residues) c
5–20 d

Gas

Gas

Gas
Liquid

78 a; 67 b; 79 c

12.8–17.2 (ligno-cellulosic) f; 24
a; 13 (waste) c; 51 d; (cid:0) 5
(municipal waste) d
6 a
5–20 d; 18 c; 10–40 g; (cid:0) 55 (cow
manure) g; 36–46
(lignocellulosic) f
0–25 (lingocellulosic) d; 70 (corn)
e

Ethanol

Liquid

Hydrogen, batteries, dimethyl ether (DME), ammonia in long-term (Note: electricity

EVs 24 gCO2eq/MJ) e

* LBG=liquid biogas, biomethane; e-methane is called also synthetic natural
gas;  BTL=Biomass-to-liquids;  GTL=Gas-to-liquids:  FAME=fatty  acid  methyl
ester; HVO=Hydrotreated oils and fats.

** HFO 697 MGO 686 g/kWh (2-stroke SSD).
a 2-stroke DF engine [66].
b [67].
c [68].
d [69].
e [70].
f [1].
g [71].

fuel are set in RED II, while in California the balance of the total fuel pool
is evaluated by the California Air Resources Board (CARB). RED II in
Europe defines minimum GHG emission savings of at least 65% (from
1.1.2021).  The  FuelEU  Maritime  Initiative  (within  the  “Fit  for  55”
package) defines that upstream WtT emissions are determined according
to RED II (EU 2018/2001) for biofuels, biogas, renewable fuels of non-
biological origin and recycled carbon fuels. A special feature of RED II
is the possibility to multiply the energy content of transport fuels from,
e.g., waste and cellulosic materials. The factor is 1.2 for compliant fuels
supplied in the aviation and maritime sectors. In California, CARB’s low
carbon fuel standard (LCFS) defines the WtW carbon intensity for fuels
and the market determines the fuel mix to meet the targets [70]. CARB
has also an “at berth” regulation recommending switching engine power
to grid electricity at berth or using only LSFS fuels at berth [65]. These
regulations  verify  that  substantial  GHG  emission  reductions  can  be
achieved with compliant fuels.

The potential for GHG emissions reduction by switching from HFO to
fossil  LNG  is  up  to  30%  compared  to  diesel  fuel  as  LNG  has  a  lower
carbon-to-hydrogen ratio. However, the GHG benefit obtained with LNG
may be lost to some extent by the slip of unburned methane, a strong
GHG gas. For LNG, a 21% GHG reduction compared with HFO use has
been reported and a 6–23% reduction depending on e.g. methane slip
[66,74]. Winebrake et al. [75] reported on a WtW analysis indicating
that NG-based marine transportation in the US can provide significant
local environmental benefits, but renewable fuel is needed to avoid a
global  warming  penalty.  The  IEA  [76]  evaluated  only  a  10%  GHG
abatement  potential  when  shifting  50%  of  the  international  shipping
fleet to LNG, and less if the methane slip is accounted for (see “Methane
emissions” section).

The carbon footprint of e-fuels depends on the electricity used in the
production  of  hydrogen:  a  prerequisite  for  low  GHG  emissions  for

hydrogen  is  carbon-free  electricity  in  the  production  instead  of  fossil
methane reforming which is used today. For electricity with relatively
high  carbon  emissions  of  375  gCO2e/kWh,  WtW  emissions  for  e-
methane, e-methanol and e-diesel are also high (176–190 gCO2eq/MJ),
while for example with wind electricity of 7–56 gCO2eq/kWh, respec-
tive WtW emissions are low (2.5–30.5 gCO2eq/MJ) [1]. Decarbonising
the power sector is progressing globally, and low-carbon electricity is
already available in some regions. The IEA [76] estimates that the global
emissions of electricity production must decrease below 100 gCO2/kWh
by  2040  to  achieve  the  two-degree  target.  In  some  regions,  CO2eq
emissions  of  electricity production  are  already  relatively  low  (e.g.  on
average 129 gCO2eq/kWh in 2017 in Finland). According to Koponen
and Hannula [77] when the carbon intensity of electricity remains under
84–110 gCO2/kWh, 70% emission savings compared to fossil fuels can
be achieved with e-fuels. The carbon emissions for NH3  and hydrogen
fuels depend on the origin of electricity used in their production, simi-
larly as for the e-fuels. Hydrogen production can be classified according
to the  production process applied to grey (fossil  methane reforming),
blue (fossil methane reforming with CCS), turquoise (methane pyrolysis)
and green (electrolysis using renewable electricity), however, even for
the green hydrogen, a considerable adverse climate impact may arise
from  e.g.  the  electricity  supply.  In  the  analysis  by  Hermesmann  and
Müller [78], the best-case scenario for green hydrogen production based
on offshore wind electricity resulted in a climate warming impact of 4.9
gCO2/MJ, while the estimate for grey hydrogen was 81 gCO2/MJ. For
blue hydrogen, climate warming impact was estimated as only approx-
imately 3.4% lower than that for grey hydrogen.

With fossil fuels, the technology to reduce GHG emissions would be
carbon capture on-board the ship, and a demonstration of this concept is
announced, e.g., by W ̈artsil ̈a and Solvang [79]. Captured carbon could
be then stored (CCS) or utilised (CCU). One of the concepts suggested by
the HyMethShip project is based on carbon capture of electro-methanol
reformation on-board pre-combustion of hydrogen. The project aims to
improve the efficiency of the process, while also achieving a reduction of
up to 97% of CO2, over 80% of NOx emissions and elimination of SOx and
PM emissions [80,81]. Generally, carbon capture from sustainable fuels
on-board  the  ship  could  enable  a  very  low,  even  negative,  carbon
balance.

3.2. Suitability of fuel alternatives for different engine technologies

3.2.1. Carbon-neutral and low-carbon fuels for diesel engines

Marine fuels today are fossil fuels. In 2018, the share of heavy fuel
oils was 66%, distillate fuels 31%, LNG 3% and less than 1% of methanol
and biofuels [7,82]. Hence, replacing these fuels with diesel-type car-
bon-neutral  alternative  fuels  is  relatively  straightforward  for  use  in
diesel engines.

The  total  consumption  of  marine  fuels  was  266.3  Mt  globally  in
2015,  which  is  approx.  10%  of  the  total  transport  fuels  (see  Supple-
mentary  Table  S9).  Production  of  biofuels  for  the  transport  sector  is
limited.  The  global  production  of  FAME  biodiesel  was  23.5  million
tonnes  of  oil  equivalent  (Mtoe)  in  2015  and  that  of  hydrotreated
paraffinic HVO was 4.7 Mtoe with an announced capacity of 11.4 Mtoe
for 2022 [83,84]. In road transport, the largest biofuel production vol-
ume is for bioethanol (50.1 Mtoe in 2015). In Iceland, the production of
e-methanol  is  approx.  5  kt  annually  [85].  These  limited  production
volumes  illustrate  the  challenge  of  replacing  fossil  marine  fuels  sub-
stantially with their carbon-neutral or low-carbon counterparts.

Until  2020,  about  42%  of  marine  fuels  was  residual  fuel  oil  con-
taining a range of harmful substances, such as sulphur, heavy metals (e.
g., V and Ni in ash), catalyst particles (“fines”) from the refining process
(Al, Si), asphaltenes and PAHs. In 2020, the IMO regulation reduced the
global fuel sulphur content limit from 3.5 to 0.5% with an impact on the
demand for low-sulfur marine fuels (and prices). Additionally, blending
residual fuel components with distillate fuels became common based on
viscosities higher than 20 mm2/s for more than 90% of very low sulfur

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010555

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

fuel oil (VLSFO) on the market [86]. Marine distillate fuels below 0.1%
sulfur content used in SECAs and EU port areas are still high-sulfur fuels
when  compared  to  road  diesel  fuels  with  a  sulphur  limit  of  0.001%.
International standard ISO 8217 specifies properties of residual marine
(RM) fuels (the third letter indicating grade, e.g., RMA and RMB clas-
sified by their viscosities) and distillate marine (DM) fuels. For instance,
the DMA class (marine gas oil, MGO) is free from residual fuel, and DMB
class  (marine  diesel  oil,  MDO)  may  contain  traces  of  residual  fuel.
Selected marine fuel properties are presented in supplementary Tables
S10-S12.

In large marine diesel engines, oils and fats could be used with minor
treatments, such as de-gumming and de-acidifying, while esterification
to FAME would be unnecessary. Using oils and fats avoids glycerol by-
products  of  transesterification.  Some  shipping  companies  already  use
biofuels from waste streams, for example, VG Ecofuel [87]. Other raw
materials for oils and fats, such as algal and seaweed, could also become
feasible  for  producing  fuels  [88–90].  For  vehicles  and  non-road  HSD
diesel engines, oils and fats are transesterified with methanol to produce
FAME to improve the fuel properties. ISO 8217 limits the use of FAME
up to 7 vol% for use in special grades (DFA, DFZ and DFB) and only “de
minimis” 0.5 vol% of FAME is accepted in the regular marine fuel grades
(e.g., residual fuels, DMA and DMB).

Another  option  is  to  produce  HVO from  oils  and  fats  by  hydroge-
nation. HVO consists of paraffins (alkanes) and has a very high cetane
number  and  high  quality  sufficient  for  road  transport  [91].  Similar
paraffinic  fuels  can  be  produced  also  by  the  gasification  of  biomass
followed  by  Fischer-Tropsch  (FT)  liquefaction  to  produce  BTL  fuel.
E-diesel is also paraffinic (resembling HVO) and it can be produced from
the synthesis of hydrogen and CO2 using FT liquefaction. The FT process
produces hydrocarbons at various chain lengths with fractions suitable
for use as jet fuels, diesel or marine fuels with the exact product defined
by post-processing of the synthesized hydrocarbons [92,93].

Bio-oils  produced  by  the  pyrolysis  of  bio-waste  or  cellulosic  feed-
stocks are challenging for internal combustion engines (ICEs), even if the
bio-oil  is  upgraded.  Bio-oils  based  on  tyres  are  less  challenging  than
those based on cellulosic raw materials. Bio-oils may contain oxygen and
acids, and their properties vary depending on the feedstock, production
process, and degree of upgrading. The corrosiveness of bio-oils is one of
the concerns [94–97]. GoodFuels and BTG Biomass Technology Group
BV in the Netherlands have announced of building a plant for producing
upgraded pyrolysis fuel for shipping to utilise residues and wastes [98].
Good  quality  bio-oils  have  been  reported  for  the  pyrolysis  of  some
recycled feedstocks, such as plastics or tyres [99]. For example, poly-
ethene (PE) and PET are feasible feedstocks [100], while special concern
regards  the  chlorine  content  of  fuel  when  the  material  contains  e.g.
polyvinyl chloride (PVC). Hossain et al. [101] reported of tyre oil having
the most fuel properties similar to diesel fuel (e.g. energy content, vis-
cosity,  density),  while  the  sulphur  content  was  substantial  (3500
mg/km).  Teoh  et  al.  [99]  found  also  many  properties  of  tyre  oil
resembling those of diesel fuel, however, the flash point was low (below
◦
40
C), carbon residue and acid number were high (1.07 wt% and 1.03
gKOH/g,  respectively).  Using  renewable  diesel-type  fuels  in  marine
diesel  engines  and  fuel  infrastructure  is  in  principle  straightforward,
however, challenges with storage, blending and end-use may occur. For
example, blends of distillate-type diesel components (e.g., FAME, par-
affins) with residual marine fuels may cause the separation of asphal-
tenes from residual fuel and the formation of sludge, filter clogging and
engine damage. Generally, the same types of components fit best with
each other, hence, paraffinic components and FAME with marine dis-
tillates. Pyrolysis oils are the most challenging components since expe-
rience in their use as marine fuels is almost non-existent. Compatibility
testing for marine fuel blends is a common procedure, but traditional
methods may not apply to new components. The compatibility problems
of diesel-type renewable fuels can be tackled by modified fuel handling
in the ships, as well as by making engine adjustments, retrofitting in-
jectors  and  engine  optimization  or  by  fuel  processing  and  upgrading

technologies.

3.2.2. Carbon-neutral and low-carbon fuels for gas engines (LNG-type
fuels)

LNG, consisting mainly of methane, is the major alternative marine
fuel on the market today, however, from fossil origin. Its share was about
2.4% of global marine fuel consumption in 2015 [51]. Overall, natural
gas (NG) is one of the major energy sources and represented 22.2% of
the world’s total primary energy supply in 2017, and 3.7% (104.7 Mtoe)
of energy consumed in the transport sector [102], hence its availability
is considerable. For shipping, methane is liquefied to produce LNG by
◦
cooling it to (cid:0) 162
C to increase its energy density and for easier storage
and  transport,  while  for  vehicles  natural  gas  is  mainly  used  in  com-
pressed form (CNG). LNG use in shipping has been favoured due to its
availability and tolerable price when compared with conventional ma-
rine fuels (Acciaro, 2014 in [103]). An important aspect favouring LNG
use  has  been  also  its  low  SOx  and  potentially  low  NOx  emissions.  In
2019, the number of LNG-powered ships was 756, of which 539 were
LNG carriers [104].

Carbon-neutral methane can be produced using several pathways: a)
LBG from biogas by cleaning and upgrading (removal of CO2  and im-
purities); b) LBG from biomass through gasification and methanation; c)
e-methane from renewable hydrogen and CO2 by synthesis (the Sabatier
process) [105]. The methane streams from different pathways are suf-
ficiently similar to fossil LNG to be compatible with respective engines.
Hythane  is  a  fuel  option  achieved  by  mixing  compressed  NG  with
hydrogen [106–109]. Hythane as a liquid fuel-mix in a tank is not an
option due to the different liquefaction temperatures of methane ((cid:0) 162
◦
C)  and  hydrogen  ((cid:0) 253
C).  However,  solutions  for  the  injection  of
hydrogen for addition in LNG DF engines could be developed.

◦

For  using  methane  (LNG  or  carbon-neutral  methane)  as  a  marine
fuel, there are three marine gas engine types today: low-pressure spark
ignited engines, low-pressure dual fuel (LPDF), and high-pressure dual
fuel (HPDF) engines. LPDF is the most popular LNG engine technology
with at least 350 ships (e.g., LNG carriers, car/passenger ferries, cruise
ships), while HPDF is used for large low-speed oceangoing vessels in less
than  100  ships  [104].  The  high  octane  number  of  methane  makes  it
compatible with spark-ignition engines and it is used as a fuel in marine
engines with the lean burn spark ignition (LBSI) technology. DF engines
use a pilot injection of distillate fuel to ignite an NG and air mixture. In
this concept, distillate fuel can be used as the back-up fuel, which is an
advantage  due  to  limited  LNG  infrastructure  [110].  The  efficiency  of
both compression ignition and LBSI marine gas engines can be high (e.g.,
the  fuel  consumption  of  166–181  g/kWh,  7154–7804  kJ/kWh  for  a
W ̈artsil ̈a 31SG gas engine). However, the required safety measures and
large space of LNG tanks on board ships are demanding when compared
to diesel. Even so, investments in ships and harbour infrastructure for
LNG use are expanding (Acciaro, 2014 in [103]).

Carbon-neutral  and  low-carbon  methanol  and  ethanol  fuels  are
compatible  with  alcohol  engines.  Methanol  is  a  liquid  fuel,  currently
produced from fossil natural gas or to a lesser extent from renewable raw
materials. In practice, methanol is  another option  to liquefy methane
besides LNG.

Carbon-neutral  methanol  can  be  produced  from  carbon-neutral
methane,  i.e.: a)  biomethanol from cellulosic biomass or  waste; or  b)
e-methanol from e-methane or by direct hydrogenation of CO2. George
Olah has suggested that the methanol economy would offer means to
realise a circular energy concept [111]. Ethanol is anticipated to remain
for  use  in  road  transport  [83].  Methanol  fuel  produced  by  thermo-
chemical  and  electro-fuel  platforms  would  be  more  economical  than
producing ethanol with these processes. This aspect combined with the
existing infrastructure and marine methanol engines makes it an inter-
esting fuel for the shipping sector.

Methanol is used as marine fuel in the Stena Germanica car ferry in
Sweden  using  W ̈artsil ̈a’s  methanol  DF  retrofit  concept  (Sulzer  ZA40S

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010556

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

engines) and on more than ten ocean-going tankers with MAN’s new-
build  methanol  DF  engines  (ME-LGI)  [112].  In  a  dual-fuel  engine,  a
pilot fuel ignites the methanol (5% diesel and 95% methanol). MAN’s
methanol DF concept for 2-stroke SSD engines and W ̈artsil ̈a’s concept
for 4-stroke MSD engines are feasible for retrofitting and new-builds. In
these concepts, methanol is injected under high pressure into the cyl-
inder chamber. One injector for diesel and the other for methanol are
used in the MAN concept [113], while a single injector is used to inject
diesel and methanol in the W ̈artsil ̈a concept [114]. A so called ‘fumi-
gation’  concept  is  also  considered  for  methanol  DF  engines  based  on
injection at low pressure in the inlet manifold [112]. Methanol tanks can
be at the bottom of the ship, which is an easier solution than restricted
placing options for LNG or diesel tanks [90]. For smaller vessels, addi-
tised  methanol  could  be  used  in  alcohol  diesel  engine.  In  the  Scania
ethanol engine concept, which has been used in buses since 1985 [115,
116], an ignition improver and lubricity additives to methanol enable its
use in a diesel engine with an increased compression ratio and a special
fuel injection system [117]. For using marine methanol, safety measures
and minor modifications to the harbour infrastructure are needed.

For other marine fuels, special engines can use carried chemicals as
fuels, for example, LPG-powered DF engines on very large gas carriers
[118,119].

3.2.3. Other carbon-neutral and low-carbon options (DME, ammonia,
hydrogen, fuel cells, batteries, wind, solar, nuclear)

Dimethyl  ether  (DME)  has been  demonstrated in  some special ap-
plications, however, engines for their use are not on the market for the
maritime  sector.  DME  is  manufactured  from  fossil,  carbon-neutral  or
low-carbon methanol, which is a marine fuel itself. DME is a gaseous fuel
needing modest pressure for liquefaction (similarly to LPG). Diesel en-
gines need relatively mild modifications to use DME [120,121].

NH3  can be used in FCs or modified ICEs, and it is considered as a
marine  fuel  [50,122,123].  NH3  is  carbon-free  fuel  produced  from
hydrogen  and  nitrogen  (from  the  air)  with  the  Haber-Bosch  process.
However,  the  WtW  carbon-balance  of  NH3  depends  on  the  origin  of
electricity  used  for  its  production  similarly  to  e-fuels  (Section  3.1).
Safety concerns are related to NH3 fuel, and thus it is converted to urea
for use as a reducing agent in the NOx reduction catalyst, SCR. NH3 is an
invisible, toxic gas and the limit for long-term exposure is 25–30 ppm
(NIOSH  limit),  300  ppm  is  immediately  dangerous,  and  5000  ppm  is
fatal within minutes. NH3 is corrosive and can cause permanent injuries
(eyes, alkali burns etc.) [124]. The combustion of NH3  produces N2O
[50] which has a high GWP100 of 265 [11]. When considering NH3 as
fuel for ICE, exhaust emission control to remove N2O is essential.

Hydrogen gas could be used in ICEs or FCs as such, however, as the
lightest gaseous molecule, its storage and distribution are challenging in
compressed or liquefied form. A relatively new concept is a reversible
system  of  liquid  organic  hydrogen  carriers  (LOHC)  [125,126].  The
LOHC  concept  is  still  not  proven,  and  the  temperature  needed  for
hydrogen release is high. Solid-state hydrogen storage carriers may have
sufficient hydrogen storage capacities, but the weight of the system is
high and hydrogen release is challenging. So far, these hydrogen storage
options don’t have sufficient energy density, non-toxicity or usability for
the  main  engines  of  large  ships.  For  easier  storage  and  transport,
hydrogen can be converted irreversibly to e-fuels (e-diesel, e-methane,
e-methanol,  e-ammonia, formic  acid) or stored  in reversible  liquid or
solid-state systems [126]. The usability of formic acid and the purity of
the  released  hydrogen  is  challenging  for  FCs.  While  compressed
hydrogen  requires  the  least  amount  of  energy,  the  energy-consuming
e-diesel fuel has the highest energy-density and fits the present infra-
structure. From all hydrogen storage options, bunkering infrastructure
for large ships is widely available only for diesel-type fuels and to some
extent for LNG and methanol.

Fuel  cells  can  utilise  hydrogen,  methane,  methanol  and  ammonia
with  high  efficiency.  FCs  using  hydrogen  and  methanol  have  been
demonstrated  in  shipping  [127].  FCs  have  high  efficiencies,  e.g.,

50–60% for proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) and 60% for
solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), and even up to 85% with heat recovery.
However,  FCs  are  space  demanding,  thus  considered  currently  for
auxiliary engines, hybrid and low-power machinery, with an estimated
2–20% CO2 reduction potential [90]. PEMFC technology is sensitive to
impurities, while SOFCs can pose a safety concern because of the high
◦
operating temperatures (800–1000

C).
All-electric ships’ emissions depend on upstream emissions and thus
mainly  on  emissions  for  electricity  generation.  Batteries  are  already
installed  on  ships  for  short-distance  routes.  The  costs  of  batteries  are
foreseen to decrease, e.g., lithium-ion battery pack prices are expected to
be as low as $73 per kWh by 2030 (Bloomberg in [90]). Batteries are
heavy,  hence  all-electric  oceangoing  ships  are  foreseen  to  be  implau-
sible,  although  they  can  be  adapted  for  shorter  routes  [128,129].
Hybridisation is probably also an option for smaller vessels to achieve
fuel savings [130,131]. California started At-Berth Regulation in 2014
for three vessel categories at six California ports to reduce PM and NOx
emissions  from  ocean-going  vessels’  auxiliary  engines  while  they  are
docked at California ports [65]. An update At-Berth Regulation will be
effective in 2023 for which vessels are required to use shore power or
fuels  that  will  emit  equal  or  less  than  shore  power  (emissions  from
electric  power  generation)  while  docked  to  meet  carbon  neutrality
[132].

Wind,  solar,  and  nuclear  power  are  options  as  energy  sources  for
shipping, however, wind and solar are not to replace the main engines of
large ships at their current stage of development. Kites and rotors are
mature  but  most  effective  only  at  slow  speeds  (e.g.,  kites  below  16
knots).  Rotors  are  challenging  for  container  ships  due  to  interference
with cargo handling, but they do achieve fuel savings. Flettner rotors are
used on ships [133]. Solar and wind technology is suggested for auxil-
iary power demands [90]. Nuclear propulsion for military and subma-
rine purposes has been used since 1955 and is used, e.g., for icebreakers.
Approx. 200 reactors in Russia enable running for long periods without
refuelling.  However,  it  is  unlikely  that  many  countries  would  allow
nuclear vessels to enter their ports due to safety risks. The environmental
consequences of a possible accident would be worse for nuclear ships
along inhabited coastlines than in power plants. Radioactive fuel and its
storage  needs,  training  of  staff,  nuclear  regulations  etc.  are  also  of
concern. In 2017, China decided to invest in the development of two
prototype molten salt nuclear reactors for aircraft carriers, drones, and
military aircraft [90].

4. Exhaust emission reduction

Upstream  emissions  of  fuel  production  are  decisive  for  WtW  CO2
emissions, however, the downstream emissions of CH4, N2O and BC also
have a significant impact. Exhaust emissions harmful to health and the
environment are NOx, SOx, NH3, formaldehyde, particles (PM, PN, BC)
and related PAHs and heavy metals. Secondary reactions of emissions in
the atmosphere may further contribute to tropospheric ozone formation,
deplete stratospheric ozone, or form secondary aerosols (Table 2). Fuel,
engine and aftertreatment technologies can remove these harmful spe-
cies of exhaust substantially. One special feature of carbon-neutral fuels
is their sulphur-free nature enabling the utilisation of the most effective
exhaust aftertreatment technologies. Exhaust aftertreatment technolo-
gies  for  reducing  harmful  pollutants  may  increase  fuel  consumption
(typically up to 10%) and solutions are needed to balance this also, e.g.,
waste heat recovery systems [134].

The IMO regulates SOx  and NOx  emissions (MARPOL Annex VI) as
described in the Background section and ship emission control systems
were  first  developed  to  tackle  these  emissions.  The  IMO  limits  SOx
emissions by setting the maximum sulphur content limit for marine fuels
or using high-sulphur fuels in combination with SOx scrubbers. The IMO
limits fuel sulphur content globally (0.5% in 2020 or SOx scrubbers to be
used, from 4.5% to 3.5% in 2012) and in SECAs to 0.1% in 2015 (earlier
from  1.5%  to  1%)  [135].  The  IMO  is  anticipated  to  limit  also  BC

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010557

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

Table 2
Classification of the effect of emission species on climate, health, environment
and  their  contribution  through  secondary  reactions  (see  the  Background
section).

Emission

Climate

Health

Environment

Reactions

c

a,  c

a

a

b

c

Yes
Yes
Indirect
Yes
Indirect
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Indirect
Indirect

Yes

Indirect
Yes
Yes

CO2
SOx
NOx, NO2
Methane
Formaldehyde
N2O
NH3
Particles
BC
PAH
Heavy metals

Yes
Indirect

Yes

Yes

Yes*
Yes

a Forming ground-level ozone.
b Depleting stratospheric ozone.
c Forming secondary aerosols.
* Via constituents of PM.

emissions from marine engines, regionally or globally. Regional regu-
lations are set for PM, PN, and methane emissions. The emission stan-
dards  in  the  EU  for  inland  waterways,  EU  Stage  V,  are  currently  the
tightest  regulations  of  their  kind.  Still,  on-road  regulations  are  even
tighter, for example, “Euro VI”  emission standards for heavy-duty ve-
hicles (Table 3) [135]. In this section, ship emissions are presented for
different engine, fuel and exhaust aftertreatment technologies (details in
supplementary Tables S1-S6).

4.1. SOx  emissions

In the combustion process, sulfur present in fuel (and lubricating oil)
forms SO2, which further converts to SO3 and the exhaust PM sulphates
(see Section 4.5). These contribute also to the atmospheric reactions to
ambient sulphate levels. Sulphates cool the climate by reflecting away
the  sunlight,  and  hence,  reduced  SO2  emissions  from  shipping  are
anticipated  to  increase  climate  warming.  However,  simultaneously
lower PM emissions reduce the health exposure of shipping [16].

SOx emissions from marine engines can be reduced by: a) using low-
sulphur  and  sulphur-free  fuels  (distillates,  LNG,  methanol,  carbon-
neutral  fuels),  and  b)  using  SOx  scrubbers.  Since  SOx  emissions  form
by the combustion from sulphur present in the fuel and lubricating oil,
SOx  reduction is also achieved by reducing fuel sulphur content. Fuel
with 3.5% sulphur content leads theoretically to SO2 emissions of 14 g/
kWh, and fuel with 0.5% sulphur content to SO2 emissions of 2 g/kWh,
respectively. Distillate fuels targeted for SECA regions with a sulphur
content below 0.1% result in SO2 emissions below 0.4 g/kWh (Fig. 4 and
supplementary Fig. S2). For high-sulphur residual fuels and low-sulphur
distillate  fuels,  several  measurement  campaigns  have  confirmed  the
relationship between SO2 emissions and the fuel sulphur content [57,87,
136,137].

Table 3
Examples of emission standards.

EU Stage V 2020
(75–3700 kW)
Euro VI heavy-duty

MARPOL Annex VI
example.a,  b

HC

CO
g/kWh

NOx

PM

PN

3.5

0.19

1.8

0.015

1 × 1012

1.5

0.13

0.4

0.010

8.1 ×
1011

2.26 (1000 1/
min)

a Tier III NOx emissions in NECAs, 3.4 g/kWh (n<130 rpm); 9×n((cid:0) 0.2) g/kWh

(130 rpm ≤ n < 2000 rpm), 2.0 g/kWh (n ≥ 2000 rpm).

b SOx  emissions from shipping are limited by the IMO’s regulation on sulfur

content of fuel.

Fig. 4. SOx  emissions from MSD and SSD marine engines using different fuels
and exhaust gas treatment technologies. For the fuels, the data is calculated as
the  SO2  emissions  from  the  reported  fuel  sulfur  values  and  for  the  scrubbers
from the measured SO2  emissions. The small markers indicate individual data
points and the large coloured markers represent the median value. Grey: S <
4.5% fuel. Dark red: S < 0.5% fuel. Red: S < 0.1% fuel. Magenta: fuel with 30%
fatty  acids. Green:  NG  with  pilot  oil ignition.  Yellow:  scrubber.  Methanol  DF
and SCR are excluded from the Figure since sulfur data was not available for
Methanol  DF  and  SCR  technology  does  not  affect  SOx  emissions.  (For  inter-
pretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)

Sulphur-free carbon-neutral diesel-type fuels containing only minor
amounts of sulphur lead to extremely low SOx emissions, and LNG and
methanol are also sulphur-free fuels. The minor amount of SOx emissions
detected when using these fuels originates from the lubricating oil or
pilot diesel-type fuel in the DF engine.

SOx scrubbers enable low SOx emissions even with high-sulphur re-
sidual fuels. Different types of SOx scrubbers include fresh water (closed
loop), seawater (open loop), and hybrid scrubbers (applicable to fresh
and seawater), as well as dry scrubbers. Scrubbers were well-known in
power plants before they were introduced  in ship applications  [138].
Scrubbers on-board have demonstrated the potential of SO2 emissions at
a  very  low  level,  for  example,  0.07  g/kWh  using  fuel  with  a  sulfur
content of 1.9 wt% [139] and generally lower SOx emissions than when
using  fuel  of  0.1wt%  sulphur  content.  SO2  emissions  of  0.12  g/kWh
equal a fuel sulphur content of <0.03wt% (see supplementary Fig. S2).
Winnes et al. [140] reported a study on-board a RoPax ferry, on a 9.6
MW common rail engine and a scrubber system using seawater resulted
in  SO2  emissions  significantly  lower  when  using  HFO  and  a  scrubber
than  when  using  below  0.1%  sulphur  fuel  oil.  Many  studies  report
similar  findings  for  several  types  of  ships  and  scrubbers,  such  as  a
modern cruise ship with a hybrid SOx scrubber using fuel having 0.65%
sulphur content; a RoRo passenger (RoPax) ship equipped with an open
loop SOx scrubber and a diesel oxidation catalyst (DOC) using residual
fuel  having  1.9%  sulphur  content [60,136,139,141];  a  container  ship
(1987) retrofitted with a SOx scrubber with an “open loop” mode at sea
and “closed loop” mode in port (fresh water/sodium hydroxide solution)
[142]; a RoRo ship and a SOx  scrubber system in an open mode [143]
and a scrubber-equipped container ship, a cruise ship and a Ro-Ro ship
[144]. Scrubbers can be adjusted for lower SO2 reduction to save energy,
e.g. when operating in non-SECA waters. However, the target values for
each of the tested scrubbers are not reported.

Although SO2  emissions can be reduced by scrubbers by 99%, sul-
phuric acid (H2SO4) can be reduced to a lesser extent [140]. Sulphuric
acid, sulphates, PAHs and heavy metals are discussed later with the PM
emissions (Section 4.5).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010558

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

4.2. NOx  emissions (including NO2)

4.2.1. Formation of NOx  in engine

NOx emissions form in diesel combustion in the reaction of nitrogen
and oxygen and the intake air at high temperatures. The nitrogen con-
tent of marine fuels (other than ammonia as fuel) is too low for sub-
stantial NOx formation.

Typical  engine-out  NOx  emissions  are  approx.  10–20  g/kWh  with
distillate-type fuels at engine loads higher than 50% MCR (Maximum
continuous  rating).  NOx  emission  consists  mainly  of  NO  and  a  minor
amount of NO2. NOx emissions from diesel engines can be reduced by: a)
on-engine  design  and  exhaust  gas  recirculation  (EGR);  b)  emission
control systems (e.g. SCR); or c) LNG fuels (or other fuels) leading to low
NOx emissions; and e) to some extent with scrubbers. Reduction of NOx
emissions  in  SOx  scrubbers  is  marginal,  reportedly  5–10%  due  to  the
NO2 transfer into water [60,140]. Furthermore, this reduction is limited
to  a  maximum  of  12%  to  allow  the  washwater  treatment  system  to
prevent the discharge of nitrates (Resolution MEPC.259(68)).

Engine out NOx control is possible for example by adjustments of the
engine parameters, e.g., delayed injection timing, cooling the charge air
or using variable valve timing and water injection to the engine. In the
aforementioned cases, the lower combustion pressure leads to a lower
peak combustion temperature and thus lower NOx emissions, however,
this comes at cost of penalty in fuel economy and increased BC emissions
[145,146].  This  physical  phenomenon  is  known  as  the  NOx/PM
trade-off, or rather the NOx/BC trade-off since other constituents of PM
(e.g., organics, sulphates, metals) do not necessarily follow this princi-
ple. In the IMO regulations, the NOx emissions limit increases along with
the engine size, allowing larger engines to be tuned towards higher NOx
and lower BC emissions (Fig. 5). For example, higher compression ratios
and combustion temperatures increase NOx  emissions while favouring
soot oxidation. Additionally, the low speed of larger engines gives more
time for soot to be oxidized in the cylinder. The engine technologies to
reduce NOx and PM simultaneously, viz. to disengage the relationship of
these emission species, include for example turbochargers and electronic
engine control. Fuel efficiency can be improved by engine tuning to high
NOx emissions combined with a NOx reduction technology, e.g., EGR or
SCR, and this combination enables simultaneous abatement of NOx and
PM emissions. EGR is an internal technology of an engine to reduce NOx
emissions by mixing a part of the exhaust gas into the intake combustion
air  to reduce the  oxygen availability and increase  the water and  CO2
concentration in the intake air, which suppresses combustion tempera-
tures and hence, NOx  formation. On the other hand, EGR tends to in-
crease  PM  emissions  [147]  and  worsens  fuel  economy.  NOx  emission
reduction is traditionally modest with engine internal methods, while
new combustion processes could be more efficient [148].

4.2.2. Exhaust aftertreatment to reduce NOx  emissions

An  SCR-system  utilizes  a  catalyst  and  ammonia  to  reduce  NOx
emissions.  This  procedure  with  higher  engine-out  NOx  emissions  and
aftertreatment  allows  better  fuel  economy.  In  the  SCR,  the  dominant
reaction involves NO, NH3, and oxygen reacting to nitrogen and water.
Due  to  toxicity  and  handling  problems  associated  with  NH3,  a  water
solution  of  urea  is  typically  used  and  its  effective  decomposition  to
ammonia is needed upstream of the SCR catalyst. Optimization of the
urea feed is important to avoid NH3 slip downstream of the catalyst. SCR
catalysts  in  ship  applications  are  typically  vanadium  (V2O5)  catalysts
with high activity and sulphur tolerance [149–151]. SCR technology is
compatible even with residual marine fuels since monolithic fixed beds
have  square  holes,  which  are  large  enough  to  avoid  clogging  and
poisoning [103,147]. Significant NOx  reductions of nearly 90% are re-
ported for ships using SCR as indicated also in Fig. 6a. NOx reductions of
90–91%  were  reported  for  SCR  retrofit  of  auxiliary  engines  on  the
ocean-going vessel using HFO at loads of 35%, 50% and 67%, at exhaust
◦
temperature of 327–363
C [152]. NOx reductions above 90% have been
achieved for a ship operating at cruise speed at a 75% load [153]. For

Fig. 5. a) NOx and b) BC emissions as a function of max engine power (MW)
from  marine  engines  at  different  engine  sizes.  Only  data  points  with  loads
greater than 40% of the MCR are shown in the figure to limit the effect of the
engine load on emissions. References are shown in the Supplementary material.
In  legend,  S  < 4.5%  means  S  = 0.5–4.5%  and  for  lower  sulphur  contents
respective ranges.

◦

two ferry engines fitted with SCR, the NOx conversions were found to be
between 36% and 94% depending on the catalyst temperature [154]. An
SCR provides greater NOx  reduction when the exhaust temperature is
within an appropriate range. With vanadium-based SCR systems and an
HFO fuel, NOx reduction efficiencies have been found to vary from 75%
to 99% at 340
C [155]. In continuation work, the NOx  reduction effi-
ciency reached nearly 90% efficiency at 340–400
C, but only 70% at
260
C [149]. By increasing the catalyst loading, the NOx removal effi-
ciency increased at lower temperatures without significant changes at
higher temperatures. The catalyst chemistry could also be modified for
this  purpose.  A  combination  of  the  SCR  and  DPF  yielding  ultra-low
emissions has also been studied for medium-speed engines [156].

◦

◦

4.2.3. The effect of fuels on the NOx  emissions

Fuels also affect NOx emissions depending on the combination of fuel
and engine technology used. Theoretical flame temperatures of chemical
compounds at similar chain lengths and boiling points are the highest for
aromatics followed by olefins, and the lowest for paraffins, alcohols and
ethers  [157].  However,  this  applies  in  adiabatic  and  stoichiometric
conditions,  while  combustion  under  pressure  in  the  cylinder  of  an

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010559

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

Fig. 6. Emissions from marine engines using different fuels and exhaust gas treatment technologies. MSD and SSD engines, engine loads equal or above 40% MCR: a)
NOx  emissions. b) BC emissions. c) PM emissions. d) PNnv emissions (non-volatile). Small markers represent individual data points and large coloured markers
represent the median values. Grey: S <4.5% fuel. Dark red: S < 0.5% fuel. Red: S< 0.1% fuel. Magenta: diesel fuel with 30% fatty acids. Cyan: methanol with pilot oil
ignition. Green natural gas with pilot oil ignition. Yellow: scrubber. Blue: SCR. Note: Methanol DF BC result is from one retrofit concept and may be different for other
engine or combustion principles. Numerical values are presented in the Supplementary material (Appendix S1). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

internal combustion engine is complex. Particularly, if air-to-fuel ratio is
not adjusted corresponding to the amount of oxygen bound in fuel, the
mixture  may  become  leaner  and  the  combustion  temperature  higher
leading to elevated NOx emissions.

For  LNG,  NOx  emissions  can  be  reduced  along  with  lower  peak
temperatures  in  the  cylinder  during  combustion  [158].  LNG  engines
tuned  to  low  NOx  may  achieve  Tier  III  NOx  levels  even  without  SCR
(primarily LPDF and spark ignition ones), while other LNG engines need
SCR to reach similar NOx emission levels (primarily HPDF ones) [104].
In  on-board  measurements, LNG  DF  marine  engines  have  shown NOx
emissions on average of approx. 1.2 g/kWh [159]. NG combustion in
lean-burn  conditions  tends  to  increase  the  NO2/NOx  ratio  [158,160,
161].

Limited data for methanol DF engines indicate lower NOx emissions
than those for marine diesel  engines using residual or distillate fuels,
although higher than that for LNG DF or SCR-equipped marine diesel
engines [114]. A special HSD diesel engine (Scania EEV Ethanol DC9
270 hp) using methanol additised with an ignition improver has shown
NOx emissions of 2.2 g/kWh [162].

Paraffinic fuels (HVO, GTL, XTL) for diesel engines generally reduce
NOx  emissions due to the lower combustion temperature of saturated
compounds  (alkanes)  in  the  absence  of  unsaturated  bonds  (aromatics
and olefins). These fuels also have high cetane numbers and hydrogen-
to-carbon ratios. Additionally, low densities and viscosities of paraffinic
fuels  may  retard  dynamic  injection  timing  and  hence  enhance  the

reduction  of  NOx  emissions  [91,163–166].  Low  NOx  emissions  for
paraffinic fuels have been reported for road and non-road applications,
while only a few studies are available on using paraffinic fuels in marine
applications. In comparison with marine gas oil, the reduction in NOx
emissions  with  paraffinic  HVO  has  been  10–19%  [167,168].  NOx
reduction  was  significant  (13%)  also  in  the  2-stroke,  small  bore,
high-speed engine [169].

FAME  biodiesels  are  often  reported  to  slightly  increase  the  NOx
emissions  when  compared  with  hydrocarbon-only  diesel  fuel,  with
typical  differences  between  fuels  below  25%  or  negligible.  Increased
NOx emissions with FAME are often explained by the higher combustion
temperature due to the fuel-bound oxygen in FAME and by the shorter
ignition delay (from the start of injection) providing time for smoother
combustion reducing the NOx emissions when compared with diesel fuel
[170–176]. On-road studies have used high-cetane diesel fuel in com-
parison with FAME, while FAME has often a higher cetane number than
marine  fuels  [170,177–179].  Besides  fuel  oxygen  content  and  cetane
number, viscosity, aromatic content, density, distillation range, satura-
tion degree and chain length of fatty acids may affect the formation of
the NOx emissions with FAME. For example, high viscosity may deteri-
orate the atomization of the injected fuel. The effect of fuel on the NOx
emissions depends also on the design of the engine and injection system,
as well as on the engine loads used in the testing protocol [180–182].
Non-esterified, upgraded straight oils and fats have been studied as
marine  fuels  to  some  extent  since  these  are  feasible  fuels  for  large

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105510

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

engines  without  transesterification  to  FAME.  Typically,  viscosity  is
substantially higher and cetane number lower for straight oils and fats
when compared with diesel fuels. In one study, blending 30% of straight
biofuel  in  diesel  fuel  did  not  change  the  NOx  emissions  significantly
[87].

Tyre  pyrolysis  oils,  crude  and  distilled,  have  been  reviewed  by
Mikulski et al. [183]. The NOx emissions obtained with these fuels have
shown  discrepancy,  however,  in  many  cases,  NOx  emissions  were
reduced  at  lower  engine  loads,  while  the  opposite  was  observed  at
higher engine loads. Tyre oils tested contained e.g. aromatics and their
cetane numbers were worse than those of FAME.

Water-in-diesel  fuel  emulsions (WiFE)  containing  20%  water  have
been  developed  to  reduce  NOx  emissions  along  with  a  reduced  com-
bustion temperature. Water is not soluble diesel fuel, and thus emulsifier
additives are necessary to keep the emulsion homogenous. The WiFE has
been  used  in  HSD  heavy-duty  diesel  engines  [184,185]  and  also  in
marine diesel engines [186–188]. Mayer et al. [189] reported of ach-
ieved Tier III NOx  emissions with a water emulsion without an EGR or
SCR system. The WiFE may increase the wear of the engine [190].

A summary of NOx emissions is shown in Fig. 6a. NOx emissions can
be reduced mainly by aftertreatment (SCR), engine internal methods (e.
g.,  EGR),  and  certain  combinations  of  fuels  and  engine  technologies
(LNG, methanol, paraffinic diesel, water in diesel). Slight NOx reduction
is achieved also by SOx  scrubbers. For ammonia as a marine fuel, it is
premature to deem whether the Tier III NOx  level is reached without
aftertreatment.

4.3. Methane emissions

The combustion of hydrocarbon fuels is not perfect and hence hy-
drocarbon  emissions,  including  methane,  are  formed  from  partially
unburned fuel “slipping” from the combustion cycle. The design of the
engine,  combustion  chamber,  injection  pressure  and  fuel  mixing  are
examples of factors affecting the formation of methane emissions [191,
192].

Methane  emissions  are  typically  low  for  diesel  engines  and  for
methanol DF engines, for which methane emissions of 0.02 g/kWh have
been  reported  for  an  80%  engine  load  [140].  Additionally,  methane
emissions below the detection limit have been observed using additised
methanol  in  an  HSD  engine  [162].  In  contrast,  substantial  methane
emissions  from  LNG-fuelled  ships  have  been  reported  in  conditions
favouring  incomplete  combustion  [159,193].  Methane  is  a  strong
greenhouse gas (GWP100 is 28) and control of methane slip is necessary
for LNG engines [194]. With certain assumptions, methane emissions of
approx. 5.8 g/kWh would compensate for the GHG mitigation potential
of LNG when compared to HFO [90]. The FuelEU Maritime Initiative
(within the “Fit for 55”  package) defines the default downstream TtW
emissions of the fuel lost as fugitive emissions (Cslip) as up to 3.1% of
the mass of fuel for LNG DF engines depending on engine type (at 50%
engine  load).  In  a  recent  study  [74],  the  ratio  ΔCH4/ΔCO2  in  the
emissions  from  LNG  vessels  should  be  equal  to  or  lower  than  3.9%
(volume-based)  to  correspond  to  the  climatic  forcing  for  100  years
caused by shipping fuelled by diesel. Authors here note that emission
evaluations per CO2  emission may be influenced by decreased energy
efficiency.

On-engine development can significantly reduce methane slip. For
example,  high-pressure  (HP)  gas  DF  engines  emit  very  low  methane
emissions at levels of 0.23 g/kWh [66,104,195]. Higher methane slip
emissions  are  reported  for  low-pressure  (LP)  LNG  DF  engines.  In  the
on-board measurement of an LPDF LNG engine, methane emissions have
been reported on average to be 1.4 g/kWh at high engine loads, while up
to  5–5.6  g/kWh  at  low  engine  loads  [159].  Other  reported  methane
emissions for LPDF LNG engines have been 6.2 g/kWh [195], 5.5 g/kWh
and 3.8 g/kWh [104] [196]. In on-board measurements, methane levels
have been reported as 3.7–25.5 g/kWh, with the highest emissions at a
25%  engine  load  [197].  Even  higher  methane  emissions  have  been

reported in a testbed related to a specific NG-fuelled engine [136]. As
mentioned, high-pressure DF LNG engines emit low methane emissions.
Cylinder deactivation technology is also an option to reduce methane
emissions  from  LNG  DF  engines  [197]  amongst  other  potential
developments.

One option to tackle methane slip from existing and new-build ma-
rine  LNG  engines  is  methane  oxidation  catalyst  (MOC),  which  have
already  demonstrated  70–80%  methane  conversions  [192].  However,
further  research  is  needed  to  solve  the  long-term  performance  of  the
methane  catalyst  systems  on-board.  Blending  hydrogen  to  methane
(hythane  fuel)  may  reduce  the  methane  slip  along  with  lower  CO2
emissions  and  increased  efficiency  (accelerated  combustion  speed),
albeit NOx emissions tend to increase [107].

All in all, the methane slip from LNG engines is of concern, and it can
be  reduced  using  on-engine  technologies  (e.g.,  high-pressure  technol-
ogy, better fuel mixing, combustion chamber design, reducing crevices),
by utilising MOC type aftertreatment systems, or by using hydrogen with
methane.

4.4. NH3, N2O and formaldehyde emissions

NH3 emissions from diesel engines are mainly related to urea-based
SCR systems for NOx  control, although the highest NH3  emissions are
typical for three-way catalyst-equipped gasoline cars [198]. For marine
engines, very low NH3 emissions are reported. For example, in a study
on-board  a  ship,  NH3  emissions  were  close  to  the  detection  limit
downstream of the SCR (NH3 < 0.026 g/kWh), and below the detection
limit after an SCR and scrubber combination. NH3 is water-soluble and
may dissolve in scrubber water. Published NH3 emissions downstream of
SCR systems in marine engines are scarce. NH3  emissions are harmful
(see  introduction)  and  deserve  consideration  when  developing  new
emission control technologies for marine engines. In road transport, NH3
is  limited  for  example  in  Europe  (max.  10  ppm  on  average  for
heavy-duty  engines)  and  is  anticipated  to  be  considered  for  more
stringent control under the future new standards.

N2O emissions measured from marine engines have been below the
detection limit of the instruments used in the reported studies (<0.04 g/
kWh) [87]. However, N2O emissions are known to be induced by the
exhaust  aftertreatment  technologies  used  in  road-transport,  namely
three-way catalysts for stoichiometric spark-ignited engines [198–202]
and  in  the  NOx  adsorber  and  selective  catalytic  reduction  (SCR)  for
diesel engines [203,204]. The formation of N2O depends on, e.g., the
active  metal  of  the  catalyst,  the  reaction  temperature,  rich-to-lean
transition,  and  exhaust  composition.  Hence,  when  developing  new
exhaust  aftertreatment  technologies  for  marine  diesel  engines,  N2O
emissions may become relevant. The possible use of ammonia as fuel
may require reducing both NH3 and N2O emissions simultaneously [50].
Formaldehyde emissions, as well as CO and HC emissions, are the
products  of  incomplete  combustion  of  carbon-containing  fuel.  These
emissions  from  marine  engines  using  residual  or  distillate  fuels  have
been  very  low  or  below  the  detection  limit  of  the  measurement  in-
struments  used.  Formaldehyde  levels  reported  for  MSD  marine  diesel
engines  have  been  for  example  0.017–0.048  g/kWh  (Supplementary
Table S5). As a reference, the limit for formaldehyde emissions in the US
for  HDVs  is  0.022  g/kWh.  FAME  content  in  diesel  has  not  affected
significantly carbonyl emissions with one marine diesel engine [176].

Scrubbers reportedly reduce HC emissions to levels lower than when

using low-sulphur fuel [140].

Measurable  formaldehyde  emissions  have  been  reported  for  NG-

fuelled engines [159,192,197].

For  methanol  DF,  the  formaldehyde  emission  reported  have  been
(cid:0) 4 g/kWh) and also low for small alcohol diesel HSD
negligible (4.9 × 10
engines  using  methanol  additised  with  an
improver
(0.004–0.014 g/kWh) [162]. Theoretically, the oxidation of methanol
could lead to formaldehyde emissions. Emission of unburned methanol
is of concern due to its toxicity.

ignition

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105511

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

4.5. Particulate matter emissions (including PAH and heavy metals)

PM mass emissions (and PAHs) form through the incomplete com-
bustion of fuel (and lubricating oil). Particles are formed in the early
phase  of  combustion,  typically  in  the  fuel  spray  where  the  fuel-to-air
ratio is elevated. PM forms through the presence of alkynes and PAHs
[183].  Heavy  metals  in  exhaust  PM  originate  from  the  fuel,  engine,
lubricating oil and engine wear.

Not only the PM mass emission, but also its composition and pro-
duced (ultrafine) particle number concentrations are important. Engine
exhaust PM emissions contain BC (see the section later) with associated
metallic ash, BrC and lighter organic compounds and, often hydrated,
inorganic ions (sulphates, nitrates, ammonium salts etc.). PAHs, heavy
metals, and other harmful organic and inorganic species are carried also
on particle surfaces. BC emissions are climate-warming while sulphates,
organics  and  nitrates  are  climate-cooling  aerosol  species  [16].  The
amount  of  sulphates,  semi-volatile  compounds  (e.g.  PAHs)  and
particle-bound  water  in  PM  depends  on  the  engine,  fuel  and  exhaust
treatment technologies and also on the measuring conditions through
aerosol processes during the cooling and dilution of the raw exhaust. For
high-sulphur  fuel,  hydrated  sulphuric  acid  and  semi-volatile  organic
compounds  condense  on  particles  from  the  gas  phase  during  diluted
sampling, while a lower amount of these species is collected by using hot
PM sampling procedures (e.g. in-stack). The repeatability of PM results
and comparability between studies would require a stricter determina-
tion  of  the  sampling  conditions  than  standardised  today  (ISO  8178
standard) [205–208].

4.5.1. The effect of fuels on the PM, PAH and heavy metals

PM emissions can be significantly reduced by switching from resid-
ual  fuels  to  distillates  or  other  fuels,  which  have  low  sulfur  and  ash
contents. When using residual fuels, PM contains substantially “heavy”
species (e.g., BC, tar BrC, long-chain high-molecular-mass heavy organic
compounds, sulphuric acid and combined water, metal sulphates, metal
oxides), whereas these species are present to a lesser extent when using
cleaner distillate fuels and biofuels [206,209]. PAHs, heavy metals and
other harmful species carried on particle surfaces are formed to a lesser
extent when fuels are clean in terms of their content of these species.

The PM emissions reported are high for marine engines using high-
sulphur  residual  fuels,  up  to  1.5  g/kWh  (ISO  8178  measurement
method) (Fig. 6c, Fig. 7), while distillate fuels have shown PM emissions
of below 0.1 g/kWh [87,140], which is largely related to the contribu-
tion of sulphates in PM. Fuel sulphur combustion product, SO2, typically

Fig. 7. The effect of fuel sulphur content on PM emissions. Lines combine the
results obtained with different fuels in the same engine. References mentioned
are [58,73,140,212,213] and rest are presented in the Supplementary material
(Appendix S1).

forms 1–2% of SO3, which further reacts to sulphuric acid and (metal)
sulphates in PM with the ratio of conversion depending on engine load
(see Fig. S2) [210]. An elevated air-to-fuel ratio, combustion tempera-
ture, and presence of vanadium (in fuel or SCR), for example, increase
the conversion of SO2 to SO3 [211]. The fraction of hydrated sulfate in
PM has been found 22%–62% for HFO fuel, while only 8.3% for MDO
fuel. The conversion of fuel and lubricating oil originating sulphur into
sulfate in PM increased from 0.4% to 3.7% as the engine load increased
from 20% to 100% [59]. Even for marine fuels containing 0.5% sulphur,
sulphates  and  combined  water  may  remain  the  major  constituents  of
PM.

Paraffinic sulphur-free fuels (HVO, GTL, XTL) reportedly reduce PM
emissions  even  when  compared  with  distillate  fuels.  These  fuels  are
sulfur-free and they have high cetane numbers and hydrogen-to-carbon
ratios.  Studies  of  using  paraffinic  fuels  in  MSD  or  SSD  marine  diesel
engines are sparse. A study comparing GTL to MGO in heavy-duty diesel
engines found a decrease of 12–16% in PM emissions combined with a
decrease  in  NOx  (up  to  19%),  CO  (25%),  and  CO2  (4%),  and  smoke
emissions (30%) [168]. For on-ground HSD applications, PM emissions
with  paraffinic  fuels  generally  reduce  when  compared  to  traditional
diesel [166].

Oxygenated FAME biodiesel tends to reduce PM emissions since the
fuel oxygen prohibits the formation of long carbon chains and enhances
the oxidation of the initially formed PM [87], particularly in conditions
where  the  fuel-to-air  ratio  is  elevated.  Additionally,  FAME  does  not
contain  aromatics  and  PAHs,  soot  precursors.  FAME  use  inhibits  soot
formation, and hence carbon surfaces for the adsorption of semi-volatile
compounds [214]. PM reductions when using FAME in marine engines
have been reported, e.g. reduction of 75% with fish oil FAME [172,176,
179]. One study found a 25% reduction in PM with a 50% FAME blend at
high engine load, while at low engine load PM emission increased [176].
In on-road studies, PM reductions have been from 4% to 63% with FAME
blends [176]. Although FAME reduces the soot part of PM, the soluble
organic fraction of PM potentially increases due to heavy boiling com-
pounds of FAME. Hence, PM emissions with FAME may be elevated e.g.
at low loads or cold exhaust (and sampling) temperatures. This effect
can be reduced by DOC to achieve low PM emissions [215,216]. Tyre
pyrolysis  oil  contains  aromatics,  and  is  suspected  of  increasing  PM
emissions when compared with diesel fuel, which is also indicated in
some studies [183].

Methane and methanol do not contain any carbon-carbon bonds and
are expected to lead to low PM emissions. This has been evidenced for
LNG  DF  engines,  which  emit  very  low  PM  emissions,  for  example
approx. 0.02 g/kWh, which is more than one order of magnitude lower
than that for  diesel  engines  [136,217]. For  4.3  MW LNG  DF  engines,
organic PM emissions (0.0044 g/kWh) are reportedly greater than BC
emissions (0.0008 g/kWh) [158]. LNG does not contain heavy metals,
but  metal-oxide  particles  originating  from  lubricating  oil  combustion
have been reported for LNG DF engines [218]. The metallic elements
have been found as both internally and externally mixed with BC [219].
Methanol  use  leads  to  relatively  low  PM  emissions,  for  example,
0.093 g/kWh for a DF engine at an 80% engine load [220]. For a smaller
alcohol  diesel  HSD  engine  on  methanol  additised  with  an  ignition
improver, PM emissions were 0.045 g/kWh, which is the same level as
PM emissions observed for low sulphur distillate fuels used in marine
diesel engines [162].

High PAH emissions for residual fuel use in marine diesel engines
have been reported (Table 4) [87,140,221] and substantially V, Ni, Fe,
Ca, and Na. Ca is the dominant metal in engine lubricating oil for large
marine engines. These species observed in PM emissions have been low
for low-sulphur fuels [87,218,221]. For FAME, in line with the absence
of PAHs in fuel, reduced PAH emissions are reported in comparison with
diesel fuel [222].

4.5.2. The effect of exhaust aftertreatment on PM emissions

SOx  scrubbers, SCR, and DOC may remove PM to some extent. For

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105512

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

Table 4
Emission  factors  for  gaseous  species,  PAHs  (BbP,  BkF,  BaP=Bentzo(x)Pyrene,
IP=Indeno  [1,2,3-cd]pyrene)  and  metals  in  PM  emissions  for  MSD  and  SSD
marine engines using residual and distillate fuels. More details are in Supple-
mentary Tables S4 and S5.

Species

Residual fuel

CO2
SO2
CO
THC

CH4
Formaldehyde
NH3
N2O
BC

BbP
BkF
BaP
IP
Sum of 7 PAHs
Sum of 16 PAHs
As
Cd
Cr
Cu
Ni
Pb
Se
Zn
V

(g/MJ)
61–81
0.29–1.2
0.057–0.255
0.018–0.057
(mg/MJ)
<0.6–6
<2.5–7
<0.2–1.2
<0.8–4
<1.7–5a/3–6b
(μg/MJ)
<0.61–1.5
<0.37–0.73
<0.02–0.5
<0.14–0.37
<2.4–17.1
24–94a/148–525
<0.24–1.5
<0.24/2–4.7b
<2–9.8
<4.9–9
<192–424a/ <778–1015b
0.7–5; 14.6c
0.2–0.7
<0.24–39a/32–61
1220–1924a/<4146b

Distillate fuel

(g/MJ)
75–81
0.04–0.25
0.074–0.202
0.026–0.068
(mg/MJ)
<0.4–1
<2.1–4
<0.5–1.3
<2.1–4
<1.6–2.4a/2–14b
(μg/MJ)
<0.14–0.31
<0.12–0.29
<0.05
<0.02
<1.2–4.8
40–84/–
<0.24–0.96
<0.24
<2.2–4
<1–4.9
0.2–24; 95.2c
0.2–2.6
0.2–0.5
<0.24–23
<5a/12–47.6b

a Below 15 MW.
b Above 15 MW.
c Highest result reported.

◦

example,  a  17–45%  reduction  can  be  achieved  by  using  a  scrubber
depending  on  the  used  engine  and  fuel  [60,140,223].  However,  this
effect  is  not  consistent  in  all  studies,  which  may  be  related  to  the
different scrubber types, and partly to the sampling methods [140,144].
The amount of H2SO4  and associated water condensed on the PM  in-
creases  as  the  dilution  ratio  and  temperature  decrease.  Cold  and  wet
exhaust  after  the  scrubber  may  require  probe  heating,  and  if  probe
heating is not used before the scrubber, the PM may seem to decline. A
scrubber  captures  H2SO4  and  bound  water,  however,  once  sulphuric
acid condenses in PM (or nucleates), it will not evaporate easily due to
its  high  boiling  point  of  337
C.  In  addition  to  sulphur  species,  the
scrubber  liquid  could  capture  the  exhaust’s  soluble  organic  and  inor-
ganic compounds (also metal oxides), or these species could condense on
the PM [206]. SCR and DOC may reduce PM emissions by oxidising the
organic fraction [139,141,156,224,225]. On the other hand, oxidation
of sulfur of fuel in catalysts tend to form SO3, which generates sulphates
in  PM  [176].  A  recent  study  reported  lower  PAH  emissions  for
low-sulphur  fuel  than  when  using  a  scrubber  and  HFO,  except  for
heavier PAHs [140]. With scrubbers, using residual fuels leads to high
PAH emissions in the air and aquatic ecosystem. Teuchies et al. [226]
found that scrubber washwater was acidic and contained e.g. Zn, V, Cu,
Ni, phenanthrene, naphthalene, fluorene and fluoranthene. The scrub-
bers’  discharge  washwater  is  acutely  toxic  for  aquatic  organisms.
Several  ‘priority  hazardous  substances’  (Water  Framework  Directive)
are already exceeded in the docks and the Scheldt estuary.

An on-board study reported a DOC efficiently reducing heavy metals
present in PM for residual fuel use, indicating the PM capturing property
of this DOC type [139,141]. Another on-board study with a SOx scrubber
did not observe reductions in metal emissions (e.g., Ni 0.5 mg/m3 STP
before/after  scrubber),  while  the  metal  emissions  were  low  with  a
low-sulphur fuel (e.g., Ni non-detectable) [60]. Heavy elements in re-
sidual fuel increase the effective density of the particles [218].

4.5.3. The PM composition in different particle sizes

The PM compositional species are present in different particle sizes.
For 20.2 MW diesel engines, particles below 1 μm have been found to
contain V, Ni and S, while particles above 200 nm contained Ca, V, and
Ni. Unburned fuel and lubricating oil originating OC was observed in
particles at 100 nm [227]. Lubricating oil as a source of PM emissions is
particularly important when the PM originating from the fuel is low.

Nucleation  mode  particles  consist  of  sulfates,  organic  compounds,
ash  and  carbonaceous  particles.  For  sulfur-free  fuels,  the  nucleation
particles  are  assumedly  dominated  by  hydrocarbons  [176]  For  diesel
engines (MSD 1 MW) the finest particles reportedly originated from the
fuel,  while  the  larger  particles  contained  elements  derived  from  the
lubricating oil [228].

For LNG DF engines (4.3 MW), OC has been found to originate from
the  lubricating  oil  and  PN  below  10  nm  from  lubricating  oil  metals
[158]. In another study for an LNG DF engine, the non-volatile particles
were fuel-originated at <10 nm, while particles originating from lubri-
cating oil were 10–30 nm, and stain-like nucleation particles together
with the grown core particles were 20(cid:0) 30 nm [229].

4.6. Particle number emissions

Particle  number  emissions  depend  on  engine,  fuel, lubricating  oil,
exhaust  aftertreatment  and  measurement  conditions,  amongst  others.
PN emission results depend on the chosen sampling and measurement
methods,  similarly  to  PM  emissions.  Legislative  limits  for  inland  wa-
terways refer to solid, non-volatile particles PNnv emissions for particle
size  ranges  above  23  nm  (abbreviated  here  PNnv>23),  which  is  less
sensitive to the sampling conditions and measurement system than the
total particle number emissions (PNtot). For PNtot, the variable pres-
ence of volatile and semi-volatile particles depends on many parameters,
e.g. exhaust temperature, the sampling methods used and particle size
ranges measured. Different research studies may report various types of
PN emissions.

For marine MSD diesel engines, with or without exhaust aftertreat-
ment,  using  residual  (0.7  and  2.2%S)  or  distillate  fuels,  PNnv  > 23
emissions have been reported from 0.6 × 1014 1/kWh to 3.5 × 1014 1/
kWh (Fig. 6d) [136,230]. Modern diesel engines are potentially in the
lower part of the range.

Reduced PNnv > 23 emissions were found when moving from fossil
marine fuel oil to biofuels, while PN emissions did not change for a 0.4
MW 1-cylinder engine (MGO < 0.1%S; fuel oil 2.17%S) (Petzold et al. in
[103]). An HSD engine showed only small differences in PN emissions
when comparing a fuel oil (0.12%S) and MDO fuels [231].

The effect of scrubbers on PNnv>23 emissions is not consistent in
different studies. A scrubber did not change the PNnv>23 levels for one
engine, while for another engine the decrease was approx. 30% at a 75%
engine load. PNnv>23 emissions were lower for MGO than downstream
of  the  scrubber  with  HFO  fuel  [136].  In  one  study,  PNnv>5.6  was
reduced by 48% with a scrubber [143], while in another study no clear
reducing  effect  of  a  scrubber  on  PNnv>23  emissions  was  observed
[140]. In the literature, engines and vehicles have emitted non-volatile
sub-23 nm particles [208].

For  LNG  DF  engines,  the  PNnv  > 23  emissions  reported  are
remarkably low, for example, PNnv > 23 emissions of 1.3 × 1012 1/kWh
[136].

4.6.1. Total PN emissions

High PNtot emissions (including volatile PN) of 2.1 × 1016  1/kWh
have been reported for an MSD diesel engine equipped with SCR (low-
sulfur residual fuel, 75% engine load). About 50% PNtot was found to
have a non-volatile core at 250
C [224]. Lower PNtot emissions have
been reported for Bio-FA blend (30%) in fossil fuel and for low sulphur
fuel (<0.1%S) than for residual fuel [232].

◦

For  paraffinic  and  biofuels,  studies  are  available  mainly  for  HSD
engines.  A  slight  increase  in  PN  emissions  has  been  reported  when

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105513

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

moving  from  MGO  to  paraffinic  GTL  fuel  [168]  and  FAME  biodiesel
assumedly due to reduced particle sizes (Jayaram et al. in [103]).

In the scrubber study, PNtot emissions were reduced by 79% (75%
engine load), potentially related to the tendency of hydrophilic particles
to transfer into the scrubber liquid or collide in water droplets [140].
PNtot reportedly reduces by using scrubbers by as much as 92% [143]
and 70–90% [232].

For an LNG DF, Anderson et al. [159] reported PNtot emissions of
only 5 × 1012 1/kWh. On the other hand, Corbin et al. [158] noted that
the majority of particles emitted from an LNG DF engine were in the size
class below 23 nm, hence, not detected with instruments designed for
PN>23 nm. Indeed, PNtot emissions reported were over 1013  1/kWh.
Alanen et al. [229] reported PNtot emissions of 2.7 × 1015(cid:0) 7.1 × 1015
1/kWh at a size range of 1.2 (cid:0) 414 nm for a 1.4 MW DF engine using NG
and marine distillates. When the smallest particles are considered, PNtot
emissions from LNG DF engines increase and potentially deserve to be
filtrated  [229,232].  However,  particle  number  emissions  for  different
fuels  and  aftertreatment  devices  are  sparse  and  more  studies  are
required as new fuels enter the arena.

4.6.2. Particle size distributions

Particle size distributions for residual fuels have been reported to be
unimodal  (two  overlapping  modes).  For  distillate,  paraffins  and  bio-
diesel  fuels,  the  bimodal  particle  size  distributions  are  reported  with
carbonaceous  accumulation  mode  and  ash  related  nucleation  mode
(<50 nm) (also semi-volatiles from lubricating oil) [172]. For FAME, a
lower number of particles in the accumulation (soot) mode are reported
than  for  conventional  diesel,  while  an  increase  in  nucleation  mode
particles with FAME may be seen [176,216,233] related to insufficient
solid carbonaceous agglomerates to adsorb volatile hydrocarbons [234].

4.7. Black carbon emissions

BC is an important contributor to global warming, and it adversely
affects health and the environment (see introduction). The fraction of BC
in  PM  and  composition  of  PM  varies  for  different  engines,  fuel  and
aftertreatment  technologies.  Hence,  merely  regulating  PM  emissions
will  not  necessarily  reduce  BC,  depending  on  the  PM  reduction  tech-
nology considered.

The IMO has worked since 2011 on the consideration of the impact of
BC emissions from international shipping on the Arctic (Marine Envi-
ronment Protection Committee, MEPC 62). The International Council on
Clean  Transportation  (ICCT)  has  organised  BC  Workshops,  including
consideration of efficient BC control methods. For regulating BC emis-
sions, an agreed measurement methodology is needed. In 2015 (MEPC
68), the IMO agreed on a BC definition according to Bond et al. [235]:
BC forms from the incomplete combustion of carbonaceous matter and it
is non-volatile, non-water-soluble, light-absorbing, 10–90 nm spherules
that contain more than 80% carbon in double bonded forms, and form
aggregates  immediately  after  formation  [235–237].  In  2018,  three
candidate methods for the BC measurements were selected by the IMO.
These  were  the:  photoacoustic  spectroscopy  (PAS),  laser  induced
incandescence  (LII)  and  filter  smoke  number  (FSN)  methods  (the
Sub-Committee on Pollution Prevention and Response, PPR 5). BC can
be  measured  using  optical  methods  based  on  filter  blackening  (e.g.,
smoke  meters,  aethalometers,  multiangle  absorption  photometry
(MAAP)), filter-free optical methods (e.g. PAS) and methods based on
refractory  properties  (e.g.,  LII).  Elemental  carbon  (EC),  which  is  not
commensurable  with  BC  in  the  shipping  sector,  is  measured  using
thermal-optical  (TOA)  methods  [87,158,238,239].  Using  a  nomencla-
ture  such  as  refractory  BC  (rBC)  reveals  the  principle  used  for  mea-
surements [238]. All these measurement methods have their limitations
related  to  definitions  of  the  carbon  measured  and  sensitivity  towards
interferences.  The  optical  BC  measurement  methods  are  sensitive  to
aerosol or gaseous species affecting the coefficients for converting the
light  absorption  into  a  BC  mass  concentration.  The  non-BC  light

absorbing aerosol species include brown carbon (BrC), mineral dust [54,
237,238,240,241]. The difference between BC and BrC is smooth, and
their differentiation by measurements is challenging [242–244]. Some
measurement methods account for tar BrC as BC, while others do not,
and, given the potentially high fraction of tar BrC at lower loads with
residual  fuels,  this  effect  should  be  considered,  especially  when
sub-optimal engine loads are studied [158,209]. Light-absorbing com-
pounds, including BrC, cause radiative forcing in the atmosphere and
induce global warming. Coating of particles and particle size also affect
the  light-absorption  properties  of  aerosol  [240,245–248].  Ideally,  the
exhaust sample would represent aerosol after the atmospheric reactions,
which is not the case after the sampling systems without chambers to
simulate secondary aerosols [139].

Some artefacts,  direct or indirect,  are  known for  BC measurement
techniques.  Filter-based  methods  suffer  from  the  effect  of  aerosols
accumulated on the filter and from scattering. The latter is avoided by
MAAP detecting the transmitted and backscattered light. Filter related
artefacts are avoided by filter-free methods, for example, PAS and LII
[54,238,247–249], which are however vulnerable towards interferences
reflected from the calibration. For example, when calibrated with the
TOA method, some constituents from residual fuels interfere with the
results  [206].  Additional  uncertainties  are  considered  when  dilution
systems are needed, especially for very high dilution levels, for example
when  devices  designed  for  atmospheric  measurements  are  used  for
measuring  high  BC  concentrations  (in  atmospheric  studies  these  in-
struments measure without dilution) [87]. Variation in the BC results
obtained with different measurement methods are reported as 11% (30
±3.3 mg/kWh) in a study by Corbin et al. [158] and 10% at BC emission
levels of <30 mg/kWh, with greater variation at higher BC concentra-
tions [21,87,250–253].

Many IMO and ICCT documents and results from voluntary ship BC
projects  called  by  the  IMO  (see  supplementary  material)  have  been
published in recent years. BC emission levels for different types of ma-
rine engines, engine loads and fuels used are high, as reflected in the BC
emission inventories. For example, wide variation in BC emission factors
have been observed, on average from 0.03 to 0.22 g/kWh [21,51,235,
250–255]. Comer et al. [51] modelled a fleet-wide average BC emission
factor  of  0.050  g/kWh  (appr  6.1  mg/MJ).  Assumedly,  the  higher  BC
emission  factors  are  related  to  data  on  older  engines  and  low  engine
loads,  since  modern  marine  diesel  engines  at  high  engine  loads  have
shown BC emissions at low levels of 0.02 g/kWh [60]. The BC emissions
vary within four orders of magnitude for different ships using distillate
fuels only, as seen in Fig. 6b. Hence, comparison of BC emissions for
different diesel-type fuels should be based on the measurements on the
same representative engine, since otherwise, differences in BC emission
levels of different engines may hide the effect of the fuels (Figs. 8a and
S3b). Evidently, BC emissions are important for marine engines of all
sizes, since large engines emit less BC per fuel consumed, but consume
orders of magnitude more fuel than smaller engines (Figs. 2 and 3).

Mitigating  the  BC  emissions  from  marine  engines  may  involve
modifying  the  fuel,  engine  (or  both),  or  adapting  the  exhaust  after-
treatment  technology.  Switching  from  current  residual  fuels  to  clean
diesel-type fuels is a tempting option due to its simplicity and immediate
impact on a large scale (retrofitting). However, the achieved reductions
in  BC  emissions  tend  to  be  modest,  at  approx.  30%  [256–258]  and
variation in the results is high with even increases observed (e.g. a 6 MW
engine in [259]).

An interesting fuel is the one meeting the global 0.5% fuel sulphur
limit of 2020. One study with an MSD engine switched fuels from 2.5%
to 0.5% to 0.1% sulphur contents and found a respective decrease in BC
emissions at high engine loads (from 0.032 to 0.013 to 0.011 g/kWh),
but the highest BC emissions for 0.5%S fuel at low engine loads (from
0.104 to 0.204 to 0.094 g/kWh) [87]. A sulphur limit of 0.5% does not
prevent using residual fuel components while meeting a sulphur limit of
0.1% in practice requires distillates. In the cited study, the 0.5%S fuel
contained asphaltenes (5.7 wt%), while the 0.1%S fuel contained high

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105514

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

with distillate fuels or by refining residual fuel tends to decrease its
asphaltene content.

Engines with a modern fuel injection system could be less sensitive to
fuel changes than old engines equipped with mechanical fuel injection
systems used in the  above mentioned study  due to e.g. the impact of
viscosity and density of fuel on the start of injection and spray formation
[165]. For example, on a newly constructed cargo vessel switching from
HFO to MDO reduced the BC emissions up to 74% and 85% at low (20%)
and high (50%) engine loads (DMD-MAN B&W 6S70ME-C8.2) [59].

Of particular interest are paraffinic renewable fuels (HVO, BTL, e-
diesel). Paraffinic fuels have been studied mainly in HSD diesel engines.
For inland ships, PM reductions of 16 to 60% and black smoke reduction
of 32% have been reported when comparing paraffinic diesel (GTL) with
road diesel fuel (EN590) [269]. In contrast, a plume study on an HSD
engine showed increased BC emissions with paraffinic HVO compared to
ultra-low sulphur diesel [169]. These contradictory results could be due
to  different  measurement  principles,  engines,  test  set-ups  and  fuel
properties. Many studies of on-road heavy-duty HDS applications have
shown lower soot emissions for paraffinic fuels than for conventional
diesel fuels [166]. This is also expected from a fuel-to-soot chemistry
point of view.

Oxygen-containing  FAME-type  biofuels  exhibit  decreased  PM  and
soot emissions in road and non-road HSD applications [166,171,215].
Similar  findings  have  been  observed  for  marine  engines  as  shown  in
Fig. 8b including the BC results from studies where different fuels were
used in the same MSD engine at engine loads above 40%. This approach
enables a comparison of fuel effects without bias resulting from different
BC emission levels from the engine types and loads used. In a study with
an MSD engine, a non-esterified Bio-FA biofuel blend (30%) in fossil fuel
showed a reduction in BC emissions when compared with residual and
distillate fuels at high and low engine loads (BC 0.008 and 0.048 g/kWh)
[87]. Another study found up to 30% lower BC emissions for palm oil
and animal fat than for MGO, but higher BC emissions for soybean and
sunflower oils [54]. For FAME, BC emissions may decrease even when
the PM emissions increase if the PM contains elevated levels of organic
carbon  [215].  FAME-type  biodiesel  (ULSF,  soybean  blends  B20,  B50)
reduced PM and BC emissions by 20–42% in a marine diesel engine at a
75% load (Jayaram et al. in [103]).

LNG  DF  engines  emit  almost  negligible  BC  emissions,  more  than
three orders of magnitude lower than those reported for high-emitting
diesel engines. The BC emission measurement results reported for LNG
DF engines are available from EUROMOT data, in which NG used as a
main fuel in the DF engines exhibited low BC emissions in all engine size
categories tested (below 0.0014 g/kWh at high engine loads, in one case,
0.017 g/kWh) [223,271]. Corbin et al. [158] reported BC emissions of
0.0008 g/kWh for a 4.3 MW LNG DF engine and concluded that the BC
mostly originated from diesel pilot fuel. Alanen et al. [229] also reported
low  soot  emissions  for  NG  combustion  and  the  contribution  of  the
lubricating oil to particle formation.

Methanol can be clean-burning as it contains oxygen and only one
carbon atom and it is a mono-molecular fuel. Stojcevski [270] reported
reduced BC emissions when using methanol instead of distillate fuel as
the main fuel in a DF engine. BC emissions were reduced by 55–75%
depending on the pilot fuel injection when compared with distillate fuel.
In  the  study  by  Diericks  [112],  in  DF  methanol  operation,  the  brake
thermal efficiency was reported to increase by 12%. The diesel substi-
tution by methanol (energy ratio) was 67–70%. The average decrease in
specific  NO  emissions  was  61%  and  in  specific  soot  emissions  77%.
Specific emissions (per kWh) take into account differences in fuel energy
contents.  BC  emissions  in  the  same  study  were  0.028–0.191  g/MJ
methanol fuel at 1250–2000 1/min. One concept reported is a methanol
DF engine with water addition [189]. When diesel fuel is the main fuel in
methanol  DF  engines,  BC  emissions  correspond  to  those  of  diesel
engines.

Water-in-fuel  emulsion,  WiFE  (designed  for  NOx  reduction)  may

Fig. 8. Comparison of fuel oils a) S < 4.5%, S < 0.1, in which lines combine the
results  obtained  in  the  same  engine  while  dots  are  individual  results  from
different engines b) S < 4.5%, S < 0.5%, S < 0.1 and bio fatty acid (30% blend
with  diesel  fuel)  from  studies,  in  which  several  fuels  were  used  in  the  same
engine at engine loads equal or above 40%. The bars represent median values.
References mentioned are [59,87,140,213] and rest are presented in the Sup-
plementary material (Appendix S1).

amounts of  aromatics (42.6  wt%)  without asphaltenes.  The hydrogen
contents were at the same level in these fuels (hydrogen 12.9 and 12.5
wt%). The 2.5%S fuel had the highest content of asphaltenes (28.3 wt%)
(see  supplementary  Tables  S11  and  S12).  The  considerations  are  as
follows:

• High BC emissions for 0.5%S fuel at low engine loads may be related
mainly to its asphaltene contents due to incomplete combustion at
insufficient temperatures, while lower BC emissions for 2.5%S could
be related to vanadium acting as “fuel-borne catalysts” [260]. Metals
are  even  considered  to  be  used  in  fuel  additives  (e.g.,  Ce,  Pt)  in
combination with catalysts [225]. However, many metals are toxic
and not desired in breathable air.

• The  aromatic  content  of  0.1%S  distillate  fuel  was  notably  high
without increased BC emissions. PAHs (di+ aromatics) rather than
the  total  aromatic  content  of  fuel  are  known  to  increase  soot  for-
mation, and hence the PAH content of road diesel fuel is limited in
the EU [261–268,].

• The high sulphur content of residual fuel is associated with asphal-
tenes. Hence, reducing the fuel sulphur content by blending residual

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105515

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

reduce BC emissions in engines equipped with conventional fuel injec-
tion at low engine loads, while the benefit may be modest in modern
engines [103,147,272]. A recent study by Mayer et al. [189] reported
increased  soot  emissions  at  higher  loads  for  a  water/diesel  emulsion
(ME-LGIM  DF,  7.12  MW).  However,  reductions  in  smoke  opacity  by
WiFE have been reported [186,187].

BC reductions by SOx  scrubbers, SCR and DOC are not effective by
default, since scrubbers are designed for reducing other emission spe-
cies. In a study by Winnes et al. [140], BC emissions were reduced when
using  HFO  and  SOx  scrubbers,  however,  this  BC  emission  was  1.5–4
times  higher  than  that  when  using  low-sulphur  fuel  oil  without  a
scrubber. Alfa Laval reported the results of testing on a test-bed showing
that their scrubber reduced BC emissions (IMO PPR 6 INF. 13) [273] and
later BC emissions were also reduced in on-board ships measurements
[144,274].  More  details on  SOx  scrubber  studies  are presented  in the
Supplementary material.

PM scrubber technologies combined with electrostatic precipitators
(ESP) and bag filters are used in some large land-based industrial plants.
When compared to wet scrubbers, ESPs and bag filters are larger and
more expensive, although the waste gas flow rates and temperatures are
lower and they do not form a sludge that requires treatment. ESP de-
velopments include wet electrostatic scrubbers (WES), Heterogeneous
Condensation  Scrubbers  and  bubble  towers  (BT)  [103]. These  need  a
wash-water  treatment  unit.  WES  increases  particle  charging  by  using
sprayed droplets as diffused particle collectors, in place of ESP plates
[103]. A new ESP system design has been developed for marine diesel
engines (Usui Co.) [275,276]. In this ESP system, the exhaust gas flow
rate design is higher than traditional and the back-pressure is low [277].
In  2021,  the  Wet  Electrostatic  Precipitator  (WESP)  by  Ecospray  was
announced to be installed on a cruise ship [278]. Additionally, Valmet
announced  the  development  of  WESP  technology  to  control  exhaust
particles, heavy metals, visible plumes, acid and oil mist [279]. Zukeran
et al. [280,281] reported that PM emission removal efficiency with ESP
exceeded 85% and the removal efficiency for the particulate PAHs in the
ESP reached 97%.

ESP-based systems may achieve high BC reductions, however, they
are  large  in  size  and  electrical  risks  are  considerable  in  installations.
Storage  and  disposal  of  the  removed  PM  are  needed,  enabling  the
recycling of e.g. metals. With ESP, energy consumption increases and
material limitations may also lead to the need for flue gas cooling [147,
275].

Particulate  filters  are  not  compatible  with  residual  marine  fuels,
mainly due to the ash and sulphur content of the fuel, while DPFs for
0.1%S  marine  fuels  are  being  developed.  Particulate  filtration  would
efficiently  reduce  PM,  PN  and  BC  emissions  when  the  fuel  quality  is
adequate. DPFs designed for automotive diesel engines reduce emitted
particles with an efficiency of more than 90%, provided that the fuel is
sulphur-free diesel (below 0.001% sulphur content), but even then, filter
clogging  due  to  ash  may  be  an  issue.  DPFs  have  small  channels
(micrometre range) where solid PM is collected and removed periodi-
cally during DPF regeneration [103,282,283]. The PNnv>23 limits in
the  European  standards  for  diesel  vehicles  are  met  only  with  closed
wall-flow DPFs. For the regeneration of DPFs, passive NO2 assisted soot
regeneration  at  relatively  low  temperatures  (i.e.  250
C),  or  active
regeneration with oxygen (at approx. 600
C) are common. However,
using marine fuels containing sulphur, ash and other impurities leads to
non-combustible  metal  oxides  and  sulphates,  resulting  in  challenges
with DPF regeneration strategies. The oxidation function in DPF systems
generates  NO2  on  purpose  to  enhance  soot  combustion,  and  harmful
NO2  may  slip  at  low  engine-out  soot  concentrations.  The  NO2/NOx
shares are regulated for ground transport retrofit catalysts e.g. in the US
and Europe [284].

◦

◦

The  particle  filter  designs  demonstrated  for  marine  diesel  engines
include a ceramic filter system installed in auxiliary engines on 10 Pure
Car Carriers to prevent new cars from fouling due to acid particulates
during the loading and unloading of cars at ports (NGK Ceralec) [275,

285]. An early demonstration of PF was conducted on a ferry in 2012
(Mitsui  O.S.K.)  (ref  in  [103]).  Additionally,  a  demonstration  with  an
integrated particle filter and SCR system on an inland ferry using marine
diesel  with  sulphur  content  below  0.1%  has  been  conducted  (Dinex
F-SCR)  [286].  Another  prototype  technology  that  has  been  demon-
strated is multi-catalytic soot filtration for marine applications (ECO--
Jet) [287]. Recently, an Exilator DPF system installed on the engines of a
Danish ferry showed a reduction efficiency of over 99% for PM and PN,
and  also  a  significant  noise  reduction  [288].  Installations  of  DPFs  in
Danish ferries have continued with the PureFilter system. DPFs designed
for on-road diesel engines have been tested for auxiliary marine engines
when using sulphur-free diesel fuel (S<15 mg/kg) [225].

The  main  challenge  of  using  particulate  filters  is  related  to  the
sulphur  and  ash  content  present  in  marine  fuels  worsening,  e.g.,  the
operation,  regeneration  and  long-term  durability  of  the  filters.  The
sulphur limit of 0.5% for marine fuels is not sufficiently low for DPFs,
since ash-containing residual fuel components can be still present along
with  catalyst  fines  (Al,  Si)  [86],  and  even  0.1%  sulphur-containing
marine  fuel  is  challenging.  With  future  carbon-neutral  fuels,  barriers
related to fuel cleanliness are likely to be alleviated depending on fossil
fuel quality used for blending. Overall, technical challenges in exhaust
filtration for marine engines are related to the regeneration of filters,
additional  energy  consumption,  exhaust  gas
temperature  and
back-pressure, reliability, durability and the space needed for the filter
[103,147,275,287].

5. Discussion on opportunities and future prospects

5.1. Carbon-neutral fuels to mitigate GHG emissions

Carbon-neutral fuels for marine engines could help to meet the IMO’s
strategy to mitigate shipping’s GHG emissions as an important piece in
shorter-term solutions along with energy savings, system changes and
emerging  technologies.  Tackling  climate  change  is  not  enough:  while
exhaust emissions from ships also need to be at harmless levels for living
organisms,  human  health  and  the  whole  environment.  Combining
carbon-neutral  fuels  with  appropriate  emission  control  technologies,
(near-)zero  exhaust emissions  are  achievable.  The carbon intensity  of
fuels needs to be truly low to mitigate global warming, although each
individual fuel batch does not need to be carbon neutral per se, if the fuel
pool consists of very  low-carbon and  even carbon-negative fuels. The
latter can be fulfilled if raw materials would otherwise degrade to GHGs
or  if carbonaceous  by-products are to be permanently stored. The re-
quirements for fuels accounted for as the low-carbon or carbon-neutral
fuels  are  becoming  ever  more  stringent.  For  example,  at  least  a  65%
reduction  of  WtW  CO2  emissions  has  been  specified  in  RED  II.  The
gradually  increasing  demand  for  carbon-neutral  fuels  improve  their
production methods and will increase their production volumes so that
affordable prices of such fuels could become reality. Carbon taxes and
policy  instruments  support  this  development.  Processes  for  the  pro-
duction of such fuels are in principle available, albeit development is
needed  to  utilise  the  most  demanding  raw  materials,  to  increase  the
energy efficiency of the processes and to optimise the whole value chain
(e.g.  through  electrolysis).  Excess  energy  used  by  clean  technologies
may be compensated by using high-efficiency engines and heat recovery
systems.

Carbon-neutral  fuels  produced  from  biomass,  waste  or  renewable
electricity-generated  hydrogen  could  replace  fossil  marine  fuels  as
“drop-ins”  when  resembling  diesel,  LNG,  or  methanol  (Fig.  9).  These
fuels could replace their fossil counterparts overnight provided that such
fuels become available at large quantities, because they would require
minimal engine adjustments, if any. Of these, only methanol is biode-
gradable  and  has  low  toxicity  to  aquatic  life,  although  it  is  toxic  to
humans [289,290]. E-fuels are actually irreversible hydrogen storages
and circulate the carbon when captured CO2 from flue gas or air is used
in  fuel  production  (CCU  concept)  and  hydrogen  is  produced  using

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105516

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

5.3. External costs of emissions justify investments in the production of
carbon-neutral, clean fuels

The drivers for clean shipping are strong, but how can these benefits
be  valued?  One  possibility  is  to  calculate  the  indirect,  external  costs
caused by shipping emissions on society through the adverse impacts on
health, the environment and the climate. The lifetime costs of exhaust
emissions  have  been  defined  for  vehicles  and  maritime  transport
(Directive 2009/33/EC) [291–294] (see Supplementary Table S12). For
maritime transport, external costs have been evaluated in the Atlantic,
Baltic, Black Sea, Mediterranean and the North Sea covering the health
effects,  crop  loss,  biodiversity  loss  and  material  damage.  The  lowest
costs are for the Atlantic and the highest for the North Sea.

The external costs estimated in literature for emissions were used in
this  study  to  calculate  examples  of  external  costs  for  selected  marine
fuels. The selected costs represent in most cases the high estimates for
maritime  transport.  The  external  costs  selected  from  literature  for
climate-forcing emissions (CO2, BC, CH4 and N2O) were as follows:

• CO2: €77 per tonne emission [295], which is higher than the typical

cost for CO2 today.

• BC and  CH4  emissions  are converted to  CO2eq emissions  by using
GWP factors. For BC, a GWP100 value used was 900 and a GWP20
value  was  of  1600.  Higher  and  lower  GWP  values  have  also  been
estimated for BC emissions from shipping [235,296,297]. For CH4,
GWP100 of 28 and GWP20 of 84 are reported.

• Global warming through the CH4-induced formation of tropospheric
ozone was not taken into account. N2O was also not considered as it
is minor emission from shipping today (GWP100 of 265).

External costs for emission species harmful to health and the envi-
ronment are presented below (references in supplementary Table S12).

• NOx €10,700 per tonne emission.
• SO2 €10,500 per tonne emission.
• PM2.5 €34,400 per tonne emission. A meta-analysis by Gren et al.
[298] found that external costs for PM2.5 were six times higher than
those for NOx and SOx. In this study, the respective ratio is approx-
imately three.

• NMHC €2300 per tonne emission.
• For PN and BC emissions, external costs related to health effects are

not defined (see above for climate impact of BC).

• Hydrocarbons inducing e.g. tropospheric ozone were not taken into

account.

Using the external costs listed, examples of external costs caused by
emissions for present and clean marine technology choices are shown in
Fig. 10. Using 260 Mtoe of residual marine fuels at Tier 0/I emission

Fig. 10. Examples of external costs of ship emissions with selected technolo-
gies. For methane and BC emissions, GWP20 values were used.

Fig.  9. Hydrogen  pathways  for  ICE  include  fuels  compatible  with  common
diesel  and  gas  engines  (hydrogen-based  e-fuels  as  drop-in).  Hydrogen  and
ammonia ICE engines are not on market for marine applications, yet (marked
with a dashed line).

electrical  power  generated  utilizing  renewable  energy  sources  (green
hydrogen).  For  e-fuel  production,  regional  integration  of  fuel  and
hydrogen  production  with  CO2  capture  involves  challenging  infra-
structure needs. Carbon-neutrality of hydrogen and ammonia depends
on their upstream emissions of production. For fossil fuels, the avoid-
ance  of  CO2  otherwise  emitted  could  be  realised  by  carbon  capture
on-board a ship. Engines for hydrogen or ammonia fuels may be intro-
duced on market in the future. Hydrogen and ammonia could also be
used as blends with conventional marine fuels, for example, hydrogen
blending with methane (hythane) is a proven technology in the auto-
motive  sector.  However,  injection  systems  and  hydrogen  storage
on-board  are  more  challenging  in  shipping  than  in  ground  transport.
When  combining  carbon  capture  on-board  with  carbon-neutral  fuels
(see  Section  3.1),  very  low  emissions  could  be  achieved.  Capturing
carbon of electro-methanol on-board and pre-combustion of hydrogen
could  reduce  up  to  97%  of  CO2  and  over  80%  of  NOx  emissions  and
eliminate SOx and PM emissions [74,75].

5.2. Cleanliness of exhaust promotes the use of renewable fuels

Carbon-neutral fuels otherwise chemically resembling fossil marine
fuels  of  today,  only  with the  absence  of  harmful  constituents  such as
sulphur, asphaltenes or heavy metals, enable the use of the most efficient
exhaust  aftertreatment  technologies  to  clean  exhaust.  How  clean  can
marine  engines  be  when  using  carbon-neutral  “drop-in”  methane,
methanol and diesel-type fuels?

LNG DF engines emit extremely low levels of SOx and PM emissions,
and NOx emissions can be low depending on the combustion cycle, even
without  exhaust  aftertreatment.  Technologies  to  control  the  methane
slip  emissions  from LNG  engines  exist  (HPDF)  or  are  promising (e.g.,
MOC  aftertreatment).  Methanol  is  a  clean-burning  fuel,  although  its
emission reduction potential concerning NOx and PM emissions is lower
than that for LNG, however, depending on the combustion technology
selected. Methane slip is not of concern for methanol fuel combustion.
Despite  low  NOx  emissions  with  LNG  and  methanol,  even  lower  NOx
emissions are achievable when adopting the SCR system. For DF engines
using diesel fuel as back-up, an SCR system is well justified.

Particle  emissions  (PM,  PN,  BC)  are  amongst  the  most  harmful
emission species, and these emissions exist also for LNG and methanol
DF, so further reduction of particle emissions is necessary with exhaust
aftertreatment. Efficient DPF technology is an option which is compat-
ible with clean carbon-neutral marine fuels unlike with present high-ash
ones. Carbon-neutral methane, methanol and diesel-type fuels combined
with  the  best  marine  engine  technology,  and  exhaust  aftertreatment
(SCR, DPF, MOC) would provide (near-)zero-emission shipping opera-
tions as regards known emission species. For considering ammonia as a
marine fuel, abatement of N2O, a strong GHG, will be one of the major
challenges.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105517

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

levels  would  cause  external  costs  of  433  billion  euros  annually  with
assumptions described (Am billion = 109). Maffii et al. [299] estimated
external costs of 260 billion euros for GHG and air quality pollutants
from the world maritime fleet in 2006. The difference between estimates
in the two studies is due to the selected lower and upper end of external
costs  reported  for  maritime  transport  (Table  S12).  Notably,  external
costs  of  pollution  from  shipping  are  almost  totally  related  to  these
emissions  to  air,  since  sewage  and  permitted  oil  spills  represent  only
0.25% of the total according to Maffii et al. [299]. These external costs
could be avoided by using modern marine engines, carbon-neutral fuels
and  the  best  exhaust  aftertreatment  options.  External  costs  here  are
likely rather underestimated than overestimated, e.g., for CO2 emission
when considering the recent natural disasters caused by climate change.
The costs of producing carbon-neutral fuels are high. However, the
2020 fuel sulphur regulations have already smoothened the difference
between fossil and renewable or carbon-neutral technologies. Some of
the common renewable fuels today are at a price level close to distillate
fuels while producing advanced renewable fuels or electro-fuels is more
expensive.  Grey  et  al.  [1]  presented  the  following  ranges  of  costs  for
various fuels (excluding infrastructure costs):

• Fossil HFO 36 €/MWh, fossil diesel 109 €/MWh, LNG 38 €/MWh
• Biomethane  91–144  €/MWh,  biomethanol  75–144  €/MWh,  HVO

140–195 €/MWh

• E-Hydrogen 110–200 €/MWh, e-methane and e-methanol 120–680

€/MWh, e-diesel 130–770 €/MWh .

Uncertainty is high regarding the cost estimates for emerging fuels.
Producing e-fuels is always more expensive than producing e-hydrogen
and proportional to the renewable electricity price. Hannula [300] has
estimated that the production costs of e-methane could be 1.5–2.5 times
higher  than  those  of  e-hydrogen,  while  e-methanol  would  be  slightly
more  costly,  and  e-diesel  (Fischer-Tropsch)  approx.  1.4  times  more
expensive  than  e-methane  due  to  the  higher  capital  investment  and
lower efficiency. When considering additional storage and distribution
costs,  the  differences  in  costs  between  liquid  (diesel,  methanol)  and
gaseous  (methane)  fuels  narrows  [300].  For  e-fuels,  also  for
hydrogen-derived  e-ammonia,  costs  are  dominated  by  the  price  of
renewable electricity.

For any of the new carbon-neutral fuels, investments needed in the
production are substantial, for example, an investment of 300 M€ for a
new plant producing 0.3 Mtoe fuel would mean an investment of 300
billion euros in 1000 plants producing 300 Mtoe of fuels. This is a lower
cost than the upper estimate of annual external costs for using residual
marine fuels at Tier 0/I emission level ships. On the financing side, there
is  will  to  invest  in  solutions  aligned  with  climate  considerations,  for
example, the Poseidon Principles, an agreement introduced by a group
of banks, integrates lending decisions to be in line with climate goals set
by the IMO’s GHG strategy [301]. Another example is the ETS system for
shipping, which is already proposed in the European Union.

5.4. Which fuel to choose?

Modern marine diesel, gas DF or methanol DF engines with appro-
priate exhaust aftertreatment (e.g., SCR, DPF, MOC) are three solutions
considered to achieve (near-)zero-emission shipping in the short-term, if
fossil fuels are replaced by their carbon-neutral alternatives. An inter-
esting question is which fuel type is the most reasonable for new fuel
production  plants  considered.  For  some  bio-based  raw  materials,  the
products are biomethane or biodiesel, while for e-fuels, the product fuel-
type can be chosen.

A qualitative evaluation of the three e-fuels (e-methane, e-methanol
and  e-diesel)  and  as  references  fossil  fuels  and  hydrogen/batteries,  is
shown  in  Table  5.  The  scores  indicate  the  pros  and  cons  for  the  best
technologies identified concerning emissions into the atmosphere and
infrastructure  needs.  Although  this  comparison  is  qualitative  and

Table 5
Evaluation of impacts of assumed carbon-neutral e-methane, e-methanol and e-
diesel as marine fuels with fossil and long-term references.

SOx

NOx

PM PN BC

Other harm

GHG

Score

0a
0a
+a,d

0a
+d
++d

– b
- b
+ b,d

Fossil
HS
LS
LNG DF
Carbon-neutral, with renewable hydrogen and CCS/CCU e
++d
e-Methane DF
++d
e-Methanol DF
++d
e-Diesel
H2-FC/batteries  ++d
Ammonia

+ b,d
0a
0a
++d

+a,d
+a,d
0a
++d

– c
- c
0
–c
*

–c
-c
– c

*

*

*

(cid:0) 6
–
(cid:0) 3
–
- (21%)  +1

+
+
+
++

*

+3
+3
+3
+6
*

LS = S<0.1%, HS = S>0.1%.

a Available: scrubber, SCR. DPF for sulphur-free fuels = 0.
b Developing: methane slip control, particulate filter, ESP. = (cid:0) 1,(cid:0) 2.
c PAHs, heavy metals, formaldehyde, methane, infra need = (cid:0) 1, (cid:0) 2.
d Low emission without exhaust aftertreatment =+1,+2.
e Biofuels, depending on the production process, may resemble respective e-

fuels in terms of their environmental impacts.

* Not available at the time of preparing the manuscript. Notably, ammonia as
fuel is not expected to emit SOx, whereas potentially, e.g., N2O (a strong GHG)
may be emitted.

schematic, the scores for the three fuel options are equal, albeit the pros
and  cons  are  rated  for  different  issues.  Hence,  there  seems  to  be  no
“winning”  fuel.  All  of  these  fuels  can  be  used  in  existing  engines,  if
production volumes with carbon-neutral principles grow. Ethanol would
also be a feasible fuel for shipping, however, it may remain a fuel for the
other transport sectors.

Of fossil fuels, LNG offers a GHG reduction potential of 21%, which is
a benefit also for its blending with biomethane or e-methane. Regarding
fossil  residual  and  distillate  marine  fuels,  despite  the  possibilities  to
reduce harmful exhaust emissions with emission control technologies,
carbon-neutrality can be achieved only by using CO2 capture on-board
ships  (for  CCS/CCU).  Demonstrations  and  consideration  of  the  space
requirement are needed to assess the feasibility of this solution in the
short-term.  Carbon  capture  on-board  ships  combined  with  carbon-
neutral fuels would enable very low carbon emissions.

The amount of energy needed in shipping in the future will depend
on  the  fuel  savings  achieved  by  operational  and  technical  improve-
ments,  e.g.,  in  the  design,  waste  heat  recovery,  ship  size,  ship-port
interface,  new  propulsion  technologies,  alternative  maritime  routes,
regional trade, and modal shifts to rail cargo. The IEA [76] has projected
that GHG reductions needed in shipping require halving the energy in-
tensity  per  travelled  distance.  Despite  energy  savings,  the  energy  de-
mand of the maritime sector is projected to remain at the level of approx.
13  EJ  (310  Mtoe)  in  2050  [76,90,302].  Hence,  GHG  emissions  from
shipping need to be tackled substantially by fuel technologies [303]. The
magnitude of biofuels available globally is 5 EJ and 3.3 EJ of biofuels
was used in the transport sector in 2016, but not in shipping [304,305].
The  production  of  biomethane  is  projected  to  increase  to  1.7EJ  (467
TWh, 40 Mtoe) by 2030 and further to 3.6EJ from the current level (193
TWh) [69]. Although biofuels could be increasingly directed to shipping
and  aviation  along  with  road-transport  switching  to  batteries,  should
these  fuels  meet  the  RED  II  or  similar  requirements,  the  quantity  of
compliant fuels likely fall, if new raw materials (lignocellulosic, waste
streams)  are  not  utilised.  Hence,  renewable  hydrogen-based  e-fuels
become  interesting  for  shipping  along with  the  increasingly  available
renewable electricity.

The outcomes of the projections for the use of marine fuels in the
future vary depending on the timeline, considerations of the barriers and
competition  with  other  sectors,  which  further  affects  the  price  devel-
opment. For example, the substantial share of marine fuels in the future
has been projected for LNG [303], advanced biofuels [76,90] and e-fuels
[306]. Selecting the fuel type depends also on regional boundaries.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105518

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

This synthesis shows that there is high demand for carbon-neutral
fuels,  especially  those  resembling  current  fossil  marine  fuels,  viz.
compatible  with  proven  technologies  as  “drop-in”  fuels  (resembling
diesel,  LNG  or  methanol).  Additionally,  harmful  exhaust  emissions
would not need to be compromised. Drop-in fuels are needed for older
vessels where retrofitting is less economical, while retrofitting certain
diesel engines for methanol use is an option. Many new-build ships have
LNG DF or methanol DF engines, which are capable of using two fuels
flexibly, increasing the reliability of the fuel supply. The timeline of the
potential adaption of these technologies for the main engines of large
ships varies:

• Fast-track globally: Diesel-type renewable and e-diesel. Investments
are needed in fuel production. Development needs: e.g., DPF to remove
BC and particle number emissions.

• Relatively fast-track globally: Biomethanol or e-methanol retrofits.
Investments are needed in fuel production, retrofitting of ships and
infrastructure.  Development  needs:  e.g.,  DPF  to  remove  particle
emissions.

• Moderate timeline, regional: LBG or e-methane: Investments needed
in fuel production, new ships and infrastructure. Development needs:
Technologies to remove methane slip and particle emissions.

5.5. Future prospects

The  carbon-neutral  fuels  produced  from  biomass,  waste  or  from
eventually  unlimited  renewable  hydrogen  and  captured  CO2  are  a
promise to substantially supplement hydrogen gas technologies, batte-
ries and ammonia in critical transport sectors. Hydrogen gas, ammonia
or batteries are not mature for the main means of propulsion for large
ships, nor are infrastructure, safety or emission controls for these options
widely available for shipping and their feasibility in the long-term is to
be  seen.  Ammonia  is  reported  as  a  strong  marine  fuel  option  [19],
however, from a technical point of view, prerequisites to its use as fuel in
ships  include  proven  technology  to  avoid  emitting  climate  warming
N2O.

Preferred  solutions  for  shipping  would  fit  the  existing  system  for
practical reasons and in respect of the re-use principle. Carbon-neutral
fuels  combined  with  efficient  emission  control  offer  drop-in  and
retrofit options to mitigate GHG and pollutant emissions immediately
and simultaneously from many aspects. Fuel molecules themselves do
not compete: the methane, methanol, diesel-type or other molecules are
acceptable as long as they are carbon-neutral clean fuels and meet sus-
tainability criteria. However, in the short-term, viability of the carbon-
neutral  raw  materials  and  the  production  will  be  limited  and  hence
fossil  fuels  may  be  used  for  a  longer  time  than  should,  which  makes
carbon capture on-board ship an interesting option.

Production costs of carbon-neutral fuels are estimated to be lower
than the external costs of using fossil fuels, and for drop-in fuels, new
infrastructure  is  not  needed  for  transport  and  delivery  or  at  the  port
level. Hydrogen-based e-fuels could become important building blocks
in the transport sector where other forms of electrification are difficult.
E-fuels could also act as renewable grid storage, hence, accelerating the
energy transition to renewables. Choices on marine fuels will be directed
largely by other than technical aspects, such as public acceptance, and
trust  in  the  fuel  availability  and  prices.  Hence,  evaluations  and  solid
evidence from many viewpoints are needed to guide non-technical de-
cision-making towards the best choices for the future.

6. Conclusions

already  capable  of  meeting  the  present  and  future  shipping  emission
regulations and with further development enable (near-)zero-emission
shipping. Immediate impact can be achieved with solutions fitted into
the existing ships (or retrofittable solutions). Marine engines for using
diesel-type fuels, methane and methanol are on the market, and so are
most  emission  control  technologies  needed.  Dual-fuel  marine  engines
for methane and methanol have the option to use diesel back-up, and
hence safeguards the security of fuel supply. For methanol use, diesel
engines can be retrofitted, while for methane new-builds are favoured.
Several technology options available allow choices of optimum solutions
for different ships, routes and regions.

Carbon-neutral counterparts of fossil marine fuels are bio-, waste- or
electro-based fuels, which are feasible as such or as blends (drop-in) up
to 100% with fossil fuels. Of the fossil marine fuels, LNG reduces GHG
emissions to some extent provided that the methane slip is controlled.
However, the main impact on GHG emissions is achieved by replacing
(or blending) LNG with LBG or e-methane, and a similar approach ap-
plies  to  carbon-neutral  methanol  and  diesel-type  fuels.  Sulphur-free
carbon-neutral  fuels  do  not  emit  SOx  and  the  reduction  of  NOx  emis-
sions is common with SCR technology. Particles (including BC) can be
removed efficiently by filtration when fuels are free from sulphur and
ash.

The  ship  fleet  could  achieve  (near-)zero-emissions,  reducing  the
adverse impacts on the climate, health and environment simultaneously,
provided  that  the  production  capacity  and  affordability  of  carbon-
neutral fuels, clean engines and efficient exhaust aftertreatment tech-
nologies improve. Substantial investments are needed to introduce these
solutions,  but  also  savings  are  gained  with  avoided  external  costs  to
society  caused  by  the  harmful  emissions  giving  arguments  to  create
further support mechanisms and to invest in the clean technologies.

Solutions  compatible  or  retrofittable  with  the  existing  ship  fleet
enabling fast implementation would maximise the impacts as the life-
time  of  ships  is  long.  Currently,  demonstration  projects  with  the
participation of public and private stakeholders are needed to examine
the most sustainable alternatives for shipping needs. This applies also to
potential future options, e.g., hydrogen (fuel cells), ammonia, batteries
and wind, to ensure that they do not create new harmful emissions.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data Availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the BC Footprint project (528/31/2019)
funded  by  Business  Finland  and  participating  companies  and  funding
from Traficom.

Supplementary materials

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101055.

Carbon-neutral  fuels,  including  low-carbon  and  carbon-negative
fuels, enabling the use of efficient emission control technologies, could
alleviate  the  climate,  health  and  environmental  burden  of  shipping
simultaneously. These would be options for deep-sea shipping and re-
gions  where  electrification  is  not  feasible.  Several  technologies  are

References

[1] Gray N, McDonagh S, O’Shea R, Smyth B, Murphy JD. Decarbonising ships,
planes and trucks: an analysis of suitable low-carbon fuels for the maritime,
aviation and haulage sectors. Adv Appl Energy 2021;1:100008. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.adapen.2021.100008.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105519

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

[2] IMO - Marine Environment Protection Committee. Reduction of GHG emissions
from ships. Fourth IMO GHG Study 2020. MEPC 75/7/15 Int Marit Organ 2020:
1689–99.

[3] Friedlingstein P, Jones MW, O’Sullivan M, Andrew RM, Hauck J, Peters GP, et al.
Global Carbon Budget 2019. Earth Syst Sci Data 2019;11:1783–838. https://doi.
org/10.5194/essd-11-1783-2019.

[4] COP26. COP26 Explained. In: UN Clim Chang Conf UK 2021; 2021.
[5] COP26. Clydebank declaration for green shipping corridors. 2021. p. 1–3.
[6] European Commission. Regulation of the european parliament and of the council

on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport and
amending directive 2009/16/EC (COM(2021) 562 final 2021/0210 (COD)
proposal), 0210; 2021. p. 247.

[7] Panoutsou C, Germer S, Karka P, Papadokostantakis S, Kroyan Y, Wojcieszyk M,

et al. Advanced biofuels to decarbonise European transport by 2030: markets,
challenges, and policies that impact their successful market uptake. Energy
Strateg Rev 2021;34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2021.100633.

[8] IPCC. IPCC, 2013: climate change 2013: the physical science basis. contribution
of working group i to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel
on climate change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA:
Cambridge University Press; 2013.

[9] Olmer N, Comer B, Roy B, Mao X, Rutherford D, Smith T, et al. Greenhouse Gas
Emissions From Global Shipping, 2013-2015. Int Counc Clean Transp 2017:1–38.
[10] AMAP. AMAP assessment 2015: black carbon and ozone as arctic climate forcers.

2015.

different fuel alternatives in sub-freezing conditions. Part Fibre Toxicol 2020;17:
1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12989-020-00348-0.

[31] Aakko-Saksa P, Koponen P, Roslund P, Laurikko J, Nylund N-ON-O,

Karjalainen P, et al. Comprehensive emission characterisation of exhaust from
alternative fuelled cars. Atmos Environ 2020;236:117643. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.117643.

[32] Armstrong B, Hutchinson E, Unwin J, Fletcher T. Lung cancer risk after exposure
to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: a review and meta-analysis. Environ Health
Perspect 2004;112:970–8. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.6895.

[33] IARC. IARC monographs - Agents Classified by alphabetic order, 1 –102. IARC;

2011. Volumes.

[34] Charrier JG, Anastasio C. On dithiothreitol (DTT) as a measure of oxidative

potential for ambient particles: evidence for the importance of soluble transition
metals. Atmos Chem Phys 2012;12:9321–33. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-12-
9321-2012.

[35] Gerlofs-Nijland ME, Totlandsdal AI, Tzamkiozis T, Leseman DLAC, Samaras Z,
Låg M, et al. Cell toxicity and oxidative potential of engine exhaust particles:
impact of using particulate filter or biodiesel fuel blend. Environ Sci Technol
2013;47:5931–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/es305330y.

[36] Oeder S, Kanashova T, Sippula O, Sapcariu SC, Streibel T, Arteaga-Salas JM, et al.

Particulate matter from both heavy fuel oil and diesel fuel shipping emissions
show strong biological effects on human lung cells at realistic and comparable in
vitro exposure conditions. PLoS ONE 2015;10:1–17. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0126536.

[11] Stocker T, Qin D, Plattner G-K, Tignor M, Allen S. Climate change 2013: the

[37] US EPA. Control of hazardous air pollutants from mobile sources. 40 cfr parts 59,

physical science basis. IPCC; 2013.

[12] Sand M, Berntsen TK, Seland Ø, Kristj ́ansson JE. Arctic surface temperature

change to emissions of black carbon within Arctic or midlatitudes. J Geophys Res
Atmos 2013;118:7788–98. https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50613.

[13] Balkanski Y, Myhre G, Gauss M, R ̈adel G, Highwood EJ, Shine KP. Direct radiative
effect of aerosols emitted by transport: from road, shipping and aviation. Atmos
Chem Phys 2010;10:4477–89. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-10-4477-2010.
[14] Sofiev M, Winebrake JJ, Johansson L, Carr EW, Prank M, Soares J, et al. Cleaner
fuels for ships provide public health benefits with climate tradeoffs. Nat Commun
2018;9:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02774-9.

[15] Fu B, Gasser T, Li B, Tao S, Ciais P, Piao S, et al. Short-lived climate forcers have
long-term climate impacts via the carbon–climate feedback. Nat Clim Chang
2020;10:851–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-020-0841-x.

[16] Szopa S, Naik V, Adhikary B, Artaxo T, Berntsen T, Collins WD, et al. Short-Lived

Climate Forcers. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; 2021.

[17] World Health Organization. Health, environment and climate change: report by

the Director-General. Seventy-First World Heal Assem 2018;2016:1–7.

[18] Corbett JJ, Winebrake JJ, Green EH, Kasibhatla P, Veronica E, Axel L. Mortality
from ship emissions: a global assessment. Environ Sci Technol 2007;41:8512–8.
https://doi.org/10.1021/es071686z.

[19] The World Bank. Charting a course for decarbonizing maritime transport.

PROBLUE; 2021.

[20] Anenberg S, Miller J, Henze D, Minjares R. A global snapshot of the air pollution-
related health impacts of transportation sector emissions in 2010 and 2015. 2019.

[21] Eyring V, Isaksen ISA, Berntsen T, Collins WJ, Corbett JJ, Endresen O, et al.

Transport impacts on atmosphere and climate: shipping. Atmos Environ 2010;44:
4735–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.04.059.

[22] Crippa M, Janssens-Maenhout G, Guizzardi D, Van Dingenen R, Dentener F.

Contribution and uncertainty of sectorial and regional emissions to regional and
global PM2.5 health impacts. Atmos Chem Phys 2019;19:5165–86. https://doi.
org/10.5194/acp-19-5165-2019.

[23] Vallero D. Fundamentals of air pollution. 5th Edit. Academic Press; 2014. https://

doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-401733-7.02006-5.

[24] Saxe H, Larsen T. Air pollution from ships in three Danish ports. Atmos Environ

2004;38:4057–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2004.03.055.

[25] Oudin A, Forsberg B, Adolfsson AN, Lind N, Modig L, Nordin M, et al. Traffic-

related air pollution and dementia incidence in Northern Sweden: a longitudinal
study. Environ Health Perspect 2016;124:306–12. https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1408322.

[26] Li N, Georas S, Alexis N, Fritz P, Xia T, Williams MA, et al. A work group report on
ultrafine particles (American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology): why
ambient ultrafine and engineered nanoparticles should receive special attention
for possible adverse health outcomes in human subjects. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2015:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.02.023.

[27] Agarwal AK, Ateeq B, Gupta T, Singh AP, Pandey SK, Sharma N, et al. Toxicity
and mutagenicity of exhaust from compressed natural gas: could this be a clean
solution for megacities with mixed-traffic conditions? Environ Pollut 2018;239:
499–511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.04.028.

[28] Jalava PI, Aakko-Saksa P, Murtonen T, Happo MS, Markkanen A, Yli-Piril ̈a P,
et al. Toxicological properties of emission particles from heavy duty engines
powered by conventional and bio-based diesel fuels and compressed natural gas.
Part Fibre Toxicol 2012;9. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-8977-9-37.

[29] Kooter IM, van Vugt MATM, Jedynska AD, Tromp PC, Houtzager MMG,

Verbeek RP, et al. Toxicological characterization of diesel engine emissions using
biodiesel and a closed soot filter. Atmos Environ 2011;45:1574–80. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2010.12.040.

[30] Hakkarainen H, Sainio M, Ihantola T, R ̈onkk ̈o TJ, Aakko-Saksa P, Koponen P,

80, 85, and 86. 2007.

[38] EU. Directive 2004/107/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15/
12/2004 relating to arsenic, cadmium, mercury, nickel and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in ambient air. Off J Eur Union 2005;23:3–16.

[39] Mudway IS, Stenfors N, Duggan ST, Roxborough H, Zielinski H, Marklund SL,

et al. An in vitro and in vivo investigation of the effects of diesel exhaust on
human airway lining fluid antioxidants. Arch Biochem Biophys 2004;423:
200–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2003.12.018.

[40] Yau PS, Lee SC, Cheng Y, Huang Y, Lai SC, Xu XH. Contribution of ship emissions
to the fine particulate in the community near an international port in Hong Kong.
Atmos Res 2013;124:61–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2012.12.009.
[41] Rosenbaum A, Hartley S, Holder C. Analysis of diesel particulate matter health
risk disparities in selected US harbor areas. Am J Public Health 2011;101:217–23.
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300190.

[42] Sun K, Tao L, Miller DJ, Pan D, Golston LM, Zondlo MA, et al. Vehicle Emissions
as an Important Urban Ammonia Source in the United States and China. Environ
Sci Technol 2017;51:2472–81. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b02805.
[43] HEI Air Toxics Review Panel. Mobile-Source air toxics: a critical review of the
literature on exposure and health effects. Boston, MA: Health Effects Institute;
2007. HEI Special Report 16.

[44] Drechsler D. Review of the california ambient air quality standard for ozone,

volume i, 1; 2004. p. 1–365.

[45] Fiore AM, Jacob DJ, Field BD, Streets DG, Fernandes SD, Jang C. Linking ozone
pollution and climate change: the case for controlling methane. Geophys Res Lett
2002;29:2–5. https://doi.org/10.1029/2002GL015601.

[46] Isaksen ISA, Berntsen TK, Dalsøren SB, Eleftheratos K, Orsolini Y, Rognerud B,

et al. Atmospheric ozone and methane in a changing climate. Atmosphere (Basel)
2014;5:518–35. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos5030518.

[47] Dingenen v trends of methane emissions and their impacts on ozone

concentrations, crippa R. global trends of methane emissions and their impacts on
ozone concentrations. 2017. https://doi.org/10.2760/73788.

[48] Carter WPL. Updated Maximum Incremental Reactivity Scale and Hydrocarbon

Bin Reactivities for Regulatory Applications. Calif Air Resour Board Contract
2010:07–339.

[49] Portmann RW, Daniel JS, Ravishankara aR. Stratospheric ozone depletion due to
nitrous oxide: influences of other gases. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 2012;367:
1256–64. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0377.

[50] Westlye FR, Ivarsson A, Schramm J. Experimental investigation of nitrogen based
emissions from an ammonia fueled SI-engine. Fuel 2013;111:239–47. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.03.055.

[51] Comer B, Olmer N, Mao X, Roy B, Rutherford D. Black Carbon Emissions and Fuel

Use in Global Shipping, 2015. ICCT, Int Counc Clean Transp 2017.

[52] Rodrigue J-P. The geography of transport systems. 4th Edition. Routledge; 2017.

p. 440. ISBN 978-1138669574.

[53] Sanguri Mohit. The Guide to Slow Steaming On Ships. Mar Insight 2012.
[54] Petzold A, Lauer P, Fritsche U, Hasselbach J, Lichtenstern M, Schlager H, et al.
Operation of marine diesel engines on biogenic fuels: modification of emissions
and resulting climate effects. Environ Sci Technol 2011;45:10394–400. https://
doi.org/10.1021/es2021439.

[55] Corbett JJ, Wang H, Winebrake JJ. The effectiveness and costs of speed

reductions on emissions from international shipping. Transp Res Part D Transp
Environ 2009;14:593–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2009.08.005.

[56] Miller JW, Agrawal H, Welch WA. Criteria Emissions from the Main Propulsion
Engine of a Post-Panamax Class Container Vessel Using Distillate and Residual
Fuels. Report 2009:44.

[57] Khan MY, Giordano M, Gutierrez J, Welch WA, Asa-Awuku A, Miller JW, et al.
Benefits of two mitigation strategies for container vessels: cleaner engines and
cleaner fuels. Environ Sci Technol 2012;46:5049–56. https://doi.org/10.1021/
es2043646.

et al. Toxicological evaluation of exhaust emissions from light-duty vehicles using

[58] Gysel NR, Welch WA, Johnson K, Miller W, Cocker DR. Detailed Analysis of

Criteria and Particle Emissions from a Very Large Crude Carrier Using a Novel

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105520

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

ECA Fuel. Environ Sci Technol 2017;51:1868–75. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
est.6b02577.

[59] Zhao J, Zhang Y, Yang Z, Liu Y, Peng S, Hong N, et al. A comprehensive study of

particulate and gaseous emissions characterization from an ocean-going cargo
vessel under different operating conditions. Atmos Environ 2020;223:117286.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.117286.

[91] Kuronen M, Mikkonen S, Aakko P, Murtonen T. Hydrotreated vegetable oil as fuel
for heavy duty diesel engines. In: SAE Tech Pap; 2007. https://doi.org/10.4271/
2007-01-4031.

[92] Tan ECD, Hawkins TR, Lee U, Tao L, Meyer PA, Wang M, et al. Biofuel Options for
Marine Applications: technoeconomic and Life-Cycle Analyses. Environ Sci
Technol 2021;55:7561–70. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c06141.

[60] Timonen H, Aakko-Saksa P, Kuittinen N, Karjalainen P, Murtonen T,

[93] Li M, Zhao W, Xu Y, Zhao Y, Yang K, Tao W, et al. Comprehensive Life Cycle

Lehtoranta K, et al. Black carbon measurement validation onboard (SEA-
EFFECTS Bc WP2). 2017. Research report VTT-R-04493-17.

[61] Equasis. The world merchant fleet in 2016 - Statistics from equasis 2016. https://

doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004.

[62] Inal OB, Charpentier JF, Deniz C. Hybrid power and propulsion systems for ships:
current status and future challenges. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2022;156.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111965.

[63] Dedes EK, Hudson DA, Turnock SR. Assessing the potential of hybrid energy
technology to reduce exhaust emissions from global shipping. Energy Policy
2012;40:204–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.09.046.

[64] Planakis N, Papalambrou G, Kyrtatos N. Ship energy management system

development and experimental evaluation utilizing marine loading cycles based
on machine learning techniques. Appl Energy 2022;307:118085. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.118085.

[65] CARB California Air Reseources Board. Control measure for ocean-going vessels
at berth port activities impact disadvantaged communities. 2020. p. 1–4.
[66] Schuller O, Kupferschmid S, Whitehouse S, Hengstler J. Life cycle ghg emission
study on the use of lng as marine fuel. Thinkstep; 2019. Report and Addendum.
[67] Bengtsson S, Fridell E, Andersson K. Environmental assessment of two pathways
towards the use of biofuels in shipping. Energy Policy 2012;44:451–63. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.02.030.

[68] Brynolf S. Thesis. Chalmers University of Technology; 2014.
[69] Chryssakis C, Pewe H. LNG as ship fuel. DNV webinar; 2021.
[70] CARB California Air Reseources Board. Low carbon fuel standard. 2021.
[71] Hamelinck C, Bunse M. Carbon footprint of methanol. Gear Up; 2022. p. 67.
[72] Edwards R, Hass H, Larive J-F, Lonza L, Maas H, Rickeard D. JEC well-to-wheels
analysis. 2014. https://doi.org/10.2790/95533. Report Version 4.a. Report EUR
26236 EN.

[73] Prussi M, Yugo M, De Prada L, Padella M, Edwards M. JEC well-to-wheels report

v5. 2020. https://doi.org/10.2760/100379.

[74] Gr ̈onholm T, M ̈akel ̈a T, Hatakka J, Jalkanen J-P, Kuula J, Laurila T, et al.
Evaluation of Methane Emissions Originating from LNG Ships Based on the
Measurements at a Remote Marine Station. Environ Sci Technol 2021;55:
13677–86. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c03293.

[75] Winebrake JJ, Corbett JJ, Umar F, Yuska D. Pollution tradeoffs for conventional
and natural gas-based marine fuels. Sustain 2019;11:1–19. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su11082235.

[76] International Energy Agency. Energy technology perspectives 2017. catalysing
energy technology transformations. etp 2017. International Energy Agency ©
OECD/IEA; 2017. https://doi.org/10.1787/energy_tech-2017-en. 2017.

[77] Koponen K, Hannula I. GHG emission balances and prospects of hydrogen

enhanced synthetic biofuels from solid biomass in the European context. Appl
Energy 2017;200:106–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.05.014.

[78] Hermesmann M, Green Müller TE, Turquoise Blue, Grey? or. Environmentally

friendly Hydrogen Production in Transforming Energy Systems. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2022;90:100996. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.100996.
[79] W ̈artsil ̈a. W ̈artsil ̈a and solvang to collaborate on retrofitting carbon capture and
storage system on clipper eos. Press release; 2021. https://www.wartsila.com/m
edia/news/20-10-2021-wartsila-and-solvang-to-collaborate-on-retrofitting-ca
rbon-capture-and-storage-system-on-clipper-eos-2992717.

[80] Wermuth N, Zelenka J, Moeyart P, Aul A, Borgh M. Application of HyMethShip
Propulsion using On-board Pre-combustion Carbon Capture for Waterborne
Transport. HighTech Innov J 2021;2:77–86. https://doi.org/10.28991/hij-2021-
02-02-01.

[81] Malmgren E, Brynolf S, Fridell E, Grahn M, Andersson K. The environmental

performance of a fossil-free ship propulsion system with onboard carbon capture-
a life cycle assessment of the HyMethShip concept. Sustain Energy Fuels 2021;5:
2753–70. https://doi.org/10.1039/d1se00105a.

[82] IMO - MEPC. Reduction of GHG emissions from ships. Fourth IMO GHG Study

2020. Int Marit Organ 2020;578:1689–99.

[83] REN21. Renewables 2016: global status report. 2016.
[84] Neste. Neste capital markets day. Presentation, 29 Feb 2019, London 2019.
[85] Helgason R, Cook D, Davíðsd ́ottir B. An evaluation of the cost-competitiveness of

maritime fuels – a comparison of heavy fuel oil and methanol (renewable and
natural gas) in Iceland. Sustain Prod Consum 2020;23:236–48. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.spc.2020.06.007.

Evaluation of Jet Fuel from Biomass Gasification and Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis
Based on Environmental and Economic Performances. Ind Eng Chem Res 2019;
58:19179–88. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.9b03468.

[94] Aakko-Saksa P, et al. Synthesis of potential fuels for combustion engine power

plants (FCEP WP4 report D4.3). 2014.

[95] Solantausta Y, Nylund N, Westerholm M, Koljonen T, Oasmaa A. Wood-pyrolysis
oil as fuel in a diesel-power plant. Bioresour Technol 1993;46:177–88. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0960-8524(93)90071-I.

[96] Chong KJ, Bridgwater AV. Fast Pyrolysis Oil Fuel Blend for Marine Vessels.
Environ Prog Sustain Energy 2017;36:677–84. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ep.12402.

[97] Oasmaa A, Lehto J, Solantausta Y, Kallio S. Historical Review on VTT Fast

Pyrolysis Bio-oil Production and Upgrading. Energy and Fuels 2021;35. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c00177.

[98] De Vries R. The role of renewable marine fuels. Sustainable Magazine; 2020.
[99] Teoh YH, Yaqoob H, How HG, Le TD, Nguyen HT. Comparative assessment of

performance, emissions and combustion characteristics of tire pyrolysis oil-diesel
and biodiesel-diesel blends in a common-rail direct injection engine. Fuel 2022;
313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.123058.

[100] Hussam WK, Nabi MN, Chowdhury MW, Hoque ME, Bin Rashid A, Islam MT. Fuel
property improvement and exhaust emission reduction, including noise
emissions, using an oxygenated additive to waste plastic oil in a diesel engine.
Biofuels, Bioprod Biorefining 2021;15:1650–74. https://doi.org/10.1002/
bbb.2262.

[101] Hossain FM, Nabi MN, Rainey TJ, Bodisco T, Bayley T, Randall D, et al. Novel

biofuels derived from waste tyres and their effects on reducing oxides of nitrogen
and particulate matter emissions. J Clean Prod 2020;242:118463. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118463.

[102] IEA International Energy Agency. Key world energy statistics. 2019.
[103] Di Natale F, Carotenuto C. Particulate matter in marine diesel engines exhausts:

emissions and control strategies. Transp Res Part D Transp Environ 2015;40:
166–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2015.08.011.

[104] Pavlenko N, Comer B, Zhou Y, Clark N, Rutherford D. The climate implications of

using lng as a marine fuel. 2020. ICCT Working Paper 2020-02.

[105] Kym ̈al ̈ainen M, L ̈ahde K, Arnold M, Kurola JM, Romantschuk M, Kautola H.

Biogasification of biowaste and sewage sludge - Measurement of biogas quality.
J Environ Manage 2012;95:S122–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvman.2011.01.003.

[106] Michikawauchi R, Tanno S, Ito Y, Kanda M, Kawauchi M. Combustion

improvement of cng engines by hydrogen addition. 2011. p. 1888–96. https://
doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-1996.

[107] Lather RS, Das LM. Performance and emission assessment of a multi-cylinder S.I
engine using CNG & HCNG as fuels. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:21181–92.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.03.137.

[108] Talibi M, Balachandran R, Ladommatos N. Influence of combusting methane-
hydrogen mixtures on compression–ignition engine exhaust emissions and in-
cylinder gas composition. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:2381–96. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.10.049.

[109] Cheng Q, Ahmad Z, Kaario O, Vuorinen V, Larmi M. Experimental study on tri-
fuel combustion using premixed methane-hydrogen mixtures ignited by a diesel
pilot. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:21182–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2021.03.215.

[110] Ushakov S, Stenersen D, Einang PM. Methane slip from gas fuelled ships: a

comprehensive summary based on measurement data. J Mar Sci Technol 2019;24:
1308–25. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00773-018-00622-z.

[111] Olah GA, Goeppert A, Prakash GKS. Beyond oil and gas: the methanol economy.

dated and. Weinheim: WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA; 2009.
[112] Dierickx J, Sileghem L, Verhelst S. Efficiency and Emissions of a High- Speed
Marine Diesel Engine Converted to Dual-Fuel Operation with Methanol. Paper
2019/013. In: 29th CIMAC World Congr 2019; 2019. p. 14.

[113] Mayer S, Sj ̈oholm J, Murakami T, Shimada K, Kjemtrup N, Kjemtrump N.

Performance and emission results from the MAN B&W LGI low-speed engine
operating on methanol. In: CIMAC Congr; 2016.

[114] Stojcevski T. Operation experience of world’s first methanol engine in a ferry

installation. In: CIMAC Congr 2016; 2016.

[115] Egeb ̈ack K-E. A clean ethanol fuelled compression ignition bus engine 2004.

[86] Bee S. VLSFO fuel management. riviera marit. media - Black carbon webinar.

Report.

Riviera Maritime Media; 2021. p. 2021. 12 March.

[87] Aakko-Saksa P, Murtonen T, Vesala H, Koponen P, Nyyss ̈onen S, Puustinen H,

et al. Black carbon measurements using different marine fuels. CIMAC Paper 068.
In: 28th CIMAC World Congr; 2016.

[88] DNV GL. Assessment of Selected Alternative Fuels and Technologies. DNV-GL

Marit 2018;391:1–48.

[89] McGill R, Remley W, Winther K. Alternative Fuels for Marine Applications. Task

41 report. Advanced Motor Fuels TCP; 2013.

[90] Kirstein L, Halim R, Merk O. Decarbonising maritime transport pathways to zero-

[116] Nylund N, Laurikko J, Laine P, Suominen J, Anttonen MPA. Benchmarking heavy-
duty ethanol vehicles against diesel and CNG vehicles. Biomass Conv Bioref 2012.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13399-012-0049-z.

[117] Aakko-Saksa PT, Westerholm M, Pettinen R, S ̈oderstr ̈om C, Roslund P,

Piim ̈akorpi P, et al. Renewable Methanol with Ignition Improver Additive for
Diesel Engines. Energy and Fuels 2020;34:379–88. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.9b02654.

[118] Anon. First LPG-Powered dual-fuel engine receives order. Marit Exec; 2018.
[119] Anon. World ’ s first LPG-fuelled vlgc now undergoing sea trials with w ̈artsil ̈a fuel

carbon shipping by 2035. International Transport Forum; 2018. Report.

system. Press Release; 2020.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105521

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

[120] Semelsberger TA, Borup RL, Greene HL. Dimethyl ether (DME) as an alternative

fuel. J Power Sources 2006;156:497–511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2005.05.082.

[121] Park J, Choi I, Oh J, Lee C. Preliminary Numerical Study on Exhaust Emission

Characteristics of Particulate Matters and Nitrogen Oxide in a Marine Engine for
Marine Diesel Oil and Dimethyl Ether Fuel. J Mar Sci Eng 2020;8:316. https://
doi.org/10.3390/jmse8050316.

[122] Klüssmann JN, Ekknud LR, Ivarsson A, Schramm J. The potential for ammonia as
a transportation fuel—a literature review. Lyngby, Denmark: The Technical
University of Denmark (DTU); 2019.

[123] Comotti M, Frigo S. Hydrogen generation system for ammonia-hydrogen fuelled
internal combustion engines. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2015;40:10673–86. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.06.080.

[124] Public Health England. Ammonia - Toxicological overview. PHE Publ; 2015.
[125] Aakko-Saksa PT, Cook C, Kiviaho J, Repo T. Liquid organic hydrogen carriers for
transportation and storing of renewable energy – Review and discussion. J Power
Sources 2018;396:803–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.04.011.

evaluation of liquefied natural gas fuelled vessels. Sci Total Environ 2021;766.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144319.

[149] Lehtoranta K, Vesala H, Koponen P, Korhonen S. Selective Catalytic Reduction
Operation with Heavy Fuel Oil: nOx, NH3, and Particle Emissions. Environ Sci
Technol 2015;49:4735–41. https://doi.org/10.1021/es506185x.

[150] Magnusson M, Fridell E, Ingelsten HH. The influence of sulfur dioxide and water
on the performance of a marine SCR catalyst. Appl Catal B Environ 2012;
111–112:20–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2011.09.010.

[151] Zheng G, Kotrba A, Golin M, Gardner T, Wang A. Overview of Large Diesel Engine

Aftertreatment System Development. SAE Tech. Pap. 2012. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2012-01-1960. 2012-01–1960.

[152] Jayaram V, Nigam A, Welch WA, Miller JW, Cocker DR. Effectiveness of emission

control technologies for auxiliary engines on ocean-going vessels. J Air Waste
Manag Assoc 2011;61:14–21. https://doi.org/10.3155/1047-3289.61.1.14.

[153] Winnes H, Fridell E. Emissions of NOX and particles from manoeuvring ships.
Transp Res Part D Transp Environ 2010;15:204–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trd.2010.02.003.

[126] Van Hoecke L, Laffineur L, Campe R, Perreault P, Verbruggen SW, Lenaerts S.

[154] Nuszkowski J, Clark NN, Spencer TK, Carder DK, Gautam M, Balon TH, et al.

Challenges in the use of hydrogen for maritime applications. Energy Environ Sci
2021;14:815–43. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ee01545h.

[127] Tronstad T, Høgmoen H, Gerd Å, Haugom P, Langfeldt L. Study on the use of fuel

Atmospheric emissions from a passenger ferry with selective catalytic reduction.
J Air Waste Manag Assoc 2009;59:18–30. https://doi.org/10.3155/1047-
3289.59.1.18.

cells in shipping. 2017.

[128] Gallucci B.M. The first battery-powered tanker is coming to tokyo 2021. https://

spectrum.ieee.org/energywise/energy/batteries-storage/first-battery-powered-t
anker-coming-to-tokyo.

[129] Smith B.A. Stena line to launch two battery-powered ships by 2030 2021. https
://www.cruiseandferry.net/articles/stena-line-to-launch-two-battery-powered-sh
ips-by-2030-1.

[130] Ritari A, Huotari J, Halme J, Tammi K. Hybrid electric topology for short sea

ships with high auxiliary power availability requirement. Energy 2020;190:1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116359.

[131] Sui C, de Vos P, Stapersma D, Visser K, Ding Y. Fuel consumption and emissions of
ocean-going cargo ship with hybrid propulsion and different fuels over voyage.
J Mar Sci Eng 2020;8. https://doi.org/10.3390/JMSE8080588.

[132] CARB California Air Resources Board. Ocean-Going vessels at berth regulation
2021. 2021. https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/news/california-approves-updated-berth-
regulation-expanding-efforts-cut-pollution-ships-california. accessed November
1,.

[133] Tillig F, Ringsberg JW. Design, operation and analysis of wind-assisted cargo

[155] Lehtoranta K, Turunen R, Vesala H, Nyyssoenen S, Soikkeli N, Esselstroem L.
Testing SCR in high sulphur application. In: 27th CIMAC World Congr; 2013.
Paper 107.

[156] Peitz D, Gschwend D, Christianen K, Lehtoranta K. Ultra-low Emission Medium

Speed Engine for EU Stage V. MTZ Worldw 2021;82:46–53. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s38313-021-0702-7.

[157] Piel WJ, Thomas RX. Oxygenates for reformulated gasoline. Hydrocarb Process

1990:68–73.

[158] Corbin JC, Peng W, Yang J, Sommer DE, Trivanovic U, Kirchen P, et al.

Characterization of particulate matter emitted by a marine engine operated with
liquefied natural gas and diesel fuels. Atmos Environ 2020;220. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2019.117030.

[159] Anderson M, Salo K, Fridell E. Particle- and Gaseous Emissions from an LNG

Powered Ship. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:12568–75. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.est.5b02678.

[160] Olsen DB, Kohls M, Arney G. Impact of oxidation catalysts on exhaust NO2/NOx

ratio from lean-burn natural gas engines. J Air Waste Manag Assoc 2010;60:
867–74. https://doi.org/10.3155/1047-3289.60.7.867.

ships. Ocean Eng 2020;211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2020.107603.

[161] Lehtoranta K, Murtonen T, Vesala H, Koponen P, Alanen J, Simonen P, et al.

[134] Lion S, Vlaskos I, Taccani R. A review of emissions reduction technologies for low

and medium speed marine Diesel engines and their potential for waste heat
recovery. Energy Convers Manag 2020;207:112553. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2020.112553.

[135] Ni P, Wang X, Li H. A review on regulations, current status, effects and reduction
strategies of emissions for marine diesel engines. Fuel 2020;279:118477. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118477.

[136] Lehtoranta K, Aakko-Saksa P, Murtonen T, Vesala H, Ntziachristos L, R ̈onkk ̈o T,
et al. Particulate Mass and Nonvolatile Particle Number Emissions from Marine
Engines Using Low-Sulfur Fuels, Natural Gas, or Scrubbers. Environ Sci Technol
2019;53:3315–22. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b05555.

[137] Khan Y. SI: benefits of two mitigation strategies for container vessels: cleaner
engines and cleaner fuels. Supporting Information. Environ Sci Technol 2012.
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201302950.

[138] Karle IM, Turner D. Seawater scrubbing - reduction of SOx emissions from ship

exhausts. The Alliance For Global Sustainability; 2007.

[139] Karjalainen P, Teinil ̈a K, Kuittinen N, Aakko-Saksa P, Bloss M, Vesala H, et al.
Real-world particle emissions and secondary particle formation from a diesel
oxidation catalyst and scrubber equipped ship operating with two fuels in a SECA
area. Environ Pollut 2021;292:118278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2021.118278.

[140] Winnes H, Fridell E, Moldanov ́a J. Effects of marine exhaust gas scrubbers on gas
and particle emissions. J Mar Sci Eng 2020;8. https://doi.org/10.3390/
JMSE8040299.

[141] Teinil ̈a K, Aakko-saksa P, Jalkanen J, Karjalainen P, Bloss M, Laakia J, et al. Effect

of aftertreatment on ship particulate and gaseous components at ship exhaust.
2018.

[142] Johnson K, Miller W, Durbin T, Jiang Y (Jade), Yang J (Joey), Karavalakis G, et al.
Black carbon measurement methods and emission factors from ships. 2016. ICCT
Report.

[143] Fridell E, Salo K. Measurements of abatement of particles and exhaust gases in a
marine gas scrubber. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part M J Eng Marit Environ 2016;230:
154–62. https://doi.org/10.1177/1475090214543716.

[144] Yang J, Johnson KC, Miller JW, Durbin DT, Jiang Y, Karavalakis G, et al. Marine
Scrubber Efficiency and NOx Emission from Large Ocean Going Vessels. In: 2017
Int Emiss Invent Conf; 2017. p. 29.

Natural Gas Engine Emission Reduction by Catalysts. Emiss Control Sci Technol
2017;3:142–52. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40825-016-0057-8.
[162] Aakko-Saksa PT, Westerholm M, Pettinen R, S ̈oderstr ̈om C, Roslund P,

Piim ̈akorpi P, et al. Renewable Methanol with Ignition Improver Additive for
Diesel Engines. Energy and Fuels 2020;34. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.9b02654.

[163] Murtonen T, Aakko-Saksa P, Koponen P, Lehto K, Sarjovaara T, Happonen M,

et al. Emission reduction potential with paraffinic renewable diesel by optimizing
engine settings or using oxygenate. SAE Tech Pap 2012;9. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2012-01-1590.

[164] Rebesco P.E., Ullmann J., Fiolet G., Manuelli P., Black A., Engelen B., et al.

Automotive fuels. paraffinic diesel fuel and blends with FAME. background to the
parameters required and their respective limits and determination n.d.;1.

[165] Nylund N-O, Aakko P, Mikkonen S, Niemi A. Effects of physical and chemical

properties of diesel fuel on NOx emissions of heavy-duty diesel engines. SAE Tech
Pap 1997. https://doi.org/10.4271/972997.

[166] Murtonen T, Aakko-Saksa P, Kuronen M, Mikkonen S, Lehtoranta K. Emissions
with Heavy-duty Diesel Engines and Vehicles using FAME, HVO and GTL Fuels
with and without DOC+POC Aftertreatment. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2009;2.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-2693. 2009-01–2693.

[167] Ushakov S, Lefebvre N. Assessment of Hydrotreated Vegetable Oil (HVO)
Applicability as an Alternative Marine Fuel Based on Its Performance and
Emissions Characteristics. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2019;12:109–20. https://doi.org/
10.4271/04-12-02-0007.

[168] Ushakov S, Halvorsen NGM, Valland H, Williksen DH, Æsøy V. Emission

characteristics of GTL fuel as an alternative to conventional marine gas oil. Transp
Res Part D Transp Environ 2013;18:31–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trd.2012.08.007.

[169] Betha R, Russell LM, Sanchez KJ, Liu J, Price DJ, Lamjiri MA, et al. Lower NOxbut

higher particle and black carbon emissions from renewable diesel compared to
ultra low sulfur diesel in at-sea operations of a research vessel. Aerosol Sci
Technol 2017;51:123–34. https://doi.org/10.1080/02786826.2016.1238034.

[170] Roskilly AP, Nanda SK, Wang YD, Chirkowski J. The performance and the gaseous

emissions of two small marine craft diesel engines fuelled with biodiesel. Appl
Therm Eng 2008;28:872–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2007.07.007.

[145] Majewski WA. Diesel Particulate Matter. Dieselnet.com. DieselnetCom 2013:

[171] McCormick RL, Graboski MS, Alleman TL, Herring AM, Tyson KS. Impact of

1–15.

[146] Babicz Jan. W ̈artsil ̈a encyclopedia of ship technology 2015;2.
[147] CIMAC. Background information on black carbon emissions from large marine

biodiesel source material and chemical structure on emissions of criteria
pollutants from a heavy-duty engine. Environ Sci Technol 2001;35:1742–7.
https://doi.org/10.1021/es001636t.

and stationary diesel engines - definition, measurement methods, emission factors
and abatement technologies. Int Counc Combusition Engines 2012. https://doi.
org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004.

[172] Aesoy V, Ushakov S, Hennie E, Nielsen J. Alternative marine fuels and the effect

on combustion and emission characteristics. CIMAC Paper no. 43. In: CIMAC
World Congr.; 2013. p. 12.

[148] Deng J, Wang X, Wei Z, Wang L, Wang C, Chen Z. A review of NOx and SOx

[173] Nishio S, Fukuda T, Yoo D-H. Combustion of biofuel and biogas in a marine

emission reduction technologies for marine diesel engines and the potential

engine. CIMAC Paper No. 189. In: CIMAC World Congr.; 2019.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105522

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

[174] Yusuf AA, Inambao FL, Ampah JD. Evaluation of biodiesel on speciated PM2.5,

[200] Nevalainen P, Kinnunen NM, Kirveslahti A, Kallinen K, Maunula T, Keenan M,

organic compound, ultrafine particle and gaseous emissions from a low-speed
EPA Tier II marine diesel engine coupled with DPF, DEP and SCR filter at various
loads. Energy 2022;239:121837. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.121837.

[175] Ogunkunle O, Ahmed NA. A review of global current scenario of biodiesel

adoption and combustion in vehicular diesel engines. Energy Reports 2019;5:
1560–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2019.10.028.

[176] Jayaram V, Agrawal H, Welch WA, Miller JW, Cocker DR. Real-time gaseous, PM

and ultrafine particle emissions from a modern marine engine operating on
biodiesel. Environ Sci Technol 2011;45:2286–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/
es1026954.

[177] Nikolic D, Cvrk S, Marstijepovic N, Gagic R, Filipovic I. Influence of Biodiesel

Blends on Characteristics of Gaseous Emissions from Two Stroke, Low Speed
Marine Diesel Engines. Advances in applications of industrial biomaterials.
Springer International Publishing; 2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
62767-0_5.

[178] Geng P, Mao H, Zhang Y, Wei L, You K, Ju J, et al. Combustion characteristics and
NOx emissions of a waste cooking oil biodiesel blend in a marine auxiliary diesel
engine. Appl Therm Eng 2017;115:947–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2016.12.113.

[179] Karavalakis G, Tzirakis E, Mattheou L, Stournas S, Zannikos F, Karonis D. The

impact of using biodiesel/marine gas oil blends on exhaust emissions from a
stationary diesel engine. J Environ Sci Heal - Part A Toxic/Hazardous Subst
Environ Eng 2008;43:1663–72. https://doi.org/10.1080/10934520802330057.
[180] Kim HY, Ge JC, Choi NJ. Effects of fuel injection pressure on combustion and

emission characteristics under low speed conditions in a diesel engine fueled with
palm oil biodiesel. Energies 2019;12. https://doi.org/10.3390/en12173264.

[181] Kim N, Guahk YT. Numerical modeling for local flame structure and pollutant

formation in biodiesel and n-Dodecane spray jet flames. Fuel 2022;321:124151.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2022.124151.

[182] Zhang Z, E J, Deng Y, Pham MH, Zuo W, Peng Q, et al. Effects of fatty acid methyl
esters proportion on combustion and emission characteristics of a biodiesel fueled
marine diesel engine. Energy Convers Manag 2018;159:244–53. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2017.12.098.

[183] Mikulski M, Ambrosewicz-Walacik M, Hunicz J, Nitkiewicz S. Combustion engine
applications of waste tyre pyrolytic oil. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2021;85:
100915. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100915.

[184] Yoshimoto Y, Tamaki H. Reduction of NOx and smoke emissions in a diesel engine

fueled by biodiesel emulsion combined with egr. 2001. SAE Technical Papers
2001-01-064901.

[185] Noll J. The effects of water emulsified fuel on diesel particulate matter

et al. Formation of NH3 and N2O in a modern natural gas three-way catalyst
designed for heavy-duty vehicles: the effects of simulated exhaust gas
composition and ageing. Appl Catal A Gen 2018;552:30–7. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apcata.2017.12.017.

[201] Mejía-Centeno I, Martínez-Hern ́andez A, Fuentes GA. Effect of low-sulfur fuels

upon NH3and N2O emission during operation of commercial three-way catalytic
converters. Top Catal 2007;42–43:381–5. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11244-007-
0210-2.

[202] Aakko-Saksa PT, Rantanen-Kolehmainen L, Skytt ̈a E. Ethanol, isobutanol, and
biohydrocarbons as gasoline components in relation to gaseous emissions and
particulate matter. Environ Sci Technol 2014;48:10489–96. https://doi.org/
10.1021/es501381h.

[203] Mr ́aˇcek D, Koˇcí P, Choi JS, Partridge WP. New operation strategy for driving the
selectivity of NOx reduction to N2, NH3 or N2O during lean/rich cycling of a lean
NOx trap catalyst. Appl Catal B Environ 2016;182:109–14. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apcatb.2015.09.002.

[204] Giechaskiel B, Suarez-Bertoa R, L ̈ahde T, Clairotte M, Carriero M, Bonnel P, et al.
Evaluation of NOx emissions of a retrofitted Euro 5 passenger car for the Horizon
prize “Engine retrofit. Environ Res 2018;166:298–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.envres.2018.06.006.

[205] Ntziachristos L, Saukko E, Lehtoranta K, R ̈onkk ̈o T, Timonen H, Simonen P, et al.

Particle emissions characterization from a medium-speed marine diesel engine
with two fuels at different sampling conditions. Fuel 2016;186:456–65. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.08.091.

[206] Aakko-Saksa P, Koponen P, Aurela M, Vesala H, Piim ̈akorpi P, Murtonen T, et al.
Considerations in analysing elemental carbon from marine engine exhaust using
residual, distillate and biofuels. J Aerosol Sci 2018;126:191–204. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jaerosci.2018.09.005.

[207] Chu-Van T, Ristovski Z, Pourkhesalian AM, Rainey T, Garaniya V, Abbassi R, et al.

On-board measurements of particle and gaseous emissions from a large cargo
vessel at different operating conditions. Environ Pollut 2018. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.envpol.2017.11.008.

[208] Giechaskiel B, Maricq M, Ntziachristos L, Dardiotis C, Wang X, Axmann H, et al.
Review of motor vehicle particulate emissions sampling and measurement: from
smoke and filter mass to particle number. J Aerosol Sci 2014;67:48–86. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2013.09.003.

[209] Corbin JC, Gysel-Beer M. Detection of tar brown carbon with a single particle soot
photometer (SP2). Atmos Chem Phys 2019;19:15673–90. https://doi.org/
10.5194/acp-19-15673-2019.

[210] Grigoriadis A, Mamarikas S, Ioannidis I, Majam ̈aki E, Jalkanen J-P,

concentrations in underground mines. In: 11th US/North Am. Mine Vent. Symp.
2006. Taylor & Francis; 2006. p. 159–64. https://doi.org/10.1201/
9781439833391.ch24.

Ntziachristos L. Development of exhaust emission factors for vessels: a review and
meta-analysis of available data. Atmos Environ X 2021;12:100142. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.aeaoa.2021.100142.

[186] Park J, Choi I, Oh J, Lee C. Nitrogen Oxides and Particulate Matter from Marine
Diesel Oil (MDO), Emulsified MDO, and Dimethyl Ether Fuels in Auxiliary Marine
Engines. J Mar Sci Eng 2020;8:322. https://doi.org/10.3390/jmse8050322.

[187] Oh J, Im M, Oh S, Lee C. Comparison of NOx and smoke characteristics of water-
in-oil emulsion and marine diesel oil in 400-kW marine generator engine.
Energies 2019;12. https://doi.org/10.3390/en12020228.

[188] Kawasaki. Kawasaki pioneers long-term On- Board Water-Emulsion fuel system

testing. 2015. https://global.kawasaki.com/en/corp/newsroom/news/detail/?
f=20150514_7660.

[189] Mayer S, Sj ̈oholm J, Ishibashi R, Fukushima T, Kondo M, Kjemtrump N, et al. NOx

Reduction to Tier III Levels on MAN B&W LGI Low-Speed Engines by Water
Addition to Either Methanol or Conventional Diesel Fuel Oil. 28th CIMAC World
Congr 2019:168.

[190] EPA. Impacts of lubrizol’s purinox water/diesel emulsion on exhaust emissions

from heavy-duty engines. United States Envirnomental Prot Agency; 2002.
p. 1–29.

[191] Hiltner J, Loetz A, Fiveland S. Unburned Hydrocarbon Emissions fromL ean Burn
Natural Gas Engines – Sources and Solutions. CIMAC Paper 032. In: 28th CIMAC
World Congr; 2016.

[211] Stuart DD. Acid Dewpoint Temperature Measurement and Its Use in Estimating

Sulfur Trioxide Concentration. Anal Div Symp 2010:12–24.

[212] Khan MY, Ranganathan S, Agrawal H, Welch WA, Laroo C, Miller JW, et al.

Measuring in-use ship emissions with international and U.S. federal methods.
J Air Waste Manage Assoc 2013;63:284–91. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10962247.2012.744370.

[213] McCaffery C, Zhu H, Karavalakis G, Durbin TD, Miller JW, Johnson KC. Sources of
air pollutants from a Tier 2 ocean-going container vessel: main engine, auxiliary
engine, and auxiliary boiler. Atmos Environ 2021;245:118023. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.118023.

[214] Wu G, Jiang G, Yang Z, Huang Z. Emission characteristics for waste cooking oil
biodiesel blend in a marine diesel propulsion engine. Polish J Environ Stud 2019;
28:2911–21. https://doi.org/10.15244/pjoes/92704.

[215] McGill R, Storey J, Wagner R, Irick D, Aakko P, Westerholm M, et al. Emission
Performance of Selected Biodiesel Fuels. SAE Tech Pap Ser 2003. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2003-01-1866. 2003-01–18.

[216] Aakko P, Nylund N-O. Particle emissions at moderate and cold temperatures using
different fuels. Soc Automot Eng 2003;SP-1809:279–96. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2003-01-3285 [Special Publ SP.

[192] Lehtoranta K, Koponen P, Vesala H, Kallinen K, Maunula T. Performance and

[217] Verbeek R, Bolech M, den Uil H. Alternative fuels for sea shipping. 2011. p. 4.

regeneration of methane oxidation catalyst for LNG ships. J Mar Sci Eng 2021;9:
1–12. https://doi.org/10.3390/jmse9020111.

[193] Sommer DE, Yeremi M, Son J, Corbin JC, Gagn ́e S, Lobo P, et al. Characterization
and Reduction of In-Use CH 4 Emissions from a Dual Fuel Marine Engine Using
Wavelength Modulation Spectroscopy. Environ Sci Technol 2019;53:2892–9.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b04244.

[194] Myhre G, Shindell D, Br ́eon F-M, Collins W, Fuglestvedt J, Huang J, et al. Global

warming potential values (AR5). Greenhouse Gas Protocol; 2013.

[195] Stenersen D., Thonstad O. GHG and NOx emissions from gas fuelled engines.

SINTEF Ocean AS. Report. 2017.

[196] Schuller O, Kupferschmid S, Whitehouse S, Hengstler J. Life cycle ghg emission

study on the use of lng as marine fuel. Thinkstep; 2019.

[197] Peng W, Yang J, Corbin J, Trivanovic U, Lobo P, Kirchen P, et al. Comprehensive
analysis of the air quality impacts of switching a marine vessel from diesel fuel to
natural gas. Environ Pollut 2020;266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2020.115404.

TNO-060-DTM-2011-04219.

[218] Momenimovahed A, Gagn ́e S, Gajdosechova Z, Corbin JC, Smallwood GJ,
Mester Z, et al. Effective density and metals content of particle emissions
generated by a diesel engine operating under different marine fuels. J Aerosol Sci
2021;151:1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2020.105651.
[219] Gagn ́e S, Couillard M, Gajdosechova Z, Momenimovahed A, Smallwood G,

Mester Z, et al. Ash-Decorated and Ash-Painted Soot from Residual and Distillate-
Fuel Combustion in Four Marine Engines and One Aviation Engine. Environ Sci
Technol 2021;55:6584–93. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c07130.
[220] Fridell E, Salberg H, Salo K. Measurements of Emissions to Air from a Marine

Engine Fueled by Methanol. J Mar Sci Appl 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11804-020-00150-6.

[221] Sippula O, Stengel B, Sklorz M, Streibel T, Rabe R, Orasche J, et al. Particle

emissions from a marine engine: chemical composition and aromatic emission
profiles under various operating conditions. Environ Sci Technol 2014;48:
11721–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/es502484z.

[198] Mejía-centeno I, Fuentes GA. Increased NH3 and N2O emissions from three-way

[222] Karavalakis G, Stournas S, Bakeas E. Effects of diesel /biodiesel blends on

catalytic converters. Inst Pet 2005;175:9340. –9340.

[199] Suarez-Bertoa R, Astorga C. Isocyanic acid and ammonia in vehicle emissions.
Transp Res Part D Transp Environ 2016;49:259–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trd.2016.08.039.

regulated and unregulated pollutants from a passenger vehicle operated over the
European and the Athens driving cycles. Atmos Environ 2009:1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2008.12.033.

[223] Aakko-Saksa P, Lehtoranta K. Ship emissions in the future - review. 2019.

Research report VTT-R-00335-19.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105523

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

[224] Hallquist ÅM, Fridell E, Westerlund J, Hallquist M. Onboard measurements of
nanoparticles from a SCR-equipped marine diesel engine. Environ Sci Technol
2013;47:773–80. https://doi.org/10.1021/es302712a.

[225] Shah SD, Cocker DR, Johnson KC, Lee JM, Soriano BL, Miller JW. Reduction of
particulate matter emissions from diesel backup generators equipped with four
different exhaust aftertreatment devices. Environ Sci Technol 2007;41:5070–6.
https://doi.org/10.1021/es0614161.

[226] Teuchies J, Cox TJS, Van Itterbeeck K, Meysman FJR, Blust R. The impact of

scrubber discharge on the water quality in estuaries and ports. Environ Sci Eur
2020;32. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-020-00380-z.

[227] Moldanov ́a J, Fridell E, Popovicheva O, Demirdjian B, Tishkova V, Faccinetto A,
et al. Characterisation of particulate matter and gaseous emissions from a large
ship diesel engine. Atmos Environ 2009;43:2632–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
atmosenv.2009.02.008.

[228] Sarvi A, Lyyr ̈anen J, Jokiniemi J, Zevenhoven R. Particulate emissions from large-

scale medium-speed diesel engines: 1. Particle size distribution. Fuel Process
Technol 2011;92:1855–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2011.04.031.
[229] Alanen J, Isotalo M, Kuittinen N, Simonen P, Martikainen S, Kuuluvainen H, et al.
Physical Characteristics of Particle Emissions from a Medium Speed Ship Engine
Fueled with Natural Gas and Low-Sulfur Liquid Fuels. Environemntal Sci Technol
2020;54:5376–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b06460.

[230] Murtonen T, Lehtoranta K, Aakko-Saksa P, Antson O, Vesala H, Koponen P, et al.
Emission measurement systems for integrated after-treatment technologies. 2018.
HERCULES-2 Project Deliverable D7.2.

[231] Anderson M, Salo K, Hallquist Å, Fridell E. Characterization of particles from a
marine engine operating at low loads. Atmos Environ 2015;101:65–71. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2014.11.009.

[232] Kuittinen N, Jalkanen J, Alanen J, Ntziachristos L, Hannuniemi H, Lehtoranta K,
et al. Shipping Remains a Globally Significant Source of Anthropogenic PN
Emissions Even after 2020 Sulfur Regulation. Environ Sci Technol 2021;55:
129–38. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c03627.

[233] Tsolakis A, Tsolakis A. Effects on particle size distribution from the diesel engine
operating on RME-Biodiesel with egr effects on particle size distribution from the
diesel engine operating on RME-Biodiesel with egr. 2006. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef050385c.

[234] Schneider J, Hock N, Weimer S, Borrmann S, Kirchner U, Vogt R, et al. Nucleation
Particles in Diesel Exhaust: composition Inferred from In Situ Mass Spectrometric
Analysis. Environ Sci Technol 2005;39:6153–61. https://doi.org/10.1021/
es049427m.

[235] Bond TC, Doherty SJ, Fahey DW, Forster PM, Berntsen T, Deangelo BJ, et al.

Bounding the role of black carbon in the climate system: a scientific assessment.
J Geophys Res Atmos 2013;118:5380–552. https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50171.
[236] Wentzel M, Gorzawski H, Naumann KH, Saathoff H, Weinbruch S. Transmission
electron microscopical and aerosol dynamical characterization of soot aerosols.
J Aerosol Sci 2003;34:1347–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-8502(03)00360-
4.

[237] Andreae MO, Gelencs ́er A. Black carbon or brown carbon? The nature of light-
absorbing carbonaceous aerosols. Atmos Chem Phys 2006;6:3131–48.

[238] Petzold A, Ogren JA, Fiebig M, Laj P, Li SM, Baltensperger U, et al.

Recommendations for reporting black carbon measurements. Atmos Chem Phys
2013;13:8365–79. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-13-8365-2013.

[239] Lack DA, Moosmüller H, McMeeking GR, Chakrabarty RK, Baumgardner D.

Characterizing elemental, equivalent black, and refractory black carbon aerosol
particles: a review of techniques, their limitations and uncertainties. Anal Bioanal
Chem 2014;406:99–122. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-013-7402-3.
[240] Collaud Coen M, Weingartner E, Apituley A, Ceburnis D, Fierz-Schmidhauser R,
Flentje H, et al. Minimizing light absorption measurement artifacts of the
Aethalometer: evaluation of five correction algorithms. Atmos Meas Tech 2010;3:
457–74. https://doi.org/10.5194/amt-3-457-2010.

[241] Kanaya Y, Komazaki Y, Pochanart P, Liu Y, Akimoto H, Gao J, et al. Correction for
a measurement artifact of the Multi-Angle Absorption Photometer (MAAP) at high
black carbon mass concentration levels. Atmos Meas Tech 2013;8:81–90. https://
doi.org/10.5194/amt-6-81-2013.

[242] P ̈oschl U. Aerosol particle analysis: challenges and progress. Anal Bioanal Chem

2003;375:30–2. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-002-1611-5.

[243] Arnott WP, Hamasha K, Moosmüller H, Sheridan PJ, Ogren JA. Towards aerosol

[244] Utry N, Ajtai T, Filep

light-absorption measurements with a 7-wavelength aethalometer: evaluation
with a photoacoustic instrument and 3-wavelength nephelometer. Aerosol Sci
Technol 2005;39:17–29. https://doi.org/10.1080/027868290901972.

 ́
A, Pint ́er M, T ̈or ̈ok Z, Boz ́oki Z, et al. Correlations between
absorption Angstr ̈om exponent (AAE) of wintertime ambient urban aerosol and its
physical and chemical properties. Atmos Environ 2014;91:52–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2014.03.047.

[245] Schnaiter M, Linke C, M ̈ohler O, Naumann KH, Saathoff H, Wagner R, et al.

Absorption amplification of black carbon internally mixed with secondary organic
aerosol. J Geophys Res D Atmos 2005;110:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1029/
2005JD006046.

[246] Lim S, Lee M, Kim S-W, Yoon S-C, Lee G, Lee YJ. Absorption and scattering

properties of organic carbon versus sulfate dominant aerosols at Gosan climate
observatory in Northeast Asia. Atmos Chem Phys 2014;14:7781–93. https://doi.
org/10.5194/acp-14-7781-2014.

[247] Kelesidis GA, Bruun CA. Pratsinis SE. The impact of organic carbon on soot light

absorption. Carbon N Y 2021;172:742–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbon.2020.10.032.

[249] Ajtai T, Filep

 ́
A, Schnaiter M, Linke C, Vragel M, Boz ́oki Z

 ́
A, et al. A novel multii-
wavelength photoacoustic spectrometer for the measurement of the UV-vis-NIR
spectral absorption coefficient of atmospheric aerosols. J Aerosol Sci 2010;41:
1020–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2010.07.008.

[250] Lack D, Lerner B, Granier C, Baynard T, Lovejoy E, Massoli P, et al. Light

absorbing carbon emissions from commercial shipping. Geophys Res Lett 2008;
35. https://doi.org/10.1029/2008GL033906.

[251] Lack DA, Corbett JJ, Onasch T, Lerner B, Massoli P, Quinn PK, et al. Particulate
emissions from commercial shipping: chemical, physical, and optical properties.
J Geophys Res Atmos 2009;114:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1029/2008JD011300.
[252] Dalsøren SB, Eide MS, Endresen O, Mjelde A, Gravir G, Isaksen ISA. Update on
emissions and environmental impacts from the international fleet of ships: the
contribution from major ship types and ports. Atmos Chem Phys 2009;9:2171–94.
https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-9-2171-2009.

[253] Klimont Z, Kupiainen K, Heyes C, Purohit P, Cofala J, Rafaj P, et al. Global

anthropogenic emissions of particulate matter including black carbon. Atmos
Chem Phys 2017;17:8681–723. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-17-8681-2017.

[254] Dentener F, Kinne S, Bond T, Boucher O, Cofala J, Generoso S, et al. Emissions of
primary aerosol and precursor gases in the years 2000 and 1750 prescribed data-
sets for AeroCom. Atmos Chem Phys 2006;6:4321–44. https://doi.org/10.5194/
acp-6-4321-2006.

[255] Fuglestvedt J, Berntsen T, Myhre G, Rypdal K, Skeie RB. Climate forcing from the

transport sectors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:454–8. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.0702958104.

[256] Lack D. An update to the investigation of appropriate control measures

(abatement technologies) to reduce black carbon emissions from international
shipping. 2017. PPR 5/INF.7.

[257] Lack DA, Corbett JJ. Black carbon from ships: a review of the effects of ship speed,
fuel quality and exhaust gas scrubbing. Atmos Chem Phys 2012;12:3985–4000.
https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-12-3985-2012.

[258] Aakko-Saksa P. Control measures of black carbon emissions from marine diesel
engines - focus on results obtained using the measurement methods selected by
the imo. 2018. Report VTT-R-06900-18.

[259] Moldanov ́a J, Fridell E, Winnes H, Holmin-Fridell S, Boman J, Jedynska A, et al.
Physical and chemical characterisation of PM emissions from two ships operating
in European Emission Control Areas. Atmos Meas Tech 2013;6:3577–96. https://
doi.org/10.5194/amt-6-3577-2013.

[260] Lack D, Thuesen J, Elliot R, Stuer-Lauridsen F, Overgaard S, Kristensen D.

Investigation of appropriate control measures (abatement technologies) to reduce
black carbon emissions from international shipping. 2015.

[261] Short DZ, Vu D, Durbin TD, Karavalakis G, Asa-Awuku A. Components of Particle
Emissions from Light-Duty Spark-Ignition Vehicles with Varying Aromatic
Content and Octane Rating in Gasoline. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:10682–91.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b03138.

[262] Cignoli F, De Iuliis S, Zizak G. Soot load versus aromatic concentration in diesel
oil premixed flames. Fuel 2001;80:945–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-2361
(00)00185-X.

[263] Martin B, Aakko P, Beckman D, Del Giacomo N, Giavazzi F. Influence of future
fuel formulations on diesel engine emissions - A joint European study. SAE Tech
Pap 1997. https://doi.org/10.4271/972966.

[264] Xi J, Zhong B-J. Soot in diesel combustion systems. Chem Eng Technol 2006;29:

665–73. https://doi.org/10.1002/ceat.200600016.

[265] Pelucchi M, Oßwald P, Pejpichestakul W, Frassoldati A, Mehl M. On the

combustion and sooting behavior of standard and hydro-treated jet fuels: an
experimental and modeling study on the compositional effects. Proc Combust Inst
2020;000:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.353.

[266] European Comission. Ambient air pollution by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons

(PAH) - Position Paper 2001. ISBN 92-894-2057-X.

[267] Westerholm R, Hang L. A Multivariate Statistical Analysis of Fuel-Related

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Emissions from Heavy-Duty Diesel Vehicles.
Environ Sci Technol 1994;28:965–72. https://doi.org/10.1021/es00054a032.

[268] Doel R, Jorgensen R, King DJJ, Mann N, Scorletti P, Heinze P. Polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in automotive exhaust emissions and fuels. 1998. p. 1–150.
CONCAWE Report.

[269] Verbeek R. Assessment of pollutant emissions with shell gtl fuel as a drop in fuel

for medium and heavy-duty vehicles, inland shipping and non- road machines.
2014. TNO report. TNO 2014 R10588.

[270] Stojcevski T, Jay D, Vicenzi L. Methanol Engine in a Ferry Installation. In: 28th

CIMAC World Congr; 2016. p. 13.

[271] EUROMOT. Black carbon measurement reporting by euromot 2015.
[272] Comer B, Olmer N, Mao X, Roy B, Rutherford D. Prevalence of heavy fuel oil and
black carbon in Arctic shipping, 2015 to 2025. Int Counc Clean Transp 2017:68.
[273] IMO International Maritime Organisation. Evaluation of the effect of SCR, egc and

sulphur limit solutions on black carbon emissions from ships using three black
carbon measurement methods. 2018. PPR 6/INF.13.

[274] Fridell E, Salo K. Measurements of abatement of particles and exhaust gases in a
marine gas scrubber. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part M J Eng Marit Environ 2014;230:
154–62. https://doi.org/10.1177/1475090214543716.

[275] Takahashi C, Masuda A. New research on Black Carbon control. In: 5th ICCT

Work. Mar. Black Carbon Emiss; 2018. p. 2018. 19-20 Sept.

[276] Umezawa K, Hayashi K, Kondo H, Furugen M, Makino T, Sasaki H, et al.

Reduction of black carbon emission and suppression of wastewater pollution from
scrubber. In: Proc. Technology for reducing emissions from marine diesel engines;
2017. p. 1–14.

[248] Tjong H. Measurement of soot with organic coatings by laser-induced

[277] Park S. PM/BC Reduction by DPF and wet-ESP for marine ship engines: recent

incandescence. 2012.

R&D in Korea. In: ICCT’s 5th Work. Mar. Black Carbon Emiss; 2018.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105524

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

[278] EcoSpray. Green shipping: ecospray launches a new particulate removal solution

for the marine market. In: Press release 5th August 2021; 2021.

[279] Valmet. Valmet introduces a new wet electrostatic precipitator for the marine

industry to enhance emission control 2021. Press release, 2.5.2022.

[280] Zukeran A, Sakuma Y, Yamagami R, Kawada Y, Kawakami H, Yasumoto K, et al.
The effects of gas cooling on removal of SOF and sulphate by electrostatic
precipitator for marine diesel. WIT Trans Ecol Environ 2014;183:165–76. https://
doi.org/10.2495/AIR140141.

[281] Zukeran A, Nanjo Y, Ito K, Inui T. Removal of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Emitted from Diesel Engine Using an Electrostatic Precipitator and Heat
Exchanger. IEEE Trans Ind Appl 2018;54:6430–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TIA.2018.2859172.

[282] Valverde V, Giechaskiel B. Assessment of Gaseous and Particulate Emissions of a
Euro 6d-Temp Diesel Vehicle Driven &gt;1300km Including Six Diesel Particulate
Filter Regenerations. Atmosphere (Basel) 2020;11:645. https://doi.org/10.3390/
atmos11060645.

[283] Keenan M. Exhaust Emissions Control: 60 Years of Innovation and Development.
SAE Tech Pap 2017. https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-24-0120. 2017-Septe.
[284] Grice S, Stedman J, Kent A, Hobson M, Norris J, Abbott J, et al. Recent trends and
projections of primary NO2 emissions in Europe. Atmos Environ 2009;43:
2154–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.01.019.

[285] Nonokawa M, Katsuki T, Noshiro S. Ceramic Filter for Ship Diesel Engines — PM
(black carbon) removal technology using the CERALLEC ® system. NGK Insul Pap
2016.

[286] Køcks M, Jensen TN, Holm JN, Jeppesen JB, Frandsen S. Shipboard

characterization of a combined particle filter and NOx-reducing technology:
influence on particle number concentration, particle size distribution and gas
emissions. Conf. Combust. Gener. Nanoparticles, ETH 2017:1.

[287] Johansen K. Multi-catalytic soot filtration in automotive and marine applications.
Catal Today 2015;258:2–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2015.06.001.
[288] Overgaard L, Pedersen D. Retrofitting diesel particulate filters on a ferry –

practical experiences and measurement results Danish Technological Institute. In:
10th VERT FORUM; 2019. 14th March 2019.

[289] Kaviraj A, Bhunia F, Saha NC. Toxicity of Methanol to Fish, Crustacean,

Oligochaete Worm, and Aquatic Ecosystem. Int J Toxicol 2004;23:55–63. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10915810490265469.

[290] Santasalo-Aarnio A, Nyari J, Wojcieszyk M, Kaario O, Kroyan Y, Magdeldin M,
et al. Application of Synthetic Renewable Methanol to Power the Future
Propulsion. SAE Technical Paper 2020-01-2151. SAE Tech Pap Ser 2020;1.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2020-01-2151.

[291] Essen H, Nieuwenhuijse I, Bruyn S, Hoen A. Health impacts and costs of diesel

emissions in the EU. 2018. p. 72.

[292] Essen H. et al. Handbook on the external costs of transport. European

Commission. Publication code: 18.4K83.131. 2019:332. https://doi.org/
10.2832/51388.

[293] Ytreberg E, Åstr ̈om S, Fridell E. Valuating environmental impacts from ship

emissions – The marine perspective. J Environ Manage 2021;282. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.111958.

[294] Holland Michael, Pye S, Watkiss Paul, Droste-Franke B. Damages per tonne

emission of PM2.5, NH3, SO2, NOx and VOCs from each EU25 member state
(excluding cyprus). 2005. p. 32.

[295] Poelhekke S. How expensive should CO2 be? Fuel for the political debate on

optimal climate policy. Heliyon 2019;5:e02936. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
heliyon.2019.e02936.

[296] Aamaas B, Berntsen TK, Fuglestvedt JS, Shine KP, Bellouin N. Regional emission
metrics for short-lived climate forcers from multiple models. Atmos Chem Phys
2016;16:7451–68. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-16-7451-2016.

[297] Walsh M, Nichols M. A policy-relevant summary of black carbon climate science

and appropriate emission control strategies. ICCT White paper; 2009. p. 10.

[298] Gren IM, Brutemark A, J ̈agerbrand AK, Sved ́en JB. Costs of air pollutants from
shipping: a meta-regression analysis. Transp Rev 2020;40:411–28. https://doi.
org/10.1080/01441647.2020.1723733.

[299] Maffii S, Andrea M, Chiffi C. External costs of maritime transport. Policy

department B. structural and cohesion policies. 2007. IP/B/TRAN/FWC/2006-
156/Lot4/C1-SC2.

[300] Hannula I, Reiner DM. The race to solve the sustainable transport problem via

carbon-neutral synthetic fuels and battery electric vehicles. Cambridge Econ
2017:1758.

[301] Parker M, Taylor P. Poseidon Principles. Annual disclosure report 2020. 2020.
[302] DNV GL. Alternative fuels and technologies for greener shipping. DNV-GL Marit

2018;391:1–48.

[303] DNV GL. Maritime Forecast To 2050. Energy Transit Outlook 2019 2021:118.
[304] International Energy Agency. Technology roadmap: delivering sustainable

bioenergy. IEA Publ; 2017.

[305] ICCT. In: Searle Stephanie, editor. Bioenergy can solve some of our climate

problems, but not all of them at once; 2018. 15 October 2018.

[306] IRENA. A pathway to decarbonize the shipping sector 2021.

Mrs  P ̈aivi  Aakko-Saksa  is  Principal  Scientist  and  leader  of
Emission  Control  team  at  VTT  Technical  Research  Centre  of
Finland. Her research covers exhaust emissions from transport
sectors with focus on reduction of emissions from shipping with
clean  marine  engines,  fuels and  exhaust  aftertreatment  tech-
nologies. She also contributes in the international activities and
forums  including  work  on  black  carbon  emissions  from
shipping.

Dr Kati Lehtoranta, Senior Scientist in Emission Control team at
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, has over 20 years’
experience  in  the  field  of  engine  emissions  and  emissions
reduction technologies. Her research interests include particle
and  gaseous  emissions  of  different  marine  engines  operating
with  liquid  and/or  gaseous  fuels  and  corresponding  after-
treatment systems to reduce the emissions.

Ms  Niina  Kuittinen  is  a  PhD  Researcher  in  Aerosol  Physics
Laboratory at Tampere University. Her research is focused on
physical  characterization  of  exhaust  particles  from  different
combustion sources as well as particles in ambient air. Her PhD
research focuses on particles emitted from marine engines.

Mr. Anssi  J ̈arvinen  (D.Sc. Tech.)  is a  Senior  Scientist at  VTT
Technical Research Centre of Finland in Emission Control and
Sustainable Fuels team. He has research background in devel-
opment of aerosol instruments and their calibration methods
and in emission measurements. Currently, his research focuses
on effects of fuels and aftertreatment methods on engine par-
ticle emissions.

Dr  Jukka-Pekka  Jalkanen  has  worked  with  ship  emission
modelling  for  15  years  at  FMI  leading  the  STEAM  model
development.  He  is  responsible  for  annual  ship  emission
reporting for HELCOM member states and the service provider
for the EU Copernicus Atmospheric Monitoring Services ship
emissions  data  product.  His-research  interests  include  the
modelling  of  atmospheric  emissions,  water  discharges  and
underwater noise from ships.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105525

P.T. Aakko-Saksa et al.

Dr. Kent Johnson has been working at UC Riverside for over 30
years and is internationally recognized as a leader for emissions
from combustion sources, specifically under real world condi-
tions. He is the director, organizer, and host of an annual in-
ternational conference on in-use testing (11th year in 2022) and
has been a guest on two television programs (MythBusters) to
represent an expert witness for in-use testing. He has his Ph.D.
in  Chemical  and  Environmental  Engineering,  MS  Degree  in
Electrical  Engineering,  and  a  BS  Degree  in  Mechanical
Engineering.

Dr Chiori Takahashi is the director of the GHG reduction project
team at the National Maritime Research Institute Japan. Her
work focuses on the marine fuel properties and their impact on
the combustion performance and the emission characteristics
of  marine  diesel  engines.  She  also  contributes  to  developing
some  ISO  standards  as  the  Convenor  of  Working  Group  10
“Exhaust gas cleaning systems” in ISO/TC 8/SC 2.

Heejung  Jung  is  a  professor  at  the  University  of  California,
Riverside.  His-interest  is  emissions,  air  quality,  and  aerosol
science.

Dr. Panu Karjalainen is a Senior Research Fellow at Institute for
Advanced  Study  &  Aerosol  Physics  Laboratory  of  Tampere
University.  His-research  focuses  on  aerosol  measurement
method  development  and  in-depth  characterization  of  emis-
sion aerosols.

Leonidas Ntziachristos is Professor of Mechanical Engineering
at  the  Aristotle  University  Thessaloniki,  Greece  and  Visiting
Professor  at  Tampere  University,  Finland.  His-research  in-
terests  include  clean  combustion  and  pollutants  formation,
exhaust  aerosol  characterization,  environmental  sensors  and
emission models. His-teaching duties include pollution control,
greenhouse gas control and sustainability courses.

Professor  Topi R ̈onkk ̈o is the leader  of the aerosol emissions
and air quality research group of the Aerosol Physics Labora-
tory  of  Tampere  University.  His-research  focuses  on  particle
and particle precursor emissions from anthropogenic sources as
well as their effects on air quality, human health and climate.
He  contributes  to  several  international  research  activities
related  to  the  atmospheric  emissions  from  transport  sector,
including  the  black  carbon  and  ultrafine  particle  emissions
from shipping.

St ́ephanie Gagn ́e is an Associate Researcher in the Black Carbon
Metrology group at the National Research Council of Canada.
She holds a PhD in Atmospheric Physics from the University of
Helsinki and has worked on atmospheric particle nucleation,
cloud physics and scientific software development as well as on
superconductors.  Upon  joining  the  Black  Carbon  Metrology
team,  she has  been leading research  into black carbon emis-
sions measurements from marine engines including participa-
tion in and design of measurement campaigns. She has been
collaborating closely with Canadian regulatory bodies, namely
Transport Canada, through which she contributed to numerous
papers submitted to the PPR sub-committee at the IMO.

Dr. Hilkka Timonen is a senior scientist and leader of Aerosol
Composition  Research  group  at  Finnish  Meteorological  Insti-
tute. Her research is focused on chemical  and physical char-
acterization of aerosol from different anthropogenic emission
sources and ambient air.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105526
