Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Contemporary methods to measure regression rate of energetic materials: 
A review 

Vladimir Zarko a,*, Alexander Kiskin a, Alexander Cheremisin a,b 
a Voevodsky Institute of Chemical Kinetics and Combustion, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia 
b Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Laboratory-scale 
Energetic materials 
Regression rate 
Measurement 
Direct 
Indirect 
Methods 

Various energetic materials, including solid rocket propellants, have found numerous applications in aerospace 
technology  in  the  past  decades.  This  growing  interest  initiated  an  increasing  number  of  experimental  and 
technological studies, leading to a wide range of published experimental data. Due to the intrinsic challenges of 
data acquisition and processing, assessing the accuracy of the measurement results is important. In this paper, a 
review of existing experimental techniques for measuring the regression rate of energetic materials is presented 
along  with  a  description  of  the  fundamental  physical  principles  used  for  developing  the  particular  methods. 
Special  attention  is  paid  to  recent  developments  in  measurements  of  highly-dynamic  processes.  Technical  re-
quirements for correct determination of regression rate are analyzed focusing on the methods associated with 
transient combustion. Emphasis is placed on laboratory-scale methods intended to obtain correct and reliable 
data  on  regression  rate  in  well-characterized  environments  that  can  be  used  for  comparison  with  theoretical 
predictions. The measurement methods are divided into direct and indirect ones. It is shown that direct high- 
speed  photography  could  not  be  effectively  used  for  recording  regression  rate  oscillations  with  frequencies 
higher than 30–50 Hz. The same limitation applies to classical ultrasound techniques and X-ray radiography. 
However, radiography techniques based on synchrotron and terahertz radiation are promising. Special attention 
is paid to development of microwave and laser recoil methods that provide high spatial and temporal resolution 
capable of correctly determining transient regression rate.   

1. Introduction 

Solid  energetic  materials  find  various  applications  in  aerospace 
technology [1–4]. That gave birth to an increasing number of experi-
mental and technological studies [5–7]. The problems of experimental 
measurements, data acquisition and processing accuracy became acute 
[8–10]. In this paper, a survey of experimental methods for energetic 
materials regression rate measurement is provided. Many years ago the 
paper “Critical review of methods for regression rate measurements of 
condensed phase systems” was reported at Symposium on Special Topics 
in  Chemical  Propulsion  (1993)  and  then  published  [11].  Specific  re-
quirements  were  formulated  for  designing  proper  technical  tools  to 
measure  transient  regression  and/or  burn  rate  of  energetic  materials 
(EMs). It was underlined that there was an urgent need in developing 

advanced  measuring  techniques  for  major  parameters,  allowing  re-
searchers  and  engineers  to  solve  current  problems  of  motor  design. 
However,  it  can  be  noted  that  the  task  of  improving  available  mea-
surement methods and designing novel ones remains actual at present 
time.  There  are  urgent  demands  of  practical  engineering  for  reliable 
determination  of  regression  rate  data  in  order  to  design  new  rocket 
motors with variable and controllable thrust, hybrid propellant engines, 
etc.  [12–15].  It  is  also  worth  mentioning  that  on  the  basis  of 
time-resolved  techniques  it  becomes  possible  to  obtain  multiple  data 
points  from  a  single  test  and  reduce  essentially  the  time  and  cost 
involved  with  testing.  At  the  same  time,  a  correct  knowledge  of  the 
regression rate data enables verifying theoretical models and validating 
their predictions. 

The paper presents a review of existing measurement techniques and 

; AP, ammonium perchlorate; EM, Energetic Material; HTPB, hydroxyl terminated polybutadien; L-C circuit, inductor-capacitor circuit; LVDT, linear variable 
differential transformer; ONERA, Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches A´erospatiales; PS, polysulfide; PSD, power spectral density; SPLab, Solid Propulsion 
Laboratory; TSMB, Thrust Stand Mass Balance; VEPP-3, linear electron accelerator. 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: zarko@kinetics.nsc.ru (V. Zarko).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100980 
Received 20 July 2021; Received in revised form 25 November 2021; Accepted 28 November 2021   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100980Availableonline7January20220360-1285/©2021ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

briefly describes basic physical principles employed in developing the 
methods  for  regression  (gasification)  rate  determination.  It  has  to  be 
mentioned that from a practical point of view there exist definite tech-
nical requirements for accuracy of regression rate values. In the case of 
stationary regimes it comprises 1%. In the case of transient gasification 
regimes, the required accuracy demands can be slightly decreased due to 
great technical difficulties of measurements. However, it is necessary to 
provide proper temporal resolution, for example, 1 ms or better. Such 
requirements were formulated many years ago in review [11] and the 
main conclusions were confirmed later [12]. 

Actually, the designers of solid rocket motors could not use directly 
the data on the propellant burn rate determined in laboratory experi-
ments, because specificity of the motor environment and manufacturing 
specifications of propellant charges implies the need for using burn rate 
fitting coefficients, enabling the appropriate description of motor pres-
sure  (thrust)  history  [12,16–18].  The  present  paper  deals  with 
laboratory-scale techniques which can yield precise regression rate data 
in well characterized conditions, enabling comparison with theoretical 
predictions  and  validation  of  existing  combustion  models.  In  the  last 
case the demands of high accuracy in the regression rate measurement 
may become crucial. For example, it was stressed in [19] that for eval-
uating the combustion stability limits of solid propellants it is necessary 
to  determine  precisely  the  values  of  governing  parameters  k=
(dlnrb/dT0)(Ts –T0) and r=dTs/dT0. Here rb is the burn rate, Ts and T0 are 
the surface and initial temperatures. 

Note that at present time existing theoretical models cannot calculate 
a priori the gasification (regression) rate of EM with required accuracy 
because the mechanisms of physical and chemical processes occurring in 
the  reaction  zones  below  and  above  the  gasification  surface  are  not 
understood  in  detail.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  develop  various 
experimental approaches for measuring quantitative characteristics of 
EM combustion processes. The different experimental methods should 
provide  possibilities  for  most  objective  and  reliable  determination  of 
characteristics of the processes under investigation. In the present paper 
we intend to review available methods for direct and indirect measuring 
the EM regression rate and formulate recommendations for their future 
development. It can be mentioned that stationary regression rate can be 
measured with relatively high accuracy, but precise measuring of tran-
sient  regression  rate  meets  essential  technical  difficulties.  Indeed,  ac-
curate  measurement  of  transient  regression  rate  of  EM  implies 
measuring of very small web thickness (characteristic EM dimension) 
variations in a short time interval. For example, consider a regression 
rate with a mean value of 10 mm/s fluctuating at a frequency of 100 Hz. 
It will result in a 5 micrometer displacement of regressing surface during 
half period of oscillation at amplitude of 10% of the mean value. This 
clearly shows that the measurement method should have spatial reso-
lution at least several micrometers and temporal resolution better than 
1 ms. It has to be also underlined that the profile of regressing EM in 
most cases is characterized by finite size roughness and linear or mass 
regression  rates  used  in  ballistic  calculations  represent  an  apparent 
quantities  corresponding  the  rate  values  averaged  over  plane  surface 
equal to cross-section of burning sample. 

In this review the available measurement methods are divided into 
two groups: direct and indirect ones. Direct methods operate with the 
magnitude of characteristic size (dimension) or mass (weight) of the EM 
sample whereas indirect methods register the parameters indicating the 
combustion process characteristics (pressure or recoil force generated by 
burning  EM,  frequency  of  hybrid  motor  Helmholtz  oscillations,  etc.). 
The developed methods can be applied to laboratory scale EM samples 
of different nature: classical solid propellants with or without metallic 
additives as well as pure fuels used in hybrid rockets. 

2. Direct measurement methods 

Direct regression rate measurement methods include measurement 
of  the  current web thickness  or its  mass and/or weight.  The simplest 

application of the methods is in the case of stationary combustion of EM. 
It implies determination of the burning time of a given sample length 
with the ratio of burned distance to measured burning time standing for 
the burning (regression) rate. This so called strand burner technique is 
widely  used  in  technical  applications  providing  data  for  solid  rocket 
motor design and operation. For better accuracy of these data it is rec-
ommended to measure the burning time of the central part of cylindrical 
sample  (e.g.,  by  using  thin  thermocouples  or  fuse  wires)  in  order  to 
exclude the ignition and extinction stages. 

2.1. Measurement of the current web thickness of EM sample 

The dynamic measurement of the EM sample web thickness can be 
performed  by  different  techniques  dealing  with  the  photographic,  ul-
trasound  and  X-ray  measurements.  In  the  past,  approaches  for  evalu-
ating  the  EM  regression  rate  were  also  developed  using  servo 
mechanisms and laser scattering. 

2.1.1. Laser-servo mechanism 

The  method  of  laser-servo  mechanism  [20]  uses  a  combination  of 
optical  and  mechanical  systems  to  measure  solid  propellant  quasi 
steady-state regression rate. The distinctive feature of this technique is 
that, as the propellant surface location recedes, a closed-loop positioning 
servo mechanism moves a sample to maintain the burning surface at a 
fixed location. Detection of a burning surface position is performed via 
optical  system  which  includes  laser  or  137Cs  source  of  gamma  rays 
coupled with a scintillation probe. The latter produces a signal employed 
to control the speed of a stepper motor. The velocity of the sample feed 
mechanism directly corresponds to the propellant regression rate. This 
technique is best suited for propellants with a smooth burning surface 
and without substantial radiation beam attenuation by the propellant 
decomposition  products.  When  optical  access  windows  are  used,  it  is 
necessary  to  obtain  very  clear  images  of  the  surface  reaction  region. 
Instrumental error of regression rate measurement can be estimated to 
be within 3%. The disadvantages of the method are the complexity of the 
control system and the demands for existence of uniform reaction over 
the burning surface. 

2.1.2. Laser beam reflection 

Original approach based on laser beam reflection from the burning 
surface  has  been  proposed  in  [21].  The  laser  beam  falling  at  fixed 
inclination onto the burning surface had high frequency angular mod-
ulation and electronic deflector system kept the beam spot of 0.4 mm 
diameter centered under a sensor while the surface regressed. Thus, the 
propellant surface location (the propellant sample height) was detected 
by  measuring  the  beam  deflection  angle.  The  experiments  were  con-
ducted at pressures 0.1–1.7 MPa with a resolution becoming lowered at 
rising pressure. When going to pressure 1.7 MPa, the measuring system 
bandwidth comprised 20 Hz and specimen height resolution 0.08 mm. 
Actually  there  exist  several  natural  limitations  for  this  and  other 
optical  measurement  systems.  First  of  all,  the  local  burning  surface 
roughness  even  in  the  case  of  non-metallized  propellant  comprises 
20–200  µm  due  to  typical  oxidizer  grains  size.  In  addition,  the  flame 
emits the light which has to be compensated by the recording system 
whereas the combustion products typically contain radiation scattering 
particulates generated via dispersion of the surface layer and/or due to 
formation of condensed combustion products. These all factors lead to 
reduction of spatial resolution of optical systems. 

2.1.3. Video photography 

It  seems  reasonable  to  use  for  the  web  thickness  measurements 
classical video photography [22,23] but its practical realization meets 
with  serious  problems.  Actually,  the  ordinary  macro  optics  (2–4  fold 
magnification) provides resolution only ca. 10–20 µm, which is insuf-
ficient  to  resolve  transient  burn  rate  details  at  frequencies  exceeding 
50–100 Hz. It is worth also to mention that application of this technique 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009802V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

is based on assumption of flat burning surface perpendicular to longi-
tudinal sample axis which could not be realized in most practical cases. 
An  example  of  recent  application  of  direct  photography  method  for 
recording the regressing surface images is presented in [24] where the 
hybrid fuel regression process was examined. Schematic of the experi-
mental  setup  is  shown  in  Fig.  1  and  images  of  the  wax  fuel  slab  at 
different instants of time are presented in Fig. 2. 

The  images  were  recorded  with  a  high  speed  Photron  SA-5  video 
camera  operating  at  full  resolution  (1024  × 1024  pixels).  Specially 
designed  optical system was used to provide a slab backlighting. The 
magnification varied from 4.75 pixels/mm to 13 pixels/mm that pro-
vided  spatial  resolution  equal  to  0.21- 0.08  mm/pixel.  The  measured 
heights of sample were then plotted against the proper time instants and 
the average fuel regression rate was described by a linear expression. 
The regression data have been shown to agree well with the results of 
traditional quasi-steady measurements reported in the literature. At the 
same  time,  the  employed  optical  technique  allowed  recording  spatial 
non-uniformity of the regression rate. 

Fig. 3 demonstrates the not smooth variations of the regression rate 
in  dependency  on  the  location  of  measuring  site  along  the  fuel  slab 
length  and  the  trend  of  increasing  averaged  regression  rate  in  the 
streamwise direction. The “chaotic”  variations of local regression rate 
are a consequence of existing not flat and variable in time profile of a 
melted wax sample. This exhibits the problem of deriving data on total 
(average) regression rate on the basis of local (in point) measurements of 
the sample height. 

2.1.4. Optical projection 

The  optical  projection  method  has  been  applied  for  determining 
transient burn rates in the processes of oscillatory combustion and fast 
depressurization  [25,26].  In  this  method,  a  beam  of  He-Ne  laser  is 
directed over the propellant top surface and detected by a photocell. The 
shape of the beam print on a photocell is corrected with a special mask to 
provide  linear  acquisition  response  when  moving  burning  surface. 
Detecting signal is converted to the voltage, then amplified and recor-
ded. The view of experimental setup is shown in Fig. 4. 

According  to  approximate  estimates  the  spatial  resolution  of 
recording  system  amounts  about 10  μm  that  provides  a  possibility  to 
record burn rate changes in the course of depressurization with char-
acteristic speed up to 50 MPa/s. It was found that for propellants based 
on  ammonium  perchlorate  (AP)  as  oxidizer  and  hydroxyl  terminated 
polybutadiene (HTPB) or polysulfide (PS) as binder the transient burn 
rates in a short time period after pressure starts decreasing are greater 
than  quasi  steady-state  rates  at  corresponding  pressure.  Upon 
continuing reduction of pressure the rates exhibit oscillations, which are 
more intense in the case of AP/HTPB propellant. The burn rate oscilla-
tions  amplitude  increases  when  the  depressurization  rate  increases 
(Fig. 5) and these observations are in a qualitative agreement with those 
made previously with use of microwave technique [27]. 

However, these findings disagree with experimental data obtained 
by the capacitance technique [28]. The reasons for such disagreement 
are not known yet but typical restrictions can be mentioned making it 
difficult to determine correctly transient burn rate when using optical 
techniques. Indeed, the effects of burning surface roughness and non-flat 
shape, illumination of flame and smoke formation, as well as a sample 

Fig. 2. Shadow projection of fuel slab at different instants of time, from top to 
bottom: 0 s, 2.5 s, and 3.75 s. The height of slab from the previous image is 
shown by black line [24]. 

Fig. 3. Regression rate variation vs. location along the fuel slab (G= 8.3 kg/ 
m2s) [24]. 

vibration have to be thoroughly examined and estimated. 

2.1.5. Bore image recording 

The  optical  technique  for  measuring  the  time  resolved  regression 
rate of hybrid fuel is presented in [29,30]. For the first time this tech-
nique  has  been  developed  in  SPLab,  Milan  and  schematic  of  setup  is 
shown in Fig. 6. It consists of an oxidant flow control system, pressure 
control system, laser ignition system, image acquisition system and the 
combustion chamber. The fuel sample has a cylindrical bore and optical 
time-resolved system records the bore diameter variation in time. 

The cross-section images of the paraffin-based fuel sample burning at 
1 MPa pressure are presented in Fig. 7. When measuring the diameter of 
bore at different time instants, it becomes possible to obtain via using 
original software the regression rate as a function of the oxidizer mass 
flow value. 

The advantage of this technique is a possibility to obtain in one test 
the data on regression rate at different values (due to increase in bore 
diameter)  of  oxidizer  mass  flow.  However,  the  accuracy  of  described 
optical  measurements  is  not  sufficient  to  conduct  studies  of  typical 
transient processes at frequencies exceeding 10–20 Hz. Actually there 
are serious problems in a treatment of the bore diameter data because 
the  location  of  sharp  image  along  the  channel  length  could  not  be 
determined accurately. Note also that typically the edges of cylindrical 
channel usually have different regression behavior if compared to the 
central part. 

Fig. 1. Scheme of paraffin wax combustion setup [24].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009803V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Fig. 4. Schematic of optical projection setup [26].  

[37],  where  the  coupling  material  was  excluded  (Fig.  9,  right)  and 
specially  designed  Oscillation  Deadener  Circuit  has  been  employed 
generating the negative wave of the first echo to cancel the following 
reflective  echoes.  The  maximum  measured  propellant  length  was 
noticeably  increased  (100  mm  instead  of  nominal  30–40  mm)  by 
applying the frequency shift method, which uses the Doppler Effect and 
Wavelet Analysis. The improved setup version provided 5% accuracy of 
measuring the average burn rate magnitude. As for a transient burn rate, 
it was stated that existing setup with ultrasonic signal pulse generation 
frequency  100  Hz  allows  measurements  only  in  the  quasi-steady 
conditions. 

The  natural  spatial  and  frequency  limitations  of  ultrasound  tech-
nique  are  dictated  by  the  technical  restrictions.  For  example,  let  the 
frequency of ultrasound wave equals 1 MHz that corresponds to 2 mm 
wavelength in a propellant with a sound speed of 2000 m/s [38]. Thus, 
an error of 1/4 of the oscillation period corresponds to an error of 500 
μm for determining the regression surface location. This clearly shows 
that  for  improving  the  accuracy  of  the  one-quarter  wavelength  ultra-
sound  method  it  is  necessary  to  use  more  sophisticated  technique  to 
process  the  echo  signals.  In  [38],  a  promising  approach  for  adequate 
processing experimental data and applying the ultrasound measurement 
results  to  determine  the  burn  rate  response  to  oscillatory  chamber 
pressure has been proposed. To improve spatial resolution it was sug-
gested to subtract the interface echo before performing the cross cor-
relation of primary (from the burning surface) echo. With the sampling 
signal frequency of 25 MHz the spatial resolution for the sample thick-
ness measurement was close to 80 μm. The example of application of this 
approach for determining the burn rate response to 50 Hz pressure os-
cillations in a chamber is shown in Fig. 10. In addition to the burn rate 
oscillating curve the plot of its power spectral density function is pre-
sented  calculated  from  a  fast  Fourier  transform  without  averaging 
original signal. This function clearly indicates the maximum response at 
pressure oscillations frequency (50 Hz) and facilitates processing data at 
higher frequencies with smaller amplitude burn rate oscillations. 

The experimental burner setup equipped with a rotating valve was 
used to obtain data on the pressure-coupled burn rate response function 
of several solid propellants and careful analysis was performed of the 
effects of propellant compressibility and thermal boundary layer prop-
erties on the measurements accuracy. The last effect may produce large 
error  in  determining  response  function  because  a  speed  of  sound  is 

Fig. 5. Response of AP/HTPB Propellant to rapid depressurization: solid lines 
1, 2 and 3 stand for dimensionless burn rate curves corresponding  to dimen-
sionless pressure curves 4, 5 and 6, respectively [26]. 

2.1.6. Ultrasound techniques 

In  the  case  of  one-dimensional  geometry  the  regression  surface 
location can also be determined by ultrasonic wave reflection method 
that was first demonstrated about 50 years ago [31]. Later this technique 
was extensively developed by different research groups over the world 
[32–35]. The method is based on measuring the time period between an 
emitted sound pulse and its echo generated by the reflection from the 
burning surface. With known value of the sound speed in the sample 
material  one  may  determine  the  distance  traveled  by  the  ultrasonic 
wave. Consequently, the burn rate can be derived via differentiation of 
the distance vs. time data. Attractive feature of the method is that when 
using simultaneously several sensors it is possible to measure a regres-
sion rate in different locations along the regression surface. Fig. 8 shows 
a schematic view of facility employed in Hycom (ONERA, France) for 
measuring hybrid fuel regression rate [36]. 

In the typical setups the ultrasonic wave propagates first through the 
cold  substances  including  coupling  and  energetic  material  and  then 
travels through the higher temperature region, which includes a reac-
tion zone layer (Fig. 9, left). The improved version has been proposed in 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009804V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Fig. 6. Overall scheme of 2D-radial setup for studying fuel regression [30].  

highly  dependent  on  the  temperature  and  propellant  structure.  The 
changes  of  thermal  boundary  layer  properties  during  transient  com-
bustion process can cause noticeable measurement errors. As a result, 
measured response function may become about two fold enhanced in 
comparison with a true value. Fortunately, because the error introduces 
similar bias for similar materials a comparison among propellants with 
similar material properties has to be valid. Finally, it was stated that the 
ultrasound  technique  can  be  best  used  for  making  response  function 
measurements at frequencies not exceeding ca. 200 Hz [38]. 

In fact this estimate of the measurements ability looks very prom-
ising. However, during past 2 decades no new results have been reported 
with use of this technique. An attempt to increase informativity of ul-
trasonic measurements was reported in [39] where specially designed 
high speed recording system has been developed, which allowed ultra-
sonic full waveforms and pressure data up to 2000 times per second be 
acquired. The data obtained were compared with a strand burner data 
(stationary combustion) indicating good representativity of ultrasound 
technique.  However,  application  of  designed  setup  for  time  resolved 
measurements was not demonstrated. 

Detailed analysis of instrumental measuriment accuracy when using 
ultrasound  technique  has  been  conducted  in  [40],  which  generalized 
accomplishments of ONERA in this field. It was reported that the method 
gives certain advantages for studying the thermal insulator properties 
and their regression behavior, as well as for studying the burn rate of 
hybrid and various energetic materials. The issues of sensitivity of ul-
trasound  wave  propagation  to  variations  of  intrinsic  EM  physical  pa-
rameters  and  operating  conditions  were  discussed.  It  was  stated  that 
when selecting proper operating conditions the instrumental error can 
be reduced down to 1% of steady-state burn rate value. The estimates of 
frequency limitations for transient combustion measurements were not 
reported. 

2.1.7. X-ray radiography 

The attempts of using the X-ray technique for dynamic measuring the 
magnitude of EM samples web thickness were made during several de-
cades  by  various  research  groups  [41–44].  Such  technique  can  be 
effectively  used  for  exploring  the  combustion  processes  in  the  closed 
vessels. A method of X-ray diagnostics has been employed [45, 46] to 
measure local burn rate in laboratory scale solid rocket motor with two 
parallel solid-propellant slabs. The source of X-rays was placed above 
the motor and the beams passed through the aluminum windows. The 
radiation  transmitted  through  the  slabs  was  recorded  by  the  sensors 
attached at the bottom window side. The setup allowed simultaneous 

Fig. 7. Sequential images of bore cross-section in combustion of paraffin-based 
fuel [30]. 

Fig. 8. Setup for studying hybrid fuel regression [36].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009805V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Fig. 9. Principal schemes of ultrasound measurements; typical (left) and improved (right) [37].  

Fig. 10. The burn rate temporal record (left) and the power spectral density (PSD, right) of original web thickness signal, 50 Hz experiment [38].  

recording X-ray attenuation in 3 different locations along the propellant 
slab  providing  information  about  local  web  thickness  on  the  basis  of 
calibration data obtained in advance. To derive dynamic burn rate data 
the procedure of time differentiation of instantaneous web thickness has 
been employed. As a result, the data about erosion characteristics of the 
propellant  burn  rate  were  obtained.  The  calibration  of  total  system 
included  measurement  of  the  attenuation  extent  when  using  slabs  of 
identical propellant and given thickness. An advantage of the approach 
characteristics 
is 

the  possibility  of  measuring 

combustion 

simultaneously in different locations of the burning surface. However, 
the reliability of the data obtained depends essentially on the calibration 
measurements  accuracy  and  the  X-ray  source  stability.  Actually,  real 
accuracy and delivered temporal resolution of the method could not be 
evaluated on the basis of published data. In fact, the method  did not 
receive further development. 

A technique for obtaining side image of a burning sample with use of 
continuous X-ray beam penetrating through a sample was employed in 
several works. Block diagram of a contemporary X-ray system [47] used 

Fig. 11. Chart of real time radiography system [47].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009806V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

for performing real time radioscopy is shown in Fig. 11. 

The setup includes an X-ray source and image intensifier converting 
X-rays to visible light. Then high-speed video-camera records the images 
which  can  be  analyzed  with  an  advanced  image  processor  allowing 
determination  of  instantaneous  burning  surface  position.  Temporal 
resolution of the system is the function of camera framing rate which 
may comprise 50–10,000 frames per second. However, spatial resolu-
tion of conventional X-ray systems is not high. According to the prin-
ciples  of  geometrical  optics  it  depends  on  the  ratio  of  the  distance 
between  the  X-ray  source to  the  object  and  the  distance  between  the 
source and image intensifier screen, as well as on the magnification scale 
of image intensifier and the size of the X-ray source focal spot. Typical 
value of real-time X-ray radiography spatial resolution is about 100 μm 
[11]. 

In many cases the framing rate must be reduced due to insufficient 
amount of visible light produced by the image intensifier that is caused 
by  a  low  power  of  X-ray  source.  This  situation  can  be  essentially 
improved  when  using  the  synchrotron  radiation  source  [48].  An 
example of such recording system is shown in Fig. 12 where synchrotron 
radiation  SR  is  generated  by  the  linear  electron  accelerator  VEPP-3 
(Institute  of  nuclear  physics,  Novosibirsk)  and  then  passes  through 
Monochromator and EM sample. Magnified X-ray image of the sample is 
recorded by 2D detector with final spatial system resolution ca. 4 μm. 
The recording system (Fig. 12) can be used to obtain a series of rotating 
sample  X-ray  images  which  allow  producing  tomography  records 
analyzed with special computer codes that provide detailed information 
on the specimen internal structure. The system is also used for detecting 
temporal X-ray images of fixed sample and obtaining sequential profiles 
of burning EM specimen. The processing of profiles gives the burn rate 
data. Current problem of available recording system is a poor detector 
temporal resolution (about few Hz). Advanced versions of detector unit 
may solve this problem in the future. 

Thus, in the case of synchrotron source the resolution may reach the 
value of few microns. Much higher spatial resolution can be obtained 
with  use  of  microfocus  X-ray  sources  [49,50].  Unfortunately,  the 
microfocus X-ray sources still have relatively small power and could not 
be used for dynamic measurements of EM burn rate. 

2.1.8. Microwave technique 

More  than  60  years  ago  it  was  proposed  to  use  microwaves  for 
recording  the  characteristics  of  fast  reactions  in  energetic  materials. 
Probably  for  the  first  time  the  use  of  microwaves  in  this  respect  was 
mentioned  in  [51]  where  the  microwave  radiation  was  employed  to 
measure  detonation  speed  in  explosives.  Later  the  application  of  mi-
crowaves for measuring the solid propellants burn rate was described in 
[52,53]. Different modifications of this technique for measuring char-
acteristics  of  linear  burn  rate  and  determination  of  pressure-coupled 
response  function,  including  reflection  and  transmission  approaches, 
have been published in literature during past decades [54–60]. 

The technique implies the measurement of the Doppler shift of fre-
quency phase  between  the  original microwave  signal and  the  one re-
flected  from  the  burning  surface.  The  burn  rate  value  rb  depends  on 
temporal derivative of the phase shift Φ according to formula rb = const 

Fig. 12. Layout of recording system for X-ray tomography.  

(dF/dt). Consequently, the accuracy of the instantaneous regression rate 
measurement depends on the accuracy of phase shift determination. To 
increase the phase resolution it was proposed to use an interferometry 
system including two klystrons operating at different frequencies [56]. 
In this case the phase resolution of the recording system can reach the 
value of 0.08 - 0.16 milliradian that corresponds to spatial resolution 
better  than  1  μm.  Obviously,  it  makes  microwave  reflection  method 
theoretically  the  most  sensitive  measurement  method,  which  allows 
obtaining very detailed data on instantaneous burn rate. Another way to 
improve spatial resolution of the technique is increasing the frequency 
of microwave signal. Development of setup working at a frequency ca. 
140 GHz (decreasing the microwave wavelength from 30 mm to 2 mm) 
was reported in [61–63] where the potential limitations of the method 
have been analyzed. In practice these limitations are caused by the ef-
fects of propellant compressibility and noticeable radiation attenuation 
(especially  for  metallized  mixtures),  signal  distortion  due  to  electro-
magnetic wave reflection from the flame ionization zone, noises due to 
instability of electronic system and vibrations of the test stand. In ex-
periments  under  elevated  pressure  an  additional  source  of  the  signal 
disturbances is the reflection of microwaves from the walls and interior 
parts of a closed vessel. As a result, delivered spatial resolution of the 
method comprises about few microns, which is the highest spatial res-
olution among existing experimental techniques. 

Recently, a sort of novel radiography reflection technique based on 
terahertz (ca. 1000 GHz, sub millimeter wavelength domain) radiation 
has been reported [64]. The measurements were made in interferometry 
mode and focused on studying the quasi-steady combustion processes. 
Obviously, such technique can potentially provide great possibilities for 
improving  the measurement  method  spatial resolution  and at  present 
the  urgent  problem  is  a  development  of  the  proper  tools  (detectors) 
allowing  the  signal  recording  with  sufficient  accuracy  and  frequency 
resolution. 

2.2. Measurement of mass (weight) of reacting sample 

2.2.1.

Inertia mass 

To  measure  instantaneous  mass  of  the  reacting  sample  one  may 
employ  a  common  physical principle  which  states that  the  resonance 
vibration  frequency  of  elastic  element  depends  on  its  mechanical 
properties  and  the  total  mass.  For  performing  instantaneous  mass 
measurements an electronic system has to record frequency of vibrations 
of elastic element with attached reacting sample and electromagnetic 
actuating unit must properly sustain the element oscillations. Various 
versions  of  such  devices  were  designed  by  different  researchers. 
Vibrating  element  in  the  form  of  a  thin  metallic  membrane  with  a 
diameter  of  50  mm  has  been  used  in  [65].  The  reacting  sample  was 
assembled on a rod mounted at the center of the membrane. In [66], the 
vibrating element was made in the form of cantilevered quartz rod; the 
reacting  sample  was  fastened  at  the  end  of  the  rod.  The  nominal  vi-
bration frequency comprised 1 kHz. However, the working frequency 
band  of  data acquisition  system  did not  exceed 100  Hz. The  reacting 
sample mass had a nominal value of about 100 mg. Even smaller mass 
reacting  samples  (ca.  1  mg)  were  studied  in  [67]  with  a  vibrating 
element  in  the  form  of  cantilevered  quartz  tube.  The  resonance  fre-
quency of the tube vibrations was 130 Hz. 

Original design of the gauge for dynamic measurement of reacting 
sample mass was proposed in [68]. Fig. 13 shows the principal scheme of 
the apparatus. The reacting sample is glued to the free end of vibrating 
ferromagnetic rod whose vibrations are generated by a disk of barium 
titanate. Wire coil is used for measuring the frequency of vibrations and 
the  feedback  loop  provides  pulses  to  the  barium  titanate  disks  at  the 
natural  frequency  of  mechanical  system  longitudinal  vibrations.  With 
the vibrations frequency of 10 kHz, the apparatus sensitivity was 1–2 mg 
in mass. 

Note  that  there  exist  common  technical  limitations  in  designing 
setups to measure the oscillating mass. It is known that the period T of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009807V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

estimated on the basis of thermodynamic calculations. Thus, the inter-
ferometric approach needs further development and substantiation with 
use of data obtained by independent experimental methods. 

2.2.3. Direct weighing 

Continuous measurement of the reacting sample weight has specific 
peculiarities. It is well known that available commercial apparatuses are 
characterized by relatively low response frequency. Many years ago a 
simple  mechanical  method  has  been  proposed  for  the  continuous 
weighing the 1–2 g samples [71]. It was based on the use of cantilevered 
beam  with  a  pedestal  containing  attached  EM  sample.  The  beam 
bending was measured with the strain gauges pasted to the base. The 
weight sensitivity of setup comprised 10–20 mg and working frequency 
band 10–30 Hz. 

Later  an  advanced  version  of  micro-force  transducer  has  been  re-
ported  in  [72].  In  this  version  the  reacting  sample  is  attached  to  the 
upper end of movable electrode which is assembled in the gauge case 
with  the  quartz  or  metallic  strings  (membranes).  Stylized  drawing  of 
transducer is shown in Fig. 14. The variation of reacting sample weight 
leads to changing the distance between the movable and fixed electrodes 
resulting in a change of the condenser capacitance. This in turn leads to 
changing the oscillation frequency of the inductance-capacitance (LC) 
circuit.  The  data  acquisition  system  is  capable  to  record  signals  pro-
portional to the sample weight. The samples used had a weight ca. 1000 
mg with the weight resolution being ca. 4–5 mg in a working frequency 
band  up to  400 Hz. In the transducer  version depicted in Fig. 14 the 
setup measures the sum of a sample weight and reactive force of gasi-
fication products. Corrupting effect of the reactive force can be elimi-
nated if the gasification proceeds in such a way that the reactive force 
vector is perpendicular to the movable rod axis. 

Original diagnostic method employing a Thrust Stand Mass Balance 
(TSMB)  is  described  in  [73].  The  method  is  based  on  the  ideas  of  its 
predecessor [74] and intentionally designed to measure directly tran-
sient mass flow from a solid-fuel micro thruster. The overview of TSMB 

Fig.  14. Micro  -  force  transducer:  1-  reacting  sample;  2-  bushing  for  liquid 
damping; 3- flange; 4- case; 5- movable rod; 6- strings (membranes); 7- pressing 
ring;  8-  flange;  9-  protective  screen;  10-  insulating  bushing;  11-  connecting 
electrode; 12- movable and fixed plates of capacitor. 

Fig. 13. Setup for measuring instantaneous reacting sample mass. 1-wire coil, 
2-  oscillating  rod,  3-  tablets  of  BaTiO3,  4  -  constant  magnet,  5  -  magnetic 
guide [68]. 

characteristic vibrations in such devices is described by the formula T =
constant (M + m1)1/2, where M is the mechanical element mass and m1 is 
the  attached  sample  transient  mass.  Obviously,  for  obtaining  high 
sensitivity it is necessary to minimize the mass of a mechanical element. 
However,  usually  the  M  value  is  much  larger  than  m1  that  leads  to 
decrease  in  method  sensitivity.  Additionally,  there  exists  physical  re-
striction  of  the  method  associated  with  reacting  sample  mechanical 
properties.  The  sample  should  retain  its  rigid  structure  to  prevent 
damping  the  high  frequency  vibrations.  The  problem  arises  if  in  the 
course of combustion the reacting sample forms on the surface relatively 
thick  melted  layer  with  different  vibrational  behavior.  Indeed,  it  was 
revealed  in  experiments  [68]  performed  with  the  samples  of  sodium 
nitrate  based  mixtures  that  the  measurement  data  in  conditions  of 
transient  combustion  became  highly  questionable  (erroneous)  due  to 
formation of thick liquid layer on the reacting surface. 

2.2.2.

Interferometry 

In  the  beginning  of  1980th  it  was  proposed  [69]  to  process  the 
interferogram of the gas phase above a reacting EM for obtaining data on 
a mass of evolved gas. In this case temporal derivative of mass yields the 
value of mass gasification rate in the course of ignition and combustion. 
Directly measured phase difference distribution S(x,y) is equal to inte-
gral of the refractive index distribution n(x,y,z) within the flame zone. 
The current value of the gas phase mass mg is determined by the formula 

[
(n (cid:0) 1)V (cid:0) λ

∫∫ S

mg =

]/
k

(x, y)dxdy

(1)  

where k is the mean Gladstone-Dale constant of the gas phase and V is its 
volume;  n  is  the  refraction  index  of  surrounding  gas  phase;  λ  is  the 
wavelength  and  S  (x,  y)  is  the  phase  difference  distribution  of  the 
interfering rays in the interferogram plane. When measuring time de-
pendency for mg one may obtain the mass burn rate dmg/dt and the mean 
linear  burn  rate  rb  as  well  as  the  linear  gas  flow  velocity  [69].  In 
calculating mg  by Eq. (1) the gas phase volume is evaluated from the 
interferogram contour assuming an axisymmetric flow. This procedure 
can be mostly applied for studying the initial moments of the ignition 
process  when  the  new  formed  gas  phase  is  detected  within  the 
motion-picture  frame.  As  mentioned  in  [70],  typical  interferometers 
have a viewing area size ca. 0.2 m and allowable time for determining 
mg(t)  does  not  exceed  0.2  s.  Interferometric  technique  has  been 
employed  in  several  studies  on  radiative  (1.06  µm)  ignition  of  nitro-
cellulose  and  model  composite  propellants  based  on  ammonium 
perchlorate.  It  revealed  staged  character  of  ignition  in  the  case  of 
transparent  energetic  materials  and  oscillating  behavior  of  their burn 
rate  after  removal  of  external  heating  source.  Evaluated  mass  flow 
sensitivity of technique reached the values of about 1 mg/s and better, 
however, the method time resolution was not reported. By indirect es-
timates,  a  frequency  resolution  comprised  ca.  50  Hz.  It  must  be 
mentioned that in this approach real mass flow measurement accuracy 
depends on the accuracy of calculating optical parameters of the EM gas 
reaction products, which are hardly measured in situ and can be only 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009808V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Fig. 15. Scheme of Thrust Stand Mass Balance [73].  

is shown in Fig. 15. 

The stand has a horizontal axis arm allowing its rotation in a vertical 
plane.  On  the  one  end  of  arm  a  small  scale  hybrid  motor  thruster  is 
attached  while  on  another  end  the  linear  variable  differential  trans-
former (LVDT) is mounted, which detects the change of motor mass due 
to fuel charge burning. The stand allows measuring total mass loss ca. 
2.5  g  at  about  45  cm  distance  from  the  center  of  stand’s  rotation. 
Detailed  calibrations  were  performed  to  determine  the  stand  spring, 
damping,  and  mass  inertia  moment  coefficients.  Optimized  design  of 
TSMB provided measuring the mass loss with extreme resolution of 1.1 
mg/s.  The  results  of  dynamic  measurement  of  total  mass  loss  were 
compared  with  the  ones  obtained  by  using  precise  digital  scale  and 
exhibited 2.5% error. The advantage of this approach is that it provides 
possibilities to determine the characteristics of transient mass flow at 
arbitrary type motor design. Unfortunately, the published information 
does not allow evaluating a real time resolution of TSMB. Delivered in 
the paper data on transient mass flow rate of ethanol stream (calibration 
tests)  and  in  course  of  hybrid  motor  operation  report  on  measured 
parameter  oscillations  with  a  frequency  about  1.5  Hz.  Further  devel-
opment of the method implies simultaneous pressure measurements as 
well as comparison with different measurement methods data. 

2.2.4. Microwave resonator 

Rather  recently  a  modified  microwave method  has been  proposed 
intended to measure transient EM mass gasification rate. The method is 
based  on  the  use  of  microwave  gauge  of  resonator type  [75,76].  The 
overview of gauge is shown in Fig. 16. 

It consists of 2 coupled coaxial resonators with two ports. One port 
serves for exciting the resonators in antiphase mode oscillations whereas 
the  second  one  serves  as  the  receiver  of  signal  passing  to  a  network 
analyzer. The gap between resonators forms a working zone of gauge. 
The length of a working zone is chosen to be equal to diameter of the 
gauge central channel that ensures high uniformity of high-frequency 
electric field in the bulk of studied sample. There exist possibilities of 
using preliminarily obtained calibration data, determined with varied 
bore diameter samples, to process the signal measured during gasifica-
tion (firing) tests. Before each experiment the gauge resonant charac-
teristic is determined first and then the forward power gain coefficient 
S21 between the gauge ports is recorded at chosen fixed frequency. The 
presence of an EM sample in a working zone changes the gauge resonant 
characteristic that leads to shifting (in proportion to sample mass) the 
resonant frequency of an antiphase mode of oscillations due to changing 
the magnitude of coupling between coaxial resonators. Using this gauge 
design allows performing the time-resolved measurements of the bored 
samples gasification rate under intense gas blowing. The measurements 
can be performed with the working zone located in different positions 
along the sample length that allows obtaining information about local 

Fig. 16. Layout of microwave resonator gauge. 1 – case; 2 – protective tube; 3 
– input port; 4 – aligning disk; 5 – output port; 6 – output resonator; 7 – sample; 
8 - input resonator [76]. 

gasification rate in the central part as well as at the bore edge points. 
Note that the most of available in literature data on the fuel gasification 
(regression) rate are based on the measurement of total weight loss over 
the  firing  time  that  correspond  to  fully  averaging  in  time  and  space 
values. 

Fig.  17  presents  an  overview  of  experimental  setup  employed  in 
experiments  with the samples of  Plexiglas, pure  paraffin and  paraffin 
with 20% AlH3  under intense blowing by air at pressures 0.1–2.0 MPa 
[76]. 

Due to high linearity of the calibration characteristic (signal vs. bore 
radius) and the proper selection of working frequency the second point 
in the characteristic can be determined for the (empty) gauge without 
EM loading the working zone. Whereas the first point is determined for 
the  gauge  with  the  initial  size  sample  loaded  into  the  working  zone. 
Thus,  for  quick  estimation  of  the  regression  (gasification)  rate  Vregr  a 
simple relationship can be used in the form 

/

Vregr = dr

dt = (dS / dt)

/

(dS / dr),

(2)  

where S(t) is the gauge signal value and r(t) is the current radius of a 
sample bore. When using commercial network analyzer the acquisition 
system makes signal records with the rate of 5000 1/s. The measurement 
accuracy is determined mainly by the electronic noise. The magnitude of 
noise comprised 0.01 dB and with measured derivative value ca. dS/dr 
= -3•103  dB/m  the  estimated  setup  spatial  resolution  was  about  few 
microns [76]. This exhibits great potential capabilities of the microwave 
resonator method for investigating transient combustion (gasification) 
processes. 

3. Indirect methods 

3.1. Pressure diagram 

Recorded pressure history for energetic material  sample fired in a 
closed  vessel  can  be  used  for  deducing  its  burn  rate  [8,11,77].  The 
simplest  approach  implies  using  the  mass  balance  equation  for  com-
busting material in the dmc /dt=ρrb S form and proper gas state equation 
PV=mcRgT. Here mc corresponds to the consumed mass of firing sample, 
ρ to its density, S to the burning surface area value, rb to the burn rate, Rg 
to the gas mixture constant, P and T to the gas pressure and temperature. 
The  gas  mixture  composition  can  be  estimated  from  thermochemical 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009809V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Fig. 17. Sketch of experimental facility for tests with gas blowing through the specimen bore [76].  

calculations  as  well  as  temperature.  However,  for  better  results  reli-
ability the temperature must be measured. When differentiating the gas 
state equation and using relationship for the (free) vessel gas volume 
V=Vves – mcη –(m0-mc)/ρ, where Vves is the vessel volume, m0 is the initial 
EM sample mass and η  is the co-volume of combustion products, one 
may obtain expression for instantaneous burn rate as a function f1  of 
pressure time derivative, rb=f1(dP/dt). 

More advanced application [78] of this approach takes into account 
the variation of gas temperature in a closed vessel during combustion 
estimated  via  chemical  equilibrium  calculations.  Numerically  solved 
mathematical model has been used to derive information on the mean 
burn rate versus pressure data (P-t results) for four propellants that was 
compared with experimental results obtained with a fuse wire method 
and reported by manufacturer. The comparison showed good agreement 
between the manufacturer’s and P-t results with experimental P-t results 
being slightly overestimated compared with manufacturer’s data. 

Obviously,  the  accuracy  and  reliability  of  P-t  approach  depend 
essentially upon the validity of several assumptions including uniform 
distribution of pressure and temperature within the vessel, the absence 
(or  formal  account)  of  heat  losses,  the  constancy  of  gas  composition 
during combustion. The application of this method in conditions of a 
closed vessel is intended mainly for the measurement of stationary burn 
rates. To determine transient burn rates during processes of depressur-
ization  or  combustion  under  oscillating  pressures  the  modified  P-t 
approach can be employed based on solving the equations describing the 
interior ballistics behavior of solid rocket motor [79–81]. 

The mass balance equation in the combustion chamber has a form 

[80]: 

(V / RT)dP/dt = rSrb (cid:0) G,

approach do not provide possibilities for precise calculation of burn rate 
values.  At  the  same  time  this  approach  can  be  used  for  approximate 
evaluation of transient combustion behavior in large scale solid rocket 
motors. 

3.2. Recoil force 

Gasification products of energetic materials decomposition generate 
a  recoil  force  F  determined  by  the  intensity  of  the  reactions  in  EM 
condensed phase [72,82,83]. This allows using the F value for recording 
dynamic  characteristics  of  linear  burn  rate  rb  and  for  determining 
laser-driven  combustion  response  of  energetic  materials.  For  this  end 
various micro force transducers have been employed in the past based 
on  microphone  [82],  strain  [84],  piezoelectric  [85–87]  and 
magnet-induction [88] sensors. In laboratory investigations, to provide 
one-dimensional motion of gasification products a thin-wall protection 
tube is usually attached to the sample reacting surface. Based on equa-
tions  of  momentum  and  mass  conservation,  the  magnitude  of  recoil 
force can be calculated as follows [89]: 

F(t) =

(

(ρcrb(t))2
ρg(t)

+ L

d
dt

)

(ρcrb(t))

S

(4) 

Here ρc is the density of condensed phase, L is the length of protec-
tion tube, ρg is the gas density at the end of protection tube, S is the cross 
section  of  a  reacting  sample,  and  t  is  the  time.  In  accordance  with 
equation of state for ideal gas its density depends on the temperature Tg, 
pressure P, molecular weight μ, and universal gas constant R as follows: 

(3)  

/
ρg = Pμ

TgR.

(5) 

where G stands for the gas release rate through the nozzle. Magnitude of 
G is calculated for supercritical gas flow as G=const(PScr), where Scr  is 
the nozzle throat area. As a result, the approximate transfer function of 
transient  burn  rate in  a  solid rocket  motor  can be obtained,  which  is 
often called the burn rate response function. This allows estimating the 
dynamic characteristics of transient burn rate and designing the auto-
matic  control  systems  for  solid  rocket  motors.  The  applicability  and 
accuracy of approach predictions can be determined by means of com-
parison  with  the  results  of  other  theoretical  approaches  and  experi-
mental tests. Unfortunately, the assumptions made in formulation of the 

In the case of sufficiently long protection tube the gas phase reactions 
proceed until forming final reaction products and the gas temperatures 
measured at the edge of tube approximately correspond to their adia-
batic values. In the case of removed protection tube the reaction prod-
ucts  plume  becomes  wider  than  the  sample  cross-section  and  the  gas 
stream motion loses one-dimensional character. Therefore, in this case a 
recoil force magnitude becomes lower of that measured with protected 
tube. 

Recoil force measurement can be effectively executed by a modified 
option of the force transducer depicted above in Fig. 14. The original 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098010V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

transducer version [72] was usually used at atmospheric pressure con-
ditions  but  under  elevated  pressures  the  measurement  lost  accuracy 
because of changing the gas mixture properties in the vessel during EM 
combustion. Therefore, a modified micro force transducer version has 
been  developed  with  the  additional  (reference)  capacitor  serving  for 
compensation of disturbing effects owing to variation of gas properties 
(molecular  weight,  temperature)  [90].  Schematic  view  of  modified 
transducer is presented in Fig. 18. Fig. 19 shows the examples of recoil 
force diagrams recorded by original and modified transducer versions. 
When measuring the recoil force the transducer axis must be posi-
tioned horizontally. In this case a reactive force vector is directed along 
the axis of a movable electrode whereas the sample weight is compen-
sated by the supports (membranes) reaction. The calibration of trans-
ducer is performed either loading the vertically installed device with the 
fixed balance weights or by loading horizontally installed device with 
the lever arm system. 

In practice of laboratory investigations for approximate evaluation of 
recoil force it is more convenient to use instead of Eq. (4) a simplified 
expression in the form [89]: 

F(t) =

m2(t)
ρg(t)

S, m = ρcrb.

(6) 

This is justified in the case when the second term in the right part of 
Eq. (4) becomes negligible in comparison with the first term. To justify, 
the allowable frequency range has to be determined. For this end, when 
fixing  the  maximal  uncertainty  δ  of  calculating  the  recoil  force,  the 
following relationship can be derived: 

f < δ

m0
2πLρgδm

,

where m0 = ρcrb0 and δm = Δm/m0 = Δrb/rb0; rb0 is the stationary burn 
rate. This relationship represents the limiting value of burn rate oscil-
lation frequency f corresponding to validity of Eq. (6) within δ  uncer-
tainty.  It  is  seen  that  the  magnitude  of  limiting  (upper)  frequency 
depends on the nominal value of burn rate, the length of protection tube 
and the ratio of condensed and gas phase densities. For typical values δ =
0.01, ρc/ρg  = 1000, rb=5 mm/s, L = 5 mm and δm  = 0.05 the limiting 
frequency comprises ca. 30 Hz. Consequently, at higher frequencies it is 
necessary to use Eq. (6) for deriving correct recoil force value. 

When processing experimental calibration data, the dependency of 
recoil force on burn rate can be presented in accordance with Eq. (6) in 
the following generalized form: 

F = kmnS

(7) 

Fig. 18. Sketch of modified force transducer: 1- reacting sample; 2- bushing for 
liquid damping; 3- flange; 4- case; 5- movable rod; 6- strings (membranes); 7- 
pressing ring; 8- flange; 9- protective screen; 10- insulating bushing; 11- con-
necting  electrode;  12-  movable and unmovable  plates  of  capacitor; 13-  refer-
ence capacitor [90]. 

Experimentally,  the  parameters  k  and  m  are  determined  via 
measuring  magnitude  of  stationary  F  at  various  values  of  initial  tem-
perature T0, pressure P or radiant flux q. As a result, one obtains the 
following relationships: 

Fi(m) = ki⋅mni ⋅S ,

i = T0, P, q

(8) 

Thus,  the  parameters  k  and  m  in  common  case  depend  on  the 
following variable pairs: kq = kq(T0, P) and nq = nq(T0, P); kp = kp(T0, q) 
and np  = np(T0, q); or  kTo  = kTo(P, q) and nTo  = nTo(P, q). It must be 
underlined that the n values of different parameter’s pairs may not be 
identical. It was established in [72,83] that in the case of basic double 
base  propellant  N  (57%  colloxylin,  28%  nitroglycerin,  11%  dini-
trotoluene,  4%  technological  additives)  the  magnitude  of  n  equals  2 
independently  on the  type of burn  rate variation  (including variation 
under radiant flux). However, for the propellant N with 1% of carbon 
black additive the magnitude of n equals 1.6 upon variation of burn rate 
by radiation from Xenon lamp whereas n= 2 upon burn rate variations 
by  initial  temperature  or  pressure.  Note  that  the  value  of  radiation 
extinction coefficient for the propellant N with 1% carbon black additive 
(cid:0) 1  for basic propellant. Similarly, in 
equals 450 cm
experiments with non-metallized composite propellant [91] containing 
1% of carbon black additive it was obtained n= 2.2, when caused by 
variations of initial temperature or pressure, and n= 1.7, when caused 
by variation of the radiant flux. The reason for observed changes in the 
expression for recoil force dependency on the burn rate is the difference 
in  temperature  profiles  created  by  radiation  absorption  in  condensed 
phase of different transparency EM. In the case of transparent material 
the absorption of radiative energy occurs preferably in the bulk of EM 
and the effect is similar to initial temperature rise. For semi-transparent 
material the absorption of radiative energy occurs in a relatively narrow 
subsurface layer that results in the noticeable change in the temperature 
profile  and  corresponding  changes  in  the  heat  release  intensity  and 
composition of gasification products. 

(cid:0) 1  instead of 15 cm

3.3. Other indirect methods 

There  exist  several  indirect  methods  to  measure  instantaneous 
regression rate of EMs. In particular, the mass vs. time dependency for 
fired EM can be determined via dynamic measuring the electrical ca-
pacity  of  a  planar  capacitor  formed  by  a  rectangular  EM  specimen 
covered with a combustible metallic foils [92] serving as the capacitor 
plates. This variable capacitor is mounted along with the capacitor and 
inductor of known characteristics. Being driven by an alternating cur-
rent the resonance frequency of the L-C circuit, which is the measure of 
unburned material volume, is determined by electronic system. Using 
the calibration data an instantaneous specimen size and the propellant 
burn rate can be derived. According to estimates [92], under pressure 
oscillations frequency about 1.0 kHz the error in the measurement of the 
burn rate comprises ca. 10%. It was shown in later work [93] that the 
measurement  results  were  corrupted  by  the  unknown  dependency  of 
flame/plasma conductance on the pressure. 

Another method for dynamic measurement of the gasification rate of 
bored fuel grains was proposed in [94]. In this method a thin mylar disk 
of 0.1 mm thickness coated with 0.01 mm aluminum layer was inserted 
in the cross-section cut of the fuel grain. The disk with an inner round 
hole of a diameter equal to the grain bore diameter had a narrow radial 
slit assembled with electrical contacts. In the course of combustion of 
fuel  grain  the  bore  diameter  increased  and  the  disk  circular  area 
decreased. The recorded temporal variation of the disk resistance was 
used to derive a linear regression rate of the fuel grain. Application of 
this  rather  simple  measurement  method  is  confronted  with  several 
technical difficulties. Actually, it is necessary to ensure good homoge-
neity of conducting material and ideal electrical contacts as well as their 
excellent physical contact with the fuel grain. In addition there must be 
known well the dependencies of resistance on temperature and thermal 
stresses. Thus, despite optimistic statements of Monti and Mazzala [94] 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098011V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Fig. 19. Recoil force records: original (left) and modified (right) transducer [90].  

on high reliability and sufficient accuracy of the method its real tech-
nical characteristics are difficult to evaluate. 

Rather  recently  an  original  not-intrusive  technique  [95]  was  pro-
posed  for  time-resolved  measurement  of  port  diameter  in  fuel  grain 
which may serve for determining spatially averaged fuel regression rate. 
The  technique  implies  recording  the  frequency  of  the  hybrid  motor 
Helmholtz oscillations and uses the known physical principle that this 
frequency is inversely proportional to the square root of the chamber 
volume. To realize, the pressure oscillations should be measured by fast 
response  transducer  or  a  plume  flicker  can  be  recorded  by  a  photo-
multiplier. As reported in [95], the values of current port diameter of the 
paraffin fuel grain were derived with a maximum uncertainty ca. 6.5% 
by  recording  the  Helmholtz  frequency.  To  obtain  the  regression  rate 
values the above data have to be numerically differentiated that leads to 
increased  uncertainty.  In  the  experiments,  thus  determined  value  of 
spatially  and  temporally  averaged  regression  rate  became  within  re-
ported  above  uncertainty  limits  in  a  good  agreement  with  the  rate 
determined from the total fuel mass loss in a firing test. Major advantage 
of  the  frequency  measurement  technique  is  that  it  needs  for  imple-
mentation only a fast pressure transducer or photomultiplier tube. 

4. Comparative analysis of measuring methods 

The aim of development of laboratory scale measurement methods is 
obtaining objective information about burn rate characteristics which 
can be used not only for practical applications but also for exploring and 
substantiating the EMs combustion mechanism. This may provide reli-
able background for  formulating novel approaches in design of novel 
EMs. It is necessary to underline that the available energetic materials 
and their mixtures are characterized usually by non-uniform and non- 
smooth reaction behavior. This is obvious in the case of heterogeneous 
propellants but even in the case of double base propellants there exist 
local reaction (hot) spots on the burning surface. However, in practical 
calculations of pressure diagram and thrust in the propulsion devices as 
well  as  in  theoretical  modeling  the  engineers  and  researchers  mostly 
consider uniform reaction over flat regressing surface. At the same time 
the local measurements of the EM sample height or length (web thick-
ness) at chosen sites on the regression surface may not provide needed 
information  about  the  average  mass  loss  rate.  Therefore,  for  using 
proper  data  in  ballistic  calculations  and  for  validation  of  combustion 
mechanism  as  most  preferable  measurement  methods  can  be  recom-
mended those, which derive the rate data averaged over a regression 
surface.  The  results  of  localized  measurements  can  be  employed  for 
substantiation  of  detailed  combustion  mechanism  and  determining 
combustion behavior of individual mixture components. Unfortunately, 
in  many  cases  published  in  literature  information  does  not  allow 

estimating real space and time resolution of a specific method. Rather 
often  the  researchers  just  report  about  good  correlation  with  strand 
burner data. It must be mentioned that for obtaining most reliable and 
objective  information  about  combustion  (gasification)  process  under 
study  it  is  necessary  to  combine  quantitative  measurement  data  with 
qualitative  information  obtained  by  visualization  techniques  clearly 
showing the surface profile and combustion temporal behavior. 

When  discussing  direct  laboratory-scale  measurement  approaches 
we  can  state  that  at  present  the  microwave  based  ones  are  the  most 
promising. Other methods including servo mechanical, direct photog-
raphy,  optical  projection,  ultrasound,  X-ray  radiography  and  direct 
weighing registration have not sufficient spatial (mass) resolution. Thus, 
this  allows  employing  these  in  quasi-stationary  studies  but  prevents 
their use in transient combustion measurements. 

As illustration to this statement serves information delivered recently 
in [96] dealing with an accuracy analysis of burn rate measurements via 
ultrasound method. It is shown that even using advanced methods for 
deducing  instantaneous  sample  thickness  the  accuracy  of  its  determi-
nation is in the range of 30–200 μm. In fact, this allows studying only 
low frequency combustion processes. 

Certain prospects of improving the approach technical characteris-
tics have the X-ray radiography based on synchrotron radiation as well 
as terahertz interferometry. The improvement of both approaches im-
plies  development  and  use  of  advanced  tools  for  recording  signals  of 
collimated  X-rays  and  ultra-high  frequency  radiation.  Recently,  there 
were  published  two  papers  [97,98]  dealing  with  application  of  syn-
chrotron radiation to exploring in situ the dynamics of aluminum par-
ticles agglomeration in combustion wave of solid propellant as well as to 
measuring thermal expansion coefficient of ammonium perchlorate in 
temperature range 260–500 K. It was made for the first time an obser-
vation of history of agglomerates formation at elevated pressures that 
gave objective information, which is used for developing substantiated 
combustion mechanism of metallized propellant and allows predicting 
true particle size of agglomerates. Important feature of this technique is 
that the highly collimated radiation beam enables possibility to deter-
mine  correctly  the  particles  size  along  the  distance,  which  is  much 
greater than the depth of field corresponding classical optics at similar 
magnification.  As  for  thermal  expansion  coefficient,  its  knowledge  at 
different  temperatures  is  important  for  evaluation  of  propellant  me-
chanical characteristics and prediction of propellant behavior in cook off 
conditions. In addition, derived in these studies data on lattice param-
eter values can be effectively used for determination of strain and stress 
characteristics of ammonium perchlorate crystals. The recording system 
used  included  scintillator  and  Photron  SA-Z  high  speed  camera  that 
provided high temporal resolution (better than 1 ms) and space reso-
lution about few tens of micrometer (not indicated in publications). This 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098012V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

work clearly demonstrated possibilities of getting in the future new and 
original insight into propellants combustion mechanism. 

effectively used for comparative express estimations of Isp  for different 
energetic materials. 

Regarding the microwave reflection method, its space resolution has 
the greatest value among existing experimental methods and actual task 
for the developers is obtaining objective and correct information about 
dielectric properties of studied materials at high temperatures close to 
the burning surface temperature value. The corrupting disturbance of 
resulting signal due to altered properties of the heated substance layer is 
relatively small in the case of low frequency oscillations of a combustion 
process  and  may  become  essential  at  relatively  high  frequencies. 
Moreover, the disturbance effects become most important in the cases 
when the surface roughness (profile) and corresponding preheat layer 
thickness are varied in transient combustion process. This might be a 
consequence  of non-uniform reaction over  burning surface. Therefore 
the visual observations (when it is possible) of the combustion process 
are of importance for objective interpretation of experimental data. One 
more problem concerns the corrupting signal disturbances due to finite 
magnitude contributions of the radiation reflected from internal parts of 
closed vessel when testing EM at elevated pressures. 

As for the microwave resonator method, it demonstrates at present 
time the best mass loss resolution when studying transient combustion 
processes.  The  limitations  of  the  method  are  the  same  as  for  the  mi-
crowave reflection method. In particular, it is important to know well 
the dielectric properties of a substance at high temperatures in order to 
evaluate the respective error in the measurements. At the same time it 
can  be  noted  that  the  measured  values  of  current  mass  loss  allow 
obtaining the values of transient mass (not linear) burn rate, which are 
especially called-for by engineers and researchers. 

When  discussing  indirect  measurement  approaches,  the  most 
promising at present time is the recoil force method. Practically, this is 
the only method, which measures the parameter directly associated with 
the burn rate and exhibits good temporal and mass flow rate resolution. 
The  limitation  of  the  method  is  due  to  the  lack  of  data  on  the  gas 
decomposition  products  density  in  transient  combustion  conditions. 
Fortunately,  it  is  not  essential  if  the  tests  are  conducted  under  near 
constant  pressure,  e.g.,  in  conditions  of  small  amplitude  oscillating 
radiant flux. In particular, such tests allow determining the burn rate 
response to radiant flux oscillations. Analysis of recoil force oscillations 
upon  sustaining  combustion  of  metalized  solid  propellant  provided 
possibility [99,100] to correlate the frequency and amplitude of oscil-
lations with metal agglomerates size distribution. 

An  additional  advantage  of  recoil  force  method  is  a  possibility  to 
obtain in laboratory conditions the approximate values of specific im-
pulse of given energetic material. The description of approach and an 
example  of  such  test  are  presented  in  [101].  Briefly,  one  has  first  to 
process the recoil force experimental data at given pressure according to 
relationship (9) in order to derive the value of the Tg/μ   ratio: 

F =

m2
P

RTg
⋅
μ

⋅S.

Then the value of specific impulse can be calculated as 

√
√
√
√

(

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
RTg
μ

γ
⋅
⋅
γ (cid:0) 1

)(γ(cid:0) 1)/γ

Po
Pc

1 (cid:0)

(

Isp =

1
g

,

γ =

Cp
Cv

(9) 

(10) 

Here  g  is  the  acceleration of  gravity  coefficient.  Note  that for  any 
novel  energetic  material  and  even  for  commercial  ones  there  is  no 
reliable information about global molecular weight of the combustion 
products in real combustion conditions that prevents obtaining reliable 
Isp  values via analytical calculations. Therefore, experimental value of 
Tg/μ ratio does provide a correct estimate for Isp in given conditions of 
firing. Because this estimate corresponds to fixed laboratory conditions 
the  experimental magnitude of Isp  determined in such a way is  lower 
than  its  theoretical  value  due  to  incomplete  combustion  of  energetic 
material and heat losses. Nevertheless, the approach described can be 

The cumulative information about different measurement methods is 
presented  in  Table  1  containing  information  about  the  methods 
measuring principles and technical parameters. It has to be mentioned 
that  original  papers  very  rarely  report  quantitative  data  on  method’s 
space and temporal resolution. Therefore, these quantities in some cases 
can be evaluated only approximately [102]. Note that mostly the listed 
methods provide information about averaged over burning surface burn 
rate  magnitude  while  laser  beam  reflection,  video  photography  and 
X-ray radiography give localized burn rate values. 

5. Concluding remarks 

The regression rate of energetic materials plays a vital role among 
the  parameters,  which  control  various  aspects  of  propulsion  devices 
operation. The paper presented comparative analysis of characteristics 
of available laboratory-scale experimental techniques and provided es-
timates for the methods temporal and spatial resolution as well as their 
specific  merits  and  limitations.  In  industrial  applications,  to  provide 
data  for  solid  rocket  motor  design  and  operation,  the  burn  rate  is 
determined  mainly  with  a  strand  burner  technique  (single  measure-
ments  of  burning  time  of  given  sample  size  at  fixed  pressure),  which 
takes  usually  a  lot  of  time  and  resources.  These  expenditures  can  be 
essentially reduced when using closed bomb (pressure diagram) tech-
nique  [[77],[103]]  that  allows  obtaining  burn  rate  data  for  a  finite 
pressure region in a single test. However, all these data correspond to 
quasi-stationary combustion conditions and present paper paid special 
attention  to  the  methods  for  determining  transient  gasification  rate. 
Despite  a  number  of  publications  devoted  to  development  of  novel 
measurement  techniques  there  still  remain  many  unsolved  problems. 
Although in the available literature one may find several declarations 
about advanced time-resolved novel measurement techniques it is easy 
to recognize that these all usually have limited capabilities in terms of 
time or space resolution. In fact, no universal method exists to measure 
transient burn rate of energetic material in a broad range of operating 
conditions with required high accuracy and time resolution. Therefore it 
is  necessary  to  analyze  in  detail  technical  characteristics  of  every 
method in order to estimate real possibilities to obtain needed data on 
transient combustion behavior with use of given technique. Actually, to 
determine  the  quality  of  the  data  reported it  is  necessary  to  evaluate 
carefully the accuracy of the measuring method and experimental re-
sults uncertainty level [99]. 

It  was  mentioned  in  comprehensive  review  [12]  that  the  funda-
mental  limitation  of  existing  experimental  techniques  is  that  they 
measure properties, which mainly correspond to spatial dimensions of 
regressing  specimen.  In  order  to  avoid  problems  with  calculating  the 
time derivative of displacement data and corresponding loss of the burn 
rate accuracy it was recommended to pay attention to development of 
novel approaches based on the measurement of properties proportional 
to  regressing  surface  speed.  The  past  two  decades  showed  that  thus 
formulated  recommendation  was  not  totally  realized.  Recently,  the 
attempt was made [104] to use the Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV) 
technique for evaluating acoustic admittance of aluminized composite 
solid propellant (AP/HTPB/Al) via measuring the instantaneous veloc-
ities  of  the  particles  generated  by  the  burning  surface  in  combustion 
under  acoustic  pressure  oscillations.  Despite  the  contemporary  im-
provements  of  measuring  technique  the  estimated  uncertainty  turned 
out in the admittance about 30% and in the mean burn rate about 9% 
that  underlines  the  necessity  of  making  further  efforts  in  developing 
novel experimental approaches. 

The  review  [12]  in  accordance  with  [11]  also  stated  “that  even 
though new breakthrough techniques using basic principles could still 
be  developed  in  the  future,  further  advancements  in  burn  rate  mea-
surements  will  depend  largely  upon  improvements  in  the  existing 
techniques”. As shown in the present review, actually there exist some 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098013V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Table 1 
Comparative  data  on  measurement  principles  and  technical  parameters  of 
different experimental techniques.  

Method title 

Measuring principle 

Technical parameters 

Refs 

Direct methods    
Laser-servo 

mechanism 

Laser beam 
reflection 

Video 

photography 

Optical 

projection 

Bore image 
recording 

Ultrasound 
length 
detection 

X-ray 

radiography 

Burning surface 
location is detected 
by optical system 
whose signal controls 
the speed of a stepper 
motor equaling the 
burn rate 
Burning surface 
location is detected 
via measuring the 
beam deflection angle 
Direct photography at 
2–4 fold 
magnification 

Laser beam is directed 
over the burning 
surface and detected 
by a photocell 
Video photography of 
regressing bore image 

Measuring the time 
lapse between the 
transmitted and 
reflected from the 
burning surface 
signals 
Obtaining X-ray side 
images or measuring 
local X-ray 
attenuation by the 
burning sample 

Inertia mass 

Microwave 
length 
detection 

Measuring the 
Doppler frequency 
phase shift for the 
signal reflected from 
the burning surface 
Measuring the 
eigenvalue 
oscillations frequency 
of elastic element 
with an attached mass 
Recording the 
interferogram of gas 
phase to evaluate 
evolved gas mass 
Direct weighing  Measuringtial the 
sample weight or 
mass current value 

Interferometry 

Microwave 
resonator 

Indirect 

methods    

Pressure 

diagram 

Recoil force 

Measuring current 
mass of a sample 
within microwave 
resonator 

Derivation of burn 
rate value using 
pressure records on 
the basis of mass 
balance equations 
Measuring the 
reactive force of 
combustion products 

Planar capacitor  Measuring the 
capacitance of 
burning specimen 
covered with the 

3% for burn rate, 
propellant with 
smooth burning 
surface 

Measuring system 
bandwidth 20 Hz, 
space resolution 0.08 
mm at 1.7 MPa 
Spatial resolution 
10–20 µm, limiting 
burn rate frequency 
oscillations ca. 50 Hz 
Spatial resolution for 
smooth burning 
surface amounts 10 
µm 
Limiting burn rate 
frequency 
oscillations 10–20 Hz 
Limiting burn rate 
frequency 
oscillations 10–20 Hz 
[38], maximal web 
thickness 10 cm [37] 

Spatial resolution 
100 µm, can be 
improved by 10 times 
when using 
synchrotron 
radiation 
Theoretical spatial 
resolution better than 
1 µm, time resolution 
better than 1 ms 

Acquisition system 
frequency band does 
not exceed 150 Hz, 
mass resolution up to 
1–2 mg 
Limiting burn rate 
frequency 
oscillations about 50 
Hz 
Weight resolution 
4–5 mg, working 
frequency band up to 
400 Hz [72] 
Spatial resolution ca. 
5 µm, frequency band 
not less than 1 kHz 

20 

21 

22,23 

25,26 

29,30 

31–40, 96 

71–74 

75,76 

Measurement 
accuracy depends on 
correct evaluation of 
properties of 
combustion products 
Force value 
resolution 3–5 mg, 
frequency band up to 
500 Hz [90] 
Burn rate 10% 
uncertainty at 1 kHz 
pressure oscillations 

8,11, 77–81 

72,82- 
91,99- 101 

92  

Table 1 (continued ) 

Method title 

Measuring principle 

Technical parameters 

Refs 

Mylar disk 

Helmholtz 

oscillation 
frequency 

combustible metallic 
foils 
Measuring temporal 
variation of electrical 
resistance of 
combustible disk 
attached to the 
burning surface 
Recording the 
frequency of hybrid 
motor Helmholtz 
oscillations (chamber 
pressure or plume 
flicker oscillations) 

Not available 

94 

Quasi stationary burn 
rate uncertainty 
worse than 6.5% 

95  

achievements in the development of microwave and recoil force tech-
niques  and  some  good  expectations  of  future  development  in  X-ray 
(synchrotron) and terahertz radiography. At the same time, the work on 
creating novel experimental approaches must be continued keeping in 
mind the final goal of providing researchers with reliable and adequate 
instruments for precise and time resolved measurement of transient burn 
rate of energetic materials. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

41–50,97,98 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgment 

51–64 

65–68 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Ministry  of  Science  and  Higher 

Education of Russian Federation [Grant No. 075–15–2020–781]. 

Supplementary materials 

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100980. 

69–70 

References 

[1] Sundaram D, Yang V, Yetter RA. Metal-based nanoenergetic materials: synthesis, 
properties, and applications. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;61:293–365. 
[2] Barato F, Bellomo N, Pavarin D. Integrated approach for hybrid rocket technology 
development. Acta Astronaut 2016;128:257–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
actaastro.2016.07.023. 

[3] Dreizin EL. Metal-based reactive nanomaterials. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2009; 

35:141–67. 

[4] Beckstead MW, Puduppakkam K, Thakre P, Yang V. Modeling of combustion and 
ignition of solid propellant ingredients. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2007;33: 
497–551. 

[5] DeLuca LT, Galfetti L, Maggi F, et al. Characterization of HTPB-based solid fuel 
formulations: performance, mechanical properties, and pollution. Acta Astronaut 
2013;92:150–62. 

[6] Tian H, Ruipeng Y, Zhu H, Wu J, Cai G. Three-dimensional numerical and 

experimental studies on transient ignition of hybrid rocket motor. Acta Astronaut 
2017;140:247–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2017.08.022. 
[7] Yeh CL, Kuo KK. Ignition and combustion of boron particles. Prog Energy 

Combust Sci 1996;22:511–41. 

[8] Kumar R, Ramakrishna PA. Measurement of regression rate in hybrid rocket using 

combustion chamber pressure. Acta Astronaut 2014;103:226–34. 

[9] Gany A. Thermodynamic limitation on boron energy realization in ramjet 

propulsion. Acta Astronaut 2014;98(1):128–32. 

[10] Dreizin EL, Schoenitz M. Correlating ignition mechanisms of aluminum-based 
reactive materials with thermoanalytical measurements. Prog Energy Combust 
Sci 2015;50:81–105. 

[11] Zarko VE, Kuo KK. Critical review of methods for regression rate measurements of 
condensed phase systems. In: Kuo KK, Parr T, editors. Nonintrusive combustion 
diagnostics. New York: Begel House; 1994. p. 600–23. 

[12] Fry RS, DeLuca L, Gadiot G, Frederick R, Strecker R, et al. Solid propellant 
burning rate measurement methods used within the NATO propulsion 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098014V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

community. In: Proceedings of the 37th AIAA joint propulsion conference; 2001. 
Jul 8-11; AIAA Paper 2001-3948. 

[13] Gupta GK, Jawale LS, Mehilal D, Bhattacharya B. Various methods for the 

determination of the burning rates of solid propellants: an overview. Cent Eur J 
Energy Mater 2015;12(3):593–620. 

[14] Pei Q, Zhao FQ, Luo Y, Xu SY. Research progress in the burning rate measurement 
technology of solid propellant. Chin J Explos Propellants 2015;38(3):9–14. 
[15] Carmicino C, Pastrone D. Novel comprehensive technique for hybrid rocket 

experimental ballistic data reconstruction. J Propuls Power 2018;34(1):133–45. 

[16] Hessler RO, Glick RL. Consistent definitions for burning-rate measurement in 

solid-rocket motors. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2000;36:76–95. 

[17] Hessler RO, Glick RL. Error analysis of burning-rate measurement procedures. 

Combust Explos Shock Waves 2000;36:96–106. 

[18] Deluca LT, Annovazzi A. Burning rate issues in solid rocket propulsion. editors. 
In: Li S, Li S, Qian J, editors. Theory and practice of energetic materials. Beijing 
Institute of Technology; 2019. p. 268. XIII. 

[19] Novozhilov BV. Acoustic resonance upon propellant combustion. Combust Explos 

Shock Waves 2000;36:3–9. 

[20] Osborn JR, Burick RJ, Panella RF. Continuous measurement of solid propellant 
burning rates. Rev Sci Instrum 1966;37(1):86–92. https://doi.org/10.1063/ 
1.1719960. 

[44] Jones DA, Frederick RA. Overview of X-ray techniques for solid rocket propellant 

regression measurements. In: Proceedings of the 52nd AIAA joint propulsion 
conference and exhibit; 2016. Jul 25-27: AIAA Paper 2016-4725. 
[45] Kohno M, Volpi A, Tokudome S. X-ray diagnostics for local burning rate 

measurement of solid propellants. Int J Energy Mater Chem Propulsion 1997;4 
(1–6):918–26. https://doi.org/10.1615/IntJEnergeticMaterialsChemProp.v4.i1- 
6.850. 

[46] Hasegawa H, Tokudome S, Hanzawa M, Kohno M. Erosive burning of aluminized 

composite propellants: x-ray absorption measurement, correlation, and 
application. J Propuls Power 2003;22(5):975–83. https://doi.org/10.2514/ 
6.2003-4812. 

[47] Xiao Y, Amano RS, Cai T, Li J, He G. Particle velocity on solid-propellant surface 
using X-ray real-time radiography. AIAA J 2003;41(9):1763–70. https://doi.org/ 
10.2514/2.7294. 

[48] Kuper KE, Zarko VE, Kvasov AA, Ten KA, Pruuel ER. High-resolution X-ray 
computed tomography of low-contrast samples with the use of synchrotron 
radiation. In: Proceedings of the 6th world congress in industrial process 
tomography; 2010. p. 451–6. 

[49] Pogany A, Gao D, Wilkins SW. Contrast and resolution in imaging with a 

microfocus X-ray source. Rev Sci Instrum 1997;68(7). https://doi.org/10.1063/ 
1.1148194. 2774-27http://dx.doi.org/. 

[21] Frederick RA. Measuring the regression of a burning solid propellant. Rev Sci 

[50] Hertz HM, Bertilson M, Chubarova E, Ewald J, Gleber SC, Hemberg O, et al. 

Instrum 1996;67:2903–9. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1147070. 

[22] Osborn JR, Murphy JM, Kershner SD. Photographic measurement of burning rates 

in solid-propellant rocket motors. Rev Sci Instrum 1963;34:305–6. https://doi. 
org/10.1063/1.1718345. 

[23] Eisenreich N, Kugler HP, Sinn F. An optical system for measuring the burning rate 

of solid propellant strands. Propellants Explos Pyrotech 1987;12:78–80. 
[24] Dunn C, Gustafson G, Edwards J, Dunbrack T, Johansen C. Spatially and 

temporally resolved regression rate measurements for the combustion of paraffin 
wax for hybrid rocket motor applications. Aerosp Sci Technol 2018;72:371–9. 

[25] Wang J, Sang B. Laser technique for determining solid propellant transient 
burning rates during oscillatory combustion. Fuel 1998;77(15):1845–9. 
[26] Wang J, Gao Z, Sang B. A laser technology for measurement of solid propellant 
transient burning rates during rapid depressurization. Fuel 2001;80(2):263–71. 

Laboratory X-ray micro imaging: sources, optics, systems and applications. J Phys 
Conf Ser 2009;186(1):0120271–3. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/186/1/ 
012027. 

[51] Koch B. Reflexion de micro-ondes par des phenomenes de detonation. C R Acad 

des Sci Paris 1953;236:661–3. 

[52] Cook MA, Doran RL, Moris GJ. Measurement of detonation velocity by doppler 

effect at three-centimeter wavelength. J Appl Phys 1955;26(3):426–8. 
[53] Dean DS, Green DT. The use of microwaves for the detection of flaws and 

measurement of erosion rates in materials. J Sci Instrum 1967;44(9):699–701. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0950-7671/44/9/317. 

[54] Wood HL, O’Brien WF, Dale CB. Measurement of solid propellant burning rates 
employing microwave techniques. In: Proceedings of the 6th international 
symposium on air breathing engines; 1983. 

[27] Strand LD, Schultz AL, Reedy GK. Microwave Doppler shift technique for 

[55] Strand LD, Schultz AL, Reedy GK. Microwave doppler shift technique for 

determining solid propellant transient regression rates. J Spacecr Rocket 1974;11 
(2):75–83. 

determining solid propellant transient regression rates. J Spacecr Rockets 1974; 
11(2):75–83. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.62012. 

[28] Yin CF, Hermance CE. Continuous measurement of transient burning rates of 

[56] Strand LD, McNamara RP. A variable-frequency driver microwave 

composite propellant undergoing rapid depressurization. In: Proceedings of the 
9th AIAA aerospace sciences meeting. AIAA Paper; 1971. https://doi.org/ 
10.2514/6.1971-173. 1971-173. 

transientregression rate measurement system. editors. In: Boggs TL, Zinn BT, 
editors. Experimental diagnostics in combustion of solids, progress in astronautics 
and aeronautics. AIAA, New York; 1978. p. 155–72. 63. 

[29] DeLuca LT, Galfetti L, Colombo G, Maggi F, Bandera A, Boiocchi M, et al. Time- 

[57] Strand LD, Magiawala KR, McNamara RP. Microwave measurement of the solid- 

resolved burning of solid fuels for hybrid rocket propulsion. Prog Propul Phys 
2011;2:405–26. 

[30] Tang Y, Chen S, Zhang W, Shen R, DeLuca LT, Ye Y. Mechanical modifications of 
paraffin-based fuels and effects on combustion performance. Propellants Explos 
Pyrotech 2017;42(11):1268–77. https://doi.org/10.1002/prep.201700136. 
[31] Mason WP. Multiple reflection ultrasonic delay lines. editor. In: Mason WP, 

editor. Physical acoustics. principles and methods. Academic Press; 1964. 
p. 485–500. 1. 

[32] Traineau JC, Kuentzmann P. Ultrasonic measurements of solid propellant burning 

rates in nozzleless rocket motors. J Propuls Power 1986;2(3):215–22. 

[33] Dijkstra F, Korting P, van den Berg RP. Ultrasonic regression rate measurement in 
solid fuel ramjets. In: Proceedings of the 26th AIAA joint propulsion conference; 
1990. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.1990-1963. Jul 16-18; AIAA Paper 90-1963. 
[34] RJr Frederick, Traineau JC, Popo M. Review of ultrasonic technique for steady 
state burning rate measurements. In: Proceedings of the 36th AIAA joint 
propulsion conference and exhibit; 2000. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2000-3801. 
Jul 24-28, AIAA Paper 2000-3801. 

[35] Deepak D, Jeenu R, Sridharan P, Padmanabhan MS. Application of ultrasonic 

technique for measurement of instantaneous burn rate of solid propellants. Def 
Sci J 2013;48(2):197–204. https://doi.org/10.14429/dsj.48.3899. 

[36] Lestrade JY, Anthoine J, Lavergne G. Liquefying fuel regression rate modeling in 

hybrid propulsion. Aerosp Sci Techol 2015;42:80–7. 

[37] Hasegawa K, Hori K. Novel burning rate measurement technique for solid 

propellant by means of ultrasonics. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2010;46(2): 
188–95. 

[38] Murphy JJ, Krier H. Evaluation of ultrasound technique for solid-propellant 
burning rate response measurements. J Propuls Power 2002;18(3):641–51. 
https://doi.org/10.2514/2.5978. 

[39] Song SJ, Kim HJ, Ko SF, Oh HT, Kim IC, Yoo JC, et al. Measurement of solid 
propellant burning rates by analysis of ultrasonic full waveforms. J Mech Sci 
Technol 2009;23:1112–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12206-009-0302-y. 
[40] Cauty F, Erad`es C. Ultrasound measurement method: errors, noise, and 

sensitivity. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2000;36(1):54–61. 

propellant pressure-coupled response function. J Spacecr Rocket 1980;17(6): 
483–8. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.57768. 

[58] Aniˇcin BA, Joji´c B, Blagojevi´c D, Adˇzi´c M, Milosavljevi´c V. Flame plasma and the 

microwave determination of solid propellant regression rates. Combust Flame 
1986;64(3):309–19. 

[59] Bozic VS, DDj Blagojevic, Anicin BA. Measurement system for determining solid 
rocket propellant burning rate using reflection microwave interferometry. 
J Propuls Power 1997;13(4):457–62. 

[60] Bozic VS, DDj Blagojevic, Anicin BA. Measurement system for determining solid 
propellant burning rate using transmission microwave interferometry. J Propuls 
Power 1998;14(4):421–8. 

[61] Zarko VE, Vdovin DV, Perov VV. Methodical problems of solid-propellant 

burning-rate measurements using microwaves. Combust Explos Shock Waves 
2000;36(1):62–71. 

[62] Zarko VE, Perov VV, Kiskin AB. Microwaves as a tool for energetic materials 

characterization. In: Proceedings of the 40th AIAA aerospace sciences meeting 
and exhibit; 2002. Jan 14-17; AIAA 2002-0190. 

[63] Zarko VE, Perov VV, Simonenko VN. Critical assessment of the microwave 
method for measuring steady-state and transient regression rates of solids. 
editors. In: Kuo KK, DeLuca LT, editors. Combustion of energetic materials. New 
York: Begell House; 2002. p. 725–32. 

[64] Zhai Z, Zhu L. Non-intrusive burning rate measurements of high-explosives by 
terahertz interferometry. editors. In: Li S, Li S, Qian J, editors. Theory and 
practice of energetic materials. Beijing Institute of Technology; 2019. p. 367–9. 
XIII. 

[65] OYa Romanov, Tarkhov VS, Shelukhin GG. On measurement of mass burning rate 
in transient combustion of condensed substance using oscillations. Combust 
Explos Shock Waves 1977;13(6):789–90. 

[66] Kochakov VD, Averson AE, Abrukov SA. Transducer for measurement the mass 
losses upon combustion. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1978;14(1):126–7. 

[67] Brill T. Connecting the chemical composition of a material to its combustion 
characteristics. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1992;18(2):91–116. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/0360-1285(92)90019-W. 

[41] Hsieh WH, Char JM, Hsieh KC, Kuo KK. Modeling and measuring of erosive 

[68] Zarko VE. Fundamentals of nonstationary combustion of solid propellants. 

burning of stick propellants. In: Proceedings of the 22nd AIAA joint propulsion 
conference; 1986. Jun 16-18: AIAA Paper 1986-1451. 

Novosibirsk: Institute of Chemical Kinetics and Combustion; 1984 [Doct. Science 
Thesis]. 

[42] Salizzoni RM, Hsieh WH, Kuo КК. Temperature sensitivity measurements and 

[69] Abrukov VS, Averson AE, Mal’tsev VM. New possibilities of investigating the 

regression behavior of a family of boron-based very high burning rate propellants. 
editors. In: Kuo КК, Pein R, editors. Combustion of boron-based solid propellants 
and solid fuels. Begell House/CRC Press; 1993. p. 438–52. 

combustion processes of condensed systems by interferometry. Combust Explos 
Shock Waves 1983;19:594–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00750431. 

[70] Abrukov VS, Ilyin SV, Maltsev VM. Ignition of propellants: shaping and 

[43] Tian CJ, Huang HL, Gao XF, Zheng RH, Hu XB, Lai MR, et al. Diagnosis of 

transient end burning law for gas generator with low burning velocity fuel rich 
propellant. J Propulsion Technol 2015;36(6). 

development of burning wave and its characteristics. Int J Energy Mater Chem 
Propulsion 1997;4(1–6):783–92. https://doi.org/10.1615/ 
IntJEnergeticMaterialsChemProp.v4.i1-6.730. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098015V. Zarko et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

[71] Khudyakov AV, Gorvard GV, Konev EV, Mikheev VF. On measurement of mass 
burning rate of solid propellants [translation]. Fizika Goreniya i Vzryva 1967;3 
(3):462–4 (in Russian). 

[72] Mikheev VF, Zarko VE, Borin SM, Kutsenogii KP, Simonenko VN. Measurement of 
burning rates in transient combustion processes under influence of external 
radiation. In: Boggs TL, Zinn BT, editors. Experimental diagnostics in combustion 
of solids. 63. New York: Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics; 1978. 
p. 173–87. 63. 

[73] Olliges JD, Lilly TC, Joslyn TB, Ketsdever AD. Invited article: time accurate mass 

flow measurements of solid-fueled systems. Rev Sci Instrum 2008;79:101301. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2982492. 

[74] D’Souza BC, Ketsdever AD. Investigation of time-dependent forces on a nano- 
Newton-second impulse balance. Rev Sci Instrum 2005;76(1):015105. https:// 
doi.org/10.1063/1.1834707. 

[75] Perov VV, Zarko VE, Zhukov AS. New microwave method for measuring unsteady 
mass gasification rate of condensed systems. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2014; 
50(6):739–41. 

[97] Kalman J, Demko AR, Varghese B, Matusik KE, Kastengren AL. Synchrotron-based 

measurement of aluminum agglomerates at motor conditions. Combust Flame 
2018;196:144–6. 

[98] Kellogg R, Lapidus S, Hedman T, Kalman J. Synchrotron based measurement of 
the temperature dependent thermal expansion coefficient of ammonium 
perchlorate. Propellants Explos Pyro 2019;45(3). https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
prep.201900257. 

[99] Glotov OG, Kiskin AB, Zarko VE, Simonenko VN, Shandakov VA, et al. Ignition 
and combustion characteristics of propellants containing coated aluminum 
particles. In: Proceedings of the 33th International Annual Conference ICT. FRG; 
2002. P80. report. 

[100] Kiskin AB. Simulation of the spectrum of recoil force oscillations during 

combustion of composites propellants. Khimicheskaya Fizika 2006;25(10):66–71 
(in Russian). 

[101] Arkhipov VA, Kiskin AB, Zarko VE, Korotkikh AG. Laboratory method for 

measurement of the specific impulse of solid propellants. Combust Explos Shock 
Waves 2014;50(5):622–4. https://doi.org/10.1134/S0010508214050177. 

[76] Zarko V, Perov V, Kiskin A, Nalivaichenko D. Microwave resonator method for 

[102] Frederick RA, Greinerf BE. Laboratory-scale hybrid rocket motor uncertainty 

measuring transient mass gasification rate of condensed systems. Acta Astronaut 
2019;158:272–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2019.03.028. 

[77] Juhasz AA, Price CF. The closed bomb technique for burning rate measurement at 
high pressure. editors. In: Boggs TL, Zinn BT, editors. Experimental diagnostics in 
combustion of solids. New York: Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics; 1976. 
p. 129–51. 63. 

[78] Yilmaz N, Donaldson B, Gill W, Erikson W. Solid propellant burning rate from 
strand burner pressure measurement. Propellants Explos Pyrotech 2008;33(2): 
109–17. https://doi.org/10.1002/prep.200800216. 

[79] Arkhipov VA, Zimin DA. Applicability conditions for inverse methods of 

reconstructing nonsteady burning rate. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2000;36(3): 
318–22. 

[80] Ivanov SM, Tsukanov NA. Estimate of the dynamic characteristics of unsteady 

combustion of a solid propellant in a semi-closed volume from measurements of 
variable pressure. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2002;38(1):71–80. 

[81] Arkhipov VA, Bondarchuk SS, Korotkikh AG. Comparative analysis of methods for 
measuring the transient burning rate. I. Research methods. Combust Explos Shock 
Waves 2010;46(5):564–9. 

[82] Mihlfeith CM, Baer AD, Ryan NW. Propellant combustion instability as measured 

by combustion recoil. AIAA J 1972;10(10):1280–5. 

[83] Simonenko VN, Zarko VE. Reactive force of combustion products as a measure of 
the transient burning rate of a propellant. Fizika Goreniya i Vzryva 1981;17(3): 
129–32 (in Russian). 

[84] Zanotti C, Giuliani P. Experimental and numerical approach to the study of the 
frequency response of solid propellants. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1993;29: 
286–90. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00797642. 

[85] Finlinson JC, Parr T, Hanson-Parr D. Laser recoil, plume emission, and flame 

height combustion response of HMX and RDX at atmospheric pressure. In: 
Proceedings of the 25th symposium international on combustion. The 
Combustion Institute; 1994. p. 1645–50. 

[86] Brewster MQ, Schroeder TB. Laser-recoil combustion response of RDX. Combust 

Sci Techol 1997;122(1):362–81. 

[87] Zhang KL, Chou SK, Ang SS. Development of a low-temperature co-fired ceramic 
solid propellant microthruster. J Micromech Microeng 2005;15:944–52. 
[88] Orieux S, Rossi C, Este`ve D. Thrust stand for ground tests of solid propellant 

microthrusters. Rev Sci Instrum 2002;73(7):2694–8. 

[89] Kiskin AB, Simonenko VN. Special features of implementation of the recoil-force 
registration method for burning-rate measurement. Combust Explos Shock Waves 
2000;36(1):48–53. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02701513. 

[90] Kiskin AB, Zarko VE, Mamaev AS. Sensor of small forces with extended frequency 
range and compensation of perturbations of environment. Combust Plasma Chem 
2016;14(4):279–84 [in Russian] Almaty, Kazakhstan. 

[91] Kiskin AB, Volpe E, DeLuca LT. Verifying the recoil force vs. burning rate 

dependence. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2000;36(1):39–47. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/BF02701512. 

[92] Hermance CE. Continuous measurement of the burning rate of a composite solid 

propellant. AIAA J 1967;5(10):1775–8. 

[93] Yin C.F., Hermance C.E. Continuous measurement of transient burning rates of a 

composite propellant undergoing rapid depresurization. AIAA Paper 1971-173, 
10.2514/6.1971-173. 

[94] Monti R, Mazzala M. Continious regression rate measurement in hybrid rockets. 
editors. In: Boggs TL, Zinn BT, editors. Experimental diagnostics in combustion of 
solids. 63. New York: Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics; 1978. p. 111–28. 
63. 

[95] De Zilwa S, Zilliac G, Reinath M, Karabeyoglu A. Time-resolved fuel-grain port 
diameter measurement in hybrid rockets. J Propuls Power 2004;20(4). https:// 
doi.org/10.2514/1.2188. 

[96] Hashmi M.A., Chandran Subash B.S., Chakravarthy S.R., Rathi R., Ganesan S., 
Jayaraman K. Sensitivity analysis of solid propellant burn rate measurements 
using ultrasound technique by different data deduction methods. AIAA Paper 
2019 4295. DOI 10.2514/6.2019-4295. 

analysis. J Propuls Power 1996;12(3):605–11. 

[103] Mezroua A., Lefebvre M.H., Trache D., Khimeche K. Burning Rate of PVC Plastisol 
Composite Propellants and Correlation Between Closed Vessel and Strand Burner 
Tests Data. In: Pang W, DeLuca L, Gromov A, Cumming A. (Eds) Innovative 
Energetic Materials: Properties, Combustion Performance and Application. 
Springer, Singapore. 2020; 351-372. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-4831- 
4_12. 

[104] Rajak R., Chakravarthy S.R., Ganesan S. Measurement of admittance and acoustic 
augmentation of burning rate of composite solid propellants using Laser Doppler 
Velocimetry. Proc Comb Institute 2021;38(3):4391-4399.  

Vladimir E. ZARKO received his DrSci degree from Institute of 
Hydrodynamics,  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences,  Novosibirsk 
(1985);  Professor, Department  of Gas Dynamics, Novosibirsk 
State Technical University (1986); Chief Scientist, Institute of 
Chemical  Kinetics  and  Combustion,  Novosibirsk.  Associate 
editor  of  Combustion,  Explosion,  and  Shock  Waves  (Russia) 
and Eurasian Chemico-Technological (Kazakhstan). Honorary 
member of HEMSI (India, 1993); Associate Fellow, American 
Institute  of  Astronautics  and  Aeronautics  (1997),  Honorary 
professor of NJUST  (China, 2017). He  has over 200 publica-
tions in peer-reviewed journals, 2 books and 6 book chapters, 
scientific reports, 14 registered patents, presentations in pro-

fessional conferences, including many invited, plenary, and keynote lectures.  

Aleksandr  B.  Kiskin  is  a  graduate  of  the  Novosibirsk  State 
University  (1976),  received  his  candidate  of  Sciences  degree 
(PhD)  from  Institute  of  Chemical  Kinetics  and  Combustion, 
USSR  Academy  of  Sciences,  Novosibirsk  (1989);  Senior 
Researcher,  Institute  of  Chemical  Kinetics  and  Combustion, 
Novosibirsk. He has 23 publications in peer-reviewed journals, 
3  book  chapters,  scientific  reports,  4  registered  patents,  12 
presentations in professional conferences.  

Alexander A. Cheremisin received his DrSci degree from Sibe-
rian Federal University (now), Krasnoyarsk (1999). Professor, 
Krasnoyarsk  State  Technical  University,  Krasnoyarsk  State 
University.  Head  of  Structural  methods  Laboratory 
(1983–1986),  Theoretical  and  experimental  space  physics 
Laboratory (1986–1991), Krasnoyarsk State University; Head 
of  the  Atmospheric  Optics  Laboratory,  Scientific-Research 
Physical-Technical  Institute  (1991–2006).  Head  of  the  Labo-
ratory of Disperse Systems, Institute of Chemical Kinetics and 
Combustion,  Novosibirsk.  Associate  editor  of  Digitalization 
(scientific  journal,  Russia).  He  has  over  280  scientific  publi-
cation  and  reports,  over  60  publications  in  peer-reviewed 
journals, presentations in professional conferences, including many invited, plenary, and 
keynote lectures. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098016