Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

A review on the recent advances of flash boiling atomization and
combustion applications

Xuesong Li a, Shangning Wang a, Shangze Yang a, Shuyi Qiu a, Zhe Sun a, David L.S. Hung a, b,
Min Xu a,*
a School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Dongchuan Road 800, Shanghai, 200240, China
b University of Michigan-Shanghai Jiao Tong University Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Dongchuan Road 800, Shanghai, 200240, China

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
Flash boiling spray
Spray breakup mechanisms
Spray-wall interference
Combustion application
Optical diagnostics

Flash  boiling  atomization  is  a  promising  approach  to  enhance  spray  atomization  with  internal  energy  as  the
driving force as well. Past investigations primarily focused on the morphologies and macroscopic characteristics
of  flash  boiling  sprays.  Recently,  with  the  advances  in  experimental  techniques  and  the  need  in  developing
cleaner and more efficient combustion systems, thorough and detailed analyses were carried out on flash boiling
atomization.  This  review  article  will  introduce  and  discuss  recent  flash  boiling  advances  using  experimental
approaches. This work will first discuss the gas-liquid, two-phase features in the nozzle and the impacts on the
primary breakup of flash boiling sprays. Then, the characteristics of the external flash boiling spray plumes will
be  discussed  with  a  dense  vapor  and  sparse  droplet  feature.  Furthermore,  practical  issues  in  adopting  flash
boiling  atomization  such  as  injector  tip-wetting  and  spray  wall  impingement  effects  are  covered  in  the  flash
boiling regime. Finally, practical applications of flash boiling atomization in combustors such as reciprocating
internal combustion engines are presented. It is aimed that this review can provide an up-to-date summary of the
current state-of-the-art of flash boiling atomizations and shed light on the future development of active flashing
atomization techniques.

1. Introduction

Spray atomization has long been recognized as an effective tool to
disintegrate liquid into fine droplets or vapor for various applications,
such  as  hydrocarbon  fuel  combustions,  agricultural,  medical,  and
heating/cooling  applications,  etc.  There  are  many  approaches  to
enhance  liquid  atomization,  for  instance,  advanced  injector  designs,
elevating the injection pressure, etc. Among these methods, flash boiling
atomization  has  been  considered  a  promising  solution  for  generating
sprays  with  finer  droplets  and  a  high  vapor  concentration  [1].  The
research  on  flash  boiling  can  be  traced  back  to  the  1950s–1960s.  An
early systematic investigation on flash boiling sprays was conducted by
Brown  et  al.  [2],  in  which  the  droplet  size,  spray  morphology,  and
breakup  mechanisms  were  discussed.  Early  flash  boiling  applications
mainly involved cryogenic sprays/jets for rocket applications, which can
be found in journal papers and NASA/Air Force reports from the United
States [3–6]. From the 1980s to the 2020s, flash boiling gained popu-
larity  in  atomizing  hydrocarbon  fuels  to  achieve  better  combustion

performance.  Recently,  flash  boiling  atomization  receives  even  more
attention  because  the  atomization  and  combustion  of  liquid  hydro-
gen/liquid ammonia (as zero-carbon fuels) intrinsically go through the
flash  boiling  process.  Therefore,  flash  boiling  atomization  shall  be
considered a promising and significant atomization scheme for current
and future combustion purposes.

The concept of “flash boiling sprays” might confuse some spray re-
searchers  since  the  resultant  sprays  do  not  necessarily  involve  the
boiling  process.  Usually,  no  nucleation  or  bubble  growth  can  be
observed  in  the  external  spray.  Practically,  when  we  refer  to  flash
boiling atomization, we are describing the phenomenon that the work-
ing fluid/fuel was superheated in the fuel line and the nozzle. As the
working fluid exits the nozzle, the local pressure drops until being lower
than the saturated vapor pressure of the liquid. The fluid then experi-
ences  flash  boiling  with  nucleation  onsets  and  bubble  developments
inside the nozzle. The so-called flash boiling atomizations rely primarily
on  the  fierce  phase  change  near  the  exit  and  in  the  near-field  of  the
injector, which means the propagation process of the flash boiling spray
might be under sub-cooled conditions. More precisely, only the in-nozzle

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: mxu@sjtu.edu.cn (M. Xu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101119
Received 20 September 2022; Received in revised form 2 August 2023; Accepted 2 August 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)101119Availableonline22September20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

X. Li et al.

Nomenclature

After start of fuel
After start of injection
Computational fluid dynamics
Diffusion back illumination

ASOF
ASOI
CFD
DBI
EGPVS  Extended glare point velocimetry and sizing
FB
GDI
HCCI
ICE
IMEP
IRES
LIEF
LIF
LPG
PCCI
PDI
PIV
PM
PN
POD
RIM
SD
SIDI
SMD
THC
XCPI
Ja

Flash boiling
Gasoline direct injection
Homogenous charge compression ignition
Internal combustion engine
Indicative mean effective pressure
Infrared extinction/scattering
Laser-induced exciplex fluorescence
Laser-induced fluorescence
Liquefied petroleum gas
Premixed-charge compression ignition
Phase Doppler interferometry
Particle imaging velocimetry
Particulate mass
Particulate number
Principle orthogonal decomposition
Refractive index matching
Superheat degree
Spark-ignition direct-injection
Sauter mean diameter
Total hydrocarbon
X-ray phase change imaging
Jacob Number = ρLcpΔT/ρVL

We
a
k
Ca
ρ
R
μ
L
l
P
s
φ
β
θ
σ
T
t
v
V
u
Θ
B
α
Δ

c
D
d

Weber Number = dρVu2/σ
Ambient
Boltzmann constant
Cavitation Number
Density
Droplet/bubble radius
Dynamic viscosity
Latent heat of evaporation
Liquid phase
Pressure
Saturated
Vapor fraction
Bubble-rupture threshold
Superheat degree
Surface tension
Temperature
Time
Vapor phase
Volume
Velocity
Dimensionless surface tension
Bubble
Thermal dissipation rate
Mass diffusivity
Concentration of gas in liquid
Injector nozzle diameter
Droplet/bubble diameter

and  near-field  process  of  flash  boiling  atomizations  involves  flash
boiling phase change. Nevertheless, we still name this category of sprays
as “flash boiling sprays” since flash boiling plays a key role during their
atomization processes.

There have been several review articles on the topic of flash boiling
atomization. For instance, Sher et al. [7] implemented a literature re-
view  on  flash  boiling  atomization  with  a  focus  on  the  fundamental
theories  during  flash  boiling  atomization,  such  as  nucleation,  bubble
growth,  two-phase  flows,  etc.  In  this  work,  numerical  and  analytical
models  for  flash  boiling  atomization  were  also  well  documented  and
discussed.  Yang  et  al.  [8]  performed  a  literature  review  on  the
non-intrusive  diagnostics  approach  for  phase-changing  flows,  and
sprays and measurement schemes for cavitating and superheated flows
were introduced. Chang et al. [9] carried out a literature review on flash
boiling characteristics from experiments and simulations under gasoline
direct injection (GDI) conditions. Polanco et al. [10] reviewed existing
studies on flashing jets with a hazard control perspective from internal
flow characteristics to external spray analysis. This review also focused
more on the theoretical ground of flash boiling atomization. Bar-Kohany
et al. [11] performed a flash boiling atomization review primarily on
nucleation theories and multi-phase flow theories during flash boiling
atomizations.

However,  although  these  efforts  had  made  notable  progress  in
summarizing  flash  boiling  characteristics,  they  only  focused  on  their
internal flow characteristics or macroscopic spray characteristics in non-
combustible constant volume chambers. The detailed breakup mecha-
nisms  of  flash  boiling  atomization  and  its  combustion  characteristics
were missing. One reason for this limitation may primarily be attributed
to  the  lack  of  flash  boiling  combustion  investigations  in  the  previous
literature. Until recent years, it is not very common to incorporate flash
boiling  atomization  in  combustion  test  facilities  such  as  optical  com-
bustion  engines.  Furthermore,  the  review  on  practical  applications  of
flash  boiling  atomization  is  also  not  adequate.  For  instance,  the  tip-

wetting  process,  spray  impingement  process,  and  droplet  evaporation
process before and during combustions were not sufficiently discussed
and  demonstrated  previously.  Finally,
there  are  many  mis-
understandings  and  inconsistencies  in  describing  or  analyzing  flash
boiling atomization, i.e., the mechanisms of flash boiling impacting the
primary  breakup,  the  relationship  between  flash  boiling  and  spray
collapse, and the mechanisms of flash boiling acting on practical com-
bustion applications. Therefore, it is necessary to review recent experi-
mental  advances  in  flash  boiling  atomization  and  flash  boiling
combustions to demonstrate what will be expected when flash boiling
sprays are facilitated, as well as how to optimize the combustion effi-
ciency  and  combustion  emissions  for  these  flash  boiling  combustion
systems.

Besides,  the  efforts  in  reviewing  recent  advances  in  flash  boiling
atomization  are  particularly  necessary  with  the  upsurge  of  carbon-
neutral  and zero-emission powertrains and other combustion applica-
tions applicable. Although the combustions of gasoline/diesel fuels are
somehow less popular from the climate change perspective, combustion
remains the primary pathway of energy conversion. Due to the energy
density consideration, it is still desirable for powertrains or vessels to
carry  liquid/solid  low-carbon  fuels.  Alternative  fuels  (such as  alcohol
fuels or ether fuels) are often less volatile compared to traditional fuels,
and  their  evaporations  and  combustions  will  suffer  especially  in  cold
environments. The most promising solution for this issue is to heat the
fuel and trigger flash boiling atomization to enhance atomization and
evaporation. For zero-carbon fuels such as hydrogen or ammonia, their
boiling temperatures are usually much lower than the room tempera-
ture. Therefore, as the fuels enter the combustion chamber from the fuel
rail, they will go through flash boiling atomization or trans-critical at-
omization  processes  rather  than  typical  sub-cooled  atomization.
Therefore,  the  utilization  of  low/zero  carbon  fuels  requires  further
knowledge  and  understanding  of  flash  boiling  sprays,  whose  charac-
teristics  can  no  longer  be  fully  described  using  parameters  such  as

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011192

X. Li et al.

penetration  length,  cone  angle,  spray  morphologies,  etc.  The  vapor
phase inside the nozzle, as we will discuss later, plays a key role from in-
nozzle behaviors and primary breakup to fuel mixing and combustions,
which  has  not  been  well  demonstrated  in  previous  sub-cooled  spray
atomization investigations, or even previous flash boiling atomization
analyses.

Therefore,  in  this  review  article,  we  will  comment  on  recent  ad-
vances  in  flash  boiling  atomization  with  a  focus  on  experimental  in-
vestigations. We will not explicate the fundamental theories and models
for flash boiling atomization since many existing reviews have analyzed
these aspects; and we will not focus much on the numerical flash boiling
explorations,  for  instance,  using  computational  fluid  dynamics  (CFD)
means. In this review, we focus on recent experimental explorations on
flash  boiling  atomization,  multiphase  interactions,  and  combustion
performance. It is our understanding that recent experimental studies
can help improve the current stage of flash boiling numerical simulation.
We  also  hope  that  this  review  can  provide  useful  observations  and
stimulate  theories  for  quantitative  modeling  or  simulation  purposes.
These experimental studies reviewed in this article cover the nucleation
and  multiphase  behaviors  inside  the  nozzle,  near-field  spray  breakup
and expansion, spray propagations and impingements, as well as flash
boiling  enhanced  fuel  spray  combustions  in  typical  combustors.  The
following  sections  will  also  follow  such  an  order  to  discuss  different
aspects of flash boiling atomizations.

2. Internal flows and near-nozzle characteristics of flash boiling
sprays

2.1. Unification of superheated and cavitating flows

In the spray atomization community, it is considered that cavitating
flows and superheated flows, for which phase change takes place in the
nozzle, are two quite distinctive phenomena. Such definitions appear to
be intuitive since the phase change behaviors inside the nozzle seem to
be  very  different.  Gemci  et  al.  [12]  believed  that  although  the  basic
mechanics  of  cavitation  and  boiling  are  similar,  it  is  important  to
differentiate the two thermodynamic paths preceding the formation of
vapor.  The  process  of  disintegrating  a  liquid  by  a  pressure  drop  at  a
roughly  constant  liquid  temperature  is  often  called  cavitation.  The
process  of  disintegrating  a  liquid  by  increasing  the  temperature  at
roughly constant pressure is often called boiling [13]. Such definitions
are helpful for researchers to understand the two phenomena, but there
is notable inconsistency using the mentioned definitions. For instance, it
is  usually  considered  that  the  phase-changing  spray  injected  into  a
low-pressure environment as flash boiling, while apparently the phase
change of such a spray is driven by the pressure difference rather than
temperature. There are other examples that are potentially conflicting
the definitions given above.

Furthermore, it should be noted that the so-called superheated and
cavitating flows are intrinsically coupled. For both scenarios, the vapor
phase generates as the saturated vapor pressure grows higher than the
local  pressure.  Cavitating  flows  achieve  evaporation  by  reducing  the
local pressure as the velocity of the fluid increases, while superheated
flows  achieve  evaporation by  increasing  the  saturated vapor  pressure
with a higher fluid temperature. Therefore, it can be considered cavi-
tating flows as dynamics-driven phase-changing flows, and superheated
flows  as  energy-driven  flows.  The  two  phenomena  can  take  place
simultaneously. For instance, the thermodynamic states of the fluid can
impact the formation of cavitating bubbles. As such, it is not appropriate
to distinguish cavitating flows and superheated flows as two separate
physics.

There  are  investigations  reflecting  the  common  characteristics  of
cavitating and flash boiling sprays. For instance, Wu et al. [14] used a
two-dimensional slit nozzle with different nozzle configurations for flash
boiling analysis, and it was found that a longer nozzle led to a higher
bubble  fraction  in  the  nozzle.  Meanwhile,  round  inlet  corners  would

suppress  the  inception  of  flash  boiling  bubbles,  which  was  a  typical
feature for cavitating flows. Li et al. [15] further showed that a swirling
structure could be seen during flash boiling atomization, which might
imply the existence of string cavitations using the two-hole fuel injector.
Zhang et al. [16] performed a study on the effect of fuel temperature on
cavitation flow inside nozzles. It was found that although the fuel tem-
perature did not affect the overall transformation process of the cavi-
tation flow, cavitation inceptions and the size of the cavitation regions
increased with a higher fuel temperature. A high fuel temperature also
led to a rapidly increased nozzle cavitation level, but such effects were
not  remarkable  under  the  hydraulic  flip  flow  stage.  Wang  et  al.  [17]
studied  the  injector  tip  wetting  phenomena  via  two-dimensional  slit
nozzles and defined the bubble index (BI) as the ratio between the local
saturated  pressure  (governed  by  temperature)  and  the  local  static
pressure (governed by velocity in the flow). The bubble index is believed
to be more accurate than the traditionally used superheat index since
this  number  describes  the  local  tendency  for  the  working  fluid  to
vaporize in the nozzle.

For  these  considerations,  we  believe  that  one  uniform  criterion/
theory  should  be  given  to  describe  the  nature  of  the  phase-changing
flows and spray atomizations. Fig. 1 exhibits the schematic describing
the  impact  of  dynamics-driven  and  energy-driven  flows.  It  is  worth
noting that the schematic shown in Fig. 1 is for demonstration purposes
only and not from experimental results or CFD simulation. As shown, the
static pressure inside the nozzle varies as the local velocity changes. For
locations such as sharp corners, the flow is accelerated, and local static
pressure drops, which would lead to the so-called cavitating flows. As for
the contours of the saturated vapor pressure of the fluid, local saturated
vapor  pressure  is  directly  correlated  to  the  local  temperature,  which
would drop as the flow goes downstream because of heat transfer and
latent heat of evaporation in the nozzle. Finally, the difference between
the local static pressure and local saturated vapor pressure determines
whether the liquid phase would evaporate/boil. The pressure difference
(potential) is co-determined by the dynamic states and the thermody-
namic states of in-nozzle flows. Meanwhile, the phase change inside the
nozzle  could  alter  the  local  pressure  and  heat  transfer  as  well.  For
instance, in-nozzle bubble formation from the liquid phase would absorb
heat from the surrounding liquid and thus vary the local temperature
distribution.  Furthermore,  the  bubble  formation  in  the  nozzle  would
also impact the static pressure distribution inside the nozzle as well. It is
worth noting that the potential distribution does not indicate the actual
bubble  regimes  in  the  nozzle  since  the  phase  change  effects  are  also
determined by factors such as nucleation and bubble growth rate, etc.
As shown in Fig. 1, it can be seen that almost all types of sprays with a
two-phase internal flow which includes flash boiling sprays, cavitating
sprays, emulsion sprays, effervescent sprays, etc., can be analyzed using
the scheme in Fig. 1. Also, the pressure potential is not a fixed value, but
a  spatial  and  temporal  resolved  parameter  that  depends  on  various
conditions  such  as  the  injection/ambient  pressure,  fluid  temperature,
fluid  physical  properties,  injector  design/dynamic  response,  etc.

Fig.  1. Illustrative  schematics  of  the  impact  of  dynamics-driven  and  energy-
driven flows that induce phase changes in the nozzle (not from CFD).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011193

X. Li et al.

However, typically only one characteristic number is used to describe
the flash boiling (superheat degree, superheat index, etc.) or cavitating
(Cavitation  number) strength  during spray  injection, which  is  not ac-
curate enough to fully define the exact state of the spray atomization.
The physical implications of these numbers are also missing. Meanwhile,
from an experimental or application perspective, it is not practical to
acquire the exact 3D, transient pressure potential distribution. A single
dimensionless number can still be beneficial for phase-changing spray
analysis, but distinguishing different forms of the phase-changing pro-
cess could be unnecessary.

With  the  previous  discussions,  we  now  examine  dimensionless-
number-related  studies  for  cavitating  flows  and  superheated  flows.
There  are  many  cavitation  number  studies  and  we  will  just  briefly
introduce them here. For cavitating flows, a dimensionless number of
Cavitation number is defined as:
/ (
1
2

Ca = (ps (cid:0) pv)

(1)

ρv2

)

Hiroyasu  et  al.  [18]  further  improved  the  definition  of  Cavitation
number by taking the local pressure Pc  and velocity vc  at the location
where vena contraction took place:

Ca = (ps (cid:0) pv)

/ (
1
2

)

2

ρvs

(2)

Besides, the Cavitation number is also defined as a ratio of pressure

differences, as seen in Eq. (3) [19,20]:

Ca =

pinj (cid:0) pback
pback (cid:0) pv

(3)

For  flash  boiling  atomization  research,  both  pressure/temperature
difference  and  pressure  ratio  are  used  to  quantify  the  level  of  flash
boiling in a fashion similar to the Cavitation number, and there are many
studies  with  a  focus  on  this  topic  [21,22].  For  the  first  category,  the
difference between saturated vapor pressure and the ambient pressure
(Ps  -  Pa)  or  the  difference  between  local  fuel  temperature  and  local
boiling temperature (Tf - Tb) is used to demonstrate how fierce the phase
change  would  be  in  the  nozzle  and  in  the  ambient.  The  difference  is
usually called the superheat degree. For the second category, the ratio of
saturated vapor pressure and the ambient pressure (Ps/Pa) or (Pa/Ps) is
used for dimensionless analysis, which is the so-called superheat index
of the atomization process. Both the superheat degree and the superheat
index have been adopted in the existing literature, and the superheat
index is preferred since it is dimensionless. Despite that, quite a lot of
investigations admitted that the so-defined superheat degree or super-
heat index might not be universal, and actual atomization performance
is also impacted by nozzle design, injection pressure, fuel characteris-
tics, etc.

For  Cavitation numbers, it is usually held that the in-nozzle flows
would be in different regimes of cavitation if the value of the Cavitation
number is in the range between 0 and 1. However, if one substitutes the
definition  of  flash  boiling  sprays  for  Cavitation  numbers,  it  can  be
inferred  that  flash  boiling  atomization  would  produce  a  non-positive
Cavitation  number,  which  implies  that  the  definition  of  Cavitation
number can somehow be used to describe flash boiling as well. Given the
definition of Cavitation number in (1) - (3), we define the flash boiling
(FB) number in a similar fashion in this work:

Ca = FB =

1 (cid:0) (pv/pback)
)
1 (cid:0)
pinj
pback

/

(cid:0)

(4)

This FB definition might not be the optimal one since it is based on
the  Cavitation  number  provided  in  Eq.  (3),  and  it  is  stated  that  a
modified Cavitation number expression may be best suited to demon-
strate  supercavitation  [23].  However,  the  newly  defined  Cavitation
number  can  well  reflect  the  transition  from  non-cavitating  flow  to
cavitating  flow.  As  the  saturated  pressure  grows  greater  than  the

backpressure,  the  flow  transits  into  a  superheated  flow  and  produces
flash boiling atomization. The FB number is a dimensionless number by
definition.  The  denominator  of  the  FB  represents  the  phase  change
tendency without the influence of flow velocity, and the numerator of
the FB represents the suppression effect of high injection pressure inside
the  fuel  nozzle.  With  such  a  definition,  the  internal  flow  is
non-cavitating with a FB greater than ~1, and cavitating flow with a FB
greater than 0 but smaller than ~1. The strength of cavitation increases
with a smaller FB value. As FB equals 0, a critical point is reached where
the vapor pressure of the fluid at the exit of the nozzle is the same as the
ambient pressure, and flash boiling effects take place. In this way, this
flash boiling number unifies both flash boiling atomization and cavita-
tion sprays. More specifically, this definition counts in the effect of the
injection pressure, which is usually ignored in the flash boiling analysis.
The injection pressure impacts on flash boiling atomization are two-fold.
Firstly, the injection pressure affects the nucleation and bubble growth
inside the nozzle since the saturated vapor pressure will have to over-
come the local pressure, which is directly correlated with the injection
pressure for creating the bubbles. Furthermore, the injection pressure
also  affects  whether  flash  boiling  atomization  or  liquid  core  disinte-
gration caused by dynamic forces dominates the atomization process,
therefore it should be counted into the expression of the flash boiling
number.

Another question that remained is, no matter what is the choice of
the dimensionless number (Cavitation number, superheat index, or flash
boiling number), the physical implication of such a number is not clear.
Based  on  the  existing  analysis  and  data,  we  cannot  provide  an  exact
physical explanation for this number at this time, but we would propose
an explanation in this work for future investigation to verify. From the
definition of the dimensionless numbers, it can be seen that most of the
parameters are associated with the in-nozzle flow characteristics, and
even the ambient pressure term actually reflects the pressure gradient at
the  nozzle  exit.  Therefore,  this  number  is  associated  closely  with  the
internal  flow  features.  Furthermore,  most  of  the  cavitating  or  flash
boiling investigations agreed that a higher (or lower, based on defini-
tions) value of the dimensionless number can drive the internal flows or
atomization into a stronger flash boiling/cavitating regime, although no
consensus is reached upon the meaning of “stronger”. If we consider the
regime transition of flash boiling sprays from transitional flash boiling,
and flare flash boiling to transcritical/supercritical sprays, it can be seen
that a lower superheat index corresponds to stronger fuel evaporation.
Given the previous discussions, we hypothesize that the so-defined
flash  boiling  number  or  other  dimensionless  numbers  are  quantita-
tively associated with the vapor fraction in the nozzle, especially near
the nozzle exit. This explanation fits experimental observations well, as
seen from in-nozzle flow results shown later. A high flash boiling level/
cavitating  level  suggests  the  working  fluid  is  more  likely  to  vaporize
inside the nozzle, therefore altering the liquid-vapor boundary condi-
tions  at  the  nozzle  exit,  which  might  impact  the  primary  breakup
mechanisms  as  well.  Furthermore,  this  explanation  does  not  involve
much  about  the  ambient  conditions,  especially  the  ambient  tempera-
ture. We hold that the ambient pressure and ambient temperature affect
the spray differently than the impacts in the nozzle, with the pressure/
density determining the resistance for the spray to diffuse and penetrate,
and the temperature determining the evaporation of the spray droplets.
However, it could be challenging to validate this theory directly, since
quantitative liquid-vapor concentration measurements near the nozzle
exit  are  very  difficult  given  the  rapid  change  of  the  refractive  index.
Experiments should be designed and conducted to examine this likeli-
hood in the future.

While again, the flash boiling number should not be a sole constant
for a specific injection case even though we provided another way to
interpret  flash  boiling  as  shown  in  Eq.  (4).  Practically,  the  saturated
vapor pressure is directly associated with the initial fluid temperature
and heat transfer in the injector. Meanwhile, the local pressure in the
nozzle  is  impacted  by  the  ambient  pressure,  injection  pressure,  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011194

X. Li et al.

nozzle geometry. Therefore, the potential field inside the nozzle is quite
sensitive to the boundary conditions and the nozzle design, which is the
reason  why  the  spray  morphologies  established  by  different  in-
vestigations  were  not  very  consistent.  Therefore,  in  our  opinion,  the
establishment of the flash boiling number or cavitation number is more
meaningful for fast determination of the status of the sprays, but not for
quantitatively or accurately predicting the characteristics of the spray
breakups  or  external  spray  features.  On  one  hand,  numerical  and
analytical models should be developed to link in-nozzle characteristics
and external spray responses. On the other hand, optical accessible ex-
periments  should  be  conducted  to  validate  these  numerical  models.
Until then, the flash boiling number or potential field analysis would be
more useful to researchers in this field.

2.2. In-nozzle bubble growth and motions

At  the  current  stage,  the  two-phase  flow  feature  inside  the  nozzle
during  flash  boiling  atomization  is  usually  investigated  and  modeled
with  traditional  nucleation  and  bubble  growth  theories,  which  have
been  well-documented  in  multiphase  boiling  flow  studies.  For  flash
boiling atomization, the length of the nozzle is usually quite short for the
superheated  flow  to  fully  develop.  Furthermore,  the  driving  force  of
nucleation  and  bubble  growth  of  flash  boiling  atomization  should  be
distinguished from typical boiling flows in a tube. The working fluid of
the flash boiling atomization is typically preheated before flowing into
the nozzle, but the fluid does not boil due to the high local pressure built
up by the injection pressure. As the fluid propagates near the nozzle exit,
the local pressure drops until the saturated vapor pressure is reached
when boiling will happen inside the nozzle. In comparison, a constant
heat  source  or  heat  transfer  from  the  surrounding  environment  for
cooling purposes is usually implemented in traditional boiling flow ap-
plications.  Therefore,  the  nucleation mechanisms  during  flash  boiling
atomization  as  well  as  cavitating  flows  are  somehow  different  from
classic  theories,  which  should  be  taken  into  account  in  flash  boiling
theory development efforts.

The nucleation and bobble growth theories have been systematically
introduced in the previous review articles [24] and therefore we will not
explicate them in this work. In brief, we adopted the inverse of superheat
index, which takes the form of:

Rp =

Ps
Pa

And then the chemical potential Δμ can be expressed by:

Δμ = kT ln

(cid:0)

)

Rp

(5)

(6)

Therefore, Rp  (equivalent to the superheat index) can measure the
discrepancy of the superheat liquid from its equilibrium state. Based on
classical nucleation theory, the number of stable vapor nuclei generated
(per unit volume and time) J can be expressed by Ref. [24]:
)

(

)2

(7)

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2σ
πm

JCNT ∝

exp

(cid:0)

4
27

(cid:0)

Θ3

ln Rp

with an equilibrium presumption and the prediction is less accurate at
relatively low flash boiling levels. Although the nucleation theory has
been well derived, it should be noted that this expression is somehow
flawed in the use of superheat index. Lamanna et al. [24] implied that
the “prescribed back pressure” was the ambient pressure in the chamber,

which is commonly defined in this way for the superheat index. While as
we  discussed,  the  driving  force  of  bubble  creation  is  ultimately  the
pressure  difference  between  the  injection  pressure  and  the  ambient
pressure.  However,  this  pressure  difference  cannot  fully  propagate
everywhere in the nozzle. For instance, as the region of interest is far
away from the nozzle exit, the local pressure is approximately the in-
jection  pressure,  and  nucleation  would  be  suppressed.  Experimental
measurement of the pressure drop during flash boiling atomization is
limited. Based on the numerical simulations, the pressure drop gradient
is only significant near the nozzle exits [25]. Therefore, the superheat
index in estimating the nucleation process should be combined with the
location variation as the flow propagates downstream, and should not be
treated as a constant with specific boundary conditions.

The steady-state rate of formation of bubble nuclei N with a radius of

R can be obtained by the following equation:

N = C ⋅ exp

(

)

,ΔA =

4
3

πR2
0σ

(8)

(cid:0) ΔA
kΔθ

where R0 is the initial radius of the nuclei. C is a constant determined by
the number density N of bubble nuclei (related to J) in the liquid. The
quantity C is not truly a constant and is slowly varying with σ, but a good
approximation  can  be  treated  as  a  constant  [26].  k  is  the  Boltzmann
constant. As the working fluid temperature increases, the value of ΔA
decreases due to the smaller surface tension of the fuel. Meanwhile, the
value of superheat degree Δθ increases, judging from its definition. The
nucleation speed would further increase with stronger fluctuation of the
fluid [27].

For  bubble  growth in  the  nozzle,  generally,  to  approximate  single
bubble development and growth trajectory in the nozzle, the Rayleigh-
Plesset equation is the most basic relationship in describing the growth
of a single bubble [13]:
(

)2

Pv (cid:0) P∞ = ρlR

d2R
dt2

+

3
ρl
2

dR
dt

+ 4

μl
R

dR
dt

+ 2

σ
R

(9)

where  Pv  is  the  saturation  vapor  pressure  of  the  fuel,  P∞  is  the  local
pressure outside the fuel vapor bubble, R is the radius of the fuel vapor
bubble, ρl is the density of the liquid fuel, μl the dynamic viscosity of the
liquid fuel, and σ the surface tension of the liquid fuel. It is worth noting
that, similar to the discussion on the nucleation process, the ambient
pressure primarily influences the pressure gradient at the nozzle exit and
changes the local pressure near the nozzle. Such impacts are less sig-
nificant since not much time is left at this stage for the bubble to grow
and  expand. Therefore,  it  is  held  that the ambient  pressure primarily
affects the near-field and external expansion of the spray plume, which
is fundamentally different than achieving flash boiling via elevating the
temperature of the working fluid.

In the RP equation realization for superheated internal flow, some-
times the superheat is converted into the form of the pressure gradient to
align  with  the  Rayleigh-Plesset  equation.  Such  a  scheme  involves  the
consideration of heat transfer and mass transfer. A common approach is
to  convert  the  temperature  inside  the  bubble  into  the  corresponding
pressure within, as shown in Eq. (10) [13]:

pB(t) = pV (TB) + pG0

)3

(

TB
T∞

)(

R0
R

Combining Eq. (9) and Eq. (10) yields:

pV (T∞) (cid:0) p∞(t)
ρL

+

pV (TB) (cid:0) pV (T∞)
ρL

+

pG0
ρL

(

TB
T∞

)(

R0
R

)3

d2R
dt2

+

(
3
2

)2

dR
dt

= R

+

4μL
ρLR

dR
dt

+

2σ
ρLR

(10)

(11)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011195

X. Li et al.

In this equation, the first term on the left-hand side represents the
growth  impact  from  the  ambient,  and  the  second  term  presents  local
growth due to superheated conditions. The heat transfer consideration is
relatively  complex.  Generally,  as  the  thermal  boundary  layer  of  the
bubble is much smaller compared with the diameter of this bubble, the
Plesset-Zwick relationship can be used to simplify the RP relationship, in
the form of:

pV (T∞) (cid:0) p∞(t)
ρL

(cid:0) Σ(T∞)C(n)R*t

(

)

n(cid:0) 1
2

d2R
dt2

+

(
3
2

)2

dR
dt

= R

+

4μL
ρLR

dR
dt

+

where C(n) and Σ(T) take the forms of:

C(n) = n

)1

2

∫1

(

4n + 1
π

0

z3n(cid:0) 1dz
(1 (cid:0) z4n+1)

1
2

(0 < n < 1)

Σ(T) =

2L2
ρV
2cPLTαL

ρL

1/2

2σ
ρLR
(12)

(13)

(14)

For  mass  transport  considerations,  currently,  such  aspects  are
ignored in RP-related analysis, especially when the bubble content is not
created from phase change. For flash boiling atomization purposes, the
mass transfer process can be pronounced, especially near the nozzle exit.
The mass transfer, governed by mass dissipation, can be represented by:

(

dR
dt

)2∂c
∂r

R
r

∂c
∂t

+

=

Δ
r2

∂
∂r

(

r2∂c
∂r

)

(15)

And the approximated solution obtained by Epstein and Plesset can

be represented by:

R

dR
dt

=

Δ
ρG

[c∞ (cid:0) cs(1 + 2σ/Rp∞)]
1 + 4σ/3Rp∞

[
1 + R(πDt)(cid:0) 1

2

]

(16)

In  the  RP  bubble  growth  theories,  no  bubble  rupture  would  happen
during  bubble  propagation.  Such  an  assumption  might  be  valid  for
laminar flow without rapid flow fluctuations. However, for flash boiling
atomizations, the in-nozzle velocity is usually very high, even reaching
the local sound speed at high flash boiling levels. Furthermore, the in-
ternal nozzle measurements and external spray results do not support
the single bubble presumption. It is plausible to assume the bubble could
collapse due to instability, and such processes should be distinguished
from cavitation bubble collapses which are primarily caused by near-
wall flow characteristics. Bubble rupture/split inside the nozzle during
flash boiling atomization is not well investigated yet. For general tube
flows with phase changes, the Blake threshold radius [13] regarding the
maximum radius of the bubble that can sustain the flow is usually used,
which is given by:

]1

2

[
9kmGTBKG
8πσ

Rc =

(17)

where KG  is the gas constant. The Blake theory predicts the maximum
radius  beyond  which  point  the  equilibrium  state  of  the  bubble  is  no
longer  valid.  Besides  the  equilibrium  theory,  another  theory  is  also
proposed based on the dispersion theory, in which a bubble breakdown
critical Weber number is used to determine the maximal bubble diam-
eter as follows [28,29]:

dmax = 1.38(Wecrit)0.6

[

(

σ0.6

)

ρ0.3
l ρ0.2
g

μ0.1
l

)

](

D0.5
U1.1
l

(18)

It should be noted that the critical Weber number is derived based on
experiments  and  the  value  might  change  with  different  fluids.  For
instance, the experimental critical Weber number for water is around
1.1, while this value might not hold for other liquids or fuels. Generally,

although  it  is  expected  that  flash  boiling  bubbles  could  break  down
especially when the bubble grows larger, the resultant smaller bubbles
are  hard  to  observe  experimentally.  Essentially,  besides  the  bubble
growth analysis, other perspectives such as bubble deformation, bubble
breakdown, and the fusion of smaller bubbles into one large bubble with
heat and  mass transfer impacts, should  be emphasized in both future
experimental  and  numerical  efforts  to  understand  these  procedures
more thoroughly.

2.3. In-nozzle superheated flows and multiphase flow patterns

Although we have unified the concept of cavitating and superheated
flows in Section 2.1, it is worth noting that the in-nozzle bubble char-
acteristics  and  external  atomization  mechanisms  under  flash  boiling
conditions  are  different  compared  with  cavitating  flows.  Thus,  this
section  will  focus  mainly  on  the  in-nozzle  liquid-gaseous  two-phase
interaction  mechanisms  for  superheated  flows/flash  boiling  atomiza-
tion phenomena. It is well recognized that during flash boiling atomi-
zation,  heterogeneous  nucleation  takes  place  inside  the  nozzle,
especially near the nozzle wall. The nuclei then grow into bubbles and
flow with the working fluid. Essentially, this process is analogical to two-
phase  flows  boiling  in  vertical  tubes  with  the  lower  end  of  the  tube
connected to the open ambient.

To reveal the two-phase flow natures and flow patterns inside the
nozzle, the most intuitive strategy is to adopt optically accessible noz-
zles.  Park  et  al.  investigated  the  interactions  between  in-nozzle  flows
and  external  sprays  using  a  transparent  nozzle  [30],  with  the  optical
measurement  results  incorporated  in  Fig.  2.  As  can  be  seen,  with  an
injection pressure of smaller than 0.20 MPa, the internal flow transited
from  bubbly  flow  to  slug  flow  and  annular  flow  with  a  higher  fuel
temperature. This work also recognized that the external flashing spray
was closely connected with the internal flow pattern. Although limited
by  experimental  capabilities  at  that  time,  this  work  still  provides  a
crucial insight regarding the connection between internal and external
flows during flash boiling atomization.

To observe the developments and propagation of the flashing bub-
bles, it is intuitive to use scale-up transparent nozzles for dimensionless
number matching analysis. However, for two-phase internal flow sprays,
there  are  dimensionless  numbers  such  as  the  Reynolds  number  and
Weber number that govern the turbulence characteristics in the nozzle,
meanwhile, the Cavitation number or superheat index that governs the
phase  change  inside  the  nozzle.  It  is  challenging  to  match  these  two
groups  of  dimensionless  numbers  simultaneously  with  the  scale-up
nozzles.

Therefore, it is more common to analyze transparent nozzles with a
nozzle  size  that  is  close  to  practical  injectors.  A  majority  of  these  in-
vestigations are conducted to analyze cavitating flows, while there are
also studies dedicated to flash boiling atomization. Serras-Pereira et al.
[31] used a real-size optical direct injection nozzle to study cavitation
and flash boiling during gasoline injections, with a nozzle diameter of
0.5 mm. As shown in Fig. 3, a notable vapor phase could be spotted due
to cavitation and flash boiling, while the details of the vapor phase could
not be well demonstrated. Ju et al. [32,33] implemented in-nozzle ex-
periments for R134a flash boiling injection with a focus on the expan-
sion chamber. Bulk vapor structures could be noted in the nozzle, and
more  significantly,  in  the  expansion  chamber.  However,  the  detailed
features of the vapor phase were still not quite distinctive from the ex-
periments. To conclude, the size of practical injector nozzles is usually
too small (~0.2 mm) for producing clear measurements with satisfac-
tory temporal and spatial resolutions, especially since applicable optical
diagnostics are usually refractive-index-based.

Another  viable  approach  for  achieving  high-contrast  in-nozzle
measurements is to adopt two-dimensional slit optical nozzles. A small
thickness of the nozzle can produce much clearer optical measurements,
but it is up to debate whether the slit nozzle reflects the same fluid dy-
namics  as  three-dimensional  practical  nozzles.  Yang  et  al.  [34]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011196

X. Li et al.

Fig. 2. Optical measurement of in-nozzle flows and external sprays under various conditions. The internal multiphase flow transited from bubbly flow to slug flow
and annular flow with the consideration of residual time for phase change in the nozzle. Reprinted from Ref. [30] with permission of Begell House.

phase change inside the nozzle, as seen in Fig. 5. Results similar to those
in Fig. 4 are seen that the liquid zone inside the nozzle always corre-
sponds  well  with  the  external  liquid  core.  Furthermore,  under  strong
flash boiling conditions, it can be spotted that the liquid is converted
into  curved  rims  in  the  step  hole  and  the  rims  that  are  mixed  with
foamed bubbles break up at the nozzle outlet. These results implied that
the  so-called  micro-explosion  breakup  mechanism  might  have  taken
place inside the nozzle already. Guo et al. [38] used a single-hole GDI
injector to produce flash boiling atomization. A central liquid core was
seen under low ambient pressure, and the liquid core was surrounded by
fine droplets. Such observations indicated incompleted, heterogeneous
nucleation and bubble growth near the nozzle wall and consequential
bubble  rupture  near  the  wall.  Wang  et  al.  [39]  incorporated  a  2D
ambient  cavity  after  the  slit  nozzle,  and  rim  structures  have  been
observed in the cavity. The rim is believed to be the transition state from
the  continuous  liquid  phase  to  discrete  droplets.  A  new  flash  boiling
atomization mechanism is also proposed, as will be explicated in later
sections.

The results shown have demonstrated the complexity of the internal
flow fields and the likelihood of coupling effects between the internal
flow  and  the  external  atomization  during  flash  boiling  injections.
However,  existing  transparent  nozzles  are  not  ideal  to  preserve  clear
vapor patterns in the nozzle. To address such issues, we used a three-
dimensional, rectangular quartz nozzle for internal flow analysis [40].
Panel (a) of Fig. 6 qualitatively demonstrates the results on a Hewitt and
Roberts Map for vertical two-phase flow with n-hexane as the working
◦
C. As the temperature of
fluid and temperature ranging from 40
the  working  fluid  increases,  the  internal  flow  transits  from  bubbly  to
slug, and finally to wispy annular or annular. The orange dash arrow
reflects the change of liquid mass flow and vapor mass flow qualitatively
as the temperature grows. Panel (b) of Fig. 6 shows the experimental
results using the three-dimensional, rectangular quartz nozzle, and clear
multiphase tube flow patterns are seen [40].

◦
C to 95

The results shown above indicate that the superheated internal flow
is  somehow  associated  with  the  flow  patterns  from  two-phase  flow
theories.  Such  observations  also  indicate  the  necessity  of  building
Hewitt  and  Roberts  Maps,  particularly  for  internal  flows  during  flash
boiling injections. Furthermore, due to the complex design of fuel in-
jectors compared with simple vertical tubes, other effects such as cavi-
tating, might also affect the internal flow, as we discussed earlier. The

Fig.  3. Gasoline  at  different  pressure  and  temperature  conditions.  Reprinted
from Ref. [31] with permission of Elsevier.

performed such experiments using a thin two-dimensional transparent
nozzle to investigate the characteristics of flash boiling atomization in
the nozzle and the near-field. As seen in the results shown in Fig. 4, as
the superheat level increased, bubbles initiated and grew near the nozzle
walls.  Correspondingly,  the  atomization  zone  exactly  overlapped  the
bubble  zones  within  the  nozzle  in  the  near-field.  No  bubble  was
observed in external droplets or the liquid core. With a high flash boiling
level, the spray broke up immediately after exiting the nozzle orifice,
with no bubble seen in the external field either.

Similar  results/observations  are  also  found  in  other  studies.  For
instance, Miao et al. [35,36] used a twin-orifice, two-dimensional slit
nozzle to investigate flash boiling atomization with aviation kerosene as
the working fluid, and the results showed that bubble disturbance could
severely
impact  fuel  atomization.  Yang  et  al.  [37]  utilize  a
two-dimensional slit nozzle with a step-hole design to further study the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011197

X. Li et al.

Fig. 4. Spray measurements at different fuel temperatures and injection pressures at t = 10 ms ASOF (after start of fuel) when the spray was fully developed [34].
Panel (a). Injection pressure = 3 MPa. Panel (b). Injection pressure = 5 MPa.

bubbles are usually formed near the nozzle wall but not adhered to the
nozzle wall, the flash boiling bubbles formed from the latter source are
also close to the wall. Sometimes the cavitating bubbles merge with the
flash boiling bubbles  to form a  continuous vapor phase  regime. Yang
et al. [41] performed an internal flow study for flash boiling atomization
in
with  a
two-dimensional nozzles. Although bubble overlaps could be seen near
the  wall,  single  bubble  dynamics  and  trajectory  were  successfully
extracted.  It  was  found  that  even  for  two-dimensional  nozzles,  the
development of the bubble in the aspect of bubble size could be well
predicted by the Rayleigh-Plesset equation.

focus  on  single  bubble  growth  and  development

The physics and process for flash boiling atomization using multi-
component  fuels  are  similar  to  that  using  single-component  fuels.  To
this  day,  many  investigations  focused  on  the  impacts  of  multi-
component fuels on the characteristics of external flash boiling sprays.
However, the investigation of such effects on the internal superheated
flow is quite limited. Therefore, more investigations on this topic are
expected, especially on the aspects of optically assessable analysis and
multi-component  heat-mass  transfer  mechanisms  during  flash  boiling
atomization,  which  is  also  expected  to  be  very  complex  though.  The
impact  of  multi-component  working  fluid  on  external  flashing  sprays
will be discussed in Section 3.2.3 of this manuscript.

For  multi-component  flash  boiling  studies,  the  most  immediate
challenge  is  the  definition  of  saturated  vapor  pressure  for  multi-
component fuels. Usually, the saturated vapor pressure is a fixed value
for single-component working fluids, however, such a definition is not
valid for multi-component fuels since the mixture evaporates one by one
as  the  liquid  temperature  increases.  Yang  et  al.  [42]  performed  an
in-nozzle flash boiling study using n-pentane, iso-octane, decane, and
their mixtures. The distillation curves of the three surrogates were ob-
tained via controlled measurements, as shown in Fig. 7. Since there is no
saturated vapor pressure or a certain boiling temperature, the  evapo-
rated volume fraction was used for comparison across different surro-
gates. This study also suggested the use of bubble point pressure as the
benchmark for comparison, which can be readily calculated using the
NIST tables.

For  the  in-nozzle  flows  using  multi-component  fuels,  as  the  fuel
temperature  reaches  a  certain  level,  i.e.,  the  boiling  points  of  lighter
components, these lighter components would start to vaporize and form
bubbles. However, for the bubbles to further grow in size, both mass and

Fig.  5. In-nozzle  and  near-field  backlit  measurements  of  flash  boiling  spray
with various fuel temperatures (ASOF 10 ms) [37].

analysis  of  multiphase  flow  patterns  should  be  associated  with  cavi-
tating flows as well if the velocity gradients in the nozzle are significant,
which would require future experimental and numerical investigations
to fully disclose detailed two-phase flow characteristics in flash boiling
atomization applications.

2.4. Bubble growth measurements and multi-component impacts

Phase  change  analysis  for  single-component  fuels  is  common  for
fundamental investigations. As the fuel flows through the nozzle near
the nozzle exit, the low local pressure would promote the formation of
flash boiling bubbles. For single-component fuels, the saturated vapor
pressure  can  be  well-defined.  Therefore,  the  dimensionless  number
distribution can be readily found following the velocity field within the
nozzle. There are two sources of flash boiling bubbles during this pro-
cess: (1). nuclei near the wall induced by cavities in the nozzle and (2).
remaining  cavitation  bubbles  from  the  upstream.  Since  cavitation

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011198

X. Li et al.

Fig. 6. Panel (a). In-nozzle and near-field flash boiling characteristics qualitatively on Hewitt and Roberts Map. Panel (b). Experimental flow pattern map in a Hewitt
and Roberts chart fashion (using the flux of two phases as parameters) [40].

good tool to quantify those quantities. To avoid the boundary layer is-
sues due to the small scale of the thickness, nozzles with a smaller aspect
ratio,  i.e.,  3-D  rectangular  nozzles  as  discussed  before,  should  be
considered.  To  acquire  temperature  and  species  concentration  infor-
mation,  laser-induced-fluorescence-based  techniques  with  liquid  laser
dopants can be regarded  as a candidate, while laser-induced exciplex
fluorescence  can  be  used  to  obtain  temperature  distributions  in  two
dimensions. As for local pressure measurements, it is possible to adopt
pressure-sensitive paints or similar methods to obtain the pressure dis-
tribution inside the nozzle. However, such investigations could still be
challenging  since  the  nozzle  should  be  at  the  same  length  scale  as
practical injectors with dimensionless-number-matching considerations.
Therefore,  a  microscope  is  necessary,  and  thus  the  signal  level  and
signal-to-noise ratio of the techniques should be given attention. Finally,
high-precision optically accessible nozzles, preferably quartz or similar
materials,  should  be  used  to  handle  high  liquid  temperatures.  The
fabrication marks and abrasion marks in resin-based nozzles are quite
remarkable when observed with a microscope, and such imperfections
may significantly compromise the imaging quality.

2.5. Two-phase primary breakup

One of the most attractive features of flash boiling atomization is its
unique breakup mechanisms. Unlike typical sub-cooled spray atomiza-
tion that is dominated by liquid disintegration from small disturbances,
it was believed that flash boiling atomization is caused by the micro-
explosion of the vapor phase within the bulk liquid near the atomizer
nozzle.  Therefore,  when  the  spray  is  superheated  or  under  cavitating
conditions, the atomization of the bulk liquid is the coupled effect of the
competition  of  cohesive/disruptive  forces,  as  well  as  the  gas-phase
expansion-induced  disintegration  from  fierce  phase  changes.  Such  a
theory  is  also  introduced  in  existing  literature  [21],  in  which  it  is
considered that the spray break-up mechanism transitions depend on the
dynamic forces acting on the liquid surface to a bubble formation and
expansion phenomena as the flash boiling level rises. However, as will
be discussed later, whether the vapor-induced breakup happens imme-
diately  after  exiting  the  nozzle  (primary  breakup)  or  happens  during
droplet propagation (secondary breakup) has not been thoroughly dis-
cussed and agreed upon yet.

One of the most commonly seen interpretations for modeling flash
boiling primary breakup is the bubble disruption model, also known as
the micro-explosion secondary breakup model [43], as shown in Fig. 8
[44].  In  this  model,  bubbles  initiate  and  grow  in  spray  droplets  dis-
integrated  from  liquid  ligaments,  and  the  growth  of  bubbles  inside  a
droplet will “explode” the droplet after a certain threshold. A parameter
of void fraction ε is used to describe such a limit, which is defined as the
volume  ratio  between  the  vapor  and  liquid  phases.  Suma  et  al.  [45]

Fig.  7. Distillation  curves
fuels [42].

for  single-component  and  multi-component

heat  transfers  are  required  from  their  surrounding  liquid  phase.  The
lighter  fuel  vapor  bubbles  are  surrounded  by  heavier  fuels  remained.
Therefore, the bubble growth and mass transfer will be suppressed un-
less the fuel temperature is enough to vaporize the heavier fuels. As a
result, the variation of bubble size is less apparent for multi-component
fuels, which yields a smoother liquid-gas interface inside the nozzle and
less radial fluctuation in the near-field of the nozzle [42]. Furthermore,
the in-nozzle two-phase fluctuations and external spray fluctuation were
both suppressed with multi-component liquid as the working fluid.

To conclude, although there are plenty of external flash boiling ex-
periments using fuel surrogates or commercial fuels, investigation of the
internal flow behavior is rare. This situation is partially owing to the
challenges  in  implementing  micro-scale  optical  measurements  for  su-
perheated in-nozzle flows. Meanwhile, we believe that the linkage be-
tween  the  internal  flow  and  the  external  flashing  atomization  is
underestimated.  More  efforts  should  be  invested  in  this  aspect.  For
instance,  the  questions,  such  as  how  to  interpret  the  heat  and  mass
transfers, especially for multi-component liquids, within the nozzle and
how  the  two-phase  flow  patterns  develop  and  evolve  in  the  nozzle,
should be studied and properly answered.

In  practice,  to  address  such  issues,  new  experimental  apparatus
should be used and new diagnostics should be implemented to capture
crucial parameters. It has been proven that two-dimensional slit nozzles,
which were originally used for cavitating flow studies, can serve as a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011199

X. Li et al.

Fig. 8. The analytical model of flash boiling spray. Reprinted from Ref. [44] with permission of Elsevier.

recommended that the breakup threshold of the void fraction could be
set to 0.55, as an experimental breakup ε was found to be 0.51–0.53. As
the bubbles in the droplets break up, the number of droplets generated is
twice the number of bubbles in the droplet before its breakup. Li et al.
[46]  observed  the  existence  of  bubbles  in  a  steady  superheat  droplet
with  a  diameter  of  around  2.0  mm,  and  they  used  image  processing
methods to quantify the void fraction of the droplet (as seen in Fig. 9).
Their experiments also validated the threshold proposed by Senda et al.,
with a 50% threshold found in the single droplet tests. There are many
numerical efforts [47–49] based on the micro-explosion model and some
agreements were found in the simulations, while there were also issues
such as sudden drops of droplet sizes in the near-field.

Although in most flash boiling primary breakup models, it is assumed
that the breakup takes place within the spray droplets as the bubbles
grow, few investigations show such evidence in a practical high-speed
spray plume with a small droplet diameter, for instance, less than 100
μm.  The  observations  in  a  scaled-up  droplet  might  not  be  valid  for
practical spray applications, where very droplets propagate under sig-
nificant thermal and dynamic non-equilibrium conditions. Such limita-
tions  were  also  agreed  upon  in  recent  cryogenic  flash  boiling  studies

Fig.  9. Image  and  data  processing  of  a  superheated  droplet.  Reprinted  from
Ref. [46] with permission of Elsevier.

conducted by Loureiro et al. [50,51] The micro-explosion phenomenon
as a secondary breakup mechanism could happen in practical atomiza-
tion considerations, but such mechanisms would be more appropriate
when cold droplets, especially those with light components in the center,
enter very hot environments and the vaporization of the light compo-
nents  trigger micro-explosion.  For  actual flash  boiling injections,  it  is
quite common to inject hot liquid into cold environments, which makes
flash-boiling-induced secondary breakup less likely to happen.

In fact, many existing studies, including investigations using trans-
parent  nozzles,  have  implied  the  existence  of  different  atomization
mechanisms. In the pioneering work of Oza [52], it was stated that “...
when a sufficient number of bubbles grow sufficiently fast during their
passage  through  the  nozzle, they  coalesce  to  create  a  two-phase flow
consisting of vapor and drops. Thus, for chamber pressures lower than
the  transition  pressure,  it  is  logical  to  conclude  that  two-phase  flow
exists at the injector exit ...” It was also stated that a direct verification of
the  two-phase  flow  is  virtually  impossible,  with  the  limitation  of
experimental  methods  at  that  time.  Reitz  [53]  used  high-intensity,
short-duration backlit spark photography to study the near-field char-
acteristics of flash boiling atomization. It was found that the liquid core
broke up immediately at the nozzle exit rather than within the nozzle as
stated by Oza. Lefebvre [54] noted that “... (in effervescent atomization)
the rapid expansion of multitudinous small bubbles in the nozzle efflux
shatters the surrounding liquid shreds and ligaments leaving the final
orifice into small drops ...“, and “... When the bubbles emerge from the
nozzle they ‘explode’, in much the same manner as flashing injection
...“. Bar-Kohany et al. [11] hold that flash boiling sprays can be cate-
gorized  into  non-shattering  (mechanical),  partial-shattering  (transi-
tional  flash  boiling),  and  full-shattering  (flare  flash  boiling).  During
full-shattering injection, the breakup length which denotes the scale of
the  liquid  core  is  negligible,  which  implies  that  the  primary  breakup
mechanism is probably not liquid core disturbance based since there is
no liquid core anymore in the external field. The disappearance of the
liquid  core  is  also  faithfully  recorded  in  recent  two-dimensional  slit
nozzle  experiments.  Such  observations  and  discussions  indicated  that
the dominating flash boiling mechanism should be a primary breakup
one that is closely associated with the vapor-liquid spatial and temporal
distribution near the nozzle exit. This hypothesis is also in agreement
with  the  conclusions  of  Park  et  al.  [30]  and  other  slit  nozzle
measurements.

With these observations and discussions considered, we propose a
for  flash  boiling

new  bubble-rapture  primary  breakup  model

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111910

X. Li et al.

Fig. 10. Flash boiling bubble-rupture primary breakup mechanisms.

atomization, with the schematics incorporated in Fig. 10. In this model,
heterogeneous nucleation initiates when the local pressure is lower than
the saturated vapor pressure of the working fluid. Bubbles will grow,
coalesce,  and/or  collapse  to  form  distinctive  two-phase  flow  patterns
based on the liquid and vapor mass flow rate. As the vapor bubbles exit
the constrained nozzle, the bubble membrane/film will instantaneously
rupture in a fashion similar to the bag breakup of droplets. The rupture
of  bubbles  will  disturb  the  nearby  liquid  phase  and  promotes  the
breakup, but the resultant droplet sizes are larger. In comparison, the
droplets directly from bubble ruptures are finer since the droplet size
will  approximate  the  thickness  of  the  bubble  membrane.  The  vapor
emitted  into  the  ambient  will  likely  go  through  an  under-expansion
process with a high initial velocity, with fine droplets entrained inside
the vapor jet, especially when the superheat level is substantially high.
This model also explains many experimental observations in which the
external  spray  was  found  to  be  fluctuating  in  droplet  density/size,
especially for flashing sprays in the transitional flash boiling regime. Lin
et al. [55] also considered this model as the internal flash boiling mode
in which the breakup happened within the nozzle or at the exit, while
the breakup mechanism was not explicated.

In  numerical/theoretical  realizations,  a  corresponding  bubble-
rupture  flash  boiling  model  should  be  established.  For  this  purpose
and to choose appropriate governing mechanisms for the working fluid
under  different  thermodynamic  states,  a  bubble-rupture  breakup
threshold number β should be defined. In each mesh or grid, the vapor
fraction α should be extracted and compared with this threshold number
β related to the thermodynamic and dynamic states of the working fluid.
If α = 0, then there is no vapor phase near this location and the primary
breakup should be modeled using Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) type mecha-
nisms. If 0 < α< β, it means that the vapor phase exists at this location
but cannot trigger bubble rupture. Therefore, the KH model should be
modified with α to yield a shorter breakup length and time scale. When β
<α < 1, the vapor phase would dominate the primary breakup and the
bubble-rupture  breakup  model  should  be  incorporated.  Under  this
circumstance,  the  flash  boiling  primary  breakup  and  the  KH  primary
breakup are coupled and act simultaneously. When α = 1, a pure vapor
composition  is  expected  at  this  location  and  no  breakup  model  is
required  to  model  this  continuous  phase.  We  believe  that  the  Euler-
Lagrange  spray  atomization  (ELSA)  modeling  architecture  might  be
appropriate  to  incorporate  the  considerations  mentioned  above.  The
bubble-rupture primary  breakup model for  numerical simulation pur-
poses  can be  obtained  by  controlled  experiments  and/or  high-fidelity
simulations,  such  as  direct  numerical  simulations  and  molecular  dy-
namics modeling.

This theory can be used to illustrate different stages of flash boiling
as well. There are different names for flash boiling regimes defined by

different  researchers,  while  they  usually  categorized  the  flash  boiling
level into the sub-cooled stage, transitional stage, and flare flash boiling
stage. Some other works, such as Kitaruma et al. [56] and Cleary et al.
[57],  distinguished  different  spray  morphologies  in  the  transitional
stage by whether the external bubbles were mildly shattered or suddenly
shattered. In Kitaruma et al. [56], the single critical superheat criterion
was given by:

(cid:0)

Ja ⋅

1 (cid:0) exp((cid:0) 2300ρv / ρL) = 100We(cid:0) 1/7

(19)

Cleary et al. [57] extended this criterion by two-stage criteria, with
the first one corresponding to external bubble nucleations and the sec-
ond  by  a  barrel  shape  spray  shape  for  fully  developed  flash  boiling
sprays. The two criteria were made by replacing the coefficient of 100 in
Eq. (19) by 55 for the lower bound, and 150 for the upper bound. They
also held that the critical superheat occurred when the residual ligament
length was ~0.5–3 times the diameter of the nozzle.

Lamanna et al. [24] confirmed the flash boiling breakup mechanisms
from mechanical breakups to flashing breakups with a transition regime
based on the data from Cleary et al. [57] (as seen in Fig. 11). While they
also  acknowledge  the  limitations  in  Cleary’s  model,  especially  in  the
aspect of the fully developed flash boiling criterion. Firstly, the thermal
driving force was not appropriately incorporated into the model. Sec-
ondly, the rate control process of the flare flash boiling regime was not
handled well. Finally, wettability and surface roughness were not taken

Fig. 11. Transition criteria for the onset of flashing according to Cleary et al.
([57]) Reprinted from Ref. [24] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111911

X. Li et al.

into account. To address these issues, they proposed a non-dimensional
parameter  to  account  for  the  energy  barrier  based  on  the  nucleation
theory.  With  the  correction,  good  correlations  were  found  with  the
spread angles in the spray experiments. Although good agreements were
found again with the experiments, the three limitations were not thor-
oughly clarified especially fundamentally. The underlying physics of the
sub-cooled, transitional, and flare flash boiling sprays were still missing
even with the correction terms.

Note that the Kitamura Jacob criterion was established for low-speed
water jets (~10 m/s and We < 25) for fundamental studies. Further-
more, the critical superheat point as described in Kitaruma et al. [56]
was  not  well  observed  in  two-dimensional  nozzle  experiments.  One
potential explanation is that for flash boiling atomization with a high
liquid  temperature  and  relatively  low  ambient  temperature,  heat
transfer would happen so that the liquid temperature would drop and
suppress  explosions  in  the  far-field,  compared  to  the  flash  boiling  at-
omization triggered solely by very low ambient pressure. To conclude,
the Kitaruma criterion is not warranted to be valid in flash boiling spray
atomizations.  To  our  best  knowledge,  the  phenomenon  shown  in
Ref. [56] that the jet exploded with segments seen downstream is rare
for atomization applications since the in-nozzle Weber Number for spray
applications  is  usually  higher  than  1000  [22,42].  The  Cleary  criteria
[57]  seem  to  be  more  appropriate  for  spray  atomization  while  estab-
lishing precise definitions of “external bubble nucleation”  and “barrel
shape spray” are quite challenging. Chang et al. [58] used a normalized
spray collapse rate to distinguish the transitional flash boiling regime
and the flare flash boiling regime. However, we feel that this definition is
still not very convincing since the authors linked flash boiling directly
with  spray  collapse,  and  the  authors  themselves  admitted  that  flash
boiling and spray collapse should be treated separately.

Therefore, we propose a two-stage criterion for flash boiling regime
transition purposes as shown in Fig. 12 [40]. The first critical condition
is when bubbles just initiate at the nozzle outlet. Under this condition,
the local pressure at the nozzle outlet equals the local saturated vapor

Fig. 12. Flash boiling stages defined by vapor component concentration within
◦
the nozzle. Note that the image of the first critical condition (T = 101
C in this
specific case) is just an illustrative example since the size of the first bubble can
be too small to be captured by regular imaging means [40].

pressure of the working fluid, when the first bubble will be formed inside
the nozzle. The second critical condition we define is the point when the
vapor  phase  or  the  liquid-vapor  mixture  has  filled  the  nozzle  exit
completely thus no continuous liquid core is expected at the nozzle exit.
Under  this  condition,  no  liquid  ligament  will  be  seen  outside  the
injector. As the flash boiling strength is below the first critical point, we
consider  the  spray  in  the  sub-cooled  stage;  when  the  flash  boiling
strength is within the first and second critical points, the spray is in the
transitional stage; and finally, as the flash boiling strength is beyond the
second critical point, we define this condition flare flash boiling stage.
We believe that by using these criteria, we are able to develop a similar
model to Cleary et al. [57], but with better experimental grounds. This
model  is  also  in  agreement  with  flow  pattern  theories  discussed  in
Section 2.3 in this work. As the bubble fills part of the nozzle, the in-
ternal flow pattern was either slug flow, plug flow, or bubbly flow, then
the atomization process is a combined one with both gas-phase-driven
breakups (bubble rupture) and liquid-phase-driven breakups (mechan-
ical),  therefore  “transitional”  characteristics  are  seen  in  the  external
sprays. As the bubbles fill the nozzle completely, the spray enters its flare
flash boiling regime. When the nozzle flow enters annular flow regimes,
the atomization is vapor-dominated with a greater Sauter mean diam-
eter (SMD) at the edge of the spray plumes. Further increasing the flash
boiling  strength  will  create  a  complete  gaseous  jet  or  even  drive  the
in-nozzle  fluid  into  its  supercritical  state,  therefore  triggering  tran-
s-critical  injections  from  super-critical  in-nozzle  flows  to  sub-critical
ambients. Such a theory is supported by many slit nozzle experiments
conducted,  but  more  experimental  investigations  are  required  to
improve  this  current  theory.  In  the  future,  we  will  carry  out
two-dimensional and three-dimensional transparent nozzle experiments
to further develop this model in the future based on flow pattern theories
and bubble rupture breakup models.

It is worth noting that the model that we proposed is comparable to
the  definition  of  heterogeneous  nucleation  (transitional  flash  boiling)
and homogeneous nucleation (flare flash boiling). However, as seen in
the  flare  flash  boiling  results  in  Fig.  12,  it  was  still  heterogeneous
nucleation since the bubbles initiated from the nozzle wall. Therefore,
we hold that the definitions made in Fig. 12 are more descriptive than
using heterogeneous nucleation to represent the transitional regime and
homogeneous nucleation to represent the flare flash boiling regime. We
believe this proposed model can better reflect the physics of flash boiling
atomization. Corresponding numerical models can have a higher fidelity
with a lower complexity compared to existing numerical models. It is
also  worth  noting  that  the  bubble-rupture  model  for  flash  boiling  at-
omization  does  not  rule  out  the  secondary  droplet  micro-explosion
model  since  the  two  models  essentially  govern  different  phases  of
flash  boiling  atomization.  These  models  should  be  incorporated  to
establish more efficient and accurate flash boiling atomization mecha-
nisms for scientific analysis and practical application considerations.

2.6. Mass flow rate

For the injection flow rates, it is generally considered that at a higher
superheat level, the flow rate of the spray under the same injection curve
would decrease, due to the choking effects when the vapor phase reaches
the  local  sound  speed  in  the  nozzle.  Related  measurements  are  not
plenty,  though,  because  flow  measurement  apparatus  usually  cannot
deal with very high-temperature liquids, sometimes with vapor phase,
during  flash  boiling  injections.  But  there  are  still  some  investigations
that  provide  quantitative  flow  rate  measurements  in  flash  boiling  at-
omization applications. Van Vuuren et al. [59] performed instantaneous
flow rate testing and simultaneous spray measurements for an SCR urea
injector using the diesel exhaust fluid (AUS-32). The fluid temperatures
◦
of 30
C (flash boiling) were tested. They found
that the two-phase flash-boiling flow leads to a buildup of liquid in the
sac volume and progressively increased the hydraulic pressure behind
the orifice holes and reduced the instantaneous flow across the sealing

◦
C (sub-cooled) and 130

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111912

X. Li et al.

band.  The  instantaneous  flow  rate  as  a  function  of  time  under  flash
boiling conditions showed a much stronger fluctuation as well.

Lin et al. [55] carried out a flash boiling analysis with liquid carbon
dioxide as the working fluid. The experimental mass flow rate was also
measured using a turbine flow meter. As seen in Fig. 13, the mass flow
rate as a function of the superheat degree is plotted. They found that the
mass flow rate of the working fluid steadily dropped at a low rate as flash
boiling progressed, and the flow rate suddenly dropped as the onset of
choking  occurred.  Such  experimental results  were  generally  in  agree-
ment with flash boiling CFD simulations. Yang et al. [34] also performed
flow  rate  measurements  in  the  two-dimensional  slit  nozzle  measure-
ments,  and  the  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  14.  When  no  flash  boiling
bubbles occurred in the nozzle, the mass flow rate fluctuated, and no
apparent trend was observed. As the fuel temperature increased to 140
◦
C,  the  mass  flow  rate  dropped  by  15%,  which  was  acceptable  for
combustion application purposes. Similar conclusions were obtained by
Xu et al. [60], in which it was found that the decrease in mass flow rate
and equivalent cross-sectional area of flow was less than 12% and 9%.
Such  a  decrement  will  not  cause  significant  issues  for  practical  com-
bustion applications.

To conclude, the impacts of boundary condition variations for flash
boiling sprays are relatively clear qualitatively. Increasing the temper-
ature  of  the  working  fluid  or  reducing  the  ambient  pressure,  thus
changing  the  local  pressure  distribution  inside  the  nozzle,  can  both
enhance  flash  boiling  atomizations  but  via  different  pathways.
Increasing the injection pressure will suppress the phase change inside
the nozzle, but the atomization efficiency is not necessarily deteriorated
due  to  the  enhancement  of  dynamic-induced  breakups.  Generally,  a
higher  flash  boiling  level  will  reduce  the  mass  flow  rate  due  to  the
production of the vapor phase, and the mass flow rate will drop signif-
icantly if choking takes place inside the nozzle.

Furthermore, the investigations discussed in this section implied that
the designs of the injectors should be reconsidered for flash boiling at-
omization  applications.  For  instance,  the  choking  issues  can  be
addressed with an enlarged nozzle diameter, while a larger diameter can
bring challenges for sub-cooled injections. Flash boiling external spray
plume characteristics are quite different from those of sub-cooled sprays,
therefore it is expected parameters such as nozzle geometry, nozzle/step
hole profiles, etc., should be particularly designed for flash boiling (or
critical) atomizations to maximally explore the potential of flash boiling
atomizations, and suppress undesirable features such as choking and low
spray  momentums  that  would  deteriorate  fuel-air  mixing  for  some
applications.

Fig.  13. Dependence  of  mass  flow  rate  and  spray  angle  on  the  degree  of  su-
perheat. Reprinted from Ref. [55] with permission of Elsevier.

2.7. Near-field characteristics

Near-field  flash  boiling  characteristics  link  the  in-nozzle  flow  and
external spray properties. While we put relevant contents in this Section
since the near-field properties of flash boiling sprays are directly asso-
ciated with the two-phase flow characteristics immediately at the nozzle
exit. Near-field spray investigations are sometimes considered the holy
grail for spray atomization since it answers crucial questions about spray
primary breakup and associated mechanisms. But due to the very small
length scale and complex physics in the near-field, even non-intrusive
diagnostics  methods  have  witnessed  substantial  obstacles  induced  by
strong multiple scattering/significant density gradients near the injector
tip. X-ray phase change imaging (XCPI) techniques have recently been
utilized  for  many  spray-related  purposes  because  of  their  excellent
penetrating  capability  [61,62].  Near-field  measurements  are  the  key
challenges  for  flash  boiling  atomization  as  well.  Sometimes  it  is
considered flash boiling sprays are ideal for XCPI detection, primarily
because the droplet density of flash boiling sprays is lower than tradi-
tional sub-cooled atomization because of the strong evaporation effects.
Recently, there have been several studies using XCPI to investigate
the near-field response of flash boiling atomization, with some of them
focused  on  the  step-hole/counterbore  and  some  of  them  focused  on
near-field  liquid  disintegration.  For  instance,  Huang  et  al.  [63]  used
XCPI to quantify tip-wetting film distribution under flash boiling con-
ditions. This work demonstrates the liquid breakup under different fuel
temperatures  at  various  critical  timings,  as  shown  in  Fig.  15.  Some
interesting  observations  can  be  made  from  the  results  shown.  Firstly,
although it is expected that in-nozzle nucleation happened during flash
boiling  injection,  the  XCPI  results  shown  in  Fig.  15  did  not  notably
reveal such information. Similar results were found in other flash boiling
studies incorporating XCPI. Such limitations were mainly due to the tiny
density  gradient  inside  the  nozzle  during  flash  boiling  atomization.
Addressing such challenges requires extremely high-energy XCPI sour-
ces. The high-speed movements of fluid/bubbles inside the nozzle also
required  imaging  cameras  with  high  sensitivity,  which  is  also  chal-
lenging based on the state-of-the-art techniques and apparatus available.
Therefore, it is not common now to use XCPI for flash boiling internal
flow diagnostics.

Furthermore,  Huang  et  al.  [63]  found  that  the  spray  becomes
extremely dispersed under flash-boiling conditions, as seen in Fig. 15.
Another interesting observation from the results, although not discussed
by the authors, is  the wave patterns shown in the counterbore at the
injector full close under flash boiling conditions. The results are analo-
gous to the results obtained using two-dimensional nozzles, as shown in
Fig. 5. We hold that this phenomenon is only observed at the end of the
low  flow  rate  at  this  moment  when
injection  because  of  a
flash-boiling-induced breakup dominates.

In  addition,  Atac  et  al.  [64]  compared  the  difference  between
achieving  flash  boiling  via  elevating  the  fuel  temperature  and
decreasing  the  ambient  pressure  with  H-mode  XPCI  techniques.  They
found  that  the  initial  dispersion  angle  of  a  high-temperature  flash
boiling plume was wider than a low-ambient-pressure plume with the
same flash boiling level. Furthermore, they found that the droplet size
with  an  elevated  temperature  was  finer  than  with  reduced  ambient
pressure. They considered the faster bubble growth rate at the instant of
a bubble burst in the case of elevated fuel temperature was discussed to
be the potential mechanism of this result based on Senda’s model, which
is  also in good agreement with our proposed model.  In another XCPI
research, Jeon et al. [65] investigated near-nozzle spray dynamics of a
six-hole GDI injector. They found that flash-boiling enhances the radial
momentum only near the spray boundary, and they found that radial
velocity is the sole function of Rp  at the flare flash boiling condition.
They also proposed a radial expansion model of flash boiling atomiza-
tion induced by bubble burst and momentum transfer in the radial di-
rection. It is worth noting that the macroscopic spray width under lower
ambient  pressure  is  usually  greater  than  elevated  temperature  flash

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111913

X. Li et al.

Although many investigations have shown that flash boiling bubbles
occurred  near  the  nozzle  wall,  flash  boiling  bubbles  could  spatially
distribute otherwise, especially when other phase change mechanisms
are involved. Li et al. [15] carried out microscope measurements for a
two-hole practical fuel injector and found that the spray plume appeared
to be hollow and swirling, which assembled the feature of string cavi-
tation (see Fig. 16). In the results, it appears vapor bubbles were formed
at  the  center  of  the  spray  plume.  Hydraulic  flip  features  were  also
observed in the experiments. When the injection reached the end and the
local pressure was low inside the nozzle, a net-like liquid ligament was
found with holes in the center, which may indicate the occurrence of the
in-liquid bubble growth and expansion. Nevertheless, such phenomena
are rare in practical injection cases. With a high injection pressure, it is
more likely that a bubbly internal flow will be formed as a result.

Wang  et  al.  [66]  also  performed  a  near-field  microscopic  analysis
using 2-methylfuran, ethanol, and iso-octane as the working fluids. They
also  found  that  flash  boiling  had  notably  changed  near-field  breakup
mechanisms, and they held the saturation ratio and cavitation number
were  both  critical  in  defining  the  primary  breakup  characteristics  of
flash  boiling  sprays.  2-methylfuran  showed  the  best  atomization  per-
formance with the highest vapor pressure, but the spray velocity suf-
fered  from  its  lower  density  and  resistance  when  penetrating  the
ambient. Wang et al. [67] carried out a systematic study investigating
the  near-field  characteristics  of  flash  boiling  characteristics  using
iso-octane. They investigated the effects of fuel temperature, injection
pressure, etc., on the near-field response during flash boiling injections.
Aleiferis et al. [68] used a transparent nozzle to study the influence of
cavitation on spray injection, and they also commented on the impacts
of flash boiling atomization. They found that under flash boiling con-
ditions, although more cavitation bubbles were formed, the atomization

Fig. 14. Total mass flow rate at various superheat indices [34].

boiling  due  to  expansion  in  the  ambient,  which  we  believe  is  related
strongly  to  the  radial  expansion  of  flashing  sprays.  A  more  thorough
discussion of a single flash boiling spray plume will be made in Section 3
of this work.

Fig. 15. Spray characteristics and tip wetting at the superheated conditions (Pin = 4 MPa; Tf = 353 K; From top to the last row, Pa = 101 kPa, 50 kPa, 10 kPa). Rp
denotes the superheated degree that equals a ratio of the saturation vapor pressure to the ambient pressure. Reprinted from Ref. [63] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111914

X. Li et al.

Fig.  16. Backlit  measurements  and  Schlieren
measurements  under  low  ambient  pressure  (25
kPa)  and  relatively  high  ambient  pressure  (250
kPa).  The  fuel  temperature  was  fixed  to  303  K.
Representative  developed  spray  plume  measure-
ments  were  chosen  for  demonstration  [15].  Col-
umn  (a).  Backlit  and  Schlieren  measurements
under an ambient pressure of 250 kPa. Column (b).
Selected  backlit  and  Schlieren  measurements
under an ambient pressure of 25 kPa. Column (c).
Selected  backlit  and  Schlieren  measurements
under an ambient pressure of 25 kPa with different
plume structures.

3. External characteristics of flash boiling sprays

3.1. Plume radial expansion

In the previous section, we have elaborated that the primary breakup
mechanisms  under  flash  boiling  conditions  could  be  different  from
typical  spray  atomization  means.  Such  a  difference  in  atomization
mechanisms also leads to the change of spray morphology from the near-
field to the far-field. Fig. 17 compares the plume structures under sub-
cooled  conditions  and  flash  boiling  conditions,  respectively  [69].  For
sub-cooled atomizations, the spray plume is a neat cone shape that can
be well-defined by the cone angle. However, the spray plume under flash
boiling  conditions  no  longer  forms  a  cone  shape.  Rather,  the
morphology of the spray plume approximates the shape of a willow leaf.
The spray plume  firstly expands in the near-field, then the expansion
trend  is  suppressed  and  even  converges  to  a  sharp  tip  as  the  plume
penetrates. Similar observations are observed in other investigations as
well.

Besides  the  difference  in  morphologies  of  the  spray  plume,  other
research also pointed out parameters that should not have significant
impacts on the plume angle under sub-cooled conditions, but these pa-
rameters affect the resultant plume angle under flash boiling conditions.
Chang et al. [70] found that the spray widths are different under flash
boiling conditions with everything the same but different step-hole di-
ameters. The plume width is greater with a larger step-hole diameter,
which  implied  that  flash  boiling  has  a  stronger  interaction  with  the
step-hole of the injector. A more intuitive observation can be made using
two-dimensional  optical  nozzles  but  from  an  external  spray  analysis
perspective. Yang et al. [37] showed that under sub-cooled conditions,
the liquid did not significantly interact with the wall of the step-hole. But
with a higher fuel temperature, notable phase change, and turbulence
occurred inside the step-hole (as seen in Fig. 5). The liquid-gas mixture
had filled up the step-hole under fierce flash boiling conditions. There-
fore,  it  leads  to  the  question  of  whether  the  phase  change  and  the
expansion of compressible mediums have become the dominant factor
for flash boiling plume morphology.

Such observations further attest to the fact that the vapor-induced
breakup  only  takes  place  in  the  near-field  under  flash  boiling  condi-
tions. As the bubbles break up, the produced projectile droplets can be

efficiency  was  mainly  governed  by  the  superheat  level.  Furthermore,
cavitation provided a plentiful of bubbles as the source for flash boiling
atomization.

To conclude, although near-field measurements of flash boiling at-
omization  inside  the  nozzle  and  outside  the  nozzle  are  crucial,  the
challenges in such efforts are acknowledged in the community. Many
qualitative investigations have been carried out to illustrate the features
of flash boiling near-field atomization, but quantitative results, such as
primary breakup droplet characteristics, vapor concentration, heat, and
mass transfers, are essential for modeling purposes and primary breakup
model developments. In the next section, we will focus on the charac-
teristics of the external flash boiling sprays, and we hope some of the
measurement  techniques  can  lead  to  a  further  understanding  of  flash
boiling spray atomization.

Fig.  17. Spray  measurements  at  different  fuel  temperatures  and  injection
pressures  at  t  = 10  ms  ASOF  (after  start  of  fuel)  when  the  spray  was  fully
developed  [69].  Panel  (a).  Injection  pressure  = 3  MPa.  Panel  (b).  Injection
pressure = 5 MPa.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111915

X. Li et al.

Fig. 18. Schematic of spray plume formation under different thermodynamic states. Panel (a). Sub-cooled injection. Panel (b). Flash boiling injection. Panel (c).
Droplet velocity analysis.

considered as an isotropic process, i.e., the droplets propagate at a 4π
solid angle volumetrically. Meanwhile, the vapor phase will also expand
in the ambient with a similar propagation trend. Thus the spray plume
will  expand  together  with  the  expansion  of  the  vapor  phase.  The ob-
servations were also highlighted by Araneo et al. [71], in which it was
found that the flash boiling spray plume had a transition from expanding
in the near-field to contracting in the far-field. Therefore, they consid-
ered it urgent to redefine the spray angle for flash boiling atomization.
The causes of the willow leaf plume shape (expanding-contracting)
can be explained in Fig. 18. For sub-cooled sprays, the spray plume does
not interfere with the nozzle hole/step hole. Therefore the spray plume
propagates in a cone shape with a well-defined cone angle. However, for
flash boiling sprays, the spray plume might interfere with the nozzle step
hole due to rapid expansion outside of the nozzle. Furthermore, since the
primary breakup of the flash boiling spray can be dominated by bubble
rupture  in  the  near-field,  the  momentum  from  the  isotropic  breakup
would compose with the momentum from fuel injection and therefore
produce  a  different  initial  velocity  distribution  in  the  near-field.  The
vapor inside the nozzle will also expand immediately out of the nozzle.
As  the  spray  droplets  propagate  further,  the  droplets  away  from  the

plume center interact with the ambient air and are prone to evaporation,
especially  under  high-temperature  flash  boiling  cases.  As  such,  the
diameter of the spray plume decreases and forms a willow-leaf shape
since  liquid-phase  droplets  will  evaporate  and  disappear  as  the  spray
propagates.

To verify such a hypothesis that flash boiling plume morphologies
are primarily determined by bubble rupture and the expansion of the
vapor phase, we performed a single plume flash boiling study and the
plume  width  at  different  distances  downstream  [72].  We  define  the
parameter of theoretical expansion ratio (ηi) as ηi = vmix/v0, where vmix
and v0 are the specific volumes of the fuel (or fuel mixture) before and
after injection. The plume volume at a specific location can be approx-
2, Therefore if ηi ∝ V, then it should be held that ηi
imated by V = Δz⋅π⋅Ws
1/2 as the variable for investigation. The rela-
∝ Ws
1/2 and normalized Ws is presented in Fig. 19. As seen
tionship between ηi
in Panel (c) and Panel (d), when the studied location is far away from the
1/2  and
nozzle,  good  linear  correlations  can  be  established  between  ηi
normalized Ws; while in the near-field, the linear fitting was less satis-
factory. It is believed that the near-field expansion is also influenced by
both  dynamic  and  flash  boiling  primary  breakups,  therefore  the

2. As such, we used ηi

Fig. 19. Relationships between the plume width (single plume injector) and the ideal expansion ratio under flash-boiling conditions [72]. Panel (a). Location z = 5d0.
Panel (b). Location z = 10d0. Panel (c). Location z = 20d0. Panel (d). Location z = 50 d0.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111916

X. Li et al.

under-expansion process is not ideal or linear. In a similar study by Guo
et al. [73], the radial expansion of the flash boiling jet is correlated to the
chemical  potential of  phase  change during  flash boiling.  Both studies
emphasized the significance of vapor phase radial expansion, and the
expansion  is  more  pronounced  with  a  higher  level  of  flash  boiling.
Therefore, it is implied that the cone angle concept is no longer very
meaningful under flash boiling conditions and the spray developments
are  mostly  governed  by  initial  isotropic  droplet  projections  and  the
under-expansion process of the vapor components.

3.2. External spray characteristics

3.2.1. Boundary conditions impacts on spray characteristics and
diagnostics

When  changing  the  thermodynamic  boundary  conditions  for  flash

boiling atomization, such as the fluid temperature, injection pressure,
ambient pressure, etc., the atomization behaviors change accordingly.
We will  not explicate and  review related literature  since some agree-
ments are reached universally in each flash boiling investigation, espe-
cially  about  the  liquid  temperature  in  the  nozzle.  To  summarize,  in
general,  increasing  the  fuel  temperature  and  reducing  the  ambient
pressure  would  both enhance  flash  boiling atomization,  which  would
lead  to  stronger  evaporation  and  finer  spray  droplets.  Meanwhile,
elevating the fuel temperature will influence stronger on the evaporative
natures of the flash boiling spray.

As for the injection pressure impact, generally, the injection pressure
acts as a competing factor to flash boiling atomization in the aspects of
dynamic  disintegration and thermodynamic phase  change breakup. A
higher injection pressure would also suppress bubble formation inside
the nozzle. Therefore, it is expected more phase change would take place

Fig.  20. Panel  (a).  Schlieren  images  at  different  temperature  and  density  conditions  with  the  detected  contours  overlapped  to  show  the  angle  determination
methodology for the vapor phase. Panel (b). Liquid and vapor spray contours comparison between a lower (left) and a higher (right) gas density level at 700 K of
chamber temperature and 20 MPa injection pressure. Reprinted from Ref. [80] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111917

X. Li et al.

in the external field in the form of liquid evaporation rather than boiling
in the nozzle. Wu et al. [74] performed a flash boiling study with a focus
on  the  injection  pressure  effects.  It  was  stated  in  their  study  that
near-nozzle-outward deviation was observed at low injection pressure
flash boiling sprays, which were attributed to a more pronounced bubble
rupture breakup under low injection pressure. They also found that a
high  injection  pressure  could  lead  to  far-field  spray  deviation  due  to
vortex motion. Yang et al. [75] investigated the influence of injection
pressure on flash boiling atomization using two-dimensional nozzles so
that the drop size can be better quantified in the near-field. It was found
that  a  lower  injection  pressure  yielded  a  finer  droplet  size  in  the
near-field due to stronger primary breakups dominated by flash boiling.
Meanwhile,  a  higher  injection  pressure  was  found  to  enhance  the
breakup in the far-field.

The value of the ambient pressure, as we have discussed, determines
how  significantly  the  spray  would  expand.  Lower  ambient  pressure
would significantly increase the spray plume diameter, thus inflicting

plume-to-plume interactions. There are many studies where the results
support this observation. More specifically, Li et al. [76] performed a
study  on  the  spray  morphology  variation  under  different  ambient
pressures using propane, n-hexane, and iso-octane as the working fluid.
They  found  that  for  propane  sprays,  increasing  the  ambient  pressure
could  suppress  spray  collapse,  while  this  phenomenon  was  not  well
observed for n-hexane or iso-octane cases. They held that the suppres-
sion  of  nucleation  rate  and  bubble  growth  under  elevated  ambient
pressures were the main cause for the observation. Li et al. further [77]
performed an ambient pressure impact analysis on flash boiling sprays in
the  pressure  range  from  2.0  kPa  to  101  kPa.  They  found  that  both
increasing  the  liquid  temperature  and  reducing  the  ambient  pressure
would  intensify  the  radial  dispersion  of  the  flashing  spray,  while  the
spray width was highly sensitive to the ambient pressure. They held that
this  observation  could  be  related  to  vapor  coagulation.  Li  et  al.  [78]
studied  the  effect  of  ambient  pressure  on  flash  boiling  sprays.  It  was
found that the penetrations of non-flash boiling and transitional flash

Fig. 21. Comparison between measured and predicted distributions of fuel/air equivalence ratio. Reprinted from Ref. [87] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111918

X. Li et al.

boiling sprays were reduced because no spray collapse had taken place,
and higher evaporation leads to shorter liquid phase penetrations. For
flare flash boiling sprays that had collapsed during propagation, a higher
ambient pressure suppressed the vortex motion at the leading edge of
the spray and extended the spray penetration. It was held that the in-
crease of vertical momentum at the center had led to such observations.
The increased amount of vapor phase concentration inside the flash
boiling spray plume is a symbolic phenomenon that distinguishes flash
boiling  sprays  from  typical  sub-cooled  sprays.  Many  benefits  of  flash
boiling  spray  rely  on  the  high  vapor  concentration  within  the  spray
plumes. The latent heat of vaporization can be compensated by a higher
liquid temperature or from a high-temperature ambient similar to diesel
sprays for non-premixed combustions. The impact of the ambient tem-
perature is quite intuitive in that it would enhance the evaporation of the
droplets.  Kale  et  al.  [79]  investigated  the  spray  behaviors  under
high-pressure and high-temperature ambient conditions. Iso-octane and

alcohol fuels were used as the working fluid. They found that the liquid
penetration  of  iso-octane  was  the  shortest  under  high-temperature
ambient  conditions,  and  ethanol  had  a  shorter  penetration  compared
to butanol despite a larger latent heat of evaporation. They attributed
this observation to the higher level of flash boiling level for ethanol as
the working fluid.

However, quantifying the liquid and vapor concentration distribu-
tion  is  not  a  trivial  task  since  the  evaporation  process  makes  corre-
sponding optical diagnostics more challenging. In addition, significant
heat and mass transfer occur during the phase change of the liquid spray,
which further complicates the physics during flash boiling atomization.
The most commonly used method in demonstrating the liquid phase/
gaseous phase is the Schlieren method/backlit method. Payri et al. [80]
performed  diffusion  back  illumination  (DBI)  and  Schlieren  imaging
scheme to measure the morphology of flash boiling spray produced by
an  ECN  (engine  combustion  network)  Spray  G  injector.  The  liquid

Fig. 22. Characteristic parameter distributions of sprays under different fuel temperatures and ambient pressures at 0.7 ms ASOF [90].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111919

X. Li et al.

component measurement was performed by DBI, and vapor distribution
was  measured  by  Schlieren.  This  research  shows  an  elevated
ambient-pressure-induced  spray  collapse.  The  liquid  contour  and  the
vapor contour could be spotted, as shown in Fig. 20. Kook et al. [81]
performed Mie scattering and Schlieren combined investigations using
conventional  fuels  and  biofuels.  They  found  that  although  the  liquid
penetration was significantly impacted by the boiling point/density of
the fuel, the vapor diffusion and vapor penetration were independent of
these  parameters,  which  provided  quite  useful  information  on  diesel
engine performance improvements. Zhou et al. [82] studied the cyclic
spray variations of flash boiling sprays and sub-cooled sprays based on
the  UV-LAS  technique  and  the  high-speed  Mie  scattering  method,
respectively. They found flash boiling can notably increase cyclic vari-
ations.  Greater turbulence will yield more significant variation in the
liquid/vapor  distribution  of  the  sprays.  The  results  are  reasonable

particularly when the spray is in its transitional flash boiling regime, and
the  cyclic variation  could be affected by  structured flows in  practical
combustors  so  that  the  resultant  cycle-to-cycle  variation  of  fuel  com-
bustion can show different characteristics.

The Schlieren method enjoys the advantages of a relatively simple
experimental  setup  and  an  affordable  cost,  but  it  can  only  provide
qualitative  results  in  depicting  the  locations  of  the  liquid  phase  or
gaseous phase. There are other laser diagnostics techniques practiced by
researchers  in  finding  the  vapor-liquid  composition  of  flash  boiling
sprays.  For  instance,  Adachi  et  al.  [83]  used  Infrared  Extinction/-
Scattering (IRES) for 1D vapor phase detection, and it was found that
this method was valid for transient spray measurements. Li et al. [84]
used  the  ultraviolet  laser  absorption/scattering  (UV-LAS)  method  to
quantitatively measure the two-dimensional projections of liquid com-
ponents and gas-phase components for flash boiling sprays. They found
that  the  vapor  mass  stemming  from  surface  evaporation  increased
steadily  as  the  flash  boiling  level  elevated.  They  also  found  that  the
vapor mass stemming from the bubble explosion was minor under mild
flash boiling conditions but increased rapidly when the bubble explosion
happened inside the nozzle.

A  relatively  more  effective  way  to  quantify  the  liquid  phase  and
gaseous  phase  distributions  is  the  laser-induced  exciplex  fluorescence
(LIEF) method. Fansler et al. [85] used the fuel combination of FB(9%)
-DEMA(2%)  -  hexane  (89%)  for  the  experiments  so  that  liquid  phase
fluorescence  and  gaseous  phase  fluorescence  are  in  different  ranges
(~280 nm and ~350 nm, respectively) excited by the fourth harmonic
of an Nd: YAG laser (266 nm). Moreover, the temperature distribution of
the  spray  can  also  be  obtained  by  the  LIEF  method  via  a  two-color
scheme. In Fansler’s work, it is stated that the absolute density of the
liquid phase and the vapor phase of an evaporating spray could be ob-
tained with an in situ calibration. This work also demonstrated that the
LIEF method was applied in regimes where liquid and vapor co-existed.
Su et al. [86] performed similar studies for diesel fuel spray using the
fuel combination of n-decane, naphthalene (Np), and 4-methyl-p-pheny-
lenediamine (TMPD) with a mass percentage of 90%:9%:1% to ensure
the  co-evaporation  of  the  fuel.  The  spray  atomization  process  was
implemented under an ambient temperature of 800 K with spray tem-
perature and local equivalence ratio achieved by the LIEF method, and
the experimental results were used to further compare with numerical
simulation results(as seen in Fig. 21) [87].

◦

◦

C to 75

The  LIEF  method  was  also  practiced  in  quantifying  flash-boiling-
related  experiments.  Zhang  et  al.  [88,89]  used  the  FB-DEMA-hexane
combination  to  quantify  the  liquid-vapor  composition  of  gasoline
sprays.  Multi-hole  injectors  were  used,  and  spray  collapse  was  also
analyzed in these studies. It was observed that in a limited temperature
range (i.e., from 30
C), the  temperature dependence  of the
fluorescence intensity was low. It was also found that the vapor phase
collapsed more significantly than the liquid phase. It was also observed
that before  the spray  plume  interacted,  the vaporation  rate increased
moderately  with  the  increase  of  fuel  superheat  degree,  while  the
vaporization rate peaked as the plume started to interact and collapse.
As we mentioned previously, the LIEF technique is also suitable for
temperature  measurement.  For  flash boiling  conditions,  Li  et  al.  [90]
performed a temperature-vapor-liquid measurement for one plume from
a  two-hole  symmetric  injector.  Corresponding  results  are  depicted  in
Fig. 22. It was found that for flash boiling plumes, the temperature drop
in the middle section of the plume was less apparent because of weak
fuel-air interaction, while the temperature drops in the near-field and at
the  plume  tip  were  more  significant.  It  was  also  held  that  the  heat
transfer  from  the  plume  to  the  ambient  air  was  enhanced  due  to
improved  air  entrainment  under  flash  boiling  conditions.  A
low-temperature  zone  is  seen  at  the  leading  edge  of  the  spray  plume
(plume tip), which is also in agreement with the experiments in Zhou
et al. [91], which measured flash boiling sprays using a thermocouple
with R134a as the working fluid. The cooling effects are also acknowl-
edged by Lin et al. [55] in a carbon dioxide flashing spray. They found

Fig.  23. Phase  Doppler  interferometry  results  at  the  test  position  with  and
without the impingement plate [93]. Panel (a). Sauter mean diameter (SMD) as
a  function  of  superheat  index.  Panel  (b).  Sample  frequency  as  a  function  of
superheat index. Panel (c). Volume flux as a function of superheat index. Panel
(d).  Normalized  volume  flux  as  a  function  of  superheat  index  based  on  PDI
rejection rate (based on sub-cooled, free spray data).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111920

X. Li et al.

◦
Fig. 24. Droplet size development under the reference condition (Tfuel = 20
bar); and the flash boiling condition (Tfuel  = 80

◦

C, Pamb  = 0.5 bar). Reprinted from Ref. [95] with permission of Elsevier.

◦
C, Pamb = 1.0 bar); the elevated ambient pressure condition (Tfuel = 20

C, Pamb = 10.0

that liquid phase  CO2  persisted after the injection. Furthermore,  they
found CO2 snow formation inside the spray plume, validating the cool-
ing  effects  of  droplet  evaporation  that  condense  liquid  droplets  into
solids for impurity removal purposes. Although the validation regarding
the  temperature  measurements  (LIEF  under  harsh  environments  and
thermocouple  surface  physics)  could  still  be  improved,  these  in-
vestigations  are  valuable  in  interpreting  the  complex  heat  and  mass
transfer of flash boiling atomization.

One challenge in illustrating the characteristics of flash boiling spray
is how to quantitatively measure the quantity of fluid evaporated during
atomization. This task can be complex even with non-intrusive optical
diagnostics such as laser-induced fluorescence because of its calibration
issues. Consequently, similar results are rare in the existing literature.
Postrioti et al. [92] carried out momentum flux measurements using an
impacting plate. It was found that the global/total momentum flux was
not impacted by flash boiling atomization, while a significant decrease
in  the  local  momentum  peak  intensity  was  found  since  the  footprint
under flash boiling conditions was evidently larger. Recently, we per-
formed a liquid volume flux study using phase Doppler interferometry, i.
e.,  counting  the  volume  of  total  registered  droplets  measured  as  a
function of time elapsed, and the results are shown in Fig. 23 [93]. The
measurement location was 50 mm beneath a five-hole, side-mount fuel
injector. As can be seen from the results, using flash boiling atomization
not only reduced the mean diameter of the spray droplets, as many in-
vestigations  have  revealed  but  also  dramatically  reduced  the  liquid
component inside the spray plume. Compared with sub-cooled sprays, a
superheat index of 0.4, roughly in the transitional flash boiling regime,

(cid:0) 5  m3/m2s (95% reduc-
reduced the volume flux from 400 to 20 × 10
tion).  Further  decreasing  the  superheat  index  to  0.15  can  reduce  the
(cid:0) 5  m3/m2s.  The  results  indicated  that
volume  flux  to  below  1  × 10
although the penetration of flash boiling plumes might appear similar to
sub-cooled  spray  plumes,  their  vapor-liquid  composition  was  very
distinctive. Furthermore, it could be inferred that the impact of averaged
droplet size decrement was more pronounced than the decrease of the
volume fluxes through calculations. Under some scenarios (transitional
flash  boiling),  the  sampling  rate  increased  as  the  superheat  level
increased, as seen in Panel (b) of Fig. 23. But since the volume flux is
proportional to the third power of droplet diameter, the resultant vol-
ume flux still declined. This finding is quite intuitive but also significant
in analyzing many spray-related characteristics of flash boiling atomi-
zation. For instance, even when the flash boiling spray is collapsed, the
impingement  mass  might  still  be  well  less  than  that  from  sub-cooled
impingement  due  to  evaporation  during  spray  propagation  and  film
deposition. More discussions/analyses can be associated with the results
shown in Fig. 23, as will be illustrated in the following sections.

3.2.2. Droplet size distribution and droplet velocity

Commonly, it is generally accepted that with flash boiling atomiza-
tion,  the  droplet  size  of  the  spray  would  decrease  because  of  1).
improved spray breakup in the near-field due to phase change; and 2).
improved droplet evaporation because of a higher fuel temperature and
stronger fuel-air interaction. With more vapor components in the plume
and roughly the same working fluid flow rate, as discussed in Section
2.5,  it  is  expected  that  the  velocity  of  the  multiphase  mixture  would

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111921

X. Li et al.

become  higher  than  typical  sub-cooled  sprays.  However,  since  the
droplet size is smaller under flash boiling conditions, the momentum of
the spray droplet is lower, which means the spray is prone to interfer-
ence from air entrainment and ambient resistance, and the penetrating
capacity can be compromised if the flash boiling is too strong.

For alternative fuels that are usually less volatile, atomization per-
formance significantly deteriorates, especially when a cold environment
is expected. For instance, Huang et al. [94] found that ethanol evapo-
rated more slowly than gasoline did in low-temperature environments
(<375 K), but the fuels reached a similar evaporation rate when the fuel
temperature was higher than 375 K. Guo et al. [95] used phase Doppler
interferometry to measure the droplet size of fuel sprays and compared
spray  atomization  under  sub-cooled,  elevated  ambient  pressure,  and
flash boiling conditions. It was found that the droplet size under flash
boiling conditions was smaller and the size distribution was more uni-
form  (see  Fig. 24).  Wang et  al.  [96,97] adopted phase  Doppler  inter-
ferometry to quantify the droplet size variation as the flash boiling level
increased. It was concluded that the droplet size under mild/transition
flash boiling conditions became larger compared to sub-cooled sprays,
yet the droplet size dropped notably under medium to high-level flash
boiling  conditions.  It  was  also  found  that  flash  boiling  atomization
showed a higher mean droplet velocity than the non-flash boiling con-
dition case. Yang et al. [98,99] used the extended glare point velocim-
etry  and  sizing  (EGPVS)  method  to  capture  the  drop  sizing  of  flash
boiling  sprays,  and  it  was  found  that the  distribution span  of  droplet
diameter became narrow from the range of 8–30 μm at the non-flash
boiling stage to the range of 11–16 μm at flare flash boiling stage. Lu
et al. [100] optimized the glare-point imaging technique for droplet size
and velocity measurement for flash boiling sprays supported by simu-
lation data verifications. Park et al. [101] found that the SMD of flash
boiling  spray  was  notably  reduced  from  KIVA-3V  simulations  with
dimethyl ether as the working fluid. Guo et al. [102] performed a phase
Doppler Velocimetry analysis in an optical GDI engine and found the
droplet size dropped for most of the conditions in the engine. They also
established that the Rosin-Rammler distribution function is still applied
to flash boiling atomization inside the optical engine.

Fig.  25. Flash-evaporating:  1.2  ms  after  start  of  injection  (ASOI),  10Mpa  in-
jection pressure, 60
C fuel temperature, and 20 MPa ambient pressure [106].

◦

However, it is worth noting that some experimental investigations
have found an increase in SMD as the flash boiling level is elevated to a
certain level. Moshkovich et al. [103] carried out a flash boiling analysis
with a single cylindrical orifice. They found out that as the flash boiling
spray  transitioned  from  heterogeneous  nucleation  (transitional  flash
boiling regime) to homogeneous nucleation regimes (flare flash boiling
regime), the mean diameter witnessed an increase, although still smaller
than sub-cooled spray droplets. This issue was discussed by Li et al. [72],
and this untypical observation was attributed to the elimination of fine
droplets  due  to  evaporations.  As  the  very  tiny  droplets  evaporate
completely or shrink below the detection threshold of the apparatus, the
droplets are excluded from the measurement, therefore the overall SMD
would increase as a result.

Most of the previously introduced investigations rely on counting the
particles  either  in  a  small  volume  (phase  Doppler  interferometry)  or
distinguishing particles on digital sensors. When the spray is too dense,
these  methods  could  either  lose  measurement  accuracy  or  fail.  To
address  potential  multiple  scattering  issues,  Berrocal  et  al.  [104]
developed  structured  laser  illumination  planar  imaging  (SLIPI)  to
address  potential  multiple  scattering  concerns.  They  further  incorpo-
rated  the  SLIPI  technique  with  laser-induced  fluorescence/Mie  scat-
tering  (SLIPI-LIF/Mie)  to  measure  the  statistic  drop  size  information
(SMD) at each camera pixel [105]. It was derived that the SMD at a given
location can be approximated by the ratio of droplet fluorescence and
scattering  signal,  with  appropriate  corrections  applied.  However,
traditionally, LIF/Mie methods are limited to weak evaporating sprays
since the cross-talk of vapor fluorescence can impact the measurements.
Furthermore, inappropriate co-evaporation properties of the fluid and
the laser dopant can deteriorate quantitative measurement results. To
address  such  concerns,  Zeng  et  al.  [106]  used  laser-induced  exciplex
fluorescence/Mie scattering (LIEF/Mie) to measure the drop size in flash
boiling sprays (see Fig. 25). A significant difference was found between
the results of LIEF/Mie and LIF/Mie measurements, which indicated that
the  evaporation  effect  cannot be  ignored  when  the  spray  experiences
strong evaporation. The LIEF/Mie results were compared against phase
Doppler  interferometry  measurements  and  good  agreements  were
obtained.

spray  using

The LIEF/Mie method is effective in quantifying flash boiling droplet
size, but the results are limited to far-field measurements due to multiple
scattering, as admitted in Zeng et al. [106]. An intuitive way to quantify
the near-field droplet size is to combine SLIPI and LIEF/Mie techniques
so that the new diagnostics can both remove vapor fluorescence inter-
ference and multiple scattering error in dense regime measurements. In
a recent investigation, Qiu et al. [107] used the SLIPI-LIEF/Mie method
to  quantify  near-field  droplet  characteristics  of  a  single  plume  flash
the  fluorobenzene(FB)/diethylmethylamine
boiling
(DEMA)/n-hexane working fluid combination. The results are shown in
Fig. 26 with an injection pressure of 10 MPa. As can be seen, when a
3p-SLIPI optical system is incorporated, a central high SMD region can
be  established,  especially  when  the  ambient  pressure  is  low  and  the
under-expansion  effects  are  pronounced.  The  primary  difference  be-
tween  experiments  with  and  without  SLIPI  consideration  is  that  for
LIEF/Mie experiments, there is a sharp SMD rise in the near-field, while
such an observation is not valid in SLIPI-LIEF/Mie measurement, which
reflects  the  impacts  of  multiple  scattering  in  the  near-field.  Unlike
sub-cooled injections, there can be no liquid cores in the near-field of the
flash boiling spray especially when the superheat level is high. There-
fore, near-field measurement of the drop size can suit well for investi-
gating the near-field breakup mechanisms of flash boiling atomization.
As for droplet velocities, many related investigations were conducted
together with droplet sizing since phase Doppler Interferometry could
incorporate  velocity  measurements  in  two  components.  For  instance,
Rees et al. [108,109] performed a flash boiling atomization investiga-
tion  under  cryogenic  conditions  with  liquid/gaseous  nitrogen  as  the
working  fluid,  and  the  fiber-coupled  phase  Doppler  Interferometry
method  was  used  for  spray  quantification.  Representative  results  are

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111922

X. Li et al.

Fig. 26. Drop size prediction using LIEF/Mie with n-hexane as the working fluid. Panel (a). The SLIPI optics are incorporated [107]. Panel (b). No SLIPI system is
added. Panel (c). Mie scattering signal comparison with and without SLIPI implementation.

shown in Fig. 27. As discussed, the velocity profiles obtained in their
research were generally in agreement with similar investigations [110]
with  ethanol  as  the  working  fluid.  Meanwhile,  the  authors  also
acknowledged that due to the high rejection rate in the near-field of the
spray, actual velocity distribution in the near-field was hard to obtain.
Aleiferis et al. [62] carried out a systematic analysis of spray penetra-
tion, cone angles, and spray dynamics properties using different types of
fuels. They found that flash boiling atomization increased the averaged
droplet  velocity  from  50  m/s  to  60  m/s,  with  the  maximum  droplet
velocity increasing from 120 m/s to 130 m/s.

Another typical method  to evaluate the velocity field of the spray
and/or  the  ambient  gas  is  to  use  particle  imaging  velocimetry  (PIV)
techniques. Since flash boiling atomizations usually induce significant
air  entrainment,  it  is  desirable  to  capture  the  spray  flow  fields  and
airflow fields simultaneously. Zhang et al. [111] carried out a study to
capture  the  spray  velocities  and  the  air  velocities  simultaneously  for
flash boiling sprays. A single Nd: YLF high-speed laser with a temporal
resolution of 10 kHz was utilized. Spray droplets were illuminated and
emitted the Mie scattering signal at 527 nm. Meanwhile, the ambient air
was  doped  with  oil  droplets  and  Rhodamine-6G  as  the  dopant.  The
signal strengths were well controlled and attenuated so that the signal
intensities  captured  by  the  image  splitter  were  comparable  to  an

enhanced SNR. The planar velocity results can be found in Fig. 28. The
spray velocity and air velocity were calculated separately, and the re-
sults shown merged the two simultaneous measurements. It was found
the kinetic energy of the ambient gas increases rapidly due to the mo-
mentum  exchange  from  the  flash  boiling  spray  injection  and  the
expanded two-phase interface area. At the end of the injection, the ki-
netic energy of the ambient gas is maintained for an extended period of
time with a central large-velocity zone of the fuel spray before finally
dissipating.

3.2.3. Multi-components working fluid impacts

In the previous section, we discussed the impact of multi-component
working fluid on the flow characteristics in the nozzle. Such impacts can
be  significant,  for  instance,  for  fuel  combustion  purposes  since  most
hydrocarbon  fuels  are  mixtures  rather  than single-component  liquids.
Although the combustion of flash boiling sprays using multi-component
fuels  could  potentially  incorporate  different  combustion  kinetics,  the
influence of multi-component working fluid is mainly attributed to its
physical and thermal properties rather than its chemical compositions.
Furthermore,  most  of  the  multi-component  flash  boiling  experiments
observed elevated atomization performances, especially those blending
high-volatile  species  with  low-volatile  species,  in  a  fashion  similar  to

Fig. 27. Vertical and horizontal velocity distributions at various locations for a flash boiling spray. Reprinted from Ref. [108] with permission of Springer.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111923

X. Li et al.

Fig. 28. Vertical and horizontal velocity distributions at various locations for a flash boiling spray. Averaged two-phase flow-field distribution of the flash-boiling
spray (black vectors: fuel spray velocity; blue vectors: ambient gas velocity) [111].

emulsion sprays. It was believed that the evaporation of the high-volatile
fluids would promote the breakup of the low-volatile fluids.

Yan et al. [112,113] studied flash boiling atomizations of isooctane,
hexane,  ethanol,  and  their  binary  mixtures.  They  found  that  adding
highly volatile species to the fuel can promote spray atomization. The
addition of ethanol is more effective than the addition of hexane. A 10%
ethanol addition would achieve a similar performance to a 30% hexane
addition with the base fuel of isooctane. They also found that high latent
heat of vaporization of the fuel may severely reduce local temperature
and deteriorate spray atomization as a result. Similar results were ob-
tained by Zhou et al. [114] with ternary-alkane fuel mixtures. They also
found that the addition of light components can enhance the breakup
and evaporation of the fuel spray, while such an addition would yield
spray collapse as well. They used the bubble point pressure as a criterion
for  determining  the  flash  boiling  state  of  the  external  fuel  spray  for
mixture fuels.

Besides, Myong et al. [115] used three single-component fuels and
fuel mixtures to study the evaporative characteristics of flashing sprays.
They found that a higher concentration of low volatile fuel in the fuel
mixture would induce notable discontinuity of the spray plume from the
midstream to downstream. They also found that the evaporation of the
spray was improved by adding high volatile fuels to the fuel mixture.
Chen  et  al.  [116]  used  diffused  back-illumination  and  phase  Doppler
interferometry  to  study  flash  boiling  sprays  using  single-component
fuels and binary fuel mixtures (ethanol and iso-octane). A more severe
flash boiling phenomenon was seen when adding a moderate amount of
ethanol  so  that  the  overall  vapor  pressure  was  increased.  However,
opposite effects were seen for fuels with a high ethanol percentage or
pure  ethanol  working  fluid,  partially  due  to  a  high  latent  heat  of
vaporization for ethanol fuels. Zhou et al. [117] studied the flash boiling
atomization effects of a non-ideal binary mixture of water and ethanol.
They  found  that  adding  ethanol  to  pure  water  could  intensify  the
expansion of the flash boiling spray plume while adding ethanol to an
aqueous ethanol solution had the opposite effect. They concluded that
the  spray  expansion  was  governed  by  both  the  heat  capacity  of  the
working fluid and the tendency of evaporation.

Avedisian  et  al.  [118]  developed  a  surrogate  with  seven  different
components for the tentative replacement of JET A with a focus on flash
boiling  atomization.  The  generalized  corresponding  states  principle
(GCSP) and pseudo-single component fluid (PSCF) models were used to
predict  the  initiation  of  flash  boiling  atomization.  Zigan  et  al.  [119]
performed a laser-induced fluorescence and phase Doppler interferom-
etry investigation on flash boiling sprays using 35% of the more volatile
n-hexane, 20% of the less volatile n-decane, and 45% of n-heptane. They
found that even a relatively small low volatility fraction can enhance
spray  atomization.  Wang  et  al.  [120]  performed  a  multi-component
flash  boiling  study  using  iso-octane,  ethanol,  and  their  mixture,  as

well  as  commercial  gasoline.  They  revealed  that  adding  low  boiling
point components can facilitate flash boiling. Furthermore, they found
that a high latent heat of the components, besides the boiling point, can
suppress the boiling effects even at a high superheat level. Gao et al.
[121] studied the flash boiling effects using a binary fuel of i-pentane
(C5)  and  n-undecane  (C11).  It  was  found  that  adding  i-pentane  can
promote
a  modified
penetration-superheat index relationship was developed.

atomization,

boiling

flash

and

To conclude, the addition of highly volatile fuels is widely proven to
promote flash boiling atomization, while the latent heat of vaporization
should be taken into account since a high latent heat value can rapidly
drive  the  superheated  flows  into  sub-cooled  flows,  thus  significantly
suppressing the flash boiling effects.

3.3. Multi-hole spray targeting variation

In our opinion, spray targeting variation (spray collapse) is one of the
three most critical topics to be understood by the community, besides
flash-boiling-induced  breakup  and  spray  evaporation  during  propaga-
tion.  The  spray  collapse  phenomenon  has  been  observed  in  a  large
percentage of flash-boiling-related investigations with a multi-hole fuel
injector  or  swirl  injector,  etc.  Therefore,  spray  collapse  is  usually
considered representative of flash boiling atomization.

Many  studies  have  related  the  spray  collapse  phenomenon  to  the
superheat level of the spray, yet other investigations find this hypothesis
less convincing. Wang et al. [122] explored flash boiling collapse using a
hollow cone fuel injector, and they found flash boiling could cause the
spray to expand both inward and outward. With a superheat index lower
than  0.5,  the  spray  merged  and  collapsed,  forming  a  fast-developing
plume.  Lacey  et  al.  [123]  studied  flash  boiling  atomization  using  an
engine combustion network (ECN) 8-hole fuel injector with the fuels of
propane  and  iso-octane.  They  found  that  flash  boiling  collapses
happened only at a subset of conditions, and the experimental results,
coupled with the thermodynamics of fuel injection, also suggested that
the superheat index (degree) lacks generality to describe spray collapse.
Considering the limitation of the superheat index, Du et al. [124] used
spray  collapse  percentage  (SCP)  based  on  Mie  scattering  and  optical
thickness based on diffused back illumination (DBI) to distinguish the
said  spray  collapse,  transitional,  and  non-flashing  regimes.  Aleiferis
et al. [125] discussed the impacts of fuel components on flash boiling
sprays. It was found that a low boiling substance can be the “catalyst” to
spray  collapse  even  with  only  a  low  concentration  present.  Such
observation  cannot  be  well  explained  by  using  the  superheat  index
concept either. Matsumura et al. [126] used super high spatial resolu-
tion  photography  and  Schlieren  methods  to  quantify  flash  boiling
sprays,  and  they  observed  that  the  evaporation  of  the  spray  did  not
decrease when the flash boiling collapse took place. Andrea et al. [127]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111924

X. Li et al.

◦
Fig. 29. 3D volume rendering based on intensity value of the case: Rp = 0.05, Tfuel = 90
C, Pinj = 100 bar, Time aSOE = 1 ms. Left: 3D reconstructed from 2p-SLIPI;
right: 3D reconstructed from conventional laser sheet imaging. Top and bottom show different views of the reconstructed spray volume. (Axis units/mm) Reprinted
from Ref. [129] with permission of Springer.

measured  the  momentum  flux  distribution  of  sub-cooled  and  flash
boiling sprays on nozzle-centered surfaces, and they found that the spray
collapse of flash boiling atomization is notably impacted by the phase
change inside the nozzle.

Many advanced experimental investigations have been incorporated
to illustrate the mechanisms of flash boiling spray collapse. For instance,
Du  et  al.  used  tomographic  techniques  [128]  and  2p-SLIPI  methods
[129] to reveal the inner structure of collapsed flashing sprays. A typical
structure of the collapsed flash boiling spray can be seen as shown in
Fig.  29  using  traditional  laser  illumination  and  2p-SLIPI  methods.
Although in a time-resolved fashion, satisfactory spray structures can be
captured  by  these  techniques,  partially  attributed  to  the
low
cycle-to-cycle  variation  feature  of  flash  boiling  sprays.  Using  these
techniques  to  remove  spray  blockings  and  possible  scatterings,  they
confirmed  that  a  hollow  part  (liquid-sparse  regime)  could  be  found
beneath  the  injector  tip,  but  this  hollow  regime  might  not  exist  for
sprays with small cone angles.

Essentially, most flash boiling studies found a similar conclusion that
the  superheat  index  (or  similar  dimensionless  number)  is  not  a  good
indicator for flash boiling spray collapse. Moreover, we agree that the
flash  boiling  phenomenon  and  spray  collapses  are  two  independent
physical  phenomena  since  flash  boiling  does  not  necessarily  lead  to
spray collapse; neither does spray collapse reflect flash boiling condi-
tions  [130].  We  believe  flash  boiling  regimes  depend  on  the  vapor
concentration in the nozzle or step-hole. For instance, it is well known
that  sub-cooled  sprays  would  also  collapse  as  the  ambient  pressure
elevated,  which  is  not  related  to  flash  boiling  at  all.  As  we discussed
previously, the flash boiling level (superheat ratio or index) mainly re-
flects how fiercely the working fluid vaporizes during the atomization
process. It is not very accurate to directly associate, for instance, flare

flash boiling with spray collapse [123], although this misunderstanding
is still quite common in this atomization society.

Therefore, a different set of characteristics or parameters governs the
targeting change phenomenon under flash boiling conditions. However,
there is no consensus about the detailed mechanisms that govern spray
collapses. There are three commonly accepted mechanisms proposed by
researchers,  which  are  air-entrainment-induced  spray  collapse,
momentum-induced  spray  collapse,  and  supersonic-induced  spray
collapse, respectively. Note that all three explanations are based on the
observation  of  plume  interference  observed  in  experiments,  but  the
proposed physics in the three explanations varies to some extent.

3.3.1. Air entrainment and spray collapse

As we discussed in the previous section, a finer droplet size (therefore
with  a  lower  Stokes  number)  and  more  vapor  components  inside  the
spray plume make the spray plume vulnerable to the impact of air co-
flow/entrainment.  Therefore,  the  motion  of  the  surrounding  air  and
consequential dynamic influences are believed to be the cause of spray
collapse  by  many  researchers.  Wu  et  al.  [131,132]  performed  flash
boiling studies using single-hole, two-hole, and six-hole fuel injectors to
investigate spray collapse characteristics under flash boiling conditions.
In this work, it was held that as the flash boiling spray was developing/at
a low flash boiling level, the ambient gas moved to the central area of the
spray when the fuel spray injection progressed. Then, the pressure in the
central region and the ambient gas was almost identical. However, for
the collapsed spray, all fuel plumes were connected, forming a closed
region in the center of the plumes, so no ambient gas could transfer from
the outside to the closed central region, which led to pressure reduction
as  the  spray  developed  further  downward.  The  principles  discussed
above can be found in Fig. 30.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111925

X. Li et al.

Fig. 30. Sketches indicate the different air motions induced by the different categories of spray patterns (a) and spray structures (b). The panels on the left show the
motion when ambient air can be exchanged with the air at the center of the spray. The panels on the right show the motion when ambient air cannot access the center
region of the spray [132].

Besides,  Sphicas  et  al.  [133]  used  an  ECN  8-hole  fuel  injector
coupling  with  particle  imaging  velocimetry  methods  to  measure  the
velocity distribution of the central spray zone under standard Spray G
conditions.  The  measurements  exhibited  a  recirculation  zone  estab-
lished  initially  between  plumes.  Once  the  neighboring  plumes  start
interacting, the gap between plumes closes, which further enhances the
spray  collapse  phenomenon.  Kim  et  al.  [134]  used  two  flash  boiling
sprays  with  different  hole  arrangements,  including  one  with  a
closed-form  hole  arrangement  (six  holes)  and  one  with  an  opened
arrangement, respectively. Their research found that the spray collapse
phenomenon was more pronounced for closed arrangements, and they
concluded that the observations could be attributed to less air flowing
into the central zone of the spray for closed arrangement cases. Mean-
while,  the  authors  also  acknowledged  that  the  spray  plume  overlaps
were narrower for opened hole arrangement injectors.

In  addition  to  multi-hole  injector  experiments,  there  are  also  in-
vestigations on swirl injectors or hollow cone injectors. For instance, Wu
et al. [135] used an E-TEC direct injection system by replacing the inner
injector  solenoid  with  a  voice  coil  motor  (VCM)  to  enable  a
self-pressurized hollow cone injector. Different ambient pressures were
used  to  achieve  different  flash  boiling  levels.  Spray  collapse  was
observed,  and  vortex  rings  were  seen  from  the  spray  morphologies.

Furthermore, the spray-induced vortex was found in the outer region of
the spray, and the enhanced air-flow entrainment contributed to droplet
movement and evaporation. They held that strong droplet coalescence
occurred downstream of the spray due to the vortex motion.

3.3.2. Momentum/plume interference-induced spray collapse

The commonly observed expansions of the spray plumes are intui-
tively suspected as the reason for the flash boiling sprays to collapse. The
low-pressure zone concept in the air entrainment explanation is possible
since expanded flash boiling plumes created a closed regime. Li et al.
[136] adopted a five-hole GDI injector to study spray collapse effects,
and phase Doppler interferometry was used to explore droplet diameters
in the collapsed spray. They held that a necessary condition for flash
boiling spray collapse to happen is jet overlap. They also considered that
vapor condensation may induce spray collapse. In another work of the
authors, they found that the radial expansion of the jet plume is posi-
tively  correlated  to  spray  collapse  in  the  transitional  regime  [73],
reflecting the significance of plume interference.

The  expansion  of  the  spray  plume  also leads  to  the  change  of  the
penetration momentum and thus impacts spray collapse characteristics.
Williams  et  al.  [137]  studied  the  spray  collapse  phenomenon  using  a
pressure-swirl atomizer, and they believed that as the radial momentum

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111926

X. Li et al.

Fig. 31. Effect of ambient pressure with same superheat factor lg(Ps/Pa) = 1.6 at the ASOI of 1.0 ms [140].

is insufficient to overcome the resistance to penetration, the spray would
collapse into a film, which ultimately became a narrow jet. Lacey et al.
[123]  held  that  flash  boiling  collapse  was  caused  by  plume-to-plume
interaction,  and  a  wider  plume  width  under  flash  boiling  conditions
might  lead  to  such  interference.  They  then  proposed  new  criteria  to
determine whether the spray would collapse based on three-dimensional
spray geometry. A similar study was performed by Liu et al. [138], and
they  held  that  Macroscopic  spray  characteristics  are  affected  by  the
degree of plume interaction in flashing conditions. They also considered
plume-to-plume interaction as a crucial criterion for spray collapse. Wu
et  al.  [139]  studied  the  morphologies  of  flash  boiling  sprays  with
different boundary conditions, and they found that spray collapse could
be avoided or suppressed by increasing plume-to-plume distance.

To avoid the complexity of using multiple and narrow-arranged jets,
Xu et al. [140,141] performed a spray collapse analysis using a two-hole
prototype fuel injector. It was found in this work that even if a two-hole
fuel injector was adopted, spray collapses would happen. These obser-
vations indicated that the central low-pressure regime impacts on flash
boiling  collapse might  be limited since  the  center of a  two-hole flash
boiling spray was still open and connected to the ambient. Furthermore,
this study found that the fuel temperature and the ambient pressure had
different  impacting  mechanisms  on  flash  boiling  spray  collapse.
Decreasing the ambient pressure in obtaining flash boiling atomization
would make the spray easier to collapse compared with increasing the
fuel temperature (see Fig. 31). Under a suitable ambient pressure (for
instance, 1.0 bar), the two-plume spray did not collapse even when the
spray was near its transcritical state. A microscopic observation in the
near-field  shows  no  interaction  between  the  two  plumes  (as  seen  in
Panel (b) of Fig. 31). These results suggested that plume interaction and
momentum  composition  could  be  dominating  factors  during  flash
boiling collapses, and air-spray entrainment might couple with plume
interaction during flash boiling atomization.

3.3.3. Supersonic shockwave-induced spray collapse

Although a majority of investigations consider the primary cause of
flash boiling spray collapse as either low-pressure zone entrainment or

plume  interference,  some  investigations  attribute  the  spray  collapse
phenomenon  to  shockwave  structures  during  under-expanded  jet  in-
jections.  The  shock  wave  feature  itself  can  be  well-identified  in  flash
boiling experiments especially when a high superheat level is adopted
and the spray behaves like gaseous jets [24,142]. It should be admitted
that  even  if  the  source  of  flash  boiling  spray  collapse  is  indeed  the
shockwave produced, it would be very challenging to illustrate that the
shock  waves  are  indeed  the  reason  for  spray  collapse  experimentally
since  very  high  temporal-spatial  resolution  measurements  will  be
required to capture such dynamics. Therefore, these investigations pri-
marily focused on CFD numerical simulations and investigated how the
spray would collapse during spray propagations. For instance, Guo et al.
[143]  performed  a  numerical  study  to  simulate  a  single-hole  spray
plume, which can be seen in Fig. 32. They found drastic vaporization
near the nozzle exit, and under-expanded gaseous jets were identified,
which is in agreement with the previously introduced spray plume radial
expansion analysis [72]. Shockwave structures were also found near the
nozzle. It was considered by the authors that the low-pressure region
caused by expansion was the origin of flash boiling spray collapses. A
follow-up  investigation  of  Guo  et  al.  [144]  exhibited  multi-hole  flash
boiling  injections  with  propane  as  the  working  fluid,  inspired  by  the
experimental results carried out by Farzad et al. [142]. In this analysis,
they held that the under-expanded gas jet would form a low-pressure
region,  which  is  considered  the  source  of  the  spray  collapse.  The  au-
thors also stated that the close contact of spray plumes that isolated the
low-pressure spray center caused the plume target change.

Although the under-expanded gaseous jet theory is legit, it is chal-
lenging to verify if this mechanism governs the spray collapse in prac-
tical experiments, especially when the spray is in its flash boiling state
rather than in its transcritical state. Almost all experimental data vali-
dated that the existence of the shockwaves was under their transcritical
states  or  quite  strongly  superheated  states  with  a  superheat  index
smaller than 0.1. As we will discuss in the next section, the spray plume
has almost become a gaseous jet under such conditions, and Mach disks
are established. However, spray collapse would take place even in its
transitional  stage.  Under  flash  boiling  conditions,  liquid  droplets  still

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111927

X. Li et al.

Fig. 32. Pressure distributions for all the cases. Reprinted from Ref. [143] with permission of Elsevier.

take up a large portion of the fuel, and a dense droplet concentration
would  forbid  high-quality  imaging  methods,  such  as  the  Schlieren
method, to quantify the shockwaves. Furthermore, the multi-phase flow
with a large number of fuel droplets is less expandable compared with
pure gas mediums. Therefore, it is not clear whether supersonic flows
indeed  take  place  during  flash  boiling  injections,  especially  in  transi-
tional flash boiling regimes and mild flare flash boiling regimes, and it is
up to debate whether the shockwave triggers the spray collapse. Such
concerns and opportunities would need to be explored by future studies
and advanced diagnostics methods.

To conclude, there has been no consensus on the exact mechanisms
of flash boiling spray collapses. There are three primary potential rea-
sons for this phenomenon, while these three factors might couple with
each other, one cannot determine which mechanism is the origin. We
tend to believe the interaction of spray plumes would be the initiation of
spray  collapse,  then  the  low-pressure  zone  or  air  entrainment  would
accelerate  the  targeting  change  procedures.  Shock  waves  might
contribute as the boiling is sufficiently strong, but it does not seem to be
the dominating mechanism based on the previous discussions.

Finally,  there  are  also  some  remarks  on  the  phenomenon  of  flash
boiling spray collapses. First of all, again, flash boiling is not necessarily
associated  with  spray  collapses.  With  proper  injector  designs  and  in-
jection strategies, flashing jets can transit directly into transcritical jets
with  the increment of temperature without collapses. It is also  worth
noting that even if spray collapse takes place, it might not be able to
cause additional pool fire issues in combustions from spray impingement
and  longer  spray  penetration.  As  shown  in  Fig.  23,  the  actual  liquid

component  under  flash  boiling  conditions  is  substantially  reduced,
therefore the liquid volume flux that interacts with the solid surface is
reduced as well, which could yield less impingement wall film deposi-
tion. Such a perspective would be discussed in more detail in Section 4
with a focus on the wall film. At last, although flash boiling spray target
change can be common in practical combustors [130], no remarkable
combustion  deterioration  was  witnessed,  and  most  pool  fire  issues
happen  during  engine  cold-start.  Such  findings  also  imply  that  flash
boiling  spray  collapse  might  not  be  a  problem  at  all  for  IC  engine
combustion  purposes.  More  discussions  on  flash  boiling  combustions
will be incorporated in Section 5.

3.4. Flash boiling injector design

From  the  discussions  in  the  previous  sections,  it  is  clear  that  the
design of flash boiling spray injectors should somehow follow different
guidelines compared with traditional injectors. However, investigations
and recommendations on designing practical flash boiling injectors are
limited, although such efforts are very important. We are in hope that
with more fundamental mechanisms revealed and agreed to within the
community, more  investigations will be  carried out that focus  on the
design of flash boiling fuel injectors. In this article, we will briefly review
existing studies involved with flash boiling injector designs.

3.4.1.

Injector style

Wu et al. [145] analyzed the characteristics of a 6-hole injector and a
1-slot  injector  under  sub-cooled  and  flash  boiling  conditions.  It  was

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111928

X. Li et al.

found that the nozzle structure has an important influence on the spray
structure  under  sub-cooled  conditions.  However,  under  flash  boiling
conditions, not only the 6-hole nozzle will produce collapsing spray, but
also the 1-slot nozzles will produce collapsing spray structure. This in-
dicates  that the  nozzle  structure has a  relatively lesser impact  on the
spray shape under flash boiling conditions than under sub-cooled con-
ditions. While all the injectors would collapse under flash boiling con-
ditions, the mechanism of collapse and resulting spray morphology were
different. For the 6-hole injector, notable interaction between adjacent
plumes under flare flash boiling conditions leads to the formation of an
enclosed  region.  The  pressure  differential  between  the  inside  and
outside of this enclosed region would drive the spray to collapse. Spray
collapse  resulted  in  longer  penetration  and  smaller  spray  angles  than
sub-cooled non-collapse conditions. For the one-slot injector, more inner
vapor  bubbles  were  generated  at  both  corners  of  the  nozzle,  which
resulted in spray collapse under flare flash boiling conditions. Due to the
promoted atomization and evaporation induced by inner vapor bubbles,
spray collapse resulted in shorter penetration and a smaller spray angle
than sub-cooled non-collapse conditions.

Wu et al. [131] also analyzed the morphological characteristics of
one-hole and two-hole GDI injectors under sub-cooled and flash boiling
conditions.  It  was  found  that  fuel  plumes  emitted  from  the  two-hole
injectors  exhibited  a  wider  dispersion  compared  to  the  plumes  from
the one-hole injector; the difference diminished as the fuel was super-
heated.  This  is  attributed  to  the  greater  influence  of  in-nozzle  fuel
evaporation and outside nozzle fuel boiling, which affects fuel plume
width  under  superheated  conditions,  outweighing  the  impact  of  the
number of injector holes.

3.4.2.

Injector nozzle parameters

Currently, the parameters for flash boiling injector design purposes
are no different than those for common fuel injectors. However, these
parameters may have different implications when a two-phase internal
flow is  involved and the vapor phase  participates during the primary
breakup. Here we will briefly review such differences when flash boiling
atomization is employed.

3.4.2.1. Needle  valve. Yang  et  al.  [146]  utilized  a  two-dimensional
transparent  optical  nozzle  to  analyze  the  presence  of  a  needle  valve
and the influence of needle valve lift on flash boiling spray. The presence
of the needle valve was found to enhance flash boiling. This is because
the  presence  of  the  needle  valve  promotes  the  development  of  flash
boiling  bubbles,  resulting  in  an  intensified  fuel  breakup  caused  by
bubble micro-explosion. Furthermore, it was discovered that reducing
the needle lift can promote the formation of all kinds of internal bubbles.
Therefore, employing injectors equipped with a needle valve and having
a lower needle valve lift can facilitate superior flash boiling atomization.

3.4.2.2. Nozzle  inlet  geometry. Wu  et  al.  [14]  conducted  an  analysis
using a two-dimensional narrow slot transparent nozzle to investigate
the influence of sharp inlet corners and round inlet corners on the in-
ternal flow and external atomization of flash boiling spray. It was found
that a nozzle with a sharp inlet corner resulted in a significantly nar-
rower near-nozzle fuel jet. This effect was attributed to the increased
formation of internal bubbles, which ruptured shortly after being dis-
charged into the surrounding environment, thereby enhancing the at-
omization of the fuel jet. Lee et al. [147] utilized orifices of different
chamfer depths to study flash boiling hydrocarbon liquid injection. For
orifices with higher chamfer depth, a transition from laminar to turbu-
lent flow was observed. The influence of chamfer depth on the discharge
coefficient  decreased  as  the  superheat  degree  increased.  Hydraulic
characteristics became independent of chamfer depth under flare flash
boiling conditions, which is similar to the observation that the influence
of the hole number on the spray width diminishes gradually under flare
flash boiling conditions [131].

3.4.2.3. Nozzle  diameter. Jiang et al. [148] used different nozzle hole
diameters  to  examine  the  droplet  size  and  the  resistance  to  spray
collapse, and they found that the nozzle with a medium hole diameter
had  the  highest  tendency  to  spray  collapse.  For  the  largest  hole  di-
ameters,  the  droplet  size  increased  notably,  but  spray  collapse  was
suppressed due to a lower level of spray breakup, which contributed to
maintaining the spray morphologies and prevented collapse.

3.4.2.4. Length-to-diameter (L/D) ratio. The nozzle’s length-to-diameter
ratio (L/D) is one of the most crucial geometric parameters. Nagai et al.
[149]  proposed  a  critical  L/D  ratio  of  7  to  distinguish  internal  flash
boiling and external flash boiling, and a large L/D corresponds to in-
ternal flash boiling. Internal flash boiling refers to the phase transition of
the superheated fluid occurring inside the nozzle, while external flash
boiling refers to the phase transition occurring outside the nozzle [150].
Xu et al. [14,151] utilized a set of custom-designed real-size injectors
with  various  L/D  ratios  to  investigate  the  influence  of  L/D  on  both
sub-cooled and flash boiling spray. It was found that the nozzle with an
L/D  ratio  of  3  exhibited  the  narrowest  fuel  plume  compared  to  the
nozzle with an L/D ratio of 0.5 and 1.5  under sub-cooled conditions.
However, the nozzle with an L/D ratio of 3 exhibited the widest fuel
plume under flare flash boiling conditions. This can be attributed to the
fact that a larger L/D ratio led to a larger bubble volume fraction due to a
longer duration of bubble growth within the nozzle [152], and subse-
quent micro explosions of the bubbles contribute to the increased plume
width. The research conducted by Huang et al. [153] also indicates that
a larger L/D ratio enhances bubble generation. Regarding the resulting
droplets, Park et al. [154]’s study demonstrated that nozzle with a larger
L/D ratio produces smaller and more uniform droplets. This finding is
consistent  with  the  previous  result  that  enhanced  atomization  with  a
larger L/D ratio is attributed to the enhanced bubble generation.

3.4.2.5. Nozzle taper angle. Wang et al. [17] utilized a two-dimensional
transparent  nozzle  to  analyze  the  effects  of  nozzle  taper  angle  on
in-nozzle  flow  and  tip-wetting  under  flash  boiling  conditions.  The
investigation  revealed  that  the  taper  angle’s  design  significantly  in-
fluences  the  pressure  distribution  within  the  nozzle,  consequently
leading to distinct bubbling characteristics even under the same super-
heat degree. The interaction mechanism between the phase boundary
and  the  surface  of  the  counterbore  would  change  with  varying  taper
angle designs. The negative nozzle taper angle configuration inhibits the
rim radial expansion at the counterbore edge and leads to minimal liquid
presence at the counterbore exit due to intense flash boiling, resulting in
negligible tip-wetting film. On the contrary, the positive nozzle config-
uration  will  result  in  the  most  significant  tip-wetting  fuel  film  under
flash boiling conditions. Zhang et al. [155] also investigated the impact
of nozzle taper angle on tip wetting in real-sized injectors, obtaining the
same results as those observed using two-dimensional transparent noz-
zles [156].

3.4.2.6. Step-hole  (Counterbore). Yang  et  al.  [37]  conducted  a  study
using a two-dimensional transparent nozzle to investigate the impact of
counterbore  presence  on  flash  boiling  sprays.  Compared  to  the
straight-hole nozzle, utilizing step-hole (counterbore) nozzles enhanced
the degree of phase change and the fuel initial disturbance, which could
improve  the  efficiency  of  external  flow  breakup  under  flash  boiling
conditions. This finding indicates that in the design of flash boiling in-
jectors, the presence of a counterbore not only optimizes carbon depo-
sition but also enhances the degree of phase change within the orifices,
thereby promoting the atomization of the external jet.

Miao et al. [35] prepared a set of dual-orifice narrow slot transparent
nozzles with different expansion chambers and investigated the influ-
ence  of  expansion  chamber  length-to-diameter  ratio  on  internal  and
external flow and atomization. It was found that decreasing the expan-
sion  chamber’s  ratio  could  degrade  the  in-nozzle  bubble  number

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111929

X. Li et al.

density,  but  it  can  enlarge  the  bubble  size  and  increase  the  effective
bubble  ratio,  which  can  promote  the  droplet  breakup  from  bubble
explosion.

3.4.3.

Injector hole arrangement

For  flash  boiling  considerations,  the  design  of  the  injector  would
mainly  affect  the  likelihood  of  spray  collapse  since  the  hole  spacing
would play a significant role in plume interference. Chang et al. [58]
used two different GDI injectors with different hole arrangements. It was
found that the fuel injector with a compact hole arrangement is prone to
spray  collapse  under  flash  boiling  conditions.  In  this  work,  they  also
found that the collapse rates were lower in the transitional flash boiling
regime. Therefore the wall-wetting possibility of the spray is reduced.
The  authors  also  made  comments  on  how  to  optimize  flash  boiling
combustion in IC engines in the aspect of fuel injector design. The same
group of researchers [157] also carried out a Schlieren-based study to
investigate flash boiling evaporation characteristics using injectors with
different designs. It was reported that a compact (skew) hole arrange-
ment could lead to better evaporation performance because of a smaller
liquid core volume.

Yao  et  al.  [158]  studied  the  tip-wetting  characteristics  of  flash
laser-induced  fluorescence  methods  using  a
boiling  sprays  via
center-mounted fuel injector and a compact side-mounted fuel injector,
and  it  was  found  that  compact  hole  designs  would  lead  to  more  fuel
deposition on the tip, which would be explored with more details in the
next section. Jiang et al. [159] performed a fuel injector analysis with
five-hole and six-hole fuel injectors, respectively. In a spray morphology
study, they found that the five-hole fuel injector has a high resistance to
spray collapse, which they attributed to a larger hole separation, which
prevented the creation of interstitial plumes from spray interferences.
They  also  used endoscopic methods to  evaluate the  dual-fuel injector
performance in a practical three-cylinder engine. It was found that the
five-hole fuel injector had a better combustion performance compared to
the six-hole fuel injector, but it is challenging to distinguish which factor
contributed  to  such  enhancement.  In  another  work  [148],  the  same
research group used different nozzle hole diameters and hole designs to
examine the resistance to spray collapse, and they found that the nozzle
with  a  medium  hole  diameter  had  the  highest  tendency  to  spray
collapse. Furthermore, they found that divergent holes offered a greater
resistance  against  spray  collapse  than  convergent  holes,  though
convergent  holes  produced  finer  fuel  droplets.  For  the  largest  hole

Fig.  33. Phase  diagram  illustration  the  spray  morphology  transistions  using
n-pentane.

diameters,  the  droplet  size  increased  notably,  but  spray  collapse  was
suppressed due to a lower level of spray breakup, which contributed to
maintaining the spray morphologies and prevented collapse. Aori et al.
[160]  performed  a  multi-hole  flash  boiling  analysis  and  found  that
nozzle hole orientation and the number of holes were the main factors
that affect the spray structure. It is also found that more holes would
result in stronger spray collapses. Therefore, it is generally held that a
sparse hole arrangement would reduce the likelihood of spray collapse.
Although spray collapse under flash boiling conditions might not affect
impingement  film  deposition,  such  an  issue  should  be  noted  when
designing or optimizing spray atomizers.

3.5. Transcritical sprays

At a further elevated temperature and injection pressure, the work-
ing liquid would inevitably enter its supercritical states from the flash
boiling states. Under such conditions, the viscosity, surface tension, and
diffusion  coefficient  approximates  those  of  the  gaseous  medium  but
maintain  a  density  close  to  the  liquid  phase,  and  such  properties  are
beneficial for mass transportation. Strictly, supercritical sprays usually
require the working fluid to enter the supercritical states from another
supercritical state. Therefore, these sprays would usually be limited to
mediums with a relatively low critical temperature, for instance, carbon
dioxide or nitrogen. However, the physical mechanisms of supercritical
fuel injection (supercritical fuel rail into supercritical environments) are
quite  different  from  flash  boiling  atomization,  therefore  we  will  not
elaborate on this topic in this paper.

For  civil  combustion  applications  such  as  internal  combustion  en-
gines,  it  is  challenging  to  keep  the  ambient  environments  under
subcritical  or  supercritical  states  of  the  liquid  injected.  Therefore,
transcritical spray atomization is more common in these scenarios, i.e.,
the fuel is injected from its supercritical states or subcritical states into
sub-cooled states. More interest has been seen recently in this specific
field, but the number of transcritical atomization investigations is still
limited  compared with  flash boiling  atomization,  partially  due  to  the
difficulties  and  energy  invested  in  heating  the  fuel  into  supercritical
states.

Transcritical  sprays  can  somehow  be  different  from  flash  boiling
atomization. It can be seen under these conditions, the external spray
preserves  the  features  of  flash  boiling  atomization  with  both  spray
droplets and fuel vapors since the working fluid is likely to transit from
the critical state into its flash boiling state as the injection pressure drops
at  the  nozzle  exits.  Therefore,  flash boiling  mechanisms still  apply to
transcritical  atomization  to  some  extent.  Furthermore,  under  a  flash
boiling setting, given the injection pressure is high enough, the atomi-
zation  will  eventually  reach  transcritical  atomization  if  one  keeps
increasing the fuel temperature. Such considerations are demonstrated
in the phase diagram as shown in Fig. 33. As can be seen, as the fuel
temperature  increases,  the  external  spray  transits  from  sub-cooled
sprays  to  flash  boiling  sprays,  and  eventually  to  transcritical  sprays
given the temperaure and pressure in the nozzle are sufficiently high.
Wieh the decrease of pressure, the phase change effects are more sig-
nificant, meanwhile spray collpase is more likely due to stronger spray
plume expansion in the ambient. Therefore, we will briefly introduce
transcritical atomizations with a focus on flash-boiling-related effects.
Liu  et  al.  [161]  experimentally  studied  the  injection  of  h-heptane
under supercritical and subcritical states into the ambient. They found
that the spray morphologies under different injection condition combi-
nations varied notably. Distinctive shock wave structure could be seen
during transcritical fuel injections, which was in good agreement with
under-expanded  jet  theories.  Gao  et  al.  [162]  performed  similar  in-
vestigations using RP-3 kerosene as the working fluid. The supersonic
flow exiting the spray nozzle induced the Mach disk phenomenon, and
the position of the Mach disk was also in good agreement with theo-
retical  predictions.  Gerber  et  al.  [163]  continued  to  investigate  tran-
scritical injections systematically using n-pentane, n-hexane, and Novec

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111930

X. Li et al.

649. They established three different thermodynamic pathways/modes
for transcritical injections. The first pathway is that the fuel goes across
the Widom line from supercritical states via pressure drop but does not
go  across  the  critical  pressure  line.  In  this  manner,  the  liquid  goes
through pseudo-boiling and forms supercritical pseudo-boiling sprays.
The  second  pathway  is  that  supercritical  fluid  goes  through  the
two-phase zone and forms supercritical flash boiling spray as a result.
Finally, the supercritical liquid can directly enter the gas-phase zone and
forms  fuel  vapor  directly.  Yuan  et  al.  [164]  used  both  gasoline  and
iso-octane  as  the  working  fluids  to  test  their  subcritical/supercritical
atomization  characteristics.  They  found  that  the  multi-component  ef-
fects had a notable impact on determining whether the spray collapsed
or  not. They also found  that for subcritical atomizations, the  thermal
motion of the fuel molecules, the internal turbulence of the jet, the heat
exchange, and the exchange of momentum increase the projected area.
Under  supercritical  conditions,  the  diffusion  effect  dominated  by  the
thermal motion of fuel molecules notably affected the projected area and
the circumference of the contour.

◦

There are also attempts to utilize transcritical spray atomization for
IC engine-related studies. De Boer et al. [165] developed a transcritical
◦
spray injection system for GDI engines that can heat the fuel to 320
C.
Compared to sub-cooled injections, transcritical injections could reduce
90%  particulate  number  and  61%  particulate  matter  emissions  and
could  gain  a  4%  reduction  in  brake  specific  fuel  consumption  under
some conditions, which justified the use of transcritical fuel injections.
Liu  et  al.  [166]  studied  the  spray  and  droplet  characteristics  of  tran-
scritical sprays with 376
C fuel temperature, and they found that the
transcritical sprays have better diffusivity. Furthermore, they found that
the droplet size of the sprays investigated was below 3 μm, which would
be  quite  beneficial  for  consequential  combustions  inside  the  engine.
Zhang  et  al.  [167]  used  propane  as  the  working  fluid  since  propane
enjoys a low boiling point for experimental implementation, with the
results  shown  in  Fig.  34.  They  found  that  as  the  injection  pressure
dropped  to  60  bar,  no  liquid  droplet  was  seen,  perhaps  due  to  the
dominance of flash boiling breakup. They also found that the location of
the  Mach  disk  slightly  deviated  from  under-expanded  ideal  gas  jets,
possibly  due  to  plume  interactions.  Anitescu  et  al.  [168]  proposed  a
gasoline-diesel  mixture  fuel  (dieseline)  for  supercritical  injection  and

combustion,  with  exhaust  gas  or  carbon  dioxide  mixed  in  the  fuel  to
promote direct evaporation inside the engine. Farzad et al. [142] per-
formed a comprehensive study on flash boiling/supercritical injections
using  liquefied  petroleum  gas  (LPG).  In  their  analysis,  they  recom-
mended an isentropic model to demonstrate the injection and an isen-
thalpic process for the under-expanded jets. Furthermore, they observed
shockwaves  during  LPG  injection,  as  well  as  the  spray  collapse  phe-
nomenon even under gaseous jet injection conditions. Xu et al. [169]
explored  transcritical  spray  injections  with  a  single-hole  injector  and
n-pentane as the working fluid. It was found that even though the liquid
component still took up a notable concentration in the plume, a Mash
disk structure was still clearly visible downstream of the spray, as re-
flected  in  Fig.  35.  The  results  indicate  that  supersonic  characteristics
were still pronounced even though the jet flow was a multiphase flow
with a high liquid concentration. Liquid droplets were concentrated at
the under-expanded core and Mach disk regimes so that these structures
could be directly observed using backlit imaging methods. It was also
found  that  the  distance  from  the  Mach  disk  to  the  injector  followed
theoretical  predictions
the
from  supersonic
multi-phase flow exhibited more characteristics as a gas jet than a jet of
droplets.

indicating

theory,

Generally,  although  there  are  supercritical  atomization-related  at-
tempts, it improved spray atomization by similar mechanisms compared
with flash boiling atomization, i.e., more vapor components and finer
fuel  droplets.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  primarily  the  extreme  boundary
conditions  required  by  supercritical-transcritical  atomizations  that
prevent its wider application range. It is expected that with enhanced
waste  heat  recovery  techniques  or  effective  heating  methods,  tran-
scritical/supercritical  sprays  would  gain  more  significance
for
combustor applications.

3.6. Flash boiling atomization of ammonia

With the initiative of carbon neutralization, the combustion of gas-
oline or diesel fuels seems less attractive in the current state. However,
we  believe  that  fuel  spray  atomization  and  combustion  will  remain
important  with  the  implementation  of  renewable/alternative  fuels.
There are two types of such fuels, including fuels with carbon (such as

Fig. 34. Liquid phase and vapor phase of flash-boiling sprays and transcritical sprays of propane at 750 μs ASOI (under Pf  = 120 bar, Pa  = 1 bar, Ta  = 20
Reprinted from Ref. [167] with permission of Elsevier.

◦

C).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111931

X. Li et al.

Fig. 35. The formation of the supercritical fuel flash-boiling spray (Tf  = 252
images of initial spray; (c) Development of tip penetration, under-expanded core, and Mach disk location with time ASOF.

C, pa  = 30 kPa) [169]: (a)macroscopic images of initial spray; (b) nozzle near-field

◦

alcohol) and fuels without carbon (such as hydrogen and ammonia). The
atomization and combustion of alcohols or bio-diesels have been well
studied, while the atomization and combustion of hydrogen or ammonia
are less investigated. Due to the low boiling point of ammonia (~(cid:0) 30
◦
C), the spray would be most likely in its flash boiling stage or even in its
transcritical  stage  without  additional  heating  during  fuel  injection.
Therefore,  in  this  section,  we  will  briefly  review  recent  advances  in
ammonia atomizations on their flash boiling aspects.

The physical properties, i.e., density, surface tension, and viscosity of
ammonia  are  notably  different  from  traditional  hydrocarbon  fuels.
Consequently, the flash boiling spray characteristics are also affected by
such  variations.  Although  such  experimental  investigations  are  still
limited, some preliminary studies have presented the influence of using
ammonia. Cheng et al. [170] carried out fuel atomization investigations
with  ammonia,  methanol,  and  ethanol  fuels.  They  found  that  the

ammonia fuel spray has sharper edges when the injection was initiated
and the edges were smoother during the steady injection stage, while the
other fuels showed the opposite trends. Furthermore, the spray vortex
structure  induced  by  air  entrainment  and  spray  evaporation  of  the
ammonia spray was earlier than the other sprays. The authors attributed
such observations to the lower viscosity and density of ammonia. Li et al.
in  a
[171]  carried  out  a
constant-volume  chamber.  It  was  first  found  that  80
C  ammonia  at-
omization  would  fall  into  superheat  region  as  long  as  the  ambient
pressure  is  lower  than  4.2  MPa,  which  is  quite  common  in  practical
combustion analysis. Representative ammonia flash boiling spray results
are shown in Fig. 36, with the spray volume achieved from the spray
projected area. From this study, it was found that the evolution process
of ammonia spray is similar to traditional flash boiling diesel sprays in
the initial flash boiling and transcritical states, and the bubble explosion

liquid  ammonia  atomization  study

◦

Fig. 36. Image processing of near-field morphologies. (The subscript of each morphology parameter stands for the specific distance from the nozzle tip). Reprinted
from Ref. [171] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111932

X. Li et al.

phenomenon  dominates  the  penetration  in  the  transitional  and  flare
flash boiling regimes. They also concluded that the expansion process of
the ammonia flash boiling spray was governed by the ratio of the vis-
cosity dissipation to the surface tension, obtained from dimensionless
analysis.  Pel ́e  et  al.  [172]  performed  a  similar  study  with  a  GDI  fuel
injector with the fuel ammonia, biofuel, ethanol, and gasoline used. A
wider spray plume was found for ammonia injection under flash boiling
conditions and a semi-empirical correlation for the penetration length as
a function of critical parameters was established.

Besides  ammonia  spray  morphological  studies,  there  are  also
ammonia  flashing  spray  and  combustion  investigations.  For  instance,
Somarathne et al. [173] studied liquid ammonia spray combustions with
gaseous hydrogen and air co-firing. The flashing effects during injection
were  considered  both  in  the  numerical  simulation  and  experimental
investigations, and good agreements were found between simulations
and experiments. It was also found that the NO combustion emission was
still  high  even  at  the  optimum  equivalence  ratio.  Zhang  et  al.  [174]
explored the mixing performance of a mostly gaseous ammonia jet and
Wang  et  al.  [175]  examined  the  produced/ammonia  hydrogen/air
laminar  combustions  with  laser  ignition  in  the  following  study.  It  is
believed that phase-changing sprays will be a crucial research topic in
the field of spray combustion with the adoption of various types of fuels,
and as can be seen, investigations that focus on this topic are still quite
limited.  Successful  interpretations  of  the  flash  boiling  atomization
mechanisms  will  help  predict  atomization  behaviors  and  assist  in
designing and optimizing the next generation of zero-carbon fuel com-
bustion systems.

4. Practical issues in utilizing flash boiling sprays in combustors

As we discussed previously, existing studies on flash boiling atomi-
zation  were  mostly  focused  on  the  free  propagations  of  flash  boiling
sprays. While in practice, spray atomizations and combustions usually
take place within confined volumes, for instance, in engine cylinders.
Therefore,  multiphase  interactions  during  flash  boiling  atomization
include both liquid-gas interactions (spray-air entrainments) as well as
liquid-solid interactions. The liquid-solid interactions in the IC engines
include spray-wall impingements and spray-injector interference. These
phenomena will usually create a thin fuel film on solid walls, which will
inevitably  cause  rich  combustions  and  pool  fires.  Consequently,  the
combustion emission and combustion efficiency are compromised due to
such interactions. For flash boiling atomizations, it has been long held
that the collapse of the flash boiling plumes would increase the pene-
tration length, therefore increasing the impingement film on the piston.
While recent studies show that flash boiling wall interference is a more
complex procedure that covers gas(vapor)-liquid-solid interactions and
the  penetration  length  is  not  the  sole  parameter  in  evaluating  wall
impingement  performance.  In  this  section,  we  will  discuss  recent  ad-
vances in flash boiling wall interactions in the aspect of wall impinge-
ment, tip wetting, and nozzle damage. This section aims to offer some
practical insights on how to avoid excessive film formation and nozzle
damage, thus optimizing the performance of flash boiling combustion
systems.

4.1. Wall impingement

Flash  boiling  spray  impingement  is  an  inadequately  investigated
topic  because  of  the  challenge  of  quantitative  measurements  for  the
fierce  phase-changing  spray  process.  Despite  that,  flash  boiling  spray
impingement is of great significance since one of the primary advances
of utilizing flash boiling sprays is the less fuel mass adhered to the wall
for IC engine applications. As we will discuss in the next section, flash
boiling sprays generally reduce the likelihood of pool fires and lead to a
steady drop in PN emissions, and such an advantage is still notable even
when the spray plumes are collapsed into one. Therefore, the fuel film
deposited onto engine walls does not only correlate to the penetration of

the spray but also other factors during this process.

In the aspect of the droplet impingement mechanism, although the
breakup and propagation of the spray are remarkably impacted by the
flash boiling atomization, there is no evidence showing that the droplet
impingement criterion is also remarkably affected by flash boiling at-
omization. It is not quite surprising since the droplet impingement cri-
terion is closely related to the Weber Number, which is not related to the
thermodynamic states of the droplets except for the surface tension and
density  that  are  not  sensitive  to  the  temperature  of  the  fuel  either.
Therefore, it is expected that the impingement of the droplets can be
simulated  similarly  to  sub-cooled  impingements,  as  long  as  the  near-
plate droplet characteristics could be obtained.

To  evaluate  the

impingement  tendency  and  severeness  of
impingement-related issues such as pool fires, usually, the penetration
length of the spray plumes is analyzed in engine-related applications.
However,  as  we  discussed  before,  the  penetration  alone  cannot  fully
represent the impingement tendency for flash boiling sprays because of
the existence of the vapor phase. If the spray plume primarily consists of
fuel vapor and only a few spray droplets, the impingement fuel film mass
won’t be as high even if the penetration of the fuel spray is long. As such,
the  vapor  fraction,  which  is  somehow  related  to  the  external  flash
boiling number, should also be incorporated to give a comprehensive
description of the impingement fuel film formation tendency.

Typically,  laser-induced  fluorescence  (LIF)  and  refractive  index
matching (RIM) methods are used to quantify the thickness distribution
of the fuel footprints on the wall. However, these two methods are not
completely  well-suited  for  flash  boiling  impingement  purposes.  The
concentration of the dopant for LIF-related methods can be considerably
impacted by the vaporization of the spray. Thus the LIF signal from the
fuel  film  might  not  accurately  correspond  to  the  film  thickness  from
calibration experiments. As for the RIM method, the maximum thickness
of the fuel film that can be measured is usually limited to around 10 μm
due  to  surface  roughness  limitations.  Laser-induced  exciplex  fluores-
cence may have the potential to quantify the film thickness as well as
film  temperature  distribution,  which  we  would  incorporate  in  the
following discussions.

To characterize the mechanisms of flash boiling spray impingement,
the  spray/droplet  characteristics  before  impingement  and  after
impingement  should  be  analyzed.  Wang  et  al.  [176]  measured  the
impingement process from the side view using the microscopic imaging
approach. As seen in Fig. 37, it was found in their work that the primary
and secondary droplets were much smaller under flash boiling condi-
tions compared with sub-cooled conditions. They held that it was the
better dispersion, atomization, and evaporation of the spray before the
impingement that had caused a smaller amount of fuel deposited on the
surface. They also noted that quite a lot of fuel still deposited on the
impact surface at the end of impingement observed from the side view,
while the footprint of the film was not captured in their investigation.
Łukasz Jan [177] studied the collapse of flash boiling sprays at low in-
jection pressures, and it was found that the flash boiling will not lead to
enhanced wall wetting regardless of the number of nozzles.

Di et al. [69] compared the macroscopic morphologies of a single
spray plume  impinging onto a plate with various temperatures under
sub-cooled  conditions  and  flash  boiling  conditions,  respectively  (See
Fig.  17).  In  this  work,  it  was  seen  that  the  plate  temperature  had  a
limited  influence  on  the  morphology  of  the  plume,  and  flash  boiling
increased the Mie scattering intensity of the spray plume, yielding even
stronger  near-plate  scattering  signals.  Despite  that,  the  film  thickness
and mass dropped under flash boiling conditions, which again reflected
that  spray  penetration  might  not  be  sufficient  to  evaluate  spray
impingement likelihood.

Recently, there have been more attempts to measure the footprints
for spray impingement under flash boiling conditions. Schulz et al. [178]
varied the injection fuel temperature to reach flash boiling atomization.
The  spray  impinged  onto  a  transparent  stage,  and  a  camera  was  set
beneath the plate to capture the fuel film as the spray completely left the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111933

X. Li et al.

Fig. 37. Droplet impingement process during (a) initial stage, (b) steady stage, and (c) end-stage under flash boiling conditions. Reprinted from Ref. [176] with
permission of Elsevier.

ambient  pressure  in  the  chamber,  and  Fig.  40  depicts  flash  boiling
impingement footprints onto the optical piston under different coolant
temperatures. Firstly, it is noted that the film thickness in these mea-
surements was relatively low, with a maximum thickness of less than 2
μm since the environment was at least lukewarm or relatively hot in the
conditions  used.  Such  settings  are  desirable  for  RIM-related  measure-
ments. As can be seen, the spray targeting varied when adjusting flash
boiling levels by changing the ambient pressure, which is in agreement
with our previous discussions. Although changing the fuel temperature
did  not  impact  the  spray  targeting  in  the  optical  engine,  the  film
thickness  obtained  by  the  RIM  method  dropped  under  flash  boiling
conditions.

◦
C to 25

The performance of flash boiling spray under cold-start conditions
and  in  cold  environments  is  also  worth  investigating  since  the  PN
emission under this condition is quite significant for IC engine applica-
tions. Di et al. [69] measured the film thickness and film temperature
simultaneously using the LIEF method. The ambient and plate temper-
◦
ature were relatively low in the range from (cid:0) 25
C. As such, the
fuel film measured was notably higher compared with the results shown
in Refs. [179,180], as shown in Fig. 41. Furthermore, as can be seen, the
shape of the footprints under flash boiling conditions has transitioned to
a  circular  shape  rather  than  the  elliptical  shape  usually  seen  in
sub-cooled  impingement  results,  which  might  be  contributed  by  less
wave-induced  film  expansion  under  sub-cooled  injections  [181].  The
film  temperature  measured  was  not  uniform  either,  suggesting  the
importance of heat transfer analysis in the investigation of flash boiling
impingement. Although the results shown by Schulz et al. [178] are still
somehow preliminary, they reveal the likelihood of evaporation/spray
collapse competition when the fuel temperature increases.

As a follow-up investigation, Qiu et al. [93] studied the impingement
fuel film characteristics besides droplet size and volume flux measure-
ments. The impingement film measurement is analogous to the research
in  Ref.  [178],  while  a  quantitative  measurement  method  was  used
(laser-induced exciplex  fluorescence).  Different fuel  temperatures and
impingement plate temperatures were examined, as shown in Fig. 42. It
was found that the impingement film size indeed decreased as the fuel
temperature increased, which induced spray collapse as a result. How-
ever, the fluorescence results showed that the thickness of the wall film
was  not  increased  but  even  decreased  compared  with  sub-cooled  in-
jections.  As  such,  flash  boiling  atomization  produced  much  smaller
footprints  on  the  impingement  plate.  A  higher  fuel  temperature  also
promotes film evaporations so that less film mass is expected at the time
of  combustion.  The  impingement  results  are  also  in  good  agreement
with the volume flux results (as shown in Fig. 23).

Furthermore, Qiu et al. [93] also studied the relationship between
the volume flux near the plate and the impingement fuel film mass at the
injection timing of 2.5 ms ASOI, as shown in Fig. 43. It was found that
the  film  mass  measured  by  the  laser-induced  exciplex  fluorescence
technique is positively correlated with the volume flux measured near
the plate. Note that the volume flux generally drops with a high flash
boiling level. Therefore, it can be concluded that the volume flux near
the impingement plate is a better criterion for determining the fuel mass

Fig.  38. Spray  impingement  footprints  from  direct  imaging  methods  under
different fuel injection temperatures. Reprinted from Ref. [178] with permis-
sion of Elsevier.

Fig.  39. Wall  wetting  pseudo  color  images  at  the  fuel  temperature  of  90
C
under a wide range of ambient pressures using the RIM method. Reprinted from
Ref. [179] with permission of Elsevier.

◦

imaging regime. It was stated in their work that the spray collapse had
deposited  more  fuel  onto  the  plate,  but  no  quantitative  results  were
obtained  because  of  the  direct  measurement  method  used,  as  seen  in
Fig. 38.

He et al. performed impingement wall film measurements using the
RIM method in a constant volume chamber [179] and an optical engine
facility  [180],  respectively.  Fig.  39  depicts  the  fuel  footprints  on  the
plate  under  various  flash  boiling  levels  adjusted  by  changing  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111934

X. Li et al.

Fig. 40. Temporal evolution of fuel film under different coolant temperatures using the RIM method. Reprinted from Ref. [180] with permission of Elsevier.

Fig. 41. 2D simultaneous measurements of film thickness and temperature under flash boiling conditions using the LIEF method [69].

adhered before film evaporation becomes significant. The typical spray
penetration  criterion  is  not  suitable  for  flash  boiling  atomizations  or
sprays  with  a  remarkable  vapor  concentration.  In  fact,  we  hold  that
spray penetration is a more specific criterion for sub-cooled spray in-
jections, where the droplet concentration is either high (in the plume) or
low  (in  the  ambient  or  at  the  edge  of  the  spray  plume).  If  the  spray
penetrates far enough to reach the plate and the volume flux near the

plate is  also high, then spray impingement takes place with impinge-
ment film produced. Otherwise, if the spray does not contact the plate (a
low volume flux), then a negligible film mass is produced. But for flash
boiling  sprays,  the  droplet  concentration  varies  under  different  flash
boiling conditions. Therefore, as seen in Fig. 42, although the penetra-
tion under different flash boiling levels is similar, the film area and film
mass created are quite different even before film evaporation. It is also

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111935

X. Li et al.

Fig. 42. 2D measurements of film thickness under flash boiling conditions using the LIEF method. The timing was 3.0 ms ASOI and a multi-hole fuel injector was
used [93].

intuitive that the amount of film mass should be directly correlated to
the number of droplets that hit the wall, which can actually be repre-
sented by the volume flux.

aspects of tip wetting, nozzle erosion, and tip heating. Therefore, the
following  sections  will  discuss  these  issues  in  practical  flash  boiling
investigations.

Tip  wetting  is  the  phenomenon  in  which  excessive  fuel  wets  the
injector tip during fuel injection and is then burned in its liquid phase
during  combustion.  Typically,  it  is  held  that  tip  wetting  is  mainly
contributed by three factors: (1) fuel impingement on the edge of the
pre-hole,  (2)  vortex  tip  wetting,  and  (3)  fuel  dribble/dripping  [183].
Existing  research  regarding  tip  wetting  mainly  focuses  on  sub-cooled
spray tip wetting, while there are also investigations dedicated to flash
boiling tip wetting. Moulai et al. [184] performed near-field microscopic
measurements for a multi-hole fuel injector under flash boiling condi-
tions,  which  showed  notable fuel  film  on  the  injector  tip when  spray
collapses occurred. Leick et al. [185] studied tip-wetting characteristics
using laser-induced fluorescence combined with side-view microscopic
measurements. A six-hole GDI injector was adopted with 1-methylnaph-
thalene  used as  the  fluorescent excited  by  a  266 nm  Nd: YAG  pulsed

A piece of somehow direct evidence to support the previous discus-
sions  can  be  found  in  Li  et  al.  [182].  In  this  study,  flash  boiling  was
achieved  by  mixing  a  low  boiling  point  component  (n-pentane)  with
commercial  gasoline.  A  split  injection  strategy  was  adopted  with  a
six-hole nozzle installed. The spray morphology results and combustion
results can be seen in Fig. 44. Panel (a) shows the spray morphologies of
the second fuel injection, which would contribute more to the pool fire
on the piston top. An n-pentane mass fraction of 0% (I0), 40% (I40), or
80%  (I80)  was  tested.  A  higher  n-pentane  indicated  a  higher  flash
boiling level. As seen in Panel (a), the spray penetrations at the same
timing were roughly the same, while a higher n-pentane concentration
yielded  a  slighter  shorter  penetration.  Panel  (b)  shows  representative
combustion  results  from  a  Bowditch  optical  engine  piston.  For  pure
gasoline  combustions  (I0),  a  clear  six-hole  footprint  pool  fire  can  be
◦
spotted from 20
crank angle ATDC. In comparison, as the per-
centage  of  n-pentane  increases,  the  pool  fire  phenomenon  was  sup-
pressed,  indicating  smaller  or  no  impinging  films  were  formed.
Therefore,  it  is  validated that  flash boiling  can reduce  the  amount of
impinging film mass if well-designed.

◦
to 30

To conclude Section 4.1, existing research generally found that flash
boiling sprays can suppress wall film deposition, but the impacts of spray
collapse on the film mass remain unclear. We expect that the film mass
adhered when the spray collapses is a complex function of the boundary
conditions  such  as  the  fuel  temperature,  injector  design,  etc.,  which
altogether determines the volume flux near the plate. Besides, the vapor
fraction  of  the  spray  plume  is  an  important  parameter  that  would
significantly impact the fuel mass adhered, as discussed in Wang et al.
[96] and Qiu et al. [93]. It is also in agreement with actual combustion
test  results,  which  we  will  illustrate  in  greater  detail  in  Section  5.
Meanwhile,  we  also  hold  that  if  the  spray  collapse  does  not  happen
during  flash  boiling,  then  increasing  the  flash  boiling  level  is  always
beneficial for impingement film mass reduction and enhancing fuel-air
mixing for combustion purposes.

4.2. Tip wettings

Although flash boiling can potentially  address many  issues associ-
ated with fuel atomization, a primary concern regarding this technique,
besides spray targeting variation, is its impact on the injector tip in the

Fig. 43. Deposited fuel film mass as a function of liquid volume flux near the
impingement  plate  at  2.5  ms  AOSI.  Different  plate  temperatures  were  exam-
ined [93].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111936

X. Li et al.

Fig. 44. Optical engine combustion of fuel mixtures with different concentrations of n-pentane [182]. Panel (a). Side view spray morphologies. Panel (b). Bottom
view spray combustion color images.

Fig. 45. Fuel distribution on injector tip, 4 ms after end of injection. A different scale is used for the measurement with the fuel at room temperature (bottom left),
and an abbreviated notation is used for Pinj, PG, and Tfuel. Reprinted from Ref. [185] with permission of Philippe Leick.

laser.  In  a  direct  and  visible  approach,  Leick  et  al.  showed  that  the
tip-wetting film area under flash boiling conditions was notably greater
than that under sub-cooled conditions, as seen in Fig. 45. They stated
that flash boiling and injection pressure could significantly impact the
tip-wetting  phenomena,  but  they  didn’t  specify  which  mechanism
contributed  the  most  to  the  formation  of  tip-wetting  film  formation.
Similar observations were also found by Park et al. [186], in which they
found that flash boiling conditions showed a larger injector tip wetted
area compared to that of non-flash boiling conditions, and they held that

increased interaction of spray and step-hole outlet led to a larger injector
tip wetted area. There is also evidence showing flash boiling atomization
would induce more severe tip-wetting phenomena that can be observed
during combustion, which will be discussed in Section 5.

As Medina et al. indicated in their work, although the mechanisms
for tip-wetting have been proposed and studied, the exact mechanism to
illustrate  the  tip-wetting  process  is  missing,  especially  for  the  fuel
dribble  tip-wetting  process  [183].  Therefore,  more  efforts  should  be
invested in demonstrating how each parameter impacts the tip wetting.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111937

X. Li et al.

Fig.  46. Tip  film  measurements using  a two-hole  fuel  injector  under  different  fuel  conditions(55  and  90
C  under  flash  boiling  conditions).  At  2  ms  ASOI,  the
majority of the fuel film was formed due to fuel dribble. At 50 ms ASOI, the tip film under flash boiling conditions evaporates faster than that under sub-cooled
conditions [187].

◦

Fig.  47. Representative  tip-wetting  film  distributions  for  the  side-mounted  fuel  injector  with  different  fuel  temperatures.  The  ambient  pressure  was  0.4  bar.
(Conditions 3, 4, and 5) [158].

With  regards  to  flash  boiling  tip  wetting,  despite  it  being  generally
believed that wider plumes and spray-air entrainment are the causes of
excessive tip wetting under flash boiling conditions, a recent work by
Xiao et al. [187] has suggested otherwise. In the two-hole injector tests,
it has been found that little fuel film was formed during the fuel injection
period, and the film can be clearly identified at the end of injection with
the help of high-speed imaging. In Fig. 46, the area of flash boiling tip
wetting film was indeed larger than that under sub-cooled conditions,
and it could be notably seen that the film was established by fuel dribble.
Such  observation  also  held  as  the  spray  collapsed  at  a  higher  flash
boiling  level.  The  results  indicate  that  the  previous  hypothesis,  i.e.,
plume interference and spray entrainment, might not be the dominant
reason for tip wetting. Furthermore, under flash boiling conditions, the
tip film would undergo a faster evaporation process so that at the time of
ignition, the film area under flash boiling conditions might be smaller
than that under sub-cooled conditions.

A  follow-up  study  by  Yao  et  al.  [158]  performed  similar  research
using center-mounted and side-mounted, six-hole fuel injectors to study
the tip film formation mechanisms under flash boiling conditions. It was
found that the tip film at each hole might collide with each other during
propagation. If such mechanisms took place, then thick film rims would
establish between the films in a fashion similar to flash boiling spray
collapses. The results can be seen in Fig. 47. Furthermore, it was inferred
that fuel dribble was still the primary cause of the tip wetting rather than
flash boiling air entrainment near the tip. In addition, it was found that
flash boiling could also produce less fuel film if the film collapse did not
happen  when  the  ambient  pressure  was  usually  higher,  for  instance,
above or equal to 1.0 bar. Finally, the investigation showed that hole
arrangement could alter the consequence of whether flash boiling would
promote or suppress tip film formation. It was recommended that a loose
hole arrangement be adopted to reduce the amount of tip film during the
injection.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111938

X. Li et al.

GDI  injector  capped  with  an  aluminum  nozzle  tip,  and  the  side-view
measurements were used to denote the tip-wetting characteristics. The
side-view  projected tip film  areas under sub-cooled, transitional  flash
boiling,  and  flare  flash  boiling  as  a  function  of  time  were  plotted,  as
shown in Fig. 48. The findings in this work are generally in alignment
with the previous studies. For injections with variable temperatures but
no flashing, tip wetting was primarily attributed to the needle bounce
(fuel dribble) at the end of the injection. As the spray was under tran-
sitional flash boiling, the film area increased gradually as time elapsed
during  injection.  While  as  the  spray  entered  the  flare  flash  boiling
regime,  the  tip  film  again  was  dominated  by  the  needle  bounce.  The
contributions of fuel adhesion and counterbore were analyzed as well
similar to the investigation in Ref. [188]. While for sub-cooled, transi-
tional, and flare flash boiling conditions, the spray profiles inside the
counterbore  were  roughly  the  same.  The  authors  held  that  the
impingement criterion under transitional flash boiling was more favor-
able in creating wall films in the counterbore, and we also propose that
such  a  phenomenon  is  attributed  to  tip  film  collapse  due  to  spray
collapse.  Under  flare  flash  boiling  conditions,  the  spray  was  more
evaporative, and the spray collapse tended to be suppressed, therefore
the tip wetting was again dominated by fuel dribble.

To  conclude  Section  4.2,  tip-wetting  processes  under  flash  boiling
conditions are somehow similar to the process of wall impingement of
the primary plume. The wetting process is strongly influenced by the
stronger evaporation of high-temperature fuels. However, since the local

Fig. 48. The projected wetting area at various superheated conditions (Pin = 4
MPa; Tf  = 353 K). Reprinted from Ref. [63] with permission of Elsevier.

Besides using laser-induced fluorescence methods in quantifying the
impact of flash boiling tip-wetting, there are also investigations using X-
ray  phase-contrast  imaging  (XPCI)  on  analyzing  the  tip-wetting  phe-
nomenon. Huang et al. [63] used the XPCI methodology on a production

Fig. 49. (a) Schematic of the sac-type nozzle investigated. (b) Picture of erosion damage of the needle and (c) erosion damage of the sac volume. Reprinted from
Ref. [189] with permission of SAE international.

Fig. 50. SEM images of the injector deposits from the (a) section view, (b) top view. Reprinted from Ref. [190] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111939

X. Li et al.

vapor  concentration  is  higher  than  the  regions  near  the  plate,  the
evaporation  near  the  tip,  especially  during  transitional  flash  boiling
conditions, is suppressed, therefore the tip film could be much greater
than  either  sub-cooled  conditions  or  flare  flash  boiling  conditions.
Meanwhile, from two-hole injector experiments, as long as the plumes
do not interfere with each other, the size of the tip film under transi-
tional flashing conditions is comparable to that under sub-cooled con-
ditions. Therefore, spray collapse might not introduce significant pool
fire on the impingement plate due to sparse droplet density, but it would
quite likely induce notable tip-wetting phenomena besides the wetting
caused by fuel dribble, which is more related to the injector control and
design. This observation is aligned with the discussions in Section 3.4
that  loose  hole  arrangements  are  ideal  both  in  suppressing  spray
collapse  and  tip  wetting  under  transitional  flash  boiling  conditions.
Furthermore, in future works, more detailed investigations of injector
designs should be implemented, such as studying the profile of injector
nozzles, the impacts of the counterbore, etc., to further reduce possible
tip  wettings  and  reduce  consequential  soot  formations  during
combustion.

4.3. Nozzle damages and deposit formation

For  phase-changing  spray  atomization  processes,  vaporization  is  a
two-edged sword for the injection system. On the one hand, as we dis-
cussed earlier, cavitation/flash boiling can notably improve atomization
efficiency and performance. On the other hand, fierce vaporization in-
side the nozzle is believed to induce more burden on the spray injector
and atomization system. Such damages have been well documented in
Gavaises  et  al.  [189]  for  cavitating  flows.  In  this  work,  microscopic
nozzle  surface  damage  was  compared  against  experimental  measure-
ments and simulation results (see Fig. 49). It was found that the erosion
site  locations  were  in  agreement  with  cavitation  formation  and  de-
velopments,  indicating  the  impact  of  in-nozzle  phase  variation  on
cavitating flows.

Although it is widely recognized that flash boiling atomization would
as well pose nozzle erosion issues for the injection system, similar in-
vestigations were missing at the current stage. While in a similar ratio-
nale to what has been observed in cavitating flows, injectors might suffer
damage from flash boiling near the nozzle exit, where the phase change
would be expected to be the strongest. Zhang et al. [190] performed a
study to evaluate the influence of flash-boiling-induced deposits on at-
omization  and  combustion  (see  Fig.  50).  It  was  found  that  the

combustion  deposit  can  promote  flash  boiling  and  spray  collapses,
which is intuitive since the deposit promotes the formation of the nu-
cleus. The primary components of the deposits were determined to be C
and  O, and the  deposit at  different locations could form via  different
pathways.

For injector deposit formation during flash boiling injections, some
insights might be obtained from tip-wetting evaluations since the pool
fire  near  the  injector  tip  can  induce  soot  formation  and  even  carbon
deposit. Besides tip wetting analysis, researchers are working on direct
studies  of  deposit  formation  from  flash  boiling  atomization  and  com-
bustion, or combustion with a higher fuel temperature. Jamroz [191]
performed a flash boiling internal flow study with a transparent nozzle.
It was considered that the nozzle temperature was the most important
factor influencing the evaporation process. It was also found that flash
boiling  injections  might  induce  more  deposit  formation,  because  the
residual  liquid  could  be  brought  out  by  the  next  injection  during
sub-cooled injections, thus reducing the likelihood of deposit. For flash
boiling atomization, fuel vapor contacts with the dry nozzle wall and
combustion  radicals  directly,  which  might  trigger  chemical  reactions
and therefore deposit formation. Badawy et al. [192] found that injector
deposit could significantly change the plume cone angle and penetra-
tion, therefore varying the mixing and impingement performance. It was
◦
also found that the cone angle of flash boiling spray changed from 55
◦
(clean injector) to 50
(coked injector), with a 10% variation. While for
sub-cooled injections, such variation was around 25%–35%, indicating
that flash boiling morphologies are more resistant to deposit formation.
Shah  et  al.  [193]  investigated  the  effects  of  fuel  additives  such  as
non-edible  Karanj  oil,  Pongamia  pinnata  on  the  base  fuel  of  straight
◦
vegetable oil. The fuel temperature of 30
C
(preheated) were tested in engine studies. It was found that preheating
the  fuel  injector  using  Karanj  oil  can  effectively  reduce  the  deposit
compared  to  30
C  fuel  conditions,  suggesting  fuel  heating  or  flash
boiling can help reduce deposit formation on injector tips.

◦
C (typical), 45

◦
C, and 60

◦

So far, Section 4 introduces practical aspects of using flash boiling
atomizations  in  combustion  applications  with  an  emphasis  on  liquid-
vapor-solid coupling through spray impingement and injector interac-
tion. For flash boiling spray wall impingement studies, the results are
generally  consistent  in  that properly  designed  flash  boiling  spray  can
reduce the amount of adhered mass on the wall even if the penetration of
flash boiling is longer. This phenomenon is attributed to the fact that
flash  boiling  plumes  are  strongly  evaporative  and  sparse,  therefore
fewer droplets would impinge on the wall and form the wall film. It was

◦
Fig. 51. Fuel distribution before ignition (29
respectively [194].

bTDC) at 10 mm below the spark plug of the SIDI optical engine, with the fuel temperature being 30, 60, and 90

◦

C,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111940

X. Li et al.

Fig. 52. Representative flame color measurements under four atomization schemes. Images were obtained from the optical piston [197].

also evident that the impingement film mass is strongly correlated with
the liquid volume flux above the plate rather than the penetration. Flash
boiling wall films are also more readily evaporated due to a higher liquid
temperature.

As for tip-wetting investigations, it was found that even during flash
boiling  injections,  fuel  dribbles  make  up  the  greatest  portion  of  the
adhered mass. For sparsely arranged hole designs, for instance, two-hole
fuel injectors, flash boiling injection would produce smaller or equiva-
lent  film  sizes  compared  with  sub-cooled  injections,  and  stronger
evaporation  effects  further  reduce  the  amount  of  adhered  fuel  mass.
Meanwhile,  for  closely  arranged  injectors,  for  example,  six-hole

injectors, the tip films also collide and merge in a fashion similar to spray
collapse.  Therefore,  a  larger  but  thinner  tip  film  is  formed  due  to
evaporation. However, a larger and thinner film is unfavorable for pool
fire suppression, which could be a disadvantage to be addressed for flash
boiling atomization.

For  nozzle  damages  and  deposit  formation  issues,  more  in-
vestigations are performed for cavitating flows, and related study under
flash boiling atomization is rare. While from the analysis of cavitating
flow, it is expected that the nozzle wall near the nozzle exit will suffer
the most from flash-boiling-related damages. Such effects are expected
to be even stronger if single-component fuels are used since the bubble

Fig. 53. Transient flame measurements at different timing of the engine cycle with λ = 1.5. First row: TCI ignition, subcooled injection. Second row: 500 mA initial
current ignition, sub-cooled injection. Third row: TCI ignition, flash boiling atomization [200].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111941

X. Li et al.

Fig. 54. Color image sequences for deteriorated combustion cycles under subcooled conditions. Cycle #8, #9, and #10 are selected [211].

responses  inside  the  nozzle  and  fluctuations  are  stronger  for  single-
component  fuels.  As  for  deposit  formation,  the  related  study  is  also
limited. It is held that the interaction of fuel vapor and the nozzle wall is
easier for the deposit to form. Preheating the biofuels can suppress the
formation of deposits, which might be attributed to the reduction of tip-
related  pool  fires  since  the  fuel  film  evaporates  faster  at  a  higher
temperature.

5. Fuel combustion and emission under flash boiling conditions

In this section, we will review existing literature on both passive and
active flash boiling techniques with a focus on reciprocating engines to
illustrate the effects of flash boiling for practical combustors.

5.1. Active flash boiling (fuel heating) combustions in SIDI engines

Flash boiling is claimed to be able to improve engine performance in
many investigations, taking internal combustion engines as an example.
The previous sections indicated flash boiling atomization can produce
finer droplets with more vapor components. A smaller Stokes number of
the  spray  droplet  can  enhance  fuel-air  mixing  in  the  combustion
chamber under the influence of the structured flow compared to tradi-
tional  sub-cooled  injections.  The  results  shown  in  Sections  3  and  4
further illustrate that a much lower mass flux flow will suppress wall
film formation, thus the soot formation from pool fires will be notably
reduced, especially when the cylinder is cold and spray evaporation is
suppressed under sub-cooled conditions. Therefore, the fuel combustion
enhancement using flash boiling atomization primarily relies on better
fuel preparation in the combustion/during combustion under the impact
of the flow field. Some research implied that flash boiling atomization

Fig. 55. The velocity field of the ELS signal obtained via the optical flow method for flash boiling conditions [213].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111942

X. Li et al.

might also impact the combustion kinetics from flame spectrum obser-
vations, but such impacts are not fully verified yet. Therefore, we will
discuss flash boiling effects mainly during the fuel preparation stages as
follows.

improved either by increasing the discharge current or adopting active
flash boiling atomization (see Fig. 53). An even better combustion per-
formance (better/larger lean limit) could be achieved by coupling flash
boiling atomization and high-energy ignition simultaneously.

It should be noted that although the two advantages mentioned have
been achieved in some research, the combustion performance still has
room for improvement. Almost all existing studies adopted commercial
injectors or injectors designed for typical sub-cooled conditions, and few
investigations optimized active flash boiling combustions with custom-
ized fuel injectors or injection controls. Nevertheless, superior efficiency
and reduced combustion emission have been witnessed in many studies,
in which the active flash boiling strategy was used solely or combined
with other techniques. These investigations will be briefly reviewed and
discussed in the following sections.

To  conclude,  existing  research  generally  found  that  flash  boiling
sprays  can  suppress  wall  film  deposition,  but  the  impacts  of  spray
collapse on the film mass remain unclear. We expect that the film mass
adhered when the spray collapses is a complex function of the boundary
conditions such as the fuel temperature, injector design, etc. Besides, the
vapor fraction of the spray plume is an important parameter that would
significantly  impact  the  fuel  mass  adhered.  However,  at  the  current
stage, it is still challenging to quantitatively determine the vapor frac-
tion  inside  the  spray  plume  experimentally  in  the  combustor,  which
should be investigated in future work.

5.1.1. Fuel-air mixing enhancement

5.1.2. Evaporation enhancement

For spark-ignition direct-injection engines, enhancing fuel-air mix-
ing efficiency in producing a more homogenous mixture is important for
flame speed enhancement and combustion duration reduction. Although
such a goal can be partially achieved by structure flow designs, such as
incorporating tumble flow or piston head design, improving fuel atom-
ization  efficiency  is  also  crucial  in  preparing  finer  fuel  droplets  and
desirable fuel-air mixtures. Therefore, flash boiling can be well utilized
since fierce phase change dominant breakup can further decrease the
droplet size inside the cylinder.

scattering

experiments.

To practice such a concept, many active flash boiling investigations
have  been  using  optical  engine  facilities.  Among  these  efforts,  Dong
et al. [194] studied flash boiling atomization inside an optical engine
facility, and it was found that the spray morphology changed notably
from  high-speed  Mie
Furthermore,
laser-induced  fluorescence  (LIF)  measurements  with  266  nm  laser
excitation were made inside the engine cylinder before combustion, as
seen in Fig. 51. It was found that under mild flash boiling conditions, the
fuel reach zone inside the cylinder was smaller, reflecting an enhanced
fuel-air mixing performance. Such observations were further justified by
combustion experiments that flash boiling combustion yielded a faster
flame speed and indicative mean effective pressure (IMEP). Similar re-
sults  were  also  shown  in  Yang  et  al.  [195].  Yang  et  al.  [196]  also
investigated  the  influence  of  engine  swirl  ratio  under  flash  boiling
conditions.  They  found  that  a  high  swirl  ratio  in  the  engine  cylinder
would make the fuel-air distribution less uniform than that with a low
swirl ratio, and the proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) method was
used to analyze the modes of the flow fields inside the engine.

The enhancement of fuel-air mixing from flash boiling atomization
has led to the investigation of lean/ultra-lean combustions in IC engines
with flash boiling incorporated. The benefit of this combination is two-
fold. Firstly, lean combustion performance relies heavily on the homo-
geneity of the fuel-air mixture, and faster flame propagation can also be
helpful to combustion efficiency and emission control. Furthermore, the
combustion temperature of lean conditions is lower than that of stoi-
chiometric combustions. Therefore NOx emissions under lean conditions
can be better controlled. A series of investigations were carried out to
explore such capacities. For instance, Sun et al. [197–199] employed a
split injection scheme under active flash boiling conditions. Both stoi-
chiometric and lean combustions were investigated. It was found that
the air entrainment near the spray plume was improved. In addition, the
flame  speed  under  lean  combustion  conditions  was  remarkably
improved by flash boiling atomization (See Fig. 52) with nearly 100%
enhancements.  Finally,  higher  IMEP  and  low  combustion  emissions
were recorded under lean combustion conditions.

In another study by Ye et al. [200], the parameters of high-energy
ignitions  were  systematically  analyzed,  and  the  combustion  perfor-
mance under lean combustion conditions was looked into. A constant
discharge  current  circuit  was  used  as  the  source  of  the  high-energy
ignition, and the current can be sustained for a couple of milliseconds.
The results showed that the combustion and flame propagation could be

Another advantage of flash boiling atomization is that a higher fuel
temperature  can  enhance  evaporation  during  spray  atomization.
Furthermore, it is held that even if the fuel spray has induced deposited
fuel on the piston or the injector tip, a high temperature can accelerate
film  evaporation  [69].  Therefore,  pool  fire  phenomena  can  be  sup-
pressed if the evaporation is strong enough that no liquid film remains
on the wall at the time of the ignition. Thus, it is expected that flash
boiling atomization can suppress soot emissions from the combustor.

Fuel heating to a very high level might deem challenging for prac-
tical engine applications, but moderate fuel heating is commonly seen to
address cold-start combustion issues. For instance, Kabasin et al. [201,
202] used injector heating to address the issues of ethanol combustion
under  cold-start  conditions,  where  the  ambient  temperature  can  be
around or even lower than the flashpoint of the fuel. They developed and
utilized a Delphi Multec 3.5 HT fuel injector that integrated a heating
coil within to heat the fuel. Generally, this specific injector can elevate
◦
the fuel temperature by around 20
C in practical operations, and they
found that the heating of the fuel had reduced CO and HC emissions by
roughly 40% but increased NOx emissions by 8%. Follow-up research by
Fedor  et  al.  [203]  used  the  same  fuel  injector  as  well  as  additional
inductive  rail  heating  to  further  elevate  the  fuel  temperature,  and  a
◦
maximum  rail  temperature  of  150
C  was  recorded  with  an  infrared
thermometer. Under typical engine operation conditions, it was found in
their research that the HC emission was reduced by 27% and PN by 8%,
while no additional NOx emission was witnessed. Similarly, Brunocilla
et al. [204] installed heating coils to a newly designed fuel rail to heat
pure alcohol (93% ethanol and 7% water) and E22 fuel (78% gasoline
◦
and 22% ethanol) with an environment temperature of 0
C. They found
that the  CO  and  HC  emissions  of the  engine  dropped,  while  the  NOx
emission of the engine increased, as we introduced earlier. Wooldridge
et al. [205]surveyed methods for reducing cold start emission and they
considered flash boiling is the main contributor to reducing PM and HC
during late intake valve open and early exhaust valve close phases.

Besides flash boiling applications of using alternative fuels in prac-
tical  engines,  there  are  also  investigations  on  studying  flash  boiling
combustion of alternative fuels in optical engine facilities. Nour et al.
[206,207] studied the combustion of butanol isomers mixed with PRF
and TPRF and found that butanol/TPRF blends show more yellow flame
compared to TPRF at both flash boiling and liquid injections. However,
butanol  addition  reduced  the  PN  emissions  by  43.4%  under  regular
liquid fuel injection. An additional reduction in PN emissions by 25%
was  recorded  with  flash  boiling  injection.  Similar  research  has  been
conducted by Kale et al. [208] using butanol isomers and iso-octane as
fuel.  They  also  found  that  flash  boiling  can  effectively  atomize
low-volatile alternative fuels and thus improve combustion performance
with wall impingement suppressed. They also pointed out the likelihood
of increased impingement due to a longer spray penetration. Fan et al.
[209]  performed  20%  ethanol-blended  gasoline  combustion  studies
under cold start conditions using an optical engine facility, and it was
◦
found that heating up the fuel to 90
C could both improve the

◦
C or 150

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111943

Table 1
Summary of IC engine key performances after incorporating the flash boiling technique.

No

Type

Design

Mode

Fuel

Pinj
(MPa)

Tfuel (K)

Pamb
(kPa)

IMEP (bar)

RON92

10,20

300, 360

100

0.7–2.6%

[194]

GDI

OE

[195]
[197]

[198]
[199]

GDI
GDI

GDI
GDI

OE
OE

OE
OE

Homogenous
Stratified
Homogenous
Homogenous

Homogenous
Homogenous

RON92
RON92

RON92
RON92

[200]

GDI

OE

Homogenous

RON92

[201]

PFI

1.8 L

Homogenous

Ethanol

[202]

PFI

1.8 L
Vehicle

Homogenous

[157]

GDI

3.8 L V6  Homogenous

E85
E100
E22
E10

10
10

10
25

25

N/A

N/A

360
470

470
450

450

420

420

15

350

[204]

PFI

Bench

Homogenous

Ethanol

0.42

350

[206,

207]

[206,

207]

[208]
[209]

[210]
[211]
[212]
[213]
[214]
[215]

GDI

OE

Homogenous

GDI

OE

Homogenous

GDI
GDI

OE
OE

Homogenous
Homogenous

GDI
GDI
GDI
GDI
Diesel
Diesel

OE
OE
OE
OE
Bench
Bench

Homogenous
Homogenous
Homogenous
Homogenous
HCCI
CI

[218]

Diesel

Bench

PCCI

TPRF
TPRF-iBu
TPRF-sBu
Butanol PRF
TPRF
Butanol
Ethanol

Iso-octane
RON92
Iso-octane
RON 95
Diesel
n-C5H12
n-C13H28
LPG + n-
C13H28
Methanol

40
91

Net 2.796–3.299
Net 6.54–6.96

91
45–75

Net 5.8–6.9
Net 3.8–4.2

45–75

Net 3.8–4.2

Cold
Start
Cold
Start

Cold
Start
Cold
Start
N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Drop
Drop
Drop
Net 5.8

N/A
4%–8%

10

10

10
15

295–450

450

63

300–420
300–420

N/A
40

10
10
10
15
12–18
15

390
390
300–390
300–390
293–620
295–440

13.86–21.27%
(cid:0) 4%
11.01%
6.8%
Drop
N/A

40
40
41
35
NA
0-60
load
60 load

N/A

360–580

N/A

Maximum Cylinder
Pressure Rise
Drop

[221]

Diesel

Bench

PCCI

Diesel Ethane

40

300

3.5

X

.

L
i

e
t

a
l
.

THC

N/A

N/A
Net 450 ppm

N/A
Net 1700–2800
ppm
Net 1700–2800
ppm
(cid:0) 42%

(cid:0) 67%
(cid:0) 66%
(cid:0) 30%
(cid:0) 27%

Net ~0.1 g/km

N/A

N/A

N/A
Net ~550 ppm

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Vary
Drop

Drop

Drop

NMHC

CO

NOx

N/A

Net 190 ppm

Net 100 ppm

N/A

N/A

(cid:0) 62%

N/A
(cid:0) 69%
(cid:0) 35%
(cid:0) 30%

Net 600–8000
ppm
Net 600–8000
ppm
(cid:0) 43%

Net 200–1450
ppm
Net 200–1450
ppm
+8%

(cid:0) 70%
(cid:0) 61%
(cid:0) 22%
+8%

+155%
+18%
+2%
(cid:0) 7%

Net ~0.06
g/km
N/A

Net ~0.23 g/
km
N/A

Net ~0.06 g/
km
N/A

N/A

N/A
N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A
Net ~1500 ppm

N/A
Net ~170 ppm

N/A
N/A

Vary
N/A

N/A

Drop

Drop
N/A

Rise

Rise

PN

60%

60%
Net 1.3e4-
2.8e4a.u.

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

(cid:0) 6.1%
(cid:0) 5.4%
(cid:0) 25.1%
Drop

Drop
Net ~4.0e5#/
cm3
(cid:0) 69-81.73%
(cid:0) 78%
(cid:0) 87.04%
(cid:0) 25%
N/A
N/A

Drop

N/A

Net +1200 ppm

N/A

Net 2400 ppm

Net (cid:0) 600 ppm

N/A

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111944











































































































































































































































X. Li et al.

IMEP and reduce engine cycle-to-cycle variation. Those improvements
are believed to be caused by improved fuel evaporation, which is evident
from more blue/premixed flame occurrence under flash boiling condi-
tions. However, it is also noted that the NOx emission with a high fuel
temperature would rise due to a higher combustion temperature inside
the engine cylinder.

As  we  discussed,  moderate  heating  of  the  fuel  might  yield  transi-
tional  flash  boiling  atomizations  and  combustions,  which  would
potentially deteriorate the combustion performance, although the pre-
viously  mentioned  literature  suggested  otherwise.  There  are  also
experimental investigations that raised the fuel temperature to an even
higher level so that flare flash boiling is possible. Sun et al. [210] per-
formed a flash boiling combustion using an optical engine facility. In this
◦
work, the fuel supplied to the optical engine was heated to 120
C with
an  external  heating  element,  and  injection  timing  was  varied  to
approximate challenging combustion conditions. It was found that the
PN  emissions  were  reduced  notably  using  the  HSV  (Hue,  saturation,
value) color model and an emission analyzer. Furthermore, the IMEP of
the engine also saw a notable enhancement. In other investigations, Sun
et al. [211,212] performed a side-view pool fire analysis to understand
the impact of flash boiling atomization (see Fig. 54). The results showed
that flash boiling atomization could notably reduce the occurrence of
diffusion flame/pool fire under challenging conditions. However, it is
worth  noting  that  flash  boiling  atomization  might  also  cause  more
pronounced tip-wetting-related diffusion flames, which required addi-
tional attention when designing the fuel injector, as well as conducting
control optimizations.

Besides  the  introduced  soot-reduction  mechanisms  by  enhanced
evaporation efficiency, it was also found that soot formed under flash
boiling conditions had a higher tendency of being oxidized. Sun et al.
[213]  used  the  elastic  laser  scattering  (ELS)  method  to  visualize  soot
distribution  inside  the  cylinder  after  the  flame  was  extinguished  (see
Fig.  55).  From  the  results,  it  is  shown  that  flash  boiling  combustion
usually produced less soot inside the cylinder. Even when the concen-
tration  of  soot  produced  was  higher  for  bad  cycles,  the  soot  motion
under  flash  boiling  combustion  conditions  was  faster,  therefore
enhancing  its  mixing  with  ambient  oxygen  and  accelerated  soot  oxi-
dization, which was also validated by consequent emission analysis from
engine exhaust pipes.

5.2. Flash boiling in com pression ignition engines

For  compression-ignition  reciprocating  engines,  the  fuel  injections
sometimes  also  satisfy  the  definition  of  flash  boiling  conditions,  i.e.,
with  the  fuel  preheated.  However,  the  impact  of  flash  boiling  on  the
combustion  performance  for  non-premixed  compression  ignition  en-
gines is up for debate since the fuel-air mixture must be heated up to a
substantial temperature (auto-ignition temperature) before combustion
is enabled. Under such a combustion scheme, significant vaporization
would  always  take  place,  which  in  turn  weakens  the  vaporization
contribution  from  flash  boiling  atomization.  Furthermore,  the  in-
cylinder  pressure  is  usually  high  (20–30  bar)  for  non-premixed
compression  ignition  engines.  In  this  scenario,  it  is  quite  challenging
to elevate the saturated vapor pressure higher than the ambient pressure
with regular hydrocarbon fuels. Therefore, it is required that either a
very high fuel temperature is adopted or some very volatile species, i.e.,
liquified  carbon  dioxide,  are  doped  in  the  fuel.  There  are  also  non-
premixed  engine  investigations  focusing  on  the  impacts  of  fuel  tem-
perature, while we are not going to cover these studies since the atom-
ization did not enter the flash boiling regime.

For these reasons, it is more common to see the application of the
flash  boiling  concept  in  HCCI/RCCI  engines.  Premixed  compression
ignition  engines,  such  as  homogenous  charge  compression  ignition
(HCCI) engines or premixed charge compression ignition (PCCI) engines
are renowned for their high thermal efficiencies. However, they have
issues  with  their  limited  stable  operational  conditions.  With  the

advances  in  flash  boiling  atomization,  a  more  homogenous/uniform
fuel-air mixture can be prepared for the combustion system, therefore
the HCCI/PCCI can be more viable and may find wider applications in
powertrains, especially for hybrid vehicles.

◦

◦

C–200

◦
C to 260

She et al. [214] performed a flash boiling combustion analysis using
a non-premixed diesel engine, and the fuel was heated within the tem-
◦
C. Similar results were obtained that
perature range from 25
finer droplets  were produced with  a higher  fuel  temperature, but the
maximum cylinder pressure and maximum heat release rate dropped. In
this investigation, it was stated that there exists an optimal fuel tem-
perature at which the engine performance can be optimized. They found
that  for  this  specific  engine,  a  fuel  temperature  around  150
C  can
achieve a good BSFC, soot emission, and CO/THC emission at the same
time, while further heating the fuel might adverse the positive effects of
flash boiling atomization. It was also recommended that the fuel tem-
◦
perature  be  set  to  160
C  in  practical  engine  applications.
However, it should be noted that the ambient pressure at the injection
time  of  20  CA  BTDC  was  around  2.0  Mpa  from  the  pressure  curves
provided by the author. Whether the improved BSFC should be attrib-
uted to flash boiling effects or enhanced evaporation is still up to debate.
Senda et al. [215,216] used RCEM and an optical engine facility to
investigate flash boiling combustion with n-tridecane as the base fuel
and liquefied carbon dioxide as an additive. It was found that the soot
and  HC  emissions  were  notably  reduced,  and  the  fuel  efficiency  was
improved. The authors also commented on the application likelihood of
this  technique  for  HCCI  combustion  modes.  Similar  conclusions  were
made by Yu et al. [217] using DME/diesel blended fuel and spray ex-
periments.  At  the same  time, it  should be noted  that this category  of
studies  introduces  a  secondary  non-reactive  fuel.  Therefore  the  out-
comes are also directly connected to such modifications besides tradi-
tional flash boiling enhancements.

Seko et al. [218] used flash boiling atomization in a PCCI methanol
engine and heated the fuel to around 650 K. It was found that the brake
thermal efficiency improved, the CO and THC emissions reduced, while
the NOx emission increased before a 400 K fuel temperature. But the
brake thermal efficiency dropped notably as the fuel temperature went
too high. The optimal temperature found in this study was 400 K with a
BMEP of 0.7 MPa and 450 K with a BMEP of 0.7 MPa. Note that the
boiling point of the fuel under the engine conditions was 370 K, meaning
the optimal temperature is not too much higher than its boiling point.
Wada et al. [219] further adopted the flash boiling concept the PCCI
combustion with mixed fuels. It was found that the THC and CO emis-
sions  were  reduced by  flash  boiling atomization,  and  meanwhile,  the
NOx emission was also reduced, similar to the results for lean combus-
tion GDI engines. It was concluded that the use of flash boiling atomi-
zation in diesel PCCI engines could promote premixed combustions and
reduce rich combustion zones inside the cylinder. This investigation also
proposed  novel  combustion  concepts  such  as  flash  boiling  combined
with early injection schemes for engine knock reduction. Similar results
were also discussed in another investigation by Kawano et al. [220].

Kobashi  et  al.  [221]  performed  a  premixed  diesel  combustion
investigation using a single-cylinder engine with diesel fuel doped with
ethane. It was found that the IMEP was elevated by 0.35 MPa with the
addition of ethane which triggered flash boiling atomization. The ethane
content should be more than 60 vol% to gain sufficient ignition delay for
early injections. It was also found that flash boiling atomization made
the  fuel-air  mixture  more  homogeneous,  therefore  reducing  NOx
emissions.

5.3. Discussions on flash boiling combustions in engines

The performance variation after incorporating flash boiling atomi-
zation has been summarized in Table 1. To briefly conclude this section,
we found that, generally, flash boiling atomization can help improve the
combustion  performance  in  engines.  For  gasoline/spark-ignition  en-
gines, existing research indicated that passive flash boiling would occur

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111945

X. Li et al.

◦

as the engine operates steadily with the cooling water temperature of
around 80–90
C, but such flash boiling effects do not deteriorate the
combustion performance. We hold that enhanced evaporation of the fuel
would  offset  the  impacts  from  phenomena  such  as  spray  targeting
change/spray collapse.

For spark ignition engines, active flash boiling could usually achieve
better combustion performance in the aspect of thermal efficiency and
THC/CO/PN emissions. The NOx emission would increase because of a
higher  combustion  temperature  under  stoichiometric  combustion
boundary conditions, but the NOx emission would also drop when lean
combustion  is  incorporated.  For  gasoline  engines,  flash  boiling  can
enhance fuel-air mixing and thus produce more premixed flame zones. It
can also promote droplet evaporation so that local rich zones or pool
fires can be eliminated to some extent. Heating the fuel would usually
improve the combustion performance of SIDI engines, and such obser-
vations hold till the fuel is very hot (near transcritical). Currently, the
investigation that heating the fuel to its transcritical or supercritical is
rare for SIDI engines. Therefore flash boiling combustion effects under
such conditions are not clear yet.

For premixed HCCI engines, flash boiling atomization would usually
promote combustion performance similar to the results shown in SIDI
engines.  Therefore,  engine  research  shows  that  active  flash  boiling
would most likely promote combustion efficiency and reduce harmful
emissions.  While  the  external  heating  source  to  trigger  flash  boiling
should be given more thought. Although such energies can be sourced
from batteries in a hybrid powertrain system, it is still desirable to heat
the  fuel  using  the  waste  heat  from  combustion.  There  have  been  in-
vestigations  developing  a  superheated  liquid  flash  boiling  engine  for
waste heat recovery in diesel engines [222]. It was considered that heat
loss  must  be  prevented  before  injection  to  increase  the  thermal  effi-
ciency of the system. They also found that with optimized boiling plate
temperatures, the system was capable of surpassing the efficiency of a
TLC-powered  piston  engine  with  a  hydro-cyclone  separator  operating
under  the  same  working  fluid  temperatures.  We  look  forward  to
cost-effective and durable flash boiling combustion systems in the next
generation of hydrocarbon powertrains, especially with the surging of
advanced hybrid vehicle powertrains in the market.

6. Future perspectives

In  this  review  article,  we  have  explored  recent  advances  in  flash
boiling studies with an experimental focus. Taking advantage of more
powerful hardware and increasing interest in flash boiling atomization,
experimental results with much better spatial and temporal resolutions
are achieved. These results include in-nozzle two-phase flows, near-field
breakup  characteristics,  macroscopic  structures,  and  spray-solid  in-
teractions.  New  experimental  results  spark  insights  and  new  funda-
mental theories in flash boiling atomization. To briefly summarize, the
two-phase  nature  of  flash  boiling  spray  makes  it  far  different  from
sub-cooled  spray  atomization  in  many  aspects,  including  the  primary
breakup  mechanism,  spray  expansion  characteristics,  spray-air
entrainment, wall impingement, etc.

However,  the  physics  involved  during  flash  boiling  atomization  is
quite complex. These processes include high-speed, turbulent, and two-
phase flows in micro-channels (nozzles) and very high optical depth in
the  near-field.  These  challenges  would  require  both  high-speed  and
high-energy laser apparatus to utilize advanced laser diagnostics with a
high temporal resolution. Furthermore, submicron visual detectors are
required  to  resolve  fine  bubbles  inside  the  nozzle.  Finally,  specially
designed  optical  diagnostics  methods  are  needed  to  overcome  strong
refractions from the liquid-vapor interfaces and multiple scattering in
the  near-field.  Advances  in  laser  diagnostics  can  promote  further  un-
derstanding  of  flash  boiling  atomization,  as  well  as  other  two-phase
internal  flow  atomization,  and  quantitative  experimental  results  will
likely  enhance  current  numerical  efforts  and  fundamental  theory
developments.

1.  Detailed breakup mechanisms of flash boiling atomization

Although  we  have  presented  the  bubble-burst  primary  breakup
theory with some preliminary results showed, the results were mostly
obtained using 2D slit nozzles, which might not reflect the volumetric
features and bubble developments in practical combustion systems. Low
injection  pressures  are  desired  to  avoid  liquid  jet  disintegration  from
dynamic  spray  primary  breakups.  Based  on  the  fundamental  experi-
ments, new numerical CFD models could be considered to incorporate
such breakup mechanisms, and the model can be validated from low-
pressure  injections.  Afterward,  breakup  models  that  can  handle  both
flash  boiling  breakups  and  dynamic  liquid  core  breakups  should  be
established  to  simulate  sprays  from  sub-cooled  states  to  flare  flash
boiling states.

2.  Specialized  atomization  systems  for  flash  boiling  atomization

applications

In the current stage, most of the investigations were carried out with
injectors designed for sub-cooled injections, and no unique injector has
been applied yet to boost the performance of flash boiling atomization.
For instance, it is recommended to increase the distance between nozzle
holes not only to reduce spray collapses but also to reduce the produc-
tion of tip films during flash boiling injections. Nozzle step holes should
be  reconsidered  for  better  liquid-gaseous  mixture  expansions  and
propagations, and the diameter of nozzle holes should be increased to
compensate for the flow rate drop from multiphase effects, or extend the
injection  duration.  It  is  also  worth  investigating  suitable  injection
pressures and different injection schemes, such as multiple injections, to
improve the performance.

In this review, we primarily explore the flashing effects of multi-hole
fuel injectors for reciprocating engines. The flash boiling influence on
other types of fuel injectors is also valuable to explore. These fuel in-
jectors can include hollow cone fuel injectors generated by piezoelectric
injectors employed by BMW [120,223–226], and swirl injectors used by
VW  in  the  FSI  engines  [227,228].  It  is  also  valuable  to  explore  these
forms of sprays since flash boiling applications in gas turbines or other
combustors are also promising. Currently, experimental investigations
on  these  injectors  are  relatively  lacking.  While  the  coupled  effects  of
flash  boiling  and  spray  design  should  be  experimentally  evaluated  to
ensure  the  injection  settings  are  beneficial  to  practical  combustion
applications.

3.  Distinctive critical parameters of flash boiling atomization compared

with sub-cooled atomizations

The breakup mechanism of flash boiling atomization primarily relies
on  the  explosion  of  vapor  bubbles.  Thus,  the  near-field  and  far-field
properties  of  flash  boiling  atomizations  are  very  different  from  sub-
cooled  atomizations.  Traditional  atomization  performance  indicators
such  as  the  spray  cone  angle  and  spray  penetration  are  not  quite
important anymore under flash boiling atomization conditions due to
the sparse nature of the spray plume. Such characteristics make flash
boiling  a  very  complex  problem  with  vapor-liquid-solid-ambient  gas
interaction coupled, and significant heat and mass transfers are expected
during flash boiling atomization. Tip wettings and spray impingements
were also investigated more thoroughly in recent investigations to help
reduce pool fires in the combustor.

4.  Transition of the thermodynamic states and their transition process

in flash boiling

In the transition of sub-cooled - transitional flash boiling - flare flash
boiling-transcritical, multi-phase characteristics of the spray reached a
maximum at some point during the transition, then the spray starts to be
dominated  by  the  gaseous  phase  until  the  spray  becomes  a  complete

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111946

X. Li et al.

gaseous jet. There is a trade-off of combustion performance as the vapor
concentration in the plume increases. A high flash boiling strength can
produce  a  more  homogenous  combustible  mixture,  as  well  as  reduce
liquid-wall interactions. However, too much vapor phase can reduce the
penetrating momentum of the spray so that the fuel propagation would
be too slow for mixing purposes. Furthermore, a high flash boiling level
would trigger nozzle chokings and other supersonic effects that might be
undesirable. Finally, additional energy input is required to heat up the
fuel  to  an  even  higher  temperature.  It  is  crucial  to  understand  the
transition process and determine the best thermodynamic state of the
working fluid for specific applications.

5.  Fuel design for flash boiling combustion systems

For instance, how to perform fuel design for combustion systems. It is
intuitive to blend high-volatile fuels into low-volatile fuels to assist the
atomization via the bubble rupture of high-volatile fuels under a rela-
tively low temperature. Flash boiling atomization for alternative fuels,
such  as  ethanol  fuels  and  ether  fuels,  can  also  notably  enhance  their
breakup performance, especially under cold-start conditions. A proper
fuel formula and the procedure for developing such a formula should be
analyzed and investigated so that the fuel can be both cost-effective and
efficient. With zero-carbon emission or negative carbon emission goals,
flash  boiling  atomization  and  combustion  of  low  boiling  points  fuels,
such as liquefied petroleum gas or even liquid hydrogen, can be directly
injected  into  the  combustion  chamber  to  produce  flash  boiling/tran-
scritical atomization and combustions with a higher mass flow rate than
injecting gaseous fuels.

6.  How flash boiling atomization promotes combustion

Fundamental investigations on flash boiling atomization, especially
for  morphological  analyses,  have  been  widely  conducted  in  the  past
decades. But it was until recently that active flash boiling atomizations
had been practiced in combustors such as optical engines and practical
engines.  Despite  the  stereotype  misunderstanding  of  flash  boiling  at-
omizations and combustions, most of the active flash boiling combustion
experiments  indeed  demonstrated  a  superior  capacity  of  flash  boiling
atomization  and  combustion  in  improving  combustion  efficiency  and
reducing harmful emissions. We reviewed and summarized the reasons
why flash boiling can generally enhance combustions. It was shown that
even during flash boiling spray collapse, most of the liquid components
have already evaporated into their vapor form. Therefore, much fewer
liquid-solid  interferences  would  happen  for  combustions  in  a  limited
volume.  Furthermore,  the  high  evaporating  features  of  flash  boiling
atomization produced finer droplets that have a smaller Stokes number,
making  the  droplets  easier  to  follow  the  flows  inside  the  combustor.
Therefore, flash boiling can generate a better fuel-air mixture, which is
beneficial, particularly for premixed combustions.

7.  Fundamental flash boiling combustion investigations

It is worth mentioning that although more combustion experiments
were performed to examine flash boiling atomizations, these attempts
were usually implemented in practical combustors or optical-accessible
complex combustors, such as optical engine facilities. However, there is
a gap between spray tests in constant volume chambers and combustion
experiments such as in reciprocating engines. Fundamental combustion
analysis  of  flash  boiling  sprays  in  constant  volume  chambers  is  rare.
Although  flash  boiling  atomization  changes  primarily  the  physical
properties of the fuel, it is suspected that such modifications also impact
the combustion mechanisms with a faster flame speed and homogenous
fuel-air mixtures. It is also desirable to investigate the detailed emission
species  from  flash  boiling  combustions  without  the  influence  of  in-
cylinder  structured  flows  and  piston  movements.  Therefore,  more
fundamental flash boiling combustion studies with various diagnostics

means  are  desired  to  understand  the  kinetics  of  flash  boiling
combustion.

To  conclude,  we  have  seen  more  practical  applications  with  flash
boiling prototypes recently, and we expect flash boiling atomization can
be adopted in multi-disciplinaries in the near future. Combustion-based
vehicle  powertrains  are  an  ideal  market  for  flash  boiling  combustion
systems, especially for electrified powertrain systems such as hybrid or
plug-in hybrid systems. While for such applications, the energy source
for  heating  up  the  fuel,  which  is  more  practical  than  reducing  the
ambient pressure, should be well designed to improve the overall effi-
ciency of the vehicle. Waste heat recovery systems can be designed to
heat up the fuel for heavy-duty trucks or watercraft. For aircraft, plenty
of  waste  heat can be recovered  to  heat up  the  fuel  even to its  super-
critical states. Therefore flash-boiling/transcritical sprays can be readily
produced, which could be a future application practice for flash boiling
atomization.  We  also  look  forward  to  the  application  of  flash  boiling
atomization in non-combustion fields such as heat management systems,
agricultural  applications,  medical  devices,  etc.,  in  the  near  future  to
come.

7. Conclusions

The following conclusions are made based on existing literature and

our own experimental investigations:

1. The  in-nozzle  two-phase  (liquid-vapor)  flow  characteristics  domi-
nate  the  near-field  breakup,  expansion,  and  penetration  of  flash
boiling sprays and similar phase-changing sprays. More gaseous jet
behaviors are expected as the in-nozzle vapor fraction increases as
the  primary  breakup  mechanisms  transit  from  traditional  KH
mechanisms to flash boiling primary breakup mechanisms.

2.  In-nozzle  superheated  flows  exhibit  distinctive  multi-phase  flow
patterns with different superheat levels, and the near-field primary
breakup is strongly associated with the in-nozzle phase change both
spatially and temporally. A bubble-rupture primary breakup model
for flash boiling atomization is proposed based on two-dimensional
slit nozzles and three-dimensional nozzle optical measurements.
3.  It has been validated by many experimental investigations that flash
boiling atomization can enhance liquid evaporation, reduce overall
droplet  diameters,  accelerates  the  velocity  of  droplets/fuel  vapor,
for  combustion
and
applications.

fuel-air  entrainments

induces  stronger

4.  The  characteristic  of  the  flash  boiling  spray  plumes  are  co-
determined  by  the  liquid  phase  and  the  vapor  phase  inside  the
plume.  The  vapor  phase  would  induce  radial  expansion  in  the
ambient, reduce the penetration momentum, and reduce the amount
of  liquid  mass  flux  that  would  cause  spray  impingement  and  wall
wetting. The cone angle and spray penetration are no longer quite
appropriate in evaluating flash boiling sprays for combustion appli-
cations in the aspect of fuel-air mixing and the tendency of pool fires.
5.  Spray  collapses  and  flash  boiling  atomization  are  related  but
distinctive  phenomena  that  should  not  be  lumped  together.
Furthermore, flash boiling spray collapse does not necessarily indi-
cate strong pool fires during combustion. A loose hole arrangement is
recommended  in  reducing  flash  boiling  tip  wetting  and  spray  col-
lapses for better fuel-air mixings.

6. Flash  boiling  atomization  can  produce  more  uniform  fuel-air  mix-
tures  and  suppresses  the  formation  of  fuel  films.  It  has  achieved
better  thermal  efficiencies  and  mostly  favorable  emissions  in  SIDI
reciprocating engines, especially in reducing soots. It is favorable in
applying flash boiling atomization for combustions during cold-start,
or processing alternative fuels that have low volatilities. For CI en-
gines,  flash  boiling  can  enhance  the  combustion  performance  of
premixed combustion engines such as HCCI engines or RCCI engines,
which is beneficial for automotive applications such as hybrid en-
gines or range extenders. The application of flash boiling spray or

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111947

X. Li et al.

similar phase-changing sprays is relatively rare for non-premixed CI
engines since the high ambient pressure suppressed the flash boiling
vaporization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  the  following  financial  interests/personal  re-
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Min  Xu  reports  financial  support  was  provided  by  National  Natural
Science Foundation of China. Xuesong Li reports financial support was
provided by National Natural Science Foundation of China. Xuesong Li
reports  financial  support  was  provided  by  Science  and  Technology
Innovation Program of Hunan Province.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgments

This work was sponsored by the National Natural Science Founda-
tion of China (Grant No. E52276125, E52006140, and E51876126); and
the  Science  and  Technology  Innovation  Program  of  Hunan  Province
(2020RC5021).  We  thank  the  support  from  the  National  Engineering
Research Center of Automotive Power and Intelligent Control.

We would like to acknowledge the support from Dr. Masataka Arai
from  Gunma University  for  his contributions  in  providing insights  on
this work and the collaborative support from Dr. Zhixia He from Jiangsu
University. We would also like to mention the graduate students that
contributed  to  the  contents  and  the  completion  of  this  manuscript:
Mingli Cui, Yijia Zhang, Qinglin Xu, Hujie Pan, Di Xiao, Yadong Fan,
Hongyu Wang, Chang Ye, Xuan Zhang, Yansong Li, Mengqi Liu, Feng-
nian Zhao, and Qiaozhi Zhai.

References

[1] Xu M, Zhang Y, Zeng W, Zhang G, Zhang M. Flash boiling: easy and better way to
generate ideal sprays than the high injection pressure. SAE Int. J. Fuel. Lubricants
2013;6:137–48.

[2] Brown R, York JL. Sprays formed by flashing liquid jets. AIChE J 1962;8:149–53.
[3] Reichenbach R, Horn K. Investigation of injectant properties on jet penetration in

a supersonic stream. AIAA J 1971;9:469–72.

[4] Tobey AC, Bastress Ek. Flame-piloting mechanisms in liquid propellant rocket

engines. In: Research AFOoS; 1966.

[5] Sutton RD. Propellant Spray combustion processes during stable and unstable

liquid rocket combustion. In: Research AFOoS; 1970.

[6] Russell LM, Schmidt HW, Clarke RF. In: Administration NAaS, editor. Reaction

characteristics of spills of fluorine and fluorine-oxygen mixture upon various
materials; 1966.

[7] Sher E, Bar-Kohany T, Rashkovan A. Flash-boiling atomization. Prog Energy

Combust Sci 2008;34:417–39.

[8] Yang S, Ma Z, Li X, Hung DLS, Xu M. A review on the experimental non-intrusive
investigation of fuel injector phase changing flow. Fuel 2020;259:116188.
[9] Chang M, Lee Z, Park S, Park S. Characteristics of flash boiling and its effects on

spray behavior in gasoline direct injection injectors: a review. Fuel 2020;271:
117600.

[10] Polanco G, Holdø AE, Munday G. General review of flashing jet studies. J Hazard

Mater 2010;173:2–18.

[11] Bar-Kohany T, Levy M. State of the art review of flash-boiling atomization, vol.

26; 2016. p. 1259–305.

[12] Gemci T, Yakut K, Chigier N, Ho TC. Experimental study of flash atomization of

binary hydrocarbon liquids. Int J Multiphas Flow 2004;30:395–417.

[13] Brennen CE. Cavitation and bubble dynamics. Cambridge University Press; 1995.
[14] Wu S, Xu M, Hung DL, Pan H. Effects of nozzle configuration on internal flow and
primary jet breakup of flash boiling fuel sprays. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2017;110:
730–8.

[15] Li X, Yang S, Li T, Hung DLS, Xu M. Investigations on near-field atomization of
flash boiling sprays for gasoline direct injection related applications. Fuel 2019;
257:116097.

[16] Zhang X, He Z, Wang Q, Tao X, Zhou Z, Xia X, et al. Effect of fuel temperature on
cavitation flow inside vertical multi-hole nozzles and spray characteristics with
different nozzle geometries. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2018;91:374–87.

[17] Wang S, Xiao D, Qiu S, Zhang X, Li X, Hung DLS, et al. The effects of nozzle taper

angle on in-nozzle flow and nozzle tip-wetting under flash boiling conditions.
Fuel 2022;329:125348.

[18] Hiroyasu H. Break-up length of a liquid jet and internal flow in a nozzle. Proc

ICLASS 1991;91:275–82.

[19] Bergwerk W. Flow pattern in diesel nozzle spray holes. Proc Inst Mech Eng 1959;

173:655–60.

[20] Soteriou C, Andrews R, Smith M. Direct injection diesel sprays and the effect of
cavitation and hydraulic flip on atomization. SAE Technical Paper; 1995, 950080.
[21] Zeng W, Xu M, Zhang G, Zhang Y, Cleary DJ. Atomization and vaporization for
flash-boiling multi-hole sprays with alcohol fuels. Fuel 2012;95:287–97.
[22] Zeng W, Xu M, Zhang M, Zhang Y, Cleary DJ. Macroscopic characteristics for

direct-injection multi-hole sprays using dimensionless analysis. Exp Therm Fluid
Sci 2012;40:81–92.

[23] Sou A, Maulana MI, Isozaki K, Hosokawa S, Tomiyama A. Effects of nozzle

geometry on cavitation in nozzles of pressure atomizers. J Fluid Sci Technol 2008;
3:622–32.

[24] Lamanna G, Kamoun H, Weigand B, Steelant J. Towards a unified treatment of

fully flashing sprays. Int J Multiphas Flow 2014;58:168–84.

[25] Yin P, Yang S, Li X, Xu M. Numerical simulation of in-nozzle flow characteristics

under flash boiling conditions. Int J Multiphas Flow 2020;127:103275.

[26] Lubetkin SD. Why is it much easier to nucleate gas bubbles than theory predicts?

Langmuir 2003;19:2575–87.

[27] Jones JOC. Flashing inception in flowing liquids. J Heat Tran 1980;102:439–44.
[28] Huang J, Sun L, Mo Z, Feng Y, Bao J, Tang J. Experimental investigation on the
effect of throat size on bubble transportation and breakup in small Venturi
channels. Int J Multiphas Flow 2021;142:103737.

[29] Hesketh RP, Fraser Russell TW, Etchells AW. Bubble size in horizontal pipelines.

AIChE J 1987;33:663–7.

[30] Park BS, Sang YL. An experimental investigation of the flash atomization

mechanism. Atomization Sprays 1994;4:159–79.

[31] Serras-Pereira J, van Romunde Z, Aleiferis PG, Richardson D, Wallace S,

Cracknell RF. Cavitation, primary break-up and flash boiling of gasoline, iso-
octane and n-pentane with a real-size optical direct-injection nozzle. Fuel 2010;
89:2592–607.

[32] Ju D, Huang Z, Jia X, Qiao X, Xiao J, Huang Z. Macroscopic characteristics and
internal flow pattern of dimethyl ether flash-boiling spray discharged through a
vertical twin-orifice injector. Energy 2016;114:1240–50.

[33] Ju D, Wang C, Qiao X, Xiao J, Huang Z. Internal flow pattern and macroscopic
characteristics of a flash-boiling spray actuated through a twin-orifice atomizer
with low injection pressure. Atomization Sprays 2016;26:377–410.

[34] Yang S, Li X, Hung DLS, Xu M. Characteristics and correlation of nozzle internal
flow and jet breakup under flash boiling conditions. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2018;
127:959–69.

[35] Miao J, Fan Y, Wu W. Characteristics of flash boiling spray of aviation kerosene in

the twin-orifice nozzle. Fuel 2021;297:120771.

[36] Miao J, Fan Y, Wu W. Effects of nozzle configuration on flash boiling fuel sprays

of twin-orifice nozzle with aviation kerosene. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2021;174:
121335.

[37] Yang S, Zhai Q, Li X, Hung DLS, Xu M. Flash boiling fuel initial disturbance in a
transparent step-hole nozzle and its effect on external flows. Fuel 2020;274:
117768.

[38] Guo H, Wang B, Li Y, Xu H, Wu Z. Characterizing external flashing jet from single-

hole GDI injector. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2018;121:924–32.

[39] Wang S, Yang S, Qiu S, Li X, Hung DLS, Xu M. Mechanism of flash boiling bubble

breakup based on rim-like structure. Fuel 2022;329:125345.

[40] Wang S, Qiu S, Zhang Y, Cui M, Li X, Xu M. In-nozzle multi-phase flow patterns in
flash boiling atomization and their impacts on external sprays. Exp Fluid 2023;64:
48.

[41] Yang S, Ma Z, Wu S, Li X, Xu M. Dynamic characteristics of in-nozzle flash boiling
bubbles and corresponding temporal responses of external spray. Exp Fluid 2019;
60:158.

[42] Yang S, Li X, Hung DLS, Arai M, Xu M. In-nozzle flash boiling flow of multi-

component fuel and its effect on near-nozzle spray. Fuel 2019;252:55–67.
[43] Kawano D, Ishii H, Suzuki H, Goto Y, Odaka M, Senda J. Numerical study on

flash-boiling spray of multicomponent fuel. Heat Tran Asian Res 2006;35:369–85.
[44] Senda J, Hojyo Y, Fujimoto H. Modeling on atomization and vaporization process

in flash boiling spray. JSAE Rev 1994;15:291–6.

[45] Suma S, Koizuimi M. Internal boiling atomization by rapid pressure reduction of

liquids. Trans JSME (B) 1977;43:4608–17.

[46] Li S, Zhang Y, Qi W, Xu B. Quantitative observation on characteristics and

breakup of single superheated droplet. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2017;80:305–12.

[47] Xi X, Liu H, Cai C, Jia M, Yin H. Flash boiling explosion model of dimethyl ether
(DME)/n-pentane bi-component droplet under gasoline engine conditions. Fuel
2019;243:240–50.

[48] Xi X, Liu H, Jia M, Xie M, Yin H. A new flash boiling model for single droplet. Int J

Heat Mass Tran 2017;107:1129–37.

[49] Mohapatra CK, Schmidt DP, Sforzo BA, Matusik KE, Yue Z, Powell CF, et al.

Collaborative investigation of the internal flow and near-nozzle flow of an eight-
hole gasoline injector (Engine Combustion Network Spray G). Int J Engine Res
2020:1468087420918449.

[50] Loureiro DD, Reutzsch J, Kronenburg A, Weigand B, Vogiatzaki K. Primary

breakup regimes for cryogenic flash atomization. Int J Multiphas Flow 2020;132:
103405.

[51] Loureiro DD, Kronenburg A, Reutzsch J, Weigand B, Vogiatzaki K. Droplet size

distributions in cryogenic flash atomization. Int J Multiphas Flow 2021;142:
103705.

[52] Oza RD. On the mechanism of flashing injection of initially subcooled fuels.

J Fluid Eng 1984;106:105–9.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111948

X. Li et al.

[53] Reitz RD. A photographic study of flash-boiling atomization. Aerosol Sci Technol

[84] Li S, Zhang Y, Qi W. Quantitative study on the influence of bubble explosion on

1990;12:561–9.

[54] Lefebvre A. Atomization and sprays. New York: Hemisphere Publishing

Organization; 1989.

evaporation characteristics of flash boiling spray using UV-LAS technique. Exp
Therm Fluid Sci 2018;98:472–9.

[85] Todd DF, Michael CD, Boguslaw G, Isabell D, Wieland K, Frank PZ, et al.

[55] Lin T-C, Shen Y-J, Wang M-R. Effects of superheat on characteristics of flashing
spray and snow particles produced by expanding liquid carbon dioxide. J Aerosol
Sci 2013;61:27–35.

Quantitative liquid and vapor distribution measurements in evaporating fuel
sprays using laser-induced exciplex fluorescence. Meas Sci Technol 2009;20:
125401.

[56] Kitamura Y, Morimitsu H, Takahashi T. Critical superheat for flashing of
superheated liquid jets. Ind Eng Chem Fundam 1986;25:206–11.
[57] Cleary V, Bowen P, Witlox H. Flashing liquid jets and two-phase droplet

dispersion: I. Experiments for derivation of droplet atomisation correlations.
J Hazard Mater 2007;142:786–96.

[58] Chang M, Park JH, Kim HI, Park S. Flash boiling macroscopic spray

characteristics of multi-hole direct injection injectors with different hole
arrangement. Appl Therm Eng 2020;170:114969.

[59] Van Vuuren N, Postrioti L, Brizi G, Picchiotti F. Instantaneous flow rate testing
with simultaneous spray visualization of an SCR urea injector at elevated fluid
temperatures. SAE Int. J. Engines 2017;10:2478–85.

[60] Xu Q, Xu M, Hung D, Wu S, Dong X. Experimental investigation into statistic mass

flow rate of superheated fuel sprays. Busan, Korea: FISITA 2016 World
Automotive Congress; 2016.

[61] Pickett LM, Manin J, Kastengren A, Powell C. Comparison of near-field structure
and growth of a diesel spray using light-based optical microscopy and X-ray
radiography. SAE Int. J. Engines 2014;7:1044–53.

[62] Aleiferis PG, van Romunde ZR. An analysis of spray development with iso-octane,
n-pentane, gasoline, ethanol and n-butanol from a multi-hole injector under hot
fuel conditions. Fuel 2013;105:143–68.

[63] Huang W, Gong H, Moon S, Wang J, Murayama K, Taniguchi H, et al. Nozzle tip

wetting in GDI injector at flash-boiling conditions. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2021;
169:120935.

[64] Atac OF, Moon S, Jeon J. Unraveling the initial flash boiling spray formation at
the same superheated index achieved by altering ambient pressure and fuel
temperature independently. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2021;169:120897.

[65] Jeon J, Moon S, Sato K, Nagasawa T. Near-nozzle spray dynamics of 6-hole GDI

injector under subcooled and superheated conditions. Fuel 2018;232:308–16.

[66] Wang B, Wang Z, Bao X, Li Y, Jiang Y, Xu H, et al. Microscopic investigation of

near-field spray characteristics of 2-methylfuran, ethanol and isooctane under
flash boiling conditions. Fuel 2018;215:142–52.

[86] Su W, Su T, Guo H, Mao L, Xie T. Quantitative study of concentration and

temperature of a diesel spray by using planar laser induced exciplex fluorescence
technique. SAE Technical Paper; 2010. 2010-01-0878.

[87] Wang X, Han Z, Su W. Numerical study of the impact on high-pressure and
evaporating spray behavior of nozzle cavitation at typical diesel engine
conditions. Int Commun Heat Mass Tran 2017;81:175–82.

[88] Zhang G, Xu M, Zhang Y, Zeng W. Quantitative measurements of liquid and vapor
distributions in flash boiling fuel sprays using planar laser induced exciplex
technique. SAE Technical Paper; 2011. 2011-01-1879.

[89] Zhang G, Xu M, Zhang Y, Zhang M, Cleary DJ. Macroscopic characterization of
flash -boiling multi-hole sprays using planar laser induced exciplex fluorescence
tesnique. Part I. On-axis spray structure. Atomization Sprays 2012;22:861–78.
[90] Li T, Dong X, Hung DL, Li X, Xu M. Analysis of evaporation characteristics and

heat transfer for flash-boiling sprays. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2018;127:244–54.

[91] Zhifu Z, Weitao W, Bin C, Guoxiang W, Liejin G. An experimental study on the
spray and thermal characteristics of R134a two-phase flashing spray. Int J Heat
Mass Tran 2012;55:4460–8.

[92] Postrioti L, Bosi M, Cavicchi A, AbuZahra F, Di Gioia R, Bonandrini G. Momentum
flux measurement on single-hole GDI injector under flash-boiling condition. SAE
Technical Paper; 2015. 2015-2024-480.

[93] Qiu S, Xiao D, Zhang X, Wang S, Li X, Xu M. Phase change impacts on flash
boiling spray propagations and impingements. Fuel 2022;312:122871.

[94] Huang Y, Huang S, Huang R, Hong G. Spray and evaporation characteristics of

ethanol and gasoline direct injection in non-evaporating, transition and flash-
boiling conditions. Energy Convers Manag 2016;108:68–77.

[95] Guo H, Ding H, Li Y, Ma X, Wang Z, Xu H, et al. Comparison of spray collapses at
elevated ambient pressure and flash boiling conditions using multi-hole gasoline
direct injector. Fuel 2017;199:125–34.

[96] Wang Z, Jiang C, Xu H, Badawy T, Wang B, Jiang Y. The influence of flash boiling
conditions on spray characteristics with closely coupled split injection strategy.
Appl Energy 2017;187:523–33.

[67] Wang Z, Wang B, Jiang C, Xu H, Badawy T. Microscopic characterization of

[97] Wang Z, Badawy T, Wang B, Jiang Y, Xu H. Experimental characterization of

isooctane spray in the near field under flash boiling condition. Appl Energy 2016;
180:598–606.

closely coupled split isooctane sprays under flash boiling conditions. Appl Energy
2017;193:199–209.

[68] Aleiferis P, Serras-Pereira J, Augoye A, Davies T, Cracknell R, Richardson D.

[98] Yang S, Wang T, Jia M, Shen S, Yao Z. An experimental study on microscopic

Effect of fuel temperature on in-nozzle cavitation and spray formation of liquid
hydrocarbons and alcohols from a real-size optical injector for direct-injection
spark-ignition engines. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2010;53:4588–606.

[69] Xiao D, Qiu S, Hung D, Li X, Nishida K, Xu M. Evaporation and condensation of
flash boiling sprays impinging on a cold surface. Fuel 2021;287:119423.
[70] Chang M, Park S. Spray characteristics of direct injection injectors with different
nozzle configurations under flash-boiling conditions. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2020;
159:120104.

[71] Araneo L, Donde R. Flash boiling in a multihole G-DI injector – effects of the fuel

distillation curve. Fuel 2017;191:500–10.

[72] Li X, Xu Q, Qiu S, Wang S, Hung D, Xu M. Investigations on the impact of phase

change on single plume flash boiling radial expansion and drop size
characteristics. Appl Therm Eng 2022;205:117911.

[73] Guo H, Li Y, Lu X, Zhou Z, Xu H, Wang Z. Radial expansion of flash boiling jet and
its relationship with spray collapse in gasoline direct injection engine. Appl
Therm Eng 2019;146:515–25.

[74] Wu Z, Zhang Z, Li W, Chen H, Li Z, Deng J. Morphology analysis on the effect of
injection pressure on jet trajectory deviation of multi-jet sprays. Fuel 2019;243:
362–70.

[75] Yang S, Li X, Hung DLS, Xu M. Effect of injection pressure on nozzle internal flow
and jet breakup under sub-cooled and flash boiling test conditions. SAE Technical
Paper; 2019. 2019-01-0286.

[76] Li Y, Guo H, Zhou Z, Zhang Z, Ma X, Chen L. Spray morphology transformation of
propane, n-hexane and iso-octane under flash-boiling conditions. Fuel 2019;236:
677–85.

[77] Li Y, Guo H, Ma X, Qi Y, Wang Z, Xu H, et al. Morphology analysis on multi-jet
flash-boiling sprays under wide ambient pressures. Fuel 2018;211:38–47.

[78] Li X, Li T, Xu M. Effect of ambient temperature on flash-boiling spray

characteristics for a multi-hole gasoline injector. Exp Fluid 2019;60:109.
[79] Kale R, Banerjee R. Experimental investigation on GDI spray behavior of

isooctane and alcohols at elevated pressure and temperature conditions. Fuel
2019;236:1–12.

[80] Payri R, Salvador FJ, Martí-Aldaraví P, Vaquerizo D. ECN Spray G external spray
visualization and spray collapse description through penetration and morphology
analysis. Appl Therm Eng 2017;112:304–16.

[81] Kook S, Pickett LM. Liquid length and vapor penetration of conventional,

Fischer–Tropsch, coal-derived, and surrogate fuel sprays at high-temperature and
high-pressure ambient conditions. Fuel 2012;93:539–48.

[82] Zhou Y, Wei Z, Zhu Q, Cao Y, Zhang Y. Quantitative characterization on cyclic
variation of mixture formation for flash boiling sprays. Energy 2022;257:124808.
[83] Adachi M, McDonell VG, Tanaka D, Senda J, Fujimoto H. Characterization of fuel

vapor concentration inside a flash boiling spray. SAE Technical Paper; 1997,
970871.

characteristics of flash boiling spray with extended glare point velocimetry and
sizing. Atomization Sprays 2016;26.

[99] Shen S, Jia M, Wang T, Lü Q, Sun K. Measurement of the droplets sizes of a flash
boiling spray using an improved extended glare point velocimetry and sizing. Exp
Fluid 2016;57:56.

[100] Lu Q, Yu X, Shen S, Ge B. Visualization of spatial distribution of the droplet size
and velocity in flash boiling spray with extended glare-point imaging technique.
Fuel 2019;242:222–31.

[101] Park SH, Kim HJ, Lee CS. Macroscopic spray characteristics and breakup

performance of dimethyl ether (DME) fuel at high fuel temperatures and ambient
conditions. Fuel 2010;89:3001–11.

[102] Guo H, Ma X, Li Y, Liang S, Wang Z, Xu H, et al. Effect of flash boiling on

microscopic and macroscopic spray characteristics in optical GDI engine. Fuel
2017;190:79–89.

[103] Moshkovich Y, Levy Y, Sher E. Experimental observations of the transition

between heterogeneous to homogeneous nucleation regimes in flash-boiling
atomization. Int J Multiphas Flow 2021;134:103476.

[104] Berrocal E, Kristensson E, Hottenbach P, Ald ́en M, Grünefeld G. Quantitative
imaging of a non-combusting diesel spray using structured laser illumination
planar imaging. Appl Phys B 2012;109:683–94.

[105] Mishra Y, Kristensson E, Pettersson S-G, Berrocal E. Planar droplets sizing of a
hollow-cone spray using SLIPI-LIF/MIE. In: Proceedings of the 25th European
conference on liquid atomization and spray systems; 2013. Chania.

[106] Zeng W, Xu M, Zhang Y, Wang Z. Laser sheet dropsizing of evaporating sprays
using simultaneous LIEF/MIE techniques. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:1677–85.

[107] Qiu S, Wang S, Zhang Y, Li X, Hung D, Xu M. Dense-field spray droplet size

quantification of flashing boiling atomization using structured laser illumination
planar imaging technique. Fuel 2023;335:127085.

[108] Rees A, Araneo L, Salzmann H, Lamanna G, Sender J, Oschwald M. Droplet

velocity and diameter distributions in flash boiling liquid nitrogen jets by means
of phase Doppler diagnostics. Exp Fluid 2020;61:1–18.

[109] Rees A, Salzmann H, Sender J, Oschwald M. About the morphology of flash

boiling liquid nitrogen sprays. Atomization Sprays 2020:30.
[110] Kamoun H, Ruberto S, Lamanna G, Weigand B, Steelant J. Velocity

characterisation of a fashing ethanol jet with laser correlation velocimetry. San
Antonio, Texas: 24th ILASS-Americas Conference; 2012.

[111] Zhang M, Xu M, Hung D. Simultaneous two-phase flow measurement of spray

mixing process by means of high-speed two-color PIV. Meas Sci Technol 2014;25:
095204.

[112] Yan J, Gao S, Liu W, Chen T, Lee TH, Lee C-F. Experimental study of flash boiling
spray with isooctane, hexane, ethanol and their binary mixtures. Fuel 2021;292:
120415.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111949

X. Li et al.

[113] Yan J, Gao S, Zhao W, Lee TH, Lee C-F. Experimental study of sprays with

[145] Wu S, Pan H, Xu M, Hung D, Li T. Investigation of rapid atomization and collapse

isooctane, hexane, ethanol and their binary mixtures under different flash boiling
intensities. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2021;179:121715.

of superheated liquid fuel spray under superheated conditions. Atomization
Sprays 2016;26:1361–84.

[114] Zhou X, Zhai Q, Hung DL, Li X, Xu M. Study of component proportion effects on

[146] Yang S, Wang S, Sun Z, Li X, Hung DL, Xu M. In-nozzle bubble formation and its

flash boiling atomization with ternary-alkane fuel mixtures. Fuel 2021;298:
120798.

effect on fuel jet breakup under cavitating and flash boiling conditions. Appl
Therm Eng 2021;183:116120.

[115] Myong K-J, Suzuki H, Senda J, Fujimoto H. Spray inner structure of evaporating

[147] Lee HJ, Choi H, Jin Y-I, Hwang K-Y, Park D-C, Min S. Effect of nozzle inlet

multi-component fuel. Fuel 2008;87:202–10.

[116] Chen T, Yan J, Gao S, Lee T, Diaz E, Lee C-F. Macroscopic and microscopic

characteristics of flash boiling spray with binary fuel mixtures. SAE International;
2019.

[117] Zhou Z, Li Y, Zhang J, Wang Y, Yan F, Xu H. Effects of component proportions on
multi-jet instant expansion of binary solutions under flash boiling conditions. Fuel
2022;308:122018.

[118] Avedisian CT, Skyllingstad K, Cavicchi RC, Lippe C, Carrier MJ. Initiation of flash
boiling of multicomponent miscible mixtures with application to transportation
fuels and their surrogates. Energy Fuels 2018;32:9971–81.

geometry in high temperature hydrocarbon liquid jets. Int J Heat Fluid Flow
2018;74:1–14.

[148] Jiang C, Parker MC, Helie J, Spencer A, Garner CP, Wigley G. Impact of gasoline
direct injection fuel injector hole geometry on spray characteristics under flash
boiling and ambient conditions. Fuel 2019;241:71–82.

[149] Nagai N, Sato K, Lee CW. Atomization characteristics of superheated liquid jets.
International conference on liquid atomization and spray systems, ICLASS-
851985. p. 1-11.

[150] Oza RD, Sinnamon JF. An experimental and analytical study of flash-boiling fuel

injection. SAE Trans 1983:948–62.

[119] Zigan L, Schmitz I, Flügel A, Wensing M, Leipertz A. Structure of evaporating

[151] Aori G, Hung DL, Zhang M, Zhang G, Li T. Effect of nozzle configuration on

single-and multicomponent fuel sprays for 2nd generation gasoline direct
injection. Fuel 2011;90:348–63.

macroscopic spray characteristics of multi-hole fuel injectors under superheated
conditions. Atomization Sprays 2016;26.

[120] Wang L, Vinod KN, Fang T. Effects of fuels on flash boiling spray from a GDI

[152] Luo M, Haidn OJ. Characterization of flashing phenomena with cryogenic fluid

hollow cone piezoelectric injector. Fuel 2019;257:116080.

under vacuum conditions. J Propul Power 2016;32:1253–63.

[121] Gao Y, Wu S, Dong X, Li X, Xu M. Evaporation and atomization characteristics of

dual-fuel system under flash boiling conditions. Appl Therm Eng 2019;161:
114161.

[153] Huang Z, Xiao J, Qiao X, Jiang G, Shao Y, Shiga S, et al. Spray characteristics and
controlling mechanism of fuel containing CO 2. Front Energy 2012;6:80–8.

[154] Park BS, Lee SY. An experimental investigation of the flash atomization

[122] Wang L, Wang F, Fang T. Flash boiling hollow cone spray from a GDI injector

under different conditions. Int J Multiphas Flow 2019;118:50–63.
[123] Lacey J, Poursadegh F, Brear MJ, Gordon R, Petersen P, Lakey C, et al.

Generalizing the behavior of flash-boiling, plume interaction and spray collapse
for multi-hole, direct injection. Fuel 2017;200:345–56.

[124] Du J, Mohan B, Sim J, Fang T, Roberts WL. Study of spray collapse phenomenon
at flash boiling conditions using simultaneous front and side view imaging. Int J
Heat Mass Tran 2020;147:118824.

[125] Aleiferis PG, Malcolm JS, Todd AR, Cairns A, Hoffmann H. An optical study of

spray development and combustion of ethanol, iso-octane and gasoline blends in
a DISI engine. SAE Technical Paper; 2008. 2008-01-0073.

[126] Matsumura E, Senda J, Imori K, Sakai Y. Experimental investigation of

superheated fuel spray characteristics for D.I.S.I engines. SAE International; 2017.
[127] Cavicchi A, Postrioti L, Sorbini G, Brizi G. Local momentum flux measurement: an
effective way for GDI spray targeting in flash boiling conditions. Fuel 2022;317:
123454.

[128] Du J, Zang G, Mohan B, Idoughi R, Sim J, Fang T, et al. Study of spray structure

mechanism 1994;4:159–79.

[155] Zhang X, Xiao D, Qiu S, Li T, Su J, Hung D, et al. Influence of different injector
structures on tip wetting by visualization method. In: 15th international
conference on liquid atomization and spray systems; 2021. Edinburgh, UK.
[156] Wang S, Xiao D, Qiu S, Zhang X, Li X, Hung DL, et al. The effects of nozzle taper

angle on in-nozzle flow and nozzle tip-wetting under flash boiling conditions.
Fuel 2022;329:125348.

[157] Chang M, Park J, Kim HI, Park S. Comparison of spray evaporation characteristics

of five-hole GDI injectors with different hole arrangements under flash boiling
conditions. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2021;181:121841.

[158] Yao B, Lv J, Xiao D, Li X, Jin S. Tip wetting film analysis using laser-induced
fluorescence for multi-hole gasoline direct injectors under flash boiling
conditions. Energy Fuel 2022;36:298.

[159] Jiang C, Parker MC, Butcher D, Spencer A, Garner CP, Helie J. Comparison of
flash boiling resistance of two injector designs and the consequences on
downsized gasoline engine emissions. Appl Energy 2019;254:113735.
[160] Aori G, Hung DLS, Zhang M, Zhang G, Li T. Effect of nozzle configuration on

from non-flash to flash boiling conditions with space-time tomography. Proc
Combust Inst 2021;38:3223–31.

macroscopic spray characteristics of multi-hole fuel injectors under superheated
conditions. Atomization Sprays 2016;26:439–62.

[129] Du J, Mohan B, Sim J, Fang T, Roberts WL. Study of spray structure under flash

[161] Liu F, Gao Y, Zhang Z, He X, Wu H, Zhang C, et al. Study of the spray

boiling conditions using 2phase-SLIPI. Exp Fluid 2021;62:1–17.

[130] Kr ̈amer M, Kull E, Wensing M. Flashboiling-induced targeting changes in gasoline

direct injection sprays. Int J Engine Res 2016;17:97–107.

[131] Wu S, Xu M, Hung DLS, Li T, Pan H. Near-nozzle spray and spray collapse

characteristics of spark-ignition direct-injection fuel injectors under sub-cooled
and superheated conditions. Fuel 2016;183:322–34.

[132] Wu S, Yang S, Wooldridge M, Xu M. Experimental study of the spray collapse

process of multi-hole gasoline fuel injection at flash boiling conditions. Fuel 2019;
242:109–23.

[133] Sphicas P, Pickett LM, Skeen SA, Frank JH. Inter-plume aerodynamics for gasoline

spray collapse. Int J Engine Res 2018;19:1048–67.

[134] Kim D, Park S. Effects of nozzle hole configuration of a multi-hole type gasoline
direct injector on spray development under flash boiling conditions. Int J Engine
Res 2020:1468087420960026.

characteristics of a diesel surrogate for diesel engines under sub/supercritical
states injected into atmospheric environment. Fuel 2018;230:308–18.

[162] Gao W, Lin Y, Hui X, Zhang C, Xu Q. Injection characteristics of near critical and

supercritical kerosene into quiescent atmospheric environment. Fuel 2019;235:
775–81.

[163] Gerber V, Baab S, F ̈orster FJ, Mandler H, Weigand B, Lamanna G. Fluid injection

with supercritical reservoir conditions: overview on morphology and mixing.
J Supercrit Fluids 2021;169:105097.

[164] Yuan L, Qin J, Pei Y, Ren Y, Wang Z, Liu W. Characteristics of sub/supercritical

gasoline and iso-octane jets in high temperature environment. SAE Technical
Paper; 2019. 2019-01-0289.

[165] De Boer C, Bonar G, Sasaki S, Shetty S, De Boer C, Bonar G, et al. Application of

supercritical gasoline injection to a direct injection spark ignition engine for
particulate reduction. SAE Technical Paper; 2013. 2013-01-0257.

[135] Wu H, Zhang F, Zhang Z, Gao H. Experimental investigation on the spray

[166] Liu Y, Pei Y, Peng Z, Qin J, Zhang Y, Ren Y, et al. Spray development and droplet

characteristics of a self-pressurized hollow cone injector. Fuel 2020;272:117710.

[136] Li Y, Guo H, Fei S, Ma X, Zhang Z, Chen L, et al. An exploration on collapse
mechanism of multi-jet flash-boiling sprays. Appl Therm Eng 2018;134:20–8.
[137] Williams PA, O’Donoghue S, Anderson RW, Richardson SH. An experimental

study of the spray characteristics of pressure-swirl atomizers for DISI combustion
systems. SAE Technical Paper; 2001. 2001-01-1974.

characteristics of high temperature single-hole gasoline spray. Fuel 2017;191:
97–105.

[167] Zhang Z, Li Y, Ma X, Ding H, Xu H, Wang Z, et al. Characteristics of trans-critical

propane spray discharged from multi-hole GDI injector. Exp Therm Fluid Sci
2018;99:446–57.

[168] Anitescu G, Bruno TJ, Tavlarides LL. Dieseline for supercritical injection and

[138] Liu W, Lu Y, Kang Y, Yan J, Lee C-F. Macroscopic characteristics of flash-boiling

spray focused on plume interaction. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2021;170:120999.
[139] Wu J, Du J, Chen H, Li Y, Zhan W, Wu G, et al. Experimental study on flash-

combustion in compression-ignition engines: volatility, phase transitions, spray/
jet structure, and thermal stability. Energy Fuels 2012;26:6247–58.

[169] Xu Q, Sun Z, Wang S, Fan Y, Li X, Xu M. A morphological study of supercritical

boiling spray structure of multi-hole gasoline direct injection injector in a
constant volume chamber. Int J Spray Combust Dyn 2020;12:
1756827720932431.

[140] Xu Q, Pan H, Gao Y, Li X, Xu M. Investigation of two-hole flash-boiling plume-to-
plume interaction and its impact on spray collapse. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2019;
138:608–19.

[141] Xu Q, Yang S, Xiao D, Li X, Xu M. Tailoring the flash-boiling spray structure

through the control of plume-to-plume interaction. Atomization Sprays 2021;31:
45–65.

fuel flash-boiling spray. Fuel 2022;310:122365.

[170] Cheng Q, Ojanen K, Diao Y, Kaario O, Larmi M. Dynamics of the ammonia spray

using high-speed schlieren imaging. SAE Int J Adv Curr Pract Mobility 2022;4:
1138–53.

[171] Li S, Li T, Wang N, Zhou X, Chen R, Yi P. An investigation on near-field and far-

field characteristics of superheated ammonia spray. Fuel 2022;324:124683.
[172] Pel ́e R, Mounaïm-Rousselle C, Br ́equigny P, Hespel C, Bellettre J. First study on
ammonia spray characteristics with a current GDI engine injector. Fuel 2021;2:
253–71.

[142] Poursadegh F, Lacey JS, Brear MJ, Gordon RL, Petersen P, Lakey C, et al. On the

[173] Somarathne KDKA, Yamashita H, Colson S, Okafor EC, Hayakawa A, Kudo T, et al.

phase and structural variability of directly injected propane at spark ignition
engine conditions. Fuel 2018;222:294–306.

[143] Guo H, Li Y, Wang B, Zhang H, Xu H. Numerical investigation on flashing jet

behaviors of single-hole GDI injector. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2019;130:50–9.
[144] Guo H, Nocivelli L, Torelli R. Numerical study on spray collapse process of ECN
spray G injector under flash boiling conditions. Fuel 2021;290:119961.

Liquid ammonia spray combustion and emission characteristics with gaseous
hydrogen/air co-firing. 13th Asia-Pacific Conference on Combustion 2021. Abu
Dhabi – UAE: ADNEC; 2021.

[174] Zhang Z, Li T, Chen R, Wang N, Wei Y, Wu D. Injection characteristics and fuel-air

mixing process of ammonia jets in a constant volume vessel. Fuel 2021;304:
121408.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111950

X. Li et al.

[175] Wang N, Huang S, Zhang Z, Li T, Yi P, Wu D, et al. Laminar burning

[204] Brunocilla MF, Lepsch F. Influence of hot fuel injection on air/fuel mixture

characteristics of ammonia/hydrogen/air mixtures with laser ignition. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:31879–93.

[176] Wang Z, Li Y, Guo H, Wang C, Xu H. Microscopic and macroscopic

characterization of spray impingement under flash boiling conditions with the
application of split injection strategy. Fuel 2018;212:315–25.

[177] Kapusta ŁJ. Understanding the collapse of flash-boiling sprays formed by multi-

hole injectors operating at low injection pressures. Energy 2022;247:123388.

[178] Schulz F, Beyrau F. The influence of flash-boiling on spray-targeting and fuel film

formation. Fuel 2017;208:587–94.

[179] He X, Li Y, Liu C, Sj ̈oberg M, Vuilleumier D, Liu F, et al. Characteristics of spray
and wall wetting under flash-boiling and non-flashing conditions at varying
ambient pressures. Fuel 2020;264:116683.

[180] He X, Li Y, Sj ̈oberg M, Vuilleumier D, Ding C-P, Liu F, et al. Impact of coolant
temperature on piston wall-wetting and smoke generation in a stratified-charge
DISI engine operated on E30 fuel. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:4955–63.
[181] Li X, Pan H, Dong X, Hung D, Xu M. Spray impingement wall film breakup by

wave entrainment. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:3287–94.

[182] Li X, Gao Y, Yao B, Cui M, Qiu S, Wang S, et al. Fuel modification flash boiling
atomization and combustion in reciprocating engines. J Energy Inst 2023:101268.
[183] Medina M, Alzahrani F, Fatouraie M, Wooldridge M, Sick V. Mechanisms of fuel
injector tip wetting and tip drying based on experimental measurements of
engine-out particulate emissions from gasoline direct-injection engines. Int J
Engine Res.22:2035-2053.

preparation and effects on Flex Fuel Engines. SAE Technical Paper; 2006. 2006-
01-619.

[205] Wooldridge MS, Singh R, Gutierrez LG, Clancy S. Survey of strategies to reduce
cold-start particulate, CO, NOx, and hydrocarbon emissions from direct-injection
spark-ignition engines. Int J Engine Res 2023;24:456–80.

[206] Nour M, Sun Z, Cui M, Hung D, Li X, Xu M. Effect of flash boiling injection on

combustion and PN emissions of DISI optical engine fueled with butanol isomers/
TPRF blends. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:5923–31.

[207] Li X, Sun Z, Yang S, Wang H, Nour M. Flash boiling combustion of isomeric

butanol and gasoline surrogate blends using constant volume spray chamber and
GDI optical engine. Fuel 2021;286:119328.

[208] Kale R, Banerjee R. Optical investigation of flash boiling and its effect on in-

cylinder combustion for butanol isomers and iso-octane. Int J Engine Res 2021;
22:1565–78.

[209] Fan Y, Sun Z, Gu Q, Xu Q, Li X, Xu M. Combustion improved by using flash boiling

sprays in an ethanol-gasoline optical engine under cold operating conditions.
Energy Fuels 2021;35:10134–45.

[210] Sun Z, Cui M, Nour M, Li X, Hung D, Xu M. Study of flash boiling combustion with
different fuel injection timings in an optical engine using digital image processing
diagnostics. Fuel 2021;284:119078.

[211] Sun Z, Cui M, Nour M, Li X, Hung D, Xu M. Differences in pool-fire induced soot
production between subcooled spray and flash boiling spray in a DISI engine. Fuel
2021;287:119453.

[184] Moulai M, Grover R, Parrish S, Schmidt D. Internal and near-nozzle flow in a

[212] Sun Z, Ma Z, Li X, Xu M. Study of flash boiling spray combustion in a spark

multi-hole gasoline injector under flashing and non-flashing conditions. SAE
Technical Paper; 2015. 2015-01-0944.

[185] Leick P, Bork B, Geiler JN. Experimental characterization of tip wetting in

gasoline DI injectors. ICLASS 2018. In: 14th triennial international conference on
liquid atomization and spray systems; 2018. Chicago, IL, US.

[186] Park C, Jung J, Bae C, Oh H, Lee J. Injector tip wetting visualization under flash-

boiling and non-flash boiling conditions. Proceedings of the Korean Society of
Liquid Fine Chemicals2017. p. 106-.

[187] Xiao D, Qiu S, Zhang X, Zhang Y, Li X, Hung D, et al. Dynamic behavior and

mechanism analysis of tip wetting process under flash boiling conditions. Fuel
2022;307:121773.

ignition direct injection optical engine using digital image processing diagnostics.
SAE International; 2019.

[213] Sun Z, Yang S, Nour M, Li X, Hung D, Xu M. Significant impact of flash boiling
spray on in-cylinder soot formation and oxidation process. Energy Fuels 2020;34:
10030–8.

[214] She J. Experimental study on improvement of diesel combustion and emissions
using flash boiling injection. SAE Technical Paper; 2010. 2010-01-0341.

[215] Senda J, Wada Y, Kawano D, Fujimoto H. Improvement of combustion and

emissions in diesel engines by means of enhanced mixture formation based on
flash boiling of mixed fuel. Int J Engine Res 2008;9:15–27.

[216] Senda J, Matsumura E. Artificial control of spray dynamics applying fuel design

[188] Huang W, Moon S, Wang J, Murayama K, Arima T, Sasaki Y, et al. Nozzle tip

approach related to flash boiling, vol. 27; 2017. p. 591–610.

wetting in gasoline direct injection injector and its link with nozzle internal flow.
Int J Engine Res 2020;21:340–51.

[189] Gavaises M, Papoulias D, Andriotis A, Giannadakis E, Theodorakakos A. Link

between cavitation development and erosion damage in diesel injector nozzles.
SAE Technical Papers 2007. 2007-01-0246.

[190] Zhang Z, Zhang W, Ma X, Awad OI, Xu H, Shuai S. Effects of GDI injector deposits
on spray and combustion characteristics under different injection conditions. Fuel
2020;278:118094.

[191] Jamroz PR. Injector deposit formation in gasoline direct injection engines.

Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 2002.

[192] Badawy T, Attar MA, Xu H, Ghafourian A. Assessment of gasoline direct injector
fouling effects on fuel injection, engine performance and emissions. Appl Energy
2018;220:351–74.

[193] Shah PR, Patel S, Bhanushali S, Ganesh A. A comparative study of use of fuel

additives in straight vegetable oil and pre-heated straight vegetable oil on
combustion and emission characteristics of CI engine. In: Symposium on
international automotive Technology. SIAT 2013; 2013.

[194] Dong X, Yang J, Hung DL, Li X, Xu M. Effects of flash boiling injection on in-

cylinder spray, mixing and combustion of a spark-ignition direct-injection engine.
Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:4921–8.

[195] Yang J, Dong X, Wu Q, Xu M. Influence of flash boiling spray on the combustion
characteristics of a spark-ignition direct-injection optical engine under cold start.
Combust Flame 2018;188:66–76.

[196] Yang J, Xu M, Hung DLS, Wu Q, Dong X. Influence of swirl ratio on fuel

distribution and cyclic variation under flash boiling conditions in a spark ignition
direct injection gasoline engine. Energy Convers Manag 2017;138:565–76.
[197] Sun Z, Cui M, Ye C, Yang S, Li X, Hung D, et al. Split injection flash boiling spray

for high efficiency and low emissions in a GDI engine under lean combustion
condition. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38(4):5769–79.

[198] Sun Z, Xu Q, Cui M, Nour M, Li X, Hung DLS, et al. Impact of flash boiling multiple

injections timing on the combustion and thermal efficiency of a gasoline direct
injection engine under lean-burn. Fuel 2021;304:121450.

[199] Sun Z, Wang H, Cui M, Nour M, Li X, Xu M. Investigation of flash boiling injection
schemes in lean-burn gasoline direct injection engines. Appl Energy Combust Sci
2021;7:100035.

[200] Ye C, Sun Z, Cui M, Li X, Hung D, Xu M. Ultra-lean limit extension for gasoline
direct injection engine application via flash boiling atomization. Proc Combust
Inst 2021.

[201] Kabasin D, Hoyer K, Kazour J, Lamers R, Hurter T. Heated injectors for ethanol

cold starts. SAE Int. J. Fuel. Lubricants 2009;2:172–9.

[202] Kabasin DF, Joseph Y, Fedor W, Geiger S, Hurter T. Emission reduction with

heated injectors. SAE Int. J. Engines 2010;3:982–95.

[203] Fedor W, Kazour J, Haller J, Dauer K, Kabasin D. GDI cold start emission

reduction with heated Fuel. SAE Technical Paper; 2016. 2016-01-0825.

[217] Yu J, Zhang Y, Jiang G, Kui Q. An experimental study on steady flash boiling
spray characteristics of DME/diesel blended fuel. SAE Technical Paper; 2010.
2010-01-0879.

[218] Seko T, Kuroda E. Combustion improvement of a premixed charge compression
ignition methanol Engine using flash boiling fuel injection. SAE Technical Paper;
2001. 2001-01-3611.

[219] Wada Y, Nishimura Y, Yamaguchi A, Magara N, Senda J, Fujimoto H. Controlling
PCCI combustion with mixed fuel - application of flashing spray to early injection.
Sae Technical Papers 2007;1.

[220] Kawano D, Senda J, Kawakami K, Shimada A, Fujimoto H. Fuel design concept for
low emission in engine systems 2nd report: analysis of combustion characteristics
for the mixed fuels. SAE Technical Papers 2001. 2001-01-0202.

[221] Kobashi Y, Hirako S, Matsumoto A, Naganuma K. Flash boiling spray of diesel fuel
mixed with ethane and its effects on premixed diesel combustion. Fuel 2019;237:
686–93.

[222] Hewavitarane D, Yoshiyama S, Li X, Wadahama H. The development of a

superheated liquid flash, boiling (S.L.F.B) engine for waste heat recovery from
reciprocating internal combustion engines. SAE Int. J. Engines 2014;7:1705–21.
[223] Wang L, Nonavinakere Vinod K, Fang T. Spark effects on compression ignition of

PRF95 direct injection spray in a constant volume combustion chamber. Exp
Therm Fluid Sci 2021;129:110456.

[224] Wang L, Nonavinakere Vinod K, Fang T. Compression ignition and spark assisted

ignition of direct injected PRF65 spray. Fuel 2021;291:120123.

[225] Wang L, Wu Z, Ahmed A, Badra JA, Sarathy SM, Roberts WL, et al. Auto-ignition
of direct injection spray of light naphtha, primary reference fuels, gasoline and
gasoline surrogate. Energy 2019;170:375–90.

[226] Wu Z, Wang L, Badra JA, Roberts WL, Fang T. GDI fuel sprays of light naphtha,
PRF95 and gasoline using a piezoelectric injector under different ambient
pressures. Fuel 2018;223:294–311.

[227] Badra J, Viollet Y, Elwardany A, Im HG, Chang J. Physical and chemical effects of
low octane gasoline fuels on compression ignition combustion. Appl Energy 2016;
183:1197–208.

[228] Zhang J, Yao S, Patel H, Fang T. An experimental study on gasoline direct-

injection spray and atomization characteristics of alcohol fuels and isooctane, vol.
21; 2011. p. 363–74.

Dr. Min Xu received his BS degree from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 1983, afterward,
as one  of the first  government-funded  exchange  students,  Dr.  Xu joined  the laboratory
founded by Prof. Hiroyuki Hiroyasu at Hiroshima University. After obtaining his Ph.D.
degree,  Dr.  Xu  became  a  postdoctoral  fellow  at  Carnegie  Mellon  University  under  the
supervision of Prof. Norman Chiger in 1991.

After a few years of participation in the automotive industry, Dr. Xu joined Shanghai
Jiao  Tong  University  as  a  Distinguished  Professor  and  Director  of  the  Institute  of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111951

X. Li et al.

Automotive Engineering at the School of Mechanical Engineering in 2006 till now. In his
academic career, Dr. Xu explored various laser diagnostics methods and their applications
for spray and combustion diagnostics. In the spray atomization field, Dr. Xu dedicates his
efforts to the research of flash boiling sprays for more than 15 years. More specifically, the
research interests cover flash boiling internal flow characteristics, breakup mechanisms,
evaporation  behaviors,  gas-liquid-solid  interactions,  and  flash  boiling  combustion  for
practical combustors. Dr. Xu has authored more than 200 journal publications and con-
ference  proceedings  in both  international  and  domestic  journals and  conferences,  with
many of them highly referred to and cited by researchers in the combustion community.

Dr. Xu is currently a Combustion Institute Fellow (2022) and SAE Fellow (2009). He is
also currently President of the Institute for Liquid Atomization and Spray System (ILASS
international) from 2022 to 2024 with his contribution in the field of spray atomization,
especially in the aspect of fuel spray for practical combustors. He was an Editorial Board
Member for Progress in Energy and Combustion Science from 2007 to 2015 and serves as
an Associate Editor from 33rd - 39th Symposia. He has served as a CI Industry Relations
Committee Member from 2013 till now. He serves as an Associate Editor for Atomization
and Sprays from 2007 till now.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10111952
