Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Low-speed pre-ignition and super-knock in boosted spark-ignition engines: A
review
Kristian Rönn a,∗, Andre Swarts b, Vickey Kalaskar b, Terry Alger b, Rupali Tripathi c,
Juha Keskiväli c, Ossi Kaario a, Annukka Santasalo-Aarnio a, Rolf Reitz d, Martti Larmi a
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, School of Engineering, Aalto University, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
b Automotive Propulsion Systems, Powertrain Engineering Division, Southwest Research Institute, TX, USA
c Technology Centre, Neste Corporation, 06101 Porvoo, Finland
d Engine Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Engineering Drive, Madison, WI 53705, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
SI engine
Autoignition
Super-knock
Low-speed pre-ignition
Combustion

The introduction of downsized, turbocharged Gasoline Direct Injection (GDI) engines in the automotive
market has led to a rapid increase in research on Low-speed Pre-ignition (LSPI) and super-knock as abnormal
combustion phenomena within the last decade. The former is characterized as an early ignition of the fuel–air
mixture, primarily initiated by an oil–fuel droplet or detached deposit. Meanwhile, super-knock is an occasional
development from pre-ignition to high intensity knocking through detonation, which is either initiated by a
shock wave interacting with a propagating reaction and cylinder surfaces or inside a hotspot with a suitable
heat release and reactivity gradient. The phenomenon can be divided into four stages, including LSPI precursor
initiation, establishment and propagation of a pre-ignited flame, autoignition of end-gases and development
to a detonation. LSPI and super-knock are rare phenomena, difficult to observe optically in engines, and
differences in methodologies and setups between steady-state experiments can lead to discrepancies in results.
Experimental research has included more detailed approaches using glow plug-equipped engines, constant
volume combustion chambers and rapid compression machines. In addition, the improved availability of
mechanisms for fuel and lubricant surrogates has allowed researchers to model the oil–fuel interaction at
the cylinder walls, evaporation and autoignition of oil–fuel droplets and regimes for different propagation
modes of an autoignition reaction wave. This paper presents a comprehensive review of the underlying
phenomena behind LSPI and its development to super-knock. Furthermore, it presents the methodology in
experimental research and draws conclusions for mitigating strategies based on studies involving fuel, oil and
engine parameters. Finally, it discusses the prerequisites for LSPI from oil–fuel droplets and the future needs
of research as original equipment manufacturers (OEM) and lubricant industry have already adopted some
proven solutions to their products.

1. Introduction

As shown in a report by the International Energy Agency [1], the de-
velopment of engine displacements in the light-duty vehicle market of
advanced economies has shown a clear downward trend in 2005–2017.
This development can be largely attributed to the rapid regulatory
restriction related to emissions and fuel consumption. However, the
evolution of power ratings has not followed in the same direction, as it
in fact has shown a moderate increase within the same time frame.

The opposite trends of engine displacement and power output have
been achieved by widely adapting turbocharging in modern light-
duty vehicles, enabling improved volumetric efficiencies. In order to

counteract a reduction in displacement, forced induction of air is ap-
plied, allowing a higher Indicated Mean Effective Pressure (IMEP). An
extensive study by Petitjean et al. [2] shows that turbocharging allows
for a 30% reduction in displacement, 8–10% increase in fuel economy
and additional improvements in torque as compared to naturally as-
pirated gasoline engines with equivalent power outputs. Furthermore,
an aggressively downsized 1.2 l engine improved the fuel economy by
almost 15% when compared to a 2.0 l turbocharged engine [3].

Conventional knock limits the potential of achieving higher effi-
ciencies in Spark-ignition (SI) engines, as the thermal conditions in
the cylinder introduce autoignition of unburned end-gases before the

∗ Correspondence to: Aalto University, School of Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Research Group of Energy Conversion, P.O. Box

14300, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland.

E-mail address: kristian.ronn@aalto.fi (K. Rönn).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101064
Received 8 August 2022; Received in revised form 18 November 2022; Accepted 25 November 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)101064Availableonline20December20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

K. Rönn et al.

ABBREVIATIONS

AKI
ATDC
BSFC
BTDC
CAD
CFD
CFR
CoV
DCN
ECU
EGR
GDI
IDT
IMEP
IQT
KI
KLSA
LES
LSPI
LTHR
MoDTC
MON
NTC
OS
PCV
PFI
PMI
PRF
RANS
RCEM
RCM
RON
SOC
SOI
SOK
TDC
ZnDTP

SYMBOLS

λ
φ
pEOC
pin
TEOC
Tin
a
DCJ
rc
rf
SL

Anti-knock Index
After Top Dead Center
Brake-specific Fuel Consumption
Before Top Dead Center
Crank Angle Degrees
Computational Fluid Dynamics
Cooperative Fuel Research
Coefficient of Variation
Derived Cetane Number
Engine Control Unit
Exhaust Gas Recirculation
Gasoline Direct Injection
Ignition Delay Time
Indicated Mean Effective Pressure
Ignition Quality Tester
Knock Intensity
Knock Limited Spark Advance
Large Eddy Simulation
Low-speed Pre-ignition
Low-temperature Heat Release
Molybdenum Dithio Carbamate
Motor Octane Number
Negative Temperature Coefficient
Octane Sensitivity
Positive Crankcase Ventilation
Port Fuel Injection
Particulate Matter Index
Primary Reference Fuel
Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes
Rapid Compression and Expansion Machine
Rapid Compression Machine
Research Octane Number
Start of Combustion
Start of Injection
Start of Knock
Top Dead Center
Zinc Dialkyl Dithio Phosphate

Ratio of air mass and stoichiometric air mass
Equivalence Ratio
End of compression pressure
Intake pressure
End of compression temperature
Intake temperature
Speed of Sound
Chapman–Jouguet detonation velocity
Critical radius for autoignition
Critical radius for stable flame
Laminar flame speed

spark-ignited flame consumes them. This form of abnormal combus-
tion has been widely investigated during the last century. However,
another destructive phenomenon has emerged with the popularization
of downsized, boosted engines. As downsizing increases the pressure
trajectory in the cylinder, the susceptibility for pre-ignition increases.
The resulting temperature and pressure rise from this early flame

development causes further increase of in-cylinder pressure and tem-
perature during the compression stroke, increasing the probability of
detonation-induced super-knock (also referred to as mega-knock or
deto-knock). Super-knock emerges as an abrupt and intensive rise in
cylinder pressure, induced by a strong, supersonic detonation wave
after autoignition [4,5]. This chain of events is not independently
initiated in modern automotive engines but requires a pre-ignited
flame to develop before the spark timing, simultaneously compress-
ing unburned gases to autoignition. Therefore, Low-speed Pre-ignition
(LSPI) is a prerequisite for super-knock. LSPI is also referred to as pre-
ignition, stochastic pre-ignition and abnormal combustion in literature.
The low-speed pre-ignition regime in a turbocharged engine is mainly
concentrated at the 15-24 bar Brake Mean Effective Pressure (BMEP)
and 1500–2000 rpm region. This region is attainable in commercial GDI
engines [3,6].

The impacts of different engine parameters and fuel and lubri-
cant formulations on LSPI and super-knock have been studied [7–9],
but yet many questions about causing mechanisms and the affecting
parameters remain unanswered. At least two review papers related
to pre-ignition have already been published [10,11]. However, much
research has been published since then and more detailed approaches
on oil reactivity and detonation development have been included.
Furthermore, with the introduction of standardized LSPI testing in
recent years, new parameters, such as engine and oil aging have gained
attraction. Thus, the objective of this review is to identify underlying
mechanisms and various parameters that impact the magnitude of these
events in SI engines.

This article provides a comprehensive review of research in LSPI and
super-knock based on steady-state experiments, numerical simulations
and optical diagnostics, highlighting recent progress in the develop-
ment of turbocharged SI engines. First, the development of LSPI and
its later development to super-knock are presented. Then, the effects of
fuel and oil properties and engine parameters on LSPI and super-knock
are reviewed. Finally, the role of oil-fuel droplets in causing LSPI, the
prevalence of pre-ignition beyond gasoline engines and potential future
research topics are discussed.

2. Development to LSPI and super-knock

The in-cylinder pressure curves for two cycles during the late com-
pression strokes and power strokes are visible in Fig. 1. One can notice
that the red pressure curve begins to deviate from the curve of a
normal cycle at 10 Crank Angle Degrees (CAD) Before Top Dead Center
(BTDC) and finally evolves to an extreme form of knocking, reaching
a maximum pressure of almost 200 bar. This is an example of LSPI
followed by super-knock.

The development to LSPI and super-knock can be divided into 4

steps as presented in Yu et al. [12] and Fig. 2.

1. Initiation mechanism: The source for pre-ignition, such as an

oil-fuel droplet or a deposit, is created.

2. Pre-ignition: The heat release from the initiation mechanism is
sufficient in order to ignite the surrounding fuel–air mixture and
form a propagating flame.

3. Autoignition: The pre-ignited flame compresses end-gases, in
which one or multiple hotspots of spatial thermal gradients
autoignite.

4. Super-knock: Depending on the

coupling between the
autoignition-derived pressure wave and reaction front, the mix-
ture may exhibit detonation, characterized by a strong rise and
oscillation in pressure.

As shown in the aforementioned steps, super-knock, as opposed to
conventional knock, is not an indicator of excessively advanced spark-
timing. Conventional knock is characterized as low-intensity oscillation
of the pressure and is simply eliminated by the Engine Control Unit

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)1010642

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 1. Pressure curves of a normal cycle and a pre-ignition event with super-knock.

(ECU) through spark retardation. Strategies for reducing conventional
knock are well known and standardized tests for deriving fuel knock
resistance have been used for almost a century now. Methods for
suppressing conventional knock are provided in [10,13].

In addition, it is important to note that LSPI and super-knock
are separate phenomena. LSPI appears as a premature ignition and
development of a flame, while super-knock is attributed to end-gas
autoignition outside of this flame, leading to developing detonation and
subsequent pressure oscillation of high intensity. LSPI is a prerequisite
for super-knock to occur, but not all LSPI cycles develop into super-
knock. Depending on various stochastic factors, such as pre-ignition
timing and location, inhomogeneities and thermal gradients in the end-
gases, the pre-ignited flame may or may not autoignite and detonate.
Therefore, the outcome of LSPI may vary between no knock, slight
knock and super-knock. This paper approaches pre-ignition and super-
knock in different sections. The pathways to LSPI and super-knock are
shown in Fig. 3.

2.1. Initiation of LSPI precursors

2.1.1. Mixture of oil and fuel droplets

The mechanism of oil–fuel droplet entrainment as the LSPI pre-
cursor is supported by repeated results presented in Section 4, which
show that changes in fuel injection strategies, fuel volatility and oil
composition significantly affect the presence of LSPI. In addition, high-
speed in-cylinder imaging by Lauer et al. [14] shows that some LSPI
cycles ignite spontaneously without prior light emission, as would be
the case if a burning particle initiated LSPI. A weak fluorescent signal
was detected from a droplet (a fluorescence agent was mixed in the oil)
in [15].

In the case of droplet-initiated pre-ignition, as shown in Fig. 4, the
fuel spray impinges on the cylinder liner before complete vaporization,
dilutes the oil and changes the chemical and physical properties, in-
cluding composition, viscosity and surface tension. The impinged fuel
creates a layer on the oil film, after which fuel vaporization, heat
transfer and mass diffusion dictate the composition of the mixture that
forms before the top ring scrapes it off. Following this, the fuel–oil-
mixture is collected at the piston crevice, from which it is released
into the combustion chamber. Motored cycles at low speeds reveal
that fuel and oil are accumulated at the top land, with release from
the crevice and piston crown [16,17]. Computational Fluid Dynamics
(CFD) derived trajectories from the crown at regions close to the fuel
impingement region agreed reasonably well with pre-ignition locations

in optical studies [18]. The experiments by Tormos et al. [19], in which
the release of oil was quantified by installing an absorbing paper above
a motored engine at 500–3000 rpm with the cylinder head missing,
revealed that the quantity of oil released per cycle would increase with
faster engine speed up to 2500 rpm.

A 3D piston ring dynamic model was applied by Zahdeh et al. [7]
to simulate interaction between the compression rings, piston and bore
and gas flow rates between cavities at the piston rings. The results
showed that the pressure at the ring crevice is higher than the com-
bustion chamber pressure from 85 CAD After Top Dead Center (ATDC)
to 117 CAD BTDC. This means that reverse blow-by occurs from the
middle of the power stroke until the early compression stroke. The
model did not include oil behavior, but the pressure difference indicates
that reverse blow-by could be a pathway for droplet detachment. The
same simulation also resulted in extreme ring acceleration exceeding
1000 g as a result of impacts with the ring grooves and the cylinder
wall, which should also enhance the detachment of droplets.

Recent research has also considered splashing as an outcome of
the interactions between the fuel spray and the oil film. This was
indicated through Laser Induced Fluorescence (LIF) experiments with
optical separation of oil and fuel traces. The images showed secondary
droplets, which contained both fluids, detaching from the relatively
thick (80 μm) oil film. These droplets could be larger than the oil film
thickness [21].

As a result of the fuel impingement, two layers of liquid initially
exist between the cylinder liner and the gaseous mixture. A thin oil
layer with a thickness smaller than the top ring-liner clearance is
maintained by the oil control ring at the liner, whereas a cool fuel layer
is generated between the oil layer and the gas phase. Heat diffuses from
the liner through the film towards the fuel–gas interface. Additionally,
convective heat transfer occurs at the fuel film–gas interface. The
temperature of the fuel film rises and evaporation of fuel components
occurs [22]. The energy balance at the interface becomes:

k

dT
dx

= ̇m × HoV + h(Tint − T∞)

(1)

where k is the heat conductivity (W/(mK)),
̇m is the evaporation mass
rate (kg/(m2s)), HoV is the heat of vaporization (J/kg) and h is
the convective heat transfer coefficient at the fuel film–gas interface
(W/(m2K)). Zhang et al. [22] showed that the evaporation of lighter
fuel components is already rapid for a 20 μm film during the late intake
stroke, and reduces fast as the volatile species have evaporated and the
gas pressure begins to increase during the compression stroke.

Meanwhile, mass transfer of both oil and fuel species dilute both
the fuel and oil layer. Oil species, with carbon chain lengths ranging
from C15 to C40, tend to diffuse slower than smaller fuel species.
However, the increase of oil species concentrations at the gas interface
is enhanced by the evaporation of fuel. A methodology to improve the
predictions of diffusion coefficients of fuel species in high carbon chain
length oils through machine learning and neural networks combined
with empirical correlations was proposed by Mariani et al. [23].

The accumulated mixture in the top ring zone is composed of
both fuel and oil-related species, the latter of which are heavier in
molecular weight. Lee et al. [24] sampled this mixture from a naturally
aspirated gasoline engine with indirect injection, and analysis with field
ionization-mass spectroscopy and gas chromatography revealed that at
75% load and 1500 rpm almost 40% of the mixture mass comprised
volatile species, mainly consisting of C6 − C15 aromatics. Alger and
Briggs [25] compared LSPI performances and analyzed crevice samples
of Primary Reference Fuel (PRF) and toluene standard fuel surrogates,
finding that the latter enhanced both LSPI and the formation of heavier
aromatics and mid-range paraffins (which were not present in either
fuel). The pathways for the formation of these species in the crevice
have not been specified. Sampling from an air-cooled engine with a
carburetor at no-load operation also showed that higher boiling point
aromatics were retained from the fuel with oil species in the top ring
zone [26]. Similarly, sampling from the piston skirt for 25 min at

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)1010643

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 2. Stages of super-knock development.

Fig. 3. Possible pathways for LSPI formation.

Fig. 4. Illustration of the pathway to LSPI through oil–fuel interaction. Based on [20].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)1010644

K. Rönn et al.

low-speed and low-load starting and warm-up conditions showed that
higher boiling point fuel species were favored [27].

The importance of piston crown and crevice geometry was shown
in Amann et al. [28], as an increased height of the top land crevice
promoted LSPI. In addition, a chamfer with a wide angle at the piston
crown would reduce LSPI by allowing the flame to penetrate the crevice
and consume the collected hydrocarbons before they would be released
into the combustion chamber. Reducing the crevice volume may be
insufficient as the LSPI frequency increased for a 0.35 cm3 crevice as
compared to 0.63 cm3 [7].

Following the release of the droplet of oil and fuel into the combus-
tion chamber, it would undergo evaporation, mixing with the charge
and autoignition. The two former steps comprise a physical Ignition
Delay Time (IDT), whereas the time required until a steep rise in the
heat release rate occurs comprises the chemical IDT. The total IDT is
then a combination of both physical and chemical IDTs. As shown by
Kuti et al. [29], already a 1% volume fraction of C16 − C18 lubricant
surrogates blended into iso-octane showed 15% shorter total IDTs in an
Ignition Quality Tester (IQT) at 15 bar and 680–873 K. A 10% volume
fraction of these species showed a much more significant reduction
in total IDTs. The reduction with 10% addition was even stronger for
base oils and a commercial lubricant with an additive package at the
lower temperatures. CFD simulations by Distaso et al. [30] with n-
hexadecane/iso-octane at these conditions showed that the reduction
in total IDTs can be attributed to the larger Low-temperature Heat
Release (LTHR) for lubricant species than in iso-octane. The higher
LTHR enhances vaporization (and lowers physical IDT), especially at
ambient temperatures above 800 K, whereas the chemical IDT would
be effectively reduced at temperatures below 750 K, as the interme-
diate stage in iso-octane ignition diminishes. The GasLube mechanism
was later used to develop a correlation for the relative impact of
n-hexadecane addition on iso-octane chemical IDT [31].

The effect of oil droplets on the ignitibility of an ambient fuel mix-
ture is dependent on the rate of droplet evaporation and the chemical
IDT of the ambient mixture. Therefore, Fei et al. [32–35] conducted
Rapid Compression Machine (RCM) studies with commercial oil and
argon/nitrogen diluted iso-octane–air mixtures. At low temperatures
(680 K, <16 bar & 740 K, <20 bar), the oil droplet would enhance
ignition significantly. However, as the pressure would increase, the
difference in IDTs between the cases with and without an oil droplet
would diminish [34].

The pre-ignition appears to be enhanced when mixing fuel into
the oil droplet. Qi et al. [36] found the earliest pre-ignition for an
injected droplet containing 75% oil and 25% gasoline in a single-
cylinder engine with a compression ratio of 14:1. Furthermore, a few
percent of naphtha increased the ignition tendency of a group III base
stock [37], but reduced it at higher fractions. Tao et al. measured
enhanced autoignition for gasoline–oil droplets when increasing the
gasoline fraction from 0 to 20% at 1 bar and 723–873 K ambient con-
ditions [38]. Qian et al. [39] recorded the evaporation of oil droplets
containing 0%–20% gasoline at 573–773 K ambient temperatures and
atmospheric pressure. The increased ratio of gasoline enhanced the
fluctuations in droplet size during evaporation as bubbles would form
and rupture the droplet.

2.1.2. Glowing particles

LSPI precursors are sometimes characterized in optical studies as
a glowing particle igniting the charge before the spark [14,15,40,41].
The particles have been identified as solid as their sizes do not change
and they can rebound from the piston head or cylinder walls [16,40,
42]. The glowing particles have in particular been initiated from the
pressure oscillation during an LSPI cycle. Some of these particles would
survive the gas exchange, heat up during the next regular cycle and
cause a new LSPI event, as outlined in Fig. 5.

High-speed imaging has verified this process as the normal cycle
after the first LSPI cycle would contain a high level of particles, which

presumably were caused by deposits detaching, and then finally a
visible glowing particle would ignite the charge during the following
compression stroke [14,15,42,43]. This explains the intermittent pat-
tern between LSPI cycles and normal cycles which are often reported in
literature. Deposit detachment and ignition was optically investigated
by Zöbinger et al. [41] (Fig. 6), where a pre-ignition and super-knock
event was initiated by a glowing object, causing a high number of
burning particles in the following cycles. A glowing particle may also
account for initial LSPI events, as was the case in Okada et al. [40]. Also
in this case, a large amount of particles were visible after the super-
knock, causing following pre-ignition events. Döhler and Pritze [43]
detected a diffusively burning lump creating glowing particles during
the power stroke. These particles kept glowing during the exhaust and
intake strokes until causing pre-ignition. They proposed that these were
caused by oil–fuel droplets that were ejected from the crevice and
ignited during the cycle before pre-ignition. This would indicate that
not all glowing particles originate from detached deposits and that oil–
fuel droplets would not require vaporization and vapor autoignition
during the compression stroke to cause pre-ignition. The following cy-
cles after strong pre-ignition exhibited again a high number of particles
[43]. It is possible that the knocking releases more droplets from the
crevice [15,42,44].

It has been reported that deposits are produced as a result of
polymerization at the cylinder surfaces. The fuel/air equivalence ratio
(φ) and coolant temperature can have significant effects on combustion-
chamber deposit formation. Aromatics promote deposit buildup and the
number of side chains increased the deposit formation.[45,46]

Particle-initiated pre-ignition has been studied experimentally by
high-speed imaging and deliberately feeding carbon particles of varying
temperatures and size. Okada et al. [40] used optical tools to investi-
gate the in-cylinder state prior to combustion and observed particles
that likely were the source of pre-ignition. They also injected soot
collected from the exhaust pipe and artificially generated carbon black
(20-−100 nm) and larger combustible particles at room temperature
into the combustion chamber, finding that pre-ignition occurs for the
latter. In another study, Wang et al. [47] injected particles of dif-
ferent temperatures and sizes and observed that particles of higher
temperatures and larger sizes can initiate early pre-ignition, leading to
super-knock.

While studies have shown that large combustible particles, such as
deposits can cause LSPI, Gupta et al. [48] investigated the experimental
results of Wang [47] with a 0D ignition model. The results indicated
that the particles need to heat up sufficiently during the previous cycles
as the required initial temperature for a 150 μm particle to cause
pre-ignition was above 1000 K.
2.1.3. Other mechanisms

During surface ignition, the flame is initiated at the boundary layer
of a hot component and the gas mixture. Some of the first reported cases
of pre-ignition were related to overheated spark plug electrodes [49].
This form of pre-ignition can also occur at high speeds in naturally
aspirated engines if the spark plug heat range is insufficient [50,51].
The pre-ignition cycle heats up the surface hotspot further, which can
trigger continuous runaway ignition (see Fig. 3), as shown for instance
in [52,53]. Surface ignition has been widely investigated at higher
engine speeds (> 4000 rpm) [50,51,53–55].

Surface ignition was detected by Ottenwälder et al. [56] and Hulser
et al. [57] at 1500 rpm as in some cases the pre-ignition coincided with
the spark plug. These studies were conducted at high intake pressures
(pin) and temperatures (70–100 ◦C) with retarded spark timing (10 CAD
ATDC or later). Winklhofer et al. [58] detected continuous pre-ignition
at the exhaust valve with an optical spark plug.

The hot surface is, however, an unlikely cause for pre-ignition in
modern commercial engines. Endoscopic access and optical spark plugs
show repeatedly that the location of pre-ignition varies and the events
occur either as individual or alternating cycles [7,14,59–61].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)1010645

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 5. Illustration of the pathway to LSPI through deposit formation.

Fig. 6. Formation of a glowing object after a normal cycle, causing pre-ignition. The following cycles show a high amount of burning particles.
Source: Reprinted from [41].

Disturbance in the exhaust gas removal leads to an increase in the
quantity of hot residual gases during the following cycle. Pre-ignition
and super-knock can be the outcome of a misfiring cycle in the same
or other cylinders, as the charge ignites in the exhaust manifold and
obstructs the flow from open exhaust ports [62].

Based on the spectroscopic work by Kalaskar et al. [63], ‘‘soot-like
aggregates’’ appeared to be one of the potential initiators of LSPI and
the pre-ignition precursors of a high Particulate Matter Index (PMI) fuel
favored wavelengths that were associated with soot-like deposits. Poor
mixing and piston wetting contribute to increased unburned hydrocar-
bon and soot formation, and in some studies higher emissions of these
coincide with elevated pre-ignition activity [47,64,65]. However, in
other studies, the soot production correlates poorly to pre-ignition [7,
66,67]. Furthermore, a sweep of engine load and Start of Injection (SOI)
showed that elevated filter smoke numbers and hydrocarbon emissions

required very early SOI, whereas higher oil dilution was noticed also
at retarded SOI for high loads [68]. Although the papers by Swarts
et al. [69,70] revealed a strong correlation between LSPI activity and
the PMI, it is acknowledged in the latter paper that PMI could simply
be a substitute for aromatic content. Based on those experiments where
soot production correlates poorly with LSPI and where only larger com-
bustible particles cause LSPI [40], fine soot particles seem like unlikely
causes for LSPI as compared to larger particles. In those cases where
high soot emissions follow pre-ignition, the improper combustion of the
oil droplet may instead be the cause [32,71]. Kar et al. [72] measured
spikes in particulate mass emissions after an LSPI cycle, indicating that
the pressure oscillation releases combustible pre-ignition precursors,
causing a momentary increase in emissions.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)1010646

K. Rönn et al.

2.2. Pre-ignition and flame propagation

The initiation of a flame from autoignition must fulfill three criteria
as explained in Kalghatgi and Bradley [73]. Firstly, the IDTs of the
combustible mixture must be sufficiently short to initiate autoignition.
Secondly, the autoignition hotspot must reach a critical radius rc for
counteracting the heat transfer through conduction to surrounding
gases with a sufficient heat release. Thirdly, the radius of the au-
toignited hot spot must be large enough to initiate a stable flame by
reaching the critical radius rf . The critical radius rc is given as:

(

rc =

δckTa
AQEn exp (−En)

)1∕2

(2)

where δc
is the critical Frank–Kamenetskii parameter before igni-
tion [74]. Ta is the ambient temperature, k is the thermal conductivity,
A is the pre-exponential factor in the Arrhenius equation and Q is
the fuel mass per volume multiplied with the reaction enthalpy. En is
expressed as:

En =

E
RTa

(3)

where E is the activation energy.

The laminar flame speed of a fuel is indicative for its propensity to

ignite from a hot spot. This propensity is expressed through rf [73].
rf
δ

( β
2

1
Le

= exp

))

1 −

(

(4)

where δ is the laminar flame thickness, Le is the Lewis number and β
is the Zeldovich number.

β = E(Tb − Tu)∕RTb

2

(5)

where Tb and Tu are the burned and unburned gas temperatures. The
laminar flame thickness is expressed as the kinematic viscosity divided
with the laminar flame speed SL.

δ = ν∕SL

(6)

A larger laminar flame thickness should decrease the propensity of

a fuel to initiate a flame.

The rate at which combustion occurs after pre-ignition is dictated
by the laminar flame speed and wrinkling from turbulence. An in-
creased flame speed can consume the unburned gases faster, leaving
less time for autoignition to occur. Furthermore, the turbulence may
dissipate radicals and thermal inhomogeneities at hotspots, retarding
autoignition. On the other hand, a higher flame speed increases the heat
release rate, which increases the heating of end-gases and promotes
autoignition [75].

2.3. Autoignition

For almost a century, the resistance of a fuel to undergo autoigni-
tion has been represented by its Research Octane Number (RON),
Motor Octane Number (MON), Anti-knock Index (AKI) and Octane
Sensitivity (OS), where AKI is the average and OS is the difference
of RON and MON. MON is operated at a higher temperature and
speed than RON [76]. These indicators are derived empirically using
PRFs in a Cooperative Fuel Research (CFR) engine, which is based on
specifications from the 1920s [77]. Modern turbocharged, GDI engines
operate on significantly lower temperature trajectories as compared
to MON tests, and thereby MON correlates rather poorly with real-
world performance. The compression-profile is closer to that of a RON
measurement and even beyond it [78,79].

Autoignition occurs as a result of a chain of reactions, resulting in a
rapid rise in OH and CH radical concentrations, pressure and tempera-
ture. Therefore, generally the IDT in homogeneous reactors is defined
as the time taken to achieve local maximum for one of these metrics.
The IDT varies strongly based on the molecular structure of the fuel.

Depending on the fuel’s structure, IDT can decrease with increasing
temperature or in some cases an increase of IDT is observed with an in-
crease in temperature. This anomaly, where even at lower temperatures
ignition propensity is increased, is known as NTC. The NTC behavior
occurs due to a specific kind of branching reactions where two OH
radicals are produced from one. This is referred as low-temperature
chemistry and is common in fuels having long carbon chains. The
understanding of the elementary reactions that govern autoignition and
low-temperature combustion has been developing over decades and
a detailed information can be found in the study of Cai et al. [80].
Lubricants consist of long carbon chain components, and therefore can
be emulated by chemically reactive long chain alkane surrogates. IQT
studies have reported that the total IDT reduces significantly when
the injected fuel is diluted with even a small amount of lubricant oil
[29,30].

End-gas autoignition after pre-ignition has been detected both close
to the cylinder wall and ahead of the pre-ignited flame front [81].
The magnitude of pressure oscillation after autoignition is given as its
Knock Intensity (KI). This quantity can be expressed as maximum value,
integrated or derived values. A description and comparison of various
approaches in terms of signal-to-noise ratio for conventional knocking
are provided in [82]. Methods used in super-knock studies include
the integral of the high-pass filtered pressure signal with respect to
CAD [83] and the difference between minimum and maximum values
from the knock signal, which was defined by subtracting a three-point
averaged value from the pressure curve [84].

The development to super-knock is partly dictated by several stochas-
tic factors. Previous studies have shown that the probabilities for very
high knock intensity and maximum pressure tend to increase if Start
of Combustion (SOC) occurs significantly before the spark timing and
Start of Knock (SOK) occurs close to TDC, but heavy variation can be
found in the peak pressure between LSPI cycles with the same SOC or
SOK [83,85,86]. In addition, the average peak pressure of LSPI cycles
reached a plateau when SOC occurred earlier than 10 CAD BTDC [87].
Furthermore, the knock intensity was weakly correlated to the thermal
conditions and burned mass fraction during knock onset [83].

2.4. Development to detonation

The final step to super-knock is the detonation of unburned end-

gases. An illustration of this process is shown in Fig. 7.

A combination of global and local phenomena dictates the outcome
of an engine cycle. Global phenomena, which can be controlled and
measured during steady-state experiments, include the trapped mass,
mean values of the cylinder pressure and mixture stoichiometry, Ex-
haust Gas Recirculation (EGR) rate and tumble ratio. Local phenomena
on the other hand include several stochastic factors, such as turbulent
flow and variations in temperature, pressure and mixture homogeneity.
Their spatial and temporal scales can be very small, within the range
of micrometers to millimeters and few microseconds to a few CAD.
The combination of these global and local phenomena lead to cyclic
combustion variability [88].

Unlike experimental setups, certain modeling approaches capture
the impact of local phenomena. Robert et al. [89] used a reactive and
compressible Large Eddy Simulation (LES) solver for simulating knock
formation for 15 cycles of different spark timings. The spark was there-
fore used as a substitute for the pre-ignition initiation. They noticed
that when advancing the spark timing from 8 CAD ATDC, the knock
intensity would initially increase proportionally to the mass burned by
autoignition. At the earliest spark timings at TDC and 4 CAD BTDC, a
transition to detonation would begin, leading to a much higher knock
intensity. They highlight that the use of Reynolds-averaged Navier–
Stokes (RANS) simulations poses a challenge due to the sporadic nature
of super-knock cycles [89].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)1010647

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 7. Illustration of detonation formation.

2.4.1. Propagation modes of autoignition reaction fronts

The lower and upper limits for developing detonation, ξl and ξu can

The classification of propagation modes after autoignition was pre-

be plotted against the dimensionless parameter ε [92].

sented by Zeldovich [90] as follows:

≥ u > a: Detonation with a compressing shock wave.

– u > DCJ > a: Propagation of a weak detonation wave.
– DCJ
– a > u > uf : Subsonic propagation.
– uf > u: Flame development generated by diffusion and heat

conduction.

where DCJ is the Chapman–Jouguet detonation velocity:

DCJ =

√

2(γ 2 − 1)Qd

(7)

where γ is the ratio of specific heats and Qd is the heat release from a
unit of mixture mass [89]. The propagation modes can be plotted into
a detonation peninsula expressed with two dimensionless parameters,
ξ and ε [4]. ξ expresses the inverse ratio of reaction wave velocity u to
the acoustic velocity a.

ξ = a∕u

(8)

The reaction wave velocity is inversely proportional to the gradient

of IDT with respect to the distance r from the center of a hotspot.

)−1

u =

( ∂τi
∂r

(9)

This can be rewritten with the IDT sensitivity and temperature

gradient:
( ∂τi
∂T

u =

)−1

×

∂T
∂r

(10)

One can notice that a reduced sensitivity of the IDT to temperature
and increased thermal homogeneity increase the reaction wave velocity
and reduces the value of ξ. Thus, the propagation can approach charac-
teristics of thermal explosion. However, at slow velocities the process is
enhanced by shock waves and heat transfer. Spontaneous propagation
occupies the regime between the point of homogeneous combustion
and Chapman–Jouguet (CJ) point on the detonation adiabat. The CJ
point is the minimum velocity of a steady spontaneous wave [91]. This
part of the detonation adiabat corresponds to weak detonations.
The parameter ξ is used to classify the propagation modes.

– Thermal explosion: ξ = 0
– Supersonic autoignitive wave: ξl > ξ > 0
– Developing detonation: ξu > ξ ≥ ξl
– Subsonic autoignitive deflagration: a∕SL > ξ ≥ ξu
– Subsonic laminar burning: ξ≥a/SL

ε =

r0
a × τe

(11)

where r0 denotes the initial hotspot radius and τe is the excitation time.
The initial hotspot radius r0 and thermal gradient (∂T /∂r) in Eq. (10)
can be approximated in computational studies. Values of 5 mm and
1 cm have been used for the radius [73,89], while values between −1
and −2 K/mm have been used for the gradient [73,93]. The hotspot
temperature at autoignition was estimated by Rudloff et al. [94] by
adjusting the hotspot temperature at intake valve closure (IVC) for
reaching unity with the Livengood–Wu integral during autoignition.
However, also in this case, the temperature gradient requires that the
hotspot radius is assumed.

Peters et al. [95] has proposed a turbulence theory based on dissi-
pation elements, each of which are limited to the gradient trajectories
between a local minimum and maximum temperature. The joint proba-
bility density of temperature gradients and their lengths could then be
used to calculate the detonation probability at each cell of an engine
CFD model.

The excitation time refers to the period, during which the chemical
energy in the hotspot is mostly released. This time, often calculated as
the period when the heat release rises from 5% to its maximum is very
short, generally in the order of microseconds [89,96–98]. This value has
been simulated to decrease with increasing pressure and temperature
for dimethyl ether (DME) and various gasoline surrogates [98,99].

In a completely homogeneous mixture, ignition would occur simul-
taneously throughout the mixture, causing constant-volume combus-
tion and a uniform rise in pressure. Complete homogeneity is virtu-
ally impossible, due to the inevitable spatial and temporal variations
of temperature and mixture homogeneity that emerge from charge
stratification, residual gases and heat transfer at the walls [4].

Quasi-homogeneous conditions with very low gradients can, how-
ever, cause extremely rapid reaction wave propagation beyond the
Chapman–Jouguet conditions, thus exhibiting no coupling between the
shock wave and reaction wave as a thermal explosion [100]. The rapid
combustion does not allow the burnt gases to expand, resulting in a fast
and smooth pressure rise, and is attractive for combustion applications,
due to the significant improvement in efficiency that it offers. Hence,
its use in both internal combustion engines and gas turbines is studied
in the forms of homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI) and
shockless explosion combustion (SEC) [93,101]. Both of these concepts
are challenging to execute homogeneously, largely due to the inevitable
thermal or mixture stratification in HCCI and the varying residence
time of the injected fuel in SEC [102,103]. The need for optimal SEC
has driven research in fuel tailoring, in which the purpose is to find
suitable fuels that exhibit very small IDT sensitivities to temperatures

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)1010648

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 8. Regions of propagation modes for dimethyl ether and air at 982 K and 40.5 bar.
Black circles: Detonation; blue squares: supersonic autoignition reaction wave; green
triangles: transonic regime; red diamonds: subsonic deflagration.
Source: Reprinted from [97].

for a wide range. Given a vanishing sensitivity for temperature or
proper mixture stratification, quasi-homogeneous combustion could be
reached despite inhomogeneities in the gas temperature [93,99].

As the parameter ε approaches zero, the combustion process inside
the hotspot becomes isobaric. In contrary, an approach towards infinity
indicates isochoric combustion leading to isentropic expansion [96].
A coupling of the reaction and sonic wave occurs when the distance
traveled by the sound during the excitation time is lower than the
distance of the constant temperature gradient in the hotspot. Therefore,
long excitation times have been desired for detonation prevention [99].
It has been shown for various fuels that ξu, which is the limit between
subsonic deflagration and developing detonation, increases for higher
values of ε, translating to larger initial hotspot size and shorter excita-
tion times. This is visible in Fig. 8 for a DME/air mixture at 982 K and
40.5 bar.

The shape of this detonation peninsula seems to be fuel-dependent,
but the detonation regime generally becomes wider for an increase
in ε, as shown for syngas [4], CH4 [104], TRF [105] and Hydro-
gen [106] in various 1-d simulations. Consequently, fuel blends that
exhibit a slow rise in heat release during the excitation period are
attractive for detonation prevention. For instance, an investigation by
Vinkeloe et al. [93] revealed that a substitution of H2 with CH4 in DME-
containing stoichiometric ternary blends slows down the excitation
time at 33 bars. The boundaries of developing detonation for DME
were determined by Dai et al. [97], showing a C-shaped curve that
becomes narrower as the hotspot temperature increases from 802 K
(before NTC) to 982 K (NTC) and 1035 K (after NTC) at 40.5 bar. Their
results indicate that the initial temperature and its related chemistry
and energy density are factors in the limits of propagation modes.

As a result of mass and thermal diffusion within the hotspot, the
reaction wave velocity has been reported to differ from the one that
was calculated from initial conditions. Thus, a modification of ξ was
used by Dai et al. [107] and Dai et al. [108]. ξa is based on the sound
speed at r0∕2 and the average reaction wave speed within the hotspot.
Both Robert et al. [89] and Zhang et al. [109] concluded in their
simulations that a detonation can be triggered by pressure waves that
were created by other hotspots. This was observed by Blumenthal
et al. [110] in a shock tube. LES simulations by Pan et al. [111]
showed that several adjacent autoigniting hotspots can merge and
yield a developing detonation. The merging of flame kernels leading
to a transition to detonation between the flame and the end-wall was
observed by Blumenthal et al. [110] in a shock tube.

2.4.2. Detonation induction from reflected shock waves

Both experimental studies using rapid compression machines and
constant volume combustion bombs have observed shock wave reflec-
tion induced detonation near the wall. A series of schlieren images at an
initial pressure of 5 bar taken by [112] showed that the rapidly accel-
erating hydrogen flame creates a shock wave, which reflects first at the
right-side wall and the left-side perforated plate before autoignition and
detonation close to the Chapman–Jouguet point occurring at the third
reflection. Zhang et al. [109] showed detonation with 2d-simulations
of stoichiometric hydrogen combustion when strong pressure waves
reflected at the end-wall.

Similar development is illustrated in Fig. 9 (cases a and b). Wang
et al. [113,114] and Liu et al. [115] ignited an iso-octane flame with a
spark in an RCM, causing autoignition in the compressed end-gases and
the generation of a shock wave, which reflects on the cylinder wall and
triggers detonation. Meanwhile, when 80% excess air was added (case
c), the detonation was avoided and a supersonic autoignitive wave
occurred instead.

It is reported that the shock wave intensifies prior to detona-
tion [113]. The intensification depends on the interaction between
primary and secondary flames and shock waves, as shown in a numeri-
cal study of H2∕O2 mixtures by Xu et al. [116]. As the initially smooth
deflagration interacts with the oscillating shock wave, the flame surface
becomes distorted and larger, accelerating it, increasing flow velocity
and mass and heat transfer to the unburned region. A significantly
cooler secondary flame is generated, resulting in deceleration, which
may be momentarily enhanced by the flow from the reflected shock
wave traveling in the opposite direction. The oncoming shock wave
also heats up the region between the primary and secondary flames,
which increases reactivity and intensifies the shock wave. The outcome
of these regular interactions between flame regions and shock waves is
an intensifying primary shock wave and the formation of secondary
shock waves that are generated from the enhanced chemical reactions
after the primary shock wave. The coupling of one of these shock waves
cause a developing detonation [116].

Chamber geometry can affect the formation of developing detona-
tion, as it dictates the convergence of shock waves. The shock waves
travel both in a radial and axial direction of the chamber, converging
with each other, subsequently initiating detonation [116].

2.5. Oscillation modes and damage

In addition, the severity and locations of damage caused by det-
onation waves can be attributed to different modes of convergence.
Experimental and numerical results by Xu et al. [117] indicate that
the most intense energy convergence occurs as a result of simultaneous
convergence of axial and radial waves at the middle of the chamber.
Meanwhile, the intensity of energy convergence of a radial wave at the
edges could be damped by ensuring enough clearance to avoid vertices.
Whereas conventional knock is often characterized by low-intensive
pressure pulses and gradual wear on hardware, a single super-knock
cycle may cause abrupt engine failure. Studies have reported pres-
sure wave amplitudes beyond 160 bar [118]. The amplitude reduces
throughout the power stroke. Only a minor deviance in exhaust pres-
sure was detected between normal cycles and pre-ignition cycles with
high peak pressures [119]. Various types of damage have been reported
by authors, including a broken spark plug electrode, melted exhaust
valve (caused by fragment from the electrode being stuck between the
valve and seat), eroded piston crown and cylinder head and fractured
piston ring land [13,83,120]. An example of broken piston ring lands
is shown in Fig. 10. Damage on piston rings includes various degrees
of coating deterioration, such as chipping, cracking and a widespread
loss of the coating material [121].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)1010649

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 9. Combustion modes of iso-octane after autoignition. (a) λ = 1.0 (b) λ = 1.6 (c) λ = 1.8.
Source: Reprinted from [115].

Fig. 10. Damage caused by super-knock to piston ring lands.

3. Methodology in research

3.1. Steady-state experiments

The most common method for studying LSPI is to use steady-state
engine operation with short health check intervals between the test
segments of high loads and low speeds. Both single-cylinder research
engines and multi-cylinder commercial engines are widely used in
research.

range is within 1500–2000 rpm. Four publications by Southwest Re-
search Institute included measurements at 1250 rpm [8,9,25,122],
whereas high-speed (> 4000 rpm) experiments on surface-induced pre-
ignition have been published by Sasaki et al. [50,54], Cavina et al. [53,
55] and Mogi et al. [51]. It is also possible to adopt an externally
driven charger for reaching boost pressures and loads above those of
commercial turbocharged engines [123]. It is common to disconnect
the positive crankcase ventilation (PCV) to eliminate the potential
impact of oil mist recirculation from the crankcase into the intake
air [59,61,124,125].

An overview of 71 experimental gasoline pre-ignition investigations
in this literature review revealed that the most common investigated

A piezoelectric sensor is installed through the cylinder head for
high-resolution pressure measurements. A high resolution (up to 0.1

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106410

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 11. Illustration of LSPI detection based on a CA05 SOC and 5σ margin [127].

CAD) of data sampling is recommended at pre-ignition relevant timings
(i.e., from the earliest expected SOC to the middle of the power stroke).
A high-pass filter with cutoff frequency at 4 kHz was applied in Zhou
et al. [118] for canceling out in-cylinder noise. The frequency of
knocking after pre-ignition can exceed 20 kHz as it shifts upwards from
conventional knock [126].

3.1.1. Statistical analysis

An LSPI event is identified if the pressure curve-derived SOC of
a cycle occurs significantly before the mean SOC of all cycles during
testing. A suitable margin, such as 5 standard deviations of the SOC, is
applied to exclude spark-initiated cycles with abnormally early SOC.
Therefore, as illustrated in Fig. 11, it is possible that pre-ignition is
detected after the spark timing, as the SOC of an ordinary cycle occurs
several CAD after the spark. However, super-knock is unlikely to occur
after such late pre-ignition, due to the thermal conditions of end-gases
being similar to those of ordinary cycles [85].

The definition of a positive pre-ignition cycle is based on the as-
sumption that the SOC data is normally distributed (skew = 0 and
kurtosis = 3). Experimental data can deviate from this assumption, and
thus, false positive or negative events are possible without adjustments.
The required standard score (e.g., −5 as suggested above) for a normal
distribution can be transformed into an adjusted standard score for a
non-normal distribution (skew ≠ 0 and kurtosis ≠ 3) with a method
presented in Boese et al. [128] and Fleishman [129]. The method has its
limitations if the distribution is heavily skewed or platykurtic (kurtosis
< 3).

As will be shown in Section 4.3.5, the engine aging and switching
between engines affects the LSPI rates in a complicated manner. Thus,
it is motivated to stabilize the engine as in [130] before LSPI tests of
fuels and lubricants and to normalize the LSPI count to account for
differences between engine hours and setups using reference tests [131,
132].

LSPI and super-knock may occur in consecutive or alternating se-
ries, as shown by Dahnz et al. [60], who noticed that up to 75%
of pre-ignitions occurred in groups of two to seven cycles. The al-
ternating series of LSPI and super-knock have been found by several
other authors [119,133,134]. This indicates a dependency between
events, thus distorting the statistical reliability of the results. An ex-
ample of an LSPI/super-knock sequence is shown in Fig. 12. Statistical
reliability can be improved by separating independent events from
following events in the data post-processing with a determined number
of dependent cycles [61,135,136].

Fig. 12. Example of an LSPI/super-knock sequence.

3.1.2. Detection methods

Kaul et al. [137] used time-delay embedding of cylinder pressure
and principal component analysis, detecting pre-ignition from a devi-
ation in the cylinder pressure trajectory up to 1.6 CAD earlier than
could be identified through direct statistical analysis of the pressure
data. However, this approach would also require cylinder pressure as
available data during operation.

Fast flame ionization detection was applied by Haenel et al. [138],
showing that a peak in total hydrocarbon emissions would occur before
an LSPI cycle. This motivated researchers to develop an early-warning
and prevention system with ion current sensors in the exhaust sys-
tem [139]. The method was deemed inadequate as no correlation
between hydrocarbon emissions and the ion signal was found. In ad-
dition, several authors report a spike in emissions after the LSPI event.
Kar et al. [72] found a spike in particulate mass after an LSPI cycle,
but without a corresponding rise in particulate number, indicating that
quite large particulates have been formed. Magar et al. [42] detected
increased oil emissions after pre-ignition with a mass spectrometer,
while Moriyoshi et al. [140] measured increased oil consumption after

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106411

K. Rönn et al.

pre-ignition with a sulfur analyzer. A wide-band O2 sensor at the
exhaust port revealed a spike in exhaust gas richness after an LSPI cycle,
more so than a simulated cycle with heavily advanced spark timing [9].
These results support the conclusion that an LSPI event combusts and
releases deposits or liquid droplets inside the cylinder.

A bandpass filtered AC ion signal inside the cylinder was utilized
for detecting a pre-ignited flame during its propagation. The early
detection of a pre-ignited flame would then allow to mitigate the knock
intensity through immediate enrichment [139]. Kumano et al. [141]
could detect pre-ignition cycles with the integral of the ion signal
intensity. Tong et al. [142] found that the ion current signal inside the
combustion chamber provides a robust replacement for the pressure
trace SOC detection and that bandpass filtering or the integral of
the signal provides good correlation with the knock signal from the
engine’s knock sensor. A pre-ignition cycle with heavy knocking could
be identified through the ion current signal, as the amplitude was an
order of magnitude higher compared to normal cycles [143]. Reliable
detection of LSPI with this method becomes difficult if it occurs close to
the spark timing as the flame has less time to reach the detector. This
was apparent in one test sequence by Wang et al. [144], where only
14.3% of LSPI cycles were detected due to them occurring relatively
late. Deep learning models were used to detect pre-ignition from pre-
processed exhaust backpressure and lambda sensor input, returning an
85% accuracy in detecting pre-ignition cycles in a test set of 44,290
cycles, 350 of which were pre-ignition cycles [145].

3.1.3. Glowplug measurements

Various studies have examined the propensity of fuels to undergo
surface ignition by deliberately causing a hotspot with a glowplug.
The resistance of a fuel against this type of pre-ignition would then
be characterized as a minimum value in glowplug temperature or elec-
trical energy for achieving a certain frequency of LSPI. The higher this
value, commonly denoted as a glowplug pre-ignition temperature index
or pre-ignition rating, becomes, the less prone the gaseous mixture
is to pre-ignition from a hot object. A description of a glowplug test
setup and precautions is given by Yu et al. [12]. They highlight that
a feedback control of the tip temperature with power reduction after
pre-ignition is crucial in order to avoid runaway ignition and maintain
statistical reliability.

3.2. On-road experiments

Generally, pre-ignition is studied at 1500–2000 rpm for steady-state
conditions, but positive cycles have also been reported for transient
conditions at 3000–4000 rpm [146]. Moriyoshi et al. [140] found
that transient operation would be more prone to pre-ignition than
steady-state operation.

On-road measurements provide important data on the incidence of
LSPI in the real-world operation. However, the transient conditions
demand changing spark timings, complicating the statistical analysis.
Positive cycles may then be detected by setting threshold values for the
SOC or peak pressure and individually analyzing the cycles that exceed
them [146]. Alternatively, super-knock cycles may be detected through
the lambda sensor, if the ECU responds to LSPI with enrichment [147].
Since the on-road testing is affected by surrounding traffic and the
selected route, there will be differences in the time spent at LSPI-
relevant conditions. This effect may be mitigated by detecting an
LSPI-prone region in the operating conditions and normalizing the
results with respect to the time spent within that region [147]. While
on-road testing provides information on the tendency of pre-ignition
to occur in transient operation, its utility in fuel, lubricant and engine
parameter testing is challenging due to the large number of variables
that it introduces.

4. Parametric studies

4.1. Impact of fuel parameters on LSPI

Researched factors of the fuel impact on LSPI can be divided into
two categories, these being the chemical composition and physical
properties. Research on chemical composition has been largely con-
centrated on ethanol and aromatics. Meanwhile, laminar flame speed,
volatility and HoV are relevant physical properties, as they should
describe the formation of initiation mechanisms or the ignition suscep-
tibility of the mixture.

4.1.1. Octane rating

Steady-state experiments have generated no significant correlations
between RON, MON and LSPI frequencies [66,148,149]. One would
expect that fuel autoignition chemistry affects LSPI as the gasoline com-
prises a fraction of the droplet composition and ambient gas mixture
before pre-ignition. The slower ignition of suspended PRF-oil droplets
with ambient air at 573 K was evident with higher RON of the PRF
blend [150]. However, constant volume combustion chamber studies at
this temperature showed a diminishing impact of the RON of a oil–fuel
droplet on the total IDT at chamber air pressures above 20 bar [151].
A high autoignition resistance is provided by branched aromatics,
iso-paraffins and ethanol. Aromatics generally exhibit very high RONs,
largely depending on the number and location of alkyl groups. More-
over, ethanol, for which some studies have revealed an LSPI promoting
impact at high concentrations, exhibits a high autoignition resistance,
as estimates vary at RON108-128 and MON90-93 [152,153]. As will be
shown in Section 4.1.3, especially aromatics can severely enhance pre-
ignition through fuel wall wetting and top ring zone retention, which
dominate over potential benefits from octane numbers.

An increased octane number however allows for advanced spark
timing, thus reducing the time available for pre-ignition. The advanced
knock limit improves the load, which can be compensated with a
reduction in boost pressure. This indirect benefit of increased RON ex-
plains the slight reduction in LSPI when comparing RON91, RON95 and
RON98 fuels with rather similar distillation curves [7]. Furthermore,
the autoignition resistance appears to be influential if the common
causes for LSPI are diminished. This was shown by applying a narrow
fuel injection spray targeting for reduced wall wetting, while increasing
pin until pre-ignition would occur [56]. It became apparent through
simulations and optical studies at high pin and intake temperature (Tin)
that fuels of relatively low autoignition resistance, including RON95E0,
RON95E10 and iso-octane, would exhibit bulk autoignition, whereas
some autoignition resistant alcohols and ketones would not. Even in
this case, the resulting correlation between RON and the critical pin for
0.1% LSPI frequency was rather modest (R2 = 0.63). In the case of
surface ignition at 4400 rpm, the MON correlated well to the required
spark-plug center electrode temperature for pre-ignition, whereas at
1600 rpm, RON showed a better correlation [50,54].

4.1.2. Laminar flame speed

As previously mentioned in Section 2.2, the laminar flame speed is
related to the susceptibility of a fuel to exhibit a stable flame. Budak
et al. [154] reported no correlation between 1∕SL at 1 bar and 120 ◦C
and required glowplug temperature for 2% LSPI frequency. Meanwhile,
Kalghatgi & Bradley [73] presented a significant correlation (R2 = 0.83)
between 1∕SL at 3.04 bar and 450 K and the required electric power
in a heated coil for pre-ignition, using data of 15 paraffins, olefins,
naphthenes, aromatics and alcohols from [155,156]. Variation in the
estimated laminar flame speed had no clear effect on steady-state LSPI
frequencies in Jatana et al. [136]. However, their results indicated that
higher flame speeds could advance the SOC, reduce the delay time
between SOC and peak pressure and increase the knock intensity.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106412

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 13. Effect of aromatic content on pre-ignition frequency. Frequency calculated
from total pre-ignition cycles (including following cycles) and data obtained from [9,
72,136,158].

Fig. 14. Effect of distillation temperatures T50 and T70 on pre-ignition frequency.
Source: Data obtained from [148].

4.1.3. Altering the chemical composition

The general view in literature is that high aromatic content and
less volatile gasoline composition (i.e., the end third of the distillation
curve) are the key properties in gasoline that increase LSPI [9,65,
67,72,136,149,157–159]. Fig. 13 shows the increasing trend in pre-
ignition from aromatic content, as the lowest relative frequencies were
found for volume fractions below 20%. Meanwhile, the highest relative
frequencies were found for volume fractions above 30%. An exception
for the trend is visible in the data by Kar et al. [72], where the highest
frequency was obtained for 30.9 vol-%, whereas a fraction of 38.7 vol-
% yielded much less pre-ignition. However, this can be explained by
an opposite order in C10+ aromatics (19.9 vol-% and 5.1 vol-%). Thus,
future analysis on the impact of aromatics should be broken down to
the numbers and lengths of their alkyl groups.

Heavier aromatics, with boiling points ranging up to 193 ◦C of
4-tert-butyltoluene [160], are prone to deposit formation [45]. The
inherent correlation between aromatics and the upper half of the
distillation curve was pointed out by both Swarts et al. [70] and Tanaka
et al. [161], as is the particular relevance of C9+ aromatics [72]. Using
a modern engine, Sethi et al. [162] showed that aromatic-rich fuels did
not stand out as more susceptible to pre-ignition than saturates and
olefins, albeit the lack of distillation properties limits the analysis of
their relative impact.

Costanzo et al. [66] showed by supplementing a premium certifi-
cation fuel with 30% of alternative components that the pre-ignition
frequency increases rapidly as the boiling point of a component exceeds
130 ◦C. The substitution shifts the distillation curve of the gasoline
and in the case of an aromatic substance with a single ethyl or propyl
group or multiple methyl groups (such as ethylbenzene, cumene and
trimethylbenzene) the upper half of distillation points will increase and
more liquid fuel will remain on the oil film and top ring zone. The im-
portance of the upper half of the distillation range was also visible in a
comparison between pure toluene (110 ◦C) and diisobutylene (104 ◦C)
and a premium certification gasoline. A refinery-based gasoline extends
its upper half of distillation from these temperatures to approximately
200 ◦C, making it more prone to LSPI. These less volatile components
not only enhance the fuel impingement but also reduce the evaporation
of the impinged fuel from the liner leading to more fuel being collected
in the top ring zone [67].

The distillation points T50–T80 in refinery-based gasoline have been
repeatedly shown as important factors for LSPI mitigation [59,64,69,

148,149]. Fig. 14 presents results from Chapman et al. [148] for the
impact of T50 and T70.

The significance of T90, T95 and final boiling point is more chal-
lenging to infer as results vary from no correlation [69,148] to mod-
erate and good correlations [86,163,164]. Kocsis et al. [149] found a
slight increasing impact from T90 on LSPI. Meanwhile, an increase of
the V150 (vaporized fraction at 150 ◦C) reduces pre-ignition [164].

Jatana et al. [136] studied the effect of cyclopentanone, 2-methyl-
1-butanol and ethylbenzene on LSPI by blending them in 25 wt%
quantities in the same gasoline blendstock. The results show that the
addition of the assessed compounds generated roughly double the LSPI
events compared to the reference gasoline through reduced vaporiza-
tion. The added compounds generated roughly the same amount of
LSPI events, despite their different physical and chemical properties.
They conclude that the physical properties (volatility and HoV) of the
gasoline blends could explain the LSPI event counts, while the LSPI
characteristics are differentiated by the chemical/kinetic properties of
the gasoline blends.

Analysis beyond the LSPI frequencies is useful to determine the
relative impacts of the volatility and autoignition chemistry of pure
fuels on the formation of LSPI. Deliberate injection of an oil droplet
into different port-injected gasoline compositions revealed that the SOC
occurs earlier with increased aromatic and olefin content and decreased
paraffin content for constant RON. This observation was only detected
for oil injection before 50 CAD BTDC, but does nevertheless indicate
that the promoting impact of aromatic species is not only restricted
to their high boiling points [165]. Glowplug measurements have not
been able to explain the enhancing role of aromatics, as several of
them, including xylene, toluene and 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene, turned
out to be more resistant towards ignition than cycloalkanes, olefins or
oxygenates [166,167].

Crevice accumulation is not only dictated by the fuel impingement
on the liner. Investigations of fuel dilution by Colomer et al. [67] and
Splitter et al. [68] were conducted using LIF in vicinity to the dry
oil sump. The analysis revealed that the dilution of relatively volatile
iso-octane (boiling point at 99 ◦C) can at some engine conditions,
especially at those of late injection, be significant. The region of engine
conditions where iso-octane causes fuel dilution also exhibited a high
ratio of ambient pressure to vapor pressure of the fuel.

In addition to fuel wall wetting, the retention of the fuel in the
top ring zone is critical for LSPI. The LSPI experiments by Colomer
et al. [67] included three gasoline compositions, two of which had al-
most the same fractions of saturates, olefins and aromatics but different

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106413

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 15. Effect of ethanol content on pre-ignition frequency.
Source: Data obtained from [66,138,157,164].

distillation curves. The heavier of these two saturate-rich fuels had a
distillation curve close to the third fuel, which contained less saturates
and more aromatics. Combined analysis of fuel dilution in oil through
LIF and the need for excess fueling to maintain stoichiometric exhaust
lambda revealed that although a volatile fuel with low distillation
temperatures could at late injection increase fuel dilution, its impact
on fueling was low as the impinged fuel evaporates instead of being
retained at the liner or top ring zone. Meanwhile, the aromatic-rich
fuel required excess fueling due to top ring zone retention, and in
this case the pre-ignition count would increase accordingly at late SOI.
The saturate-rich fuel with high distillation temperatures caused fuel
retention and pre-ignition values between those of the volatile and
aromatic-rich fuels.

The impacts of ethanol addition on pre-ignition in engines for
various studies are presented in Fig. 15. Singh et al. [157] studied
the effect of ethanol on the LSPI by experimenting with five different
gasolines with 0 vol-%, 13 vol-% and 27 vol-% ethanol content. The
study concluded that the addition of ethanol increases LSPI. However,
the ethanol additions were made on different hydrocarbon gasoline
blendstocks. Haenel et al. [138] also noticed the increased amount
of LSPI events with increasing ethanol content using a regular E10
gasoline as a blendstock/reference to which desired amount of ethanol
was splash blended. The LSPI density was shown to increase from the
E10 base level 271/292 ppm to 2167 ppm, 3063 ppm and 4000 ppm
with E20, E30 and E50 gasoline, respectively [138]. A slight promoting
effect of ethanol was also reported by Kocsis et al. [149].

It is considered that the impact of ethanol on LSPI is heavily dictated
by mixture preparation. The injected volume of ethanol as compared to
gasoline is high, and thus the duration of injection is long, enhancing
the impingement on walls and the piston crown. In addition, it creates
a significant charge cooling effect on surrounding gases. This can
be beneficial for LSPI mitigation by delaying ignition through lower
mixture temperatures, but may also lead to postponed evaporation
during injection and increased impingement and interaction with oil
on cylinder walls. The switch in weight between these effects may
be the reasons for heavy variation in LSPI in Mayer et al. [164],
which showed a mitigating impact within the range 0%–30%, but a
sharp rise within 30%–50%. The mitigating effect of ethanol when
aiming for high pre-ignition frequencies with direct injection is shown
in Günther et al. [168] and Pischinger et al. [169]. The authors applied
high temperature and pressure intake conditions and heavily retarded
combustion phasing to trigger gas-phase pre-ignition at a relatively

high frequency. Splash blended E20 would have similar IDTs as E85
and E100, but the latter blends would be more resistant against pre-
ignition. This can be attributed to the charge cooling as the increase
in pre-ignition resistance was not as distinct with Port Fuel Injection
(PFI) at high Tin. The E20, having a higher RON and charge cooling
effect, was more resistant than splash blended ETBE20 for both direct
injection and PFI. The approach for direct injection was continued by
Ottenwälder et al. [56], in which wall wetting and glow ignition were
further counteracted, resulting in a very good resistance from ethanol
against LSPI. Moreover, Costanzo et al. [66] reported a mitigating effect
when increasing splash blended ethanol content from 10 to 50 %. They
used a newly formulated, more LSPI-resistant lubricant and the liner
temperature was suspected to be higher than in referred studies, in
which case the fuel–oil interaction should have less of an effect on pre-
ignition rates. Amann et al. [9] reported that the addition of 10 mass-%
ethanol with varying blendstock reduces the number of independent
LSPI events, but the number of cycles per LSPI cluster would increase
at the baseline conditions.

The charge cooling effect of a fuel depends on its injected mass
and heat of vaporization and may affect both the formation of pre-
ignition mechanisms and the propensity of a fuel to autoignite. Using
the narrow spray strategy for avoidance of wall wetting, Ottenwälder
et al. [56] found that the specific heat of vaporization (kJ∕kgair ) would
correlate with the critical pin for pre-ignition with R2 = 0.56, deriving
a mitigating effect.

The study by Ottenwälder et al. [56] (at Tin = 100 ◦C) showed
that ketones and alcohols required a much higher critical pin (> 3.0
bar) for achieving 0.1% LSPI frequency than RON95E0, RON95E10 and
iso-octane (< 2.0 bar). Particularly good resistances were shown by 2-
butanone and ethanol, which did not reach 0.1% even when the pin was
increased to the maximum available value of 3.65 bar. Furthermore,
it became apparent through optical imaging that the pre-ignition of
conventional fuels occurred more on the exhaust side, presumably due
to a higher heat transfer from the walls to the mixture. Simulations
of the thermal conditions and the scattered locations of pre-ignition
indicate that bulk gas autoignition would be the source in this case.
Meanwhile, the pre-ignition sites of 2-methylfuran, iso-butanol and 1-
propanol would be concentrated at the spark plug, thus indicating glow
ignition [56]. An increase in ethanol content in certification gasoline
caused a reduction in glowplug temperature at up to 50 vol-% for direct
injection and 20 w-% for PFI [66,166]. In the contrary, splash blended
E20, M20 and ETBE20 with RON95 base fuel were more resistant
to glowplug ignition than RON95E0, whereas fuels with even higher
ethanol content, i.e., E85 and E100, were less resistant to glowplug
ignition than E20 [169]. The impact of ethanol addition on glowplug
temperature index could thus be a balance between increased charge
cooling with direct injection (leading to increased heat transfer from
the boundary layer to the cooler mixture) and an increased ignition
tendency at high-temperatures. The good performances of 2-butanone
and iso-propanol are apparent when comparing glowplug temperatures
with ethanol [154,166,169].

Paraffins were shown to quench LSPI when compared to aromatics,
olefins and ethanol [149]. Steady-state results for olefinic compounds
have not yet indicated such a strong promoting effect of olefins on
LSPI as in the case with aromatics. Kocsis et al. [149] found a slightly
mitigating impact of them, as opposed to the enhancement from aro-
matics. Mansfield et al. [135] compared the fits of different regression
models with varying mathematical forms and fuel components as in-
dependent variables using experimental results from ten ‘‘US regular
octane’’ commercial fuels. The best performing fit was attributed to an
exponential function with the sum of the volumetric shares of olefins
and aromatics as variables. However, the relative importance of olefins
was not determined due to a limited dataset.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106414

K. Rönn et al.

4.1.4. Additives

Nomura et al. [170] studied the effect of methylcyclopentadienyl
manganese tricarbonyl (MMT) on the LSPI propensity. The addition of
15 ppm of MMT increased the number of LSPI events with at least 160
bar peak pressures for all the tested gasoline grades, and the biggest
change was from 2 events/h to over 40 events/h. The gasolines with
LSPI increasing factors, i.e. high aromatic content and low volatility,
reacted more strongly to the addition of MMT. The MMT was hypoth-
esized to generate small incandescent manganese oxide particles in the
combustion chamber upon the oxidation/burning of the manganese
complex compound. These particles then act as the ignition source for
the fuel to generate LSPI.

The effect of gasoline detergent additive on the LSPI was assessed
by Zahdeh et al. [7]. The used detergent additive package contained a
kerosene type solvent according to the supplier. Although the content
of the high boiling detergent package solvent was below 0.4% of the
whole gasoline blend it was shown to increase the LSPI events over two-
fold compared to unadditized reference fuel. The result highlights how
big of an impact the small but very harmful fractions in the gasoline
might have regarding the LSPI count. Although typically the detergent
packages are used in the level hundreds of ppm (in volume), the high
boiling components in the package alters the end distillation properties
that favors the LSPI phenomenon. Chapman et al. [87] varied the
concentrations of three detergent chemistries, finding that the number
of LSPI cycles would exceed those of an unadditized gasoline when any
of the detergents were blended at a treat rate of 5 times the Top Tier
gasoline specifications.

Meanwhile, it was shown by Joedicke et al. [171] that a unad-
ditized fuel would increase the injection duration at 19 bar BMEP
and 1500 rpm due to injector tip deposit formation, also leading to
an increase in cycles with peak pressures exceeding 100 bar. Colliou
et al. [65] reported a slightly decreasing trend in LSPI when using
1000 ppm of a deposit control additive in an extended test. The
aforementioned studies indicate that the detergent has potential to both
promote and mitigate LSPI. Firstly, it counteracts injector fouling and
deposit buildup, decreasing the formation of LSPI precursors. Secondly,
similarly to the used gasoline, the heavy hydrocarbon composition of
the detergent package enhances LSPI, especially if used above normal
treat rates. The latter of these effects is assumed to dominate in Zahdeh
et al. [7] as no cleaning effect was noticed. However, the detailed
assessment of the effect of detergent additives (or any other organic
additives) is challenging as there are multiple additive suppliers with
their own additive packages and formulations, which typically are not
disclosed to the public. In this regard the detailed evaluation of the
detergent would require samples, detailed information of the additives
and close collaboration with the additive suppliers.

4.2. Impact of oil parameters on LSPI

Studies show that oil additive properties strongly affect LSPI forma-
tion. The base oil is treated with various additives including detergents,
antiwear additives, soot dispersants, viscosity improvers, oxidation in-
hibitors, corrosion inhibitors, friction modifiers, pour point depressants,
foam inhibitors and metal deactivators [172]. The detergent is often
highlighted as a strong influencer on LSPI. Another important factor is
the ratio of antiwear additives due to their mitigating effect on LSPI.

Literature does not indicate a significant impact from additives
beyond detergents and antiwear additives. This was shown in Kassai
et al. [163], Ritchie et al. [173] and Takeuchi et al. [174] for poly-
methacrylate or olefin copolymer viscosity index improvers, dispersant
molecular weights, phenolic, aminic or sulfurized esther antioxidants
or glycerol monooleate as a friction modifier. However, an increased
dispersant treat rate was proven beneficial in Fletcher et al. [131].

4.2.1. Viscosity, volatility and base oil properties

Experiments concerning base oil properties have concentrated on
the effect of the API group. It is reported that higher groups (III and IV)
of base oils exhibit higher derived cetane numbers and lower total IDTs
than lower groups (I and II) when mixed with gasoline or iso-octane in
IQT measurements [29,175]. This impact is also apparent in ignition
measurements of oil in constant-pressure air flow at 50 bar and below
800 K, whereas at higher temperatures the difference is reduced [176].
The higher reactivity of group III as compared to groups I and II is
attributed to the increased content of saturates and decreasing content
of aromatics [29,175,177]. Surprisingly, Takeuchi et al. [174] found
a decreasing trend in LSPI frequency with increasing base oil group,
as groups III and IV (polyalphaolefin) exhibited lower LSPI frequencies
than groups I and II when using the same additive package. Therefore,
LSPI behavior has not yet been explained through base oil reactivity,
albeit additional investigations would be desirable.

As fuel–oil interaction, droplet detachment and vaporization are
generally considered as steps for LSPI, it is reasonable to study the
impacts of viscosity and volatility. Volatility shows no significant effect
on LSPI propensity. Takeuchi et al. [174] compared Noack volatilities
ranging 5–25% and found a very weak correlation. In addition, Kocsis
et al. [122] found no consistent trend from increased volatility as it
varied by detergent composition.

The effort to achieve lower fuel consumption and emissions has
included the introduction of thinner engine oils to the market. IDT
measurements at high-temperature atmospheric conditions in a co-
flow burner show slightly increased tendency of autoignition for lower
viscosity [178]. This impact was also noticed with deliberate injection
of oil droplets into the cylinder [37].

Andrews et al. [132] showed a statistically significant increase in
LSPI with higher KV100 viscosity of the oil. Furthermore, Takeuchi
et al. [174] found higher rates for a polyalphaolefin with 8 cSt than
one with 4 cSt KV100. Ritchie et al. [173] did not find statistical sig-
nificance when comparing SAE grades 0W-16, 0W-30, 10W-30, despite
the slight decreasing trend in LSPI in this order. Moreover, no clear
impact of SAE grades of synthetic oils was detected by Teng et al. [133]
or Kubach et al. [61]. The impact of viscosity index was not deemed
significant in Andrews et al. [132], whereas in Magar et al. [42] the
addition of a viscosity improver to a 0W-40 lubricant for increased
viscosity would reduce LSPI.

The results indicate that the reduction in oil viscosity does not cause
a clear impact on the formation of LSPI. Variations in oil temperature
or viscosity caused no clear effect on oil release rates from the piston
crevice and crown during motored operation [19,179]. LIF measure-
ments of a GDI spray showed slightly enhanced fuel deposition for a
more viscous oil film at 70 bar injection pressure, but a reversed trend
at 150 bar [180].

4.2.2. Detergent additives

The detergents are composed of a polar head group containing an
anionic functional group associated with a metal cation (mainly Ca2+
and Mg2+) and a hydrocarbon tail. The purposes of metallic deter-
gents in lubricants include suspending insoluble combustion products,
mitigating corrosion through neutralization of acidic products from
combustion and oil oxidation (in the case of overbased detergents) and
maintain a proper antiwear and friction performance [181].

The harmful

impact of calcium in detergents was already ad-
dressed in the early 1970s as part of a study on deposit-initiated
pre-ignition [182]. The promoting effect has since then been confirmed
by several other studies [20,64,119,122,131,163,173,174,183–186].
The steep increase in LSPI for a calcium content between 1000 and
2500 ppm is visible in Fig. 16.

The only exception to our knowledge was shown in [187] where
the LSPI activity was kept virtually the same, despite the calcium
content varying more than an order of magnitude. In this case, the
load was maintained at a moderate level (13 bar IMEPg) contrary to

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106415

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 16. Effect of calcium content in oil detergents on pre-ignition frequency. Hollow symbols indicate a change in phosphorus and molybdenum content. The highest frequency
for each dataset has a relative frequency of 100%. Data obtained from [20,131,163,173,174,183,184]. Only independent LSPI cycles counted in [20,163].

the near maximum load that is normally used in lubricant-related LSPI
studies. This may suggest that the impact of calcium is biased towards
higher engine conditions, especially as the same study showed that the
increased calcium content would promote LSPI at 16 bar IMEPg.

The functional group of the calcium additive may vary between
sulfanate, phenate, salicylate and calixarene [188]. No significant dif-
ferences on LSPI have been noticed between the three former op-
tions [131,163,173,174]. No significant impact has been attributed
to the change in total base number [174] or the alkylate backbone
type [173]. A typical calcium content of oils that have not been
formulated for LSPI mitigation is over 2000 ppm and a replacement
of half of the content with an LSPI-neutral detergent additive would
decrease LSPI significantly.

Interestingly, it is widely reported that a partial or complete substi-
tution of calcium for magnesium suppresses the formation of LSPI [72,
122,131,147,163,173,184,189,190]. In fact, magnesium appears to be
neutral (Fig. 17) to pre-ignition frequencies, despite overbased magne-
sium sulfonate being beneficial for increasing total base number [131].
A magnesium detergent was also beneficial for reaching sufficient
anti-rust performance [189].

The magnesium may be added to the detergent either as a sulfonate
or salicylate, the latter of which performed better in a silicone rubber
compatibility test [191]. It was shown by Kaneko et al. [192] that car-
bonate containing micelles from overbased magnesium sulfanate would
deteriorate the poly-phosphate tribolayer and inhibit MoS2 formation,
thus also counteracting the friction reduction provided by Molybde-
num Dithio Carbamate (MoDTC) and Zinc Dialkyl Dithio Phosphate
(ZnDTP). The increase in friction coefficients in the boundary and thin
film regimes for an all magnesium formulation was reported in Gupta
et al. [190], which was also reflected in deteriorated fuel economy as
compared to an all calcium formulation. The friction performance was
improved by adopting a borated dispersant [192].

Corresponding studies with other metals have shown promising
effects, such as in the case of potassium [193]. A partial substitution
of calcium with lithium also showed benefits, whereas experiments by
Ritchie et al. [173], Kassai et al. [163] and Fletcher et al. [131] indicate
that sodium in the detergent promotes LSPI, likely even more than
calcium. Deliberate injection of sodium sulfonate containing oil lead
to slightly earlier SOC than a base oil [165].

Fig. 17. Effect of calcium (sulfonate) and magnesium content on pre-ignition frequency
in single-metal detergents.
Source: Data obtained from [173].

4.2.3. Friction modifiers and antiwear additives

Molybdenum as an anti-oxidant or as the friction modifier Molyb-
denum Dithio Carbamate (MoDTC) and the antiwear additive Zinc
Dialkyl Dithio Phosphate (ZnDTP) have been identified as quenchers
of LSPI [163,173,174,183,184]. An ashless antioxidant also showed
promising results in [159]. The impact of molybdenum is shown in
Fig. 18.

The phosphorus content is reported to dominate over the zinc
content in mitigating LSPI [131], whereas increasing the alkyl length
in ZnDTP showed slight but no statistically significant increase in
LSPI [173]. ZnDTP may produced using differently structured alcohols
and a ZnDTP produced with a secondary alcohol would be more
effective against LSPI than one made with a primary alcohol [131].

ZnDTP and MoDTC have multifunctional purposes, as they not
only provide friction and wear protection but also function as an-
tioxidants. ZnDTP stabilizes highly reactive radicals and peroxides,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106416

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 18. Impact of Molybdenum content on pre-ignition.
Source: Data obtained from [174,183].

Fig. 19. Impact of oil aging on pre-ignition. Results normalized to the frequency of
the first test of each oil. Hollow symbols represent results for fresh oils tested after the
aged oils. Data obtained from [20,146,162]. Only independent cycles counted in [162].

which possibly counteracts pre-ignition [20,184,194]. The addition
of MoDTC and ZnDTC to ZnDTP exhibit synergy in friction and an-
tioxidant performance [195,196]. Phosphorus can cause poisoning of
catalytic converters. These limitations and interdependences show the
importance of finding a proper balance between additives.

Titanium was highlighted for its antiwear and friction performance
[197]. In addition, 800–1000 ppm of titanium has been shown to
effectively mitigate LSPI for an all calcium oil formulation [190,198].

4.2.4. Oil aging, contamination and dilution

Oil-related experiments are mainly conducted with fresh lubricants.
However, several experiments within recent years have extended the
test matrix to include aged oil as well. In addition to a change in phys-
ical properties from fuel dilution, the long duration at engine conditions
reduces the total base number. Typically, the aging process includes
hundreds of hours of engine operation, but alternative methods, where
the oil is oxidized at elevated temperatures in the presence of a catalyst,
have also been used [175,176].

Oil aging can show a promoting trend on LSPI. Hirano et al. [20]
aged the same Mo-containing oil for 30,000 km in two different cars,
finding that one three-folded the LSPI frequency as compared to a fresh
oil, whereas the other did not degrade LSPI performance. In fact, it
was shown that the number of events would elevate after 50–100 h
of operation [20,146,162] (Fig. 19). The authors repeated LSPI testing
with a fresh oil after the aging study and noticed less pre-ignitions than
during the peaks at 50–100 h of aging. The pre-ignition frequencies
decreased in some cases as the aging continued beyond 100 h.

Little research has concentrated on the combined effects of oil
formulations and aging. The benefits of magnesium appear to hold
throughout aging [147,198], whereas the mitigating impacts from
molybdenum and titanium deteriorated (Fig. 20).

In Haenel et al. [185], a 10,000 miles aged LSPI-resistant for-
mulation showed twice as many independent pre-ignition events as
compared to a fresh one. In this case, both magnesium and molybde-
num were included in the additive package. Swarts et al. [199] did not
find any evidence of oil aging during single 12-hour steady-state engine
tests for LSPI.

No significant change in Derived Cetane Numbers (DCN) was at-
tributed to the oxidation of a Ca-containing 0W-30 lubricant [175].
Constant-pressure ignition measurements, in which 100 h aged and
144 h oxidized group I and III oils with API SN Plus additive package
showed slightly slower ignition as compared to fresh oils [176]. How-
ever, engine wear can introduce Fe and Cu into the oil and thereby aged

Fig. 20. Impact of oil aging on pre-ignition for four different formulations. Frequency
normalized to a fresh baseline oil formulation and corrected for engine effects using
reference tests and linear interpolation for engine hours.
Source: Data obtained from [198].

oil contained more of these metals than a fresh oil [162]. A manual
increment of these metals as naphthenates into the oil promoted LSPI
both for a low and mid-level calcium content [20].

Engine runs at LSPI conditions can cause significantly increased
fuel dilution, which affects the physical properties of the oil. In fact,
only 50,000 cycles of LSPI conditions with a commercial engine caused
enough dilution (9%) to reduce the KV100 of fresh oil by 42%, almost
covering the viscosity difference between fresh 5W-30 and 15W-50
oils [61]. Still, the global dilution levels (without aging and fuel added
directly to the oil pan) do not show a significant change in pre-ignition
counts [185]. This further indicates that a reduction in oil viscosity has
no clear trend on the outcome, as already stated in Section 4.2.1. The
role of the fuel and oil interaction is thus limited to increased crevice
accumulation and potential chemical effects prior to ignition.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106417

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 21. Impact of SOI on pre-ignition or super-knock frequency (only super-
knock cycles counted in [125]). Data obtained from [7,28,59,119,125,163,200,202].
Independent pre-ignition cycles counted in [28,119,163].

4.3. Impact of engine parameters on LSPI

4.3.1. Injection strategy

The benefits of GDI over other injection technologies comprise
reduced mixture temperatures due to in-cylinder evaporation and in-
creased flexibility in injection timing and mixture homogeneity. As
the fuel-wall interactions are an important step for the formation of
deposits and release of fuel–oil droplets, one should consider the ef-
fects of different injections strategies, including fuel pressure, injection
targeting and timing, on LSPI.

Amann et al. [28] showed that the lowest number of pre-ignition
events would result for SOI between 292 and 240 CAD BTDC, with
higher occurrence at SOI before or after this interval. An SOI of 240
CAD BTDC was also found to be optimal for an intake side-mounted
injector in [119], whereas a retardation of SOI to 210 CAD BTDC
would deteriorate the LSPI performance more than an advancement.
Zahdeh, et al. [7] showed the mitigating influence of SOI at 275 CAD
BTDC compared to 305 CAD BTDC for a side-mounted injector, which
was targeting the liner. Singh [200] reduced pre-ignition clearly by
retarding SOI of a central direct injector past 270 CAD BTDC, which
did, however, lower IMEP and increase the Coefficient of Variation
(CoV) of IMEP.

Meanwhile, several studies have revealed that pre-ignition increases
with the retardation of SOI from 300 CAD BTDC. Kassai et al. [163]
and Inoue et al. [125] reported a consistent increase in LSPI and super-
knock, respectively, when retarding the SOI for a side-mounted injector
from 310 to 200 CAD BTDC. Han et al. [201] shows slightly less pre-
ignition for the timing of the first injection (SOI1) in a split injection
strategy at 310 CAD BTDC compared to 290 CAD BTDC and 330 CAD
BTDC with a 6-hole injector. Intake side-mounted swirl and multihole
injectors produced less pre-ignition at 310 CAD BTDC than at 270 and
250 CAD BTDC [59,61]. Mayer et al. [202] found significant increase of
the pre-ignition frequency by retarding the SOI. Especially with lateral
injector position at early SOI of 330 CAD BTDC strong piston crown
wetting occurred, which, however, evaporated rapidly due to the high
piston temperatures. Retarding the SOI led to an increased wall wetting
by fuel impingement. Overall, it appears that retarded injection risks
an increase in pre-ignition, at least when using a side-mounted injector
(Fig. 21).

Fig. 22. Effect of split injection on pre-ignition.
Source: Data obtained from [7,59,164].

Split injection shows repeatedly benefits. Mayer et al. [164] reduced
the pre-ignition propensity of E50 by approximately 90% by chang-
ing to split injection with a side-mounted 7-hole injector. Palaveev
et al. [59] halved pre-ignition events by switching from single injection
at 290 CAD BTDC to a split injection with about 20% of the injected
mass close to the spark timing. Zahdeh et al. [7] decreased LSPI by 78%
with a transition from single injection at 305 CAD BTDC to optimized
split injection. The impacts of split injection strategies on LSPI in these
studies are shown in Fig. 22.

Xu et al. [159] found that the pre-ignition frequency can be sup-
pressed to a third of that of single injection by using equally split
injection pulses, with the SOI1 maintained at 275 CAD BTDC and end
of the second injection at 190 CAD BTDC. A triple injection strategy
by Arnold et al. [203] reduced wall wetting by a factor of 5 in CFD
simulations as compared to a single injection strategy and almost
completely eliminated the occurrence of LSPI in experiments.

Singh et al. [204] applied a split injection strategy for pre-ignition
suppression in a turbocharged engine using gasoline in the first pulse,
and gasoline, ethanol, methanol or water in the second pulse (which
was injected late in the compression stroke). All of these strategies
turned out to mitigate pre-ignition as compared to single injection,
but late injection of gasoline and the alcohols also decreased IMEP
and increased CoV IMEP when the fraction of the second injection was
increased. Water injection was beneficial in reducing the pre-ignition
count when injected during the intake or compression strokes (charge
cooling effect) or late exhaust stroke (quenching pre-ignition precur-
sors) without the compromises on IMEP and CoV IMEP. Furthermore,
Singh et al. [205] applied two or three injection pulses for mitigating
pre-ignition, while calibrating the SOI and duration of injection to
mitigate the compromises on IMEP and combustion instability. They
showed that when a small mass of fuel was delivered in the last injec-
tion pulse close to TDC, the IMEP and CoV IMEP could be compromised
little, while still mitigating pre-ignition as compared to single injection.
A sweep of SOI2 from 183 CAD BTDC to 143 CAD BTDC indicated
lower pre-ignition frequency for an earlier second injection in Han
et al. [201]. Moreover, an increased fuel ratio of the second injection
from 17 to 27 and 40% at 163 CAD BTDC SOI2 lead to more pre-
ignition [201]. A CFD model explained this through a higher wall film
thickness during the compression stroke. Meanwhile, a sweep of the
ratio for the second injection from 37 to 63% revealed the lowest
pre-ignition frequency when at least half of the fuel is injected in the
second pulse for SOI1 300 CAD BTDC and SOI2 210 CAD BTDC, but
the CoV IMEP would increase with a higher fraction of the second
injection [205].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106418

K. Rönn et al.

Although the current vehicle fleet comprises primarily GDI engine
technology and LSPI is often attributed to its related engine parameters,
PFI technology can exhibit it [28]. Singh [200] reported that PFI
caused only slightly less pre-ignition than a central direct injector, but
significantly more as compared to a lateral direct injector. Enhanced
impingement is expected when the end of injection is delayed to after
intake valve opening (IVO), as was the case in Han et al. [201].
However, in Amann et al. [28], a change from open valve injection to
closed valve injection yielded no significant differences in the results.
Injection pressures of GDI systems have been reaching values about
one order of magnitude higher than PFI engines to ensure efficient
evaporation and homogenization within the limited time available
until ignition. An increased injection pressure is critical for better
atomization, but the higher momentum also increases the penetration
of the spray. Thus, the impact of fuel pressure on pre-ignition is
not straightforward, as these factors cause opposing effects on the
magnitude of fuel wall impingement. In a study by Liu et al. [180],
increased fuel pressure from 70 bar to 150 bar with constant injected
mass caused less deposited fuel in the oil in LIF measurements of a
GDI spray. LIF measurements in a pressure vessel showed that the
reduction in deposited fuel amount with increasing injection pressure
is emphasized at boosted pressures [206]. These results can be at-
tributed to a higher incident velocity, which promotes splashing, and
enhanced mixing of fuel and air. However, a reduction of the rail
pressure from 150 bar to 70 bar reduced LSPI by almost a factor
of 10 while using a side-mounted injector with a spray modified to
target the opposite wall for liner wetting (SOI 305 CAD BTDC) [7].
Morikawa et al. [119] changed the fuel pressure from 80 bar to 100
and 120 bar and noticed that LSPI frequency was the lowest at 80 bar.
Singh et al. [205] studied the IMEP, CoV of IMEP and pre-ignition
frequency for three different fuel injection pressures (130, 150 and 170
bar) both for single injection and split injection with a small fraction
of fuel injected at SOI2 30 CAD BTDC. The highest fuel injection
pressure provided a slightly higher IMEP, but also an increasing trend
in pre-ignition.

Injector location and orientation affect spray direction and amount
of fuel impingement on cylinder walls. The LSPI occurrence is obvi-
ously sensitive to the spray pattern. This was shown in studies by
Splitter et al. [187,207], where the centrally-mounted injector was
rotated 45–180◦ to direct the spray towards the wall instead of the
spark plug, resulting in following LSPI cycles. This modification would
also reduce oil pressure with increased oil dilution [187]. The be-
havior can be explained through increased fuel impingement, but an
increasingly inhomogeneous mixing with air was also indicated. A swirl
injector promoted LSPI as compared to a six-hole injector, with an
increased droplet number and more concentrated distribution at 180
CAD BTDC [59]. Meanwhile, increasing the bent angle and narrowing
the spray of a side-mounted multi-hole injector directed the fuel to-
wards the piston crown instead of the liner, resulting in effective LSPI
mitigation [7].

The effect of equivalence ratio on LSPI in gasoline SI engines is not
straightforward. For premixed homogeneous mixtures, the IDT tends
to increase for leaner mixtures. However, in case of a fuel–oil droplet
causing LSPI, the evaporation introduces a locally rich region with
higher reactivity than the surrounding mean mixture [208]. Amann
et al. [9], Xu et al. [159] and Zahdeh et al. [7] found that the
LSPI frequency reduced during fuel enrichment (exhaust λ=0.8–0.95),
whereas a stoichiometric or slightly lean mixture (exhaust λ=1.05–
1.1) increases LSPI. Moreover, the detrimental impact of slightly lean
operation is apparent in Inoue et al. [125], where a transition from
stoichiometric operation to λ=1.13 caused a 3-fold increase in super-
knock cycles. The benefits of fuel enrichment in GDI and PFI engines
were shown by Han et al. [201]. The GDI results are plotted in Fig. 23.
Although it has been shown that fuel enrichment can be favorable
in terms of LSPI, continuous enrichment is not desirable due to de-
teriorated fuel economy. Okada et al. [40] reported that immediate

Fig. 23. Impact of λ on pre-ignition (only super-knock cycles counted in [125]). Data
obtained from [7,9,125,201]. Independent pre-ignition cycles counted in [9].

enrichment during the normal cycle after an initial LSPI event would
almost completely eliminate following LSPI cycles. However, if the
enrichment started two cycles after the initial LSPI event, the following
LSPI cycle would not be as effectively mitigated. This indicates that the
benefits of enrichment are not only attributed to the charge conditions
during the compression stroke, but also to the combustion process and
exhaust composition of the previous normal cycle.

Pischinger et al. [169] reported a lower thermal threshold for sur-
face ignition when using a RON95E0 gasoline in slightly lean conditions
(λ = 1.1), whereas rich conditions at λ = 0.7 (and constant pin) would
result in an over 50 K glowplug temperature increase (Fig. 24). This can
be explained by a reduced cooling effect from decreased GDI fueling
and a higher isentropic exponent, leading to increased temperatures
at the end of compression. Meanwhile, Yu et al. [12] found that the
required glowplug temperature reaches its lowest value at stoichiomet-
ric or slightly rich conditions. In this case the engine was equipped
with PFI, which should mitigate the charge cooling effect, thus making
enrichment less effective.

The mitigating impact of enrichment is presumably due to a com-
bination of the cooling effect and the reduced oxidation of particles
that were released during the previous LSPI cycle. It should however be
noted that the enrichment increases injection duration and mass, which
in turn favor wall wetting. Based on previously mentioned results, the
oxygen-deprived conditions and cooler charge from slight enrichment
outweigh the negative effect from accumulation of fuel on the oil
film. However, enrichment increases fuel consumption and deteriorates
catalyst performance, thus limiting its feasibility to only temporary use.

4.3.2. Gas exchange

The scavenging is crucial in eliminating particles after a super-
knock cycle and mitigate the risk of following LSPI cycles. This would
explain why the number of following LSPI cycles remained low when
using an electrically driven supercharged engine (having higher pin
than exhaust pressure) with a large valve overlap, as shown in the
work of Kuboyama et al. [15]. In turbocharged engines, the insufficient
scavenging has been attributed to LSPI, in particular during super-
knock series. These findings are supported by optical investigations
showing a high density of particles in the combustion chamber after
a pre-ignition event as mentioned in Section 2.1.2. In addition to
enhanced removal of initiation mechanisms, the scavenging of residual
gases decreases the temperature of unburned gases, thus decreasing the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106419

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 24. Impact of λ on glowplug temperature index.
Source: Data obtained from [12,169].

Fig. 25. Pre-ignition count with varying exhaust back pressure, when Tin (squares) and
pin (circles) are kept constant.
Source: Data obtained from [200].

propensity of surface ignition. This was also reported in the work of
Pischinger et al. [169], in which a 10 CAD valve overlap would increase
the glowplug temperature by approximately 20 K for a chosen surface-
ignition frequency. However, Inoue et al. [125] advanced the intake
cam phasing by 30 CAD from a baseline IVO of 390 CAD BTDC and IVC
of 174 CAD BTDC, leading to a higher frequency in super-knock with
increased valve overlap. Moreover, the increased mass of air bypassing
combustion through increased valve overlap makes the exhaust gases
lean, which reduces catalyst compatibility [209].

Exhaust back pressure limits turbocharger efficiency and enhances
conventional knock, as part of the hot exhaust gases remain in the
cylinder [210]. Exhaust back pressure was also shown to enhance LSPI
severely in [207]. The exhaust gas residuals increase the polytropic
constant, causing higher End of Compression Pressure (pEOC) and End
of Compression Temperature (TEOC) at stoichiometric operation [207].
The quantity of residual gases is dependent on the intake valve timing.
At certain timings, the exhaust gas pressure wave from the previous
cylinder will reduce the scavenging of residual gases.

Gao et al. [62] detected pre-ignition in misfiring cylinders and
the cylinders next and last in the firing order as counted from the
misfired cylinder. Moreover, pressure oscillation from the combustion
of unburned gases in the exhaust pipe was connected to super-knock
in the cylinder that followed in the firing order. This was attributed to
the fact that the unburned mixture would burn in the exhaust pipe and
can produce pressure waves. The stronger the pressure fluctuation, the
higher was also the intensity of knock in the power cylinder.

Singh [200] carried out experiments on the impact of exhaust back
pressure on pre-ignition. These experiments were conducted separately
for constant Tin (increased pin with higher back pressure) and constant
pin (lower Tin with higher back pressure). It was shown that pre-ignition
was promoted by higher Tin for cases when pin was higher than exhaust
back pressure and the scavenging of precursors is effective. When both
exhaust back pressure and pin are increased, the scavenging is less
effective due to the increased back pressure. The temperature near TDC
was also calculated to increase in this case. An exponential increase in
pre-ignition tendency was then observed (Fig. 25).

The closing of tumble flaps enables increased charge motion. This
should reduce fuel impingement on the walls and enhance evaporation,
which would explain the reduced pre-ignition events with an intake
side-mounted injector [59,61]. Radwan et al. [211] investigated the
effect of induction manifold angles on pre-ignition with a Ricardo E6
variable compression engine, equipped with a glowplug. A manifold

angle of 40◦–50◦ yielded better surface ignition resistance than 30◦,
60◦ or 90◦.

4.3.3. External exhaust gas recirculation

External EGR can be used to advance the knock limit by dilut-
ing the unburned mixture with relatively inert exhaust gases from
previous cycles. In addition, it offers effective NOx mitigation and
exhaust temperature reduction without the fuel consumption increase
from mixture enrichment or the degradation of aftertreatment systems
during stratified lean burn. EGR may be conducted internally or with a
valve-controlled external loop, the latter of which may use a cooler to
maintain low temperatures within the intake manifold. Low-pressure
EGR is generated by directing a fraction of the post-turbine gases
through a cooler to the compressor, and the following improvement in
fuel consumption is attributed to the advancing of combustion phasing,
low heat transfer and avoidance of rich fueling. This strategy has
improved fuel consumption at 2000 rpm and high loads [210,212].
The improvement was reached by advancing CA50 and eliminating the
need for overfueling, the latter of which improved fuel consumption
significantly as compared to combustion phasing alone [210].

The addition of EGR will contribute to a higher cylinder pressure
in order to maintain a high intake air flow. Meanwhile, the rise of in-
cylinder temperatures is affected by the change in the ratio of specific
heats. EGR offers a lower ratio of specific heats than air. However, as
constant equivalence ratio is applied, the addition of EGR also reduces
the fractions of fuel-related hydrocarbons, which offer significantly
lower heat capacity ratio γ than the gases in EGR. Therefore, the change
in end-gas temperature trajectories is limited (and might even increase
before start of combustion) when adding EGR, while maintaining a
constant value of λ = 1 [213].

Considering the aforementioned results, it is unlikely that thermo-
dynamic cooling of unburned gases is behind the suppressive impact of
EGR on pre-ignition but rather the quenching of reactions caused by
chemical dilution. The mitigating impact of EGR on glowplug ignition
was clearly shown [12].

The mitigating effect of cooled EGR on pre-ignition was shown by
Zaccardi and Serrano [208] for constant load operation with RON97E5
and advancing combustion phasing through improved Knock-limited
Spark Advance (KLSA). Amann et al. [8] reduced LSPI by using low-
pressure cooled EGR in moderate levels, while maintaining constant
combustion phasing or advancing the spark timing to KLSA. The results

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106420

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 26. Impact of low-pressure cooled EGR on pre-ignition frequency.
Source: Data obtained from [8,72,208].

Fig. 27. Impact of coolant temperature on pre-ignition. Data obtained from [20,60,61,
119,134,140,163,202]. Only independent LSPI cycles counted in [20,140,163].

in Fig. 26 indicate a consistent reduction in LSPI as the EGR rate
approaches 10%.

It should be noted that the increment of EGR may result in promoted
deposit buildup. High-load operation at 5% low-pressure cooled EGR
would again be beneficial as compared to 0% in terms of LSPI mit-
igation in Kar et al. [72]. However, the following operation without
EGR showed more LSPI than corresponding operation before using
EGR. Borescope images revealed significant deposit buildup after the
160,000 cycle EGR operation. Repeating this procedure with an im-
proved oil formulation resulted in no LSPI before, during and after EGR
operation, despite the deposit buildup.

The immediate benefits of EGR are comprehensive. Its inhibiting
effect on super-knock formation is not only limited to less frequent pre-
ignition but also includes the suppressive effect on the knocking itself.
The latter effect will be addressed in Section 4.5.2.

4.3.4. Measures to restrict oil transport and carryover

As droplet release from the top land is a pathway to LSPI, measures
to mitigate lubricant oil consumption are attractive solutions. Tran-
sient engine operation showed that oil that had been accumulated in
the crevice was burned during acceleration, resulting in increased oil
consumption. Several pre-ignition cycles were detected during steady-
state conditions immediately after the acceleration [140]. Increasing
the tension of the top ring [42] and the oil control ring [7] resulted
in reduced LSPI. Furthermore, increasing the wear resistance of the
top ring and conformability of the oil control ring allows for reduced
oil consumption and blow-by. Suggestions for improved ring designs
were given in Sekarapandian et al. [214], including U-flex oil control
rings instead of three-piece oil control rings and double layer physical
vapor deposition coating with nitrided steel instead of plasma-coating
on the top rings. An improved ring pack with smaller ring gaps and
a modified third land reduced both oil consumption and pre-ignition
during steady-state tests [140]. However, high-speed camera footage
from motored operation suggests that the piston ring gap is a less
frequent source for droplet intrusion as compared to the piston crevice
or crown [17].

PCV recirculates blow-by gases from the crankcase to the intake
manifold. The PCV includes an oil separator, but oil mist may enter
the intake manifold. A slightly higher frequency of LSPI was noticed for
PCV as compared to open air ventilation in Morikawa et al. [119]. Luo
et al. [134] and Inoue et al. [125] reported that the LSPI/super-knock
could be lowered with improved oil separator efficiency. No significant
impact of the PCV was found in [124].

4.3.5. Engine aging and cleanliness

A reduction in LSPI activity over multiple tests was ascribed to a
gradual deterioration of the engine [199]. This phenomenon was first
observed by Andrews et al. [132] and confirmed by Kocsis et al. [149]
wherein extended testing on the same engine required an appropriate
adjustment to the measured activity to account for the change in sever-
ity of the engine. Swarts et al. [199] additionally demonstrated that
new engines would undergo a rapid decrease in severity during initial
LSPI testing, even after break-in, and would continue to deteriorate,
albeit it a slower rate, after this stabilization. The paper also showed
that different engines behave differently during the stabilization and
stabilized phases and also different from each other, reinforcing the
need for continual reference testing to enable quantitative comparisons.
A reduction was also noticed by Sethi et al. [162] after approx 200 h
and by Michlberger et al. [146] during 76,250 miles of engine oper-
ation. Kocsis et al. [149] applied a correction to the measured LSPI
events per test to account for not only changes within an engine due to
aging, but also differences between different engines of the same type.
Disassembly and cleaning of an existing LSPI test engine revealed no
impact on activity, indicating a negligible impact from deposits [130].
Consequently, the reduced activity was attributed to impaired oil trans-
port at the liner resulting from increased wear with a fuel-diluted
oil.

4.3.6. Coolant and oil temperature

Increasing the coolant temperature restricts the formation of LSPI
precursors. It is directly linked to the surface temperatures of the
cylinder, and since a high local temperature improves splashing and
the evaporation of the volatile species, both the deposit mass [46]
and fuel–oil film thickness during compression will be reduced. The
reduction in LSPI from higher coolant temperature has been reported
by several studies [7,20,60,61,72,119,134,140,163,202,203,215] and
a temperature of 95 ◦C can be deduced as sufficient (Fig. 27). Hirano
et al. [20] and Zahdeh et al. [7] also noticed a simultaneous reduction
in crankcase oil dilution and the filter smoke number, respectively.
To our knowledge, the only exceptions for reduced pre-ignition with
increased coolant temperature was shown by Han et al. [201] and
Mounce [216], the former of which noticed a small increase in pre-
ignition when changing coolant temperature from 88 to 98 ◦C with split
injection.

Results also suggest that a cooled piston yield higher LSPI counts
than high-temperature conditions [7,202]. The improved evaporation

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106421

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 28. The amount of fuel adhesion onto a 10 μm oil film for varying wall temperature. LIF measurements of 100 bar injection at 90 mm distance and 70◦ angle.
Source: Reprinted from [217] with permission from SAE.

of fuel was indicated by lower filter smoke number and hydrocarbon
emissions [7]. Mounce [216] found that oil temperature was a signif-
icant positive determinant for LSPI activity in the range 75 to 95 ◦C
whereas coolant temperature was not significant. On the contrary, a
reduction in oil temperature increased LSPI in [202].

The often reported benefits of higher coolant temperatures can
be attributed to mitigated fuel adhesion on the oil film and faster
evaporation of the volatile species. Fuel adhesion experiments (Fig. 28)
with a 100 bar single-hole injection onto a 10 μm oil film by Kouchi
et al. [217] show a clear reduction in the amount of fuel on the liner
as the wall temperature becomes higher, which was attributed to the
Leidenfrost effect.

The impact of wall temperature on fuel–oil film thickness reduc-
tion was shown by Zhang et al. [22] using a numerical model with
multicomponent fuel and oil formulations that takes into account mass
and heat transfer at the fuel–oil film and boundary movement through
evaporation (Fig. 29). The fuel film was formed at 100 CAD ATDC
and the simulation terminated at 100 CAD BTDC when the upwards
traveling piston is assumed to reach the film and collect the mixture
into the crevice. One can notice that the initial thickness of the film
has a strong impact on the final thickness, more so than the liner
temperature and vertical location on the liner (20 to 100 CAD BTDC).
However, for a 20 μm thickness, the sensitivity to liner temperature
is strong between 400 and 500 K. Therefore, it is likely that some
LSPI cycles in the aforementioned studies have been prevented by the
Leidenfrost effect and enhanced evaporation of fuel due to a higher
coolant temperature.

4.3.7. Intake conditions

The increased boosting of downsized engines is the main cause
for why LSPI and super-knock have become a critical issue for the
automotive industry. Zahdeh et al. [7] increased the manifold air
pressure by 0.2 bar (or 10%) resulting in twice as many LSPI cycles.
Super-knock occurred for pin exceeding 1.9 bar in Inoue et al. [125]
and the frequency would reach 800 ppm for 2.3 bar. However, in this
case, a positive event was defined both through early ignition and
knocking, making it difficult to assess whether the development is due
to increased risk of LSPI or detonation.

Glowplug measurements with a certification fuel by Yu et al. [12]
resulted in a lower resistance for glowplug ignition following a rise
in pin, both for fixed intake air mass and temperature. It has also
been shown by various studies that the chemical IDTs of gasolines and
their surrogate blends reduce with increasing pressures as measured

in RCMs [218–220]. The rise in pEOC from 13 bar to 25 bar at 850 K
shortened the total IDT of a suspended oil droplet in a stoichiometric
iso-octane/O2/Ar blend from 6.5 to 4.2 ms [165], while at lower tem-
peratures (740 K) the total IDT would remain almost the same as the
pressure approached 20 bar [34]. Faster ignition was also detected for
elevated pressures in fuel–oil droplet constant-volume measurements at
573 K [151]. These results indicate that the gaseous fuel–air mixture
increases its reactivity at boosted condition, while the effect of an oil
or fuel–oil droplet can vary by the conditions. Whether the droplet
is volatile and reactive enough to cause pre-ignition at these boosted
conditions will be discussed in section 5.1.

The intake air temperature affects the formation of pre-ignition
precursors and their propensity to initiate a flame. Firstly, a minimum
Tin should be chosen in order to ensure proper evaporation of the liquid
fuel for mitigation of wall wetting. Improved evaporation of injected
fuel is presumably the reason for less pre-ignition when increasing
the manifold air temperature from 20 ◦C with split injection [201].
Secondly, a maximum limit should be decided, as an excessive Tin will
elevate the mixture temperature throughout the compression stroke,
leading to more susceptible conditions for the fuel–air mixture to
ignite from a pre-ignition precursor. Glowplug ignition propensity of
a certification gasoline for an elevating Tin has been investigated by
Yu et al. [12] both for a constant pin (reducing charge density) and air
mass. In both cases, the propensity for glowplug ignition increased for
a sweep of the Tin from 40 ◦C to 100 ◦C.

Kar et al. [72] reported increased LSPI for a higher Tin. Changing the
temperature between 26 and 42 ◦C was considered insignificant for the
frequency of LSPI with super-knock in Inoue et al. [125]. Meanwhile,
Zahdeh et al. [7] reported a promoting influence for 50 ◦C manifold air
temperature as compared to 30 ◦C with constant MAP. However, the
same study found that the detrimental impact of a higher temperature
after the charge air cooler can be eliminated with a sufficiently high oil
control ring tension.

4.3.8. Spark parameters

A heavy retardation of the spark timing from the knock limit tends
to increase the CoV IMEP and exhaust temperatures towards the turbine
inlet limit. No significant change in LSPI was noticed by Morikawa et al.
when retarding the timing by 5 CAD [119]. The retardation slightly
decreased super-knock in Inoue et al. [125].

The spark plug itself is an unlikely cause for pre-ignition and super-
knock in modern gasoline engines. This is evident in investigations by
Inoue et al. [125], where the heat range or electrode designs did not
affect super-knock frequencies.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106422

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 29. The ratio of fuel–oil film thickness at various points of the compression stroke and initial thickness with respect to cylinder wall temperatures.
Source: Reprinted from [22] with permission from SAE.

4.4. Impact of fuel parameters on super-knock

As already explained in Section 2, autoignition is a step in the
development to super-knock. Therefore, super-knock peak-pressures
and KI can be expected to relate well to the change in octane numbers.
Mansfield et al. [158] compared AKI 88 and AKI 94 gasolines without
significant differences in median LSPI SOC, yet finding clear dissim-
ilarity in the following frequency of autoignition and median peak
pressures. Only 2% of the LSPI cycles exhibited autoignition with AKI
94, whereas the corresponding share for AKI 88 was 56%. Moreover,
the share of heat released from autoignition was less than 10% for
the high-grade fuel and 10–55% for the low-grade fuel. Thus, it is not
surprising that the peak pressure were about 30 bar higher for the latter
fuel. In Hulser et al. [57], only 2-methyltetrahydrofuran and gasoline
(RON88 and RON96) would exhibit heavy knocking after pre-ignition,
whereas 2-methylfuran and ethanol (RON101 and RON107) would not.
Haenel et al. [138] and Mayer et al. [164] both reported the
mitigating impact of ethanol on the severity of super-knock, but nei-
ther attempted to separate the possible confounding impact of octane
numbers. Two papers by Swarts et al. [69,70] studied the impact of fuel
composition on not only the LSPI frequency but also on the severity of
the ensuing super-knock. The study of nine market fuels provided lower
knock intensities with increased octane numbers and ethanol content.
This was found not to be the case for 17 specially prepared test fuel
blends, nine of which contained no ethanol and rest with 15% ethanol
content.

4.5. Impact of engine parameters on super-knock

4.5.1. Injection strategy

Singh and Dibble [126] studied the direct injection of excess fuel
for mitigating conventional knock and super-knock. Under boosted
conditions, a low excess fuel quantity at 5 CAD BTDC led to knock
suppression, but beyond a threshold value, higher fueling resulted in
pre-ignition events.

A heavy reduction in equivalence ratio should also reduce the
probability for LSPI to develop into super-knock. This is apparent in
Fig. 9 by Liu et al. [115], where detonation would occur for spark-
ignited iso-octane RCM experiments with λ = 1.0 and λ = 1.6, but not
for λ = 1.8.

4.5.2. Exhaust gas recirculation

The inhibiting effect of EGR on conventional knock has been shown
by various studies, manifesting itself through earlier KLSA [210,213]
and combustion phasing [8,208]. The slower propagation of a CO2

diluted flame mitigated the formation of compression waves [221]. Dai
et al. [108] found that the excitation time increases with CO2 dilution
for n-heptane/air mixtures at 40.5 bar and 1000 K, reducing the risk
of coupling between the pressure and reaction wave. The location of
the peak pressure was retarded for LSPI cycles with increased EGR [8].
This implies that a later pre-ignition or the longer delay between SOC
and SOK in a diluted charge allows the expansion stroke to begin
before knocking, thus also mitigating the risk of detonations. It is thus
no surprise that an increment of EGR has shown suppressed knock
intensity for LSPI-initiated knock. This is visible in Amann et al. [8],
where an increment of EGR from 0% to 6% and 10% significantly
reduced the average knock intensity of LSPI cycles.

5. Discussion and future needs

5.1. Prerequisites for LSPI from oil

A few simulations have been conducted for identifying thresh-
old conditions for droplets and fuel–air mixtures before pre-ignition.
Palaveev et al. [59] conducted numerical modeling for droplets with
n-heptane chemistry and n-hexadecane physical properties at high-load
conditions and the earliest ignition they could predict was at −3.5
CAD ATDC for a 60 μm droplet with an initial temperature of 470 K
and a high initial gas-phase temperature of 450 K. This indicates that
enhanced reactivity would be needed for oil droplets to cause LSPI at
several CAD BTDC. No autoignition of local n-heptane vapor was found
before TDC in [124]. In recent studies, it has become popular to use
n-hexadecane as a lubricant surrogate in experimental and numerical
studies, as the computed chemical ignition delay times of n-alkanes
C7 − C16 can show remarkable similarities in the low-temperature
region [222,223]. It should however be noted that n-hexadecane repre-
sents the lower range of carbon chain lengths in commercial lubricants
as the chain length can reach C40 [224,225]. This difference may still
introduce some discrepancy, as up to 25% longer IQT IDTs were shown
at the low-temperature region for n-hexadecane as compared to base
and commercial oils [29].

It should be noted that the average end of compression temperatures
are unlikely to exceed 700 K in turbocharged, GDI engines, as shown
in a comparison between different Tin, loads and fuels by Birkigt
et al. [226]. They concluded that the temperature at TDC for a 90%
load with a RON95 fuel is 661 K. The temperatures at TDC were
estimated through rotational coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy
measurements and isentropic calculations for stoichiometric mixtures
at 9.3:1 CR, 289 K Tin, 2.01 bar pin, SOI 300 CAD BTDC and 1800 rpm,
thus representing LSPI prone conditions well.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106423

K. Rönn et al.

The charge motion affects the homogeneity of mixture stoichiom-
etry and temperature. CFD modeling of the stoichiometric injection
from a centrally-mounted injector at 2000 rpm presented distribution
of the temperature at TDC ranging between 660 and 750 K, the latter
of which would coincide close to the exhaust valve at a locally lean
region [124]. Considering that a reactive base oil droplet could enter
this region and form a small rich and reactive mixture, the 750 K
can be considered to represent the worst case scenario for LSPI to
occur. Döhler and Schaffner [120] found through endoscopic access
that the most common location for pre-ignition would be close to the
exhaust valve. The exhaust valve temperature was determined through
infrared measurements to be around 425 ◦C at 40 CAD BTDC during
steady-state, wide-open throttle operation with retarded spark timing.
Based on aforementioned simulations, it appears unlikely that pre-
ignition several CAD before TDC could be reached solely with base
oil droplets. The chemical reactivity of oil is high but the volatility
is low. For instance, Fei et al. [34,35] measured the autoignition of
gaseous iso-octane both with and without an oil droplet in an RCM,
finding that the droplet would enhance ignition below 16 bar at 680
K and below 20 bar at 740 K, with diminishing impact at the higher
pressures. While these temperatures are close to end-of-compression
conditions in a gasoline engine, the pressures are below the end-
of-compression pressures during heavily boosted operation. However,
considering that the droplet temperature influences evaporation, it is
necessary to study the constraints for it throughout the compression
stroke. Ohtomo et al. [227] and Ohtomo et al. [228] used a Rapid
Compression and Expansion Machine (RCEM) to compare total IDTs
for oil (API group 3, no additives) droplets at different initial droplet
temperatures and diameters in both air and gasoline–air mixtures. A
410 μm droplet required an initial temperature in excess of 250 ◦C
to exhibit vapor ignition during the 25 ms (translating to 1200 rpm)
compression stroke (+5 ms at the TDC) (with TEOC = 530 ◦C and
pEOC = 19 bar), and an initial temperature of 335 ◦C would exhibit
vapor ignition and flame propagation in the gasoline–air mixture in 23
cases out of 30 tests. Furthermore, EGR mitigated oil vapor ignition
effectively, while RON and equivalence ratio showed only minor impact
on the probability of ignition. A reduction in the oil droplet size in RCM
tests with ambient air, iso-octane/O2/N2/Ar and methane/O2/N2/Ar
mixture would enhance earlier ignition of the oil as the droplet tem-
perature rise and evaporation is faster [33,228,229]. This is supported
by calculations by Ito et al. [17] where a droplet diameter of 50 μm
would almost reach the in-cylinder temperature before TDC. A 0.2 mm
oil droplet was calculated to be approximately 1500 times slower to
reach the maximum vapor mass fraction on the surface in an inert
environment above TDC conditions (773–1023 K and up to 50 bar) as
compared to a 0.05 mm diameter [230].

The temperature of the oil film at the liner does not generally exceed
200 ◦C, and thereby it appears that the oil droplet must be very small
in size or heated during the previous cycle. It was determined through
numerical simulations that a relatively large droplet (250–500 μm)
would survive the previous power and exhaust strokes, resulting in
droplet temperatures above 300 ◦C at the early compression stroke,
which is enough to cause ignition [227,228]. Support for this theory
is provided by Welling et al. [231], where some deliberately injected
oil droplets during the early exhaust stroke would remain in the cylin-
der and autoignite during the following cycles. Similarly, Döhler and
Pritze [43] proposed that diffusively burning droplets survive the gas
exchange and initiate pre-ignition during the next cycle based on their
optical findings.

Already a small addition of NO (100 ppm) in 25% N2-diluted engine
operation at 2000 rpm and 19 bar IMEP showed a need for ignition re-
tardation due to knocking [212]. It is known that NOx also participates
in reactions with the engine oil, as shown by Coultas [232] in engine
and nitro-oxidation bench tests. The reaction path initiated through H-
abstraction from oil species by NO2, forming hydrocarbon radicals that
further react to form peroxide species and nitrate esters. These species

decompose to form free radicals. The formation and decomposition of
nitrate esters are sensitive to the oil temperature, as the peak of nitrate
esters formed at 130 ◦C, whereas at 150 ◦C the decomposition back
to RO radicals and NO2 would consume them. The impacts of these
or other radicals on oil or oil–fuel reactivity in LSPI-relevant engine
conditions would be of interest to predict pre-ignition before TDC.

Lauer et al. [14] first approached to simulate pre-ignition in a
stochastic reactor model by injecting an n-heptane droplet at 100 CAD
ATDC into a toluene reference fuel. The reactivity of pure n-heptane
was deemed too slow to cause pre-ignition, and thereby a small fraction
of octylketohydroperoxide was added to the droplet. This triggered
autoignition at a timing of −17.5 CAD ATDC, thus corresponding well
with pre-ignition cycles in engine experiments. Considering that other
modeling efforts with n-heptane also have predicted too slow reactivity
for pre-ignition [59], it appears that initial reactions of alkane chain
branching occurring before droplet ejection from the crevice is a crucial
step for LSPI.

The reason for why a substitution of calcium with magnesium in
the oil detergent reduced LSPI still remains unknown. The additives
do not show the same consistent difference in IQT measurements as
in engine operation, as fuel–oil mixtures containing different levels of
calcium and magnesium additives showed no variation in DCN [175].
Combustion bomb measurements in air at 773 K and 45 bar by Kassai
et al. [163] showed no reduction in IDT when calcium salicylate, cal-
cium sulphonate or ZnDTP were added to base oil. Similar conclusions
can be drawn from IQT measurements at 15 bar and 680–873 K in
air by Kuti et al. [29] where total IDTs of 20W-50 with an additive
package (including antiwear additives in addition to detergents) did
not differ significantly from those of pure base stocks. No significant
differences in IDTs could be inferred for 1,157–20,000 ppm calcium
containing oils blended in 25% p-xylene during IQT measurements at
30 bar, 10% O2 and 620–770 K [187]. In fact, IDTs in 50-75 bar,
750–850 K constant-pressure air flow were either similar or longer
for high-calcium oil formulations as compared to LSPI-mitigating ad-
ditive packages [176]. Remembering that the in-cylinder pressure and
temperature in a turbocharged engine should not exceed 40 bar and
750 K before ignition, one can notice that the constant-volume and
constant-pressure measurements in air at relevant conditions do not
exhibit the increased reactivity from Ca-rich lubricant detergents that
would be expected based on LSPI measurements. Differential scanning
calorimetry at 10 bar measurements exhibited reduced autoignition
temperature for an increased amount of calcium detergent, but little
difference between magnesium and calcium detergents [184].

On the contrary, increased calcium content in a group 3 oil showed
a clear reduction in IDT when injected into high-temperature atmo-
spheric co-flow (1123–1173 K) [233]. No significant impact was found
from the addition of Mg [178]. Kassai et al. [234] showed advanced
ignition when adding calcium additive into an iso-octane droplet,
which was injected to a gaseous PRF mixture in an RCEM. However,
they found no significant impact on the IDT when adding calcium into
an iso-octane/base oil droplet injected into a methane mixture. This
indicates that the effect of calcium is fuel dependent. Moreover, calcium
salicylate was shown to promote autoignition and conventional knock-
ing when mixed purely into PRF50, whereas sodium and magnesium
would not encourage autoignition [235,236]. It has been indicated that
the deposits formed by the addition of calcium salicylate in the fuel
would enhance the autoignition [237].

The impact from calcium was theorized by Moriyoshi et al. [238] to
be caused by reactions involving CaO and CaCO3. Initially, CaCO3 de-
composes to CaO and CO2, due to the heat release during combustion.
During the next compression stroke, the reverse exothermic reaction
occurs and heats up the droplet to a temperature where pre-ignition
may take place. This theory would also explain why substitution of
calcium with magnesium reduces LSPI, as the reaction enthalpy for the
MgO/MgCO3 reaction is significantly lower than for the corresponding

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106424

K. Rönn et al.

reaction with calcium [239]. The decomposition and its reverse reac-
tion do not explain the promoting effect of calcium in single-stroke
applications, such as the RCEM experiments by Kassai et al. [234].
Therefore, they proposed that the impact may be due to catalytic
enhancement of H abstraction [194].

A third theory for the impact of detergents was expressed by Splitter
et al. [187], in which the detergent metals would enhance the reactivity
of nitro compounds in the oil. This was supported by results show-
ing that the LSPI activity would increase with calcium content at a
moderate load with a CH3NO2 doped RON70 fuel. This effect was not
observed without the addition of CH3NO2, suggesting that the nitrogen
levels in the crevice accumulation have a role in the formation of LSPI.
A mitigating effect of ZnDTP has been concluded through the vari-
ous engine experiments that were addressed in Section 4.2.3. This effect
of ZnDTP was also shown by slower ignition in an RCEM when added
in increased amounts to an iso-octane droplet that was injected into
a PRF90/air mixture [234]. Furthermore, increased ZnDTP resulted
in longer IDTs in high-temperature (1123–1223 K) atmospheric co-
flow [178,233]. A high fraction of phosphate (5–10 vol-%) increased
the IDT of hexadecane in 573 K air at 4 and 12 bar, whereas 5% of
magnesium would not change the IDT [240]. Meanwhile, no impact on
autoignition was inferred from the addition of molybdenum and zinc
into the fuel itself (PRF50) [241].

5.2. Pre-ignition in other engines

Lubricant-initiated pre-ignition is not only restricted to gasoline
engines for automotive use but has also been encountered in medium-
speed gas engines [242]. In this case, the countermeasures include
reduced amount of oil in the combustion chamber, lower compression
temperatures and suppressing the flame kernel propagation. In recog-
nition of this Yasueda and coworkers coined the phrase lubricating oil
autoignition or LOA [243–245].

A natural gas or dual fuel engine should counteract pre-ignition
effectively since cylinder wall wetting and crevice accumulation from
impinging fuel droplets are deemed unlikely as the gaseous methane
is port-injected and the small fraction of pilot diesel fuel is injected
directly close to TDC. Still, pre-ignition has been encountered in small
gas and dual fuel engines operating on natural gas and biogas and its
probability increases with higher load [246–248]. Surface ignition was
ruled out by Konigsson [248] as the required glowplug temperature
for repeated pre-ignition was approximately 1000 ◦C and sporadic
events would occur at much lower temperatures. As with gasoline
engines, the lubricant oil has an influence on pre-ignition. The reduc-
tion in chemical IDT is apparent with increased n-hexadecane content
into methane [249]. However, the benefits of reduced calcium in the
lubricant could not be shown [248].

The delay of pilot fuel SOI for dual fuel combustion caused an
increase in LSPI [208]. This was explained to be both due to a longer
time available for pre-ignition to occur and an increase in exhaust and
residual gas temperatures. An increase in the methane number results
in lower intensity of the following knock after pre-ignition [247,248].
Zaccardi and Serrano [208] reported a 9-fold increase in methane–
diesel dual fuel LSPI frequency when decreasing φ from 1 to 0.75 with a
constant pilot SOI and simultaneous rise in intake air pressure (Fig. 30).
Thus, the rise in pressure maintains a fixed load and counterbalances
the longer IDTs that follow a lower equivalence ratio. Meanwhile, the
required Tin for pre-ignition was increased by approximately 50 K when
increasing λ from 1.35 to 1.6, while keeping the load constant [247].
As with SI engines, a dual fuel engine with a high compression ratio
shows improvement with EGR [208,248]. The trend is apparent despite
variations in piston configuration and equivalence ratio [208].

Zaccardi and Serrano [208] noticed that the LSPI rate would in-
crease when decreasing the compression ratio from 17:1 to 16:1 in a
multi-cylinder dual fuel engine. The lower compression ratio would
produce higher exhaust gas temperatures and residual rates, which

Fig. 30. Impact of equivalence ratio in a single-cylinder 0.5 l methane-diesel dual fuel
engine. Increased pin used for lower φ in order to maintain constant load.
Source: Reprinted from [208] with permission from SAE.

counteracted the reduced pressure during compression. An increased
Tin also enhanced pre-ignition [248], which has been supported through
faster ignition of suspended oil droplets in RCM measurements [229].
Green hydrogen is an attractive fuel due to its carbon-free emissions.
However, pre-ignition restricted the increment of H2 in a 1.3 l single-
cylinder diesel dual fuel engine already at intermediate loads (7 bar
IMEP) [250].

Liquified petroleum gas (LPG) blends with varying levels of C3
and C4 with late combustion phasing and high intake air temperature
revealed an improved gas phase pre-ignition resistance with higher
propane content [251].

Two-stroke engines have exhibited pre-ignition at very high speeds.
The reason appears to be slow combustion during the preceding cycle,
which leads to immediate combustion during the following compres-
sion stroke [252].

5.3. Progress and future needs

The conclusions from Sections 4.1–4.3 are shown in Fig. 31, in
which the green color indicates a higher likelihood for a mitigating
impact against LSPI and the red color indicates a higher likelihood
for a promoting impact. Meanwhile, the yellow color indicates that
the impact is close to neutral, whereas the impacts of black factors
have not been properly concluded yet and can vary heavily between
experimental setups.

An adoption of the effective LSPI mitigation strategies allows the
automotive industry to continue the downsizing of gasoline engines.
Morikawa et al. [119] applied very high pin in combination with a Ca-
free oil and low-pressure EGR or Miller timing, achieving IMEPg values
of 28.5 and 30.2 bar at 1500 rpm, respectively. Strategies for highly
downsized engine operation were also studied by Martin et al. [209].
Most pre-ignition studies in this review have been performed at loads
below these examples and it would be beneficial to expand testing to
loads approaching 30 bar IMEP.

Improvements in fuel economy can be reached through further
reductions in oil viscosities and lower hydrodynamic friction, although
the effect may vary significantly by the vehicle [253]. These im-
provements have been approached through newly developed viscosity
modifiers [254] and sludge handling systems [255]. The boundary
lubrication was improved with a borated calcium detergent that re-
duces boundary friction through promoted MoS2 formation [256]. An

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106425

K. Rönn et al.

Fig. 31. Factors in the formation of LSPI.

interesting scope would be to compare how these borated detergents
compare to carbonate detergents in LSPI tests.

Besides a higher coolant temperature, the increment of cooled low-
pressure EGR was found to be a potential remedy for LSPI and super-
knock. However, IDT studies of oil–fuel droplets in EGR diluted gaso-
line mixtures would allow to quantify its impact on LSPI formation.
Similarly, variations in the composition of both the droplet and ambient
gasoline mixture in IDT studies would be beneficial to understand
the impact of fuel formulations on LSPI beyond the susceptibility
to cause fuel-wall wetting and top ring zone retention. Furthermore,
additional ignition studies on commercial base oils would be beneficial
to understand their reactivity as compared to any potential surrogate
species.

Despite the significant enhancing impact of calcium-rich oil de-
tergents on LSPI, the pathway through which they activate ignition
has not yet been proven in the studied literature. Therefore, elaborate
studies on how detergent metals interact with different hydrocarbon
chemistries at engine relevant conditions would widen the understand-
ing on why magnesium-based detergents have proven to be a remedy
for LSPI. We recommend further fundamental studies on the impact
of calcium on the reactivity between heavy fuel components, lubricant
components and NOX at conditions relevant to the top ring zone and
the compression stroke.

Steady-state engine tests have become the standard to evaluate the
impact of oils, fuel, hardware and operational conditions on LSPI. The
multi-segment tests published by Southwest Research Institute and FEV
established the basis for the development of the Sequence IX engine to
evaluate the effect of engine oil on LSPI. The paper by Mounce [216]
provided a practical guide to not only the test engine modification
and test-stand requirements, but also details of the prove-out and
precision matrices required to ultimately arrive at a precision statement
of the test. The practice of testing reference oils to allow read-across
between different engine is also firmly established. The Sequence IX
test was ultimately codified in ASTM D8291 [257] and accepted as
the gauge for conformance to LSPI performance requirements in the
ILSAC Standards For Passenger Car Engine Oils (GF-6 A and GF-6B),
as well as the earlier, interim SN PLUS, and latest American Petroleum
Institute (API) service category SP, for gasoline engine oils. The same
test method is required for adherence to categories A7/B7 and C6 or

the ACEA European Oil Sequences for Light-duty Engines. An LSPI
performance required was also incorporated as a requirement in the
second generation (Gen2) of GM dexos1TM oil specification.

Much of the understanding of LSPI is based on these steady state
engine tests, supported by real-life, on-road experiences. There has been
very little published in the way of transient testing, aimed at replicating
the in-vehicle behavior. The performance requirement for the third
generation (Gen3) of GM dexos1TM oils incorporate a transient engine
test which is expected to be more severe than any of the previous
steady-state tests. Very little is known about the details of this test.

6. Conclusions

This article provided a review of the phenomena behind LSPI and
super-knock in gasoline engines. Furthermore, suitable methods for
mitigating LSPI have been presented. LSPI has been a threshold in the
further downsizing of gasoline engines through increased boosting, and
effective mitigation of this issue will allow further improvements in fuel
economy and emissions reductions, while reducing the risk of hardware
damage from super-knock. Some of the main findings of this review
include:

Initiation of LSPI precursors: LSPI is a stochastic phenomenon
and occurs every 10,000–100,000 cycles under high-load and low-
speed conditions. Oil–fuel droplets that have been ejected from the top
ring crevice and deposits can be the precursors for LSPI events. An
LSPI event can release more pre-ignition precursors, thereby initiating
following LSPI cycles.

Development to super-knock: The pre-ignited flame compresses
unburned end-gases to the point of autoignition. The following knock-
ing may exhibit very high intensities if a detonation follows the au-
toignition. This detonation can be the result of an autoignitive reaction
wave coupling with the pressure wave in a hotspot or as the result of a
shock wave interacting with cylinder surfaces and a propagating flame.
Impact of fuel parameters: A high volatility fuel (i.e. by reducing
the distillation temperatures T50–T90) substantially reduces LSPI due
to mitigated wetting of the cylinder wall and reduced oil–fuel dilution
at the top ring crevice. Therefore, fuels with high fractions of C9+
aromatics were susceptible to LSPI. The research octane number has
not shown a notable impact on the LSPI frequency, but some studies

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106426

K. Rönn et al.

indicate a higher average knock intensity after an LSPI event for
low-octane fuels. The impact of ethanol varied significantly between
studies.

Impact of oil parameters: Oils with higher concentrations of cal-
cium have been established as common LSPI promoters, whereas al-
ready a partial substitution of calcium for magnesium reduces LSPI.
ZnDTP and MoDTC suppress LSPI, while sodium promotes it. LSPI
experiments with aged oils have been published within recent years,
showing that the aging can affect LSPI frequencies.

Impact of engine parameters: Fuel injection strategies that reduce
wall impingement, including split injection and spray targeting that
avoids the cylinder liner, can effectively reduce LSPI. Late injection
timings during the intake stroke have in several studies revealed a
promoting impact on LSPI, while increased fuel injection pressure has
not shown a mitigating effect despite improved atomization. Fuel en-
richment has been shown to mitigate LSPI and can thereby be suitable
to mitigate the risk of following events. The integration of cooled EGR
and higher coolant temperatures have also counteracted LSPI, and the
former of these appears to mitigate the risk of super-knock after an LSPI
event. Engine aging tends to reduce the frequency of LSPI.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Kristian Rönn: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization,
Roles/Writing – original draft, Writing –
review & editing.
Andre Swarts: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing – original
draft, Writing – review & editing. Vickey Kalaskar: Writing
– review & editing. Terry Alger: Supervision. Rupali Tripathi:
Roles/Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Juha
Keskiväli: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. Ossi Kaario:
Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. Annukka Santasalo-
Aarnio: Investigation, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Rolf
Reitz: Writing – review & editing. Martti Larmi: Supervision,
Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgments

The authors want to thank the support by the Dean’s grant of Aalto
University School of Engineering, Henry Ford Foundation of Finland
and Technology Industries of Finland, Combustion Engines Branch
Group.

References

[1] International Energy Agency. Fuel economy in major car markets: Technology

and policy drivers 2005–2017. 2019.

[2] Petitjean D, Bernardini L, Middlemass C, Shahed S. Advanced gasoline en-
gine turbocharging technology for fuel economy improvements. Tech. Rep.,
(2004-01-0988). SAE Technical Paper; 2004.

[3] Fraser N, Blaxill H, Lumsden G, Bassett M. Challenges for increased efficiency
through gasoline engine downsizing. SAE Int J Engines 2009;2(2009-01-
1053):991–1008.

[4] Bradley D, Morley C, Gu X, Emerson D. Amplified pressure waves during
autoignition: relevance to CAI engines. SAE Trans 2002;(2002-01-2868):2679–
90.

[5] Gu X, Emerson D, Bradley D. Modes of reaction front propagation from hot

spots. Combust Flame 2003;133(1–2):63–74.

[6] Björnsson H, Adkin P, Johannesson T, Johansson K, et al. The new volvo
drive-e 3-cylinder engines. In: 25th Aachen colloquium automobile and engine
technology. 2016.

[7] Zahdeh A, Rothenberger P, Nguyen W, Anbarasu M, Schmuck-Soldan S,
Schaefer J, et al. Fundamental approach to investigate pre-ignition in boosted
SI engines. SAE Int J Engines 2011;4(1):246–73.

[8] Amann M, Alger T, Mehta D. The effect of EGR on low-speed pre-ignition in

boosted SI engines. SAE Int J Engines 2011;4(1):235–45.

[9] Amann M, Mehta D, Alger T. Engine operating condition and gasoline fuel
composition effects on low-speed pre-ignition in high-performance spark ignited
gasoline engines. SAE Int J Engines 2011;4(1):274–85.

[10] Wang Z, Liu H, Reitz RD. Knocking combustion in spark-ignition engines. Prog

Energy Combust Sci 2017;61:78–112.

[11] Chapman EM, Costanzo VS. A literature review of abnormal ignition by fuel

and lubricant derivatives. SAE Int J Engines 2016;9(1):107–42.

[12] Yu X, Costanzo V, Chapman E, Davis R. A robust preignition rating methodol-
ogy: Evaluating the propensity to establish propagating flames under real engine
conditions. Tech. Rep., (2017-01-2241). SAE Technical Paper; 2017.

[13] Attard WP, Toulson E, Watson H, Hamori F. Abnormal combustion including
mega knock in a 60% downsized highly turbocharged PFI engine. Tech. Rep.,
(2010-01-1456). SAE Technical Paper; 2010.

[14] Lauer T, Heiss M, Bobicic N, Holly W, Pritze S. A comprehensive simulation
approach to irregular combustion. Tech. Rep., (2014-01-1214). SAE Technical
Paper; 2014.

[15] Kuboyama T, Moriyoshi Y, Morikawa K. Visualization and analysis of LSPI
mechanism caused by oil droplet, particle and deposit in highly boosted SI
combustion in low speed range. SAE Int J Engines 2015;8(2):529–37.

[16] Kassai M, Hashimoto H, Shiraishi T, Teraji A, Noda T. Mechanism analysis
on LSPI occurrence in boosted SI engines. Tech. Rep., (2015-01-1867). SAE
Technical Paper; 2015.

[17] Ito T, Abe Y, Tanaka J. Lubricating oil droplets in cylinder on abnormal com-
bustion in supercharged SI engine. Tech. Rep., (2018-32-0008). SAE Technical
Paper; 2018.

[18] Heiss M, Lauer T. Analysis of particle separation with respect to pre-igniton in
an si-engine. In: 11th world congress on computational mechanics (WCCM XI),
Barcelona, Spain. 2014.

[19] Tormos B, García JM, Bastidas S, Domínguez B, Oliva F, Cárdenas D. Investi-
gation on low-speed pre-ignition from the quantification and identification of
engine oil droplets release under ambient pressure conditions. Measurement
2020;107961.

[20] Hirano S, Yamashita M, Fujimoto K, Kato K. Investigation of engine oil effect
on abnormal combustion in turbocharged direct injection-spark ignition engines
(Part 2). Tech. Rep., (2013-01-2569). SAE Technical Paper; 2013.

[21] Maliha M, Stumpf B, Beyer F, Kühnert M, Kubach H, Roisman I, et al. Optical in-
vestigation on the interaction between a fuel-spray and an oil wetted wall with
the focus on secondary droplets. Int J Engine Res 2022;14680874221095235.
[22] Zhang Q, Kalva VT, Tian T. Modeling the evolution of fuel and lubricant inter-
actions on the liner in internal combustion engines. Tech. Rep., (2018-01-0279).
SAE Technical Paper; 2018.

[23] Mariani V, Pulga L, Bianchi GM, Cazzoli G, Falfari S. Neural network-based
prediction of liquid-phase diffusion coefficient to model fuel-oil dilution on
engine cylinder walls. SAE Int J Engines 2020;13(03-13-05-0041).

[24] Lee P, Priest M, Stark M, Wilkinson J, Smith LJ, Taylor R, et al. Extraction and
tribological investigation of top piston ring zone oil from a gasoline engine.
Proc Inst Mech Eng J 2006;220(3):171–80.

[25] Alger TF, Briggs TE. Chemical analysis of potential initiating fluid for low-
speed pre-ignition. In: International conference on knocking in gasoline engines.
Springer; 2017, p. 112–20.

[26] Splitter D, Burrows B, Lewis S. Direct measurement and chemical speciation of
top ring zone liquid during engine operation. Tech Rep., (2015-01-0741). SAE
Technical Paper; 2015.

[27] Frottier V, Heywood JB, Hochgreb S. Measurement of gasoline absorption into

engine lubricating oil. SAE Trans 1996;1114–21.

[28] Amann M, Alger T, Westmoreland B, Rothmaier A. The effects of piston crevices
and injection strategy on low-speed pre-ignition in boosted SI engines. SAE Int
J Engines 2012;5(3):1216–28.

[29] Kuti OA, Yang SY, Hourani N, Naser N, Roberts WL, Chung SH, et al. A
fundamental investigation into the relationship between lubricant composition
and fuel ignition quality. Fuel 2015;160:605–13.

[30] Distaso E, Amirante R, Calò G, De Palma P, Tamburrano P, Reitz R. Predicting
lubricant oil induced pre-ignition phenomena in modern gasoline engines: The
reduced GasLube reaction mechanism. Fuel 2020;281:118709.

[31] Distaso E, Amirante R, Calò G, De Palma P, Reitz R. Lubricant-oil-induced
pre-ignition phenomena in modern gasoline engines: Using experimental data
and numerical chemistry to develop a practical correlation. Tech. Rep.,
(2021-24-0052). SAE Technical Paper; 2021.

[32] Fei S, Wang Z, Qi Y, Wang Y, Zhang H. Ignition of a single lubricating oil
droplet in combustible ambient gaseous mixture under high-temperature and
high-pressure conditions. Combust Sci Technol 2019;191(11):2033–52.
[33] Fei S, Wang Z, Qi Y, Wang Y. Investigation on ignition of a single lubricating oil
droplet in premixed combustible mixture at engine-relevant conditions. Tech.
Rep., (2019-01-0298). SAE Technical Paper; 2019.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106427

K. Rönn et al.

[34] Fei S, Qi Y, Wang Y, Zhang H, Wang Z. Study of oil droplet ignition and its

induction for pre-ignition under different environmental conditions.

[35] Fei S, Qi Y, Liu W, Wang Y, Wang Z, Zhang H. Combustion modes induced by
oil-droplet gas-phase pre-ignition in the chamber under different environmental
conditions. Combust Sci Technol 2021;1–19.

[36] Qi Y, Xu Y, Wang Z, Wang J. The effect of oil intrusion on super knock in
gasoline engine. Tech. Rep., (2014-01-1224). SAE Technical Paper; 2014.
[37] Welling O, Collings N, Williams J, Moss J. Impact of lubricant composition on
low-speed pre-ignition. Tech. Rep., (2014-01-1213). SAE Technical Paper; 2014.
[38] Tao C, Miao K, Tang F, Qian Y, Zhang Y, Meng S, et al. Evaporation and
combustion characteristics for a droplet of lubricating oil and gasoline. Int
Commun Heat Mass Transfer 2021;127:105513.

[39] Qian Y, Zhao P, Tao C, Meng S, Wei J, Cheng X. Experimental study on
lubricating oil/gasoline blended droplet. Exp

evaporation characteristics of
Therm Fluid Sci 2019;103:99–107.

[40] Okada Y, Miyashita S, Izumi Y, Hayakawa Y. Study of low-speed pre-ignition
in boosted spark ignition engine. SAE Int J Engines 2014;7(2):584–94.
[41] Zöbinger N, Schweizer T, Lauer T, Kubach H, Koch T. Experimental and
numerical analysis on two-phase induced low-speed pre-ignition. Energies
2021;14(16):5063.

[42] Magar M, Spicher U, Palaveev S, Gohl M, Müller G, Lensch-Franzen C,
et al. Experimental studies on the occurrence of low-speed pre-ignition in
turbocharged GDI engines. SAE Int J Engines 2015;8(2):495–504.

[43] Döhler A, Pritze S. A contribution to better understanding the pre-ignition
phenomenon in highly charged internal combustion engines with direct fuel
injection. In: 4th international conference on knocking in gasoline engines
(Berlin). 2013, p. 41–61.

[44] Dingle SF, Cairns A, Zhao H, Williams J, Williams O, Ali R. Lubricant induced
pre-ignition in an optical SI engine. Tech. Rep., (2014-01-1222). SAE technical
Paper; 2014.

[45] Cheng S. The impacts of engine operating conditions and fuel compositions
on the formation of combustion chamber deposits. Tech. Rep., (2000-01-2025).
SAE Technical Paper; 2000.

[62] Gao J, Yao A, Zhang Y, Qu G, Yao C, Zhang S, et al. Investigation into the
relationship between super-knock and misfires in an SI GDI engine. Energies
2021;14(8):2099.

[63] Kalaskar V, Moore T, Swarts A. On optical semi-quantitative spectral study of
low-speed pre-ignition sources in spark ignition engines. SAE Int J Adv Curr
Pract Mobil 2021;3(5):2581–93.

[64] He Y, Liu Z, Stahl I, Zhang G, Zheng Y. Comparison of stochastic pre-ignition
behaviors on a turbocharged gasoline engine with various fuels and lubricants.
Tech. Rep., (2016-01-2291). SAE Technical Paper; 2016.

[65] Colliou T, Giarracca L, Lahaussois D, Sasaki T, Fukazawa Y, Iida Y, et al. Impact
of diesel and detergent contamination on gasoline low-speed pre-ignition and
their characterization using unwashed gums. Fuel 2022;318:122754.

[66] Costanzo VS, Yu X, Chapman E, Davis R, Haenel P. Fuel & lubricant effects on
stochastic preignition. SAE Int J Adv Curr Pract Mobil 2019;1(1):259–77.
[67] Boronat Colomer V, Splitter D, Neupane S, Partridge Jr. W. Particle matter
index and fuel wall-wetting relations on stochastic pre-ignition. SAE Int J Adv
Curr Pract Mobil 2021;1(1):636–48.

[68] Splitter D, Colomer VB, Neupane S, Chuahy FDF, Partridge W. In situ laser
induced florescence measurements of fuel dilution from low load to stochastic
pre ignition prone conditions. Tech. Rep., (2021-01-0489). SAE Technical Paper;
2021.

[69] Swarts A, Chapman E, Costanzo V. Detailed analyses and correlation of fuel
effects on stochastic preignition. Tech. Rep., (2020-01-0612). SAE Technical
Paper; 2020.

[70] Swarts A, Kalaskar V. Market fuel effects on low speed pre-ignition. In: SAE
WCX digital summit. Tech. Rep., (2021-01-0487). SAE Technical Paper; 2021.
[71] Niegemann P, Fikri M, Kaiser S, Schulz C. Ignition of individual droplets in
a reactive fuel/air mixture behind reflected shock waves. SAE Int J Adv Curr
Pract Mobil 2019;2(2019-01-2162):301–9.

[72] Kar A, Huisjen A, Aradi A, Reitz J, Iqbal A, Haumann K, et al. Assessing
the impact of lubricant and fuel composition on LSPI and emissions in a
turbocharged gasoline direct injection engine. SAE Int J Adv Curr Pract Mobil
2020;2(2020-01-0610):2568–80.

[46] Cheng S, Kim C. Effect of engine operating parameters on engine combustion

[73] Kalghatgi GT, Bradley D. Pre-ignition and ‘super-knock’in turbo-charged

chamber deposits. Tech. Rep., (902108). SAE Technical Paper; 1990.

spark-ignition engines. Int J Engine Res 2012;13(4):399–414.

[47] Wang Z, Qi Y, Liu H, Long Y, Wang J-X. Experimental study on pre-ignition
and super-knock in gasoline engine combustion with carbon particle at elevated
temperatures and pressures. Tech. Rep., (2015-01-0752). SAE Technical Paper;
2015.

[48] Gupta A, Seeley R, Shao H, Remias J, Roos J, Wang Z, et al. Impact of
particle characteristics and engine conditions on deposit-induced pre-ignition
and superknock in turbocharged gasoline engines. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr
2017;10(3):830–41.

[49] Sparrow SW. Preignition and spark-plugs. SAE Trans 1920;412–27.
[50] Sasaki N, Nakata K, Kawatake K, Sagawa S, Watanabe M, Sone T. The effect
of fuel compounds on pre-ignition under high temperature and high pressure
condition. Tech. Rep., (2011-01-1984). SAE Technical Paper; 2011.

[74] Takeno T.

Ignition criterion by thermal explosion theory. Combust Flame

1977;29:209–11.

[75] Zhou L, Zhang X, Zhong L, Yu J. Effects of flame propagation velocity and
turbulence intensity on end-gas auto-ignition in a spark ignition gasoline engine.
Energies 2020;13(19):5039.

[76] Kalghatgi G. Fuel anti-knock quality-part
(2001-01-3584). SAE Technical Paper; 2001.

I. Engine studies. Tech. Rep.,

[77] Szybist JP, Splitter DA. Pressure and temperature effects on fuels with varying
octane sensitivity at high load in SI engines. Combust Flame 2017;177:49–66.
[78] Yates AD, Swarts A, Viljoen CL. Correlating auto-ignition delays and
fuel. Tech. Rep.,

types of

knock-limited spark-advance data for different
(2005-01-2083). SAE Technical Paper; 2005.

[51] Mogi K, Hashizume K, Arisawa K, Kobayashi H. Analysis and avoidance of

[79] Prakash A, Wang C, Janssen A, Aradi A, Cracknell R. Impact of fuel sensitivity

pre-ignition in SI gasoline engines. JSAE Rev 1998;19(1):9–14.

(RON-mon) on engine efficiency. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2017;10(1):115–25.

[52] Dahnz C, Spicher U.

Irregular

nition engines–pre-ignition and other phenomena.
2010;11(6):485–98.

combustion in supercharged spark ig-
J Engine Res

Int

[53] Cavina N, Rojo N, Businaro A, Ceschini L, Balducci E, Cerofolini A. Analysis of
pre-ignition combustions triggered by heavy knocking events in a turbocharged
GDI engine. Energy Procedia 2016;101:893–900.

[54] Sasaki N, Nakata K. Effect of fuel components on engine abnormal combustion.

Tech. Rep., (2012-01-1276). SAE Technical Paper; 2012.

[55] Cavina N, Rojo N, Poggio L, Calogero L, Cevolani R. Investigation on pre-
ignition combustion events and development of diagnostic solutions based on
ion current signals. SAE Int J Engines 2017;10(4):1518–23.

[56] Ottenwälder T, Burke U, Hoppe F, Budak O, Brammertz S, Klintworth K, et al.
Experimental and numerical study of abnormal combustion in direct injection
spark ignition engines using conventional and alternative fuels. Energy Fuels
2019;33(6):5230–42.

[57] Hülser T, Grünefeld G, Brands T, Günther M, Pischinger S. Optical investigation
on the origin of pre-ignition in a highly boosted SI engine using bio-fuels. Tech.
Rep., (2013-01-1636). SAE Technical Paper; 2013.

[58] Winklhofer E, Hirsch A, Kapus P, Kortschak M, Philipp H. TC GDI engines at
very high power density—irregular combustion and thermal risk. Tech. Rep.,
(2009-24-0056). SAE Technical Paper; 2009.

[59] Palaveev S, Magar M, Kubach H, Schieß l R, Spicher U, Maas U. Premature
flame initiation in a turbocharged DISI engine-numerical and experimental
investigations. SAE Int J Engines 2013;6(1):54–66.

[60] Dahnz C, Han K-M, Spicher U, Magar M, Schieß l R, Maas U. Investiga-
tions on pre-ignition in highly supercharged SI engines. SAE Int J Engines
2010;3(1):214–24.

[61] Kubach H, Weidenlener A, Pfeil J, Koch T, Kittel H, Roisman IV, et al.
Investigations on the influence of fuel oil film interaction on pre-ignition
events in highly boosted DI gasoline engines. Tech. Rep., (2018-01-1454). SAE
Technical Paper; 2018.

[80] Cai L, Pitsch H, Mohamed SY, Raman V, Bugler J, Curran H, et al. Optimized
reaction mechanism rate rules for ignition of normal alkanes. Combust Flame
2016;173:468–82.

[81] Feng D, Buresheid K, Zhao H, Wei H, Chen C. Investigation of lubricant induced
pre-ignition and knocking combustion in an optical spark ignition engine. Proc
Combust Inst 2019;37(4):4901–10.

[82] Chun KM, Kim KW. Measurement and analysis of knock in a SI engine using
the cylinder pressure and block vibration signals. SAE Trans 1994;56–62.
[83] Wang Z, Liu H, Song T, Qi Y, He X, Shuai S, et al. Relationship between

super-knock and pre-ignition. Int J Engine Res 2015;16(2):166–80.

[84] Kalghatgi G, Algunaibet I, Morganti K. On knock intensity and superknock in

SI engines. SAE Int J Engines 2017;10(3):1051–63.

[85] Haenel P, Seyfried P, Kleeberg H, Tomazic D. Systematic approach to analyze
and characterize pre-ignition events in turbocharged direct-injected gasoline
engines. Tech. Rep., (2011-01-0343). SAE Technical Paper; 2011.

[86] Haenel P, Tomazic D, Kleeberg H, Ciaravino J. Fuel properties and their impact
on stochastic pre-ignition occurrence and mega-knock in turbocharged direct-
injection gasoline engines. Tech. Rep., (2020-01-0614). SAE Technical Paper;
2020.

[87] Chapman E, Studzinski W, Monroe R, Tolou A, Wagle M, Ciaravino J, et al.
Impact of fuel detergent type and concentration on the rate and severity of
stochastic preignition in a turbocharged spark ignition direct injection gasoline
engine. Tech. Rep., (2021-01-0490). SAE Technical Paper; 2021.

[88] Truffin K, Angelberger C, Richard S, Pera C. Using large-eddy simulation and
multivariate analysis to understand the sources of combustion cyclic variability
in a spark-ignition engine. Combust Flame 2015;162(12):4371–90.

[89] Robert A, Richard S, Colin O, Poinsot T. LES study of deflagration to det-
onation mechanisms in a downsized spark ignition engine. Combust Flame
2015;162(7):2788–807.

[90] Zeldovich YB. Regime classification of an exothermic reaction with nonuniform

initial conditions. Combust Flame 1980;39(2):211–4.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106428

K. Rönn et al.

[91] Khokhlov AM, Oran ES, Wheeler JC. A theory of deflagration-to-detonation

transition in unconfined flames. Combust Flame 1997;108(4):503–17.

[92] Meyer J, Oppenheim A. Dynamic response of a plane-symmetrical exothermic

reaction center. AIAA J 1972;10(11):1509–13.

[93] Vinkeloe J, Zander L, Szeponik M, Djordjevic N. Tailoring the temperature
sensitivity of ignition delay times in hot spots using fuel blends of dimethyl
ether, methane, and hydrogen. Energy Fuels 2019;34(2):2246–59.

[94] Rudloff J, Zaccardi J-M, Richard S, Anderlohr J. Analysis of pre-ignition in
highly charged SI engines: Emphasis on the auto-ignition mode. Proc Combust
Inst 2013;34(2):2959–67.

[95] Peters N, Kerschgens B, Paczko G. Super-knock prediction using a refined theory

of turbulence. SAE Int J Engines 2013;6(2):953–67.

[96] Lutz AE, Kee RJ, Miller JA, Dwyer HA, Oppenheim AK. Dynamic effects of
autoignition centers for hydrogen and C1, 2-hydrocarbon fuels. In: Symposium
(International) on combustion. 22, (1):Elsevier; 1989, p. 1683–93.

[97] Dai P, Qi C, Chen Z. Effects of initial temperature on autoignition and deto-
nation development in dimethyl ether/air mixtures with temperature gradient.
Proc Combust Inst 2017;36(3):3643–50.

[98] Gorbatenko I, Singh E, Sarathy M, Nicolle A. Effects of fuel composition on auto-
ignition and detonation development in boosted spark-ignited engines. Tech.
Rep., (2021-24-0022). SAE Technical Paper; 2021.

[120] Döhler A, Schaffner P. Optical diagnostic tools for detection and evaluation of
glow ignitions. In: International conference on knocking in gasoline engines.
Springer; 2017, p. 55–70.

[121] Passow EJ, Sethi P, Maschewske M, Bieneman J, Karrip K, Truckel P. An
introduction to how low speed pre ignition affects engine components. Tech.
Rep., (2017-01-1042). SAE Technical Paper; 2017.

[122] Kocsis MC, Briggs T, Anderson G. The impact of lubricant volatility, viscosity
and detergent chemistry on low speed pre-ignition behavior. SAE Int J Engines
2017;10(3):1019–35.

[123] Willand J, Daniel M, Montefrancesco E, Geringer B, Hofmann P, Kieberger M.
Limits on downsizing in spark ignition engines due to pre-ignition. MTZ
Worldwide 2009;70(5):56–61.

[124] Heiß M. Approach for modelling the initiation process of low-speed pre-ignition

in downsized SI-engines [Ph.D. thesis], Wien; 2015.

[125] Inoue T, Inoue Y, Ishikawa M. Abnormal combustion in a highly boosted
SI engine-the occurrence of super knock. Tech. Rep., (2012-01-1141). SAE
Technical Paper; 2012.

[126] Singh E, Dibble R. Effectiveness of fuel enrichment on knock suppression in a
gasoline spark-ignited engine. Tech. Rep., (2018-01-1665). SAE Technical Paper;
2018.

[127] Rönn K, et al. Low-speed pre-ignition and super-knock in spark-ignition engines.

[99] Cai L, Pitsch H. Tailoring fuels for a shockless explosion combustor. In: Active

2020.

flow and combustion control 2014. Springer; 2015, p. 299–315.

[100] Wang Y, Qi Y, Liu W, Wang Z. Investigation of methanol ignition phenomena
using a rapid compression machine. Combust Flame 2020;211:147–57.
[101] Bobusch BC, Berndt P, Paschereit CO, Klein R. Shockless explosion combustion:
An innovative way of efficient constant volume combustion in gas turbines.
Combust Sci Technol 2014;186(10–11):1680–9.

[102] Dec JE. Advanced compression-ignition engines—understanding the in-cylinder

processes. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32(2):2727–42.

[103] Berndt P, Klein R. Modeling the kinetics of the shockless explosion combustion.

Combust Flame 2017;175:16–26.

[104] Su J, Dai P, Chen Z. Detonation development from a hot spot in methane/air
mixtures: Effects of kinetic models. Int J Engine Res 2020;1468087420944617.
[105] Guerouani A, Robert A, Zaccardi J-M. Detonation peninsula for TRF-air mix-
tures: assessment for the analysis of auto-ignition events in spark-ignition
engines. Tech. Rep., (2018-01-1721). SAE Technical Paper; 2018.

[106] Gao Y, Dai P, Chen Z. Numerical studies on autoignition and detonation
development from a hot spot in hydrogen/air mixtures. Combust Theory Model
2020;24(2):245–61.

[107] Dai P, Chen Z. Effects of NOx addition on autoignition and detonation
development in DME/air under engine-relevant conditions. Proc Combust Inst
2019;37(4):4813–20.

[108] Dai P, Chen Z, Gan X. Autoignition and detonation development induced by a
hot spot in fuel-lean and CO2 diluted n-heptane/air mixtures. Combust Flame
2019;201:208–14.

[128] Boese D, Ritchie A, Young AW. Controlling low-speed pre-ignition in modern
automotive equipment: Defining approaches to and methods for analyzing
data in new studies of lubricant and fuel-related effects (part 2). Tech. Rep.,
(2016-01-0716). SAE Technical Paper; 2016.

[129] Fleishman AI. A method for simulating non-normal distributions. Psychometrika

1978;43(4):521–32.

[130] Kalaskar VB, Swarts A, Alger T. Impact of engine age and engine hardware
on low-speed pre-ignition. Tech. Rep., (2018-01-1663). SAE Technical Paper;
2018.

[131] Fletcher KA, Dingwell L, Yang K, Lam WY, Styer JP. Engine oil additive impacts

on low speed pre-ignition. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2016;9(3):612–20.

[132] Andrews A, Burns R, Dougherty R, Deckman D, Patel M. Investigation of
engine oil base stock effects on low speed pre-ignition in a turbocharged direct
injection SI engine. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2016;9(2):400–7.

[133] Teng H, Luo X, Hu T, Miao R, Wu M, Chen B, et al. Influence of crankcase oil
properties on low-speed pre-ignition encountered in a highly-boosted gasoline
direct injection engine. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2016;9(3):603–11.

[134] Luo X, Teng H, Hu T, Miao R, Cao L. An experimental investigation on low
speed pre-ignition in a highly boosted gasoline direct injection engine. SAE Int
J Engines 2015;8(2):520–8.

[135] Mansfield AB, Chapman E, Briscoe K. Effect of market variations in gasoline

composition on aspects of stochastic pre-ignition. Fuel 2016;184:390–400.

[136] Jatana GS, Splitter DA, Kaul B, Szybist JP. Fuel property effects on low-speed

pre-ignition. Fuel 2018;230:474–82.

[109] Zhang X, Wei H, Zhou L, Cai X, Deiterding R. Relationship of flame propagation
and combustion mode transition of end-gas based on pressure wave in confined
space. Combust Flame 2020;214:371–86.

[137] Kaul B, Finney C, Stiffler R, Drallmeier J. Advanced intra-cycle detection of
pre-ignition events through phase-space transforms of cylinder pressure data.
Tech. Rep., (2020-01-2046). SAE Technical Paper; 2020.

[110] Blumenthal R, Fieweger K, Komp K, Adomeit G. Gas dynamic features of self
ignition of non diluted fuel/air mixtures at high pressure. Combust Sci Technol
1996;113(1):137–66.

[138] Haenel P, Kleeberg H, de Bruijn R, Tomazic D. Influence of ethanol blends on
low speed pre-ignition in turbocharged, direct-injection gasoline engines. SAE
Int J Fuels Lubr 2017;10(1):95–105.

[111] Pan J, Wei H, Shu G, Pan M, Feng D, Li N. LES analysis for auto-ignition
induced abnormal combustion based on a downsized SI engine. Appl Energy
2017;191:183–92.

[139] Singh E, Dibble R. Pre-ignition detection followed by immediate damage
mitigation in a spark-ignited engine. Tech. Rep., (2021-01-0437). SAE Technical
Paper; 2021.

[112] Wei H, Zhao J, Zhang X, Pan J, Hua J, Zhou L. Turbulent flame–shock
interaction inducing end-gas autoignition in a confined space. Combust Flame
2019;204:137–41.

[140] Moriyoshi Y, Kuboyama T, Takaki T, Hitosugi H. Investigation on relationship
between LSPI and lube oil consumption and its countermeasure. Tech. Rep.,
(2021-01-0567). SAE Technical Paper; 2021.

[113] Wang Z, He X, Liu H, Qi Y, Zhang P, Wang J. Initiation of detonation in iso-
octane/air mixture under high pressure and temperature condition in closed
cylinder. In: 25th int. colloq. dyn. explos. react. syst. 2015.

[141] Kumano K, Akagi Y, Matohara S, Uchise Y, Yamasaki Y. Using an ion-current
sensor integrated in the ignition system to detect precursory phenomenon of
pre-ignition in gasoline engines. Appl Energy 2020;275:115341.

[114] Wang Z, Qi Y, Liu H, Zhang P, He X, Wang J. Shock wave reflection induced
detonation (SWRID) under high pressure and temperature condition in closed
cylinder. Shock Waves 2016;26(5):687–91.

[142] Tong S, Yang Z, He X, Deng J, Wu Z, Li L. Knock and pre-ignition detection us-
ing ion current signal on a boosted gasoline engine. Tech. Rep., (2017-01-0792).
SAE Technical Paper; 2017.

[115] Liu H, Wang Z, He X, Qi Y, Wang Y, Wang J. Super-knock suppression for
highly turbocharged gasoline engines using lean mixture control strategy with
the same energy density. Int J Engine Res 2021;22(2):665–73.

[143] Ayad S, Sharma S, Verma R, Henein N. Combustion ionization for detection of
misfire, knock, and sporadic preignition in a gasoline direct injection engine. J
Energy Res Technol 2019;141(11).

[116] Xu H, Weng C, Gao J, Yao C. The effect of energy intensification on
the formation of severe knock in internal combustion engines. Appl Energy
2020;266:114854.

[144] Wang J, Hu Z, Zhu D, Ding W, Li L, Yan W, et al. In cycle pre-ignition diagnosis
and super-knock suppression by employing ion current in a GDI boosted engine.
Tech. Rep., (2020-01-1148). SAE Technical Paper; 2020.

[117] Xu H, Yao A, Yao C, Gao J. Energy convergence of shock waves and its
destruction mechanism in cone-roof combustion chambers. Energy Convers
Manage 2016;127:342–54.

[118] Zhou L, Kang R, Wei H, Feng D, Hua J, Pan J, et al. Experimental analysis of
super-knock occurrence based on a spark ignition engine with high compression
ratio. Energy 2018;165:68–75.

[119] Morikawa K, Moriyoshi Y, Kuboyama T, Imai Y, Yamada T, Hatamura K.
Investigation and improvement of LSPI phenomena and study of combustion
strategy in highly boosted SI combustion in low speed range. Tech. Rep.,
(2015-01-0756). SAE Technical Paper; 2015.

[145] Kuzhagaliyeva N, Thabet A, Singh E, Ghanem B, Sarathy SM. Using deep neural

networks to diagnose engine pre-ignition. Proc Combust Inst 2020.

[146] Michlberger A, Sutton M. LSPI durability, a study of LSPI over the life of a

vehicle. SAE Int J Engines 2018;11(1):23–38.

[147] Zhang R, Howard K, Browne D. A real-world fleet test of the effects of engine
oil on low speed pre-ignition occurrence in TGDi engine. (2019-01-2294). SAE
Technical Paper; 2019.

[148] Chapman E, Davis R, Studzinski W, Geng P. Fuel octane and volatility effects on
the stochastic pre-ignition behavior of a 2.0 l gasoline turbocharged DI engine.
SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2014;7(2):379–89.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106429

K. Rönn et al.

[149] Kocsis MC, Anderson G, Briggs T. Real fuel effects on low speed pre-ignition.

Tech. Rep., (2018-01-1456). SAE Technical Papers; 2018.

[150] Maharjan S, Elbaz AM, Roberts WL. Study of the effect of research octane
number on the auto-ignition of lubricant oil surrogates (n-hexadecane). ACS
Omega 2022.

[151] Mitsudharmadi H, Maharjan S, Elbaz AM, Qahtani YA, Roberts WL. Auto-
ignition of a hexadecane droplet mixed with different octane number fuels
at elevated pressures to investigate the pre-ignition behavior. Energy Fuels
2019;34(1):806–16.

[152] Andrae JC. Development of a detailed kinetic model for gasoline surrogate fuels.

Fuel 2008;87(10–11):2013–22.

[153] Ghosh P, Hickey KJ,

Jaffe SB. Development of a detailed gasoline

composition-based octane model. Ind Eng Chem Res 2006;45(1):337–45.
[154] Budak O, Hoppe F, Heuser B, Pischinger S, Burke U, Heufer A. Hot sur-
face pre-ignition in direct-injection spark-ignition engines: Investigations with
Tailor-Made Fuels from Biomass. Int J Engine Res 2018;19(1):45–54.
[155] Farrell JT, Johnston R, Androulakis I. Molecular structure effects on lam-
inar burning velocities at elevated temperature and pressure. SAE Trans
2004;1404–25.

[156] Downs D, Theobald F. The effect of

fuel characteristics and engine op-
erating conditions on pre-ignition. Proc Inst Mech Eng Automob Div
1963;178(1):89–108.

[157] Singh E, Dibble R. Knock, auto-ignition and pre-ignition tendency of fuels for
advanced combustion engines (FACE) with ethanol blends and similar RON.
Tech. Rep., (2020-01-0613). SAE Technical Paper; 2020.

[158] Mansfield AB, Chapman E, Briscoe K. Impact of fuel octane rating and aromatic
content on stochastic pre-ignition. Tech. Rep., (2016-01-0721). SAE Technical
Paper; 2016.

[159] Xu Z, Zhou Z, Wu T, Li T, Cheng C, Yin H. Investigations of smoke emission,
fuel dilution and pre-ignition in a 2.0 l turbo-charged GDI engine. Tech. Rep.,
(2016-01-0698). SAE Technical Paper; 2016.

[160] Haynes WM. CRC handbook of chemistry and physics. CRC Press; 2014.
[161] Tanaka D, Uchida R, Noda T, Kolbeck A, Henkel S, Hardalupas Y, et al.
Effects of fuel properties associated with in-cylinder behavior on particulate
number from a direct injection gasoline engine. Tech. Rep., (2017-01-1002).
SAE Technical Paper; 2017.

[162] Sethi P, Passow E, Karrip K, Maschewske M, Bieneman J, Truckel P. A study
to determine factors that have influence on the propensity of natural LSPI
occurring in GTDI engines. In: ASME 2018 internal combustion engine division
fall technical conference. American Society of Mechanical Engineers Digital
Collection; 2018.

[163] Kassai M, Torii K, Shiraishi T, Noda T, Goh TK, Wilbrand K, et al. Research on
the effect of lubricant oil and fuel properties on LSPI occurrence in boosted SI
engines. Tech. Rep., (2016-01-2292). SAE Technical Paper; 2016.

[164] Mayer M, Hofmann P, Geringer B, Williams J, Moss J.

Influence of dif-
ferent fuel properties and gasoline-ethanol blends on low-speed pre-ignition
in turbocharged direct injection spark ignition engines. SAE Int J Engines
2016;9(2):841–8.

[165] Long Y, Wang Z, Qi Y, Xiang S, Zeng G, Zhang P, et al. Effect of oil and gasoline
properties on pre-ignition and super-knock in a thermal research engine (TRE)
and an optical rapid compression machine (RCM). Tech. Rep., (2016-01-0720).
SAE Technical Paper; 2016.

[166] Costanzo V, Yu X, Chapman E, Davis R. Fuel effects on the propensity to
establish propagating flames at SPI-relevant engine conditions. SAE Int J Adv
Curr Pract Mobil 2021;3(2021-01-0488):3194–203.

[167] Downs D, Pigneguy J. An experimental investigation into pre-ignition in the

spark-ignition engine. Proc Inst Mech Eng Automob Div 1950;4(1):125–49.

[168] Günther M, Uygun Y, Kremer F, Pischinger S. Pre-ignition and glow-ignition of

gasoline biofuels. MTZ Worldwide 2013;74(12):46–53.

[169] Pischinger S, Günther M, Budak O. Abnormal combustion phenomena with
different fuels in a spark ignition engine with direct fuel injection. Combust
Flame 2017;175:123–37.

[170] Nomura T, Ueura H, Tanaka Y, IIda Y, Yuan Z, Ando A. The effect of gasoline
metallic additives on low speed pre-ignition. Tech. Rep., (2018-01-0936). SAE
Technical Paper; 2018.

[171] Joedicke A, Krueger-Venus J, Bohr P, Cracknell R, Doyle D. Understanding
injector deposits on vehicle performance. Tech. Rep.,

the effect of DISI
(2012-01-0391). SAE Technical Paper; 2012.

[172] Van Basshuysen R, Schäfer F. Internal combustion engine handbook-basics,

components, systems and perspectives. vol. 345, 2004.

[173] Ritchie A, Boese D, Young AW. Controlling low-speed pre-ignition in modern
automotive equipment part 3: Identification of key additive component types
and other lubricant composition effects on low-speed pre-ignition. SAE Int J
Engines 2016;9(2):832–40.

[174] Takeuchi K, Fujimoto K, Hirano S, Yamashita M. Investigation of engine oil
effect on abnormal combustion in turbocharged direct injection-spark ignition
engines. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2012;5(3):1017–24.

[175] Haas FM, Won SH, Dryer FL, Pera C. Lube oil chemistry influences on
autoignition as measured in an ignition quality tester. Proc Combust Inst
2019;37(4):4645–54.

[176] Tormos B, García-Oliver JM, Carreres M, Moreno-Montagud C, Domínguez B,
Cárdenas MD, et al. Experimental assessment of ignition characteristics of
lubricating oil sprays related to low-speed pre-ignition (LSPI). Int J Engine Res
2021;1–12.

[177] Hourani N, Muller H, Adam FM, Panda SK, Witt M, Al-Hajji AA, et al. Structural
level characterization of base oils using advanced analytical techniques. Energy
Fuels 2015;29(5):2962–70.

[178] Pan K, Deng J, Chen Y, Zhang E, Xie W, Qin Q, et al. Auto-ignition
characteristics of lubricant droplets under hot co-flow atmosphere. Tech. Rep.,
(2018-01-1807). SAE Technical Paper; 2018.

[179] Inada Y, Tanaka J. Lubricating oil droplets from piston crown on abnormal com-
bustion in supercharged SI engine. Tech. Rep., (2020-32-2302). SAE Technical
Paper; 2020.

[180] Liu Y, Pei Y, Wang C, Guo R, Xu B. Characteristics of the deposited fuel liquid
film when GDI spray impacts viscous oil film. Energy 2019;188:116011.

[181] Wang QJ, Chung Y-W. Encyclopedia of tribology. Springer; 2013.
[182] Guibet J-C, Duval A. New aspects of preignition in European automotive

engines. SAE Trans 1972;399–417.

[183] Fujimoto K, Yamashita M, Hirano S, Kato K, Watanabe I, Ito K. Engine oil
development for preventing pre-ignition in turbocharged gasoline engine. SAE
Int J Fuels Lubr 2014;7(3):869–74.

[184] Mayer M, Hofmann P, Geringer B, Williams J, Moss J.

Influence of dif-
ferent fuel properties and gasoline-ethanol blends on low-speed pre-ignition
in turbocharged direct injection spark ignition engines. SAE Int J Engines
2016;9(2):841–8.

[185] Haenel P, de Bruijn R, Tomazic D, Kleeberg H. Analysis of the impact of
production lubricant composition and fuel dilution on stochastic pre-ignition
in turbocharged, direct-injection gasoline engines. Tech. Rep., (2019-01-0256).
SAE Technical Paper; 2019.

[186] Elliott I, Sztenderowicz M, Sinha K, Takeuchi Y, Ushioda N. Understanding low
speed pre-ignition phenomena across turbo-charged gdi engines and impact on
future engine oil design. Tech. Rep., (2015-01-2028). SAE Technical Paper;
2015.

[187] Splitter D, Kaul B, Szybist J, Speed L, Zigler B, Luecke J. Fuel-lubricant interac-
tions on the propensity for stochastic pre-ignition. Tech. Rep., (2019-24-0103).
SAE Technical Paper; 2019.

[188] Lattuada M, Manni M. Evolution of

the additive technology for top tier
lubricating oils: Use of calixarene detergents for fuel economy improvement.
Tech. Rep., (2021-01-1212). SAE Technical Paper; 2021.

[189] Onodera K, Kato T, Ogano S, Fujimoto K, Kato K, Kaneko T. Engine oil
formulation technology to prevent pre-ignition in turbocharged direct injection
spark ignition engines. Tech. Rep., (2015-01-2027). SAE Technical Paper; 2015.
Impact of engine oil detergent on low speed pre-
ignition (LSPI) and fuel economy performance. Tech. Rep., (2020-01-1424).
SAE Technical Paper; 2020.

[190] Gupta A, Devlin M.

[191] Liu H, Jin J, Li H, Yamamori K, Kaneko T, Yamashita M, et al. 0W-16
fuel economy gasoline engine oil compatible with low speed pre-ignition
performance. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2017;10(3):842–7.

[192] Kaneko T, Yamamori K, Suzuki H, Onodera K, Ogano S. Friction reduction
technology for low viscosity engine oil compatible with LSPI prevention
performance. Tech. Rep., (2016-01-2276). SAE Technical Paper; 2016.
[193] Elliott I, Cherpeck R, Maria A, Gunawan T. Alternative engine oil formulating
solutions to reduce low speed pre-ignition. Tech. Rep., (2019-01-2153). SAE
Technical Paper; 2019.

[194] Kassai M, Shiraishi T, Noda T. Fundamental mechanism analysis on the
underlying processes of LSPI using experimental and modeling approaches. In:
International conference on knocking in gasoline engines. Springer; 2017, p.
89–111.

[195] McQueen J, Gao H, Black E, Gangopadhyay A, Jensen R. Friction and wear
of tribofilms formed by zinc dialkyl dithiophosphate antiwear additive in low
viscosity engine oils. Tribol Int 2005;38(3):289–97.

[196] Du D-C, Kim S-S, Chun J-S, Suh C-M, Kwon W-S. Antioxidation synergism
between ZnDTC and ZnDDP in mineral oil. Tribol Lett 2002;13(1):21–7.
[197] Guevremont JM, Guinther GH, Szemenyei D, Devlin MT, Jao T-C, Jaye C, et
al. Enhancement of engine oil wear and friction control performance through
titanium additive chemistry. Tribol Trans 2008;51(3):324–31.

[198] Michlberger A, Sutton M, Dohner B. Low speed pre-ignition (LSPI) durability -
a study of LSPI in fresh and aged engine oils. Tech. Rep., (2018-01-0934). SAE
Technical Paper; 2018.

[199] Swarts A, Kostan T, Kalaskar V. Combined effects of engine and oil
J Adv Curr Pract Mobil

SAE Int

age on low speed pre-ignition.
2019;1(2019-01-0033):227–35.

[200] Singh E. Mechanism triggering pre-ignition events and ideas to avoid and
suppress pre-ignition in turbocharged spark-ignited engines [Ph.D. thesis], 2019.
[201] Han L, Zhu T, Qiao H, Zhang D, Fu D, Zhang J. Investigation of low-speed
pre-ignition in boosted spark ignition engine. Tech. Rep., (2015-01-0751). SAE
Technical Paper; 2015.

[202] Mayer M, Hofmann P, Geringer B, Williams J, Moss J.

Influence of dif-
ferent fuel properties and gasoline-ethanol blends on low-speed pre-ignition
in turbocharged direct injection spark ignition engines. SAE Int J Engines
2016;9(2):841–8.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106430

K. Rönn et al.

[203] Arnold Kaden A, Gildein H, Kraus E, Schaupp U. Knocking simulation at
mercedes-benz—application in series production development. Knocking in
Gasol Engines 2013.

[231] Welling O, Moss J, Williams J, Collings N. Measuring the impact of engine oils
and fuels on low-speed pre-ignition in downsized engines. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr
2014;7(1):1–8.

[204] Singh E, Hlaing P, Shi H, Dibble RW. Effect of different

fluids on in-
jection strategies to suppress pre-ignition. Tech. Rep., (2019-01-0257). SAE
International; 2019.

[205] Singh E, Morganti K, Dibble R. Optimizing split fuel injection strategies to
avoid pre-ignition and super-knock in turbocharged engines. Int J Engine Res
2021;22(1):199–221.

[206] Schulz F, Samenfink W, Schmidt J, Beyrau F. Systematic LIF fuel wall film

investigation. Fuel 2016;172:284–92.

[207] Splitter D, Kaul B, Szybist J, Jatana G. Engine operating conditions and fuel
properties on pre-spark heat release and SPI promotion in SI engines. SAE Int
J Engines 2017;10(3):1036–50.

[208] Zaccardi J-M, Serrano D. A comparative low speed pre-ignition (LSPI) study
in downsized si gasoline and CI diesel-methane dual fuel engines. SAE Int J
Engines 2014;7(4):1931–44.

[209] Martin S, Beidl C, Mueller R. Responsiveness of a 30 bar BMEP 3-cylinder
turbocharged downsizing. Tech. Rep.,

engine: Opportunities and limits of
(2014-01-1646). SAE Technical Paper; 2014.

[210] Alger T, Chauvet T, Dimitrova Z. Synergies between high EGR operation and

GDI systems. SAE Int J Engines 2009;1(1):101–14.

[211] Radwan M, Helali A, Elfeky S, Attai Y. An investigation on knock and pre-
ignition with tumble induced turbulence. Tech. Rep., (2007-01-3557). SAE
Technical Paper; 2007.

[212] Francqueville L, Michel J-B. On the effects of EGR on spark-ignited gasoline

combustion at high load. SAE Int J Engines 2014;7(4):1808–23.

[213] Hoepke B, Jannsen S, Kasseris E, Cheng WK. EGR effects on boosted SI engine
operation and knock integral correlation. SAE Int J Engines 2012;5(2):547–59.
[214] Sekarapandian N, Kannaiyan A, Arivukkarasu H, Mani R, Muthu S. Advanced
methods to handle LSPI in TGDI engines. SAE Int J Adv Curr Pract Mobil
2020;3(1):614–20.

[215] Park S, Woo S, Oh H, Lee K. Effects of various lubricants and fuels on pre-
ignition in a turbocharged direct-injection spark-ignition engine. Energy Fuels
2017;31(11):12701–11.

[216] Mounce F. Development of a standardized test to evaluate the effect of gasoline
engine oil on the occurrence of low speed pre-ignition-the sequence IX test.
Tech. Rep., (2018-01-1808). SAE Technical Paper; 2018.

[217] Kouchi S, Okamoto S, Ozawa K, Kawashima H, Ishima T, Uchida R, et al.
Observation and analysis of behavior of spray impingement on a liquid film.
Tech. Rep., (2015-01-2006). SAE Technical Paper; 2015.

[218] Lee C, Ahmed A, Nasir EF, Badra J, Kalghatgi G, Sarathy SM, et al. Autoignition

characteristics of oxygenated gasolines. Combust Flame 2017;186:114–28.

[219] Javed T, Lee C, AlAbbad M, Djebbi K, Beshir M, Badra J, et al. Ignition studies

of n-heptane/iso-octane/toluene blends. Combust Flame 2016;171:223–33.

[220] Cheng S, Kang D, Fridlyand A, Goldsborough SS, Saggese C, Wagnon S, et al.
Autoignition behavior of gasoline/ethanol blends at engine-relevant conditions.
Combust Flame 2020;216:369–84.

[221] Wei H, Xu Z, Zhou L, Zhao J, Yu J. Effect of hydrogen-air mixture diluted with
argon/nitrogen/carbon dioxide on combustion processes in confined space. Int
J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43(31):14798–805.

[222] Sarathy SM, Westbrook CK, Mehl M, Pitz WJ, Togbe C, Dagaut P, et al.
Comprehensive chemical kinetic modeling of the oxidation of 2-methylalkanes
from C7 to C20. Combust Flame 2011;158(12):2338–57.

[223] Westbrook CK, Pitz WJ, Herbinet O, Curran HJ, Silke EJ. A compre-
hensive detailed chemical kinetic reaction mechanism for combustion of
n-alkane hydrocarbons
from n-octane to n-hexadecane. Combust Flame
2009;156(1):181–99.

[224] Soejima M, Harigaya Y, Hamatake T, Wakuri Y. Study on lubricating oil
consumption from evaporation of oil-film on cylinder wall for diesel engine.
SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2017;10(2):487–501.

[225] Wang FC-Y, Zhang L. Chemical composition of group II lubricant oil studied by
high-resolution gas chromatography and comprehensive two-dimensional gas
chromatography. Energy Fuels 2007;21(6):3477–83.

[226] Birkigt A, Michels K, Theobald J, Seeger T, Gao Y, Weikl M, et al. Investigation
of compression temperature in highly charged spark-ignition engines. Int J
Engine Res 2011;12(3):282–92.

[227] Ohtomo M, Miyagawa H, Koike M, Yokoo N, Nakata K. Pre-ignition of
gasoline-air mixture triggered by a lubricant oil droplet. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr
2014;7(3):673–82.

[228] Ohtomo M, Suzuoki T, Miyagawa H, Koike M, Yokoo N, Nakata K. Fundamental
analysis on auto-ignition condition of a lubricant oil droplet for understanding a
mechanism of low-speed pre-ignition in highly charged spark-ignition engines.
Int J Engine Res 2019;20(3):292–303.

[229] Gong Z, Hu M, Fang Y, Zhang D, Feng L. Mechanism study of natu-
lubricating oil. Fuel

ral gas pre-ignition induced by the auto-ignition of
2022;315:123286.

[230] Yi P, Long W, Feng L, Wang W, Liu C. An experimental and numerical study of
the evaporation and pyrolysis characteristics of lubricating oil droplets in the
natural gas engine conditions. Int J Heat Mass Transfer 2016;103:646–60.

[232] Coultas DR. The role of NOx in engine lubricant oxidation. SAE Tech Pap

2020;2(2020-01-1427).

[233] Chen Y, Li L, Zhang Q, Deng J, Xie W, Zhang E, et al. Effects of lubri-
cant additives on auto-ignition under a hot co-flow atmosphere. Tech. Rep.,
(2017-01-2231). SAE Technical Paper; 2017.

[234] Kassai M, Shiraishi T, Noda T, Hirabe M, Wakabayashi Y, Kusaka J, et al. An
investigation on the ignition characteristics of lubricant component containing
fuel droplets using rapid compression and expansion machine. SAE Int J Fuels
Lubr 2016;9(3):469–80.

[235] Miyasaka T, Miura K, Hayakawa N, Ishino T, Iijima A, Shoji H, et al. A study
on the effect of a calcium-based engine oil additive on abnormal SI engine
combustion. SAE Int J Engines 2015;8(1):206–13.

[236] Miura K, Shimizu K, Hayakawa N, Miyasaka T, Iijima A, Shoji H, et al. Influence
of Ca-, Mg-and Na-based engine oil additives on abnormal combustion in a
spark-ignition engine. SAE Int J Engines 2016;9(1):452–7.

[237] Tamura K, Utaka T, Kamano H, Hayakawa N, Miyasaka T, Ishino T, et al. Abnor-
mal combustion induced by combustion chamber deposits derived from engine
oil additives in a spark-ignited engine. SAE Int J Engines 2015;8(1):200–5.

[238] Moriyoshi Y, Yamada T, Tsunoda D, Xie M, Kuboyama T, Morikawa K.
Numerical simulation to understand the cause and sequence of LSPI phenomena
and suggestion of CaO mechanism in highly boosted SI combustion in low speed
range. Tech. Rep., (2015-01-0755). SAE Technical Paper; 2015.

[239] Kyaw K, Matsuda H, Hasatani M. Applicability of carbonation/decarbonation re-
actions to high-temperature thermal energy storage and temperature upgrading.
J Chem Eng Japan 1996;29(1):119–25.

[240] Maharjan S, Qahtani Y, Roberts W, Elbaz A. The effect of pressure, temperature
and additives on droplet ignition of lubricant oil and its surrogate. Tech. Rep.,
(2018-01-1673). SAE Technical Paper; 2018.

[241] Hayakawa N, Miura K, Miyasaka T, Ishino T, Iijima A, Shoji H, et al. A
study on the effect of Zn-and Mo-based engine oil additives on abnormal
SI engine combustion using in-cylinder combustion visualization. SAE Int J
Engines 2015;8(1):214–20.

[242] Yasueda S, Takasaki K, Tajima H. Abnormal combustion caused by lubricating

oil in high BMEP gas engines. MTZ Ind 2013;3(1):34–9.

[243] Yasueda S, Takasaki K, Tajima H. The abnormal combustion affected by
lubricating oil ignition in premixed gas engine. In: Proceedings of the ASME
2012 internal combustion engine division spring technical conference. ASME
2012 internal combustion engine division spring technical conference. 2012, p.
29–36.

[244] Yasueda S, Tozzi JL. Conseil international des machines a combustion inter-
national council on combustion engines paper no.: 37 predicting autoignition
caused by lubricating oil in gas engines. Tech. Rep., 2013.

[245] Yasueda S, Zhu S, Sotiropoulou E, Tozzi L. The working process of the internal

combustion engine. Tech. Rep., 2015.

[246] Serrano D, Obiols J, Lecointe B. Optimization of dual fuel diesel-methane
operation on a production passenger car engine-thermodynamic analysis. Tech.
Rep., (2013-01-2505). SAE Technical Paper; 2013.

[247] Chen R, Kuboyama T, Moriyoshi Y, Yasueda S, Doyen V, Martin J-B. Effects of
engine operating condition and fuel property on pre-ignition phenomenon in a
highly boosted premixed natural gas engine. Tech. Rep., (2019-01-2154). SAE
Technical Paper; 2019.

[248] Königsson F. On combustion in the CNG-diesel dual fuel engine [Ph.D. thesis],

KTH Royal Institute of Technology; 2014.

[249] Gong Z, Feng L, Li L, Qu W, Wei L. Shock tube and kinetic study on ignition

characteristics of methane/n-hexadecane mixtures. Energy 2020;201:117609.

[250] Tsujimura T, Suzuki Y. The utilization of hydrogen in hydrogen/diesel dual fuel

engine. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42(19):14019–29.

[251] Krieck M, Günther M, Pischinger S, Kramer U, Thewes M. Effects of LPG fuel
formulations on knock and pre-ignition behavior of a DI SI engine. SAE Int J
Engines 2016;9(1):237–51.

[252] Eto K, Kihara M. Calcium in oil effects on pre-ignition of two-stroke engine.

Tech. Rep., (2019-32-0579). SAE Technical Paper; 2020.

[253] Devlin MT. Common properties of lubricants that affect vehicle fuel efficiency:

a north American historical perspective. Lubricants 2018;6(3):68.

[254] Onodera K, Watanabe H, Sato T, Lee GH, Kaneko T, Yamamori K, et al. Fuel
economy improvement by engine oil with ultra-high viscosity index. Tech. Rep.,
(2019-01-2203). SAE Technical Paper; 2019.

[255] Matsui T, Featherstone T, Wright P. Art of fuel economy lubricant formulation:
How appropriate fuel economy assessment tools and new technologies are
opening-up new formulation spaces for the next generation fuel economy
lubricants. Tech. Rep., (2019-01-2242). SAE Technical Paper; 2019.

[256] Yamamori K, Uematsu Y, Manabe K, Miyata I, Kusuhara S, Misaki Y. Develop-
ment of ultra low viscosity 0W-8 engine oil. Tech. Rep., (2020-01-1425). SAE
Technical Paper; 2020.

[257] D8291 A. Standard test method for evaluation of performance of automotive
engine oils in the mitigation of low-speed, preignition in the sequence IX
gasoline turbocharged direct-injection, spark-ignition engine. Tech. Rep., ASTM
International, West Conshohocken, PA.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106431

K. Rönn et al.

Kristian Rönn is a doctoral student at Aalto School of Engineering, conducting research
on low-speed pre-ignition through experiments and chemical simulations. He received
his master’s degree in 2020 from Aalto University, majoring in Sustainable Energy
Conversion Processes.

Dr Andre Swarts is a staff engineer at Southwest Research Institute, where he works
in fuels and lubricant research and fluids for electrified vehicles, including battery
cooling. He has published more than 30 papers including several articles on low-speed
pre-ignition. He obtained his Ph.D. from the University of Cape Town in 2006.

Dr Vickey Kalaskar is a Senior Research Engineer at Southwest Research Institute,
where he has participated in several articles on low-speed pre-ignition.

Dr. Alger graduated from the US Military Academy as
a Distinguished Cadet in 1992 and was commissioned as
a 2nd Lieutenant in the US Army Corps of Engineers. He
received his Ph.D.
in Mechanical Engineering from The
University of Texas at Austin in 2001. Dr. Alger joined
Southwest Research Institute in 2003 in the Advanced
Combustion and Emissions Section. During his career, he
has worked on topics including improved efficiency and
advanced combustion modes in SI engines, heat transfer and
thermal management in motors and energy storage systems,
abnormal combustion, connected vehicle energy optimiza-
tion, grid storage and defense-related mobility challenges.
He is currently the Executive Director of Sustainable Energy
and Mobility and his team focuses on developing sustainable
mobility technologies for the transportation industry and
low carbon intensity solutions for other industries, including
utilities and manufacturing. He is a Fellow of the Society of
Automotive Engineers.

Dr Rupali Tripathi has been working as a researcher at Neste Corporation since 2019.
She obtained her doctorate from Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule Aachen
in Combustion Technology. She has published many articles in various prestigious
combustion journals. Her research interests include renewable fuel development,
ignition behavior of biofuels, and combustion kinetics.

Dr Juha Keskiväli obtained his Ph.D. from the Department of Chemistry in University
of Helsinki in 2018. After that, he worked for Neste Oyj as a product researcher.

Associate Professor Ossi Kaario at Aalto University School of Engineering has a
background in engine modeling and experiments and has published more than 30
journal papers related to engine modeling and more than 20 journal papers on engine
experiments.

Assistant professor Annukka Santasalo-Aarnio was ap-
pointed as the head of Energy Storage research team at
Aalto School of Engineering in September 2018. The re-
search focus areas in her team are power-to-fuels, thermal
energy storage systems and materials, non-battery energy
storage systems for grid stabilization and harvesting energy
from end-of-use batteries. She is the project manager of
an industrial research project on future fuels and has 3
Academy of Finland projects on Energy Storage. Annukka
currently has a research team of 15 researchers and she is
also the responsible professor at Aalto for the InnoEnergy
Energy Storage master program.

Annukka obtained her Ph.D. on Fuel Cell material
development and testing at Helsinki University of Technol-
ogy in 2012. She did her postdoctoral work with Li-ion
battery development and as an leader a work package in
a Horizon 2020 project on Solar to Hydrogen, for task in
the development of an electrolyzer technology and complete
process integration. She obtained a University Teacher po-
sition in 2015 at the Department of Materials Science and
Metallurgy, and became the responsible teacher on a variety
of materials science, particularly on circular economy.

Professor Rolf D. Reitz is an emeritus professor at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. His career has included pi-
oneering work on reactivity controlled compression ignition
(RCCI) combustion for high efficiencies and low emissions
and development of computer models of fuel injected en-
gines. Professor Reitz has authored and co-authored more
than 500 journal publications and he has 5 patents. He
is the co-founding editor (Americas) of the International
Journal of Engine Research. He has served on the executive
board of the Institute of Liquid Atomization and Spraying
Systems and was the director of the UWMadison Mechanical
Engineering Department’s Engine Research Center.

is the Head of

Professor Martti Larmi

the Research
Group of Energy Conversion at Aalto University School of
Engineering. He obtained his degree in Doctor of Science in
Technology in 1993 from Helsinki University of Technology
in Mechanical Engineering and has been a Professor of Inter-
nal Combustion Engine Technology since 2002 at Helsinki
University of Technology and later at Aalto University.
In 2005, he received the Reward of Finnish Technology
Industry 100-year Foundation for the development of low
emission combustion. He has examined or supervised 30
doctoral theses.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience95(2023)10106432
