Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Lithium Plating Mechanism, Detection, and Mitigation in 
Lithium-Ion Batteries 

Xianke Lin 1,*, Kavian Khosravinia 1, Xiaosong Hu 2, *, Ju Li 3, Wei Lu 4 
1 Department of Automotive and Mechatronics Engineering, Ontario Tech University, Oshawa, ON L1G 0C5, Canada 
2 State Key Laboratory of Mechanical Transmissions, Department of Automotive Engineering, Chongqing University, China 
3 Department of Nuclear Science and Engineering and Department of Materials Science and Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
4 Department of Mechanical Engineering and Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Lithium-ion battery 
Degradation mechanisms 
Lithium plating 
Lithium plating mechanisms 
Lithium plating detection and prevention 
Fast charging strategies 

The  success  of  electric  vehicles  depends  largely  on  energy  storage  systems.  Lithium-ion  batteries  have  many 
important properties to meet a wide range of requirements, especially for the development of electric mobility. 
However, there are still many issues facing lithium-ion batteries. One of the issues is the deposition of metallic 
lithium on the anode graphite surface under fast charging or low-temperature conditions. Lithium plating re-
duces the battery life drastically and limits the fast-charging capability. In severe cases, lithium plating forms 
lithium dendrite, which penetrates the separator and causes internal short. Significant research efforts have been 
made over  the last two decades to understand the lithium plating mechanisms. However, the lithium plating 
mechanisms  have  not  yet  been  fully  elucidated.  Meanwhile,  another  challenge  in  the  development  of  fast 
charging technologies is to identify degradation mechanisms in real-time. This includes real-time detection of 
lithium  plating  while  the  battery  is  being  charged.  Accurate  detection  and  prediction  of  lithium  plating  are 
critical for fast charging technologies. Many approaches have been proposed to mitigate lithium plating, such as 
adopting advanced material components and introducing hybrid and optimized charging protocols. Nevertheless, 
most detection techniques and mitigation strategies are only used for fundamental research with limited pos-
sibilities in large-scale applications. To date, there is still a lack of a comprehensive review of lithium plating, 
reflecting  state  of  the  art  and  elucidating  potential  future  research  directions.  Therefore,  in  this  article,  we 
provide a snapshot of recent advances in lithium plating research in terms of mechanism, detection, and miti-
gation  to  fill  this  gap  and  incentivize  more  innovative  thoughts  and  techniques.  In  the  present  study,  the 
mechanisms of lithium plating and approaches used to characterize and detect it in different applications are 
carefully  reviewed.  This  review  also  provides  a  summary  of  recent  advances  in  model-based  approaches  to 
predict lithium plating. Based on the gathered information, the advantages and drawbacks of each model are 
compared. The mitigation strategies for suppressing lithium plating at different levels are studied. Finally, we 
highlighted some of the remaining technical challenges and potential solutions for future advancement.   

Abbreviations:  AU,  Aluminum;  BC,  Boost  charging;  BMS,  Battery  management  system;  CC,  Constant-current;  CC-CV,  Constant-current  constant-voltage;  CE, 
Coulombic efficiency; CPCV, Constant power constant voltage; C-rate, Current rate; DAE, Differential algebraic equation; DM, Degradation mode; DMC, Dimethyl 
carbonate; DOCV, Differential open-cell voltage; DV, Differential Voltage; DP, Dynamic  Programming; EC, Electrochemical; ECM, Equivalent circuit  model; EIS, 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy; EPR, Electron paramagnetic resonance; EV, Electric vehicle; FTIR, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy; GA, Genetic 
algorithm; GHG, Greenhouse gas; GPC, Generalized predictive control; IC, Incremental capacity; LAM, Loss of active materials; LCO, Lithium Cobalt Oxide; LFP, 
Lithium Iron Phosphate Battery; LiB, Lithium-ion battery; LLI, Loss of lithium inventory; LSTM, Long short-term memory; MCMB, Meso-carbon microbeads; ML, 
Machine  learning;  MPC,  Model  predictive  control;  MSCC,  Multistage  constant  current;  NMC,  Lithium  Nickel  Cobalt  Manganese  Oxide;  NMR,  Nuclear  magnetic 
response spectroscopy; OCV, Open circuit voltage; P2D, Pseudo-two-dimensional; PC, Pulse charging; PEV, Plug-in electric vehicle; RE, Reference electrode; ROM, 
Reduced-order model; SEM, Scanning electron microscopy; SEI, Solid electrolyte interphase; SOC, State of charge; SOH, State of health; STM, Scanning tunneling 
microscopy; TEM, Transmission electron microscopy; TOF, Time of flight; XFC, Extreme fast charging; XRD, X-ray diffraction; XPS, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. 

* Corresponding authors. 

E-mail addresses: xiankelin@ieee.org (X. Lin), xiaosonghu@ieee.org (X. Hu).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100953 
Received 30 September 2020; Received in revised form 24 July 2021; Accepted 26 July 2021   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)100953Availableonline5August20210360-1285/©2021ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

1. Introduction 

The transportation sector is one of the largest contributors to global 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions [1–3]. The negative effect of GHG on 
human  life  and  the  environment  provides  a  strong  driving  force  for 
reducing GHG emissions [4]. Transportation electrification is a prom-
ising  solution to alleviate the growing concern about GHG emissions. 
More and more electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), 
and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) have been developed and 
deployed as alternatives to traditional internal combustion engine (ICE) 
vehicles  [4–6].  The  success  of  transportation  electrification  depends 
largely on energy storage systems. As one of the most promising energy 
storage  systems,  lithium-ion  batteries  (LiBs)  have  many  important 
properties to meet the wide range of requirements of electric mobility 
[7,8]. The challenging requirements for further development of the LiB 
system  are  longer  life,  fast  charging,  low-temperature  charging, 
self-recovery capability, and safety performance. In fact, according to 
the literature, these requirements are related to the aging mechanisms of 
lithium  plating  and  anode  kinetics.  Precise  diagnosis,  prognosis  and 
understanding of the mechanisms and effects of lithium plating on the 
performance of cells and battery packs are critical to the optimal design 
and  safe  operation  of  LiB  systems.  However,  due  to  the  complex, 
nonlinear, and path-dependent nature of battery degradation [9,10], the 
aging  mechanisms  are  not  fully  understood.  As  a  result,  as  shown  in 
Fig. 1, lithium plating has been the subject of several levels of research, 
ranging  from  understanding  the  mechanism  of  lithium  plating  to 
demonstrate  why,  where,  when,  and  under what  conditions  this  phe-
nomenon occurs, to determining the most effective method to detect, 
predict, and prevent it. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to review 
the existing work in the literature and identify some of the fundamental 
knowledge gaps at each of these levels. 

A typical lithium-ion battery cell, as shown in Fig. 2 (A), comprises a 
composite negative electrode, separator, electrolyte, composite positive 
electrode, and current collectors [11,12]. The composite negative elec-
trode has a layered and planner crystal structure that is placed on the 
copper foil, which functions as a current collector. There are three types 
of  carbonaceous  materials:  graphite,  graphitizable  carbon,  and 
non-graphitizable carbon (hard carbon) [11,13]. Graphite is frequently 
used as a negative electrode because of its excellent performance, low 
cost, and non-toxicity [14]. The composite positive electrode (cathode) 
is a metal-oxide with a tunneled or layered structure that is coated with 

aluminum foil [15]. Aluminum acts as a current collector. The electro-
lyte plays a critical role in the lithium-ion diffusion process. The elec-
trolyte  allows  lithium  ions  to  move  between  electrodes  [13,16].  The 
separator  is  a  piece  of  thin  microporous  polymer  film  (10  to  30  μm) 
soaked in the electrolyte and sandwiched between the anode and cath-
ode electrodes to prevent shorting of the two electrodes [11]. 

+

+

+

+

During the normal charging process, electrons are extracted from the 
cathode  and  moved  to  the  anode  through  the  external  circuit  by  the 
ions are de-intercalated from the cathode and 
charger. Meanwhile, Li
moved  to  the  anode  through  electrolyte  [14].  During  discharge,  the 
entire  procedure  is  reversed.  The  lithium-ion  intercalation  process 
(during charging) has three major steps [17]: (i) the Li
ions diffuse out 
of the cathode, (ii) the diffusion of solvated Li
ions in the electrolyte, 
(iii) de-solvation Li
ions pass through the SEI and intercalate into the 
interlayer  of  graphite  [18–20].  Step  (iii),  generally  known  as  the 
charge-transfer  process,  is  broken  into  three  subprocesses  [21,22]:  1) 
de-solvation of solvated Li
ions (strip off their solvation shell), 2) naked 
Li
passing  through  the  SEI,  and  3)  solid-state  lithium  diffusion  into 
graphite (Li
reaching the anode and receiving an electron, which could 
occur at the anode-SEI interface or the anode-electronic conductor-SEI 
interface [18]) (Fig. 2 (C)). These steps would be favored in an ideal 
battery working condition. Nonetheless, in real-world applications, LiBs 
are subjected to a variety of severe working conditions, which have a 
substantial impact on battery performance and longevity. 

+

+

+

Battery  degradation  is  a  complicated  issue  involving  numerous 
physical and chemical processes. Degradation is dependent on a number 
of complex mechanisms caused by a variety of factors (e.g., intrinsic and 
extrinsic)  [23,24].  Intrinsic  factors  are  classified  into  two  categories: 
material properties and manufacturing procedures [25]. Extrinsic fac-
tors derive from the LiB operating conditions, such as charging at a high 
C-rate,  high  state  of  charge  (SOC),  or  low  temperature  [23,24].  As 
shown in Fig. 3, the aging mechanisms affect not only the anode and 
cathode electrodes, but also other LiB components such as electrolyte, 
separator, binder, and current collector [25–27]. The most detrimental 
aging mechanisms impacting graphite anode electrodes are solid elec-
trolyte interphase (SEI) film growth, binder decomposition, and lithium 
plating [28–30]. According to the literature, aging mechanisms can be 
divided into three main degradation modes (DMs): loss of lithium in-
ventory (LLI), loss of active materials (LAM) [31], and loss of electrolyte 
[25,32]. In LLI, lithium ions are consumed by side reactions, such as SEI 
film formation and irreversible plating [33]. Since these lithium ions are 

Figure 1. Lithium Plating Phenomena at Different Research Levels.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009532X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Figure 2. Schematic of a Battery Cell During Charging Process and Lithium Plating Behavior under Different Operational Conditions. 
(A) In the intercalation/de-intercalation process, Li-ions intercalate into or de-intercalate from the active material between the two electrodes in a reversible manner. 
(B) Schematic of lithium plating-stripping on the graphite anode electrode. The primary SEI layer (yellow color) is formed at the anode surface during the first charge 
of the cell to protect the electrode. Because the primary SEI layer prevents electrons from making direct contact with the electrolyte, metallic lithium (red color) is 
deposited  between  the  primary  SEI  layer  and  graphite  particles.  Mossy  and  dendritic  deposition  are  two  well-known  morphologies  of  deposited  lithium.  When 
deposited lithium reacts with electrolyte solutions, the secondary SEI layer (green color) forms. (C) Under ideal conditions, the charge-transfer process consists of 
+
three steps: 1. de-solvation of solvated Li
ions move slowly in graphite due to the low diffusivities of lithium ions and the sluggish charge transfer kinetics, resulting in lithium plating. (E) At high charging C- 
rate, Li
ions accumulate at the electrode interface due to the slow lithium solid diffusion, and lithium plating occurs. (F) 
Under high SOC conditions, Li

ions pass through the SEI, and 3. solid-state lithium diffusion into graphite particles. (D) At low temperature, Li

ions could accumulate at the surface due to fewer available sites in graphite under high SOC conditions. 

ions move fast and a large amount of Li

ions, 2. Li

+

+

+

+

+

no  longer  cyclable  for  the  intercalation  process,  the  cell  capacity  is 
reduced  (capacity  fade)  [34,35].  LAM,  on  the  other  hand,  is  usually 
related with structural changes and material loss [23]. The active mass 
on the anode is reduced due to graphite exfoliation, electrode particle 
cracking, or dead lithium blocking the active site pathway. Furthermore, 
the  active  mass  of  the  cathode  is  reduced  due  to  transition  metal 
dissolution, structural disordering, and electrode particle cracking [27, 
34,36,37]. The other significant cause of degradation is electrolyte loss; 
the deposited lithium on the anode interface reacts with the electrolyte, 
consuming  the  electrolyte  [16,32].  The  significant  reduction  in  elec-
trolyte content may result in capacity and power fading at the end of the 
battery’s life. 

Among  the  several  aging  mechanisms  in  LiBs,  one  of  the  most 
detrimental is the deposition of metallic lithium or lithium plating on 
the graphite anode surface. This is due to the fact that lithium plating 
may  not  only  promote  further  degradation,  but  it  may  also  have  a 
negative  impact  on  the  safety  of  LiBs  [38].  During  fast  charging, 
lithium-ions can be deposited on the surface of the graphite anode rather 
than being intercalated into the interstitial space between the graphite 
anode’s  atomic  layers  [39].  In  general,  the  deposited  lithium  can  be 
reversible  or  irreversible.  The  irreversible  portion  can  react  with  the 
electrolyte  to  form  a  secondary  SEI  layer,  or  it  can  form  a 
high-impedance “dead” lithium film that is electrically isolated from the 
graphite anode and remains irreversible, increasing internal resistance 

and decreasing energy density [29,40]. The irreversible portion causes 
capacity fade to be accelerated. In severe cases, the accumulated lithium 
might  also  form  a  dendrite.  Dendrites  can  develop  and  pierce  the 
separator [41]. The reversible portion describes the deposited lithium 
with an electrical contact on the  anode interface, which  can undergo 
charge  transfer  reaction 
into  the  electrolyte  and  subsequently 
re-intercalate into the anode, this process is known as lithium stripping. 
The stripping process occurs throughout the rest or discharge process 
following lithium plating [42,43]. One of the major limiting factors for 
fast charging is lithium plating. As a result, one of the major difficulties 
of fast charging technologies is to prevent or mitigate lithium plating 
during the charging process. 

Several studies have been conducted, including investigations into 
lithium plating mechanisms at various charging conditions, the devel-
opment of effective detection techniques, and the development of stra-
tegies  for  mitigating  lithium  plating.  Fig.  4  (A)  and  (B)  outline  the 
various  charging  currents  (C-rates),  testing  temperatures,  and  com-
mercial cell types used in the literature to study lithium plating. The C- 
rate is the current value that discharges a battery within 1 h from a fully 
charged state to a fully discharged state [44]. It is generally known in 
battery testing as a current value equal to a cell’s rated capacity (Ah). 
The test temperature varies from study to study and might range from 
-60 
C. According to our findings, the majority of the studies 
◦
tested  the  cells  at  room  temperature  (25 
C)  at  1  C.  Some  studies  at 

C to 80 

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009533X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Figure 3. Degradation Modes, Aging Mechanisms and the Affected Components in Lithium-ion Batteries. 
There are many different aging mechanisms, and they are generally divided into three different degradation modes (DMs): loss of lithium inventory (LLI), loss of 
active material (LAM) and loss of electrolyte. There is a general relationship between battery working conditions and the affected components with the corresponding 
aging mechanisms. Charging the battery at a high C-rate, a high state of charge (SOC), or at a low temperature can accelerate battery degradation [34]. 

Figure  4. Lithium  Plating  C-rates/  Temperature  Summary.  (A)  Analyzing  the  existing  literature  on  lithium  plating  based  on  two  common  testing  conditions: 
temperature and C-rate. Larger dots represent a greater number of publications that used the C-rate and temperature at those dots. (B) Commercial lithium-ion 
batteries cells that have been used for lithium plating studies in the literature. 

higher C-rates and lower temperatures have also been conducted. 

111), lithium iron phosphate (LFP), and lithium cobalt oxide (LCO). 

◦

Several studies investigated lithium plating at lower charging rates 
(0.3  and  0.5  C-rate)  and  temperature  ranges  from  (-20 
C). 
However, further research on lithium plating at lower temperatures and 
greater C-rates is still necessary. Various types of commercial cells were 
employed in the literature to study lithium plating, ranging from 18650 
and 26650 types (1.5 Ah to 3.4 Ah) to large-scale pouch types (9.5 Ah to 
16 Ah). In the literature, various battery cells are used for investigating 
lithium plating. Most of them use graphite as the anode and use different 
cathode materials, such as lithium nickel cobalt manganese oxide (NMC 

C  to  40 

◦

The overarching goal of this paper is to provide a timely, compre-
hensive review of the latest progress of lithium plating in the existing 
literature,  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  lithium  plating.  Since 
graphite  has  been  widely  used  as  the  anode  in  commercial  LiBs,  this 
work is focused on studying lithium plating in batteries that use graphite 
as  the  anode.  The  most  recent  studies  on  lithium  plating on  graphite 
anode are thoroughly reviewed. The mechanisms of lithium plating and 
the chemical reactions that contribute to lithium plating under various 
conditions  are  discussed.  Recent  approaches  for  detecting  lithium 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009534X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

plating are thoroughly explored and compared. Each detection method’s 
applicability is also investigated. The existing electrochemical models 
used  to  simulate  cell  behavior  in  order  to  predict  lithium  plating  are 
studied  and  explained.  Additionally,  optimal  and  common  charging 
protocols are introduced. In conclusion, based on the literature, research 
gaps are identified, and suggestions for future research directions are 
provided. 

2. Lithium Plating Reactions 

+

+

+

+

+

Lithium plating is a parasitic process that goes along with the lithium 
intercalation  process.  Equation  (1)  shows  the  complete  insertion  of 
Li
ions into the graphite anode electrode. Intercalation is a diffusion- 
limited  process,  meaning  that  a  certain  amount  of  Li
ions  can  be 
embedded into the interlayer of graphite per unit time at a given tem-
perature  [37].  The  potential  range  for  Li
ions  insertion  inside  the 
graphite is 65-200 mV vs. Li
/Li [29]. Equation (2) shows partial or full 
deposition  of  lithium  on  the  anode  surface.  The  charging  current  is 
divided into two parts: (i) intercalation current and (ii) lithium plating 
current  [38].  Ideally,  the  charging  current  affects  the  pace  at  which 
Li
ions are coming to the anode surface. However, there is a competi-
tion between the intercalation current and the lithium plating current. 
As the charging process continues, the vacancy sites in the graphite layer 
will decrease, and therefore the intercalation current is decreased while 
the lithium plating current is increased [19]. When the anode potential 
drops below 0 V, lithium plating is thermodynamically permitted and 
the rate of lithium deposition exceeds the rate of intercalation. The main 
contributors  to  the  graphite  electrode  overpotential  are  i)  charge 
transfer,  ii)  electrolyte  concentration  (mass  transfer),  and  iii)  lithium 
solid-phase in the negative electrode [39]. These are the kinetics cause 
for lithium plating. When the local potential at the negative electrode 
falls below 0 V (vs. Li
/Li) due to high SOC, high charging C-rate, and 
low temperatures, all of which polarize the electrode, lithium plating 
can  occur  thermodynamically  [7,45].  However,  because  the  reaction 
enthalpy is more positive, lithium plating is not as favorable as inter-
calation from a thermodynamic standpoint. Kinetic arguments alone are 
insufficient  to  explain  lithium  plating.  It  should  be  noted  that  LiB 
charging is a dynamic process that is not in equilibrium, especially at 
high  C-rates.  In  thermodynamic  equilibrium,  the  cell  voltage  can  be 
determined by the Nernst equation [40,41]. The equilibrium potential 
difference  can  be  used  as  an  indicator  of  the  thermodynamic  driving 
force of plating vs. intercalation, as plating and intercalation compete 
for electrons and lithium-ions [42]. The equilibrium electrode potential 
shifts with temperature, for both lithium plating and graphite interca-
lation. This temperature variation leads to a heterogeneous distribution 
of  the  equilibrium  potential  on  the  anode  [41].  The  heterogeneous 
equilibrium electrode potential leads to heterogeneous lithium plating 
[42]. It should be noted that the plated lithium will react with electro-
lyte  and  consume  electrolyte,  and  due  to  the  heterogeneity  on  the 
graphite electrode, lithium electroplating may occur locally [43]. 

+

lithium is inserted into the anode. The lithium stripping process is an 
easier  reaction  than  lithium  deintercalation  (Equation  (3)).  However, 
the reversible lithium in the lithium stripping process during discharge 
has two destinations, the intercalation into the graphite and transfer to 
the cathode to deliver output current [48]. 

εLi + Liδ+xC6→ Liδ+x+εC6

R + Li →R (cid:0) Li

Li→Li+ + e(cid:0)

(3)  

(4)  

(5) 

Based on the working and charging conditions, the morphology of 
deposited lithium are different, which can be classified into three types, 
including  mossy,  granular  (particle-like),  and  dendritic  (needle-like 
deposits) [7,47]. Morphology is determined by the current rate. Mossy 
and granular lithium form at low current rates, whereas dendrites form 
at  high  current  rates  [49].  Dendritic  growth  can  be  particularly 
destructive to the cell because it can penetrate the separator and reach 
the cathode electrode, causing an internal short-circuit and rapid heat-
ing of the cell. The generated heat may first melt dendrite and discon-
nect the short, and later it may trigger other aging mechanisms, such as 
SEI formation and electrolyte decomposition [17,50]. In terms of safety, 
the  dendritic  structure  is  considerably  less  safe  than  the  mossy  and 
granular lithium forms. Internal short circuits can be classified into two 
types, soft shorts and hard shorts [20]. Soft shorts normally disappear 
after discharge and do not cause cells to fail catastrophically. A soft short 
may  reduce  the  cell’s  current  and  voltage  while  simultaneously 
increasing the local temperature [51,52]. The heat generated by the soft 
short can cause an exothermic reaction with the electrolyte, causing the 
separator to melt. Hard shorts are characterized by slightly larger short 
circuit  currents  between  the  anode  and  the  cathode  due  to  their  low 
resistance  [52].  Due  to  a  higher  increase  in  local  temperature,  hard 
shorts  are  also  more  likely  to  contribute  to  thermal  runaway  [52].  It 
should be noted that lithium plating is a result of the actual operating 
conditions, poorly balanced cell, material properties, electrode design, 
and cell design [45]. 

3. Main Factors Affecting Lithium Plating 

Many  research  efforts  have  been  undertaken  to  understand  how, 
where  and  why  lithium  plating  occurs  during  both  normal  and  fast 
charging conditions. However, the mechanisms of lithium plating have 
not been fully elucidated due to its complex nature [53]. According to 
numerous previous researches, lithium plating occurs as a result of three 
major  factors,  which  include  but  are  not  limited  to:  (i)  hazardous 
operating conditions, (ii) cell defects, and (iii) aging of the cell (Table 1) 
[54]. 

3.1. Hazardous Operating Conditions 

xLi+ + LiδC6 + xe(cid:0) → Lix+δC6

(1 (cid:0) X)Li+ + (1 (cid:0) X)e(cid:0) →(1 (cid:0) X)Li

(1)  

(2) 

Lithium plating occurs when batteries are subjected to harsh condi-
tions, such as charging at high C-rates, charging at a high state of charge 
(SOC), and charging at low temperatures [55–59]. These harsh condi-
tions  can  limit  the  charge  transfer  kinetics  in  the  electrolyte  and 

Lithium  plating  has  three  different  outcomes,  which  are  dead 
lithium, reversible lithium, and secondary SEI film, as shown in Fig. 2 
(B) [46]. A portion of deposited lithium with lost electrical contact with 
the graphite is referred to as dead lithium [20]. Dead lithium may create 
a tortuous pathway for lithium-ion transport, reducing the active area 
for intercalation [46]. The secondary SEI film is the result of a reduction 
of solvent electrolyte (R) by the deposited lithium (Equation (4)). Both 
dead  lithium  and  SEI  film  are  irreversible  [47]  and  lead  to  reduced 
lithium  from  the  system  and  capacity  loss  over  time  [17].  Reversible 
lithium  returns  back  to  the  system  in  the  lithium  stripping  process 
(Equation  (5))  during  relaxation  or  resting  time  (Equation  (3))  [48]. 
During  relaxation,  the  reinsertion  continues  until  all  the  reversible 

Table 1 
Factors Causing Lithium Plating  

Factors 

Causes and Conditions 

Hazardous Operating 

Conditions 

Cell Defects 

Aging of the Cell 

(a) Low temperatures 
(b) High charging C-rates 
(c) High SOCs 
(a) Cell properties and poor design, such as imbalanced 
negative to positive ratio 
(a) Leading to cell unbalance 
(b) Kinetic degradation (Capacity fade, energy fade, CE 
decrease, energy efficiency fade and resistance increase)  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009535X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

solid-state diffusion, causing anode potential to drop below the potential 
of  lithium  metal  to  make  lithium  plating  happen  [60,61].  Because 
hazardous  operating  conditions  are  considered  to  be  one  of the  main 
factors affecting lithium plating, we will provide a comprehensive re-
view of the main parameters that accelerate lithium plating under the 
aforementioned conditions in this section. 

3.1.1. Low-Temperature Effects 

+

Low  temperature  is  one  of  the  main  obstacles  to  fast  charging. 
Charging at high C-rates can result in a severe capacity fade. Charging a 
◦
7.5 Ah cell at 1 C-rate at 0 
C, for example, would result in a considerable 
capacity loss (3.6%) [59]. Generally, the power and energy densities of 
LiBs are reduced at low temperatures, particularly during the charging 
process, due to three major factors: 1. decreased ionic conductivity in 
the electrolyte; 2. poor solid diffusivity of lithium-ion in the electrode; 3. 
poor charge-transfer rate [62–64]. According to the Arrhenius equation, 
at  low  temperatures,  the  cell  internal  resistance  increases  due  to 
decreasing  ionic  conductivity  in  the  electrolyte;  however,  decreased 
ionic conductivity is not the main problem in low-temperature charging. 
Studies show that the poor Li
diffusivity within the electrodes may be 
one of the main causes for lithium plating at low temperature, where 
lithium ions accumulate at the interface between carbon particles and 
electrolyte  [46,47,59].  Lithium  plating  occurs  when  the  surface  con-
centration of lithium ions in the graphite particles reaches the maximum 
value. The other major limiting factor in low-temperature charging is 
sluggish  charge  transfer  kinetics.  As  soon  as  the  current  is  applied,  a 
large  overpotential  is  produced.  As  anode  polarization  increases,  the 
anode potential falls below 0 V (vs. Li
/Li), resulting in lithium plating, 
where Li
ions accumulate at the anode interface rather than intercala-
tion, as shown in Fig. 2 (D) [49,53]. In addition, the potential drop of the 
composite anode close to the separator is larger than that at other lo-
cations, indicating that the lithium plating begins on the anode close to 
the separator [46,54,65]. As a result, charging currents at low temper-
atures  should  be  strictly  controlled.  The  lithium  deposition  at  low 
temperatures  may  be  suppressed  by  applying  a  pre-heating  strategy 
prior  to  charging  the  cell  or  by  charging  the  cell  at  low  rates  [66]. 
Recently, Yang and coworkers developed a cell structure consisting of 
thin nickel (Ni) foils embedded within the cell. The Ni foil acts as an 
internal heating material, generating heat in less than 10 seconds. The 
structured cell can be charged to 80 % SOC without lithium plating in 15 
minutes with high charging currents (3.5 C-rate) at temperatures as low 
as  -50 
C  [66].  The  same  group  recently  developed  an  asymmetric 
temperature modulation (ATM) method that charges a cell by elevating 
C during charging.  They showed that lithium 
the cell temperature to 60
plating may be prevented by a short-time exposure to 60
C (10 minutes 
per cycle) [67]. It should be noted that, from an EV standpoint, most 
modern EVs have an effective thermal management system that prevents 
extreme  operating  temperatures.  In  addition,  at  low  temperatures, 
electricity from the grid is often used to preheat the cells. 

+

+

◦

◦

◦

more heat is generated. Lithium plating and temperature rise are two 
well-known issues during the fast charging process [70]. 

3.1.3. High SOC 

+

Each  cell  has  an  upper  cutoff  voltage  predefined  by  the  manufac-
turer.  The  failure  of  a  battery  management  system  (BMS)  to  stop 
charging beyond its upper cutoff voltage during the charging process is 
the main cause for overcharging (high SOC) of the cell. High SOC is a 
condition  under  which  the  LiB  is  already  full,  but  the  current  keeps 
flowing to the LiB [71]. At high SOCs, as the charging continues, it is 
ions  on  the  anode  surface  to 
much  easier  for  the  concentration  of  Li
exceed the maximum allowable level and become saturated (Fig. 2 (F)). 
Lithium starts to deposit on the anode surface once the anode is satu-
rated [19,49]. Juarez-robles et al. [72] studied the effect of high SOC on 
graphite/LCO 5 Ah pouch cells at the various cutoff voltages ranging 
from  4.2  V  to  4.8  V.  Cells  charged  beyond  4.5  V  showed  significant 
capacity fade, lithium plating, electrolyte decomposition, and volume 
expansion. Dendrite structures are observed in cells that were charged to 
4.6 V, 4.7 V, and 4.8 V [72]. The dendrite penetrated the porous sepa-
rator, resulting in a micro-internal short-circuit. Moreover, at high SOCs, 
the side reactions are not only limited to the anode electrode, and the 
decomposition  of  the  electrolyte  also  occurs  at  the  cathode  electrode 
side. 

3.2. Cell Defects 

Many studies in the literature have emphasized the impact of the cell 
manufacturing  process  and  cell  properties  on  lithium  plating.  For 
example, Liu and coworkers showed that a cell with a negative to pos-
itive (N/P) ratio of 1.19 has a lower aging rate and less impedance rise 
than a cell with an N/P ratio of 1.06 [73]. The local cell defects can have 
an impact on lithium plating. For example, separator deformation (pore 
closure), which might occur during the cell manufacturing process or 
operation as a result of internal mechanical stress accumulation during 
charging or aging, could lead to lithium plating [74]. Furthermore, the 
kinetics  at  the  material  level  can  be  characterized  by  the  activation 
energy barrier. The kinetics of interfacial Li
ion transfer is one of the 
important factors in charge transfer [22,49,75]. There is a correlation 
between the intercalation kinetics and the lithium plating behavior [20, 
76].  Xu  et  al.  [21]  reported  that  desolvation 
the  most 
(cid:0) 1)  step  in  the  charge-transfer  process 
energy-consuming  (50kJmol
while the overall activation energy barrier of the graphite/electrolyte is 
(cid:0) 1) [77]. In another study, Yao et al. [78] found 
about (60 (cid:0) 70kJmol
that due to the difference of the energy barrier for lithium de-solvation 
on  the  edge  plane  and  the  basal  plane  of  graphite,  the  intercalation 
process prefers to occur at the edge plane of the graphite instead of the 
basal plane. It should be noted that during lithium plating, lithium-ions 
tend  to  continue  deposition  on  the  surface  where  lithium  has  been 
previously deposited. 

is 

+

3.1.2. High Charging C-rates 

3.3. Aging of the Cell 

+

Fast charging is becoming increasingly important for EVs and other 
types of applications. Fast charging, which is based on a high charging 
current (C-rate), has a significant impact on the battery’s performance 
and cyclic life due to accelerated aging. The charging rate is more likely 
to exceed the intercalation rate during fast charging. At a high C-rate, 
the  amount  of  Li
ions  moved  from  the  cathode  to  the  anode  in  the 
charge-transfer process per unit time increases [20]. Increased charging 
rates are often associated with higher polarization due to transport and 
kinetic  overpotentials,  making  lithium  plating  favorable  [68,69].  For 
example, to recharge a cell in 10 mins, a charge rate of 6 C is required. At 
this charge rate, Li
ions start to accumulate at the anode surface (Fig. 2 
(E)). As the high-rate charging continues, the accumulated Li
ions result 
+
in a high concentration of Li
ions on the graphite surface. If the con-
centration at the anode surface is saturated, lithium plating occurs[16, 
19].  Furthermore,  because  fast  charging  uses  a  high  charge  current, 

+

+

Even  under  normal  operation  conditions,  lithium  plating  can  still 
occur due to the aging of the cell. As mentioned earlier, the most com-
mon modes of degradation in the literature are LLI and LAM, where LAM 
can be further divided into four types based on the affected electrode 
and the degree of lithiation: loss of active material on the delithiated 
negative electrode (LAMdeNE), loss of active material on the delithiated 
positive  electrode  (LAMdePE),  loss  of  active  material  on  the  lithiated 
negative electrode (LAMliNE), and loss of active material on the lithiated 
positive electrode (LAMliPE) [31]. After the lithium plating occurs, the 
side reaction between the plated lithium and the electrolyte generates 
new SEI, resulting in capacity fading and increased impedance [17]. The 
changes in these degradation mechanisms can be used to study lithium 
plating. The analysis of capacity fade curve shapes will provide insight 
into the mechanism of aging and signs of lithium plating. These curve 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009536X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

shapes were classified into three types, linear capacity fade, decelerated 
capacity  fade,  and  accelerated  capacity  fade,  all  of  which  can  be 
expressed  as  a  function  of  the  number  of  cycles  [20].  In  commercial 
cells,  generally,  the  batteries  have  a  two-stage  capacity  fade.  The  ca-
pacity fade is fairly constant in the first stage, with a degradation mode 
related to LLI [31]. Accelerated capacity fade can be found in the second 
stage of degradation, usually after 500 cycles. The second stage is usu-
ally due to LAMdeNE. Ansean et al. [54] showed that LAMdeNE occurs at a 
pace  four  times  faster  than  LLI,  which  causes  cell  imbalance  and 
over-lithiation  of  the  negative  electrode  and  leads  to  lithium  plating. 
They found that lithium deposition becomes irreversible at the turning 
point of sudden capacity loss (curve shape). The second stage usually 
does not occur due to changes in cell usage, but it may be a product of 
underlying  silent  degradation  mechanisms  from  the  beginning  of  life 
[54,79].  The  type  of  silent  degradation  will  be  affected  by  the  cell 
chemistry as well as its form factor (pouch and cylindrical cells). These 
silent degradations have a certain incubation period during which they 
do not cause any capacity loss [79]. Therefore, it is important to study 
the modes of degradation, particularly those that may lead to lithium 
plating.  Besides  the  ratio  of  LAMNEto  the  LLI,  the  plating  threshold 
(LAMNE,PT) is also a predictor of an accelerated degradation stage [80]. 
Cell design parameters (such as mass ratio), capacity loss, and the two 
degradation  modes  (LLI  and  LAMPE)  will  affect  this  value.  Values 
exceeding this threshold cause lithium plating [80]. In another study, 
Schuster et al. [81] found a significant decrease in capacity at moderate 
temperatures and charging rates due to lithium plating. They showed 
that  the  lithium  plating  occurred  due  to  significantly  decreased  ionic 
kinetics  of  the  graphite  as  a  result  of  SEI  growth  and  graphite  active 
material loss. It should also be noted that in literature, the capacity curve 
is often plotted against temperature (Arrhenius plot), which is obtained 
from cycling experiments at various temperatures. Lithium plating leads 
to faster aging at lower temperatures, although without lithium plating, 
it typically ages faster at elevated temperatures [82]. 

4. Lithium Plating Detection Approaches 

Detecting lithium plating in its early stages is often challenging. To 
understand the formation and growth of lithium plating, extensive ef-
forts have been made in the past to characterize and observe the anode 
lithium  plating  morphology  [83].  Many  approaches  (in-situ,  ex-situ, 
non-destructive,  and  recently  in-operando  methods)  have  been  pro-
posed by researchers to investigate lithium plating mechanisms in LiBs. 
These  detection  methods  are  classified  into  three  main  categories: (i) 
physical characterization of surface morphologies, (ii) physical charac-
terization of surface chemistry, and (iii) electrochemical methods. The 
first and second categories are based on physical properties of the plated 
lithium films, such as morphology, chemical composition, and surface 
chemistry, whereas the third technique is based on electrochemical re-
actions  between  the  electrolyte  and  metal  lithium  [19].  These  tech-
niques enable ex-situ and in-situ investigations. To study lithium plating 
using ex-situ methods, post-mortem analysis is required, in which the 
cell is disassembled and opened with special tools, and then the desired 
specimen  is  transferred  to  microscopes  or  spectrometers  for  further 
investigation. In-situ approaches, on the other hand, require a complex 
spectroelectrochemical cell design [84]. In the following subsections, we 
have systematically classified the existing lithium plating detection ap-
proaches  to  highlight  the  technological  status  of  this  ever-evolving 
research field and current research gaps. Furthermore, we have classi-
fied  each  electrochemical  approach  based  on  its  ability  to  be  used 
on-board  in  real-time  automotive  applications.  We  briefly  review  the 
post-mortem analysis steps, including cell disassembly, specimen pro-
cessing,  and  specimen  analysis,  as  this  is  the  basic  procedure  for  the 
majority of the ex-situ approaches. 

4.1. Post-Mortem Analysis for Lithium Plating Study 

In literature, methodologies or procedures for post-mortem analysis 
of  lithium  plating  have  not  been  clearly  explained.  Research  groups 
mainly  carried  out  the  procedures  based  on  their  own  expertise  and 
experiences [85,86]. Therefore, we provide a snapshot of the detailed 
steps for the disassembly process and post-mortem analysis (Fig. 4). The 
first stage, as illustrated in Fig. 5 (A), is to deep-discharge the cell (end of 
the discharge voltage 0 V) to reduce the potential risk of the short circuit 
during the cell opening process [87–89]. After that, since the electrode 
sample surfaces are reactive to the atmospheric gases (H2OandO2), the 
cell should be transferred to the controlled environment to decrease the 
risk of surface contamination during the disassembly process. In general, 
two  types  of  controlled  environments  are  used  for  this  procedure: 
argon-filled glove boxes and fume hoods (Fig. 5 (B)). The choice of either 
option is dependent on the cell design and the goal of the investigation 
[86].  Choosing  an  appropriately  controlled  environment  is  not  only 
important for safety, but it can also have an impact on the experimental 
outcomes  [86].  The  entire  disassembling  procedure  takes  place  in  a 
controlled environment. To avoid sample contamination, the H2OandO2 
levels in the argon-filled glove box should be between 0.1 ppm and 10 
ppm  [87,90,91].  If  the  samples  do  not  need  to  be  protected  from  at-
mospheric gases, the disassembly procedure can be carried out in a fume 
hood. To avoid inhaling dangerous gases, the fume hood should evac-
uate the air at a rate of 60-100 feet per minute [86]. The final step of the 
disassembly  process  is  cell  opening.  Non-conductive  tools  are  recom-
mended to prevent any short-circuiting between the cell terminals. The 
cell configuration will determine which cutting tool should be used in 
the disassembly process. Rotary tools, such as Dremel, are typically used 
for cylindrical cells; the isolated plier is used for prismatic cells; and the 
knife, along with a pair of scissors, can be used for pouch cells [85,86, 
92]. No heat or smoke will be produced if the disassembly procedure is 
successful. During the post-mortem analysis, the jelly cell is unrolled and 
the  cell  components  are  separated  from  one  another  to  be  studied 
individually.  The  separated  components  are  then  transferred  to 
dimethyl carbonate (DMC) solvent for washing [92]. The appropriate 
components are immersed in the DMC liquid during the washing process 
to dissolve the electrolyte salt residues on the sample surface (Fig. 5 (C)). 
Some authors, however, suggested two washing steps, one minute each, 
to remove all electrolyte salt residues [85]. It should be noted that the 
post-mortem  analysis  takes  place  in  a  controlled  environment. 
Following that, the samples are kept in the glove box to dry and prepared 
for  further  investigation.  The  cell  components  are  now  ready  to  be 
moved  to  the  testing  facility  for  physical  characterization,  and  the 
samples must be transferred from the glove box to the testing facility in a 
vacuum-sealed container due to the possibility of air contamination of 
the cell component (Fig. 5 (D)) [86,93]. 

4.2. Physical Characterization of Surface Morphologies 

Several  efforts  have  been  made  in  recent  years  to  study  the 
morphology  of  deposited  lithium  using  physical  characterization  ap-
proaches  to  acquire  a  better  understanding  of  the  lithium  plating- 
stripping  mechanism.  Physical  characterization  approaches  are 
commonly employed to study the structure of the deposited lithium and 
the growth processes of the lithium dendrites on the anode surface in the 
laboratory [83]. The most commonly used approaches for the physical 
characterization of lithium plating are explained. In addition, Table 2 
summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each approach in order 
to highlight their effectiveness. 

4.2.1. Optical Microscopy 

High-resolution optical microscopy can be used both in-situ and ex- 
situ to observe lithium plating-stripping processes during cell operation 
[94].  In-situ  optical  microscopy  can  be  used  to  directly  observe  the 
plating  morphology.  A  custom-made  optical  in-situ  cell  is  designed 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009537X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Figure 5. Overview of Post-Mortem Analysis for Lithium-Ion Cells. A) The test cell is required to be fully discharged before any further steps. B) The test cell is moved 
to the controlled environment for the opening procedure, where the controlled environment is chosen based on the study goals. Cell casing is removed. C) Cell 
components  are  separated  and  washed,  and  they  are  ready  to  be  sent  to  the  testing  facilities.  D)  Cell  components  are  subjected  to  further  analysis  in  order  to 
investigate lithium plating. 

◦

◦

(Fig.  6  (A))  to  study  the  penetration  of  lithium  dendrite  through  the 
separator in order to find strategies to stop them (Fig. 6 (B) and (C)) 
[95]. The in-situ techniques can also be used to find the position and 
direction  of  the  deposited  lithium  on  the  electrode  surface  [96].  In 
Ref. [77], in-situ optical microscopy is used to study the morphology of 
deposited  lithium.  At  10 
C,  mushroom-like  dendrites  were  seen, 
whereas needle-like and wound-ball morphologies were observed at 5 
◦
C and 20 
C, respectively. During the lithium stripping process, dead 
lithium is observed, where it grows at the tips of the lithium and even-
tually  loses  electrical  contact  and  separates  from  the  graphite  [96]. 
Lithium ions are extracted from the cathode compound and intercalate 
into the graphite structure. The color of the graphite changes depending 
on  the  stage  of  intercalation.  Each  stage  has  been  associated  with 
recognizable color, ranging from black to red to gold (as a function of 
lithium concentration  x  in LixC6  (Fig.  6 (D)) [97,98].  As a  result, the 
in-situ optical microscopy method based on color change can be useful 
for  observing  lithium  plating.  Thoma-Aleya  et  al.  [99]  designed  a 
coin-type half-cell for in-situ optical microscopy to analyze color change 
at the graphite particles (Fig. 6 (E)). Using in-situ optical microscopy, 
Harris et al. [43] observed three stages on the meso-carbon microbeads 
(MCMB) electrode. In the beginning, the electrode was entirely in the 
blue stage (4L). The red-blue and gold-red boundaries then began at the 
edge of the electrode and sparsely departed from there until the voltage 
dropped  to  +2  mV  (Fig.  6  (F)).  Furthermore,  they  observed  lithium 
plating on the (MCMB) electrode. The MCMB electrodes became golden 
(stage 1) after a voltage (+2 mV) was applied to the current collector, as 
shown in Fig. 6 (G) and (H). The edge of the electrode was free of lithium 
plating, whereas the rest of the electrode remained (stage 2) red graphite 
particles  for  many  hours  [43].  Moreover,  they  observed  that  lithium 
+
plating occurred when the anode potential was +0.002 V against Li
/Li. 
However,  thermodynamically  lithium  plating  should  occur  when  the 
anode potential drops below 0 V against Li
/Li[43]. The change in the 
color associated with lithium concentration is dependent on the ambient 
is  characterized  as 
lighting  condition; 

technique 

thus, 

this 

+

semi-quantitative. 

4.2.2. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) 

◦

Since  1988,  SEM  has  been  used  to  investigate  the  surface 
morphology of the lithium electrode, and it has a higher resolution than 
optical microscopy [100]. Many studies have employed both in-situ and 
ex-situ  SEM  to  investigate  the  lithium  plating-stripping  process  [101, 
102]. Yamaki et al. [103] used ex-situ SEM observation to characterize 
the lithium electrode surface morphologies during an extensive cycling 
test on a lithium coin cell for the first time. They identified two types of 
lithium deposits: particulate and dendritic. During discharge, the par-
ticulate  lithium  structure  is  reinserted  into  the  anode  graphite.  The 
dendritic structure, on the other hand, remained on the anode surface. 
Rauhala et al. [88] investigated the lithium plating on the cell that was 
cycled at low temperatures using ex-situ SEM. A considerable amount of 
lithium plating was observed on the anode surface when the cell was 
C. Surface contamination is always a risk during ex-situ 
cycled at -18 
SEM  investigations,  especially  for  highly  sensitive  surfaces  like 
graphite anode electrodes [83,96]. Using in-situ SEM to study lithium 
plating-stripping, on the other hand, requires unique cell and equipment 
designs. Many research groups have developed ultrahigh vacuum types 
of equipment to reduce the possible risk of lithium specimen contami-
nation  during  the  transfer  process  [100,102,104].  However,  because 
ultra-high vacuum equipment is used in the examination process, in-situ 
SEM is only applicable to batteries that use solid polymer electrolytes 
and  ionic  liquids  [102,105,106].  Uhlmann  et  al.  [98]  applied  a  high 
charging  current  of  up  to  10  C  to  three  different  half-cells  to  study 
lithium  plating.  They  used  SEM  to  observe  changes  in  the  surface 
morphology  of  the  deposited  lithium  during  both  the  charging  and 
relaxation phases. Fig. 6 (I) and (J) show the surface structure of the 
anode  sample  with  mossy  grown  lithium  that  is  charged  with  a  high 
charging current of 10 C. To avoid the relaxation period, this sample was 
disassembled in less than 5 minutes after charging. Another interesting 
approach  was  taken  by  Rong  et  al.  [107]  who  developed  an  in-situ 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009538X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Table 2 
Advantages and Disadvantages Physical Characterization of Surface Morphologies for Lithium Plating Detection  

Techniques 

In- 
situ 

Ex- 
situ 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Scanning Electron 

Microscope (SEM)   

✓   

✓  

Optical Microscopy  

✓  

✓  

Atomic Force Microscopy 

✓   

(AFM)  

Transmission Electron 
Microscope (TEM)  

✓  

✓  

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 

✓  

✓  

Spectroscopy (NMR)  

(a) Suitable for large morphology change 
(b) Applicable to all types of cells 
(c) More effective to monitor the detrimental 
formation of dendrites directly 

(a) Instantly distinguish the surface change 
(b) Able to monitor lithium stripping/ 
plating during operation 

(a) Imaging at the atomic level 
(b) Three-dimensional (3D) image 
(c) Visibility of Li surface including 
boundaries, ridgelines, flat areas 

(a) Suitable for large morphology change 
(b) Dynamic evolution of interfaces at high 
tempo-spatial resolutions 
(c) Observation of SEI mechanisms and 
structures at the nanoscale 
(d) Observing microstructures in real-time 
(using open cell) 
(a) Quantitative method 
(b) Provide a non-equilibrium state during 
charging/discharging 
(c) Processes in a non-invasive manner 
(d) Observe the change in intensity 
proportional to the lithium content of each 
stage 

(a) Only applicable on batteries using solid polymer or inorganic 
SSE in in-situ condition 
(b) Risks of surface contamination were always present 
(c) Not applicable for quantitative studies in dynamic condition 
(d) The requirement of an extra high vacuum 
(a) Resolution not as high as of SEM 
(b) Not applicable for quantitative studies in dynamic condition 
(c) Resolution is too low for most of the nanoscale materials 
(d) Required to design an optical cell for in-situ investigation 
(a) Not suitable for inspection of dendrite formation 
(b) Not applicable for quantitative studies in dynamic condition 
(c) Destructive method (surface scratching needed in the 
contact mode) 
(d) Risks of surface contamination were always present  

(a) The requirement of an extra high vacuum 
(b) Require solid-state electrolyte and ionic liquid (volatile 
organic electrolytes are incompatible with the high-vacuum 
environment) 
(c) Surface damage due to the beam effect (80/300keV) 
(d) Low spatial/energy resolution due to the presence of various 
stimuli along the beam path 
(a) Risks of surface contamination were always present on Ex- 
situ condition  

Refs 

[170,172,169, 
174,7,105,83] 

[7,43,83,175, 
105] 

[176,7,130, 
129] 

[19,177,112, 
7,178,101, 
110] 

[121,117,179, 
102]  

electrochemical  scanning  electron  microscopy  (EC-SEM)  technique  to 
observe  the  lithium  plating-stripping  process  on  Li/Cu  electrode  in 
liquid electrolyte LiTFSI/DOL/DME. They showed the significance and 
advantages  of  LiN3  and  Li2S8  as  additives  on  lithium  dendrite 
suppression. 

Fig. 7 (A) shows lithium dendrites with a length of 18 μm after 350 
seconds.  During  the  stripping  process,  however,  the  majority  of  the 
lithium dendrites begin to dissolve into the electrolyte after 600 seconds, 
while the remainder tends to become dead lithium. Tallman et al. [108] 
reduced the amount of the deposited lithium up to 50 % by increasing 
the deposited overpotential through surface treatment. They deposited 
ultrathin  (10  nm)  Cu  and  Ni  film  on  the  graphite  electrode  surface. 
Ex-situ SEM results reveal that the deposited lithium was significantly 
decreased on the coated graphite with Cu and Ni compared to the un-
coated graphite Fig. 7 (B). 

4.2.3. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) 

One of the most promising observation methods for studying lithium 
dendrite  growth at the nanoscale is  transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) [83]. In the literature, in-situ TEM setup is divided into two major 
types:  a  liquid  cell  system  and  an  open-cell  system  [109,110].  In 
Ref. [111], a nanoscale LiB was built inside a TEM to investigate lithium 
plating  in-operando  using  an  ionic  liquid  as  the  electrolyte.  They 
demonstrated how lithium ions nucleate at the anode-electrolyte inter-
face and ultimately form fibers. The fundamental disadvantage of this 
approach is that volatile organic compounds (ionic liquids or solid-state 
electrolytes)  are  incompatible  with  the  high-vacuum  environment  of 
TEM, hence it cannot be used to analyze lithium plating [112]. Mehdi 
et al. [113] recently used an in-situ liquid ec-TEM cell to study the dy-
namic volumetric changes at the electrolyte silicon nanowires interface 
during  the  charging  and  discharging  process.  They  measured  the 
thickness of the SEI layer of the anode electrode which was immersed in 
LiClO4with (EC: DMC) as electrolytes during lithium plating-stripping. 
They  confirmed  that  the  SEI  formation  kinetics  is  greatly  reduced  by 
electron  transport.  Lithium  plating-stripping  in  a  LiPF6-ethylene 

carbonate (EC)-diethyl carbonate (DEC) electrolyte was studied by Zeng 
et al. [114] to investigate the formation of dead lithium during cycling, 
as shown in Fig. 7 (C). Overall, in-situ TEM requires further develop-
ment, particularly for liquid cell constructions due to electron scattering 
in the liquid layer [83]. The key issue is to find a suitable electrolyte for 
the TEM column [101]. 

4.2.4. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (NMR) 

The key advantages of this technique over other approaches are its 
non-destructive nature and applicability to both crystalline and amor-
phous  materials  [115,116].  Ex-situ  NMR  can  distinguish  between 
different chemical states of lithium in the active material of the graphite 
electrode. Hao et al. [57] used an ex-situ NMR to measure the quantity of 
◦
C), 
plated lithium while the cell was charged from 0 % to 60 % SOC (-25 
C) with high currents (1.5 C). 
80 % SOC (-25 
They found that the activation energy of lithium intercalation is higher 
than lithium plating even at low SOCs, resulting in lithium plating [57]. 
However,  the  use  of  the  ex-situ  method,  like  the  ex-situ  procedures 
discussed  above,  requires  certain  additional  steps  before  the  experi-
ments, which may influence the experimental outcomes [117]. 

C), and 80 % SOC (-20 

◦

◦

Several research groups have employed in-situ NMR to study carbon 
graphite  electrodes,  lithium  metal  oxide,  and  metal  electrodes 
[117–120].  The  hard  carbon  electrode  as  a  negative  electrode  can 
consume  more  lithium  during  relaxation  compared  to  the  graphite 
electrode,  Gotoh  et  al.  [121]  constructed  full  LiB  cells  with  different 
materials  including  LiCoO2,  LiNixCoyAlz,  and  LiMn2O4  as  the  positive 
electrode,  along  with  graphite  and  hard  carbon  as  the  negative  elec-
trodes to study relaxation effects in LiBs. They measured lithium spectra 
of cells at various SOCs, particularly after overcharging (2 C and 3 C) at 
170 % SOC. They showed that the phenomenon of the "relaxation effect" 
occurs after overcharging based on the lithium metal signal measure-
ment  [121].  The  lithium  metal  signal  decreases  with  time  as  lithium 
atoms begin to reinsert into the graphite layer. Ota et al. [122] employed 
NMR spectroscopy to investigate the surface chemistry (surface film). 
They  found  that  lithium  cycling  efficiency  affects  not  only  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009539X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Figure 6. In-situ Cell Design and Results of Optical Microscopy and Ex-situ SEM for Lithium Plating Morphology Characterization. 
(A) Schematic of the custom-made optical in-situ cell with a quartz glass window. (B) In-situ optical microscopy at a current density of 1 mA/cm2 (t = 0 - 600 s). The 
gap between lithium metal and separator helps in the observation of the dendrite growth until it reaches the separator. (C) In-situ optical microscopy at a current 
density of 1 mA/cm2 (t = 0 - 795 s). There is no gap between the separator and the lithium electrode. Penetration started at t = 595 s and quickly changed to the bush- 
like structure (Reprinted from Liu et al. [95] with permission of American Chemical Society Publications). (D) The color of graphite is affected by the concentration 
of lithium x in LixC6  (data adapted from Ref. [123], the random occupation of all superlattices defined as ’liquid-like’  or L stage). (E) Side-view schematic of a 
custom-made coin-type half-cell for in-situ optical microscopy (Reprinted from Thomas-Alyea et al. [99] with permission of Electrochemical Society). (F) The MCMB 
electrode surface inside an in-situ optical half-cell, three different graphite colors (stages) were observed over 3 hours. Lithium Plating on an MCMB electrode was 
observed when a voltage (+2 mV) is applied to the current collector, although according to bulk thermodynamics, lithium metal plating should not occur unless the 
voltage becomes negative. The image (G) is taken 8 h before (H) (Reprinted from Harris et al. [43] with permission of Elsevier). (I) and (J) Ex-situ SEM images show 
the morphology of an anode surface with mossy lithium plating. The anode is charged with a high current of 10 C and then instantly dismantled in less than 5 minutes 
to interrupt the relaxation phase, scale bars: 20 μm and 2 μm (Reprinted from Uhlmann et al. [98] with permission of Elsevier). 

morphology of deposited lithium but also the chemical components of 
the surface film. Arai et al. [119] studied lithium metal deposition with 
in-situ solid-state Li NMR on a full cell consisting of LiCoO2  (positive 
electrode),  graphite  (negative  electrode),  polypropylene  (separator), 
and an organic liquid such as electrolyte (1 M LiPF6, ethyl methyl car-
bonate 30:70 vol.%) during both continuous currents (CC) and pulses 
current  (PC)  mode  operations.  As  shown  in  Fig.  7  (D),  the  deposited 
lithium metal became visible at approximately 265 ppm at -5 oC tem-
perature  for  different  cell  cycles  with  a  CC  mode  pattern.  Simulta-
neously, no lithium metal deposition was detected at -5  oC with a PC 
mode pattern [119]. 

They also calculated the lithium deposition rate (k) using the slopes 
of the plots. The lithium deposition rate at -5 oC is approximately 12.4 
(cid:0) 1).  Wandt  et  al.  [124]  employed  electron  paramagnetic 
(103mgmAh
resonance (EPR) spectroscopy to identify the onset of lithium plating in 
a graphite electrode under realistic cell conditions. EPR is more sensitive 
than  NMR,  making  it  excellent  for  analyzing  lithium  materials 
in-operando  [125,126].  EPR  spectroscopy,  in  addition  to  NMR,  uses 
low-energy radiation that does not affect the chemical characteristics or 
morphology of the investigated species [125,127]. 

scrapes the sample’s surface in contact mode [130]. The image resolu-
tion is low in non-contact mode due to the large distance between the 
probe  and  the  sample.  As  shown  by  in-situ  AFM  in  Ref.  [129],  the 
structure of the lithium surface includes grain boundaries, ridge-lines, 
and flat areas. These lines were found to be critical in controlling the 
morphology  of  the  deposited  lithium.  Aurbach  et  al.  [131]  studied 
lithium deposition on the copper electrode in a nonaqueous electrolyte 
system  using  in-situ  AFM  measurements.  They  found  that  although 
lithium metal is soft, utilizing AFM as a detection tool does not modify 
the  surface  morphology.  In  another  approach,  Shen  et  al.  [132]  used 
in-situ  electrochemical  atomic  force  microscopy  (EC-AFM)  to  study 
lithium  dendrite  growth  on  a  graphite  electrode  cycled  in  1  M  LiP-
F6-EC-DMC and 1 M LiPF6-FEC-DMC electrolytes. They confirmed the 
importance  and  advantages  of  FEC-based  electrolytes  on  lithium 
dendrite detention, as the formed SEI is harder and denser compared to 
the SEI formed in the EC-based electrolyte. Overall, AFM is an accurate 
and  powerful  technique  to  study  the  morphology  and  topography 
changes of LiBs [133]. However, it is not recommended to use AFM for 
inspection of the dendrite formation as it has some limitations in the tip 
dimension and the usual vertical scanning range of instruments [134]. 

4.2.5. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) 

4.3. Physical Characterization of Surface Chemistry 

AFM  is  one  of  the  most  effective  tools  for  analyzing  the  surface 
morphology of electrodes at the nanoscale scale [128,129]. AFM scans 
the  surface  of a  sample with  a cantilever and  a  sharp probe. In com-
parison to SEM or optical microscopy, it can also provide significantly 
higher morphological resolution in three-dimensional (3D) format [83]. 
In-situ AFM was utilized by Mogi et al. [130] to investigate the surface 
morphology  of  deposited  lithium  on  the  Nickel  substrate  at  elevated 
temperatures.  At  40 
C,  they  discovered  heterogeneous  and  massive 
deposits of lithium underneath the substrate’s surface film, whereas, at 
◦
60 
C, they discovered a homogenous and thick surface film. 
The results, however, were inaccurate since the AFM observation was 
done  in  contact  mode.  During  the  investigation,  the  AFM  probe  (tip) 

◦
C and 80 

◦

One of the most common approaches in the field of LiBs is to analyze 
the  chemical  composition  of  the  surface  films  on  electrodes  in  non- 
aqueous  solutions.  The  chemical  composition  of  deposited  lithium  as 
well  as  the  oxidation  states  of  the  elements  can  be  examined  using 
surface chemistry analysis techniques [135,136]. In the following part, 
the  methodologies  used  to  characterize  the  surface  chemistry  of  the 
deposited lithium on the anode surface will be introduced. In addition, 
for a more in-depth understanding of the existing techniques, the ad-
vantages and disadvantages of each are listed in Table 3. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095310X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Figure 7. Different Physical Characterization Approaches for Lithium Plating investigation. 
(A) Schematic of the in-situ SEM EC-liquid cell setup for direct observation of lithium plating, Li/Cu electrode during lithium plating for a)200 s, b)250 s, c)350 s, and 
(cid:0) 2. Scale bars: 20 μm, (Reprinted from Rong et al. [107] with permission of Advanced Materials). (B) Schematic 
d)50 s, e)270 s, f)600 s for stripping under 0.15 mAcm
of Li-metal nucleation on the uncoated graphite surface and coated graphite surface during high current charging, the nucleation is significantly decreased due to 
increased overpotential for Li-metal deposition, which was obtained by the nanoscale coating of Cu and Ni, backscatter SEM images of the deposited lithium metal on 
the uncoated graphite and coated graphite with Cu and Ni. Scale bar: 20 μm (Reprinted from Tallman et al. [108] with permission of American Chemical Society). (C) 
Schematic of in-situ TEM liquid cell for nanoscale observation of electrode-liquid electrolyte interfaces using lithium dendrite growth. Scale bars: 800 nm, (Reprinted 
C. These spectra were measured at the fully 
from Zeng et al. [114] with permission of Nano Letters). (D) The stacked in-situ NMR spectroscopy for different cells at -5
charged state in the latest cycle. Pulse current mode: cells were cycled with pulse current (PC) mode pattern, and no lithium plating was detected. Continuous current 
mode: cells were cycled with continuous current (CC) mode pattern and lithium plating observed at 265 ppm (Reprinted from Arai et al. [119] with permission of 
Electrochemical Society). 

◦

4.3.1. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) 

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy has been widely used for surface 
chemistry analysis (element analysis and oxidation state of elements) of 
lithium electrodes due to the relative simplicity in use and data inter-
pretation [137]. Castro et al. [136] used XPS to investigate the aging 
mechanism  of  a  LiFePO4/graphite  cell  after  200  cycles  at  ambient 
temperature. They found that cyclable lithium can be consumed at each 
cycle due to the deposited lithium on the anode surface and the insta-
bility of the SEI (LAM). XPS may be a destructive method due to the 
usage  of  an  argon  ion  sputter  gun  and  an  X-ray  beam  on  the  sample 
during the investigation [84]. However, Aurbach et al. [137] found that 
by  working  at  low  emission  and  balancing  the  quality  of  the  spectra 
based  on  the  shorter  measurement  duration,  it  is  possible  to  collect 
reliable and reproducible findings with minimum damage to the mate-
rial  when using  the XPS technique.  The XPS method, like  most  other 
spectroscopic methods, requires a vacuum system and there is always 
the  risk  of  surface  contamination  in  highly  sensitive  electrodes.  As  a 
result, a special transfer arrangement is required [138,139]. X-ray to-
mography can provide a better understanding of the structure and ma-
terial composition of the electrodes, as well as morphological changes 
[140–143].  X-ray  beams  with  energy  ranging  from  10-100  keV  may 
easily penetrate the plastic and metallic cell casing and directly visualize 
the  inner  LiB  components  in  3D  [140,144].  Eastwood  et  al.  [145] 
applied  a  synchrotron-based  X-ray  phase-contrast  tomography  tech-
nique to investigate the microstructures of the electrodeposited lithium, 
which  is  necessary  for  understanding  the  dendrite  formation.  Harry 

et al. [146] used synchrotron hard X-ray microtomography to investi-
gate  the  lithium  dendrite  in  a  lithium/polymer/lithium  cell.  They 
discovered  that  the  subsurface  structure  of  the  electrode  is  critical  in 
facilitating dendritic formation in the polymer electrolyte. 

4.3.2. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) 

+

FTIR is a non-destructive method for analyzing the chemistry of the 
lithium surface [84]. Many researchers have used FTIR to investigate the 
surface  chemistry  of  lithium  in  organic  electrolytes  [147–149].  To 
quantitatively  describe  liquid  electrolyte  solutions,  Ellis  et  al.  [150] 
combined  FTIR  spectra  with  machine  learning  (ML)  techniques.  The 
electrolyte concentration was reported to be reduced by 10–20% (Vol) 
◦
in cells after 200 cycles at 55
C. This is a significant amount of salt loss, 
which contributes to cell failure. Morigaki [148] analyzed the impact of 
EC
dimethyl carbonate (DMC) solution on lithium surface based on the 
locations and strengths of the peaks in DMFTIR spectra. They found a 
new reduction product of the solvent on lithium after 1 and 15 hours 
immersion  with  DMFTIR.  In  another  approach,  FTIR  was  used  by 
Kramer et al. [149], who studied lithium plating in pristine cells of two 
different forms (cylindrical and pouch). The impacts of electrolyte sol-
vent  such  as  propylene  carbonate  (PC),  ethylene  carbonate  (EC), 
dimethyl  carbonate  (DMC),  and  different  salts  (LiAsF6,LiBF4,LiPF6)on 
the  lithium surface  were investigated  with FTIR in  [137]. The in-situ 
FTIR technique uses attenuated total reflectance (ATR) to examine the 
lithium sample in the nonaqueous system [151]. Therefore, using ATR 
crystal for each experiment would be prohibitively expensive due to the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095311X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Table 3 
Advantages and Disadvantages Physical Characterization of surface chemistry 
for Lithium Plating  

In- 
situ 

Ex- 
situ 

✓  

✓  

Techniques 

Fourier 

Transform 
Infrared 
(FTIR) 

X-ray 

✓  

✓  

Photoelectron 
Spectroscopy 
(XPS)  

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Refs 

(a) Only suitable 
for detecting the 
organic 
components 
(b) Low 
reflectance 
intensity and 
broad 
(c) Expensive 
material for in- 
situ experiments 
(d) Damages the 
electrode surface 
(in contact mode) 
(a) Damages the 
electrode surface 
(b) Modify the 
oxidation states 
of elements 
(c) Requires a 
vacuum system 

[83, 
84, 
151, 
180] 

[181, 
139, 
136, 
138, 
137]  

(a) Non- 
destructive 
method 
(b) High surface 
sensitivity at 
the molecular 
level 
(c) Qualitative/ 
quantitative 
analysis 

(a) Provide the 
3D structure of 
surface films 
(b) Analysis of 
inorganic 
components 
(c) Study 
surface species 
(which are not 
too active in IR) 

damage to the crystal surface during the investigation [84]. 

4.4. Electrochemical Methods 

Electrochemical  in-situ,  ex-situ,  and  in-operando  are  the  most 
effective  methods  for  monitoring  unsafe  battery  behavior,  such  as 
lithium plating. Voltage plateau after charging, anode potential, elec-
trochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  (EIS),  differential  voltage  (DV), 
and  incremental  capacity  (IC)  can  be  used  in  in-situ  or  in-operando 
electrochemical  methods  [44].  These  methods  are  based  on  electro-
chemical signals, which are available in any LIB. Using electrochemical 
techniques is convenient because they can be implemented in BMS [19]. 
The  most  common  electrochemical  approaches  for  detecting  lithium 
plating in the context of possible BMS deployment are described briefly. 
Table 4 summarizes the benefits and drawbacks of each strategy for a 
more thorough comparison. 

4.4.1. Voltage Plateau After Charging 

Voltage plateau is a non-destructive and indirect method that has the 
potential to be used as an online tool for lithium plating detection in 
automotive applications [48]. Reversible lithium is reinserted into the 
graphite during the relaxation. This process affects the voltage plateau 
signal due to variations in the overall potential of the anode electrode 
during  relaxation  and  discharging  after  a  charging  step  [48,59,152]. 
Therefore, the presence and changes in the voltage plateau could pro-
vide indications of lithium plating [153,154]. Zinth et al. [155] com-
bined  the  voltage  plateau  method  with  in  situ  neutron  diffraction 
measurements to study lithium plating at -20 oC, where the degree of 
graphite lithiation can be used to estimate the amount of lithium plating. 
A quantitative detection method for lithium plating based on plotting 
the derivative of voltage over capacity (dV/dQ plot) was presented by 
Petzl et al. [153], who found that the voltage plateau appeared at the 
beginning of discharge. They proposed that the discharge capacity at the 
dV/dQ  peak  contributes  to  the  total  reversible  part  of  the  deposited 
lithium  during  charging.  Recently,  it  has  been  reported  by  Campbell 
et al. [59] that the cell self-heating and concentration gradients during 
fast  charging  can  increase  the  voltage  plateau  curve,  which  could  be 
incorrectly  detected  as  lithium  plating.  Also,  they  showed  that  the 
absence of stripping plateau does not mean that no lithium plating has 

taken place in the cell. However, a recent study showed that the relax-
ation  process  is  much  faster  at  a  higher  temperature  and  the  voltage 
plateau  is  less  visible  at  higher  temperatures  [156].  Therefore,  the 
voltage plateau detection technique works better at lower temperatures 
(-20 oC) since the relaxation process is slower at subzero temperatures 
[98,157]. In another approach, Uhlmann et al. [98] detected a kink in 
the  voltage  curve  during  relaxation  after  the  charging  process  rather 
than during discharging. They found that for the detection of lithium 
plating,  flattening  the  voltage  curve  can be  used.  This  technique  was 
later  expanded  by  plotting  the  derivative  voltage  over  time  (dV/dt), 
where the same dV/dt peak curve for lithium stripping is seen [154]. 
Yang et al. [48] studied the voltage plateau during relaxation and during 
discharge  to  determine  the  parameters  affecting  the  voltage  curves 
during lithium stripping. In this study, they used a 9.5 Ah pouch cell for 
a plug-in hybrid EV application. The dV/dt curve is plotted and shown in 
Fig. 8 (A), where it is shown that the dV/dt peaks appear sooner with a 
higher  discharge  rate  compared  to  the  dV/dQ  analysis.  They  showed 

Table 4 
Advantages  and  Disadvantages  of  On-Line  Electrochemical  Lithium  Plating 
Detection  

Techniques 

BMS 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Refs 

[170, 
172, 
169, 
174] 

[17, 
48,59, 
98, 
154, 
195] 

[49] 
[162, 
196, 
197, 
163, 
160] 

[183, 
182, 
23, 
198, 
199] 

(a) Inaccurate 
results if another 
parasitic reaction 
happens (Oxidation, 
loss of active 
materials) 
(b) Expensive 
equipment 
(a) Needs slow 
discharge rate 
(b) Availability of 
abnormal 
exothermic peaks 
(c) The importance 
of the lithium 
deposited areas 
(d) Highly depends 
on internal cell 
characteristics 
(a) Safety (Short 
circuit) 
(b) Not applicable in 
Commercial cells 
(c) Require 
modifying cell 
design and 
fabrication 
(complicated 
implementation) 
(a) Reduction in cell 
performance after 
RE insertion 
(b) Require 
complicated 
computation 
(c) The cell must be 
in the equilibrium 
state 

(a) Required small 
currents for 
discharge curves 
(b) Slow analyzing 
period (10 h/cell) 

[200, 
31, 
201, 
44]  

Measurement of 

- 

Columbic 
Efficiency 

Voltage Plateau 
after charging 

✓ 

- 

✓ 

Third Lithium 
Reference 
Electrode 

Electrochemical 
impedance 
spectroscopy 
(EIS) 

Incremental 

✓ 

Capacity (IC) 
Differential 
Voltage (DV) 

(a) Applicable to 
all types of cell 
(b) Suitable for 
identification of 
side reactions in 
early stages 

(a) Non- 
destructive 
method 
(b) Suitable for on- 
board 
implementation 
(c) No requirement 
for special and 
expensive 
equipment  

(a) Quantitative 
evaluation of 
different 
electrochemical 
aspects 
(b) Reliable 
method  

(a) Suitable for 
study LiB 
characteristics 
(b) Non- 
destructive 
method which is  
suitable for on- 
board 
implementation 
(c) Fast analyzing 
period (25/min/ 
cell)  

(a) Non- 
destructive 
method 
(b) Suitable for on- 
board 
implementation 
(c) Ideal for 
identification and 
quantification of 
DM 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095312X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

+

that  the  rate  of  lithium  stripping  is  limited  by  the  rate  capability  of 
intercalating Li
ions into graphite, and that the duration of the voltage 
plateau is highly dependent on the rate of lithium stripping. Intercala-
tion  kinetics,  graphite  solid-state  diffusivity,  and  cell  temperature  all 
have  an  effect  on  the  voltage  curves.  Another  interesting  finding  is 
represented  in  the  schematic  above  Fig.  8  (A).  Near  the  separator, 
lithium metal is deposited. The high degree of graphite lithiation limits 
the rate of Li
ions can not be inserted into 
the anode near the separator, they begin moving to the other part of the 
anode near the foil and are intercalated into the graphite along the path 
[48]. At the beginning of discharge, a dV/dQ peak occurs. Nevertheless, 
in the case of C/3 discharge, the dV/dQ peak seems earlier than that of 1 
C Fig . 8 (B). Li
ions intercalation still takes place in the anode in the 
discharge phase after charging, as long as the Li stripping reaction can 
support the discharge current. 

ions insertion. Since the Li

+

+

+

4.4.2. Third Lithium Reference Electrode (RE) 

As  previously  stated,  lithium  plating  takes  place  when  the  anode 
+
). To directly measure the anode 
potential drops below 0 V (vs. Li/Li
potential,  a  third  reference  electrode  (RE)  must  be  used  [49].  None-
theless,  because  commercial  cells  lack  a  third  reference  electrode, 
measuring  the  anode  potential  directly  is  not  currently  practicable. 
Anode potential may, however, be measured in the laboratory using a 
specific setup in which the RE is inserted into the cell (machinery). The 
RE  materials  (e.g.,  metallic  Li,  FePO4/LiFePO4,  Li-Sn,  Li-Al)  and  cell 
configurations are important factors in the insertion process. The loca-
tion of the RE is chosen based on these factors [49,158,159]. Several 
studies  have  been  conducted  to  demonstrate  how  to  develop  and 
implement the RE into LiBs, as well as where the ideal position for the RE 
is to reduce the ohmic drop while maximizing measurement accuracy 
[160–163]. An interesting approach was taken by Waldmann et al. [49], 

+

Figure 8. Electrochemical Methods. 
(A) Differential voltage over time (dV/dt) for the two discharge cases and the 5C charge relaxation event, as well as a schematic diagram of the anode’s internal 
characteristics at the start of relaxation. During relaxation, Li
ions that are not consumable at the separator travel and diffuse through the electric field (migration) 
and concentration gradient (diffusion) towards the foil, where they are intercalated into graphite (Reprinted from Yang et al. [48] with permission of Elsevier). (B) 
Differential voltage over capacity (dV/dQ) in the discharge phase as a result of discharge capability and a schematic diagram of the anode’s internal characteristics at 
ions formed by Li stripping near the separator have three destinations: they are intercalated into graphite, they travel to 
the start of discharge. During discharge, Li
the cathode to deliver output current, and they move under an electrical field (migration) and a concentration gradient (diffusion) towards the foil and are inter-
calated along the path into graphite (Reprinted from Yang et al. [48] with permission of Elsevier). (C) Cycling data versus time extracted by a high-precision charger. 
A two-stage charge process is applied on pouch cells at different rates from (C/50 to 5C) at 30 oC ((a) Capacity, (b) Coulombic efficiency, (c) Coulombic inefficiency 
per hour) (Reprinted from Burns et al. [170] with permission of Electrochemical Society). (D) Resistance values Rcc + RSEI as a function of time for various electrolyte 
solutions (Reprinted from Schweikert et al. [120] with permission of Elsevier). 

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095313X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

who positioned the RE near the current collecting tab of the anode as this 
area  has  a  higher  current  density.  Due  to  the  low  diffusivity  of 
lithium-ions  in  graphite  at  low  temperatures  and  high  SOC,  they 
discovered that lithium-ions begin to accumulate at the anode interface. 
Rangarajan  et  al.  [69]  used  a  lithium  titanate  (LTO)  electrode  as  a 
reference electrode in a pouch cell with a stable voltage over a range of 
SOC to detect and quantify lithium plating. To quantify the amount of 
lithium  plating  at  each  rate,  the  plating  period,  plating  power,  and 
plating energy were defined. They called lithium plating a non-linear 
process since it does not increase monotonically under varied working 
conditions.  Low  cost  and  reliable  RE  insertion  methods  have  been 
introduced  in  Ref.  [163],  which  require  less  equipment  than  existing 
procedures for commercial 18650 cells. Non-polarizability, reliability, 
and  reproducibility  are  the  key  characteristics  in  the  RE  material  se-
lection process [164]. Lithium metal is the most common material for 
RE, but it cannot provide all these characteristics due to unstable po-
tential  (reliability)  [165].  The  potential  of  RE  may  vary  due  to  me-
chanical treatment, the nature of the electrolyte, and the formation of 
the SEI layer [19,164]. Moreover, lithium metal is not a proper choice 
for high-temperature applications due to its low melting point (i.e., 180 
C) [49]. The accuracy of the RE method with alternative materials such 
as Li4Ti5O12andLiFePO4  has been studied by Mantia et al. [164]. They 
showed that these materials may be the most promising materials for RE 
since they exhibit a constant potential for Li4Ti5O12 (1.567 ± 0.0025 V) 
and  LiFePO4(3.428  ± 0.0005  V)  vs.  Li/Li
.  These  materials  can  also 
provide low polarizability under high current rates during the two-phase 
reactions. Overall, RE insertion may cause surface film modification and 
degradation by interfering with the battery’s electrochemical process. 
Furthermore, due to safety concerns, RE has yet to be deployed in any 
commercial  cells  or  real-time  LiB  applications  for  measuring  electro-
chemical characteristics. 

+

○

4.4.3.

Incremental Capacity (IC) and Differential Voltage (DV) 

IC-DV  techniques  are  based  on  the  rate  of  changes  in  the  electro-
chemical  equilibrium  phase  (EEP)  [166].  The  EEP  changes  are  deter-
mined  by  the  intercalation  and  de-intercalation  processes  that  occur 
between  the  anode  and  cathode  materials.  The  IC-DV  curves  are  ob-
tained by a constant battery charge curve, and the IC curve is mathe-
matically estimated as the gradient of Q with respect to V (dQ/dV = f(V)) 
[166]. The DV curve is obtained by inversely computing the IC curve 
(dV/dQ = f(Q)). The researchers use prognostic/mechanistic models to 
directly clarify the aging mechanism by identifying model parameters 
[31,166,167].  Indeed,  the  mechanistic  model  is  a  backward-looking 
modeling  approach  in  which  the  degradation  is  the  input  and  the 
output is the cell’s voltage and capacity [31]. Thus, when a cell is in 
equilibrium,  the  IC-DV  approach  can  quantify  its  electrochemical 
properties as well as its various degradation modes (LLI, LAM) [31,167]. 
The IC and DV curves can be used to study the degradation mechanism 
both  qualitatively  and  quantitatively [44].  Tanim  et  al.  [68]  recently 
investigated  the  lithiation  voltage  profile  and  demonstrated  that 
reversible lithium stripping is dependent on the level of over-lithiation 
in the graphite electrode. Capacity fading was observed using IC anal-
◦
ysis  on  13  cells  cycled  at  a  low  temperature  (-10
C)  under  diverse 
conditions such as varying charge current rates, charge cut-off voltages, 
and charge cut-off current [24]. 

4.4.4. Coulombic Efficiency (CE) 

Coulombic efficiency (CE) is defined as the ratio of energy (Qd) a LiB 
outputs during discharge to the energy (Qc) a LiB takes in during charge 
[168].  When  lithium  plating  occurs  on  the  anode  surface  during  the 
charging cycles, the CE decreases [19]. As a result, CE can be recognized 
as a method for detecting lithium plating. Smith et al. [169] advised four 
important aspects to correctly measure the CE: (i) accuracy of the set 
current,  (ii)  precision  of  the  voltage  measurement,  (iii)  duration  be-
tween  voltage  measurements,  and  (iv)  precisely  controlled  cell  tem-
perature. Burns et al. [170] investigated lithium plating by plotting CE 

versus charging current rates. As shown in Fig. 8 (B), there is a consid-
erable  variation  in  the  capacity  loss  rates  of  cells  charged  at  room 
◦
C, 
temperature above 2 C. Furthermore, with a charging rate of 1C at 12 
they  found  a  considerable  amount  of  lithium  plating.  The  CE  versus 
charging rate at various temperatures was recorded (Fig. 8 (C)), with a 
minor drop in CE occurring as the deposited lithium began to consume 
the active lithium. They also proved the presence of lithium plating on 
graphite electrodes for cells cycled at charging current rates of 2 C for 50 
◦
◦
C and 0.5 C for 12
C [170]. Liu et al. [171] measured the CE of four 
silicon-based electrode materials during cycling (condition: voltage cut 
off 1.5-0.02 V), and the resulting CE ranged from 95 % to 98 %. The 
measurement equipment used in this procedure must be highly precise 
to detect any variations in voltage and current. However, Tanim et al. 
[68] recently demonstrated that the CE approach could not be precise 
for detecting lithium plating in a full cell over extended cycling. When 
only small amounts of lithium are deposited, high precision coulomb-
meters are required. Otherwise, if the amount of deposited lithium is 
significant,  conventional  testers  or  measurement  devices  can  be  used 
[68,172]. Furthermore, the rest period has a considerable impact on the 
CE method, as it cannot distinguish stripping from the plating process 
[68,173]. 

4.4.5. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) 

EIS  is  a  quantitative  approach  for  analyzing  battery  behavior  and 
determining electrochemical kinetics throughout the lithium insertion- 
extraction process [165]. Lithium deposition has been studied in Li/L-
i4Ti5O12  battery cells based on ionic liquid electrolytes during several 
charging/discharging cycles by EIS [120]. In another study by the same 
author,  a  correlation  between  the  surface  area  of  the  electrolyte  and 
lithium  metal  (formation  of  lithium  dendrites)  with  Rcc  + RSEIwas 
introduced. They showed that a decrease in the Rcc  + RSEIvalue corre-
sponds to an increase in the interfacial area between the electrolyte and 
lithium metal electrode [182]. As shown in Fig. 8 (D), using a conven-
tional electrolyte (LiPF6 in EC/DMC) resulted in the formation of lithium 
dendrites [120]. The Rcc  + RSEI  values ofLiPF6  in EMIM-TFSA/EC and 
LiPF6  in  EMIM-TFSA/PC  do  not  show  any  decrease.  However,  there 
could  be  additional  factors  causing  a  drop  in  Rcc  + RSEI  values.  EIS 
measurements  are  often  conducted  using  laboratory  equipment  [120, 
182,183].  Nevertheless,  Nazer  et  al.  [184]  proposed  an  online  EIS 
technique  for  implementation  in  the  BMS  of  HEVs  and  EVs.  They 
measured  electrochemical  impedance  using  broadband  excitation  sig-
nals  (pseudo-random  binary  sequences  (PRBSs),  random  white  noise, 
swept  sine,  swept  square,  and  a  square  wave).  The  proposed  system, 
however, was noisy and could result in an impedance error value at high 
frequencies [184]. 

4.5. Recent Non-Destructive Approaches for Detecting Lithium Plating 

In addition to these electrochemical and physical detection methods, 
simpler  techniques  for  studying  lithium  plating  have  been  proposed. 
According to the literature, when transitioning from a completely unli-
thiated  condition  to  lithiatedLiC6  (intercalation  of  lithium),  the  total 
volume  of  the  graphite  anodes  might  increase  by  10%  [43,185].  The 
extra volume changes can also be caused by the deposited lithium on the 
graphite. As a result, detecting changes in cell thickness can be a useful 
strategy for detecting lithium plating [36,186,187]. There is a correla-
tion between the volume change and lithium plating, which determines 
the expected extent of volume gain due to deposited lithium Fig. 9 (A) 
[185]. In Ref. [185], a customized setup was provided to measure the 
thickness of a 20Ah pouch cell during cycling with varied currents and 
temperatures,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  9  (B).  Due  to  the  reversibility  of 
lithium plating, it was shown that the cell thickness increases rapidly 
during the lithium plating condition and decreases during the rest time 
(Fig. 9(C)). This method is straightforward and valid, but it requires the 
use of an accurate device to measure cell thickness. Furthermore, this 
approach is only applicable to pouch cells. It should be also noted that it 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095314X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

is not possible to differentiate volume changes due to gassing reactions 
with lithium plating [188]. 

Ultrasonic acoustic approaches have recently been used to study LiB 
behavior [189–191]. The propagation and reflection of soundwaves is 
the fundamental working principle of the ultrasonic method. Hsieh et al. 
[192] used this approach to measure SOC and SOH in a pouch cell. The 
ultrasonic  investigation  can  be  divided  into  two  modes  [193]:  (i) 
pulse-echo mode, which uses a transducer that can either be glued or 
pressed onto the cell casing. In this case, a voltage pulse is sent out to-
wards the object (cell) and the pulse is reflected back to the transducers. 
(ii)  Through-transmission  mode,  which  employs  two  separate  trans-
ducers, one of which serves as a transmitter and the other as a receiver; a 
voltage pulse is transmitted from the transceiver and travels through the 
object material (cell), arriving at the receiver, which is installed on the 
opposite side of the object. Gold et al. [191] proposed a linear model 
with ultrasonic pulse frequencies ranging from 200 kHz to 2.25 MHz, 
which is lower than the one used in prior studies to measure SOC in one 
cycle.  Bommier  et  al.  [189]  recently  employed  the  electrochemical 
acoustic (EA) technique to study SEI formation in NMC/SiGr pouch cells. 
Due  to  gassing  reactions  that  occurred  during  the  first  SEI  for-
mation/lithiation  of  the  silicon  particles,  the  acoustic  signal  was  lost 
during  the  first  40  hours  of  charging.  They  demonstrated  that  the 
acoustic signal is significantly attenuated in the presence of a gaseous 
environment. Moreover, they found a correlation between the passiv-
ation of the silicon particles and the acoustic time-of-flight (TOF) shift. 
Bommier et al. [194] used the ultrasonic approach to detect lithium 
plating  in  a  pouch  cell.  Commercial  210-mAh  lithium-ion  cells  were 
ultrasonically tested in through-transmission mode. Fig. 9 (D), shows a 
schematic  of  the  ultrasonic  setup.  In  their  study,  they  established  a 
connection between the acoustic signal and lithium plating. When the 
cell was charged with 1C and discharged with C/10, the acoustic signal 
was quickly attenuated at the second cycle (t=20 h) and reappeared at 

the 18th cycle (t=195 h), as shown in Fig. 9(E) [194]. Meanwhile, the 
cell  capacity  was  reduced  from  0.210  Ah  to  0.195  Ah,  and  they  sus-
pected  that  the  loss  of  acoustic  signal  was  due  to  lithium  plating. 
However, the loss of the acoustic signal, according to the literature, is a 
strong sign of a gassing reaction in the cell, and because distinguishing 
between lithium plating and gas reaction is difficult, it cannot be utilized 
as  an  indication  for  lithium  plating.  As  a  result,  they  discovered  that 
employing an acoustic signal alone is ineffective. In the second attempt, 
they  decided  to  measure  the  shifts  (time-of-light)  in  the  full  acoustic 
waveforms [194]. Cells were cycled twice at C/15 for both charge and 
discharge and then a CC charge with a fixed capacity of 0.210 Ah (no 
voltage cutoff) was applied to trigger lithium plating. As shown in Fig. 9 
(F), they found a significant difference at the endpoints of the TOF shifts 
of the cells that were cycled with fixed-capacity charge (1 C) than the 
cells that were cycled with a C/15 charge. It was shown that there is a 
correlation  between  TOF  endpoints  differences  and  lithium  plating. 
They proved the efficiency of this strategy using various ex-situ char-
acterization methods, such as ex-situ SEM, as shown in Fig. 9 (G) [194]. 

5. Model-Based Investigation of Lithium Plating 

In order to optimize the battery design and develop more practical 
charging protocols, model-based approaches are a good option [7,35, 
202].  There  are  several  different  approaches  to  model  LiBs:  electro-
chemical  models,  equivalent-circuit  battery  models  (ECM),  thermal 
models,  electrical  models,  mechanical  models,  and  molecular  models 
[203]. Modeling provides us with the exact time of lithium plating and 
the location of the deposited lithium on the electrode surface. Newman 
[204] and co-workers introduced the first battery physics-based model. 
In  the  following,  we  review  the  recent  results  on  lithium  plating 
modeling, and based on the gathered information, the advantages and 
disadvantages of each model are compared in Table 5. 

Figure 9. Non-Destructive Approaches for Detecting Lithium Plating. 
(A) Theoretical relation between volume gain and lithium plating. (B) Schematic of the setup for in-operando measurements of pouch cell thickness during the 
lithium plating (resolution 1 µm). (C) Significant changes in the cell thickness at the charge current of 7 A due to lithium plating (Reprinted from Bitzer et al. [185] 
with permission of Elsevier). (D) Schematic of the in-operando acoustic detection setup for studying lithium plating. (E) Acoustic plots consist of three distinct panels, 
which are, from top to bottom, a heatmap of acoustic time of  flight (s), total amplitude of waveforms in  random components, and a voltage versus time curve 
corresponding to the adjoined waveforms. (F)  The difference in acoustic TOF shifts during the C/15 charge and the fixed-capacity charge of 0.210 Ah at different 
temperatures was measured when the cell was cycled at 10
C (G) 
C. Scale bars: 5 μm (Reprinted from Bommier et al. 
Ex-situ SEM measurement: electrodes were washed in (DMC) and dried in an argon-filled box for 2 hours at 40
[194] with permission of Cell Reports). 

◦
C with a fixed capacity charge of 1 C. The cell was cycled with a fixed capacity charge of 1 C at 0

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095315X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

5.1. Electrochemical Models of Lithium Plating 

Electrochemical  models  based  on  the  porous  electrode  theory  and 
lithium concentration solution have been widely used to study lithium 
plating in LiBs [7]. The electrochemical models cover both particle level 
and cell level dynamics. At the particle level, the mass conservation and 
diffusion dynamics at both electrodes are explained based on Fick’s law 
[205]. At the cell level, it needs to describe the flow of lithium-ion in the 
electrolyte,  the  diffusion  of  lithium  in  the  active  material,  and  the 
electron charge transfer in the lithium-ion intercalation process at the 
surface  of  the  active  material.  All  of  them  are  based  on  the 
porous-electrode model. The cell level and particle level dynamics are 
coupled through the local reaction current based on charge conserva-
tion. The properties of materials can be estimated based on the electrical 
measurements of the full cell [206]. The lithium plating criteria can be 
divided into two different kinds: (i) A saturation concentration at the 
interface;  lithium  plating  would  happen  when  the  concentration  of 
lithium-ions at the electrode interface reaches the saturation level [7, 
57].  (ii)  The  interfacial  overpotential;  when  the  overpotential  (η)  is 
lower than 0 V against Li/Li
, lithium plating would occur [7,57,98]. 
These  criteria  are  applied  in  the  electrochemical  models  to  predict 
lithium plating. Arora et al. [38] made the first attempt to develop a 
physics-based mathematical model for investigating lithium plating on 
the  negative  electrode  (graphite  and  coke)  during  charge  and  over-
charge. This macro-homogeneous model was based on the work of Doyle 
and  Newman  [204].  Kinetic  and  thermodynamic  parameters  (e.g., 
transfer coefficient (αa,αc), exchange current density (i0)) were adopted 
into the model to simulate the electrochemical reactions, mass transport, 
and other physical processes. 

+

They assumed lithium plating is partially reversible. They found that 
the  particle  size  and  electrode  thickness  can  influence  the  lithium 
plating phenomena [38]. As long as the electrode is thinner and has a 
smaller  particle  size,  lithium  plating  is  less  favorable  compared  to 
thicker  electrodes  with  larger  particles  [38].  However,  many  other 
features need to be added to this model to study lithium deposition in an 
overcharge reaction. Moreover, this model cannot capture the edge ef-
fects of the cell on the accumulation of the lithium-ions on the anode 
electrode during the charging process [207]. 

In  another  approach  by  Ge  et  al.  [57],  who  used  Newman’s  elec-
trochemical  model,  also  known  as  a  pseudo-two-dimensional  (P2D) 
model, to study lithium plating at low temperatures. They divided the 
total electrochemical reaction current density into two parts: the lithium 
intercalation current j1 and the lithium deposition current j2: [57], 

j = j1 + j2

Both of them can be described by the Butler-Volmer equation: 

[

(

j1 = j0,1

exp

)

(

(cid:0) exp

(cid:0)

∝aF
RT

η1

)]

∝cF
RT

η1

(6) 

(7)  

where  j0,1  is  the  exchange  intercalation  current,  ∝a  and  ∝c  are  the 
transfer  coefficients  which  generally equal  to 0.5,  and η1  is  the  over- 
potential for intercalation reaction. 

{

[

(

j2 = min

0, j0,2

exp

)

(

(cid:0) exp

(cid:0)

∝a,2F
RT

η2

∝c,2F
RT

η2

) ] }

(8)  

where j0,2 is the exchange plating current, ∝a,2 and ∝c,2 are the transfer 
coefficients which are generally taken to be 0.3 and 0.7, respectively, 
and  η2  is  the  over-potential  for  lithium  plating  reaction.  When  the 
overpotential (η2) is lower than 0 V against Li/Li
, lithium plating would 
occur.  They  found  that  during  low  temperature  charging  when  the 
overpotential (η2) is minimum, lithium-ions start to accumulate at the 
anode-separator interface and then move into the anode electrode. This 
model also proposed a multi-step charging process that can charge the 
cell fast and safely without incurring lithium plating at low temperatures 
[57]. However, the model validation has been carried out with few data 

+

Table 5 
Advantages and Disadvantages of Lithium Plating Models in LiBs [7].  

Criterion 

Model 

Advantages 

Disadvantages  

(i) The 
interfacial 
overpotential 
(ii) A saturation 
concentration 
at the interface.  

Purushothaman 
et al. [212] 

Arora et al. [38] 

Tang et al. [207] 

(a) Time-efficient 
calculation 
(b) Quickly iterate 
on cell design 

(a) Applicable to 
Predict the overall 
behavior of many 
systems. 
(b) High accuracy 
(c) Based on the 
internal 
electrochemical 
process  

(a) Capture the 
edge effects 
(b) Easily iterate 
on cell design 

Perkins et al.  
[209] 

(a) Time-efficient 
calculation 

points. 

(a)Only applicable 
at low C-rate and 
small electrode 
thickness 
(b) Not-accurate 
(a) Only focus on 
overcharging 
conditions. 
(b) 
Computationally 
expensive 
(b) Involve lots of 
manual tuning 
(c)Require deep 
understanding  

(a). Long 
simulation time 
due to a large 
number of 
nonlinear 
equations 
(b) Extremely 
sensitive to the rate 
constant and 
charge rate 
(a) Only applicable 
at low C-rate and 
small electrode 
thickness  

A P2D-modeling has been presented by Tang et al. [207] to study 
lithium  plating  during  cell  charging.  They  found  that  increasing  the 
thickness of the negative electrode can hinder the deposition of lithium, 
specifically at the edge of the electrode. In another interesting approach 
by Tippmann et al. [206], a P2D electrochemical model was combined 
with a 0D thermal model to predict the aging at different temperatures 
C) and currents (0.1 C to 6 C). They used COMSOL Mul-
(-25 
tiphysics 4.2 to perform the simulation and compared the obtained re-
sults with EIS experiments. However, the implementation of this model 
into  BMS  is  difficult  due  to  the  cost  and  time-consuming  simulations 
while using the porous electrode theory. 

C to 40 

○

○

Computational cost is also one of the challenges in lithium plating 
modeling due to a large number of governing equations (e.g., ten non- 
linear and multidimensional partial differential in spatial directions x, 
r, t) that are required to be solved at the same time with the highly non- 
linear algebraic expression for transport and kinetic parameters [208]. 
Liu et al. [50] developed a model that couples lithium plating with SEI 
growth,  allowing  simulating  concurrent  lithium  dendrite  growth,  SEI 
growth, SEI penetration and regrowth. Their work highlights the effect 
of SEI in lithium plating. Boovaragavan et al. [208] proposed a refor-
mulated physics-based model for real-time parameter estimation. Their 
model can simulate porous model equations in 15-45 ms with only 29-49 
differential-algebraic equations (DAEs) while using the rigorous model, 
it  takes  90-120s  with  at  least  4800  DAEs.  This  model  is  suitable  for 
predicting the capacity fade, but it has only been validated at the 2C rate 
of discharge [208]. A reduced-order model (ROM) was created by Per-
kins et al. [209], who defined five different assumptions, such as keeping 
the  cell  always  in  the  quasi-equilibrium  state  for  studying  lithium 
plating  during  overcharge.  This  model  is  an  optimized  version  of  the 
Arora model to speed up the calculation of the governing equation in the 
ROM compared with the physical-based model. They could reduce the 
calculation  time  to  1/5000  by  using  ROM  compared  to  the 
physical-based  model.  This  ROM  can  only  be  implemented  for  short 
pulses (less than 10s) due to the quasi-equilibrium. Thus, it can recog-
nize  the  time  when  lithium  plating  is  about  to  occur  in  the  charging 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095316X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

process [209]. A physics-based model by Wang et al. [210] studied the 
aging  behaviors  due  to  lithium  plating  and  SEI  growth  of  a  plug-in 
electric vehicle (PEV) battery over a normal charge/discharge current 
at the ambient temperature. This model considered the SEI growth and 
lithium  plating  rate  to  explain  linear  and  nonlinear  behavior  during 
cycling. The linear aging stage is linked to SEI growth. The transition 
from  linear  to  nonlinear  aging  is  associated  with  lithium  plating. 
Recently,  Lin  [205]  proposed  a  data-driven  strategy  that  uses  long 
short-term  memory  (LSTM)  to  monitor  anode  electrode  potential  in 
real-time  to  prevent  lithium  plating.  Because  physics-based  model 
implementation  is  complex,  time-consuming,  and  requires  extensive 
manual tuning, real-time LSTM is far more computationally efficient and 
can be easily integrated into the BMS. The LSTM model can complete the 
entire test in 87 seconds, whereas the physics-based model takes 7 hours 
and 44 minutes. 

6. Effect of Material Components and Charging Protocols on 
Lithium Plating 

As shown in Fig. 10, developing high-performance fast-charging LiB 
without  lithium  plating  requires  a  multidisciplinary  approach.  The 
previous  sections  have  provided  a  comprehensive  overview  of  the 
mechanisms, detection, and prediction of lithium plating. Extensive ef-
forts have been made at multiple levels, including material component 
modification (electrode and electrolyte interfaces), cell and pack design 
optimization, charging protocol optimization, and the development of a 
battery  management system  to  prevent the  formation of  lithium  den-
drites.  The  success  of  each  approach  can  greatly  improve  the  fast 
charging performance of lithium-ion batteries. As a result, we will re-
view  the  existing  literature  on  material  components,  cell  design,  and 
charging protocol approaches in terms of their strengths and weaknesses 
in the following sections. 

6.1. Effects of Material Components on Lithium Plating 
LiB material components, such as electrodes and electrolytes, have a 
significant impact on lithium plating. Many studies have been conducted 
from  a  material  perspective  to  improve  the  lithium-ion  cell  for  fast 
charging while suppressing lithium plating. The approaches proposed 
with an emphasis on material properties can be divided into two groups. 
As shown in Fig. 11 (A) [211], group A is focused on anode material 
modification,  whereas  group  B  is  focused  on  advanced  electrolyte 

adoption. In group A, the modification of anode martial can be further 
categorized into five groups in terms of their functions and effects on the 
charge  transfer  process.  In  group  B,  adopting  advanced  electrolytes 
could be further divided into three subgroups: (1) introduction of low 
viscosity co-solvents and esters, with improvement in ionic conductivity 
and  electrolyte  diffusion;  (2)  introduction  of  electrolyte  additives  to 
+-
obtain  desirable  SEI  properties;  and  (3)  introduction  of  optimal  Li
transfer number. 

Based on the aforementioned classification, considerable efforts have 
been  made  to  introduce  a  potential  liquid  electrolyte  with  enhanced 
transport  as  well  as  a  fast-charging  capable  anode  electrode  that  can 
prevent  lithium  dendrite  formation.  Recent  advances  in  the  improve-
ment  of  the  charge  transfer  process  (rate  performance)  are  discussed 
below.  For  a  more  precise  comparison  of  the  different  strategies,  the 
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  each  strategy  are  summarized  in 
Table 6. 

Anode material modifications are necessary since it has a significant 
impact on the lithium plating in LiBs. The most practical anode material 
in the current market is graphite due to its low working potential, high 
capacity, and long cyclic life [12]. However, the activation energy of 
charge transfer, which is dependent on Li
desolvation at the SEI layer 
and  lithium  diffusion  in  small  graphite  interlayer  spaces  (0.335  nm), 
limits the lithiation rate capability of graphite anode materials, resulting 
in  lithium  plating  [213].  Hard  carbon  and  soft  carbon  are  two  other 
carbonaceous-based compounds used as anode materials. Because of the 
larger interlayer space, these materials exhibit higher intercalation rates 
than graphite [214]. Nonetheless, due to low CE and high raw material 
costs, these materials are not widely used in today’s market. 

+

The size and structure of graphite particles, such as flake-like and 
spherical,  can  influence  charge  acceptance  [7,215].  Park  and  his  col-
leagues  demonstrated  that  lithium  plating  occurs  more  frequently  in 
graphite with flake-like particles than in graphite with spherical parti-
cles  [216].  Graphite  with  flake-like  particles  is  typically  used  in  the 
market due to the low price. Cheng et al. [213] designed a multi-channel 
structure that significantly increased the intercalation sites by making 
holes on the graphite surface with KOH etching. A hybrid anode was 
developed  which  consists  of  an  edge-plane  activated  graphite  and  Si 
nanolayer  (SEAG),  where  the  activated  edge-plane  increases  the  site 
reaction [217]. Nanoscale Si coating layer enhances the energy density 
while reducing the Li
diffusion path by increasing accessible reaction 

+

Figure 10. Fast Charging Process.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095317X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Figure 11. Electrode Modification and Mitigation Strategies. 
A) Classification of existing mitigation strategies based on the material components. B) The procedures for the fabrication of SEAG composite. a) reflux: spherical 
nickel  nanoparticles (size 500 nm) are adsorbed  on the Mesocarbon Microbeads (MSMBs) with the use of  reflux technique (80  oC), b) heat treatment: the holy 
structure of the sample is a result of two steps, first heating the sample at 1000 oC in a Hydrogen (H2) environment, then the penetration of adsorbed Ni nanoparticles 
into the graphite with the methane (CH4) gas evolution, c) Chemical vapor deposition: CVD method was used with C2H2 and SiH4 gases to distribute graphitic carbon 
and a SiO nanolayer on the graphite with holy structure. As a result, no lithium plating was observed on the cell with the SEAG electrode after 50 cycles, while 
significant  lithium  plating  was observed  on  the cell  with  a  graphite  electrode  (Reprinted from  Kim  et al.  [217] with  permission  of  Nature  Communication). C) 
Detailed illustration of a cell with the laser-structured graphite anode and unstructured NMC cathode and an SEM image (resolution 10 μm) of a structured hole with 
a lateral length of 100 μm (Reprinted from Habedank et al. [215] with permission of Electrochemical Society). 

sites.  The fabrication  of  SEAG  composite includes  simple  steps which 
are:  a)  reflux,  b)  heat  treatment,  and  c)  chemical  vapor  deposition 
(CVD). The SEAG electrode showed improvement in capacity retention 
(99.3%) at a current density (1.75 mA/cm2) for 50 cycles. Moreover, a 
stable  CE  (> 93.8%)  is  achieved  with  a  high  specific  capacity  (525 
mAh/g) in the first cycle. Additionally, the effect of fast charging (> 3 C) 
on the SEAG electrode was examined, as shown in Fig. 11 (B), no lithium 
plating was observed on the SEAG electrode for the first 50 cycles, while 
a  significant  amount  of  the  deposited  lithium  was  observed  on  the 
graphite electrode [217]. 

+

+

The use of electrodes with reduced tortuosity is another approach, 
which is especially useful for thick electrodes to prevent lithium plating. 
The  Li
move  in  the  electrolyte  through  the  porous  electrode,  the 
diffusion rates of the Li
highly depends on the microstructure of the 
electrode, which is called tortuosity [215]. A lower tortuosity yields a 
higher rate capability and improvement in capacity retention, where a 
high tortuosity slows down Li
transport in the electrodes and increase 
the concentration gradients [218]. Reducing the tortuosity for thick and 
dense electrodes would be beneficial for developing materials for fast 
charging. Recently, Habedank and co-workers investigated the effects of 
anode tortuosity on lithium plating [215]. The tortuosity was reduced 
by using a laser structuring technique (pulse duration 150 ps/frequency 
1.200  MHz)  to  remove  a  tiny  fraction  of  the  electrode  material.  As 

+

shown in Fig. 11 (C), many holes in a hexagonal pattern with a lateral 
length  of  100  μm  were  made.  They  used  OCV  (after  charging)  as  a 
detection  technique.  Lithium  plating  was  significantly  reduced  in  the 
cell  at  2  C  charge  rate  and  0  oC  compared  to  the  conventional  cell. 
However, laser structuring of the graphite anode was not effective at -15 
oC due to very slow lithium diffusion in the graphite particles. In another 
study,  Kraft  et  al.  [218]  applied  laser  structuring  to  modify  the  pore 
morphology of the graphite anodes. Charging time was reduced by 15 % 
to 17 % for a 3 C charge, and almost no lithium plating was observed. 
As mentioned earlier, strategies to prevent lithium plating are not 
only limited to the anode modifications. The electrolyte is the media in 
which Li
ions move between the cathode and anode electrodes, and the 
electrolyte also affects the properties of the SEI layer. Organic solvent 
blends for electrolyte is made of a mixture of ethyl methyl carbonate 
(EMC), ethylene carbonate (EC), dimethyl carbonate (DMC), and diethyl 
carbonate  (DEC),  where  DEC,  EMC,  and  DMC  have  a  lower  melting 
pointing  and  viscosity  compared  to  the  EC  [219].  EC  has  a  high 
dielectric constant and is traditionally included in the electrolyte as it 
can help form SEI on the graphite layer. Adding aliphatic esters along-
side  the linear  carbonates, such as  DMC and EMC,  which  have lower 
melting points and viscosity, would have a positive impact on the per-
formance of the electrolyte [16]. Dahn et al. [219] have studied using 
the  most  typical  type of  solvents esters  such  as  methyl  acetate  (MA), 

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095318X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Table 6 
Advantages and Disadvantages of Material Based Strategies for Lithium Plating 
Mitigation  

Material 
Components 
Modification 

Material 
Based 
Strategies for 
Lithium 
Plating 
Mitigation 

Reducing 
Particle Size of 
the Electrode 

Reducing 
Electrode 
Thickness and 
Tortuosity  

Modification 
of Anode 
Material 

Coating with 
Conducting 
Agent / Metal or 
Metal Oxides 

Increasing 
Lithium Solid 
Diffusion 

Nanostructured 
Carbon Design 

Adopting 
Advanced 
Electrolyte 

Introduction of 
Low Viscosity 
Co-solvents / 
Esters 

Introduction of 
Optimal 
Transference 
Number 

Introduction of 
Electrolyte 
Additives 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Refs.  

(a) Low 
electronic 
conductivity 
(b) 
Volumetric 
expansion 
(a) Low 
performance 
at subzero 
temperatures  

(a) Coulombic 
efficiency 
drops 
(b) Adverse 
effect on 
specific 
capacity 

(a) Coulombic 
efficiency 
drops 
(b) Severe 
parasitic 
reactions 

(a) Costly 
process 
(b) Not 
applicable for 
large scale 
(a) Failure in 
properly SEI 
layer 
formation 
(b) Negative 
impact on 
calendar life 
(c) Gas 
generation 
(d) Coulombic 
efficiency 
drops 
(a) Corrosion 
of the current 
collector 

[215,213, 
217]   

[215,218] 

[108,215]  

[19,20]  

[215,232]  

[219-221]  

[222-226]   

[228-231]  

(a) Prone to 
lithium 
plating 
(b) Increase 
polarization 
at the anode 

(a) Shortened 
lithium 
diffusion path 
(b) Enhance 
energy 
density 
(a) Higher Li- 
ion diffusivity 
rate 
(b) 
Improvement 
in capacity 
retention 
(a) Excellent 
electrical 
conductivity 
(b) Improve 
Electrode 
kinetics 
(c) Higher 
lithium-ion 
diffusivity 
(a) Higher 
lithium-ion 
diffusivity 
(b) Improve 
high-rate 
charge 
(c) Improve 
low- 
temperature 
performance 
(a) Increased 
energy 
(b) Shortened 
lithium 
diffusion path 
(a) Improve 
high-rate 
charge 
(b) Increase in 
ionic 
conductivity 
(c) Improve 
low- 
temperature 
performance 

(a) Increased 
power 
densities 
(b) Improve 
high-rate 
charge 
(c) 
Improvement 
in capacity 
retention 
(a) Improve 
low- 
temperature 
performance 
(b) Forming 
effective SEI 
(c) Reduce 
anode 
interface 
resistance are 

ethyl acetate (EA), methyl propionate (MP), and methyl butyrate (MB) 
in  the  electrolyte  to  improve  the  charging  speed  of  lithium-ion  cells. 
They found that MA is the most suitable co-solvent as it has the lowest 
viscosity compared to the EMC and DMC (Fig. 12 (A)). Therefore, esters 
(MA)  were  added  at  a  fraction  of  20  %  and  40  %  to  the 
(NMC532)/graphite cells that were cycled at 1 C, 1.5 C, and 2 C charge 
rates,  leading  to  a  50  %  increase  in  ionic  conductivity.  As  shown  in 
Fig. 12 (B), significant capacity fade at 2 C charging occurred due to 
lithium plating in the cells without MA. However, cells with 20 % and 40 
%  MA  did  not  show  any  capacity  fade.  Other  research  groups  also 
investigated the effects of esters such as MA or EA as co-solvents in LiB 
electrolytes, where all of them agree that using esters can significantly 
improve low-temperature performance and rate capability of cells. They 
also found the negative effect of using esters. The SEI layer can not be 
formed properly, and the cell cycle life is reduced because esters cause 
other side reactions, such as gassing and CE drops [220,221]. 

+

+

Transference  number  (t+)  is  defined  as  the  fraction  of  the  ionic 
conductivity contributed by the Li
ions [16,222]. The importance of the 
transference  number,  especially  at  rates  above  2  C,  is  highlighted  in 
Fig. 12 (C). The optimal transference number should be close to 1. Even 
when the electrolyte has a low conductivity, a high transference number 
can  still  provide  good  power  densities  and  enable  high-rate  charging 
[222]. However, due to the formation of large solvation shells around 
the Li
, the transference number in existing liquid electrolytes ranges 
between 0.30 and 0.40. Approaches to increase transference number can 
be divided into two groups: (a) immobilizing the anions (using salts with 
bulky  anions)  [223,224],  (b)  increasing  electrolyte  concentration 
(nonaqueous  polyelectrolytes)  [225,226].  Du  and  colleagues  investi-
gated the effects of the lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI), as an 
alternative  to  the  typical  salt  hexafluorophosphate  (LiPF6)  in  the 
graphite - LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 pouch cells [227]. Cell capacity retention 
and  fast  charging  capability  have  been  significantly  improved,  as  the 
LiFSI have a higher transference number (t+ = 0.495) and ionic con-
ductivity  compared  to  the  LiPF6(t+ = 0.382).  Additionally,  a  smaller 
amount of lithium plating was observed on the graphite electrode in the 
LiFSI  electrolyte  after  500  cycles  compared  to  the  LiPF6  electrolyte 
(Fig. 12 (D)). In fact, Li
can move faster in LiFSI, as LiFSI have bulky 
(cid:0)
69 Å3). However, using 
anions (FSI
LiFSI  may  cause  anodic  corrosion  of  the  aluminum  cathode  current 
collector. 

95 Å3) compared with LiPF6 (PF6

+

(cid:0)

The effects of electrolyte additives on the performance of LiBs have 
been extensively investigated over the last decade. Electrolyte additives 
play a critical role in forming the SEI layer. To improve the fast charging 
capability,  the  desirable  SEI  layer  should  be  thin,  compact,  and  less 
resistive with high ionic conductivity [228,229]. Using electrolyte ad-
ditives,  such  as  vinylene  carbonate  (VC),  lithium  bis  (oxalato)  borate 
(LiBOB), fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC), showed significant improve-
ment in terms of performance and lifetime at a lower charge rate [230, 
231]. However, it may also increase the chance of lithium plating due to 
the formation of a highly resistive SEI layer by adding the above addi-
tives. Adding LiSFI as an electrolyte additive in (1.0 M LiPF6  in EC +
EMC  + MP  (20:  20:  60  vol%)  can  improve  the  low  temperature  per-
formance and reduce lithium plating [230]. A comprehensive review of 
recent advances in electrolyte composite for fast-charging can be found 
in Ref. [16]. 

Besides the material selection and microstructure modification dis-
cussed  in  the  previous  section,  the  selection  of  electrode  and  cell 
geometrical  parameters  (cell  and  pack  design)  and  the  design  of 
advanced battery thermal management systems (high-temperature ho-
mogenization)  are  also  important.  Approaches  such  as  increasing  the 
porosity and the width of the anode are widely used in literature as a 
method to prevent lithium plating. However, they may also lead to a 
reduction  in  capacity  [231].  The  negative  to  positive  ratio  (N/P)  is 
closely  related  to  lithium  plating,  where  values  greater  than  1  are 
typically used for commercial cells. Mechanical stresses on the anode are 
reduced  with  the  higher  N/P  ratios,  resulting  in  a  decrease  in  SEI 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095319X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Figure 12. Electrolyte Adaptation and Mitigation Strategies. 
A) The viscosity of different esters and carbonated co-solvents was measured as a function of temperature (-25 
C), solid lines show the viscosities that 
measured  from  the advanced  electrolyte  mode (AEM).  B) Discharge  capacity against  cycle number;  after  adding 20  %  and 40 %  of  MA,  two similar  cells  were 
designed  and evaluated. All cells were charged  at 1  C, 1.5  C, and 2  C rates  at 20 
C, cells without  MA  showed significant  capacity fade  due to lithium plating 
(Reprinted from Dahn et al. [219] with permission of Electrochemical Society). C) Attainable SOC against C-rate for electrolyte with a constant ionic conductivity (10 
mS/cm), the positive impacts of high transference number is highlighted at 2 C charge rate and above (Adopted from Diederichsen et al. [222]). D) long term cycling 
(500 cycles) performance for two cells with LiPF6(t+ = 0.382)and LiFSI (t+ = 0.495), both cells were charged at 5 C rate for 12 minutes. Capacity fade for the cell with 
LiFSI at the first cycle was about 153.2 mAh/g, which was 134.3 mAh/g for the same cell after 500 cycles (84 % retention). Capacity fade for the cell with LiPF6 at the 
first cycle was about 135.4 mAh/g, which was 110.6 mAh/g for the same cell after 500 cycles (77 % retention) (Reprinted from Du et al. [227] with permission 
of Elsevier). 

C to 40 

○

○

○

formation and associated LLI. Kim and colleagues investigated the effect 
of  various  N/P  ratios  on  1.4  Ah  pouch  cells.  In  cells  with  N/P  ratios 
greater than 1.10, no lithium plating was observed at 0.85 C and 25
C. 
They  demonstrated  that  designing  the  anode  capacity  at  least  20% 
bigger  than  the  cathode  capacity  is  an  effective  strategy  to  suppress 
lithium plating [233]. 

◦

However, the optimal ratio may also be affected by other parameters 
in the battery, such as the electrode material and battery form param-
eters. Especially for large cells, the battery form parameters affect the 
current and temperature distribution. In large cells, the current distri-
bution  is  very  important,  because  a  uniform  current  distribution  can 
reduce the risk of lithium plating. Details of cell and pack design and 
their impacts on lithium plating can be seen in reference [61]. 

6.2. Effects of Charging Protocols on Lithium Plating 

Several mitigation strategies were discussed in the previous section 
from a material standpoint. Although they show promising results, most 
of  them  are  complicated  and  time-consuming  to  execute  and  are  not 
compatible  with  large-scale  manufacturing.  As  a  result,  many  re-
searchers have focused more on cell and pack-level solutions, such as 
charging  strategies,  which  can  usually  be  implemented  in  actual  sys-
tems. Charging protocols determine how the current changes during the 
charging process. The improvement of the charging protocols would be 
beneficial  for  mitigating  the  formation  of  lithium  dendrite  on  the 
graphite surface [19,70,234]. Conventional charging protocols include 
constant-current constant-voltage (CC-CV), multistage constant current 
(MSCC), pulse charging (PC), and boost charging (BC). These methods 
are based on predetermined charging parameters with constant voltage, 
current,  or  power  (Fig.  13)  [235].  These  techniques  are  simple  and 

ignore  the  detailed  battery  response  in  each  stage.  Optimizing  the 
charging protocols according to the battery dynamics could be useful. In 
the following subsections, we review different charging protocols and 
their  characteristics,  along  with  a  discussion  of  strategies  that  can 
reduce  the  charging  time  without  sacrificing  battery  health.  Table  7 
highlights the advantages and disadvantages of each charging protocol. 

6.2.1. Constant Current Constant Voltage (CC-CV) Charging 

The standard constant current-constant voltage (CC-CV) is a combi-
nation of the constant current (CC) and constant voltage (CV) methods, 
which is the most commonly-used technique for charging the LiBs [70, 
236]. The CC-CV charging profile starts with the (CC) phase until the cell 
voltage reaches a predefined voltage (cut-off voltage). Then the process 
switches  to  CV  phase,  maintaining  the  constant  cell  voltage.  The 
charging process stops when the charging current drops below a pre-
determined low value(Iend)(Fig. 13 (A)). The CC-CV technique is simple 
and  useful  for  various  battery  types.  However,  the  charging  time  is 
usually long due to CV phase [234]. One of the main reasons for battery 
degradation in CC-CV high-rate charging is lithium plating because the 
high  charge  rate  triggers  favourable  conditions  for  lithium  plating 
[237].  Some  researchers  proposed  some  methods  that  may  reduce 
lithium  plating  during  the  charging  process,  such  as  modifying  the 
electrode  thickness,  adding  electrolyte  additives,  and  using  smaller 
active material particles in the negative electrode [37,214,238]. Tipp-
mann et al. [206] performed a charging experiment in which, CC phase 
continued until it reached 4.2 V (cut-off-voltage) followed by CV phase 
to  investigate  CC-CV  charging  parameters  for  LiBs  to  prevent  anode 
lithium plating at sub-zero temperatures. Ref. [239] studied the effect of 
high charge current rate and high charge voltage on the cycle life of a 
900-mAh wound prismatic cell, and found that a cut-off voltage higher 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095320X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

than 4.2 V, a long charge period at 4.2 V, and a high charge rate above 1 
C will significantly reduce the cell cycle life. Zhang et al. [240] studied 
the effect of charging currents and temperatures on the electrode’s po-
tential during the CC-CV charging and showed that the anode potential 
is  decreased  at  high  charging  rates  and  low  ambient  temperature. 
Lithium plating could occur at the end of the CC phase and continue 
until the charge current reaches the predetermined value. 

6.2.2. Multistage Constant Current (MSCC) Charging 

The multistage constant current (MSCC) method can be a suitable 
alternative  to  the  CC-CV  charging  protocol  [7].  MSCC  is  designed  to 
charge LiB through a series of decreasing currents (Ich1 > Ich2 > Ich3... >
Ichn)  [70].  The  MSCC  consists  of  several  CC  steps.  At  each  stage,  the 
charging current has a predefined value. Charging continues until the 
voltage reaches its upper limit. Then the charge current is reduced to the 
next level accordingly and the charging process continues until all the 
stages are completed (Fig. 13 (B)) [70]. The decreasing charging rate 
over time can help reduce the chance of lithium plating on the anode 
surface. MSCC fast charging technique was introduced in Ref. [241] for 
charging a high-power LFP cell. The charging pattern was divided into 
three  stages  to  recharge  a  cell  in  20  min.  No  cell  overheating  was 
observed  during  the  charging  process.  MSCC  optimization  technique 
was proposed in Ref. [242] based on Taguchi’s method to calculate the 
magnitude  of  each  current  step  in  the  MSCC  charging  pattern.  They 
charged a cell up to 75% capacity in 40 min. This method can be easily 
implemented into the battery charging and testing equipment. Tanim 
et al. [53] proposed an MSCC charging protocol to examine XFC cycling 
behavior  in  different  cells.  In  the  proposed  MSCC  charging  protocol, 
they maximized the magnitude of CC charging by minimizing the cell 
overpotential (< 0.25V). Zhang et al. [243] studied the effect of three 
charging protocols (MSCC, CC-CV, and constant power-constant voltage 
(CP-CV)) on the capacity fade of commercial 18650 cells. They found 
that the rate of capacity degradation is minimum when using CP-CV at 1 
C rate compared with other charging protocols. 

6.2.3. Pulse Charging (PC) 

Pulse  charging  is  a  fast-charging  method  [212,244].  In  PC,  the 
charging current to a LiB consists of pulses characterized by frequency, 
duty cycle, pulse current peak, and pulse width. In order to control these 
parameters, the internal states of LiBs are needed (Fig. 13 (C)). PC im-
proves the charging performance due to the short relaxation times or 
discharge pulses which reduce the concentration gradients and anode 
overpotential. Therefore, this technique can reduce the risk of lithium 
plating. Another useful approach was proposed by Purushothaman et al. 
[212]. They developed a macro-homogeneous lithium diffusion model 

Table 7 
Advantages and Disadvantages of Charging Protocols  

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Charging 
Protocols 

Constant 
Current 
– 

Constant 
Voltage 
(CC-CV) 

(a) Simplicity 
(b) Ease of 
implementation 
(c) Reliable at 
mid to low 
charging rates 
(d) Chargeable up 
to max. capacity 

Multi 

Constant 
Current 
– 

Constant 
Voltage 

(a) Prolonged 
cycling life 
(b) Improve 
energy transfer 
efficiency 
(c) Improve cell 
capacity 
retention 

Pulse 

Charging 

(a) Shortening 
charging time 
(b) Reduce the 
impedance 
accumulation of 
anode electrode 
(c) Reduce the 
polarization 

Boost 

Charging 

(a) Shorter 
charging time 
(b) Ease of 
implementation 
(c) Reduce the 
degradation 
effects  

Refs. 

[70, 
236, 
262] 

Consider 
lithium 
plating 

By choosing 
appropriate 
constant 
current and 
voltage 

Limited effect 
on lithium 
plating 

[70, 
242, 
241, 
235] 

[263, 
236, 
246, 
235] 

The pauses 
during 
charging can 
prevent 
lithium 
plating 

– 

[70, 
235, 
247, 
235]  

(a) It is not suitable 
for rapid charging 
(b) Not time- 
oriented due to the 
long CV stage 
(c) Impedes 
overcharging the 
battery 
(d) Reduces the 
cyclic life of the 
battery  

(a) Limited in 
application to 
pouch cell 
(b) Needs to 
estimate the SOC 
accurately during 
the process. 
(c) Increases the 
implementation 
costs  

(a) Pulverization of 
the electrode 
particle due to 
informal cycling 
performance 
(b) Increase heat 
generation in the 
connected parallel 
pack 
(c) It is so 
complicated and 
costly 
(d) Require an 
accurate estimation 
for selecting the 
appropriate 
parameter for pulse 
sequence. 
(a) Temperature is 
not considered 
(b) The charge rate 
is not optimized 

for  conventional  and  pulse  charging  protocols.  They  determine  the 
charging  current  waveform  based  on  the  lithium  concentration.  The 
charging pulse width and the rest pulse width were determined. Their 
pulse charging method is 2.6 times faster than the typical method. Hasan 
et  al.  [245]  presented  an  electrochemical  thermal  coupled  model  to 
study  the  impact  of different  temperatures  and  charging  rates  on  PC, 
CC-CV, and BC protocols. They found that the pulse charging protocol is 
the fastest one among others and has maximum efficiency. Monte Carlo 
simulation  was  used  by  Aryanfar  et  al.  [246]  to  study  the  dendrite 
growth  during  the  pulse  charging  process.  They  showed  that  using 
shorter  pulses  (1  ms)  with  3  ms  relaxation  time  can  hinder  lithium 
dendrite  growth.  However,  they  did  not study  the  impact  of  ambient 
temperature  during  their  experiments.  PC  technique  requires  a  good 
understanding of LiB internal states. Also, implementing PC into char-
gers requires a complicated control algorithm. 

Figure 13. Schematic of General Fast Charging Protocols. A) Constant Current- 
Constant Voltage, B) Multi-stage Constant Current, C) Pulse Charging, D) Boost 
charging (Reprinted from Keil et al. [70] with permission of Elsevier). 

6.2.4. Boost Charging (BC) 

The  boost  charging  method  is  another  form  of  MSCC.  The  cell  is 
charged  using a high current (Iboost) at the beginning of the charging 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095321X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

process for a short period which is called the boost-charge period, and is 
then followed by a conventional CC-CV method (Fig. 13 (D)) [70]. The 
boost-charge  period  is  terminated  based  on  a  predefined  maximum 
voltage  Vmaxand  time  value  tb.  Notten  et  al.[247]  proposed  the  BC 
protocol on the cylindrical (US18500, Sony) and prismatic (LP423048, 
Philips) cells. They compared BC with the conventional CC-CV in terms 
of charging time and cyclic life performance. Both cells can be charged 
to 30% of the cell capacity in 5 mins for 700 times without any degra-
dation. Keil et al. [70] studied different charging protocols and the effect 
of  charging  currents  and  charging  voltages  on  the  cycle  life  of  three 
high-power 18650 cell types. They showed that the cell cycle life could 
be reduced in BC protocol at high charging rates and high or low SOCs. 
However,  in  both  above  studies,  the  impact  of  temperature  on  the 
charging process was not considered. 

6.2.5. Charging of Electric Vehicles 

EV companies try to address the issue of ’range anxiety,’ which is one 
of  the  primary  market  barriers  for  EVs  [248,249].  Depending  on  the 
ambient  temperature,  charging  a  Nissan  LEAF  with  a  typical  50  kW 
charger can take anywhere from 30 minutes to 90 minutes to reach 80 % 
SOC  [250]. Among  EV  manufacturers,  Tesla  was  the  first to  offer  su-
perchargers  with  a  recharge  rate  of  120  kW  [251].  They  also  just 
upgraded the supercharger’s charging rate to 225 kW [252]. Last year, 
Porsche developed an ultra-rapid charger rated at 350 kW (800 V) in 
Berlin for the new Taycan model released to the market in 2020 [253, 
254]. The Tycan ultra-rapid charger with a maximum charging capacity 
(peak) of 270 kW can charge the battery from 5 % to 80 % in just 22 
minutes  [254].  Despite  the  recent  development,  the  current  charging 
solutions are still far from what EV consumers expect. Charging up to 
80% SoC in 15 minutes by 2023 is a goal set by the U.S. advanced battery 
consortium [255]. To achieve the 15-minutes refueling for a large bat-
tery pack size (for example, >90 kWh), at least 300 kW charging power 
is required [214]. 

Various charging standards have been developed around the world. 
IEC  62196  is  a  global  standard  issued  by  the  International  Electro-
technical Commission (IEC) that acts as an umbrella standard for many 
charging standards. The umbrella standard addresses the fundamentals 
of power and communication interfaces, whereas other charging stan-
dards address the mechanical and electrical requirements for plug and 
socket  assemblies  [256].  Charging  standards  are  classified  into  four 
categories [256]: (i) SAE J1772, which is used in North America for ac 
and dc charging, (ii) VDE-AR-E 2623-2-2, which is used in Europe for 
single-phase  and  three-phase  ac  charging,  (iii)  JEVS  G105-1993  (also 
known as CHAdeMo), which is developed in Japan and used globally for 
high-power  dc  charging,  (iv)  Charging  standard  provided  by  Tesla 
[251]. Tanim et al. performed pack-level evaluations using two Nissan 
Leaf battery packs (2012 model year) [257]. They evaluated the effect of 
50 kW (approximately 2C) direct current rapid charging on a full-size 
electric  vehicle’s  battery  pack  compared  with  a  pack  charged  at  3.3 
kW  (the  standard  alternating  current  level  2  charging).  They  investi-
gated various aging modes using IC analysis. The primary aging modes 
in the cells tested with AC Level 2 and DCFC charging protocols were 
found to be LLI and LLM in the negative electrode. Lithium plating was 
not observed at any stage of the test at any of the three temperatures 
(20

◦
C, and 40

C) [257]. 

◦
C, 30

◦

6.2.6. Optimization Methods for Fast Charging 

The current standard fast-charging protocols are mostly model-free 
strategies, which means they are based on charging profiles with fixed 
values and do not use any mathematical models. The existing protocols 
cannot achieve optimal charging performance in terms of charging ef-
ficiency and charging time. Therefore, developing optimal charging al-
gorithms  is  essential  to  meet  the  requirements.  The  LiB  charging 
structure is shown in Fig. 10, which includes the battery model, state 
estimator  and  model-based  controller  [235].  In  general,  optimal 
charging strategies are formulated based on battery models. Zou et al. 

[258] divided optimal charging strategies into two categories based on 
the type of battery model used in the development process: (I) ECMs, 
which fit the electrical and thermal behavior using an equivalent circuit 
consisting  of  a  voltage  source,  several  resistors,  and  capacitors.  This 
model is known for its simplicity. The results of ECMs are less accurate 
due  to  the  simple  structure  of  the  model.  (II)  Electrochemical-based 
model, which is based on the ion diffusion dynamics, intercalation ki-
netics, and electrochemical potentials [235,259,260]. Based on the state 
estimator and reduced-order battery model, an optimal charging algo-
rithm  is  developed  [235].  Many  optimal  control  algorithms  were 
developed,  such  as  (i)  model  predictive  control  (MPC)-based,  (ii) 
generalized predictive control (GPC)-based, (iii) dynamic programming 
(DP)-based,  and  (iv)  linear  quadratic-based.  MPC,  as  one  of  the  most 
powerful  and  advanced  control  techniques,  has  been  widely  used  in 
industrial  process  control.  For  the  multiple  objectives  during  the 
charging process, MPC is one of the most promising techniques to meet 
these objectives [235,261]. MPC can be implemented in BMS due to its 
simple structure and computational efficiency. 

7. Challenges and Future Trends 

Lithium  plating  has  been  widely  investigated  in  the  last  decade. 
However, some problems remain, such as accurate and reliable detec-
tion methods, mechanisms, prediction, and prevention. In this section, 
challenges and prospects are introduced in the aspects of mechanisms, 
detection  methods,  modeling,  material  components,  and  optimized 
charging protocols. 

7.1. Mechanisms Study 

Understanding  the  lithium  plating  mechanism  is  the  key  to 
advancing  fast  charging  technology.  Most  of  the  current  studies  are 
conducted  in  the  laboratory,  which  is  useful  to  understand  lithium 
plating mechanisms [45]. However, the results obtained from laboratory 
experiments  cannot  be  easily  validated  in  large-scale  engineering  ap-
plications  [45].  Considering  electric  vehicles  equipped  with  a  large 
battery pack, electrical contacts between different parts of the system, 
mechanical  forces,  and  vibrations  may  affect  the  behavior  of  lithium 
plating in the cell [264]. Therefore, the results from the lab may become 
inaccurate when applied in the actual vehicle [265]. Taylor et al. [266] 
showed that even the laboratory experiments on the same battery cell 
could have a 4% error. They divided the errors into two types: proce-
dural  and  environmental.  Procedural  errors  occur  during  the  experi-
ments,  such  as  set-up  variations.  Environmental  errors  include  room 
temperature, humidity, and measurement accuracy [266]. For example, 
a recent study by Tanim et al. [53] showed that lithium plating behavior 
could be different between two same cells (NMC532 pouch cell) cycled 
under the same XFC conditions. Therefore, a major challenge in studying 
lithium plating mechanisms in laboratories and large-scale applications 
is  how  to  ensure  accurate  and  reliable  results  at  different  charging 
conditions. 

The  impact  of  vibration  on  the  electrochemical  performance  of  a 
single cell or an EV battery pack has not been investigated. Based on the 
previous  study,  the  pouch  cell  does  not  experience  any  degradation 
under vibration [267]. However, when going through the z-vibration, 
the  cylindrical  cells  appear  to  show  an  increase  in  the  internal  resis-
tance, which may cause power capability decline [268]. Vibration could 
cause the SEI layer to break [269] and SEI has been shown to interact 
with lithium plating [50]. Moreover, it is well-known that temperature 
plays  a  vital  role  in  the  performance  of  LiB.  During  low-temperature 
charging,  the  resistance  of  charge  transfer  increases,  and  lithium 
plating  may  occur,  which  leads  to  significant  battery  capacity  fade. 
Thus, accurate measurement of internal temperature would be helpful 
for  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  lithium  plating  mechanism.  In  the 
literature, the cell temperature can be adjusted in a thermal chamber. 
However, battery cells in electric vehicles are located in a battery pack 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095322X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

where the temperature can decrease slowly and the internal temperature 
and heat generation of cells cannot be monitored easily [270]. There are 
methods  in  the  literature  to  measure  cell  temperature  based  on  the 
thermal  models  [64].  These  methods  are  computationally  costly  and 
challenging  to  implement.  Besides,  accurate  measurement  of  battery 
core temperature is still challenging in real-time applications. A method 
for internal temperature estimation is proposed in [271]. The authors 
proposed an internal temperature estimation approach using a recurrent 
neural  network  which  was  trained  based  on  the  temperature  signal 
measured by a thermocouple inserted into a cylindrical cell. However, 
the  method was only  tested on a single  cell, not a battery pack. Two 
important questions remain: what is the core temperature of the cells in 
the  automotive  battery  packs,  how  does  it  affect  the  lithium  plating. 
Unfortunately, there are limited studies on lithium plating mechanisms 
under real-world EV operation conditions. A better understanding of the 
relationship  between  battery  testing  environment  and  local  electro-
chemistry  is  needed.  Further  research  on lithium  plating mechanisms 
under actual EV operation conditions is needed. 

Another important aspect of studying lithium plating at the cell level 
is  related to overall safety. It  is necessary to understand the negative 
impact of lithium plating on safety. According to the literature, internal 
short  circuits  caused  by  lithium  dendrites  are  safety  concerns.  The 
thermal  runaway  caused  by  lithium  plating on  the  anode surface  has 
been studied, and most of the studies have theoretically explained the 
possibility of thermal runaway due to lithium plating. Recently, Li et al. 
[272] explained that the reaction between plated lithium and electrolyte 
could  release  enough  heat  after  fast  charging  to  activate  the  thermal 
runaway, and the temperature rise rate decreases as the plated lithium is 
completely  consumed.  Commercial  battery  cells  with  a  considerable 
amount of lithium plating can still be cycled hundreds of times without 
any explosion, short circuit, or other safety hazards [54]. Therefore, an 
important  question  is  whether  lithium  plating  is  really  a  dangerous 
safety issue. 

It is still difficult to understand the lithium plating mechanism at the 
atomic level, as lithium plating is a reversible/irreversible reaction. If all 
the lithium deposited on the surface of the anode is reversible, the cell 
will  not  lose  capacity.  Therefore,  another  important  question  is  what 
variables affect the reversibility. There is an urgent need to study the 
factors that affect the reversibility of lithium plating, which can mitigate 
lithium plating in various applications. 

7.2. Detection Methods 

Since lithium plating significantly affects the capacity of LiBs, much 
research  has  been  conducted  to  design  and  develop  methods  for 
detecting  lithium plating.  Characterization  methods  for  analyzing the 
morphology and material composition are available. TEM, SEM, FTIR, 
XPS, and acoustic methods have been used in many studies to observe 
and  quantify  the  deposited  lithium  on  the  anode  surface.  Physical 
characterization approaches for both surface morphologies and chem-
istry  are  commonly  used  for  fundamental  studies  to  gain  a  deep  un-
derstanding of the lithium plating process in the laboratory. However, 
they can not be used for real-time lithium plating detection in actual 
engineering  applications.  In  ex-situ  studies,  sample  transfer  while 
avoiding contamination is required. Due to the difficulty of quantifying 
the  lithium  plating  process  during  cycling,  ex-situ  techniques  cannot 
provide enough dynamic information [156]. Techniques such as X-ray 
diffraction  (XRD)  are  known  as  techniques  that  can  characterize  the 
local lithium plating in fully assembled cells [53]. It is challenging to 
study ex-situ lithium plating, because the deposited lithium is partially 
reversible and most of the reversible lithium plating could be gone after 
sample transfer [155]. Several non-destructive electrochemical methods 
have been developed. Some of them require specialized instrumentation 
such as high precision coulombmeters, while others, such as RE tech-
nique, require special cell design. In-situ electrochemical methods rely 
on  electrochemical  parameters  such  as  voltage,  current,  and  capacity 

[153,154]. In the literature, analyzing voltage plateau after discharging 
or relaxation and analyzing IC curves are some of the most promising 
methods for detecting lithium plating [54]. However, new studies show 
that when the amount of deposited lithium is small, the voltage plateau 
technique could provide incorrect results [60]. Fear et al. [60] showed 
that  battery  capacity  fade  could  be  prevented  by  detecting  lithium 
plating when graphite starts lithiation. However, none of the existing 
techniques can detect and quantify lithium plating in real-time when the 
battery is in the charging process. Recently, Konz et al. [195] developed 
an  in-situ  method  for  detecting  lithium  plating  using  differential 
open-circuit  voltage  (dOCV)  analysis.  Knowing  the  starting  point  of 
lithium plating is very useful for charging protocols to prevent lithium 
plating. However, it is not clear how much lithium must be deposited on 
the anode surface to detect the dOCV plating signal. In another inter-
esting  approach,  Carter  et  al.  [273]  introduced  a  new  in-operando 
technique  for  detecting  lithium  plating.  They  detected  the  onset  of 
lithium plating under two transient thermal conditions (transient 10 to 
0 oC and 40 to 0 oC). The deposited lithium was increased by charging 
the battery  under transient thermal conditions, and a  negative differ-
ential  voltage  occurs.  They  mentioned  that  the  negative  differential 
voltage in the charge voltage could be used as a signal to detect the onset 
of lithium plating in the BMS algorithm. Several in-situ electrochemical 
lithium  plating  detection  techniques  based  on  the  reversible  part  of 
lithium plating have been proposed. However, only a few of them can 
measure  or  estimate  the  irreversible  part  via  online  measurements. 
Therefore, further research should develop a better in-operando method 
that can distinguish and evaluate the ratio of reversible and irreversible 
lithium plating and stripping during the fast charging. 

7.3. Lithium Plating Modeling 

Electrochemical models are usually used to simulate lithium plating. 
They can be used to study the long-term behaviors of LiBs. One of the 
problems  for  electrochemical  models  is  the  difficult  parameterization 
due to a large number of parameters [206]. Developing sophisticated 
models that capture the interaction of lithium plating with other side 
reactions, such as SEI growth, can help understand the lithium plating 
mechanisms  and  battery  degradation  [50].  The  models  need  to  be 
simplified  so  that  they  can  be  implemented  in  the  BMS  for  real-time 
monitoring. The charging strategy can use the feedback from electro-
chemical  models  to  adjust  the  charging  current  to  prevent  lithium 
plating and extend battery cycle life. With machine learning algorithms, 
data-driven methods can become a promising solution and are expected 
to play an important role in predictions, especially for lithium plating 
predictions.  However,  they  require  a  huge  amount  of  training  data. 
Recently, Dubarry et al. [274] proposed a mechanistic framework that 
works backward compared with the conventional battery model, which 
means the model input is the degradation and the model’s output is the 
voltage  and  capacity  of  the  cell.  This  makes  the  technique  ideal  for 
producing  training  data.  They  produced  the  first  synthetic  dataset  to 
train diagnosis and prognosis algorithms. 

7.4. Material Components and Optimized Charging Methods 

Many research groups have investigated each LiB component sepa-
rately to prevent lithium plating on the anode electrode. Some of the 
important  approaches  for  suppressing  lithium  plating  are:  adopting 
advanced  electrolytes,  reducing  the  lithium-ion  path  by  changing  the 
structure of the anode electrode, and introducing hybrid and optimized 
charging protocols. However, any changes in internal components may 
adversely affect other battery components [214]. Moreover, most of the 
existing strategies are only focusing on suppressing lithium plating, but 
other  factors,  including  final  production  cost  and  the  requirement  of 
new manufacturing techniques, need to be considered because the cost 
is a very important factor in large-scale applications. 

Most existing charging protocols are only validated for specific types 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095323X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

of cells at fixed temperatures. However, under fast charging conditions, 
each type of cell has a different response. Validating charging protocols 
for each type of cell is a time-consuming process. Therefore, developing 
reliable  cell  and  battery  pack  models  is  important  to  speed  up  the 
development of fast charging protocols. The charging protocols need to 
be optimized to effectively control lithium plating. The optimization of 
the charging protocols requires a balance between charging time and 
battery  degradation  [261].  The  disadvantages  associated  with  the 
existing  optimized  charging  protocols,  such  as  complexity,  imple-
mentation cost as well as harsh duty cycle cell tests, need to be addressed 
before implementation [265]. Rynne and coworkers tried to address the 
challenge  of  a  large  number  of  testing  in  battery  research  by  using 
Design of Experiments (DoE) and statistical techniques, which made it 
possible to minimize the number of experiments and obtain meaningful 
parameters [275]. Overall, the development of fast and smart optimal 
charging protocols based on machine learning techniques is a promising 
direction for future research. 

8. Conclusions 

In this paper, the current literature on lithium plating was reviewed. 
Degradation of LiBs during operation is one of the most complicated and 
critical issues that involve the variety of electrochemical side reactions 
in all the LiB components. Lithium plating is one of the most important 
degradation  mechanisms  of  the  anode  electrode.  The  main  impact  of 
lithium  plating  is  severe  capacity  fade.  It  occurs  under  three  main 
working  conditions:  low-temperature  charging,  high  C-rate  charging, 
and high SOC charging. It’s a challenging but important task to under-
stand  the  lithium  plating  mechanisms  and  how  to  prevent  them. 
Therefore,  in  this  paper,  we  comprehensively  reviewed  the  recent 
progress  on  investigating  the  lithium  plating  mechanisms,  existing 
detection  techniques,  and  mitigation  strategies.  Detection  techniques 
can be divided into two main categories: (i) Physical characterization of 
the deposited lithium morphology and anode surface characterization. 
These techniques are more suitable for fundamental studies. (ii) Elec-
trochemical techniques based on the charging voltage and currents are 
more useful for real-time applications. Although many studies have been 
done for lithium plating detection, there is still no promising and real- 
time method for lithium plating detection in engineering applications. 
Prediction  of  lithium  plating  is  also  a  complicated  task.  The  current 
electrochemical models for lithium plating have been reviewed. These 
models  are  too  complicated  and  computationally  costly  for  imple-
mentation  in  BMS.  Many  approaches  have  been  studied  that  could 
potentially prevent lithium plating, especially the formation of lithium 
dendrite,  including  modification  of  material  components  (adopting 
advanced electrolyte and modifying the graphite surface structure) and 
optimization of charging protocols. More progress needs to be made in 
developing methods to avoid lithium plating during charging. We can 
significantly reduce the degradation during fast charging and achieve 
long cycle life through a deep understanding of lithium plating mecha-
nisms  under  different  operating  conditions  and  advanced  detection 
methods that can be easily implemented in engineering applications. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgements 

XL acknowledges support by the Natural Sciences and Engineering 
Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through the NSERC Early Career 
Researcher  Supplement  &  Discovery  Grant  Program  (RGPIN-2018- 
05471)  and  Ontario  Tech  University  Startup  Fund.  XH  acknowledges 
support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 

51875054 and Grant no. U1864212). JL acknowledges support by Wuxi 
Weifu High-Technology Group Co., Ltd. 

References 

[1] Petroleum British. BP Energy Outlook 2019 edition The Energy Outlook explores 

the forces shaping the global energy transition out to 2040 and the key 
uncertainties surrounding that. BP Energy Outlook 2019 2019. 22–4, 72–6, 144- 
118. 

[2] Popham K. Transportation electrification. Smart Cities Appl Technol Stand Driv 

Factors 2017:109–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-59381-4-7. 

[3] Zhang R, Fujimori S. The role of transport electrification in global climate change 
mitigation scenarios. Environ Res Lett 2020;15. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748- 
9326/ab6658. 

[4] IRENA. Global Renewables Outlook: Energy transformation 2050. 2020th ed. 

2020. 

[5] Latulippe ´E, Mo K. Outlook for Electric Vehicles and Implications for the Oil 

Market. 2019. 

[6] National Resources Canada. Electric Vehicle Technology Roadmap for Canada: A 

strategic vision for highway-capable battery-electric, plug-in and other hybrid- 
electric vehicles. Nat Resour Canada 2010;1:1–71. 

[7] Li Z, Huang J, Yann Liaw B, Metzler V, Zhang J. A review of lithium deposition in 

lithium-ion and lithium metal secondary batteries. J Power Sources 2014;254: 
168–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.12.099. 

[8] Pistoia G, Liaw B. Green Energy and Technology Behaviour of Lithium-Ion 

Batteries in Electric Vehicles; Battery Health, Performance, Safety, and Cost. 
Springer International Publishing AG; 2017. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-319-69950-9. 

[9] Dubarry M, Baure G, Devie A. Durability and reliability of EV batteries under 
electric utility grid operations: Path dependence of battery degradation. 
J Electrochem Soc 2018;165:A773–83. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0421805jes. 

[10] Ma Z, Jiang J, Shi W, Zhang W, Mi CC. Investigation of path dependence in 

commercial lithium-ion cells for pure electric bus applications: Aging mechanism 
identification. J Power Sources 2015;274:29–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2014.10.006. 

[11] Nitta N, Wu F, Lee JT, Yushin G. Li-ion battery materials: Present and future. 
Mater Today 2015;18:252–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2014.10.040. 

[12] Pistoia G, Boston A, et al. Lithium-Ion Batteries Advances and Applications. 

Elsevier B.V; 2014. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-59513- 
3.00001-7. 

[13] Mishra A, Mehta A, Basu S, Malode SJ, Shetti NP, Shukla SS, et al. Electrode 
materials for lithium-ion batteries. Mater Sci Energy Technol 2018;1:182–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mset.2018.08.001. 

[14] Goriparti S, Miele E, De Angelis F, Di Fabrizio E, Proietti Zaccaria R, Capiglia C. 
Review on recent progress of nanostructured anode materials for Li-ion batteries. 
J Power Sources 2014;257:421–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2013.11.103. 

[15] Xu B, Qian D, Wang Z, Meng YS. Recent progress in cathode materials research for 
advanced lithium ion batteries. Mater Sci Eng R Reports 2012;73:51–65. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.mser.2012.05.003. 

[16] Logan ER, Dahn JR. Electrolyte Design for Fast-Charging Li-Ion Batteries. Trends 

Chem 2020;2:354–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trechm.2020.01.011. 
[17] Tomaszewska A, Chu Z, Feng X, O’Kane S, Liu X, Chen J, et al. Lithium-ion 

battery fast charging: A review. ETransportation 2019;1:100011. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.etran.2019.100011. 

[18] Jow TR, Delp SA, Allen JL, Jones J-P, Smart MC. Factors Limiting Li + Charge 
Transfer Kinetics in Li-Ion Batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2018;165:A361–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1221802jes. 

[19] Liu Q, Du C, Shen B, Zuo P, Cheng X, Ma Y, et al. Understanding undesirable 

anode lithium plating issues in lithium-ion batteries. RSC Adv 2016;6:88683–700. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ra19482f. 

[20] Waldmann T, Hogg B. Wohlfahrt-mehrens M. Li plating as unwanted side reaction 
in commercial Li-ion cells – A review. J Power Sources 2018;384:107–24. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.02.063. 

[21] Xu K, Von Cresce A, Lee U. Differentiating contributions to “ion transfer” barrier 
from interphasial resistance and Li+ desolvation at electrolyte/graphite interface. 
Langmuir 2010;26:11538–43. https://doi.org/10.1021/la1009994. 

[22] Yamada Y, Iriyama Y, Abe T, Ogumi Z. Kinetics of lithium ion transfer at the 

interface between graphite and liquid electrolytes: effects of solvent and surface 
film. Langmuir 2009;25:12766–70. https://doi.org/10.1021/la901829v. 
[23] Pastor-Fern´andez C, Uddin K, Chouchelamane GH, Widanage WD, Marco J. 
A Comparison between Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy and 
Incremental Capacity-Differential Voltage as Li-ion Diagnostic Techniques to 
Identify and Quantify the Effects of Degradation Modes within Battery 
Management Systems. J Power Sources 2017;360:301–18. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.03.042. 

[24] Ouyang M, Chu Z, Lu L, Li J, Han X, Feng X, et al. Low temperature aging 

mechanism identification and lithium deposition in a large format lithium iron 
phosphate battery for different charge profiles. J Power Sources 2015;286: 
309–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.03.178. 

[25] Vetter J, Nov´ak P, Wagner MR, Veit C, M¨oller KC, Besenhard JO, et al. Ageing 
mechanisms in lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2005;147:269–81. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2005.01.006. 

[26] Agubra V, Fergus J. Lithium ion battery anode aging mechanisms. Materials 

(Basel) 2013;6:1310–25. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma6041310. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095324X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

[27] Tanim TR, Dufek EJ, Evans M, Dickerson C, Jansen AN, Polzin BJ, et al. Extreme 
Fast Charge Challenges for Lithium-Ion Battery: Variability and Positive Electrode 
Issues. J Electrochem Soc 2019;166:A1926–38. https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
2.0731910jes. 

[28] Birkenmaier C, Bitzer B, Harzheim M, Hintennach A, Schleid T. Lithium plating 

on graphite negative electrodes: Innovative qualitative and quantitative 
investigation methods. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162:A2646–50. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/2.0451514jes. 

[29] Legrand N, Knosp B, Desprez P, Lapicque F, Ra¨el S. Physical characterization of 

the charging process of a Li-ion battery and prediction of Li plating by 
electrochemical modelling. J Power Sources 2014;245:208–16. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.06.130. 

[30] Pastor-Fern´andez C, Bruen T, Widanage WD, Gama-Valdez MA, Marco J. A Study 
of Cell-to-Cell Interactions and Degradation in Parallel Strings: Implications for 
the Battery Management System. J Power Sources 2016;329:574–85. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.07.121. 

[31] Dubarry M, Truchot C, Liaw BY. Synthesize battery degradation modes via a 

diagnostic and prognostic model. J Power Sources 2012;219:204–16. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.07.016. 

[32] Edge JS, O’Kane S, Prosser R, Kirkaldy ND, Patel AN, Hales A, et al. Lithium ion 

battery degradation: what you need to know. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2021;23: 
8200–21. https://doi.org/10.1039/d1cp00359c. 

[33] Ratnakumar BV, Smart MC. Lithium plating behavior in lithium-ion cells. ECS 

Trans 2010;25:241–52. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3393860. 

[34] Birkl CR, Roberts MR, McTurk E, Bruce PG, Howey DA. Degradation diagnostics 
for lithium ion cells. J Power Sources 2017;341:373–86. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.12.011. 

[35] Lin X, Park J, Liu L, Lee Y, Lu W, Sastry AM. A Comprehensive Capacity Fade 

Model and Analysis for Li-Ion Batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2013;160:A1701–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.040310jes. 

[36] Grimsmann F, Brauchle F, Gerbert T, Gruhle A, Parisi J, Knipper M. Impact of 
different aging mechanisms on the thickness change and the quick-charge 
capability of lithium-ion cells. J Energy Storage 2017;14:158–62. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.est.2017.10.010. 

[37] Ahmed S, Bloom I, Jansen AN, Tanim T, Dufek EJ, Pesaran A, et al. Enabling fast 
charging – A battery technology gap assessment. J Power Sources 2017;367: 
250–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.06.055. 

[38] Arora P, Doyle M, White RE. Mathematical Modeling of the Lithium Deposition 
Overcharge Reaction in Lithium-Ion Batteries Using Carbon-Based Negative 
Electrodes 1988;146. 

[39] Chandrasekaran R. Quantification of bottlenecks to fast charging of lithium-ion- 
insertion cells for electric vehicles. J Power Sources 2014;271:622–32. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.07.106. 

[40] Hein S, Latz A. Influence of local lithium metal deposition in 3D microstructures 
on local and global behavior of Lithium-ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 2016;201: 
354–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2016.01.220. 

[41] Hein S, Danner T, Latz A. An Electrochemical Model of Lithium Plating and 
Stripping in Lithium Ion Batteries. ACS Appl Energy Mater 2020;3:8519–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaem.0c01155. 

[42] Wang H, Zhu Y, Kim SC, Pei A, Li Y, Boyle DT, et al. Underpotential lithium 

plating on graphite anodes caused by temperature heterogeneity. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 2020;117:29453–61. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2009221117. 
[43] Harris SJ, Timmons A, Baker DR, Monroe C. Direct in situ measurements of Li 

transport in Li-ion battery negative electrodes. Chem Phys Lett 2010;485:265–74. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2009.12.033. 

[44] Barai A, Uddin K, Dubarry M, Somerville L, McGordon A, Jennings P, et al. 
A comparison of methodologies for the non-invasive characterisation of 
commercial Li-ion cells. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2019;72:1–31. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.pecs.2019.01.001. 

[45] Ecker M, Shafiei Sabet P, Sauer DU. Influence of operational condition on lithium 
plating for commercial lithium-ion batteries – Electrochemical experiments and 
post-mortem-analysis. Appl Energy 2017;206:934–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2017.08.034. 

[46] Zhao X, Yin Y, Hu Y, Choe SY. Electrochemical-thermal modeling of lithium 
plating/stripping of Li(Ni0.6Mn0.2Co0.2)O2/Carbon lithium-ion batteries at 
subzero ambient temperatures. J Power Sources 2019;418:61–73. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.02.001. 

[47] Ren D, Smith K, Guo D, Han X, Feng X, Lu L, et al. Investigation of Lithium 

Plating-Stripping Process in Li-Ion Batteries at Low Temperature Using an 
Electrochemical Model. J Electrochem Soc 2018;165:A2167–78. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/2.0661810jes. 

[48] Yang XG, Ge S, Liu T, Leng Y, Wang CY. A look into the voltage plateau signal for 
detection and quantification of lithium plating in lithium-ion cells. J Power 
Sources 2018;395:251–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.05.073. 
[49] Waldmann T, Hogg BI, Kasper M, Grolleau S, Couceiro CG, Trad K, et al. Interplay 
of operational parameters on lithium deposition in lithium-ion cells: Systematic 
measurements with reconstructed 3-electrode pouch full cells. J Electrochem Soc 
2016;163:A1232–8. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0591607jes. 

[50] Liu G, Lu W. A model of concurrent lithium dendrite growth, SEI growth, SEI 

penetration and regrowth. J Electrochem Soc 2017;164:A1826–33. https://doi. 
org/10.1149/2.0381709jes. 

[51] Sahraei E, Meier J, Wierzbicki T. Characterizing and modeling mechanical 

properties and onset of short circuit for three types of lithium-ion pouch cells. 
J Power Sources 2014;247:503–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2013.08.056. 

[52] Orendorff CJ, Roth EP, Nagasubramanian G. Experimental triggers for internal 

short circuits in lithium-ion cells. J Power Sources 2011;196:6554–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.03.035. 

[53] Tanim TR, Paul PP, Thampy V, Bryant J, Dunlop AR, Trask SE, et al. Article 

Heterogeneous Behavior of Lithium Plating during Extreme Fast Charging 
Heterogeneous Behavior of Lithium Plating during Extreme Fast Charging 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2020.100114. 

[54] Anse´an D, Dubarry M, Devie A, Liaw BY, García VM, Viera JC, et al. Operando 
lithium plating quantification and early detection of a commercial LiFePO4 cell 
cycled under dynamic driving schedule. J Power Sources 2017;356:36–46. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.04.072. 

[55] Guan T, Sun S, Yu F, Gao Y, Fan P, Zuo P, et al. The degradation of LiCoO2/ 

graphite batteries at different rates. Electrochim Acta 2018;279:204–12. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2018.04.197. 

[56] Gireaud L, Grugeon S, Laruelle S, Yrieix B, Tarascon JM. Lithium metal stripping/ 

plating mechanisms studies: A metallurgical approach. Electrochem Commun 
2006;8:1639–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2006.07.037. 

[57] Ge H, Aoki T, Ikeda N, Suga S, Isobe T, Li Z, et al. Investigating lithium plating in 
lithium-ion batteries at low temperatures using electrochemical model with NMR 
assisted parameterization. J Electrochem Soc 2017;164:A1050–60. https://doi. 
org/10.1149/2.0461706jes. 

[58] Petzl M, Kasper M, Danzer MA. Lithium plating in a commercial lithium-ion 

battery - A low-temperature aging study. J Power Sources 2015;275:799–807. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.11.065. 

[59] Campbell ID, Marzook M, Marinescu M, Offer GJ. How observable is lithium 
plating? differential voltage analysis to identify and quantify lithium plating 
following fast charging of cold lithium-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2019;166: 
A725–39. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0821904jes. 

[60] Fear C, Adhikary T, Carter RE, Mistry AN, Love CT, Mukherjee PP. In Operando 
Detection of the Onset and Mapping of Lithium Plating Regimes during Fast 
Charging of Lithium-ion Batteries. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acsami.0c07803. 

[61] Ringbeck F, Rahe C, Fuchs G, Sauer DU. Identification of Lithium Plating in 

Lithium-Ion Batteries by Electrical and Optical Methods. J Electrochem Soc 2020; 
167:090536. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/ab8f5a. 

[62] Ouyang D, He Y, Weng J, Liu J, Chen M, Wang J. Influence of low temperature 
conditions on lithium-ion batteries and the application of an insulation material. 
RSC Adv 2019;9:9053–66. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9ra00490d. 

[63] Jaguemont J, Boulon L, Dub´e Y. A comprehensive review of lithium-ion batteries 
used in hybrid and electric vehicles at cold temperatures. Appl Energy 2016;164: 
99–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.11.034. 

[64] Ma S, Jiang M, Tao P, Song C, Wu J, Wang J, et al. Temperature effect and 

thermal impact in lithium-ion batteries: A review. Prog Nat Sci Mater Int 2018;28: 
653–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnsc.2018.11.002. 

[65] B¨orner M, Horsthemke F, Kollmer F, Haseloff S, Friesen A, Niehoff P, et al. 
Degradation effects on the surface of commercial LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2 
electrodes. J Power Sources 2016;335:45–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2016.09.071. 

[66] Yang XG, Zhang G, Ge S, Wang CY. Fast charging of lithium-ion batteries at all 

temperatures. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018;115:7266–71. https://doi.org/ 
10.1073/pnas.1807115115. 

[67] Yang XG, Liu T, Gao Y, Ge S, Leng Y, Wang D, et al. Asymmetric Temperature 
Modulation for Extreme Fast Charging of Lithium-Ion Batteries. Joule 2019;3: 
3002–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2019.09.021. 

[68] Tanim TR, Dufek EJ, Dickerson CC, Wood SM. Electrochemical Quantification of 

Lithium Plating: Challenges and Considerations. J Electrochem Soc 2019;166: 
A2689–96. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1581912jes. 

[69] Rangarajan SP, Barsukov Y, Mukherjee PP. In operando signature and 

quantification of lithium plating. J Mater Chem A 2019;7:20683–95. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/c9ta07314k. 

[70] Keil P, Jossen A. Charging protocols for lithium-ion batteries and their impact on 
cycle life-An experimental study with different 18650 high-power cells. J Energy 
Storage 2016;6:125–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2016.02.005. 
[71] Zhang L, Zhang Z, Redfern PC, Curtiss LA, Amine K. Molecular engineering 

towards safer lithium-ion batteries: A highly stable and compatible redox shuttle 
for overcharge protection. Energy Environ Sci 2012;5:8204–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/c2ee21977h. 

[72] Juarez-Robles D, Vyas AA, Fear C, Jeevarajan JA, Mukherjee PP. Overcharge and 
Aging Analytics of Li-Ion Cells. J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:090547. https://doi. 
org/10.1149/1945-7111/ab9569. 

[73] Liu S, Xiong L, He C. Long cycle life lithium ion battery with lithium nickel cobalt 
manganese oxide (NCM) cathode. J Power Sources 2014;261:285–91. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.03.083. 

[74] Cannarella J, Arnold CB. The Effects of Defects on Localized Plating in Lithium- 
Ion Batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162:A1365–73. https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
2.1051507jes. 

[75] Abe T, Fukuda H, Iriyama Y, Ogumi Z. Solvated Li-ion transfer at interface 

between graphite and electrolyte. J Electrochem Soc 2004;151. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/1.1763141. 

[76] Smart MC, Ratnakumar BV. Effects of electrolyte composition on lithium plating 
in lithium-ion cells. J Electrochem Soc 2011;158. https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
1.3544439. 

[77] Love CT, Baturina OA, Swider-Lyons KE. Observation of lithium dendrites at 

ambient temperature and below. ECS Electrochem Lett 2014;4:A24–7. https:// 
doi.org/10.1149/2.0041502eel. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095325X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

[78] Yao F, Günes¸ F, Ta HQ, Lee SM, Chae SJ, Sheem KY, et al. Diffusion mechanism of 
lithium ion through basal plane of layered graphene. J Am Chem Soc 2012;134: 
8646–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja301586m. 

[79] Dubarry M, Baure G, Anse´an D. Perspective on State-of-Health Determination in 
Lithium-Ion Batteries. J Electrochem Energy Convers Storage 2020;17:1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4045008. 

[80] Baure G, Dubarry M. Synthetic vs. Real driving cycles: A comparison of electric 
vehicle battery degradation. Batteries 2019;5. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
batteries5020042. 

[81] Schuster SF, Bach T, Fleder E, Müller J, Brand M, Sextl G, et al. Nonlinear aging 
characteristics of lithium-ion cells under different operational conditions. 
J Energy Storage 2015;1:44–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2015.05.003. 
[82] Waldmann T, Wilka M, Kasper M, Fleischhammer M, Wohlfahrt-Mehrens M. 

Temperature dependent ageing mechanisms in Lithium-ion batteries - A Post- 
Mortem study. J Power Sources 2014;262:129–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2014.03.112. 

[83] Zhang J-G, Xu W, Henderson WA. Lithium Metal Anodes and Rechargeable 

Lithium Metal Batteries. Springer Series in Materials Science; 2017. https://doi. 
org/DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-44054-5. 

[84] Perla BB, Yixuan W. Lithium-Ion Batteries - Solid-Electrolyte Interphase. Imperial 

College Press; 2010. https://doi.org/10.1142/9781860946448. 

[85] Waldmann T, Iturrondobeitia A, Kasper M, Ghanbari N, Aguesse F, Bekaert E, 

et al. Review—Post-Mortem Analysis of Aged Lithium-Ion Batteries: Disassembly 
Methodology and Physico-Chemical Analysis Techniques. J Electrochem Soc 
2016;163:A2149–64. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1211609jes. 

[86] Williard N, Sood B, Osterman M, Pecht M. Disassembly methodology for 

conducting failure analysis on lithium-ion batteries. J Mater Sci Mater Electron 
2011;22:1616–30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10854-011-0452-4. 

[87] Friesen A, Horsthemke F, M¨onnighoff X, Brunklaus G, Krafft R, B¨orner M, et al. 
Impact of cycling at low temperatures on the safety behavior of 18650-type 
lithium ion cells: Combined study of mechanical and thermal abuse testing 
accompanied by post-mortem analysis. J Power Sources 2016;334:1–11. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.09.120. 

[88] Rauhala T, Jalkanen K, Romann T, Lust E, Omar N, Kallio T. Low-temperature 

aging mechanisms of commercial graphite/LiFePO4 cells cycled with a simulated 
electric vehicle load profile—A post-mortem study. J Energy Storage 2018;20: 
344–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2018.10.007. 

[89] Iturrondobeitia A, Aguesse F, Genies S, Waldmann T, Kasper M, Ghanbari N, et al. 
Post-Mortem Analysis of Calendar-Aged 16 Ah NMC/Graphite Pouch Cells for EV 
Application. J Phys Chem C 2017;121:21865–76. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jpcc.7b05416. 

[90] Kassem M, Delacourt C. Postmortem analysis of calendar-aged graphite/LiFePO4 

cells. J Power Sources 2013;235:159–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2013.01.147. 

[91] Lang M, Darma MSD, Kleiner K, Riekehr L, Mereacre L, 

´
Avila P´erez M, et al. Post 

mortem analysis of fatigue mechanisms in LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 – 
LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2 – LiMn2O4/graphite lithium ion batteries. J Power 
Sources 2016;326:397–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.07.010. 

[92] Storch M, Hahn SL, Stadler J, Swaminathan R, Vrankovic D, Krupp C, et al. Post- 
mortem analysis of calendar aged large-format lithium-ion cells: Investigation of 
the solid electrolyte interphase. J Power Sources 2019;443:227243. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.227243. 

[93] Cohen Y, Aurbach D. The use of a special work station for in situ measurements of 
highly reactive electrochemical systems by atomic force and scanning tunneling 
microscopes. Rev Sci Instrum 1999;70:4668–75. https://doi.org/10.1063/ 
1.1150130. 

[94] Steiger J, Kramer D, M¨onig R. Mechanisms of dendritic growth investigated by in 
situ light microscopy during electrodeposition and dissolution of lithium. J Power 
Sources 2014;261:112–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.03.029. 

[95] Liu G, Wang D, Zhang J, Kim A, Lu W. Preventing Dendrite Growth by a Soft 

Piezoelectric Material 2019. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsmaterialslett.9b00289. 
[96] Steiger J, Kramer D, M¨onig R. Microscopic observations of the formation, growth 
and shrinkage of lithium moss during electrodeposition and dissolution. 
Electrochim Acta 2014;136:529–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
electacta.2014.05.120. 

[97] Persson K, Sethuraman VA, Hardwick LJ, Hinuma Y, Meng YS, Van Der Ven A, 
et al. Lithium diffusion in graphitic carbon. J Phys Chem Lett 2010;1:1176–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jz100188d. 

[98] Uhlmann C, Illig J, Ender M, Schuster R, Ivers-Tiff´ee E. In situ detection of lithium 
metal plating on graphite in experimental cells. J Power Sources 2015;279: 
428–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.01.046. 

[99] Thomas-Alyea KE, Jung C, Smith RB, Bazant MZ. In situ observation and 

mathematical modeling of lithium distribution within graphite. J Electrochem 
Soc 2017;164:E3063–72. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0061711jes. 

[100] Baudry P, Armand M, Gauthier M, Masounave J. In situ observation by SEM of 
positive composite electrodes during discharge of polymer lithium batteries. Solid 
State Ionics 1988. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2738(88)90421-3. 28-30:1567- 
71. 

[101] Shao M. In situ microscopic studies on the structural and chemical behaviors of 

lithium-ion battery materials. J Power Sources 2014;270:475–86. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.07.123. 

[102] Chang HJ, Trease NM, Ilott AJ, Zeng D, Du LS, Jerschow A, et al. Investigating Li 
Microstructure Formation on Li Anodes for Lithium Batteries by in Situ 6Li/7Li 
NMR and SEM. J Phys Chem C 2015;119:16443–51. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jpcc.5b03396. 

[103] Yoshimatsu I, Hirai T, Yamaki J ichi. Lithium Electrode Morphology during 

Cycling in Lithium Cells. J Electrochem Soc 1988;135:2422–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/1.2095351. 

[104] Nagao M, Hayashi A, Tatsumisago M, Kanetsuku T, Tsuda T, Kuwabata S. In situ 
SEM study of a lithium deposition and dissolution mechanism in a bulk-type solid- 
state cell with a Li2S-P2S5 solid electrolyte. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2013;15: 
18600–6. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3cp51059j. 

[105] Chen D, Indris S, Schulz M, Gamer B, M¨onig R. In situ scanning electron 

microscopy on lithium-ion battery electrodes using an ionic liquid. J Power 
Sources 2011;196:6382–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.04.009. 

[106] Sagane F, Shimokawa R, Sano H, Sakaebe H, Iriyama Y. In-situ scanning electron 

microscopy observations of Li plating and stripping reactions at the lithium 
phosphorus oxynitride glass electrolyte/Cu interface. J Power Sources 2013;225: 
245–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.10.026. 

[107] Rong G, Zhang X, Zhao W, Qiu Y, Liu M, Ye F, et al. Liquid-Phase Electrochemical 
Scanning Electron Microscopy for In Situ Investigation of Lithium Dendrite 
Growth and Dissolution. Adv Mater 2017;29. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201606187. 

[108] Tallman KR, Zhang B, Wang L, Yan S, Thompson K, Tong X, et al. Anode 

Overpotential Control via Interfacial Modification: Inhibition of Lithium Plating 
on Graphite Anodes. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11:46864–74. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acsami.9b16794. 

[109] Wu Y, Liu N. Visualizing Battery Reactions and Processes by Using In Situ and In 
Operando Microscopies. Chem 2018;4:438–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chempr.2017.12.022. 

[110] Yuan Y, Amine K, Lu J, Shahbazian-Yassar R. Understanding materials challenges 
for rechargeable ion batteries with in situ transmission electron microscopy. Nat 
Commun 2017;8:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15806. 

[111] Ghassemi H, Au M, Chen N, Heiden PA, Yassar RS. Real-time observation of 

lithium fibers growth inside a nanoscale lithium-ion battery. Appl Phys Lett 2011; 
99:1–4. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3643035. 

[112] Liu XH, Liu Y, Kushima A, Zhang S, Zhu T, Li J, et al. In situ TEM experiments of 

electrochemical lithiation and delithiation of individual nanostructures. Adv 
Energy Mater 2012;2:722–41. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201200024. 

[113] Mehdi BL, Gu M, Parent LR, Xu W, Nasybulin EN, Chen X, et al. In-situ 

electrochemical transmission electron microscopy for battery research. Microsc 
Microanal 2014;20:484–92. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1431927614000488. 
[114] Zeng Z, Liang WI, Liao HG, Xin HL, Chu YH, Zheng H. Visualization of electrode- 
electrolyte interfaces in LiPF 6/EC/DEC electrolyte for lithium ion batteries via in 
situ TEM. Nano Lett 2014;14:1745–50. https://doi.org/10.1021/nl403922u. 
[115] Krachkovskiy S, Trudeau ML, Zaghib K. Application of magnetic resonance 

techniques to the in situ characterization of Li-ion batteries: A review. Materials 
(Basel) 2020;13. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma13071694. 

[116] Arai J, Okada Y, Sugiyama T, Izuka M, Gotoh K, In Takeda K. Situ Solid State 7 Li 
NMR Observations of Lithium Metal Deposition during Overcharge in Lithium Ion 
Batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162:A952–8. https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
2.0411506jes. 

[117] Chevallier F, Poli F, Montigny B, Letellier M. In situ7Li nuclear magnetic 

resonance observation of the electrochemical intercalation of lithium in graphite: 
Second cycle analysis. Carbon N Y 2013;61:140–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbon.2013.04.078. 

[118] Letellier M, Chevallier F, B´eguin F, Frackowiak E, Rouzaud JN. The first in situ 7Li 
NMR study of the reversible lithium insertion mechanism in disorganised carbons. 
J Phys Chem Solids 2004;65:245–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpcs.2003.10.022. 

[119] Arai J, Nakahigashi R. Study of Li metal deposition in lithium ion battery during 

low-temperature cycle using in situ solid-state 7Li nuclear magnetic resonance. 
J Electrochem Soc 2017;164:A3403–9. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1921713jes. 
[120] Schweikert N, Hofmann A, Schulz M, Scheuermann M, Boles ST, Hanemann T, 
et al. Suppressed lithium dendrite growth in lithium batteries using ionic liquid 
electrolytes: Investigation by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, scanning 
electron microscopy, and in situ 7Li nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. 
J Power Sources 2013;228:237–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2012.11.124. 

[121] Gotoh K, Izuka M, Arai J, Okada Y, Sugiyama T, Takeda K, et al. In situ 7Li 

nuclear magnetic resonance study of the relaxation effect in practical lithium ion 
batteries. Carbon N Y 2014;79:380–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbon.2014.07.080. 

[122] Ota H, Sakata Y, Wang X, Sasahara J, Yasukawa E. Characterization of Lithium 
Electrode in Lithium Imides/Ethylene Carbonate and Cyclic Ether Electrolytes II. 
Surface Chemistry. J Electrochem Soc 2004;151. https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
1.1644137. 

[123] Zheng T, Dahn J. Effect of turbostratic disorder on the staging phase diagram of 
lithium-intercalated graphitic carbon hosts. Phys Rev B - Condens Matter Mater 
Phys 1996;53:3061–71. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.53.3061. 

[124] Wandt J, Jakes P, Granwehr J, Eichel RA, Gasteiger HA. Quantitative and time- 
resolved detection of lithium plating on graphite anodes in lithium ion batteries. 
Mater Today 2018;21:231–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2017.11.001. 
[125] Niem¨oller A, Jakes P, Eichel RA, Granwehr J. EPR Imaging of Metallic Lithium 
and its Application to Dendrite Localisation in. Battery Separators. Sci Rep 2018; 
8:1–7. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32112-y. 

[126] Sathiya M, Leriche JB, Salager E, Gourier D, Tarascon JM, Vezin H. Electron 

paramagnetic resonance imaging for real-time monitoring of Li-ion batteries. Nat 
Commun 2015;6:1–7. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7276. 

[127] Wandt J, Marino C, Gasteiger HA, Jakes P, Eichel RA, Granwehr J. Operando 
electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy-formation of mossy lithium on 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095326X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

lithium anodes during charge-discharge cycling. Energy Environ Sci 2015;8: 
1358–67. https://doi.org/10.1039/c4ee02730b. 

[152] Fan J, Tan S. Studies on charging lithium-ion cells at low temperatures. 
J Electrochem Soc 2006;153. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2190029. 

◦

[128] Luo K, Yorgancioglu M, Keller D. Scanning force microscopy at -25

C. 

[153] Petzl M, Danzer MA. Nondestructive detection, characterization, and 

Ultramicroscopy 1993;50:147–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3991(93) 
90005-I. 

[129] Morigaki KI, Ohta A. Analysis of the surface of lithium in organic electrolyte by 
atomic force microscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and scanning 
auger electron microscopy. J Power Sources 1998;76:159–66. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0378-7753(98)00151-7. 

[130] Mogi R, Inaba M, Iriyama Y, Abe T, Ogumi Z. In situ atomic force microscopy 

study on lithium deposition on nickel substrates at elevated temperatures. 
J Electrochem Soc 2002;149:0–5. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1454138. 
[131] Aurbach D, Cohen Y. The application of atomic force microscopy for the study of 
Li deposition processes. J Electrochem Soc 1996;143:3525–32. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/1.1837248. 

[132] Shen C, Hu G, Cheong LZ, Huang S, Zhang JG, Wang D. Direct Observation of the 

Growth of Lithium Dendrites on Graphite Anodes by Operando EC-AFM. Small 
Methods 2018;2:1–7. https://doi.org/10.1002/smtd.201700298. 

[133] Yang Y, Liu X, Dai Z, Yuan F, Bando Y, Golberg D, et al. In Situ Electrochemistry 

of Rechargeable Battery Materials: Status Report and Perspectives. Adv Mater 
2017;29:1–22. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201606922. 

quantification of lithium plating in commercial lithium-ion batteries. J Power 
Sources 2014;254:80–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.12.060. 

[154] Schindler S, Bauer M, Petzl M, Danzer MA. Voltage relaxation and impedance 

spectroscopy as in-operando methods for the detection of lithium plating on 
graphitic anodes in commercial lithium-ion cells. J Power Sources 2016;304: 
170–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.11.044. 

[155] Zinth V, Von Lüders C, Hofmann M, Hattendorff J, Buchberger I, Erhard S, et al. 
Lithium plating in lithium-ion batteries at sub-ambient temperatures investigated 
by in situ neutron diffraction. J Power Sources 2014;271:152–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.07.168. 

[156] Koleti UR, Dinh TQ, Marco J. A new on-line method for lithium plating detection 

in lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2020;451:227798. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.227798. 

[157] Smart MC, Ratnakumar B V, Wbitcanack L, Chin K, Rodriguez M, Surampudi S. 
Performance Characteristics of Lithium Ion Cells at Low Temperatures. Proc Annu 
Batter Conf Appl Adv 2002:41–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/BCAA.2002.986366. 
2002-Janua. 

[158] Jansen AN, Dees DW, Abraham DP, Amine K, Henriksen GL. Low-temperature 

[134] Cohen YS, Cohen Y, Aurbach D. Micromorphological studies of lithium electrodes 
in alkyl carbonate solutions using in situ atomic force microscopy. J Phys Chem B 
2000;104:12282–91. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp002526b. 

study of lithium-ion cells using a LiySn micro-reference electrode. J Power 
Sources 2007;174:373–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.06.235. 
[159] Abraham DP, Poppen SD, Jansen AN, Liu J, Dees DW. Application of a lithium-tin 

[135] Aurbach D, Markovsky B, Weissman I, Levi E, Ein-Eli Y. On the correlation 

between surface chemistry and performance of graphite negative electrodes for Li 
ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 1999;45:67–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0013- 
4686(99)00194-2. 

[136] Castro L, Dedryv`ere R, Ledeuil JB, Br´eger J, Tessier C, Gonbeau D. Aging 

mechanisms of LiFePO 4 //graphite cells studied by XPS: Redox reaction and 
electrodeelectrolyte interfaces. J Electrochem Soc 2012;159:357–63. https://doi. 
org/10.1149/2.024204jes. 

[137] Aurbach D, Weissman I, Schechter A, Cohen H. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
studies of lithium surfaces prepared in several important electrolyte solutions. A 
comparison with previous studies by fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. 
Langmuir 1996;12:3991–4007. 

[138] Wenzel S, Leichtweiss T, Krüger D, Sann J, Janek J. Interphase formation on 

lithium solid electrolytes - An in situ approach to study interfacial reactions by 
photoelectron spectroscopy. Solid State Ionics 2015;278:98–105. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ssi.2015.06.001. 

[139] Harilal SS, Allain JP, Hassanein A, Hendricks MR, Nieto-Perez M. Reactivity of 
lithium exposed graphite surface. Appl Surf Sci 2009;255:8539–43. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2009.06.009. 

[140] Wood V. X-ray tomography for battery research and development. Nat Rev Mater 

2018;3:293–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41578-018-0053-4. 

[141] Pietsch P, Wood V. X-Ray Tomography for Lithium Ion Battery Research: A 

Practical Guide. Annu Rev Mater Res 2017;47:451–79. https://doi.org/10.1146/ 
annurev-matsci-070616-123957. 

[142] Sun F, He X, Jiang X, Osenberg M, Li J, Zhou D, et al. Advancing knowledge of 

electrochemically generated lithium microstructure and performance decay of 
lithium ion battery by synchrotron X-ray tomography. Mater Today 2019;27: 
21–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2018.11.003. 

[143] Waldmann T, Scurtu R-G, Richter K. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens M. 18650 vs. 21700 Li- 

ion cells – A direct comparison of electrochemical, thermal, and geometrical 
properties. J Power Sources 2020;472:228614. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2020.228614. 

[144] Vanpeene V, Villanova J, King A, Lestriez B, Maire E, Rou´e L. Dynamics of the 
Morphological Degradation of Si-Based Anodes for Li-Ion Batteries Characterized 
by In Situ Synchrotron X-Ray Tomography. Adv Energy Mater 2019;9:1–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201803947. 

[145] Eastwood DS, Bayley PM, Chang HJ, Taiwo OO, Vila-Comamala J, Brett DJL, 
et al. Three-dimensional characterization of electrodeposited lithium 
microstructures using synchrotron X-ray phase contrast imaging. Chem Commun 
2015;51:266–8. https://doi.org/10.1039/c4cc03187c. 

[146] Harry KJ, Hallinan DT, Parkinson DY, MacDowell AA, Balsara NP. Detection of 

subsurface structures underneath dendrites formed on cycled lithium metal 
electrodes. Nat Mater 2014;13:69–73. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat3793. 

[147] An SJ, Li J, Daniel C, Mohanty D, Nagpure S, Wood DL. The state of 

understanding of the lithium-ion-battery graphite solid electrolyte interphase 
(SEI) and its relationship to formation cycling. Carbon N Y 2016;105:52–76. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2016.04.008. 

[148] Morigaki K. Analysis of the interface between lithium and organic electrolyte 

solution. J Power Sources 2002;104:13–23. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0378-7753(01)00871-0. 

[149] Kr¨amer Y, Birkenmaier C, Feinauer J, Hintennach A, Bender CL, Meiler M, et al. 
A New Method for Quantitative Marking of Deposited Lithium by Chemical 
Treatment on Graphite Anodes in Lithium-Ion Cells. Chem - A Eur J 2015;21: 
6062–5. https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.201406606. 

[150] Ellis LD, Buteau S, Hames SG, Thompson LM, Hall DS, Dahn JR. A New Method 

for Determining the Concentration of Electrolyte Components in Lithium-Ion 
Cells. Using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy and Machine Learning 
2018;165:256–62. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0861802jes. 

[151] Burba CM, Frech R. In situ transmission FTIR spectroelectrochemistry: A new 

technique for studying lithium batteries. Electrochim Acta 2006;52:780–5. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2006.06.007. 

reference electrode to determine electrode contributions to impedance rise in 
high-power lithium-ion cells. Electrochim Acta 2004;49:4763–75. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.electacta.2004.05.040. 

[160] Hoshi Y, Narita Y, Honda K, Ohtaki T, Shitanda I, Itagaki M. Optimization of 

reference electrode position in a three-electrode cell for impedance measurements 
in lithium-ion rechargeable battery by finite element method. J Power Sources 
2015;288:168–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.04.065. 
[161] Nara H, Mukoyama D, Yokoshima T, Momma T, Osaka T. Impedance analysis 

with transmission line model for reaction distribution in a pouch type lithium-ion 
battery by using micro reference electrode. J Electrochem Soc 2016;163: 
A434–41. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0341603jes. 

[162] McTurk E, Birkl CR, Roberts MR, Howey DA, Bruce PG. Minimally invasive 

insertion of reference electrodes into commercial lithium-ion pouch cells. ECS 
Electrochem Lett 2015;4:A145–7. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0081512eel. 
[163] Somerville L, Ferrari S, Lain MJ, McGordon A, Jennings P, Bhagat R. An in-situ 
reference electrode insertion method for commercial 18650-type cells. Batteries 
2018;4:1–11. https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries4020018. 

[164] La Mantia F, Wessells CD, Deshazer HD, Cui Y. Reliable reference electrodes for 

lithium-ion batteries. Electrochem Commun 2013;31:141–4. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.elecom.2013.03.015. 

[165] Doll´e M, Orsini F, Gozdz AS, Tarascon JM. Development of Reliable Three- 

Electrode Impedance Measurements in Plastic Li-Ion Batteries. J Electrochem Soc 
2001;148:851–7. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1381071. 

[166] Pastor-Fern´andez C, Widanage WD, Chouchelamane GH, Marco J. A SoH 

diagnosis and prognosis method to identify and quantify degradation modes in Li- 
ion batteries using the IC/DV technique. IET Conf Publ 2016;2016:1–6. https:// 
doi.org/10.1049/cp.2016.0966. 

[167] Han X, Ouyang M, Lu L, Li J, Zheng Y, Li Z. A comparative study of commercial 

lithium ion battery cycle life in electrical vehicle: Aging mechanism 
identification. J Power Sources 2014;251:38–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2013.11.029. 

[168] Bard AJ, Faulkner LR. Fundamentals and Applications. vol. 30. 1980. https://doi. 

org/10.1146/annurev.matsci.30.1.117. 

[169] Smith AJ, Burns JC, Trussler S, Dahn JR. Precision measurements of the 

Coulombic efficiency of lithium-ion batteries and of electrode materials for 
lithium-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2010;157:196–202. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/1.3268129. 

[170] Burns JC, Stevens DA, Dahn JR. In-situ detection of lithium plating using high 
precision coulometry. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162:A959–64. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/2.0621506jes. 

[171] Liu Y, Hanai K, Yang J, Imanishi N, Hirano A, Takeda Y. Morphology-stable 
silicon-based composite for Li-intercalation 2004;168:61–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ssi.2004.01.031. 

[172] Smith AJ, Burns JC, Dahn JR. A high precision study of the coulombic efficiency 
of Li-Ion batteries. Electrochem Solid-State Lett 2010;13:177–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/1.3487637. 

[173] Shi F, Pei A, Boyle DT, Xie J, Yu X, Zhang X, et al. Lithium metal stripping beneath 

the solid electrolyte interphase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018;115:8529–34. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1806878115. 

[174] Stevens DA, Ying RY, Fathi R, Reimers JN, Harlow JE, Dahn JR. Using high 

precision coulometry measurements to compare the degradation mechanisms of 
NMC/LMO and NMC-only automotive scale pouch cells. J Electrochem Soc 2014; 
161:1364–70. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0971409jes. 

[175] Osaka T, Momma T, Nishimura K, Taiima T. In situ Observation and Evaluation of 
Electrodeposited Lithium by Means of Optical Microscopy with Alternating 
Current Impedance Spectroscopy. J Electrochem Soc 1993;140:2745–8. https:// 
doi.org/10.1149/1.2220903. 

[176] Downie LE, Krause LJ, Burns JC, Jensen LD, Chevrier VL, Dahn JR. In situ 

detection of lithium plating on graphite electrodes by electrochemical 
calorimetry. J Electrochem Soc 2013;160:588–94. https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
2.049304jes. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095327X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

[177] Wang CM, Li X, Wang Z, Xu W, Liu J, Gao F, et al. In situ TEM investigation of 

[201] Berecibar M, Omar N, Garmendia M, Villarreal I, Van Den Bossche P, Van 

congruent phase transition and structural evolution of nanostructured silicon/ 
carbon anode for lithium ion batteries. Nano Lett 2012;12:1624–32. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/nl204559u. 

[178] Sacci RL, Dudney NJ, More KL, Parent LR, Arslan I, Browning ND, et al. Direct 

visualization of initial SEI morphology and growth kinetics during lithium 
deposition by in situ electrochemical transmission electron microscopy. Chem 
Commun 2014;50:2104–7. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3cc49029g. 

[179] Bhattacharyya R, Key B, Chen H, Best AS, Hollenkamp AF, Grey CP. In situ NMR 
observation of the formation of metallic lithium microstructures in lithium 
batteries. Nat Mater 2010;9:504–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2764. 

[180] Cheng H, Zhu CB, Lu M, Yang Y. In situ micro-FTIR study of the solid-solid 

interface between lithium electrode and polymer electrolytes. J Power Sources 
2007;174:1027–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.06.213. 

[181] Takahara H, Kojyo A, Kodama K, Nakamura T, Shono K, Kobayashi Y, et al. Depth 
profiling of graphite electrode in lithium ion battery using glow discharge optical 
emission spectroscopy with small quantities of hydrogen or oxygen addition to 
argon. J Anal At Spectrom 2014;29:95–104. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
c3ja50183c. 

[182] Schweikert N, Hahn H, Indris S. Cycling behaviour of Li/Li4Ti5O12 cells studied 

by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2011;13: 
6234–40. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0cp01889a. 

[183] Fern´andez Pulido Y, Blanco C, Anse´an D, García VM, Ferrero F, Valledor M. 
Determination of suitable parameters for battery analysis by Electrochemical 
Impedance Spectroscopy. Meas J Int Meas Confed 2017;106:1–11. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.measurement.2017.04.022. 

[184] Al Nazer R, Cattin V, Granjon P, Montaru M, Ranieri M. Broadband identification 

of battery electrical impedance for HEVs. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2013;62: 
2896–905. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2013.2254140. 

[185] Bitzer B, Gruhle A. A new method for detecting lithium plating by measuring the 

cell thickness. J Power Sources 2014;262:297–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2014.03.142. 

[186] Bauer M, Wachtler M, St¨owe H, Persson JV, Danzer MA. Understanding the 
dilation and dilation relaxation behavior of graphite-based lithium-ion cells. 
J Power Sources 2016;317:93–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2016.03.078. 

[187] Grimsmann F, Gerbert T, Brauchle F, Gruhle A, Parisi J, Knipper M. Determining 
the maximum charging currents of lithium-ion cells for small charge quantities. 
J Power Sources 2017;365:12–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2017.08.044. 

[188] Liu QQ, Xiong DJ, Petibon R, Du CY, Dahn JR. Gas Evolution during Unwanted 

Lithium Plating in Li-Ion Cells with EC-Based or EC-Free Electrolytes. J OfThe 
Electrochem Soc 2016;163:A3010–5. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0711614jes. 

[189] Bommier C, Chang W, Li J, Biswas S, Davies G, Nanda J, et al. Operando Acoustic 

Monitoring of SEI Formation and Long-Term Cycling in NMC /SiGr Composite 
Pouch Cells Operando Acoustic Monitoring of SEI Formation and Long-Term 
Cycling in NMC / SiGr Composite Pouch Cells 2020. https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
1945-7111/ab68d6. 

[190] Davies G, Soc JE, Davies G, Knehr KW, Van Tassell B, Hodson T, et al. State of 
Charge and State of Health Estimation Using Electrochemical Acoustic Time of 
Flight Analysis. J OfThe Electrochem Soc 2017;164:A2746–55. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/2.1411712jes. 

[191] Gold L, Bach T, Virsik W, Schmitt A, Müller J, Staab TEM, et al. Probing lithium- 
ion batteries ’ state-of-charge using ultrasonic transmission e Concept and 
laboratory testing. J Power Sources 2017;343:536–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2017.01.090. 

[192] Hsieh AG, Bhadra S, Hertzberg BJ, Gjeltema PJ, Goy A, Fleischer JW, et al. 
Environmental Science Electrochemical-acoustic time of flight : in operando 
correlation of physical dynamics with battery charge and health † 2015:1569–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ee00111k. 

[193] Wu Y, Wang Y, Yung WKC, Pecht M. Ultrasonic Health Monitoring of Lithium-Ion 

Batteries. Electron 2019;8. https://doi.org/doi:10.3390/electronics8070751. 

[194] Bommier C, Williams M, Chang W, Lu Y, Yeung J, Davies G, et al. In Operando 

Acoustic Detection of Lithium Metal Plating in Commercial LiCoO2/Graphite 
Pouch Cells. Cell Reports Phys Sci 2020;1:100035. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
xcrp.2020.100035. 

Mierlo J, et al. SOH Estimation and Prediction for NMC Cells Based on 
Degradation Mechanism Detection. In: 2015 IEEE Veh Power Propuls Conf VPPC 
2015 - Proc; 2015. https://doi.org/10.1109/VPPC.2015.7353020. 

[202] Lin X, Hao X, Ivanco A, Liu Z, Jia W. Physics-based and control-oriented modeling 
of diffusion-induced stress in Li-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2018;165: 
A2255–66. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0971810jes. 

[203] Tomasov M, Kajanova M, Bracinik P, Motyka D. Overview of battery models for 

sustainable power and transport applications. Transp Res Procedia 2019;40: 
548–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2019.07.079. 

[204] Doyle M, Fuller T, Newman J. Modeling of galvanostatic charge and discharge of 
the lithium/polymer/insertion cell. J Electrochem Soc 1993;140:1526–33. 
https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2221597. 

[205] Lin X. Real-Time Prediction of Anode Potential in Li-Ion Batteries Using Long 

Short-Term Neural Networks for Lithium Plating Prevention. J Electrochem Soc 
2019;166:A1893–904. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0621910jes. 

[206] Tippmann S, Walper D, Balboa L, Spier B, Bessler WG. Low-temperature charging 

of lithium-ion cells part I: Electrochemical modeling and experimental 
investigation of degradation behavior. J Power Sources 2014;252:305–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.12.022. 

[207] Tang M, Albertus P, Newman J. Two-dimensional modeling of lithium deposition 

during cell charging. J Electrochem Soc 2009;156. https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
1.3095513. 

[208] Boovaragavan V, Harinipriya S, Subramanian VR. Towards real-time 

(milliseconds) parameter estimation of lithium-ion batteries using reformulated 
physics-based models. J Power Sources 2008;183:361–5. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.04.077. 

[209] Perkins RD, Randall AV, Zhang X, Plett GL. Controls oriented reduced order 

modeling of lithium deposition on overcharge. J Power Sources 2012;209: 
318–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.03.003. 

[210] Yang XG, Leng Y, Zhang G, Ge S, Wang CY. Modeling of lithium plating induced 
aging of lithium-ion batteries: Transition from linear to nonlinear aging. J Power 
Sources 2017;360:28–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.05.110. 
[211] Zhang SS. Reformulation of Electrolyte for Enhanced Fast-Charge Capability of Li- 
Ion Battery. J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:060527. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945- 
7111/ab84fd. 

[212] Purushothaman BK, Landau U. Rapid charging of lithium-ion batteries using 

pulsed currents. J Electrochem Soc 2006;153. https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
1.2161580. 

[213] Cheng Q, Yuge R, Nakahara K, Tamura N, Miyamoto S. KOH etched graphite for 
fast chargeable lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2015;284:258–63. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.03.036. 

[214] Liu Y, Zhu Y, Cui Y. Challenges and opportunities towards fast-charging battery 

materials. Nat Energy 2019;4:540–50. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-019- 
0405-3. 

[215] Habedank JB, Kriegler J, Zaeh MF. Enhanced Fast Charging and Reduced Lithium- 
Plating by Laser-Structured Anodes for Lithium-Ion Batteries. J Electrochem Soc 
2019;166:A3940–9. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1241915jes. 

[216] Park G, Gunawardhana N, Nakamura H, Lee YS, Yoshio M. The study of 

electrochemical properties and lithium deposition of graphite at low temperature. 
J Power Sources 2012;199:293–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2011.10.058. 

[217] Kim N, Chae S, Ma J, Ko M, Cho J. Fast-charging high-energy lithium-ion batteries 
via implantation of amorphous silicon nanolayer in edge-plane activated graphite 
anodes. Nat Commun 2017;8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00973-y. 

[218] Kraft L, Habedank JB, Frank A, Rheinfeld A, Jossen A. Modeling and Simulation 

of Pore Morphology Modifications using Laser-Structured Graphite Anodes in 
Lithium-Ion Batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:013506. https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/2.0062001jes. 

[219] Logan ER, Tonita EM, Gering KL, Li J, Ma X, Beaulieu LY, et al. A Study of the 
Physical Properties of Li-Ion Battery Electrolytes Containing Esters. J Electrochem 
Soc 2018;165:A21–30. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0271802jes. 

[220] Ma X, Arumugam RS, Ma L, Logan E, Tonita E, Xia J, et al. A Study of Three Ester 
Co-Solvents in Lithium-Ion Cells. J Electrochem Soc 2017;164:A3556–62. https:// 
doi.org/10.1149/2.0411714jes. 

[221] Hall DS, Eldesoky A, Logan ER, Tonita EM, Ma X, Dahn JR. Exploring Classes of 

[195] Konz ZM, McShane EJ, McCloskey BD. Detecting the Onset of Lithium Plating and 
Monitoring Fast Charging Performance with Voltage Relaxation. ACS Energy Lett 
2020;5:1750–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.0c00831. 

Co-Solvents for Fast-Charging Lithium-Ion Cells. J Electrochem Soc 2018;165: 
A2365–73. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1351810jes. 

[222] Diederichsen KM, McShane EJ, McCloskey BD. Promising Routes to a High Li+

[196] Belt JR, Bernardi DM, Utgikar V. Development and Use of a lithium-metal 

reference electrode in aging studies of lithium-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 
2014;161:1116–26. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.062406jes. 

[197] Raccichini R, Amores M, Hinds G. Critical review of the use of reference 

electrodes in li-ion batteries: A diagnostic perspective. Batteries 2019;5:1–24. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries5010012. 

[198] Ge H, Huang J, Zhang J, Li Z. Temperature-adaptive alternating current 

preheating of lithium-ion batteries with lithium deposition prevention. 
J Electrochem Soc 2016;163:A290–9. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0961602jes. 

[199] Harting N, Wolff N, Krewer U. Identification of Lithium Plating in Lithium-Ion 

Batteries using Nonlinear Frequency Response Analysis (NFRA). Electrochim Acta 
2018;281:378–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2018.05.139. 
[200] Pastor-Fern´andez C, Yu TF, Widanage WD, Marco J. Critical review of non- 

Transference Number Electrolyte for Lithium Ion Batteries. ACS Energy Lett 2017; 
2:2563–75. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00792. 

[223] Popovic J, H¨ofler D, Melchior JP, Münchinger A, List B, Maier J. High Lithium 
Transference Number Electrolytes Containing Tetratriflylpropene’s Lithium Salt. 
J Phys Chem Lett 2018;9:5116–20. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b01846. 
[224] Berhaut CL, Porion P, Timperman L, Schmidt G, Lemordant D, Anouti M. LiTDI as 
electrolyte salt for Li-ion batteries: Transport properties in EC/DMC. Electrochim 
Acta 2015;180:778–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2015.08.165. 
[225] Fong KD, Self J, Diederichsen KM, Wood BM, McCloskey BD, Persson KA. Ion 

Transport and the True Transference Number in Nonaqueous Polyelectrolyte 
Solutions for Lithium Ion Batteries. ACS Cent Sci 2019;5:1250–60. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acscentsci.9b00406. 

[226] Buss HG, Chan SY, Lynd NA, McCloskey BD. Nonaqueous Polyelectrolyte 

invasive diagnosis techniques for quantification of degradation modes in lithium- 
ion batteries. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;109:138–59. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2019.03.060. 

Solutions as Liquid Electrolytes with High Lithium Ion Transference Number and 
Conductivity. ACS Energy Lett 2017;2:481–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsenergylett.6b00724. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095328X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

[227] Du Z, Wood DL, Belharouak I. Enabling fast charging of high energy density Li-ion 

[256] Hayes JG, Goodarzi AG. Electric Powertrain: Energy Systems, Power Electronics 

cells with high lithium ion transport electrolytes. Electrochem Commun 2019; 
103:109–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2019.04.013. 

[228] Liu QQ, Petibon R, Du CY, Dahn JR. Effects of electrolyte additives and solvents 

on unwanted lithium plating in lithium-ion cells. J Electrochem Soc 2017;164: 
A1173–83. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1081706jes. 

[229] Liu QQ, Ma L, Du CY, Dahn JR. Effects of the LiPO2F2 additive on unwanted 

lithium plating in lithium-ion cells. Electrochim Acta 2018;263:237–48. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2018.01.058. 

[230] Jones J-P, Smart MC, Krause FC, Bugga R V. The Effect of Electrolyte Additives 
upon Lithium Plating during Low Temperature Charging of Graphite-LiNiCoAlO 2 
Lithium-Ion Three Electrode Cells. J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:020536. https:// 
doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/ab6bc2. 

[231] Colclasure AM, Dunlop AR, Trask SE, Polzin BJ, Jansen AN, Smith K. 

Requirements for Enabling Extreme Fast Charging of High Energy Density Li-Ion 
Cells while Avoiding Lithium Plating. J Electrochem Soc 2019;166:A1412–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0451908jes. 

[232] Liu H, Zhang S, Zhu Q, Cao B, Zhang P, Sun N, et al. Fluffy carbon-coated red 

phosphorus as a highly stable and high-rate anode for lithium-ion batteries. 
J Mater Chem A 2019;7:11205–13. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9ta02030f. 
[233] Kim CS, Jeong KM, Kim K, Yi CW. Effects of capacity ratios between anode and 
cathode on electrochemical properties for lithium polymer batteries. Electrochim 
Acta 2015;155:431–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2014.12.005. 

[234] Banguero E, Correcher A, P´erez-Navarro 

´
A, Morant F, Aristizabal A. A review on 

battery charging and discharging control strategies: Application to renewable 
energy systems. Energies 2018;11:1–15. https://doi.org/10.3390/en11041021. 

[235] Gao Y, Member S, Zhang XI, Member S, Cheng Q. Classification and Review of the 

Charging Strategies for Commercial Lithium-Ion Batteries. IEEE Access 2019;7: 
43511–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2906117. 

[236] Arabsalmanabadi B, Tashakor N, Javadi A, Al-Haddad K. Charging Techniques in 
Lithium-ion Battery Charger: Review and New Solution. IEEE 2018. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/IECON.2018.8591173. 

[237] Howell David, Boyd Steven, Cunningham Brian, Samm Gillard LS. Enabling Fast 
Charging : A Technology Gap Assessment. US Dept Energy; 2017. p. 83. 

[238] Eberman K, Gomadam PM, Jain G, Scott E. Material and design options for 

avoiding lithium-plating during charging. ECS Trans 2010;25:47–58. https://doi. 
org/10.1149/1.3414003. p. 

[239] Choi SS, Lim HS. Factors that affect cycle-life and possible degradation 
mechanisms of a Li-ion cell based on. LiCoO 2 2002;111:130–6. 

[240] Zhang SS, Xu K, Jow TR. Study of the charging process of a LiCoO2-based Li-ion 
battery. J Power Sources 2006;160:1349–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2006.02.087. 

[241] Anse´an D, Gonz´alez M, Viera JC, García VM, Blanco C, Valledor M. Fast charging 
technique for high power lithium iron phosphate batteries : A cycle life analysis. 
J Power Sources 2013;239:9–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2013.03.044. 

and Drives for Hybrid, Electric and Fuel Cell Vehicles. Wiley; 2018. 

[257] Tanim TR, Shirk MG, Bewley RL, Dufek EJ, Liaw BY. Fast charge implications: 

Pack and cell analysis and comparison. J Power Sources 2018;381:56–65. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.01.091. 

[258] Zou C, Hu X, Wei Z. Electrochemical Estimation and Control for Lithium-Ion 

Battery Health-Aware Fast Charging. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2018;65:6635–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2017.2772154. 

[259] Song M, Choe SY. Fast and safe charging method suppressing side reaction and 

lithium deposition reaction in lithium ion battery. J Power Sources 2019;436: 
226835. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.226835. 

[260] Chu Z, Feng X, Lu L, Li J, Han X, Ouyang M. Non-destructive fast charging 

algorithm of lithium-ion batteries based on the control-oriented electrochemical 
model. Appl Energy 2017;204:1240–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2017.03.111. 

[261] Lin X, Hao X, Liu Z, Jia W. Health conscious fast charging of Li-ion batteries via a 
single particle model with aging mechanisms. J Power Sources 2018;400:305–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.08.030. 

[262] Spingler FB, Wittmann W, Sturm J, Rieger B, Jossen A. Optimum fast charging of 
lithium-ion pouch cells based on local volume expansion criteria. J Power Sources 
2018;393:152–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.04.095. 

[263] Zhao H, Wang L, Chen Z, He X. Challenges of Fast Charging for Electric Vehicles 
and the Role of Red Phosphorus as Anode Material : Review 2019. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/en12203897. 

[264] Shevtsov S, Chang S. ScienceDirect Modeling of vibration energy harvesting 

system with power PZT stack loaded on Li-Ion battery. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2016;41:12618–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.03.183. 
[265] Dubarry M, Baure G. Perspective on commercial Li-ion battery testing, best 

practices for simple and effective protocols. Electron 2020;9. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/electronics9010152. 

[266] Taylor J, Barai A, Ashwin TR, Guo Y, Amor-Segan M, Marco J. An insight into the 

errors and uncertainty of the lithium-ion battery characterisation experiments. 
J Energy Storage 2019;24:100761. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2019.100761. 
[267] Zhang L. applied sciences Effects of Vibration on the Electrical Performance of 
Lithium-Ion Cells Based on Mathematical Statistics 2017. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/app7080802. 

[268] Michael J, Marco J, Henri G, Sylvie J, Williams D. Multi-axis vibration durability 

testing of lithium ion 18650 NCA cylindrical cells. J Energy Storage 2018;15: 
103–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2017.11.006. 

[269] Somerville L, Hooper JM, Marco J, Mcgordon A, Lyness C, Walker M, et al. Impact 

of Vibration on the Surface Film of Lithium-Ion Cells. Energies 2017;10:1–12. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en10060741. 

[270] Schmidt JP, Arnold S, Loges A, Werner D, Wetzel T, Ivers-Tiff´ee E. Measurement 
of the internal cell temperature via impedance: Evaluation and application of a 
new method. J Power Sources 2013;243:110–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2013.06.013. 

[242] Luo Y, Wang S. Search for an Optimal Multistage Charging Pattern for Lithium- 
Ion Batteries Using the Taguchi Approach. In: TENCON 2009 - 2009 IEEE Reg 10 
Conf; 2009. p. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/TENCON.2009.5395823. 

[271] Ojo O, Lang H, Kim Y, Hu X, Mu B, Lin X. A Neural Network Based Method for 
Thermal Fault Detection in Lithium-Ion Batteries. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2021; 
68:4068–78. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2020.2984980. 

[243] Zhang SS. The effect of the charging protocol on the cycle life of a Li-ion battery. 

[272] Li Y, Feng X, Ren D, Ouyang M, Lu L, Han X. Thermal Runaway Triggered by 

J Power Sources 2006;161:1385–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2006.06.040. 

[244] Amanor-Boadu JM, Guiseppi-Elie A, S´anchez-Sinencio E. The impact of pulse 

charging parameters on the life cycle of lithium-ion polymer batteries. Energies 
2018;11:1–15. https://doi.org/10.3390/en11082162. 

Plated Lithium on the Anode after Fast Charging. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019; 
11:46839–50. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b16589. 

[273] Carter R, Klein EJ, Kingston TA, Love CT. Detection of Lithium Plating During 

Thermally Transient Charging of Li-Ion Batteries. Front Energy Res 2019;7:1–12. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2019.00144. 

[245] Hasan MF, Chen C, Shaffer CE, Mukherjee PP. Analysis of the Implications of 

[274] Dubarry M, Beck D. Big data training data for artificial intelligence-based Li-ion 

Rapid Charging on Lithium-Ion Battery Performance 2015;162:1382–95. https:// 
doi.org/10.1149/2.0871507jes. 

[246] Aryanfar A, Brooks D, Merinov B V, Goddard WA, Colussi AJ, Hoffmann MR. 
Dynamics of Lithium Dendrite Growth and Inhibition : Pulse Charging. J Phys 
Chem Lett 2014;5:1721–6. 

[247] Notten PHL, Op JHG, Beek JRG Van. Boostcharging Li-ion batteries : A 

challenging new charging concept 2005;145:89–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2004.12.038. 

[248] Mussa AS, Klett M, Behm M, Lindbergh G, Lindstr¨om RW. Fast-charging to a 
partial state of charge in lithium-ion batteries: A comparative ageing study. 
J Energy Storage 2017;13:325–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2017.07.004. 

[249] Li W, Erickson EM, Manthiram A. High-nickel layered oxide cathodes for lithium- 
based automotive batteries. Nat Energy 2020;12. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41560-019-0513-0. 

[250] Lemon C, Booklet L, S U. OWNER’S MANUAL For your safety, read carefully and 

keep in this vehicle. 2010. 

[251] Tu H, Feng H, Srdic S, Lukic S. Extreme Fast Charging of Electric Vehicles: A 
Technology Overview. IEEE Trans Transp Electrif 2019;5:861–78. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/TTE.2019.2958709. 

[252] Tesla increases Model S and X Supercharging rate to 225 kW - Electrek n.d. 
https://electrek.co/2020/06/24/tesla-model-s-x-supercharging-rate-increase- 
225-kw/(accessed July 19, 2020). 

[253] Porsche installs first 350 kW ultra-rapids in Berlin - Zap-Map 2020. https://www. 
zap-map.com/porsche-installs-first-350-kw-ultra-rapids-in-berlin/(accessed July 
19, 2020). 

[254] The charging process: Quick, comfortable, intelligent and universal 2020. https:// 

newsroom.porsche.com/en/products/taycan/charging-18558.html (accessed 
July 19, 2020). 

[255] XCEL : eXtreme Fast Charge Cell Evaluation of Lithium-ion Batteries Report 

Period : July – September 2019. 2019. 

diagnosis and prognosis. J Power Sources 2020;479:228806. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.228806. 

[275] Rynne O, Dubarry M, Molson C, Lepage D, Pr´eb´e A, Aym´e-Perrot D, et al. Designs 

of experiments for beginners-A quick start guide for application to electrode 
formulation. Batteries 2019;5. https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries5040072.  

Xianke Lin received the BS degree from Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, China, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical 
engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA, in 2014. He has extensive industrial experience with Fiat 
Chrysler Automobiles, Auburn Hills, MI, USA, Mercedes-Benz 
Research  &  Development  North  America,  Detroit,  MI,  USA, 
and  General  Motors  of  Canada,  Oshawa,  ON,  Canada.  He  is 
currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Auto-
motive  and  Mechatronics  Engineering,  Ontario  Tech  Univer-
research  activities  have 
sity,  Oshawa,  Canada.  His 
concentrated  on  hybrid  powertrain  design  and  control 
strategy optimization, multiscale/multiphysics modeling, and  

optimization of energy storage systems.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095329X. Lin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Kavian  Khosravinia  received  the  BS  degree  in  automotive 
engineering  from  Azad  University  of  Khomeinishahr,  Iran  in 
2012.  And  Master  of  Science  in  Automotive  Engineering  in 
University Putra Malaysia in 2018. He is currently pursuing the 
Ph.D. degree in automotive engineering at Ontario Tech Uni-
versity.  His  research  interests  include  battery  degradation 
modeling and fast charging technologies.  

Ju Li received the BS degree in Physics from the University of 
Science and Technology of China in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree 
in  nuclear  engineering  from  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology, USA, in 2000. He is currently the Battelle Energy 
Alliance  Professor  of  Nuclear  Science  and  Engineering  at 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology.  He  has  received  TMS 
Robert  Lansing  Hardy  Award  and  MRS  Outstanding  Young 
Investigator Award. A highly cited expert in his field, he is also 
a  Fellow  of  the  Materials  Research  Society  and  American 
Physical Society.  

Xiaosong  Hu  received  the  Ph.D. degree  in  automotive  engi-
neering from Beijing Institute of Technology, China, in 2012. 
He did scientific research and completed the Ph.D. dissertation 
in Automotive Research Center at the University of Michigan, 
Ann  Arbor,  USA,  between  2010  and  2012.  He  is  currently  a 
Professor  at  the  State  Key  Laboratory  of  Mechanical  Trans-
missions  and  at  the  Department  of  Automotive  Engineering, 
Chongqing  University,  Chongqing,  China.  He  was  a  post-
doctoral  researcher  at  the  Department  of  Civil  and  Environ-
mental  Engineering,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  USA, 
between  2014  and  2015,  as  well  as  at  the  Swedish  Hybrid 
Vehicle Center and the Department of Signals and Systems at   

Wei Lu received his Ph.D. from the Mechanical and Aerospace 
Engineering Department, Princeton University, and joined the 
faculty of Mechanical Engineering Department, the University 
of Michigan in 2001. He received his BS from Tsinghua Uni-
versity,  China.  His  research  interests  include  energy  storage 
and electrochemistry; simulation of nano/microstructure evo-
lution;  mechanics 
systems;  advanced 
in  nano/micro 
manufacturing;  mechanical  properties  and  performance  of 
advanced  materials  and  relation  to  microstructures.  Prof.  Lu 
was  the  recipient  of  many  prestigious  awards  including  the 
CAREER  award  by  the  US  National  Science  Foundation,  the 
Robert  J.  McGrattan  Award  by  the  American  Society  of  

Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, between 2012 and 2014. He 
was  also  a  visiting  postdoctoral  researcher  in  the  Institute  for  Dynamic  systems  and 
Control  at  Swiss  Federal  Institute  of  Technology,  Zurich,  Switzerland,  in  2014.  His 
research interests include battery management technologies and modeling and controls of 
electrified  vehicles.  He  has  been  a  recipient  of  several  prestigious  awards/honors, 
including SAE Ralph Teetor Educational Award in 2019, Emerging Sustainability Leaders 
Award in 2016, EU Marie Currie Fellowship in 2015, ASME DSCD Energy Systems Best 
Paper Award in 2015, and Beijing Best Ph.D. Dissertation Award in 2013.  

Mechanical Engineers, Elected Fellow of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 
Robert M. Caddell Memorial Research Achievement Award, Faculty Recognition Award, 
Department Achievement Award, Distinguished Professor Award, Novelis and College of 
Engineering, Ted Kennedy Family Faculty Team Excellence Award, CoE George J. Hueb-
ner,  Jr.  Research  Excellence  Award,  and  the  Gustus  L  Larson  Memorial  Award  by  the 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers. He was invited to the National Academies Keck 
Futures Initiative Conference multiple times. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10095330