Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Biochar as the effective adsorbent to combustion gaseous pollutants:
Preparation, activation, functionalization and the adsorption mechanisms

Chang Wen a,b, Tianyu Liu a, Dapeng Wang b, Yaqin Wang b, Hanping Chen a,b, Guangqian Luo a,
Zijian Zhou a, Changkang Li a, Minghou Xu a, *
a State Key Laboratory of Coal Combustion, School of Energy and Power Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
b Department of New Energy Science and Engineering, School of Energy and Power Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Biochar
Combustion gaseous pollutants
Adsorption
Functionalization
Regeneration

The  massive  combustion  utilization  of  fossil  fuel  in  human  industrial  activities,  such  as  power  plants,  waste
incineration, and kiln combustion for cement production, would emit serious gaseous pollutants (SO2, NOx, VOC,
and mercury), aerosols and CO2. There is a growing interest in using novel solid sorbents, i.e., activated carbon
(AC), zeolites, carbon nanotube, carbon molecular sieve, and MOFs (metal-organic frameworks), for their ability
to capture gaseous pollutants from combustion flue gas through adsorption processes. However, these emerging
alternatives are generally expensive, limiting large-scale industrial utilization. Biochar, as a stable carbon-rich
solid by-product from biomass thermal treatment, is not only capable of replacing coal as fuel in power plants
but also widely reported to be an effective and cheap sorbent for removing the gaseous pollutants in flue gas,
including SO2, NOX, Hg, CO2 and VOC, due to its high porosity and specific surface area and surface functional
groups. In this review, the physical activation, chemical activation, and novel modification methods including
microwave, ultrasonic, plasma, ball-milling, and molten salts were introduced as their optimization to the porous
properties  and  active  surface  functional  groups  for  biochar  sorbents.  The  functionalized  treatments  including
metal, ammonia/amines, and halogen modification on activated biochar were reviewed to observe the further
improved adsorption performance of biochar, for possible engineering application. The abundant amounts of the
oxygenic functional group increase the number of active sites onto which NH3 or Hg can be adsorbed, resulting in
higher  NO  and  Hg  removal  efficiencies.  Oxygenated  anchoring  sites  are  also  effective  intermediate  stage  to
introduce the nitrogen functional groups, which are generally more effective than the porous texture for acidic
◦
SO2 and CO2 adsorption, especially at adsorption temperature higher than ~100
C. The redox reactions of metal
catalyst in biochar and the improved adsorption ability of NH3  and Hg mainly determine the removal perfor-
mance  of  biochar  for  NOx  and  Hg0.  The  halogen  addition  to  form  C-halogen  groups  can  transform  Hg0  into
mercury  halide  retained  on  the  biochar.  The  practical  removal  performance  of  various  gaseous  pollutants  is
affected by the adsorption conditions, such as adsorption temperature, humidity and impurities concentrations in
simulated flue gas, selectivity, synergistic adsorption of typical gases, and regeneration capacity. The adsorption
isotherm models and the adsorption kinetic models are helpful for predicting the adsorption amount and con-
trolling mechanism and calculating the energy of adsorption to indicate the strength and potential of adsorption
and  desorption.  Finally,  the  review  presents  the  research  gaps  on  biochar  adsorption  mechanisms,  industrial
application and evaluation of economy and energy-saving analysis.

1. Introduction

According to the “BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2020”, the
global consumption of primary energy reached 583.9 EJ in 2019 with
the ratio of 84.3% is still the fossil fuel and only 5.0% is the renewable
energy  including  biofuel.  However,  the  renewable  energy  sector  has

contributed  significantly  to  the  41%  increase  in  energy  demand.  The
massive combustion utilization of fossil fuel in various human industrial
activities, such as power plants, waste incineration, and kiln combustion
for  cement  production,  would  emit  serious  gaseous  pollutants  (SO2,
NOx, CO, VOC, HCl, mercury and NH3), aerosols (PM10, PM2.5) and CO2
[1]. The anthropogenic emitted CO2  is the chief culprit of greenhouse

* Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory of Coal Combustion, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, 1037 Luoyu Road, Wuhan, 430074, China.

E-mail addresses: wenchang@hust.edu.cn (C. Wen), mhxu@hust.edu.cn (M. Xu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101098
Received 6 April 2022; Received in revised form 9 May 2023; Accepted 16 May 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)101098Availableonline17August20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

C. Wen et al.

gas (GHG) to aggravate the global warming, thus it can also be deemed
as  one  type  of  gas  pollutant.  At  present,  there  are  various  typical
pollutant control devices installing in power plants and other types of
industrial plants, such as the flue gas desulfurization (FGD) which can
remove the SO2 and soluble Hg2+
simultaneously, the selective catalytic
reduction  (SCR)  and  selective  non-catalytic  reduction  (SNCR)  for
reducing NOx, the activated carbon (AC) which is used to adsorb Hg, and
the developing technology of monoethanolamine (MEA) solvent and the
CaO-based and Li4SiO4-based sorbents achieved by a reversible reaction
between a calciner and a carbonation reactor [2,3], which separates CO2
from  the  other  flue  gases  [1,4].  However,  the  gaseous  pollutants  still
emit enormously in global perspective because the complete capture is
impossible. Zhong et al. [5] reported that the global total SO2 emission
from all sources was estimated as 105.4 Mt/year in 2014, with a pre-
dominant  contribution  of  98%  from  anthropogenic  sources.  Approxi-
mately 10,000 t of SO2 is produced by a medium-sized coal-fired plant
per year [6]. The global increasing emissions for NOx is from 68 Mt/year
to  122  Mt/year  over  the  period  1970–2012,  estimated  by  the  global
anthropogenic emission time series of EDGAR (Emissions Database for
Global Atmospheric Research) [7]. Streets et al. [8] estimated that the
global environmental Hg emissions have grown from 2.19 Mt/year in
2010 to 2.39 Mt/y in 2015 at the rate of 1.8%/year, with the contri-
bution  of  coal  combustion  and  municipal  waste  of  29.2%.  The  latest
estimates from EDGAR [9] confirmed that the global anthropogenic CO2
emission in 2018 reaches 37.9 Gt CO2, which is 1.9% higher than that in
2017. The VOC emitted by human activities is about 142 Mt/year [10],
and  it  is  reported  that  44.07  Mt  VOCs  is  emitted  annually  by  the
coal-fired power plants [11].

Some novel solid sorbents have been attempted as technology op-
tions  to  remove  gaseous  pollutant  from  combustion  flue  gas  through
adsorption processes. The widely used solid sorbents include activated-
carbon  (AC),  carbon  nanotube,  carbon  molecular  sieve,  zeolites,  and
MOFs  (metal-organic  frameworks)  [12,13].  However,  these  emerging
alternatives tend to be expensive and have limited the industrial utili-
zation on a large scale. Biomass is an important type in renewable en-
ergy  families  and  it  is  the  only  renewable  carbon  source  which  can
produce  bio-solid,  bio-oil  and  bio-gas  synergistically  through  thermal
pretreatments like torrefaction, pyrolysis, gasification, and hydrother-
mal carbonization (HTC). The biosolid, as the stable carbon-rich solid
by-product, is called as biochar and hydrochar when it is derived from
HTC process. The biochar is not only capable of replacing coal as fuel in
power plants [14–17], but also utilized to be cheap and effective gaseous
adsorbent  for  adsorption  removal  of  flue  gas  pollutants  such  as  SO2,
NOX, CO2, Hg and VOC. Its porous texture, high specific surface area,
and ample surface functional groups and aromatic surfaces make it an
excellent candidate for this application.

At  present,  there  have  been  several  review  papers  that  have
described  the application of biochar as the gas adsorbent. Qian et al.
[18]  and  Cha  et  al.  [12]  have  shortly  introduced  the  CO2  adsorption
performance of biochar and biomass-based activated carbon. Chen et al.
[19]  has  paid  attention  to  the  modification  methods  on  the  structure
evolution of pyrolyzed biochar, and described that the porosity of bio-
char improved the adsorption ability of gas pollutant (mainly CO2, SO2,
NOx) and the special functional groups affected the sorption stability.
Bamdad et al. [20] reviewed the adsorption isotherms, mechanisms, and
reaction systems of dynamic and static tests for removal of CO2 and H2S
by biochar. Dissanayake et al. [21] summarized the potential of biochar
as  CO2  capturing  media,  their  review  work  found  that the  micropore
area showed an apparent positive correlation with adsorption capacity
of CO2  onto biochar. The review work from Xu et al. [22], Yang et al.
[23]  and  Liu  et  al.  [24]  commented  the  research  progress  of  novel
carbon-based solid sorbents including biochar for gaseous Hg removal.
Zhang  et  al.  [10]  discussed  recent  research  developments  for  the
adsorption  of  VOC  onto  engineered  carbon-based  sorbents  including
biochar. Gwenzi et al. [25] shortly reviewed the removal performance of
biochar for application into systems of air pollution control, including

the SO2, NOx, Hg, CO2 and VOC.

These review publications are all highly valuable to understand the
advantages  of  biochar  on  adsorption  of  typical  gaseous  products  that
may  cause  atmospheric  hazard.  However,  they  are  still  not  compre-
hensive  enough  to  find  out  how  the  biochar  works  as  the  effective
adsorbent to gaseous pollutants from combustion flue gas. In compari-
son to previous reviews, this review work concentrates on the adsorption
by  biochar  rather  than  other  carbonaceous  solid  adsorbent  and  con-
centrates  on  the  adsorption  of  only  gaseous  pollutants  rather  than
adsorption from liquid or solution which often happens in other reviews
to result in confusing description (especially for heavy metals and VOCs)
[25].  Subsequently,  both  the  methods  of  biochar  preparation,  activa-
tion,  and  functionalization  and  the  subsequent  adsorption  conditions
and mechanisms need to be elaborately considered in the perspective of
individuality and universality of various gas types, the systematical ef-
forts  for  these  are  undoubtedly  benefit  to  improve  the  theory  and
technology of gaseous adsorption of biochar. Therefore, this study aims
to  achieve  a  comprehensive  understanding  on  the  correlation  among
biochar  characteristics,  adsorption  conditions,  and  adsorption  perfor-
mance for a typical gaseous pollutant or the simultaneous adsorption
performance to multiple types of pollutants. Such an understanding will
guide the design of biochar-based adsorbents for practical application.

2. Knowledges for understanding the gas adsorption of biochar

2.1. Gas adsorption principles

Adsorption presents the process that the adsorbate transfers from the
fluid  including  gas  and  liquid  to  the  adsorbent  surfaces,  it  is  mainly
affected  by  two  types  of  mechanisms  including  physisorption  (i.e.,
physical adsorption) and chemisorption (i.e., chemical adsorption). The
physisorption is characterized by the diffusion of adsorbate into adsor-
bent surfaces, driven by physical forces resulting from concentration or
pressure  gradients.  This  mechanism  is  typically  described  by  a  weak
interaction between adsorbate and adsorbent, which stems from inter-
molecular  forces  (e.g.,  Van  der  Waals  forces).  As  expected  for  any
physisorption  processes  outlined  by  the  Le  Chatelier  principles,  the
adsorption capacity of biochar drops with the rise of adsorption tem-
perature [26]. In contrast, the chemisorption however is governed by
chemical  interactions  between  the  adsorbate  and  adsorbent  surfaces,
and the electron transfer between adsorbate and surface function groups
in  adsorbent  forms  chemical  bonds.  Generally,  physisorption  mainly
occurs  in  either  monolayer  or  multilayer  and  is  a  reversible  process,
while chemisorption indicates that the adsorbate is chemically bonded
with the adsorbent and thus tends to be non-reversible [27,28].

In the gas-solid reaction system occurred in gas adsorption process of
porous biochar, the macropore (>50 μm) in solid sorbent serves as a gate
of  gas  flow,  allowing  the  gas  molecules  transporting  into  the  biochar
interior rapidly for the following diffusion into the narrower pores; the
mesopore (2–50 μm) serves as a molecule transmission channel from the
surface  to  adsorption  sites;  and  the  micropore  (<2  μm)  serves  as  the
main  physisorption  sites  for  gas  molecule.  The  micropore  adsorption
generally  follows  the  mechanism  of  volume  filling  of  the  adsorption
space rather than layer-by-layer surface coverage [29]. According to the
adsorption potential of theory of micropores volume filling, the internal
adsorption potential of micropores would be apparently promoted and
the  vacant  pores  are  gradually  filled  with  adsorbate  [30].  The  high
adsorption  potential  of  biochar  is  thus  mainly  related  with  its  highly
developed  micro-porosity  and  large  surface  area  [31],  and  the  rich
porous structure and the formed abundant active sites would be bene-
ficial to the diffusion and adsorption of gas molecules [32]. Pore diffu-
sion  can  be  further  classified  into  ordinary  diffusion  and  Knudsen
diffusion. Ordinary diffusion presents when the pore size of the adsor-
bent is larger than the mean molecule free path of the adsorbate, while
molecular transport through the finer pores than the mean free path of
the adsorbate is defined as Knudsen diffusion. For gas-phase adsorption

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1010982

C. Wen et al.

onto biochar which is dominantly microporous, gas molecular transfer
via Knudsen diffusion primarily, and the Knudsen diffusion coefficient
can  be  predicted  from  kinetic  theory  by  correlating  the  pore  size  of
biochar with the mean free path of the adsorbate. Gas molecular diffu-
sion in biochar includes two types, namely surface diffusion and pore
diffusion [33].

There are multiple common steps in the typical adsorption processes
of biochar. (1). The gaseous adsorbate diffuses from flue gas streams to
external  surface  of  biochar,  which  is  bulk  diffusion  and  known  as
external mass transfer; (2). It further diffuses via macropores and mes-
opores, which is known as surface diffusion; (3). It is adsorbed into the
micropores, which is called intra-particle diffusion to form the adsorbed
species; (4). If the biochar is functionalized to improve the chemisorp-
tion, the adsorbed species would chemically react with the active sites
and functional groups onto the functionalized biochar. The slowest step
determines the rate of the whole adsorption process.

2.2. Biochar preparation, activation and modification

Biomass  is  the  fourth  important  energy  resource  in  the  world,
providing  approximately  14%  of  the  global  energy  requirements.  In
developing  countries,  it  is  even  more  important,  providing  23.5%  of
their energy. Biomass broadly include five different groups depending
upon  the  source  obtained  naturally  or  anthropogenically  [34],  i.e.,
herbaceous  species,  wood  wastes,  industrial  residues,  aquatic  plants
such as algae, and human and animal wastes including the municipal
solid waste. As mentioned above, the thermal pretreatment processes on
biomass such as torrefaction, pyrolysis, gasification, HTC, are available
to form the biochar as gas adsorbent. The International Biochar Initia-
tive (IBI) guidelines defines that “the biochar is a solid material obtained
from the thermochemical conversion of biomass in an oxygen-limited
environment”.  Note  that  the  hydrochar  is  produced  by  the  HTC  pro-
cess  separated  from  a  two-phase  mixture  of  solid  and  liquid,  it  is  a
somewhat similar product to biochar and can be classified into biochar
generally.  The  yield  and  properties  of  biochar  from  biomass  depend
upon  both  the  employed  technique  and  the  process  parameters  like
biomass  properties  (feedstock  type,  particle  size),  reaction  conditions
(reactor  type,  reaction  temperature,  heating  rate,  reaction  time,  type
and flow rate of carrier gas). Generally, biomass feedstock with higher
lignin content is preferred for the production of biochar, due to it forms
biochar with high porosity and surface area [35]. The potential feed-
stocks for biochar production such as wood and agricultural wastes, food
waste, and sludge, have attracted much attention recently due to their
inexpensive, eco-friendly, and carbon-rich advantages.

The thermal carbonization in the inert atmosphere works to release
non-carbon  elements  of  biomass,  mainly  oxygen  and  hydrogen  [28],
generating a char structure of rudimentary pore with the tar blocking
the incipient porosity, the formed biochar with limited surface area and
sparse  surface  functional  groups  inhibits  its  sorbent  application  seri-
ously.  Fortunately,  if  the  carbonization  process  is  advanced  by  the
physical or chemical activation, the tar can be removed and the porosity
is developed to upgrade the physical and chemical structure of biochar
[19]. The activating agents of physical activation include CO2, steam,
H2O2, O2, air or their mixture. As a relative green way, physical acti-
vation could both increase the porosity of biochar and introduce some
surface  functional  groups  onto  biochar,  such  as  oxygenic  functional
groups
from  activation  of  O2,  H2O,  H2O2,  and  CO2  and
nitrogen-containing functional groups from NH3 activation, accordingly
may favoring the polarity and hydrophobicity of biochar. Therein, the
CO2 can be recycled as an activation agent to reduce GHG emission after
CCUS  technology  was  widely  implemented  in  the  field  of  industrial
combustion. Activation with CO2  is an oxidative treatment that elimi-
nates  carbon  atoms  and  release  volatiles  with  low  molecular  weight
from the biochar via a heterogeneous reaction (Equation (1)). The high
treatment  temperature  would  increase  the  reaction  rate  between  the
carbon  structure  in  biochar  and  CO2  gas  and  therefore  develop  the

porous  properties.  The  steam  plays  as  oxidant  agent  to  improve  the
porosity  of  biochar,  as  the  efficient  diffusion  of  steam  could  enhance
devolatilization and further promote gasification reactions if the tem-
perature  is  high  enough  (Equation  (2))  [36].  Similarly,  the  oxidizing
properties  of  H2O2  is  able  to  cleanse  the  inner-pores  of  biochar  and
expand the micropores, and increase the number of oxygenic functional
groups (mainly C––O, –OH), leading to a higher Hg adsorption perfor-
mance of biochar activated with H2O2 (biocharH2O2) than that of biochar
activated with H2O (biocharH2O) [37]. It is noteworthy that the activa-
tion  or  modification  methods,  such  as  H2O,  H2O2,  and  CO2,  are
expressed as subscript of biochar in this paper for simplicity.

In  comparison  to  the  physical  activation,  the  chemical  activation
shows some advantages such as lower thermal-treatment temperature,
higher  micro-porosity  and  surface  area,  which  mainly  includes  the
activation  of  acids  (H3PO4,  H2SO4,  HNO3),  alkalis  (NaOH,  KOH)  and
salts (K2CO3, MgCl2, ZnCl2). KOH activation is widely used to prepare
activated biochar with very high porosity and large BET specific surface
area up to 2000 m2/g (Equation (3)), but the preparation process trig-
gers higher chemical consumption, increased cost, and raised environ-
mental issues. K2CO3 is chosen to replace the KOH sometimes as it can
avoid the high temperature corrosion and environmental hazard of KOH
effectively  and  shows  comparable  activating  behavior  in  preparing
porous  biochar  (Equation  (4)),  although to  a  lesser  degree  leading  to
surface area of about 1000–1300 m2/g [38,39]. The activated biochar
modified by H3PO4 had microporous characteristics [40] and presented
the  main  typical  acidic  functional  groups  including  phenols  and  car-
boxylic acids [41]. HNO3 activation can enhance the C and O containing
surface groups via oxidation, it activates the biochar without damage to
its  physical  morphology  [42].  ZnCl2  acts  as  a  dehydrating  agent  of
biochar at low temperatures and promotes carbon fixation and aroma-
tization  at  high  temperatures,  producing  a  high  carbon  yield  and
well-developed porosity [19].

Some other novel modification methods have been tried to benefi-
ciate the pore texture of biochar adsorbents and/or enhance the surface
active sites onto the biochar. During microwave radiation treatment, the
microwave energy, as a type of electromagnetic energy, is transferred
into thermal energy through molecular interaction of materials, it can
overcome  the  drawbacks  of  temperature  gradient  from  the  exterior
surface  to  interior  found  in  conventional  heating  treatment  methods,
achieving uniform and rapid heating of biochar [43]. It is advantageous
to  the  development  of  porous  properties  and  add  new  active  sites  of
adsorbents [22], however, part of chemisorption sites may be consumed
by the microwave modification after an enough activation, causing the
Hg0  removal  of  biocharH2O2  decreased  from  90.86%  to  65.39%  [44].
The suitable ultrasonic treatment can prevent the blocking of pores and
aid in enhancing the BET surface area, and then promotes the active sites
capable of further functionalization optimizing the dispersion of active
components  such  as  amine  groups  and  active  metal  ingredients.  The
plasma  modification  is  able  to  produce  energetic  electrons,  ions  and
active  radicals  that  can  improve  the  porous  texture  and  promote  the
active  surface  functional  groups  on  the  biochar  [23,45].  The  plasma
treatment  on  the  biochar  can  purposively  generate  various  surface
functional  groups  by  reductive,  oxidative,  or  inactive  reactions  using
different gas environments [22]. For example, the adsorbed oxygen and
water onto biochar can provide the oxygen source for plasma modifi-
cation  to  generate  oxygenic  functional  groups.  Furthermore,  the
ball-milling  method  has  also  been  introduced  to  produce  biochar
eco-friendly.  The  kinetic  energy  formed  by  the  moving  balls  helps  to
break down chemical bonds of the referred molecules and produce new
surfaces by fracturing biochar particles [46,47].

These  activation  and  modification  methods  work  to  significantly
improve the porosity and affect the specific organic structures in bio-
char.  When  the  biochar  has  a  higher  micro-porosity,  the  adsorption
capacities of various gas pollutants generally become higher via phys-
isorption [48], and would be intensified when the pore distribution of
biochar  matches  the  molecular  dynamic  size  of  gas  adsorbates  [19].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1010983

C. Wen et al.

Generally,  the  atomic  ratio  of  biochar  indicates  the  hydrophilicity
(O/C), aromaticity (H/C) and polarity ((O + N)/C) that can affect the
adsorption capacity of polar and non-polar gas pollutants [25,49], note
that the polarity of biochar is usually expressed by O/C ratios roughly
[35,50]. For example, a hydrophobic biochar surface was generated as
the decrease of hydrogen and oxygen by raising the pyrolysis tempera-
ture, leading to an effective adsorption of nonpolar gas molecules, e.g.,
CO2 [20]. Zhang et al. [40] reported that the H3PO4 activation produced
much oxygenic functional groups and improved the adsorption capac-
ities of polar acetone onto hydrochar. The surface oxygenic functional
groups,  e.g.,  carboxyl,  lactone,  and  phenolic  hydroxyl,  are  closely
related  to  the  acidic  character  of  biochar,  which  can  be  effectively
created  when  the  carbon  surface  of  biochar  is  oxidized  by  gases  and
aqueous oxidants. They are reported to be benefit to the sorption of Hg
to form Hg-OM and polar organic  pollutants to facilitate electrostatic
interactions  [25].  However,  the  majority  of oxygen  functionalities on
the biochar surface was reported to decompose at pyrolysis temperature
of 800
C [51]. It should be noted that certain surface oxygenic func-
tionalities  such  as  ketone,  chromene,  and  pyrone,  and  nitrogen  con-
taining groups can contribute to the basicity of biochar [51]. The higher
proportion  of  alkaline  C–O  groups  in  biochar  could  lead  to  stronger
electrostatic or hydrogen bonding interaction with acidic CO2 and SO2
[52].

◦

As a brief result, the gas adsorption onto porous biochar is initially
driven by physisorption via mass transfer of target gas molecules from
the  bulk combustion flue gas to the biochar pores, then the modified
biochar drives chemisorption with the chemical reaction between gases
adsorbed and surface functional groups [53].

C + CO2⟶2CO

C + H2O⟶CO + H2

6KOH + 2C⟶2K + 3H2 + 2K2CO3

K2CO3 + 2C⟶2K + 3CO

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

2.3. Functionalization for engineering biochar

Some functionalized treatments are considered to further promote
the performance of activated biochar for possible engineering applica-
tion. Doping the oxides of transition metals and noble metals (Fe, Mn, V,
Ti,  Ce,  Cu,  Co,  Ni  et  al.)  onto  biochar  could  promote  the  activity  of
biochar materials for effectively capturing NOx and Hg through catalytic
reactions [19], the biochar works mainly as a supporter or carrier that
not only increases the dispersion of fine metal oxides but also partic-
ipatse  in  the  removal  process  in  some  cases  [23].  The  amorphous  or
ultrafine  structure  of  metal  oxides  from  elaborative  preparation
methods generally provides more active sites for catalytic reactions in
comparison to the corresponding raw crystalline states [32,54,55]. For
example,  the  ultrasound  treatment  was  reported  to  optimize  the
dispersion of active ingredients such as Mn and Fe [22]. Generally, the
biochar  adsorbents  functionalized  by  metal  oxides  are  capable  of
achieving good removal performance in a higher temperature range and
longer  operation  time,  as  redox  reactions  are  found  among  doped
metals, carbon structure of biochar, and gas pollutants. Noteworthy, the
development of magnetic biochar adsorbent is beneficial to the better
utilization efficiency of biochar due to it can feasible be recovered from
engineering fly ash.

The  surface  basic  properties  of  biochar  are  generally  suitable  to
adsorption of acidic gas such as SO2, NOx, CO2, while the biochar pre-
senting surface acidity is beneficial to the adsorption of alkaline gas. The
functionalized  modifications  by  incorporating  basic  sites  capable  of
interacting strongly with acidic gas are benefit to promote the adsorp-
tion capacities of CO2 and SO2 [1], therefore the ammonia modification
of  biochar  to  introduce  basic  nitrogen  functionalities  is  a  promising

method [51], the amines are nucleophilic owing to the occurrence of a
lone pair of electrons and can thus interact with CO2 [56], it is generally
attached with biochar either through impregnation or through grafting
[57]. Samanta et al. [1] summarized the name and structure of widely
used amine groups for sorbent functionalization. The suitable time of
ultrasonic irradiation can aid in enhancing the active sites capable of
chemical functionalization by amines. Meanwhile, although the occur-
rence  of  acidic  oxygenic  functional  groups  is  generally  invalid  to  the
adsorption of acid gas, the oxygenated anchoring sites play as the good
intermediate to develop nitrogen functionalities to the surface of biochar
[58,59]. The pre-oxidation of biochar can be thus considered to enhance
the nitrogen incorporation during the ammonia treatment [58].

In addition, the halogens (Cl, Br, I) have been demonstrated as the
effective modification reagents to promote the Hg0 removal capacity of
biochar  from  combustion  flue  gas.  The  C–Cl  groups,  as  the  example,
were acted as activated sites and could be effectively generated during
HCl impregnation and NH4Cl impregnation (Equation (5)), which may
convert  Hg0  into  HgCl2  and/or  other  Hg–Cl  complexes  in  the  Hg0-
chemisorption  process  (Equation  (6))  [60,61].  However,  if  the  Cl  in
biochar is in form of chloride or chlorate and fails to generate the C–Cl
group, it will not be benefit to the Hg0 removal capacity [62]. When the
plasma treatment in Cl2 atmosphere is introduced, the active electrons
collide with Cl molecules to form Cl active radicals, and then attach onto
the biochar to generate more C–Cl groups. The HCl plasma modification
was reported to perform four times higher Hg removal capacity than HCl
impregnation  modification  [63].  Further,  the  presence  of  polyvinyl
chloride  (PVC)  also  acted  a  beneficial  role  in  Hg0  adsorption  as  the
successful formation of C–Cl groups during its co-pyrolysis with biomass
[64,65]. The typical functionalized methods will also be expressed as
subscript of biochar for simplicity in this paper, such as biocharMn/Ce,
biocharamine and biocharHCl.
C + X(cid:0) → C (cid:0) X (X = Cl, Br, I)

(5)

Hg0

(ad) + 2C (cid:0) X → 2C + HgX2 (ad)

(6)

2.4. Research frame

This review paper summarizes the research on adsorption of various
gaseous  pollutants  including  SO2,  NOx,  Hg,  CO2  and  VOC  from  com-
bustion  flue  gas  using  biochar-based  adsorbents,  with  the  research
framework presented in Fig. 1. Both the physical and chemical proper-
ties  of biochar and  the adsorption  conditions affect  the final  removal
capacities of various gaseous pollutants. Accordingly, the preparation,
activation  and  functionalization  conditions  of  biochar  would  be  paid
attention, that is, the physical activation including CO2, steam, H2O2, air
and O2, the chemical activation including KOH, H3PO4, H2SO4, HNO3,
ZnCl2  and  K2CO3,  the  modification  achieved  through  microwave,  ul-
trasonic,  plasma,  ball-milling,  and  molten  salts  techniques,  and  the
functionalization for engineering biochar including addition of the ox-
ides of transition metals, the basic sites capable of interacting with acidic
gas,  and  the  halogens  or  sulfur  species  improving  Hg  removal.  The
relevant treating conditions, such as pyrolysis and activation tempera-
ture, flow rate of activated gas, concentrations of chemical activation
agents, ratios of biochar to activating agent, and processing time, should
also  be  attended  as  their  influence  on  biochar  characteristics.  It  is
noteworthy  that  the  systematic  introduction  about  the  thermal  pre-
treatment of biomass, the physical and chemical properties of biochar,
and the relevant analytical methods such as XPS, FTIR, TPD, and XRD,
have been given in other relevant reviews [21,51,53], this review work
will  thus  focus  on  their  influence  on  the  adsorption  performance  of
gaseous pollutants.

The typical layout of power plant and waste incineration plant with
the possible injection positions of biochar are presented in Fig. 2. There
are always multiple gas compositions existing in the industrial fuel gas.
The adsorption conditions, mainly include the adsorption temperature,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1010984

C. Wen et al.

Fig. 1. The research framework on biochar adsorbent to combustion gaseous pollutants.

the humidity and impurities concentrations in simulated flue gas, the
selectivity and synergistic adsorption of typical gases, would be related
to affect the final removal performance of various gaseous pollutants.
The  cycle  and  regeneration  capacity  of  biochar  is  also  important  to
guarantee a satisfactory practical removal performance. The adsorption
isotherm models and the adsorption kinetic models provide the valuable
insight  into  the  predicted  adsorption  amount  and  controlling  mecha-
nism and therefore are vital in optimization the design and performance
of biochar, from them the adsorption energy can be calculated to indi-
cate  the  strength  and  potential  of  adsorption  and  desorption.  Subse-
quently, the research gap on improving the adsorption performance of
biochar, on synergistic adsorption in industrial application and on the
evaluation of economy and energy saving analysis are presented.

3. Adsorption of various combustion gas pollutants by biochar

3.1. Adsorption performance of SO2

SO2  is harmful to skin and respiratory system. In order to combat
these  threats,  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)  of  United
States has revised their National Ambient Quality Standard (NAAQS) for
hourly primary standard of SO2 emissions, reducing from 140 ppb down
to 75 ppb in 2012. The European Union demanded 70% lowered SO2
emission by 2029 through the establishment of 2016/2284/EU Regu-
lation [66]. The ultra-low emission retrofitting of China released in 2015
requires  coal-fired  power  plants  to  limit  SO2  emissions  to  35  mg/m3
[67]. The adsorption method for the reduction emission of SO2 has the
potential to compete with the widespread FGD technology, because of
its  fast  process,  simple  equipment,  and  effectiveness.  Table  S1  of  the
Supplementary  Materials  summarizes  the  biomass  precursors,  the
preparation conditions of biochar, the typical adsorption conditions and
the optimum adsorption performance of SOx by biochars.

3.1.1.

Influence of biochar preparation conditions

As shown in Table S1, only the pretreatment methods of pyrolysis up

◦

◦

C), heating rate (5–20

◦
C [28] and gasification up to 950–1100

◦
C [68,69] were tried to
to 750
produce the biochars using for adsorption of SO2. The adsorption uptake
of SO2 by unmodified biochar is generally at a low amount of less than
20 mg_SO2/g_biochar [70]. Iberahim et al. [71] carried out the response
surface method (RSM) using central composite design (CCD) to optimize
the  production  of  biochar  from  sludge.  The  heating  temperature
◦
(200–600
C/min), and holding time (60–120
min) during pyrolysis in N2  condition were investigated, with the SO2
adsorption  capacity  as  the  responses.  They  found  that  the  pyrolysis
temperature had the most obvious effect on adsorption capacity of SO2,
which increased to reach optimum and then showed falling trend after
◦
C with the increment of pyrolysis heating temperature [71]. Yavuz
450
◦
et al. [72] prepared the biocharH3PO4 from olive stone at 200–700
C, the
pore volume enhanced up to 400
C and then a shrinking of the pores
mainly affecting the mesoporosity was found due to a further increase of
temperature. The high pyrolysis temperature is benefit to increase the
porosity  of  biochar  and  enhance  the  adsorption  ability,  but  at  higher
temperature,  the high  ash volumes in  biochar from high  temperature
pyrolysis blocked the pores of biochar and destructed the surface func-
tional group, both of which ultimately hindered the adsorption process
[73]. Bashkova et al. [68] reported the sewage sludge biochars prepared
◦
at 600–950
C
(Table S1), it is likely that the presence of high dispersion of catalytic
metals  and  chemically  active  calcium  oxides  during  carbonization  at
high temperatures may react with SO2 to form sulfites, which offset the
unfavorable effect of high temperature on pore and functional groups.
The  higher  pyrolysis  heating  rate  is  expected  to  promote  the  mass
transfer of volatiles and improve the development of the porous texture
and surface area of biochar, however, the heating rate higher than 12
◦
C/min presented lower BET surface area and reduced SO2  adsorption
capacity. This can be caused by the high internal temperature resulting
in partial graphitization in the interior of biochar [73]. After carrying
out the experiments of different holding time between 60 min and 120
min, the SO2 adsorption uptake was found to reduce after 98 min owing
to pore destruction caused by the extended heating time [73].

◦
C had similar removal capacities of ~12–14 mg/g at 25

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1010985

C. Wen et al.

Fig. 2. The typical layout of power plant (a) and waste incineration plant (b) with the possible injection positions of biochar.

Sumathi  et  al.  [69]  and  Iberahim  et  al.  [6,73]  also  presented  the
optimization analysis with the RSM/CCD design, in which the activation
temperature, retention time and flow rate of CO2  were the main vari-
ables  considered  for  generating  porous  biochars,  and  the  activation
temperature was found to play the major role. CO2  activation at high
temperature promotes the reaction intensity between the carbon struc-
ture of biochar and CO2 gas (Equation (1)) and leads to the development
of micropore structure. As shown in Table S1, the biochar prepared at
◦
1100
C reported the highest surface area and highest removal capacity
of  SO2  (~37 mg/g),  implying the contribution  of physical adsorption
[69].  However,  other  work  found  the  obviously  lower  optimum  acti-
◦
◦
vation temperature of 442
C [6], respectively. The too
C [73] and 753
extended activation temperature accelerates the reaction between car-
bon and CO2, it may encourage more pore widening and collapse rather
than  pore  development  and  meanwhile  destroy  the  basic  functional
groups  which  acted  an  active  role  in  the  SO2  adsorption.  A  suitable
activation time extended from 1 h to 2 h can increase the pore volume,
surface  area,  and  acidity  of  the  biocharH2O  [74],  but  the  prolonged
activation  time  can  also  damage  the  pore  structure,  indicating  a
decreasing trend in SO2 adsorption capacity [6,72]. Guo et al. [75] re-
ported that the adsorptive capacities of SO2 were linearly proportional
related with the micropore volumes of biochars. Yavuz et al. [72] also
observed an almost linear relationships between the SO2 adsorption and
the textural properties. SO2 adsorbs on smaller pores preferentially due
to its kinetic diameter of 0.364 nm, and the dipole-oriented single layer
structure favors the interaction between micropores and SO2  molecule
[72].

Atanes et al. [28] compared the performance of three types of bio-
chars from waste cork powder prepared by thermal with N2 (biocharN2),

physical activation with CO2 (biocharCO2) and chemical activation with
KOH (biocharKOH), respectively. The biocharKOH  presented the largest
surface area and the narrowest pores, and an acidity behavior after an
acid-base  titrations  exhibited  the  lowest  affinity  for  the  acidic  SO2
indicated by the Freundlich model, meanwhile the biocharN2 presented
the more basic surfaces capable of enhancing the affinity of SO2. Despite
its weak interaction with SO2, the biocharKOH still exhibited the highest
SO2  uptake which should be controlled by its best porosity character-
istic. Besides, the similar SO2  adsorption of biocharN2  and biocharCO2
was  caused  by  the  balance  of  the  lower  micro-pore  volume  and  the
higher  surface basicity of biocharN2  than biocharCO2. Braghiroli  et al.
[76] also compared three types of activation treatments, i.e., CO2, steam
and KOH. The biocharH2O  had the highest adsorbed proportion of SO2
(Table  S1),  owing  to  its  lowest  acid  oxygenated  groups  as  it  had  a
moderate surface area compared with the other two biochars. Guo et al.
[41] compared the biochar treated by KOH and H3PO4, the biocharH3PO4
presented the main typical acidic functional groups (phenols, carboxy),
as expected, had lower adsorption capacity per BET surface area than
the biocharKOH which contained much basic functional groups (pyrone).
As a result, the adsorption performance of SO2 is affected by both porous
and chemical properties of biochar, i.e., pore volume, surface area and
acid-base properties.

3.1.2.

Impacts of functionalization

As a Lewis acid, SO2 tends to interact with basic surfaces, that is, the
sulfur atom in SO2  as the electron acceptor can effectively form stable
complexes with the bases as the electron donor [77]. The linear rela-
tionship between the SO2 adsorption and the content of basic groups was
found by Yavuz et al. [72]. The NH3 modification was reported to have a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1010986

C. Wen et al.

◦

lower temperature (~700
C) to improve the micropore texture of bio-
char than the CO2  activation [78]. It is noted that the high activation
temperature in NH3 improved the porous texture and then enhance the
impregnation effectiveness of nitrogen [79], however, if the treatment
◦
temperature is too high (≥900
C), the NH3 modification resulted in the
decomposition  of  nitrogen-containing  groups  [78].  Shao  et  al.  [70]
performed an effective work to identify the joint effects of physisorption
and  chemisorption  on  the  adsorption  of  SO2,  the  CO2  activation  and
tertiary  amine  (MEDA)  impregnation  were  employed  to  prepare  the
biochar from corncobs. CO2 activation can aid in improving BET surface
area  and  enhancing  the  amount  of  activated  sites,  leading  to  an
adsorption  amount  of  57.78  mg/g  of  SO2  at  100
C  (Table  S1).  The
impregnated  nitrogen  sites  from  MEDA  were  mainly  observed  on  the
micropores of biocharCO2 [79], the nitrogen content thus showed a good
linear relationship with the BET surface area and the total pore volume
of the biochars prepared from different biomasses [79]. When the MDEA
mass  concentration  was  added  to  1%  and  4%,  the  deteriorated  pore
structure significantly destroyed the adsorption of SO2  compared with
biocharCO2. However, as the MDEA concentration was higher than 8%,
the micropore structure nearly collapsed completely meanwhile much of
nitrogen-containing functional groups (mainly C–N) were generated, the
chemical  adsorption  was  dominant  to  receive  a  very  high  adsorption
◦
capacity of SO2, i.e., 156.22 mg/g at 100
C (Table S1) [70], indicating
the nitrogen functionalities onto the biochar are more influential than
the pore texture for the adsorption of SO2, with the conversion to N–H
groups  (Equation  (7)).  The  ammonia  and  amine  functionalization  on
biochar for adsorption and reaction of SO2 is manifested in Fig. 3.

◦

The pyrolyzed biochar from sewage sludge was impregnated with Ni
(NO3)2 [80], the Ni and NiO phases were found to coexist in biochar and
the oxygenic functional groups increased. SO2 could be absorbed on the
surface of biochar to react with oxygen species to generate NiSO3, fol-
lowed by the reaction with H2O to generate Ni–H2SO4  (Equation (8)),
furthermore,  SO2  was  adsorbed  on  the  NiO  surface  to  form  sulfate,
possibly as C–NiSO4  (Equation (9)). However, Sumathi et al. [81] re-
ported  that  if  the  biochar  impregnated  with  Ni  and  Ce  catalyst,  the
adsorbed amount of SO2 decreased regularly, due to the pore blockage
by the Ni and Ce metals. When the SO2  was dissolved in the alkaline
water membrane formed on the biochar surface, the minerals in biochar
could  react  with  them  to  form  stable  sulfates  via  catalysis  oxidation
(Equation (10)), the contribution to SO2 sorption from minerals in bio-
char was reported to be 44.6%–85.5% [82].

R2CH3N + SO2 +

1
O2 + H2O→(R2CH3NH)2⋅SO4
2

(7)

NiSO3 + H2O → Ni (cid:0) H2SO4

NiSO3 + C (cid:0) O → C (cid:0) NiSO4

SO2(cid:0)

4 + M2+ + 2H2O → MSO4⋅2H2O (M = Ca, Ce...)

3.1.3. Adsorption conditions

(8)

(9)

(10)

◦

◦

C  to  ~100

◦
C and 200

Some studies reported that as increasing the adsorption temperature
from  ~25
C,  the  amounts  of  SO2  adsorbed  by  biochar
decreased continuously [72,75,83]. They described that the high tem-
peratures resulted in SO2 molecules losing their kinetic energies and no
adsorption due to Brownian movement of the SO2 molecules, so that the
adsorption  became  an  exothermic  process  [83].  The  overheating  at
◦
C may cause higher adsorption
higher temperatures of 150
potential energy and then suppress the adsorption capacity of SO2 [33,
78,84].  Furthermore,  the  adsorption  temperature  can  also  affect  the
chemisorption behavior of SO2. Iberahim et al. [73] reported that as the
adsorption  reaction  temperature  increased  from  room  temperature  to
50–100
C, an increasing tendency of SO2 adsorption amount could be
observed because of the enhanced chemical reaction rate between SO2
and  active  surface  sites.  Zhang  et  al.  [78]  reported  that  the  SO2
adsorption  capacity  of  175.9  mg/g  fairly  depended  upon  the  porous
texture  of  biocharNH3  especially  micropores  at  a  low  adsorption  tem-
perature of 30
C (Table S1), the physisorption is the major adsorption
C,  the  SO2
power.  At  the  higher  adsorption  temperature  of  120
adsorption  capacity  of  biochar  presented  a  strong  linear  relationship
with  its  N/C  mass  ratio,  indicating  the  chemisorption  come  from
nitrogen-containing functional groups were primary factor leading to a
higher  sorption  capacity  of  115.4  mg/g  at  120
C  than  biocharCO2
(Table S1).

◦

◦

◦

◦

The adsorption capacity increased from 16.65 mg/g in dry adsorp-
tion atmosphere to 37.72 mg/g in atmosphere with 15% moisture [73],
the nearly half SO2 removal capacity at dry atmosphere compared with
that at wet atmosphere was also indicated by Bashkova et al. [68] and
Iberahim et al. [6]. As the humidity increased from 0 to 50–60%, the
sorption capacity of SO2  increased continually [6,79,81,82]. The H2O
accumulated  on  the  surface  and  interior  pores  of  biochar  favors  the
formation of a liquid membrane which would lead to the SO2 adsorbed
by biochar easier than the adsorption in gas-solid reaction. If the SO2,
O2, and H2O were all adsorbed on the surface of biochar, the SO2  was
first  physically  adsorbed  onto  the  biochar,  then  oxidized  to  SO3  and
transformed to H2SO4  (Equations (11) and (12)) [81]. Three forms of
adsorbed sulfur-containing substances could exist, i.e., weakly adsorbed
SO2,  physically  adsorbed  SO3,  and  strongly  adsorbed  H2SO4  [68].

Fig. 3. The ammonia and amine functionalization on
biochar for adsorption and reaction of SO2  and CO2.
Route  1:  The  nitrogen-containing  functional  groups
(C–N,  –NH2,  etc.)  onto  biochar  are  generated  from
ammonia and amine modification, they interact with
SO2 to form N–H groups (Equation (7)). Route 2: The
similar nitrogenous functionalities react with CO2  to
form  N–COO  groups  (Equation  (64)).  Therein,  the
pre-oxidation  and  ball-milling  treatment  of  biochar
help to form acidic oxygenic functional groups, which
can act as an effective intermediate stage to introduce
nitrogen functionalities onto the biochar.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1010987

C. Wen et al.

Nevertheless, the adsorption capacity was also reported to be decreased
at the high humidity of 30% and 60% [73], this could be attributed to
the  decrease  in  SO2  partial  pressure  leading  to  SO2  molecules  more
difficult  to  compete  with  water  vapor  to  occupy  the  biochar  surface.
Besides, Xu et al. [82] found that the SO2  adsorption by biochar from
sewage sludge increased with the humidity raising from 0% to 20% and
then decreased until 50%, too much H2O tended to induce aggregation
of the clay minerals rich in sludge biochar, which blocked or occupied
the active sites for the adsorption of SO2. Bashkova et al. [68] described
that  at  wet  air  adsorption  conditions,  the  SO2  adsorption  capacity  of
biochar from sludge increased with increasing temperature of carbon-
ization, as the chemically active calcium oxides and high dispersion of
catalytic  metals  was  formed  during  high  temperatures  carbonization.
The sulfuric acid derived from SO2 reacted with inorganic oxides and/or
salts in biochar to form more soluble sulfates in biochar, improving the
chemisorption of SO2.

Zhang et al. [79] paid attention to the influence of flue gas compo-
nents in the SO2 adsorption of biochar. With the raise of O2 concentra-
tion from 0 to 14%, the nitrogen-containing groups in biochar might be
oxidized, leading to the SO2 adsorption capacity reduced generally. The
presence  of  O2  may  promote  the  adsorption  process  although  the  su-
periority was not as good as the humidity [82]. The strong adsorption
was  related  to  the  oxygenated  groups  onto  the  biochar,  which  were
believed  to be catalytic  centers  for  SO2  oxidation  to SO3  [68].  In the
presence  of  NO,  the  SO2  adsorption  capacity  of  biochar  was  clearly
better  than  that  without  NO,  and  the  SO2  adsorption  uptake  first
enhanced and then dropped as the increase of NO concentration, with
the maximum adsorption uptake of 216.19 mg/g at 500 ppm NO [79].
The  synergistic  adsorption  effect  of  NO  and  SO2  may  be  helpful  to
generate the (NO2)(SO3) intermediates, which was reported to adsorb
effectively at the nitrogen-containing adsorption sites (Equation (13)).

SO2 (ad) + O(ad)→SO3 (ad)

SO3 (ad) + H2O(ad)→H2SO4 (ad)

R2N (cid:0) CH3 + NO + SO2 + O2→R2CH3N⋅(NO2)(SO3)

3.2. Adsorption performance of NOX

(11)

(12)

(13)

◦

The concentration of NO in combustion flue gas mainly depends on
the nitrogen content in fuel and typically ranges from 100 to 1000 ppm
[85].  It  causes  environmental  problems  such  as  photochemical  smog,
acid rain, ozone layer depletion, and global warming. SCR is the most
widely used technology worldwide to reduce NOx emissions among the
various measures. NH3, as the reducing agent in SCR processes, is used to
convert NOx  into harmless N2  and H2O (Equation (14)). The catalysts
most frequently used are V2O5/TiO2 catalysts mixed with WO3 or MoO3.
Recently, the low-temperature SCR catalysts capable of working under
300
C have attracted more attention, resulting in
the removal  systems with low energy consumption and ease of retro-
fitting [86]. Biochar based catalysts were reported to present a high NOx
◦
removal capacity at relatively low temperatures of 100–250
C through
suitable treatments, such as impregnation with metals such as Fe, Mn, V,
Cu, and Ni, that create ample oxygenic functional groups onto the bio-
char, assisting the adsorption and chemical reaction of NOx. Table S2 of
the Supplementary Materials summarizes the preparation conditions of
biochar, and the typical adsorption conditions and optimum adsorption
performance of NOx by biochars.

C or even 100–200

◦

4NH3 + 4NO + O2 → 4 N2 + 6H2O [SCR reaction]

(14)

3.2.1.

Influence of biochar preparation conditions

Qin  et  al.  [87]  reported  that  with  the  carbonization  temperature
◦
increased from 500
C, the specific surface area of biochar and
the NOx  removal first increased until 700
C and then decreased. It is
noteworthy that the NOx  adsorption capacity on biochar without any

◦
C to 900

◦

◦
functionalization at temperature range of 100–300
C is very poor [81,
88]. Al-Rahbi et al. [88] reported that the KOH activation provided the
best NO removal efficiency of ~75% after 120 min which was related to
the  increase  in  micropore  volume  and  BET  surface  area  (Table  S2),
followed by K2CO3, NaOH and Na2CO3  activation with 37%, 30% and
19% removal respectively. Ko et al. [89] observed that the pore volume
and specific surface area of biochar from municipal waste only increased
slightly after the HCl treatment, thus without the improved effect on the
NOx removal. The kinetic diameter of NO is 0.3 nm, biochar with similar
pore  diameter  should  have  an  observable  adsorption  efficiency  [88],
both  increasing  micro-porosity  and  surface  area  of  the  biochars  were
observed to correlate directly with the increased NO removal efficiency
[88].

◦

Cha et al. [86] presented that the biochars prepared from rice straw
and sewage sludge served as SCR catalysts between 50 and 250
C. In
comparison with the biocharH2O, the biocharKOH  created more micro-
pores and mesopores, specific surface areas, active nitrites, and oxygen
functional group amounts (mainly C––O and C–O), which increased the
amount of active sites onto which NH3 can be adsorbed, the higher NO
removal efficiency was thus observed due to reaction between adsorbed
NH3  and NO (Equation (14)). Yang et al. [90,91] attempted the HNO3
modification and found an apparent porous structure and the increased
surface  acidic  functional  groups  of  biochar,  showing  an  impressive
de-NOx  efficiency. When the activation temperature increased for acti-
vation process at steam and KOH, more micropores and mesopores were
generated, resulting in the generally increased total pore volume and
specific surface area for both biocharH2O  [74,92] and biocharKOH  [88,
92], while the oxygen functional groups increased for biocharH2O  but
decreased for biocharKOH with increasing temperature [92]. The former
is because the aromatization reaction that takes place at high tempera-
tures, indicating the transformation of aliphatic or alicyclic compounds
into aromatics, while the latter attributes to breakage of chemical bonds
◦
such as carboxylic group bonds since 700
C. As a result, the functional
◦
groups that developed onto the biocharH2O prepared at 700 and 800
C
acted as active sites on which NH3 can be adsorbed, resulting in a higher
◦
NOx removal compared with that prepared at 600
C, even if the biochar
prepared at 600
C had the best specific surface area. By contrast, the
◦
NOx removal efficiencies of biocharKOH prepared at 700 and 800
C were
lower than that prepared at 600
C owing to the damage of oxygenic
functional groups.

◦

◦

During steam activation, the specific surface area increased firstly as
the water content raised from 10 to 60% and then decreased when it
raised further to 80% [92]. Under the high water vaper concentration
from 40 to 80%, the oxygenic functional groups developed more easily
onto the biochar to create more active sites which played the dominant
role in the increased NOx  removal efficiency [92]. The de-NOx  perfor-
mance of biochar appeared to be affected more by chemical properties
(mainly oxygenic functional groups on active sites) instead of physical
properties under this circumstance [92]. With the weight ratio of KOH to
biochar increased from 0.5 to 2, the micropores were developed and the
amount  of  oxygenic  functional  groups  increased,  both  of  which  were
benefit  to  the  adsorption  of  NH3  and  increase  of  NOx  removal.
Furthermore, the proportion of N-6 groups (pyridine nitrogen) formed
by the increased nitrogen ratio from urea increased de-NOx  activity of
the cotton stalk biocharH3PO4 significantly [93].

3.2.2.

Impacts of functionalization

The  biochar  materials  with  transition  metal  oxide  catalysts  are
widely recognized to fit in the low-temperature flue gas. Mn based SCR
catalysts have been studied extensively due to their superior low tem-
perature performance and CeO2 has also been used as a promoter to the
SCR catalyst owing to its unique acid-base and redox properties. Singh
et al. [94] suggested that the NO conversion capacities of Mn/Ce func-
tionalized  biochars  were much  more dependent  on  the metal  loading
content than the pore structure, the NO removal capacities increased as
the addition of Mn and Ce. Yang et al. [90] reported that the conversion

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1010988

C. Wen et al.

◦
C followed Mn > Ce > V > Fe, and the
capacities of NO within 125–225
biocharMn presented the highest NO removal efficiency of 87.6% at 200
◦
C (Table S2). Another study presented the Fe and Mn presented rela-
tively higher NOx removal abilities than Cu and Al in higher temperature
◦
section of 250–400
C due to the strong adsorption energy indicated by
the density functional theory (DFT) theoretical calculations [87]. The
micropores would be reduced after the impregnation of metals, e.g., Mn,
Ce, Sm, due to blocking of the pores [86,89,90,95,96]. The bimetallic
oxides were found to enter the interlayers or pore holes and caused the
collapse or block of pore holes to result in the larger pore size, thus the
catalysts were typical mesoporous materials with most of the pores of
3–4 nm [95].

and Ce4+

The redox reactions of metal catalyst in biochar and the adsorption
ability of NH3 mainly determine the de-NOx performance of the biochar
with metal catalyst [81,94]. Yang et al. [91] revealed that Mn/Ce oxides
had  a  low  degree  of  crystallinity  and  dispersed  well  on  the  biochar
surface, and the higher fractions of Mn to Ce, i.e., 5:5 and 7:3, on bio-
charMn/Ce catalysts were beneficial for the conversion of NO. The highly
dispersed Mn increased both the number of oxygen vacancies and the
surface oxygen functional groups, as its low binding energy indicates the
actived Mn state and strong redox properties of Mn4+
(Equation (15))
[91,96].  The  oxygen  vacancies  would  adsorb  oxygen  to  form  the
chemisorbed oxygen, which is more active and has higher mobility than
the lattice oxygen and plays the important role in the catalytic reaction
[90,96].  As  the  number  of  oxygen  vacancies  from  Mn  increased,  the
oxygen storage and release cycle between Ce3+
was enhanced,
which is positively related to the electron interaction between Mn and
Ce species with oxygen converted from CeO2 to Mn2O3 (Equation (16))
and is able to accelerate the conversion of O2 into chemisorbed oxygen
(Equations (17) and (18)) [91,96,97]. The surface oxygenic functional
groups (e.g., carboxylic group) can not only help to adsorb NO but also
improve the dispersion of active phase to generate more adsorption sites
for NH3 [90]. The amount of NH3 desorption tested by NH3-TPD is used
to express the surface acidity of biochar catalysts governed by both the
Lewis acid sites and Brønsted acid sites [95,98]. The Lewis acid sites are
derived  from  highly  dispersed  and  unsaturated  Mn  or  Ce  sites  [90],
while the Brønsted acid sites are related to surface hydroxyl groups [98].
NH3 is able to adsorb on both the Lewis and Brønsted acid sites (Equa-
tion (19)). The coordinated NH3 onto the Lewis acid sites is capable of
+
forming –NH2 species and NH4
can be generated from the protonation of
adsorbed NH3  on the Brønsted acid sites, respectively (Equations (20)
and  (21)).  The  biochar  catalyst  exhibiting  the  high  surface  acidity
generally indicated that more NH3 can absorb on its surface [96]. Based
on  the  above  reasons,  the  higher  catalytic  activities  of  NO  compared
with the biochar without metal impregnation were widely achieved [86,
89,98], a high NO removal capacity of 99.2% at 175
C was thus ach-
ieved by Yang et al. (Table S2) [91].

◦

Some catalytic processes of biochar catalyst were recognized as the
Eley-Rideal  (E-R)  mechanism  indicating  the  reaction  between  the
adsorbed NH3 and gaseous NO. The NH3 was adsorbed quickly onto the
Lewis  acid  sites as  coordinated  NH3  on the  surface  of MnOx, and  the
interaction  of  coordination  and  adsorbed  oxygen  on  the  surface  of
catalyst  could  generate  –NH2,  which  reacted  with  the  gaseous  NO  to
generate NH2NO, and finally decomposed to form N2 and H2O (Equation
(22)) [94,96]. Similarly, the coordinated NH3  can also be activated by
Ce4+
was oxidized by O2  to replenish the
Ce4+

to generate –NH2, and Ce3+
for the single CeO2 catalysts [91].

The  other  mechanism  named  as  Langmuir-Hinshelwood  (L-H)
mechanism  presenting  the  reaction  between  the  adsorbed  NH3  and
adsorbed NO2. The π-bonds in the graphite crystallite and the oxygenic
functional groups as well as chemisorbed oxygen strengthened by the
impregnation  of  Mn  were  beneficial  to  the  oxidation  of  NO  to  NO2
(Equation (23)) [90,96,97]. The adsorbed NO2  was much more stable
than NO owing to the strong binding between NO2  and carbonaceous
surface  [99].  The  coexistence  of  NO2  and  NO  would  arouse  the  “fast
SCR” reaction of NO2, NO and NH3 (Equation (24)), which follows the

◦

◦

L-H mechanism and significantly enhanced the de-NOx efficiency due to
the “fast SCR” reaction shows a markedly higher reaction rate than the
“standard SCR”  reaction [90,98]. Oxides of Zr, Ni and Co were doped
into  Mn  oxide  biochar  catalysts,  thereinto  the  biocharZr/Mn  catalyst
C (Table S2) [100],
presented the highest NO removal of 86% at 200
similarly, the biocharSm/Mn catalyst showed the high NO conversion of
85% at 200
C (Table S2) [95]. The high activities of biocharZr/Mn and
biocharSm/Mn were related to the high Mn4+
concentration, chemisorbed
oxygen, excellent reducibility and more Brønsted acid sites and weak
Lewis acid sites, which increased more active sites and facilitated the
oxidation of NO and followed the L-H reaction mechanism: on one hand,
the coordinated NH3 onto the Lewis acid sites would be oxidized to form
–NH2 intermediates which can be promoted by the more Mn4+
ratio, the
–NH2(ad)  reacted with NO(ad)  to generate NH2NO and then formed N2
and  H2O  (Equation  (25)).  On  the  other  hand,  the  adsorbed  NO2  was
(cid:0)
oxidized to NO2
onto
the Brønsted acid sites to generate NH4NO2 or NH4NO3, also formed N2
and H2O finally (Equations (26) and (27)).

+
species, and then reacted with NH4

(cid:0)
and/or NO3

The biocharMn/Ce from co-activation of H3PO4 and steam exhibited a
◦
high NO conversion  of 95%  at 280
C (Table S2) [96],  as  the H3PO4
activation apparently increased the BET surface area of biochar while
the  steam  activation  mainly  led  to  an  increase  in  the  acidity  and
oxygenic functional groups of the biochar catalysts [94]. However, the
alkali  metals  presented  in  the  flue  gas  or  cotton  biochar  itself  may
neutralize the Lewis and Brønsted acid sites, thus inhibiting the initial
+
protonation of NH3 to NH4
and causing a relatively low NO removal of
◦
65%  at  280
C  (Table  S2)  [94].  Liu  et  al.  [97]  carried  out  the  air
oxidation treatment before and/or after loading biochar with Mn. The
oxidation treatment introduced more oxygenic functional groups on the
catalyst that could produce the high-valence state Mn (Mn4+
) through
electron transfer. After pre-oxidation of biochar, the pore volume and
specific  surface  area  enhanced,  and  the  C–O  groups  were  oxidized to
acidic carboxyl groups, and after further post-oxidation, the contents of
Mn4+
,  chemisorbed  oxygen  and  the  surface  acidity  increased,  which
improved the adsorption of NH3, the conversion of NO to NO2, and the
redox  capabilities  of  the  biochar  catalysts.  The  biochar  after  two
◦
oxidation treatments thus reached the NO conversion of 97.0% at 150
C
(Table  S2).  The  metal  functionalization  on  biochar  for  adsorption,
catalysis, and reaction of NOx is presented in Fig. 4.

2MnO2 → Mn2O3 + O

Mn2O3+2CeO2→2MnO2 + Ce2O3

M(n(cid:0) 1)++O(ad)→Mn+ (M = Mn, Ce...)

M(n(cid:0) 1)+ +

1
O2→Mn+ (M = Mn, Ce...)
2

Lewis acid sites

NH3 (g) ⟶

NH3 (ad)

NH3 (ad) + Mn+ → M(n(cid:0) 1)+ ± NH2 (ad) + H+(M = Mn, Ce...)

NH3 (g) + H+ ⟶

Bronsted acid sites

NH+

4 (ad)

Eley-Rideal mechanism:

(cid:0) NH2 (ad) + NO (g) → NH2NO (ad) → N2 (g) + H2O (g)

Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism:

NO(g) →M

π(cid:0) bonds
NO(ad) + O2(ad) ⟶

NO2 (ad)

2NH3 (ad) + NO (ad) + NO2 (ad)→2 N2+3H2O

(cid:0) NH2 (ad) + NO (ad) → NH2NO → N2 + H2O

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1010989

C. Wen et al.

Fig.  4. The  metal  functionalization  on  biochar  for  adsorption,  catalysis,  and  reaction  of  NOx,  Hg,  SO2  and  CO2.  Note  that  the  dash  line  simply  expresses  the
adsorption of NOx, NH3, Hg, O2, SO2, CO2 from atmosphere to surface pore of biochar. Route 1: The sulfuric acid derived from SO2 reacts with inorganic oxides and/
or salts in biochar to form sulfates in biochar (Equations (8)–(10)). Route 2: Basic metal oxyhydroxides interact with CO2 to form carbonate (Equation (67)). Route 3:
The sophisticated details to transfer NOx are described in Section 3.2.2. Route 4: The loss of oxygen from a metal oxide could be replenished by the lattice oxygen in
another metal oxide with higher oxidizability during the bimetal redox reactions (Equations (15) and (16)), and the Hg0 adsorbed onto biochar can be oxidized by
both lattice oxygen and chemisorbed oxygen replenished by gaseous O2  to produce HgO (Equation (31)).

M(n(cid:0) 1)+ + NO2 (ad) → Mn+ + NO(cid:0)

2 (M = Mn, Ce...)

NH+

4 (ad) + NO(cid:0)

2 (ad) → NH4NO2→N2+2H2O

(26)

(27)

3.2.3. Adsorption conditions

◦

◦

◦

◦
C to 200

C and the other was between 260 and 280

For  biocharMn  prepared  from  straw,  as  the  reaction  temperature
◦
raised from 50
C, the removal capacity of NOx was reported to
decrease from 86% to 41%, but the removal efficiency promoted again
to  85%  at  a  higher  temperature of  200–250
C  [86].  For  the  biochar
prepared from co-activation of H3PO4  and steam [96], the NO conver-
◦
sion increased as the temperature increased from 160 to 280
C. Sumathi
et al. [81] found that the optimum reaction temperature for removal of
NOx  on biocharNi  and biocharCe  was around 200
C between 100 and
◦
300
C. Cerium oxide has high oxidation activity to decompose NO, but
◦
at the higher 300
C, the oxygen-containing groups formed on biocharCe
were attached to the carbonaceous group to generate CO and CO2, thus
lowered the conversion of NO [84]. Two temperature windows for the
biochar SCR test were found by Wu et al. [74], one was between 180 and
240
C. The biochars with
most  micropores  promoted  the  conversion  of  NO  at  the  temperature
range  of  180–240
C  while  the  presence  of  mesopores  as  well  as  the
higher dispersion of metals and acidity in the biochars catalyst benefited
NO conversion at the reaction temperature above 260
C. Chen et al.
◦
◦
C, the
C to 175
[100] presented that when temperature raised from 75
NO conversion of biocharZr/Mn promoted rapidly, and then stayed stable
◦
after 200
C. The phenomena can be explained with the help
of  an  in-situ  DRIFTS  analysis.  Both  the  Lewis  and  Brønsted  acid  sites
were found on the biocharZr/Mn catalysts. The amount of Brønsted acid
sites were more than that of Lewis acid sites but the Lewis acid sites had
better  thermostability  than  the  Brønsted  acid  sites  which  totally  dis-
C.  It  appears  that  the  Brønsted  acid  sites  mainly
appeared  at  250
◦
worked at the low and medium temperature (≤200
C), while the Lewis
acid  sites  served  as  catalytic  role  in  the  entire  studied  temperature

◦
C until 250

◦

◦

◦

◦

ranges. Liu et al. [93] reported that at low temperatures of 50–150
C,
some NO was transformed to NO2 on the surface of biocharH3PO4, which
induced the “fast-SCR” reaction (Equation (24)). However, NO2 was no
longer generated at the high-temperature region of 225–300
C, there-
fore, NO was mainly reduced by the “standard-SCR” reaction.

◦

◦

The addition of O2 was essential to boost the adsorption of NOx via
the addition of the oxygenic functional groups and the catalytic oxida-
tion of NO to NO2 [88]. Sumathi et al. [84] reported that the removal of
NO  at  15%  H2O  was  nearly  identical  to  that  at  dry  condition,  as  the
process of adsorption, reduction and catalytic oxidation of NO would
happen simultaneously on the system of H2O–O2–NO-biochar, but the
removal of NO was deterred at higher percentage of H2O, possibly owing
to the low solubility of NO in H2O and the pore blockage derived from
the salt by-products. The biocharMn from peanut shell was subjected to
water  vapor  or  SO2  to  check  the  resistance  of  biochar  catalysts  [90].
When 10% H2O was added, the NO conversion of biocharMn  dropped
from 87% to 81% and exhibited a rapid recovery after stopping the H2O
flow,  implying  that  H2O  did  not  lead  to  permanent  deactivation  of
biocharMn catalyst. When the SO2 was added, the NO conversion drop-
ped from 87% to 71% and recovered to about 79% after the SO2  flow
was  stopped, suggesting  a certain of irreversible deactivation for bio-
charMn. Furthermore, it implied that the addition of Ce could promote
the H2O and SO2 resistance of catalysts [91]. Chen et al. [100] detected
◦
the biocharZr/Mn catalysts in the presence of SO2 + H2O at 200
C, they
found that the NO conversion of biocharZr/Mn declined from 86% to 60%
and recovered to 87% with the addition and stopping of H2O and SO2,
indicating the good renewable activity of biocharZr/Mn.

3.3. Adsorption performance of Hg

Mercury  has  received  increasing  attention  worldwide  due  to  its
toxicity, migration and accumulation in organisms. The United States
issued the Clean Air Mercury Rule (CAMR) in 2005, which planned to
reduce mercury emissions from 48 tons to 34 tons from 2010 to 2017

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109810

C. Wen et al.

and the mercury emission control rate of 70% was achieved in 2018.
Meanwhile, the emission standards of pollutants for stannum, antimony
and mercury Industries (GB/30770-2014) in China stipulated that the
emission limit of mercury in new enterprises should be 0.01 mg/m3. The
adsorption of Hg0 on biochar mainly follows: the Hg0 in combustion flue
gas  firstly  diffuses  to  exterior  surface  of  biochar,  which  is  called  as
external mass transfer, the Hg0 then diffuses into micropores of biochar,
which is known as intraparticle diffusion, and the Hg0 is further oxidized
or reacted by the active sites onto the biochar. Both homogeneous and
heterogeneous oxidation may promote the retention of Hg in the bio-
char. Fuente-Cuesta et al. [101] reported that about 35–60% of gaseous
Hg  was  found  to  be  the  oxidized  form  in  biochars,  reflecting  the
occurrence of heterogeneous oxidation. Table S3 of the Supplementary
Materials  summarizes  the  preparation  conditions  of  biochar,  and  the
typical adsorption conditions and optimum adsorption performance of
Hg by biochars.

3.3.1. Treatment conditions of biochar

◦

The high carbonization temperature generally increased the micro-
pore  volume  and  surface  area  of  biochar,  and  the  developed  micro-
porosity  could  provide  more  physisorption  sites  for  Hg0  capture  [27,
61,102,103]. The atom radius of gaseous mercury is approximately 0.15
nm, the effective collisions between mercury and micropores less than 2
nm were expected to be conductive to the adsorption of Hg0  [30]. Shi
et al. [104] reported that the carbonization temperature between 400
C mainly controlled the mesopore fabrication. At higher py-
and 600
rolysis temperatures of 500–700
C, chemisorption began to dominate
the Hg0 removal instead of physisorption affected by BET surface area,
then the decrease of the organic functional groups (mainly C––O) [105,
106],  the  decomposition  of  C-halogen  functional  groups  [105]  and
sulfur species [107] at excessive high temperature would weaken the
chemisorption and removal performance for Hg0. Pyrolysis temperature
had impacts on the removal performance of Hg0 due to the influence in
the  physicochemical  properties  of  biocharFe/Cl  [64],  both  C–Cl  group
and iron oxides could supply the active sites useful for the removal of
◦
Hg0 but decreased at high pyrolysis temperature of 800
C. The related
reactions would be introduced in Section 3.3.3.

◦

Shan et al. [108] reported that after microwave activation of biochar,
the  Hg0  removal  capacity was  enhanced from 21.4%  to  53.7%, as its
obvious advantageous for the development of the porosity and specific
surface area and the oxygenic functional groups. The Hg removal effi-
ciency of biochar by ultrasound treatment after NH4Cl loading was re-
ported  to  be  15–25%  higher  than  that  without  ultrasound  treatment
[109].  The  ultrasound  process  is  thought  to  increase  the  BET  surface
area  and  improve  Hg  removal  efficiency  by  enhancing  the  further
functionalization effect including the dispersion and penetration of the
NH4Cl [109] and dispersion active ingredients such as Mn and Fe [108],
Fe and Cu [43], and Mn and Ce [54].

Biochar was subjected to the modification of N2-plasma [110], the
adsorbed oxygen and water onto biochar can supply the oxygen source
for plasma modification to produce oxygenic functional groups, i.e. C–O,
C––O and O–C––O from water and C–O, C––O from oxygen (Equations
(28) and (29)), thereby assisting with the oxidation of Hg0. With the O2
and  H2O  treatments  by  dielectric  barrier  discharge  plasma,  higher
contents of oxygenic functional groups (carbonyl and ester groups) were
obtained  by  increasing  O2  and  H2O  concentrations  to  50%  and  9%
respectively, and increasing plasma treatment time up to 30 min, which
also  resulted  in  an  enhancement  of  Hg0  adsorption  capacity  [111],
although the pore volume and surface area of biochar decreased slightly.
The  non-thermal  plasma  has  characterized  a  promising  application
prospect in modifying biochar to bring specific functional groups onto
the  biochar, due to its high efficiency, simple  operation and environ-
ment friendly.

Shi et  al. [104] carried out the co-pyrolysis of rice straw together
with  nanoscale  CaCO3  template,  the  treatment  clearly  promoted  the
specific  surface  area  from  107.7  to  742.5  m2/g  and  successfully

fabricated  a  hierarchical  porous  structure  of  biochar  with  a  balanced
distribution of micropores, mesopores, and macropores. The pores with
20 nm width derived from the 20 nm-CaCO3  nanoparticles serve as a
sacrificed template, and pores with 5 nm width were probably formed
via the activation of CO2  released with CaCO3  decomposition at high
pyrolysis  temperature.  The  ratio  of  mesopores  controlled  by  carbon-
ization temperature could be an important reason in the Hg0  removal
capacity  of  hierarchical  biochar,  as  a  stronger  correlation  of  Hg0
removal capacity with the proportion of mesopores than that of micro-
pores. Large numbers of oxygenic functional groups (C––O and COO)
were also generated, and served as active sites and oxidized Hg0  into
HgO (Equations (30) and (31)). The Hg0 removal capacity by the hier-
archical biochar was 65% higher than that of raw biochar at 180
C,
owing  to  their  hierarchical  porous  properties  and  large  numbers  of
functional groups.

◦

Xu et al. [112] prepared the biochar sorbents from biomass and PVC
under  isothermal  smoldering,  this  process  presented  the  highest  Cl
content and the highest Hg0  adsorption efficiency compared with the
isothermal  heating  and  non-isothermal  heating  in  N2  atmosphere,  as
smoldering  allowed  the  sufficient  time  of  HCl  released  from  PVC  to
interact  with  cellulose  in  biomass  to  produce  more  C–Cl  functional
groups which impacted significantly on Hg adsorption process.

H* + O*̅̅̅̅→Plasma

OH*

(cid:0) C + O* + OH*̅̅̅̅→Plasma

(cid:0) COOH

(cid:0) C = O + e(cid:0) → (cid:0) C (cid:0) O

Hg0

(ad) + O*

(ad)→HgO(ad)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

3.3.2. Activization conditions of biochar

◦

The biochar have a developed pore structure in the higher temper-
ature of 700–900
C during activation in CO2  condition [30,104,113].
However,  when  the  increased  temperature  surpasses  a  certain  limit
◦
C), thermal annealing at high temperature leads to the walls of
(~800
the pores become thin and pore collapse, micropores tend to form large
pores  as  a  result  of  CO2  over-etching  [104],  as  well  as  the  high  ash
content of biochar offers a diffusion resistance and may sinter and block
pores, all of those result in the destructive pore structure and decreased
surface  area  [113].  Walnut  shell  biochars  were  prepared  in  pyrolysis
atmosphere of N2, O2/N2, and CO2/N2, respectively [114]. The results
indicated that the Hg0 adsorption capacity of biocharO2/N2 were worse
than that of biocharN2  whereas CO2  atmosphere greatly improved the
adsorption capacity. The activation reaction occurred between CO2 and
biochar resulted in the pore structure of biocharCO2/N2 better than that
of biocharN2, which was conductive to the diffusion and mass transfer of
Hg.  As  the  increase  in  CO2  concentration,  the  pore  volume  and  BET
specific surface area increased gradually, and more oxygenic functional
groups  and  organic  Hg-OM  species  were  generated  (Equation  (32)),
therefore  the  Hg  adsorption  capacity  of  biocharCO2/N2  presented  an
overall increasing trend [114].

Steam activation was widely conducted to help the Hg0 adsorption of
biochar [109,115–120]. Shu et al. [37] suggested that the steam acti-
vation enhanced the surface area (414.9 m2/g) and micropore volume of
biochar  apparently,  resulting  in  better  Hg  adsorption  characteristics.
H2O2  activation  was  also  widely  conducted  [30,37,44,85].  The
oxidizing properties of H2O2  could cleanse the inner-pores of biochar,
thus  helping  expand  the  micropores.  Meanwhile,  the  number  of
oxygenic functional groups (mainly C–O, –OH) increased, which act as
possible  chemisorption  centers  for  Hg0  and  facilitate  the  process  of
electron transfer and the oxidization of Hg0 onto the biochar (Equations
(31) and (33)) [37,44]. These two reasons played important roles in the
higher Hg adsorption capacities of biocharH2O2  than biocharH2O  [37].
Shen  et  al.  [30]  reported  that  the  specific  surface  areas,  micropore

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109811

C. Wen et al.

◦

volumes and total pore volumes of biochar increased as the concentra-
tion of H2O2 increased from 10% to 30%. Yang et al. [44] reported that
biochar modified with 30% H2O2 exhibited good initial adsorption rate
and Hg0  capture ability of 90.86% at 120
C (Table S3). Nevertheless,
Shu et al. [37] found a slightly ruined pore structure after 30% H2O2
modification,  too  higher  concentration  may  arouse  much  powerful
oxidizing  effect  and  make  the  collapsed  inner  pores  and  decreased
specific surface area [85], as well as may accelerate the esterification
reaction  between  –COOH  and  –OH,  which  eliminated  the  chemical
adsorption  sites  of  Hg  and  resulted  in  a  worse  removal  of  Hg  [37].
Recently, Liu et al. [121,122] developed an ultraviolet/H2O2 oxidation
modification technology on biochar from straw, corn stalk and seeweed.
They indicated that through producing abundant OH free radicals with
high activity, the UV/H2O2  modification could not only improve pore
structure of biochar, but also produce more oxygenic functional group
on the surface of biochar. The chemisorbed oxygen, C–O group [121],
C––O  and  COOH/COOC  [122]  showed  crucial  roles  in  promoting  the
adsorption  of  Hg0.  As  a  result,  the  Hg0  removal  efficiency  of  bio-
charUV/H2O2  was  improved  from 48.41%  to  91.34%,  compared to  the
biochar after microwave steam activation [122].

Hg0

(ad) + C = O → Hg (cid:0) OM + C (cid:0) O

(cid:0) COOH + Hg0

(ad) → (cid:0) COOHg + H*

3.3.3.

Impacts of functionalization

(32)

(33)

3.3.3.1. Halogen and sulfur. It is well known that mercury species may
react with halogen (Cl, Br, I) and sulfur, the presence of these relevant
elements  in  biochars make  them  good  potential  sorbents for  mercury
species (Fig. 5). HCl impregnation with biochar was conducted by au-
thors [102,120,123,124]. HCl modification reduced the ash in biochars
significantly [120] and created the increased surface area from 29.9 to
110.1 m2/g, these formed micropores effectively capable of adsorbing
the Cl atoms onto the internal surface of biochar [124], besides, new
formed sites (C–O, C––O, O–H, C–Cl) during HCl impregnation acted as
chemisorption sites, both of which caused a marked improvement in Hg0
adsorption  performance  [123,124].  The  other  halogen  acid,  HBr  was
impregnated  on  rice  husk  biochar,  the  enrichment  of  the  brominated
functionalities played the dominant role in its improved Hg adsorption
capacity [125].

The ammonia halides (NH4Cl, NH4Br, NH4I) were also widely used to
modify  the  biochar.  The  halides  majorly  absorbed  on  the  micropore
religion, leading to the partly blockage of inner pore structure and the
reduced  micropore  volume  and  surface  area  [126].  The  Hg0  removal
capacity  enhanced  as  the  increase  of  NH4Cl  loading,  owing  to  more
chemisorption sites were introduced by the higher impregnation amount
on the surface of biochar [127]. The chemisorption process of Hg0 was
that  the  C–Cl  groups  formed  in  biochar  during  NH4Cl  impregnation
acted  as  activated  sites,  which  can  convert  Hg0  into  HgCl2  or  other
Hg–Cl complexes (Equations (6) and (34)) [60,61]. The optimum NH4Cl
loading was reported to be about 5% [109], and the Hg removal effi-
ciency  no  longer  increased  [127,128]  or  even  decreased  for  NH4Cl
loadings >7% [109], might be ascribed to the biochar surface saturation
causing pore destruction and diminution of surface area. Similarly, an
increase in loading value of NH4Br reported by Yang et al. [103] would
generate  more  chemisorption  sites,  the  removal  efficiency  of  Hg
C (Table S3). C–Br and C––O
◦
increased from 78.13% to 98.07% at 120
groups  served  as  the  chemisorption  sites,  they  can  participate  in  the
reactions to result in the removal of Hg (Equations (6), (30) and (31)).
Besides, Zhu et al. [99] observed the Hg removal efficiencies of modified
biochars increased in the following sequence: HBr (pH: ~0.7) > NH4Br
(pH:  ~5.0)  > CaBr2  (pH:  6–8).  On  one  hand,  as  the  pH  values  of
impregnation solutions increased, the oxygenic functional groups like
lactone and carbonyl as the active sites might be destroyed, on the other
hand, the protonation effect was enhanced with the pH value decreased,
leading to the accumulation of positive charge on biochar surface and
subsequently  promoting  the  electrostatic  attraction  between  Hg0  and
bromide ions. Zeng et al. [118] reported that the impregnation of iodine
could be beneficial to the formation of chemisorption sites and favored
the  Hg  adsorption,  while  3%  NH4I  addition  can  generate  almost  the
same amount of adsorption sites and similar Hg0 removal ability as 5%
NH4I,  as  the  above-mentioned  effects  caused  by  too  much  halogen
impregnation  contents  [126].  The  main  mechanisms  of  ammonia  ha-
lides modification on Hg removal refer to that the impregnated halogen
ion reacts with carbon atom onto the biochar to produce the C-halogen
groups, while the O2 in flue gas is adsorbed onto biochar to generate the
chemisorbed oxygen and/or weakly bonded oxygen species (O*). Both
of which are the dominant chemisorption sites and positively influence
in  the  removal  process  of  Hg0.  The  former  oxidizes  mercury  to  form
mercury  halides  (Equation  (6))  [126],  while  the  latter  reacts  to  form
C–O groups and HgO (Equations (30) and (31)). C––O groups generally

Fig.  5. The  halogen  and  sulfur  functionalization  on
biochar for adsorption and reaction of Hg0. Route 1:
The C-X groups in biochar convert Hg0  into HgX2  or
other  Hg-X  complexes  (Equation  (6)).  Route  2:  The
oxygenic functional groups (mainly C–O, –OH) act as
chemisorption centers for Hg0  and facilitate the oxi-
dization  of  Hg0  onto  the  biochar  to  form  HgO,  Hg-
OM,  and  -COOHg  (Equations  (31)–(33)).  Route  3:
The  sulfur-containing  groups  (C–S)  on  biochar  react
with Hg0  to form HgS (Equation (39)).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109812

C. Wen et al.

serve  as  electron  acceptors  and  facilitate the  electron  transfer  for  the
oxidation of Hg0 during this process [61,123].

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0) > Cl

with 1.96 Å and Cl

Both the two types of modifying agents, i.e., ammonia halides and
potassium  halides,  followed  the  same  sequence  of  Hg  removal  effi-
ciencies:  biochar  < biocharNH4Cl  < biocharNH4Br  < biocharNH4I  [117,
118] and biochar < biocharKCl < biocharKBr < biocharKI [117,126,129].
The  amounts  of  C-halogen  groups  dominantly  decide  the  effects  of
halide modification on Hg removal capacity as they mainly react with
the Hg0 to produce mercury halides. It is noteworthy that the production
of C-halogen groups depends upon both the reducibility and the size of
halide ions [129]. The reducibility of halide ion presents the sequence of
(cid:0) > Br
I
, the iodine ion is thus readily to donate electron and in-
teracts with carbon atom to generate covalent bonds that serve as major
chemisorption  sites  [118].  Meanwhile,  the  higher  size  of  halide  ion
possibly has higher surface exposure and provides more probability to
interact  with  carbon  atom  and  produce  covalent  bonds  as  the  higher
London dispersion forces [118,129], resulting in stronger ability to form
chemisorption sites [126], thereby the Hg removal efficiency of biocharI
is usually the highest as its highest ionic radius of 2.20 Å, compared with
(cid:0)
Br
with 1.81 Å, respectively [117]. Besides, the
halogenated activated carbon models were adopted using DFT method
to find that the halide type has no significant impact on the adsorption
energy of Hg, but has a greater effect on the activation energy barrier of
HgX (X = Cl, Br, I) formation in the order of HgI < HgBr < HgCl [130].
The modification effects of ammonium halides were generally better
than that of potassium halides in the Hg removal efficiency [129]. On
one  hand,  with  the  example  of  iodine,  the  finer  size  of  NH4I  (4.8  Å)
compared  to  KI  (6.7  Å)  possibly  resulted  in  less  blockage  of  porous
structure and easier access of Hg to active sites [117]. On the other hand,
the amino groups adsorbed onto the biochar would further react with
halide  ion  to  form  the  C–NH2-halogen  groups  (Equation  (35))  [123,
129], which was also beneficial to form more chemisorption sites than
potassium  halide.  Shen  et  al.  [123]  compared  three  types  of  Cl
impregnation and found that Hg adsorption efficiency by biocharNH4Cl
was much better than those by biocharHCl and biocharZnCl2. The superior
performance  of  NH4Cl  to  ZnCl2  was  also  attributed
to  the
above-mentioned finer size of NH4Cl and the presence of amino groups.
Meanwhile,  the  hydrogen  bonding  and  hydroxyl  caused  by  HCl
impregnation had positive impacts on the adsorption of Hg0, causing a
better capacity than biocharZnCl2 which had a poor pore structure. Yet,
the  biocharZnCl2  still  presented  higher  Hg  adsorption  capacity  than
biocharH2O2  [37],  which  was  attributed  to  the  chloride  surface  com-
plexes as possible Hg0 active sites although blockage of some inner pores
would interact with carbon in biochar to generate lots of
happened. Cl
[Cl–C–Cl]2-  groups onto the biochar (Equation (36)), these groups can
provide more active sites to promote chemisorption of Hg0.

(cid:0)

The non-thermal plasma is able to promote the porosity and boost
the active functional groups onto the biochar, therefore was considered
to activate biochar for Hg0  removal [45]. The energetic electrons and
active free radicals formed in the 1% Cl2 plasma system led to a porous
surface properties of biochar [45,131]. The chlorine molecules collided
with  active  electrons  to  generate  Cl  active  radicals  (Cl*),  and  then
contacted on the biochar surface to produce more C–Cl groups (Equa-
tions (5) and (37)), which promoted chemisorption and enhance the Hg0
capture efficiency from 8.2% to 84.2%, up to 583.0 μg/g for tobacco
biochar (Table S3) [45]. HCl non-thermal plasma was also utilized to
bring  in  Cl active  sites  [63],  the  active  free  radicals  produced by  the
discharge  cycle  bombarded  and  reacted  with  the  surface  of  biochar,
leading to the collapsed pore walls and blocked pore entrance, mean-
while,  HCl  plasma  modification  promoted  Cl-containing  active  sites
successfully  onto  the  biochar  and  significantly  performed  four  times
higher Hg removal capacity than HCl modification [63]. The Cl active
sites could react with Hg0 heterogeneously via electron-transfer process
and generated Hg2Cl2  compounds (Equation (38)). Cl appears to react
preferentially with Hg than O and S, as the introduction of HCl plasma
inhibited the production of HgO and HgS.

◦

◦

The biochar price for  Hg adsorption can be further reduced if the
sources  of  carbon  and  halogen  are  obtained  cheaply  and  with  an
affordable synthesis routine. The polyvinyl chloride (PVC) with over 50
wt% Cl was able to co-pyrolyze with biomass wastes to generate the Cl-
rich  biochars  [64,112],  the  C–Cl  groups  were  successfully  introduced
and  performed  the  beneficial  adsorption  of  Hg0,  although  the
co-synthesis dropped the specific surface area of biochar [64,65]. The
chemisorption was enhanced greatly and the Hg0 adsorption efficiency
C  (Table  S3)  [64].  PVC  was  also  used  to
reached  about  82%  at  140
prepare  the  hierarchically  biochar  with  CaCO3  as  template  [65],  the
H–Cl  group  released  from  PVC  reacted  with  C––C  groups  to  generate
C–Cl  groups,  the  high  removal  efficiency  of  90%  at  120
C  shown in
Table  S3  was  thus  ascribed  to  the  synergistic  effects  of  the
well-developed hierarchically pores (554.9 m2/g) especially mesopores
and  high  Cl  active  sites  which  were  beneficial  to  rapid  Hg0  trans-
portation.  In  this  study,  the  DFT  surface  model  was  established  to
simulate the reaction process of Hg0  on biochar (Fig. 6), in which the
biocharCl doped with di-chlorine was obtained to build the active sites of
C–Cl bond and the adsorption energy was calculated. The results pre-
sented  that  the  loading  of  dichloride  atoms  and  carbonyl  groups  on
biochar model enlarged adsorption energy, and would directly facilitate
the  adsorption  process  of  Hg0  [65].  Similarly,  the  waste  brominated
flame retarded plastic (BFR) was utilized to produce the Br-rich biochar
(cid:0)
and C–Br groups, therefore
[105]. Br was doped into the biochars as Br
the biocharBr  presented much better Hg0  removal efficiency than raw
biochar. It can be found that the C––O groups participated in Hg0 cap-
ture reaction only until C–Br bonds were exhausted as the higher reac-
tivity of C–Br bonds. It was also noteworthy that the excessive ratio of
biochar/BFR  plastic  to  1:2  was  adverse  to  Hg0  removal,  as  the  pore
structure  of  biochar  was  deteriorated  caused  by  the  aggregation  of
melted plastic residues.

The  introduction  of  sulfur-containing  functional  groups  can  also
effectively promote  the Hg  removal performance of biochar.  The rice
husk  was  physically  mixed  with  elemental  sulfur  and  carbonized  to
generate  biochar  [116].  The  sulfur  can  dope  into  the  biochar  via
monolayer surface deposition or volume pore filling, and reduced both
the pore volume and surface area, especially for the low carbonization
◦
temperature of 300
C, at which the lacking microporous structure was
entirely blocked by the overloaded sulfur molecules, thus dramatically
reducing  the  adsorption  capacity  of  Hg.  At  the  higher  carbonization
temperature, there are abundant micropores to adsorb the sulfur mole-
cules,  forming  the  organic  sulfur  such  as  sulfone  and  sulfoxide.  The
doped  sulfur,  including  the  retained  elemental  sulfur  and  formed
organic sulfur, can play as new adsorption sites for the removal of Hg0
mainly  via  chemisorption  to  generate  S–Hg–S  and  S–Hg–O  bonds,
◦
resulting in a removal performance of 344.3 μg/g at 150
C (Table S3).
Zhang et al. [132] carried out a H2S plasma modification, the amount of
sulfur-containing  groups  (C–S)  and  carboxyl  groups  on  biochar
increased, which mainly formed HgS and HgO to retain the Hg removal
◦
efficiency of 95.5% at 30
C shown in Table S3 (Equation (39)). Li et al.
[60]  presented  that  the  waste  tire  generated  sulfide  (ZnS)  during  py-
rolysis which could work as chemisorption sites and oxidize Hg0  into
stable  HgS  on  biochartire,  however,  the  further  process  of  microwave
activation  or  chemical  modification  of  NH4Cl  to  the  biochar  possibly
removed or covered inherent sulfide active sites, unfavorably inhabited
the  Hg  capture  of  biochartire.  Furthermore,  the  pyrolysis  of  medical
residue generated sulfate, which is not useful to the adsorption of Hg.
Sulfurized  biochar  from  co-pyrolysis  of  scrap  tire  and  wood  was  pre-
pared as economical sorbents [107]. The occurrence forms of sulfur in
the  biochar  were  organic  sulfur  (aliphatic  sulfur,  sulfoxide),  sulfide,
elemental sulfur and sulfate. The biochar with the largest amounts of
elemental  sulfur  and  organic  sulfur  showed  the  optimal  Hg0  capture
capacity, strengthened by the higher ratio of tire and higher pyrolysis
temperature. Both of the organic sulfur and elemental sulfur act as active
sites for the removal of Hg0  and then are transformed into HgS (Equa-
tions (39)–(41)) [133], as shown in Fig. 5. From DFT calculations, Liu

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109813

C. Wen et al.

Fig. 6. The typical configuration of Hg0 adsorption on biochar using DFT model, including (a) model of biochar, (b) chlorinated Cl-biochar model, (c) C––
model and (d) C––

O/Cl-biochar model. Reprinted from Ref. [65] with permission of Elsevier.

O/biochar

et  al.  [134]  found  that  the  adsorption  energy  of  S-doped  carbon  for
mercury was (cid:0) 51.76 kJ/mol, the value belongs to chemisorption and
implies that the doping of sulfur enhanced the electron transfer from Hg0
to the sulfur atom that bonded in carbon (Equation (39)).

Hg0

(ad) + C (cid:0) X (ad) → C (cid:0) Hg (cid:0) X (ad) (X = Cl, Br, I)

NH4X + R (cid:0) C → R (cid:0) C (cid:0) NH2 (cid:0) X

2X(cid:0) + C→[X (cid:0) C (cid:0) X]2(cid:0)

Cl2 (g) ̅̅̅̅→Plasma

2Cl*

(g)

2Hg0

(ad) + 2C (cid:0) X→Hg2X2 (ad)

Hg0

(ad) + C (cid:0) S → HgS(ad) + C

SO2 + S2(cid:0) → S0 + O2(cid:0)

Hg0

(ad) + S0→HgS(ad)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

3.3.3.2. Metal  modification. The  mineral  components  as  a  medium  of
Hg  capture  or  as  a  catalyst in  the  adsorption  process  also  need to  be
considered. Fuente-Cuesta et al. [101] mixed the fly ash and biochar to
find  that  the  Hg  retention  capacity  of  biochar  was  not  apparently
influenced by the fly ash particles presented in simulated flue gas, but
the heterogeneous oxidation was promoted obviously. Wang et al. [45]
reported  that  the  minerals  in  the  ash,  such  as  Ca  and  Fe,  can  act  as
catalysts to improve the oxidation of Hg0 to form HgO, helping the good

performance of tobacco biochar with high ash content. Some metal el-
ements,  such  as  Fe,  Cu,  Mn,  Ce,  and  Zr,  were  purposely  loaded  into
biochar for improving the Hg removal capacity of biochar.

Biochar  was  prepared  as  Fe-based  or  Fe–Ce  based  composite  with
doped  metals  of  Co,  Mn  or  Cu  by  the  sol-gel  and  the  coprecipitation
methods [55]. The pore structure of biochar was apparently promoted
by the low contents of metal oxides while higher contents (~2–3 wt%)
would agglomerate and block part of pores [43,55], which is similar as
the case for NOx removal mentioned in Section 3.2.2. CeO2 was observed
to have strong oxygen storage capacity and could achieve a synergistic
effect  with  other  doped  oxides,  making  the  distribution  of  CeO2  on
biochar surface more dispersedly especially with Cu or Mn and reducing
the  crystallinity  of  the  active  component  CeO2,  which  reflected  high
oxidizability generating more oxygen vacancies on the biochar support.
However,  too  higher  loading  amount  of  Ce  would  agglomerate  and
crystallize the active metals, also limiting the improvement in the Hg
removal. As the oxidizability of metal ion follows the sequence: Cu2+<
Co3+<Fe3+<Mn4+<Ce4+
, the loss of oxygen from the Cu or Co oxides
could be replenished by the lattice oxygen in Fe2O3, while the lattice
oxygen in CeO2 is able to supplement the lost oxygen in Fe2O3 and MnO2
during  the  bimetal  redox  reactions  (Equations  (15)  and  (16)).  The
consumption  of  lattice  oxygen  promoted  the  introduction  and  con-
struction of oxygen vacancies, the Hg0 adsorbed onto the biochar can be
oxidized  by  both  the  lattice  oxygen  and  chemisorbed  oxygen  replen-
ished by the gaseous O2 to produce HgO (Equation (31)), and then the
reduced metals were re-oxidized by other metal oxides. The existence of
chemisorbed oxygen and its mobility and reactivity are related to the
vacancies, charge imbalance and chemical bonds formed by the metal
oxides [96]. This Hg0 removal mechanisms indicating that the adsorbed
Hg  combines  with  the  chemisorb  oxygen  or  the  lattice  oxygen  were

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109814

C. Wen et al.

described  as  the  Langmuir-Hinshelwood  (L-H)  mechanism  and  the
Mars-Maessen mechanism, respectively [23,135].

◦

◦

◦

◦

C, respectively, 500

converted into Mn3+

The calcination temperature significantly affected the formation of
metal oxide components and crystalline phases onto the biochar. During
the preparation of biocharFe/Cu, Cu2O with low catalytic oxidation ac-
◦
tivity or Fe3C with reduced active components was formed at 300
C and
700
C was thus the optimal calcination tempera-
ture to exhibit a high Hg0  removal efficiency of biocharFe/Cu [43]. The
Cu/Fe oxides with Cu molar ratio of 0.3 showed a good dispersion and a
strong interaction, producing more active sites and thus receiving the
Hg0  removal  of  90.58%  at  130
C  (Table  S3).  The  excessive  loading
value of Cu/Fe oxides, e.g., 15 wt%, would lead to the blockage of the
partial pore structure and reduce the physisorption performance of Hg,
further  inhibited  the oxidation  or chemisorption  process and  was  not
conducive to Hg0 removal any more. Shan et al. [108] showed that as the
loading amount of Mn/Fe bimetal oxides increased from 1% to 7%, the
surface area and pore volume of biocharMn/Fe  increased first and then
decreased, with the maximum value at 4% loading. The well dispersed
active ingredients of Mn and Fe were largely consumed to receive a Hg0
removal capacity of 531.9 μg/g at 120
C (Table S3), accompanied by
the considerable proportion of Mn4+
and
reduced to Fe2+
some Fe3+
. Therefore, the adsorbed Hg0  was oxidized
into HgO or Hg2+
(Equations
(31),  (42)–(44)).  The  mechanochemical  process  of  ball-milling  was
applied to synthesize the composites of metal oxides and biochar, the
metal composites of Fe and Mn was reported to effectively increase the
oxygenic functional groups on biochar as it alleviated undesired func-
tional  groups  blockage  by  free  metal  ions  which  often  found  during
conventional wet impregnation, therefore, it is a more favorable method
than wet impregnation to receive the Hg0  removal of ~92% at 150
C
[11]. The FeCl3  modified biochar was doped with Cu or Mn by Zhao
et al. [136]. The biocharFe/Cu  had the stronger Hg adsorption capacity
than biocharFe/Mn due to Fe2O3 and CuO presented a synergistic effect.
C––O  and  –COOH,  chemisorbed  oxygen,  lattice  oxygen,  metal  oxides
and ions, and Cl ions were all effective active sites for the adsorption of
Hg0 assisted by heterogeneous oxidation. A part of Hg0 complexed with
C––O and –COOH to generate Hg-OM and -COOHg (Equations (32) and
(33)), the other part adsorbed on the vacancies of metal cations would
combine with the lattice oxygen in metal oxides to generate HgO. The
high-valent Mn ions from KMnO4 were observed to compete with Fe2O3
to adsorb and oxidize Hg0, failing to present a synergy between Mn and
Fe in this case, due to little cation vacancies and unsaturated chemical
bonds capable of the redox reaction were formed [136].

by chemisorbed oxygen, Fe3+

and Mn4+

and Mn2+

◦

CeO2 promoted the regeneration of the active ingredient MnO2 due
to the redox cycle occurred to produce new oxygen vacancies, the bio-
char with the Mn/Ce molar ratio of 2:1 presented the Hg capture ca-
◦
pacity of 83.6% at 150
C (Table S3) [54]. However, excessive Mn would
result in the decrease in redox activity and a noticeable decline of sur-
face area, would further leading to the reduction of active adsorption
and oxidation sites, and thereby inhibited the removal of Hg. Zeng et al.
[118] studied the biocharMn/Zr and found that the doping of ZrO2 did not
participate  in  the  capture  process  of  Hg0  directly,  but  could  help  to
improve the dispersity of MnOx and inhibit the pores blockage raised by
NH4I  modification,  thereby  could  benefit  the  formation  of  high
oxidation-state Mn. The Hg0  adsorption capacity of biocharMn/Zr  after
C and the Hg0 oxidation ratio
1440 min was up to 5587.0 μg/g at 150
was  higher  than  30%  after  reaching  adsorption  equilibrium.  The
chemisorption sites of C–I groups dominated the removal of Hg0 at the
initial  reaction  stage.  As  reaction  progressed,  chemisorption  was
weakened  owing  to  the  gradual  depletion  of  adsorption  sites,  never-
theless catalytic oxidation affected by hydroxyl oxygen and lattice ox-
ygen substituted chemisorption and dominated the capture of Hg0 at the
latter reaction step. O2  in the combustion flue gas replenished the hy-
droxyl oxygen and lattice oxygen to maintain the continuous oxidation
process. Tang et al. [128] also found that ZrO2 did not take part in Hg0
oxidation directly and rendered the well dispersed active components of

◦

/Co2+

◦
Cu. The superior performance of biocharCu/Zr of 98.87% at 120
C shown
in  Table  S3 might  be  attributed  to the  low  crystallinity, strong  redox
ability  of  Cu  and  good  porous  properties.  Li  et  al.  [137]  studied  a
Co-enriched biochar for sufficiently and properly utilizing the Siberian
Iris. The cobalt species in the biochar existing mainly as cobalt oxides
were  non-crystal  and  highly  dispersed,  which  was  benefit  to  the
Co3+
redox cycle and could produce active oxygen species with
the  assistance  of  gaseous  O2  to  receive  the  Hg  removal  efficiency  of
◦
C. Liu et al. [138] tried the eutectic salt (K2CO3+Li2CO3)
70.5% at 150
synthesis  and  CuS-doping  to  produce  biochar  from  rice  straw,  its
maximum  accumulative  mercury  adsorption  capacity  were  838  μg/g
◦
over 600 min at 100
both acted as the adsorption sites
and the Mars-Maessen mechanism was identified: Cu2+
ions oxidize the
Hgad
to form HgS, accompa-
nied by the formation of Cu
.

species and then react with S2(cid:0)

species from Cu2+

2+
0  into Hgad

C. Cu2+

and S2(cid:0)

+

◦

For better separating the spent halogen-modified biochars from fly
ash, one-step pyrolysis of sawdust and FeCl3  was carried out by Yang
et al. [106] and one-step pyrolysis of PVC and Fe(NO3)3-laden wood was
carried out by Xu et al. [64] and Fe(NO3)3 with waste tea by Altaf et al.
[119] to synthesize the biocharFe/Cl. The catalysis of Fe promoted the
release of volatile matters during co-pyrolysis, and then developed the
porous  texture  and  enhance  the  specific  surface  area  [64,119].  The
biocharFe/Cl  presented  much  higher  Hg0  removal  capacity  compared
with the biocharCl  over a wide range of adsorption temperature up to
C, as the chemisorption/oxidation of Hg0 played the more impor-
250
◦
tant roles to attain a removal capacity of 953 μg/g at 120
C (Table S3)
[106]. On one hand, the C–Cl group was generated after Fe activation
with PVC [64] and more oxygenic functional groups especially the C––O
group were produced with the activation of FeCl3. On the other hand,
Fe3O4 should also be helpful to the removal of Hg0, Fe3+
(t) coordination
in Fe3O4 could work as the active sites for the adsorption and oxidation
of Hg0, leading to the production of iron amalgamation, Fe3+
converted
into  Fe2+
(Equation  (45))  and  lattice  oxygen  which  assisted  the
adsorption of Hg0  to form HgO [64,106]. Yang et al. [106] found that
the role of Cl in the removal of Hg0  was not apparent due to the Cl in
biocharFe/Cl  existed  as  FeCl2  rather  than  the  effective  FeCl3.  The  Hg0
removal efficiencies were apparently promoted with the increase of Fe
loading  ratio,  however,  the  excessive  Fe  loading  may  inhibit  the
dispersion  of  Fe3O4  and  result  in  the  reduction  of  pore  volume  and
physisorption of Hg0, therefore, was not beneficial to the Hg0  removal
[64,106,119].

The DFT method can reveal the molecular structure and the mech-
anism of Hg adsorption on the metal-modified carbon materials more
clearly. Li et al. [139] revealed that the presence of oxygen in the carbon
skeleton can tune the electrons of small-sized Mn clusters, enhancing the
affinity  of  mercury  atoms  and  lowering  the  free  energy  of  mercury
adsorption.  Zhang  et  al.  [140]  found  that  the  mercury  adsorption
strength of metal-modified carbon materials was in the order of Ni > Cu
> Zn,  by  comparing  the  adsorption  energy,  adsorption  distance,  and
various  electronic  properties.  Qin  et  al.  [141]  studied  the  adsorption
reaction of Hg0 on iron-based modified biochar at different chemisorp-
tion sites (oxygen vacancy with electrons) and oxidation sites (mainly
Fe3+
, lattice oxygen and chemisorbed oxygen), and found the coupling
between them formed Hg–O–Fe-Ox-1  and the complex Hg-OM. In gen-
eral,  the  metal  functionalization  on  biochar  for  adsorption,  catalysis,
and reaction of Hg can be observed in Fig. 4.

Mars-Maessen mechanism:

2Mn4+ + Hg0

(ad) → 2Mn3+ + Hg2+

(ad)

Mn4+ + Hg0

(ad) → Mn2+ + Hg2+
(ad)

2Fe3+ + Hg0

(ad) → 2Fe2+ + Hg2+

(ad)

Fe3O4 → 3FeO + [O]

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109815

C. Wen et al.

3.3.4. Adsorption conditions

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

C  and  200

3.3.4.1. Temperature. A  lot  of  research  studied  the  Hg0  removal  ca-
pacity of biochar under the similar temperature range as upstream of the
C and  observed  the  in-
dust  removal  device  between  80
fluence of adsorption reaction temperature in the Hg0 removal [44,65,
C and the
85,87]. The biocharH2O2  had poor ability of 83.42% at 80
C [44], while the Hg0  uptakes
better  performance of 90.86% at 120
decreased  at  higher  temperature  than  140
C.  The  similar  work  on
biocharH2O2 showed the best removal of 78.99% at 130
C between 70
◦
C (Table S3) [85]. The Hg0 removal performance from hi-
C and 160
erarchically biochar by CaCO3 template also had the optimum temper-
◦
C [65]. The physisorption is an
ature of 120
exothermal  process, along  with the rising  temperature, the molecular
kinetic  energy  and  the  vibration  increase,  enhancing  the  amount  of
activated  molecules  and  the  collision  probability  of  each  other,  and
leading to more valid active sites capable of enhancing chemical reac-
tion for Hg0  removal. However, excessive temperature could result in
the weaken of adsorption power, the suppression of physisorption pro-
cess and even re-release of Hg0  on the surface of biochar [13], which
might inhibit the efficiency of Hg removal.

◦
C between 80

◦
C and 160

C to 250

◦
C–160

◦
When the reaction temperature enhanced form 80

C, the Hg
capture efficiencies increased from 81.16% to 93.96% for biocharNH4Br
[103] and from 73.4% to 95.7% for biocharKI  (Table S3) [126]. Mass
transfer  was  the  main  controlling  factor  on  Hg0  adsorption  at  80
C,
while the reaction at higher temperature was mainly controlled by the
chemisorption based on the kinetic simulation. The biocharMn/Zr loaded
with NH4I also presented an increased capacity from 50
C
[118]. They reported that the enhancement of Hg0 removal for halogen
activated biochar may be relevant to the elevation of the chemical re-
action between the increased chemically active sites and Hg0 [103,117,
126]. Li et al. [61] observed that the highest Hg0 removal efficiency of
biocharNH4Cl  from  municipal  waste  reached  97.3%  at  80
C  and
C. They also found the biocharNH4Cl  from
decreased to 50.7% at 180
◦
medicinal residues had a best Hg0 removal efficiency of 95% at 50
C but
◦
only 62% at 180
C [127]. They explained the chemisorption caused by
Hg  reaction  with  chloride  functional  groups  displayed  exothermic
behavior indicated by the negative enthalpy change, higher temperature
thus  inhibited  chemisorption  and  Hg  would  be  desorbed.  The  bromi-
nated biochar, the biochar from co-pyrolysis of wood and PVC and the
biochar from one-step co-pyrolysis of S-containing scrap tire and wood
◦
all showed the optimum temperature of 140
C and 220
◦
C
the
above-mentioned reasons [105]: reactants could acquire more kinetic
energy at high temperature, but too high temperature would restrict the
Hg0  physisorption and cause Hg0  desorption which was confirmed by
Hg-TPD  analysis.  Zhang  et  al.  [132]  found  that  the  amount  of
sulfur-containing groups (C–S) and carboxyl groups formed by the H2S
C,  however,  the  C–S
plasma  modification  helped  to  retain  Hg  at  30
bonds were easily broken to release the active S and form the sulfate at
high adsorption temperature of 150
C, which was likely to block the
pore structures of biochar and further inhibited the adsorption of Hg. As
a  result,  the  Hg  removal  efficiency  of  wheat  straw  biochar  decreased
apparently from 95.5% at 30

[105,107,112].  The  phenomena  were  attributed

◦
C between 25

C to 60.8% at 150

C (Table S3).

to

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

Biochar loaded with FeCl3  presented excellent Hg0  removal perfor-
mance  of  ~95%  at  120–180
C,  and  biochar  loaded  with  Fe(NO3)3
◦
presented a significant Hg0 removal of 94.81% at 180
C
C [119], while biochar loaded with Fe(NO3)3  and PVC pre-
and 300
sented the optimum Hg0  removal performance of ~80% at 140
C be-
◦
◦
tween 25
C [64]. The biocharMn/Fe presented the optimum
C and 220
Hg0  removal performance at 120
C [108],
the biocharMn/Ce  presented the optimum Hg0  removal performance at
150
C [54], the biocharCu/Zr  loaded with
NH4Cl presented the optimum Hg0  removal performance of 98.87% at
◦
120
C  [128],  and  the  biocharFe/Cu  had

◦
C between 30

C between 130

C  between  30

C between 80

C  and  270

C and 170

C and 140

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦
C in the range of 50–350

◦
C [136]. Zhao
optimum temperature of 200
et al. [136] observed that at 50
C, the pore texture of biochar was not
destroyed  obviously  and  only  the  adsorbed  mercury  species  blocked
some  narrow  pores.  At  the  higher  temperature  of  200
C,  abundant
mercury  species  were  adsorbed  meanwhile  the  thinner  pore  wall  of
biochar was destroyed to cause blockage of the micropores and deple-
◦
tion of the physisorption region. At the highest 350
C, the loaded active
metals onto the biochar were melted and fell, resulting in the depletion
of active centers and worse adsorption capacity of Hg. Furthermore, it
appears  that  as  the  reaction  temperature  raised  till  to  350
C,  the
oxidation capacity was improved due to the reactants could gain more
kinetic  energy,  accelerating  the  oxidation  reaction  of  Hg0  [106,118,
119].  However,  the  reaction  temperature  higher  than  200
C  might
reduce  the  physisorption,  as  well  as  HgO  and  HgCl2  may  undergo
decomposition and desorption caused by the catalysis of metal species
[136],  which  would  suppress  the  Hg0  adsorption  capacity  at  high
temperature.

◦

◦

3.3.4.2. Flue  gas. As the combustion flue gas is cooled gradually, ho-
mogenous  reactions  between  Hg  and  other  gas  components  and  het-
erogeneous  interactions  of  Hg  with  fly  ash  particles  and  biochar
adsorbents may happen, the interactions of biochar with the gases via
adsorption  and  homogenous/heterogeneous  oxidation  affect  the  mer-
cury  speciation  and  retention.  Therefore,  the  impacts  of  combustion
atmospheres such as flue gas components (SO2, NOx, HCl) and fly ash
particles  on  homogeneous  and  heterogeneous  reactions  and  on  Hg
removal efficiency of biochar should be assessed. The Hg0  removal ef-
ficiency of biochar was generally higher in simulated coal-fired flue gas
than in N2 atmosphere [101]. This might be relevant to acidic gases, e.g.,
low concentration of SO2, NO, and HCl, promoting the oxidation of Hg0
[105,109].

An  unusual  result  of  SO2  on  Hg0  removal  was  observed,  i.e.,  low
concentration of SO2 facilitated the removal of Hg0 apparently whereas
high concentration of SO2 (>~700 ppm) inhibited Hg0 capture [127].
As discussed in Section 3.1, part of SO2 adsorbed on biochar is oxidized
into SO3  and then reacted with H2O to form H2SO4, both the SO3  and
H2SO4 can react with Hg0 to generate HgSO4 in the oxygen containing
atmosphere (Equations (46) and (47)), thus enhancing the Hg0 retention
and removal efficiency [54,109]. However, when the SO2 concentration
increased, the competition adsorption of the SO2 and Hg0 happened [85,
103,128] and the excessive SO2 was more competitive than Hg0 in the
adsorption onto the biochar as its much higher concentration in flue gas
[126]. The existence of SO2 led to the conversion of active Co3+
to Co2+
,
2(cid:0)
which bonded with SO4
and thus decomposed difficultly at adsorption
temperatures (Equation (48)). As a result, SO2 would not only compete
with Hg0 for the lattice oxygen to form sulfate species but also react with
some metal oxides (such as Mn, Ce) onto the biochar to generate ther-
mally  stable  metal  sulfates  (Equations  (49)  and  (50))  [54,112],  both
covering  the  active  sites,  causing  the  deactivation  and  poisoning  of
biochar,  and  destructing  the  Hg0  removal  [43,108].  The  experiment
from Li et al. [137] emphasized that the metal sulfates poisoning was the
predominant reason compared with the competitive adsorption between
Hg0 and SO2. The occurrence of Fe could promote the sulfur poisoning
resistance  of  biochar  in  1200  ppm  SO2,  likely  owing  to  the  chemical
reaction  of  iron  oxides  and  SO2  [64],  the  biochar  generated  from
co-pyrolysis  of  S-containing  scrap  tire  and  wood  also  presented  an
excellent poisoning resistance in 1200 ppm SO2 [107], as SO2 adsorbed
onto the biochar should react with sulfide to produce elemental sulfur
which still provides active sites for Hg0 capture.

The existence of O2  and NO generally improved Hg0  removal. The
promoted  Hg  adsorption  by  O2  should  be  attributed  to  the  oxidized
mercury which can be readily adsorbed compared to the gaseous mer-
cury. However, the further increase of O2  concentration to about 10%
had little impact on Hg0 removal performance [107]. More importantly,
the  gas  phase  O2  could  replenish  the  chemisorbed  oxygen  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109816

C. Wen et al.

reestablish  the  lattice  oxygen  of  metal  oxides  effectively  on  metal
functionalized biochar [126], increased the Hg0  removal efficiency by
facilitating electron transfer and Hg0 oxidation [43,54,85,103,104,108,
112]. For biocharNH4Cl  loaded with Cu and Zr, the removal efficiency
◦
advanced little when the O2 content enhanced from 3% to 12% at 120
C
◦
C [128]. The removal of Hg0 was mainly
and enhanced slightly at 240
◦
determined by adsorption at low temperature of 120
C, and 3% O2 was
sufficient to the slight catalytic oxidation. Whereas, catalytic oxidation
C  [128]  and  high
turned  to  important  at  high  temperature  of  240
content  introduction  of  metal  oxides  [118],  much  contents  of  lattice
oxygen formed in the metal redox reactions can be replenished by the
high concentration of O2, thus facilitating the oxidation and removal of
Hg0.

◦

+

As discussed in Section 3.2, the biochar could be a catalyst for the
oxidation of NO with chemically adsorbed oxygen to produce new active
components  such  as  NO
and  NO2  in  the  presence  of  O2.  Although
gaseous NO is difficult to react with Hg0  homogeneously, the NO2  has
higher reactivity for the adsorbed Hg0 [43,103,127,137]. The produced
NO2 reacted with Hg0 to form Hg(NO3)2 on the biochar (Equations (51)
and (52)) [64,107,109], meanwhile the produced NO2 could also react
with Hg0 to generate HgO (Equations (53) and (54)) [54,108,127,137],
helping  with  the  oxidation  removal  of  Hg0.  The  presence  of  O2  is
necessary as the active N-containing species derived from the reaction of
limited active oxygen and NO should be gradually exhausted by Hg0 if
O2  was cut off [137]. However, excessive NO (~400–800 ppm [126])
was also reported to cover the active sites and consume surface oxygens
on  biochar,  suppressing  the  adsorption  performance  of  Hg0.  Li  et  al.
[127] reported that 100 ppm SO2 had a greater influence in Hg0 capture
than 100 ppm NO. In the co-presence of SO2  and NO, SO2  consumed
active oxygen and generated sulfates, leading to irreversible damage of
active  sites  on  the  biochar,  therefore,  the  activation  of  NO  and  the
following  reaction  between  Hg0  and  NO2  were  hampered  by  SO2,
limiting the Hg0  removal performance. It can be observed that no ho-
mogeneous oxidation reactions between gaseous Hg0 and individual gas
component of NO, O2, or SO2 occurred [101]. The SO2 together with O2
as well as NO2 with or without O2 were the major gas combination types
in charge of the homogeneous oxidation of gaseous Hg0 [101].

Although it is difficult for gaseous HCl to homogeneous react with
Hg0  owing to the high energy barrier [101,137], HCl had positive in-
fluences  in  Hg0  removal,  even  low  HCl  concentration  of  20–30  ppm
could substantially enhance the Hg0  removal performance [107,137].
The decomposition of adsorbed HCl produced active species Cl* which
was aided by the active O* that was supplemented by O2 [64,137], the
reaction path between gas-phase (or weakly bonded) Hg0 and adsorbed
HCl via E-R mechanism might dominantly form HgCl2  (Equations (55)
◦
C, the
and (56)). As the reaction temperature raised from 150
chemical reaction between Hg0  and Cl* was promoted, therefore facil-
itating  the  capture  of  Hg0  [137].  SO2  somewhat  inhibited  the  active
influence of HCl in the removal of Hg0 as the formation of metal sulfate
which hinds the chlorine species [137].

◦
C to 250

At the relative low H2O concentration, the decomposition of water
molecules  onto  the  biochar  produces  the  OH  radicals,  which  could
enhance the electron transfer processes and effectively oxidize Hg0  to
form HgO (Equations (57) and (58)), thereby promoting the Hg removal
[54,103]. The interactions between H2O and C–O complexes may also
promote the electron transfer processes to enhance the adsorption of Hg0
[30]. When the H2O concentration was high (~3–5% [54,109,127]), the
excessive water vapor may not only cause the competitive adsorption
with Hg0 onto the active sites but also coagulate on the surface of bio-
char to form water film which separates active sites from Hg0, both of
which  prevented  the  efficient  contact  between  Hg0  and  biochar,  and
thereby suppressed Hg0 removal [64,85,108,126,128]. The positive ef-
fect of the formed oxygenic functional groups might partially counteract
the negative role of H2O competitive adsorption, leading to only a mild
reduction in the removal capacity of Hg0 [30]. The water vapor can also
combine  with  the  Cu–Fe  mixed  oxides  and  SO3  to  generate  sulfates,

which  easily  caused  the  deactivation  of  biochar,  thereby  further
inhibited the removal of Hg0  [43]. Besides, the promoted Hg removal
efficiency by SO2 or NO was reported to be restrained by the addition of
3% H2O [127].

A  very  small  number  of  15  ppm  SO3  was  reported  to  lead  to  a
restricted Hg0 removal effect over biochar [142]. SO3 presented stronger
affinity with biochar than Hg0, strengthening the competitive adsorp-
tion  between  Hg0  and  SO3.  Furthermore,  the  metal  sulfates  were
generated to seal up the active sites especially in the presence of H2O.
The deposition of H2SO4 and HgSO4 on the biochar further suppressed
the Hg0 removal. Whereas, as the concentration of SO3 enhanced to 200
ppm, the oxidation performance of Hg0 enhanced, owing to SO3 assisted
the formation of C––O groups and had no obvious damage on the C–Cl
groups, both of which played as effective active sites for the removal of
Hg0 [142].

NH3 was reported to negatively affect Hg0 removal [98], it presented
prohibitive  influence  in  adsorption  and  oxidation  of  Hg0  for  bio-
charCu/Zr, which was mainly ascribed to, on one hand, the competitive
adsorption  between  NH3  and  Hg0,  on the  other hand,  NH3  generated
+
adsorbed species such as NH4
and NH3 that occupied the active sites and
consumed surface active oxygen, which limited to the oxidation of Hg0
[128]. However, the adsorbed NH3 promoted the Hg removal process of
Cl plasma modified biochar [131]. NH3 turned Cl
* which
assembled with C to generate C–Cl group. As both NH3 and NO existed in
flue gas, the Hg removal capacity was lower than the case that the two
gases  presented  alone,  owing  to  NO  would  be  depleted  with  NH3  to
generate  N2  and  H2O  (Equation  (14)).  When  the  NH3  and  SO2  were
co-existed, SO2  inhibited Hg removal through competitive adsorption,
the formed sulfates and sulfites were more likely to block the biochar
pores and occupied the active site (Equation (59)), thus deteriorating the
efficiency of Hg removal [131].

to active Cl

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

Under oxyfuel (O2/CO2) combustion atmosphere, on one hand, the
amount of chemisorbed oxygen on biochar was decreased as the high
concentration of CO2, hence inhibiting the production of HgO on bio-
char in comparison to air atmosphere. On the other hand, the abundant
CO2  at oxyfuel combustion atmosphere caused the formation of much
C––O groups, which accelerate the electron transfer to generate Hg-OM
(Equation  (32)).  In  oxyfuel  combustion  condition,  the  heterogeneous
oxidation of Hg by biochar was noticeably promoted [143]. Besides, the
Fe3+
(t) coordination also performed as Hg active site in oxyfuel atmo-
sphere. The 8% H2O apparently inhibited the Hg removal by biochar,
owing to the water occupied active sites helpful to the adsorption of Hg.

H2SO4 (ad) + Hg0

(ad) +

1
O2 → H2SO4 (ad) + H2O
2

Hg0 + SO3 +

1
2

O2→HgSO4

CoO + O* + SO2 → Co2+ (cid:0) SO2(cid:0)

4

2MnO2 + 3SO2 + O2→Mn2(SO4)3

2CeO2 + 3SO2 + O2→Ce2(SO4)3

Hg0 + 2NO2 + O2→Hg(NO3)2

4Hg0

(g) + 4NO2 (g) + O2 (g) → Hg2(NO3)2 + Hg2(NO2)2

Hg0

(ad) + NO2 (ad) → HgO(ad) + NO(ad)

Hg0

(ad) + NO2 (g) → HgO(ad) + NO(g)

Eley-Rideal mechanism:

O* + 2HCl(ad) → 2Cl*(ad) + H2O

(46)

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

(53)

(54)

(55)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109817

C. Wen et al.

Hg0 + 2Cl*(ad)→HgCl2

H2O → OH + H

OH + Hg0 → HgO + H

NH3 (ad) + H2SO4 (ad)→NH4HSO4 (ad)

3.4. Adsorption performance of CO2

(56)

(57)

(58)

(59)

The global atmospheric concentration of CO2 has risen sharply from
a preindustrial value of around 280 ppmv to approximately 419 ppmv
currently.  To  address  this  issue,  current  processes  for  pre-  and  post-
combustion capture of CO2  have their respective advantages and limi-
tations.  The  pre-combustion  capture  of  CO2  is  adapted  to  integrated
gasification combined cycle (IGCC) plants, while the post-combustion
capture  consumes 20–30  wt%  aqueous MEA  and  leads  to  an  80%  in-
crease  in  the  electricity  cost  for  power  plants  [1].  However,  the
adsorption  technique  using  solid  sorbents  capable  of  capturing  CO2
reversibly from flue gas streams is a promising option [21]. Table S4 of
the Supplementary Materials summarizes the preparation conditions of
biochar, and the typical adsorption conditions and optimum adsorption
performance of CO2 by biochars.

3.4.1. Treatment conditions of biochar

3.4.2. Activation conditions of biochar

Many efforts have been carried out to increase the CO2  adsorption
capacity  of  biochar  through  treatments  of  physical  modification  with
carbon  dioxide  activation  [26,39,150,156,159–161],  air  activation
[147],  steam  activation  [36,162–164],  H2O2  activation  [165],  and
chemical  activation  treatments  with  KOH  [48,145,148,149,165–169],
H3PO4 [150], H3PO4+KOH [170], K2CO3 [38,39,171], ZnCl2 [170,172].
Activation  of  biochar  with  CO2  at  different  burn-off  degrees  was
studied by Plaza et al. [159,160], the CO2 adsorption capacity enhanced
as  increasing  the  burn-off  rate  from  20%  to  40%  but  decreased  at
burn-off rate of 50%, as it led to the narrow micropores widen. Zhang
et al. [173] reported the impacts of CO2 activation temperature on the
CO2  adsorption capacity, they found the adsorption uptake of biochar
improved  significantly  from  500
C  and  decreased  slightly
◦
after 800
C. They believed that higher temperature was favorable to the
production  of  micropores.  However,  some  micropores  might  be  coa-
lesced to form mesopores or macropores at higher temperature and then
weakened the adsorption capacity of CO2. Gonz ́alez et al. [156] studied
the effect of holding time (0.5–8 h) during CO2  activation, they found
that at too long activation time of 6 h, the walls of adjacent micropores
collapsed to produce wider pores, causing a decreased CO2 uptake at 25
◦
C. Rashidi et al. [26] designed the Taguchi experiments and presented
that the processing temperature had the most important effects on CO2
adsorption  capacity  of  biochar  as  it  had  most  development  of
micro-porosity, followed by biomass precursors, holding time, gas flow
rate, particle size, and heating rate.

C  to  800

◦

◦

Thermal treatment conditions of biomass for preparing biochar in-
fluence the adsorption capacity of CO2, including the properties of the
starting biomass material, the thermal processing measures (pyrolysis,
oxidation [58,144–147], HTC [48,148–152]), the processing tempera-
ture, the gas flow rate, the heating rate, the holding time, and so on.

◦

With  the  pyrolysis  temperature  raised  up  to  600–900

C,  the  CO2
adsorption capacities on biochars were widely reported to be improved
gradually [153,154]. By contrast, Huang et al. [155] presented that 550
◦
C was the optimal temperature for pyrolysis between 250
C and 600
C. Generally, high temperature pyrolysis resulted in structural evolu-
tion  and  defect  creation  of  biochar  to  develop  the  surface  area  and
micro-porosity [153]. The similar size of micropores as CO2  molecule
(with kinetic diameter of 0.33 nm) varies from 0.4 to 0.9 nm and is thus
advantageous  to  CO2  adsorption  [156].  However,  as  the  temperature
increased, the more drastic reactions accelerated the gas diffusion rate,
which is no longer desirable for generating micropores [156].

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

C and 504

C was less than that by microwave pyrolysis at ~321

The  microwave  pyrolysis  is  capable  of  forming  the  biochar  with
saved consumption of cost, time, and energy in comparison to conven-
tional  pyrolysis.  Huang  et  al.  [155]  reported  that  the  maximum  CO2
adsorption  amount  of  biochar  prepared  by  conventional  pyrolysis  at
550
C, which
possessed the highest specific surface area between 224
C.
The higher power levels and temperatures may cause pore destruction
and decrease the adsorption capacity due to the physisorption capacity
of CO2 was greatly relevant to the BET specific surface area of biochar.
The  HTC  pretreatment  of  biomass  is  sometimes  important  as  oxygen
functionalities  of  biochar  decreased  significantly  compared  with  con-
ventional  pyrolysis  treatment,  biochar  thus  reflects  the  hydrophobic
properties making them favorable as an adsorbent for the hydrophobic
and non-polar CO2  [21,48]. The pyrolysis assisted by a typical ternary
carbonate  molten  salt  (K2CO3–Na2CO3–Li2CO3)  under  different
inducing atmospheres of air or nitrogen was used to fabricate the porous
hierarchical biochar [157]. The biocharair had a CO2 adsorption capacity
of  72.42  mg/g,  which  depends  on  the  combination  of  the  improved
micro-pore surface area and the accessible dispersed basic adsorption
sites (e.g., the metal species and the surface N and O containing func-
tional groups) of biochar. Poultry litter was used for synthesizing the
biochar  and  then  the  biochar-based  nanofibers  (~579  nm)  through
electrospinning  [158],  its  adsorption  capacity  of  pure  CO2  at  20
C
reached 426 mg/g because of a high surface area and porosity.

◦

The  steam  activated  biochar exhibited  a  narrow  micro-porosity  of
0.3–0.8 nm which indicated evident positive correlation with high CO2
adsorption capacity [163]. Besides, the higher proportion of C–O, a basic
functional group, was reported to form after steam activation and could
result  in  stronger  electrostatic  or  hydrogen  bonding  interaction  with
acidic CO2  [163]. The use of O2  as the activating gas was reported to
achieve  a  similar  effects  with  the  CO2  or  steam  activation  at  lower
◦
activation temperatures [144]. Activation by 5% O2 at 500
C resulted in
biochar with comparable micropore volume as air activation at the same
temperature,  meanwhile  the  increase  in  activation  temperature  from
500
C reduced the mean micropore size and improved the
micropore volume, presenting the narrowest range of 0.3–0.4 nm which
showed a sufficient potential for adsorbing CO2  [144]. Only one study
treated the biochar with H2O2 for improving the CO2 adsorption, more
oxygenic functional groups and narrower micro-porosity were achieved
[165].

C to 650

◦

◦

KOH activation process introduced more micropores onto the surface
of  biochar  although it  also  introduced  more  oxygen  atoms  to  present
acidic [21,162], the larger impact of porosity in biocharKOH  presented
higher  adsorption  capacity  of  CO2  than  biocharH2O  and  biocharCO2.
Several studies have shown the promising CO2 uptake for biocharKOH at
low pressure conditions that mimic the post capture environment of CO2
◦
from combustion flue gas, up to 1.5–2.0 mmol/g at 25
C and 0.15 atm
(Table S4) [151,167]. Among a variety of preparation conditions, the
activation time, the mass ratio of KOH/C and the activation temperature
may have obvious impacts on biochars for the adsorption of CO2 [145,
166]. Biochar produced at the activation time of 1–1.5 h showed the
largest  micropore  volume  and  the  optimum  adsorption  of  CO2  [145,
166].  Sevilla  et  al.  [148]  indicated  that  the  biochars  attained  under
milder conditions (KOH/biochar = 2) showed the high micro-porosity of
>80% composed of narrow micropores of <1 nm. The fraction of narrow
micro-porosity  depends  significantly  upon  the  activation  degree  to
which  biomass  underwent,  indicating  a  good  CO2  adsorption  perfor-
mance. Wei et al. [166] reported that the optimal activation tempera-
◦
ture of bamboo biocharKOH for CO2 adsorption was 600
C in the range
of 500–850
C and observed the adsorption amount of CO2  first raised
and then reduced with the enhancement of KOH/C mass ratio from 1 to
5,  with  the  ratio  of  3  exhibiting  the  maximum  adsorption.  However,
other research [151,167] reported that the optimal KOH/C mass ratio
◦
and activation temperature of biochar were 2 and 700
C. The optimum

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109818

C. Wen et al.

◦

KOH/C ratio of 1:1 and activation temperature of 800
C were also re-
ported to exhibit the maximum CO2 capacity because of its higher pore
volume and BET surface area, as well as higher basic oxygenic functional
groups and oxidized sulfur content [169]. The acidity of sulfur causes
oxygen to be negatively charged, which is conducive to attracting CO2
[169]. Therefore, the optimum KOH/C ratio and activation temperature
for  biochars  prepared  from  different  precursors  should  be  carefully
selected to create desired narrow micropores of biochars for favorable
CO2 adsorption [145,166,167], which have strong adsorption potentials
at atmospheric pressure [148]. Igalavithana et al. [52] indicated that the
activation  of  KOH  plus  CO2  could  not  further  increased  the
micro-porosity derived from KOH activation, the further activation with
CO2  even might enlarge the micropores forming mesopores due to the
overreaction of biochar with CO2 [21].

◦

K2CO3  is chosen to replace the KOH sometimes as it can avoid the
high  temperature  corrosion  and  environmental  hazard  of  KOH  effec-
tively  [38,39].  The  micropore  volume  and  surface  area  generally
increased  with  raising  the  activation  temperature  (600–800
C),  the
narrow micropores abundant in biochar was the determining factor of its
good CO2 adsorption capacity. The adsorption amount was also reported
to improve as the increase of K2CO3 loading up to 20% [171], indicating
the efficient chemisorption forming KHCO3 as both the pore volume and
surface area decreased (Equations (60)–(62)). Heidari et al. [170] pre-
pared the biochar activated by H3PO4+KOH and ZnCl2, they found the
lowest impregnation ratio (0.75 g/g) of ZnCl2 into biochar had the 100%
micropore structure and the most CO2  adsorption amount, presenting
better efficiency than H3PO4 activation, while the adsorption ability of
CO2  increased and then rapidly decreased as increasing of the impreg-
nation ratio of H3PO4 from 1.5 to 2.5 g/g, attributed to the formation of
more mesopores as well as low micro-porosity.

On the whole, the adsorption of CO2  using biochar is mainly asso-
ciated  with  micro-porosity,  large  surface  area,  and  surface  chemical
properties.  The  narrow  micropores  enhance  their  filling  by  the  CO2
molecules  and  thus  have  stronger  adsorption  potentials  than  larger
micropores  and  mesopores  [150].  Wei  et  al.  [166]  observed  that  the
pore size of ~0.55 nm contributed dominantly to CO2  adsorption at 1
bar,  as  it  supplies  enough  spaces  for  the  CO2  molecules  with  kinetic
diameter of 0.33 nm to adjust their orientation and accommodate itself
onto the pore wall. Coromina et al. [151] indicated that the energy of
adsorption was optimized when the pore size of biochar was 2–3 times
than the size of CO2 molecule, the optimum pore size was thus between
0.7 and 0.9 nm for the excellent adsorption of CO2 at 1 bar. Deng et al.
[167]  reported  the  linear  correlation  between  the  amount  of  CO2
◦
C and 1 bar and the pore volume in the range 0.33–0.63
adsorbed at 25
nm, as well as the effective adsorption performance of the narrow mi-
◦
cropores of 0.33–0.48 nm at 25
C and 0.15 bar. Evidently, the narrower
micropore is mainly responsible to CO2  adsorption under the practical
flue gas conditions with lower pressure, which will be further discussed
in Section 3.4.4. For the physisorption mainly controlled by the narrow
micropores,  there  is  possibly  no  influence  of  biomass  precursors  and
preparation  method  on  the  linear  correlation  between  the  micropore
volume of biochar and the adsorption amount of CO2  [166]. Besides,
Feng et al. [164] found the mesopores volume and adsorption capacity
were also correlated positively, the channel role of mesopores for the
diffusion  and  transport  of  gas  molecules  into  abundant  micropores
appeared to be important to the adsorption performance of CO2 as well.
Noteworthy, the high content of aromatic structures in biochar might
increase the van der Waals forces between carbon structure of biochar
and CO2, which would also improve the physisorption of hydrophobic
CO2 [21,163].

K2CO3 ↔ K2O + CO2

K2O + H2O→2KOH

KOH + CO2→KHCO3

(60)

(61)

(62)

3.4.3.

Impacts of functionalization

3.4.3.1. Ammonia/amines. Fig.  3  presents  the  ammonia  and  amine
functionalization on biochar for adsorption and reaction of CO2 together
with SO2. The basic amines are nucleophilic and play as electron-donors
due  to  the  occurrence  of  a  lone  pair  of  electrons,  allowing  them  to
interact  effectively  with  the  acidic  CO2,  which  is  weak  Lewis  acid  as
electron-acceptor  because  of  the  strong  electron  negativity  of  oxygen
atoms [56]. The strong pole-pole interactions occur between the polar
sites associated to nitrogen functional groups and the large quadrupole
moment of CO2 molecules to form covalent bonding [46]. The ammonia
modification of biochar is thus a promising method for promoting the
adsorption  capacity  of  CO2  [159,160],  it  is  generally  attached  with
biochar through impregnation or grafting [57]. Samanta et al. [1] listed
the name and structure of widely used amines for sorbents functionali-
zation. HNO3+ammonia gas [31], gaseous ammonia [58,159,160,165,
173–175], ammonia solution [164], urea [168,176], organic ammoni-
ated  chemicals  [56,57,152,177]  were  reported  to  functionalize  the
biochars.

Both the porous texture and nitrogen amount and types affect the
CO2  adsorption  performance  of  N-doped  biochars  [165,178].  On  one
hand, the ammonia decomposes at high temperature forming atomic H
and NH2 and NH radicals that react with the carbon, the gasification at
high  temperature  produces  the  high  BET  surface  area  and  narrow
micro-porosity that promotes physisorption of CO2 [174]. On the other
hand, nitrogen can interact with the carbon matrix by reaction between
surface  oxides  or  active  sites  in  biochar  and  ammonia  to  generate
ammonium salts and amine groups and then produce various nitrogen
functional  groups  [159].  Zhang  et  al.  [173]  elaborately  discussed
chemical  reaction  and  mechanisms  between  amine  and  CO2.  On  one
hand,  C–OH  and  C–O–C  respectively  reacted  with  ammonia  to  form
amines, and then react with CO2 to generate N–COO (Equations (63) and
(64)). On the other hand, the formation of pyridine C––N and C––O was
caused by the dehydration reaction of ammonium carbamate or carba-
mic acid, providing more active sites for nitrogen functionalities. The
type of the nitrogen functional groups, e.g., pyridine-like functionalities,
apart from their amount, was reported by Shafeeyan et al. [58] to affect
the CO2  uptake, meanwhile pyrrolic-N (N-5) should be more favorable
for CO2  adsorption than pyridinic-N and quaternary-N (N-Q) [38,152,
168,178]. Feng et al. [164] adopted quantum chemistry simulation on
the CO2 adsorption by biochar first time, they confirmed the strong in-
teractions between pyridine-N and CO2  molecules. Zhang et al. [179]
revealed the adsorption mechanisms using in-situ DRIFTS to monitor the
interfacial reactions between biochar and CO2, they discovered the hy-
droxyl,  amines,  primary  amide,  secondary  amide  groups,  N––N  and
aliphatic C–N/C–O were all useful active sites to interact with CO2 at the
◦
adsorption temperature between 30
C, while the secondary
amide  group  showed  decreased  effects  on  CO2  adsorption  when  the
temperature  raised  to  120
C.  The  ZIF-8  (zeolitic  imidazolate  frame-
works)  was  grafted  onto  biochar  to  form  nitrogen-enriched  modified
biochar  [180],  the  results  showed  that  the  in-situ  synthesis  method
improved the dispersion of ZIF-8 nanoparticles containing high nitrogen
content of >10%, and the modified biochar contained more micropores
centered  at  0.8–1.5  nm  and  abundant  pyrrolic  nitrogen.  The  DFT
calculation indicated that on one hand, the van der Waals effect mainly
dependent on the pores ranged from 0.62 to 0.72 nm is decisive in the
CO2 adsorption performance, on the other hand, the nitrogen and oxy-
gen functional groups, especially C–O/C––O and graphitic-N, have an
apparent synergistic effect on CO2  adsorption [181]. Thermal treating
biochar with ammonia gas at temperature from 400
C was
studied, it can be observed that the formation of new micro-porosity of
<1 nm [58] and the nitrogen content in biochar was maximum at 600
◦
◦
C [173] or 800
C [59,159,160], respectively, leading to improved CO2
adsorption capacity of biochar. The gasification with carbon increased
at higher temperature to produce higher BET surface area and narrow

C and 60

C to 900

◦

◦

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109819

C. Wen et al.

◦
micro-porosity, however, the gasification was too severe above 800
C at
which the narrow micropores were decreased owing to the collapse of
adjacent  pore  structures,  causing  the  decreased  adsorption  of  CO2  at
high temperature [58,59,177].

◦

The important role of nitrogen functionalities in CO2 adsorption was
demonstrated by the lower textural development but similar adsorption
capacity of biocharNH3  compared with biocharCO2  [159]. Zhang et al.
◦
[173] prepared the CO2-ammonia modification biochars from 500
C to
C,  they  found  that  the  presence  of  CO2  generated  a  number  of
900
functional  active  sites  that  prompted  the  production  of  the  nitrogen
functional  groups,  implying  that  the  modification  of  CO2-ammonia
combined the advantages of those two treatments. The N-doped biochar
decreased  in  nitrogen  content after  KOH  activation [165,178],  which
was probably due to the formed nitrogen groups during ammoxidation
were  low  thermal  stability.  Meanwhile,  the  doped  nitrogen  can  addi-
tionally activate biochar upon KOH treatment, which belonged to the
depth  activation  and  increased  the  narrow  microporous  textures  of
biochar [178]. Chen et al. [168] activated the coconut shell at 650
C
with KOH and urea, they observed that both high porosity and sufficient
nitrogen amount worked together in the great CO2 adsorption of formed
biochar.  At  too  high  temperature,  coarser  pore  sizes  were  developed
because of the gasification caused by the decomposition of potassium
salts.  It  is  noteworthy  that  a  deashing  treatment  on  biomass  was  re-
ported  to  promote  the  porous  texture  of  N-enriched  biochar  and  the
introduction of nitrogen functional groups by increasing the number of
active sites [175].

◦

◦

◦

Ultrasonic irradiation at a short time of 30 s can leach the minerals
from biochar and making space for amine groups to attach, meanwhile
not only expedite the mass transport inside the pores due to increased
turbulence but also hinder the generation of an agglomerated graphitic
layer by exfoliation of biochar, thus the process can prevent the blocking
of  pores  and  aid  in  enhancing  surface  area  that  supplies  active  sites
capable of amine groups functionalization, and then benefited to CO2
C and CO2  partial pressure of
adsorption arriving 2.79 mmol/g at 70
0.15 atm [56] and 1.91 mmol/g at 70
C and  0.10 atm CO2  [57], as
shown in Table S4. However, too long sonication time foiled the pro-
duction and collapse of microbubbles and would reduce ultrasonic ef-
ficiency and adsorption performance of CO2. The ball-milling method
has also been applied to produce N-doped biochars eco-friendly [46].
The volumes of total pore and micropore as well as BET surface area of
biochars increased after ball milling, strengthening the beneficial effect
of earlier doped N on CO2  adsorption. The existence of acidic oxygen
functional groups is generally not benefit to CO2 adsorption, however, it
is a good idea to develop some oxygenated anchoring sites as an effective
intermediate stage to introduce nitrogen functionalities onto the biochar
[58,59]. The pre-oxidation of biochar was thus considered to enhance
the  nitrogen  incorporation  during  ammonia  treatment,  and  displayed
enhanced adsorption ability of CO2 at relatively high temperature [58].
H2O2 treatment was also carried out to increase oxygenic functionalities
and further enhance the amount of nitrogen functional groups in bio-
char, it meanwhile had a favorable influence in promoting the narrow
micro-porosity  of  N-doped  biochar,  leading  to  an  impressive  CO2
adsorption performance of 4.47 mmol/g at 25

C (Table S4) [165].

◦

(cid:0) OH + NH3→ (cid:0) NH2 + H2O

2R (cid:0) NH2 + CO2 → R (cid:0) NH+

3 + R (cid:0) NH (cid:0) COO(cid:0)

(63)

(64)

3.4.3.2. Metal modification. Xu et al. [182] found that the chemisorp-
tion  induced  by  CO2  mineralogical  reactions  was  promoted  by  high
temperature. They separated the inorganic fraction of biochar for indi-
rectly determining the role of the chemisorption induced by reactions of
mineral components (Ca, Fe, Mg, K, etc) in CO2 adsorption [182], which
accounted for 17.7%–50.9% of CO2 adsorption when assuming without
interactions  occurred  between  the  organic  and  mineral  portions  of
biochar.  Metal  oxyhydroxides  commonly  possessed  basic,  thus  was

◦

likely to interact with CO2  when polar surfaces are in contact. Cotton-
wood was treated with metal ions (AlCl3, FeCl3, and MgCl2 hexahydrate)
and  then  pyrolyzed  to  prepare  biochar-based  composites  with  metal
oxyhydroxide crystalline nanoparticles. The composites especially the
biocharAl  had  better  adsorption  uptake  of  CO2  than  the  unmodified
biochar [183]. As the concentration of Al increased, the adsorption of
CO2 of biocharAl increased as well, mainly contributed by the process of
surface adsorption. In this work, the Mg(OH)2 particles rather than MgO
particles  were  introduced,  possibly  caused  by  too  much  water  input
leading to the transformation of MgO into Mg(OH)2. Mg(OH)2 particles
can chemisorb CO2  only under high temperatures of 200–315
C and
high pressure conditions [183]. The biochar-based composites loaded
with  Fe  oxyhydroxide  nanoparticles  was  further  studied  [184].  The
dominant mechanism of CO2 adsorption was physisorption for the bio-
char  composites  with  low  Fe  content.  As  the  increase  of  Fe  content,
biocharFe showed enhanced CO2 adsorption capacity come from chem-
isorption contributed by the collapse of the crystalline structures and the
structure  disordering  enhancing  the  mineral  carbonation  of  CO2
(Equations (65) and (66)). Several basic metals were also loaded to the
biochar skeleton  by the methods of wet impregnation and heat treat-
ment, the introduction of basic metal sites enhanced the CO2 adsorption
performance of biochars with 5 wt% metal loading in the sequence of
Mg > Al > Fe > Ni > Ca > raw biochar > Na via the synergistic physical
and chemical interactions [153]. The basic O2(cid:0)
in MgO was the main
CO2 capture sites, which was generated from thermal decomposition of
anhydrous magnesium nitrate and reacted with CO2 to form carbonate
(Equation (67)). Sodium incorporated biochar presented worse capacity
than raw biochar due to the incorporated Na failed to form Na2O, thus
not  only  failed  to  promote  the  chemisorption,  but  also  hampered  the
physisorption performance caused by pore blockage.

The impregnation of Mg onto the biochar structure was reported to
improve  the  capture  of  CO2  in  the  order  of  magnesium  acetate  <
magnesium chloride < magnesium sulfate < magnesium nitrate [154].
The worst capacity of acetate was attributed to the applied calcination
◦
temperature of 500
C may insufficient to generate oxides which should
be decomposed by the acetate salt, as a contrast, the decomposition of
◦
magnesium nitrate towards magnesium oxide initiates at around 400
C.
Too high Mg impregnation of 7%–20% on biochar would cause the pore
blockage,  thus  reducing  the  advantage  of  chemisorption  from  metal
loading [153,154]. The fast pyrolysis MgCl2-loaded biomass were syn-
thesized to form biochar stabilized with MgO nanoparticles, achieving a
favorable  CO2  capture  amount  of  5.45  mmol/g  at  80
C  (Table  S4)
[185]. Pyrolysis at 800
C presented the highest pore volume and sur-
face area, in comparison to other temperature and raw biochar without
MgO, confirming that the dehydration and decomposition of magnesium
chloride hexahydrate changed the decomposition pathway of biomass,
promoted the release of volatile matter, and thus promoted the porous
properties  and  CO2  capture  capacity  [185].  The  basic  O2(cid:0)
in  oxides
around the edges and corners of crystal surfaces is frequently more basic
than those near the planes. The MgO nanoparticles present more edges
and corners per unit weight because of their small size, thus containing
more basic O2(cid:0)
and providing more active sites for CO2 chemisorption
[153,185].  A  dependable  mechanism  of  CO2  capture  by  biochar  was
plotted by Luo et al. [186].

◦

◦

Furthermore, the hydrogen bonding produced from the interactions
of the OH groups and CO2 molecule can boost the CO2 capture capacity,
however  this  weak  bonding  may  be  destroyed  at  high  temperature
[185]. The S-containing function groups were also reported to benefit
the adsorption of CO2 [21,52].
CO2 (ad) + OH(cid:0) →HCO(cid:0)

3 (ad)

(65)

FeOOH + HCO(cid:0)

3 (ad)→Fe(OH)2CO3 (s)

Mg (cid:0) O + CO2 → Mg (cid:0) O...CO2(ad)

(66)

(67)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109820

C. Wen et al.

3.4.4. Adsorption conditions

◦

3.4.4.1. Temperature. For  the  physical  interaction,  the  adsorption  ca-
pacity of CO2 drops as the elevation of adsorption temperature outlined
by Le Chatelier principles, however, with regard to the chemical inter-
action, the capacity increases with an increase in adsorption tempera-
ture  firstly  but  declined  with  a  more  increase  in  temperature  [185].
Creamer  et  al.  [187]  reported  that  when  the  adsorption  experiments
◦
were performed at 25–100
C, the adsorption capacity of CO2 by biochar
declined linearly with increasing the temperature. The similar tendency
was also found in the biocharKOH  work at 0–100
C [48,148,162,169,
◦
◦
170], biocharCO2 at 0–120
C [26,39], biocharNH3 at 20–105
C [31,58],
◦
and  bicharMg  at  25–70
C  [153].  The  exothermic  characteristics  of
physisorption  would  be  increased  at  higher  temperatures,  which  in-
dicates the increase of the diffusion rate of gas molecule and the energy
of surface adsorption and further leads to the increment of thermal en-
ergy  of  CO2  molecules  and  the  decrease  of  adsorption  force  onto  the
biochar  [48,175].  As  increasing  the  temperature,  only  the  narrowest
pores  mainly  acting  as  the  most  energetic  adsorption  sites  maintain
occupied, more pores in biochar are useless for the adsorption of CO2 via
pore-filling mechanism [156]. Plenty of CO2 adsorbed at low tempera-
ture would obtain sufficient energy at higher temperature to get over the
van  der Waals  forces and get back to the gas phase [59]. Deng et al.
◦
[167] reported that when the adsorption temperature raised from 25
C
◦
C at 1 bar, the range of micropores effectively for the adsorption
to 75
of CO2 narrowed from 0.33-0.63 nm to 0.33–0.52 nm. For the ammonia
treated biochar, the observed CO2  adsorption performance of biochar
was  linear  correlated  with  the  micropore  volume  at  low  adsorption
C. However, at higher temperature of 105–120
temperature of 20–30
◦
C, it was noticeable to be dependent on the existence of basic nitrogen
functional groups of biochar [58,172,173]. The porosity development
became no longer important as the adsorption temperature increased,
but the regeneration of chemisorption active sites will be more difficult
as  the  promoted  chemisorption  at  high  temperature  [175].  The  in-
teractions of both physical and chemical adsorption controlled the CO2
capture by the MgO loaded biochar, with a best removal capacity at 80
◦
◦
C between 50 and 300
C [185]. Xu et al. [182] also found the transition
of  CO2  adsorption  mechanisms  by  biochar  from  physisorption  to
chemisorption  as  the  increase  of  reaction  temperature,  causing  the
◦
removal of CO2 enhanced from 50
C. To sum up, the capture of
CO2 can be carried out at relative high temperature when the developed
biochar has more ultra-micropores or enhanced chemisorption capacity.

◦
C to 75

◦

◦

3.4.4.2. Flue gas. The research on the CO2 partial pressure with ~15%
of CO2  in N2/CO2  atmosphere were widely proceeded to simulate the
flue  gas  condition  of  coal-fired  boiler  [31,153,156,159,160,168,174],
and other CO2  concentrations were also concerned as it can represent
different types of post-combustion flue gases, such as that produced by a
natural gas fired plant of 8% CO2  and by a cement plant of 30% CO2
[147]. When inlet concentration of CO2 increased, the diffusion velocity
of  CO2  increased  through  the  pores  of  biochar,  thus  promoting  the
adsorption  capacity  of  CO2  [39,56,162,169].  The  CO2  adsorption  ca-
C and 1 bar in CO2/N2  = 15%:85% was thus
pacity of biochar at 25
lower than that in pure CO2 flow [160]. A new machine learning study
on  the  carbon  materials  from  biomass  revealed  both  the  volumes  of
mesopores and micropores played an important role at 0.1 bar according
to the random forest model [188]. At the pressure up to 1 bar, the uptake
of CO2 was dominantly controlled by the pore size and accordingly the
interactions between the pore walls and gas molecules, wherein biochar
with  narrow  micropores  had  the  higher  CO2  uptake  [151].  As  the
decrease  of  CO2  partial  pressure,  the  occurred  nitrogen  functional
groups or a narrower pore size distribution in biochar appears to become
important,  instead  of  the  surface  area  [159].  Linear  correlations  of
narrow micropore ranges of biochar adsorbed at 0.15 bar were calcu-
lated [146,167], 0.33–0.40 nm was indicated to be mainly responsible

for the adsorption of CO2, obviously narrower than 0.33–0.52 nm at 75
◦
C and 1 bar [167]. The improved texture and functionalities charac-
teristic  of the  biocharamine  presented  an impressive  CO2  uptake up  to
◦
8.89 mmol/g in CO2/N2 = 20%:80% at 20
C and 1 bar (Table S4) [31].
The CO2 uptake rose rapidly as the pressure increased (0.01–1 bar [36,
166,167], 0.5–4 bar  [161], and  1–16–20 bar  [59,151,170]). Biochars
with high surface area was able to have better performance at higher
pressure of 20 bar which mimics the pre-combustion CO2 capture [151],
the  removal  mechanism  is  more  dependent  on  surface  area  or  space
filling, therefore, pore diffusion is the major governing mechanism and
wider pores become more relevant for the CO2 adsorption [36]. Lahijani
et al. [153] observed the influence of CO2 gas flow rate in the adsorption
uptake of biochar, they found that the adsorption and surface saturation
were speeded up to signify the CO2 capture under a high gas flow rate
but  the  ending  adsorption  amount  remained  almost  unchanged  if
providing sufficient time.

Multi gas component adsorption experiments simulating the real flue
gas were conducted to observe the CO2 capture performance by biochar
[189,190]. The adsorption of H2O was a very slow process in compari-
son with the adsorption of N2 and CO2, the occurrence of typical flue gas
compositions,  including  N2,  O2,  and  H2O,  hardly  hampered  the
adsorption of CO2 for relatively short adsorption time of less than 60 min
[189].  However,  another  research  indicated  that  the  breakthrough
curves  over  the  biochar  initially  almost  saturated  with  H2O,  which
implied the adsorption performance of CO2  was highly reduced by the
moisture input [190]. Furthermore, Xu et al. [182] indicated that the
addition  of  50%  moisture  presented  a  positive  influence  in  the  CO2
adsorption. The sewage biochar containing much inorganics is alkaline
and thus favors the interactions with acidic CO2 dissolved in the alkaline
water  membrane  on  the  biochar  surface  to  form  insoluble  inorganic
carbon and improve the chemisorption. Murge et al. [171] observed that
the CO2 capture capacity of biochar initially enhanced and then dropped
as  the  enhancement  of  H2O  concentration,  too  much  H2O  formed  a
thicker  layer  of  water  and/or  KHCO3  precipitation  come  from  K2CO3
activation,  which  offered  a  resistance  to  CO2  gas  to  access  the  other
active sites and pores.

◦

◦

When 4% O2  was introduced into 15% CO2/N2  stream at 75

C, a
deteriorating  effect  was  observed  to  CO2  adsorption  by  Thote  et  al.
[172], they speculated it was attributed to the competitive adsorption
for the micropores between CO2  along with O2  at 75
C. Other study
reported  that  the  O2  concentration  up  to  8%  affected  little  on  the
adsorption of CO2 at 25
C in the simulated flue gas [169], ascribed to
that the nonpolar O2 molecules were very stable at 25
C, which made
the attraction between O2 and biochar very weak. In the flue gas com-
ponents,  the  increase  of  SO2  concentration  up  to  1500  ppm  slightly
inhibited  the  CO2  adsorption  performance,  as  these  two  acid  oxides
would compete for the active cites. NO is not an acid oxide and its input
up to 800 ppm presented unchanged influence in the adsorption of CO2
[169].

◦

The reported maximum adsorption uptake shown in Table S4 for the
adsorption of pure CO2 using biochar was 10.15 mmol/g at room tem-
◦
perature of 20–30
C and atmospheric pressure [31], and 5.2 mmol/g at
flue  gas  temperature  (~70–120
C)  [185].  In  the  research  reports  of
actual or simulated flue gas, the maximum adsorption uptake of CO2 was
◦
8.89 mmol/g at 20
C and
20% CO2 [31]. More effects are necessary to match the requirement at
flue  gas  conditions  and  completing  with  other  technologies  of  CO2
capture.

◦
C and 20% CO2 as well as 2.84 mmol/g at 75

◦

3.4.4.3. Selectivity of CO2. An effective biochar adsorbent for practical
applications in the CO2 capture systems requires an adequate selectivity,
i.e., it should be easy to remove the CO2 component in industrial flue gas
with minimal interference from other major gaseous species such as N2
and O2 [48,153]. The adsorption of CO2 was generally easier than that of
N2 for all pressures and biomass samples. The equilibrium selectivity of

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109821

C. Wen et al.

CO2/N2  is defined as the ratio of the molar fractions at equilibrium in
adsorbed phase to those in gas phase, the ratio of adsorbed amount of
pure CO2 to N2 is generally calculated to receive an equimolar CO2 and
N2  at a typical pressure. However, selectivity is better evaluated from
the measurements of multicomponent adsorption, because the adsorp-
tion  of  the  weaker  adsorbate  (N2)  is  significantly  suppressed  when  it
co-exists  with  the  stronger  adsorbate  (CO2),  causing  the  conservative
estimates of the CO2-over-N2  selectivity in CO2/N2  equilibrium calcu-
lation [156]. The CO2/N2 selectivity for the binary gas mixtures can be
calculated  and  predicted  using  the  ideal  adsorption  solution  theory
(IAST) [31,36,156,165,168].

(cid:0) 40 cm

(cid:0) 25  cm

(cid:0) 40  cm
(cid:0) 3, 4.7 × 10

(cid:0) 3, 13.4 × 10
(cid:0) 25 cm

For selectivity based on the main physical adsorption, the separation
of the gas molecules relies on their different physical properties, e.g.,
polarizability  and  quadrupole  moment,  causing  the  different  gas
adsorption enthalpy [48]. The polarizability and quadrupole moment of
(cid:0) 2, respectively) are higher
CO2  (29.1 × 10
(cid:0) 2, respectively), it
than those of N2 (17.4 × 10
is thus expected that CO2 is able to interact stronger with the electrical
field  gradient  of  biochar  and  has  higher  affinity  of  the  pore  surface
leading to a high selectivity [48]. Lahijani et al. and Zubbri et al. [153,
154] showed that the profound affinity of Mg-loaded biochar towards
CO2  compared  with  other  gases  (N2  and  O2)  may  be  ascribed  to  the
higher quadrupole moment and polarizability of CO2, inducing a larger
polar bonds and stronger interaction with the biochar surface. The gas
selectivity is also affected by the kinetic diameter of the gas molecule,
which is directly proportional to the diffusion process, however the af-
finity  of  gas  molecule  towards  biochar  should  not  be  ascribed  to  the
diffusivity due to the similar kinetic diameters of O2 (3.46 Å), N2 (3.64
Å)  and  CO2  (3.30  Å)  [154].  Servilla  et  al.  [148]  observed  that  the
adsorption of CO2 was very fast with around 95% in the first 2 min, but
N2  adsorption  was  slower  which  took  around  60  min  to  reach  the
maximum adsorption uptake, therefore, high CO2/N2 selectivity can be
achieved for short adsorption time, which was apparently beneficial to
practical  applications.  The  narrower  micro-porosity  and  improved
functional  group  properties  arised  from  the  aminated  biochars  also
presented high selectivity of CO2/N2  at low CO2  partial pressures [31,
150,160,174], but may increase the preparation cost and regeneration
difficulty.  Manya  et  al.  [146]  reported  that  the  selectivity  notably
decreased  at  75
C,  revealing  that  the  CO2  phys-
isorption  by  biocharKOH  was  more  temperature  dependent  than  N2
adsorption.

C  compared  to  25

◦

◦

3.5. Adsorption performance of VOCs

As defined by the U.S. EPA, the volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
are “any compound of carbon, excluding carbon monoxide, carbon di-
oxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides or carbonates, and ammonium
carbonate, which participates in atmospheric photochemical reactions”
[10].  Most  of  them  are  toxic  and  can  lead  to  severe  environmental
hazard,  e.g.,  greenhouse  effect,  stratospheric  ozone  depletion,  and
photochemical smog, to seriously damage the human health. VOCs in
atmospheric environment are characterized by low molecular weight,
high saturated vapor pressure, low boiling point, easy decomposition,
volatile, and so on. The specific industrial combustion activities are one
of the important sources of VOCs [49]. Some common types of VOCs
include toluene, benzene, chlorobenzene, chloroform, acetone, formal-
dehyde,  xylenes,  ethylbenzene  and  halogenated  hydrocarbons  [191].
Adsorption removal by biochar can be an efficient technology for flue
gas  streams  containing  low  concentrations  of  VOCs.  However,  the
removal  availability  varies  with  not  only  biochar  properties  but  also
different VOC types. The real-time monitoring of removal capacities of
trace VOCs such as formaldehyde, acetone, xylene, toluene and benzene
by  wood  biochar  was  reported  to  be  1.46,  28.24,  0.71,  433.83,  0.35
mg/g,  respectively  [192].  Table  S5  of  the  Supplementary  Materials
summarizes  the  preparation  conditions  of  biochar,  and  the  typical
adsorption conditions and optimum adsorption performance of VOCs by

biochars.

Adsorption of VOCs onto biochar is a physicochemical interactions
generally affected by physical process such as van der Waals forces and
pore-filling  [49].  The  attractive  forces  between  biochar  material  and
VOC molecules can be affected by polarity and hydrophobic effect of
biochar. The atomic ratios of biochar provide an indication of its hy-
drophilicity (O/C), aromaticity (H/C) and polarity ((O + N)/C), which
can affect the  adsorption capacity  of polar  and non-polar VOCs  [49],
although polarity of biochar is usually expressed by O/C ratios roughly
[35,50]. The biochar containing much polar compounds (e.g., cellulose,
lignin, and fatty acids) can elevate its polarity [49]. The VOCs adsorp-
tion by biochar involves both adsorption to the carbonized fraction and
partitioning to the non-carbonized organic matter (NOM) fraction [35].
The  presence  of  oxygenic  functional  groups onto  biochar is  generally
responsible for surface acidity of biochar and the increased adsorption of
polar  and  hydrophilic  VOCs  [193], but it  has  negative  impact  on the
adsorption of hydrophobic VOC by suppressing the interactions between
p-electron rich regions of biochar and hydrophobic VOCs [40]. Chemical
functional  groups  influence  both  electrostatic  and  dispersive  in-
teractions between VOCs and biochar with the foundation of Van der
Waals interactions [191], the π-π  dispersion interaction and hydrogen
bonds are both the attractive forces affecting the adsorption capacity of
biochar  [194]. Therefore,  a  balance  between  the  features  of  the  pore
properties, chemical functional groups of biochar and characteristics of
VOCs needs to be considered to reveal the adsorption performance of
typical VOCs [191]. Fig. 7 illustrates the main adsorption mechanism of
onto biochars.

3.5.1. Effects of biochar properties

Many research reported the physisorption as the dominating mech-
anism of VOCs. An appropriate mesoporous and macropore network is
necessary to enhance the diffusion of the VOC molecules into the mi-
cropores,  although  VOCs  would  be  hardly  adsorbed  dynamically  in
mesopores and macropores. The adsorption capacities of toluene [195]
and limonene [196] were found to linear correlate with mesopore vol-
ume of biochars. Further, when the dynamic diameter of VOCs is close to
the micropore size of biochar, the van der Waals potential fields pro-
duced by the pore wall overlaps lead to higher adsorption energy for
VOCs [197], a low kinetic diameter of VOCs can thus react with more
active sites and access finer pores/canals [49]. As a result, a stronger
linear  correlation  between micropore volumes or  BET surface  area of
biochars and adsorption capacities of VOCs were widely observed [40,
191,194,196,198].  The  narrow  micro-porosity  was  reported  to  be
dominant at low concentrations of toluene with the kinetic diameter of
0.67 nm [191,196] and P-xylene of 0.58 nm [198]. The more micropores
of  ~0.8  nm  benefited  the  adsorption  performance  of  chlorobenzene
(0.78 nm) than toluene [197].

The Grand Canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) simulation can be con-
ducted to predict and guide the optimal adsorption pore size of VOCs
adsorption.  It  can  be  found  that  with  the  increase  of  pore  size,  the
adsorption  capacity  of  cork  biocharKOH  for  acetone  firstly  increased,
then stabilized, and finally rapidly declined through GCMC simulation
[199]. When the pore size was less than 0.8 nm, acetone molecules with
the dynamics diameter of 0.46 nm were limited by the insufficient pore
volume. Then, the acetone molecules adsorbed not only on the pore wall
but also  on the adsorbed acetone molecular layer  when the pore size
increased  to  1.6–2.8  nm,  forming  an  optimal  multilayer  adsorption
strengthened  by  an  interaction  force  among  the  acetone  molecules.
However, this interaction was greatly weakened when the pore size was
further enlarged [199]. Similarly, the optimal pore with 3.5 nm and 3.0
nm  were  reported  for  methanol  and  acetone  adsorption,  respectively
[200].

As indicated by the GCMC simulation, the nitrogen and oxygen atom
doping  can  improve  the  adsorption  capacity  of  oxygenated  VOCs
(methanol) at relatively low pressure, while the adsorption capacity at
high pressure mainly depended on the pore structure. By contrast, the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109822

C. Wen et al.

Fig. 7. VOCs adsorption mechanism diagram of biochar, referring to physical adsorption including surface adsorption, pore filling and partitioning to noncarbonized
organic matter and intermolecular forces including electrostatic attraction, π-π interaction, CH-π bonding, etc. The molecular size, molecular weight and boiling point
of VOCs also impact the adsorption behaviors.

influence of nitrogen and oxygen groups on adsorption capacity of ar-
omatic  VOCs  was  limited,  and  the  adsorption  capacity  was  mainly
determined by the pore structure at both low and high pressures [201].
The  multilayer  adsorption  of  p-xylene  onto  mesopores  were  found  to
enhance the adsorption capacity by activated carbon dramatically when
the pressure was high enough [202].

As raising the pyrolysis temperature, the BET surface area of biochar
increased generally and the ratio of O/C decreased which reflects hy-
drophobicity, reduced polarity, and raised aromaticity of biochar, both
effects were benefit to adsorb hydrophobic VOCs [35,50]. Besides, the
NOM  of  biochar,  which  can  sorb  VOCs  through  partitioning  into  the
organic phase, would decrease due to more volatiles were decomposed
and  released  at  higher  pyrolysis  temperatures  [35,198].  Therefore,
increasing  pyrolysis  temperature  of  biochar  may  present  opposite  in-
fluence in VOC sorption via an adsorption-partition combined mecha-
nism. The adsorption would be the leading mechanism for the biochars
formed at higher temperature with high porosity, whereas partitioning
is the dominant mechanism for the biochars from lower pyrolysis tem-
perature with the relatively enough surface area for VOC molecules to
diffuse into biochar [35,50,193,203]. Note that the physisorption was
◦
more sensitive to the adsorption temperature between 20
C,
and had faster kinetic than the partition mechanism which was mainly
governed by pore diffusion process [35,50]. Ball milling treatment on
biochar can reduce the particle size of biochar, not only increasing the
exterior surface area but also opening its interior pore to improve inte-
rior  surface  area.  The  ball-milled  biochar  had  higher  specific  surface
area and O/C ratio which could increase the acidity, polarity and hy-
drophilicity of biochar, meanwhile, the oxygen in air can introduce the
oxygenic  functional  groups  onto  biochar  and  increase  the  content  of
volatile  organic  matter  during  ball  milling  [50,198].  Therefore,  the
adsorption of VOC onto ball-milled biochar was also dominated by the
combined mechanisms of surface adsorption and partition [50]. Besides,
sludge  biochar  was  reported  to  contain  much  oxygenic  functional
groups, therefore could be used for polar VOCs [204].

◦
C and 40

Activation methods on biochar affect the adsorption of VOCs. The
adsorbed amount of VOCs increased with elevating the activation tem-
perature in CO2, may be ascribed to the larger porosity [194]. Oxidizing
agent such as H2O2 can react with biochar’s unsaturated ring sites, and
then  introduce  oxygen  into  biochar  which  affected  the  formation  of

above-mentioned  NOM  [198].  The  activation  of  KOH  or  K2CO3
enhanced textural properties of biochar and resulted in a high toluene
adsorption capacity which was conditioned by its small molecules size
readily  to  access the  inner micropores  [191]. The biochar which  was
activated without a prior pyrolysis or applying for a low weight ratio of
activating agent showed much chemical (oxygenated) functional groups
which can improve the adsorption of hydrophilic VOCs [191]. H3PO4
activated hydrochar was reported to possess higher surface area, O/C
ratio  and  polarity  than  hydrocharKOH  [40].  On  one  hand,  the  higher
surface area of hydrocharH3PO4 provided more adsorption sites for VOC
molecules. On the other hand, the H3PO4 activation produced plentiful
oxygenic functional groups onto hydrochar. Therefore, the adsorption
capacity  of  polar  acetone  was  improved  by  hydrocharH3PO4  while
hydrocharKOH  possessed  a  slightly  better  adsorptive  capacity  of
non-polar cyclohexane than hydrocharH3PO4 [40].

The adsorption performance of toluene from a N-doped biochar with
the hydrophobic properties could reach up to 223 mg/g [205]. N-doping
promoted π-electron polarization and produced π-electron enrichment
sites  on  the  biochar surface,  which  generated π-π  dispersion  with  the
benzene ring in toluene to promote adsorption. Besides, pyrrole N had
the  strongest  promoting  effect  to  toluene  adsorption  by  electrostatic
interaction. Cu-BTC@biochar was synthesized by a facile solvothermal
synthesis  method  from  the  bamboo-based  biochar  [206].  The  intro-
duction  of  biochar  is  crucial  for  the  construction  of  composites  with
controlled morphology. Its adsorption capacity of toluene reached 501.8
◦
and 88.8 mg/g at 60
C, respectively. The van der Waals
force generated by the micropores and toluene molecules and the syn-
ergy
sites  and
oxygen-containing  groups  in  Cu-BTC@biochar  both  played  important
roles in improving the toluene adsorption capacities at relatively high
temperature.

interaction)  of  Cu

(electrostatic

ion  metal

C and 150

◦

3.5.2. Effects of VOC types and properties

The polar VOCs tend to adsorb onto biochar containing rich polar
groups, while nonpolar VOCs prefer to adsorb on the biochar without
polar groups. There are three forms of intermolecular forces for the polar
VOC  molecules  (e.g.,  acetone,  chloroform,  ethanol),  namely  dipole-
dipole,  induced  dipole-induced  dipole,  and  dipole-induced  dipole
forces.  By  contrast,  only  induced  dipole-induced  dipole  force  is

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109823

C. Wen et al.

dominant  for  nonpolar  VOC  molecules  (e.g.,  cyclohexane,  benzene,
xylene). The induced dipole-dipole and dipole-dipole forces reinforcing
polar  molecular  forces  are  analogous  to  the  hydrogen  bond  with
medium-strength,  which  are  more  powerful  than  the  induced  dipole-
induced  dipole  force.  The  polar  acetone  thus  demonstrated  greater
adsorption  than  nonpolar  cyclohexane  onto  a  hydrochar  with  polar
surface [194]. The oxygenic functional groups were introduced and the
polarity was enhanced during the ball milling treatment to biochar, the
adsorption of polar acetone, chloroform, and ethanol was thus promoted
by forces of dipole-dipole and hydrogen bonds [50]. Both chlorobenzene
and toluene contain benzene ring. The larger polarization of Cl (2.18) in
substitutional  group  of  chlorobenzene  led  to  stronger  interaction  po-
tential  than  C  (1.76)  in  toluene,  thus  making  chlorobenzene  readily
adsorbed by biochar [197]. Besides, the polarizability of VOCs increased
with the relative molecular mass because of the participation of more
polarized  electrons,  the  larger  relative  mass  of  chlorobenzene  can  be
also  effective  to  result  in  a  greater  adsorption  potential  than  toluene
[197].

Biochar  contains  much  of  carbon  atoms  having  π-electron  orbit,
which  can  be  coupled  with  VOC  molecules  having  π-electrons  (e.g.,
acetone) to generate π-π dispersion interaction with face-to-face or offset
face-to-face orientations  [40].  The π-electrons in the  aromatic ring of
VOCs  can  interact  with  the  electron-rich  regions  locate  in  graphene
layers of biochar via π-π argument, the higher degree of graphitization
thus likely promoted the adsorption with aromatic toluene and chloro-
benzene [197] and xylenes [203] on biochar due to π-π conjugated ef-
fect. However, no extra orbital is available to generate the π-bond for
cyclohexane,  which  thus  was  impossible  to  present  π-π  dispersion
interaction onto the hydrochar [40]. The carbonyl (C––O) groups on the
biochar surface are electron-withdrawing groups, therefore lowering the
electron  density  of  biochar  and  weakening  the  π-π  conjugated  effect
between VOCs and biochar, the electron density in the π-system from
aromatic  ring  in  toluene  decreased  rapidly  compared  with  that  in
chlorobenzene [197]. The low adsorption capacity of hexane on biochar
was related to its specific molecular arrangements, it can interact with
carbon molecules of biochar only through CH-π bonding, as a contrast,
other  aromatic VOCs, such  as p-xylene  and  toluene, utilized not only
CH-π bonding but also π-π stacking and other functionalities interacted
with carbon surfaces [49]. The interaction of chemical functional groups
in biochar with the p-electrons of aromatic ring in VOCs (e.g., toluene)
may  also  act  on  the  donor-acceptor  mechanism  involving  oxygen  or
nitrogen atoms of biochar as the electron-donors and aromatic rings in
VOCs as electron-acceptors [191]. The adsorption of chlorobenzene on
biochar  exhibited  greater  affinity  (i.e.,  Lennard-Jones  potential)  than
toluene, it was considered that the substituent groups of VOCs made a
deviated charge distribution, resulting in adsorption capacity of chlo-
robenzene higher than toluene [197].

VOC inherent properties, e.g., molecular size, molecular weight and
boiling point, also impact their adsorption behaviors besides the surface
adsorption mechanisms of biochars [40,50,198]. The higher adsorption
of acetone could be relevant to its finer kinetic diameter (0.46 nm) than
toluene (0.67 nm) and cyclohexane (0.60 nm) [35]. Benzene had higher
diffusion  rate  than  other  xylene  VOCs,  this  may  be  attributed  to  the
small molecular size (0.58 nm) of benzene that could prompt its diffu-
sion  into  the  micropores  and  access  adsorption  sites  [198].  P-xylene
presented better adsorption onto biochar than M-phenyl and O-xylene,
which  should  also  be  derived  from  the  P-xylene’s  smallest  kinetic
diameter (0.58 nm) [198,203]. Liu et al. [207] reported the adsorption
affinity of several VOCs by biocharKOH  was negatively correlated with
the difference value between kinetic diameter of VOCs and average pore
width  of  biocharKOH,  suggesting  characteristics  of  the  pore  filling
mechanisms. The larger diameter of VOC molecules, the closer to the
pore walls of biocharKOH, and ultimately resulted in higher adsorption
affinities which are preferentially adsorbed at low relative pressure.

◦

◦

C than 56.53

indicating  the  better  adsorption  of  cyclohexane  (84.16  g/mol)  than
acetone (58.08 g/mol) [40]. The high boiling point properties of VOCs
suggests  the  stronger  intermolecular  forces  with  biochar,  it  would  be
beneficial  to  the  adsorption  process.  Therefore,  the  cyclohexane  had
larger  adsorption  amount  on  hydrochar  than  acetone  as  its  higher
C of acetone [40]. The toluene,
boiling point of 80.74
cyclohexane, and ethanol with high boiling points (110.6
C,
and  78.2
C,  respectively)  presented  greater  adsorption  on  the
C)  of
ball-milled  biochar  [50].  Much  higher  boiling  point  (138.36
◦
P-xylene facilitated its adsorption on biochar than benzene (80.09
C)
[198]. The isosteric heat of chlorobenzene was generally larger than that
of toluene, which expressed the stronger binding force derived from the
◦
higher boiling point of 131.72
C of chlorobenzene [197]. However, it is
noteworthy that the desorption of VOCs with high boiling points would
be more difficult.

C, 80.7

◦

◦

◦

◦

3.5.3. Effects of adsorption conditions

◦

◦

◦
C–60

C  to  45

◦
C to 40

◦
C, a slightly higher adsorption temperature of 40

Current understanding of adsorption conditions such as adsorption
temperature and multi-component of VOCs which could mimic actual
combustion conditions is very scarce. As the physical exothermic pro-
cess,  the  sorption  capacity  of  acetone  dropped  by  73.1–98.2%  as  the
◦
adsorption temperature raised from 20
C [35]. Benzene uptake
[42]  and  xylenes  sorption  [203]  by  biochar  also  dropped  with
enhancement  of  temperature  from  25
C.  At  the  range  of
◦
C presented
20
the benefited adsorption for cyclohexane in comparison to the best ca-
pacity  in  20
C  for  acetone  [194].  They  explained  that  the  size  of
cyclohexane  is  larger  than  acetone,  the  relative  high  adsorption  tem-
perature can achieve the transport of cyclohexane into the larger pores
on hydrochar and thus facilitate the adsorption when the rate-limiting
step is determined by intrapore diffusion. Cheng et al. [205] found the
fair adsorption performance of toluene for N-doped biochar in 40% and
80%  humid  environments.  DFT  results  manifested  that  the  biochar
containing abundant  N-containing functional groups on surface  could
achieve strong interaction with toluene and weak interaction with water
vapor.

◦

During  the  multi-component  adsorption,  the  partially  adsorbed
toluene  was  replaced  by  chlorobenzene  gradually  when  the  biochar
approached adsorption saturation, may be relevant to lower volatility of
chlorobenzene and stronger adsorption of chlorobenzene onto the bio-
char [197]. The dynamic adsorption equilibrium of toluene was prior to
that of phenol onto the biochar, revealing the simultaneity of phenol and
toluene adsorbed onto the biochar in the gas phase. The competition of
various VOC species for adsorption sites onto the biochar led to a less
absolute adsorption amount of each species during a multi-component
adsorption, however, the overall adsorption performance of biochar in
multi-component tests was generally alike to the sum of the single gas
tests,  indicating  that  nearly  all  active  sites  was  occupied  during  the
competitive adsorption process [49]. The order of adsorption amount
for  the  studied  four  VOC  species  appeared  to  be  consistent  for  both
single and multi-component tests, and the higher individual adsorption
amount  of acetone  should be attributed  to the  effective  roles  of  finer
pores  in  capturing  acetone,  owing  to  a  large  amount  of  acetone  was
replaced by larger molecules of p-xylene, toluene, and hexane during the
competitive adsorption process [49]. However, the reduction amounts
between  individuals  and  mixtures  in  adsorption  capacity  were  more
obvious for light VOCs (e.g., acetone) than heavy VOCs (e.g., hexane,
p-xylene,  and  toluene),  which  should  be  relevant  to  stronger  van  der
Waal’s forces between heavier VOCs containing more carbon atoms and
the carbon surface of biochar.

3.6. Adsorption performance of multi gas components

3.6.1. Synergistic adsorption of SO2  and NOx

The diffusion  coefficient  of VOCs  with  higher  molecular weight is
apparently  larger  than  that  of  VOCs  with  lower  molecular  weight,

Table S6 of the Supplementary Materials summarizes the preparation
conditions of biochar, and the adsorption and removal performance of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109824

C. Wen et al.

multi  gas-components  by  biochars.  The  simultaneous  removal  of  SO2
and NOx was tried by the biochars impregnated with the metal oxides,
with the sorption capacity increased in the following sequence of CeO2
> V2O5  > NiO  > Fe2O3  [208].  The  metal  oxides  having  powerful
oxidizing  and  oxygen  storage  capacity  can  introduce  new  oxygenic
functional  groups  such  as  C––O,  C–O,  and  COOH  onto  the  biochar,
which benefited the oxidation reaction of SO2  to SO3  and NO to NO2,
positively contributing to the high synergistic removal of SO2 and NOx
[208]. Zhang et al. [79] revealed that the SO2  removal uptake of Bio-
charamine  during  the  atmosphere  of  co-presence  of  SO2  and  NO  was
apparently higher than that during the atmosphere without NO, and the
SO2 removal uptake first increased and then dropped as the concentra-
tion of NO increased, with the maximum amount of 216.19 mg/g at 120
◦
C and 500 ppm NO. SO2 and NO themselves occur interaction reaction
especially  at  the  N-containing  adsorption  sites  of  biochar  during  the
adsorption process, possibly contributing to the formation of the (NO2)
(SO3) intermediates [79].

The competitive adsorption between SO2 and NO on the active sites
of biochar was also reported. It is understood that molecules with higher
boiling  point possess more Van der Waals  attractive forces  and  inter-
molecular  interactions,  hence  SO2  is  readily  adsorbed  by  the  biochar
compared to NOx as the higher boiling point of SO2 than NOx [53,208].
Increasing  SO2  concentration  (up  to  2500  ppm)  would  thus  strongly
replace  and  desorb  the  NO  from  the  active  sites  on  biochar  and  thus
restrict NO adsorption [209]. Furthermore, higher concentrations of NO
(up to 700 ppm) compared to SO2 in the flue gas caused the much more
catalytical bonding of NO on the active sites of biocharCe. Therefore, it
reduced the active sites for the catalytical removal of SO2 [209].

With the presence of 15% H2O, more NO2  molecules was found to
present in the water layer due to NO2  is more soluble in water and a
(cid:0)
much stronger oxidant than NO and O2, and the oxidations of HSO3
and
2(cid:0)
were  promoted,  accordingly  more  SO2
SO3
molecules were captured into the water layer, and the overall removal of
SO2  was  increased  compared  to  the  case  without  interference  of  the
simultaneous removal of NO [84].

2(cid:0)
with  NO2  to  form  SO4

3.6.2. Synergistic adsorption of SO2, NOx  and Hg0

◦

The biocharCe/Co yielded prominent Hg0 removal efficiency of 96.8%
and  NO  removal  efficiency  of  84.7%  at  230
C  (Table  S6)  [98].  The
synergetic effects between Co and Ce oxides not only cause the unsat-
urated chemical bonds and imbalance charge as well as generate more
chemisorbed oxygen and  oxygen vacancies, but also form amorphous
surface  species  which  is  beneficial  to  catalytic  reactions.  More  active
oxygen  species  would  be  in  favor  of  the  reduction  of  NO  and  the
oxidation of Hg0  to produce HgO. The NO reduction reactions mainly
corresponded to the L-H mechanism (Equations (23)–(27)), and the Hg0
oxidation  reactions  were  assigned  to  the  Mars-Masson  mechanism
(Equations  (42)–(45))  [98].  The  removal  of  NO  presented  a  slight
decrease with addition of 100 μg/m3 Hg0, indicating that Hg0 showed an
adverse effect on the removal of NO, due to the formed HgO might be
accumulated to cover some adsorption sites. By contrast, NO appeared
to boost Hg0 removal when O2 was presented, as some weakly absorbed
NO could produce NO2 by reacting with the surface oxygen, which was
generally beneficial to the oxidation of Hg0 (Equations (51)–(54)) [43,
85,98,103,127,137].  However, as  mentioned in  section 3.2, excessive
NO (~400–800 ppm) was reported to cover the active sites and exhaust
the  surface  oxygens  onto  the  biochar  [126],  which  suppressed  the
adsorption performance of Hg0. The removal efficiencies of NO and Hg
increased  when  the  adsorption  temperature  increased  and  afterwards
decreased since 260
C, respectively [98]. O2  could appar-
ently facilitate the removal of Hg0 and NO due to gaseous O2 could offset
the consumed chemisorbed oxygen and lattice oxygen of metal catalyst.
The presence of H2O may negatively influence the removal of Hg0 and
NO because of the competitive adsorption.

C and 230

◦

◦

The  simultaneous  removal  efficiencies  of  NOx,  SO2,  and  Hg0  on
biochar  varied  with  the  increase  of  carbonization  temperature  which

affects  the  porous  properties  and  surface  defects  of  biochar.  Carbon-
◦
C made the graphitization degree, rich pore structure and
ization at 700
surface defect content of biochar much higher than other temperatures,
which was benefit to the loading and dispersion of active components of
Fe species and in turn impacted the activity of biochar for the simulta-
neous removal [87]. The DFT calculation presented the strong adsorp-
tion between Fe and Mn species and the adsorbates of SO2, NOx, Hg0,
indicating that biocharFe/Mn  possessed high simultaneous removal effi-
◦
ciency of >80% at 300–350
C [87]. When the biochar sorbents for Hg
◦
was injected in coal-fired flue gas at 150
C at an entrained-flow reactor,
about  80%  gaseous  mercury  was  removed  and  the  SO2  and  NO  con-
centration decreased 35.6% and 36.0% respectively [87]. SO2 and NOx
had extremely limited effects on Hg capture by biocharNH4Br. 6% O2 and
10% H2O acted positively in the oxidation of SO2 to SO3 and H2SO4 and
oxidation of NO to NO2 [99]. A discrepant influence of SO2 was found on
the removal of Hg0, i.e., low concentration of SO2 facilitated its removal
apparently whereas high concentration of SO2 (>~700 ppm) presented
inhibited effect [127]. In the co-presence of SO2 and NO, SO2 consumed
active oxygen and generated sulfate, leading to irreversible damage of
active sites onto the biochar, therefore, the reaction between Hg0  and
NO2 formed from NO were hampered by SO2 [137]. Gao et al. [98] re-
ported that the adsorbed SO2 may competitively inhibit the adsorption
of NO, NH3 and Hg0. The more deteriorative effect was resulted from the
joint influence of SO2  and H2O, as the competitive adsorption and the
formed ammonium sulfates could ruin the porous texture and cover up
the activated sites on biochar.

As mentioned in Section 3.4.4, the effects of SO2  and NO input on
CO2 adsorption was observed [169]. The increase of SO2 concentration
up to 1500 ppm slightly inhibited the CO2  adsorption performance, as
these two acid oxides would compete for the active cites. NO is not an
acid oxide and its input up to 800 ppm presented unchanged effect on
the CO2 adsorption.

3.6.3. Synergistic adsorption of VOC and Hg0

The composite of Mn–Fe oxides and biochar effectively removed Hg0
and  aromatic  o-xylene  via  the  process  of  adsorption  and  catalytic
oxidation from simulated flue gas of power plant. The highly dispersed
metal oxides having high valence states provided more Lewis acid sites
derived from unsaturated metal sites and more adsorbed oxygen, they
would effectively facilitate the catalytic conversion of VOC to CO2 and
H2O and Hg to Hg2+
, respectively. Similarly, biocharCu/Mn presented the
good  removal  efficiencies  of  HCHO  (89%)  and  Hg0  (83%)  shown  in
Table  S6,  which  were  ascribed  to  the  large  specific  surface  area  and
much chemisorbed oxygen and lattice oxygen promoted by the highest
molar ratio of Mn4+
[32]. The electron transfer between Cu and
Mn played the crucial role in the capture of HCHO or Hg0.

/Mn3+

◦

◦

◦

C and 300

C between 100

The  Hg0  and  o-xylene  removal  capacities  firstly  dropped  with  the
◦
temperature  increased  to  200–250
C  and  then  enhanced  with  the
further increase in temperature up to 350
C [11]. The formaldehyde
conversion and Hg0 removal efficiency also presented the lowest value
◦
at 175
C [32]. At low temperatures, the
exothermic  removal  via  adsorption  should  be  dominant,  while  the
extent of catalytic oxidation should be enhanced at high temperatures
[11].  On  the  biocharMn/Fe  composite,  the  competitive  adsorption  be-
tween Hg0  and o-xylene and the catalytic reactions occurred simulta-
neously. Owing to the catalytic oxidation dominated pollutant removal
at high temperature, the competitive inhibitory effects were intensified
at high temperature as the Hg0  and o-xylene molecules battled for the
limited  catalytic  sites.  Similarly,  another  study  also  found  that  the
removal efficiency of HCHO without Hg0 was a little bit higher than that
with Hg0, meanwhile the addition of HCHO had a decreased influence in
the removal efficiency of Hg0 from 95 to 83% at 175
C as the compe-
tition adsorption and oxidation with Hg0. Fortunately, the removal ef-
ficiency of Hg0  can be recovered after withdrawing HCHO, due to the
activated  cites  can  be  released  after  HCHO  transforming  to  CO2  and
gaseous O2 can replenish the surface active oxygen consumed by HCHO

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109825

C. Wen et al.

[32].

As  the  concentration  of  O2  increased  from  0  to  12%,  both  the
removal efficiencies of HCHO and Hg0  increased, as the lattice oxygen
and the chemisorbed oxygen were regenerated by the gas phase O2. The
addition of SO2  and NO revealed inhibited influence in the removal of
HCHO, while NO presented an observed positive effect but SO2 had an
adverse influence for the Hg0  removal [32]. The adverse influence of
SO2  in  the  two  pollutants  should  ascribe  to  not  only  the  competitive
adsorption  of  SO2  but  also  the  formation  of  metal  sulfates  onto  the
biochar which made the content of active Cu/Mn components decreased
[32].  It  was  speculated  that  NO  occupied  the  active  sites  faster  than
HCHO because of its small molecular, implying the inhibited influence
of  NO  in  the  HCHO  removal.  Besides,  NO  would  consume  oxygen  to
form  NO2  and  nitrate,  the  above-mentioned  discussion  indicated  the
promoted capacity on Hg0 oxidation [32].

4. Adsorption isotherm, kinetic, and energy analysis

4.1. The adsorption isotherm models

The  gas-phase  adsorbates  requires  to  diffuse  into  the  interior  of
biochar driven by the radial concentration gradient, and the adsorption
generally takes place in the void interior surfaces of biochar. Equilib-
rium  relationships  received  by  the  modelling  of  adsorption  isotherm
data in a wide temperature and pressure range correlating the amount of
adsorbate adsorbed on biochar with the applied gas pressure is crucial to
the  design  and  optimization  of  biochar  performance.  The  adsorption
isotherm  models  can  indicate  how  the  adsorbate  and  adsorbent  (bio-
char) interact and the equations are described in Table S7 of the Sup-
plementary  Materials. The Langmuir and Freundlich  isotherm models
were widely applied to the research of biochar adsorption on gas pol-
lutants  [48,59,161].  Langmuir  equation  assumes  a  simplified  model
describing  that  the  biochar  surface  has  homogeneous  distribution  of
active sites and the gas molecule is adsorbed by active sites one by one
without  interactions  [28].  As  a  result,  Langmuir  model  indicates  a
saturated  monolayer  adsorption  while  operating  at  low  partial  pres-
sures.  In  the  equation  shown  in  Table  S7,  b  as  the  Langmuir  affinity
constant  is  proportional  to  the  adsorption  heat,  it  determines  the
strength that the gas is bonded onto the biochar surface, i.e., higher b
values express a more powerful adsorption [28]. Freundlich model is the
empirical  equation  describing  non-ideal  and  reversible  adsorption  on
heterogeneous surfaces with diverse adsorption sites, while adsorbate
occupied the higher affinity sites initially and as the surface coverage
accumulates, the adsorption strength declines. The model can thus be
applied  to  express  multilayer  adsorption,  implying  that  the  affinity
distribution  and  non-uniform  adsorption  heat  throughout  the  hetero-
geneous  surface.  The  Freundlich  constant  KF  indicates  the  adsorption
capacity of biochar. The value of parameter 1/n is normally between
0 and 1, lower 1/n value indicates stronger interaction and the value of
n  > 1  represents  a  beneficial  adsorption  condition  between  gas  and
biochar.  It  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  adsorption  sites  are
distributed  with  the  adsorption  heat  exponentially.  The  Temkin
isotherm  also  expresses  the  adsorption  behaviors  on  heterogeneous
surfaces, and supposes that the binding energies are uniform distributed
and the adsorption heat of all molecules in single layer reduces linearly
with  coverage  owing  to  the  interactions  between  adsorbate  and
adsorbent.

Atanes  et  al.  [28]  observed  a  heterogeneous  surface  indicated  by
Freundlich equation for the biocharCO2 and biocharKOH. The most acidic
biochar presented the weakest affinity for SO2, while the biochar with
more  basic  surface  increased  its  affinity.  The  Langmuir  isotherm  was
reported  to  match  the  experimental  data  of  SO2  adsorption  by  bio-
◦
charCO2 well over a temperature range of 25–100
C [83]. Sumathi et al.
[209] found that the adsorption capacity of biocharCe at different input
concentration  of  SO2  or  NO  well  matched  the  Langmuir  adsorption
isotherms  in  comparison  to  Freundlich  model.  The  above-mentioned

three  models  could  well  fit  the  experimental  data  of  Hg  adsorption
with correlation coefficients R2 > 0.90 for biochar prepared at 500–900
◦
C [27]. Igalavithana et al. [52] and Nasri et al. [161] indicated that
both Freundlich and Langmuir models were fitted accurately with R2 >
0.99, implying that the CO2  adsorption of gasification biochar can be
described as monolayer or multilayer. Parshetti et al. [48] reported that
the Freundlich model could well fit the adsorption equilibrium of CO2
from biocharKOH, while the Temkin and Langmuir isotherms failed to
match satisfyingly with the equilibrium experimental data. Manap et al.
[210]  revealed  that  the  adsorption  of  formaldehyde  by  biochar  was
distinctly determined by the Langmuir surface adsorption mechanism.
The Sips isotherm shown in Table S7 presents a comprehensive effect
of the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. The Sips predicts the typical
monolayer adsorption characteristic of the Langmuir isotherm at higher
pressures,  whereas  describes  the  Freundlich  isotherm  at  relative  low
pressures  [20].  The  sips  model  was  reported  to  reproduce  the  tested
adsorption isotherms of CO2 fairly well [156,174]. The pure CO2 and N2
adsorption equilibrium were described satisfactorily by the Sips model
◦
in the studied temperature up to 50
C and pressure range up to 100 kPa,
compared  with  Langmuir  and  Tὸth  models  [156].  The  Tὸth  isotherm
equation  is  deduced  from  the  Polanyi’s  potential  theory  and  is  also
effective  to  heterogeneous  adsorption  [197].  It  can  fit  the  adsorption
equilibrium of pure CO2 and N2 satisfactorily by biocharO2 [144]. Zhao
et  al.  [197]  found  that  the  Dubinine-Astakhov  model,  also  depended
upon the potential theory, can favorably describe the adsorption equi-
librium compared to the Langmuir and Tὸth models at different tem-
peratures,  it  can  imply  a  stronger  interaction  for  the  adsorption  of
chlorobenzene  compared  to  toluene.  Besides,  the  linearized  isotherm
models matched the experimental data of benzene adsorption capacity
by  biocharKOH  in  the  order  of:  Langmuir  > Dubinin–Radushkevich  >
Freundlich [211]. An extended Jain and Snoeyink (JS) Langmuir model
was  reported  to  well  correlate  with  the  mixtures  of  SO2  and  NO  at
different  input  concentrations  [209],  which  considered  the  apparent
affinity and the adsorption on an active site of a particular gas can be
influenced  by  other  gas,  the  maximum  uptake  thus  did  not  remain
constant.

4.2. The adsorption kinetic models

The adsorption kinetic models shown in Table S7 provide valuable
insights  into  the  mass  transfer  and  controlling  mechanisms  of  the
adsorption  process.  There  are  multiple  steps  in  a  typical  adsorption
process, such as bulk diffusion indicating the mass transfer of adsorbate
to  the  surface  of  adsorbent,  film  diffusion  indicating  external  mass
transfer, and the following surface diffusion and intra-particle diffusion
indicating the adsorption into the interior sites. The slowest step con-
trols the rate of a gas adsorption process. Gonzalez et al. [156] revealed
that the intra-particle resistance is more important than the external film
resistance  to  the  overall  mass  transfer  rate  of  CO2  under  most
circumstances.

Pseudo-first  order  kinetic  model  (i.e.,  Lagergren  model),  with  the
driving  force  expressed  as  a  concentration  difference,  is  good  at
describing the early stages of adsorption with low surface coverage and
the amount of vacant available adsorption sites onto the adsorbent is
proportional to the gas adsorption rate [31,185]. Pseudo-second order
kinetic  model  (i.e.,  Ho  and  Mckay  model)  is  derived  from  Langmuir
adsorption isotherms [61], it is more suitable to describe the adsorption
process  involving  chemical  interactions  [31],  and  the  gas  adsorption
rate  is  assumed  to  be  proportional  to  the  square  of  vacant  available
adsorption sites number (Table S7) [154]. The pseudo-first order model
and intra-particle diffusion model (i.e., Weber-Morris) deduced from the
Ficks  second  law  of  diffusion  focus  on  the  process  of  external  mass
transfer  and  interior  diffusion  respectively,  while  the  Elovich  kinetic
model  and  pseudo-second  order  model  explore  the  surface  chemical
reaction  and  catalytic  reaction,  i.e.,  chemisorption  process  [62].  The
Elovich  model  can  describe  the  desorption  process  as  the  β  value

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109826

C. Wen et al.

corresponds to the desorption rate of CO2 at different temperature [26].
The CO2 adsorption onto the biochar at different operating temper-
ature  [26,31]  or  different  pressure  [161]  can  be  modelled  by  using
several kinetic models. Lahijani et al. [153] reported that both the first
and second-order kinetic models had high fitted R2 coefficients, but the
fitted  adsorption  amounts  were  not  well  compatible  for  the  experi-
mental results and usually overestimated the adsorption amount of CO2.
Those four mentioned models were used by Rashidi et al. [26] and Nasri
et al. [161], they concluded that the pseudo-second-order model fitted
the  adsorption  of  CO2  well  at  various  adsorption  temperatures.  The
adsorption of CO2 complying with the pseudo-second-order adsorption
kinetics was also reported by others [155,183,187]. Rashidi et al. [26]
observed that the experimental data was deviated from the linear curve,
implying  that  the  intra-particle  diffusion  was  not  the  only  major
rate-controlled step during the CO2 adsorption, while Nasri et al. [161]
observed that the pore diffusion was the dominant reason for the CO2
adsorption at pressures above 1 bar using intra-particle diffusion model.
Johari  et  al.  [27]  observed  that  the  pseudo-second  order  models
presented the optimum performance to the chemisorption of Hg0  over
the adsorption and breakthrough periods of biochar, in comparison to
the  pseudo-first  order  model  and  Elovich  model.  Shen  et  al.  [123]
divided the modeling into two steps and found that the first step was
controlled by the pseudo-first order model and the second step by the
pseudo-second order model. The modeling results revealed the path of
mass transfer from gaseous Hg0 to biochar surface during the first stage
of Hg0 adsorption, while the overall Hg0 adsorption process of biocharCl
was obviously controlled by chemisorption. Zhao et al. [136] observed
that  the  pseudo-first  order  and  pseudo-second-order  models  were
compatible strongly to the Hg adsorption process, implying the combi-
nation effects of physisorption and chemisorption. The initial reaction
rate  appeared  to  be  controlled  by  external  mass  transfer  and  surface
adsorption, while the dominant rate-limited step should be chemisorp-
tion for the whole adsorption process [103]. Li et al. revealed that the
Hg0 adsorption rate of biocharH2O could be mainly governed by the Hg0
mass transfer from flue gas to surface adsorption sites and followed to
the pseudo-first order model [60], while the biochar activated at H2O
and modified by NH4Cl followed to the pseudo-second model, verifying
the  chemisorption  process  [61].  Shi  et  al.  [104]  observed  the  curves
fitting  to  the  pseudo  first-order  kinetic  model,  it  showed  the  greater
exterior  mass  transfer  caused  by  the  extensive  hierarchical  porous
structure of biochar fabricated with CaCO3, in comparison, the lack of
porous structures of un-fabricated biochar would limit Hg0 intraparticle
diffusion  indicated  by  the  intraparticle  diffusion model.  Furthermore,
Hsi et al. [116] found that the surface functional groups, especially the
S-containing  groups,  presented  much  more  influence  in  adsorption
equilibrium than kinetics, while the porous properties of biochar may
affect the Hg adsorption kinetics more than equilibrium. In general, the
above-mentioned kinetic models were widely utilized to discuss the Hg0
adsorption onto the biochars [55,103–105,114,136].

Kumar  et  al.  [193]  reported  that  the  pseudo-second-order  model
fitted better to the first-order model for the experimental results of VOC
adsorption  by  pyrolyzed  biochar.  By  contrast,  the  pseudo-first-model
worked  better  than  the  pseudo-second-model  for  the  adsorption  of
phenyl  VOCs,  indicating  its  more  homogeneous  adsorption  led  by
ball-milled  treatment  of  biochar  [198].  The  second-order  model  per-
formed better than first-order model for the adsorption kinetics of polar
acetone, while opposite for nonpolar cyclohexane [194]. Zhang et al.
[40]  found  that  both  the  pseudo-first-order  and  pseudo-second-order
kinetics  models  can  not  predict  the  adsorption  very  well,  indicating
that  the  adsorption  of  cyclohexane  and  acetone  by  hydrochars  were
affected by multiple rate-controlling steps [35]. Besides, the adsorption
of phenyl VOCs onto biochar were governed by the interior diffusion,
according to the intra-particle diffusion model [198]. On one hand, the
fine molecular size of benzene makes it diffuse into the micropores easily
and then access adsorption sites, on the other hand, the high concen-
tration gradient and large driving force caused by high vapor pressure of

◦

◦

in  both

the  best  fitting

benzene accelerates its diffusion into biochar. The adsorption kinetic of
formaldehyde was best described by pseudo-first-order model for bio-
chars  treated  by  oil  palm  at  500–700
C  with  high  surface  area  and
abundant  extra  vacant  sites  compared  with  other  three  mentioned
models, indicating the physisorption of formaldehyde [210]. In contrast,
the biochar treated at 800
C had lower surface area giving less vacant
site, however matched well with the Elovich kinetic model. Meanwhile,
the  intra-particle  diffusion  occurred  within  pores  of  the  biochar,
contributing to a slow adsorption of formaldehyde [210]. The Elovich
model  presented
single  gas  and
multi-compositions  adsorption  experiments  for  toluene  onto  biochar
compared with other three models [49], implying that chemisorption on
heterogeneous  adsorbing  surfaces  via  hydrogen  bonding  and  electro-
static attraction is the dominant mechanism for the pyrolyzed biochar.
Another  kinetic  model  shown  in  Table  S7,  namely  Avrami  model
[153,154],  is  applied  to  explain  the  adsorption  kinetic  when  the
adsorption  process  is  affected  by  both  physical  and  chemical  in-
teractions,  especially  for  some  functionalized  sorbents.  The  Avrami
model was used to obtain better agreement of CO2 capture by biocharMg
between calculated and experimental values than the pseudo-first-order
and  second-order  models  [153].  Furthermore,  the  Fickian  diffusion
model analyzes the experimental results from breakpoint to equilibrium
time and describe the breakthrough curves [27], and the adsorption rate
coefficient can be received when the interior diffusion including surface
diffusion and pore diffusion dominates the adsorption process. Johari
et al. [27] found that increasing the pyrolysis temperature resulted in
reduced the effective diffusivity as well as Fickian adsorption rate co-
efficient,  presenting a  slower kinetic  process.  The  deactivation  model
(DM) was used by Zhang et al. [78] to simulate the breakthrough curves
of  SO2  adsorption  and  investigate  the  SO2  adsorption  kinetics,  they
found that the CO2 activation promoted the incipient adsorption rate of
SO2 by biochar at 30

C probably due to it was mainly physisorption.

◦

4.3. Adsorption energy evaluation

The heat of adsorption, which is the negative adsorption enthalpy,
elucidates  the  strength  of  adsorption.  It  is  relevant  to  the  interaction
between  the  adsorbent  surface  and  the  various  adsorptive  molecular
forces  including  van  der  Waals,  hydrogen  bonds,  hydrophobicity,
chemical  bands,  and  dipole-dipole  interactions  [59].  Using  the
Clausius-Clapeyron equation (Table S7), the adsorption isotherms can
be  measured  at  different  temperatures  to  assess  the  isosteric  heat  of
adsorption  (i.e.,  differential  heat  of  adsorption)  [42,146,165,178],
which  indicates  the  temperature  dependency  of  adsorption  isotherms
[42]. The degree of coverage of adsorbate can also be determined, and
the  isosteric  heat  generally  decreases  with  the  increase  of  surface
coverage [42,146]. The higher heat values during the initial adsorption
of CO2 can be ascribed to the large amounts of narrow micropores [146,
165,167] and surface chemistry such as nitrogen content [165,178], and
the slight decrease in isosteric heats at higher coverage was attributed to
the weak repulsive interactions for the CO2 molecules adsorbed on the
larger pores of biochar [48,146]. It is noteworthy that the adsorption
isosteric heats by biocharKOH remained almost unchanged regardless of
the  surface  coverage,  suggesting  the  adsorption  occurs  on  relatively
homogeneous surfaces [146]. The isosteric heat of CO2 adsorption pre-
sented  a  slow  declining  trend  as  the  accumulation  of  CO2  adsorption
amount [150,156,167,168], as was expected for indicating the hetero-
geneity nature of adsorption sites in the internal surfaces of biochar. At
low CO2 pressure, the biochar has abundant vacant micropores benefi-
cial to the pass of CO2  molecules  into biochar, but the micropores in
biochar were occupied at higher CO2  pressure, the heat of adsorption
thus decreased due to the weak interaction between biochar and CO2
[59].

In order to further investigate the adsorption mechanism of biochar
sorbents, the thermodynamic parameters such as enthalpy change (ΔH),
change of gibbs free energy (ΔG) and entropy change (ΔS) were applied

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109827

C. Wen et al.

to describe the thermodynamic behavior of gas adsorption on biochars
at  different  temperatures  [103,127].  In  this  case,  ΔH  determines  the
endothermic  or  exothermic  characteristics  of  the  adsorption  reaction
and  the  effects  of  adsorption  temperature.  ΔH  is  equal  to  the  energy
released during the exothermic reaction at constant pressure, including
the energy lost to the surroundings and retained in the adsorption. For
an endothermic reaction, ΔH expresses the absorbed energy, including
the energy lost by adsorption and gained from surroundings [209]. Note
that the physisorption is exothermic while chemisorption can be both
exothermic  and  endothermic.  The  adsorption  reaction  of  NO  was
C as the ΔH was positive, the
endothermic at temperatures below 300
NO molecules thus needed more energy to be adsorbed by biocharCe and
the NO adsorption was more favorable at higher temperature [209]. Li
et al. [127] reported that the Hg0  adsorption process was exothermic
implied  by  the  negative  ΔH,  indicating  that  raising  temperature  was
adverse to the adsorption reaction. Yang et al. [103] observed the pos-
itive ΔH during Hg0 removal process, indicating that it was endothermic
for the biocharNH4Br, and the higher reaction temperature was favorable
to  the  adsorption  of  Hg.  The  adsorption  of  toluene,  cyclohexane  and
acetone on biochar was reported to be an exothermic process, observed
by the typical differential scanning calorimetry curve [40].

◦

Other calculation or simulation methods were also applied to acquire
the  adsorption  of  heat.  If  the  heat  of  adsorption  was  supposed  to  be
irrelevant to temperature, it can also be evaluated by fitting the Lang-
muir  isotherm  equilibrium  constant  into  the  van’t  Hoff  equation
(Table S7) [83,209]. The activation energy of adsorption involves the
minimum  required energy to prompt the normal molecule to become
activated molecule, which is able to reflect the active sites properties
and  the  adsorption  mode  [103,127,136].  The  Arrhenius  equation  is
applied to calculate the activation energy (Table S7) [26], the negative
activation energy is derived from the reaction’s exothermic character-
istics  and  the  reaction  rate  constant  decreases  when  the  adsorption
temperature raises [153]. Some study imply that the activation energy is
generally linearly relevant to the adsorption heat for surface diffusion
[212,213]. Note that the physisorption of gas molecules does not require
activation energy. Furthermore, the sorption heat of CO2  onto biochar
was  reported to  be  calculated  by  integrating  the  sorption  appearance
from the TGA diagram during a pre-defined time range [182].

To sum up, the heat of adsorption is normally between 5 kJ/mol and
800  kJ/mol.  Physisorption  typically  produces  an  adsorption  heat  of
5–40 kJ/mol, most of experimental data showed that the adsorption of
CO2  by  biochars  was  chiefly  via  physisorption  [144,149,187].  These
values  are  much  lower  than  the  energy  necessary  to  break  covalent
bonds,  suggesting  a  readily  reversible  desorption  and  regeneration  of
adsorbent  at  a  low  energy  penalty  [168].  Whereas,  chemisorption  is
typically  between  40  and  800  kJ/mol  [59,187].  By  contrast,  the
adsorption isosteric heat of N2 (~16 kJ/mol) is alomost half than that of
CO2,  which  should  be  caused  by  its  lower  quadrupole  moment.
Accordingly, it benefits the selectivity of CO2/N2 [156]. The adsorption
heat  is  critical  to  the  cost  profile  of  gas  pollutants  with  biochar.  The
higher  isosteric  heat  of  adsorption  represents  the  stronger  adsorption
and greater selectivity, meanwhile the regeneration of sorbent will be
harder as higher energy consumption is needed. It appears that an in-
termediate level of heat of adsorption is preferred. That is, from an en-
gineering point of view, the recommended values for post-combustion
capture of gas pollutants are between 30 and 60 kJ/mol [36].

build  pore  models  of  carbon  materials  to  predict  the  adsorption  iso-
therms, adsorption heat and electrostatic interactions of flue gas.

Zhao  et  al.  [215]  built  a  DFT  model  of  biochar  surface  with  or
without inherent potassium to uncover the mechanism of NO reduction,
they found that the bonding of K atoms (-O-K) to carbon atoms on bio-
char  surface  enhanced  NO  chemisorption  through  charge  transfer,
reducing the energy barrier from 173.7 kJ/mol to 31.6 kJ/mol. Shi et al.
[65] established the surface model to simulate the reaction process of
Hg0 on biochar prepared from straw and PVC, the unsaturated edge on
period graphite like the cluster model was applied to simulate the sur-
face active site, and the adsorption energy was calculated based on the
DFT  calculation.  The  model  of  biocharCl  doped  with  di-chlorine  was
obtained to build the active sites of C–Cl bond. The results presented the
loading  of  dichloride  atoms  and  carbonyl  groups  on  biochar  model
enlarged  adsorption  energy,  would  directly  facilitate  the  adsorption
process of Hg0. The HgCl was confirmed to be an intermediate in a re-
action pathway. Jia et al. [216] constructed a 3D molecular structure
model based on molecular mechanics, eight adsorption configurations
were  studied  according  to  the  location  and  amount  of  the  chosen
adsorption  sites.  They  found  that  the  chemisorption  of  Hg0  onto  the
biochar  occurred  notably,  with  adsorption  energy  of  higher  than  40
kJ/mol  at  six  configurations.  If  the  adsorption  site  was  negatively
charged and the charges number was large, the adsorption of Hg0 onto
the biochar was facilitated. The molecular structure of iron-based bio-
char was determined as C45H24O12NFe [141], and the adsorption energy
of oxygen-containing functional groups was carboxylic acid > lactone >
aldehyde,  implying  the  adsorption  effect  on  Hg0.  Feng  et  al.  [164]
constructed the DFT models of biochar including N-Q, N-5, N-6, –OH
and –CHO. The adsorption energies between CO2  and biochar with ni-
trogen  functional  groups,  oxygenic  functional  groups  and  without
functional groups was (cid:0) 30.87 kJ/mol, (cid:0) 24.07 kJ/mol, (cid:0) 7.27 kJ/mol,
respectively,  confirming  that  the  N  and  O  functionalities  in  biochar
apparently  promoted  the  adsorption  of  CO2  molecules.  Another  DFT
calculations showed that the adsorption energies of CO2 on pure carbon,
graphitic  N,  pyridine  N  and  pyrrolic  N  surfaces  were  (cid:0) 0.15,  (cid:0) 0.25,
(cid:0) 0.32, and (cid:0) 0.41 eV, respectively [186], confirming that the N loading
was beneficial to CO2  adsorption. Cao et al. [217] used N/P co-doped
biochar  as  acetone  adsorber  and  revealed  the  adsorption  mechanism
on biochar surface using DFT. It was found that the binding energy of
C––P functional group ((cid:0) 70.567 kJ/mol) and acetone was stronger than
that of C–P–O ((cid:0) 32.516 kJ/mol).

Li et al. [218] established different functional group modified carbon
structure for CO2  adsorption using a  combination of DFT and  GCMC.
They  found  that  the  combination  of  pore  widths  <0.6  nm  and  alkali
metal  (Li/Na/K)  modifications  improved  the  CO2  adsorption  amount
and CO2/N2 selectivity. The isosteric heats of chlorobenzene and toluene
were  acquired  by  the  simulation  of  GCMC,  and  the  higher  value  of
chlorobenzene than toluene signified its stronger binding force on bio-
char [197]. Zhang et al. [206] used GCMC to reveal that van der Waals
interactions  were  the  main  mechanism  of  toluene  physisorption,
accompanied by electrostatic interaction which can be attributed to the
synergy between oxygenic functional groups and Cu metal sites.

5. Engineering consideration

5.1. Biochar preparation

4.4. Assistance from computational simulation methods

With  the  rapid  development  of  computer  technology,  various
computational  simulation  methods,  such  as  density  functional  theory
(DFT),  classic  molecular  dynamics  (MD),  and  grand  canonical  Monte
Carlo (GCMC), have been widely applied to describe the biochar struc-
ture  model  and  adsorption  process  recently.  DFT  is  mainly  used  to
predict the lattice constant, crystal structure, adsorption energy, elec-
tron  energy  density,  reaction  path,  etc,  in  biochar  [214].  GCMC  can

As discussed in Section 2.4, the treating conditions on the biochar,
such as raw materials, pyrolysis and activation temperature, flow rate of
activated  gas,  concentrations  of  chemical  activation  agents,  ratios  of
biochar  to  activating  agent,  and  processing  time,  affect  the  biochar
characteristics and further removal capacities of gas pollutants. Never-
theless, it is noted that the conditions of thermal treatment, activation
and functionalization of biochar are related to the time and economic
expenses required for the preparation of biochar. Therefore, the prepa-
ration of biochar should pursue both superior removal capacities of gas

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109828

C. Wen et al.

pollutants and the time and cost-saving methods.

The increased particle size of biochar arouses a relatively longer time
required to achieve the same interior gas concentration [33]. Guo et al.
[41] observed that when the particle size of biocharCO2 increased from 1
mm  to  4  mm,  both  the  gas  film  resistance  and  the  internal  diffusion
distance were intensified, leading to slower mass transfer and decreased
breakthrough  time.  However,  the  resulting  adsorbed  capacity  of  SO2
were  similar  compared  with  the  different  sizes  of  biochar,  i.e.,  ~14
mg/g for dynamic and 76 mg/g for static conditions. Wei et al. [166]
also found that the bamboo biochar ranging from 0.075 to 2.0 mm had
almost the same adsorbed amounts of CO2, indicating the little effect of
particle size.

An  increase  in  carbonization  temperature  generally  increases  the
microporosity, ash, fixed carbon, basic functional groups, pH of biochar,
accordingly, acidic and oxygenic functional groups, H/C and O/C molar
ratios, volatile, and yields of biochar decrease [219]. The high pyrolysis
temperature is benefit to promote the porosity of biochar and intensify
the adsorption ability of gas, but at higher temperature, the high ash
volumes in biochar from high temperature pyrolysis blocked the pores of
biochar and destructed the surface functional group, both of which ul-
timately  hindered  the  adsorption  process  [73].  The  decrease  of  the
organic functional groups (mainly C––O) [105,106], the decomposition
of  C-halogen  functional  groups  [105]  and  sulfur  species  [107]  at
excessive  high  temperature  would  weaken  the  chemisorption  and
removal performance for Hg0. As to the extended activation tempera-
ture,  it  was  reported  to  accelerate  the  reaction  between  carbon  and
activation  agents,  and  may  encourage  the  widening  and  collapse  of
pores  instead  of  pore  development  and  meanwhile  destroy  the  func-
tional groups. The oxygen functional groups were reported to increase
for biocharH2O but decrease for biocharKOH with increasing temperature
[92].

Generally, the carbonization process of biomass can occur at a suit-
able activation time and the prolonged time do not differ markedly [28],
the more prolonged activation time may even cause the damage to pore
surface [73]. Yavuz et al. [72] found that when the activation time in
H3PO4 extended from 30 min to 120 min, the pore size of biochars was
gradually increased and widened firstly, and then decreased within the
further 60 min. Wu et al. [74] reported that the pore volume and surface
area of biochar were promoted moderately when the activation time was
prolonged from 1 h to 2 h during the H2O activation at 800
C, mean-
while,  the  reduction  of  activation  time  weakened  the  acidity  of  the
biochar catalyst.

◦

During H2O2  activation, too higher concentration input may cause
much  powerful  oxidization  and  make  the  collapsed  inner  pores  and
decreased specific surface area [85], as well as may promote the ester-
ification  reaction  between  –OH  and  –COOH,  which  eliminated  the
chemisorption  sites  of  Hg  and  resulted  in  a  worse  removal  [37].  The
different optimum KOH/biomass ratios and temperatures exhibiting the
maximum CO2  capacity were reported in Section 3.4.2, with the inde-
pendent activation effects on the higher pore volume and BET surface
area, as well as higher basic oxygenic functional groups and oxidized
sulfur content [169].

◦

Microwave pyrolysis is capable of generating the biochar with saved
cost, time, and energy consumptions in comparison to the conventional
pyrolysis. The maximum CO2 adsorption amount of biochar formed by
C  was  reported  to  be  higher  than  by
microwave  pyrolysis  at  ~321
◦
conventional  pyrolysis  at  550
C  [155].  At  higher  power  levels,  the
adsorption  performance  weakened  possibly  due  to  the  pore  damage.
Besides, the ultrasound process is thought to increase the BET surface
area  and  improve  gas  removal  efficiency  by  enhancing  the  further
functionalization effect including the dispersion and penetration of the
NH4Cl [109] and dispersion active ingredients such as Mn and Ce [109].
The functionalization of ammonia, halogen and metals presented in
Figs. 3–5 also should be accessed suitably. The high activation temper-
ature  in  NH3  improved  the  porous  texture  and  then  enhance  the
impregnation effectiveness of nitrogen [79], however, if the activation

temperature is too high, the NH3  modification resulted in the decom-
position of nitrogen functionalities [78]. The narrow micropore volume
was also reduced at high temperature owing to the collapse of adjacent
pore walls, causing decreased adsorption of CO2  [58,59,177]. The op-
timum NH4Cl loading was reported to be about 5% [109], and the Hg
removal efficiency no longer increased [127,128] or even decreased for
NH4Cl  loadings  >7%  [109],  might  be  caused  by  the  biochar  surface
saturation leading to pore blockage and diminution of surface area. The
excessive loading value of Cu/Fe oxides, e.g., 15 wt%, would lead to the
blockage  of  the  partial  pore  structure  and  reduce  the  physisorption
performance  of  Hg,  further  inhibiting  the  oxidation  or  chemisorption
process and was not conducive to Hg0 removal any more. The removal
efficiencies of HCHO and Hg0 apparently dropped when the molar ratio
of Cu to Mn was decreased from 1:1 to 1:5 or enhanced from 1:1 to 3:1
[32].  The  suitable  molar  ratio  of  bimetals  is  benefit  to  form  the  well
dispersed active ingredients and can promote the occurred redox cycle
to  produce  new  oxygen  vacancies,  receiving  good  mercury  removal
capacity [54]. Too excessive metal input would result in the decrease of
redox activity and a noticeable decline of surface area, it would further
led  to  the  reduction  of  active  sites  of  adsorption  and  oxidation,  and
thereby inhibited the catalytic removal. During the ball-milling treat-
ment,  extending  the  time  from  1  to  4  h  was  reported  to  benefit  the
magnetic properties of biocharFe/Mn and improve the Hg0 removal [11].
However, when the process time of ball-milling was prolonged to 12 h,
the surface energies elevated and the metal oxides began to aggregate, a
proper time thus needs to be considered to improve the dispersion of
metal oxides onto the biochar for better functionalized effects.

The balance between adsorption performance and yields of biochar
is particularly important in choosing the treatment methods to produce
biochar,  considering  that  a  satisfying  adsorption  performance  at  the
expense  of  reducing  biochar  yield  might  not  be  economical  from  the
industrial point of view [220]. Al-Rumaihi et al. [221] summarized that
the feedstock type, carbonization temperature, heating rate, residence
time, and reactor bed type and height, have the influence on the biochar
yield. Generally, biomass with higher ash content leads to higher bio-
char  yield  due  to  higher  inorganic  content  [222],  and  lignocellulosic
feedstocks  with  larger  lignin  content  show  higher  biochar  yield  and
lower volatiles. Besides, the biochar yields are inversely related to the
pyrolysis temperature and the heating time, possibly posing an opposite
effect on the adsorption performance [71,223]. The biochar yield de-
creases  with  the  increase  of  temperature,  which  is  attributed  to  the
dehydration  of  hydroxyl  groups  and  thermal  degradation  of  cellulose
and  lignin  structures  [71].  Sessa  et  al.  [224]  also  reported  that  the
biochar yield was mainly determined by the maximum temperature, but
heating  rate  and  the  particle  size  did  not  affect  the  biochar  yield
significantly  when  uniform  heating  was  assured.  Meanwhile,  biochar
yield was reported to increase with the increase of holding time [71].
As to some typical methods of activation, the biochar yield of mi-
crowave pyrolysis was reported to be lower than that of conventional
pyrolysis  at  the  same  processing  temperature  of  600
C  [155].  The
biochar yields from activation of steam, CO2 and KOH were reported to
be  59%,  55%  and  35%,  respectively  [225].  The  high  CO2  activation
temperature reduces the surface functional groups, hydrophobicity, and
the production yield of biochar, although increasing the surface area and
porosity  positively.  After  incorporating  urea  phosphate,  the  biochar
yield was significantly enhanced from 25.8% to 50% at pyrolysis tem-
perature  of  600
C  [226].  It is  caused  by  the fact  that  H3PO4  and  its
polymers  can  combine  with  the  organic  components  in  sawdust  to
generate  phosphates  and  polyphosphate  esters  through  crosslinking,
which avoids the escape of carbon atoms [226]. The impregnation ratio
of NaOH and urea phosphate did not affect the biochar yield apparently
[223,226].

◦

◦

5.2. Reactor conditions

The lab-scale studies widely use the fixed bed reactor (FBR), thermo-

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109829

C. Wen et al.

gravimetric analyzer (TGA) and static volumetric analyzer. FBR presents
the dynamic and volumetric sorption, the TGA presents a kinetic and
gravimetric sorption [20], and the static volumetric analyzer measures
the gas adsorption/desorption isotherms and equilibrium, generally at
different  temperatures  and  a  pressure  range  from  0  to  101  kPa.  The
dynamic tests generate necessary data for calculating of adsorption ki-
netic  and  rate  equation.  Through  the  fixed  bed,  the  gas  adsorbate  is
passed at a given flow rate and the experiment is terminated when the
outlet flow concentration is equal to inlet concentration, indicating the
breakthrough occurs. The adsorption capacity of biochar can be calcu-
lated via the breakthrough curve as a function of operation time, using
the  area  integration.  In  the  TGA  test,  the  gas  adsorbate  uptake  is
weighted  from  the  increased  mass  gained  by  the  biochar  during  the
feeding of the adsorbate gas flow.

The understanding of influences of controlling parameters for FBR in
the  adsorption  performance  is  necessary  to  the  further  engineering
application of large-scale fixed adsorption bed device. The bed density of
reactor is calculated from the quality of adsorbent loaded into the vol-
ume of the reaction column. From a practical of view, the higher bed
density can decline the required volume of adsorbents [174]. The length
of mass transfer zone (MTZ) represents the active part where adsorption
occurs in the fixed bed, presenting a concentration gradient in adsorbate
from  zero  to  equilibrium  [41,162].  Guo  et  al.  [41]  observed  that  the
increase of column length retarded the breakthrough time and exhaus-
tion  time,  however,  had  an  insignificant  effect  on  the  MTZ  length.
Meanwhile,  the  diffusion  is  generally  faster  when  the  particle  size  of
biochar is smaller, the MTZ will thus be shorter and sharper [41].

The increase of feeding rate promotes the surface diffusion so that
the mass transfer rates increases, leading to steeper breakthrough curve
and correspondingly a relative lower adsorption capacity of SO2  [83].
The servicing time of the packed column was decreased due to a higher
loading factor [41]. An approximate linear correlation between the inlet
SO2  concentration and the adsorption amount of SO2  was observed by
Yavuz et al. [72]. Furthermore, Lua et al. [83] and Iberahim et al. [6]
revealed that the higher GHSV (gas hourly speed velocity) indicated by
higher gas flow rate would transfer more gases into the adsorption bed
per unit time and led to faster breakthrough. The contact time between
SO2 and biochar decreased, sometimes the equilibrium had not reached
when  the  breakthrough  occurred,  thereby  reducing  the  treated  and
adsorbed  amount  of  SO2  [6,41,75].  At  higher  GHSV,  the  decline  in
adsorption  capacity  of  SO2  and  NO  was  attributed  to  the  insufficient
contact time or space between the sorbent and the simulated flue gas
[209].  The  GHSV  was  also  important  to  the  Hg0  removal,  the  Hg0
removal capacity declined from 65.9% to 50.0% as the GHSV enhanced
(cid:0) 1 [61]. Similar findings were given by
from 260,000 h
Shen et al. [109] and Xu et al. [105].

(cid:0) 1 to 520,000 h

5.3. Adsorption rate

The  dynamic  breakthrough  experiments  of  feed  gas  was  generally
used to quantify the rate of adsorption and then the adsorption amount
of  typical  gas  such  as  SO2,  NO  and  CO2.  The  adsorption  rate  can  be
calculated from the slope of the breakthrough curve of SO2, NO, and CO2
and the slope of accumulative adsorption curve of Hg0 and VOCs, which
are  difficult  to  penetrate  due  to  the  very  low  concentration.  The
breakthrough time is calculated between the initial feeding time and the
saturation  time,  which  detects  the  non-zero  gas  concentration  at  the
outlet of the reactor column. Generally, the experimental data showed
that  the  breakthrough  time  decreased  with  increasing  both  feeding
concentration [33,83] and flow rate of gas or GHSV [6,41,83]. An in-
crease in gas feeding concentration improves the surface diffusion and
then  the  mass  transfer  coefficient,  resulting  in  a  relatively  steeper
breakthrough curve and earlier breakthrough of SO2 [33]. Besides, it is
expected that the more flow rate of gas or GHSV will deliver high flux of
adsorbate  into  the  reactor  bed  per  unit  time,  which  decreases  the
breakthrough  time  of  SO2  [6]  and  CO2  [153].  However,  the  ultimate

adsorption capacity may remain almost the same when sufficient time is
provided  [153].  As  the  adsorption  temperature  increased,  both  the
breakthrough  time  of  SO2  [79]  and  CO2  [186]  were  found  to  be
decreased, indicating that the increased adsorption temperature allows
for a faster transport of gas within the pores and then improves diffusion
and adsorption rate. The reported data of breakthrough time of typical
gas differ in several seconds to hundreds of minutes, depending on the
specific  experimental  conditions  including  gas  type,  gas  feeding  con-
centration, gas flow rate or GHSV, adsorption temperature, and loading
weight  and  shape  of  biochar.  Therefore,  it  seems  to  be  difficult  to
compare the rate of adsorption from different publications.

◦

Al-Rahbi et al. [88] reported that both increasing microporosity and
surface  area  of  biocharKOH  correlated  directly  with  the  increased  NO
breakthrough,  indicating  a  faster  adsorption  rate.  Similarly,  Jia  et  al.
[55] reported that the diffusion and then surface adsorption rate of Hg0
was greatly improved with the development of pore structure and sur-
face  chemical  properties.  The  physically  biocharCO2  presented  faster
◦
adsorption rates of CO2 than chemically biocharKOH at 75
C, indicating
that the more hierarchical pore structure of biochar can lead to a higher
diffusion rate of CO2 [146]. The N-doped hierarchical biochar showed a
(cid:0) 1 for toluene, which is benefited from
high adsorption rate of 0.189 min
mesopores  improving  the  mass  transfer  behaviors  [227].  The  VOC
C pyrolytic biochar were higher than
adsorption rate constants of 600
◦
that of biochars produced at 300
C, which suggested that the physical
adsorption  rate  was  slightly  higher  than  partition  rate  [35].  The
adsorption saturation time of acetone from biochar after ball milling was
apparently shortened from 40 min to 20 min, as the BET specific surface
area  and  the  oxygenic  group  content  of  biochars  increased  after  ball
milling [228]. Generally, the surface adsorption is the main adsorption
form in the initial stage, which makes the surface adsorption rate faster
than  the  intraparticle  diffusion  rate  owing  to  the  large  amount  of
adsorption  active  sites  existing  on  the  surface  of  biochar  [114].  For
example, the CO2 adsorption increased almost vertically as a function of
time  within  the  first  5  min  [229].  Subsequently,  the  adsorption  rate
decreases  gradually  due  to  the  depletion  of  active  sites,  which  is
confirmed  by  the  geometric  logarithm  increase  of  Hg  adsorption  rate
with time elapsed over 600 min, with an average adsorption rate of 1.40
μg/g ⋅ min

(cid:0) 1 [138].

5.4. Cycle and regeneration

Regeneration  of  spent  biochar  is  necessary  to  the  successive
adsorption-desorption  cycles  in  industrial  applications,  and  a  low
regeneration temperature and a short cycle time should be pursued. The
rapid kinetics process is benefit to shorten the adsorption cycle time. The
stronger chemisorption would make the regeneration of biochar sorbent
harder, this requires higher desorption/regeneration temperature with
high energy consumption [156].

Atanes  et  al.  [28]  found  that  the  SO2  adsorbed  by  acidic  biochar
adsorbents via physisorption would be readily to regenerate for more
adsorption cycles. Braghiroli et al. [76] reported that thermal treating
regeneration mostly affected the physical structure of the spent biochar,
H2SO4 adsorbed onto the biochar was removed along with the decrease
of carbon, whereas water treatment mainly dealt with the adsorption of
SO2  found  in  surface.  These  two  types  of  treatments  were  tested  by
Iberahim et al. [73] to find out that about half adsorption amount of SO2
was regenerated after the first cycle, and the lower treatment tempera-
ture may lead to higher residual sulfur which caused the decrease of SO2
adsorption.  The  SO2  adsorption  efficiency  decreased  when  the  regen-
eration cycles increased to the third times, owing to the damage of pore
texture and active adsorption sites [6]. The regeneration efficiency of
biocharH2O  was evaluated with 6 cycles by Braghiroli et al. [76]. They
found that the pore structure of biochar was changed after regeneration
cycles, which resulted in a moderate promotion in micropore volume
and surface area since the 4th cycles. Besides, the acid surface after SO2
◦
C, which can
adsorption was decomposed during desorption test at 600

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109830

C. Wen et al.

leave  new  basic  surface  and  favor  the  further  SO2  sorption  capacity
possibly  compared  with  the  original  biochar.  These  two  reasons  sur-
prisingly  made  the  SO2  adsorption  capacities  from  the  4th-6th  cycles
higher than those from the 1st-3rd cycles.

VOCs derived from either strong affinity between VOC and biochar, or
the  formed  permanent  bonds  requiring  higher  temperature  to  break
them [198].

◦

◦

◦

C.  Tang  et  al.  [230]  reported  that  Hg  desorbed  at  200

The Hg captured by the stable sites is relatively difficult to re-release,
whereas  the  Hg  retained  by  the  physisorption  and  catalytic  sites  is
readily  to  desorb  by  heating  [230].  Fan  et  al.  [114]  showed  that  the
physisorbed  Hg0  onto  the  biochar  initially  desorbed  at  160
C,  the
desorption peak temperature of the organic Hg-OM species formed by
the heterogeneous reaction of Hg0  with carbonyl and carboxyl groups
C, while the corresponding temperature of HgO happened at
was 210
◦
300
C  was
caused by the oxidation of Hg by catalytic sites, and that desorbed at
280
C was attributed to the adsorbed Hg onto the surface functional
groups. Yang et al. [43] reported that the biocharCu/Fe exhibited a good
regeneration performance and still had a high Hg0 removal efficiency of
76.33%  after  6  regeneration  cycles,  compared  with  the  efficiency  of
90.58% by original biochar. Shan et al. [108] reported that the average
Hg0 removal capacity was 10% lower than the original 87.1% after the
5th cycle for biocharMn/Fe. The average Hg removal capacity of the re-
generated biocharMn/Ce just decreased by 16.1% after 10 cycles, owing
to the destruction of porous properties and active site [54]. Besides, the
Fe impregnated biochar maintained above 90% after 6 cycles [119].

◦

Two main types of adsorption technologies are deemed as feasible in
post-combustion capture of CO2 and can match the adsorbent regener-
ation: temperature swing adsorption (TSA) and pressure swing adsorp-
tion (PSA) or even vacuum swing adsorption (VSA) [174]. The biochar
can be readily regenerated by increasing the temperature in TSA process
and/or reducing the system pressure in PSA process [144]. However, it
would  be  uneconomical  and  difficult  to  compress  the  flue  gases  with
high flowrate for a conventional PSA process. Plaza et al. [144] reported
that 5 kPa seemed a reasonable low pressure level during the depres-
surization desorption step of CO2 in order to maintain the low operation
costs. By contrast, the CO2-rich adsorbent was regenerated by raising the
reactor  temperature  in  TSA  process,  this  can  be  easily  achieved  by
harnessing a heat steam from the running industrial plant via adding the
heating exchanger [174]. Because of the weak interactions between CO2
and biochar determine the requirement of low energy, its regeneration is
relatively  simple  and  has  been  observed  widely  [148,149,174],  and
most of reported biochars can be rapidly and simply regenerated over
multiple  cycles  without  distinct  drop  of  adsorption  capacity  via  TSA
process [31,48,153] or PSA process [31,48,148,150,153,166,185]. The
high  reusability  of  the  biochar  sorbent  elucidates  that  physisorption
process  was  the  predominant  mechanism.  The  decline  in  capture  ca-
pacity of CO2 with cyclic process may be due to loss of surface activity,
agglomeration and incomplete regeneration of sorbent [171]. It should
be mentioned that the spent biochar captured CO2 could be utilized as
the soil amendment and carbon storage directly, as CO2 would not leak
under normal soil/atmospheric temperatures [187], in this case it is no
need to regenerate the biochar for a long time.

For the renewable potential of VOCs, Zhang et al. [40] indicated that
the desorption temperature of acetone on biochar was lower than that of
cyclohexane, affected by both the high porosity and abundant functional
groups  onto  biochar  as  well  as  the  properties  of  VOCs.  The  VOCs
adsorbed in the narrow micropores generally required higher desorption
temperatures, and the abundance of oxygenic functional groups onto the
hydrocharH3PO4  would strengthen the adhesion force with hydrophilic
acetone. Besides, the high boiling point adsorbate has strong affinity to
the sorbent, therefore the higher boiling point of cyclohexane compared
to  acetone explained its  more difficult  desorption. Nearly 90%  of the
adsorption capacity of acetone was remained at the end of the 5 cycles,
while it had 83.30% capacity remaining for cyclohexane [194]. Another
study  presented  that  there  were  merely  2.5%  and  0.9%  decline  in
cyclohexane and acetone respectively during the last four cycles [40]. A
large decrease of adsorption capacity of VOCs primarily happened in the
first  cycle  [35],  should  be  attributed  to  the  incomplete  desorption  of

5.5. Biochar selection consideration

Some viewpoints that can reflect the commonality and personality of
adsorption characteristics of various pollutants are summarized in this
section, which can be used to help guide the selection of biochar. The
high BET surface area and developed micro-porosity characteristics in
biochar  are  necessary  to  provide  sufficient  physisorption  sites  for
enhancing  the  gas  adsorption  [48],  while an  appropriate  mesoporous
and  macropore  network  works  to  enhance  the  diffusion  of  the  gas
molecules  into  the  micropores.  The  high  carbonization  temperature
generally increases the micropore volume and surface area of biochar,
however,  some  micropores  might  be  coalesced  to  form  mesopores  or
macropores at the overhigh temperatures. Similarly, the mild conditions
of activation, microwave, ultrasonic and plasma are all able to develop
the porous properties of biochar. The physisorption would be intensified
when the pore distribution of biochar matches the molecular dynamic
size  of  gas  adsorbates  [19,37].  SO2,  NO,  Hg,  CO2  have  the  kinetic
diameter  of  0.364  nm,  0.3  nm,  0.32  nm,  0.33  nm,  respectively.  The
typical  VOCs,  such  as  toluene  and  chlorobenzene,  have  the  kinetic
diameter of 0.46 nm and 0.78 nm, respectively. Therefore, they tends to
collide and adsorb on micropores effectively due to their kinetic diam-
eter  much  less  than  2  nm  [30].  For  example,  Coromina  et  al.  [151]
indicated that the adsorption energy was optimized when the pore size
of biochar was 2–3 times than that of CO2 molecule, the optimum pore
size was thus between 0.7 and 0.9 nm for CO2 adsorption.

◦

◦

The adsorptive capacities of SO2 were reported to be approximately
linearly  proportional  related  with  the  micropore  volumes  of  bio-
charH3PO4 and biocharCO2 [72,75]. Al-Rahbi et al. [88] reported that the
best  NO  removal  efficiency  was  related  to  the  increase  in  micropore
volume and BET surface area of biocharKOH. The linear correlation be-
tween  the  amount  of  CO2  adsorbed  at  25
C  and  1  bar  and  the  pore
volume  of  0.33–0.63 nm,  and  the  correlation  between  narrow  micro-
pores of 0.33–0.48 nm and adsorption amount at 25
C and 0.15 bar
were  reported  [167].  Evidently,  the  narrower  micropore  is  mainly
responsible  to  CO2  adsorption  under  the  practical  flue  gas  conditions
with lower pressure of ~15% CO2. Furthermore, the capture of CO2 can
be carried out at relative high temperature when the biochar contains
more ultra-micropores, owing to only the narrowest pores mainly acting
as the most energetic adsorption sites maintain occupied as increasing
the temperature [156]. Accordingly, The CO2 or VOCs adsorbed in the
narrow micropores generally required higher desorption temperatures.
The strong linear correlation between micropore volumes or BET surface
area  of  biochars  and  adsorption  capacities  of  VOCs  were  also  widely
observed  [40,191,194,196,198].  The  narrow  micro-porosity  was  re-
ported to be dominant at low concentrations of toluene with the kinetic
diameter of 0.67 nm [191,196] and P-xylene of 0.58 nm [198], while the
more micropores of ~0.8 nm benefited the adsorption performance of
chlorobenzene (0.78 nm) than toluene [197]. The small molecular size
(0.58 nm) of benzene could prompt its diffusion rate into the micropores
and access adsorption sites, compared to other xylene VOCs [198].

It is noteworthy that the functionalized treatments including metal
and  halogen  modification  would  block  the  biochar  micropores  and
occupy  the  active  site.  The  physisorption  performance  of  NO  or  Hg
should  not  be  destroyed  by  the  too  drastic  treatments,  otherwise  the
further chemisorption or catalytic oxidation process would be inhibited.
Some above-mentioned treatments especially the physical activation
of O2, H2O, H2O2, and CO2  could introduce some oxygenic functional
groupss (mainly C––O, –OH) onto biochar, affecting the chemisorption
performance  of  various  gaseous  pollutants.  The  metal  oxides  having
powerful oxidizing and oxygen storage capacity can also introduce new
oxygenic functional groups onto the biochar, and the ball-milling pro-
cess helps to further increase the oxygenic functional groups effectively.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109831

C. Wen et al.

However,  the  oxygen  functionalities  on  the  biochar  surface  could
decompose at overhigh treatment temperature [51].

The surface oxygenic functional groups, e.g., carboxyl, lactone, and
phenolic hydroxyl, are closely related to the acidic character of biochar,
accordingly may favoring the polarity and hydrophobicity of biochar.
Therefore, they are benefit to the sorption of polar and hydrophilic VOCs
[193].  On  the  contrary,  biochar  reflects  the  hydrophobic  properties
making  them  favorable  as  an  adsorbent  for  the  hydrophobic  and
non-polar CO2 and VOCs [21,48]. It should be noted that certain surface
oxygenic  functionalities  such  as  ketone,  chromene,  and  pyrone,  and
nitrogen  containing  groups  can  contribute  to  the  basicity  of  biochar
[51]. The higher proportion of alkaline C–O groups in biochar could lead
to  stronger  electrostatic  or  hydrogen  bonding  interaction  with  acidic
CO2 and SO2 [52,169]. The strong adsorption is related to the oxygen-
ated groups onto the biochar, which are believed to be catalytic centers
for  SO2  oxidation  to  SO3  and  then  from  H2SO4  [68].  The  acidic
oxygenated anchoring sites are also the effective intermediate stage to
introduce the nitrogen functional groups, which are generally effective
for acidic SO2 and CO2 adsorption especially at the adsorption temper-
ature higher than ~100

C.

◦

, Mn4+

The oxidation treatment introduce large number of oxygenic func-
tional groups on the metal catalyst. They serve as active sites and pro-
duce the high-valence state (e.g., Ce4+
) through electron transfer.
C––O  groups  generally  serve  as  electron  acceptors  and  facilitate  the
electron transfer for the oxidation of Hg0 into HgO during this process
[61,123].  Meanwhile,  they  can  not  only  help  to  adsorb  NO  but  also
improve the dispersion of active phase to generate more adsorption sites
for NH3 [90], which can be beneficial to the oxidation of NO to NO2 and
the following L-H mechanism or “fast SCR” reaction to form N2 [90,96,
97]. Besides, the oxygenic functional groups onto biochar increase the
content of volatile organic matter during ball milling [50,198]. There-
fore, the adsorption of VOC onto ball-milled biochar is also dominated
by the combined mechanisms of surface adsorption and partition [50].

5.6. Field tests

◦

In the field scale coal-fired unit, only the adsorption removal of Hg0
using biochar was reported. The biochar can be injected into the flue gas
stream to capture Hg0  before dust remover, then the spent biochar is
captured by precipitator and recycled to re-inject into the flue gas after
regeneration  by  high  temperature  desorption  [54].  De  et  al.  [117]
evaluated the performance of the biocharH2O in Poplar River, Coronach,
Canada.  It  is  a  562  MW  power  plant  firing  lignite,  and  the  stack  gas
temperature  for  this  test  was  120–130
C.  The  biocharH2O  can  attain
more than 90% Hg capture when the biochar feeding rate was higher
than 25 kg/106  m3  of flue gas amount, while 80% of Hg removal rate
from 12 kg/106 m3. The ratio of biochar to Hg can be chosen to arrive
the  suitable  operating  cost  of  Hg  capture  process.  Tang  et  al.  [125]
carried out an onsite sampling in the 660 MW demonstration pulverized
coal  unit  to  compare  the  effects  of  Hg  removal  monitoring  from  the
biocharHBr  traps methods and the existing Ontario Hydra Method. The
parallel  Hg  sampling  results  of  biochar  sorbent  traps  and  the  OHM
showed 13.21 and 12.63 μg/Nm3  respectively in the sampling sites of
boiler outlet, indicating satisfactory Hg removal and collection by the
biocharHBr traps.

6. Challenges and perspectives

6.1. Research gap on exploring the adsorption mechanisms of biochar

(1) The  advanced  quantitative  analyzing  methods.  Various  character-
ization  technologies  have  been  applied  to  measure  the  pore
textural property and the occurrence of surface functional groups
of  biochars  before  and  after  use.  Shafeeyan  et  al.  [51]  and
Abdulrasheed  et  al.  [53]  systematically  described  the  typical
methods  including  chemical  titration,  X-ray  photoelectron

reduction

spectroscopy  (XPS),  Fourier  transform  infrared  spectroscopy
temperature  programmed  desorption  (TPD)  and
(FT-IR),
(TPR).  For  example,
temperature-programmed
NH3-TPD  can be applied  to  evaluate the surface  acidic  charac-
teristic of biochar, and H2-TPR measurement is used to observe
the  redox  property  of  metal  oxides.  However,  the  functional
groups  of  biochar  are  measured  by  those  technologies  off-line,
which  may  change  when  the  spent  biochar  is  cooled  down.
Therefore,  some  in-situ  advanced  methods  to  quantitatively
analyze  biochar  should  be  developed  to  detect  the  adsorption
mechanisms of biochar correctly [19].

(2)  Further  research  demand  for  typical  gas  pollutants.  The  metallic
oxides with high basicity were reported to successfully improve
the  removal  capacity  of  SO2  of  activated  carbon  support  by
chemisorption, and even performed better than the amine group
[53]. However, little similar attempts on biochar have been car-
ried out at present. The existing research on CO2 adsorption using
biochar are mainly relied on simulated gas that consist of merely
several major gas compositions (e.g., N2, CO2, and H2O) or even
pure CO2. More studies are necessary to elaborate the competitive
adsorption  by  biochar  in  industrial  flue  gas  containing  some
impurities [21]. Many solid adsorbents were modified by noble
metals  to  improve  the  Hg adsorption  capacity  because  of their
regeneration  capacity  and  satisfying  high  temperature  stability
[22], mainly including Ir, Pt, Pd, Rh, Ag and Au. From the sci-
entific  view  rather  than  economic  view,  the  effects  of  noble
metals modification can be attended to check their Hg removal
performance after adding into biochar. The adsorption of VOCs
onto  solid  sorbent  generally  decreases  with  elevating  the
adsorption
to  physical
exothermic  interaction.  Noteworthy,  high  temperature  would
facilitate the molecular diffusion, catalytic oxidation and chem-
isorption,  causing  the  complicated  effects  on  VOCs  adsorption
especially  for  the  metal  oxide  modified  biochar.  Besides,  hu-
midity can affect the adsorption of VOC onto carbon materials
due  to  the  H2O  molecules  can  competitively  occupy  the  pore
sites.  However,  the  influence  of  temperature  and  humidity  in
VOCs adsorption by biochar were little studied [10,231].

temperature,  mainly  attributed

(3)  Further  research  demand  for  synergistic  adsorption  of  multi  gas
components.  As  presented  in  Section  3.6  and  Table  S6,  the
research  on  multi  gas  adsorption  by  biochar  is  very  limited  at
present  and  none  of  those  tried  more  than  three  types  of  gas
pollutants  at  the  meantime.  Some  hints  can  be  considered  for
further  synergistic  adsorption  of  multi  gas  components.  The
oxygenic functional groups onto the biochar are generally acidic
and  they  are  benefit  to  the  sorption  of  polar  and  hydrophilic
VOCs,  besides,  they  provide  abundant  amounts  of  active  sites
onto which NH3  or Hg can be adsorbed, the higher NO and Hg
removal  efficiency  can  thus  be  achieved.  Meanwhile,  the
oxygenated anchoring sites are the effective intermediate stage to
introduce  the  nitrogen  functional  groups  (Fig.  3),  which  are
generally  more  effective  than  the  pore  properties  for  the
adsorption  of  acidic  SO2  and  CO2,  especially  at  an  adsorption
◦
temperature higher than ~100
C. The redox reactions of metal
catalyst in biochar (Fig. 4) and the improved adsorption ability of
NH3  and  Hg  mainly  determine  the  NOx  and  Hg0  removal  per-
formance  of  the  biochar,  and  also  able  to  promote  catalytic
conversion of VOC to CO2  and H2O. The metal oxides may also
react with SO2 or CO2 to generate sulfates or carbonates at a high
adsorption temperature (Fig. 4). Furthermore, the development
of biochar capable of simultaneous removal of multi gas pollut-
ants  at  one-step  process  remains  a  challenge  as  the  inevitable
competitive adsorptions.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109832

C. Wen et al.

6.2. Concerns on the industrial application

(1)  The requirement of industrial scale configurations loading biochar. As
mentioned in Section 5.2 and 5.4, nearly all studies on gas pol-
lutants adsorption of biochar were performed in lab scale reac-
tion systems until now. However, it should be difficult to present
as good adsorption capacity at industrial complicated conditions
as those received in lab scale systems, due to the particle char-
acteristics  of  biochar  sorbents  and  reactor  bed  configurations
need to be considered. The possible layout types for interacting
biochar sorbents with combustion flue gas streams are injection
systems,  fixed-bed,  moving-bed,  and  fluidized-bed  [232].  The
multiphase reactor may efficiently promote the mass transfer and
diffusion of gases which should be the major rate-controlled steps
of  gas  adsorption,  thereby  improving  the  adsorption  efficiency
[135]. The efficient utilization of the biochar sorbent in typical
industrial  scale  will  determine  the  feasibility  and  economy  of
biochar adsorption technology for the removal of gas pollutants
from combustion flue gas.

(2)  The requirement of biochar sorbent in industrial scale. The biochar
adsorbents should satisfy the following criteria under industrial
condition for an economic and idea capture of gas pollutants: (a).
be  produced  via  inexpensive  and  energy-save  processes,  e.g.,
microwave,  plasma,  ultrasonic  and  template;  (b)  present  large
adsorption capacity and high selectivity with N2, and should be
tolerate to other flue gas compositions (e.g., SOx, NOx, H2O and
light hydrocarbons) and it is better to remove multi gas pollutants
simultaneously; (c). fast adsorption and desorption kinetics, low
energy  requirements  for  desorption,  and  good  mechanical
regeneration  stability  are  necessary  to  achieve  long-term
adsorption-desorption  cycles  operation;  (d).  the  separation  for
the recovery of biochar adsorbents from the magnetic impurities
is a challenge, and the magnetically separable biochar should be
considered  [23].  These  problems  are  important  for  developing
the  candidate  biochar  sorbents  being  and  designing  the  gas
removal system, they still need to be boardly and deeply studied.
(3)  The optimum adsorption conditions. The cost of biochar and capture
efficiencies of gas pollutants should be balanced in order to work
in the typical engineering parameters [159], and the adsorption
capacity and kinetics of the same biochar adsorbents will differ
apparently under various flue gas parameters. For instance, CO2
in the flue gas streams of the energy and industry facilities, such
as power plants, lime production, or steel plants have different
concentrations  up  to  35%,  affecting  the  choice  of  optimum
adsorption  removing  technology  [189].  The  SCR  catalyst  is
promising  to  simultaneous  remove  NOx  and  Hg0,  and  the  low
temperature catalyst working in ~150–200
C should be devel-
oped. The most acceptable location for a CO2 capture unit is after
◦
FGD with temperatures of 50–105
C in the nearby location, and
the low CO2 partial pressure of ~15 kPa in high gas flow rate is
the main challenges of capturing post-combustion CO2, causing
that  only  the  very  narrow  micropores  in  biochar  positively
affected CO2 adsorption [167]. Besides, the adsorption efficiency
of low boiling VOC needs to be increased while the difficulty and
necessity of high temperature during high boiling VOC desorp-
tion should be solved. It should also keep in minds that the useful
operation conditions found in experimental research are gener-
ally in a narrow range or even far from the representative con-
ditions of post-combustion capture.

◦

(4)  Recommended  disposal  strategy  of  spent  biochar.  The  priority  in
industry is regenerating the used biochar for many times until the
removal  capacities  of  gas  pollutants  are  invalid,  mainly  via
◦
thermal regeneration at about 200–300
C which can be supplied
by heat transfer with a circulating flue gas in plants. The desorbed
gas pollutants such as SO2 and NOx  can be intensively collected
and disposed to as chemical feedstock. Then, it is prior to send

back  the  waste  biochar  into  boiler  as  it  is  a  fuel  with  better
heating value and energy density than its parent biomass. As the
disposal demand of CO2 having much higher concentration than
other  gas  types,  the  biochar  specifically  adsorbing  CO2  can  be
buried  as  a  type  of  carbon  sequestration  before  it  loses  the
effective adsorption capacity. In this case, biochar plays as the
carbon-sequestering soil amendment.

6.3. Economy, energy and environmental analysis

It is worth noting that many of modification processes onto biochar
adsorbent  may  add  extra  synthesis  costs  and  cause  harmful  environ-
mental implication. For example, the common treatment of acid solvent
activation is time and energy consuming in the applications of industrial
scale  [11].  Therefore,  the  green  and  simple  activation and/or  doping
methods,  such  as  ultrasonic,  plasma,  microwave,  and  ball-milling,
should be attempted in order to achieving the large scale commercial
production. Huang et al. [155] indicated that microwave pyrolysis can
achieve  a  near-zero  emission  of  CO2  according  to  the  mass  balance
relationship between the CO2 adsorption of biochar and the microwave
pyrolysis. The biochar sorbents lack of ample capabilities of recycling
and regeneration would increase the costs of production, operation, and
post-processing and lead to environmental issues because of the inevi-
table solid waste treatments [23]. The magnetically separation can be an
important  assistance  to  the  cyclic  utilization  of  biochar,  Yang  et  al.
[233] notified that the recyclability of magnetic separation adsorbents
led to only a 1/4-1/5 utilized cost compared to traditional AC adsor-
bents. However, the effectiveness of these methods for the modification
and application of biochar on an industrial scale is still unclear [21].

(cid:0) 1  (¥15.9 kg

The  biochar  costs  and  prices  depend  on  local  raw  material  avail-
ability, thermal treatment conditions, process flow, reactor availability,
recovery, service life and markets [234]. Praveen et al. [235] presented
(cid:0) 1
that the worldwide mean price of biochar up to 2018 was ₹185.5 kg
(cid:0) 1, China’s RMB Yuan), with the data source of a total of 91
(¥15.5 kg
companies reporting the sales of biochars across the world. They esti-
mated  that  the  cost  of  biochar  of  1  kg  was  ₹45.4,  ₹42.7  and  ₹42.5
(cid:0) 1) for coconut shell, rice husk and groundnut shell in India,
(¥3.5–3.7 kg
respectively  [235].  Dai  et  al.  [234]  stated  that  the  average  price  of
biochar in the United States from a survey of 23 biochar sellers in 2014
(cid:0) 1) and the cost of biochar production in
was $2512.0 ton
China  was  reported  to  be  only  about  15%  of  other  similar  foreign
products. Alhashimi et al. [236] evaluated the economic performance
(cid:0) 1)
and found the mean cost of AC and biochar were $5.6 kg
(cid:0) 1),  respectively,  however,  they  recommended
and  $5  kg
that the prices should be considered cooperatively with adsorption ca-
pacities  to  evaluate  the  bulk  cost  of  pollutant  capture.  For  economic
(cid:0) 1  (¥63.5
performance,  Tarka  et  al.  [237]  chose  a  baseline  of  $10  kg
(cid:0) 1) for solid sorbents in the sensitivity analysis, and they found that a
kg
(cid:0) 1  presented a good performance and a cost of $15 kg
(cid:0) 1
cost of $5 kg
(cid:0) 1) was not economical for the CO2  capture sorbent. The re-
(¥95.2 kg
(cid:0) 1 [122], appears
ported cost of seeweed biochar, i.e., $13.19–13.43 kg
to be around this range.

(cid:0) 1  (¥31.7  kg

(cid:0) 1 (¥35.5 kg

Economic benefits are secondary to the application value of biochar,
the environmental benefits of biochar are more important [234]. The
biochar production and its use for adsorption of pollutants present lower
environmental impacts than AC [238]. Alhashimi et al. [236] reported
that  the  energy  consumption  value  to  generate  1  kg  biochar  was
calculated to be 6.1 MJ/kg, in comparison to 97 MJ/kg for AC, and the
biochar  presented  negative  GHG  emissions  of  (cid:0) 0.9  kg  CO2eq./kg
because of its capacity to sequester carbon, while AC showed a positive
emission  of  6.6  kg  CO2eq./kg.  If  the  energy  demand  of  biochar  pro-
duction is too high, it would penalize the environmental profile of bio-
char, but the function of heat generation of biomass for biochar systems
with the highest environmental credits can provide an offset [238]. In
order  to  harness  the  biochar  adsorbents,  the  techno-economic  and
environmental  feasibility  should  be  evaluated  from  a  life-cycle

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109833

C. Wen et al.

(cid:0) 1, $329.93 ton CO2

perspective.  The  techno-economic  assessments  of  biocharKOH  were
investigated  to  compare  the  utilization  potentiality  with  MEA  and
PEI/silica at the post-combustion capture technology integrated with a
solar-assisted coal-fired power plant [239]. The corresponding values of
COA (cost of CO2  removed) for the system using MEA, PEI/silica and
(cid:0) 1  and $14.12 ton
biocharKOH  were $31.53 ton CO2
(cid:0) 1,  respectively,  indicating  the  best  performance  of  biocharKOH.
CO2
Comprehensive life cycle analysis can indicate the environmental foot-
prints  including  carbon,  energy,  water  and  toxic  emissions  [25].  The
following  life  cycle  stages  should  be  included:  biomass  collection,
transportation to pyrolysis facilities, pre-treatment processes, pyrolysis
stage, adsorption process, and final use of co-products [238]. The po-
tential disposal methods include soil amendment, solid fuel for energy
generation together with syngas and bio-oil, and filler material in con-
struction materials. However, until now little studies paid attention to
the life-cycle analysis of biochar adsorption [235,236,238], and none of
them concerned the adsorption of gas pollutants.

7. Conclusions

This  review highlights  the potential  of biochar as  an efficient  and
low-cost  for  removing  the  gaseous  pollutants  in  combustion  flue  gas,
including SO2, NOX, Hg, CO2 and VOC. The physical activation, chem-
ical  activation,  and  the  novel  modification  methods  including  micro-
wave, ultrasonic, plasma, ball-milling, and molten salt, were introduced
as their improvement in the micropore properties and the active surface
functional groups of the biochar sorbents. The relevant treating condi-
tions  were  attended  as  their  influence  on  the  biochar  characteristics,
such as pyrolysis and activation temperature, flow rate of activated gas,
concentrations of chemical activation agents, ratios of biochar to acti-
vating agent, and processing time. Furthermore, the functionalization
for engineering biochar, including addition of the oxides of transition
metals, basic sites capable of interacting with acidic gas, and halogens or
sulfur species on activated biochar were reviewed to observe the further
improved  adsorption  performance  of  biochar,  for  the  possible  engi-
neering application.

The adsorption conditions, mainly include the adsorption tempera-
ture, the humidity and impurities concentrations in simulated flue gas,
and  the  selectivity  and  synergistic  adsorption  of  typical  gases,  were
related  to  the  adsorption  rate  and  removal  performance  of  various
gaseous  pollutants.  Additionally,  the  study  examines  the  cycle  and
regeneration  capacity  of  biochar  to  guarantee  satisfactory  practical
removal  performance.  The  adsorption  isotherm  models  and  the
adsorption kinetic models are helpful to predict the adsorption amount
and controlling mechanism and from them the adsorption energy can be
calculated  to  determine  the  strength  and  potential  of  adsorption  and
desorption.  The  advanced  computational  simulation  methods  such  as
DFT, MD and GCMC were also discussed for helping with the description
of physisorption and chemisorption. At last, the challenges on improving
the  adsorption  performance  of  biochar,  the  synergistic  adsorption  in
industrial application, and the evaluation of economy and energy saving
analysis were presented.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  sincerely  acknowledge  the  financial  support  of  the

National  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  China  (Nos.  52076091,
52036003, 52076093). The authors sincerely appreciate the literature
collection assistance from Mr. Wuhao Wen, Yuhao Shao, Yu Dai, Yuxuan
Chang, and Miss. Guangyue Zhu, Shimeng Zhou.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101098.

References

[1] Samanta A, Zhao A, Shimizu GK, Sarkar P, Gupta R. Post-combustion CO2 capture

using solid sorbents: a review. Ind Eng Chem Res 2011;51:1438–63.

[2] Hu Y, Liu W, Chen H, Zhou Z, Wang W, Sun J, et al. Screening of inert solid

supports for CaO-based sorbents for high temperature CO2  capture. Fuel 2016;
181:199–206.

[3] Yang X, Liu W, Sun J, Hu Y, Wang W, Chen H, et al. Preparation of novel Li4SiO4

sorbents with superior performance at low CO2  concentration. ChemSusChem
2016;9:1607–13.

[4] Creamer AE, Gao B. Carbon-based adsorbents for postcombustion CO2 capture: a

critical review. Environ Sci Technol 2016;50:7276–89.

[5] Zhong Q, Shen H, Yun X, Chen Y, Ren Ya, Xu H, et al. Global sulfur dioxide
emissions and the driving forces. Environ Sci Technol 2020;54:6508–17.

[6] Iberahim N, Sethupathi S, Bashir MJ, Kanthasamy R, Ahmad T. Evaluation of oil
palm fiber biochar and activated biochar for sulphur dioxide adsorption. Sci Total
Environ 2022;805:150421.

[7] Crippa M, Guizzardi D, Muntean M, Schaaf E, Dentener F, Van Aardenne JA, et al.
Gridded emissions of air pollutants for the period 1970–2012 within EDGAR v4.
3.2. Earth Syst Sci Data 2018;10:1987–2013.

[8] Streets DG, Horowitz HM, Lu Z, Levin L, Thackray CP, Sunderland EM. Global and
regional trends in mercury emissions and concentrations. Atmos Environ 2019;
201:417–27. 2010–2015.

[9] Crippa M, Oreggioni G, Guizzardi D, Muntean M, Schaaf E, Lo Vullo E, et al. Fossil
CO2 and GHG emissions of all world countries. Publication Office of the European
Union: Luxemburg; 2019.

[10] Zhang X, Gao B, Creamer AE, Cao C, Li Y. Adsorption of VOCs  onto engineered

carbon materials: a review. J Hazard Mater 2017;338:102–23.

[11] Zhang X, Ren K, Wang Y, Shen B, Shen F, Shang Y. Solvent-free synthesis of

MnOx-FeOx/biochar for Hg0  and o-Xylene removal from flue gas. Energy Fuel
2021;35:15969–77.

[12] Cha J, Park S, Jung S, Ryu C, Jeon J, Shin M, et al. Production and utilization of

biochar: a review. J Ind Eng Chem 2016;40:1–15.

[13] Wang D, Jing Z, Wang Y, Liu T, Zhang B, Wen C. The novel magnetic adsorbent
derived from MIL-100 (Fe) loading with bimetallic Cu and Mn oxides for efficient
Hg0  removal from flue gas. J Clean Prod 2022;377:134384.

[14] Wang W, Wen C, Liu T, Li C, Chen L, Wu J, et al. Effects of various occurrence
modes of inorganic components on the emissions of PM10  during torrefied
biomass combustion under air and oxy-fuel conditions. Appl Energy 2020;259:
114153.

[15] Wang W, Wen C, Chen L, Liu T, Li C, Liu E, et al. Effect of combining water

washing and carbonisation on the emissions of PM10 generated by the combustion
of typical herbs. Fuel Process Technol 2020;200:106311.

[16] Wang W, Wen C, Liu T, Li C, Xu J, Liu E, et al. Emission reduction of PM10  via
pretreatment combining water washing and carbonisation during rice straw
combustion: focus on the effects of pretreatment and combustion conditions. Fuel
Process Technol 2020;205:106412.

[17] Chen L, Wen C, Wang W, Liu T, Liu E, Liu H, et al. Combustion behaviour of

biochars thermally pretreated via torrefaction, slow pyrolysis, or hydrothermal
carbonisation and co-fired with pulverised coal. Renew Energy 2020;161:867–77.
[18] Qian K, Kumar A, Zhang H, Bellmer D, Huhnke R. Recent advances in utilization

of biochar. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2015;42:1055–64.

[19] Chen Y, Zhang X, Chen W, Yang H, Chen H. The structure evolution of biochar
from biomass pyrolysis and its correlation with gas pollutant adsorption
performance. Bioresour Technol 2017;246:101–9.

[20] Bamdad H, Hawboldt K, MacQuarrie S. A review on common adsorbents for acid
gases removal: focus on biochar. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2017;81:1705–20.

[21] Dissanayake PD, You S, Igalavithana AD, Xia Y, Bhatnagar A, Gupta S, et al.

Biochar-based adsorbents for carbon dioxide capture: a critical review. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2020;119:109582.

[22] Xu W, Hussain A, Liu Y. A review on modification methods of adsorbents for

elemental mercury from flue gas. Chem Eng J 2018;346:692–711.

[23] Yang W, Adewuyi YG, Hussain A, Liu Y. Recent developments on gas–solid

heterogeneous oxidation removal of elemental mercury from flue gas. Environ
Chem Lett 2019;17:19–47.

[24] Liu D, Li C, Wu J, Liu Y. Novel carbon-based sorbents for elemental mercury

removal from gas streams: a review. Chem Eng J 2020;391:123514.

[25] Gwenzi W, Chaukura N, Wenga T, Mtisi M. Biochars as media for air pollution
control systems: contaminant removal, applications and future research
directions. Sci Total Environ 2021;753:142249.

[26] Rashidi NA, Yusup S, Hameed BH. Kinetic studies on carbon dioxide capture
using lignocellulosic based activated carbon. Energy 2013;61:440–6.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109834

C. Wen et al.

[27] Johari K, Saman N, Song ST, Cheu SC, Kong H, Mat H. Development of coconut

[57] Chatterjee R, Sajjadi B, Chen W, Mattern DL, Egiebor NO, Hammer N, et al. Low

pith chars towards high elemental mercury adsorption performance-Effect of
pyrolysis temperatures. Chemosphere 2016;156:56–68.

[28] Atanes E, Nieto-M ́arquez A, Cambra A, Ruiz-P ́erez MC, Fern ́andez-Martínez F.

frequency ultrasound enhanced dual amination of biochar: a nitrogen-enriched
sorbent for CO2  capture. Energy Fuel 2019;33:2366–80.

[58] Shafeeyan MS, Daud WMAW, Houshmand A, Arami-Niya A. Ammonia

Adsorption of SO2 onto waste cork powder-derived activated carbons. Chem Eng
J 2012;211–212:60–7.

modification of activated carbon to enhance carbon dioxide adsorption: effect of
pre-oxidation. Appl Surf Sci 2011;257:3936–42.

[29] Hutson ND, Yang RT. Theoretical basis for the Dubinin-Radushkevitch (DR)

adsorption isotherm equation. Adsorption 1997;3:189–95.

[30] Shen B, Liu Z, Xu H, Wang F. Enhancing the absorption of elemental mercury

using hydrogen peroxide modified bamboo carbons. Fuel 2019;235:878–85.
[31] Nguyen MV, Lee BK. A novel removal of CO2 using nitrogen doped biochar beads

as a green adsorbent. Process Saf Environ Protect 2016;104:490–8.

[32] Yi Y, Li C, Zhao L, Du X, Gao L, Chen J, et al. The synthetic evaluation of CuO-

MnOx-modified pinecone biochar for simultaneous removal formaldehyde and
elemental mercury from simulated flue gas. Environ Sci Pollut Control Ser 2017;
25:4761–75.

[33] Lua AC, Guo J. Adsorption of sulfur dioxide on activated carbon from oil-palm

waste. J Environ Eng 2001;127:895–901.

[34] Vassilev SV, Baxter D, Andersen LK, Vassileva CG, Morgan TJ. An overview of the
organic and inorganic phase composition of biomass. Fuel 2012;94:1–33.
[35] Zhang X, Gao B, Zheng Y, Hu X, Creamer AE, Annable MD, et al. Biochar for

volatile organic compound (VOC) removal: sorption performance and governing
mechanisms. Bioresour Technol 2017;245:606–14.

[36] Gargiulo V, Gomis-Berenguer A, Giudicianni P, Ania CO, Ragucci R, Alfe ’ M.

Assessing the potential of biochars prepared by steam assisted slow pyrolysis for
CO2  adsorption and separation. Energy Fuel 2018;32:10218–27.

[37] Shu T, Lu P, He N. Mercury adsorption of modified mulberry twig chars in a

simulated flue gas. Bioresour Technol 2013;136:182–7.

[38] Yue L, Xia Q, Wang L, Wang L, DaCosta H, Yang J, et al. CO2  adsorption at

nitrogen-doped carbons prepared by K2CO3  activation of urea-modified coconut
shell. J Colloid Interface Sci 2018;511:259–67.

[39] Li M, Xiao R. Preparation of a dual pore structure activated carbon from rice husk
char as an adsorbent for CO2  capture. Fuel Process Technol 2019;186:35–9.
[40] Zhang X, Gao B, Fang J, Zou W, Dong L, Cao C, et al. Chemically activated
hydrochar as an effective adsorbent for volatile organic compounds (VOCs).
Chemosphere 2019;218:680–6.

[41] Guo J, Lua AC. Adsorption of sulphur dioxide onto activated carbon prepared
from oil-palm shells with and without pre-impregnation. Separ Purif Technol
2003;30:265–73.

[42] Opatokun SA, Prabhu A, Al Shoaibi A, Srinivasakannan C, Strezov V. Food wastes

derived adsorbents for carbon dioxide and benzene gas sorption. Chemosphere
2017;168:326–32.

[43] Yang W, Li Y, Shi S, Chen H, Shan Y, Liu Y. Mercury removal from flue gas by
magnetic iron-copper oxide modified porous char derived from biomass
materials. Fuel 2019;256:115977.

[44] Yang W, Liu Y, Pan J. Experimental and kinetic study on Hg0  removal by

microwave/hydrogen peroxide modified seaweed-based porous biochars. Environ
Technol Innov 2021;22:101411.

[45] Wang T, Liu J, Zhang Y, Zhang H, Chen W, Norris P, et al. Use of a non-thermal
plasma technique to increase the number of chlorine active sites on biochar for
improved mercury removal. Chem Eng J 2018;331:536–44.

[46] Xu X, Zheng Y, Gao B, Cao X. N-doped biochar synthesized by a facile ball-milling

method for enhanced sorption of CO2  and reactive red. Chem Eng J 2019;368:
564–72.

[47] Kumar M, Xiong X, Wan Z, Sun Y, Tsang DC, Gupta J, et al. Ball milling as a
mechanochemical technology for fabrication of novel biochar nanomaterials.
Bioresour Technol 2020;312:123613.

[48] Parshetti GK, Chowdhury S, Balasubramanian R. Biomass derived low-cost
microporous adsorbents for efficient CO2  capture. Fuel 2015;148:246–54.
[49] Rajabi H, Mosleh MH, Prakoso T, Ghaemi N, Mandal P, Lea-Langton A, et al.

Competitive adsorption of multicomponent volatile organic compounds on
biochar. Chemosphere 2021;283:131288.

[50] Xiang W, Zhang X, Chen K, Fang J, He F, Hu X, et al. Enhanced adsorption

performance and governing mechanisms of ball-milled biochar for the removal of
volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Chem Eng J 2020;385:123842.

[51] Shafeeyan MS, Daud WMAW, Houshmand A, Shamiri A. A review on surface

modification of activated carbon for carbon dioxide adsorption. J Anal Appl Pyrol
2010;89:143–51.

[52] Igalavithana AD, Choi SW, Dissanayake PD, Shang J, Wang C, Yang X, et al.

Gasification biochar from biowaste (food waste and wood waste) for effective
CO2  adsorption. J Hazard Mater 2020;391:121147.

[53] Abdulrasheed AA, Jalil AA, Triwahyono S, Zaini MAA, Gambo Y, Ibrahim M.

Surface modification of activated carbon for adsorption of SO2 and NOX: a review
of existing and emerging technologies. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;94:
1067–85.

[54] Yang W, Liu Y, Wang Q, Pan J. Removal of elemental mercury from flue gas using
wheat straw chars modified by Mn-Ce mixed oxides with ultrasonic-assisted
impregnation. Chem Eng J 2017;326:169–81.

[55] Jia L, Yu Y, Li Z, Qin S, Guo J, Zhang Y, et al. Study on the Hg0  removal

characteristics and synergistic mechanism of iron-based modified biochar doped
with multiple metals. Bioresour Technol 2021;332:125086.

[56] Chatterjee R, Sajjadi B, Mattern DL, Chen W, Zubatiuk T, Leszczynska D, et al.

Ultrasound cavitation intensified amine functionalization: a feasible strategy for
enhancing CO2  capture capacity of biochar. Fuel 2018;225:287–98.

[59] Heidari A, Younesi H, Rashidi A, Ghoreyshi AA. Evaluation of CO2  adsorption
with eucalyptus wood based activated carbon modified by ammonia solution
through heat treatment. Chem Eng J 2014;254:503–13.

[60] Li G, Wang S, Wang F, Wu Q, Tang Y, Shen B. Role of inherent active constituents

on mercury adsorption capacity of chars from four solid wastes. Chem Eng J
2017;307:544–52.

[61] Li G, Shen B, Li F, Tian L, Singh S, Wang F. Elemental mercury removal using
biochar pyrolyzed from municipal solid waste. Fuel Process Technol 2015;133:
43–50.

[62] Li G, Shen B, Wang Y, Yue S, Xi Y, An M, et al. Comparative study of element
mercury removal by three bio-chars from various solid wastes. Fuel 2015;145:
189–95.

[63] Luo J, Jin M, Ye L, Cao Y, Yan Y, Du R, et al. Removal of gaseous elemental

mercury by hydrogen chloride non-thermal plasma modified biochar. J Hazard
Mater 2019;377:132–41.

[64] Xu Y, Luo G, He S, Deng F, Pang Q, Xu Y, et al. Efficient removal of elemental

mercury by magnetic chlorinated biochars derived from co-pyrolysis of Fe(NO3)3-
laden wood and polyvinyl chloride waste. Fuel 2019;239:982–90.

[65] Shi Q, Zhang X, Shen B, Ren K, Wang Y, Luo J. Enhanced elemental mercury
removal via chlorine-based hierarchically porous biochar with CaCO3  as
template. Chem Eng J 2021;406:126828.

[66] Ng K, Lai S, Jamaludin N, Mohamed A. A review on dry-based and wet-based

catalytic sulphur dioxide (SO2) reduction technologies. J Hazard Mater 2022;423:
127061.

[67] Liu F, Yu D, Han J, Wu J, Yu X, Gong X. Effects of ultra-low emission air pollution
control devices on the evolution of PM and its associated water-soluble ions in a
1000 MW coal-fired power plant. Fuel 2023;343:127931.

[68] Bashkova S, Bageev A, Locke DC, Bandosz TJ. Adsorption of SO2  on sewage

sludge-derived materials. Environ Sci Technol 2001;35:3263–9.

[69] Sumathi S, Bhatia S, Lee KT, Mohamed AR. Optimization of microporous palm

shell activated carbon production for flue gas desulphurization: experimental and
statistical studies. Bioresour Technol 2009;100:1614–21.

[70] Shao J, Zhang J, Zhang X, Feng Y, Zhang H, Zhang S, et al. Enhance SO2
adsorption performance of biochar modified by CO2 activation and amine
impregnation. Fuel 2018;224:138–46.

[71] Iberahim N, Sethupathi S, Bashir MJK. Optimization of palm oil mill sludge

biochar preparation for sulfur dioxide removal. Environ Sci Pollut Res 2017:1–13.
[72] Yavuz R, Akyildiz H, Karatepe N, Çetinkaya E. Influence of preparation conditions

on porous structures of olive stone activated by H3PO4. Fuel Process Technol
2010;91:80–7.

[73] Iberahim N, Sethupathi S, Goh CL, Bashir MJK, Ahmad W. Optimization of

activated palm oil sludge biochar preparation for sulphur dioxide adsorption.
J Environ Manag 2019;248:109302.

[74] Wu C, Nahil M, Sun X, Singh S, Chen J, Shen B, et al. Novel application of biochar
from biomass pyrolysis for low temperature selective catalytic reduction.
J Energy Inst 2012;85:236–9.

[75] Guo J, Lua AC. Microporous activated carbons prepared from palm shell by

thermal activation and their application to SO2 adsorption. J Colloid Interface Sci
2002;251:242–7.

[76] Braghiroli FL, Bouafif H, Koubaa A. Enhanced SO2 adsorption and desorption on
chemically and physically activated biochar made from wood residues. Ind Crop
Prod 2019;138:111456.

[77] Rezaei F, Rownaghi AA, Monjezi S, Lively RP, Jones CW. SOx/NOx removal from

flue gas streams by solid adsorbents: a review of current challenges and future
directions. Energy Fuel 2015;29:5467–86.

[78] Zhang X, Zheng H, Li G, Gu J, Shao J, Zhang S, et al. Ammoniated and activated
microporous biochar for enhancement of SO2 adsorption. J Anal Appl Pyrol 2021;
156:105119.

[79] Zhang J, Shao J, Huang D, Feng Y, Zhang X, Zhang S, et al. Influence of different
precursors on the characteristic of nitrogen-enriched biochar and SO2 adsorption
properties. Chem Eng J 2020;385:123932.

[80] Wu C, Song M, Jin B, Wu Y, Zhong Z, Huang Y. Adsorption of sulfur dioxide using
nickel oxide/carbon adsorbents produced by one-step pyrolysis method. J Anal
Appl Pyrol 2013;99:137–42.

[81] Sumathi S, Bhatia S, Lee K, Mohamed A. Performance of an activated carbon

made from waste palm shell in simultaneous adsorption of SOx and NOx  of flue
gas at low temperature. Sci China E 2009;52:198–203.

[82] Xu X, Huang D, Zhao L, Kan Y, Cao X. Role of inherent inorganic constituents in
SO2  sorption ability of biochars derived from three biomass wastes. Environ Sci
Technol 2016;50:12957–65.

[83] Lua AC, Yang T. Theoretical and experimental SO2 adsorption onto pistachio-nut-

shell activated carbon for a fixed-bed column. Chem Eng J 2009;155:175–83.

[84] Sumathi S, Bhatia S, Lee K, Mohamed A. Cerium impregnated palm shell activated
carbon (Ce/PSAC) sorbent for simultaneous removal of SO2  and NO-Process
study. Chem Eng J 2010;162:51–7.

[85] Li Y, Liu Y, Yang W, Liu L, Pan J. Adsorption of elemental mercury in flue gas
using biomass porous carbons modified by microwave/hydrogen peroxide. Fuel
2021;291:120152.

[86] Cha J, Choi J, Ko J, Park Y, Park S, Jeong K, et al. The low-temperature SCR of NO

over rice straw and sewage sludge derived char. Chem Eng J 2010;156:321–7.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109835

C. Wen et al.

[87] Qin Y, Wang C, Sun X, Ma Y, Song X, Wang F, et al. Defects on activated carbon
determine the dispersion of active components and thus the simultaneous
removal efficiency of SO2, NOx  and Hg0. Fuel 2021;293:120391.

[88] Al-Rahbi AS, Williams PT. Production of activated carbons from waste tyres for

low temperature NOx  control. Waste Manag 2016;49:188–95.

[117] De M, Azargohar R, Dalai AK, Shewchuk SR. Mercury removal by bio-char based

modified activated carbons. Fuel 2013;103:570–8.

[118] Zeng J, Li C, Zhao L, Gao L, Du X, Zhang J, et al. Removal of elemental mercury
from simulated flue gas over peanut shells carbon loaded with iodine ions,
manganese oxides, and zirconium dioxide. Energy Fuel 2017;31:13909–20.

[89] Ko JH, Kwak YH, Yoo KS, Jeon JK, Park SH, Park YK. Selective catalytic reduction

[119] Altaf AR, Teng H, Zheng M, Ashraf I, Arsalan M, Rehman AU, et al. One-step

of NOx  using RDF char and municipal solid waste char based catalyst. J Mater
Cycles Waste Manag 2011;13:173–9.

[90] Yang J, Zhou J, Tong W, Zhang T, Kong M, Ren S. Low-temperature flue gas

denitration with transition metal oxides supported on biomass char. J Energy Inst
2019;92:1158–66.

[91] Yang J, Su Z, Ren S, Long H, Kong M, Jiang L. Low-temperature SCR of NO with
NH3 over biomass char supported highly dispersed Mn-Ce mixed oxides. J Energy
Inst 2019;92:883–91.

[92] Jo YB, Cha JS, Ko JH, Shin MC, Park SH, Jeon JK, et al. NH3  selective catalytic
reduction (SCR) of nitrogen oxides (NOx) over activated sewage sludge char. Kor
J Chem Eng 2011;28:106–13.

[93] Liu S, Feng X, Liu Z, Zhao W, Li Y, Zhang J. Nitrogen doping in porous biochar
from cotton stalk with H3PO4  activation for reduction of NOx  with NH3-SCR at
low temperatures: characteristics and catalytic activity analysis. Fuel 2023;332:
126256.

[94] Singh S, Nahil MA, Sun X, Wu C, Chen J, Shen B, et al. Novel application of cotton
stalk as a waste derived catalyst in the low temperature SCR-deNOx process. Fuel
2013;105:585–94.

[95] Chen L, Yang J, Ren S, Chen Z, Zhou Y, Liu W. Effects of Sm modification on

biochar supported Mn oxide catalysts for low-temperature NH3-SCR of NO.
J Energy Inst 2021;98:234–43.

[96] Shen B, Chen J, Yue S, Li G. A comparative study of modified cotton biochar and
activated carbon based catalysts in low temperature. SCR. Fuel 2015;156:47–53.
[97] Liu L, Wang B, Yao X, Yang L, Jiang W, Jiang X. Highly efficient MnOx/biochar

catalysts obtained by air oxidation for low-temperature NH3-SCR of NO. Fuel
2021;283:119336.

[98] Gao L, Li C, Zhang J, Du X, Li S, Zeng J, et al. Simultaneous removal of NO and

Hg0  from simulated flue gas over CoOx-CeO2  loaded biomass activated carbon
derived from maize straw at low temperatures. Chem Eng J 2018;342:339–49.

synthesis of renewable magnetic tea-biochar derived from waste tea leaves for the
removal of Hg0  from coal-syngas. J Environ Chem Eng 2021;9:105313.
[120] Klasson KT, Lima IM, Boihem Jr LL, Wartelle LH. Feasibility of mercury removal
from simulated flue gas by activated chars made from poultry manures. J Environ
Manag 2010;91:2466–70.

[121] Liu Y, Cui S, Wu P, Liu L, Dou Z, Wang Y. Removal of gaseous elemental mercury
using corn stalk biochars modified by a green oxidation technology. Fuel Process
Technol 2023;242:107621.

[122] Yang W, Dou Z, Liu Y, Zhao Y, Huang R. Gaseous mercury capture using seaweed

biochars modified by clean ultraviolet/hydrogen peroxide advanced oxidation
process. J Clean Prod 2023:136121.

[123] Shen B, Li G, Wang F, Wang Y, He C, Zhang M, et al. Elemental mercury removal
by the modified bio-char from medicinal residues. Chem Eng J 2015;272:28–37.
[124] Wang T, Wu J, Zhang Y, Liu J, Sui Z, Zhang H, et al. Increasing the chlorine active
sites in the micropores of biochar for improved mercury adsorption. Fuel 2018;
229:60–7.

[125] Tang H, Duan Y, Zhu C, Li C, She M, Zhou Q, et al. Characteristics of a biomass-

based sorbent trap and its application to coal-fired flue gas mercury emission
monitoring. Int J Coal Geol 2017;170:19–27.

[126] Liu Z, Yang W, Xu W, Liu Y. Removal of elemental mercury by bio-chars derived
from seaweed impregnated with potassium iodine. Chem Eng J 2018;339:468–78.
[127] Li G, Shen B, Li Y, Zhao B, Wang F, He C, et al. Removal of element mercury by
medicine residue derived biochars in presence of various gas compositions.
J Hazard Mater 2015;298:162–9.

[128] Tang L, Li C, Zhao L, Gao L, Du X, Zeng J, et al. A novel catalyst CuO-ZrO2 doped

activated bio-char for Hg0  removal in a broad temperature range. Fuel

(cid:0)

on Cl
2018;218:366–74.

[129] Li G, Wang S, Wu Q, Wang F, Shen B. Mercury sorption study of halides modified

bio-chars derived from cotton straw. Chem Eng J 2016;302:305–13.

[99] Zhu C, Duan Y, Wu C, Zhou Q, She M, Yao T, et al. Mercury removal and

[130] Rungnim C, Promarak V, Hannongbua S, Kungwan N, Namuangruk S. Complete

synergistic capture of SO2/NO by ammonium halides modified rice husk char.
Fuel 2016;172:160–9.

reaction mechanisms of mercury oxidation on halogenated activated carbon.
J Hazard Mater 2016;310:253–60.

[100] Chen L, Ren S, Liu W, Yang J, Chen Z, Wang M, et al. Low-temperature NH3-SCR
activity of M (M= Zr, Ni and Co) doped MnOx supported biochar catalysts.
J Environ Chem Eng 2021;9:106504.

[131] Zhang H, Wang T, Zhang Y, Sun B, Pan W. Promotional effect of NH3 on mercury
removal over biochar thorough chlorine functional group transformation. J Clean
Prod 2020;257:120598.

[101] Fuente-Cuesta A, Lopez-Anton MA, Diaz-Somoano M, Martínez-Tarazona MR.

Retention of mercury by low-cost sorbents: influence of flue gas composition and
fly ash occurrence. Chem Eng J 2012;213:16–21.

[102] Klasson KT, Boihem Jr L, Uchimiya M, Lima I. Influence of biochar pyrolysis
temperature and post-treatment on the uptake of mercury from flue gas. Fuel
Process Technol 2014;123:27–33.

[103] Yang W, Liu Z, Xu W, Liu Y. Removal of elemental mercury from flue gas using

sargassum chars modified by NH4Br reagent. Fuel 2018;214:196–206.

[104] Shi Q, Wang Y, Zhang X, Shen B, Wang F, Zhang Y. Hierarchically porous biochar
synthesized with CaCO3 template for efficient Hg0 adsorption from flue gas. Fuel
Process Technol 2020;199:106247.

[105] Xu Y, Deng F, Pang Q, He S, Xu Y, Luo G, et al. Development of waste-derived

sorbents from biomass and brominated flame retarded plastic for elemental
mercury removal from coal-fired flue gas. Chem Eng J 2018;350:911–9.
[106] Yang J, Zhao Y, Ma S, Zhu B, Zhang J, Zheng C. Mercury removal by magnetic

biochar derived from simultaneous activation and magnetization of sawdust.
Environ Sci Technol 2016;50:12040–7.

[107] Xu Y, Luo G, Zhang Q, Li Z, Zhang S, Cui W. Cost-effective sulfurized sorbents
derived from one-step pyrolysis of wood and scrap tire for elemental mercury
removal from flue gas. Fuel 2021;285:119221.

[132] Zhang H, Wang T, Sui Z, Zhang Y, Sun B, Pan W. Enhanced mercury removal by
transplanting sulfur-containing functional groups to biochar through plasma. Fuel
2019;253:703–12.

[133] Li G, Shen B, Lu F. The mechanism of sulfur component in pyrolyzed char from

waste tire on the elemental mercury removal. Chem Eng J 2015;273:446–54.

[134] Liu Y, Wang J, Wang T, Pan W. Removing mercury from flue gas by sulfur-doped

zeolite-templated carbon: synthesize and adsorption mechanism. Separ Purif
Technol 2022;294:121228.

[135] Yang W, Wang Z, Liu Y. Review on magnetic adsorbents for removal of elemental

mercury from flue gas. Energy Fuel 2020;34:13473–90.

[136] Zhao R, Jia L, Yao Y, Huo R, Qiao X, Fan B. Study of the effect of adsorption

temperature on elemental mercury removal performance of iron-based modified
biochar. Energy Fuel 2019;33:11408–19.

[137] Li H, Zhang J, Cao Y, Liu C, Li F, Song Y, et al. Role of acid gases in Hg0 removal

from flue gas over a novel cobalt-containing biochar prepared from harvested
cobalt-enriched phytoremediation plant. Fuel Process Technol 2020;207:106478.
[138] Liu D, Yang L, Wu J, Li B. Molten salt shielded preparation of rice straw biochars
doped by copper sulfide for elemental mercury capture. J Energy Inst 2022;102:
176–83.

[139] Li J, Li H, Xu H, Hong Q, Ji L, Liu Z, et al. Regulated adsorption sites using

[108] Shan Y, Yang W, Li Y, Liu Y, Pan J. Preparation of microwave-activated magnetic
bio-char adsorbent and study on removal of elemental mercury from flue gas. Sci
Total Environ 2019;697:134049.

atomically single cluster over biochar for efficient elemental mercury uptake.
Biochar 2023;5:1–15.

[140] Zhang Y, Zhao Y, Yang Y, Liu P, Liu J, Zhang J. DFT study on Hg0 adsorption over

[109] Shen B, Tian L, Li F, Zhang X, Xu H, Singh S. Elemental mercury removal by the

modified bio-char from waste tea. Fuel 2017;187:189–96.

graphene oxide decorated by transition metals (Zn, Cu and Ni). Appl Surf Sci
2020;525:146519.

[110] Zhang H, Wang T, Chen W, Zhang Y, Sun B, Pan W. Derivation of oxygen-

[141] Qin S, Fan H, Jia L, Jin Y, Li Z, Fan B. Molecular structure analysis and mercury

containing functional groups on biochar under non-oxygen plasma for mercury
removal. Fuel 2020;275:117879.

adsorption mechanism of iron-based modified biochar. Energy Fuel 2022;36:
3184–200.

[111] Niu Q, Luo J, Xia Y, Sun S, Chen Q. Surface modification of bio-char by dielectric
barrier discharge plasma for Hg0 removal. Fuel Process Technol 2017;156:310–6.

[142] Zhou Y, Yang J, Zhang Y, Zhang Y, Yu X, Zhao Y, et al. Role of SO3 in elemental
mercury removal by magnetic biochar. Energy Fuel 2019;33:11446–53.

[112] Xu Y, Zeng X, Luo G, Zhang B, Xu P, Xu M, et al. Chlorine-char composite

[143] Zhou Y, Zhao Y, Zhang J, Zheng C. Mercury adsorption and oxidation over

synthesized by co-pyrolysis of biomass wastes and polyvinyl chloride for
elemental mercury removal. Fuel 2016;183:73–9.

[113] Huang Y, Jin B, Zhong Z, Zhong W, Xiao R. Characteristic and mercury adsorption

magnetic biochar in oxyfuel combustion atmosphere: impact of enriched CO2 and
H2O. Fuel 2019;251:458–65.

[144] Plaza M, Gonz ́alez A, Pis J, Rubiera F, Pevida C. Production of microporous

of activated carbon produced by CO2  of chicken waste. J Environ Sci 2008;20:
291–6.

biochars by single-step oxidation: effect of activation conditions on CO2 capture.
Appl Energy 2014;114:551–62.

[114] Fan B, Jia L, Li B, Yao Y, Huo R, Zhao R, et al. Study on the effects of the pyrolysis
atmosphere on the elemental mercury adsorption characteristics and mechanism
of biomass char. Energy Fuel 2018;32:6869–78.

[115] Cui H, Cao Y, Pan W. Preparation of activated carbon for mercury capture from

[145] Zhu X, Wang P, Peng C, Yang J, Yan X. Activated carbon produced from

paulownia sawdust for high-performance CO2 sorbents. Chin Chem Lett 2014;25:
929–32.

[146] Many`a JJ, Gonz ́alez B, Azuara M, Arner G. Ultra-microporous adsorbents

chicken waste and coal. J Anal Appl Pyrol 2007;80:319–24.

[116] Hsi H, Tsai C, Kuo T, Chiang C. Development of low-concentration mercury

adsorbents from biohydrogen-generation agricultural residues using sulfur
impregnation. Bioresour Technol 2011;102:7470–7.

prepared from vine shoots-derived biochar with high CO2  uptake and CO2/N2
selectivity. Chem Eng J 2018;345:631–9.

[147] Plaza MG, Dur ́an Is, Querejeta N, Rubiera F, Pevida C. Experimental and

simulation study of adsorption in postcombustion conditions using a microporous
biochar. 1. CO2  and N2  adsorption. Ind Eng Chem Res 2016;55:3097–112.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109836

C. Wen et al.

[148] Sevilla M, Fuertes AB. Sustainable porous carbons with a superior performance

for CO2  capture. Energy Environ Sci 2011;4:1765–71.

[149] Sevilla M, Falco C, Titirici M-M, Fuertes AB. High-performance CO2 sorbents from

algae. RSC Adv 2012;2:12792–7.

[150] Hao W, Bj ̈orkman E, Lilliestråle M, Hedin N. Activated carbons prepared from

hydrothermally carbonized waste biomass used as adsorbents for CO2. Appl
Energy 2013;112:526–32.

[151] Coromina HM, Walsh DA, Mokaya R. Biomass-derived activated carbon with

simultaneously enhanced CO2  uptake for both pre and post combustion capture
applications. J Mater Chem 2016;4:280–9.

[152] Liu S, Huang Y. Valorization of coffee grounds to biochar-derived adsorbents for

CO2  adsorption. J Clean Prod 2018;175:354–60.

[153] Lahijani P, Mohammadi M, Mohamed AR. Metal incorporated biochar as a

potential adsorbent for high capacity CO2  capture at ambient condition. J CO2
Util 2018;26:281–93.

[154] Zubbri NA, Mohamed AR, Kamiuchi N, Mohammadi M. Enhancement of CO2
adsorption on biochar sorbent modified by metal incorporation. Environ Sci
Pollut Control Ser 2020;27:11809–29.

[155] Huang Y, Chiueh P, Shih C, Lo S, Sun LP, Zhong Y, et al. Microwave pyrolysis of
rice straw to produce biochar as an adsorbent for CO2  capture. Energy 2015;84:
75–82.

[156] Gonz ́alez A, Plaza M, Rubiera F, Pevida C. Sustainable biomass-based carbon
adsorbents for post-combustion CO2  capture. Chem Eng J 2013;230:456–65.

[157] Zhu X, Sun M, Zhu X, Guo W, Luo Z, Cai W, et al. Molten salt shielded pyrolysis of
biomass waste: development of hierarchical biochar, salt recovery, CO2
adsorption. Fuel 2023;334:126565.

[158] Haleem N, Khattak A, Jamal Y, Sajid M, Shahzad Z, Raza H. Development of poly
vinyl alcohol (PVA) based biochar nanofibers for carbon dioxide (CO2)
adsorption. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2022;157:112019.

[159] Plaza MG, Pevida C, Arias B, Fermoso J, Casal MD, Martín CF, et al. Development
of low-cost biomass-based adsorbents for postcombustion CO2 capture. Fuel 2009;
88:2442–7.

[160] Plaza MG, Pevida C, Martín CF, Fermoso J, Pis JJ, Rubiera F. Developing almond
shell-derived activated carbons as CO2 adsorbents. Separ Purif Technol 2010;71:
102–6.

[161] Nasri NS, Hamza UD, Ismail SN, Ahmed MM, Mohsin R. Assessment of porous
carbons derived from sustainable palm solid waste for carbon dioxide capture.
J Clean Prod 2014;71:148–57.

[162] Shahkarami S, Azargohar R, Dalai AK, Soltan J. Breakthrough CO2 adsorption in

bio-based activated carbons. J Environ Sci 2015;34:68–76.

[163] Igalavithana AD, Choi SW, Shang J, Hanif A, Dissanayake PD, Tsang DC, et al.
Carbon dioxide capture in biochar produced from pine sawdust and paper mill
sludge: effect of porous structure and surface chemistry. Sci Total Environ 2020;
739:139845.

[164] Feng D, Guo D, Zhang Y, Sun S, Zhao Y, Chang G, et al. Adsorption-enrichment

characterization of CO2  and dynamic retention of free NH3  in functionalized
biochar with H2O/NH3⋅H2O activation for promotion of new ammonia-based
carbon capture. Chem Eng J 2021;409:128193.

[165] Guo L, Yang J, Hu G, Hu X, Wang L, Dong Y, et al. Role of hydrogen peroxide

preoxidizing on CO2  adsorption of nitrogen-doped carbons produced from
coconut shell. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng 2016;4:2806–13.

[166] Wei H, Deng S, Hu B, Chen Z, Wang B, Huang J, et al. Granular bamboo-derived
activated carbon for high CO2  adsorption: the dominant role of narrow
micropores. ChemSusChem 2012;5:2354–60.

[167] Deng S, Wei H, Chen T, Wang B, Huang J, Yu G. Superior CO2 adsorption on pine

[179] Zhang X, Zhang S, Yang H, Shao J, Chen Y, Liao X, et al. Generalized two-
dimensional correlation infrared spectroscopy to reveal mechanisms of CO2
capture in nitrogen enriched biochar. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:3933–40.

[180] Zhang J, Huang D, Shao J, Zhang X, Zhang S, Yang H, et al. A new nitrogen-
enriched biochar modified by ZIF-8 grafting and annealing for enhancing CO2
adsorption. Fuel Process Technol 2022;231:107250.

[181] Zhang J, Huang D, Shao J, Zhang X, Yang H, Zhang S, et al. Activation-free

synthesis of nitrogen-doped biochar for enhanced adsorption of CO2. J Clean Prod
2022;355:131642.

[182] Xu X, Kan Y, Zhao L, Cao X. Chemical transformation of CO2 during its capture by

waste biomass derived biochars. Environ Pollut 2016;213:533–40.
[183] Creamer AE, Gao B, Wang S. Carbon dioxide capture using various metal
oxyhydroxide–biochar composites. Chem Eng J 2016;283:826–32.

[184] Xu X, Xu Z, Gao B, Zhao L, Zheng Y, Huang J, et al. New insights into CO2 sorption
on biochar/Fe oxyhydroxide composites: kinetics, mechanisms, and in situ
characterization. Chem Eng J 2020;384:123289.

[185] Liu W, Jiang H, Tian K, Ding Y, Yu H. Mesoporous carbon stabilized MgO

nanoparticles synthesized by pyrolysis of MgCl2  preloaded waste biomass for
highly efficient CO2  capture. Environ Sci Technol 2013;47:9397–403.
[186] Luo J, Chen Y, Zhang X, Ma R, Huang H, Sun S, et al. Microwave-induced
preparation of MgO-loaded N-rich porous biochar from marine biomass for
efficient CO2  capture and mechanism exploration via theoretical calculation.
J Clean Prod 2023:136915.

[187] Creamer AE, Gao B, Zhang M. Carbon dioxide capture using biochar produced
from sugarcane bagasse and hickory wood. Chem Eng J 2014;249:174–9.
[188] Zhu X, Tsang DC, Wang L, Su Z, Hou D, Li L, et al. Machine learning exploration of

the critical factors for CO2  adsorption capacity on porous carbon materials at
different pressures. J Clean Prod 2020;273:122915.

[189] Plaza MG, Gonz ́alez AS, Pevida C, Rubiera F. Influence of water vapor on CO2

adsorption using a biomass-based carbon. Ind Eng Chem Res 2014;53:15488–99.

[190] Plaza MG, Dur ́an I, Querejeta N, Rubiera F, Pevida C. Experimental and

simulation study of adsorption in postcombustion conditions using a microporous
biochar. 2. H2O, CO2, and N2  adsorption. Ind Eng Chem Res 2016;55:6854–65.
[191] Gil RR, Ruiz B, Lozano MS, Martín MJ, Fuente E. VOCs  removal by adsorption

onto activated carbons from biocollagenic wastes of vegetable tanning. Chem Eng
J 2014;245:80–8.

[192] Papurello D, Boschetti A, Silvestri S, Khomenko I, Biasioli F. Real-time monitoring
of removal of trace compounds with PTR-MS: biochar experimental investigation.
Renew Energy 2018;125:344–55.

[193] Kumar A, Singh E, Khapre A, Bordoloi N, Kumar S. Sorption of volatile organic

compounds on non-activated biochar. Bioresour Technol 2020;297:122469.

[194] Zhang X, Xiang W, Wang B, Fang J, Zou W, He F, et al. Adsorption of acetone and

cyclohexane onto CO2  activated hydrochars. Chemosphere 2020;245:125664.

[195] Shen Y, Zhang N. Facile synthesis of porous carbons from silica-rich rice husk char

for volatile organic compounds (VOCs) sorption. Bioresour Technol 2019;282:
294–300.

[196] Anfruns A, Martin MJ, Montes-Mor ́an MA. Removal of odourous VOCs  using

sludge-based adsorbents. Chem Eng J 2011;166:1022–31.

[197] Zhao X, Zeng X, Qin Y, Li X, Zhu T, Tang X. An experimental and theoretical study
of the adsorption removal of toluene and chlorobenzene on coconut shell derived
carbon. Chemosphere 2018;206:285–92.

[198] Zhang X, Miao X, Xiang W, Zhang J, Cao C, Wang H, et al. Ball milling biochar
with ammonia hydroxide or hydrogen peroxide enhances its adsorption of phenyl
volatile organic compounds (VOCs). J Hazard Mater 2021;403:123540.
[199] Jiang Y, Xu X, Liu B, Zhou C, Wang H, Qiu J, et al. Optimal pore size design

nut shell-derived activated carbons and the effective micropores at different
temperatures. Chem Eng J 2014;253:46–54.

guided by GCMC molecular simulation for VOCs  adsorption. Microporous
Mesoporous Mater 2022;341:112081.

[168] Chen J, Yang J, Hu G, Hu X, Li Z, Shen S, et al. Enhanced CO2 capture capacity of

nitrogen-doped biomass-derived porous carbons. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng
2016;4:1439–45.

[200] Yu L, Guo Y, Chen H, Liu B, Xu X, Sheng P, et al. Influence of functional groups
and pore sizes in porous carbon for methanol acetone adsorptive separation based
on molecular simulation. J Mater Sci 2021;56:18550–65.

[169] Ding S, Liu Y. Adsorption of CO2  from flue gas by novel seaweed-based KOH-

[201] Li D, Su R, Ma X, Zeng Z, Li L, Wang H. Porous carbon for oxygenated and

activated porous biochars. Fuel 2020;260:116382.

[170] Heidari A, Younesi H, Rashidi A, Ghoreyshi A. Adsorptive removal of CO2  on

highly microporous activated carbons prepared from Eucalyptus camaldulensis
wood: effect of chemical activation. J Taiwan Inst Chem Eng 2014;45:579–88.
[171] Murge P, Dinda S, Roy S. Adsorbent from rice husk for CO2  capture: synthesis,
characterization, and optimization of parameters. Energy Fuel 2018;32:
10786–95.

[172] Thote JA, Iyer KS, Chatti R, Labhsetwar NK, Biniwale RB, Rayalu SS. In situ

nitrogen enriched carbon for carbon dioxide capture. Carbon 2010;48:396–402.

[173] Zhang X, Zhang S, Yang H, Feng Y, Chen Y, Wang X, et al. Nitrogen enriched

biochar modified by high temperature CO2-ammonia treatment: characterization
and adsorption of CO2. Chem Eng J 2014;257:20–7.

[174] Plaza MG, García S, Rubiera F, Pis JJ, Pevida C. Evaluation of ammonia modified
and conventionally activated biomass based carbons as CO2  adsorbents in
postcombustion conditions. Separ Purif Technol 2011;80:96–104.

[175] Zhang X, Zhang S, Yang H, Shao J, Chen Y, Feng Y, et al. Effects of hydrofluoric
acid pre-deashing of rice husk on physicochemical properties and CO2 adsorption
performance of nitrogen-enriched biochar. Energy 2015;91:903–10.
[176] Qiao Y, Zhang S, Quan C, Gao N, Johnston C, Wu C. One-pot synthesis of

digestate-derived biochar for carbon dioxide capture. Fuel 2020;279:118525.
[177] Bamdad H, Hawboldt K, MacQuarrie S. Nitrogen functionalized biochar as a

renewable adsorbent for efficient CO2  removal. Energy Fuel 2018;32:11742–8.
[178] Yang M, Guo L, Hu G, Hu X, Xu L, Chen J, et al. Highly cost-effective nitrogen-
doped porous coconut shell-based CO2  sorbent synthesized by combining
ammoxidation with KOH activation. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:7063–70.

aromatic VOCs adsorption by molecular simulation and experimental study: effect
pore structure and functional groups. Appl Surf Sci 2022;605:154708.

[202] Gu Z, Zhu C, Huang Z, Xu M, Gong L. Numerical simulations on the adsorption
characteristics of aromatics on activated carbon by the GCMC method. Case Stud
Therm Eng 2021;26:101116.

[203] Rajabi H, Mosleh MH, Mandal P, Lea-Langton A, Sedighi M. Sorption behaviour of

xylene isomers on biochar from a range of feedstock. Chemosphere 2021;268:
129310.

[204] Tsai J, Chiang H, Huang G, Chiang H. Adsorption characteristics of acetone,

chloroform and acetonitrile on sludge-derived adsorbent, commercial granular
activated carbon and activated carbon fibers. J Hazard Mater 2008;154:1183–91.
[205] Cheng T, Bian Y, Li J, Ma X, Yang L, Zhou L, et al. Nitrogen-doped porous biochar
for selective adsorption of toluene under humid conditions. Fuel 2023;334:
126452.

[206] Zhang J, Shao J, Zhang X, Rao G, Li G, Yang H, et al. Facile synthesis of Cu-BTC@
biochar with controlled morphology for effective toluene adsorption at
medium–high temperature. Chem Eng J 2023;452:139003.

[207] Liu X, Zhu H, Wu W, Lin D, Yang K. Role of molecular size of volatile organic

compounds on their adsorption by KOH-activated micro-mesoporous carbon.
J Hazard Mater 2022;424:127355.

[208] Sumathi S, Bhatia S, Lee K, Mohamed A. Selection of best impregnated palm shell

activated carbon (PSAC) for simultaneous removal of SO2  and NOx. J Hazard
Mater 2010;176:1093–6.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109837

C. Wen et al.

[209] Sumathi S, Bhatia S, Lee K, Mohamed A. Adsorption isotherm models and

properties of SO2 and NO removal by palm shell activated carbon supported with
cerium (Ce/PSAC). Chem Eng J 2010;162:194–200.

[210] Manap NRA, Shamsudin R, Maghpor MN, Hamid MAA, Jalar A. Adsorption
isotherm and kinetic study of gas-solid system of formaldehyde on oil palm
mesocarp bio-char: pyrolysis effect. J Environ Chem Eng 2018;6:970–83.
[211] Khan A, Szulejko JE, Samaddar P, Kim K, Liu B, Maitlo HA, et al. The potential of
biochar as sorptive media for removal of hazardous benzene in air. Chem Eng J
2019;361:1576–85.

[212] Rigby SP. Predicting surface diffusivities of molecules from equilibrium

adsorption isotherms. Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp 2005;262:139–49.

[213] Gilliland E, Baddour R, Perkinson G, Sladek K. Diffusion on surfaces. I. Effect of
concentration on the diffusivity of physically adsorbed gases. Ind Eng Chem Fund
1974;13:95–100.

[214] Jeyasubramanian K, Thangagiri B, Sakthivel A, Raja J, Seenivasan S,

Vallinayagam P, et al. A complete review on biochar: production, property,
multifaceted applications, interaction mechanism and computational approach.
Fuel 2021;292:120243.

[215] Zhao S, Xun C, Xu W. Density functional theory study on the catalytic reduction of
nitric oxide over the bio-char surface during biomass reburning: the influence of
inherent potassium. Fuel 2023;342:127923.

[216] Jia L, Yu Y, Guo J, Qin S, Wang Y, Shen X, et al. Study of the molecular structure
and elemental mercury adsorption mechanism of biomass char. Energy Fuel 2020;
34:12743–56.

[217] Cao D, Ji Y, Liu L, Li L, Li L, Feng X, et al. A facile and green strategy to synthesize
N/P co-doped bio-char as VOCs  adsorbent: through efficient biogas slurry
treatment and struvite transform. Fuel 2022;322:124156.

[218] Li Q, Xu W, Liang X, Liu B, Wu Q, Zeng Z, et al. Specific alkali metal sites as CO2

traps in activated carbon with different pore size for CO2  selective adsorption:
GCMC and DFT simulations. Fuel 2022;325:124871.

[219] Zhao Z, Wang B, Theng BK, Lee X, Zhang X, Chen M, et al. Removal performance,
mechanisms, and influencing factors of biochar for air pollutants: a critical
review. Biochar 2022;4:30.

[220] Shafawi A, Mohamed A, Lahijani P, Mohammadi M. Recent advances in

developing engineered biochar for CO2  capture: an insight into the biochar
modification approaches. J Environ Chem Eng 2021;9:106869.

[221] Al-Rumaihi A, Shahbaz M, Mckay G, Mackey H, Al-Ansari T. A review of pyrolysis
technologies and feedstock: a blending approach for plastic and biomass towards
optimum biochar yield. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2022;167:112715.
[222] Mamaghani Z, Hawboldt K, MacQuarrie S. Adsorption of CO2  using biochar-

Review of the Impact of gas mixtures and water on adsorption. J Environ Chem
Eng 2023:109643.

[223] Saeed A, Harun N, Nasef M, Al-Fakih A, Ghaleb A, Afolabi H. Removal of

cadmium from aqueous solution by optimized rice husk biochar using response
surface methodology. Ain Shams Eng J 2022;13:101516.

[224] Sessa F, Merlin G, Canu P. Pine bark valorization by activated carbons production

to be used as VOCs  adsorbents. Fuel 2022;318:123346.

[225] Shahkarami S, Azargohar R, Dalai A, Soltan J. Breakthrough CO2  adsorption in

bio-based activated carbons. J Environ Sci 2015;34:68–76.

[226] Ma Q, Chen W, Jin Z, Chen L, Zhou Q, Jiang X. One-step synthesis of microporous

nitrogen-doped biochar for efficient removal of CO2  and H2S. Fuel 2021;289:
119932.

[227] Yang Y, Sun C, Huang Q, Yan J. Hierarchical porous structure formation

mechanism in food waste component derived N-doped biochar: application in
VOCs  removal. Chemosphere 2022;291:132702.

[228] Zhuang Z, Wang L, Tang J. Efficient removal of volatile organic compound by
ball-milled biochars from different preparing conditions. J Hazard Mater 2021;
406:124676.

[229] Li K, Niu X, Zhang D, Guo H, Zhu X, Yin H, et al. Renewable biochar derived from
mixed sewage sludge and pine sawdust for carbon dioxide capture. Environ Pollut
2022;306:119399.

[230] Tang R, Yang W, Wang H, Zhou J, Zhang Z, Wu S. Preparation of fly-ash-modified

bamboo-shell carbon black and its mercury removal performance in simulated
flue gases. Energy Fuel 2016;30:4191–6.

[231] Liu H, Yang B, Xue N. Enhanced adsorption of benzene vapor on granular

activated carbon under humid conditions due to shifts in hydrophobicity and total
micropore volume. J Hazard Mater 2016;318:425–32.

[232] Raganati F, Miccio F, Ammendola P. Adsorption of carbon dioxide for post-

combustion capture: a review. Energy Fuel 2021;35:12845–68.

[233] Yang J, Zhao Y, Zhang J, Zheng C. Removal of elemental mercury from flue gas by
recyclable CuCl2 modified magnetospheres catalyst from fly ash. Part 1. Catalyst
characterization and performance evaluation. Fuel 2016;164:419–28.

[234] Dai Y, Zhang N, Xing C, Cui Q, Sun Q. The adsorption, regeneration and

engineering applications of biochar for removal organic pollutants: a review.
Chemosphere 2019;223:12–27.

[235] Praveen S, Gokulan R, Pushpa TB, Jegan J. Techno-economic feasibility of

biochar as biosorbent for basic dye sequestration. J Indian Chem Soc 2021;98:
100107.

[236] Alhashimi HA, Aktas CB. Life cycle environmental and economic performance of
biochar compared with activated carbon: a meta-analysis. Resour Conserv Recycl
2017;118:13–26.

[237] Tarka Jr TJ, Ciferno JP, Fauth DJ. CO2 capture systems utilizing amine enhanced

solid sorbents. Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society.

Washington, DC 20036 USA: American Chemical Society 1155 16th ST, NW;
2006.

[238] Moreira M, Noya I, Feijoo G. The prospective use of biochar as adsorption
matrix–A review from a lifecycle perspective. Bioresour Technol 2017;246:
135–41.

[239] Ji Y, Zhang C, Zhang X, Xie P, Wu C, Jiang L. A high adsorption capacity bamboo
biochar for CO2 capture for low temperature heat utilization. Separ Purif Technol
2022;293:121131.

Minghou Xu received his PhD degree in 1992 from the Department of Thermal Power
Engineering, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, China. He is a Chair Professor
of  “Cheung  Kong  Scholar”  of  China.  He  has  been  elected  as  Fellow of  the  Combustion
Institute for excellent research on solid fuel combustion, as applied to the formation and
control of particulate matter and trace elements, and he currently works as the associate
editor for Energy &  Fuels, ACS. His research fields include pulverized coal combustion,
advanced  utilization  of  biomass,  CCUS,  energy  storage,  industrial  application  of  com-
bustion  technology,  comprehensive  modeling  on  pulverized  coal  combustion.  He  has
published 3 monographs and 200+ academic papers. He received the distinguished paper
in the Stationary Combustion colloquium of the 33rd  International Symposium on Com-
bustion in 2010 and also won more than 8 Science and Technology Awards of National
Ministry or Provincial Government.

Chang Wen received his PhD degree in 2013 from State Key Laboratory of Coal Com-
bustion, Huazhong University of Science &  Technology, China. He is currently an Asso-
ciate  Professor  at  Department  of  New  Energy  Science  and  Technology,  Huazhong
University  of  Science  and  Technology.  He  was  an  Endeavour  Visiting  Scholar  in  the
Department of Chemical Engineering at Curtain University, Australia from 2012 to 2013
and a post-doctor in State Key Laboratory of Coal Combustion, Huazhong University of
Science & Technology, China from 2013 to 2016. His research fields include energy uti-
lization of biochar materials and PM2.5 emission control during solid fuel combustion. He
has  published more than 40  academic journal papers.  He received  the Australian  Gov-
ernment  Endeavour  Research  Fellowship  Awards  in  2011  and  the  Excellent  Doctoral
Dissertation Award of Hubei Province, China, in 2015.

Hanping Chen currently is a Professor and head of Department of New Energy Science and
Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). He also serves as
deputy director of State Key Laboratory of Coal Combustion, and deputy director of Na-
tional Energy R&D Center of Biomass Gas Preparation & Utilization Technology. He was a
visiting scholar in the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at University of
British Columbia, Canada from 2000 to 2001 and a senior visiting fellow in the Depart-
ment  of  Mechanical  Engineering  at  University  of  Sheffield,  UK  in  2011.  He  has  been
devoted  himself  to  fundamental  research,  technology  development  and  engineering
application of high-efficiency conversion and high-value added comprehensive utilization
for biomass. He has been the manager of 30+ key national research projects and has also
led 60+ industry-supported projects. As the leading investigator, he won a Second-Class
Award  of National Science  and  Technology  Progress. He  also  won more  than 10 other
Science and Technology Award of National Ministry or Provincial Government, a National
Overseas  Chinese  Contribution  Award  (Innovation  Project),  and  a  Blue  Sky  Award  of
Global Top Investment Scenarios to Apply New Technology for Renewable Energy Utili-
zation. He has published 3 monographs and 150+ academic papers and he also holds 10+
Chinese patents.

Guangqian Luo received his PhD degree in 2009 from the department of Thermal Power
Engineering,  Huazhong  University  of  Science  &  Technology,  China.  He  is  currently  a
Professor at Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His research fields include
transformation mechanism and control technology of heavy metals (Hg, Se, As, Pb), NOx,
SOx, VOC and other pollutants, and application of image recognition and artificial intel-
ligence technologies in the energy area. He has published more than 100 academic papers
indexed  by  SCI.  He  was  awarded  the  Excellent  Doctoral  Dissertation  Award  of  Hubei
Province, China, the Distinguished paper for the 33rd  International Symposium, the Best
Paper for the 9th International Symposium on Coal Combustion and the ESI Highly Cited
Papers. He also applied for 53 Chinese patents and 32 patents have been authorized.

Zijian Zhou received his PhD degree in 2017 from State Key Laboratory of Coal Com-
bustion, Huazhong University of Science &  Technology, China. He is currently an Asso-
ciate  Professor  at  State  Key  Laboratory  of  Coal  Combustion,  Huazhong  University  of
Science and Technology. He was a post-doctor in State Key Laboratory of Materials Pro-
cessing  and  Die  &  Mould  Technology,  Huazhong  University  of  Science  &  Technology,
China from 2017-2020. His research fields include coal-fired flue gas pollutants control via
carbon-based adsorbents and metal oxides-based catalysts. He landed on Forbes 30 Under
30 in Energy for China in 2019. He has published more than 40 academic journal papers,
and authorized 7 patents.

Tianyu Liu is now a Ph.D. candidate in the State Key Laboratory of Coal Combustion at
Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His current research focuses on the high-
value utilization of biochar. His main contribution in this paper are the acquisition and
curation of data, including the conceptualization of mechanism and abstract.

Dapeng  Wang  is  now  a  postgraduate  in  Professor  Minghou  Xu’s  group  at  Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, China. His main contribution in this paper is in the
part of Hg. It includes the arrangement of the table, drawing the picture of the mechanism.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109838

C. Wen et al.

Yaqin Wang is now a postgraduate in Professor Minghou Xu’s group at Huazhong Uni-
versity of Science and Technology, China. Her main contribution in this paper is in the part
of  CO2  and  SO2.  It  includes  the  arrangement  of  the  table,  drawing  the  picture  of  the
mechanism.

Changkang Li is now a Ph.D. candidate in the State Key Laboratory of Coal Combustion at
Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His main contribution in this paper is in
the part of CO2 and Hg.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10109839
