Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Thermo-kinetic multi-zone modelling of low temperature 
combustion engines 

Aneesh Vasudev a, *, Maciej Mikulski a,b,*, Praveen Ramanujam Balakrishnan c, Xiaoguo Storm a, 
Jacek Hunicz d 
a School of Technology and Innovation, Energy Technology, University of Vaasa, Wolffintie 34, FI-65200 Vaasa, Finland 
b Vaasa Energy Business and Innovation Centre (VEBIC), Yliopistonranta 3, FI-65200 Vaasa, Finland 
c Department of Mechanical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600 MB Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
d Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Lublin University of Technology, Nadbystrzycka 36, 20-618, Lublin, Poland   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
multi-zone models 
chemical kinetics 
low-temperature combustion 
RCCI 
control-oriented models 

Many researchers believe multi-zone (MZ), chemical kinetics–based models are proven, essential toolchains for 
development of low-temperature combustion (LTC) engines. However, such models are specific to the research 
groups that developed them and are not widely available on a commercial nor open-source basis. Consequently, 
their governing assumptions vary, resulting in differences in autonomy, accuracy and simulation speed, all of 
which affect their applicability. Knowledge of the models´individual characteristics is scattered over the research 
groups´publications, making it extremely difficult to see the bigger picture. This combination of disparities and 
dispersed information hinders the engine research community that wants to harness the capability of multi-zone 
modelling. 

This work aims to overcome these hurdles. It is a comprehensive review of over 120 works directly related to 
MZ modelling of LTC extended with an insight to primary sources covering individual submodels. It covers 16 
distinctive  modelling  approaches,  three  different  combustion  concepts  and  over  60  different  fuel/kinetic 
mechanism  combination.  Over  38  identified  applications  ranging  from  fundamental-level  studies  to  control 
development. The work aims to provide sufficient detail of individual model design choices to facilitate creation 
of improved, more open multi-zone toolchains and inspire new applications. It also provides a high-level vision of 
how multi-zone models can evolve. 

The  review  identifies  a  state-of-the-art  multi-zone  model  as  an  onion-skin  model  with  10–15  zones; 
phenomenological heat and mass transfer submodels with predictive in-cylinder turbulence; and semi-detailed 
reaction  kinetics  encapsulating  53-199  species.  Together  with  submodels  for  heat  loss,  fuel  injection  and  gas 
exchange, this modelling approach predicts in-cylinder pressure within cycle-to-cycle variation for a handful of 
combustion concepts, from homogeneous/premixed charge to reactivity-controlled compression ignition (HCCI, 
PCCI, RCCI). Single-core simulation time is around 30 minutes for implementations focused on accuracy: there 
are direct time-reduction strategies for control applications. Major tasks include a fast and predictive means to 
determine  in-cylinder  fuel  stratification,  and  extending  applicability  and  predictivity  by  coupling  with  com-
mercial one-dimensional engine-modelling toolchains. There is also significant room for simulation speed-up by 
incorporating techniques such as tabulated chemistry and employing new solving algorithms that reduce cost of 
jacobian construction.   

1. Introduction 

1.1. Principles of LTC 

Low temperature combustion (LTC) offers new hope for the internal 

combustion engine (ICE). Two conditions must be met to fulfil LTC: (i) 
premixed fuel and air, and (ii) fuel-lean in-cylinder charge [1]. These 
LTC  conditions  facilitate  low  nitrogen  oxides  (NOX),  which  are 
supressed by low local combustion temperatures. Emissions of particu-
late matter (PM) are also low thanks to a large local oxygen surplus. PM 
creation also requires a certain temperature threshold for the reactions 

* Corresponding authors 

E-mail addresses: aneesh.vasudev@uwasa.fi (A. Vasudev), maciej.mikulski@uwasa.fi (M. Mikulski).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.100998 
Received 28 August 2021; Received in revised form 14 January 2022; Accepted 4 March 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100998Availableonline21March20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Nomenclature and abbreviations 

boundary layer 
blend ratio 
compression ignition 
controlled auto-ignition 
conventional diesel combustion 
computational fluid dynamics 
control-oriented models 
compression ratio 
differential algebraic equations 
conventional dual fuel 
design of experiments 
exhaust gas recirculation 
gasoline direct-injection compression ignition 
Gas Research Institute 
homogeneous charge compression ignition 
heat loss 
high-pressure, direct injection 
heat release rate 
internal combustion engine 
inlet valve closing 
indicated specific fuel consumption 
large eddy simulation 
low temperature combustion 

BL 
BR 
CI 
CAI 
CDC 
CFD 
COM 
CR 
DAE 
CDF 
DOE 
EGR 
GDCI 
GRI 
HCCI 
HL 
HPDI 
HRR 
ICE 
IVC 
ISFC 
LES 
LTC 
MVEM  mean-value engine models 
multi-zone model 
MZM 
natural gas 
NG 
negative temperature coefficient 
NTC 
ordinary differential equations 
ODE 
octane number 
ON 
operating point 
OP 
start of injection 
RCCI 
nitric oxide 
NO 
NOX 
oxides of nitrogen 
negative valve overlap 
NVO 
premixed charge compression ignition 
PCCI 
premixed compression ignition 
PCI 
probability density function 
PDF 
premixed compression ignition 
PPCI 
partially premixed combustion 
PPC 
particulate matter 
PM 
primary reference fuel 
PRF 
pressure rise rate 
PRR 
reactivity-controlled compression ignition 
RCCI 
reformer gas 
RG 
start of combustion 
SOC 
start of injection 
SOI 
single zone 
SZ 
top dead centre 
TDC 
unburnt hydrocarbons 
UHC 
Variable Valve Actuation 
VVA 

Symbols 
λ 

AFr 
A 
B 
δBL 
Smin 

air-fuel equivalence ratio 
air-fuel ratio 
area 
bore 
boundary layer thickness 
clearance height 

cr 
ρ 
VD 
μ 
Neng 
ℏ 
η 
F 
φ 

Q 
h 
h 
iEGR 
E 
D 

Yi 
m 
SP 
W 
ωi 
Pr 
P 
PEQ 
r 
Sc 
T 
Λ 
Δw 
Δr 
Δt 
nR 
nS 
nZ 
ζ 
ε 
k 
Ru 
u 
V 

compression ratio 
density 
displacement volume 
dynamic viscosity 
engine speed 
enthalpy 
efficiency specified by subscript 
flow across zone boundary 
fuel-air equivalence ratio 
heat energy 
height 
heat transfer coefficient 
internal EGR 
internal energy 
mass diffusion coefficient 
mass fraction of species i 
mass 
mean piston speed 
molar mass 
molar production rate of species 
Prandtl number 
pressure 
pressure equalisation 
radius 
Schmidt number 
temperature 
thermal conductivity 
zone thickness 
zone thickness in radial direction 
time step size 
total number of reactions 
total number of species 
total number of zones 
tuning parameter specified by subscript 
turbulence dissipation 
turbulent kinetic energy 
universal gas constant 
velocity 
volume 

Subscripts 
avg 
axl 
cool 
cyl 
comb 
z 
i 
iman 
lam 
linr 
zz 
n 
pist 
rd 
rad 
th 
tur 

average 
axial 
coolant 
cylinder 
combustion 
index for zones 
index of species 
intake manifold 
laminar 
liner 
neighbours of zone z 
normal direction 
piston 
radial 
radiation 
thermal 
turbulent  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009982A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

from conventional diesel and gasoline, through alcohols, natural gas and 
biodiesels to advanced renewable fuels with a minimal carbon footprint. 
Homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI) realises the LTC 
principle to the greatest extent. It involves completely evaporated and 
well-premixed  fuel  before  combustion  starts.  Combustion  is  also 
generally homogeneous (volumetric). However, temperature gradients 
caused by heat transfer through cylinder elements can create local auto- 
ignition  sources  in  close  time-proximity.  Fig.  1  illustrates  the  funda-
mental differences between conventional combustion modes and HCCI. 
Specifically, HCCI (Fig. 1c) combustion initiates at multiple sites in the 
cylinder  [5]  and  progresses  rapidly  towards  completion.  There  is  no 
flame propagation as in SI (Fig. 1a) because HCCI combustion is driven 
by chemical kinetics. This is central to the difference between HCCI and 
conventional combustion modes. 

to  proceed  [2].  Combustion  in  conventional  spark  ignition  (SI)  or 
compression ignition (CI) engines is far from these conditions. Although 
SI engines are characterised by premixed air-fuel charge, flame propa-
gation limits prevent the fuel being extensively diluted. CI engines can 
run on very lean global excess air ratios, but locally, in the zones where 
combustion starts, the mixture is fuel-rich. Practical realisation of a lean 
premixed charge and its compression ignition in reciprocating engines 
poses certain challenges [1,3,4]: 

• Volumetric,  kinetically  controlled  combustion  is  very  rapid,  pro-
ducing excessive pressure rise rates (PRR), especially at high engine- 
loads, challenging mechanical durability limits.  

• Start of combustion (SOC) lacks a direct control mechanism. There is 
no direct ignition trigger, like spark discharge in an SI engine or fuel 
injection into hot gas in a CI engine. Instead, SOC timing is deter-
mined by the compression temperature histories and auto-ignition 
properties of the in-cylinder mixture.  

• Although  laboratory  experiments  demonstrate  excellent  results  in 
steady states, efficient engine operation under transient conditions is 
extremely challenging due to the control issues mentioned above.  
• LTC’s benefit in terms of low NOX and PM, are accompanied by high 
emissions of CO and unburnt hydrocarbons (UHC), which straight-
forwardly reduce combustion efficiency.  

• The benefits of LTC cannot be fully exploited using typical SI or CI 
combustion systems. SI engines fuelled with gasoline or other high 
octane-number  (ON)  fuels  must  have  low  compression  ratios.  CI 
engines have in-piston combustion chambers that are designed for 
late fuel injection: with early fuel injection this design´s squish effects 
pose challenges in terms of emissions.  

• When  higher  boiling-range  fuels  typically  used  for  CI  engines  are 
injected  early,  at  low  in-cylinder  pressure,  they  are  prone  to  wet 
cylinder liners and pistons, resulting in fuel films, pool fires and oil 
dilution. 

Several  advanced  combustion  systems  have  been  proposed,  each 
aiming to increase the feasibility of LTC combustion by addressing the 
above-mentioned issues. They are presented and evaluated in abundant 
worldwide research. Notably, the studies cover a wide range of fuels, 

Fig. 2. Relative change in emissions and fuel consumption for stoichiometric 
HCCI  using  NVO  and  different  SI  technologies,  with  stoichiometric  SI  as  a 
baseline  (100  %).  Data  adopted  from  Osborne  et  al.  [17].  Experiments  per-
formed on a car engine with compression ratio 11.7:1 at 2000 rev/min and 2.7 
bar IMEP 

Fig. 1. Combustion image of conventional (a and b) and LTC (c and d) concepts. Adopted from Mueller & Upatnieks [16] with permission from authors.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009983A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig.  2  compares  HCCI  and  different spark  ignition  technologies  in 
terms  of  NOX  and  UHC  emissions,  and  indicated  specific  fuel  con-
sumption  (ISFC).  HCCI´s  outstanding  attribute  is  reduction  of  NOX 
emissions by 99 % in comparison to stoichiometric SI, penalised by only 
a 38 % increase of UHC emissions. HCCI also offers 8 % reduction of fuel 
consumption, which is comparable to lean homogeneous SI concept but 
10 % higher than stratified SI. 

The two main challenges for HCCI engines are controlling the start of 
combustion, especially at transient conditions and in changing ambient 
conditions,  and  high PRR  at high  loads. Many  research  projects have 
addressed these twin issues, yielding different HCCI combustion control 
concepts. Their strategies include: (i) fast thermal management on the 
intake side [6]; (ii) variable valve actuation enabling internal exhaust 
gas  recirculation  (EGR)  or  exhaust  rebreathing  [7];  (iii)  variable 
compression ratio; (iv) tailoring fuel reactivity by mixing two fuels [8, 
9]; (v) modification of fuel reactivity by in-cylinder reforming [10]; (vi) 
thermal stratification by late direct fuel injection [11] or water injection 
[12]; (vii) spark assistance [13]; and (viii) HCCI/SI mode switching [7]. 
HCCI, adopting one or more of those control systems, is also referred to 
as controlled auto-ignition (CAI), particularly when so-called negative 
valve  overlap  is  used  to  trap  exhaust  gas  [14].  Work  by  Duan  et  al. 
provides a good review of different means to realise HCCI [15]. Notably, 
any single control approach is insufficient to gain combustion control. 
Therefore, HCCI combustion requires a complex approach that embraces 
fuel,  the  gas  exchange  system  and  engine  mechanical  design,  thus 
making this technology extremely demanding. 

Looking at examples of applied HCCI, stationary two-stroke engines 
employing this combustion concept were demonstrated in the late 1970s 
for electricity generation. The first automotive application of an HCCI 
engine  was  recorded  in  1995  when  a  two-stroke  activated  radical 
combustion  system  was  employed  in  a  205  cm3  engine  powering  a 
Honda prototype motorcycle. HCCI combustion in four-stroke gasoline 
car engines was demonstrated by major engine and car makers in the 
first decade of the twenty-first century [18]. Recently, Mazda marketed 
gasoline spark-assisted HCCI technology [19]. Nevertheless, pure HCCI 
engines  are  not  commercially  available  even  today,  despite  huge 
research efforts. It should be noted that emissions and efficiency benefits 
of  HCCI  in  real  automotive  applications  proved  less  spectacular  than 
demonstrated by laboratory experiments [20]. 

Another LTC strategy is premixed compression ignition (PCI). The 
concept is less homogeneous than HCCI (compare Fig. 1´s photographs b 
and d) and is a step in the progression from conventional diesel com-
bustion (CDC) towards LTC. PCI is also known by other names, such as 
partially  premixed  combustion  (PPC)  [21]  or  partially  premixed 
compression ignition (PPCI) [22]. PCI achieves LTC by application of 

high EGR rates, often exceeding 50 %. This increases fuel dilution and 
thus reduces combustion temperature, at a given air excess. In CDC, such 
high EGR rates cuts NOX  production but causes soot formation. There-
fore, PCI combustion uses a much larger fraction of premixed, kinetic 
combustion than in CDC, aiming at simultaneous smokeless combustion. 
A  larger  premixed  fraction  is  achieved  by  the  elongated  mixing  time 
provided by a lower compression ratio (CR) with near top dead centre 
(TDC)  injection.  PCI  combustion  in  diesel  engines  is  supported  by 
extended intake and EGR thermal management [21]. 

The first demonstration of PCI combustion mode in a diesel engine 
was  in  the  late  1990s  by  Nissan  [23],  which  dubbed  the  combustion 
system Modulated Kinetics. It incorporated a low compression ratio and 
a  high swirl  combustion  chamber  design.  The  concept  enabled  diver-
gence  from  the  usual  NOX-PM  trade-off.  Fig.  3  shows  the  scale  of 
improvement:  at  a  PM  emission  level  typical  for  non-EGR  CDC,  NOX 
emissions are reduced by 98 %. 

Premixed charge compression ignition (PCCI) is similar to PCI but 
utilises earlier injection timings to create a premixed fuel fraction [24]. 
Consequently, start of combustion becomes decoupled from the injec-
tion event [25]. PCCI requires tailored spatial fuel distributions in the 
cylinder,  provided  by  sophisticated  multiple  injection  strategies  [2]. 
This  also  necessitates  modifying  injector  nozzles  to  avoid  piston  and 
cylinder-liner impingement by early injected fuel [24]. 

It should be noted that the borderline between PCI, PCCI and CDC is 
fuzzy. Contemporary diesel engines utilise EGR in combination with a 
higher premixed fraction to reduce NOX and PM simultaneously. 

Although PCI and PCCI are feasible for diesel engines, this concept 
favours  gasoline-like  fuels  because  they  allow  operation  with  higher 
compression  ratios  and  better  air-fuel  mixing  due  to  longer  ignition 
delay and faster evaporation [4]. When using gasoline, this concept is 
called gasoline direct-injection compression ignition (GDCI) [26]. GDCI 
is currently in development by Aramco, among others [27]. 

Using  two  fuels  of  different  reactivity  to  achieve  HCCI-like  com-
bustion  was  first  postulated  in  2006  by  Inagaki  et  al.  [28].  So-called 
reactivity  controlled  compression  ignition  (RCCI)  was  further  devel-
oped by Kokjohn et al. [29], who used gasoline injected into the intake 
manifold and diesel fuel injected directly into the cylinder. The diesel 
was  injected  early  enough  to  form  a  premixed  charge  before 
auto-ignition,  providing  reactivity  stratification  along  the  cylinder 
centreline. RCCI´s heat release rate is driven by chemical kinetics and 
controlled  predominantly  by  fuel  reactivity  stratification,  which  is 
enhanced by different auto-ignition properties of the fuels. Contrary to 
HCCI, thermal stratification plays a secondary role. Fig. 4 shows how 
typical RCCI spray patterns translate into spatial mixture stratification in 
the engine cylinder. n-Heptane and iso-octane were used as high- and 

Fig. 3. NOX-PM trade-off for CDC and PCI combustion at variable injection strategies and EGR. Experiments performed on an automotive diesel engine at 2000 rev/ 
min and 6 bar BMEP. Data adopted from Kimura et al. [23] 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009984A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 4. Low-reactivity (iso-octane) and high-reactivity (n-heptane) fuels stratification in early injection RCCI [30]. n-Heptane injected with two pulses at -60 CA and 
-40 CA (a). Equivalence ratios (b) at -10
CA are from the fuel tracer PLIF measurements. (Reproduced from Combustion and Flame with permission from Elsevier) 

◦

low-reactivity fuels respectively. 

Note  that  single-fuel  RCCI  was  proposed  to  make  the  technology 
more  feasible  for  the  automotive  sector.  Variable  reactivity  was  ach-
ieved by making the first injection of diesel fuel directly to the cylinder, 

while its second stream passed through an exhaust-gas steam reformer, 
which produced low-reactivity syngas [31]. 

One  should  note  that  all  the  acronyms  are  quite  often  used  inter-
changeably in the literature – there is no strict classification. However, 

Fig. 5. Temperature-equivalence ratio map of soot and NOX yields from h-heptane combustion, adopted from Kimura et al. [23], Kim et al. [22], Paykani et al. [32] 
and Dec [25]. Low UHC and low CO zones are designated in such a way that combustion efficiency drop inside is lower than 2 %. The black line is a typical non-EGR 
CDC combustion path, with asterisk denoting point where high temperature reactions start. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009985A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

the  classification  ambiguity  relates  only  to  the  control  approach.  For 
example,  different  approaches  use  one  or  two  fuels,  or  some  other 
agents, e.g. water, while naming the combustion systems HCCI, PCCI, 
PPCI or RCCI. Nevertheless, the difference between combustion modes 
lies  within  their  characteristic  combustion  paths,  as  clearly  shown  in 
Fig.  5.  Typically,  CDC  runs  along  the  black  line  when  EGR  is  not 
considered.  High  temperature  combustion  starts  at  high  fuel  excess, 
moving  the  combustion  regime  towards  the  soot  production  zone. 
Combustion,  progressing  in  time,  but  also  moving  outside  the  fuel 
stream core, becomes nearly stoichiometric and runs in the high tem-
perature  zone,  increasing  NOX  formation.  PCI  and  PCCI  combustion 
progress qualitatively in a similar way. High EGR rates, characteristic for 
both  concepts,  reduce  mixture  temperature;  longer  mixing  time  in-
creases air excess at the start of combustion. Therefore, the combustion 
pathway bypasses the zones where both soot and NOX  are intensively 
created. RCCI is based on a much more premixed charge, characterised 
by a narrower equivalence ratio span, so combustion starts at excess air, 
which produces hardly any soot. HCCI combustion is assumed to entail 
equal fuel vapor distribution across the combustion chamber. Combus-
tion theoretically runs along the horizontal line (dashed blue) in Fig. 5, 
hence is completely smokeless. This high fuel dilution limits combustion 
temperature. Fig. 5 also illustrates why LTC combustion can be incom-
plete. Namely, when mixing time is increased and combustion is delayed 
to  reduce  PRR,  the  combustion  pathway  is  broken  by  lowering  tem-
perature  due  to  progressing  cylinder  expansion.  Work  by  Dec  [25] 
provides a detailed analysis of different LTC combustion pathways. 

Thanks  to  its  uncompromised  emission  mitigation  benefits  and  its 
ability  to  accommodate  carbon-neutral  fuels,  LTC  development  is 
currently high on the agenda of the global engine research community. 
Progress  so  far  is  summarised  in  numerous  reviews  and  books.  For 

example, Stanglmaier & Roberts documented the state of the art in HCCI 
as  it  was  in  1999  [1].  This  work  pointed  out  HCCI´s  drawbacks  and 
control  issues,  indicating  general  control  approaches  which  remain 
unchanged till today. In 2007 Zhao edited a [33] book collating the work 
of other leading researchers describing the history and progress in HCCI 
research.  The  later  review  of  Yao  et  al.  [3]  focused  on  combustion 
control, indicating that multi-mode combustion is necessary for HCCI in 
practical  engines.  They  also  highlighted  the  need  to  develop 
control-oriented  models.  Remedies  for  specific  key  issues  of  HCCI 
combustion, such as tailored HCCI fuel design [8], high-load extension 
[34]  or  cycle-to-cycle  variability  [35]  have  been  reviewed  in  recent 
years.  For  example,  Duan  et  al.  [15]  comprehensively  reviewed  and 
evaluated HCCI control approaches, providing systematised reference. 
Fig.  6  sets  out  the  range  of  governing  methods  when  striving  for 
controllable HCCI combustion. Notably, the control methods summar-
ised by Duan et al. cover the requirements of all LTC concepts. 

Reitz & Duraisamy [36] published a review of the progress in RCCI 
research. The paper provided deep insight into engine design, control 
approaches, emissions, efficiency and the operating range of RCCI en-
gines.  It  focused  primarily  on  the  achievements  of  the  University  of 
Wisconsin-Madison research group. Importantly, the study determined 
the PRR-constrained maximum engine load in RCCI mode for different 
fuels, providing a favourable pathway for high ON fuels like natural gas 
and alcohols. Ultimately, the study showed a clear route towards 50 % 
brake thermal efficiency for heavy-duty engines working in RCCI mode. 
The  recent  review  by  Paykani  et  al.  [37]  focused  on  RCCI  control 
techniques to enable engine operation in transient conditions, including 
multi-mode  combustion.  The  study  put  forward  arguments  for  com-
mercial feasibility of RCCI engines, also addressing life cycle analysis 
and cradle-to-grave CO2  emissions. Notably, the study underlined the 

Fig. 6. Strategies for controlling the ignition timing and combustion phase of the HCCI engine [15] (Reproduced from Fuel with permission from Elsevier)  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009986A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

need  to  develop  physics-based  control-oriented  models  (COM)  as  en-
ablers. This conclusion underpins and mandates our study. 

1.2. Overview of LTC modelling approaches 

The challenges discussed in the previous subsection make combus-
tion  modelling  instrumental  for  further  development  of  technologies 
like  RCCI,  HCCI  or  PCCI.  The  phenomenological  complexity  of  the 
process  and  challenging  control  make  it  particularly  difficult  to  rely 
solely on engine experiments. Models can be used either to support the 
fundamental understanding of the governing phenomena or help move 
the concept to towards industrial application. To this end, different LTC 
modelling  approaches  exist  and  their  common  categorisation  is  pre-
sented in Fig. 7, along with the application range and complementary 
experimental techniques. 

In terms of physical models, rapid developments in Computational 
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) propel research on fundamental aspects of LTC, 
complementing experimental-driven studies on mixture formation and 
in-cylinder stratification. The availability of commercial CFD packages 
containing  direct  engine  templates  encourages  many  researchers  to 
engage in the hot topic of LTC research. This review has identified that 
many such studies published in the last couple of years are of doubtful 
quality: their sheer number makes it increasingly difficult to separate the 
wheat  from  the  chaff.  For  example,  many  of  the  available  literature 
sources aim to analyse LTC phenomena using only simulation results, 
without approaching detail model validation. In this case, widely used 
yet  relatively  course  Reynolds-averaged  Navier–Stokes  (RANS)  ap-
proaches  for  modelling  turbulence,  combined  with  other  simplifying 
assumptions on spray modelling and reaction kinetics (crucial for LTC 
phenomena), can lead to biased conclusions. This is particularly true if 
the authors lack a proper engine background. In contrast, a good over-
view of CFD approaches for HCCI and RCCI combustion can be found in 
[38,39]. 

In-cylinder turbulence and spray formation play a vital role in more 
complex LTC strategies involving mixture stratification. Thus, contem-
porary CFD studies, gradually move from RANS to more accurate large 
eddy simulation (LES) combustion. In a recent study, Tekgül et al. [40] 
investigated the influence of diesel injection timing on NG-diesel-fuelled 
RCCI combustion. They used a CFD set-up similar to an Engine Com-
bustion Network (ECN) spray chamber, and emulated the influence of 
piston motion on in-cylinder thermodynamic state by additional source 
term [41] in the conservation equations. This was done mainly to reduce 
computational  load,  but  also  simplified  the  physics  by  eliminating 

spray-wall interactions. Thus, LES enabled detailed visualisation of the 
combusting  spray  characteristics  under  engine-relevant  conditions.  In 
another recent work, Zhong et al. [42] broadened the horizon of novel 
single-fuel  RCCI  [31]  by  studying  n-heptane  sprays  in  a  reform  gas 
environment composed of partially oxidised intermediate species of the 
fuel. The large eddy simulation-probability density function (LES-PDF) 
combustion model was able to resolve the double-layered flame struc-
ture exhibited around the spray tip and periphery. 

However, detailed combustion modelling with LES requires hours of 
simulation time, even using supercomputer clusters, greatly limiting the 
applicability  of  this  approach.  Direct  numerical  simulation  (DNS),  is 
nowadays technically feasible but far too computationally expensive for 
reactive flow. Thus, its application in LTC is limited to mixture forma-
tion studies or kinetic ignition studies in constant volume reactors [40, 
43–46]. 

On the opposite end of LTC modelling applications (right-hand side 
of Fig. 7) are the empirical (black-box) combustion models. They are 
mostly  data-driven  correlations  of  selected  combustion  parameters  of 
the  engine.  As  such,  they  are  not predictive  (invalid  outside the  cali-
bration space) and not transferable to different engine platforms. They 
are  essentially  a  set  of  algebraic  relations  or  look-up  tables,  so  this 
simplicity  means  they  can  be  computed  in  real  time  within  a  single 
engine-cycle and thus are very suitable for on-board applications such as 
virtual sensors or as parts of engine control. An overview of HCCI and 
RCCI control models is provided in reviews by Fathi et al. [47] and Hall 
et al. [48]. 

Empirical  models  require  a  large  amount  of  data  for  building  a 
proper surrogate of the phenomena. This implies use of large-scale tests 
of  the  combustor/engine  prototype,  driven  by  design  of  experiments 
(DOE). Alternatively, one can use a predictive nature of detail physical 
models to build a calibration map. In the latter case, the detailed model 
is  calibrated  using  a  very  limited  spectrum  of  experimental  (optical 
engine  research,  for  instance)  cases  and  transposition  to  real  engine 
operation  is  made  by  simulation.  Both  the  experimental  and  model- 
based  approaches  were  found  suitable  for  calibrating  legacy  engine 
concepts. However, for LTC, the core issue is the number of independent 
control variables required for efficient realisation of combustion. Thus, 
the  conventional  DOE  approach  fails  to  provide  a  global  multi- 
parameter optimum in reasonable time. Fig. 8 illustrates this issue. 

Quasi-dimensional models form an application bridge between the 
detailed  CFD  and  the  black-box  models.  This  approach,  instead  of 
imposing explicit spatial discretisation of Naiver-Stokes equations (as in 
CFD) relies on a zero-dimensional (0D) routine which solves only the 

Fig. 7. Combustion model type and its applicability  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009987A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 8. Engine calibration space showing the exponential increase in the calibration burden as the number of independent control parameters increase. Data from 
Atkinson [49] 

time-dependent  energy  equation.  (See  Section  2  for  governing  equa-
tions). Spatial inhomogeneity in temperature and composition, impor-
tant  from  the  perspective  of  H/P/RCCI  concepts,  is  captured  in  a 
simplified way by dividing the cylinder volume into several zones (in 
principle  separate  0D  reactors).  The  way  in  which  zone-to-zone  and 
zone-to-environment interactions are defined can shift the predictivity/ 
computational  time  trade-off  either  towards  more  data-driven  ap-
proaches or towards the more phenomenological approach. 

By far the biggest impact on this trade-off is the way the combustion 
term is solved. In the simplest case, experimental data are used to define 
the burn rate, either via a directly imposed look-up table or by a shape 
function.  This  makes  the  model  potentially  real-time  capable  but  im-
pinges  on its predictive nature. The main advantage of this approach 
compared to straight black-box modelling lies in its more direct corre-
lation of combustion to in-cylinder parameters, creating more flexibility 
in dealing with complex non-linearity in combustion behaviour. This is 
particularly  relevant  for  LTC.  One  of  the  most  common  engineering 
methods  in  this  so-called  grey-box  approach  is  to  use  experimentally 
correlated Wiebe shape function to represent the burn rate. This tech-
nique  was  widely  used  in  the  early-days  HCCI  control  developments. 
Work by Ghojel [50] includes a comprehensive review of applications of 
the Wiebe function, including LTC engines. 

The predictivity of quasi-dimensional modelling can be improved by 
phenomenological modelling of combustion. Many combustion models 
have  been  proposed  to  match  the  framework  quasi-dimensional 
modelling. According to GT-Suite [51], in the context of conventional 

SI, there may be turbulent flame model; and the diesel multi-pulse or 
diesel jet model may be used for conventional DI diesel combustion. For 
a further collection of quasi-dimensional models, the reader is directed 
to  the  work  of  Verhelst  and  Sheppard  [52]  for  SI  multi-zone  models 
(MZM) and to Kumar et al. [53] for a review of CI engine models. 

For fast, yet fully predictive, LTC modelling, the quasi-dimensional 
approach  is  commonly  coupled  with  reaction  kinetics.  In  principle, 
this follows an assumption that HCCI, PCCI and RCCI are predominantly 
controlled by this mechanism. Since mixture formation and ignition are 
majorly decoupled in premixed LTC combustion, mixing phenomenon is 
either omitted (HCCI) or dealt with in a simplified manner – by zonal 
interaction. Such defined combustion models form the core of the pre-
sent  review.  The  following  subsection  explores  the  background  of 
physics-based  multi-zone  models  and 
to  LTC 
development. 

their  relevance 

1.3. Quasi-dimensional thermo-kinetic models for LTC simulation 

The  quasi-dimensional  chemical  kinetics-based  models,  further 
referred  to  as  MZM  (multi-zone  models),  offer  computational  perfor-
mance an order of magnitude better than CFD. Fig. 9 is an adaptation of 
an image by C. Allen [54] that captures the ideological difference be-
tween  the  two  approaches  and  underlines  MZM´s  computational  effi-
ciency benefits. 

The  single-core  simulation  times  typically  vary  from  a  couple  of 
seconds to a couple of hours for a single engine cycle, depending on the 

Fig. 9. Comparison of CFD and MZ models (Based on [54])  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009988A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

zonal resolution, size of the mechanism and submodels involved. The 
physical nature of an MZM in general aims to provide trend predictivity 
(outside the calibration space) in terms of combustion parameters and 
emission indicators. However, some authors set absolute-level accuracy 
targets. Wilson and Allen for instance assumed 10 % maximum error in 
emissions for their MZM vs. detail CFD calculation [55]. Mikulski et al. 
aimed  at 
in-cylinder  pressure  to  be  within  the  experimental 
cycle-to-cycle variations [56]. 

Predictivity/accuracy combined with fast simulations times enables 
MZM’s  wide  scope  of  applications,  ranging  from  fundamental-level 
studies  through  to  control  development  endeavours  (Fig.  7).  Impor-
tantly, their speed and accuracy make them suitable for co-simulation 
with  typical  1D  [57–59]  or  mean-value  engine  models  [60,61]  for  a 
complete  system-level  analysis.  This  fills  the  mentioned  applicability 
gap between CFD and black-box models, in the context of a complete 
model-based  engine  development  framework.  This  methodology, 
postulated  amongst  others  by  Indrajuana  et  al.  [62]  for  RCCI  and 
depicted in Fig. 10, allows the system complexity issues to be overcome. 
The  removal  of  this  bottleneck  helps  to  take  LTC  concepts  towards 
real-world applications. 

In principle, either validated CFD or engine tests are used to build a 
narrow design space of several operating points (for instance, 14 inde-
pendent control parameters and four point-sweeps without parameter 
combination). A physics-based MZM captures the non-linearity between 
the coarse nodes of the calibration space and can extrapolate beyond it. 
MZM combined with an engine model allows development of full multi- 
cylinder engine LTC pre-calibration, including global multi-parameter 
optimisation routines [57] and development of controls [62]. Further 
development  stages  usually  involve  embedding  the  control  and  final 
testing. It is relatively easy to make MZM real-time capable, for instance, 
by  creating  a  data-driven  metamodel  for  heat  release  and  emissions 
[63].  Experimental  validation  is  recommended  at  each  development 
stage, gradually moving from model- and software in-the-loop (MIL/SIL) 
to  hardware-in-the-loop  (HIL)  testing  [64,65].  According  to  Fig.  10, 
building an MZM and employing it in engine development end-to-end, 
by  far  surpasses  conventional  incremental  (experimental)  approach 
when the objective is multi-cylinder RCCI or advanced H/PCCI. 

MZM are thus extremely important for moving LTC technology to-
wards  the  market.  Note,  however,  that  the  complete  model-based 
development framework with MZM so far has not been demonstrated: 
individual  studies  have  focused  on  individual  elements  of  the  frame-
work. A recent RCCI review by Paykani et al. [37], aiming to map out the 
“pathways towards commercial viability,” highlighted the development 
of a proper control-oriented model (COM) as one of the key enablers. 
The  authors  examined  two  physics-based  multizone  models  incorpo-
rating chemical kinetics. They concluded that current RCCI COM have 

limitations and need improvement. Many similar MZM have been pro-
posed for HCCI development. A control-oriented review by Fathi et al. 
[47] mentions over 15 works committed to quasi-dimensional modelling 
of HCCI. Due to a broad scope, however, the authors committed only a 
paragraph  or  so  to  this  issue.  On  the  other  hand,  Komninos  &  Rako-
poulos [66] dedicated their whole review to heat-loss modelling in HCCI 
MZM,  without  particular  attention  to  other  aspects.  The  work  is 
extremely  valuable  to  researchers  looking  at  detailed  information  on 
quasi-dimensional  modelling and  demonstrates the  issue´s  complexity. 
However, it lacks the critical perspective to accommodate different ap-
proaches,  and  its  highly  focused  nature  does  not  allow  the  reader  to 
grasp the essence of application-tailored MZM modelling. Note that the 
authors underlined the value of their review when observing that cur-
rent literature does not cover MZM comprehensively. 

1.4. Motivation and scope of the present paper 

Our introduction advocates LTC as a technology for next-generation 
combustion  engines.  Further  subsections  have  focused  on  the  major 
hurdle to be overcome, namely system complexity, and proposed MZM 
as a tool to deal with it. We also have indicated that those tools need 
constant evolution because LTC technology is evolving to include more 
actuators and more complex phenomena. At the same time, there is no 
single recipe for an ultimate MZM toolchain: it needs to be tailored to fit 
the  desired  application.  This  means  balancing  the  trade-off  between 
accuracy  and  calculation  time  with  a  proper  selection  of  submodels, 
which often need specific assumptions in terms of zonal configuration 
and  an  adequate  numerical  solver.  Consequently,  there  is  no  mature 
commercial  solution  for  a  physics-based  LTC  MZM  framework.  For 
instance,  the  industrial  standard  1D  engine  simulation  toolchain  GT 
Suite  accommodates  application  of  reaction  kinetics  in  only  a  single- 
zone  framework,  sufficient  only  for  a  very  coarse  estimation  of  fully 
homogenous combustion [51]. Neither is the subject comprehensively 
described  in  any  books  related  to  combustion  engine  simulations,  so 
establishing the model is a challenging task. 

As  discussed  in  the  introduction,  although  LTC  development  has 
been  already  extensively  reviewed,  MZM  so  far  has  not  been  given 
sufficient  attention,  except  in  the  mentioned  work  by  Komninos  & 
Rakopoulos [66] with its shortcomings. The topic becomes even more 
relevant as advanced multi-fuel LTC concepts move from fundamental 
level studies towards applied research. The present work aims to fill this 
knowledge gap with a comprehensive and critical view on the current 
state of the art in physics-based MZM suitable for control-oriented LTC 
simulation. The aim is to provide sufficient details on governing physics 
and mathematics to enable approach reproduction, while assessing in-
dividual  submodels  for  fitness  for  purpose,  accuracy  and  impact  on 

Fig. 10. Pathway for model-based engine development with the use of MZM (adopted from [62])  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009989A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

computational efficiency. 

This aim can be distilled to four research questions:  

Q1  How do MZ models evolve and what is the current state of the art 

in terms of model configuration and submodels?  

Q2  What  is  the  accuracy/calculation-speed  trade-off  issue  for  MZ 

models, and how can it be addressed and improved?  

Q3  What  is  the  application  area  for  MZM  in  terms  of  combustion 

concepts and associated fundamental-level phenomena?  

Q4  How do MZ models support applied-level research? 

Section 2 introduces the governing assumptions for all MZ models, 
aiming to provide a complete picture. It also contributes input towards 
Q1, which ultimately is answered by sections 3 and 4, examining zonal 
configurations  and  available  submodels  respectively.  Section  5  ad-
dresses  the  simulation  procedure,  directing  the  discussion  towards 
computational efficiency and thus contributing to answering Q2´s trade- 
off issue. The accuracy side of Q2´s trade-off is addressed in subsection 
6.1´s  detailed review  of MZM  validation  results.  The  crucial, forward- 
looking  issue  of  MZM  application  is  raised  in  Q3  and  Q4  and 
answered in subsection 6.2. This reviews the whole range of MZM ap-
plications foreseen by Fig. 7, from fundamental-level studies to control 
embedding. Finally, section 7´s discussion and outlook, pulls together all 
the individual strands to provide a concise roadmap of MZM evolution. 

2. Multi-zone modelling framework 

The  purpose  of  this  chapter  is  to  provide  an  introduction  to  the 
theoretical framework of multi-zone modelling. This begins with listing 
the governing equations and describing the assumptions common to all 
multi-zone  models.  Importantly,  it  explains  the  terms  and  concepts 
commonly used in literature. 

2.1. Governing equations and common assumptions 

Construction of an MZ framework is based on a network of homo-
geneous reactors. Thus, the combustion chamber´s volume is segmented 
into  zones,  each  with  its  own  thermodynamic  state.  Although  this  is 
analogous to domain discretisation in CFD, the division is much coarser, 
typically not exceeding 40 zones. As such, the zones represent lumped 
regions  of  the  in-cylinder  space  like  crevice,  boundary  layer  or  core 
region. 

Each zone is assigned any number of boundaries, separating it from 
neighbouring  zones  or  from  the  environment  (combustion  chamber 
surfaces). The boundaries can prescribe shape to the zones and serve as 
interfaces for exchanging heat, mass and/or work. Fig. 11 illustrates a 
zone  within  the  MZ  framework,  along  with  its  boundaries  and  in-
teractions. The solid red arrows represent interzonal heat exchange; the 
solid  blue  arrows  represent  interzonal  mass  exchange  and  the  black 
arrows represent interzonal work exchange. The dashed arrows repre-
sent the zone´s interaction with the combustion chamber surfaces. 

The primary assumption of MZM is that pressure remains uniform 
across all zones at each time step. This follows the premise that pressure 
between  zones equalises  rapidly  [67],  at  a  rate  equal  to  the  speed  of 
sound. This is connected to the presupposition of MZM not resolving the 
in-cylinder flow field, by disregarding the surface forces of pressure and 
viscous  effects.  As  a  result  of  pressure  equalisation,  momentum  con-
servation is deemed satisfied, and so is not explicitly modelled. 

Analogous  to  homogeneous  reactors,  the  governing  equations  of 
MZM constitute a coupled set. Each zone in general requires equations 
for balance of mass Eq. (1), energy Eq. (2), species Eq. (3) and a coupling 
between  pressure  and  temperature  via  equation  of  state,  specifically 
ideal gas equation Eq. (4). The equations below are listed in their generic 
form, where subscript z is the index for zones and nZ is the total number 
of zones. In the energy equation Eq. (2), heat transfer to cylinder walls is 
explicitly captured by dQz/dt. In the species conservation Eq. (3),  ˙ωi,z 

Fig. 11. Generalised MZ framework; red arrow – heat flow, blue arrow – mass 
flow, black arrow – work 

represents the molar production rate of species i, and Wi is its associated 
molar mass. Ru in Eq. (4) is the universal gas constant of a zone and Wz is 
the mean molar mass of z. 

dmz
dt

=

∑

(m)Fzz→z

zz

dEz
dt

=

dQz
dt

(cid:0) Pcyl

dVz
dt

+

∑

(E)Fzz→z

zz

dYi,z
dt

=

˙ωi,zWi,z
ρz

+

∑

(Y)Fi,zz→z

zz

PcylVz = mz

Ru
W z

Tz

∑nZ

z

Vz = Vcyl

(1)  

(2)  

(3)  

(4)  

(5) 

In each equation, the term F with superscript m, E and y represent 
interzonal transport of mass, energy and species respectively. Summa-
tion ensures contribution from all neighbours (zz) to a particular zone 
(z). Moreover, (E)Fzz  →  z can include contributions from both interzonal 
heat transfer and mass transport (enthalpy). The F terms are expressed 
within the context of the associated submodels, as will be described in 
section 4. Equations (5) and (4) enforce the condition of uniform pres-
sure (Pcyl) across the zones. 

2.2. Zonal configuration 

Charge stratification is the rationale behind the division of the in- 
cylinder  volume  into  zones.  In  the  context  of  MZ  models,  the  main 
focus is on stratification in the bulk portion of the combustion chamber 
gases  [68–70].  With  uniform  zonal  pressure  in  the  MZ  framework, 
stratification across the zones pertains to temperature and composition. 
It is the manner in which the zones are arranged that enables the model 
to capture the influence of in-cylinder inhomogeneity on combustion, in 
a computationally efficient manner. 

Thus, zonal configuration refers to the arrangement of the zones in a 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099810A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

multi-zone  model.  A  rudimentary  sense  of  the  arrangement  is  estab-
lished  by  the  numbering  of  zones.  Furthermore,  zonal  configuration 
determines  the  number  of  neighbours  to  a  particular  zone.  Evidently 
(Fig. 11), the number of boundaries of a zone corresponds to the number 
of neighbouring zones, in addition to the bounding combustion chamber 
surfaces. Following convention, this paper´s indexing of the zones starts 
with the outermost zone or the zone associated to the liner. 

The  properties  of  a  zone  and  its  associated  boundaries  will  be 
referred to in the present review as zonal attributes. Taking the example 
of crevice zone, as in [71], which was prescribed as a constant volume 
implying  that  it  remained  isochoric  throughout  the  simulation.  Thus, 
references  to  zone  boundaries  in  literature  may  include  a  range  of 
properties:  adiabatic,  fixed  zone  mass  (implying  no  interzonal  mass 
flow) and geometry or shape. Apart from fixed volume, zones may be 
fixed  temperature or  even have  chemical  kinetics disabled.  All  in all, 
zone attributes in a MZ model can be dissimilarly specified in order to 
reinforce the notion of charge stratification in the zonal configuration. 

2.3. Mechanism of pressure equalisation 

In practice, pressure equalisation across the zones is achieved as a 
result of readjusting either volume or mass of the zones. This is illus-
trated in Eq. (6), obtained by combining Eqs. (4) and (5). In the latter it 
is  assumed  that  the  volume  distribution  of  zones  remains  fixed 
throughout the simulation. In other words, the proportion of the zonal 
volumes with reference to the in-cylinder volume does not change after 
being set at the initialisation stage. Instead, mass among the zones is 
readjusted, manifesting as interzonal mass transfer. The mechanism of 
this mass transfer is not based on processes of convection, nor diffusion, 
but rather is driven by thermodynamics Eq. (6). This means of bulk mass 
transfer will be referred to as PEQ based interzonal mass transfer in this 
review paper. Further discussions on this mechanism will resume in the 
context of the associated submodel (section 4.3). 

On the other hand, when pressure equalisation is achieved by read-
justing zonal volumes, it is presumed that the mass of each zone remains 
fixed,  or  if  interzonal  mass  transfer  occurs,  it  may  be  based  on  the 
diffusion mechanism (section 4.3). Thus, volume of the zones is read-
justed at every time step to maintain equal pressure among all zones. In 
other words, zonal volume distribution prescribed at initialisation will 
have changed with the progress of the simulation. This process manifests 
itself as interzonal work transfer. In such a case, volume change of a zone 
is due to both piston motion and interzonal work transfer. 

Pcyl =

1
Vcyl

∑nZ

z

mz

Ru
W z

Tz

3. Classification of multi-zone models 

(6)  

Development  of  thermo-kinetic  MZ  modelling  has  progressed  in 
parallel  with  improvements  in  LTC  engines.  Initially  used  for  HCCI 
simulations [72], the models have become more sophisticated in terms 
of  submodels  and  numerical  schemes,  able  to  predict  performance  of 
advanced  strategies  such  as  RCCI  on  VVA  hardware  [56].  There  are 
numerous realisations of MZ models in literature and they generally fall 
into one of two major groups: balloon and onion-skin models. There are 
also  two  minor  groups:  stochastic  MZ  models  and  spray  MZ  models. 
Balloon  models  can  be  further  sub-divided  into  two  types:  one-way 
coupled  CFD-balloon  and  two-way  coupled  CFD-balloon  MZ  models. 
As  the  names  suggest,  this  grouping  is  based  on  how  MZ  models  are 
coupled with CFD models. Onion-skin models also can be sub-divided 
into  two  types,  based  on  commonality  of  their  zonal  configuration: 
annular and enclosed type models. 

Fig.  12  illustrates  this  classification  and  depicts  the  relative  pro-
portions of the groups within the reviewed literature. Broadly speaking, 
zonal configuration is a common theme for the models´classification, so 
the current section elaborates on each class from the perspective of zonal 

Fig. 12. Classification of multi-zone models. Size of the sectors corresponds to 
the volume of literature of a certain model type in proportion to the total body 
of reviewed works. 

configuration. It focuses on aspects such as interzonal interaction, zonal 
attributes, geometric constraints and possible reasons behind a partic-
ular  zonal  arrangement.  Since  stratification  plays  a  key  role  on  the 
phenomenology of LTC, we assess the ability of a zonal configuration to 
reflect the same. There is also an overview of how zonal configuration 
influences model predictivity, simulation time and choice of submodels. 

3.1. Balloon configuration 

Being  the  simplest  of  zonal  configurations,  the  balloon  type  was 
popularly employed during early developments in MZ simulation of LTC 
engines. The distinguishing characteristic is that the zones lack shape. 
Furthermore, the zonal configuration has a non-existent to weak phys-
ical  connection  to  the  topology  of  the  combustion  chamber.  Conse-
quently, the zones have no real sense of surface area. Still, each zone is 
prescribed  a  volume,  which  can  change  as  the  simulation  progresses. 
The  arrangement  can  be  conceptualised  as  a  collection  of  balloons 
containing reacting gases, constrained within the in-cylinder volume. 

In most of the early balloon models all zones had the same attributes 
and  interzonal  heat  and  mass  flows  were  excluded  [73,74].  This 
modelling  simplicity  meant  that  charge  inhomogeneity  was  primarily 
captured  at  the  initialisation  phase.  In  other  words,  MZ  predictivity 
hinged on proper estimation of initial inhomogeneity of properties, i.e., 
temperature,  volume,  mass  and  fuel  concentration.  Since  this  initial 
inhomogeneity could not be straightforwardly determined from exper-
imental data, CFD results were used. As in the works of Aceves et al. [75, 
76], the balloon model was coupled with a CFD model, where the initial 
phase until combustion initiation, was handled by the CFD simulation. 
The CFD results were then processed to provide initial conditions of the 
MZ  model,  by  generating 
(T-m)  or 
a 
temperature-equivalence  ratio  (T-ф)  distribution.  T-m  mapping  pro-
vided information about zonal mass and temperature distribution, while 
composition was assumed uniform across the zones. This was acceptable 
for HCCI simulations. T-ф mapping also provided information regarding 
mixture strength distribution among the zones, relevant in simulations 
of PCCI [77,78] or VVA strategies [79]. Section 5.2 has further discus-
sion of model initialisation methods. 

temperature-mass 

Briefly,  the  approach  of  mapping  from  CFD  to  balloon  involves 
identifying representative regions [80] within the in-cylinder space. The 
CFD grid is arranged into a number of regions, equal to the number of 
zones. The approach for division is to lump together cells with similar 
properties.  This  is  then  mapped  to  the  corresponding  zones  of  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099811A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

balloon  model,  via  T-m  or  T-ф  distributions.  For  instance,  for  HCCI, 
regions of similar T are brought together. In the initial work of Aceves 
et al. [73] from a total of 10 regions, three regions (amounting to 3 % of 
in-cylinder mass) represented the crevice; four regions (amounting to 10 
% mass) represented boundary layer; and the remaining three regions 
(amounting  to  87  %  mass)  represented  the  central  or  core  region. 
Similarly, for PCCI, representative regions were formed based on tem-
perature and mixture strength, as in [77], where five from a total of 40 
regions (amounting to 4.5 % of in-cylinder mass) represented the com-
bustion chamber´s coldest and leanest space. Section 5.3 elaborates on 
calibration of zone size. The essence of the approach is that zonal divi-
sion was carried out in T-m / T-ф space, as opposed to physical space. 
Fig. 13 provides a brief overview of this. The corollary is that without 
intrinsic coupling with CFD, stand-alone balloon models were used in 
the  context  of  parametric  studies  (see  section  6.2  on  application  for 
further details). 

Charge  inhomogeneity  in  the  zonal  configuration  is  further 
emphasised  by  non-uniformly  setting  up  attributes  among  the  zones. 
This can be done by application of (well-known) wall heat loss corre-
lations to MZM. This raises the question regarding distribution of the 
resulting cylinder-averaged heat flux among the zones, which is relevant 
since it links to thermal stratification. Distribution of cylinder-averaged 
wall heat loss may be based on zonal mass distribution [81] or volume 
distribution [74]. In addition, Kodavasal et al. [81] proposed an elab-
orate  approach  for  establishing  thermal  stratification  using  heat  loss 
modelling, as they aimed for a stand-alone MZM. CFD results only aided 
model calibration, and were not used to generate initial conditions. In 
their MZ approach, distribution of overall heat loss among zones was 
modulated by ‘heat-loss multiplier’. The idea was based on fact that the 
central portion of the combustion chamber remained warmer than re-
gions  close  to  the  walls.  Thus,  zones  representing  the  BL  and  crevice 
experienced more heat loss than the zones representing the core region. 
Section 4.1 has more details on wall heat transfer modelling in MZM. 

Due to the simplicity of balloon models, interzonal transport of heat 
and  mass  are usually  not  modelled. Work  exchange remains  the only 
interzonal  interaction,  in  accordance  with  the  pressure  equalisation 
condition (Eq.(6)). However, the study of Hergart et al. [78], considered 
the flow of heat and mass among the zones. Due to the lack of spatial 
topology of balloon configuration, a pseudo flow area was conceived, 
shown in Eq. (7). This is the surface area of a sphere formed by summing 
volumes of adjacent zones. Furthermore, the interzonal flow was based 
on  wall  heat  loss  correlation,  where  interzonal  mass  transfer  was 
assumed  proportional  to  the  heat  loss  coefficient.  Interzonal  heat 
transfer was then based on the enthalpy of the exchanged mass. Further 
details of these submodels are presented in Section 4.3. 

Az = π

(

3
4π

)2/3

(Vz + Vz+1)

(7) 

Balloon models´simplicity [74] means their computational expense is 
lower  (disregarding  CFD  initialisation)  than  other  MZ  approaches. 

Although a larger number of zones can be simulated (as many as 100 
[80]),  this  does  not  necessarily  translate  into  improved  model  pre-
dictivity.  Balloon  models  are  generally  poor  in  emission  predictions, 
crucially of CO, NOX and UHC, as recognised by Flowers et al. [82], due 
to the lack of interzonal heat and mass flow. Section 5.3 includes further 
discussions on Flowers et al.´s findings, together with an assessment of 
model calibration and validity. 

From  an  application  perspective,  balloon  configuration  is  largely 
popular for HCCI simulations [76,79,81,83]. The suitability is due to the 
volumetric  nature  of  combustion,  where  the  chemistry  timescale  is 
much too short compared to the flow timescale. Aceves et al. [84] used 
this explanation to justify the exclusion of interzonal flows. They per-
formed a sensitivity analysis by artificially introducing interzonal mix-
ing, based on diffusion. The effect of turbulence was emulated by scaling 
molecular diffusivities by 100-fold. The authors reported a small sensi-
tivity of CO and HC emissions, with around 1 % difference between runs 
with and without interzonal flow. It is worth noting that they conducted 
this study on a flat piston geometry. 

3.2. Onion-skin configuration 

An onion-skin model differs from other classes of MZM because its 
zones have a defined shape. Following the explanation in section 2.2, the 
geometric properties specified to zonal boundaries also fall under the 
attributes of the associated zone. The arrangement of such zones into a 
zonal configuration establishes a strong sense of spatial association to 
the topology of the combustion chamber. Furthermore, geometric con-
straints are required to govern the shape of the zonal configuration in 
response  to  the  changing  combustion  chamber  volume.  This  makes 
onion-skin  zonal  configurations  more  sophisticated  than  the  balloon 
types. 

Shape and arrangement of the zones are defined in a way that cap-
ture in-cylinder charge inhomogeneity. Since the topology between the 
stratification in temperature and fuel may be dissimilar, in addition to 
their relative importance for a given LTC concept, there are a variety of 
realisations of onion-skin models. However, all the zonal configurations 
are built from one of three simple elementary zone shapes: (a) cylinder 
or disc (b) annulus or ring (c) enclosed, as shown in Fig. 14. These are 
logical derivatives of a cylinder and are popularly employed in litera-
ture,  despite  complexities  in  combustion  chamber  geometry,  such  as 
piston bowl shapes, as in seen in implementations [85,86]. 

Table  1  summarises  different  realisations  of  onion-skin  zonal 
configuration, based on select examples. The following general obser-
vations can be made. First, the central or core zone is typically large due 
to  lower  temperature  gradients  at  the  combustion  chamber  centre. 
Second, intermediate zones that surround the core are either annular, as 
in the work of Neshat & Saray [87], or of enclosed shape as in Komninos 
[88]. Finally, the outermost zone corresponds to the boundary layer (BL) 
region  and  is  modelled  as  a  thin  zone.  Approaches  such  as  Kongser-
eeparp & Checkel [89] and Kozarac et al. [90] further split the BL zone 

Fig. 13. Illustration of the one-way coupled CFD-balloon MZM via temperature-mass (T-m) mapping. Adopted from Hergart et al. [78].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099812A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 14. Typical zone geometries under the onion-skin MZM; (a) cylinder, (b) annular, (c) enclosed  

according to individual combustion chamber surface – head, liner and 
piston.  Notably,  in  an  effort  to  better  capture  the  BL  phenomenon, 
Fiveland  et  al.  [91]  apportioned  the  liner  region  axially,  with 
ring-shaped  zones  stacked  on  top  of  each  other.  Geared  towards 
improved emissions predictivity, their model captured UHC emissions 
with around 10-20 % error and CO emissions within 50 % error, tested 
over a range of turbocharged conditions. 

Onion-skin models account for interzonal heat and mass transport 
with their zone geometry enabling physics-based approaches. As will be 
elaborated  in  sections  4.2  and  4.3,  this  pertains  to  computations  of 
gradients  of properties  and  the  flow area.  Therefore,  geometric  prop-
erties of a zone influence the direction and magnitude of heat and mass 
flow. For instance, in an annular zonal configuration [92], interzonal 
flow occurs only in a radial direction. It is worth noting that outer zones, 
or zones closer to the combustion chamber surfaces, have larger surface 
areas than inside zones, influencing heat and mass flow. 

In the work of Kongsereeparp & Checkel [89] a zone had up to four 
neighbours and the interzonal heat transfer occurred both in radial and 
axial direction, as can be seen in Tab. 1. In the model of Neshat & Saray 
[87] for instance, the BL zone solely had a different geometry. It was of 
the  enclosed  type,  encapsulating  all  the  remaining  (annular)  zones. 
Thus, its outer side was in contact with the combustion chamber surfaces 
(liner, head and piston), and the inner side contacted the annular zones – 
specifically,  their  axial  (top  and  bottom)  surfaces.  This  arrangement 
allowed it to exchange heat and mass with all the other zones. In other 
words,  each  annular  zone  exchanged  heat  and  mass  with  its  radial 
neighbours (inner and outer) as well as the BL zone (axial). 

As mentioned earlier, the notion of thermal stratification was further 
emphasised  across  the  zones  by  dissimilarly  defining  the  zonal  attri-
butes.  Since  the  central  portion  of  the  combustion  chamber  is  the 
warmest, the core zone is often modelled as adiabatic [93]. Easley et al. 
[94]  additionally  considered  disabling  mass  transfer  across  the  core 
zone  boundaries.  In  a  similar  vein,  a  dedicated  crevice  zone  was 
included to improve emissions results. This zone was assigned a small 
volume, 1-3 % of clearance volume as in [95,96]. Furthermore, the zone 
was  set  up  as  isothermal  [97,98]  by  imposing  the  cylinder  liner 
temperature 

Owing to the fact that onion-skin models take account of physical 
effects  of  in-cylinder  flows,  this  alleviates  the  requirement  for  high- 
fidelity  initial  conditions.  In  contrast,  the  T-m  map  generation  from 
CFD  simulation is  case-dependent for sequential  CFD-balloon models. 
Thus,  simulation  predictivity  of  the  model  as  a  standalone  entity  is 
substantially improved in onion-skin approaches. Taking the example of 
the HCCI model by [87], a spatially averaged value of temperature at 
initialisation  was  sufficient  to  provide  results  within  the  required  ac-
curacy limits. It is worth bearing in mind that despite the sufficiency of 
spatially averaged thermodynamic state, it must be estimated reason-
ably well due to the sensitivity of kinetics-driven auto-ignition. To this 
end, lower- fidelity valve flow or air-path models are employed, as will 
be discussed in section 5.2. 

3.2.1. Annular type 

In  an  annular  configuration,  division  of  the  combustion  chamber 
volume into zones begins from a central cylindrical zone and subsequent 
zones  encase  each  other  only  in  the  radial  direction,  analogous  to 
annular  rings.  In  other  words,  the  MZ  model  mainly  is  composed  of 
annular-shaped zones, all sharing the same height. However, each zone 
has a unique radius (Fig.  14b). This can be observed in the model of 
Neshat  &  Saray  [99]  in  Tab.  1,  or  in  [92].  From  this  topology,  it  is 
apparent that the outermost zone corresponds to gases close to the liner, 
and vice versa for the innermost zone. The configuration can be con-
ceptualised as radial discretisation of the in-cylinder space. In terms of 
charge stratification, the zonal configuration is able to reflect the profile 
only in a radial direction. 

Geometry  of  the  zones  changes  in  congruence  with  the  evolving 
combustion  chamber  volume  and  possibly  interzonal  work  transfer. 
Therefore, constraints are applied on the zone dimensions, namely its 
radii (rz). According to the approach of Egüz et al. [100], a zone´s radius 
was the distance between the common axis and its outer interface. Thus, 
the radius was recalculated at each time step, based on volume of the 
zone.  The  approach  is  a  manifestation  of  constraint  Eq.  (5).  In  other 
words, Eq. (8) implies that zonal radii have one degree of freedom but 
are constrained by Eq. (5). Indexing in the below equation below starts 
from the outer zone. 

√
√
√
√

rz =

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)

(

∑z(cid:0) 1

1
πhcyl

Vcyl (cid:0)

Vj

j=1

(8) 

On  the  other  hand,  Neshat  &  Saray  [87]  dimensioned  their  zonal 
configuration based on Δrz, referred to as thickness of zone. This was the 
distance between the radial interfaces of a zone. Importantly, Δrz of each 
zone  was  considered  fixed  throughout  the  cycle.  This  meant  that  the 
volume of the zones remained in proportion to the in-cylinder volume at 
each time step. 

Following the explanation for pressure equalisation (section 2.3), it 
is  apparent  in  the  approach  of  Egüz  et  al.  included  interzonal  work 
transport. In contrast, in Neshat & Saray´s model, PEQ -based interzonal 
mass transfer occurred, whereby pressure equalisation among the zones 
occurred as a result of readjusting zonal mass. It is worth noting that the 
model of Egüz et al. nevertheless enabled interzonal mass transfer, but 
governed  by  the  diffusion  mechanism,  where  the  gradient  in  species 
concentration was the driving force. 

These geometry constraints connect the zonal configuration to the 
interzonal transport submodel. In the case of interzonal heat and mass 
transport, the flow area is the curved surface area ((radial)Az), which can 
be simply computed from the radii (Eq. 8). The approach of Mikulski 
et al. [101] took advantage of the zonal configuration to couple wall 
heat loss to thermal stratification. This is because, the heat loss area of a 
zone was based on its axial area ((axial)Az), which contacted the head and 
piston  surfaces.  As  such,  the  prescribed  zone  size  distribution  affects 
(axial)Az, which in-turn can influence thermal stratification. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099813A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 1 
Various  implementations  of  onion-skin  zonal  configuration,  using  selected 
examples.  

Reference 

Illustration 

Description 

Kongsereeparp & 

Checkel 

[89] 

Kozarac et al. 

[90] 

Fiveland & Assanis 

[91] 

Single cylindrical core zone 
Annular zones of increasing 
height in radial direction 
Disc zones of increasing 
radius in axial direction 

Single cylindrical core zone 
Single enclosed-type 
intermediate zone 
Annular-shaped liner BL 
zone 
Disc-shaped piston and head 
BL zone 
Fixed-volume crevice zone 

Cylindrical adiabatic core 
zone 
Multiple, stacked annular 
zones for liner BL 
Single disc zone for both 
head and piston BL 

Neshat & Saray 

[87] 

Cylindrical core zones 
Annular outer zones 
Enclosed BL zone 
Fixed-volume crevice zone 

Komninos 

[88] 

Enclosed zones surrounding 
core zone 
Fixed-volume crevice zone  

3.2.2. Enclosed type 

This configuration is essentially an arrangement of zones enclosed 
one inside the other, akin to nesting (matryoshka) dolls. Thus, each zone 
possesses the geometric properties of height and radius (see Fig. 14c). 
This  gives  a  zonal  topology  whereby  the  outermost  zone  contacts  all 
combustion chamber surfaces (liner, head and piston). 

In response to the changing combustion chamber volume, the shape 
and  volume  of  each  zone  is  governed  by  applying  constraints  to  its 

radius and height. The common approach is to couple both into a single 
parameter, and to this end, various implementations exist. The approach 
of Bissoli et al. [96] maintains the proportion of each zone (Eq.(9)) in 
accordance with the combustion chamber geometry at each time step 
(Eq.(10)). The other approach employs a single parameter, zone thick-
ness  (Δwz),  referring  to  the  distance  between  the  walls  or  interfaces. 
Here, the presumption is that the thicknesses in both radial and axial 
directions  are  equal  (Eq.(11)).  Importantly,  thickness  of  a  zone  is 
considered  fixed  throughout  the  cycle.  This  approach  was  applied  in 
works such as Komninos et al. [71], Tzanetakis et al. [67] and Voshtani 
et al. [102]. 

Following  the  previously  utilised  route  for  analysis,  it  is  apparent 
from the former approach that zonal pressure equalisation was achieved 
by interzonal work transfer. According to Eq.(10), the radius of a zone is 
updated,  based  on  the  readjusted  volume  of  the  zones.  As  such,  to 
implemented  interzonal  mass  transfer,  Bissoli  et  al.  [96]  relied  on 
diffusion approach. On the other hand, Δwz  maintains the thickness of 
each zone during the progress of heat release. Here, PEQ based interzonal 
mass transfer is used to achieve equal pressure across the zones. 

rz
hz

= Θ ≡

B/2
hcyl

√

3

rz =

(

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
Θ
Vcyl (cid:0) Σz(cid:0) 1
π

j=1 Vj

Δwz ≡ Δrz = Δhz

(9)  

(10)  

(11) 

In influencing interzonal heat and mass transport modelling, the flow 
area is the overall surface area of the zone ((radial)Az + 2(axial)Az). Simi-
larly, heat loss area is the total surface area of the combustion chamber, 
in the case that it is imposed only on the outer zone. Furthermore, with 
the outermost zone contacting all combustion chamber surfaces (liner, 
head  and  piston),  a  surface-averaged  wall  temperature  is  commonly 
prescribed. 

This  zonal configuration enables capture  of the in-cylinder  charge 
stratification  profile  in  both  radial  and  axial  directions  [103].  This  is 
especially suitable for reflecting thermal stratification, evident from its 
shape.  As  such,  the  outermost  zone  stays  cooler  and  temperature  in-
creases approaching the core zone. Taking advantage of this fact, some 
works  aim  to  accurately  model  heat  loss  phenomenon  by  finer  dis-
cretisation of the near-wall regions [104] and incorporating more so-
phisticated heat transfer submodels [96]. 

3.3. Spray-based multi-zone models 

These  models  traditionally  find  their  application  in  conventional 
diesel  combustion  (CDC)  concepts  where  the  phenomenology  of 
diffusion-spray  combustion must  be captured  accurately.  As  noted  by 
Kook et al. [105], in the context of LTC, these models simulate concepts 
that  maintain  the  coupling  between  combustion  and  injection  event, 
such as PPC/PPCI/PCCI [106–109] and to some extent RCCI [58]. The 
focus of the current discussion is the singular work by Eichmeier et al. 
[58],  where  chemical  kinetics  was  employed  to  simulate  RCCI  com-
bustion. In contrast, the other approaches mentioned above use empir-
ical  correlations  to  model  combustion  end  emissions,  and  so  are 
considered  out  of  scope  of  the  present  paper.  However,  the  reader  is 
directed to the work of Kumar et al. [53] for a comprehensive review on 
phenomenological spray combustion models. 

These models´zonal configuration may be conceptualised as tracking 
the evolution of fuel spray in space and time, analogous to a Lagrangian 
description. Eichmeier et al. [58] adopted the popular packet approach 
originally proposed by Hiroyasu et al. [110]. The zonal configuration 
was a 2D discretised the spray space along axial and radial directions. 
The zones were identified by an ordered pair of indices, and a zone had 
up to four neighbours. Although the zones individually lacked shape, the 
zonal  configuration  on  the  whole  was  bounded  by  physical 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099814A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

characteristics of the spray. For the axial direction, the correlation for 
spray- tip penetration was used, as proposed in [110]. The configuration 
was set up with 15 zones in the radial direction and two zones in the 
axial  direction,  giving  30  zones  in  total.  This  choice  was  based  on 
sensitivity analysis in which the model showed more фdiesel stratification 
along the radial zones. 

The working methodology is illustrated in Fig. 15, reflecting Eich-
meier et al.´s use of the model for gasoline-diesel RCCI simulation. The 
premixed gasoline-air charge was represented by a single zone until the 
injection  event.  Starting  at  SOI,  new  zones  were  created  in  the  axial 
direction  at  every  time  step.  The  packets  were  initialised  with  liquid 
droplets of diesel (SMD [111]) and thus included models for the evap-
oration process. Air entrainment into the packets was based on simple 
momentum balance in the axial direction, and on mass diffusion in the 
radial direction. Thus, the packet evolves to contain liquid diesel, diesel 
vapours,  air,  gasoline  and  burnt  gas.  The  authors  did  not  consider 
interzonal  heat  transfer,  with  thermal  stratification  due  to  heat  loss 
(correlation) model and fuel evaporation. Therefore, diesel stratification 
was primarily captured across the zones. 

Thus,  it  can  be  said  that  the  model  has  the  potential  to  capture 
complex multi-injection RCCI concepts. Equally, it should, in principle, 
be capable of reflecting transitional behaviour between RCCI and CDF 
combustion modes –  an important advantage over onion-skin models. 
On the other hand, despite the rhetoric used in the paper, in our view the 
validity of the assumptions was not confirmed by the presented results. 
The heat-release shape showed clear double peak behaviour, suggesting 
separate combustion of diesel and gasoline fraction – a phenomenon not 
observed  in  RCCI.  Furthermore,  the  limited  application  (singular)  of 
these  models  in  the  context  of  chemical  kinetics-based  LTC  studies 
makes it difficult to assess the capabilities of this approach. Accordingly, 
the following sections devote limited attention to this model. 

3.4. Other related modelling approaches 

3.4.1. Two-way coupled CFD – balloon models 

While  many  MZ  approaches  employ  CFD  models  as  part  of  their 
initialisation or calibration routine (section 5), there are methodologies 
which fully couple the two models. These can be found under different 
names in literature: the most common are two-way coupled [112], fully 
coupled  [80]  and  interactively  coupled  [113]  CFD-MZ  models.  The 
approach  was  adopted  in  response  to  the  poor  emissions  predictivity 
[83] of early MZ models. Its principle is to primarily run a CFD simu-
lation but solve for chemistry at every time step within a MZ framework. 
By  alleviating  chemical  kinetics  calculation,  this  methodology  can  be 
identified as an accelerating technique for CFD, as noted by Wei et al. 
[114],  where  it  resides  among  other  techniques  such  as  tabulated 
chemistry.  Since  two-way  coupled  CFD-MZ  models  are  mainly 
CFD-oriented,  they  are  not  discussed  explicitly  in  this  review.  The 
following text justifies this decision and highlights some differences with 
stand-alone MZ models. 

To explain the approach briefly, there are two information streams 
connecting  the  CFD  and  MZ  model.  Analogous  to  the  time-splitting 
approach,  at  every  time  step,  the  CFD  solver  advances  without 

computing chemistry, and passes information regarding the in-cylinder 
flow field to the MZ model. Using this, the MZ model then advances the 
chemistry solver to the same time step. The heat release information is 
fed back (remapped) to the CFD model, and the solution algorithm loop 
repeats. Fig. 16 is a schematic of the approach. The MZ model employed 
is  usually of the simple balloon type [83].  Later works  accounted for 
interzonal  heat  and  mass  transport,  but  it  was  done  in  an  artificial 
manner, based on the heat-loss correlation [112] or drew from the CFD 
information  [113].  Heat  loss  to  walls  was  captured  only  in  the  CFD 
model. For forward mapping, parallels can be drawn to the sequential 
CFD-balloon  approach  (section  3.1),  such  as  T-ф  mapping.  The  real 
challenge, however, lies with backward mapping, which would intro-
duce an error pertaining to artificial mixing/diffusion [80,114]. 

A comparison can be made with sequential CFD-balloon, since it is 
closest to the present approach. Results of the simple two-way coupled 
CFD-MZ  model  by  Flowers  et  al.  [83]  showed  that  the  error  in  UHC 
prediction reduced by a factor of 4.5 and CO prediction error reduced by 
factor  of  more  than  two.  Interestingly,  error  in  combustion  duration 
increased by a factor of two. This can be attributed to errors introduced 
during  the  mapping  procedures,  as  previously  explained.  Later  ap-
proaches [115] were more sophisticated and achieved results closer to 
full  CFD  simulations.  Regarding  simulation  speed,  it  can  be  expected 
that this approach is computationally heavier than stand-alone MZ ap-
proaches.  In  the  analysis  by  Felsch  et  al.  [113]  the  two-way  coupled 
model  was  nearly  two  orders  of  magnitude  slower  than  a  sequential 
CFD-balloon approach. Nevertheless, as a CFD-accelerating technique, it 
can be about an order of magnitude [116] faster than full CFD runs. Thus 
apparent, these approaches are not similar to standalone MZ run over 
the  closed  cycle,  and  far  from  rapid, 
low-fidelity  means  for 
control-oriented modelling. 

3.4.2. PDF-based multi-zone models 

The authors acknowledge that there is a noteworthy body of litera-
ture  based  on  so-called  stochastic  reactors  (SR),  which  fall  within 
chemical kinetics-based predictive, low-fidelity modelling for low tem-
perature combustion. Each zone is a stochastic reactor and thermody-
namic  quantities  of  temperature  and  composition  are  modelled  as 
probability  density  functions  (PDF).  They  are  popularly  found  in  the 
form  of  single-zone  (SZ)  models  used  for  concepts  like  HCCI  [117], 
DI-HCCI  [118]  and  PCI  [119].  To  the  authors´ knowledge,  multizone 
stochastic reactor (MZ-SR) models are rare and some examples include 
the works by Montorsi et al. [120], Cao et al. [121]and Lundgren et al. 
[122]. 

Similar to the previously discussed multi-zone homogeneous reactor 
(MZ-HR)  models,  PDF-based  MZ-SR  models  make  a  simplifying 
assumption  on  the  in-cylinder  flow  field.  Fundamentally,  SR  models 
differ  from  HR  models in  making  the  assumption of  statistical homo-
geneity of the physical quantities within each zone. This is different from 
the spatial homogeneity in a zone for HR models. In practice, interpre-
tation of the results obtained from SR models also differs. Taking the 
example of the  in-cylinder pressure trace, each  simulation run  differs 
from  the  other  [123]  for  the  same  set  of  initial  conditions.  This  is 
analogous to the physical cycle-to-cycle variation. 

Fig. 15. Schematic of zoning approach in spray-based MZM for RCCI simulation [58]. (Reproduced with permission from SAE International)  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099815A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 16. Illustration of the two-way coupling between CFD and balloon MZM by Kodavasal et al. [115] (Reproduced with permission from Combustion Theory and 
Modelling, Taylor & Francis) 

The governing equations of SR-MZ models track the temporal evo-
lution of the probability distribution associated to each quantity of the 
zone.  Statistical  distribution  is  implemented  via  stochastic  particles 
[124], each comprising its own temperature and chemical composition. 
The mass density function (MDF) transport equation [124] governs the 
nature of stochastic particles in a zone. The particles exchange heat and 
mass between each other and also experience wall heat loss. The sub-
models  describing  heat  loss  and  interzonal  mixing  are  also  based  on 
stochastic processes. 

As  such,  a  stochastic  particle  is  analogous  to  a  zone  in  MZ-HR 
models. Compared with MZ-HR models, SR models require large num-
ber of particles - usually around 50 - for reliable results [123]. On the 
other hand, Cao et al. [121] postulated the necessity of 200 particles in 
three  zones  to  accurately  reflect  PCCI  combustion.  The  zones  were 
representations  of  bowl,  squish  and  crevice  regions.  Error  against ex-
periments for CO emissions was 968 ppm and for UHC was 137 ppm, 
while achieving a simulation time of two hours. Montorsi et al. [120] 
divided the combustion chamber into two representative zones, core and 
BL. The BL zone consisted of 50 stochastic particles while the core was 
only  one.  Although  the  simulation  lasted  around  three  hours,  they 
managed to obtain good trend predictions on emissions and combustion 
phasing quantifiers. In particular, the error in UHC predictions was 5 
g/kWh and that for NOX  was 47 mg/kWh. Lundgren et al. [122] used 
two zones for their PPC simulation: a rich zone consisting of particles 
introduced due to fuel injection, and a lean zone consisting of the fresh 
charge.  Interzonal  heat  and  mass  transfer  captured  the  evolution  of 
zonal stratification. 

However,  SR  models  depart  from  the  modelling  approaches  dis-
cussed in the present review work. As the name suggests, they model in- 
cylinder  inhomogeneity  and  mixing  as  a  stochastic  process.  The  gov-
erning equations, submodels and interpretation of results are substan-
tially different, demanding extensive discussion on their own [97]. Thus, 
SR models will not be further covered in the current work. 

calculation  time.  It  is  worth  reiterating  that  the  submodels  are 
phenomenological  in  nature,  following  the  approach  of  thermo- 
chemical  models.  This  section  provides  a  detailed  description  of  the 
submodels available in literature. 

4.1. Wall heat transfer 

These submodels aim to capture the process of heat transfer between 
the gas and combustion chamber walls. Historically, they have formed 
an  integral  part  of  combustion  engine  modelling  studies  intent  on 
achieving  tangible  results.  In  terms  of  phenomenology,  convection 
forms the dominant means of wall heat transfer in the context of most 
LTC concepts. Although a few studies [99,125] included the contribu-
tion of radiation, it is of minor importance owing to the lean, premixed 
nature  of  combustion  resulting  in  low  soot  [126].  Thus,  wall  heat 
transfer is mainly restricted to the near-wall regions where temperatures 
are lower than that of the bulk gas. The temperature gradient is steep 
moving  towards  the wall,  with  a  thin thermal  boundary  layer, in  the 
order of a few millimetres [69]. Therefore, with slower reactions and 
delayed  combustion, they  are potential  sites for  formation of  CO and 
UHC emissions. 

These submodels are required for LTC modelling in order to reliably 
reproduce the heat release rate profile and emissions. They serve as a 
building block in MZ models for establishing the thermal stratification 
across  the  zones,  thus  influencing  model  predictivity  for  combustion 
phasing  and  peak  pressure.  The  following  text  does  not  provide  a 
detailed treatment of the phenomenology and historical development of 
heat transfer modelling. For this, the reader is directed to the excellent 
work  by  Komninos  &  Rakopoulos  [66].  However,  the  goal  here  is  to 
provide a comprehensive review of the modelling choices in MZ litera-
ture by classifying the approaches based on phenomenological sophis-
tication,  starting  from  simple,  correlation-based  approaches,  and 
moving towards more fundamental treatment of the physics. 

4. Relevant submodels 

4.1.1. Correlation-based modelling 

The in-cylinder physics may be broken up into individual phenom-
ena  to  efficiently  manage  model  implementation.  Each  submodel  en-
compasses  distinct  processes  such  as  turbulence,  wall  heat  transfer, 
interzonal  heat  and  mass  flows,  etc.  Specifically,  this  pertains  to  the 
terms on the right-hand side of the governing equations (Section 2.1). 
Therefore, submodels play an elemental role in the construction of an 
MZM. As with choice of zonal configuration and number of zones, se-
lection of appropriate submodels to suit the application (LTC concept 
and type of study) influences the trade-off between model accuracy and 

Models in this category capture the phenomenon of heat loss from 
the combustion chamber by employing empirical relations. They aim to 
provide a spatially averaged yet instantaneous value for wall heat flux 
by basing on bulk thermodynamic properties and scaling arguments on 
in-cylinder  geometry.  Using  the  temperature  difference  between  bulk 
gas and combustion chamber walls, Newton’s law of cooling (Eq. (12)) 
furnishes  a  lumped  approach  for  capturing  convection  heat  transfer. 
Since the quantity of interest is heat transfer coefficient (h) from gas to 
wall, the various approaches in literature were formulated towards its 
estimation. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099816A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

˙Qloss = hA(T (cid:0) Twall)

(12) 

Although originally intended for conventional CI and SI engines, the 
traditional  approaches  of  Annand  [127],  Hohenberg  [128]  and  espe-
cially Woschni [129], were popularly used in MZ models. Evidently, this 
leads to overpredictions in the context of LTC engines, as acknowledged 
by  many  works  from  experimental  analysis  [126],  CFD  results  [58], 
single-zone  [130] and MZ [131] models. In particular,  radiation heat 
transfer  is  implicitly  accounted  for  in  correlations  of  Hohenberg  and 
Woschni  [66],  thus  amounting  to  20-35  %  of  net  heat  loss  [132],  of 
which soot is a well-known contributor. Furthermore, some works [102, 
133,134] explicitly appended a term for radiation (Eq. (13)), similar to 
the approach of Annand. They justified its inclusion in order to accu-
rately model heat loss, with the main contributors being CO, CO2 and 
H2O. In (Eq. (13)) ζrad is a tuning factor and σ is the Stephan Boltzman’s 
constant. 
˙Qloss,rad = ζradAσ

T 4 (cid:0) T 4

)

(13) 

wall

(cid:0)

Nevertheless, the popular Woschni model was modified for use in the 
context of LTC MZ simulations, mainly pertaining to the estimation of 
characteristic velocity. This can be observed in the work of Ogink et al. 
[93]  for  gasoline  HCCI  combustion.  Mehl  et  al.  [135]  coupled  a  0D 
turbulence (K-k) model to the characteristic velocity relation to enhance 
the prediction of the heat loss (HL) correlation. Orlandini et al. [74] used 
separate HL correlations for simulating HCCI with different fuels; the 

Woschni relation for diesel and Bargende [136] for gasoline. The land-
mark  work  by  Chang  et  al.  [126]  set  out  to  establish  a  universal  HL 
model like the above, but applicable to HCCI-type heat release concepts. 
They conducted an extensive study on the suitability of the traditional 
HL correlations for HCCI engines, based on heat flux measurements from 
multiple  locations.  Basing  on  the  Woschni  approach,  they  proposed 
modifications  including  changes  to  the  relation  on  characteristic  ve-
locity.  Since  its  conception,  the  correlation  by  Chang  et  al.  has  been 
extensively used in literature. 

The discussion thus far has focused on issues relating to the corre-
lation itself. However, application in MZ models is not straightforward 
since the correlations were developed in the context of zero-dimensional 
or single- zone (SZ) models. The variety of implementations in literature 
offer a range of modelling choices. As discerned by Komninos & Rako-
poulos  [66],  these  can  be  split  into  two  categories.  One  uses  zonal 
averaged properties; the other is based on the local thermodynamic state 
of a zone. Thus, observing the canonical form of the heat loss correlation 
(Eq. (12)) each  of the quantities in the  relation can be treated in the 
above manner. Table 2 summarises the details. 

The column ‘zones applied’  shows which of the zones in the MZM 
experienced wall heat loss. This is either ‘all’ or specific zones, in which 
case the number is presented in brackets. In the latter case they were 
typically  described  as  boundary  layer  (BL)  zones.  This  is  typically  a 
group  of  zones  or  a  single  zone  representing  the  lumped  region  of 
boundary layer on combustion chamber surfaces. Then is the question of 

Table 2 
Tabulation of the modelling options of correlation-based wall heat loss models in MZM  

Reference 

Model 

Concept 

h calc. 

Flow area 

T 

Distribution 

Radiation term 

Aceves et al. [75,76] 

Woschni 

Aceves et al. [84] 
Aceves et al. [77] 
Noda & Foster 

[72] 

Woschni 
Woschni 
Woschni 

HCCI 

HCCI 
PCCI 
HCCI 

— 

Global 
Global 
Global 

Babajimopoulos et al.  

— 

HCCI 

Global 

[79] 

Orlandini et al. [74] 

Xu et al. [137] 
Kodavasal et al. [81] 

Woschni (diesel) 
Bargende (gasoline) 
Woschni 
Woschni 

HCCI/DI- 
HCCI 
— 

HCCI 

Global 

— 

Global 

Hergart et al. [78] 

Chang 

PCCI 

Global 

Mehl et al. [135] 

Woschni-Kk 

Easley et al. [94] 

Woschni 

Ogink et al. [93] 
Tzanetakis et al. [67] 
Visakhamoorthy et al.  

Woschni 
Chang 
Chang 

[138] 

Guo et al. [134] 

Woschni 

Voshtani et al. [102] 
Komninos et al. [71, 

Chang 
Annand 

139] 

Nobakht et al. [140] 
Egüz et al. [100] 

Chang 
Chang 

Egüz et al. [141] 
Kongsereeparp et al.  

Hohenberg 
Woschni 

[99] 

HCCI 

HCCI 

HCCI 
HCCI 
HCCI 

HCCI 

HCCI 
HCCI 

HCCI 
PCCI  

RCCI 
HCCI 

BL (based on 
adiabatic core) 
BL (based on 
adiabatic core) 
Global 
Global 
Global 

— 

— 

Zonal 

Zonal 
— 

Kongsereeparp et al. 

Woschni 

HCCI 

Zonal 

Woschni 
Chang 
Chang 

DI-HCCI 
DI-HCCI 
HCCI 

Global 
— 
— 

[89,133] 

Kozarac et al. [90] 
Fathi et al. [142] 
Nazoktabar et al.  

[125] 

Eichmeier et al. [58] 

— 

Global 
Global 
Global  

Global 

Global 

— 

Global 

Wall surface 
area fraction 
Global 

Global 

Global 
Global 
Global 

Global 

— 

Zonal 

Zonal 
BL 

Zonal 

Zonal 
— 

Zonal 

Global 
Global (f(Re)only)  — 

Global 

Zones 
applied 

5 or 7 BL 
zones 
All 
All 
All  

Zonal 

Zonal 
Zonal 

Equal weights 

Equal weights 
Vz/Vcyl 

Zonal 

All 

Global 

All 

Vz/Vcyl 

Vz/Vcyl 

— 

Global 

— 

BL 
zone 
Zonal 

Global 
— 
— 

— 

— 

BL 

— 

Zonal 

Zonal 
BL 

—  

All 

All 

BL zone 

BL zone +
crevice 
all 
BL zone 
BL zone 

BL zone 

BL zone 
BL zone 

— 

All 

All 
BL 

mz/mcyl *heat-loss 
multiplier 
Wall surface area 
fraction 
— 

— 

Vz/Vcyl 
— 
— 

— 

— 
— 

— 

Zonal config 

Zonal config 
Zonal config 

BL 

3 BL zones 

Zonal config 

Zonal 
— 

Zonal 

3 BL zones 
— 

— 
— 

3 BL zones 

Zonal config 

— 

— 
— 
— 

— 

— 

— 
— 

— 

— 

— 

— 
— 
— 

CO2, H2O & CO 
radiation 
all zones 
BL zone 

— 
— 

— 

all zones, 
ζrad = 0.6 
Yes, 
all zones 
— 
— 

Yes, 
ζrad = 0.6 
—  

Chang (Hohenberg, 
Hensel) 

RCCI 

Global 

Global 

Global 

All zones 

Vz/Vcyl 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099817A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

how the cylinder-averaged heat loss may be distributed. This is shown 
under ‘distribution’, and has been based on fraction of in-cylinder mass 
[81]; fraction of in-cylinder volume [74]; fraction of total in-cylinder 
surface area [78]; or evenly distributed [84] (equal weights). The col-
umn ‘h calc’ refers to which set of thermodynamic quantities were used 
in computing the correlation. Here, ‘global’ refers to cylinder-averaged 
value; ‘zonal’ refers to the associated zones. The same choice arises with 
bulk temperature ‘T’ and the same notation is used. 

Geometry  of  the  zonal  configuration  becomes  relevant  when  dis-
cussing the flow area for heat flux. In the ‘flow area’  column, ‘global’ 
refers to the overall in-cylinder surface area, while ‘zone’  denotes the 
surface area of the particular zone contacting the combustion chamber 
surfaces. It is evident that the latter concerns onion-skin models, thus, 
topology  of  the  zonal  configuration  with  respect  to  the  combustion 
chamber geometry. This topic was covered in section 3.2, showing how 
flow area of zones can be computed. 

Kodavasal et al. [81] followed a different approach by intrinsically 
tying  thermal  stratification  to  the  correlation  approach  for  heat  loss. 
Their balloon model used Woschni correlation to compute bulk cylinder 
heat flux and it was distributed among the zones based on weights they 
called heat-loss multipliers. This is shown as cz in Eq. (14) and Eq. (15). 
The former was used for the compression phase; the latter was used once 
ignition occurred. Eq. (14) relied on CFD results under motoring con-
ditions, where an approach similar to T-m distribution determined Tz, 
TDC,CFD  of  each  zone.  Tadb,TDC  refers  to  a  hypothetical  adiabatic  tem-
perature of the in-cylinder gases reached, should there be no heat loss. 
Tadb,TDC  was  obtained  assuming  that  the  cylinder  mass  underwent 
isentropic compression until TDC, and simple thermodynamic relations 
were employed to this end. Importantly, Eq. (14) is supposedly evalu-
ated only once, during model calibration for a given engine geometry. 
Section 5.4 provides further details of this. On the other hand, quantities 
in Eqs. (15) and (16) were obtained directly from the MZM. Tavg  is the 
averaged zonal temperature and ξ is a normalising factor, defined in Eq. 
(16) and used to maintain consistency between the cumulative heat loss 
by  all  zones  and  the  bulk  heat  loss  predicted  by  the  correlation.  The 
effect of the approach can be observed in the left-hand plot of Fig. 17, 
where  temperature  of  zones  decreases  with  the  zone  index.  Fig.  17´s 
right-hand plot shows the values of heat-loss multipliers of the corre-
sponding zones. Note that cz for the innermost zone is zero, in order to 
maintain it as the warmest zone. 

cz =

Tadb, TDC (cid:0) Tz, TDC, CFD
Tadb,TDC (cid:0) Tavg,CFD

mz
⋅
mcyl

After ignition 

cz =

1
ξ

Tz (cid:0) Twall
Tavg (cid:0) Twall

mz
⋅
mcyl

ξ =

∑nZ

z

Tz (cid:0) Twall
Tavg (cid:0) Twall

mz
⋅
mcyl

(14) 

(15)  

(16) 

So much diversity in implementation means it is challenging to make 

definitive  statements  regarding  the  most  appropriate  approach.  The 
design choice is coupled with the implementation of zonal configuration 
and interzonal flows. Dealing with a similar situation for heat loss cor-
relation, Komninos & Rakopoulos [66] note that, at least in the context 
of  HCCI  simulations,  the  question  remains  open.  However,  Komninos 
[88] also mentions that the error in combustion predictions across the 
HL correlations is usually systematic in nature. Based on this fact, the 
obtained heat transfer coefficient may simply be scaled by matching, for 
instance pressure curve or available wall heat flow data, as in the work 
of Barroso et al. [143] or Eichmeier et al. [58]. 

[73]  approach,  of  computing 

From a holistic perspective, the authors opine that the correlation- 
based  approach  is  most  suitable  for  balloon-type  models.  Conse-
quently,  Aceves  et  al.´s 
the 
cylinder-averaged heat loss coefficient and then apportioning it among 
the  zones  based  on  individual  zone  temperatures  and  mass,  appears 
closest to the procedure used in designing the HL correlation itself. From 
onion-skin  MZM  onwards,  the  more  rigorous  means  of  zonal  dis-
cretisation deviates from the lumped nature of capturing physics as used 
in  HL  correlations.  Furthermore,  it  is  desirable  that  physics-based 
modelling  of  interzonal  heat  flows  in  onion-skin  MZM  matches  the 
modelling  approach  for  wall  heat  loss,  as  will  be  explained  in 
physics-based approaches, below. 

A perception of the sensitivity of the modelling choices in balloon 
MZM can be obtained by comparing the simplest and most sophisticated 
option. The models of Flowers et al. [82] and of Kodavasal et al. [81] 
both  implemented  Woschni  correlation  in  a  40-zone  MZM  for  HCCI 
simulation by  disregarding  interzonal  heat and  mass flows.  However, 
Kodavasal et al.´s approach was sophisticated in its ability to reflect the 
profile of thermal stratification and in being a stand-alone balloon MZM. 
Our analysis of their results focuses on emissions predictions. In the best 
case, Kodavasal et al.´s model predicted CO within 400 ppm; the error in 
the worst case was over 900 ppm. For HC emissions, best case was within 
600 ppm and the worst was over 900 ppm. In the work of Flowers et al., 
the error in CO predictions was 600 ppm and for HC it was 200 ppm. 
Evidently, the question regarding suitable modelling choices for balloon 
MZM  is  still  open.  Nevertheless,  it  can  be  said  that  the  attempt  by 
Kodavasal et al. to create a stand-alone MZM based entirely on heat loss 
modelling shows potential against the coupled CFD-balloon model. 

4.1.2. Fundamental approach 

Broadly,  the  approaches  described  in  the  following  text  aim  to 
circumvent use of the heat loss correlations. By basing on physics, the 
fundamental thermal condition of the boundary layer given in Eq. (17), 
is used. The quantity of concern in Eq. (17) is the temperature gradient, 
with rn being a coordinate normal to the wall. Therefore, the approach is 
most suitable for onion-skin type models where its zonal configuration 
has  a  geometric  association  to  the  in-cylinder  space.  Specifically,  the 
condition is applied to the outermost zone or BL zone/s as discussed in 
section 3.2. In fact, in the review work by Komninos & Rakopoulos [66], 
the authors reason that the interzonal heat transfer and cylinder-wall 
heat loss phenomena are coupled. They emphasise that it is imperative 

Fig. 17. Approach of leveraging heat loss correlation to set up zonal thermal stratification according to Kodavasal et al. [81]. Temperature distribution across the 
zones (left) heat-loss multipliers of zones (right).(Reproduced with permission from International Journal of Engine Research, SAGE) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099818A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

to  have  a  consistent  modelling  approach  across  both  processes  (Ex. 
diffusion  based).  On  the  contrary,  among  the  previously  discussed 
models,  for  instance  in  [102],  interzonal  heat  flow  was  based  on  the 
diffusion  approach,  and  heat  loss  was  modelled  using  correlations. 
Komninos & Rakopoulos state that this inconsistency might inhibit the 
MZM´s ability to capture combustion performance accurately. 

submodel, based on heat flux and wall temperature profile data from 
different  engines  (CFD)  and  across  different  operating  points  (motor-
ing).  Furthermore,  compared  with  the  previous  implementation  by 
Komninos & Kosmadakis [104], the error in heat flux trace was similar 
and the discontinuity mentioned above was avoided. 
(

)

˙q = (cid:0) Λgas,rn=0

∂T
∂rn

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

rn=0

Neshat & Saray [131] used a simple linear approximation (Eq. (18)) 
of the gradient by assuming a thickness of the BL zone, based on the 
combustion  chamber  geometry  (see  section  3.2.1).  The  temperature 
difference involved Twall and that of the BL zone (Tz=BL). They validated 
this  approach  on  HCCI  using  a  wide  range  of  operating  conditions, 
including  different  fuelling  –  methane  and  n-heptane.  The  evaluation 
methodology was indirect, i.e., based on cylinder pressure and emissions 
the 
data.  Furthermore, 
correlation-based  approaches  of  Annand,  Hohenberg,  Woschni  and 
Chang. Based on a 10-zone model, the results showed that the pressure 
trace fit of the fundamental approach was better than the correlations 
implementation.  Emissions  results  of  this  fundamental  approach  also 
agreed much better with the experimental data than the correlations´. On 
the  other  hand,  worth  noting  that  emissions  predictions  are  in  part 
influenced  by  interzonal  mass  transfer.  Nevertheless,  the  authors 
showed the potential of this approach over the correlation models. 

they  compared 

results  against 

the 

∂T
∂rn

|rn=0 ≈

Tz=BL (cid:0) Twall
Δwz=BL/2

(18) 

In  the  analysis  of  Komninos  [88],  the  authors  aimed  at  better 
capturing the temperature profile in the near- wall region. They assumed 
the gradient to be of the form Eq. (19), based on a (one-sided) second 
order approximation of (an assumed) T profile near the wall. This form 
was used only when Tmean>Twall and Twall<Tz=BL<Tz=BL-1. Eq. (18) was 
used for the other cases. The authors then [104] validated the approach 
using CFD models of three different engines under motoring operation, 
using heat flux data and monitoring the T profile at the near-wall region. 
They used the same enclosed zonal configuration as the previous work, 
but used more zones - 16. Based on a ‘grid dependency’ study, the au-
thors showed that although the zone number could be reduced, the zone 
thickness had to be progressively smaller near the wall, to capture the T 
profile well. Furthermore, due to switching between the two relations, 
Eq. (18) and Eq. (19), the expected discontinuity was rather small, given 
that sufficient zones were present at the boundary region. Ultimately, 
the  authors  in  another  study  [88]  proved  that  for  HCCI  combustion 
simulations, this approach captured the pressure trace and HRR well, 
and closely captured the emissions trend. 

⎛

∂T
∂rn

|rn=0 ≈

⎜
⎝

Tz=BL (cid:0) Twall
Δwz=BL
2

⎞

⎟
⎠

2⎛
⎜
⎝

Tz=BL(cid:0) 1 (cid:0) Tz=BL
Δwz=BL+Δwz=BL(cid:0) 1
2

⎞

(cid:0) 1

⎟
⎠

(19) 

Bissoli et al. [96] went a step further by incorporating a wall-function 
formulation for the thermal boundary layer, by Han & Reitz [144]. This 
is a more sophisticated submodel, based on the solution of the energy 
equation at the boundary layer. Such submodels are typically applied in 
the context of CFD, but the authors adapted it for use in their MZM. As in 
the  previous  two  works,  the  authors  established  an  enclosed  zonal 
configuration,  and  the  heat  loss  model  was  applied  to  the  BL  zone. 
Thickness  of  the  BL  zone  changes  as  a  result  of  interzonal  work  ex-
change,  which  in  turn  was  accounted  for  in  Eqs.  (22)  and  (23).  It  is 
important to note that although Eq. (20) represents the analytical so-
lution, there are still some empirical aspects to it. Based on trends in 
experimental data, an assumed function for the variation of (μtur/Prtur) 
with  y
is  used,  resulting  in  Eqs.  (22)  and  (23).  Also,  the  tuning 
parameter ζwall  in Eq. (21) needs to be adjusted for a given engine ge-
ometry.  Thus,  the  authors  successfully  tuned  and  validated  their 

+

Qwall = A

(17) 

(cid:0)

u∗
wall
T +

ρcpT

)
z=BLln

Tz=BL
Twall

u∗
wall = ζwall SP

T += {

(cid:0)
8.89 + 2.098ln

7.42tan(cid:0) 1[0.0037(24y+ + 25)] (cid:0) 0.69

)

3.34⋅104y+ + 105

(cid:0) 29.74

y+ =

u∗
wall Δwz=BLρz=BL
μz=BL

, y+ ≤ 40
, y+ > 40

(20)  

(21)  

(22)  

(23) 

In a similar vein, Fiveland & Assanis [145,91] focused on modelling 
the physics of wall heat loss by capturing the entirety of the boundary 
layer phenomenon, comprising boundary layer growth, trapped mass in 
boundary layer and near-wall turbulence. Their study [145] employed a 
two-zone model consisting of a dedicated BL zone and an adiabatic core 
zone. The wall-heat transfer coefficient was obtained by integrating over 
the BL thickness (δBL) according to Eq. (24), where y was a coordinate 
normal to the cylinder walls. Thickness of BL zone varied with time as 
prescribed 
in  Eq.  (25),  which  was  obtained  by  applying  a 
one-dimensional  compressible  energy  equation  [146].  Variation  of 
density (ρ) with y was assumed to follow a cubic shape according to Eq. 
(26), which was subjected to boundary conditions of Eq. (27). Similarly, 
variation of the effective Prandtl number (Preff) within the BL zone fol-
lowed the approach [144]. Finally, mass transfer with the core zone was 
considered  as  a  result  of  variation  in  density  and  thickness  of  the  BL 
zone. 
∫

h =

1
/(

) dy

δBL

y
ρcp

μeff
Preff

⎡

dδBL
dt

=

1
P
cp
Rg

⎣ (cid:0) δBL

cv
Rg

dP
dt

+ cpTz=BL

[

ρ = ρcore

a1 + a2

]

)3

y
δ

+ a3

(y
δ

y = 0

y = δ

ρ = ρcore(t)

ρ = ρwall(t)
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

= 0

dρ
dy

⎤

⎦

(ρ dy) + qw

d
dt

∫

δBL

(24)  

(25)  

(26)  

(27) 

Fig. 18 depicts the predictions of the two-zone model, which exhibits 
variation of density, thickness and trapped mass in the BL zone. Results 
were in qualitative agreement with data from literature [147], although 
the latter was for conventional SI operation. Nevertheless, their model 
predicted an increase in thickness during compression from 0.5 mm to 2 
mm, and 30-35 % of in-cylinder mass trapped in the BL zone at the time 
of ignition. In a follow-up study [91], the authors enhanced their model 
to capture the axial variation of the boundary layer. They proposed to 
axially  discretise  the  BL  region,  thus  creating  or  erasing  zones  in 
accordance with piston motion (see Tab. 1). Results showed trend-wise 
predictions  in  emissions,  with  UHC  overpredicted  by  20  %  and  CO 
underpredicted by 50 %. Ignition angle was within 1-2 CAD and com-
bustion duration within 7 CAD. 

4.1.3. Wall temperature 

From the canonical equation (Eq. (12)) for wall heat loss, the final 
quantity  required  is  that  of  combustion  chamber  wall  temperature 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099819A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Twall, avg = Tcool +

rpm
6

(0.945 (cid:0) 0.0078⋅Tcool) + 4.2⋅IMEP

Tpist = 2(Thead (cid:0) Tcool) + Tcool

Tlinr = 5/16⋅(Thead (cid:0) Tcool) + Tcool

(28)  

(29)  

(30) 

Mikulski et al. [92] formulated an advanced approach to compute 
time-averaged, in-cylinder surface temperatures Twall, and attempted to 
utilise  readily  available  engine  measurement  data.  Proposed  in  their 
earlier work [151], the approach considered the three-way heat transfer 
between gas side to wall, and eventually from wall to coolant. In Eq. 
(31),  h  is  the  bulk  gas  heat  transfer  coefficient,  Uwall  is  overall  heat 
transfer  coefficient  of  the  individual  surfaces  indexed  with  wall.  The 
overbar  represents  the  cycle  time-averaged  quantity,  so  Twall  is  the 
weighted average of bulk gas temperature and coolant temperature. In 
the computation of Uwall  (Eq. (32)) the material properties of the indi-
vidual surfaces were considered, namely thermal conductivity (k) and 
material  thickness  (δwall),  in  addition  to  heat  transfer  coefficient  of 
coolant (hcool). Since Eq. (31) relies on time-averaged data of h and T, it 
was proposed to obtain them from the model itself, by running the MZM 
in cycle-to-cycle connection. Section 5.4 gives further details of this. 

T wall =

h T + UwallTcool
h + Uwall

wall ∈ {head, pist, linr}

(31)  

⎛

Uwall =

⎜
⎜
⎝

1
hcool

1
(cid:0)

δwall
kwall

⎞

⎟
⎟
⎠

1
tcycle

∫

tcycle

4.2. Interzonal heat transfer 

h dt wall ∈ {head, pist, linr}

(32)  

The purpose of inter-zonal heat transfer is to emulate the effect bulk 
fluid motion has on the thermal state of the in-cylinder charge. Heat is 
exchanged  between  neighbouring  zones  by  virtue  of  the  relative  dif-
ference  in  their  thermal  state.  This  means  of  interaction  is  essential, 
because, as Komninos & Rakopoulos [66] noted, the absence of external 
means of ignition signifies a strong coupling between chemical kinetics 
and  heat  transfer.  Jia  et  al.  [85]  studied  the  sensitivity  that  heat  ex-
change had on HCCI combustion performance and emissions. Between 
interzonal  work  exchange  and  interzonal  heat  flow,  combustion  effi-
ciency showed an increase for the latter case, and so did burn duration. 
UHC showed particularly high sensitivity, exhibiting a reduction of 120 
%. 

Note that the term (E)Fz in energy conservation Eq. (2) encompasses 
contributions of two processes (Eq. (33)). The first is due to the tem-
perature difference between zones, analogous to heat conduction. The 
second comes from the bulk mass transfer between zones, transporting 
enthalpy. Ideally, both contributions are included but implementations 
vary across MZM studies. The choice is partially constrained by the zonal 
configuration. For instance, the diffusion-based heat flow requires in-
formation on zonal geometry and topology, thus is found only in onion- 
skin  type  models.  Furthermore,  as  discussed  in  the  previous  section, 
there  is  the  elemental  coupling  between  interzonal  heat  transfer  and 
wall  heat  loss.  Studies  that  modelled  heat  loss  only  on  the  BL  zones 
require interzonal heat transfer to reinforce thermal stratification across 
all zones. With this means of zonal interaction playing such a decisive 
role, the following text elaborates on the mechanisms implemented in 
MZM. 
(E)Fz→z+1 = IZT ˙Qz→z+1 + IZT ˙mz→z+1ℏz

(33)  

4.2.1. Based on diffusion 

This  is  a  physics-based  approach,  popularly  used  in  onion-skin 
models.  Heat  flux  between  zones  is  driven  by  temperature  gradient 
and  is  based  on  the  Fourier’s  conduction  law,  as  in  Eq.(34).  The 

Fig. 18. Evolution of thickness and mass trapped within boundary layer zone 
(a) and variation of density and temperature with thickness of the BL zone (b), 
according to the work of Fiveland & Assanis [145] 

(Twall).  The  simplest  approach  involves  imposing  a  fixed  value  by 
making educated guesses, for instance, based on coolant data [58]. As 
such, Twall was usually considered constant across operating conditions, 
and furthermore, no distinction made among in-cylinder surfaces. 

Nevertheless,  with  chemical  kinetics-driven  combustion  being  so 
sensitive to the in-cylinder thermal state, some research works included 
a sensitivity study of Twall on model predictivity. Bissoli et al. [96] varied 
the surface-averaged Twall from 400K to 500K, noticing a 2 % change in 
combustion phasing. Easley et al. [94] similarly showed that for HCCI 
simulations, increase in Twall from 370 to 410K gave IMEP sensitivity of 
6 %, 4 % for UHC and 22 % for NOX. 

Thus, to capture physics accurately, the model must encompass heat 
transfer processes from gas to wall, across the cylinder wall and wall to 
(liquid) coolant. To this end, there are sophisticated approaches such as 
finite  element-based  wall-temperature  solvers  [51].  Work  by  Fonseca 
et al. [148] provides an overview of other available approaches. How-
ever, for MZ modelling, the following approaches are considered more 
sophisticated than the simpler ones already mentioned. 

Kongsereeparp  &  Checkel  [149]  employed  a  correlation  to  obtain 
surface-averaged  wall  temperature  from  measurement  data  of  engine 
load and coolant temperature, as shown in Eq. (28). They also included a 
term to account for the effect of knock, correlating it to peak PRR. On the 
other  hand,  estimates  of  component  surface  temperatures  can  be  ob-
tained by following the approach by Kodavasal et al. [81]. They applied 
the correlation [150] based on readily available cylinder-head temper-
ature  data  to  provide  estimates  on  liner  Eq.  (29)  and  piston  Eq.  (30) 
temperatures. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099820A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

proportionality constant, Λ, is based on thermal conductivity of the gas 
mixture. Although laminar conductivity has been used [99], it proved 
insufficient [100] to capture the effects of macroscale mixing on heat 
flow. The influence of turbulence is reflected by enhancing the diffusion 
mechanism by multiplying the effect of laminar conductivity. Section 
4.4 examines the connection to a turbulence submodel in greater detail. 
Choice of zonal configuration plays an important role in determining 
the total heat flow, which mainly pertains to, interzonal interface area 
(A) and zone thickness (Δw). These quantities change with crank angle, 
since dimensions of the zones evolve during the cycle. In addition, zonal 
configuration  provides  information  on  the  number  of  neighbouring 
zones. Along with thermal conductivity (Λ), these quantities need to be 
determined at the interface between zones, to which end, the common 
practices employed in finite volume methods [152] may be used. 

(

IZT ˙Qz→z+1 =

ΛA

)

ΔT
Δw

z→z+1

(34) 

Among onion-skin models, heat flow can occur along radial (curved 
surface) and axial (flat surface) directions of a zone. Furthermore, heat 
flux can be different across the curved and flat surfaces when different 
neighbours lie along radial and axial directions [89,125]. For example, 
the work by Neshat & Saray [87,131] used a single enclosed-type zone 
representing the BL, which encompassed the remaining annular zones. 
Heat flow among the annular zones occurred along a radial direction 
and was modelled according to Eq. (35). Additionally, each annular zone 
exchanged  heat  with  the  BL  zone  in  the  axial  direction,  which  was 
simply calculated according to Eq. (34). In an enclosed MZM, heat flux is 
uniform for both directions, with Δr referring to zone thickness and A 
being the overall surface area. In an annular MZM, the flow occurs only 
in the radial direction, as in the work of Egüz et al. [100,141]. 

IZT ˙Qz→z+1 =

⎛

πl(Tz+1 (cid:0) Tz)

⎞

⎜
⎝ rz+1
ln
Δrz
rz +
2

⎟
⎠

⎛

Δrz
2

⎝rz +
rz

ln

⎞

⎠

(35)  

Λz+1

+

Λz

4.2.2. Based on enthalpy transport 

This is the heat exchange associated with interzonal mass flow, by 
virtue of thermal energy contained by the moving mass. Thus, unlike the 
diffusion-based mechanism, the heat flow´s magnitude and direction are 
based on the transferred mass. So, if a model captures both interzonal 
heat  and  mass  flow,  both  processes  make  contributions  to  the  heat 
exchanged, as shown in Eq. (33). 

As mentioned, while all studies that enable interzonal mass transfer 
include this mechanism, some differences in implementation still exist. 
In  the  work  of  Komninos  et  al.  [71,88,139],  there  was  no  explicit 
mention  of  interzonal  enthalpy  transport.  In  stark  contrast,  enthalpy 
transport was the sole mechanism to capture interzonal thermal flow in 
the approach used for works [78,93,94]. Easley et al. [94] and Ogink & 
Golovitchev  [93] allowed interzonal mass flow only among the outer 
core  zone,  crevice  zone  and  BL  zone,  so  enthalpy  transport  occurred 
among  these  zones.  In  the  one-way  coupled  CFD-balloon  model  of 
Hergart et al. [78] the mass flow (section 4.3) causing enthalpy transport 
was interestingly based on wall heat loss correlation. Kozarac et al. [97] 
followed an empirical approach as in Eq. (36). ΔQz → z + 1 was referred to 
as  heat  transfer  potential,  and  ζHTP  was  actually  a  tuning  parameter. 
Although their description of heat transfer potential was sparse, it is our 
understanding that it may have referred to the difference in enthalpy 
between neighbouring zones (mzcp,zTz (cid:0) mz + 1cp,z + 1Tz + 1). Although it 
may be understood that tuning of ζHTPwill be case dependent, Kozarac 
et al. set it to a constant value of 1e-3 s. Ultimately, in terms of results, 
they were able to reasonably capture the qualitative trends in CO and HC 
with λ. 

IZT ˙Qz→z+1 =

ΔQz→z+1
ζHTP

(36)  

4.2.3. Based on heat-loss correlation 

This mechanism for interzonal heat flow is simply based on the heat 
loss correlation, as discussed earlier (Section 4.1). As such, the heat flow 
is  proportional  to  the  temperature  difference  between  neighbouring 
zones and flow area. The heat transfer coefficient is computed from the 
bulk properties of the cylinder gas. This approach was used by Tzane-
takis et al. [67] and Visakhamoorthy et al. [138], both of whom used the 
Chang correlation [126]. Due to connection with zonal configuration, 
both authors used the enclosed-type MZM. 

The  physical  basis  for  this  approach  exploits  the  assumption  that 
turbulence  stays  relatively  homogeneous  throughout  the  combustion 
chamber. This is supported by the fact that both authors used their MZM 
to simulate HCCI combustion. Specifically, Tzanetakis et al. [67] stated 
that  their  experimental  engine  was  designed  to  minimise  the  spatial 
variation of turbulence. Chang et al. [126] concluded that spatial vari-
ation of heat flux was small from different measurement locations within 
the cylinder. One of the modifications they made in computing the heat 
transfer coefficient was on the estimation of bulk gas velocity. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  both  models  [67,138]  did  not  enable 
interzonal mass exchange. As a connecting point, wall heat transfer in 
both models was prescribed on the outermost (BL) zone, following from 
zonal configuration. Still, the results of [138] indicate this approach was 
able to achieve a representative thermal stratification. 

4.3. Interzonal mass transfer 

Earlier attempts relied on work exchange between zones (coupled to 
heat  exchange)  to  achieve  combustion  predictions,  but  these  studies 
were  limited  to  HCCI.  Nevertheless,  it  became  increasingly  apparent 
that interzonal mass transfer was necessary for reliable predictions of 
engine-out emissions and for application to fuel-stratified LTC concepts. 
This is because formation of emission is spatially inhomogeneous. CO 
and  UHC  occur  in  the  cooler  crevice  and  BL  regions  [153],  due  to 
incomplete combustion, while NOX forms in the core region, due to high 
temperatures.  Komninos  &  Hountalas  [139]  observed  the  flow  of 
emissions  species  and  noted  that  CO  and  HC  move  to  the  outer  core 
region during the expansion stroke, where they undergo partial oxida-
tion. Additionally, there is some production of CO during this phase, due 
to partial oxidation of HC. Thermal mixing of the hot and cold regions as 
a  result  of  enthalpy  transport  also  influences  overall  predictions  of 
combustion performance. 

To this end, there are a variety of approaches to capture the inter-
zonal mass exchange. For instance, Hergart et al. [78] modelled it as 
proportional to the wall heat transfer (correlation) coefficient. Perhaps 
the motivation for their approach was: (i) wall heat transfer coefficient 
being a cylinder-averaged value; and (ii) isotropic turbulence assump-
tion. Fiveland & Assanis’  approach [145] was based on modelling the 
boundary layer phenomenon, where mass flow across the BL zone was a 
consequence of the time evolution in its thickness and thermodynamic 
conditions.  Broadly,  however,  there  are  two  main  approaches  for 
capturing interzonal mass flows; one based on the pressure equalisation 
mechanism, the other on the diffusion mechanism. 

4.3.1. Based on pressure equalisation (PEQ) mechanism 

This is a phenomenological-based approach for mass transfer widely 
used  among  onion-skin  MZM,  for  example  in  the  enclosed  model  of 
Komninos et al. [71] and in the annular model of Neshat & Saray [87]. It 
takes advantage of the governing assumption (section 2.1) that the zones 
share a common pressure. The mechanism is unlike that of convection or 
diffusion,  and  occurs  as  a  result  of  zonal  mass  readjustment  due  to 
pressure equalisation, as discussed in section 2.3. It was also mentioned 
that  interzonal  work  exchange  is  absent  in  the  context  of  PEQ  mass 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099821A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

transfer, since both are governed by the same process. 

In implementing this approach, the time-splitting solution algorithm 
is used, as will be explained in section 5.1. Briefly, the solution of the 
system  of  equations  at  every  time  step  is  split  into  a  sequence  of 
chemistry  solution  and  flow  solution.  The  chemistry  step  occurs  by 
disregarding  interzonal  exchange,  and  similarly,  chemistry  is  not 
considered in the flow step. Of importance for PEQ mass transfer, is the 
consideration that the zones in the chemistry step are non-interacting 
constant  volume  reactors.  Consequently,  by  the  end  of  the  time  step, 
the zones would have developed disparate pressures. In the ensuing flow 
step, this serves as the driving force for interzonal mass transfer. 

An algorithm illustrating the process is shown in Fig. 19, taken from 
the work of Komninos et al. [71]. Between the chemistry and flow step 
an error is introduced as a result of the interzonal mixing. As such, the 
flow step is iterated over a loop until the conservation equations of mass 
and energy are satisfied. 

Finally,  it  is  worth  noting  that  turbulence  effect  is  not  explicitly 
considered in the bulk motion. This reduces modelling complexity. On 
the  other  hand,  the  iteration  scheme  could  be  a  potential  source  of 
computational load, as it introduces stiffness in the system of differential 
equations. Section 5.1 examines this aspect more closely. 

Thus, the methodology is described in the following steps. First, the 
equalised zonal pressure (Pcyl) is calculated according to Eq. (6). Based 
on it, the zonal mass is computed, as in Eq. (37). In order to quantify the 
interzonal mass exchanged, the change in mass of a zone over a time step 
is calculated by Eq. (38). Thus, mass exchanged (IZTmz) by zone z with its 
neighbours z-1 and z+1 is Eq. (39), which in turn is subject to boundary 
conditions in Eq. (40). The boundary conditions follow from the zonal 
configuration, where change in mass of zones located at the periphery, i. 
e.,  innermost  and  outermost  zones,  is  the  mass  exchanged  with  their 
respective neighbours. Furthermore, the associated exchange of species 
as in the term 

Fi,z  of Eq. (3), can be expressed as Eq. (41). 

(Y)

mz =

1
Ru

PcylVzMz
Tz

mass change from time step t-1 to t 

Δ ˙mz,t =

mz, t (cid:0) mz,t(cid:0) 1
Δt

Δ ˙mz,t = IZT ˙mz→z+1 (cid:0)

IZT ˙mz(cid:0) 1→z

Subject to boundary conditions 

IZT ˙m1→2 = Δ ˙m1
IZT ˙mnZ→nZ(cid:0) 1 = Δ ˙mnZ

Species exchange 

(Y)Fi,z(cid:0) 1→z =

(cid:0)

IZT ˙mz(cid:0) 1→z
mz

)

Yi,z (cid:0) Yi,z(cid:0) 1

(37)  

(38)  

(39) 

(40) 

(41) 

4.3.2. Based on diffusion 

In this approach, the diffusion mechanism drives mass flux, which is 
based on the Fick’s law Eq. (42)). Thus, the composition gradient dic-
tates direction and magnitude of the flow, so geometry of the zones and 
topology  of  the  configuration  are  central  to  its  computation.  This 
approach is widely used in onion-skin models. Eq. (42) represents the 
mass  flow  at  the  interface  between  zones  z-1  and  z.  Since  the  mass 
exchanged consists of a bulk component dmz/dt and passive scalar dYi,z/ 
dt, (associated to (m)Fz  and (y)Fi,z  respectively), for ease of implementa-
tion, the corresponding Eqs. (1) and ((3) may be combined giving spe-
cies mass balance, as in [100]. As before, with the requirement of the 
quantities D, ρ and dr being at the zonal interface, approaches used in 
finite volume methods [152] may be adapted. 
)

(

IZT ˙mi,z→z+1 =

DρA

ΔYi
Δw

z→z+1

(42) 

It is important to note that in the above equation, the diffusion co-
efficient is presented in a generic form. Owing to the consideration of 
multiple components (species) in the system, different models [154] are 
available to capture the phenomenon of molecular diffusion. However, 
within  the  scope  of  the  reviewed  literature,  ‘mixture-averaged’  and 
‘unity Lewis number’ approximations have been used. The former was 
incorporated in the work of Bissoli et al. [96], and the diffusion coeffi-
cient identifies differently for each species, as shown in Eq. (43), with 
D

ji  as the binary diffusion coefficient [154]. On the other hand, in unity 
Lewis number approximation, the diffusion coefficient is independent of 
the species and given as Eq. (44). It was used in the work of Egüz et al. 
[100].  Although  the  mixture-averaged  approach  is  a  more  accurate 
model for molecular diffusion, unity Lewis number approximation fa-
cilitates modelling by reducing computational load. 

′

Di =

∑

1 (cid:0) Yi
/

j∕=i Xj

′

D
ji

D =

k
cpρ

(43)  

(44) 

Nevertheless,  modelling  interzonal  mass  flux  solely  based  on  mo-
lecular  diffusion  proves  largely  insufficient  to  reflect  the  in-cylinder 
flows.  In-fact,  the  flux  influenced  by  turbulence  can  effectively  be 
1000 times higher [100]. To this end, the model presented here needs to 
be coupled with a turbulence submodel, described later in section 4.4. 
Regarding  computation  of  the  gradient  and  flow  area,  which,  as 
mentioned  earlier,  depends  on  zonal  configuration,  Egüz  et  al.  incor-
porated  this  submodel  on  their  annular  MZM  for  simulation  of  PCCI 
[100] and RCCI [141]. Here the flow area is the curved surface area (in 
the  radial  direction).  In  the  work  of  Bissoli  et  al  [96],  the  enclosed 
configuration  was  used  to  simulated  HCCI.  In  their  case,  the  flow  is 
symmetrical in the axial and radial directions. 

The  implementation  by  Eichmeier  et  al.  [58]  followed  a  different 
approach, since their basis was a spray combustion MZM. From their 
model  description  in  section  3.3,  interzonal  mass  transfer  referred 
mainly  to  the  entrainment  of  charge  from  the  premixed  charge  zone 
(zair) to the spray zones (zax  and zrd). As such, the mass flow was one 
directional. Entrainment before EOI was defined according to Eq. (45) 

Fig. 19. The algorithm for PEQ-based mass transfer, adopted from the work of 
Komninos et al. [71] 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099822A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

which used the assumption that momentum of diesel droplets exiting the 
nozzle  equals the  rate  of  entrainment of  charge  into  the  spray  zones. 
Here the variation in mass flow was along the axial zones (zax). After 
EOI,  entrainment  was  defined  according  to  the  diffusion  process  (Eq. 
(46)),  with  flow  occurring  mainly  along  the  radial  zones  (zrd).  The 
equation was derived as the analytical solution to a point source diffu-
sion problem.ζmix is an adjustable constant and D and τ refer to turbu-
lence  diffusivity  and  turbulent  timescale  respectively,  which  were 
obtained from a turbulence submodel (explained in section 4.4). 

ax ˙mzair →z =

mdiesel u0inj
s

Yair

for t < EOI

rd ˙mzair→z = ζmix

)

(

exp

a z2
rad
Dt

mzair
τ

for t > EOI

4.4. Turbulence 

(45)  

(46)  

Since the flow regime in the combustion chamber is fully turbulent, 
the combustion process is globally influenced by it, from the tempera-
ture and fuel stratification to emissions formation. However, the find-
ings  of  Aceves  et  al.  [84]  are  noteworthy,  as  they  showed  that 
combustion´s  sensitivity  to  turbulence  varies  during  the  cycle.  Turbu-
lence has a small effect during the main heat release event, due to the 
high HRR (tested for IMEP 6.5-7.3 bar). In other words, the timescale of 
chemical kinetics is much too fast for the fluid motion to have an effect. 
But turbulence  certainly impacts the events  before and  after the heat 
release, i.e., charge stratification, ignition and emissions formation. 

Importantly, turbulence also affects wall heat loss and the boundary 
layer phenomenon. Works by Aceves et al. [84] and Yu et al. [155] show 
that higher levels of turbulence cause more heat loss, a thicker boundary 
layer and lower bulk cylinder temperatures. Accordingly, the contribu-
tion of turbulence is implicit in submodels for heat loss. Furthermore, as 
explained  in  Section  4.1,  works  that  incorporated  the  traditional 
Woschni correlation, made modifications to the estimate of character-
istic velocity, with Mehl et al. [135] coupling a zero-dimensional tur-
bulence model. 

Inclusion  of  bulk flow  field effects  on combustion  has been  previ-
ously discussed in interzonal heat and mass transfer submodels. How-
ever,  examination  of  diffusion-based  approaches  remains  incomplete 
since  the  means  of  computing the  diffusion  coefficients  were  not dis-
cussed.  The  following  text  gives  a  brief  account  of  the  popular  ap-
proaches  for  turbulence  modelling in  MZM.  For a  background  on the 
phenomenology, plus a comprehensive collection of turbulence models 
in  connection  to  quasi-dimensional  models,  the  reader  is  referred  to 
work by Vasudev [156]. 

Egüz et al. [141] incorporated the influence of turbulence by scaling 
the molecular diffusivities by a tuning constant they called turbulence 
factor (ζt) shown in Eq.(47). Based on the unity Lewis law, ζt was applied 
identically to both diffusion coefficients. Thus, Λeff and Deff  refer to the 
effective diffusion coefficients of heat and mass respectively. Due to its 
simplicity, this approach was not predictive, and required tuning on a 
case-by-case  basis.  Thus,  in  the  follow-up  work  on  RCCI  simulations, 
Mikulski  et  al.  [92]  created  a  map  for  obtaining  ζt  in  accordance  to 
operating conditions, which was characterised by speed, load, EGR %, 
fuel blending and SOI. Section 5.4 provides further details in the context 
of calibration. 

Λeff = ζtΛandDeff = ζtD

(47) 

For a phenomenological treatment, Eichmeier et al. [58] employed a 
single equation to model turbulent kinetic energy (k). The turbulence 
length  scale  (LI)  and  turbulence  dissipation  (ε)  were  estimated  from 
algebraic  relations.  The  methodology  starts  with  relation  for  mass 
diffusion  coefficient,  Deff,  since  interzonal  heat  transport  was  not 
considered in their MZM. The first term in Eq. (49) was concerned with 
generation of turbulence. It followed the rapid distortion theory [157], 

the basis for many zero-dimensional turbulence models. The third term 
accounted  for  the  addition  of  turbulence  due  to  DI,  with  u0inj  repre-
senting the velocity at the moment of SOI. The second term represented 
dissipation of turbulence, given in Eq. (50). Turbulence length scale (LI) 
is based on geometrical arguments of the combustion chamber, as shown 
in Eq. (51). ζtur1,ζtur2,ζtur3  and ζtur4  are global tuning constants of this 
model. The tuning procedure will be discussed in section 5.4. 

Deff =

k2
ε

dk
dt

= ζtur1

2
3

k
ρcyl

dρcyl
dt

(cid:0) Ctur2 ε + ζtur3

u2
0inj
mcyl

dminj
dt

)3

2

(
2
3 k

ε =

LI

lt = ζtur4

4Vcyl
πB

with LI ≤

B
9

(48)  

(49)  

(50)  

(51) 

Alternatively, phenomenological approaches based on Yang & Mar-
tin [158] have been popularly used in MZM. These approaches account 
for the spatial variation of Λeff and Deff, thus making it appropriate for 
onion-skin models. While Yang & Martin intended it as a wall function 
formulation for CFD (RANS) models, the methodology was adopted for 
MZM, as in the works of Komninos et al. [71,88,139], Guo et al. [134] 
and  Neshat  &  Saray  [87].  The  core  idea  is  employing  an  algebraic 
relation between the viscosity ratio, μtur/μlam and normal distance from 
), based on fitting to experimental data. This approach starts 
the wall (rn
with defining an effective diffusion coefficient as the sum of laminar and 
turbulent contributions. This is shown for heat diffusion coefficient in 
Eq. (52), but can be straightforwardly obtained for Deff  based on Eq. 
(54). Here, the turbulent values of Prandtl and Schmidt numbers may be 
assumed as unity, as in [69], or following the work of Bissoli et al. [103], 
Prtur may be set to 0.85 and Sctur to 0.7. 

+

Γeff, z = Γlam,z + Γtur, z

Γtur, z
Γlam, z

=

Prlam, z
Prtur, z

μtur, z
μlam, z

Dtur, z =

μtur, z
Sctur, z ρz

(52)  

(53)  

(54) 

Ratio of turbulent to laminar viscosity was obtained from the func-
tional form expressed in Eq. (55). The constants κ and a were set to 0.41 
+
and 0.06 respectively [158]. In Eq. (56) r
n  is the dimensionless distance 
perpendicular to the cylinder walls, with μwall  being the dynamic vis-
cosity  at  wall  temperature.  u*  is  the  characteristic  velocity,  and  was 
popularly scaled to the mean piston speed (Sp) using the tuning constant 
ζu  as given in Eq. (57). By integration, starting from the cylinder walls 
(rn),  in  Eq.  (56),  the  variation  of  μtur/μlam  with  respect  to  the  dimen-
+
sionless r
n  (Eq. (55)) can be obtained. Fig. 20 shows this variation as in 
the original work of Yang & Martin. In practice, integration in Eq. (56) is 
handled discretely, using properties of subsequent zones. The implica-
tion is that effective coefficients (Λeff, Deff) have higher values in the 
inner zones and smaller values in the outer ones. 
μtur
μlam

(cid:0)
[
1 (cid:0) exp

(cid:0) 2aκr+
n

= κr+
n

)]

(55)  

r+
n =

u∗
μwall

∫rn

0

ρ dr

u∗ = ζu Sp

(56)  

(57)  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099823A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

interpret  fundamental  phenomena  occurring  in  shock  tubes  and  flow 
reactors [161]. Also referred to as ’reaction mechanisms’, chemical ki-
netics models of varying levels of detail [162] have become an impor-
tant tool in combustion analyses through phenomenological or detailed 
CFD  modelling  [97].  Their  importance  lies  in  prediction  of  onset  of 
ignition and/or knock, negative temperature coefficient (NTC) behav-
iour, combustion phasing and pollutant species production [163]. 

As noted above, the chemical processes associated with combustion 
rely  on  favourable  thermal  conditions  for  initiation  and  subsequent 
propagation throughout  the cylinder.  It therefore becomes crucial for 
the  reaction  mechanisms  in  LTC  combustion  prediction  models  to 
accurately  represent  this  temperature  dependence  in  order  to  model 
auto-ignition  behaviour.  LTC  applications  have  been  shown  to  be 
dominated  by  chemical  kinetics  [78,101].  Development  of  chemical 
kinetics models for combustion can be considered a study topic in its 
own right, and IC engine combustion modelling studies do not usually 
include this. Instead, researchers incorporate readily available reaction 
mechanisms developed by validating (ignition-delay computations, for 
example)  against  shock  tube  or  rapid  compression  machine  experi-
ments.  Where  desired,  studies  can  also  implement  simplified  mecha-
nisms  derived 
larger  parent  mechanisms.  Some 
investigations include a  combination of  different readily  available re-
action mechanisms to include species-related information and reaction 
pathways  for  multi-component  fuels  [78]  or  prediction  of  emissions 
such as CO2 or NOx. The chemical kinetics models used in these studies 
are considered suitably validated for the use cases. 

from  much 

Generally, the trend in multi-zone model-based engine research is to 
incorporate a suitable mechanism that has been pre-tuned or validated 
specifically for the chosen fuel(s) and operating conditions. Inclusion of 
relevant fuel species in the mechanism dictates the choice of chemical 
kinetics model used, while the balance between accuracy and compu-
tational effort is also a key factor. To understand this within the MZM 
context,  Tab.  3  lists  a  few  relevant  LTC-MZM  works  that  incorporate 
chemical  kinetics  in  the  overall  modelling  framework.  This  list  is  se-
lective, aiming to paint a general picture of the types of mechanisms, 
fuels, surrogate(s) and level of detail included in model-based studies of 
LTC. 

MZM studies have largely focused on HCCI combustion, evidenced 
by  the  higher  incidence  of  works  including  data  on  chemical  mecha-
nisms that were used. Table 2 groups these works together, along with 
other combustion concepts for reference. Other concepts such as PCCI 
and  RCCI  are  yet  to  be  studied  as  extensively  and  this  applies  to  the 
inclusion  of  detailed  chemistry  in  the  modelling  framework.  As  ex-
pected, common fuels such as gasoline and diesel, represented by their 
surrogates iso-octane and n-heptane respectively, form the bulk of the 
studies. This is attributed to the existence of well-established chemical 
kinetics models for these fuels and the fact that they allow direct com-
parison  with  conventional  IC  engine  concepts.  As  complex  hydrocar-
bons,  both  gasoline  and  diesel  sometimes  necessitate  additional 
representative molecules or surrogates to enable accurate combustion 
prediction. The work by Ogink &  Golovitchev [93] included aromatic 
(toluene  (C7H8))  reaction  pathways  to  the  n-heptane  and  iso-octane 
combination to represent gasoline in their previously presented chem-
istry  model  (109  species,  506  reactions),  modified  from  [164].  This 
‘skeletal’ model resulted in enhanced CO2 emissions prediction thanks to 
inclusion of toluene to model the fuel, which otherwise comprises only 
aliphatic  components.  While  the  improved  CO2  predictions  were 
approximately 2  % lower than the measured values, the modified  re-
action  scheme  with  additional  fuel  species  included  still  performed 
better than its parent reaction mechanism. Similarly, to model different 
compositions of diesel in their study to model PCCI combustion, Hergart 
et 
and 
alpha-methylnaphthalene in their 118-species, 1000-reactions detailed 
reaction  mechanism.  This  new  model  was  shown  to  better  represent 
ignition delay behaviour in the low-temperature regime. The enhance-
ment of this prediction was a result of the inclusion of n-decane, which, 

combination 

n-decane 

used 

[78] 

al. 

of 

a 

Fig. 20. Variation of μtur/μlam  with dimensionless distance from cylinder wall 
r+
n , from the work of Yang & Martin [158]. (Reproduced with permission from 
Journal of Heat Transfer, ASME.) 

4.5. Chemical kinetics 

As combustion is a chemical process, the rate at which the reactions 
occur  refers  to  chemical  kinetics.  This  concerns  the  rate  of  creation/ 
destruction  of  individual  species,  and  thus  influences  the  thermody-
namic state in a zone. This arises because oxidation of the complex fuel 
molecule to its simpler combustion products of H2O, CO, CO2 and NOX 
occurs in a sequence of elementary reactions over several intermediate 
species. The kinetic processes and the elemental reaction rates depend 
on the prevalent thermo-physical and chemical conditions and are to be 
modelled accordingly. Thus, the chemical kinetic mechanism contains 
information  regarding the elementary  reactions, species  involved, the 
rate law and rate constants. From the perspective of implementation, 
data from the mechanism file is suppled to Eq. (58), which determines 
the  net  production  rate  of  species  i.  ν′
ij  are  the  forward  and 
reverse stoichiometric coefficients and j indexes the reactions. rj  is net 
reaction  rate  obtained  according  to  Eq.  (59),  where  Xi  is  the  molar 
concentration of species i. k
j is the forward rate constant which can be 
′′
obtained, for instance, from the Arrhenius relation, and k
j is the reverse 
rate constant which may be obtained basing on equilibrium constant. 
The  heat  released  as  a  result  of  change  in  composition  is  contained 
within  the  internal  energy  term  (left-hand  side)  of  Eq.  (2).  Upon 
expansion,  (Eq.  (60))  the  last  term  on  the  right-  hand  side  is  mainly 
responsible. 

ij  and  ν′′

′

˙ω1 = ΣnR
j=1

(cid:0)

ν′′

′

ij (cid:0) ν

ij

)

rj

rj = k

′

j

∏nS

i=1

[Xi]ν

′

ij (cid:0) k

′ ′

j

∏nS

i=1

[Xi]ν′′

ij

(

dE
dt

=

dm
dt

e + m

cv

)

dT
dt

+

∑nS

i

ei

dYi
dt

(58)  

(59)  

(60) 

Simple  methods  of  modelling  combustion  employ  a  global  single- 
step  or  a  two-step  reaction  approach  [159,160].  These  facilitate  fast 
computing but lack the sophistication required to determine the sensi-
tivities of ignition delay, HRR profile and emission levels to IVC con-
ditions of mixture strength, temperature, pressure and EGR levels. Thus, 
information  regarding  elementary  reactions  and  intermediate  species 
are crucial with combustion proceeding along multiple reaction path-
ways. Detailed chemical kinetics models have been used extensively to 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099824A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 3 
Overview of chemical kinetic models implemented in LTC-MZM literature  

Fuel 

Surrogate or fuel 
representative species 

Gasoline 

i-C8H18, toluene & n-C7H16 

Gasoline 
Gasoline 

i-C8H18 
i-C8H18 

Gasoline 

i-C8H18 

Gasoline 
Diesel 

i-C8H18 
n-C7H16 

Diesel 

Diesel 

PRF20 
PRF20 

PRF90 
Diesel  

Gasoline 
Diesel & 

gasoline 

Diesel & 

gasoline 
Methane    

n-C7H16 

n-C10H22 and alpha- 
methylnaphthalene 
n-C7H16 and i-C8H18 
i-C8H18 & n-C7H16 

i-C8H18 & n-C7H16 
n-C7H16  

i-C8H18 
i-C8H18 & n-C7H16 

i-C8H18 & n-C7H16 

CH4 

Level of 
detail 

Skeletal 

Skeletal 
Reduced 

Semi- 
detailed 
Detailed 
a) Semi- 
detailed 
b) Reduced 
c) Skeletal 
Detailed 

Detailed 

Reduced 
Detailed 

Detailed 
Reduced 

Reduced 
Reduced 

Semi- 
detailed 
Detailed 

No. of 
species 

No. of 
reactions 

Regime 

Reference 

Chemistry model – source / 
basis 

109 

291 
199 

84 

859 
a) 137 
b) 159  
c) 48 

177 

118 

32 
480 

1036 
17  

26 
41 

137 

53 

506 

875 
386 

412 

3606 
a) 633 
b) 770 
c) 248 

1638 

1000 

55 
19000 

4238 
21  

37 
130 

633 

325 

HCCI 

Ogink & Golovitchev [93]  Modified from Ogink & 

HCCI 
HCCI 

Kozarac et al. [97] 
Flowers et al. [83] 

Golovitchev [164] 
Chen & Chen [166] 
Curran et al. [167]  

HCCI 

Komninos et al. [71] 

Golovitchev [168] 

HCCI 
PCCI 

Aceves et al. [76] 
Egüz et al. [100] 

Curran et al. [167] 
a) Andrae et al. [169] 
b) Seiser et al. [170] 
c) Peters et al. [171] 

HCCI 

Guo et al. [134] 

PCCI 

Hergart et al. [78] 

Seiser et al. [170] 
& GRI-Mech 3.0 [172] for NOx 
Hergart et al. [173] 

HCCI 
HCCI 

HCCI 
HCCI 

HCCI 
RCCI 

Tzanetakis et al. [67] 
Bissoli et al. [96] 

Angelos et al. [98] 
Orlandini et al. [74] 

Orlandini et al. [74] 
Eichmeier et al. [58] 

RCCI 

Egüz et al. [141] 

Tanaka et al. [174] 
CRECK Modeling Group 
(PoliMilano) [175] 
Curran et al. [176] 
Peters et al. [171] 

Golovitchev [168] 
Ra &Reitz [177]Ra &Reitz  
[177] 
Andrae et al. (2008) [169] 

PCCI 

Babajimopolous et at. [79] 

GRI-Mech 3.0 [172] 

Diesel 

n-C7H16 

Detailed 

57  

290   

HCCI 

Neshat & Khoshbakthi 
Saray [87] 

Golovitchev et al. [178] 
Golovitchev et al. [178]  

Methane 

CH4 

Detailed 

53 

NG 

NG 

Diesel & NG 

CH4,C2H6, C3H8, n-C4H10, N2, 
CO2 
(CH4,C2H6, C3H8, n-C4H10, N2, 
CO2) 
n- C7H16, CH4, C2H5 & C3H8 

Diesel & NG 

n- C7H16 & CH4 

Hydrogen 

H2  

NG 

CH4 & C3H8 

Reduced 

179 

Detailed 

Semi- 
detailed 
Semi- 
detailed 
Detailed 

Detailed 

60 

65 

76 

53 

53 

325 

1125 

349 

354 

567 

325 

325 

HCCI 

HCCI 

HCCI 

RCCI 

RCCI 

Neshat & Khoshbakthi 
Saray [87] 
Aceves, et al. [73] 

Babajimopoulos et al.  
[179] 
Mikulski & Bekdemir  
[101] 
Lashkarpour et al. [95] 

GRI-Mech 3.0 [172] 

Curran et al. [167] & 
GRI-mech [172] 
Warnatz,J (1999 [180] 

1) Peters et al. [171] 
2) GRI-Mech 3.0 [172] 
Rahimi et al. [181] 

HCCI 

Kongsereeparp et al. [99] 

Chemkin library [182] 

HCCI 

Kongsereeparp et al. [99] 

GRI-Mech 3.0 [172]  

according  to  the  authors,  is  known  to  be  the  primary  driver  of 
low-temperature  chemistry.  This  study  also  included  revised  reaction 
rates to match the shock tube experiments by Pfahl et al. [165]. 

Dual-fuel concepts such as RCCI, however, favour studies with nat-
ural gas (various compositions) as one of the fuels, as can be seen in Tab. 
3. In such studies, the comprehensive GRI 3.0 (Gas Research Institute) 
mechanism [172], validated extensively for NG combustion, tends to be 
the  primary  reaction  mechanism  of  choice.  This  detailed  mechanism 
contains information about several hydrocarbon species that are typi-
cally  constituents of natural  gas. The  GRI mechanism is  usually com-
plemented for dual-fuel applications by separate reaction mechanisms 
for diesel or gasoline. For example, Mikulski &  Bekdemir [101] com-
bined the GRI 3.0 mechanism with a skeletal n-heptane mechanism by 
Peters et al. [171], creating a semi-detailed chemistry model containing 
65 species and 384 reactions. The authors replaced the C1-C3 part of the 
n-heptane mechanism with information from the GRI 3.0 mechanism, 
which  also  provided  NOx  reaction  pathways.  This  approach  enabled 
tracking of the intermediate species from n-heptane oxidation to give an 
accurate  trend-wise  prediction  of  RCCI  combustion  across  different 
loads. The reaction mechanism used was not developed exclusively for 
RCCI  combustion,  but  the  authors  justify  its  use  based  on  the  good 
predictive  capabilities  shown  by  their  multi-zone  model  [56][101] 

[183],  where  the  negative  temperature  coefficient  (NTC)  behaviour 
described  by  the  n-heptane  mechanism  is  apparently  of  sufficient  fi-
delity. However, there is a need to develop dedicated combustion re-
action  mechanisms  for  RCCI  applications,  where  chemical  kinetics 
assume  even  more  importance  as  the  combustion  proceeds  without 
flame  propagation. The emergence  of HPDI-RCCI concepts  makes un-
derstanding the complex reactions even more crucial. This recent study 
on HPDI-RCCI (NG-diesel) [184]  focused on constructing a chemistry 
model for the specific fuel combination and combustion mode. Detailed 
and reduced kinetic mechanisms, based on experimental and numerical 
studies,  seemingly  show  good  agreement  in  simulated  pressure  trace 
from  CFD  calculations.  However,  the  document  cited  here  does  not 
provide  more information about the  mechanism itself, and  its  perfor-
mance within phenomenological multi-zone models is yet to be under-
stood. While such studies are ongoing, it seems to be common practice to 
use mechanisms studied or developed for HCCI or other older combus-
tion concepts. 

Table  4´s ‘Level of  detail’  column categorises  reaction  mechanisms 
based on their method of generation. This is also an important parameter 
in determining the speed of computation and accuracy of results. This 
column´s  terminology  follows  that  commonly  used  in  literature.  The 
work  by  Zheng  et  al.  [162]  provides  concise  definitions  for  types  of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099825A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 4 
Categories of chemical kinetic models [162]  

Category 

Description 

No. of 
species 

No. of 
reactions 

Detailed 

Lumped 

Reduced 
Skeletal 

Global 

The latest comprehensive reaction 
set 
Uses a lumped description for larger 
species 
A subset of the detailed model 
Employs class chemistry and 
lumping concepts 
Utilises global reactions to minimise 
reaction set 

100s 

100s 

10s 
10s 

<10 

1000s 

1000s 

10s-100s 
10s 

<10  

reaction mechanisms (Tab. 4) and readers are encouraged to refer to this 
work for more detail on the classification. The works included in Tab. 2 
generally adhere to this nomenclature, but note that the table presents 
the model type as listed by the publication´s authors. 

Detailed chemical kinetic models include all important elementary 
reactions and species, using the highest quality of thermochemical and 
rate  parameter  information  available.  They  are  inherently  large  and 
therefore  demand  highest  computational  effort.  Reduced  models  are 
derivations of these, culled to form a subset of the comprehensive model. 
They contain only the most important elements of the parent mecha-
nism.  Identification  of  these  important  elements  is  based  on  several 
established algorithmic procedures [185]. Reduced kinetic models aim 
to reproduce accuracy levels close to those of detailed models but with 
far  less  computational  effort,  focusing  only  on  parts  of  the  detailed 
mechanism  applicable  to  the  chosen  combustion  regime.  Skeletal 
models  can  be  considered  a  type  of  reduced  models,  where  species 
deemed unnecessary are eliminated following a sensitivity analysis (as 
described by Bissoli et. al [96]). The skeletal model´s definition is slightly 
different in Zheng et. al [162]’s work, which states that these models are 
constructed using a sequence of composite kinetic steps representing the 
progress  of  the  reaction.  While  definitions  vary  and  nomenclature  is 
open to interpretation, skeletal models in general offer the lowest level 
of detail but the fastest computation. Comparing Tab. 3 and Tab. 4, one 
can see a contradiction in the number of species used to classify these 
models. In Tab. 3, the models used by Ogink &  Golovitchev [93] and 
Kozarac et al. [97] are labelled as ‘skeletal’, although containing more 
species  than  a  supposed  ‘semi-detailed’  gasoline  reaction  mechanism 
used by Komninos et al. [71]. This illustrates that using only the number 
of species or reactions included is not a robust method of determining a 
model´s level of detail. 

While skeletal or reduced models with fewer species and reactions 
generally tend to compute faster, there is a limit to how much the model 
can  be  reduced  before  computation  times  become  longer.  Take,  for 
example,  the  skeletal  model  for  gasoline  described  by  Kozarac  et  al. 
[97],  reduced  from  Chen  and  Chen  [166]  in  order  to  model  ignition 
timing and HC and CO emissions for HCCI. The skeletal model contains 
291  species  and  875  reactions,  yet  takes  three  times  as  long  as  the 
detailed PRF20 model used by Bissoli et al [96] containing 480 reactions 
and 19000 reactions. While other aspects such as number of zones, fuel 
combination, etc. also affect total simulation time, the chemistry solver, 
like other ordinary differential equation (ODE) solvers, is impacted by 
the  model´s  overall  stiffness.  The  system  of  chemical  equations  may 
become stiff if the model is reduced too much, potentially giving rise to 
solution stability issues [163]. The timescales with which free radicals 
approach pseudo steady-state and steady-state are vastly different and 
timescales of the chemical processes generally are very different from 
the timescales of the engine cycle. Due to these vagaries, reducing the 
chemistry information too much results in model stiffness and compu-
tation  takes  infinitely  longer.  Discussion  of  strategies  to  overcome 
stiffness are beyond the scope of this work, but readers are encouraged 
to  consult  works  by  Miller  &  Kee  [163]  and  McNenly  et  al.  [186] 
addressing  this  subject  in  the  context  of  combustion  modelling.  It  is 

important to state that reducing the overall size of the chemistry model 
is possible in certain cases, as shown by Flowers et al. [82] (elimination 
of NOx reaction pathways). The same is true in the case of modular re-
action  mechanisms,  such  as  the  one  developed  by  Ra  &  Reitz  [177], 
which enable users to choose only the parts of the mechanism pertinent 
to the fuel species studied. 

The above-mentioned aspects are illustrated well in the work by Egüz 
et  al.  [100],  which  compared three  types  of  reaction  mechanisms for 
PCCI application. Interestingly, the skeletal mechanism by Peters et al. 
[171] used in this study appeared to provide better results than the more 
detailed ones by Seiser et al. [170] and Andrae et al. [169], also studied 
in this work. The difference in the speeds with which the different re-
action mechanisms proceed significantly impacts the production of CO 
emission species, because the time available for complete oxygen con-
version in the CO2-rich zones dictates the emission levels. Such quali-
tative differences among different types of reaction mechanism impose 
difficulty  in  determining  the  suitability  of  mechanisms,  so  a  global 
heuristic  approach  to  select  a  mechanism  is  not  straightforward.  As 
indicated  by  [100],  skeletal  models  sometimes  perform  better  than 
detailed 
a 
phase-optimised-skeletal-mechanism approach to improve performance 
of skeletal models, even using a sensitivity analysis to determine which 
species are necessary for a given phase in the HCCI combustion cycle. By 
relaxing the necessity value of any species and selectively optimising an 
existing skeletal combustion mechanism for different combustion pha-
ses, Tun´er illustrated (as a best-case scenario) computation times three 
times faster than a standard reaction mechanism, with deviations less 
than  0.1%.  Such  approaches  can  be  considered  for  chemical  kinetics 
implementation in multi-zone models of the future. 

proposes 

Tun´er 

models. 

[123] 

4.6. Crevice and blow-by modelling 

The  following  sub-section  consolidates  the  modelling  assumptions 
for the crevice and blow-by phenomena. In the context of MZM, crevice 
usually refers to the piston-top land crevice, although it may be extended 
to  the  ring  pack  [91].  Appropriate  approaches  to  capture  the  crevice 
region improves engine out emission predictions. According to Komni-
nos et al. [71], at TDC 10-12% of the charge is located within crevice 
volume, of which around 5% is fuel. After the main phase of combustion, 
the unburnt charge flows back from the crevice to the in-cylinder area. 
Apart from being a source of UHC, Komninos & Hountalas [139] notes 
that the crevice is also source of CO, and the mechanism is 2 fold. The 
first  is  due  to  quenching  effect  causing partial  combustion.  Secondly, 
UHC  leaving  the  crevice  undergo  partial  oxidation  further  producing 
CO. A sensitivity analysis by Easley et al. [94] showed that if crevice 
volume was increased by 50%, the UHC emissions increased by 11%, CO 
emissions increased by 1.5% and NOx emissions decreased by 9%. 

Modelling of crevice region is usually by adding a dedicated zone. 
The size of this zone is fixed and is typically 1-3% crevice volume. To 
ensure  quenching  effect,  the  zone  is  prescribed  as  isothermal,  with 
temperature fixed to that of cylinder wall, but Guo et al. [134] used the 
IVC temperature for this purpose. On the other hand, heat loss may be 
applied  as  in  the  work  of  [71],  but  with  the  heat  transfer  coefficient 
scaled up to ensure the thermal state is close to that of the cylinder wall. 
Crevice  zone  is  usually  shaped  as  a  thin  ring  and  located  below  the 
boundary layer zone. It is imperative to have mass transfer communi-
cation with the other zones to capture the phenomenology of emissions 
formation. Due to its location, mass transfer occurs through the BL zone. 
According  to  the  scoped  literature,  mechanism  of  mass  transfer  has 
popularly been the PEQ based. However, Bissoli et al. [96] proposed an 
alternative approach based on pressure difference, as in Eq. (61). ζcrevice 
is a calibration constant. In fact, all remaining zones of the configuration 
exchanged mass with the crevice, and the quantity was based on pre-
assigned weights. Tuning of ζcrevice,z  was based on a non-reactive CFD 
simulation. As a consequence of this approach, Bissoli et al. excluded 
crevice zone from the pressure equalization condition. Ultimately, the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099826A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

authors observed that the pressure difference was usually less than 1%, 
and that their MZM showed little sensitivity to ζcrevice. Nevertheless, their 
model was able to replicate trapped mass in the crevice, with a peak of 
2.25% total mass at TDC. 

crevice ˙mz = (cid:0) ζcrevice

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒Pcrevice (cid:0) Pcyl

(61) 

Blow-by on the other hand, refers to gas flow from the combustion 
chamber that gets past the piston rings into the crankcase [132]. It re-
sults in loss of mass and energy (enthalpy) and typically is driven by the 
pressure difference between the cylinder and crankcase. In the recent 
analysis by Koszalka & Hunicz [187] blow-by energy loss in HCCI mode 
was observed to be nearly twice the amount occurring in SI combustion. 
They  noted  that losses varied  from 3  % to  8 %  for HCCI,  with  lower 
losses associated with high-load operation. Based on conventional en-
gine analysis, they showed that 60 % of the work losses attributed to 
cylinder friction was the contribution of blow-by. 

From the modelling perspective, blow-by is influenced by in-cylinder 
conditions, piston ring-pack design and lubrication condition. The so-
phisticated approaches [187–189] model the effects of the piston ring 
dynamics by obtaining the gap through which the flow occurs. Other 
approaches [190] have determined blow-by at the post-processing stage. 
Nevertheless, most MZ implementations follow the conventional view in 
neglecting  this  approach.  The  works  by  Tzanetakis  et  al.  [67]  and 
Visakhamoorthy et al. [138] are exceptions. 

The MZM for HCCI combustion by Tzanetakis et al. [67] considered 
blow-by, using the simplified approach of Ferguson [191]. The model 
implemented  the  enclosed  zonal  configuration  and  did  not  include  a 
crevice  zone.  According  to  their  approach  (Eq.  (62)),  every  zone 
contributed to blow-by, and the rate was proportional to the zone mass 
and  engine  speed  (Neng).  In  addition,  the  authors  accounted  for  the 
enthalpy loss associated with the mass flow BB ˙mz.The ζBB in Eq. (62) is a 
calibration constant tuned by matching the pressure curve. 

BB ˙mz = (cid:0) ζBB

mz
Neng

(62) 

Although this model was able to predict the blow-by in the best case 
within 10% error, the authors suggest the need for a detailed piston ring- 
pack model. The model was unable to capture the physics of low blow-by 
after occurrence of peak pressure via flooding of lubrication oil into the 
ring  pack.  Such  limitation  in  predictivity  was  also  substantiated  by 
Visakhamoorthy et al. [138], who experienced poor predictions in the 
misfire region. 

5. Simulation procedure 

With  discussions  on  modelling  of  all  the  terms  in  the  governing 
equations complete, the focus now shifts to practical matters regarding 
implementation.  This  addresses  aspects  relevant  to  setting  up  and 
running  the  MZ  simulations,  including  approaches  to  solve  the  ODE, 
prescribe the initial conditions and calibration procedures. We do not 
consider  it  relevant  to  explicitly  discuss  the  implementation  environ-
ments.  Ultimately,  differences  between  Matlab  [92,99],  C/C++ [96], 
Fortran [94,140], Java [58] or any other programming language come 
down to syntax. Choice of a particular environment may be dictated by 
available  libraries  and  toolboxes,  including  selection  of  solvers,  inte-
gration with external software packages and development time. Indeed, 
this  encompasses  applications  that  handle  thermo-kinetic  databases 
including dedicated solvers and analysis routines for chemical kinetics. 
The majority of the research works incorporate readily available pack-
ages  such  as  Cantera  [192,92,125]  or  Chemkin  [182,71,134].  So,  we 
proceed  without  further  discussion,  save  for  minor  comments  where 
needed. 

5.1. Solution methodology 

The  equations  that  govern  the  dynamics  of  a  multi-zone  model 
constitute a coupled, non-linear and stiff system (section 3.1). They are 
relatively  simple  (first-order  ODE)  and  straightforward  to  implement. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  options  for  computational  algorithms,  solver 
choices  and  coding/implementation  of  equations  which  can  affect 
simulation  time  and  solution  accuracy.  The  following  text  provides  a 
brief overview of these choices. 

McNenly et al. [186] note that stiffness in MZ models arises due to 
two  contributions.  The  first  is  the  well-known  problem  of  solving 
chemical kinetic, where rate of change of species is spread over a large 
timescale. The second is coupling between the zones, governed by the 
constraint of equivalent zonal pressures Eqs. (4) and ((5)). Both issues 
can be handled by implicit solvers like LSODE [193], VODE [194,195] 
and their variants, which have been popularly employed in many MZM 
works. Even so, simulation time of a typical 10-zone model can last up to 
a couple of hours [97], depending on the size of chemical mechanism. 
That is not beneficial for control development and optimisation appli-
cations, so there have been many efforts to cut simulation time. These 
are summarised in the following text. 

One way of improving simulation speed is based on the time-splitting 
approaches [196], popularly used in reactive simulations [197]. In the 
context of MZM, an adaptation of a first order splitting scheme, called 
the segregated approach [76], has been prevalent. It obtains the solution 
in two steps, i.e., chemistry step and flow step. First, the chemistry solver 
is advanced by a time step, by disregarding interzonal interactions. The 
obtained heat release information is fed back to the zones in the second 
step, where energy balance is performed up to the same time interval. 
Interzonal  interactions  and  heat  loss  are  considered  in  this  step,  but 
species change is disregarded. The algorithm then repeats, as summar-
ised in Fig. 21. 

Importantly,  special  attention  needs  to  be  given  to  the  pressure 
equalisation condition. In the chemistry step, heat release in the zones is 
obtained as independent constant volume reactors. Consequently, by the 
end  of  step  one,  the  zone  would  have  developed  different  pressures. 
Thus, between the chemistry and flow step, ‘pressure correction’  [81] 
needs to be performed to satisfy the energy equation and ideal gas law. 
Fig. 22, taken from the work of Tzanetakis et al. [67], shows an example 
of the algorithm. The steps within pressure correction is analogous to the 
algorithm of PEQ mass transfer (Fig. 19) where thermodynamic state of 
each zone is adjusted such that overall energy balance is satisfied. Note 
that Tzanetakis et al. did not model interzonal mass transfer. 

The  computation  time,  in  theory  [81],  scales  according  to  [nZ  •
(nEq)3] as opposed to [nZ • nEq]3 for the non-segregated algorithm. nEq 

Fig.  21. Segregated  solving  algorithm  implemented  by  Eichmeier  et  al.  [58] 
with  Cantera  used  to  perform  the  chemistry  step  and  the  flow  step  handled 
using  engine  system solver  coded in  Java  (Reproduced with  permission from 
SAE International) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099827A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

(Eq. (64)); the other was a so-called ‘G’ equation [96]. G was considered 
a pressure-weighted accumulated volume, as shown in Eq. (65). As can 
be seen, these equations take the form of algebraic constraints. With this 
particular  formulation  of  the  equations,  the  authors  reasoned  that  a 
clear tri-diagonal block sparsity pattern of the Jacobian was achievable. 
Although  simulation  times  were  not  presented  in  their  work,  in  our 
opinion  the  improvement  in  speed  could  scale  as  (nZ),  following  the 
analysis of McNenly et al. [186]. 

Gz =

∑nZ

z

PzVz

Pz = Pz(cid:0) 1
Gz
Vcyl

Pz =

for z = 1, …, nZ (cid:0) 1

for z = nZ

(64)  

(65) 

Along similar lines, use of advanced solvers in MZ literature has been 
aimed  at  easing  the  effort  in  Jacobian  construction  and  the  ensuing 
(iterative) solution of a linear system. Together, they account for nearly 
95 % [81,186] of the computation resource per time step. Among earlier 
studies, Mehl et al. [135] employed a stiff solver from the BzzODE [203] 
package,  attempting  to  reduce  the  number  of  function  evaluations 
needed to construct the Jacobian, in addition to leveraging on Jacobian 
sparsity. McNenly et al. [186] conducted a detailed analysis of how to 
reduce the associated cost of Jacobian construction. A highlight of their 
work is their use of a run of non-interacting constant volume reactors as 
a preconditioner for the Jacobian factorisation, which was incorporated 
using  a  Krylov-type  solver  [204].  Ultimately,  the  authors  reported  a 
75-fold  decrease  in  computation  time  for  a  20-zone  simulation, 
compared  to  the  regular  (dense  Jacobin  factorisation)  approach.  This 
methodology  was  implemented  later  by  Kodavasal  et  al.  [81],  who 
similarly reported a speed improvement of up two orders of magnitude 
for a 40-zone run. 

5.2. Initialisation 

This section discusses the common assumptions and methodologies 
employed to initialise MZ models. The essence stems from the nature of 
the governing equations, which being ODE, require well-defined initial 
conditions to draw out the desired solution. Regardless of the fidelity of 
the  modelling  approach,  the  accuracy  of  results  depends  on  properly 
prescribed  initial  conditions,  as  highlighted  in  section  1.1.  Broadly, 
there are two points to be considered: when the MZ simulation is ini-
tialised; and what constitutes the set of initial conditions. 

Discussion of the former point is trivial if the engine´s valve timing is 
fixed, because MZM are relevant only within the closed/trapped part of 
the four-stroke cycle. When the study involves an engine with variable 

Fig. 22. Implementation of pressure correction by Tzanetakis et al. [67] (With 
permission from International Journal of Vehicle Design, Inderscience) 

refers to the number of equations per zone. However, computation re-
sources are wasted in integrator restarts. Specifically, this arises from 
the implicit integrator used in solving the chemistry step. The restarts 
happen in every loop of the segregated algorithm, and is connected to 
the numerical (approximation) Jacobin computation. This issue with the 
time-splitting approach is well known: interested readers are directed to 
the work of Sandu et al. [198]. 

On the other hand, the structure of the segregated approach offers a 
huge benefit in that it naturally facilitates parallel computing. This is 
because the zones are treated as independent constant volume reactors 
during the chemistry step. In the work of Visakhamoorthy et al. [138], 
for  instance,  a  simulation  time  of  about  a  minute  was  reported  for  a 
10-zone model. Eichmeier et al. [58] developed their model in a Java 
environment  as  they  claimed  it  eased  parallel  programming.  They 
attained a simulation time of 12 s for a 31-zone simulation. 

Furthermore, a segregated solver´s algorithm structure was used to 
good effect in [71], capturing interzonal mass transfer. Specifically, this 
relates  to  the  PEQ  based  approach  (section  4.3),  where  the  pressure 
differences developed between zones at the end of every chemistry step, 
drive  mass transfer. The present algorithm needs  to  be supplemented 
and the details were described in section 4.3. 

While the above efforts focused on efficient usage of a given implicit 
solver, another group of research works explored improved solvers. At 
this point it is important to recognise that the governing set of equations 
(section 2.1) forms a differential algebraic equations (DAE) system. As is 
evident, equation of state (Eq. (4)) and volume constraint (Eq. (5)) are in 
fact  algebraic  equations.  For  use  in  traditional  ODE  solvers,  the  two 
equations should be combined (as in Eq. (6)), then differentiated, as Eq. 
(63). However, newer solvers like DASSL [199], or DSL48S [200], allow 
algebraic equations to directly coded. Although, it is typically known 
that solution to DAE systems are more challenging than (explicit) ODE 
[201], the difference in performance is of negligible concern to modern 
solvers [202].   

=

(

dP
dt

Ru
Vcyl

∑nZ

z=1

mzTz

∑nSp

i

1
Wi

dY
dt

+

∑nZ

z=1

mz

dTz
dt

∑nSp

i

yz,i
Wi

+

∑nZ

z=1

dmz
dt

Tz

∑nSp

i

Yz,i
Wi

(cid:0)

1
Vcyl

dVcyl
dt

∑nZ

z=1

mzTz

∑nSp

i

Yz,i
Wi

)

(63)   

Approaches such as that of Bissoli et al. [103] make best use of the 
DAE structure in order to use the solvers efficiently. Their approach was 
based  on  the  previously  mentioned  fact  that  pressure  equalisation 
among zones burdens the computation. Instead of having a single, global 
equation of pressure such as Eq.(63), they implemented two additional 
equations for each zone. One pertained to pressure of individual zones 

valve  timing,  the  start  (IVC)  and  end  (EVO)  crank  angles  need  to  be 
additionally  specified.  Furthermore,  nuances  exist,  depending  on  the 
combustion  model  and  MZM  type.  Fathi  et  al.  [142]  advocated  MZ 
simulation should start after the direct injection event (EOI), stating that 
it had no observable influence on model predictivity, which they carried 
out for DI-HCCI. Therefore, it is evident that their approach can reduce 
computation  effort.  A  similar  approach  can  be  found  in  the  work  of 
Orlandini  et  al.  [74]  for  DI-HCCI,  and  [77]  for  PCCI.  In  the  case  of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099828A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Eichmeier et al. [58], the model was initialised at the moment of SOI, 
since it was the spray-MZ type. 

approaches from literature, while keeping in mind the predictive capa-
bility of multizone simulations. 

Turning to prescription of initial conditions, the question concerns 
choice of information necessary to set the thermodynamic state of the 
system. Commonly used properties are pressure, temperature, mass and 
composition.  However,  difficulty  lies  in  obtaining  them  without 
considerable uncertainty, as discussed well in literature [67,138]. For 
example,  initial  temperature  is  impacted  by  flow  over  the  hot  valves 
[58] and mixing with residual burnt gases. Indeed, determining initial 
composition can be troublesome due to influences of both external and 
internal EGR. The prominence of this cannot be understated, due to the 
high sensitivity of chemical kinetics-initiated combustion, as explored in 
many studies [58,94]. 

While correlations exist to estimate the IVC conditions [108, 252], 
the  popular  mitigation  measure  involves  coupling  with  gas  exchange 
models,  such  as  simple  valve  flow  models  [130]  or  detailed  air-path 
models.  Examples  of  the  latter  include  GT-Power,  Ricardo  Wave, 
AVL  Boost,  which  are  based  on  one-dimensional-quasi-steady 
-compressible-flow modelling. Typically, the gas exchange models are 
implemented on a single-zone framework. An exception is the work by 
Fiveland & Assanis [91,145], who ran their MZM even for the open cycle 
to  obtain  appropriate  initial  values  (at  IVC)  for  their  turbulence  and 
boundary  layer  submodels.  3D-CFD  models  have  also  been  used  to 
model gas exchange [79]: although this approach provides detailed re-
sults, evidently it is computationally demanding. 

Nevertheless,  the  technique  is  to  run  the  MZ  and  gas  exchange 
models  sequentially  in  closed-loop  iterations  [134]  (cycle-to-cycle 
connection)  to  achieve  results  less  impacted  by  experimental  un-
certainties. This is especially useful for VVA simulations. When dealing 
with negative valve overlap (NVO), Mikulski et al. [86] used an SZ-valve 
flow model coupled to their MZ RCCI simulation tool, as illustrated in 
Fig. 23. The methodology enabled them to study the influence of fuel 
injection during the NVO phase (fuel reforming) and the ensuing IVC 
conditions  set-up  for  the  following  cycle.  Section  6.2  has  further  dis-
cussion on this particular application. The authors mentioned that their 
simulation required six to eight iterations to arrive at converged results. 
Further comments are made after acknowledging that MZ models, by 
nature, necessitate a set of initial conditions consisting of both cylinder- 
averaged  quantities  and  zonal  (local)  quantities.  The  governing 
assumption  common  to  all  MZ  models  states  that  zones  are  homoge-
neous in pressure, so initialisation is naturally with cylinder-averaged 
value.  The  remaining  quantities  are  usually  dissimilarly  initialised 
across the zones, especially T and/or λ, which are highly influential in 
many LTC strategies. However, the distribution cannot be straightfor-
wardly  obtained  from  experimental  data,  and  so  assumptions  and 
empirical approaches are applied. As discussed above, although CFD is 
an apparent answer [100,141,179], its use may not justify the compu-
tational  effort.  Therefore,  the  following  text  elaborates  on  available 

5.2.1. Zonal temperatures 

Most onion-skin MZM simply prescribe a uniform temperature across 
all  zones,  equal  to  the  initial  cylinder-  averaged  value  [71,87,142]. 
Zonal  thermal  inhomogeneity  is  then  captured  by  appropriately 
modelling interzonal heat exchange and wall heat loss. Still, specifying 
an appropriate temperature distribution at initialisation phase is shown 
to  affect  predictions  [72,137].  For  balloon  MZM,  on  the  other  hand, 
initial  zonal  temperature  distribution  is  key  to  capturing  in-cylinder 
inhomogeneity  (section  3.1).  Specifically,  sequential  CFD-balloon 
models rely on the methodology of T-m mapping for initialisation. The 
T-m distribution is obtained from CFD simulation, and essentially pro-
vides  information  on  what  portion  of  the  in-cylinder  mass  lies  at  a 
certain temperature. The procedure first involves post-processing CFD 
results of the motoring operation in a manner that associates the spatial 
distribution of in-cylinder mass to the temperature field, as shown in the 
centre of Fig. 24. Next, the area under the distribution is apportioned 
into bins (green-coloured grid), with the number of bins corresponding 
to the number of zones. Alternatively, the cumulative T-m distribution 
may also be used. In either case, the mean value of temperature and total 
mass of each bin is used to initialise the zones. Assignment to the zones is 
in order of increasing temperature. Fig. 24 summarises the procedure. 
Apportionment of the T-m distribution into bins is based on identi-
fying  representative  regions  of  the  in-cylinder  space.  For  example, 
Aceves et al. [73] assigned five from a total of 10 bins to represent the 
colder regions of BL and crevice. The five bins totalled 5 % of in-cylinder 
mass, each containing 1 %. Since the remaining 95 % mass was coarsely 
divided among the other five bins, in a follow-up [75] they attempted to 
redistribute this mass among the smaller bins in order to obtain a better 
heat release profile. Six of the 10 zones were used to describe the cold BL 
region, amounting to 12 % of in-cylinder mass. This is summarised in 
Tab.  5.  Similar  proportions  were  used  in  by  Flowers  et  al.  [82]  and 
Babajimopoulos  et  al.  [79].  However,  Jia  et  al.  [85]  conducted  a 
detailed analysis of the binning strategy, comparing two distributions 
while keeping the total bins to 10. The first distribution followed the 
proposal of Aceves et al. [73]. For the second, 0.5 % of in-cylinder mass 
was  assigned to a  bin  representing the crevice;  11.5 % mass to a  bin 
representing the BL region; 34 % representing the outer core region; and 
the remaining 56 % mass was evenly distributed in bins representing the 
hottest  core  region.  Employing  both  distributions  for  their  MZM,  Jia 
et al. identified no difference with respect to Pmax  and CA(10-90) pre-
dictions, with sensitivity showed by HC and CO emissions. 

In  the  case  of  stand-alone  MZM  (mainly  onion-skin  type),  initial 
distribution  of  temperature  is  assumed  to  follow  a  certain  profile. 
Starting  with  the  simple,  linear  profile,  two  pieces  of  information  in 
order to be applied. There are different ways of setting it up. Ogink & 

Fig. 23. Simulation framework for cycle-to-cycle connectivity of MZ-gas exchange model from the work of Mikulski and Bekdemir [101]. Beside cylinder-specific 
initial conditions, manifold conditions were also used for MZM initialization. (Reproduced with permission from Applied Energy, Elsevier) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099829A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 24. Procedure for temperature-mass mapping adopted from [113, 79] and [75]. CFD results (left) are post-processed to produce a T-m distribution (middle), 
which then, based on binning, is assigned to the zones for MZM simulation (right). 

Table 5 
Initial zone mass fractions obtained from temperature-mass distribution of the 
coupled CFD-balloon MZ approach. Tabulated set of values are adopted from the 
works of Aceves et al. [73,75,77]  

Golovitchev [93] used cylinder-averaged temperature, and a constant, 
ΔT,  being  the  temperature  difference  between  subsequent  zones.  To 
achieve  predictivity,  they  determined  a  relation  between  engine  load 
and  ΔT,  based  on  several  simulation  runs.  Within  the  explored  load 
range of 1.9 – 3.8 bar, they observed that for high loads ΔT=4K and low 
loads ΔT=6K gave best fits of the pressure and HRR traces. Additionally, 
the  cylinder-averaged  temperature  was  obtained  from  a  detailed 
air-path model, and set to the middle zone. Thus, the BL zone and core 
zone are at the lowest and highest temperatures respectively. 

Also  for  HCCI,  Guo  et  al.  [134]  established  a  linear  profile  using 
manifold  temperature  (Timan)  and  a  cylinder-  averaged  temperature 
(Tavg), obtained from a valve-flow model. It was assumed for all oper-
ating cases that Tavg > Timan. They set the outermost (BL) zone to Timan 
and the middle zone to Tavg. Thus, temperature of the remaining zones 
was evenly distributed. In a similar vein, Tzanetakis et al. [67] used TIVC 

and  Twall,  where  TIVC  was  set  to  the  innermost  zone  and  Twall  to  the 
outermost zone. This exact approach was also used by Visakhamoorthy 
et al. [138]. 

On  the  other  hand,  Kongsereeparp  &  Checkel  [89]  prescribed  an 
S-shaped profile among the zones, as shown in Fig. 25, with temperature 
increasing  from  BL  to  core  zone.  The  core  zone  temperature  was  ΔT 
above the BL zone temperature, which was computed based on a simple 
relation Eq. (66). Timan  is the intake manifold temperature and KT  is a 
tuning constant, set to 0.75. The model´s predictions corresponded well 
with experiments, with small errors in CA10, 35 % in CA(10-90) at most 
and a maximum of 40 % for Pmax. The approach was also used in work by 
Orlandini  et  al.  [74].  However,  it  is  difficult  to  further  evaluate  this 
approach,  since  the  sensitivity of  the profile  on MZM  results  was  not 
isolated.  Furthermore,  the  authors  did  not  provide  a  mathematical 
description of the profile. Nevertheless, in our opinion, an S-shape might 
be a poor representation of the temperature profile. Looking at the work 
of Bissoli et al. [103] or Komninos & Kosmadakis [104], the shape might 
resemble a square root´s profile. And the previous linear approximation 
may be better in providing a simpler and practical approach. 

ΔT =

TiEGR (cid:0) Timan
KT

(66)  

5.2.2. Zonal fuel distribution 

Fuel distribution appears to be a prominent topic for LTC concepts 
exploiting  direct  fuel  injection,  such  as  DI-HCCI  [74],  PCCI  [100]  or 
RCCI  [92,95,141].  Fuel  injection  is  used  to  restore  (indirect)  control 
over ignition timing and in moderating HRR [101,142,205]. It is worth 
noting that according to the phenomenology of LTC, early SOI provides 
adequate  time  for  mixture  formation,  satisfying  the  requirement  of 
(relatively) premixed and lean combustion. Consequently, all or at least 
the bulk of the injected fuel evaporates by the time combustion initiates. 
In  other  words,  the  lengthy  ignition  delay  allows  sufficient  time  for 
chemical kinetics to dominate in driving the start of combustion (SOC). 
From  a  modelling  perspective,  the  bulk  effect  of  fuel  injection, 
relevant to LTC is to be accounted for. Fundamentally, this pertains to 
the  spatial  inhomogeneity  in  mixture  strength  (ф  or  λ),  analogous  to 

Fig. 25. Assumed S-shaped profile for zonal temperature and EGR by Orlandini et al. [74] and Kongsereeparp & Checkel [89]. Colour bar represents the variation in 
thermal state across the zones. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099830A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

thermal  stratification.  In  other  words,  the  current  approach  aims  to 
establish a distribution of ф across the zones by the time fuel injection is 
completed.  To  this  end,  the  popular  modelling  approach  uses  the 
assumption  that  fuel  injection  and  combustion  are  decoupled.  As  a 
result,  the  complex  processes  of  fuel  break-up,  evaporation,  air 
entrainment, etc. are omitted from MZM applications. Instead, fuel is 
introduced directly to the zones in a vapour state. In the works of Egüz 
et al. for PCCI [100] and RCCI [141], diesel vapours were introduced 
between SOI and EOI to all zones, based on an imposed ф distribution. 
On the other hand, works such as Orlandini et al. [74] initialised their 
MZ simulation after EOI, with the zone imposed by a λ distribution. 

The question then pertains to the shape of the fuel distribution. In 
sequential  CFD-balloon  models  for  simulation  of  PCCI  combustion, 
Aceves et al. [77] employed an approach analogous to T-m mapping. 
Following the methodology of Babajimopoulos et al. [179], Aceves et al. 
processed the CFD results to produce a so-called T-ф distribution. This 
gave information on T and ф, corresponding to the distribution of the 
in-cylinder  mass,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  26.  Apportionment of  the  T-  ф 
distribution  into  bins  first  follows  the  procedure  of  binning  in  T-m 
approach. Aceves et al. identified representative regions by assigning the 
coldest 6 % of in-cylinder mass to three bins, the warmest 25 % mass to a 
single bin, and distributing the remaining mass among the other six bins. 
Following  this,  each  T-m  bin  was  further  divided  (equally,  on  mass 
basis) into a predetermined number of bins (four) along ф. This gave a 
total of 40 bins, which were accordingly assigned to the zones. Simpli-
fied for the purpose of illustration, the lines in Fig. 26 represent division 
of the T-ф distribution into 12 bins. 

Lashkarpour et al. [95] initialised their onion-skin (annular) MZM by 
sequentially  coupling  it  to  a  CFD  model.  The  difference  with  their 
approach was that the time evolution of the spatial distribution of fuel 
vapours was processed from CFD results. This was then imposed onto the 
zones of the MZM until combustion initiated. The fuel vapour history 
was obtained from a CFD run under motoring operation, and tracking 
spatial regions that corresponded with the zones of the zonal configu-
ration. A large portion  of the fuel  fraction was assigned to the inner-
most/central zone for two reasons. First, the size of the innermost zone 
was  relatively  large,  at  14  %  -18  %  of  the  in-cylinder  volume  in  an 
11-zone MZM. Second, the injector cone angle was narrow, at 800. 

For a stand-alone approach, Egüz et al. [100] initialised their annular 
MZM  by  observing  the  spatial  distribution  of  evaporated  diesel  mass 

Fig.  26. The  T-ф  distribution  at  30  CAD  bTDC  from  the  work  of  Babajimo-
poulos et al. [179]. The lines indicate limits of the bins and the dots indicate the 
average  temperature  and  equivalence  ratio  (ф)  of  each  bin.  The  percentages 
show the fraction for each temperature bin by mass, which is further divided 
into three ф bins. (Reproduced with permission from SAE) 

from a CFD model. Over a range of SOI, the distribution of diesel vapours 
was such that rich regions were located towards to the cylinder liner and 
lean regions near the cylinder centre. This stratification was observed at 
the instant before SOC. It is worth noting that the particular injector had 
a broad cone angle of 1530. The authors then generalised the shape of 
diesel stratification for all operating conditions, to a monotonic distri-
bution with the outermost zone assigned as richest. They arrived at this 
deduction based on a sensitivity analysis. However, this approach to fuel 
distribution  was  not  predictive  and  required  user  input  of  fuel  mass 
fraction in each zone. To this end, Mikulski et al. [92] set up the dis-
tribution (analogous to [74]) by applying two tuning parameters: fuel 
concentration  in  the  last  zone  (ζλnZ)  and  gradient  in  lambda  starting 
from the last zone (ζ∇λ). Thus, the distribution shape was linear in λ over 
the zones. Since this approach required tuning on a case-by-case basis 
Mikulski et al. created a map to obtain ζλnZ  and ζ∇λ, characterised by 
operating  parameters  such  as  load,  SOI,  Neng  etc.  Section  5.4  gives 
further details of the calibration procedure. 

Orlandini et al. [74] used a functional form (Eq. (67)) to initialise 
their onion-skin model for DI-HCCI simulations. It relied on two tuning 
parameters, ζλ,rich and ζλ,lean, to help determine how the overall fuel mass 
(λcyl) was distributed among the zones. With indexing starting from the 
outermost zone, the shape of fuel stratification was monotonic, with the 
innermost  zone  being  fuel-rich.  The  authors  attempted  to  make  the 
simulations predictive  by  specifying  two  sets  of values  for  the  tuning 
parameters, based on the operating load. For λcyl  < 2, ζλ,rich  and ζλ,lean 
were set to 0.35 and 20 respectively. For λcyl > 2, ζλ,richwas 0.45 and ζλ, 
lean was 4. It is apparent that this approach disregards SOI´s influence on 
fuel  stratification.  Furthermore,  the  calibration  procedure  behind  the 
choice of tuning parameters was not presented, and the authors seemed 
to  have  used  the  approach  as  part  of  a  parametric  analysis  of  fuel 
stratification. 

(

λz = ζλ,rich + ζλ,leanexp

)

(cid:0) z
λcyl

(67) 

One potential aspect to consider here is the effect of fuel evaporation 
on thermal stratification, as in the work of Egüz et al. [100]. The latent 
heat of evaporation was introduced along with the injected fuel mass in 
the zones, and the quantity of evaporative cooling in each zone followed 
the zonal λ  distribution. Mikulski &  Bekdemir [101] later shown that 
such introduced thermal stratification plays a significant role in making 
RCCI MZM predictive in terms of injection parameters. 

Spray-based  MZM  by  design  capture  the  injection  event  in  much 
more  detail.  With  each  zone  initialised  with  fuel  droplets  during  the 
injection  event,  the  rate  of  spray  evaporation,  enthalpy  flux  and  air 
entrainment  are  modelled.  Fuel  stratification  is  implicitly  captured 
within the model. To this end, discussion of the modelling approach and 
the limitations were presented in section 3.3. Furthermore, the authors 
are aware of attempts [206] to use 1D-spray models coupled to MZM 
[92] to establish a zonal λ  distribution. That work used the model of 
Musculus &  Kattke [207] and captured the effects of spray-wall inter-
action.  The  approach  generally  required  extensive  tuning,  and  ulti-
mately  did  not  prove  advantageous  over  simpler  and 
faster 
implementations of using ζλnZ  and ζ∇λ, explained above. Furthermore, 
phenomena  like  wall  impingement,  relevant  in  early  injection  LTC 
concepts, have not yet been considered in MZM simulations. The above 
isolated examples suggest that direct coupling of a 1D-spray model with 
MZM  is  still  considered  relatively  uncharted  territory  and  can  be  a 
relevant development path. 

5.2.3. Residual gas distribution 

While accounting for residual gas (internal EGR) is crucial for model 
predictivity  [86],  its  inhomogeneity  distribution  has  secondary  influ-
ence in comparison to thermal and fuel stratification [137,179]. Even in 
the  case  of  VVA  strategies  (such  as  [56]),  good  estimates  of  the 
cylinder-averaged value seem sufficient for trend-wise results. To this 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099831A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

end, valve flow or detailed air-path models are coupled to simulate the 
gas exchange phase, as explained above. Still, there are a few studies 
which attempt to initialise an iEGR distribution, aiming for predictive 
simulations. 

In  the  sequential  CFD-balloon  approach,  the  aforementioned  T-ф 
distribution was used by Babajimopoulos et al. [179] to investigate the 
influence  of  iEGR  on  HCCI  operation  (using  NVO  –  see  section  6.2). 
Details of the T-ф distribution have been explained above, but it is also 
worth noting that ф was based on fuel/O2 ratio. The authors justified this 
choice by stating that the iEGR gas contained a significant composition 
of O2. By comparing results of T-m-based initialisation against T-ф, the 
authors  concluded  that  the  latter  approach  better  represented  the 
phenomenon. 

In  the  light  of  the  above  findings,  Kongsereeparp  &  Checkel  [89] 
developed  an  approach  to  account  for  iEGR  stratification  in  their 
onion-skin  model.  In  particular,  the  conclusion  relevant  here  is  the 
correlation between iEGR and T distributions. As noted in [179], regions 
with lower temperatures also showed low concentrations of iEGR, such 
as near the liner. Similarly, higher concentrations of iEGR were observed 
in the central region of the combustion chamber. Thus, Kongsereeparp & 
Checkel applied this pattern by assuming an S-shaped profile (Fig. 25), 
comparable  to  the  zonal  temperature  distribution  explained  above. 
ΔfEGR  is the cylinder-averaged residual gas fraction, which the authors 
obtained  by  a  simple  relation.  Nevertheless,  once  determined,  it  is 
distributed among the zone, based on the shape. 

5.3. Zoning calibration 

The  compromise  between  solution  accuracy  and  computational 
effort is determined via an analysis analogous to the grid independence 
study,  used  to  assess  the  influence  of  number  of  zones  and  the  size/ 
volume  distribution of  zones.  Prescribing  a  low  zone-count  causes  an 
over  prediction  of  ignition  angle  [99]  and  HRR.  Traces  of  cylinder 
pressure and temperature are bumpy or choppy [137] due to sequential 
auto-ignition of the zones. However, a higher zone count does not al-
ways imply better simulation results. For instance, Somers et al. [208] 
noticed  that  although  smoother  HRR  were  obtained  with  increasing 
zone count, a clear converging trend was not observed with respect to 
ignition angle. Aceves et al. [73] observed that their model was rela-
tively  insensitive  for  the  tested  zone  counts  of  10  and  20.  This  was 
reinforced by Hergart et al. [78] and Egüz et al. [100], who observed 
that very small changes in results were observed when the number of 
zones was beyond 10. The most popular zone count found in literature is 
around 10 (see Tab. 7). 

The  general  procedure  to  determine  the  required zone  count  is  to 
vary the number until simulation results match experimental data, or 
converging  trends  [100]  on  certain  indicators  are  observed.  Ideally, 
suitable indicators include a combustion phasing quantifier and one for 
emissions. Egüz et al. [100] used both CA10 and CO predictions, while 
Kongsereeparp et al. [99] used only CA10. Flowers et al. [82] used burn 
duration  (CA90-CA10)  and  position  of  peak  heat  release.  A  fit  to 
experimental pressure trace has also been used, for instance by Voshtani 
et al. [102], and works [78,81] also used HRR profile. More extensive 
calibration was performed in [82], using other synthetic performance 
quantities  such  as  indicated  gross  thermal  efficiency  and  gross  IMEP, 
plus emissions species UHC, NOx and CO2 [87,95]. 

It is worth noting that the number of zones required for a certain 
accuracy level depends on fidelity of the MZ approach, with interzonal 
heat and mass transfer being particularly influential. For instance, in the 
balloon approach of Flowers et al. [82], a zone count of 40 was required 
to predict CO emissions, which still differed from experiments [209] by 
almost an order of magnitude. The authors noticed that CO emissions 
were  particularly  sensitive,  as  opposed  to  other  emission  indicators. 
Also,  a  lack  of  convergence  in  trends  of  CO  with  zone  number  was 
indicative of needing more zones. On the contrary, enabling interzonal 
flows  in  onion-skin  models  like  [87,101]  made  it  possible  to  achieve 

Fig. 27. Initial zone size distribution as a fraction of cylinder volume at IVC; (a) 
from Orlandini et al [74] (b) from Mikulski et al. [92] (with permission from 
authors) (c) from Kongsereeparp & Checkel [89] 

trend-wise results of CO with only around 10 zones. Furthermore, the 
disproportionate sensitivity of CO to zone count was also reduced [95, 
100]. 

Size  distribution  of  the  zones  also  must  be  considered  in  the  cali-
bration  procedure.  Discretisation  naturally  demands  that  regions  of 
large (property) gradients need to be better resolved. Bissoli et al. [96] 
notes  that  appropriate  characterisation  of  the  gradients  only  where 
needed  allows  reduction  of  computational  effort  without  affecting 
combustion  behaviour.  For  sequential  CFD-balloon  models  (Tab.  5), 
nearly  half  of  the  zones  [75,77,79]  are  resolving  regions  of  BL  and 
crevice, which amounted to around 5 % of total mass. The hottest gases 
located in the core zone were 25 %–40 % of total mass. However, the 
approach of Orlandini et al. [74] used a Gaussian distribution for zone 
size (Fig. 27a), since they aimed for a stand-alone predictive MZ model. 
The standard deviation of the distribution was arrived at the value of 
1.4, fixed  for all  operating conditions.  As  mentioned by Aceves  et  al. 
[84], since interzonal flows are usually excluded in these approaches, 
sufficient zones need to be located in the crevice and BL region to cap-
ture  the  process  of  CO  and  HC  production.  Equally,  there  must  be 
enough zones in the core region to obtain a smooth heat-release curve. 
Jia et al. [85] conducted a comprehensive study of zone size distri-
bution.  Considering  onion-skin  models,  the  authors  investigated  the 
approaches of Komninos et al. [71] and Easley et al. [94], focusing on 
how interzonal mass transfer influences choice of zonal size distribution. 
While  both  models  were  of  enclosed  zonal  configuration,  that  of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099832A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Komninos had a large core zone with approximately 40 % of in-cylinder 
mass, and smaller zones moving towards the BL. Easley’s model divided 
the core mass (55 %) among seven zones, each around 8 % of total mass, 
and assigned a coarser BL with 20 % of total mass. Both models had same 
number  of  zones,  similar  inputs  and  had  other  similarities.  Results 
showed  significant  difference  between  the  approaches,  especially  for 
combustion phasing and emissions. Easley’s model performed better for 
combustion  duration  and  HC  emission  predictions,  while  Komninos’ 
model  performed  marginally  better  in  CO  predictions.  On  the  other 
hand, the comparison was not completely fair, as the seven core zones of 
Easley’s model were constant-mass zones; only the outer core, BL zone 
and crevice zone transferred mass among themselves. 

In  case  of  annular  MZM,  as  in  Egüz  et  al.  [100],  the  in-cylinder 
volume was divided evenly among the zones. In order to capture ther-
mal  and  fuel  stratification  near  the  liner  region,  Mikulski  et  al.  [92] 
prescribed a finer distribution moving towards the liner (Fig. 27b). In a 
follow-up study [101], the authors modified the distribution slightly by 
reducing  volume  in  the  core  zone  (Fig.  27b)  to  better  reflect  CH4 
emissions  in  their  diesel-NG  simulations.  With  a  large  core  zone,  the 
model  exhibited  a  largely  binary  behaviour  in  this  respect.  The  zone 
either did not combust due to insufficient mass and heat transfer from 
burning  neighbours,  or  it  combusted  completely  and  under-predicted 
CH4  and  CO  emissions.  Neshat  &  Saray  [87]  followed  a  different 
approach, as described in section 3.2.1. Referring to Eq. (68), the user 
inputs required were size of core zone (Δrcore) and thickness of BL zone 
(ΔrBL). Then, the remaining in-cylinder volume was distributed evenly 
among  the  remaining  zones.  Furthermore,  the  authors  considered  a 
crevice zone with constant volume of 3 % clearance volume, which was 
also accounted for in the calculation. Thus, in their studies [95,131], the 
core zone was prescribed a volume of around 40 % of the bore, corre-
sponding to 14 %-18 % of the in-cylinder volume. The BL zone was set 
with a thickness of 3 % of the bore (combustion chamber dimensions). 
The  remaining  volume of  70-75  % was  distributed  evenly among the 
remaining eight zones. 

Δrz =

B/2 (cid:0) Δrcore (cid:0) ΔrBL
nZ (cid:0) 2

∀z, z ∕= core, BL zones

(68) 

Among  enclosed-zone  models,  in  the  earlier  work  of  Bissoli  et  al. 
[103] the size of the zones was initialised using volume. A normalised 
weighting  factor  was  applied  to  make  successively  smaller  zones 
approaching the cylinder walls. For instance, the outer zone was 1.5 % 
of VIVC  and core zone 50 % of VIVC. In a similar vein, Tzanetakis et al. 
[67] employed a calibration constant ζΔw, defined as a factor by which 
volume of subsequent zones were reduced, approaching the outer zone. 
Specifically,  ζΔw  functioned  as  the  common  ratio  in  a  geometric  pro-
gression formed with the zonal volumes. The same approach was used 
by Nobakht et al. [140], who set ζΔw=0.3 and Vcore as 20 % of VIVC. Since 
Komninos  et  al.  [71]  implemented  a  ‘thickness’  parameter  (Δwz)  in 
defining geometry of their zonal configuration (section 3.1), they used 
the clearance height (Smin) as a reference to initialise the dimension of 
the zones. From Eq. (69), Δwz was assigned equally to all zones. This is 
the volume remaining after subtracting the core zone´s volume from the 
combustion chamber volume. It is the understanding of the authors of 
the present study, that core zone volume would then follow Eq. (70). In a 
later  study,  Komninos  accommodated  the  changing  thickness  of 
boundary layer with boost pressure, by employing the correlation shown 
in Eq. (71). The subscript ref indicates the baseline operating conditions, 
i.e.,  naturally  aspirated.  This  was  necessary  since  they  used  a 
physics-based approach to model heat loss (Section 4.1). 

Δwz =

Smin
2⋅nZ

∀z, z ∕= core zone

rz=core =

B
2

(cid:0) Δw(nZ (cid:0) 1) & hz=core = hcyl (cid:0) 2Δw(nZ (cid:0) 1)

(69)  

(70)  

Δwz = Δwz,ref

)0.511

(

PIVC, ref
PIVC

5.4. Submodel calibration 

(71)  

Calibration of the zonal configuration (zoning) and that of the sub-
models usually can be treated in a decoupled manner. For example, the 
zero-dimensional turbulence submodel implemented by Eichmeier et al. 
[58] was calibrated using CFD results of turbulence quantities such as 
turbulent kinetic energy and turbulent length scale. The focus was to 
capture  the  trends  during  compression  and  fuel  injection,  so  used 
motoring condition data. As such, the cylinder-averaged quantities were 
used and thus did not depend on a perfectly turned zonal configuration. 
The  fundamental  heat  loss  submodel  used  by  Bissoli  et  al.  [96]  was 
tuned using wall heat flow data from non-reactive CFD simulation. Since 
the conditions pertained to the BL zone, calibration could be conducted 
independent of a tuned zonal configuration. However, this was not the 
case  in  the  model  of  Komninos  [88].  The  nature  (section)  of  their 
fundamental heat loss meant that it consisted of no tuning parameters, 
but  relied  on  calibration  of  the  zonal  configuration,  as  explained  in 
section 5.3. This also can be the case [92] for submodels of interzonal 
heat and mass flow. 

The following section examines procedures for selection of the tun-
ing  parameters/calibration  constants  of  the  discussed  submodels  in 
section 4. This separated from the text in the submodel section because 
certain  calibration  procedures  [92]  deal  with  tuning  of  multiple  sub-
models at once. In addition, Tab. 6 provides a holistic view of the typical 
range of tuning parameters of submodels, comparing tuning procedures 
across different approaches. 

5.4.1. Wall heat transfer 

For use in their spray-based MZ model, Eichmeier et al. [58] assessed 
the performance of several correlation heat-loss models using CFD re-
sults. Their choice included models by Chang et al. [126], Hensel [212], 
Hohenberg  [128]  and  Woschni  [129].  The  comparison  was  based  on 
cylinder  pressure,  temperature,  HRR  and  wall  heat  flow  data  for  a 
low-load (3.2 bar) operating point. Their initial assessment showed that 
each of the models produced different trends during the different phases 
of  the  cycle.  For  instance,  during  the  compression  stroke,  Woschni’s 
predictions were lower among the tested models and CFD data. How-
ever,  Woschni’s predictions were considerably higher  than the  others 
during  combustion.  Thus,  to  maintain  consistency  for  the  purpose  of 
comparison and calibration, the heat loss coefficient of all the correla-
tions were scaled by matching the compression curve of wall heat flow. 
Chang’s model was set to a factor 1.1, while Hensel´s and Woschni´s were 
set to 1.75. Ultimately, Chang’s model was chosen, based on closeness to 
wall  heat  flow  data  of  the  CFD  model.  Working  along  similar  lines, 
Komninos  &  Hountalas  [139]  calibrated  the  Annand  correlation  by 
matching to the compression pressure curve from experimental data. 

The  elaborate  approach  of  Kodavasal  et  al.  [81]  leveraged  on  the 
correlation correlation-based heat transfer coefficient to set up thermal 
stratification across the zones of their MZM. This was performed ach-
ieved by using individually tailored scaling factors (cz) for each zone, 
explained in Section 4.1, by Eqs. (14) – (16). Eq. (14) relied on external 
means of obtaining cz, by using results of motoring CFD simulation. The 
procedure was based on T-m mapping, where regions of the CFD grid 
were associated to zones of the MZM. The regions´ temperatures were 
captured at TDC and then mapped to the zones. Observing Eq. (14), cz 
was obtained straightforwardly from the CFD results without any need 
for  tuning.  Ultimately,  the  MZM  results  were  not  significantly  better 
than simplistic implementations of HL correlation (explained in Section 
4.1),  so  a  follow-up  study  by  Garcia-Guendulain  [213]  attempted  to 
improve results by modifying Eq. (14). Specifically, Tadb was replaced by 
a tuneable temperature parameter they called Tref. The tuning procedure 
entailed  matching  the  zonal  temperature  distribution  at  TDC  against 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099833A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 6 
Summary of the calibration procedure and typical values of the tuning parameters of all the submodels  

Submodel 

Approach 

Calibration 
parameter 

Meaning 

Range 

Procedure 

Wall heat transfer 

Correlation 

Fundamental 
Twall 

Heat loss multiplier 
Scaling factor 
Scaling factor 
ζwall 
Surface temperatures 

Scaling factor for h in each zone 
Constant multiplied to h 
Constant multiplied to h 
Wall friction velocity 
— 

Area-averaged wall 
temperature 

— 

Boundary layer 

BL zone size 

— 

Interzonal heat 
transport 

Interzonal mass 

transport 
Turbulence 

Heat transfer 
potential 
Diffusion 

Yang & Martin 

ζHTP 

ζmix,  
ζmix,R 
ζu 

Heat transfer time 

Scaling factor for axial and 
radial entrainment rate 
Characteristic velocity 

Scaling factor 

ζt 

Turbulent diffusivity factor 

Single k eqn 

Fuel stratification 

— 

ζrd, 
ζdiss, 
ζinj 
ζλnZ 
ζ∇λ 
ζλ,rich 
ζλ,lean  

kproduction 
kdiss 
kinj 
Ф in outer zone, 
gradient of Ф in outer zone 

Crevice 

Crevice zone size  — 

— 

Blow-by 

Crevice mass flow 
— 

ζcrevice 
ζBB 

Crevice flow constant 
Blow-by rate constant 

0–3 
1.1 
0.9–1.5 
0.3–0.83 
Tlinr = 422 K 
Thead = 478 K 
Tpist = 437 K 
Tlinr = 440 K 
Thead = 420 K 
Tpist = 420 K 
Tlinr = Thead =
Tpist 
430 K 

Eq. (14) 
Wall heat flux from CFD data 
Compression P curve 
In-cylinder T field or wall heat flux 
— 

— 

Exp. data of head + ΔT linear, 
interpolation between 20 K and 50 K 
— 

Estimated based on Tin 
Eqs. (29) & (30) 
— 
— 

430–440 K 
400 K 
440 K 
400 K 
Twall = Tcool 
375 K 
350 K 
373 K 
390 K 
453 K 
0.9 mm 
3 % Bore 
15% (m/m) 
0.1 mm 
16.6% (V/V) 
19.6% (V/V) 
4% (m/m) 
0.045-0.088 
mm 
— 
1.5% (V/V) 
4.5% (V/V) x3  — 
— 
5% (m/m) 
(cid:0) 3 s 
1.0 e

Experiment 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 

Match T, P, HRR 
— 

Literature [145] 
Literature [132] 
Match P 
Match P 
— 

Match emissions 

Match T, P, HRR 

– 

Match combustion P curve 

0.19 
0.05 – NA 
0.1 – boost 
0.03–0.06 
0.057 
0.05  
0.03–0.24 
based on 
engine 
0.32 
10–1900 

— 

0.4–0.8 
1.5–3 
0.35–0.45 
4–20 
1.25% 
Vclearance 
2.5% mcyl 
3% Vclearance 

Match P curve 
— 

Match peak heat flux from CFD data 
— 

Match CFD mass flow rate 

— 

Optimising performance quantifiers with 
experiment data 
Motoring CFD 

Optimising performance quantifiers with 
experiment data 
P curve (2 OPs tested) 

Literature [132] 

— 

Literature [132] 

1.5% Vclearance 

Literature [132] 

3% Vclearance 
3% Vclearance 
0.825 cm3 
2.8% Vclearance 
1.5 × 10
(cid:0) 1 
5.5 s
(cid:0) 1 
6 s

(cid:0) 4 

— 

Literature [211] 
geometry (piston) 
geometry (piston) 
Match ΔP (CFD) 
Match compression P curve 
Match compression P curve 

Ref. 

[81] 
[58] 
[89] 
[96] 
[73,75] 

[79] 

[97] 

[71,88, 
139] 
[88] 
[81] 
[93] 
[103] 
[58] 
[99] 
[133] 
[138] 
[67] 
[210] 
[97] 
[131] 
[135] 
[93] 
[67] 
[138] 
[134] 
[88, 
104] 
[140] 
[89] 
[98] 
[97] 

[58] 

[71] 
[88] 

[104] 
[133] 
[134] 
[96] 

[87] 
[92, 
141] 
[58] 

[92] 

[74] 

[93] 

[134] 
[71, 
139] 
[88, 
104] 
[95] 
[131] 
[97] 
[96] 
[96] 
[67] 
[138]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099834A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

that  obtained  from  CFD,  using  T-m  mapping.  The  authors  included  a 
terse  validation  section,  involving  qualitative  comparison  against  an 
experimental pressure curve, indicating that peak pressures were within 
+/-  2  bar.  Nevertheless,  they  said  improvement  in  results  was  not 
apparent. 

Using a physics-based wall function model [144], Bissoli et al. [96] 
conducted a detailed evaluation of their heat loss submodel. This per-
tained  to  the  constant  ζwall  in  Eq.  (21).  They  calibrated  their  model 
mainly  by  using  wall  heat  flux  data  from  CFD  models  which  were 
operated under motoring condition. This was done across three engine 
geometries  and  different  operating  points.  Furthermore,  they  verified 
the predictivity of their model, based on piston surface heat flux data 
from  literature  [214,215].  Additionally,  results  of  the  temperature 
profile along the axial direction was assessed (from literature [216]) to 
ensure optimal calibration and predictivity. 

The  wall  temperature  model  of  Mikulski  et  al.  [92,141]  required 
information  regarding  mean  value  bulk  gas  temperature  and  heat 
transfer coefficient (gas to wall). Due to the interconnectivity between 
Twall and bulk gas temperature, their MZ model was run in cycle-to-cycle 
connectivity until converged results were obtained. They validated the 
results against GT-Power´s predictive wall temperature solver [51], and 
achieved  Twall  within  +/-  7  K.  This  approach  did  not  require 
case-dependent tuning, nor calibration to a particular engine. Running 
the  model  over  a  convergence  loop  was  not  considered  a  drawback 
because  the  integrated  gas  exchange  submodel  also  needed  the  same 
step. Four to six iterations usually were needed for converged results. 
Size of the BL zone usually follows from observations of bulk thick-
ness of the boundary layer. Guo et al. [134] fixed the BL zone thickness 
to  0.1mm  citing  data  from  literature  [132]  of  conventional  engines 
typically 0.04 – 0.2mm. The work of Fiveland and Assais [145] has also 
been a popular reference for setting BL zone size, as followed in [135]. 
Tzanetakis  et  al.  [67]  tuned  the  BL  zone  volume  by  matching  with 
experimental  data  of  peak  pressure  and  pressure  trace  of  expansion 
stroke. The onion-skin MZM of Kongsereeparp and Checkel [89] con-
sisted of 3 BL zones (Tab. 1) and each was specified 4.5% IVC volume. 
The model of Komninos et al. [88,104], used emissions measurements to 
calibrate  their  zone  size.  Since  they  implemented  a  fundamental 
approach for wall HL, fine resolution of the boundary layer region was 
necessary. The calibration procedure was to progressively make the BL 
zone  thinner,  starting  from  a  size  equal  to  the  other  zones.  The 

simulation  that  best  resulted  a  match  in  CO  and  HC  emissions  was 
chosen. 

5.4.2.

Interzonal flows and turbulence 

The  implementation  by  Kozarac  et  al.  [97],  discussed  in  section 
4.2.1, used the heat transfer time parameter (ζHTP) to tune interzonal 
heat flow. The straightforward procedure assessed the sensitivity of ζHTP 
on pressure trace, HRR and temperature trace. Ultimately, they selected 
a constant value of 1e-3 s for all operating conditions (λ sweep). Their 
MZM was able to attain qualitative trends in CO, UHC, ηcomb and fitness 
to pressure trace. 

Tuning  of  the  popularly  used  Yang  &  Martin  turbulence  model 
(section 4.4) is based on the sole parameter ζu, pertaining to the char-
acteristic velocity. As noted in the works [96,104], ζu is a global tuning 
parameter  implying  that  retuning  is  required  if  the  engine  geometry 
changes. Regarding the means for tuning, Komninos et al. [71] initially 
stated that the experimental cylinder pressure during combustion was 
used for tuning, and the resulting value was 0.19. In a later study [104], 
Komninos & Kosmadakis conducted an extensive analysis and validation 
of their fundamental heat loss submodel, using wall heat flow data from 
a CFD model. They assessed the model over three different engines with 
the  value  ranging  from  0.03  to  0.06.  Bissoli  et  al.  [96]  employed  a 
non-reactive CFD model, specifically designed to tune their MZM. The 
procedure  involved  tracking  the  evolution  of  an  initially  segregated 
N2/Ar  mixture  under  adiabatic  conditions  and  under  closed  cycle 
operation. ζu  was then adjusted so that the MZM (initialised similarly) 
matched the results of the CFD model. 

Eichmeier et al. [58] based their spray-MZ combustion approach on a 
zero-dimensional, single equation k model for turbulence. Tuning of the 
model mainly pertained to Eq. (49), using the parameters of ζtur1, ζtur2, 
ζtur3  and ζtur4. ζtur1  was for turbulence generation, ζtur2  for turbulence 
dissipation and Ctur3 for turbulence induced by direct injection. ζtur4was 
for scaling the turbulent length scale. The tuning process employed a 
CFD  model,  where  the  results  of  concern  were  the  cylinder-averaged 
turbulent  kinetic  energy  (k),  turbulence  intensity  (v)  and  turbulence 
length scale (lt). The simulation was performed over four representative 
load  points  of  varying  engine  speed,  diesel  injection  timing  and 
diesel-gasoline  mixture.  Thus,  the  tuning  procedure  encapsulated 
matching  the  MZM  results  to  CFD  by  adjusting  the  three  tuning  pa-
rameters. The results are shown in Fig. 28. 

Fig. 28. Calibration and functional verification of zero-dimensional turbulence submodel by Eichmeier et al. [58], based on evolution of turbulence kinetic energy, 
turbulence intensity and turbulence length scale. RCCI combustion in diesel-gasoline engine across four operating conditions. (Reprinted with permission from SAE 
international) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099835A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

The  MZM  of  Mikulski  et  al.  [92]  simulated  NG-diesel  RCCI  com-
bustion, and presented three case-dependent tuning parameters. One (ζt) 
pertained to the turbulence submodel and two (ζλnz, ζ∇λ) were associ-
ated with the initial diesel stratification, as discussed in sections 4.4 and 
5.2.2  respectively.  The  authors  devised  a  single  tuning  procedure  to 
handle all three parameters, by creating a map of the tuning parameters 
for  different  operating  conditions.  To  this  end,  they  selected  four 
representative load points (of varying fuel mixtures, SOIdiesel and EGR), 
and optimised the values of ζt, ζλnZ and ζ∇λ  for each case. Optimisation 
was based on matching simulation results to experimental data of CA10, 
CA50, Pmax, IMEP and UHC. Ultimately, ζt  varied from 10 to 1600 be-
tween low and high loads. ζ∇λ  varied between 1.5 and 3, and ζλnZ  be-
tween  0.4  and  0.8,  for  changes  in  SOI  and  NG-diesel  mixtures.  In  a 
follow-up  study,  Mikulski  &  Bekdemir  [101]  also  included  the  influ-
ence  of  NG  (low-reactivity  fuel)  stratification,  ultimately  resulting  in 
five case-dependent tuning parameters. Nevertheless, their work was an 
explorative  study  and  the  tuning  procedure  was  extended  to  accom-
modate the additional parameters. 

5.4.3. Crevice and blow-by 

Size  of  crevice  zone  is  usually  of  fixed  volume  and  specified  as 
fraction of clearance volume (Vclearance). The value ranges between 1.5 – 
3% and the choice is cited from literature [132]. Since crevice usually 
refers  to  the  piston  top-land  crevice,  the  volume  can  be  directly 
computed if piston geometry is available, as in [97]. As mentioned in 
Section 4.6, mass flow via the BL zone is based on the mechanism of PEQ. 
However, Bissoli et al. [96] modelled mass flow according to square root 
of pressure difference as in Eq. (61). The constant ζcrevice was calibrated 
from  non-reactive  CFD  simulation.  Essentially  the  difference  between 
crevice and bulk cylinder pressure was matched. The value of ζcrevice,z 
turned out to be 1.5 × 10

(cid:0) 4. 

The simplified  blow-by model in  Tzanetakis et  al.  [67] was  tuned 
using the proportionality constant ζBB,as in Eq. (61). A single operating 
point with λ = 1.51 and EGR = 13.5 % was chosen for calibration, and 
the  process  involved  matching  the  compression  pressure  curve  from 
(cid:0) 1  for the blow-by 
experiments. With a global calibrated value of 5.5 s
constant, the authors observed around 18 % loss in the trapped resid-
ual  mass  at  IVC.  Although  seemingly  high,  this  loss  was  in  line  with 
measurements on their target platform, which indicated 20 – 30%, by 
TDC. 

6. Model application and validation 

6.1. Accuracy of the modelling approaches 

The goal of validation is to ensure a simulation model can produce 
consistent  results  within  predefined  accuracy  requirements.  These  re-
quirements  differ  according  to  application,  depending  whether  the 
model  is  used  for  control  purposes  or  for  insight  into  a  specific  phe-
nomenon, as discussed in the following subsection. This will define the 
appropriate  scope  (what  quantities)  and  range  (how  many  operating 
points) to validate the model. Finally, the MZM can be validated against 
experimental data (from full-metal or optical engines) or against a more 
detail  model  (CFD),  assuming  this  already  has  been  validated  experi-
mentally.  The  latter  approach  has  some  added  value  since  the  high- 
fidelity  modelling  provides  additional  insight  into  the  phenomena, 
allowing comparison with parameters that are difficult to obtain directly 
from engine measurement. However, note that some studies have relied 
on literature data to validate the MZM model. Tab. 7 sets out validation 
methodologies  and  assesses  MZ  approaches,  based  on  accuracy  and 
versatility for operating regimes. 

Balloon MZ models account for 77 % of the reviewed literature, with 
the one-way coupled CFD-balloon model comprising a significant pro-
portion  of  those.  The  models  were  mainly  validated  against  HCCI 
operation. A few works [77,78,112] were oriented towards PCCI com-
bustion,  but  they  lacked  adequate  validation  and  focused  instead  on 

exploratory or model model-sensitivity studies. Regarding accuracy, the 
coupled  CFD-balloon  approaches  models  perform  well  in  terms  of 
qualitative reproduction of the pressure curve and combustion phasing 
predictions. A good example is the work of Babajimopoulos et al. [79], 
where in the best-case, peak pressure prediction was within 5 % of the 
experimental reference, while predictions in CA10 and CA50 was were 
within 1CAD. On the other hand, CFD-balloon models typically provide 
poor  predictions  of  emissions,  with  lack  of  interzonal  heat  and  mass 
flows being the main reason. This can be observed (Tab. 7) in the work 
by Aceves et al. [73,75,76,84,218]. Section 5.3 expands on this problem, 
which is based on the analysis by Flowers et al. [82]. It is worth noting 
that  NOX  and  PM  quantities  were  usually  ignored  in  these  modelling 
approaches, since these emissions already were considered ultra-low for 
HCCI,  both  from  the  experimental  and  simulation  side.  Regarding 
simulation  time,  these  models  were  reportedly  slow,  despite  ignoring 
the CFD simulation at initialisation phase. A possible explanation is their 
use of relatively large chemical mechanisms (such as for propane [167], 
with  179  species  and  1125  reactions)  running  on  the  early  computer 
machines (such as DEC Alpha). However, in the follow-up works they 
were  able  to  accelerate  this  by  using  parallel  computation,  reducing 
simulation time by a factor of 100, as explained in section 5.1. Conse-
quently, data regarding the calculation speed/accuracy trade-off must 
be viewed with a historical perspective, since these works were the first 
to deal with MZ thermo-kinetic HCCI simulations. Finally, note that few 
stand-alone  balloon  models  [74,135,210]  were  explicitly  meant  for 
trend prediction only, and there are very few data on their quantitative 
validation. 

Among onion-skin models, the enclosed type has been used solely in 
the  context of  HCCI  simulations.  Komninos &  Kosmadakis  [104]  per-
formed  extensive  validation  of  their  MZM  including  that  for  their 
fundamental  wall  heat  loss  submodel  (described  in  section  4.1).  It  is 
worth acknowledging that the heat loss submodel could not be validated 
by  a  decoupled  approach  since  it  was  intrinsically  tied  to  the  zonal 
configuration and interzonal heat transport. Nevertheless, CFD models 
of  three  different  engine  geometries  were  constructed  and  after  vali-
dating with experimental data, served for MZM model validation. The 
conditions  covered  variations  in  rpm  and  compression  ratio,  and  the 
simulation runs were under motoring conditions. Overall, the validation 
outcome is that the authors´in-house fundamental heat loss model better 
matched wall heat flow than single-zone results based on the Annand 
correlation.  There  also  was  good  agreement  with  the  near-wall  tem-
perature  profiles.  The  authors  [88]  also  conducted  an  overall  model 
validation to reflect HCCI engine operation under boosted conditions. 
Variations  in  PIVC,  TIVC  and  λ  were  considered  over  nine  operating 
points.  The  model´s  predictions  showed  good  correspondence  with 
experiment data with respect to qualitative pressure trace and trends in 
emissions. Specifically, the average error in NOX  emissions was 0.005 
g/kWh, 1.72 g/kWh for HC and a rather large 3.6125 g/kWh for CO. In 
our  opinion,  the  works  of  Komninos  and  his  group  present  a  most 
thorough  validation  of  the  MZM  approach,  and  the  process  of  the 
workflow is inspirational. However, considering the intended applica-
tions of MZM, the large investment in effort and resources may not be 
justified. 

Other  authors  validated  their  HCCI-oriented  onion-skin  models 
directly  on  full-metal  engine  experiments.  Table  7  shows  their  most 
relevant  validation  results.  The  scope  of  validation  in  the  works  of 
Neshat  et  al.  deserves  attention:  the  authors  tested  their  HCCI  model 
with  different  fuels,  including,  n-heptane,  NG  [87],  PRF  mixture,  RG 
blending [219], and over a range of EGR rates and compression ratios 
[95].  Voshtani  et  al.  [102]  used  reformer  gas–HCCI  experiments  to 
validate their model. Fathi et al. [142] validated their HCCI combustion 
MZM  (with  a  direct  injection  predictive  submodel,  discussed  in  sub-
section 5.2.2) by exclusively varying SOI (146↔61 CAD bTDC), covering 
over 10 operating points. The sophisticated MZM of Bissoli et al. [96] 
demanded  validation  in  two  stages.  First,  its  fundamental  heat  loss 
model  was  validated,  using  heat  flux  measurements  under  motoring 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099836A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 7 
Accuracy and validation of different modelling approaches  

Reference 

Model 
type 

Concept 

Engine 
type 

Range of 
validation 

nZ 

Simulation 
time 

Model performance 
Percentage error 
Combustion 
indicators 

In-cylinder 
pressure /HRR 

Aceves et al. 
2000-2005 

[73] 

CFD- 
balloon 

HCCI 

[75] 

HCCI 

[76] 

HCCI 

Babajimopo- 
ulos et al. 
2003 

[79] 

CFD- 
Balloon 

HCCI 

Fiveland & 
Assanis 
2001 

[145] 

Onion- 
skin 

HCCI 

Ogink & 

[93] 

Golovitchev 
2002 

Onion- 
skin 

HCCI 

Guo et al. 
2009 

[134] 

Onion- 
skin 

HCCI 

Komninos et al. 
2005-2009 

[71] 

Onion- 
skin 

HCCI 

NG 
VD = 1600 
cm3 
B = 120 
mm 
cr = 21:1 
6-cyl to 1- 
cyl 
(flat 
piston) 
C3H8 
VD=1378 
cm3 
B=114 
mm 
cr = 18:1 
6-cyl to 1- 
cyl 
(flat 
piston) 
i-C8H18 
VD = 1378 
cm3 
B = 114 
mm 
cr = 10.5:1 
6-cyl to 1- 
cyl 
(bowl in 
piston) 
NG 
VD = 4310 
cm3 
B = 170 
mm 
cr = 21:1 
1-cyl 

NG 
VD = 1600 
cm3 
B = 120 
mm 
(flat 
piston) 

RF-08-A- 
85 (97 
RON) 
VD = 487 
cm3 
B = 83 mm 
cr = 13.2:1 
1-cyl 
n-C7H16 
VD = 612 
cm3 
B = 82.5 
mm 
zariable cr 
1-cyl 

i-C8H18 
VD = 1600 
cm3 
B = 120 
mm 

#OP = 3 
Pintake = 1–3 
bar 
Ф =
0.26–0.38 

#OP = 3 
Neng 
=1000–1800 
rpm 
T0 =
340–342K 
Ф =
0.17–0.36 

#OP = 2 
Neng =
1010–2007 
rpm 
T0 = 381 K, 
413 K 
Ф =
0.346–0.348 

#OP = 3 
P0 = 1.5–2.0 
bar 
Ф = 0.25–0.3 
T0 = 391–444 
K 

#OP = 2 
Ф =
0.26–0.31 
cr = 17:1, 
19:1  

#OP = 3 
Neng =
1450–2000 
rpm 
λ = 0.99–1.56 

#OP > 25 
AFR = 45–55 
cr =
10:1–14:1 
Neng =
600–1400 

10 

12 hrs 
MZ only 

Pmax ≤ 5%  

Pmax ≤ 5% 

10 

12 hrs 
(40 hrs total) 
DEC-Alpha 
450 MHz 

Pmax ≤ 2% 

10 

2 days 
MZ only 
DEC-Alpha 
450 MHz 

CA10-90 ≤
10% 
Ƞth ≤ 10% 
Ƞind ≤ 10% 
Ƞcomb ≤ 1% 

CA10-90 ≤
8% 
Ƞth ≤ 5% 
Ƞind ≤ 5% 
Ƞcomb ≤ 4% 

CA10-90 ≤
20% 
Ƞth ≤ 2% 
Ƞind ≤ 2% 
Ƞcomb ≤ 1% 

Emissions 

UHC ≤
55% 
CO ≥ 70% 

Remarks 

NOX ignored 
because too 
small, 
closed cycle 

UHC ≤
35% 
CO ≤ 70%  

Improved 
emissions 
predictions 

UHC ≤
30% 
CO ≤ 90%  

Segregated 
solver 

10  — 

Pmax ≤ 5% 

— 

CA10 ≤ 0.3% 
CA50 ≤ 0.5% 
CA90 ≤ 0.5% 

2 

— 

P – qlt 

— 

— 

9 

20–30 min 

P – qlt 
HRR – qlt 

IMEPnet ≤
13% 

8 

— 

P – qlt  

— 

UHC ≤
100% 
CO ≤ 88%  

qlt: 
CO vs. 
AFr– fair 
NOX vs. 
AFr– good 
NOX vs. cr 
– poor  

CFD: BL grid 
coarse 
full cycle 
VVA 
parametric 
study, 
results 
compared 
against 
simulations in  
[91] 
Assumed valve 
profile and 
flow coeffs, 
comparing CK  
[172] & [180], 
parametric 
study of HL 
models [129, 
217] 
Full cycle, 
coupled to AVL 
Boost 

Calibration of 
T0  

#OP = 3 
λ = 2.66–3.23 

11 

40 min 
(Pentium4 
3GHz) 

P – qlt 
HRR qlt 

— 

— 

ζu = 0.19 (not 
explicit 
calibration) 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099837A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 7 (continued ) 

Reference 

Model 
type 

Concept 

Engine 
type 

Range of 
validation 

nZ 

Simulation 
time 

Model performance 
Percentage error 
Combustion 
indicators 

In-cylinder 
pressure /HRR 

Remarks 

Emissions 

[88] 

Onion- 
skin 

HCCI 

[104] 

Onion- 
skin 

HCCI 

Kongsereeparp 

[99] 

et al. 
2005 

Onion- 
skin 

HCCI 

Egüz et al. 
2013 

[141] 

Onion- 
skin 

RCCI 

Mikulski et al. 

[92] 

2016 

Onion- 
skin 

RCCI 

Mikulski et al. 

[56] 

2018 

Neshat & Saray 

[87] 

2014 

Onion- 
skin 

Onion- 
skin 

RCCI 

HCCI 

Lashkarpour 

et al. 
2018 

[95] 

Onion- 
skin 

RCCI 

Eichmeier et al 

[58] 

Spray 
MZ 

RCCI 

cr = 17:1 
6-cyl to 1- 
cyl 
i-C8H18 
VD = 1600 
cm3 
B = 120 
mm 
cr = 17:1 
6-cyl to 1- 
cyl 
Fairbanks- 
Morse 
diesel (a) 
B = 79.4 
mm 
GM 
Triptane 
(b) 
B = 76.2 
mm 
Perkins 
engine (c) 
B = 98.4 
mm 
VD = 612 
cm3 
B = 82.5 
mm 
cr = 17:1 
(NG), 
11.5:1 (n- 
C7H16) 
1-cyl 
n-C7H16 þ
i-C8H18 
VD = 2097 
cm3 
B = 130 
mm 
cr = 14.9:1 
bowl in 
piston 
6-cyl to 1- 
cyl 
NG þ n- 
C7H16 
cr = 14:1 
flat piston 

NG þ n- 
C7H16   

CH4, n- 
C7H16 
VD = 612 
cm3 
B = 82.5 
mm 
1-cyl 
CH4 þ n- 
C7H16 
VD = 612 
cm3 
B = 82.5 
mm 
cr = 17:1 

i-C8H18 þ
n-C7H16 
VD = 477 
cm3 

#OP = 9 
P0 = 1–3 bar 
λ = 2.67–4.44 

16 

40 min 
(Intel 
Core2duo) 

P – qlt 
HRR – qlt 

— 

◦

ζu = 0.05, 0.1, 
T0 = 80, 105
C, 
calibration 
Vzone = f(p) 

qlt: 
CO vs. λ, 
p0 – fair 
UHC vs. λ, 
p0 – fair 
NOX vs. λ, 
p0 – good 

#OP = 9 
(a) motoring 
cases 
cr = 8:1–14:1 
(b) Neng=
750, 1500 
rpm 
(c) Neng=
705–2395 
rpm 

#OP = 3 
For NG+RG 
RG = 16%– 
40% 
For 
C7H14+RG 
Ф = 0.3–0.6 

#OP = 12 
BR = 0.7–0.9 
SOI = 60–90 
CAD bTDC 

16  — 

Heat flow – qlt 

— 

— 

12 

30 min 

P – qlt 
PRRmax ≤ 20%  

10 

1 hour 

P-V (log-log) – 
qlt 

— 

— 

CA10 ≤ 3% 
CA10-90 
≤25% 
IMEP ≤ 25% 
Ƞth ≤ 20% 
Ƞth, ind ≤ 20%  

CA10 ≤ 5 
CAD 
CA50 ≤ 5 
CAD  

Validation of 
fundamental 
HL model, 
thickness of 
zones is 
generated 
automatically 
by the code 

Comparison 
with single- 
zone model 

Good trend- 
wise CA50 

12 

30 min 

#OP = 4 
BR =
0.6–0.85 
GR = 0–48% 

P – qlt 
HRR – qlt 
CHR – qlt 
Pmax ≤ 10 bar  

13 

45 min 

— 

CA10 ≤ 3 
CAD 
CA50 ≤ 3 
CAD 
IMEP ≤ 0.5 
bar 
— 

11  — 

P – qlt 
HRR – qlt 

— 

11  — 

p – qlt 
HRR – qlt 
Pmax ≤ 2.8%  

CA10 ≤
200% 
CA50 ≤ 25% 

— 

Different 
geometry, VVA 

nZ calibration 

nZ based on 
emissions  

UHC ≤
50% 
CO ≤ 30% 
NOX ≤
1130%  

— 

UHC ≤
20% 
CO ≤ 2% 
NOX ≤
100%  

UHC ≤
35% 
CO ≤ 20% 
NOX ≤
67%  

30 

12 s 
(operator 
splitting, 
parallel) 

P – qlt 
HRR – qlt 
(fundamentally 
different 

— 

— 

CFD for 
calibration  

(continued on next page) 

#OP = 6 
cr = 12.7:1, 
21.5:1 
λ = 2.05–3.87 
EGR = 0–40% 

#OP = 6 
BR =
0.978–0.984 
˙mair=
2.63–3.89 g/s 
SOI = 10–25 
CAD bTDC 
EGR = 0–30% 
#OP = 4 
Neng =
1500–2300 
rpm 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099838A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 7 (continued ) 

Reference 

Model 
type 

Concept 

Engine 
type 

Range of 
validation 

nZ 

B = 82mm 
cr = 16.7:1 

Single & 
double 
injection 
BR = 0.7–0.9 

Simulation 
time 

Model performance 
Percentage error 
Combustion 
indicators 

In-cylinder 
pressure /HRR 

Remarks 

Emissions 

characteristics)  

qlt = qualitative validation; OP = operating point; cr = compression ratio; VD = displacement volume; Ƞth,  ind = indicated thermal efficiency 

conditions, sourced from literature covering three different engine ge-
ometries: Fairbanks-Morse [214,220], GM Tripane [214,220] and Per-
kins  [220].  This  first  stage  validation  confirmed  that  the  submodel 
enabled qualitative capture of the profile of heat flux with CAD, across 
changes in engine speed and engine geometries. The secondvalidation 
stage was of the MZM as a whole and was conducted under firing con-
ditions  with  data  from  literature  [221,222].  Results  showed  that  the 
model was qualitatively able to follow the profile of pressure and cu-
mulative  heat  release  rate  (CHR)  over  varying  boost  pressure  [221]. 
With in-cylinder intermediate species data available, [222] the model 
overestimated  the  concentration  of  molecules  such  as  formaldehyde, 
alkenes and CO during the main combustion event. The authors attrib-
uted this to residual gases residing in the crevice zone. However, further 
comments cannot be made since validation results regarding emissions 
were sparse. Nevertheless, the results show the potential of Bissoli et al.´s 
predictive simulation tool, applying physics-based submodels for inter-
zonal heat and mass flow, turbulence and wall heat loss. 

Looking at onion-skin MZM validated for dual-fuel RCCI operation, 
the most thoroughly validated is the approach first proposed by Egüz 
et  al.  [100].  In  their  original  work,  the  authors  provided  qualitative 
validation  of  in-cylinder  pressures  (P-V  plots)  for  several  sweeps  of 
gasoline-diesel blend ratios (BR) and SOI. Their Fortran-code model was 
concluded  to  be  trend-wise  predictive  for  relevant  combustion  in-
dicators  like  IMPE,  Pmax,  PRR  and  CA10/50. The  absolute  simulation 
error for the latter was rather large, however, at 5 CAD. Emissions were 
not  considered  as  a  validation  factor.  The  code  of  Egüz  was  further 
modified by Bekdemir et al. [183] to the Matlab-Cantera coupling and 
after several upgrades, including (but not limiting) initialisation with a 
valve-flow  submodel  and  a  predictive  wall-temperature  submodel, 
validated directly on a multi-cylinder, heavy-duty NG-diesel RCCI en-
gine in subsequent works by Mikulski et al [56,92,101]. The upgrades 
also resulted in greater detail for the zonal configuration, including 13 
zones, and simulation time was halved to around 30 minutes per cycle. 

The  validation  in  [92]  targeted  reproduction  of  in-cylinder  pressure 
trace  within  cycle-to-cycle  variations,  which  transferred  to  the  same 
target for IMEP, CA10/50 and Pmax. Experimental and simulated emis-
sions  were  also  compared.  The  results  summarised  in  Tab.  7  are 
expanded for selected operating points in Fig. 29 and Fig. 30 for better 
comprehension. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  their  later  works  Mikulski  et  al.  [56,86] 
proved that their MZM (XCCI), when combined with a zero-dimensional 
valve-flow  submodel,  can  predict  the  RCCI  combustion  response  to 
various  variable  intake  valve  actuation  strategies.  The  experimental 
validation  involved  different  piston  geometry  and  injector  alignment 
(Mexican hat with squish; narrow injection umbrella-angle), compared 
to the original calibration´s set-up in [86] (flat piston; wider umbrella). 
Those  changes  meant  absolute  values  of  CA10/CA50  were  off  by  as 
much as 4 CA, but this difference was consistent when varying intake 
valve timing, proving high scalability and transferability of the model to 
different hardware platforms. Other, less complete validation endeav-
ours  for  onion-skin  RCCI  MZM  were  made,  amongst  others,  by  Lash-
karpour et al. [95]. The model was conceptually similar to the earlier- 
mentioned models by Egüz et al. [100,141] and the TNO team (Bekde-
mir et al [183], Mikulski et al. [92]). The zonal division and NG-diesel 
kinetic mechanism involved were much coarser than those of Mikulski 
et al, which resulted in a large error in CA10 prediction. Emission pre-
diction accuracy was similar to that of other onion-skin models. 

Summarising Tab. 7´s data regarding onion-skin model validity, it can 
be concluded that the models can predict control-relevant combustion 
indicators  both  qualitatively  (trends)  and  quantitatively  (absolute 
values).  Absolute  differences  in  combustion  phasing  (CA10/50)  and 
IMEP do not exceed 3 CAD or 0.5 bar respectively. Emissions are trend- 
wise predictive and particular focus is on calibrating CO and HC as they 
influence  IMEP.  Outside  the  calibration  spectrum,  onion-skin  MZM 
typically capture these emission indicators with an error of 30 %. NOx 
emission is reported as ultra-low, the same as in LTC experiments, and 

Fig. 29. Experimental and simulated in-cylinder pressure and heat release rate (left) and cumulative heat release as a function of CA for selected RCCI case (mid- 
load) [101]. Cycle-to-cycle variations of the measured pressure are indicated with the bars. (Reproduced with permission from Applied Energy, Elsevier) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099839A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 30. Engine-out emissions and control-related parameters: model (brick) vs. experiment (blue) for several validation cases (x-axis) [101]. Error bars indicate 
mean  cylinder-to-cylinder  variations  when  such  data  were  available.  Emission  values  are  given  relative  to  the  experimental  value  of  case  1.  (Reproduced  with 
permission from Applied Energy, Elsevier) 

though  the  relative  differences  may  be  up  to  70  %,  with  such  small 
values  these  differences  are  within  emission  measurement  accuracy. 
Finally, simulation times on a single CPU are consistently reported as 
between 30 minutes and one hour, with differences in performance due 
to different levels of fidelity, ways of initialisation, solver, and, of course, 
the simulation platform. As the latter factor is not always reported, one 
should  take  in  to  account  that  newer  studies  bring  progressive 
improvement  in  computational  power.  Thus,  the  actual  computation 
time probably converges around the lower value of the reported span, 
assuming models are benchmarked on a common up-to-date hardware 
platform. 

Validation data from other MZM categories are scarce. The spray- 
based MZM of Eichmeier et al. [58] was validated against CFD results 
of  gasoline-diesel  RCCI  combustion.  The  authors  also  presented  it 
against  experimental  data,  sourced  from  [223].  The  operating  condi-
tions spanned four load points (IMEP: 3-5 bar), various fuel blends and 
different SOI. The authors claimed qualitatively good fit of in-cylinder 
pressure traces, but in-depth analysis of HRR suggests a fundamentally 
different combustion regime in the model (separate combustion of diesel 
and gasoline fractions) compared to the RCCI experiments. The good fit 
was obtained probably by over-constraining the physics with tuning, a 
pitfall of all simplified physics-based approaches. This, and the fact that 
emission  prediction  validity  was  not  reported,  make  it  doubtful  that 
spray-based approaches can be useful to predict RCCI. This is despite 
spectacular computational speed (a matter of seconds – see Tab. 7) and 
ability  to  straightforwardly  connect  to  multi-injection  strategies  and 
other diesel fuel modes. 

6.2. Applications 

This section reviews the application domains of MZM. They range 
from  fundamental-level  studies  that  support  understanding  of  in- 
cylinder processes in LTC, through applied-level research into combus-
tion  concept  design  and  optimisation,  to  direct  control-development 
applications.  The  section  is  divided  accordingly  and  may  be  inspira-
tional in highlighting how different MZM approaches can suit particular 
applications.  This  focus  on  application,  coupled  with  the  previous 
sections´review of submodel structure, accuracy and simulation times, 

should provide input to the final discussion about what makes the op-
timum application-tailored MZM. 

6.2.1. Fundamental studies 

One  of  the  advantages  that  engine  modelling  has  over  full-metal 
engine  tests  is  the  possibility  to  isolate  selected  parameters  and  then 
identify  the  model’s  response  to  a  single  factor.  This  is  especially 
important for LTC combustion concepts, where in-cylinder thermody-
namic  parameters,  chemical  composition,  combustion  and  emissions 
usually are cross-related, both within a single cycle and on the cycle-to- 
cycle basis. This complexity is magnified if thermal and compositional 
stratifications  are  taken  into  consideration.  Therefore,  MZ  models 
proved to be useful tools for various parametric studies aiming to pro-
vide deeper understanding of the phenomena. 

The works focused on fundamental understanding of LTC phenom-
enon are summarised Tab. 8. In this section, we do not comment on the 
modelling details or validation, focusing instead on approaches to solve 
particular problems and their results. As a side note, the cited results are 
arranged so that they start with general statements and move to more 
detailed conclusions. 

6.2.1.1. Stratification. Thermal  and  compositional  stratification,  after 
chemical kinetics, is the second-most important phenomenon shaping 
LTC performance. Here, the work of Kongsereeparp et al. [99] is worth 
mentioning, because it decoupled the effects of thermal and composi-
tional stratification in a hydrogen-fuelled HCCI engine. The stratifica-
tion  of  Ф  was  found  to  have  modest  effect  on  SOC  and  combustion 
duration. With homogeneous mixture (Ф  = 0.3) as a reference, 50 % 
stratification  span  with  higher  fuel  concentration  in  the  core  zones 
advanced SOC, but in a limited range of less than a single CAD. At the 
same  time  combustion  duration  was  lengthened  by  20  %.  Quantita-
tively,  the  opposite  effect  was  observed  for  both  combustion  indices 
when  fuel  was  more  concentrated  in  the  outer  zones.  In  contrast  to 
excess air, the effect of thermal stratification was found to be much more 
pronounced. When the temperature span between inner and outer zones 
at IVC was set to 60 K, auto-ignition was advanced by 4 CAD. At the 
same time, combustion duration increased by a factor of six. Examina-
tion of the isolated effect of residual gas inhomogeneity, where up to 35 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099840A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 8 
Application of MZM to fundamental studies  

MZM 
type 

Ref. 

concept 

Application 

Approach 

Highlights 

Comment 

Stratification 
Balloon 

[77] 

PCCI 
CH4, 
n-C4H10 

Study of Ф stratification 
Applying T-ф mapping for PCCI 

Onion- 
skin 

[99] 

HCCI 
H2, 
NG 

Parametric study: fuel (Ф) 
compositional stratification, 
compositional EGR stratification, 
thermal effect of EGR 
stratification 
Isolation of the individual effects 
Light-duty engine 

Onion- 
skin 

[101] 

RCCI 
n-C7H16 
+ NG 

Parametric study: low- reactivity 
fuel (NG) stratification 
Heavy-duty NG-diesel RCCI 

Onion- 
skin 

[145] 

HCCI 
NG 

Influence of PIVC on BL thickness 
and wall heat transfer coefficient 

Balloon 

[209] 

HCCI 
iC8H18 

Influence of Crevice size on 
combustion performance 

Four hypothetical Ф stratification 
cases (profiles). 
Profiles are only in radial direction, 
and linear in ф 
Two fuels tested 
Results verified against CFD 
simulation 
Different Ф in zones: from 
homogeneous to 50 % variability 
Variable residual concentrations 
between zones from uniform to 40 % 
difference 
Temperature differences between 
zones at IVC from 0 to 60 K 

Steepest profile with rich zone on 
cylinder axis – earliest auto- 
ignition 
Gradient of profile has little effect 
on burn duration and NOX. 

Modest effect of fuel stratification 
on SOC and CD; 1 CAD advance of 
SOC, 20 % longer CD 
Moderate effect of EGR 
stratification: 1.5 CAD advance of 
SOC, 35 % longer CD 
Substantial effect of temperature 
stratification 
Increase in NG stratification affects 
ηcomb improvement at low load 
THC & CH4 emissions decrease at 
low & mid loads 
Pmax, PRRmax & NOX increase in 
general 

NG stratification by tuning 
parameters: Ф(13) and ΔФ 
Combustion performance evaluated 
on CA10, CA50, Pmax, PRRmax 
IMEPnet, ηt,net, ηcomb& emissions of 
NOX, UHC, CH4, CO 
Fundamental heat loss and BL model   Within a cycle, BL thickness 

Vcrevice =1.26, 6.2, 10.26 cm3 
Rc maintained at 17:1 
Influence of λ (2.5↔4.5) also 
included 
Results verified against experiments 

increases during compression 
Heat transfer coefficient increases 
with PIVC 
BL thickness decreases with PIVC 
Smallest Vcrevice showed lowest CO 
& HC emissions and highest Ƞcomb 
CO increases with λ, & Ƞcomb 
decreases 
HC emissions insensitive to λ 

ф is fuel/O2 equivalence 
ratio 
Results influenced by 
transition angle 
Discussion focuses more on 
transition angle 

Potential of thermal 
stratification in HCCI 
control 

Shape of stratification – 
linear in phi space 

— 

MZ model [76] captures 
trends of results very well 
nZ = 40 used. 

Turbulence effect 
Balloon 

[75] 

HCCI 
C3H8 

Balloon 

[84] 

HCCI 

Influence of swirl, Twall and 
crevice volume on emissions (CO 
& HC) reduction potential 
Applying MZ model of [73] to 
propane fuelling 
Influence of piston bowl shape on 
combustion and emissions 
Sensitivity of piston induced 
turbulence on combustion  

Two swirl ratios tested: 4.3:1 & 
0.43:1 
Two Twall tested: 440K & 600K 
Five out of 10 zones are considered 
adiabatic 
Flat vs. square piston bowl 
Influence of TIVC (429K ↔ 451K) 
also investigated 
Results verified against experiments 

Fuel Reforming 
Onion- 
skin 

[224] 

HCCI 
n-C7H16 

H2 blending with n-C7H16 

Isolating chemical & dilution effects 
by artificial inert species approach 
H2: 0 ↔20 (%m/m) 

Onion- 
skin 

[225] 

HCCI 

Reformer gas (RG) blending with 
NG, n-C7H16, i-C8H18 

Onion- 
skin 

[219] 

HCCI 
PRF 

Reformer gas (RG) blending with 
PRF 
[226] additional investigation on 
influence of supercharged 
condition 

Isolating thermodynamic, chemical 
& dilution effects by artificial inert 
species approach [224] 
Interaction effect between artificial 
species also studied 
RG = 0.75H2 + 0.25CO 
RG: 0↔50 (%m/m) 

Isolating thermodynamic, chemical 
& dilution effects by artificial inert 
species approach [224] 
RG = 0.5H2 + 0.5CO (%V/V) 
RG: 0↔30 (%BR) 
Varying PRF % 
Varying RG-PRF blends 
ROPA 

Swirl has little effect. CO & HC 
change by <̰  3% 
Twall has significant effect CO & HC 
reduce by 75% 

Hot walls effects – by 
correlation… 
Only 2 ‘states’ for Vcrevice 
influence – base and 0 

Square piston bowl causes higher 
CO & HC, as well as lower Ƞcomb 
HC emissions relatively insensitive 
to TIVC, as opposed to CO & Ƞcomb 

CA50 retards with H2 
CA10-90 first decreases then 
increases with H2 
Ƞth, ind first increases then 
decreases with H2 
Indicated specific UHC & N2O 
emissions increases with H2 
Influence of H2 decreases with 
EGR% 
CA10 advanced for NG, retards for 
n-C7H16, slightly advances for i- 
C8H18 with RG% 
Peak ROHR increases for all fuels 
with RG % 
Thermal effect of RG advances 
CA10 for all fuels 
Chemical effect of RG causes 
different behaviour in SOC for fuels 
Influence of RG decreases with i- 
C8H18 % 
Pmax, PRRmax,IMEP & NOX 
emissions reduces with RG 
CA10, CD, UHC & CO emissions 
increases with RG 
Chemical effect most prominent, 
followed by dilution effect, then 
thermodynamic effect 

CO predictions are poor 
(underpredicted, error ≈
0.9) 
Trends in HC & Ƞcomb with 
TIVC is not captured well 
Trends in burn duration 
captured well 

Interzonal mass transfer 
considered for crevice zone 

No interzonal mass transfer 
Influence of RG composition 
not studied 

— 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099841A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 8 (continued ) 

MZM 
type 

Ref. 

concept 

Application 

Approach 

Highlights 

Comment 

Onion 
skin 

[227] 

HCCI 
NG 

Detailed study into the effects of 
water addition 

Water addition to fuel up to 10 % 
Separation of thermal and chemical 
effects of water addition 

Second Law analysis 
Onion- 
skin 

[228] 

HCCI 
i-C8H18 

Exergy analysis 
Optimisation 

Onion- 
skin 

[229] 

HCCI 
n-C7H16 

Availability (exergy) analysis of 
RG blending 

Exergy analysis by varying PIVC, Ф, 
rpm & VD 
300 simulation cases 

Closed cycle analysis 
Isolating thermodynamic, chemical 
& dilution effects by artificial inert 
species approach [224] 
RG = 0.5H2 + 0.5CO (V/V) 
RG: 0 ↔20 (%BR) 
EGR: 0 ↔46 (%m/m) 

Water injection can be used 
as an additional control tool 
for HCCI combustion 

Balloon, low no. of zones, 
emissions, no interzonal 
heat & mass transfer 

Influence of RG composition 
not tested 

Low-temperature H abstraction 
reactions rate decreases with RG 
RG has strong influence on LTHR 
Thermal effect of water is 
dominating over chemical effect. 
Thermal effect of water addition 
can effectively control SOC 
Water addition reduces reaction 
rate but not reaction pathways 

Exergy efficiency increases with 
PIVC, Ф, rpm 
Exergy efficiency highly sensitive 
to Ф, & low sensitivity to Neng 
Optimal combustion timing to 
maximize exergy 
Optimal strategy to control load 
Availabilities of chemical, 
thermomechanical, work, wall 
heat transfer & destruction 
decreases with RG % 
ȠII insensitive to RG % 
Dilution effect of RG more 
influential on availability terms 
than chemical & thermodynamic 
effects 
Utilisation increases with RG % 

Variable valve actuation 
Onion 
skin 

[56] 

RCCI 

Onion 
skin 

[86] 

RCCI 

Parametric study: VVA (lIVO, 
eIVC, 2EVO) 
Heav- duty NG-diesel RCCI 

Parametric study: VVA (NVO) 
NVO + fuel injection (high 
reactivity) 
lIVO, eEVO, eEVC 
late IVO for validation 
Heavy-duty NG-diesel RCCI 

IOCV & EOCV 
Combustion performance evaluated 
on TIVC, TEVO, CA10, CA50, Pmax, 
PRRmax IMEPnet, ηt,net, ηcomb& 
emissions of NOX, UHC, CH4 
Combustion performance evaluated 
on TIVC, CA10, CA50, IMEPnet, ηth,net, 
ηcomb& emissions of NOX, UHC, CH4 

EIVC – high load extension (by 
limiting Pmax, PRRmax) 
LIVO – improved at ηcomb low load 
2EVO – improved ηcomb & thermal 
management 
NVO w/ eEVO + eEVC 
15 % reduction in CH4 emissions 
Improved thermal management  

— 

— 

CD = combustion duration; ȠII = second law efficiency 

%  of  air  and  exhaust  was  unmixed,  also  showed  that  the  effects  on 
combustion depended on the direction of stratification. When residual 
content in the core zone was increased, SOC was retarded by 1.5 CAD 
and  combustion  duration  reduced  by  about  35  %.  The  trends  were 
reversed for greater concentration of residuals in the boundary region. 
The common conclusion of the study is that increase of fuel concentra-
tion in the core zone advances SOC, independently of the diluent, i.e., air 
or  residuals.  However,  combustion  duration  lengthens  because  more 
diluted  fuel  in the  outer  zones,  which  ignite  later,  burns  slower.  In a 
more  realistic  scenario,  Kongsereeparp  et  al.  provided  the  results  for 
combined compositional and thermal effect of residuals inhomogeneity. 
The  results  showed  that  the  thermal  effect  dominated.  Repeating  the 
same research plan with NG revealed lower sensitivity, presumably due 
to lower NG ignition energy, but following the same trends. 

Mikulski & Bekdemir [101] investigated the effects of low-reactivity 
fuel stratification in a Diesel-NG RCCI engine, as a response to difficulty 
of realising high-pressure gaseous fuel injection experimentally. At this 
point it should be noted that, in contrast to HCCI, where auto-ignition 
first  appears  in  the  centre  of  the  combustion  chamber,  in  RCCI  more 
reactive diesel-like fuel is distributed in the outer regions, which ignite 
earlier.  Therefore,  unlike  HCCI,  in  RCCI  combustion  there  is  usually 
incomplete  burning  in  the  combustion  chamber´s  core  zone.  The  in-
vestigations compared even distributions of NG with stratified cases, but 
with  increasing  fuel  concentrations  towards  outer  zones.  The  results 
showed  that at  low load,  NG stratification improved combustion  effi-
ciency because the core zones contained less fuel, which usually is not 
completely burnt due to the quenching effect of temperature drop. 

6.2.1.2. Influence  of  in-cylinder  flow  field/turbulence. The  effect  of  in- 
cylinder flow field was studied mainly within the context of one-way 
coupled  CFD-balloon  approaches.  Aceves  et  al.  [75]  conducted  a 
limited  study  of  how  initial  swirl  number  affected  HCCI  combustion 
characteristics  for  a  low-load  case.  They  changed  swirl  number  by  a 
factor of 10 (i.e., from 0.43 to 4.3), for which UHC and CO emissions 
changed by approximately 7 %. In a follow-up study [84] the authors 
used the same model for a detailed analysis of the influence of squish 
flow  and  turbulence  on  HCCI  combustion.  They  tested  two  shapes  of 
piston bowl: a flat one, and a square bowl shape with a surface area of its 
top land increased by a factor of 1.66. Results indicated that combustion 
duration was prolonged with the square bowl, with an advance in CA10 
by  about  6  CAD.  However,  this  was  accompanied  by  a  5  %  drop  in 
combustion efficiency. Although CO and UHC results were presented, it 
is difficult to make comments, since CO was underpredicted by a factor 
of 3-10, and good trend-wise results in CO and HC were not seen. 

In  the  above  methodology,  information  regarding  flow  field 
modelled by CFD was contained within the T-m history. Thus, by dis-
regarding interzonal flows, the balloon MZ model had little to do with 
the sensitivity of the results. On the other hand, sophisticated MZ ap-
proaches  [58,103]  with  predictive  turbulence  submodels,  although 
capable, have not yet been used in the context of such studies. 

6.2.1.3. Fuel composition/reforming effects. Guo & Neill used their eight- 
zone model [134] to study hydrogen enrichment on n-heptane-fuelled 
HCCI combustion [224]. The influence of H2  blending on engine per-
formance was analysed by isolated its effect on chemistry, dilution and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099842A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

thermodynamics.  To  do  so,  artificial  species  were  introduced  to  the 
chemical  mechanism,  substituting  the  corresponding  components  of 
reformer gas. Their MZ model was of the onion-skin type and included a 
dedicated boundary layer and crevice zone. Interzonal mass transfer was 
mainly considered for the crevice zone. The blending of H2  was quan-
tified as a fraction of total fuel mass (% m/m). Results show that CA50 
retards with H2 blending, with the dilution effect being most influential. 
Combustion duration first decreases and then increases with percentage 
of H2, and is mainly influenced by its chemical effect. Indicated thermal 
efficiency  increases  with  percentage  of  H2  at  fixed  CA50.  In  terms  of 
emissions, indicated specific quantities of UHC and N2O increase with 
percentage of H2, but N2O sensitivity reduces with delayed CA50. 

The influence of reformer gas (RG) blending was explored mainly in 
the context of HCCI. RG being a hydrogen- enriched gas [133], it was 
modelled as mixtures of H2 and CO. Due to the chemical kinetics-driven 
nature of LTC, RG acts as an additive to affect combustion characteris-
tics,  and  its  influence  depends  on  the  type  of  baseline  fuel  used.  The 
analysis to identify the influence of RG blending is along the lines of 
chemical, dilution and thermodynamic influences, similar to the previ-
ously  mentioned  artificial  species  methodology  [224].  Reyhanian  & 
Hosseini [225] performed a comprehensive analysis by including NG, 
n-heptane  and  iso-octane  fuelling  in  a  study  mainly  focused  on  RG 
blending´s influence on combustion timing. NG showed an advancement 
in CA10 with increasing percentage of RG; n-heptane showed retarda-
tion; and iso-octane showed advancement, although less sensitive. The 
peak value of heat release rate increased for all fuels with RG blending. 
The thermal influence of RG causes advancement in CA10 for all fuels, 
owing to its high ratio of specific heats (γ). Dilution effect has a large 
influence  on  n-heptane.  The  chemical  effect  is  the  main  reason  for 
discrepancy in SOC behaviour between fuels. Individual contributions of 
CO and H2 revealed both act to advance SOC for n-heptane, but for NG 
they act oppositely, with H2 being more influential. 

The  study  of  Neshat  et  al.  [219]  focused  on  influence  of  primary 
reference fuel (PRF) composition coupled with RG blending. They used a 
similar methodology as the above, and fixed RG composition to a 50/50 
H2-CO2 mix. RG blending with PRF was quantified on an energy basis, as 
in Eq. (72). The authors noticed that increasing RG percentage generally 
caused a retardation in combustion phasing; decrease in Pmax, IEMP and 
NOX; and increase in combustion duration, UHC and CO. Although some 
of  these  trends  might  not  agree  with  the  previous  study,  it  is  worth 
noting  the  difference  in  RG  composition  and  the  maximum  levels  to 
which RG-PRF blending was studied. Furthermore, analysis of chemical 
kinetics by rate of production analysis (ROPR) revealed that RG had a 
strong influence on low-temperature heat release (LTHR) of n-C8H18, by 
reducing rate of H abstraction reactions. 

ERRG =

˙mRGLHVRG
˙mRGLHVRG + ˙mPRFLHVPRF

(72) 

Ahari  &  Neshat  [227]  simulated  addition  of  water  vapour  to  an 
NG-fuelled HCCI engine, aiming to identify the mechanisms of water´s 
effect on combustion and emissions. Generally, water additive up to 3 % 
increased thermal efficiency and substantially decreased NOX emissions. 
Greater  additions  of  water  resulted  in  delayed  and  incomplete  com-
bustion, with high CO and UHC emissions. The use of the artificial inert 
species method enabled the authors to identify the effects of water. The 
most pronounced water function was its high heat capacity. Water´s ef-
fects on combustion chemistry were negligible. 

6.2.1.4. Second-law  analysis. The goal of these studies was to investi-
gate  the  mechanisms  and  sources  of  thermodynamic  irreversibilities 
which otherwise would not be possible based on the first law alone. In 
combining the first and second laws, they assess the quality of energy 
content and identify potential for efficient resource utilisation. Saxena 
et  al.  [228]  set  out  to  investigate  the  influences  of  intake  pressure, 
equivalence  ratio,  engine  speed  and  displacement  volume  on  the 
mechanisms of exergy losses. They used a one-way coupled CFD-balloon 

model for the investigation on a gasoline-fuelled HCCI engine. They set 
up a simulation matrix consisting of 300 cases to accommodate varia-
tions  of  all  input  parameters,  with  quantities  varied  from  four  to  six 
steps. Their analysis used the quantity exergy efficiency (Ƞex), defined as 
the ratio between total indicated work and total exergy in fuel. Results 
indicated that Ƞex in general increased with intake pressure, equivalence 
ratio  and  engine  speed,  but  remained  relatively  insensitive  to  engine 
size.  Importantly,  the  authors  concluded  that  optimal  combustion 
timing, according to exergy efficiency, occurred when unburnt species 
losses surpassed that of wall heat transfer. Thus, the optimal strategy to 
control load in HCCI engines mainly was to vary PIVC during high-load 
operating  points,  while  maintaining  a  constant  value  of  Ф.  Only  for 
low-load operation was  Ф  to be varied, but minding that combustion 
phasing occurred before the point that induced a sharp increase in un-
burnt species. 

Another  example  is  the  study  by  Neshat  &  Asghari  [229],  which 
analysed how reformer gas blending affected the various mechanisms of 
irreversibilities. Their baseline was an n-heptane HCCI engine, and RG 
composition  was  a  fixed  50/50  (%V/V)  mixture  of  H2  and  CO.  For 
blending with n-heptane they used an energy- based quantifier, blend 
ratio, similar to the Eq. (71) and essentially used two operating points (0 
and 20 BR %) to delineate the influence of RG blending. They used the 
quantifier of utilization factor, which was defined differently from Ƞex. It 
was defined as the ratio of total availability utilised to the availability 
supplied  to  the  engine.  It  included  contributions  of  rejected  heat  to 
cylinder walls and exhaust gas on the output side, and accounted for 
availability  of  in-cylinder  charge  at  IVC,  apart  from  the  chemical 
availability of the fuel. Results showed that chemical and work avail-
abilities decreased with percentage of RG, and so did availability loss 
due to heat transfer. They observed that the irreversibilities decreased 
with percentage of RG, leading to an increase in utilisation factor, by 
approximately 1 % for every 10 % increase in RG. However, second-law 
efficiency (ȠII) remained relatively insensitive. In terms of isolating the 
individual  effects  of  RG  blending,  they  used  the  [224]  artificial  inert 
species methodology. They discovered that the dilution effect was most 
influential and led to a decrease in thermomechanical availability. 

6.2.1.5. Understanding variable valve actuation (VVA) effects. Regarding 
the application of variable valve actuation for LTC, readers are referred 
to  the  works  by  some  authors  of  this  current  article  [56,86].  These 
studies are of importance because, unlike most other studies in litera-
ture,  they  focus  on  prediction  of  RCCI  combustion  rather  than  HCCI 
applications.  Both  cited  investigations  used  an  onion-skin  type 
multi-zone  model  and  the  VVA  concepts  were  tested  for  NG-diesel 
combustion  in  RCCI  mode.  The  primary  focus  in  [56]  was  extending 
the operating range of RCCI. Three different VVA measures were stud-
ied, two of which were also realised on a heavy-duty RCCI test-engine 
hardware  platform.  Early  intake  valve  closing  (EIVC)  simulations 
demonstrated that extending full-load operation up to 23 bar IMEP was 
possible while adhering to maximum cylinder-pressure limits, but with 
the  observation  that  increasing  load  beyond  21  bar  IMEP  resulted  in 
reduced thermal efficiency. On the other hand, late intake valve opening 
(LIVO)  was  observed  to  offer  potential  for  moderate  combustion  effi-
ciency improvement for low-load RCCI operation, where the improved 
combustion efficiency (in simulations) from higher  blend-ratio opera-
tion  could  be  countered  by  higher  pumping  losses  in  a  real  engine. 
Additionally, the authors also used the model to investigate the exhaust 
valve double lift (2EVO) strategy on the same platform. This entailed 
opening the exhaust valve for a short duration during the intake stroke 
to promote internal EGR and increase intake charge temperature. It was 
investigated  in  a  one-way  coupled  simulation  set-up  where  the 
multi-zone  combustion  model  was  coupled  with  a  GT-Power  engine 
model  that  simulated  the  gas  exchange  processes  during  valve  flow. 
Simulation results indicated that it was possible to reduce engine-out 
methane  emissions  by  as  much  as  98  %,  along  with  up  to  100  K 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099843A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

increase in exhaust gas temperature for better thermal management at 
low loads. 

Continuing the theme of enhancing low-load RCCI combustion, the 
research  presented  in  [86]  focused  on  investigating  the  effects  of 
negative  valve  overlap  (NVO)  and  on-board  fuel  reforming  by  direct 
diesel injection. In this simulation study, the MZM presented in [56] was 
modified to represent the reduced valve overlap period and the partial 
fuel oxidation occurring in that phase. The timing and amount of diesel 
directly injected into the hot, recompressed exhaust gases was varied to 
modify  in-cylinder  thermo-chemical  state  prior  to  combustion.  The 
strategy  was  studied  in  two  cases:  a  high-EGR  operating  point  and  a 
lean-burn case. This VVA measure was shown to elevate the exhaust gas 
temperature  to  850  K,  enabling  reformation  of  diesel  and  ultimately 
cutting methane emissions by as much as 15 %. At low loads, net indi-
cated efficiency was also seen to improve, despite increased pumping 
losses from reducing the valve overlap. With these measures, the authors 
attempted  to  provide  an  outlook  for  RCCI  operation  across  the  full 
load-range, with emission reduction towards Euro VI limits. It must be 
noted that the simulation model used for these studies was best-suited 

for trend-wise prediction of the combustion characteristics. 

6.2.2. Application-oriented studies 

Fast  simulation  times,  comparable  with  high-fidelity  1D  engine 
simulation,  make the  MZM particularly  suitable for  different applied- 
level  studies.  This  refers  mostly  to  finding/optimising  the  operating 
limits of the given LTC concept, as a prerequisite to detail control design, 
discussed  in  the  next  subsection.  Tab.  9  gathers  the  works  that  used 
MZM to deal with defined application-oriented studies. The key findings 
and  results  are  presented  in  the  ‘Highlights’  column:  the  ‘Comments’ 
column lists aspects not directly mentioned in the publication or which 
provide  related  information  outside  the  scope  of  the  associated 
application. 

Prediction of knock and misfire limits 

True analysis of knocking conditions cannot be studied within the 
MZ framework, since its fundamental assumption of equal zonal pres-
sure, breaks down. This is because the large-amplitude pressure waves 
associated  with  knock  occur  at  speeds  greater  than  that  of  sound. 

Table 9 
MZM use for application-oriented studies  

MZM 
type 

Ref. 

Concept 

Application 

Approach 

Highlights 

Comments 

Balloon 

[230]  HCCI 

i-C8H18 

Knock limit prediction 
Misfire limit prediction 

Balloon 

[231]  HCCI 

i-C8H18 

Influence of T stratification on 
knock limit 

Onion- 
skin 

[67] 

HCCI 
PRF20 

Knock limits prediction 

Onion- 
skin 

[57] 

RCCI 

Feasibility study: RCCI large- 
bore engine 
Optimising combustion 
performance over whole 
operating range 

Balloon 

[213]  HCCI 

i-C8H18 

Generating performance map 
Identification of optimal 
operating region 

Balloon 

[98] 

HCCI 
PRF90 

Transient operartion 

Balloon 

[112] 

PCCI 
n-C7H16 

Transient operation 
Development of a dynamic time 
response plant model 

Based on analysing P and HRR using 
correlation Eq. (72) 
Results verified against data from 
literature 
Misfire: Ƞcomb < 93 % 

Knock: ringing intensity < 5 MW/m2 
MZM: five-zone, equal zone mass, 
adiabatic 
T stratification: linear (parametric 
variation) 

Comparing knock prediction 
methods: PRRmax [232] & β [230] 
Varied λ & EGR% 
Results compared against data from 
literature 

MZ decoupled air-path model 
Full factorial (5670 OPs) with 
variable EGR, TIVC, λ, BR, SOI on stock 
hardware 
Optimising based on rc 
Constraints: NOX < 2.4 g/kWh & Pmax 
< 180 bar 
Large bore (B = 350 mm) 
Ф–iEGR performance map 
Constraints: Ƞcomb > 85% & RI < 5 
MW/m2 
Constant speed operation 
Closed cycle MZ model 
Plant model: MZ+GEX 
Fuelling transient (step change in Ф 
from 0.9 to 1) 
rpm transient (step-change in Neng 
from 1500 to 1250) 
Valve timing transient (Step- change 
in EVC by 6 CAD) 
Plant model: MZ+mean 
value+Wiener model [233] 
Controlled variables: IMEP, CA50 
Actuators: SOI, EGR, mdiesel 
Response for step inputs in SOI, EGR 
& mdiesel 

Formulated β correlation 
Knock mainly influenced by λ & 
EGR% 
Knock insensitive to TIVC & PIVC 
Knock occurs λ > 1.8 or EGR >
30 %  
To avoid knock: 
T stratification must increase 
with rpm. 
T stratification must increase 
with Ф 
Higher T stratification required 
for earlier CA50 
For EGR ≤ 15% both methods are 
similar 
PRRmax captures knock boundary 
better for EGR > 15% 
βk not limited by solver time step 
size. But PRRmax is. 
Linear trend of knock boundary 
with λ 
Knock occurs at λ < 1.8 or EGR <
30% 
Peak Ƞth ≈ 47.8% @ 75% load 
for stock hardware (rc = 12.2:1) 
Optimum @ T0 ≈ 370 K, λ ≈ 2.6, 
SOI ≈ 60 CAD bTDC, BR ≈ 83% 
Peak Ƞth ≈ 51.8% for rc = 15.2:1 
within constraints of Pmax & NOX 

Optimum operating range at 25% 
< iEGR < 55% & 0.35 < Ф <
0.65 
Optimum performance at 1 bar <
IMEP < 4bar & 28% < Ƞth < 42% 
Trend-wise results 

IMEP & CA50 are in very good 
agreement with experiment 

Influence of crevice on misfire 
limit not modelled 
Fixed Neng 

Equal zone P assumption 
breakdowns 
No extensive validation of MZ 
model 
Heat loss ignored 

Fixed Neng = 700 rpm 

Fuel stratification modelled 
from pre-tuned map 
Not validated on large bore 
13-zone simulation time ≈ 20 
min 

Simulation time ≈ 10min 

Step-change approximated by 
manual operation of actuators 
Step-change in rpm aided by 
fuelling change 

Fixed fuel stratification 
imposed on all OP 
Simulation time of plant model 
≈ 6 min 
Constant speed operation  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099844A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Nevertheless, MZ models can be used to predict propensity for engine 
knock, based on given operating conditions. The methodology relies on 
identifying when HRR exceeds the rate of pressure equalisation, which 
represents (localised) overpressure in a zone. To this end, Yelvington & 
Green [230] formulated a dimensionless parameter, Eq. (73) based on 
scaling analysis of the first law. In the equation,  ˙q is the volumetric heat 
release rate and γ is ratio of specific heats. Lc  is a characteristic length 
scale which was fixed to B/10. The parameter β is applied to all zones 
and knock is identified when β ≤ 1. Basically, it implies that knock oc-
curs when the HRR of any zone becomes greater than the rate of volume 
expansion of that zone. 

β =

Lc(γ (cid:0) 1)
γP

˙q
vsound

≤ 1

(73) 

Yelvington  &  Green  conducted  their  study  under  constant-speed 
operation,  and  observed  that  λ  and  EGR  were  more  influential  than 
pressure and temperature at IVC. Results showed that knock occurred 
for λ >1.8 or EGR >30 %. In a following study, Tzanetakis et al. [67] 
observed similar results for the β criterion. In addition, they tested knock 
detection based on PRRmax, choosing a threshold criterion of 39 bar/-
CAD. However, for the PRRmax method, its value was sensitive to the size 
of  the  simulation´s  time  step.  After  a  sensitivity  analysis,  the  authors 
(cid:0) 6s for 700rpm. Comparing 
settled with a value for time-step size of 10
both approaches, the authors noted that both performed similarly for 
EGR <15 %, but the PRRmax  method  gave better predictions for EGR 
>15 %. 

Sj¨oberg & Dec [231] undertook a parametric study of the influence of 
thermal  stratification  on  knock.  They  used  the  criterion  for  knock  as 
ringing intensity > 5 W/m2, similar to [234]. This is shown in Eq. (74) 
where the unit of PRRmax is kPa/ms and for Pmax is kPa. They employed a 
simple  five-zone  model  and  disregarded  wall  heat  loss.  Temperature 
stratification  was  set  linearly  across  the  zone,  and  the  gradient  was 
varied.  They  concluded  that  steeper  thermal  stratification  reduced 
knock  tendency.  In  other  words,  steeper  thermal  stratification  was 
required  to  avoid  the  tendency  to  knock  when  operating  at  higher 
engine-speed or high equivalence ratio. 

RI =

1
2γ

(0.05 PRRmax)2
Pmax

.

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
γRTmax

(74) 

In terms misfire detection, the approach used thus far has been based 
on value of combustion efficiency. If combustion efficiency drops below 
a pre-calibrated value, it is considered that the engine operates in the 
misfire  region.  For  HCCI,  Yelvington  &  Green  [230]  followed  this 
approach and selected the misfire limit as 92-94%. However, compared 
to their knock boundary predictions, the predictions of misfire did not 

reproduce the experimental trends well enough. This may be attributed 
to  the  balloon  MZM  inherently  producing  poor  emissions  predictions 
(Section 5.3). In addition, their model did not capture the changes in IVC 
conditions  well  (by  gas  exchange  model),  due  to  large  cycle-to-cycle 
variability during this unstable operation. Good estimates of IVC tem-
perature  and  composition  is  shown  to  largely  influence  misfire  pre-
dictions [235]. 

6.2.2.1. Optimisation. Due to the unique positioning of MZ models be-
tween simplified single-zone and detailed CFD models, they can be used 
as  a  reliable  means  of  exploring  the  design  space.  Along  these  lines, 
Garcia-Guendulain  et  al.  [213]  focused  on  identifying  the  optimal 
operating region for an HCCI (i-C8H18) engine by generating a perfor-
mance map. The design space was composed of ф and iEGR, and con-
strained  by  combustion  efficiency  and  ringing  intensity  Eq.  (73) 
thresholds of 85 % and 5 MW/m2 respectively. They employed the MZ 
model of Kodavasal et al. [81] and did not incorporate a gas-exchange 
model. Thus, iEGR concentration was imposed, and the resulting TIVC 
was estimated by using standard procedure [132]. With over 100 points 
in  the  design  space,  each  run  of  their  40-zone  model  took  about  10 
minutes. The optimisation results were typical of Pareto front (Fig. 31), 
with optimal indicated thermal efficiency between 28 % and 42 %, and 
IMEP in the range of 1 to 4 bar. 

Mikulski  et  al.  [57]  a  performed  an  extensive  study  seeking  the 
optimal performance region of a natural gas-diesel RCCI engine, with 
the goal to demonstrate its applicability as a mid-speed marine engine. 
Their hardware was based on a commercial, boosted, dual-fuel gas en-
gine. They explored a vast design space composed of TIVC, λdiesel, BR, 
SOIdiesel, EGR concentration and across four representative load points. 
A total of 5670 cases were considered. The design was constrained by 
limiting NOX to 2.4 g/kWh and peak in-cylinder pressure to 180 bar. The 
MZM  employed  was  a  detailed  13-zone,  onion-skin  (annular)  type, 
extensively  validated  in  their  earlier  works  [56,92].  To  improve 
computational efficiency, they ran a detailed air-path model which was 
decoupled from the MZ model. The sequence entailed first an optimi-
sation  run  solely  on  the  MZ  model,  followed  by  the  air-path  model 
simulation, with imposed burn rate from the previous run. The authors 
demonstrated  that,  based  on  the  stock  engine  hardware,  a  peak  indi-
cated efficiency of 47.8 % was attainable at 75 % load, with CO and UHC 
emissions  well  below  legislation  limits.  The  optimum  was  located 
around TIVC at 370 K, and λ, SOI and BR at 2.6, 60 CAD bTDC and 83 % 
respectively. In addition, they demonstrated the potential of hardware 
enhancements for RCCI performance. Their detailed analysis focused on 
compression ratio (rc), showing a further improvement in indicated ef-
ficiency to 51.8 % at a rc of 15.2:1. This was still within the previously 

Fig. 31. HCCI operating region based, on optimisation for ηcomb ≥ 85% and RI ≤ 5WM/m2 from Garcia-Guendulain et al. [213]. (Reproduced with permission from 
International Journal of Engine Research, SAGE) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099845A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

defined  constraints,  and  was  achieved  by  adjusting  for  optimal  CA50 
using TIVC and BR. 

6.2.2.2. Dynamic  time  response  simulation. In  an  attempt  towards 
creating transient simulation, Angelos et al. [98] developed a simplified 
approach.  They  created  the  plant  model by  coupling  a  two-zone  to  a 
detailed air-path model. The simulation was run in closed-loop cycles, 
each lasting seven or eight minutes, and requiring between 20 and 25 
cycles  to  reach  steady  state.  Transients  were  then  introduced  as  step 
changes in the inputs, and the responses of IMEPgross  and CA50 were 
monitored. For a step change in ф, from 0.9 to 1, the trend in transients 
of  IMEPgross  was  captured  well,  with  a  small  systematic  5  %  over-
prediction.  Predicted  response  in  CA50  was  a  1.7  CAD  drop,  against 
experimental (mean) value of 0.7 CAD. The model was tested for speed 
transients (1500 to 1250 rpm) where a similar accuracy in IMEPgross as 
before  was  obtained.  However,  CA50  was  largely  underpredicted, 
around a value of 9 CAD. Finally, valve timing transients were intro-
duced by earlier EVC by 6 CAD. The model was able to reproduce the 
response in CA50, which however was underpredicted by 7 CAD. 

Felsch  et  al.  [112]  presented  a  comprehensive  methodology  for 
development  of  control-oriented,  dynamic  time  response  simulation, 
starting  from  3D  CFD  results.  Ultimately,  their  simulation  toolchain 
followed the Wiener-type [233] approach, splitting the plant model into 
stationary and dynamic response parts. The stationary model consisted 
of an MZ and mean-value gas exchange model to capture steady-state 
operation,  but  also  to  well  represent  the  non-linearities  associated 
with  LTC  operation.  The  dynamic  part  was  for  transfer  functions 
developed in the frequency domain. Considered inputs were SOI, EGR 
rate and mdiesel  (mass of fuel injected); outputs were IMEP and CA50. 
Fig. 32 depicts the overall structure. 

The  MZM used  was  derived  from a  two-way  coupled  CFD-balloon 
model. It was made to operate as a stand-alone model by assuming a 
fixed zonal fuel distribution for all operating conditions. This was done, 

based on the experimental matrix, which consisted only of an SOI sweep. 
Nevertheless, the overall simulation time for 15 zones was six minutes 
per cycle. The results (Fig. 32) were obtained for a square wave in SOI 
signal  (between  20.7  &  30.7  CAD  bTDC)  while  EGR  and  fuel  mass 
injected were held at 30 % and 10.2 mg/cycle respectively. The inte-
grated model captured the dynamics well, as shown by the responses 
depicted in Fig. 32. It is worth noting that experimental data were ob-
tained via step response measurement in an HIL set-up. 

6.2.3. Control development 

All the combustion concepts discussed here lack a distinctive, fast- 
response ignition trigger. Since LTC is very sensitive to changes in IVC 
conditions  and  thermal  and  compositional  stratification,  closed-loop 
combustion  control  is  believed  to  be  a  necessary  pre-condition  to 
maintain proper combustion onset [236]. The limited load- range orig-
inating from the low-load issues with combustion efficiency is another 
control problem for LTC, as is excessive combustion harshness at high 
loads, as discussed in the introduction. These issues make it difficult to 
cover the whole load-range with a single LTC strategy, so this usually 
calls  for mode-switching towards  more conventional  (hot combustion 
concepts), leading to the need to develop proper control functions for 
this  transition.  Finally,  overall  LTC  performance  can  be  further 
improved  by  considering  constrained  or 
(on-board 
extremum-seeking) control of emissions or/and efficiency. The control 
problem may be addressed with various actuators, usually involving fast 
thermal management (HCCI), combined with coordinated air/fuel path 
control strategies in stratified LTC concepts (PCCI, RCCI). Different LTC 
control approaches have been reviewed by, amongst others, Duan et al. 
[15], Li et al. [237], Pandey et al. [238], Rahul et al. [239]. Those works 
identify the proper combustion models as enablers for rapid prototyping 
of robust control, balancing system complexity with fast simulation. This 
section  aims  to  give  an  overview  of  how  MZ  models  fit  this 
control-oriented  application,  revealing  the  benefits  of  a  detailed, 

targeted 

Fig. 32. Combined static and dynamic plant model (a) and comparison of measurements and simulation data for step SOI changes; IMEP (b), CA50 (c) from [112]. 
Data acquired for diesel engine operated in PCCI mode at moderate load. (Reproduced with permission from International Journal of Engine Research, SAGE) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099846A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 10 
Application of MZM for controller development  

Ref. 

Concept 

MZM reference model 

Control model surrogate (COM) 

Control strategy 

Highlights 

Map-based control  

HCCI 
i-C8H18 

[81, 
213] 

AMECS; accelerated 40-zone, 
252 species & 1038 reactions 
balloon-type MZM 

[240, 

241] 

HCCI 
ethanol 

Six-zone, 58 species, 310 
reaction MZM 

— 

— 

[242] 

HCCI 
ethanol 

Six-zone, 58 species, 310 
reaction MZM 

Surrogate double Vibe model 

[59] 

HCCI 
diesel 

Five-zone model coupled with 
GT-Power model to simulate the 
whole engine process 

NA 

Model-based control 
[243, 

244] 

HCCI 
n-C7H16 & 
ethanol 

Single-zone, 38 species & 69 
reactions 

Reduced-order kinetics for resolving 
the ignition point and Vibe function 
for combustion 

[65, 

125] 

HCCI 
i-C8H18 & 
n-C7H16 

Six-zone, 64 species & 125 
reactions MZM with inter-zonal 
heat transfer 

0-D physics-based CA50 and IMEP 
model and ANN optimal CA50 and 
ANN minimum emission model 

CA50 control; optimal control 
map for Ф and iEGR 

CA50 optimal control map for 
Neng, P0 & Ф 

CA50 control with 2 sets of 
input variables: 
VVA, EGR & VGT 
VVA, EGR, SC & VGT 

Dual PID control of IMEP and 
CA50; input variables: IVC & 
fuel flow rate 

PID and MPC CA 50 
controllers; comparison of two 
input variables: 
Fuel BR 
IVC 

MIMO control (with three sub- 
controllers) of CA50, IMEP & 
emissions of CO + HC; 
input variables: fuel flow rate 
& ON (by BR). 

[64] 

RCCI 
NG-diesel  

XCCI; 13-zones, 354 reactions & 
65 species, phenomenological 
heat and mass transfer 

Nonlinear function fitted to 
approximate the MZM (the function 
is further linearised around the 
nominal operating condition) 

MIMO combustion control of 
IMEP, CA10, NOx, and soot; 
input variables: SOI & BR 

[62] 

RCCI / 
CDF* 
NG-diesel 

XCCI; 13-zones, 354 reactions 
and 65 species, 
phenomenological heat and mass 
transfer 
2-zone model used for CDF mode 

RCCI: nonlinear function fitted to 
approximate the MZM (the function 
is further linearised around the 
nominal operating condition) 

Coordinated air-fuel path 
controller of IMEP, CA50, and 
PRR; input variables: VTG, 
EGR, SOI & BR 

MZM model experimentally validated - the 
results show good agreement 
10 min run on a single-core desktop 
computer 
Low nZ limits the emission prediction 
accuracy 
PRR cannot be predicted 
Good correspondence between the double 
Vibe results and the MZM result – suitable 
for the system-level simulation study 
Double Vibe model computation time is 
500 times shorter than the MZM 
Concept demonstrating the cycle- 
simulation model to identify the PID 
controller parameters, and control design 
during transients in speed and load 
Controller performance is not considered 

The physical COM model can be used as a 
base for feedback strategies for ignition 
control. 
Qualitative phasing behaviour is correctly 
reproduced at variations of input condition 
Model-based HCCI control entirely based 
on physical modelling has not been 
achieved 
Experimental results show both PID and 
MPC controllers are capable to track the 
reference and compensate for the 
disturbance 
COM model is validated by engine tests at 
steady-state and transient conditions with 
acceptable accuracy of CA50, IMEP, UHC, 
and CO 
The simulation time of the grey-box model 
on a 3.00GHz processor is about 0.1ms per 
cycle 
The controller is capable of tracking all 
desired set-points solely through load 
demand and rejecting the disturbances 
within three-five engine cycles  
COM 99 % accurate versus detail MZM, but 
in limited range due to linearisation 
Robust control performance, effective 
decoupling, and fast settling time 
Control demonstration in MIL; MZM as a 
plant model 
Robust combustion mode switching 
control developed (RCCI-CDF) 
Results demonstrated in MIL 
MZM and a two-zone model (CDF) coupled 
with MVEM (air-path) as plant model   

predictive approach, and identifying the limitations. 

Table 10 summarizes the most relevant research works that applied 
MZM to develop LTC control. In general, the control strategies can be 
divided  into  map-based  and  model-based  approaches.  We  lead  the 
following discussion accordingly, with a separate subsection for each of 
those control approaches. The schematic diagram in Fig. 33 should serve 
as a useful accompaniment to both subsections. 

6.2.3.1. Map-based control. Currently, the most common way of engine 
control is the look-up table-based proportional integral derivative (PID) 
controller, where the controller adjusts the actuator’s action to reach the 
reference condition. With the MZM model, a thorough simulation of all 
conditions can provide a preliminary optimal reference essential for this 
strategy. To this end, Kodavasal et al. [81] used an accelerated MZM 
model for engine cycle simulation (referred to as AMECS) which cap-
tures the closed cycle of the HCCI engine with initial condition obtained 

from CFD analysis. The term accelerated refers to its use of block pre-
conditioning of the multi-zone solver, reusing individual zone Jacobians 
over several time steps. The model was thoroughly benchmarked against 
detailed  CFD  simulation  and  HCCI  engine  experiments  in  [213].  The 
validation  included  two  different  engine  designs  and  a  variety  of 
equivalence ratios. It proved in-cylinder pressure reproduction within 
experimental cycle-to-cycle variations and zonal temperature distribu-
tion  within  4.4  K  accuracy,  comparing  to  the  spatially  averaged  CFD 
results. The HC emission is underestimated, with the highest accuracy of 
around 65 %; CO estimation, in general, is underestimated, with the best 
accuracy  of  around  47  %.  The  validated  model  is  further  applied  to 
generate a performance map where combustion timing CA50 is optimal 
for efficient and smooth combustion. This was performed by running the 
AMECS over 100 times for an engine controlled by equivalence ratio and 
internal EGR (iEGR) under single-speed, steady-state condition. Simu-
lation results show that, with this map, when IMEP remains low, HCCI 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099847A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 33. MZM control design routines, including map-based and model-based strategies  

operation  can  achieve  high  efficiency  and  low  (essentially  zero)  NOx 
and particulate matter emissions. 

Pinheiro et al. [240], applied MZM full-cycle simulation to enable 
the high load to present the complete engine map for a boosted HCCI 
engine.  They  used  a  six-zone,  balloon-type  model  incorporating 
inter-zonal heat and mass transfer and a kinetic mechanism with 354 
species. The MZM simulation results match the experimental pressure 
traces with a small difference in the intake phase, while the combustion 
timing, and the average combustion rate match well and are suitable for 
the system-level simulation study. The engine map was built to ensure 
that powertrain systems are designed to achieve optimal performance, 
by defining the most efficient intake temperature, with the combination 
of variables: engine speed, intake pressure and equivalence ratio. Intake 
temperature  is  used  to  control  CA50,  thus  the  CA50  map  is  created 
further. The study identified the limitations of the control strategy, as 
the  applied  temperature  actuation  was  not  rapid  enough  for 
cycle-to-cycle engine control. Furthermore, the control map was created 
through  the  evaluation  of  steady-state  conditions,  so  the  effects  of 
transient  conditions  on  the  performance  map  were  not  considered. 
Further limitations were identified on the model side. The use of only six 
zones meant the temperature gradient could not be properly captured, 
so  the  maximum  PRR  could  not  be  predicted.  At  the  same  time,  the 
emission  predictions  were  unreliable,  rendering  the  inclusion  of 
emission-control strategies impossible. 

Note  that  the  authors  also  used  the  MZM  presented  in  [240]  to 
calibrate a fast-running combustion model (FRM) in [241]. A surrogate 
semi-predictive double-Vibe model was created, using parameters - the 
start  of  combustion,  combustion  duration  and  the  shape  parameter  - 
extracted  from  the  MZM.  These  parameters  were  obtained  easily  by 
means of a regression function for each one, found through DOE and the 
response  surface  method.  The  FRM  showed  good  correspondence  ac-
curacy,  and  calculation time  was  500  times  shorter than  the  detailed 
MZM. However, such a model is engine- and fuel-specific and predictive 
only within the calibration range of the used training matrix, limiting its 
applicability. 

This FRM model is further used as the combustion model in the full- 
engine model by Taritas et al. [242] to numerically study two different 

charging strategies by a cycle simulation. The aim was to enable high 
boost-levels and high-load operation in an ethanol HCCI engine working 
across a wide speed range. The first set-up consisted of variable valve 
actuation  (VVA),  EGR  and  a  variable  geometry  turbocharger  (VGT) 
whereas the second one used VVA, EGR, a supercharger (SC) and VGT. 
To  achieve  CA50  of  8-10  CA  ATDC,  the  two  charging  systems  were 
compared, based on performance and efficiency. The approach of the 
cycle simulation model enables a relatively easy search for the optimal 
solution in a complex and large design space. 

In work [59], a one-dimensional (1-D) GT-Power model was coupled 
with an external cylinder model which incorporates submodels for fuel 
injection, vaporisation, detailed chemistry calculations (Chemkin), heat 
transfer, energy conservation and species  conservation. Modelling  ac-
curacy was  improved  by using  a five-zone  model to account  for tem-
perature and fuel stratifications in the cylinder charge. The predictions 
from  the  coupled  model were  compared with  experimental  data.  The 
model´s prediction of the two-stage ignition phenomena and the start of 
combustion  were  fairly  good.  However,  Pmax  was  over  predicted  and 
there was a deviation from the experimental data during the expansion 
process. Inclusion of more zones in the multi-zone calculations as well as 
tuning  the  initial  conditions  for  temperature  and  fuel-air  distribution 
may  offer  improvements.  Nevertheless,  the  predicted  trends  were 
generally  in  good  agreement  with  the  experiments.  A  dual  PI-control 
(proportional,  integral)  simulation  for  simultaneous  control  of  IMEP 
and  CA50  by  IVC  timing  and  fuel  amount  was  demonstrated.  The 
controller parameters were identified by the integrated cycle simulation. 
The work mainly demonstrates that an integrated model can be used to 
develop closed-loop control strategies. However, the response time be-
tween control computation and actuation, and the effect of controller 
characteristics to capture cycle-to-cycle variations are two of the issues 
that were not considered. 

6.2.3.2. Model-based  control. The  ever-increasing  number  of  sensors 
and actuators in engines makes the feedback design more complex, due 
to  the  greater  number  of  control  parameters  and  couplings  between 
control  inputs  and  process  variables.  The  conventional  map-based 
controller  works  well  for  a  single-input,  single-output  (SISO)  system, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099848A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

but there is no systematic way for a multi-injection, multi-input, multi- 
output  (MIMO)  system.  Model  predictive  control  (MPC)  provides  the 
solution for handling MIMO systems, especially in terms of constraints- 
handling  ability  and  control  optimization.  MPC  relies  on  the  control- 
oriented  model  (COM)  to  predict  the  future  system  parameters  from 
the  current  time  step.  The  predicted  process  parameters  are  used  to 
formulate a predefined optimization problem: by solving this problem 
the  optimal  control  actions  can  be  obtained,  and  this  will  eventually 
achieve the desired control objective. 

Early works by the Combustion Engine Research Team from Lund 
University,  Sweden,  greatly  contributed  towards  HCCI  control  [243, 
244].  The  model-based  HCCI  engine-control  framework  is  well 
described  by  Bengtsson,  Tunestal,  &  Widd  [245,246].  The  real-time 
capable HCCI control model was created by incremental simplification 
of  the  detailed MZM  concept. The resolution  was  reduced to a  single 
zone, and the reduced-order kinetics were maintained only for resolving 
the  ignition  point:  combustion  followed  via  a  pre-calibrated  Wiebe 
function. Such a model was used to train the controllers, which were 
designed  from  the  result  of  direct  control  model  linearisation.  The 
controlled output was the combustion onset (CA50), and a fast thermal 
management system was used to obtain intake temperature actuation. 
Successful model-based control was accomplished for both the set-point 
tracking  and  disturbance  rejection.  Obvious  limitations  come  directly 
from  the  used  COM  because  its  physics-based  principle  was  too 
simplistic  to  provide  MIMO  functionalities  in  terms  of  combined 
emission-performance control. 

Nazoktabar et al. [125] used a six-zone chemical kinetic mechanism 
with 125 reactions and 64 species to develop model-based HCCI com-
bustion control. It included heat transfer between zones and assumed 
that blow-by is negligible and that all zones have the same pressure. The 
cylinder-pressure result from the validated MZM was very close to the 
experimental test and the model gave acceptable accuracy of emission 
estimation. Then the MZM was coupled with a genetic algorithm (GA) to 
find the optimal CA50 where normalized CO and UHC emission (NCHC) 
is  minimum  and  IMEP  are  maximum  at  different  engine-loads,  with 
control  variables  of  octane  number  (ON)  and  equivalence  ratio.  This 
methodology enables determination of the optimal CA50 for any load, 
and the data are used to train the artificial neural network (ANN) model 
for predicting the optimal CA50, based on IMEP trajectory and control 
variables. Afterward, the ANN model determines the minimum NCHC, 
employing  optimal  CA50  trajectory  and  control  variables.  The  ANN 
optimal CA50 model and ANN minimum emission model, together with 
a physical CA50 and IMEP model, constituent a grey-box model, which 
acts as a virtual HCCI engine to track the main control variables. It was 
validated extensively with experimental data at steady-state and tran-
sient  conditions  from  a  Ricardo  HCCI  engine.  The  validation  showed 
that the grey-box model was able to predict CA50, IMEP, NOx, CO and 
UHC with average errors of 1.2 CAD, 0.4 bar, 10 PPM, 0.8 % and 394 
PPM respectively. The simulation time of the grey-box model on a 3.00 
GHz processor was about 0.1 ms per engine-cycle. In other work [65], 
the  grey-box  model  is  applied  as  a  control  model,  where  a  MIMO 
controller has been designed to control CA50, IMEP and NCHC by fuel 
flow rate (FFR), fuel equivalence ratio (FER) and ON respectively. The 
disturbance  effects  of  any  sub-controller  on  the  other  ones  were  pre-
vented by using two maps in optimum conditions. The controller was 
tuned and validated by using the MZM model, and it was concluded that 
the controller is capable of regulating and tracking the desired outputs in 
less than five engine-cycles and the controller can reject the disturbances 
within three to five cycles, with deviations within 0.04 bar, 0.5 CAD and 
0.03 for IMEP, CA50 and normalized NCHC. 

Indrajuana et al. applied an MZM-supported approach to investigate 
different RCCI control strategies [64,62]. The MZM, referred to as XCCI 
(discussed earlier in section 6.1), was used to develop dedicated control 
models, targeting a concrete strategy. 

In  [64]  the  detailed,  354-reaction,  kinetic  model,  including  13 
annular zones with a phenomenological heat and mass transfer model, 

was approximated by a non-linear stationary function which described 
the cycle- individual combustion event, based on selected performance 
(CA10,  IMEP  and  specific  fuel  consumption)  and  emissions  (specific 
NOx) indicators. Additionally, Pmax and PRR were mapped by a separate 
function to predict if safety-priority mode should be enabled in control. 
The model was further linearised around the nominal engine operating 
conditions,  which  allowed  reproduction  of  the  detailed  MZM  results 
with over 99 % accuracy, however in a very limited range of parameter 
disturbances.  The  linearised  model  was  further  used  to  design  the 
multi-input multi-output (MIMO) controller with start of injection and 
fuel  values  (of  diesel  and  NG)  as  control  actions.  This  cycle-to-cycle 
control  strategy  was  tested  on  desktop  simulations using  the  detailed 
XCCI MZM as the plant model, and it demonstrated robust and stable 
performance  for  the  simulated  disturbance  rejection  and  reference- 
tracking cases. 

In  [62]  Indrajuana  et  al.  extended  this  RCCI  combustion  control 
concept  into  coordinated  air-fuel  path  control,  by  combining  static 
decoupling  EGR  ratio,  pressure  difference  control  with  next-cycle 
CA50-IMEP-blend  ratio  control.  The  linearised  XCCI  model  discussed 
earlier  [64]  and  a  two-zone  thermodynamic  conventional  dual  fuel 
(CDF)  model  are  integrated  into  a  mean-value  engine  model  for  the 
design  of an RCCI-CDF mode-switching  controller. Note  that the  CDF 
model was only trend-wise validated to show feasible sensitivities for 
diesel SOI and BR. In previous work [64], fuel-path control was applied 
here, with the decoupling method extended for coordinated air-fuel path 
control. An air-path feedback controller was designed, with EGR ratio 
and VTG as control actions. The closed-loop, mode-switching simulation 
showed all reference variables are reached within three seconds, indi-
cating the stability and reference-tracking capabilities of the proposed 
controller.  However,  tracking  errors  occurred  during  a  mode  change: 
dynamic decoupling would be beneficial to reduce such errors. 

7. Discussion and outlook 

The  present  work  encapsulates  over  70  original  works,  aiming  to 
create  a  concrete  vision  of  MZM-based  development  of  LTC  engine 
concepts. This includes a review of 16 distinctive modelling approaches 
developed independently by numerous research groups over the past 20 
years. These works are analysed, assessed and discussed, starting from 
modelling assumptions, and  then moving through  model composition 
towards model performance and application range. Table 11 presents a 
“big-picture” summary of the individual sections, helping to address the 
four research questions set out in the introduction and thus formulate a 
cohesive vision for MZM in LTC. 

According to the core concept of phenomenological modelling, the 
detailed  assumptions  of  the  MZM  will  be  tailored  towards  the  given 
application, both in terms of the combustion concept to be simulated 
and engine development stages. Thus, it is logical first to answer the two 
research  questions  concerning  application  area  (and  Q4),  and  then 
address issues of optimum model configuration (Q1) and the accuracy/ 
calculation-speed trade-off (Q2). The discussion follows this logic, and 
in addition to answering the research questions, also identifies specific 
knowledge gaps in the corresponding research areas. 

7.1. Application of MZM with respect to combustion concepts and 
associated fundamental-level phenomena 

As  evident  from  Tab.  11,  early  MZ  models  were  developed  exclu-
sively to tackle HCCI combustion, fuelled by the automotive industry´s 
interest  in  this  new  combustion  concept.  The  early  toolchains  were 
designed to support fundamental-level combustion studies, providing a 
solution  to  the  simulation-speed  issues  of  CFD  simulation.  A  good 
example  of  such  an  approach  is  the  Hydrodynamics,  Chemistry  and 
Transport  (HCT)  multi-zone  model  developed  by  the  University  of 
Michigan  and  Lawrence-Livermore  National  Laboratories  [73,76,79]. 
The  fundamental-level  works  covered  various  parametric  studies 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099849A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 11 
Summary of most relevant works involving MZ models, grouped by the development team  

References 

Model highlights 

LTC concept / fuels 

Validity/ simulation speed 

Applications 

Research Group / 
Model 

Lawrence Livermore 
National Labs, 
University of 
Michigan 
Massachusetts 
Institute of 
Technology 
HCT 

General Motors Corp. 

RWTH Aachen 
X0D 

University of Michigan 

University of 
Guanjuato 
AMECS 
(based on HCT) 

University of Michigan 

Aceves et al.(2000)[73] 
Aceves et al.(2001), [76, 
75, 209] 
Aceves et al.(2004)[218] 
Aceves et al.(2005)[84, 
12] 
Flowers et al.(2002)[82] 
Babajimopoulos et al. 
(2002)[79] 
Babajimopoulos et al. 
(2003) [179] 
Yelvington & Green 
(2003) [230] 
Bedoya et al.(2012) [251] 
Hergart et al. (2005) [78] 
Felsch et al. (2007)[252] 
Felsch et al. (2009)[112] 

Kodavasal et al. (2013) 
[81] 
Garcia-Guendulain et al. 
(2020)[213] 

Fiveland & Assanis (2001) 
[145] 
Fiveland & Assanis (2002) 
[91] 

Ford Motors Corp. 

Chalmers University 

Easley et al.(2001) [94] 
Ogink & Golovitchev 
(2002) [93] 
Orlandini et al. (2005)  
[74] 

National Technical 

University of Athens 

University of Alberta 
Sharif University of 
Technology 
Babol University of 
Technology 

University of Toronto 

University of 
Waterloo 

Komninos et al. (2005) 
[71] 
Komninos & Hountalas 
(2008) [139] 
Komninos (2009)[88] 
[256] 
Komninos & Kosmadakis 
(2011) [104] 

Kongsereeparp et al. 
(2005) [99] 
Kongsereeparp & Checkel 
(2007) [133][89] 
Voshtani et al. (2014)  
[102] 
Reyhanian & Hosseini 
(2018) [225] 
Fathi et al. (2017) [142] 
Tzanetakis et al. (2010)  
[67] 
Visakhamoorthy et al. 
(2012) [138] 

National Research 

Council of Canada 

Guo et al. (2009) [134] 
Guo & Neill (2013) [224] 

One-way coupled CFD- 
balloon 
10-40 zones 
T-m or T-ф map 
depending on application 
NG = (detailed) 179 
species 

One-way coupled CFD- 
balloon 
15 zones 
IZMT (HL correlation) 
IZHT (enthalpy) 
T-ф map 
(detailed) 118 species 
Balloon 
40 zones 
Simplified thermal 
stratification by heat-loss 
multipliers 
(lumped) 252 species 
Onion-skin 
Two zones [145]; 17 
zones [91] 
IZMT 
Heat loss (fundamental) 
Boundary layer submodel 
Turbulence (k-ε) 
(Detailed) 60 species 
Onion-skin (enclosed) 
Six-nine zones 
IZMT (PEQ) 
IZHT (enthalpy) 
([74] disabled IZHT & 
IZMT) 
GEX (APM) 
(Skeletal) 109 species 
Onion-skin (enclosed) 
10-21 zones 
IZHT (diffusion), IZMT 
(PEQ) 
Heat loss (fundamental) 
Turbulence (Yang & 
Martin) 
(Semi-detailed) 84 
species 
Onion-skin 
(enclosed [102,225]) 
11-13 zones 
IZHT (diffusion) 
Turbulence (Yang & 
Martin) 
GEX (valve flow) 
53 species (GRI3.0) 

Onion-skin (enclosed) 
10 zones 
IZHT (HL correlation) 
Blow-by 
(Reduced) 32 species 
Onion-skin (Enclosed) 
Eight zones 
IZHT (diffusion) 
Turbulence (Yang & 
Martin) 
GEX (APM) 
(Detailed) 177 species 

HCCI 
Initially validated on NG 
i-C8H18, C3H8 

12 hrs (single- core) 2 hrs 
(parallelised) for 10 zones 
Pmax ≤ 5% 

Fundamental: 
Crevice effects, piston 
geometry 
VVA (eEVC, 2EVO, NVO) 
Fuel stratification 
Applied: 
Knock limit analysis 
Optimisation 

PCCI 
n-C7H16 
Initially validated on n- 
C10H22 +
α-methylnapthalene 

≈3 min 
In-cylinder pressure within 
cycle-to-cycle variations 
Trend-wise emissions 

Fundamental: 
VVA (NVO) 
Applied: 
Dynamic time response 
simulation 

HCCI 
PRF90 

10 min (block 
preconditioning) 
P – qlt  
HRR – qlt 

HCCI 
Initially validated on NG 

P – qlt 

HCCI, PCCI 
Initially validated on 
gasoline 
n-C7H16, i-C8H18 

HCCI 
i-C8H18 

≈30 min 
P – qlt  
HRR – qlt 

≈40 min 
P – qlt 
HRR – qlt 

HCCI, PCCI 
H2, NG, n-C7H16, RG 
blending, PRF70 

≈30 min 
P – qlt 
PRRmax ≤ 20% 
Heat flow – qlt 

HCCI 
PRF20, methane + hydrogen 

≈1 min (parallelised) 
In-cylinder pressure within 
Cycle-to-cycle variations 

HCCI 
n-C7H16 

In-cylinder pressure within 
cycle-to-cycle variations 
Trend-wise emissions 

Control dev: 
Map-based control 

Fundamental: 
Wall heat loss (BL 
phenomenon) 

Fundamental: 
Fuel stratification 

Fundamental: 
Wall heat loss 
IZMT 

Fundamental: 
T, fuel, EGR stratification 
Fuel composition effects 
(fuel blending, reformer 
gas) 

Applied: 
Knock limit predictions 
Fundamental: 
Fuel composition effects 
(biogas fuelling) 
Fundamental: 
Fuel composition (H2 
blending) 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099850A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

References 

Model highlights 

LTC concept / fuels 

Validity/ simulation speed 

Applications 

Table 11 (continued ) 

Research Group / 
Model 

University of Zagreb 

University of 
California 

Technical University of 

Eindhoven 
TNO Netherlands 
XCCI 

Sahand University of 

Technologya,b 
Islamic Azad 
Universityc 

Politecnico di Milano 

Kozarac et al. (2010) [97] 
Kozarac et al. (2010) [90] 
Kozarac et al. (2011)  
[241] 
Kozarac et al. (2014)  
[257] 
Taritas et al. (2014) [242] 
Pinheiro et al. (2015)  
[240] 
Egüz et al. (2012) [100] 
Egüz et al. (2013) [141] 
Bekdemir et al. (2015)  
[183] 
Mikulski et al. (2016)  
[92] 
Mikulski & Bekdemir 
(2017) [101] 
Mikulski et al. (2018)  
[56] 
Mikulski et al. (2019)  
[86] 
Mikulski et al. (2019)  
[57] 
Indrajuana et al. (2016)  
[64] 
Indrajuana et al. (2018)  
[62] 
Neshat & Saray (2014)  
[87][131] 
Neshat & Saray (2015)  
[247] 
Neshat et al. (2016)  
[219]a 
Neshat et al. (2017)  
[226]a 
Neshat & Saray (2019)  
[258] 
Neshat & Asghari (2019)  
[229] 
Ahari & Neshat (2019)  
[227] 
Lashkarpour SM (2017)  
[95] 
Nazoktabar et al. (2018)  
[125] 
Nazoktabar et al. (2019)  
[65] 
Bissoli et al.(2013) [103] 
Bissoli et al.(2016) [96] 
Pelucchi et al.(2017)  
[248] 

Karlsruhe Institute of 

Technology 

Eichmeier et al. (2014)  
[58] 

Onion-skin 
Six zones 
IZHT (heat transfer 
potential) 
GEX (APM) 
(Skeletal) 291 species 

Onion-skin (annular) 
10-13 zones 
IZHT (diffusion) 
IZMT (diffusion) 
Turbulence (scaling 
const.) 
GEX (SZ valve flow) 
(Semi-detailed) 65 
species 

Onion-skin (annular) 
11 zones 
IZHT (diffusion) 
IZMT (PEQ) 
Heat loss (fundamental) 
Turbulence (Yang & 
Martin) 
GEX (0D) 
Coupled CFD-MZM for 
fuel distribution 
65-137 species, 
depending on fuel 

Onion-skin 
Six zones 
IZHT (diffusion) 
64 species 
Onion-skin (enclosed) 
10-15 zones 
IZHT (diffusion) 
IZMT (diffusion) 
Turbulence (Yang & 
Martin) 
Heat loss (fundamental) 
(Detailed) 480 species 
Spray-based 
IZMT (diffusion) 
Turbulence (single eqn k) 
GEX (APM) 
(Reduced) 41 species 

HCCI 
i-C8H18 initial validation 

14-15 hrs (single- core) 
In-cylinder pressure within 
cycle-to-cycle variations 
Trend-wise emissions 

Mainly RCCI diesel-NG; 
Initial validation on PCCI 

≈30 min cycle 
P – qlt 
HRR – qlt 
CHR – qlt 
pmax ≤ 10 bar  

HCCI, RCCI 
Initially validate on HCCI 
using n-C7H16 & NG 
PRF mixtures, PRF/RG 
blend, NG  

P – qlt 
HRR – qlt  

Fundamental: 
VVA (NVO) 
Fuel composition (ethanol, 
biogas fuelling) 
Control dev.: 
Development of FREM 
Map-based control 

Fundamental: 
Low-reactivity fuels 
stratification 
VVA strategies 
Applied: 
Design exploration and 
optimisation 
Control dev.: 
Controller design and 
mode- switching control 

Fundamental: 
Fuel composition 
(Reformer gas blending) 
Exergy analysis 
Water injection 
Wall heat loss (comparison 
of HL models) 
Influence of IZMT 

HCCI 
PRF mixtures 

In-cylinder pressure within 
cycle-to-cycle variations 
Trend-wise emissions 

Fast-running (grey-box) 
model 
Controller development 

HCCI 
Validated on PRF20 
n-C7H16, methyl-hexanoate, 
methyl-decanoate 

≈2 min (15 zones) 
P – qlt 
PRRmax ≤ 20% 
Heat flow – qlt 

RCCI 
Gasoline-diesel 

12s (parallelised) 
P – qlt 
HRR – qlt 

Fundamental 
Fuel composition (n- 
butanol, n-pentanol, TRF/ 
butanol blend) 
Applied: 
Extending engine 
performance map 

— 

gex = gas exchange model; APM = air path model; IZHT = interzonal heat transfer; IZMT = interzonal mass transfer 

investigating, amongst others, the effects of piston geometry on HCCI 
performance and emissions [84,209], various fuels including different 
PRF  [247],  reformer  gas  blends  [226]  and  natural  gas  blends  [101]. 
These  kinds  of  studies  are  still  popular,  because  capturing  the  fuel 
compositional  effects  is  inherited  by  the  governing  chemical  kinetic 
submodels.  Within  the  HCCI  regime,  they  were  recently  picked-up, 
amongst others, by Politecnico di Milano on n-butanol and n-pentanol 
[248]. The potential of MZM fuel-sensitivity simulation spans towards 
other alcohols (ethanol [240]) bio-gas compositions [138] and supports 
the  current  interest  in  direct  use  of  hydrogen  in  LTC  engines,  as 

investigated  by  researchers  from  the  National  Research  Council  of 
Canada  [224].  Regarding  high  reactivity  fuels,  the  challenge  lies  in 
simulating the effects of biodiesels on LTC. MZM can capture those ef-
fects  provided  appropriate  multicomponent  mechanisms  are  able  to 
reflect ignition properties of associated hydrocarbon chains. Examples 
of such biodiesel mechanisms may be Luo et al. [249] or An et al. [250], 
however, their application in MZM is yet to be seen. 

More recently fundamental-level MZ modelling has leaned towards 
PCCI concepts more than HCCI. This supplements the bulk portfolio of 
HCCI  explorations  of  thermal  [72,81,99,135,251]  and  compositional 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099851A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

(EGR) [79,90,99,179], towards a better understanding of fuel stratifi-
cation. These fundamental issues have been studied by almost all the 
development groups listed in Tab. 11 and both balloon and onion-skin 
type models have proved suitable for this purpose. However, we note 
that in many cases the authors silently hypothesised that models that 
were validated for homogenous combustion are ultimately valid in the 
PCCI domain too. One should bear in mind that, at least for simplest 
models without interzonal heat and mass transfer [77], the hypothesis 
may not hold, rendering the results questionable. The few dedicated MZ 
models  created  explicitly  for  stratified  PCCI  combustion  include  the 
onion-skin approach by Technical University of Eindhoven [100], and 
the balloon-type XOD model by General Motors Corporation [78]. 

MZ models applied towards dual-fuel RCCI are comparatively rare in 
literature. A singular spray-based MZM by Karlsruhe Institute of Tech-
nology [58] led to a paper reporting validation results, but the works did 
not follow up with publicly reported use cases. That apart, the only MZM 
thoroughly validated on RCCI is the XCCI toolchain by TNO Netherlands 
[92]. Note that this approach bases on earlier FORTRAN code designed 
in TU-Eindhoven for PCCI combustion [100]. 

Regardless  of  the  combustion concept, one  of  the most  prominent 
fields of explorative MZM simulations was understanding the effects of 
various VVA strategies on LTC [56,79,179,242,252]. After connecting 
with  the  gas  exchange  submodel,  the 
inherited  sensitivity  of 
kinetic-based  models  to  thermal  and  compositional  effects  make  MZ 
models particularly suitable for this kind of application. Complex valv-
ing strategies incorporating fuel reforming effects during the NVO phase 
are also within the realm of MZM applications [86,252]. As proven by 
Mikulski et al [56,86], the results of VVA simulations qualitatively are 
valid for multiple engine platforms, without needing to re-calibrate the 
model. VVA control is commonly considered as an enabler for LTC, so 
this  field  of  explorative  research  creates  an  important  bridge  for  MZ 
models  towards  applied  development,  addressed  in  the  next  research 
question. 

In summary, MZ models have been proven suitable for all “clean” 
LTC concepts, with RCCI being so far the least documented. In terms of 
PCCI and RCCI, the regimes on the boundary of conventional CI (like 
PPC)  where  diffusion  flame  plays  an  increasing  role,  the  results  are 
predicted with increased error. The only “hybrid” solution advertised to 
be capable of capturing the LTC and CI regime is the spray-based MZM 
by the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology [58]. However, it has not been 
thoroughly validated, nor confirmed in any direct applications. Conse-
quently,  one  can  say  that  the  state  of  the  art  for  MZ  models´ use  for 
resolving combustion regime change remains co-simulation with other 
phenomenological  (diffusive  flame  and/or  flame  propagation)  com-
bustion  models.  In  such  a  case,  transition  points  are  simulated  inde-
pendently by both models and a good approximation of actual engine 
performance and emissions can be achieved by weighted averaging of 
the results, as proposed by Indrajuana et al. [62]. 

Turning  to  performance/emission  simulation  of  LTC,  the  scope  of 
confirmed  fundamental-level  applications  of  MZ  models  is  similar  to 
CFD, as long as insight of detailed dimensional and flow effects is not 
sought.  Naturally,  one  must  acknowledge  the  accuracy  reduction  in 
favour  of  covering  trends  from  many  more  simulations,  both  on  the 
individual  operating-point  bases  or  cycle-to-cycle  basis.  Apart  from 
faster  simulation  allowing  large-scale  parameter  sweeps,  another 
undervalued advantage of low-fidelity simulation for fundamental-level 
research is that it allows easy decoupling of the governing mechanisms. 
When the goal is to understand those mechanisms, the targeted research 
produced  with  MZM  can  have  potentially  bigger  archival  value  than 
largely generic CFD simulations. A good example of such highly-cited, 
fundamental-level  research  performed  with  an  MZM  is  the  paper  of 
Mikulski  et  al.  [101],  investigating  the  effects  of  low-reactivity  fuel 
stratification on RCCI combustion. 

7.2. MZM and applied engine research 

The reduced model complexity and focus on governing combustion 
mechanism  make  MZ  models  particularly  suitable  for  applied-level 
research.  The  boundary  between  fundamental-  and  applied-level 
research  is  not  explicitly  defined.  Naturally,  the  fundamental  insight 
obtained from various parametric explorations, mentioned in the pre-
vious paragraph, provides the basis for efficient design of optimisation 
experiments  and  engine-control  functions.  This  incremental  type  of 
research is therefore defined here as applied research. Accordingly, any 
research  with  a  primary  goal  of  a  functional  and  robust  LTC  engine, 
basing  on  an  established  combination  of  an  experimental  set-up  and 
MZM, is regarded as applied in this paper. 

This maturity requirement narrows down the portfolio of such ap-
plications.  Surprisingly,  this  review  has  revealed  only  two  publicly 
available  reports  of  MZ  models  being  employed  in  large-scale  LTC 
optimisation  endeavours  [57,213].  Neither  of  these  optimum-seeking 
study  has  been  verified  experimentally,  leaving  a  knowledge  gap  in 
MZM  applications.  This  gap  is  significant,  because  these  kinds  of 
phenomenological  combustion  models  are  expected  to  solve  the 
dilemma of the extensive calibration effort for next-generation engines. 
Only Mikulski et al. [57] attempted to couple the MZM with a detailed 
air-path model for fully resolved extremum seeking. This research had 
the potential to resolve another knowledge gap for MZM applications - 
namely its coupling with one-dimensional engine air-path models. The 
XCCI  MZM,  however,  was  not  integrated  with  the  GT-Power  engine 
model  used  in  this  study,  and  IVC  conditions  were  provided  off-line 
without aiming for convergence. 

Two research studies aimed to use MZ models directly for transient 
engine simulations [98,112], thus moving towards coupling MZM with 
engine models for a complete, system-level toolchain. However, Angelos 
et al. [98], as in the earlier-cited work by Mikulski, could not cope with 
the computation effort and so settled for coupling a simplified two-zone 
surrogate of his detailed MZM with a GT-Power engine model. Felsch 
et al. [112] coupled his full MZM, but the engine model was simplified to 
a mean-value approach. Thus, the full coupling of MZM kinetic codes 
with third-party engine-modelling software remains to be demonstrated. 
MZ models have been widely used for HCCI control development. 
These  were  usually  speed-oriented  models  (reduced  zone  number  or 
simplified  chemical  kinetics  mechanisms)  used  directly  to  generate  a 
reference  map  for  the  controller  [59,213,241,242].  Some  researchers 
used an intermediate approach: Taritas et al. [242] used very narrow 
MZM-generated data to first train a much faster Wiebe function-based 
combustion model surrogate. This was then used to increase the con-
trol  map  resolution.  In  the  light  of  bulk  research  using  the  direct 
approach,  the  additional  effort  of  training  a  surrogate  might  seem 
questionable.  But  with  typical  simulation  times  of  MZ  models  (~30 
minutes), one needs to bear in mind that not all authors have access to 
high-performance  cluster  computing  that  allows  direct  generation  of 
large-scale maps. 

Such  map-based  control  strategies  have  been  successfully  verified 
experimentally in many cases, providing solid proof of concept for MZ 
models as LTC-control design tools. On the other hand, most of these 
tackled relatively simple dual-input (equivalence ratio and EGR [213]; 
IVC timing and fuel amount [59])/single-output (CA50 [213,240,242]) 
control problems, excluding, for instance, emissions control. Their use of 
MZ models as map-generators was largely an academic exercise, since 
the  workload  of calibrating an  MZM most  probably would  be  no less 
than  the  experimental  effort  needed  to  create  the  controller  maps 
experimentally using DOE techniques (refer to Fig. 8). 

From this perspective, committed MZM development makes much 
more  sense  for  more-demanding  MIMO  controls.  These  have  been 
mostly realised as model-based control, where the controllers encapsu-
late the models. The controller model is a surrogate derived from the 
detailed  MZM.  These  surrogates  have  been  obtained  by  various  mea-
sures, starting as simple nonlinear approximation around the operating 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099852A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

point [62] of interest, and moving towards the most sophisticated direct 
reduction  of  MZ  models  (single-zone  Wiebe  incorporating  part  of  the 
kinetic mechanism to be predictive on SOC [244]). Coordinated air-fuel 
path control of RCCI is an emerging topic and MZ models have high-
lighted its usefulness. In this domain, the work of Indrajuana et al. [62] 
represents  the  state  of  the  art,  although  it  has  limitations  of  the 
controller and has only been confirmed in MIL simulations. 

Considering the rapid progress in model-based control methodolo-
gies,  MZM  application  in  RCCI  control  is  thus  considered  largely  un-
charted  territory.  With plenty  of open  questions  concerning optimum 
controller design, model reduction techniques and real-engine validity, 
many more contributions are needed to advance LTC strategies towards 
market readiness. 

7.3. Evolution of MZM 

Chronological  analysis  of  Tab.  11  reveals  that  balloon  models  are 
making way for onion-skin models. This trend is explainable when we 
look at the applications. Computational power has progressed rapidly in 
the past 20 years, along with computational techniques for reactive CFD. 
Thus, accelerating the reactive simulation stops being the primary goal 
for MZ models that evolve from largely CFD-dependent balloon models 
towards  more  generic  and  autonomous  onion-skin  models.  The 
requirement for autonomy is relevant to the applied research discussed 
in the previous point. If the model should reduce the effort for engine 
calibration and control design, it should not be forced to rely extensively 
on experimental (or high-fidelity simulation) results for its own initial-
isation and calibration. 

Onion-skin models are a better fit for autonomy. They can rely on 
simple yet reliable estimations of IVC conditions, derived, for instance, 
from  isentropic  valve  flow  correlations  [86].  This  provides  the  MZM 
with full-cycle simulation capability, while thermodynamic conditions 
at intake/exhaust port/manifold are used to initialise the model. Ther-
mal stratification, a determinant for combustion phasing and emission 
formation  in  HCCI,  can  be  resolved  during  the  simulation,  instead  of 
imposing the T-m map as occurred in most early-stage balloon-type MZ 
models.  For  stratification  to  evolve  during  the  simulation,  the  model 
needs to employ a proper mechanism of heat transfer to the environment 
and between the zones. In terms of the first submodel, there seems to be 
agreement  that  diffusion-based  mixing  better  resembles  the  system 
phenomenology  and  is  computationally  more  efficient  than  the  PEQ--
based approach. Two concepts compete for modelling heat loss. Neshat 
&  Saray  [87]  and  Komninos  et  al.  [104]  advocated  advantages  of 
fundamental heat loss modelling over the empirical heat transfer cor-
relations  popularly  used  in  other  phenomenological  models.  The  first 
approach mainly benefits from calculation efficiency, since in principle 
the  same  phenomena  govern  the  interzonal  interaction  and  zone-to- 
environment  coupling,  so  calculation  can  be  partially  shared.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  original  correlations  of  Woschni  or  Hohenberg  have 
been validated on a variety of engine classes (including LTC) and are 
well established in post-processing the experimental data. Thus, if used 
properly,  they  can  reduce  the  amount  of  effort  necessary  for  model 
calibration. However, it is necessary to stress that heat transfer corre-
lations were used inconsistently in the studied works. Not all authors 
acknowledged  that  correlations  were  validated  for  bulk  in-cylinder 
conditions.  In  principle,  applying  the  same  correlation  to  individual 
zones requires normalisation (in every time-step) so that the sum of heat 
losses per zone is equal to bulk heat loss, as postulated in Kodavasal et al. 
[81]. Still, very accurate modelling of heat loss coefficient has no real 
point if the cylinder wall temperature is not evaluated carefully, as this 
has a governing effect on overall heat transfer. In many studies this was 
just assumed from literature, forming an example of unjustified simpli-
fication. Relatively simple yet accurate methods exist for estimating wall 
temperature  of  various  cylinder  components,  and  their  use  with  MZ 
models is recommended [96,94]. 

Applying physics-based heat transfer models assumes both laminar 

and turbulent phenomena. The effect of turbulence has been neglected 
by some researchers, although its influence on transfer of heat and mass 
can be an order  of magnitude greater than in steady-flow conditions. 
This  example,  together  with  the  previous  note  on  using  heat  transfer 
correlations,  illustrates  the  pitfalls  of  creating  phenomenological 
models. To this end, we consider phenomenological turbulence model-
ling to be crucial for predictive simulation at different engine- speeds, 
boost pressures or VVA strategies. Although traditional k-ε  or K-k tur-
bulence submodels have been used in MZ models, the Yang &  Martin 
[158] approach now seems to be established in state-of-the-art onion--
skin models. This mainly is due to its low demand for calibration, using a 
single tuning parameter to reflect differences in engine hardware. 

Including  turbulence  will  have  a  more  pronounced  effect  in  LTC 
concepts that include stratification of mass. Needless to say, MZ models 
for  simulating  PCCI  or  RCCI  regimes  should  include  a  proper  mass 
transfer submodel, as evident from Tab. 11. At each time step, reaction 
products  from  one  zone  will  be  transferred  to  their  neighbours,  rein-
forcing (highly reactive radicals) or suppressing (for instance, CO2) re-
action rates in these zones. Studies on RCCI modelling [101] show that 
without this mechanism in place, largely fuel-lean core zones have no 
chance of igniting, heavily underestimating the overall combustion ef-
ficiency.  The  mass  transfer  is  usually  handled  according  to  the  same 
principle as the interzonal heat transfer. For gradient-based approaches, 
individual species concentration is used as the driving force. 

Sophisticated MZ models suitable for PCCI/RCCI include submodels 
for  simple  (imposed  rate)  fuel-injection  and  evaporation  [100].  The 
initial fuel distribution between them is still imposed, from optical en-
gine data or CFD studies [95], or as a calibration parameter [92,101]). 
So far, there is no successful attempt to couple an onion- skin model with 
a  phenomenological spray  formation submodel [206]. This  remains a 
major gap to be filled in the drive for fully autonomous MZ models. 

Leading-edge  onion-skin  MZ  models  have  6-15  zones  and  employ 
mechanisms for between 53 and 480 species (Tab. 11). Both parameters 
naturally  are  influenced  by  the  accuracy/calculation-speed  trade-off 
that is chosen: this point is pursued in the next subsection. It is important 
to stress that generally, more advanced LTC concepts will require more 
zones.  They will  also need more elaborate mechanisms to  handle the 
complexity of fuel and the number of species that need to be captured. 
For  example,  initial  studies  with  PRF  require  fewer  species  and  thus 
fewer reactions than the studies that aim to capture fuel compositional 
effects.  Here  for  instance  the  influence  of  different  renewable  diesels 
(compositionally  complex  mixtures)  on  LTC  combustion  forms  a 
particular challenge that has not been yet addressed in MZM simulation. 
Similarly,  dual-fuel  RCCI  combustion  will  require  bigger  mechanisms 
than single fuel HCCI or PCCI simulation. 

The  requirement  for  more  zones  stems  from  the  need  for  better 
reproduction  of  stratification  and  chamber  geometry  effects.  Again, 
simulation of stratified charge concepts usually involves grid-resolved 
simulation  with  a  zone  count  above  10  [95,141],  whereas  six  zones 
have proven sufficient for simple HCCI concepts with flat piston geom-
etry [97,125]. Zone size distribution favours smaller zones towards the 
cylinder liner for optimum capture of influences on combustion timing 
and NOx formation. Smaller zones are also preferable towards the cyl-
inder centreline, where there are important influences on combustion 
efficiency and HC/CO emissions. To this end, smart zonal distribution, 
either  imposed  or  generic,  facilitates  accurate simulations  with  fewer 
zones. In addition to the numbers mentioned above for forming a clean 
annular/enclosed  zone  structure,  there  is  the  need  to  reproduce  the 
combustion chamber´s geometrical features. A separate crevice zone is 
considered essential for accurate UHC/CO emission results, regardless of 
the  combustion  concept  [71].  Then,  depending  on  the  target  of  the 
simulation,  one  can  consider  one  to  three  zones  to  account  for  com-
bustion  chamber/squish  zone,  which  would  be  useful  for  comparing 
different hardware. It may also be beneficial to have additional separate 
zones  pertaining  to  the  boundary  layer,  to  investigate  how  thermal 
properties of cylinder components, such as the hot exhaust valve seat, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099853A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

affect  ignition  and  emissions.  These  additional  special  zones  usually 
result  in  a  hybrid  annular/structure  with  more  complex  constraints 
applied on interzonal mixing models. 

7.4. Accuracy and speed of MZM 

As already outlined, the trade-off between accuracy and calculation 
speed  will  majorly  depend  on  the  task-tailored  composition  of  the 
model. Many remarks on model accuracy have been already provided 
while addressing the research questions above. It is useful to address the 
issue  of  accuracy  and  simulation  speed  by  first  defining  a  certain 
benchmark.  Then,  by  synthesising  the  knowledge  from  sections  4 
(Relevant submodels), 5 (Simulation procedure) and 6 (Model applica-
tion and validation), we will discuss the factors that have greatest in-
fluence on the trade-off. 

Of  the  studies  listed  in  this  review,  most  that  report  in  detail  on 
model performance are works related to model calibration and valida-
tion.  Usually,  this  step  ultimately  determines  the  grid-resolved  zonal 
configuration beyond which additional zones do not lead to significantly 
better  accuracy.  This  is  confirmed  in  Tab.  11,  as  practically  all  the 
models report accuracy in terms of in-cylinder pressure within the cycle- 
to-cycle variations, and aim to predict trends in emissions without am-
bitions to get the absolute level correct. The fact that this is reported 
regardless of the number of zones, size of mechanism or involved sub-
models, is partially explained by the fact that simpler combustion con-
cepts  require  less-detailed  models  –  a  trend  already  discussed  in  the 
earlier research question. Finally, MZM accuracy will depend on how 
carefully the model has been identified and calibrated and in what range 
this has been done. Although authors usually claim that the model is 
valid outside the calibration space, none of the studies reported have 
verified  this for the  whole foreseen engine  map  –  a  shortcoming that 
needs  to  be  addressed  to  establish  trust  towards  the  MZM  family  in 
general. 

Aside from consistency in the claimed accuracy, individual research 
groups report largely consistent simulation times. This is also explained 
when we consider evolution of the MZ models. The models have grad-
ually  become  more  sophisticated  to  tackle  more  complex  combustion 
concepts, but the growth in model complexity has been balanced by the 
progress in the computational power of the workstations. 

Let us assume that the current state-of-the-art MZM is an onion-skin 
model  with  13  zones,  including  intentional  heat  and  mass  transfer 
submodels, with a reaction mechanism involving a combination of six 
PRF and suitable for simulating a variety of combustion concepts, from 
HCCI  to  multi-fuel  RCCI.  The  expected  simulation  time on  a  leading- 
edge personal computer will be around 30 minutes, depending on the 
exact  assumptions  and  efficiency  of  implementation  (coding,  solver 
choice etc.). 

From  this  reference,  assuming  proper  calibration,  increasing  the 
zone  number  usually  does  not  bring  substantial  improvement  in  the 
estimation  of  in-cylinder  pressure  trace  and  resulting  combustion  in-
dicators, but does influence the emission calculation. On the other hand, 
every extra zone will increase the number of required operations by the 
factor of [1 + 1/nZ]3. Thus, moving from 13 to 14 zones with a non- 
segregated solver increases the simulation time by 25 %. 

The size of the mechanism affects calculation time but this is largely 
dependent  on  how  well  the  solver  can  deal  with  the  stiffness  of  the 
system. Typically, stiffness in the chemical mechanism is due to the large 
spread, highly coupled and non-linear rate of change of species, espe-
cially the rapid elementary reactions. Furthermore, overhead of memory 
usage  increases  with  the  size  of  mechanism,  including  computation 
expense  for  the  thermo-chemical  data-handling  routines.  There  are 
many  mitigation  strategies  for  this:  one  potential  approach  yet  to  be 
explored  in  LTC  MZM  is  tabulated  chemistry.  This  has  been  imple-
mented, for instance, in phenomenological models [253,254] for con-
ventional SI, where it was reported to speed-up calculation by a factor of 
four or five. 

Stiffness arises in MZ models due to the coupling among the zones, 
based  on  pressure  equalisation.  In  comparison,  diffusion-based  inter-
zonal mixing has secondary influence [186] on computational demand. 
A  proven  mitigation  strategy  is  to  use  a  segregated  solver,  whereby 
computational effort is 1/nZ2 of the non-segregated approach [81]. This 
acceleration  reduces  the  typical  simulation  time  to  30  minutes  for  a 
13-zone  model,  as  mentioned  above.  Further  reduction  techniques 
involve alleviating dense Jacobian construction. Perhaps the analytical 
Jacobian approach offers most promise: there is a report [98] of an order 
of magnitude decrease in simulation time of a two-zone model. Other 
approaches include tri-diagonal block sparsity in Jacobian [96] (via G 
formulation) and Jacobian preconditioning [81,186]. However, from a 
programming/implementation perspective, parallel computing has been 
shown [58,138] to reduce the time of a typical 10-zone simulation to the 
order of seconds. Furthermore, computing on graphical processing units 
reportedly [255] is able to cut simulation time by a factor of two to four, 
and this potential is so far unexplored in MZM studies for LTC. 

7.5. Outlook 

Although MZ modelling has been used for LTC simulation for over 20 
years, the evolving development of LTC technologies sets new modelling 
challenges. Literature analysis indicates a recent revival of interest in 
these  toolchains  associated  with  maturing  dual-fuel  RCCI  technology 
and  its  extensive  needs  for  calibration  and  control.  To  this  end,  the 
above discussion has revealed multiple knowledge gaps in MZM devel-
opment, application and techniques to improve calculation speed. The 
individual  challenges  ahead  will  be  restated  in  the  conclusions  for 
clarity. In broader terms, there are two core issues that need addressing. 
First, there is no openly available MZM toolchain thoroughly validated 
for RCCI combustion. Second, there is no complete proof of concept that 
MZM  can  support  the  evolution  of  RCCI  and  other  LTC  technology 
throughout  the  complete  engine  development  pathway  foreseen  in 
Fig.  10.  Overcoming  these  development  challenges  requires  excellent 
infrastructure, substantial resources and strategic commitment, beyond 
the reach of the relatively small consortia (refer to Tab. 11) working in 
this field. 

The recently established Clean Propulsion Technologies (CPT) [259] 
consortium has those mentioned resources and strategic commitment to 
developing  MZM-supported  RCCI  combustion.  This  work  will  be  in 
synergy with other highly promising powertrain technologies, including 
advanced  aftertreatment  and  deep  hybridisation  with  self-learning 
power  management.  The  CPT  consortium  brings  together  the  core  of 
the  Finnish  powertrain  industry  and  academia  in  a  15-million-euro 
project focused on the marine and off-road sectors. Fig. 34 illustrates 
how CPT work packages (WP) 2 and 3 relate directly to MZM/LTC. 

WP3 will apply the lessons learned from this review, developing a 
new MZM by taking it from the governing assumptions towards a fully 
autonomous  simulation  toolchain.  The  model  identification  and  crea-
tion  of  dedicated  submodels  (spray/fuel  distribution,  turbulence)  are 
supported by high-fidelity CFD simulation, validated on a state-of-the- 
art RCCI engine with variable  valve actuation and  using natural gas/ 
diesel as the baseline fuel mixture. The final experimental validation of 
the MZM involves three engine platforms with cylinder bores of up to 
310 mm and having different spray patterns. The developed MZM will 
be  used  to  optimise  the  RCCI operating  range  and  to  develop  the  so-
phisticated multi-input/multi-output RCCI control. The latter´s control 
parameters will include the fuel blend ratio, high-reactivity fuel injec-
tion, variable valve actuation and advanced thermal management. This 
will  be  implemented  using  a  tailored,  fast-running  surrogate,  main-
taining the most relevant physics from the full model. Other use cases of 
the  developed  MZM  in  CPT  involve  coupling  with  a  detailed  one- 
dimensional  model  of  the  engine  air-path  to  support  optimisation 
studies. This coupled model will be further coupled with the dedicated 
aftertreatment  submodel  towards  full  (hybrid)  powertrain/propulsion 
system-level simulations. Interested readers are encouraged to track the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099854A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 34. Work packages 2 and 3 of Clean Propulsion Technologies have common workflow and support each other in model-based development of RCCI technology.  

project website [259]. 

8. Conclusion 

The  following  main  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  this  compre-

hensive review:  

• Multi-zone  models  have  proven  their  mandate  for  supporting  LTC 
combustion. Current use cases gradually move from mono-fuel HCCI 
and PCCI modes towards more complex RCCI strategies. MZ models 
still figure prominently in fundamental-level, large-scale parametric 
investigations but their focus is gradually shifting to more applied 
research  involving  multi-parameter  optimisation  and  transient 
simulation  towards  (indirect  so  far)  applications  in  model-based 
control.  

• Bearing in mind the above prospective applications, the current state 
of the art in multi-zone modelling is an onion-skin configuration with 
10-15  zones  and  phenomenological  heat  and  mass  transfer  sub-
models  with  predictive  in-cylinder  turbulence.  Recommended 
chemical  kinetic  mechanisms  are  of  the  semi-detailed  or  reduced- 
order type, involving 53-199 species, depending on the fuels used. 
Such  a  set-up  calculates  a  single  combustion  cycle  in  roughly  30 
minutes on a contemporary workstation, with single-core simulation.  
• Looking  towards  fully  autonomous  and  predictive  simulation,  the 
handful of submodels that exist are proven to couple well with MZM 
simulation.  This  involves  zero-dimensional  gas  exchange  models 
capable  of  capturing  effects  of  variable  valve  actuation;  wall  tem-
perature submodels enhancing the predictive capabilities in terms of 
thermal stratification; simple rate-driven injection and fuel evapo-
ration routines; blow-by models; or knock prediction functions.  
• Turning to direct control applications, most viable model-reduction 
strategies  involve  zone  reduction  and  tabulated  chemistry,  avoid-
ing operator splitting with dedicated implicit solvers. Further selec-
tivity of the range of detailed kinetics to be resolved, in favour of 
covering the bulk part of the cycle with a (still physics-based) semi- 
predictive surrogate, brings real-time simulation within scope.  
• The above development would open a new chapter for model-based 
RCCI  control,  ultimately  making  the  final  leap  towards  a  robust 
combustion engine running in ultra-efficient and clean RCCI mode 
across the whole load-range. 

Before the above can happen, however, the present study identifies 

several knowledge gaps that need to be addressed. The most important 
are:  

• Model  predictivity  –  providing  a  robust  way  to  couple  multi-zone 
models  with  phenomenological  spray  formation  models  for  fully 
predictive initialisation of fuel stratification 

• Model  applicability  –  developing  stable  and  computationally  effi-
cient  two-way  coupling  with  commercial  one-dimensional  engine 
modelling toolchains  

• Calculation speed – implement available techniques for reducing the 

cost of Jacobian construction and factorisation  

• Model  reliability  –  providing  unbiased  results  of  model  validity 
outside  the  calibration  space  for  a  broad  range  of  operating 
conditions 

Author statement 

Aneesh Vasudev: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, 
investigation,  project  administration,  visualization,  data  Curation, 
writing –  original draft, writing –  review &  editing Maciej Mikulski: 
conceptualization, methodology, funding acquisition, project adminis-
tration, supervision, resources, writing – original draft, writing – review 
& editing Xiaoguo Storm investigation, writing – original draft, writing 
– review & editing Praveen Ramanujam Balakrishnan: investigation, 
visualization, writing – original draft Jacek Hunicz writing – original 
draft, writing – review & editing 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgements 

The work was conducted in the framework of the Clean Propulsion 
Technologies project with financial support from Business Finland (ref. 
38485/31/2020).  Jacek  Hunicz  also  acknowledges  financial  support 
from the project Lublin University of Technology-Regional Excellence 
Initiative, funded by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Educa-
tion  (contract  no.  030/RID/2018/19).  Finally,  we  appreciate  the 
invaluable  contribution  of  Mr.  David  Wilcox  in  proofreading  our 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099855A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

manuscript and providing his expert suggestions on stylistic points. 

References 

[1] Stanglmaier RH, Roberts CE. Homogeneous Charge Compression Ignition (HCCI): 
Benefits, Compromises, and Future Engine Applications. SAE Transactions 1999; 
108:2138–45. https://doi.org/10.4271/1999-01-3682. 

[2] Akihama K, Takatori Y, Inagaki K, Sasaki S, Dean AM. Mechanism of the 

Smokeless Rich Diesel Combustion by Reducing Temperature. SAE Transactions 
2001;110:648–62. 

[3] Yao M, Zheng Z, Liu H. Progress and recent trends in homogeneous charge 

compression ignition (HCCI) engines. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 
2009;35:398–437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2009.05.001. 

[4] Reitz RD. Directions in internal combustion engine research. Combustion and 

Flame 2013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2012.11.002. 

[5] Ozaki J, Iida N. Effect of Degree of Unmixedness on HCCI Combustion Based on 
Experiment and Numerical Analysis. SAE Transactions 2006;115:1053–60. 
[6] Martinez-Frias J, Aceves SM, Flowers D, Smith JR, Dibble R. HCCI Engine Control 

by Thermal Management. SAE Transactions 2000;109:2646–55. 

[7] Chang K, Babajimopoulos A, Lavoie GA, Filipi ZS, Assanis DN. Analysis of Load 
and Speed Transitions in an HCCI Engine Using 1-D Cycle Simulation and 
Thermal Networks. SAE Transactions 2006;115:621–33. 

[8] Lu X, Han D, Huang Z. Fuel design and management for the control of advanced 
compression-ignition combustion modes. Progress in Energy and Combustion 
Science 2011;37:741–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2011.03.003. 

[9] Pachiannan T, Zhong W, Rajkumar S, He Z, Leng X, Wang Q. A literature review 

of fuel effects on performance and emission characteristics of low-temperature 
combustion strategies. Applied Energy 2019;251:113380. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113380. 

[10] Urushihara T, Hiraya K, Kakuhou A, Itoh T. Expansion of HCCI Operating Region 
by the Combination of Direct Fuel Injection, Negative Valve Overlap and Internal 
Fuel Reformation. SAE Transactions 2003;112:1092–100. 

[11] Hunicz J, Kordos P. An experimental study of fuel injection strategies in CAI 

gasoline engine. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 2011;35:243–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2010.09.007. 

[12] Lawler B, Splitter D, Szybist J, Kaul B. Thermally Stratified Compression Ignition: 
A new advanced low temperature combustion mode with load flexibility. Applied 
Energy 2017;189:122–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.11.034. 
[13] Olesky LM, Lavoie GA, Assanis DN, Wooldridge MS, Martz JB. The effects of 

diluent composition on the rates of HCCI and spark assisted compression ignition 
combustion. Applied Energy 2014;124:186–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2014.03.015. 

[14] Lavy J, Dabadie J-C, Angelberger C, Duret P, Willand J, Juretzka A, et al. 

Innovative Ultra-low NOx Controlled Auto-Ignition Combustion Process for 
Gasoline Engines : the 4-SPACE Project. SAE Transactions 2000;109:1072–87. 

[15] Duan X, Lai M-C, Jansons M, Guo G, Liu J. A review of controlling strategies of the 
ignition timing and combustion phase in homogeneous charge compression 
ignition (HCCI) engine. Fuel 2021;285:119142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fuel.2020.119142. 

[16] Mueller CJ, Upatnieks A. Dilute clean diesel combustion achieves low emissions 

and high efficiency while avoiding control problems of HCCI. In: 11th  Annual 
Diesel Engine Emissions Reduction (DEER) Conference, Chicago, Illinois; 2005. 
[17] Osborne RJ, Li G, Sapsford SM, Stokes J, Lake TH, Heikal MR. Evaluation of HCCI 
for Future Gasoline Powertrains. SAE 2003-01-0750 2003. https://doi.org/ 
10.4271/2003-01-0750. 

[18] Fuerhapter A, Unger E, Piock WF, Fraidl GK. The new AVL CSI Engine - HCCI 

Operation on a Multi Cylinder Gasoline Engine. SAE 2004-01-0551 2004. https:// 
doi.org/10.4271/2004-01-0551. 

[19] Mackay S.New hope for internal combustion engines. EIT | Engineering 

Institute of Technology, https://www.eit.edu.au/new-hope-for-internal-combust 
ion-engines/; 2017 [accessed 16.03.2021]. 

[20] Nüesch SP, Stefanopoulou AG, Jiang L, Sterniak J. Fuel Economy of a Multimode 

Combustion Engine With Three-Way Catalytic Converter. Journal of Dynamic 
Systems, Measurement, and Control 2014;137. https://doi.org/10.1115/ 
1.4028885. 

[21] Han J, Wang S, Somers B. Comparative Study on the Effects of Inlet Heating, Inlet 
Boosting, and Double-Injection Strategy on Partially Premixed Combustion. SAE 
2019-01-1149 2019. https://doi.org/10.4271/2019-01-1149. 

[22] Kim D, Ekoto I, Colban WF, Miles PC. In-cylinder CO and UHC Imaging in a Light- 
Duty Diesel Engine during PPCI Low-Temperature Combustion. SAE International 
Journal of Fuels and Lubricants 2009;1:933–56. 

[23] Kimura S, Aoki O, Kitahara Y, Aiyoshizawa E. Ultra-Clean Combustion 

Technology Combining a Low-Temperature and Premixed Combustion Concept 
for Meeting Future Emission Standards. SAE Transactions 2001;110:239–46. 

[24] Martin GC, Mueller CJ, Milam DM, Radovanovic MS, Gehrke CR. Early Direct- 

Injection, Low-Temperature Combustion of Diesel Fuel in an Optical Engine 
Utilizing a 15-Hole, Dual-Row, Narrow-Included-Angle Nozzle. SAE International 
Journal of Engines 2009;1:1057–82. 

[25] Dec JE. Advanced compression-ignition engines—understanding the in-cylinder 

processes. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2009;32:2727–42. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2008.08.008. 

[26] Sellnau M, Sinnamon J, Hoyer K, Husted H. Gasoline Direct Injection 

Compression Ignition (GDCI) - Diesel-like Efficiency with Low CO2 Emissions. 
SAE International Journal of Engines 2011;4:2010–22. 

[27] Kumar P, Zhang Y, Traver M, Watson J. Tailored Air-Handling-System 

Development for Gasoline Compression Ignition in a Heavy-Duty Diesel Engine. 
Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering 2021;7:6. 

[28] Inagaki K, Fuyuto T, Nishikawa K, Nakakita K, Sakata I. Dual-Fuel PCI 

Combustion Controlled by In-Cylinder Stratification of Ignitability. SAE 2006-01- 
0028 2006. https://doi.org/10.4271/2006-01-0028. 

[29] Kokjohn SL, Hanson RM, Splitter DA, Reitz RD. Experiments and Modeling of 

Dual-Fuel HCCI and PCCI Combustion Using In-Cylinder Fuel Blending. SAE 
International Journal of Engines 2010;2:24–39. 

[30] Kokjohn SL, Musculus MPB, Reitz RD. Evaluating temperature and fuel 

stratification for heat-release rate control in a reactivity-controlled compression- 
ignition engine using optical diagnostics and chemical kinetics modeling. 
Combustion and Flame 2015;162:2729–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2015.04.009. 

[31] Chuahy F, Kokjohn SL. Single fuel RCCI combustion using reformed fuel. Internal 
Combustion and Gas Turbine Engines. Washington DC, USA: Eastern States 
Section of the Combustion Institute; 2017. p. 23–4. 

[32] Paykani A, Kakaee A-H, Rahnama P, Reitz RD. Progress and recent trends in 

reactivity-controlled compression ignition engines. International Journal of 
Engine Research 2016;17:481–524. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1468087415593013. 

[33] Zhao H. HCCI AND  CAI ENGINES  FOR  THE  AUTOMOTIVE  INDUSTRY. Elsevier; 2007. 
[34] Saxena S, Bedoya ID. Fundamental phenomena affecting low temperature 

combustion and HCCI engines, high load limits and strategies for extending these 
limits. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2013;39:457–88. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pecs.2013.05.002. 

[35] Finney CE, Kaul BC, Daw CS, Wagner RM, Edwards KD, Green JB. Invited Review: 
A review of deterministic effects in cyclic variability of internal combustion 
engines. International Journal of Engine Research 2015;16:366–78. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1468087415572033. 

[36] Reitz RD, Duraisamy G. Review of high efficiency and clean reactivity controlled 
compression ignition (RCCI) combustion in internal combustion engines. Progress 
in Energy and Combustion Science 2015;46:12–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pecs.2014.05.003. 

[37] Paykani A, Garcia A, Shahbakhti M, Rahnama P, Reitz RD. Reactivity controlled 

compression ignition engine: Pathways towards commercial viability. Applied 
Energy 2021;282:116174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.116174. 
[38] Liu X, Kokjohn S, Wang H, Yao M. A comparative numerical investigation of 
reactivity controlled compression ignition combustion using Large Eddy 
Simulation and Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes approaches. Fuel 2019;257: 
116023. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.116023. 

[39] Nazemi M, Saigaonkar H, Shahbakhti M. Thermo-kinetic modelling of variable 

valve timing effects on HCCI engine combustion /HCCI Motorun Yanmasına 
De˘gis¸ken Supap Zamanlamasının Etkilerinin Termo-Kinetik Modeli. International 
Journal of Automotive Engineering and Technologies 2015;4:54–62. https://doi. 
org/10.18245/ijaet.51525. 

[40] Tekgül B, Kahila H, Karimkashi S, Kaario O, Ahmad Z, Lendormy ´E, et al. Large- 
eddy simulation of spray assisted dual-fuel ignition under reactivity-controlled 
dynamic conditions. Fuel 2021;293:120295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fuel.2021.120295. 

[41] Bhagatwala A, Chen JH, Lu T. Direct numerical simulations of HCCI/SACI with 
ethanol. Combustion and Flame 2014;161:1826–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2013.12.027. 

[42] Zhong S, Xu S, Bai X-S, Hadadpour A, Jangi M, Zhang F, et al. Combustion 

characteristics of n-heptane spray combustion in a low temperature reform gas/ 
air environment. Fuel 2021;293:120377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fuel.2021.120377. 

[43] Reith M, Day M, Bansude S, Tianfeng L, Kweon C-B, Temme J, et al. Direct 
Numerical Simulation of Multi-Injection Ignition in Low-Temperature 
Compression Ignition Environments. Bulletin of the American Physical Society, 
64. Seattle, WA: American Physical Society; 2019. Number. 
[44] Chen JH. DNS of Turbulent Combustion in Complex Flows. In: 11th 
Mediterranean Combustion Symposium, Tenerife, Spain; 2019. 

[45] Gadalla M, Kannan J, Tekgül B, Karimkashi S, Kaario O, Vuorinen V. Large-eddy 

simulation of tri-fuel combustion: Diesel spray assisted ignition of methanol- 
hydrogen blends. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:21687–703. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.03.238. 

[46] Zhong S, Zhang F, Du Q, Peng Z. Characteristics of reactivity controlled 

combustion with n-heptane low temperature reforming products. Fuel 2020;275: 
117980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117980. 

[47] Fathi M, Jahanian O, Shahbakhti M. Modeling and controller design architecture 
for cycle-by-cycle combustion control of homogeneous charge compression 
ignition (HCCI) engines – A comprehensive review. Energy Conversion and 
Management 2017;139:1–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2017.02.038. 
[48] Hall C, Kassa M. Advances in combustion control for natural gas–diesel dual fuel 
compression ignition engines in automotive applications: A review. Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2021;148:111291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2021.111291. 

[49] Atkinson C. Fuel Efficiency Optimization using Rapid Transient Engine 

Calibration. SAE 2014-01-2359 2014. https://doi.org/10.4271/2014-01-2359. 

[50] Ghojel JI. Review of the development and applications of the Wiebe function: A 
tribute to the contribution of Ivan Wiebe to engine research. International Journal 
of Engine Research 2010;11:297–312. https://doi.org/10.1243/ 
14680874JER06510. 

[51] GT-Suite Engine Performance Application Manual. Illinois, USA: Gamma 

Technologies LLC; 2019. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099856A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

[52] Verhelst S, Sheppard CGW. Multi-zone thermodynamic modelling of spark- 

[79] Babajimopoulos A, Assanis DN, Fiveland SB. An Approach for Modeling the 

ignition engine combustion – An overview. Energy Conversion and Management 
2009;50:1326–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2009.01.002. 

[53] Kumar S, Kumar Chauhan M, Varun. Numerical modeling of compression ignition 
engine: A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2013;19:517–30. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2012.11.043. 

[54] Allen C. FIRE Lab. Marquette University FIRE Lab; 2017. https://cslabs.wixsite. 

com/allen/research [accessed 22.06.2021]. 

[55] Wilson D, Allen C. Application of a multi-zone model for the prediction of species 
concentrations in rapid compression machine experiments. Combustion and 
Flame 2016;171:185–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.05.018. 

[56] Mikulski M, Balakrishnan PR, Doosje E, Bekdemir C. VARIABLE  VALVE  ACTUATION 

STRATEGIES  FOR  BETTER  EFFICIENCY  LOAD  RANGE  AND  THERMAL  MANAGEMENT  IN  AN  RCCI 
ENGINE. SAE International; 2018. https://doi.org/10.4271/2018-01-0254. 
[57] Mikulski M, Ramesh S, Bekdemir C. Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition 
for clean and efficient ship propulsion. Energy 2019;182:1173–92. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.06.091. 

[58] Eichmeier JU, Reitz RD, Rutland C. A Zero-Dimensional Phenomenological Model 
for RCCI Combustion Using Reaction Kinetics. SAE Int J Engines 2014;7:106–19. 
https://doi.org/10.4271/2014-01-1074. 

[59] Narayanaswamy K, Rutland CJ. Cycle Simulation Diesel HCCI Modeling Studies 
and Control. SAE 2004-01-2997 2004. https://doi.org/10.4271/2004-01-2997. 

[60] Ekberg K, Leek V, Eriksson L. Validation of an Open-Source Mean-Value Heavy- 
Duty Diesel Engine Model. In: Proceedings of The 59th Conference on Simulation 
and Modelling. 153. Oslo Metroplitan Univeristy, Norway: Link¨oping University 
Electronic Press, Link¨opings universitet; 2018. p. 290–6. https://doi.org/ 
10.3384/ecp18153290. 

[61] Wahlstr¨om J, Eriksson L. Modelling diesel engines with a variable-geometry 

turbocharger and exhaust gas recirculation by optimization of model parameters 
for capturing non-linear system dynamics. Proceedings of the Institution of 
Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of Automobile Engineering 2011;225: 
960–86. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954407011398177. 

[62] Indrajuana A, Bekdemir C, Feru E, Willems F. Towards Model-Based Control of 
RCCI-CDF Mode-Switching in Dual Fuel Engines. SAE 2018-01-0263 2018. 
https://doi.org/10.4271/2018-01-0263. 

[63] Bidarvatan M, Gray-Box Shahbakhti M. Modeling for Performance Control of an 

HCCI Engine With Blended Fuels. Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and 
Power 2014;136. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4027278. 

[64] Indrajuana A, Bekdemir C, Luo X, Willems F. Robust Multivariable Feedback 
Control of Natural Gas-Diesel RCCI Combustion. IFAC-PapersOnLine 2016;49: 
217–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.08.033. 

[65] Nazoktabar M, Jazayeri SA, Parsa M, Ganji DD, Arshtabar K. Controlling the 

optimal combustion phasing in an HCCI engine based on load demand and 
minimum emissions. Energy 2019;182:82–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2019.06.012. 

[66] Komninos NP, Rakopoulos CD. Heat transfer in hcci phenomenological simulation 
models: A review. Applied Energy 2016;181:179–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2016.08.061. 

[67] Tzanetakis T, Singh P, Chen J-T, Thomson MJ, Koch Charles R. Knock limit 

prediction via multi-zone modelling of a primary reference fuel HCCI engine. 
International Journal of Vehicle Design 2010;54:47–72. https://doi.org/ 
10.1504/IJVD.2010.03487. 

[68] Dec JE, Hwang W, Sj¨oberg M. An Investigation of Thermal Stratification in HCCI 
Engines Using Chemiluminescence Imaging. SAE Transactions 2006;115:759–76. 
[69] Hultqvist A, Engdar U, Johansson B, Klingmann J. Reacting Boundary Layers in a 

Homogeneous Charge Compression Ignition (HCCI) Engine. SAE 2001-01-1032 
2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/2001-01-1032. 

[70] Maghbouli A, Lucchini T, D’Errico G, Izadi Najafabadi M, Somers B. Numerical 
Investigation of PPCI Combustion at Low and High Charge Stratification Levels. 
SAE 2017-01-0739 2017. https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-01-0739. 
[71] Komninos NP, Hountalas DT, Kouremenos DA. Description of in-Cylinder 

Combustion Processes in HCCI Engines Using a Multi-Zone Model. SAE 2005-01- 
0171 2005. https://doi.org/10.4271/2005-01-0171. 

[72] Noda T, Foster DE. A Numerical Study to Control Combustion Duration of 

Hydrogen-Fueled HCCI by Using Multi-Zone Chemical Kinetics Simulation. SAE 
Transactions 2001;110:186–91. 

[73] Aceves SM, Flowers DL, Westbrook CK, Smith JR, Pitz W, Dibble R, et al. A Multi- 

Zone Model for Prediction of HCCI Combustion and Emissions. SAE 2001-01- 
0327 2000. https://doi.org/10.4271/2000-01-0327. 

[74] Orlandini I, Kulzer A, Weberbauer F, Rauscher M. Simulation of Self Ignition in 
HCCI and Partial HCCI Engines Using a Reduced Order Model. SAE 2005-01-0159 
2005. https://doi.org/10.4271/2005-01-0159. 

[75] Aceves SM, Flowers DL, Martinez-Frias J, Smith JR, Westbrook CK, Pitz WJ, et al. 

A Sequential Fluid-Mechanic Chemical-Kinetic Model of Propane HCCI 
Combustion. SAE 2001-01-1027 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/2001-01-1027. 

[76] Aceves SM, Martinez-Frias J, Flowers DL, Smith JR, Dibble RW, Wright JF, et al. 
A Decoupled Model of Detailed Fluid Mechanics Followed by Detailed Chemical 
Kinetics for Prediction of Iso-Octane HCCI Combustion. SAE Transactions 2001; 
110:2135–46. 

[77] Aceves SM, Flowers DL, Espinosa-Loza F, Babajimopoulos A, Assanis DN. Analysis 

Effects of Gas Exchange Processes on HCCI Combustion and Its Application in 
Evaluating Variable Valve Timing Control Strategies. SAE Transactions 2002;111: 
1794–809. 

[80] Babajimopoulos A, Assanis DN, Flowers DL, Aceves SM, Hessel RP. A fully 
coupled computational fluid dynamics and multi-zone model with detailed 
chemical kinetics for the simulation of premixed charge compression ignition 
engines. International Journal of Engine Research 2005;6:497–512. https://doi. 
org/10.1243/146808705X30503. 

[81] Kodavasal J, McNenly MJ, Babajimopoulos A, Aceves SM, Assanis DN, 

Havstad MA, et al. An accelerated multi-zone model for engine cycle simulation 
of homogeneous charge compression ignition combustion. International Journal 
of Engine Research 2013;14:416–33. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1468087413482480. 

[82] Flowers DL, Aceves SM, Martinez-Frias J, Dibble RW. Prediction of carbon 

monoxide and hydrocarbon emissions in iso-octane HCCI engine combustion 
using multizone simulations. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2002;29: 
687–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1540-7489(02)80088-8. 

[83] Flowers D, Aceves S, Martinez-Frias J, Hessel R, Dibble R. EFFECT  OF  MIXING  ON 

HYDROCARBON AND CARBON MONOXIDE EMISSIONS PREDICTION FOR ISOOCTANE HCCI ENGINE 
COMBUSTION  USING  A  MULTI-ZONE  DETAILED  KINETICS  SOLVER. SAE International; 2003. 
https://doi.org/10.4271/2003-01-1821. 

[84] Aceves SM, Flowers DL, Martinez-Frias J, Espinosa-Loza F, Christensen M, 

Johansson B, et al. ANALYSIS  OF  THE  EFFECT  OF  GEOMETRY  GENERATED  TURBULENCE  ON 
HCCI COMBUSTION  BY  MULTI-ZONE  MODELING. SAE International; 2005. https://doi. 
org/10.4271/2005-01-2134. 

[85] Jia M, Xie M, Peng Z. A Comparative Study of Multi-zone Combustion Models for 
HCCI Engines. SAE 2008-01-0064 2008. https://doi.org/10.4271/2008-01-0064. 
[86] Mikulski M, Balakrishnan PR, Hunicz J. Natural gas-diesel reactivity controlled 
compression ignition with negative valve overlap and in-cylinder fuel reforming. 
Applied Energy 2019;254:113638. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2019.113638. 

[87] Neshat E, Saray RK. Development of a new multi zone model for prediction of 

HCCI (homogenous charge compression ignition) engine combustion, 
performance and emission characteristics. Energy 2014;73:325–39. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.energy.2014.06.025. 

[88] Komninos NP. Modeling HCCI combustion: Modification of a multi-zone model 
and comparison to experimental results at varying boost pressure. Applied Energy 
2009;86:2141–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2009.01.026. 

[89] Kongsereeparp P, Checkel MD. Novel Method of Setting Initial Conditions for 
Multi-Zone HCCI Combustion Modeling. SAE 2007-01-0674 2007. https://doi. 
org/10.4271/2007-01-0674. 

[90] Kozarac D, Sjeric M, Mahalec I. Introducing Initial Conditions with Non-uniform 

Mixtures and Fuel Injection into the Multi Zone HCCI Simulation Model. SAE 
2010-01-1083 2010. https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01-1083. 

[91] Fiveland SB, Assanis DN. Development and Validation of a Quasi-Dimensional 

Model for HCCI Engine Performance and Emissions Studies Under Turbocharged 
Conditions. SAE Transactions 2002;111:842–60. 

[92] Mikulski M, Bekdemir C, Willems F. Experimental validation of a combustion 
kinetics based multi-zone model for natural gas-diesel RCCI engines. In: 2016 
Symposium for Combustion Control (SCC 2016), Aachen, Germany; 2016. 
p. 83–91. 

[93] Ogink R, Golovitchev V. Gasoline HCCI Modeling: An Engine Cycle Simulation 

Code with a Multi-Zone Combustion Model. SAE 2002-01-1745 2002. https://doi. 
org/10.4271/2002-01-1745. 

[94] Easley WL, Agarwal A, Lavoie GA. Modeling of HCCI Combustion and Emissions 

Using Detailed Chemistry. SAE 2001-01-1029 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/ 
2001-01-1029. 

[95] Lashkarpour SM, Khoshbakhti Saray R, Najafi M. Multi-zone model for reactivity 

controlled compression ignition engine based on CFD approach. Energy 2018; 
156:213–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.05.084. 

[96] Bissoli M, Frassoldati A, Cuoci A, Ranzi E, Mehl M, Faravelli T. A new predictive 
multi-zone model for HCCI engine combustion. Applied Energy 2016;178: 
826–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.06.062. 

[97] Kozarac D, Lulic Z, Sagi G. A six-zone simulation model for HCCI engines with a 
non-segregated solver of zone state. Combustion Theory and Modelling 2010;14: 
425–51. https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830.2010.489959. 

[98] Angelos JP, Puignou M, Andreae MM, Cheng WK, Green WH, Singer MA. Detailed 
chemical kinetic simulations of homogeneous charge compression ignition engine 
transients. International Journal of Engine Research 2008;9:149–64. https://doi. 
org/10.1243/14680874JER02207. 

[99] Kongsereeparp P, Kashani B, Checkel MD. A Stand-Alone Multi-Zone Model for 
Combustion in HCCI Engines. In: ASME 2005 Internal Combustion Engine 
Division Fall Technical Conference (ICEF2005); 2005. p. 265–74. https://doi.org/ 
10.1115/ICEF2005-1241. 

[100] Egüz U, Leermakers CA, Somers LM, de Goey LP. Premixed charge compression 
ignition combustion modelling with a multi-zone approach including inter-zonal 
mixing. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of 
Automobile Engineering 2013;227:1313–24. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0954407012474193. 

of Premixed Charge Compression Ignition Combustion With a Sequential Fluid 
Mechanics-Multizone Chemical Kinetics Model. SAE Transactions 2005;114: 
252–62. 

[101] Mikulski M, Bekdemir C. Understanding the role of low reactivity fuel 

stratification in a dual fuel RCCI engine – A simulation study. Applied Energy 
2017;191:689–708. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.01.080. 

[78] Hergart C-A, Barths H, Siewert RM. Modeling Approaches for Premixed Charge 

Compression Ignition Combustion. SAE 2005-01-0218 2005. https://doi.org/ 
10.4271/2005-01-0218. 

[102] Voshtani S, Reyhanian M, Ehteram M, Hosseini V. Investigating various effects of 
reformer gas enrichment on a natural gas-fueled HCCI combustion engine. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099857A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2014;39:19799–809. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.09.130. 

[103] Bissoli M, Cuoci A, Frassoldati A, Faravelli T, Ranzi E, Lucchini T, et al. Detailed 

Kinetic Analysis of HCCI Combustion Using a New Multi-Zone Model and CFD 
Simulations. SAE International Journal of Engines 2013;6:1594–609. 
[104] Komninos NP, Kosmadakis GM. Heat transfer in HCCI multi-zone modeling: 

Validation of a new wall heat flux correlation under motoring conditions. Applied 
Energy 2011;88:1635–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2010.11.039. 

[105] Kook S, Bae C, Miles PC, Choi D, Pickett LM. The Influence of Charge Dilution and 

Injection Timing on Low-Temperature Diesel Combustion and Emissions. SAE 
Transactions 2005;114:1575–95. 

[125] Nazoktabar M, Jazayeri SA, Arshtabar K, Ganji DD. Developing a multi-zone 

model for a HCCI engine to obtain optimal conditions using genetic algorithm. 
Energy Conversion and Management 2018;157:49–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.enconman.2017.12.001. 

[126] Chang J, Güralp O, Filipi Z, Assanis D, Kuo T-W, Najt P, et al. New Heat Transfer 

Correlation for an HCCI Engine Derived from Measurements of Instantaneous 
Surface Heat Flux. SAE Transactions 2004;113:1576–93. 

[127] Annand WJD. Heat Transfer in the Cylinders of Reciprocating Internal 

Combustion Engines. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers 
1963;177:973–96. https://doi.org/10.1243/PIME_PROC_1963_177_069_02. 
[128] Hohenberg GF. Advanced Approaches for Heat Transfer Calculations. SAE 

[106] Perini F, Busch S, Reitz RD. A phenomenological rate of injection model for 

Transactions 1979;88:2788–806. 

predicting fuel injection with application to mixture formation in light-duty diesel 
engines. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal 
of Automobile Engineering 2020;234:1826–39. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0954407019898062. 

[129] Woschni G. A Universally Applicable Equation for the Instantaneous Heat 
Transfer Coefficient in the Internal Combustion Engine. SAE 1967;670931. 
https://doi.org/10.4271/670931. 

[130] Fiveland SB, Assanis DN. A Four-Stroke Homogeneous Charge Compression 

[107] Baratta M, Catania A, Ferrari A, Finesso R, Spessa E. Innovative multizone 

premixed-diffusion combustion model for performance and emission analysis in 
conventional and PCCI diesel engines. In: Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on Modeling and Diagnostics for Advanced Engine Systems, 
COMODIA 2008 2008. 7; 2008. p. 351–62. https://doi.org/10.1299/ 
jmsesdm.2008.7.351. 

Ignition Engine Simulation for Combustion and Performance Studies. SAE 
Transactions 2000;109:452–68. 

[131] Neshat E, Saray RK. Effect of different heat transfer models on HCCI engine 

simulation. Energy Conversion and Management 2014;88:1–14. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enconman.2014.07.075. 

[132] Heywood JB. Internal combustion engine fundamentals. New York: McGraw-Hill; 

[108] Kuleshov A, Kozlov AV, Mahkamov K. Self-Ignition Delay Prediction in PCCI 

1988. 

Direct Injection Diesel Engines Using Multi-Zone Spray Combustion Model and 
Detailed Chemistry. SAE 2010-01-1960 2010. https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01- 
1960. 

[133] Kongsereeparp P, Checkel MD. Investigating the Effects of Reformed Fuel 

Blending in a Methane- or n-Heptane-HCCI Engine Using a Multi-Zone Model. 
SAE 2007-01-0205 2007. https://doi.org/10.4271/2007-01-0205. 

[109] Baratta M, Catania AE, Ferrari A, Finesso R, Spessa E. Premixed-Diffusive 

[134] Guo H, Li H, Neill WS. A Study on the Performance of Combustion in a HCCI 

Multizone Model for Combustion Diagnostics in Conventional and PCCI Diesel 
Engines. Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 2011;133. https:// 
doi.org/10.1115/1.4003048. 

Engine Using n-Heptane by a Multi-Zone Model. In: ASME 2009 Internal 
Combustion Engine Division Fall Technical Conference (ICEF2009; 2009. 
p. 489–97. https://doi.org/10.1115/ICEF2009-14117. 

[110] Hiroyasu H, Kadota T, Arai M. Development and Use of a Spray Combustion 
Modeling to Predict Diesel Engine Efficiency and Pollutant Emissions : Part 1 
Combustion Modeling. Bulletin of JSME 1983;26:569–75. https://doi.org/ 
10.1299/jsme1958.26.569. 

[111] Dos Santos F, Le Moyne L. Spray Atomization Models in Engine Applications, from 
Correlations to Direct Numerical Simulations. Oil & Gas Science and Technology - 
Revue d’IFP. Energies Nouvelles 2011;66:801–22. https://doi.org/10.2516/ogst/ 
2011116. 

[112] Felsch C, Hoffmann K, Vanegas A, Drews P, Barths H, Abel D, et al. Combustion 
model reduction for diesel engine control design. International Journal of Engine 
Research 2009;10:359–87. https://doi.org/10.1243/14680874JER04509. 
[113] Felsch C, Dahms R, Glodde B, Vogel S, Jerzembeck S, Peters N, et al. An 

Interactively Coupled CFD-Multi-Zone Approach to. Model HCCI Combustion. 
Flow, Turbulence and Combustion 2009;82:621–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10494-009-9202-6. 

[114] Wei H, Chen C, Feng D, Gao D, Chen L. Combustion Simulations under IC Engine- 

Relevant Conditions Using Dynamic Adaptive Multi-Zone Method. Combustion 
Science and Technology 2017;189:2242–65. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00102202.2017.1369971. 

[115] Kodavasal J, Keum S, Babajimopoulos A. An extended multi-zone combustion 

model for PCI simulation. Combustion Theory and Modelling 2011;15:893–910. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830.2011.578663. 

[116] Shi Y, Hessel RP, Reitz RD. An adaptive multi-grid chemistry (AMC) model for 

efficient simulation of HCCI and DI engine combustion. Combustion Theory and 
Modelling 2009;13:83–104. https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830802401101. 
[117] Bhave A, Kraft M, Montorsi L, Mauss F. Sources of CO emissions in an HCCI 
engine: A numerical analysis. Combustion and Flame 2006. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.10.015. 

[118] Mosbach S, Su H, Kraft M, Bhave A, Mauss F, Wang Z, et al. Dual injection 

homogeneous charge compression ignition engine simulation using a stochastic 
reactor model. International Journal of Engine Research 2007;8:41–50. https:// 
doi.org/10.1243/14680874JER01806. 

[119] Ahmedi A, Ahmed SS, Kalghatgi GT. Simulating combustion in a PCI (premixed 
compression ignition) engine using DI-SRM and 3 components surrogate model. 
Combustion and Flame 2015;162:3728–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2015.07.011. 

[120] Montorsi L, Mauss F, Bianchi GM, Bhave A, Kraft M. Analysis of the HCCI 

Combustion of a Turbocharged Truck Engine Using a Stochastic Reactor Model. 
In: ASME 2002 Internal Combustion Engine Division Fall Technical Conference 
(ICEF2002); 2002. p. 97–108. https://doi.org/10.1115/ICEF2002-488. 

[121] Cao L, Su H, Mosbach S, Kraft M, Bhave A, Kook S, et al. Studying the influence of 
direct injection on pcci combustion and emissions at engine idle condition using 
two dimensional CFD and stochastic reactor model. SAE Technical Papers 2008. 
https://doi.org/10.4271/2008-01-0021. 

[122] Lundgren M, Tuner M, Johansson B, Bjerkborn S, Frojd K, Andersson A, et al. 

Gasoline PPC: A parametric study of late cycle mixing conditions using a 
predictive two-zone SRM modeling tool. SAE Technical Papers 2013;11. https:// 
doi.org/10.4271/2013-01-2621. 

[123] Tun´er M. Stochastic Reactor Models for Engine Simulations. Doctoral Thesis 
(monograph). Division of Combustion Physics, Department of Physics, Lund 
University; 2008. 

[124] Kraft M, Maigaard P, Mauss F, Christensen M, Johansson B. Investigation of 

combustion emissions in a homogeneous charge compression injection engine: 
Measurements and a new computational model. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2000;28:1195–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(00)80330-6. 

[135] Mehl M, Tardani A, Faravelli T, Ranzi E, D’Errico G, Lucchini T, et al. A Multizone 

approach to the detailed kinetic modeling of HCCI combustion. SAE 2007-24- 
0086 2007. https://doi.org/10.4271/2007-24-0086. 

[136] Bargende M. PhD Thesis. University of Darmstadt; 1991. 
[137] Xu H, Liu M, Gharahbaghi S, Richardson S, Wyszynski M, Megaritis T. Modelling 

of HCCI Engines: Comparison of Single-zone, Multi-zone and Test Data. SAE 
2005-01-2123 2005. https://doi.org/10.4271/2005-01-2123. 

[138] Visakhamoorthy S, Tzanetakis T, Haggith D, Sobiesiak A, Wen JZ. Numerical 

study of a homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI) engine fueled with 
biogas. Applied Energy 2012;92:437–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2011.11.014. 

[139] Komninos NP, Hountalas DT. Improvement and validation of a multi-zone model 

for HCCI engine combustion concerning performance and emissions. Energy 
Conversion and Management 2008;49:2530–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2008.05.008. 

[140] Nobakht AY, Khoshbakhi Saray R, Rahimi A. A parametric study on natural gas 
fueled HCCI combustion engine using a multi-zone combustion model. Fuel 2011; 
90:1508–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2010.12.026. 

[141] Egüz U, Maes NCJ, Leermakers CAJ, Somers LMT, Goey LPHD. Predicting auto- 

ignition characteristics of RCCI combustion using a multi-zone model. 
International Journal of Automotive Technology 2013;14:693–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s12239-013-0075-2. 

[142] Fathi M, Jahanian O, Ganji DD, Wang S, Somers B. Stand-alone single- and multi- 
zone modeling of direct injection homogeneous charge compression ignition (DI- 
HCCI) combustion engines. Applied Thermal Engineering 2017;125:1181–90. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.07.123. 

[143] Barroso G, Escher A, Boulouchos K. Experimental and Numerical Investigations 
on HCCI- Combustion. SAE 2005-24-038 2005. https://doi.org/10.4271/2005- 
24-038. 

[144] Han Z, Reitz RD. A temperature wall function formulation for variable-density 
turbulent flows with application to engine convective heat transfer modeling. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 1997;40:613–25. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0017-9310(96)00117-2. 

[145] Fiveland SB, Assanis DN. Development of a Two-Zone HCCI Combustion Model 
Accounting for Boundary Layer Effects. SAE 2001-01-1028 2001. https://doi.org/ 
10.4271/2001-01-1028. 

[146] Puzinauskas P, Borgnakke C. Evaluation and Improvement of an Unsteady Heat 
Transfer Model for Spark Ignition Engines. SAE Transactions 1991;100:345–60. 
[147] Lyford-Pike EJ, Heywood JB. Thermal boundary layer thickness in the cylinder of 
a spark-ignition engine. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 1984;27: 
1873–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(84)90169-8. 

[148] Fonseca L, Novella Rosa R, Olmeda P, Valle RM. Internal Combustion Engine Heat 

Transfer and Wall Temperature Modeling: An Overview. Archives of 
Computational Methods in Engineering 2019;27:1661–79. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s11831-019-09361-9. 

[149] Kongsereeparp P, Environmental Checkel MD. Thermodynamic and Chemical 

Factor Effects on Heptane- and CNG-fuelled HCCI Combustion with Various 
Mixture Compositions. SAE 2008-01-0038 2008. https://doi.org/10.4271/2008- 
01-0038. 

[150] Sj¨oberg M, Dec JE. An Investigation of the Relationship Between Measured Intake 
Temperature, BDC Temperature, and Combustion Phasing for Premixed and DI 
HCCI Engines. SAE Transactions 2004;113:1271–86. 

[151] Mikulski M, Wierzbicki S. Validation of a zero-dimensional and 2-phase 

combustion model for dual-fuel compression ignition engine simulation. Thermal 
Science 2017;21:387–99. https://doi.org/10.2298/TSCI160127076M. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099858A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

[152] Versteeg HK, Malalasekera W. An introduction to computational fluid dynamics 

the finite volume method. 2 ed. Harlow: Pearson/Prentice Hall; 2007. 

[153] Iida N, Ichikura T, Kase K, Enomoto Y. Self-ignition and combustion stability in a 

methanol fueled low heat rejection ceramic ATAC engine—analysis of cyclic 
variation at high wall temperatures and lean burn operation. JSAE Review 1997; 
18:233–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0389-4304(97)00012-X. 

[181] Rahimi A, Fatehifar E, Saray RK. Development of an optimized chemical kinetic 
mechanism for homogeneous charge compression ignition combustion of a fuel 
blend of n-heptane and natural gas using a genetic algorithm. Proceedings of the 
Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of Automobile Engineering 
2010;224:1141–59. https://doi.org/10.1243/09544070JAUTO1343. 

[182] Kee R, Rupley F, Miller J, Coltrin M, Grcar J, Meeks E, et al. CHEMKIN Collection. 

[154] Law CK. COMBUSTION  PHYSICS. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2006. 

San Diego, California: Reaction Design; 2000. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511754517. 

[155] Yu R, Bai XS, Lehtiniemi H, Ahmed SS, Mauss F, Richter M, et al. EFFECT  OF 

TURBULENCE  AND  INITIAL  TEMPERATURE  INHOMOGENEITY  ON  HOMOGENEOUS  CHARGE 
COMPRESSION  IGNITION  COMBUSTION. SAE International; 2006. https://doi.org/ 
10.4271/2006-01-3318. 

[156] Vasudev A. TURBULENCE  BASED  INTER-ZONAL  MIXING  IN  A  MULTI-ZONE  MODEL  FOR  PREDICTIVE 
RCCI COMBUSTION  SIMULATIONS. Master of Science Thesis. Eindhoven University of 
Technology; 2018. 

[157] Wong VW, Hoult DP. Rapid Distortion Theory Applied to Turbulent Combustion. 

SAE Transactions 1979;88:1243–62. 

[158] Yang J, Martin JK. Approximate solution—One-dimensional energy equation for 
transient, compressible, low mach number turbulent boundary layer flows. 
Journal of Heat Transfer (Transactions of the ASME (American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers), SERIES C); (UNITED STATES) 1989. https://doi.org/10.1115/ 
1.3250727. 

[159] Westbrook CK, Dryer FL. Simplified Reaction Mechanisms for the Oxidation of 

Hydrocarbon Fuels in Flames. Combustion Science and Technology 1981;27: 
31–43. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102208108946970. 

[160] Mikulski M, Wierzbicki S, Piętak A. Numerical Studies on Controlling Gaseous 

Fuel Combustion by Managing the Combustion Process of Diesel Pilot Dose in a 
Dual-Fuel Engine 2015:225–38. 

[161] Westbrook CK, Dryer FL. Chemical kinetics and modeling of combustion 

processes. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1981;18:749–67. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(81)80079-3. 

[162] Zheng J, Miller DL, Cernansky NP. A Global Reaction Model for the HCCI 

Combustion Process. SAE 2004-01–2950 2004. https://doi.org/10.4271/2004- 
01-2950. 

[183] Bekdemir C, Baert R, Willems FPT, Somers LMT. Towards Control-Oriented 
Modeling of Natural Gas-Diesel RCCI Combustion. SAE 2015-01-1745 2015. 
https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-1745. 

[184] Yadav J, Eise F, Preussker M, Cai L, vom Lehn F, Bekdemir C. RCCI-Combustion 
System in HD Applications Achieving Lowest Fuel Consumption and Emissions. 
FVV (The Research Association for Combustion Engines eV) 2020. 

[185] Hern´andez JJ, Ballesteros R, Sanz-Argent J. Reduction of kinetic mechanisms for 
fuel oxidation through genetic algorithms. Mathematical and Computer 
Modelling 2010;52:1185–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcm.2010.02.035. 
[186] McNenly MJ, Havstad MA, Aceves SM, Pitz WJ. Integration Strategies for Efficient 
Multizone Chemical Kinetics Models. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2010;3:241–55. 
https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01-0576. 

[187] Koszalka G, Hunicz J. Comparative study of energy losses related to the ring pack 
operation in homogeneous charge compression ignition and spark ignition 
combustion. Energy 2021;235:121388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2021.121388. 

[188] Roberts CE, Matthews RD. Development and Application of an Improved Ring 

Pack Model for Hydrocarbon Emissions Studies. SAE Transactions 1996;105: 
1480–502. 

[189] Namazian M, Heywood JB. Flow in the Piston-Cylinder-Ring Crevices of a Spark- 

Ignition Engine: Effect on Hydrocarbon Emissions, Efficiency and Power. SAE 
Transactions 1982;91:261–88. 

[190] Zheng J, Caton JA. Second law analysis of a low temperature combustion diesel 
engine: Effect of injection timing and exhaust gas recirculation. Energy 2012;38: 
78–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2011.12.034. 

[191] Ferguson CR. INTERNAL  COMBUSTION  ENGINES, APPLIED  THERMOSCIENCES. New York: 

Wiley; 1986. 

[163] Miller JA, Kee RJ, Westbrook CK. Chemical Kinetics and Combustion Modeling. 
Annu Rev Phys Chem 1990;41:345–87. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev. 
pc.41.100190.002021. 

[192] Goodwin DG, Moffat HK, Speth RL. Cantera: An Object-Oriented Software Toolkit 
For Chemical Kinetics, Thermodynamics, And Transport Processes. Version 2.3.0. 
Zenodo; 2017. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.170284. 

[164] Ogink R, Golovitchev V. Gasoline HCCI Modeling: Computer Program Combining 
Detailed Chemistry and Gas Exchange Processes. 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/ 
2001-01-3614. 2001-01–3614. 

[193] Radhakrishnan K, Hindmarsh A. DESCRIPTION  AND  USE  OF  LSODE, THE  LIVEMORE 

SOLVER  FOR  ORDINARY  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS. Livermore, CA: Lawrence Livermore 
National Lab.(LLNL; 1993. https://doi.org/10.2172/15013302. 

[165] Pfahl U, Fieweger K, Adomeit G. Shock Tube Investigation of Ignition Delay Times 

[194] Brown PN, Byrne GD, Hindmarsh AC. VODE: a variable-coefficient ODE solver. 

of Multicomponent Fuel/Air-Mixtures under Engine Relevant Conditions. Final 
Report, Subprogramme FK. 4. IDEA-EFFECT 1996. 

SIAM j Sci Statist Comput 1989;10:1038–51. 

[195] Cohen SD, Hindmarsh AC, Dubois PF, CVODE A. Stiff/Nonstiff ODE Solver in C. 

[166] Chen Y-H, Chen JY. Development of Isooctane Skeletal Mechanisms for Fast and 

Computers in Physics 1996;10:138. 

Accurate Predictions of SOC and Emissions of HCCI Engines based on LLNL 
Detailed Mechanism. In: 2005 Fall Meeting Western States Combustion Institute, 
Stanford, California; 2005. 

[167] Curran HJ, Gaffuri P, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK, Leppard WR. Autoignition 

Chemistry of the Hexane Isomers: An Experimental and Kinetic Modeling Study. 
SAE Transactions 1995;104:1184–95. 

[168] Golovitchev VI. n.d. http://www.tfd.chalmers.se/~valeri/MECH.html. 
[169] Andrae JCG, Brinck T, Kalghatgi GT. HCCI experiments with toluene reference 

fuels modeled by a semidetailed chemical kinetic model. Combustion and Flame 
2008;155:696–712. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.05.010. 
[170] Seiser R, Pitsch H, Seshadri K, Pitz WJ, Gurran HJ. Extinction and autoignition of 
n-heptane in counterflow configuration. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 
2000;28:2029–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(00)80610-4. 

[171] Peters N, Paczko G, Seiser R, Seshadri K. Temperature cross-over and non-thermal 

runaway at two-stage ignition of n-heptane. Combustion and Flame 2002;128: 
38–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(01)00331-5. 

[172] Smith GP, Golden DM, Frenklach M, Moriarty NW, Eiteneer B, Goldenberg M, 

et al. GRI-MECH 3.0. http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri_mech/. 

[173] Hergart C, Barths H, Peters N. Modeling the Combustion in a Small-Bore Diesel 

Engine Using a Method Based on Representative Interactive Flamelets. SAE 
1999001-3550 1999. https://doi.org/10.4271/1999-01-3550. 

[174] Tanaka S, Ayala F, Keck JC. A reduced chemical kinetic model for HCCI 
combustion of primary reference fuels in a rapid compression machine. 
Combustion and Flame 2003;133:467–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180 
(03)00057-9. 

[175] Faravelli T, Ranzi E, Frassoldati A, Cuoci A, Mehl M, Stagni A, et al. The CRECK 

modeling group. http://creckmodeling.chem.polimi.it/; [accessed 21.07.2021]. 

[176] Curran HJ, Gaffuri P, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK. A comprehensive modeling study of 
iso-octane oxidation. Combustion and Flame 2002;129:253–80. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0010-2180(01)00373-X. 

[177] Ra Y, Reitz RD. A reduced chemical kinetic model for IC engine combustion 
simulations with primary reference fuels. Combustion and Flame 2008;155: 
713–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.05.002. 

[178] Golovitchev VI, Atarashiya K, Tanaka K, Yamada S. Towards Universal EDC-based 
combustion model for compression ignited engine simulations. SAE Transactions 
2003;112:1329–43. 

[196] Wu H, Ma PC, Ihme M. Efficient time stepping for reactive turbulent simulations 
with stiff chemistry. In: 2018 AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting. American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics; 2018. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2018- 
1672. 

[197] Fedkiw RP, Merriman B, Osher S. High Accuracy Numerical Methods for 

Thermally Perfect Gas Flows with Chemistry. Journal of Computational Physics 
1997;132:175–90. https://doi.org/10.1006/jcph.1996.5622. 

[198] Sandu A, Verwer JG, Van Loon M, Carmichael GR, Potra FA, Dabdub D, et al. 

Benchmarking stiff ode solvers for atmospheric chemistry problems-I. implicit vs 
explicit. Atmospheric Environment 1997;31:3151–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S1352-2310(97)00059-9. 

[199] Petzold LR. DESCRIPTION  OF  DASSL: A  DIFFERENTIAL/ALGEBRAIC  SYSTEM  SOLVER. 

Livermore, CA: Lawrence Livermore National Lab. (LLNL); 1982. https://www. 
osti.gov/biblio/5882821. 

[200] Barton PI, Allgor RJ, Feehery WF. ABACUSS Project Report. Massachusette 

Institute of Technology; 1997. 

[201] S¨oderlind G, Wang L. Evaluating numerical ODE/DAE methods, algorithms and 
software. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 2006;185:244–60. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cam.2005.03.009. 

[202] Manca D, Buzzi-Ferraris G, Ples¸u V, PS¸  Agachi. The solution of DAE systems by a 
numerically robust and efficient solver. Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, 
24. Elsevier; 2007. p. 93–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1570-7946(07)80039-3. 

[203] Ferraris GB, Manca D. BzzOde: a new C++ class for the solution of stiff and non- 
stiff ordinary differential equation systems. Computers & Chemical Engineering 
1998;22:1595–621. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0098-1354(98)00233-6. 

[204] Knoll DA, Keyes DE. Jacobian-free Newton–Krylov methods: a survey of 

approaches and applications. Journal of Computational Physics 2004;193: 
357–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2003.08.010. 

[205] Ravi N, Liao H-H, Jungkunz AF, Widd A, Gerdes JC. Model predictive control of 

HCCI using variable valve actuation and fuel injection. Control Engineering 
Practice 2012;20:421–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conengprac.2011.12.002. 

[206] Vaidhiyanathan A. NUMERICAL  ESTIMATION  OF  FUEL  DISTRIBUTION  IN  A  MULTI-ZONE 

COMBUSTION  MODEL. Master of Science Thesis. Eindhoven University of Technology; 
2016. 

[207] Musculus MPB, Kattke K. Entrainment Waves in Diesel Jets. SAE International 

Journal of Engines 2009;2:1170–93. 

[179] Babajimopoulos A, Lavoie GA, Assanis DN. Modeling HCCI Combustion With 

[208] Somers LMT, Evlampiev AV, Goey de LPH. Modelling Auto-Ignition of 

High Levels of Residual Gas Fraction - A Comparison of Two VVA Strategies. SAE 
2003-01-3220 2003. https://doi.org/10.4271/2003-01-3220. 

Automotive Fuels using Detailed Mechanisms. In: Proceedings of the 3rd 
European Combustion Meeting ECM 2007, Chania, Greece; 2007. p. 22. –14. 

[180] Warnatz J. A Reaction Mechanism for the Description of Low and High 
Temperature Oxidation of Hydrocarbon-Air Mixtures at Lean and Rich 
Conditions. Personal Communication 1999. 

[209] Aceves SM, Flowers DL, Espinosa-Loza F, Martinez-Frias J, Dibble RW, 

Christensen M, et al. Piston-Liner Crevice Geometry Effect on HCCI Combustion 
by Multi-Zone Analysis. SAE Transactions 2002;111:2691–8. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099859A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

[210] Amano T, Morimoto S, Kawabata Y. Modeling of the Effect of Air/Fuel Ratio and 
Temperature Distribution on HCCI Engines. SAE 2001-01-1024 2001. https://doi. 
org/10.4271/2001-01-1024. 

[237] Li J, Yang W, Zhou D. Review on the management of RCCI engines. Renewable 

and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2017;69:65–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2016.11.159. 

[211] Sher E. HANDBOOK  OF  AIR  POLLUTION  FROM  INTERNAL  COMBUSTION  ENGINES: POLLUTANT 

FORMATION  AND  CONTROL. editor. Academic Press; 1998. 

[212] Hensel S. Modellierung der Verbrennung und des Wandw¨armeübergangs in 
Ottomotoren mit homogen kompressionsgezündeter Verbrennung. 
Hochschulschrift. Karlsruher Institut für Technologie (KIT) 2009. 
[213] Garcia-Guendulain JM, Ramirez-Barron A, Riesco-Avila JM, Whitesides R, 

Aceves SM. Computationally efficient evaluation of optimum homogeneous 
charge compression ignition operating range with accelerated multizone engine 
cycle simulation. International Journal of Engine Research 2020: 
1468087420929488. https://doi.org/10.1177/1468087420929488. 

[214] Yang J, Pierce P, Martin JK, Foster DE. Heat Transfer Predictions and Experiments 

in a Motored Engine. SAE Transactions 1988;97:1608–22. 

[215] Zhang Y, Boehman AL. Oxidation of 1-butanol and a mixture of n-heptane/1- 

butanol in a motored engine. Combustion and Flame 2010;157:1816–24. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.04.017. 

[216] Dec JE, Hwang W. Characterizing the Development of Thermal Stratification in 
an HCCI Engine Using Planar-Imaging Thermometry. SAE Int J Engines 2009;2: 
421–38. https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-0650. 

[217] Assanis DN, Heywood JB. Development and Use of a Computer Simulation of the 
Turbocompounded Diesel System for Engine Performance and Component Heat 
Transfer Studies. SAE Transactions 1986;95:451–76. 

[218] Aceves SM, Flowers DL, Espinosa-Loza F, Martinez-Frias J, Dec JE, Sj¨oberg M, 
et al. Spatial Analysis of Emissions Sources for HCCI Combustion at Low Loads 
Using a Multi-Zone Model. SAE Transactions 2004;113:1014–24. 

[219] Neshat E, Saray RK, Hosseini V. Effect of reformer gas blending on homogeneous 

charge compression ignition combustion of primary reference fuels using multi 
zone model and semi detailed chemical-kinetic mechanism. Applied Energy 2016; 
179:463–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.06.150. 

[220] Lawton B. Effect of Compression and Expansion on Instantaneous Heat Transfer in 

Reciprocating Internal Combustion Engines. Proceedings of the Institution of 
Mechanical Engineers, Part A: Power and Process Engineering 1987;201:175–86. 
https://doi.org/10.1243/PIME_PROC_1987_201_022_02. 

[221] Dec JE, Yang Y. Boosted HCCI for High Power without Engine Knock and with 

Ultra-Low NOx Emissions - using Conventional Gasoline. SAE Int J Engines 2010; 
3:750–67. https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01-1086. 

[222] Mehl M, Faravelli T, Ranzi E, Miller D, Cernansky N. Experimental and kinetic 

modeling study of the effect of fuel composition in HCCI engines. Proceedings of 
the Combustion Institute 2009;32:2843–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2008.08.001. 

[238] Pandey S, Diwan P, Sahoo PK, Thipse SS. A review of combustion control 
strategies in diesel HCCI engines. Biofuels 2018;9:61–74. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/17597269.2016.1257315. 

[239] Chowta PR, Murthy K, Mahesha GT. Emission control studies in homogeneous 

charge compression ignition, premixed charge compression ignition and common 
rail direct injection engines – a review. Biofuels 2021;12:363–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/17597269.2019.1657660. 

[240] Pinheiro A, Vuilleumier D, Kozarac D, Saxena S. Simulating a Complete 

Performance Map of an Ethanol-Fueled Boosted HCCI Engine, 2015, p. 2015- 
01–0821. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-0821. 

[241] Kozarac D, Sjeric M. Ilincic lng P. Numerical Study of Influencing Factors and the 
Possibility to Use Vibe Parameters in Crank-Angle Resolved HCCI Control Models 
2011. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-0906. 2011-01–0906. 

[242] Taritas I, Kozarac D, Sjeric M. Numerical Study of Boosting Configurations and 

Valve Strategies for High Load HCCI Engine in Wide Range of Engine Speed, 
2014, p. 2014-01–1267. https://doi.org/10.4271/2014-01-1267. 

[243] Bengtsson J, Strandh P, Johansson R, Tunestål P, Johansson B. Closed-loop 

combustion control of homogeneous charge compression ignition(HCCI) engine 
dynamics. Int J Adapt Control Signal Process 2004;18:167–79. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/acs.788. 

[244] Bengtsson J, Strandh P, Johansson R, Tunestål P, Johansson B. Hybrid modelling 
of homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI) engine dynamics—a survey. 
Journal of Control 2007;80:1814–47. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00207170701484869. 

[245] Del Re L, Allg¨ower F, Glielmo L, Guardiola C, Kolmanovsky I. AUTOMOTIVE  MODEL 

PREDICTIVE  CONTROL: MODELS, METHODS  AND  APPLICATIONS. 1st ed. London: Springer; 
2010. 

[246] Widd A, Tunesta P. Physical Modeling and Control of Homogeneous Charge 

Compression Ignition (HCCI) engines. In: 2008 47th IEEE Conference on Decision 
and Control, Cancun, Mexico; 2008. p. 5615–20. 

[247] Neshat E, Saray RK. An optimized chemical kinetic mechanism for HCCI 

combustion of PRFs using multi-zone model and genetic algorithm. Energy 
Conversion and Management 2015;92:172–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2014.11.057. 

[248] Pelucchi M, Bissoli M, Rizzo C, Zhang Y, Somers K, Frassoldati A, et al. A Kinetic 
Modelling Study of Alcohols Operating Regimes in a HCCI Engine. SAE 
International Journal of Engines 2017:2354–70. https://doi.org/10.4271/2017- 
24-0077. 

[249] Luo Z, Plomer M, Lu T, Som S, Longman DE, Sarathy SM, et al. A reduced 

[223] Dempsey AB. PhD Thesis. University of Wisconsin-Madison; 2013. 
[224] Guo H, Neill WS. The effect of hydrogen addition on combustion and emission 

mechanism for biodiesel surrogates for compression ignition engine applications. 
Fuel 2012;99:143–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2012.04.028. 

characteristics of an n-heptane fuelled HCCI engine. International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy 2013;38:11429–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2013.06.084. 

[225] Reyhanian M, Hosseini V. Various effects of reformer gas enrichment on natural- 
gas, iso-octane and normal-heptane HCCI combustion using artificial inert species 
method. Energy Conversion and Management 2018;159:7–19. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enconman.2017.12.074. 

[226] Neshat E, Saray RK, Parsa S. Numerical analysis of the effects of reformer gas on 

supercharged n-heptane HCCI combustion. Fuel 2017;200:488–98. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.04.005. 

[227] Ahari MF, Neshat E. Advanced analysis of various effects of water on natural gas 
HCCI combustion, emissions and chemical procedure using artificial inert species. 
Energy 2019;171:842–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.01.059. 
[228] Saxena S, Shah N, Bedoya I, Phadke A. Understanding optimal engine operating 

strategies for gasoline-fueled HCCI engines using crank-angle resolved exergy 
analysis. Applied Energy 2014;114:155–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2013.09.056. 

[229] Neshat E, Asghari M. Investigation on the effect of reformer gas on availability 

terms and waste heat recovery from exhaust gases of an HCCI engine considering 
radiation heat transfer. Journal of the Brazilian Society of Mechanical Sciences 
and Engineering 2019;42:55. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40430-019-2139-3. 

[230] Yelvington PE, Green WH. Prediction of the Knock Limit and Viable Operating 

Range for a Homogeneous-Charge Compression-Ignition (HCCI) Engine. SAE 
2003-01-1092 2003. https://doi.org/10.4271/2003-01-1092. 

[231] Sj¨oberg M, Dec JE. Effects of Engine Speed, Fueling Rate, and Combustion 

Phasing on the Thermal Stratification Required to Limit HCCI Knocking Intensity. 
SAE Transactions 2005;114:1472–86. 

[232] Yoshizawa K, Teraji A, Miyakubo H, Yamaguchi K, Urushihara T. Study of high 
load operation limit expansion for gasoline compression ignition engines. Journal 
of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 2006;128:377–87. https://doi.org/ 
10.1115/1.1805548. 

[233] Nelles O. NONLINEAR  SYSTEM  IDENTIFICATION: FROM  CLASSICAL  APPROACHES  TO  NEURAL 
NETWORKS, FUZZY  MODELS, AND  GAUSSIAN  PROCESSES. Springer Nature; 2020. 
[234] Eng JA. Characterization of Pressure Waves in HCCI Combustion. SAE 2002-01- 

2859 2002. https://doi.org/10.4271/2002-01-2859. 

[250] An H, Yang WM, Maghbouli A, Li J, Chua KJ. A skeletal mechanism for biodiesel 
blend surrogates combustion. Energy Conversion and Management 2014;81:51–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2014.02.012. 

[251] Bedoya ID, Saxena S, Cadavid FJ, Dibble RW. Exploring Strategies for Reducing 
High Intake Temperature Requirements and Allowing Optimal Operational 
Conditions in a Biogas Fueled HCCI Engine for Power Generation. Journal of 
Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 2012;134. https://doi.org/10.1115/ 
1.4006075. 

[252] Felsch C, Sloane T, Han J, Barths H, Lippert A. Numerical Investigation of 

Recompression and Fuel Reforming in a SIDI-HCCI Engine. SAE 2007-01-1878 
2007. https://doi.org/10.4271/2007-01-1878. 

[253] Bougrine S, Richard S, Michel J-B, Veynante D. Simulation of CO and NO 
emissions in a SI engine using a 0D coherent flame model coupled with a 
tabulated chemistry approach. Applied Energy 2014;113:1199–215. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.08.038. 

[254] Matrisciano A, Franken T, Gonzales Mestre LC, Borg A, Mauss F. Development of a 

Computationally Efficient Tabulated Chemistry Solver for Internal Combustion 
Engine Optimization Using Stochastic Reactor Models. Applied Sciences 2020;10. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/app10248979. 

[255] Niemeyer KE, Sung C-J. Accelerating moderately stiff chemical kinetics in 

reactive-flow simulations using GPUs. Journal of Computational Physics 2014; 
256:854–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2013.09.025. 

[256] Komninos NP. Assessing the effect of mass transfer on the formation of HC and CO 

emissions in HCCI engines, using a multi-zone model. Energy Conversion and 
Management 2009;50:1192–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2009.01.026. 

[257] Kozarac D, Vuilleumier D, Saxena S, Dibble RW. Analysis of benefits of using 
internal exhaust gas recirculation in biogas-fueled HCCI engines. Energy 
Conversion and Management 2014;87:1186–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2014.04.085. 

[258] Neshat E, Saray RK. Mathematical modeling and validation of mass transfer 

phenomenon in homogeneous charge compression ignition engines based on a 
thermodynamic multi zone model. Mathematical and Computer Modelling of 
Dynamic Systems 2019;25:167–94. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
13873954.2019.1596957. 

[235] Jia M, Dempsey AB, Wang H, Li Y, Reitz RD. Numerical simulation of cyclic 

[259] Clean Propulsion Technology. 2021. https://cleanpropulsion.org/ [accessed 

variability in reactivity-controlled compression ignition combustion with a focus 
on the initial temperature at intake valve closing. International Journal of Engine 
Research 2015;16:441–60. https://doi.org/10.1177/1468087414552088. 

[236] Willems F. Is Cylinder Pressure-Based Control Required to Meet Future HD 
Legislation? IFAC-PapersOnLine 2018;51:111–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ifacol.2018.10.021. 

12.08.2021].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099860A. Vasudev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Aneesh  Vasudev  (MSc)  is  a  PhD  scholar  and  project 
researcher  at  the  renewable  energy  research  group  at  the 
University  of  Vaasa.  He  graduated  from  the  Eindhoven  Uni-
versity of Technology, with a combined internship and thesis 
focusing on multizone modelling for heavy-duty RCCI engines, 
performed  at  TNO  Automotive.  Afterwards,  he  joined  the 
research  group  of  Prof.  Mikulski  working  for  major  marine 
engine  OEMs.  His  research  work  lies  in  reciprocating  com-
bustion  engines  and  uses  computational  modelling  as  the 
principal  technique.  His  current  focus  is  on  reactivity 
controlled compression ignition (RCCI) and the development of 
associated control-oriented modelling tools. In the fall of 2020, 
he started his PhD studies pursuing the same subject. As such, 
he  has  accumulated  over  four  years  of  experience  within  the  domain  of  multizone 
modelling. For his contribution to industry-applicable combustion-modelling research, he 
has been recently awarded a scholarship from the Finnish Cultural Foundation.  

Praveen  Ramanujam  Balakrishnan  (MSc)  received  his  de-
gree in Automotive Technology from the Eindhoven University 
of  Technology,  The  Netherlands,  specializing  in  the  field  of 
vehicle  powertrains.  He  continued  as  a  Research  Scientist  at 
TNO  for  3  years  (Powertrains  Department)  working  on 
improving  the  functionality  of  TNO’s  in  house  multi-zone 
Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition (RCCI) simulation 
model.  Currently,  he  is  employed  at  Convergent  Science 
GmbH,  Linz,  Austria,  as  a  Research  Engineer,  working  on 
development  and  support  for  the  CFD  simulation  package 
’CONVERGE’,  focusing  on  IC  engine  applications  for  the 
automotive industry. He has authored five research articles on 
the simulation-based development of internal combustion en-
gines. Two of his publications are in the area of variable valve actuation for a multi-zone 
low-temperature  combustion  model  –  directly  relevant  to  this  review.  His  research  in-
terests also include model-based development of EuroVI-rated alternative-fuel propulsion 
for the heavy-duty sector, as well as optimizing the energy management of hybrid trucks.  

Dr Maciej Mikulski is an Associate Professor in combustion 
engine  technology  at  the  University  of  Vaasa  Finland  and  a 
Principle  Scientist  in  the  VEBIC  internal  combustion  engine 
laboratory (Finland). He  has 15 years of professional experi-
ence in combustion engine research in industry and academia. 
He  has  worked  in  several  relevant  engine/fuel  development 
projects with the world’s leading automotive, marine and off- 
road  OEMs  and  co-established  the  first  full-load  capable, 
ultra-efficient RCCI natural gas engine. For his research on low- 
temperature  combustion,  he  was  recently  honored  with  the 
Finish  Ostrobothnia  Chamber  of  Commerce  award.  He  is  an 
author of over 85 research papers in the field and a member of 
several  international  expert  groups  and  combustion  research 
associations. He is currently (2020-2023), amongst others, a leader in a major (over 15M€ 
in  total  founding)  Finish  industry-academia  consortium  -  the  CLEAN  PROPULSION 
TECHNOLOGY committed to advanced combustion and powertrain development.  

Xiaoguo Storm (MSc) is a senior researcher and a PhD Scholar 
at the University of Vaasa Finland. Her research work is centred 
on  internal  combustion  engine  control  system  development. 
Her interests strongly focus on cylinder pressure-based control 
and model predictive control, range from conventional diesel 
and  dual-fuel  engines  to  advanced  low-temperature  types  of 
combustion. She has experience from several European engine 
development  initiatives  (Hercules  2,  FLEXe,  INTENS).  She 
works  in  close  collaboration  with  W¨artsil¨a  R&D  in  control 
functionality development for marine and powerplant engines. 
She was amongst others responsible for the commissioning of 
the  rapid  control  prototyping  system  for  the  state  of  the  art 
VEBIC- W¨artsil¨a 4L20 medium-speed engine. Currently, she is 
(2021-2023) working in the CLEAN PROPULSION TECHNOLOGY project in Prof. Mikul-
ski’s team, with the duty of control system development for the cutting-edge ultra-heavy 
duty, reactivity controlled compression ignition (RCCI) marine engine.  

Jacek Hunicz (PhD, DSc.) is an associate professor and head 
of  Powertrains  Laboratory  at  the  Lublin  University  of  Tech-
nology, Poland. His track record includes experimental engine 
research and renewable low-carbon fuels. In the area of com-
bustion research, his studies are centred on the control strate-
gies  for  low-temperature  combustion  in  HCCI  engines, 
including the NVO fuel reforming. With over 23 years of pro-
fessional  expertise  in  combustion  engines  and  powertrain 
development, prof. Hunicz is a grant holder of several relevant 
nationwide  projects  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  Science  and 
Higher  Education  and  the  National  Science  Centre.  He  is  a 
member of several international research groups. He is also an 
innovation  consultant  for  domestic  off-road  vehicle  and  bus 
manufacturer Ursus and a technical advisor to the Polish military industry in the field of 
powertrain testing. Since 2018, he has been a board member of the Polish Scientific So-
ciety for Combustion Engines. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099861