Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Challenges and Opportunities for Application of Reactivity-Controlled
Compression Ignition Combustion in Commercially Viable
Transport Engines

Avinash K. Agarwal a,*, Akhilendra P. Singh b, Antonio García c, Javier Monsalve-Serrano c
a Engine Research Laboratory, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, 2018016, India
b Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi, 221005, India
c CMT - Motores T ́ermicos, Universitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia, Camino de Vera s/n, 46022, Valencia, Spain

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Reactivity-controlled compression ignition
Alternative fuels
Optical diagnostics
Simulations
Reactivity gradient

Several  advanced  low-temperature  combustion  (LTC)  strategies  have  been  developed  to  reduce  the  harmful
emissions from diesel engines. These LTC strategies, such as homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI),
premixed charge compression ignition (PCCI), and reactivity-controlled compression ignition (RCCI), can reduce
engine-out  nitrogen  oxides  (NOx)  and  soot  emissions  simultaneously.  LTC  investigations  exhibit  several  limi-
tations of HCCI and PCCI combustion modes, such as lack of combustion control and other operational issues at
higher engine loads, making their application in production-grade engines challenging. RCCI combustion mode
exhibited promising results in combustion control, engine performance, and applicability at higher engine loads.
The  potential  of  the  RCCI  concept  was  demonstrated  on  different  engine  platforms,  showing engine-out  NOx
levels below the limits proposed by the emissions regulations, together with ultra-low soot emissions, eliminating
the  need  of  after-treatment  devices.  However,  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  has  several  challenges,  such  as
excessive hydrocarbons (HC) and carbon monoxide (CO) emissions at low loads and excessive maximum pressure
rise rate (MPRR) at high loads, which limit its effective operating range and practical applications. This review
article  includes  recent  advancements  in  RCCI  combustion  mode,  its  potential  for  using  alternative  fuels,  the
effects  of  different  parameters  on  RCCI  combustion  mode  and  its  optimization,  and  the  ability  of  RCCI  com-
bustion mode to extend the engine operating limit to reach higher loads, which prevents the application of this
concept in commercial applications. The findings of different optical diagnostics have also been included, which
have been performed to understand the detailed chemical kinetics of the fuel-air mixtures and the effect of fuel
reactivities on the RCCI combustion mode. The first part of this article focuses on these studies, which provide
important outcomes that can be used for the practical implementation of RCCI combustion mode in production-
grade engines. The second part of this article covers different RCCI combustion mode strategies that can be used
to eliminate the restrictions of RCCI combustion mode at high loads. Among the different techniques, dual-mode
concepts have been extensively investigated. The dual-mode concept is based on switching between two different
combustion  modes,  typically  an  LTC  mode  and  conventional  compression  ignition  (CI)  combustion  mode,  to
cover the entire operational range of the engine. Many studies showed that the NOx and soot emissions from
stationary  engines  with  dual-mode  RCCI/CI  combustion  had  substantially  improved  versus  a  single-fueled  CI
combustion mode engine. Results related to the measurements of emissions and performance in transient con-
ditions and driving cycles have also been included, which exhibit promising results for RCCI combustion mode. A
comprehensive review on overcoming the challenges and real-world applicability of RCCI combustion mode is
not available in the open literature yet. This article includes the results of relevant RCCI combustion mode in-
vestigations carried out in single-cylinder and multi-cylinder engines, intending to fill this research gap. Finally,
the results from alternative RCCI combustion mode concepts such as the dual-mode, hybrid-RCCI, simulations,
and  experiments  in  transient  conditions  using  various  driving  cycles  make  this  article  uniquely  relevant  for
researchers.

* Corresponding author

E-mail address: akag@iitk.ac.in (A.K. Agarwal).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101028
Received 26 August 2021; Received in revised form 8 July 2022; Accepted 8 July 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)101028Availableonline19August20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Nomenclature

2-ethylhexyl nitrate
2-EHN
air-assisted direct injection
AADI
accumulation mode particles
AMP
active thermo-atmosphere combustion
ATAC
black carbon
BC
brake mean effective pressure
BMEP
brake-specific fuel consumption
BSFC
crank-angle degree
CAD
crank angle position for xx% cumulative heat release
CAxx
compressed biogas
CBG
conventional diesel combustion
CDC
cumulative heat release
CHR
compression ignition
CI
close-loop
CL
cetane number
CN
carbon monoxide
CO
CO2 equivalent
CO2e
catalytic partial oxidation
CPOX
direct dual-fuel stratification
DDFS
dual direct injection
DDI
diesel exhaust fluid
DEF
dedicated EGR
D-EGR
direct injection
DI
direct injection compression ignition
DICI
diesel methanol compound combustion
DMCC
diesel-methanol dual-fuel
DMDF
dual-mode dual-fuel
DMDF
dimethyl ether
DME
diesel oxidation catalyst
DOC
dynamic programming
DP
diesel particulate filter
DPF
diesel pilot injection
DPI
diterbutyl peroxide
DTBP
exhaust gas recirculation
EGR
energy management control
EMC
extended range electric vehicle
EREV
electric vehicle
EV
fuel-flexible vehicles
FFV
full hybrid electric vehicle
FHEV
fuel injection pressure
FIP
field of view
FoV
filter smoke number
FSN
federal test procedure
FTP-75
gasoline compression ignition
GCI
gasoline direct injection
GDI
greenhouse gas
GHG
general motors
GM
hydrocarbon
HC
homogeneous charge compression ignition
HCCI
homogeneous combustion heat release
HCHR
high reactivity fuel
HRF
heat release rate
HRR
high-temperature heat release
HTHR
hydrotreated vegetable oil
HVO
HWFET  highway fuel economy test
internal combustion engine
ICE
in-cylinder fuel blending
ICFB
intake charge temperature
ICT
indicated thermal efficiency
ITE
gross indicated thermal efficiency
ITEg

model-predictive control

japanese cycle
lifecycle analysis
late intake valve closing
low-pressure dual-fuel direct injection
liquefied petroleum gas
low reactivity fuel
low-temperature combustion
low-temperature heat release

JC08
LCA
LIVC
LPDDI
LPG
LRF
LTC
LTHR
MHEV  mild hybrid electric vehicle
MPC
MPRR  maximum pressure rise rates
MSR
NC
NFL
NL
NMP
NOx
NP
NVH
NVO
OC
OL
PAHs
PCCI
PCHR
PCI
PDFC
PHEV
PLIF
PM
PN
PODEn
PPC
PPCCI
PRF
PRR
PSD
RBC
RCCI
RDE
RON
R-RCCI
SCR
SHEV
SI
SMR
SoC
SOC
SPCCI
SR
TC
TDC
TFR
TPM
TPME
UDDS
v/v
VCR
VVT
WHTC  worldwide harmonized light vehicle test cycle
WLTP

methanol substitution ratio
next cycle
natural flame luminosity
natural luminosity
nucleation mode particles
nitrogen oxides
nanoparticles
noise vibration harshness
negative valve overlap
organic carbon
open-loop
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
premixed charge compression ignition
premixed combustion heat release
premixed compression ignition
piston-split dual-fuel combustion
plug-in hybrid electric vehicle
planar laser-induced fluorescence
particulate matter
particle number
polyoxymethylene dimethyl ether
partially premixed combustion
partially premixed charge compression ignition
primary reference fuel
pressure rise rate
particle size distribution
rule-based control
reactivity-controlled compression ignition
real driving emissions
research cetane number
reverse RCCI
selective catalytic reduction
series hybrid electric vehicle
spark ignition
steam methane reforming
star of combustion
state of charge
spark controlled compression ignition
steam reforming
total carbon
top-dead-center
thermochemical fuel reformer
total particle mass
thevetiaperuviana methyl ester
urban dynamometer driving schedule
volume over volume
variable compression ratio
variable valve timing

world harmonized light vehicles test procedure

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010282

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 1. GHG emission trends, projections, and targets (Reprinted from [6] with permission of European Environment Agency (EEA)).

1. Introduction

The internal combustion engines (ICE) were conceptualized in 1876
[1],  more  than  145  years  ago,  and  they  have  played  an  extremely
important role in human development by catering to power generation
and transportation. Fossil fuels have traditionally been the main energy

source  to  power  the  ICEs;  however,  it  is  well  documented  that  their
production, exploitation, and use have several negative environmental
impacts [2,3] and health issues associated with air pollution generated
[4]. The energy landscape has exploded in recent years, giving rise to
newer  options  such  as  synthetic  fuels,  fuel  cells,  electric  and  hybrid
vehicles, and renewable fuels. These are aimed to reduce the negative

Fig. 2. Global greenhouse gas emissions, sector-wise (Reprinted from [5] with permission of Our World in Data).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010283

A.K. Agarwal et al.

impact of pollutants from the transport sector, which currently accounts
for ~16.2% of the global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions [5]. Addi-
tionally, to prevent the dire effects of GHG emissions and achieve the
goal of a climate-neutral economy by 2050, emissions regulators have
imposed  stricter  emission  limits  in  the  transport  sector  [6–8],  thus
accelerating  the  demand  from  the  automotive  manufacturers  for  a
cleaner engine-out exhaust from vehicles. Hence, an accelerated opti-
mization of ICEs and the introduction of efficient combustion concepts
are vital for reducing emissions in the foreseeable future. This section
deals with these aspects related to the automotive sector and presents
the current scenario and possible solutions to deal with these burning
issues.

1.1. Current Automotive Scenario and Challenges

Knowing that in the short-to-medium term, ICEs would continue to
move the world and remain an important power plant for vehicles in the
transport  industry, active  research  and  development  for the  improve-
ment in fuel consumption and reduction in pollutants (namely carbon
monoxide  (CO),  hydrocarbon  (HC),  nitrogen  oxides  (NOx),  and  soot/
particle matter (PM)) would continue to be important. In particular, the
evolution of compression ignition (CI) engines with direct injection (DI)
of high cetane fuels would be important since they are highly efficient,
widely used, and produce relatively lower CO and HC emissions than
their spark ignition (SI) engine counterparts. On the other hand, one of
the  main  challenges  for  these  direct  injection  compression  ignition
(DICI)  engines  would  be  higher  NOx  and  PM  emissions  due  to  their
higher combustion temperatures [9,10] and fuel-rich regions [11,12],
respectively.  A  close  relationship  among  these  pollutant  species  is
another challenge because of a trade-off. Preventive measures to control
one  of  them  promote  the  formation  of  the  other  [13].  Several  routes
have been discussed to control the emissions of these pollutants, such as
the use of alternative fuels [14], exhaust after-treatment systems [15],
improving combustion, and using advanced combustion concepts [16].
Among these options, the advanced combustion concepts have signifi-
cant  potential  since  they  provide  several  benefits  over  conventional
diesel combustion (CDC) without using after-treatment devices for the
exhaust  gas.  After-treatment  systems  increase  vehicle  production  and
operational costs, fuel consumption, and engine complexity and require
frequent  maintenance  [17,18].  The  reactivity-controlled  compression
ignition  (RCCI)  is  a  dual-fuel  combustion  concept  aiming  to  simulta-
neously  reduce  the  engine-out  soot  and  NOx  emissions  while  main-
taining the engine performance and efficiency comparable to the CDC
[19].

1.2. Need for Alternative Combustion Concepts

Between  1990  to  2017,  global  GHG  emissions  were  reduced  by
~21.7% (4483 megatons of CO2  equivalent (CO2e)) [6]. In 2018, the
energy sector reduced CO2e emissions by 22.2% with respect to 1990;
however, the transport sub-sector (the category that provides movement
of  humans,  animals  and  goods  from  one  location  to  another)  GHG
emissions increased ~20% with respect to 1990 [6] (Fig. 1). Among the
GHG  emissions  from  the  transport  sector,  road  transport  contributed
73.45% [5] (Fig. 2). A clear impact of the activities in this sector un-
derscores  the  need  for  emission  regulations  such  as  EURO  VI  for
light-duty and heavy-duty vehicles and subsequent strategies to develop
efficient ICEs that can achieve the target GHG emissions by cutting down
on  carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  emissions.  Hence,  a  combination  of  newly
developed combustion strategies such as low-temperature combustion
(LTC) and alternative fuels will be hugely beneficial since electrification
does  not  guarantee  decarbonization  if  the  main  sources  of  electricity
generation are non-renewables [20,21].

CDC has excellent efficiency and engine performance, indicating that
its fuel-to-energy conversion is effective [22]. The problem lies in the
engine-out  emissions.  Reducing emissions  will  then get  the  ICE  to  an

acceptable  emission  footprint.  The  emissions  control  techniques  have
traditionally been deployed on two fronts: (i) active control strategies
using after-treatment systems and (ii) passive control strategies to con-
trol pollutant formation inside the engine’s combustion chamber. On the
after-treatment side, diesel oxidation catalysts (DOC), diesel particulate
filters (DPF), and selective catalytic reduction (SCR) have been deployed
to  comply  with  prevailing  emission  standards.  However,  they  have
several disadvantages, which have already been mentioned in Section
1.1.  It  is  worth  restating  that  reducing  the  emissions  during  the
in-cylinder  formation stage would reduce  the after-treatment require-
ment, thus minimizing the overall system complexity and engine cost.
Traditionally, a large number of pollutant formation control strate-
gies –  such as optimized fuel injection strategies, including the use of
high fuel injection pressures (FIP), fuel injection timing optimization,
multiple  fuel  injections,  use  of  exhaust  gas  recirculation  (EGR),
increased  in-cylinder  turbulence  (increased  in-cylinder  motion  and
turbocharging), and redesign of the combustion chamber and injection
system –have been deployed with varying degrees of success for con-
trolling the NOx and the soot emissions. A combined in-cylinder com-
bustion optimization and after-treatment device approach has also been
explored to control the emissions to meet the regulatory requirements
[23,24].  These  methods  struggle  primarily  because  of  the  intrinsic
trade-off between the soot and the NOx in diesel engines. More often
than  not,  managing  to  reduce  one  pollutant  increases  the  other.  Pri-
marily, NOx is formed through a thermal mechanism (although other
mechanisms  also  exist  and  can  be  prevalent  during  some  combustion
modes)  where  nitrogen  and  oxygen  in  the  cylinder  combine  in  the
presence  of  high  temperature  and  adequate  residence  time.  Hence
reducing the combustion temperatures and duration can reduce the NOx
formation. Nonetheless, this has a counter effect on soot formation since
the temperature and residence time are not high enough to burn off the
soot particles. LTC strategies that deal with the soot-NOx trade-off have
been  developed  over  time  and  can  be  integrated  with  the  use  of
advanced  fuels  to  mitigate  these  emissions.  In  particular,  many  LTC
strategies  have  been  developed,  which  improve  the  fuel-to-work  con-
version efficiency while providing low soot and NOx emissions [25]. It is
worth  noticing  that  CO2  equivalent  emissions  need  to  be  reduced  by
more  than  half  of  the  current  levels  by  2050  to  avoid  severe  global
warming [26]. A single pathway is not enough to reach this emission
goal. Hence it is important to address more than one strategy at a time.
Another path explored for more than two decades is using oxygenated
fuels to achieve  virtually soot-free combustion [27,28]. However, the
increase of the oxygen content in the fuel composition (as with some
alcohols)  can  increase  NOx  emissions  and  peak  pressures  if  suitable
strategies  to  address  those  issues  are  not  used  [29,30].  Since  their
characteristic properties also differ from commercially available fossil
fuels,  dedicated  calibration  and  fuel  injection  strategies  need  to  be
developed  for  alternative  fuels.  However,  research  has  shown  that
combining both the LTC and alternative fuels in the same system can
benefit both emissions and engine efficiency.

1.3. Evolution of Different LTC Concepts

In the past few decades, LTC modes have gained significant attention
from researchers (correlated to the increasing number of publications in
the  field)  due  to  their  excellent  capabilities  in  terms  of  emission
reduction, especially NOx and soot. LTC modes including homogeneous
charge  compression  ignition  (HCCI),  partially  premixed  charge
compression ignition (PPCCI), and premixed charge compression igni-
tion  (PCCI),  have  the  potential  to  reduce  NOx  and  PM  emissions
simultaneously  without  a  “soot-NOx  dilemma”  [31–33].  In  all  LTC
modes, relatively lower in-cylinder combustion temperatures are com-
mon,  which  is  the  main  reason  for  extremely  low  NOx  emissions.  To
explore  other features of  LTC, Akihama  et  al.  [34]  applied ultra-high
EGR  in  a  conventional  diesel  engine.  The  objective  of  this  study  was
to explore the potential of EGR for the simultaneous reduction of NOx

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010284

A.K. Agarwal et al.

combustion noise [46].

A  broad  range  of  technologies  is  covered  in  the  ambit  of  LTC,
including HCCI, PCCI, partially premixed combustion (PPC), premixed
compression  ignition  (PCI),  and  gasoline  compression  ignition  (GCI),
and RCCI. Among these, the RCCI combustion mode is a strategy that is
extensively reviewed in this article. Besides these combustion-specific
methods,  integration  of  LTC  in  hybrid  powertrains  has  also  been
explored  [47].  Among  many  LTC  strategies,  few  are  described  here,
which  have  assisted  in  the  evolution  of  the  RCCI  combustion  mode
concept, focusing on their capabilities, the drawbacks encountered, and
how they have helped the evolution of the RCCI combustion mode.

1.3.1. HCCI Combustion Concept

HCCI is the most common technique for achieving LTC by combining
the premixing of fuel (similar to gasoline engines) and the compression
ignition (similar to diesel engines) [48]. Originally coined by Najt and
Foster [49], it consists of homogeneous fuel, air, and EGR mixture. An
early injection of fuel to form a well-mixed charge is required to achieve
HCCI  combustion  in  gasoline  engines.  In  diesel  engines,  early  direct
injection of fuel in the intake stroke can be implemented, which provides
enough time for fuel-air mixing in the combustion chamber. The fuel-air
mixture  is  compressed  in  the  compression  stroke,  increasing  its  tem-
perature to the autoignition temperature, until a volumetric combustion
is initiated at multiple sites in this homogeneous fuel-air mixture. The
ignition is controlled by the composition of the fuel-air mixture and the
in-cylinder  temperature.  A  lean  and  homogeneous  fuel-air  mixture
auto-ignites without a spark because of the increased in-cylinder tem-
perature at the end of the compression stroke. Local temperatures are
kept at low levels, and there is no high-temperature flame front [50]. It
experiences lower throttling losses, favouring higher thermal efficiency
[51],  fuel  versatility  [52],  and  lower  CO2  [53],  NOx,  and  PM  [54]
emissions. Due to these attributes, the HCCI combustion mode ensures
smoother  LTC,  leading  to  significantly  lower  NOx  and  PM  emissions
[55]. The gasoline HCCI concept was first demonstrated by Onishi et al.
[56]  in  1979,  who  named  it  ‘Active  Thermo-Atmosphere  Combustion
(ATAC).’  They  successfully  achieved  stable  combustion
in  a
gasoline-fueled 2-stroke engine and reported significant improvement in
emission  characteristics,  engine  noise  and  vibrations.  They  suggested
that  a  relatively  leaner  mixture  combustion  was  the  main  reason  for
these observations. However, the applicability of this novel combustion
technique only up to part-load was a major limitation. After this pio-
neering  work,  several  researchers,  including  Thring  [57]  (1989),
Christensen  et  al.  [58]  (1997),  Stanglmaier  et  al.  [59]  (1999),  and
Maurya et al. [60] (2011), successfully demonstrated this combustion
concept  in  gasoline-fueled  engines.  In  most  of  these  research  studies,
gasoline-like  fuels  were  used  to  achieve  HCCI  combustion,  demon-
strating superior emission characteristics compared to the conventional
SI combustion mode. Researchers also explored HCCI combustion using
diesel-like fuels to resolve the soot-NOx trade-off observed in CDC en-
gines. Some of the most influential factors were the fuel injection stra-
tegies [61] and other characteristics of the fuel injection system, such as
an  injector  and  the  injection  pressure  [62].  The  main  challenges  in
achieving  diesel-fueled  HCCI  combustion  were  achieving  a  homoge-
neous fuel-air mixture, avoiding the fuel wall-wetting, controlling the
auto-ignition, and excessive pressure rise rates (PRR). In particular, the
PRR was crucial to avoid potential damage to the engine components
and control the noise and vibration issues [63]. The combustion control
brings another set of issues. Combustion can be affected by small vari-
ations  in  the  charge  composition  or  system  temperature  [64].  Singh
et  al.  [65]  reported  combustion  characteristics  of  diesel-fueled  HCCI
combustion in which they used an external mixture preparation device
for  preparing  a  homogeneous  charge.  They  reported  that  combustion
characteristics of the HCCI combustion mode were dominantly affected
by  the  charge  homogeneity.  They  also  explored  the  performance  and
emission characteristics of diesel-fueled HCCI combustion engines and
reported superior emissions characteristics but slightly degraded engine

Fig.  3. φ-T  diagram  for  identifying  soot  and  NOx  emission  zones  (Adapted
from [34]).

and  soot.  They  reported  a  ‘soot-NOx  dilemma’  in  conventional  diesel
engines, which could be avoided only by achieving combustion outside
the NOx and soot zones in Fig. 3.

The  authors  indicated  that smokeless  engine  combustion  could  be
achieved  for  any  equivalence  ratio  at  in-cylinder  temperatures  below
1500  K.  However,  a  more  sensitive  behaviour  of  soot  emissions  was
observed at in-cylinder temperatures above 2000 K. They reported that
soot formation increased rapidly at excessively richer mixtures. The NOx
formation increased significantly at relatively lower loads (1<φ<2). In
this  regard,  Beatrice  et  al.  [27]  reported  an  important  finding  that
oxygenated  fuels  exhibit  different  soot-NOx  characteristics  than  con-
ventional  diesel.  They  reported  that  using  oxygenated  fuels  and  high
EGR could drastically reduce both soot and NOx. Various LTC method-
ologies  were  extensively  explored  by  researchers  worldwide  to  meet
stringent emission norms. LTC strategies, as the name indicates, promote
a  combustion  process  at  lower  temperatures.  Therefore,  it  involves
reducing  the  flame  temperature  and  allowing  sufficient  air-to-fuel
mixing  to  increase  the  fuel-air  mixture  homogeneity  [35].  This
method theoretically reduces NOx and soot because these pollutants are
strongly influenced by the flame temperature and the equivalence ratio
[36]  while  preserving  thermal  efficiency.  This  concept  virtually  com-
bines the benefits of CI and SI engines. The necessary in-cylinder con-
ditions  can  be  achieved  by  early  fuel  injections  [37],  improved  fuel
atomization [38], or even using fuels with lower CN [39,40], alternative
fuels, or a combination of diesel- and gasoline-like fuels [41]. This al-
lows more time for fuel-air mixing before the start of combustion (SoC).
Similarly,  EGR-controlled  combustion  can  trigger  this  combustion
mode with injections close to the top-dead-centre (TDC) [42]. LTC ad-
dresses the conventionally inferior capacity of diesel-fueled engines to
prepare a premixed fuel-air mixture before the SoC, caused by the higher
fuel  viscosity  and  lower  fuel  volatility  [25].  Like  other  combustion
strategies,  the  LTC  use  various  alternative  fuels,  providing  additional
freedom  for  controlling  combustion.  Alternative  fuels  reduce  the
dependence on existing petroleum reserves [43] and open up the use of
new  fuels  having  special  properties  such  as  higher  fuel  oxygen  or
absence of carbon. This can lead to extremely low soot emissions and
increase the tolerance to higher EGR for reducing NOx emissions. Two
key concepts emerge in this LTC method: (i) reduced in-cylinder tem-
perature and (ii) improved in-cylinder fuel-air mixture formation. The
soot-NOx trade-off associated to the conventional CI combustion mode is
another important aspect that promotes LTC engine development. Even
though  the  LTC  strategies  address  the  soot-NOx  trade-off  issues  and
maintain conventional diesel-like efficiencies, they have challenges as
well, such as higher CO and HC emissions [44], lack of ignition timing
control  over  the  high  and  low  load  extremes  [45],  and  increased

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010285

A.K. Agarwal et al.

performance. A detailed comparison of PM emission characteristics of
diesel-fueled HCCI combustion engine and CDC engine exhibited rela-
tively lower PM and trace metals from the HCCI combustion mode [66].
In another study carried out by Singh et al. [67], diesel and biodiesel
blends were used to achieve the HCCI combustion mode. They reported
almost  similar  HCCI  combustion  characteristics  of  diesel-biodiesel
blends as that of mineral diesel. However, relatively inferior biodiesel
properties  affected  the  engine  performance  and  emissions  adversely.
Several  test  fuel  blends  were  also  used  to  explore  the  effects  of  fuel
properties  on  the  HCCI  combustion  engine,  including  mineral
diesel-alcohol,  mineral  diesel-gasoline,  mineral  diesel-kerosene,  and
mineral diesel-biodiesel. They reported that fuel properties, especially
volatility,  affected  the  HCCI  combustion,  resulting  in  superior  engine
performance and emission with increased fuel volatility. Nonetheless,
HCCI  is  one  of  the  few  LTC  concepts  that  has  been  commercially
implemented. In the Mazda Skyactiv X engine, a strategy denominated
spark  controlled  compression  ignition  (SPCCI)  uses  a  lean  burn
compression  ignition  combustion  with  gasoline,  spark-ignited  local
combustion  (to  increase  in-cylinder  temperature  and  propitiate
auto-ignition)  and  a  high  compression  ratio  (CR),  leading  to  HCCI
combustion that is stable and improves the fuel economy by ~5% [68].
Although the HCCI combustion exhibited a sharp reduction in both
NOx and PM emissions, relatively higher HC and CO emissions due to
lower in-cylinder temperatureand the use of high EGR adversely impacts
the popularity of HCCI combustion mode for deployment in production-
grade  engines.  This  also  leads  to  an  overall  reduction  in  the  thermal
efficiency of the HCCI combustion engines. Lack of direct combustion
control and excessive PRR are two critical challenges of HCCI combus-
tion, limiting its application at higher engine loads. This issue assumes a
more serious dimension in the mineral diesel-fueled HCCI combustion
engine due to its lower volatility and auto-ignition temperature. It has
been reported in several studies that mineral diesel-fueled HCCI com-
bustion  results  in  either  too  advanced  or  too  retarded  combustion
phasing,  leading  to  lower  thermal  efficiency.  These  drawbacks  moti-
vated researchers to develop a new LTC strategy, known as PCCI com-
bustion mode.

1.3.2. PCCI Combustion Concept

PCCI combustion mode evolved from the HCCI combustion mode to
address the difficulties and challenges of HCCI. Like its predecessor, the
PCCI combustion mode reduces soot and NOx, but not as much as the
HCCI combustion mode [69]. HC and CO emissions are lower in PCCI
combustion mode than in HCCI combustion mode [70]. Unlike the HCCI
combustion mode, the PCCI combustion mode is not fully homogeneous.
Additionally, PCCI combustion offers relatively better control of the SoC
and combustion duration because of the charge dilution by highEGR to
delay the ignition and increase the mixing duration [71]. Higher EGR
levels in PCCI combustion mode affect combustion stability at high en-
gine loads, which could be addressed by early fuel injections strategies.
However,  this  has  a  counter-effect  of  reducing  the  thermal  efficiency
[72]. Another negative effect of using high EGR levels is the increased
fuel  consumption  and  higher  CO,  HC  [73],  and  PM  emissions  due  to
reduced  availability  of  oxygen  [16].  Musculus  et  al.  [74]  proposed  a
conceptual LTC model describing spray formation, mixing, ignition, and
pollutant formation. Their analysis stated that both HC and CO highly
depend on the mixture distribution. A narrow range of equivalence ra-
tios providing a low CO yield can make CO emission more problematic
than HC emissions in early-injection PCCI combustion engines. Solutions
such as increased boost pressure [70,75], high FIP, multiple injections to
reduce the maximum heat release rate (HRR), and enhanced mixing to
reduce combustion noise and soot [76] have been proposed to extend
the engine operating range. The effect of EGR and variations in injection
parameters on the PCCI combustion mode has been extensively studied
by various researchers worldwide [77–80], with a common observation
of  a  simultaneous  reduction  in  NOx  and  PM  by  early  fuel  injection
timings. High EGR in PCCI combustion mode also led to a slight increase

in  brake-specific  fuel  consumption  (BSFC).  Torregrosa  et  al.  [79]  re-
ported a reduction in the combustion noise by using a pilot injection in
the  PCCI combustion  engine; however,  brake  mean  effective  pressure
(BMEP)  decreased  significantly  as  the  pilot  injection  quantity  was
increased. Emission reduction by variable valve timing (VVT) and early
◦
start  of  injection  (SoI)  timing  as  46  and  30
bTDC  were  achieved  by
Murata et al. [69] and Torregrosa et al. [79], respectively, at the cost of a
significant reduction in the engine torque.

PCCI combustion mode can be realized using a variety of fuels [81],
including  fuel  blends  with  lower  cetane  numbers  (CN)  fuels  such  as
gasoline, to enhance fuel-air mixing before the SoC [82] and to extend
the  engine  operating  range  [83].  Fuels  with  high  CN  are  favourably
combined with a longer ignition delay of the PCCI combustion strategy.
Lilik and Boehman [84] tested two synthetic diesel fuels produced by a
low- and high-temperature Fischer-Tropsch process, having 81 and 51
CN, respectively. They reported that HC and CO emissions were reduced
by 32% and 31%, respectively, for the CN 51 fuel than baseline diesel
and 80% and 74% for the CN 81 fuel. CN 81 fuel also maintained PM and
NOx emissions at the same level as baseline diesel due to a shorter and
less  intense  premixed  combustion  that  preceded  a  mixing  controlled
combustion  phase.  Alternative  fuels  such  as  alcohol  blending  seem
feasible for achieving more efficient and controllable PCCI combustion.
Some researchers used ethanol-diesel blends in CI engines to attain low
temperatures during combustion. Mohammadi et al. [78] explored the
possibility  of  very  clean  combustion  using  ethanol  in  a  partial  PCCI
combustion engine. They realized that the utilization of cooled EGR with
an  early  pilot  injection  leads  to  a  significant  PM-NOx  trade-off.  Park
et  al.  [80]  investigated  a  narrow  spray  angle  injection  strategy  using
bioethanol blended diesel in a conventional diesel engine. They reported
that  the  premixed  combustion  phasing  decreased  with  increased  bio-
ethanol  content  in  the  fuel.  A  significant  reduction  in  HC  and  CO
emissions was also reported.

More recent works evaluated the potential of bio-origin fuels such as
hydrotreated vegetable oil (HVO) [85] and diesel-biodiesel blends [86]
in PCCI combustion mode. The sensitivity to the mixture dilution and
conditions were evaluated [85] by varying the boost pressure and EGR
levels. The results show that the increasing EGR from 0% to 39% reduces
NOx  emissions  by  almost  7  g/kWh  with  a  penalty  increase  of  ~  0.3
g/kWh  PM.  An  optimized  condition  balances  both  pollutants  as  0.5
g/kWh of PM and 1.5 g/kWh of NOx, which is lower than mineral diesel.
Specifically, they emphasized that HVO responds well to higher EGRs
(25%) and lower boost pressures (130 kPa). A similar trends of reduction
in both NOx and PM emissions [86] were also found for increasing the
percentage of waste cooking oil biodiesel in test fuel. Additionally, they
observed some reduction in  CO and  HC emissions (~0.05%  and ~25
ppm, respectively). Biofuels like HVO, free from cycloalkanes and aro-
matics and with the presence of oxygen in their molecule, play a sig-
nificant role in reducing soot formation, making it easier to control the
NOx emissions.

Many research studies also explored another version of LTC, namely
PPC.  In  PPC,  a  stratified  fuel-air  mixture  is  used.  The  degree  of  fuel
stratification can be controlled by varying the SoI timing and other fuel
injection parameters, such as multiple fuel injections [87]. In PPC, both
premixed and diffusion flames are present after auto-ignition in several
locations  in  the  combustion  chamber  [88,89].  PPC  can  be  applied  to
both gasoline and diesel-fueled engines. Kalghatgi et al. [90,91] applied
PPC in light- and heavy-duty engines and simultaneously achieved su-
perior engine efficiency and lower exhaust emissions. It was suggested
that gasoline with the research octane number (RON) of around 70 is
highly recommended for the optimum PPC. Using this fuel, PPC results
in a trade-off between combustion stability at low loads and HRR at high
loads  [92–94].  Han  et  al.  [95,96]  performed  PPC  experiments  using
diesel/gasoline blends. PPC exhibited relatively higher engine efficiency
and  lower  exhaust  emissions  than  CDC.  However,  relatively  inferior
combustion stability at low loads and high soot emissions at high loads
are  two  major  concerns  of  PPC.  Liu  et  al.  [97]  also  performed  PPC

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010286

A.K. Agarwal et al.

investigations  to  resolve  these  issues.  They  used  a  blend  of  polyoxy-
methylene dimethyl ethers (PODEn) and gasoline in a heavy-duty diesel
engine  for  achieving  PPC.  They  reported  significantly  improved
soot-NOx trade-off in the PPC using gasoline/PODEn blends without any
fuel efficiency penalty. Due to the addition of PODEn, the combustion
efficiency  and  combustion  stability  also  exhibited  a  significant
improvement,  especially  at  low  loads.  Although  preliminary  LTC  ap-
proaches demonstrated significant potential in reducing NOx and PM,
these combustion strategies have many issues related to engine perfor-
mance compared to baseline CDC and, more specifically, their applica-
bility in production-grade engines. Several techniques such as EGR [98],
VVT [99,100], variable compression ratio (VCR) [101], and intake air
temperature  variations  [60]  have  been  investigated  extensively  to
overcome  these  challenges.  These  interventions  resolved  some  of  the
issues related to the engine performance and emission characteristics;
however, these techniques could not resolve their applicability at higher
engine loads. In most LTC studies involving mineral diesel as test fuel, it
was seen that the high reactivity of mineral diesel was the main hurdle
for extending the extreme load limits (low and high loads) of the LTC
concept.  In  LTC,  many  researchers  advocated  using  low  octane  fuels
(diesel-like fuels) at lower engine loads.

However, high octane fuels (gasoline-like fuels) could be used at high
loads to achieve stable combustion, superior engine performance, and
lower emissions [102]. Lu et al. [103] explored the effect of the addition
of  gasoline-like  fuels  in  PCCI  combustion  mode.  They  performed  ex-
periments  using  the  blends  of  butanol  and  gasoline  vis-`a-vis  pure
butanol  fuelled  PCCI  combustion  mode.  They  reported  that  adding  a
small amount of gasoline in butanol resulted in superior PCCI combus-
tion  mode  by  increasing  the  maximum  pressure  and  temperature,
leading  to  lower  HC  and  CO  emissions  from  PCCI  combustion  mode.
Following  the  preliminary  research  efforts  of  Bessonete  et  al.  [102],
Inagaki et al. [104] demonstrated yet another version of LTC, namely
dual-fuel  PCI  combustion.  Two  fuels  with  different  reactivity  were
injected into the combustion chamber using two separate injectors in the
PCI combustion. The fuel quantities were varied depending on the en-
gine  load  to  control  the  overall  mixture  reactivity  in  the  combustion
chamber. The results exhibited excellent control over various combus-
tion parameters, which was impossible with previous LTC strategies. PCI
combustion yielded extremely low NOx and PM emissions and showed
significant potential for further improvement. Shim et al. [105] carried
out a detailed investigation of dual-fuel PCCI combustion mode using a
combination of compressed natural gas (CNG) and mineral diesel. They
compared the combustion, performance and emission characteristics of
dual-fuel PCCI combustion mode to single fuel PCCI combustion mode.
They  reported  that  combustion  control  was  easier  in  dual-fuel  PCCI
combustion mode, which can be done by adjusting the premixed amount
of the second fuel. They also reported that the dual-fuel PCCI combus-
tion mode exhibited superior engine performance and lower CO and HC
emissions  than  the  single  fuel  PCCI  combustion  mode.  Hence,  many
researchers explored this combustion strategy, which further developed
as the RCCI combustion mode. The next sub-section provides insights
into the fundamentals of RCCI combustion mode and its evolution with
time.

1.4. RCCI Combustion Concept

Previous efforts to develop a commercial LTC engine failed due to
certain  limitations,  especially  for  high-load  applications.  The  high
chemical  reactivity  of  mineral  diesel  is  the  major  concern  for  diesel-
fueled LTC engine development, resulting in inferior control over com-
bustion. Bessonette et al. [102] suggested that the in-cylinder reactivity
of the fuel-air mixture should be varied to achieve stable LTC at different
engine  loads.  Based  on  these  recommendations,  Kokjohn  et  al.  [106]
proposed the concept of RCCI, wherein gasoline was the premixed low
reactivity fuel (LRF), and diesel was the directly injected high reactivity
fuel (HRF) for achieving reactivity stratification in the cylinder. In their

work,  50%  thermal  efficiency  could  be  achieved  along  with
virtually-zero NOx and soot emissions. In RCCI combustion mode, a LRF
was supplied in the intake manifold, mixed with the intake air to form a
fully premixed intake charge. The HRF was directly injected to ignite the
premixed  intake  charge;  however,  the  directly  injected  fuel  did  not
completely mix and remained stratified before the SoC.

In the RCCI combustion mode, the combustion phasing is determined
by the global reactivity of the mixture, given by the LRF to HRF ratio. At
the  same  time,  the  stratification  of  the  ignition  delay  controls  the
combustion  timing  (duration  and  phasing).  Initiation  of  combustion
takes place at HRF-air mixture locations, and the combustion progresses
from high-to-low reactivity regions, which allows a controlled sequen-
tial  ignition.  It  provides  superior  combustion  control  than  other  LTC
strategies. RCCI combustion mode exhibits low soot and NOx emissions
with enhanced engine efficiency than CDC for various speeds and loads.
This  combustion  strategy  requires  highly  premixed  air-fuel  mixtures,
which can be achieved by using two injections of HRF in the combustion
chamber. The first injection is used to increase the in-cylinder reactivity.
The second injection improves the mixing and acts as an ignition source,
resulting in lower soot formation [107]. By altering the global charge
reactivity in combination with one or more direct injections, complete
control  over  the  combustion  phasing  and  HRR  can  be  accomplished
[106,108-113].  This  allows  RCCI  combustion  engine  operation  with
combustion efficiencies over 97% across a wide load range (from 4 bar
to 20 bar BMEP) [114].

Additionally, gross indicated thermal efficiencies (ITEg) approach-
ing 60% have been demonstrated experimentally. The dual-fuel strategy
allows easier control of the combustion phasing, which is regulated by
the local concentration and the injection timing of the HRF . The com-
bustion duration is controlled by the mixture reactivity gradient, which
can be tailored to reduce the PRR and combustion noise. Cycle-to-cycle
control  would  be  relatively  easier  to  implement  in  production-grade
engines with proper feedback.

RCCI  engine  operation  has  been  expanded  by  the  direct  dual-fuel
stratification (DDFS) combustion strategy, which utilizes two direct in-
jectors, each of which dedicated to injecting either the LRF or the HRF.
These are centrally mounted in the combustion chamber to achieve a
clean and efficient RCCI combustion in a heavy-duty engine [115,116].
RCCI combustion mode relies heavily on the fuel reactivity stratification
gradient to achieve clean and efficient combustion, and a broad range of
fuels  may  be  used.  RCCI  combustion  is  essentially  an  inherently
fuel-flexible  LTC  strategy.  Research  shows  that  the  RCCI  combustion
mode offers relatively more flexible control over combustion since fuel
concentration and reactivity stratifications regulate the HRR [117]. Due
to wide availability, gasoline and diesel have been used as the LRF and
HRF, respectively, in most previous RCCI research [108,113,108-121].
In  many  studies,  primary  reference  fuels  (PRF)  as  iso-octane  and
n-heptane have also been studied as the LRF and HRF, respectively [104,
122-125].  Researchers  also  explored  the  potential  of  alcohols  as  LRF
[120,122,126-130]  and  biodiesel  as  HRF  for  RCCI  combustion  mode
[131,132].  However,  mobile  engine  applications  may  preclude  the
ability to carry large quantities of two separate fuels. As a result, cetane
improvers, such as di-tert-butyl peroxide (DTBP) and 2-ethyl-hexyl ni-
trate (EHN), have also been studied as low quantity additives to con-
dition the LRF to perform as an HRF to approximate single fuel RCCI
combustion  [120,127,130,131,133].  Splitter  et  al.  [133]  carried  out
RCCI combustion investigations using two fuels having large reactivity
differences  and  optimized  the  in-cylinder  fuel  stratification.  They
observed a simultaneous reduction in NOx and PM emissions and ach-
ieved ~60% indicated thermal efficiency (ITE). Liu et al. [134] explored
the  ignition  and  flame  development  in  RCCI  combustion  mode.  They
used  several  fuel  supply  strategies  to  achieve  different  fuel  stratifica-
tions. They reported that the auto-ignition and flame front propagation
could be controlled by regulating the degree of fuel stratification. Kok-
john et al. [135,136] carried out detailed investigations of RCCI com-
bustion  mode  using  optical  diagnostic  and  simulation.  They  reported

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010287

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 4. Comparison of various conventional and advanced combustion strategies with respect to fuel stratification (Adapted from [143]).

that the fuel-air mixture reactivity stratification dominantly controlled
the ignition and combustion events. However, the role of mixture con-
centration stratification and thermal stratification was less influential.
That is why the reactivity and concentration stratification focus on RCCI
combustion mode to extend the engine load range. The mixture reac-
tivity gradient can be enhanced by enlarging the reactivity difference
between the premixed and DI fuels [137–140]. Many studies have re-
ported  that  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  exhibits  higher  thermal  effi-
ciency due to shorter combustion duration, increased specific heat ratio,
and decreased heat transfer losses than conventional CI combustion [19,
141].

Olmeda et al. [142] suggested that the primary reason for the rela-
tively higher efficiency of all LTC modes is common in which mixture
homogeneity plays an important role because this leads to rapid com-
bustion  events.  Under  optimized  combustion  phasing,  this  results  in
higher fuel-to-work conversion efficiency. The uniform charge inside the
combustion chamber also results in similar global and local temperature
distribution. This is useful in reducing the localized effect of temperature
distribution  in  heat  transfer  from  cylinder  walls.  LTC  strategies  have
emerged as pathways for achieving high engine efficiency and relatively
cleaner  combustion than conventional  combustion  engines in  the  last
few  decades.  In  most  LTC  techniques,  the  thermodynamic  cycle  effi-
ciency can be increased by idealizing the heat release during combustion
towards  constant-volume  energy  conversion.  In  addition  to  the
constant-volume approach, LTC strategies also result in relatively lower
heat  loss  from  the  cylinder  walls  due  to  significantly  lower  peak  of
in-cylinder temperatures. This feature of LTC is also reflected in NOx
emissions. Improving mixture formation and spray performance reduces
PM formation by reducing peak equivalence ratios during combustion.
Numerous strategies have been developed to achieve clean and efficient
combustion, as summarized in Fig. 4 [143].

Despite the great potential of the RCCI combustion mode to operate
at high engine loads, it required a high degree of fuel stratification to
avoid  excessive  HRR.  In  the  absence  of  fuel  stratification  at  higher

engine  loads,  the  fraction  of  diffusion  phase  combustion  becomes
dominant in RCCI combustion mode, leading to higher soot emissions
[125].

2. Evolution of RCCI Combustion Concept

RCCI combustion mode can be considered a special dual-fuel com-
bustion in which an appropriate fuel pair can be used under optimized
operating conditions. The dual-fuel combustion strategy is not new. It
was introduced in the 1970s as ATAC. The basic difference between the
two dual-fuel combustion modes is the methodology of fuel introduc-
tion. In ATAC, the LRF is directly injected into the combustion chamber,
and a two-stage ignition assists combustion. In the ATAC concept, a hot
(thermal) atmosphere with (active) combustion products and radicals is
created by igniting a small amount of premixed HRF, which dominantly
affects the combustion of LRF.

In the RCCI combustion mode, an LRF is supplied through the intake
port, forming a premixed charge. This premixed fuel-air mixture is then
ignited using the directly injected HRF [144,145]. The HRF is delivered
through the intake port to form a premixed charge [146–149].

In ATAC, the combustion parameters at varying engine loads can be
controlled effectively by the fuel injection parameters, such as the fuel
injection  timing  of  the  LRF.  However,  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  is
more popular due to its engine performance improvement and emission
reduction  potential.  Hence,  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  has  been
extensively  explored  experimentally  and  numerically  [150–153].
Recent studies focused on extending the engine load window from low
to high load and then to full load [154–156] in RCCI combustion mode.
Cooper-Bessamer applied the dual-fuel concept, and they demonstrated
a gas-diesel dual-fuel engine in 1927 for the first time [157]. However, a
successful  dual-fuel  concept  was  first  demonstrated  commercially  in
1940  by  the  National  Gas  &  Oil  Engine  Company  Limited,  England
[158]. Their dual-fuel engine model used a dual-fuel combustion strat-
egy in which a direct-injected diesel ignited a premixed natural gas-air

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010288

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig.  5. In-cylinder  temperature,  apparent  heat  release  (left),  and  energy  distribution  (right)  for  RCCI  combustion  mode  gasoline  engine  vis-`a-vis  CDC  engine
(Reprinted from [142] with permission of Elsevier).

mixture. In this concept, the pilot injection of mineral diesel acted as a
“spark  plug,”  allowing  sufficient  ignition  energy  at  multiple  ignition
sites in the premixed charge. This resulted in flame propagation, which
combined  the  ignition  mechanisms  of  both  conventional  SI  and  CI
engines.

Most dual-fuel engines use gasoline as the premixed fuel [159], and,
in most of the industry-standard dual-fuel modern engine combustion
strategies,  a  diesel  pilot  ignition  (DPI)  is  used  with  gaseous  fuels
[160–162].  The  basic  concept  of  RCCI  combustion  mode  has  become
popular among researchers because of its potential for achieving supe-
rior  engine  performance  and  significantly  lower  emissions,  especially
NOx and soot. Previous studies have shown that the RCCI combustion
mode  can  effectively  utilize  many  renewable  fuels,  such  as  biofuel
[163–167], PODEn  [168,169], and methanol [170,171]. Olmeda et al.
[142]  performed  RCCI  combustion  mode  experiments  using  different
LRF (gasoline and E85) and compared the heat transfer characteristics to
the baseline CDC combustion engine (Fig. 5). These experiments were
performed in a single-cylinder light-duty research engine equipped with
several thermocouples in the cylinder head and liner (Fig. 6). They re-
ported that the heat transfer characteristics of both LRFs were almost
similar; however, both test fuels exhibited relatively lower heat transfer
compared  to  the  baseline  CDC  combustion.  The  exhaust  losses  were
slightly higher for the E85 due to the longer combustion duration. This
effect was balanced by higher combustion efficiency, proving that both
LRFs can be applied in RCCI combustion mode and would deliver similar
energy use and efficiency results. The authors also performed an energy
analysis of the gasoline-diesel fueled RCCI combustion mode and CDC
mode engines focusing on their energy balances. The RCCI combustion
mode engine exhibited superior energy capacity from the combustion
process. Relatively shorter combustion duration was responsible for this
trend,  which  reduced  13%  heat  loss  with  respect  to  the  CDC  engine.
Relatively lower enthalpy of exhaust gases from the RCCI combustion
mode was another important factor, resulting in lower exhaust losses.
These  lower  heat  losses  also  positively  affected  the  combustion
efficiency.

Jia and Denbratt [172] investigated the combustion characteristics
of mineral diesel-methanol fueled RCCI combustion mode at high engine
loads.  They  reported  ultra-low  soot  and  NOx  emissions.  Singh  et  al.
[173]  performed  comparative  investigations  of  RCCI  and  PCCI  com-
bustion modes to baseline CI combustion mode using critical parametric
analyses. They reported that RCCI combustion mode was comparable to
CI combustion mode at low loads. However, the RCCI combustion mode

exhibited  superior  engine  performance  at  higher  engine  loads  and
significantly lower NOx and PM  emissions than PCCI and baseline CI
combustion modes (Fig. 7).

In a similar investigation by Han et al. [174], different LTC modes,
namely PCCI, HCCI, and RCCI, were compared to baseline CI combus-
tion  mode.  They  used  n-butanol  and  mineral  diesel  as  test  fuels  in
different combustion modes. They reported that all LTC modes emitted
significantly  lower  NOx  and  soot  than  baseline  CI  combustion  mode.
RCCI  combustion  mode  exhibited  relatively  higher  efficiency  and  su-
perior combustion control than other LTC modes.

led

to  relatively

The potential of using single fuel in RCCI combustion mode to reduce
the system complexity has also been explored. In this strategy, an LRF
can also be used as HRF with a small amount of cetane improver such as
DTBP, 2-EHN, etc. [122]. Splitter et al. [133] used gasoline as LRF and
gasoline with DTPB as HRF. They compared single fuel RCCI combustion
mode results with dual-fuel (gasoline/mineral diesel) RCCI combustion
mode. They reported slightly improved engine performance of the single
fuel RCCI combustion mode. This might be due to the higher reactivity
gradient  generated  by  DTPB,  which
lower
low-temperature  heat  release  (LTHR).  A  lower  LTHR  results  in  lower
compression work, leading to higher engine efficiency. In another study
by  Hanson  et  al.  [175],  single  fuel  gasoline-gasoline  +3.5%  2-EHN
fueled RCCI combustion mode was compared to gasoline-diesel-fueled
RCCI combustion mode. They reported that adding a cetane improver
resulted  in  relatively  faster  high-temperature  heat  release  (HTHR)  of
single fuel RCCI combustion mode, leading to a relatively shorter com-
bustion duration than dual-fuel RCCI combustion mode. Mohammadian
et  al.  [176]  explored  this  strategy  using  isobutanol  as  LRF  and  iso-
butanol+20%  DTPB  as  HRF  and  reported  similar  RCCI  combustion
mode characteristics to dual-fuel RCCI combustion mode. Wang et al.
[161] also used isobutanol/isobutanol doped with a DTPB fuel pair in a
heavy-duty  engine  running  under  RCCI  combustion  mode.  They  re-
ported that isobutanol required more DTPB for generating a reactivity
gradient. Although the combustion characteristics of both alcohol and
gasoline  were  similar  in  RCCI  combustion  mode,  alcohols  required
higher doping with cetane improver due to their lower CN of alcohols,
especially  butanol  [122,177].  A  reverse  single  fuel  strategy  was  also
explored in a few studies, in which HRF was used as the LRF [178,179].
Although  PPC  and  RCCI  combustion  modes  have  significantly
improved combustion, performance, and emission characteristics than
baseline CDC and other LTC modes, RCCI combustion mode has several
technical challenges. Results of previous studies showed that the RON of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010289

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 6. Measured cylinder head temperature surfaces at 7 mm (upper graphs) and 4 mm (middle graphs) from the fire deck and liner (lower graphs) temperatures for
RCCI combustion mode gasoline engine (left) and RCCI combustion mode E85 engine (right) (Reprinted from [142] with permission of Elsevier).

the  fuel  should  be  changed  depending  on  the  engine  load.  The  RON
indicates  how  much  compression  the  fuel  can  withstand  before  auto-
igniting; the higher the RON, the higher pressure would be needed for
ignition. For effective RCCI combustion mode at low loads, RON should
be  reduced  to  enhance  combustion  stability.  Similarly,  a  higher  RON
should accelerate the combustion at medium and high loads. In RCCI
combustion  mode,  a  fraction  of  premixed  LRF  cannot  be  completely
oxidized  due  to  the  dominant  charge  cooling  effect  near  the  cylinder
walls and crevice regions. This results in relatively higher HC and CO
emissions,  promoting  incomplete  combustion.  A  new  combustion
strategy,  ‘reverse  RCCI’  (R-RCCI)  combustion,  has  gained  significant
attention.  In  the  R-RCCI  combustion  mode,  reverse  reactivity  stratifi-
cation  is  used  to  achieve  superior  performance  and  emissions  to  the
conventional RCCI combustion mode. In R-RCCI, a small amount of HRF
is premixed in the intake manifold to ignite the LRF, which is directly
injected into the cylinder during the compression stroke (Fig. 8).

In  R-RCCI  combustion  mode,  a  relatively  smaller  quantity  of  HRF
than conventional RCCI is premixed, resulting in lesser fuel trapped in
the squish and crevice regions. The higher oxidization tendency of the
trapped  premixed  HRF  is  another  important  aspect  of  the  R-RCCI

combustion mode, enhancing the combustion efficiency. A lower com-
bustion rate of R-RCCI compared to PPC makes it more suitable due to
more  reactivity  stratification.  Many  researchers  have  carried  out
detailed experimental and simulation studies and reported that the R-
RCCI combustion mode results in lower heat transfer, leading to higher
thermal efficiency. Previous studies showed that R-RCCI balanced the
crucial  parameters  required  for  soot  oxidation,  namely  the  degree  of
premixed combustion and combustion temperature. This led to very low
soot  emissions  at  all  engine  loads.  Huiquanet  al.  [87]  conducted  an
experimental  investigation  in  RCCI,  PPC,  and  R-RCCI  combustion
modes.  They  reported  that  the  R-RCCI  combustion  mode  resulted  in
lower NOx and soot emissions than PPC (Fig. 9). The authors focused on
the RCCI combustion mode exhaust losses caused by its lower combus-
tion rate, which resulted in lower ITE. They suggested that the R-RCCI
configuration effectively resolved this issue by using PODE injection in
the  port  and  gasoline  injection  directly  in  the  combustion  chamber
(Fig. 10).

Liu et al. [131] used PRFs (n-heptane and iso-octane) as test fuels in
the R-RCCI combustion mode to investigate the effects of fuel concen-
tration and reactivity stratifications. They reported a significant increase

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102810

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 7. Comparison of baseline CI, PCCI, and RCCI combustion modes at (a) low engine load (1 bar BMEP) and (b) high engine load (4 bar BMEP) (Reprinted from
[173] with permission of Elsevier).

Fig. 8. PPC, RCCI, and R-RCCI combustion modes at low-to-medium loads (Reprinted from [87] with permission of Elsevier).

in the engine’s thermal and combustion efficiency. Ji et al. [180] and Lu
et al. [146] also used the same test fuels (n-heptane as the premixed HRF
and iso-octane as DI fuel) in their investigations. They focused on the
fuel  injection timing of  the LRF and  reported a weak  effect of the  DI
timing  of  the  LRF  on  the  R-RCCI  combustion  mode.  The  SoI  sweep
◦
exhibited the best ignition characteristics at the DI timing of (cid:0) 25
CA
aTDC, leading to the highest thermal efficiency.

Yao et al. [149] and Chen et al. [181] investigated the RCCI com-
bustion mode using the reverse fuel reactivity combination. They used a
modified  single-cylinder  diesel  engine  with  premixed  dimethyl  ether
(DME) as HRF and injected methanol as LRF directly into the combus-
tion chamber. They utilized the basic concept of ATAC, in which the heat
released  by  premixed  DME  was  enhanced  by  the  in-cylinder  thermal
atmosphere. They reported that this method extends the load limit due
to higher reactivity stratification achieved by direct methanol injection.
They  found  that early  direct injection of  fuel  results in  homogeneous

combustion, similar to HCCI; however, the late direct injection can be
used  for  the  three-stage  combustion.  Lu  et  al.  [146,182,183]  investi-
gated  a  similar  type  of  combustion  using  different  LRFs,  namely
iso-octane, n-butanol, and ethanol, along with premixed n-heptane as
HRF. Based on the heat release pattern, they categorized the combustion
of two fuels having different reactivities in three ways:(i) a two-stage
HCCI-like heat release process dominated by the thermal atmosphere,
(ii)  a  three-stage  heat  release  process  dominated  by  the  active  atmo-
sphere combustion, and (iii) a heat release process lying in between the
above two categories dominated by both the active and thermal atmo-
spheres [146]. Cui et al. [184] performed an optical investigation of the
R-RCCI  combustion  mode  to  understand  the  combustion  better.  They
reported that the premixed ratio (rp) was the most critical parameter in
controlling the combustion phasing.

Lu et al. [182] also used premixed n-heptane and directly injected
methanol  in  the  R-RCCI  combustion  mode  and  reported  significantly

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102811

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig.  9. Fuel  induction strategies  corresponding  to  the  electrical signal  to  the
injectors  for  PPC,  RCCI,  and  R-RCCI  combustion  modes  (DI:  direct  injection;
PFI:  port  fuel  injection;  PR:  premixed  ratio)  (Reprinted  from  [87]  with
permission of Elsevier).

Fig. 11. Experimental and predicted in-cylinder pressure and HRR profiles at
three SoI timings (Reprinted from [185] with permission of Elsevier).

two HTHR regimes, in which HCHR became more dominant at retarded
SoI  timings.  Recently,  a  new  version  of  the  RCCI  combustion  mode,
namely  “Intelligent  Charge  Compression  Ignition”  (ICCI),  has  been
introduced  in  which  both  LRF  and  HRF  can  be  directly  injected  to
achieve superior combustion control [186,187]. Zhao et al. [187] car-
ried out a detailed investigation using ICCI and RCCI combustion modes
and  compared their  performance  and  emission  characteristics  to  con-
ventional combustion using blends of HRF and LRF. They reported that
the  conventional  combustion  using  blends  resulted  in  superior  com-
bustion and performance characteristics at low engine loads; however,
RCCI and ICCI combustion modes exhibited superior combustion control
at higher engine loads, leading to higher engine efficiency. Among both
LTC modes, the RCCI combustion mode was found superior, especially
up  to  medium  engine  loads;  however,  the  ICCI  combustion  mode
showed greater potential to be adopted at higher engine loads. This was
mainly due to precise control of injection parameters of LRF and HRF.
This section summarizes the evolution of the RCCI combustion mode
as  an  LTC  strategy.  A  LRF  is  introduced  into  the  engine  through  the
intake port, forming a premixed charge, which is ignited using a directly
injected  HRF.  The  RCCI  combustion  mode  performance  is  analysed
using  numerous  test  fuels,  including  alternative  fuels.  Some  of  these
alternative fuels aided in reducing soot and NOx emissions. RCCI com-
bustion mode was compared to other combustion concepts, including
the ATAC. The injection mechanisms/strategies were different among
these combustion modes, e.g., the ATAC inducted the LRF through direct
injection  and  the  HRF  through  the  intake  port.  This  section  also  un-
derscores some of the issues faced by RCCI, including relatively higher
HC and CO emissions. In the RCCI combustion mode evolution, reverse
RCCI  was  explored  as  a  new  strategy  consisting  of  reverse  reactivity
stratification,  i.e.,  injecting  a  smaller  quantity of  HRF into  the  intake
manifold to ignite the LRF, directly injected into the cylinder. A smaller
quantity of HRF injected in the R-RCCI combustion mode leads to lesser
fuel entrapment in the crevices. Finally, some fundamental studies on
the effect of boundary conditions of R-RCCI are listed to explore how the
combustion is affected.

2.1. Fuel Kinetics of LTC

Most  ICEs  are  operated  by  gasoline-  and  diesel-like  fuels,  which
contain  primarily  straight-chain  alkanes,  branched  alkanes  and  aro-
matics. Previous studies using PRFs exhibited that the combustion ki-
netics  of  these  fuels  and  their  auto-ignition  characteristics  are
significantly  affected  by  the  fuel  composition  and  molecular  size  and
structure  of  fuel  constituents.  The  gasoline  and  diesel  combustion  in

Fig. 10. Comparison of NOx and soot emissions among PPC, RCCI, and R-RCCI
combustion modes (Reprinted from [87] with permission of Elsevier).

lower NOx and soot emissions. They suggested that combining optimum
combustion  characteristics  and  fuel  properties  promoted  huge  re-
ductions in soot and NOx emissions.

Tang  et  al.  [185]  also  investigated  the  R-RCCI  combustion  mode
using  a  combination  of  n-heptane  and  iso-octane  as  test  fuels.  They
analyzed the effect of injection timings of iso-octane on the combustion
characteristics  of  dual-fuel  combustion.  They  divided  the  combustion
into  three  regimes,  namely  LTHR,  homogeneous  combustion  heat
release (HCHR), and premixed combustion heat release (PCHR), where
HCHR and PCHR were the two sub-parts of the HTHR (Fig. 11). They
observed that the SoI timings of iso-octane had little effect on the LTHR;
however,  retarding  the  SoI  timing  of  iso-octane  resulted  in  relatively
dominant HTHR. This was mainly attributed to HCHR and PCHR as the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102812

A.K. Agarwal et al.

reactively plays an important role because, at low temperatures, the rate
of chain branching for straight-chain paraffins (like n-heptane) is much
more intense than for branched-chain paraffins (like iso-octane). This is
due  to  the  structure  of  n-heptane  radicals,  which  leads  to  higher
alkyl-peroxy  radical  (RO2)  isomerization  from  keto-hydro-peroxide
decomposition  [191].  A  research  study  by  Barusch  et  al.  [202]  re-
ported that the cool flame chemistry of LTC was significantly affected by
RO2 and hydroperoxyl alkyl radicals (QOOH). On the other hand, many
less reactive methyl groups and tertiary and quaternary C atoms in its
structure  promoted  lower  reactivity  of  branched-chain  paraffins  (like
iso-octane).  For  compact  and  highly  branched  fuels,  ignition  was
inhibited by a large fraction of strongly bonded H atoms . The OH radical
pool  controlled  the  iso-octane  combustion,  mainly  derived  from  the
n-heptane low-temperature pathway.

Fig.  12. Typical  HRR  for  two-stage  combustion  in  the  LTC  mode  (Adapted
from [192]).

conventional  combustion  mode  is  mainly  affected  by  transport-
controlled  high-temperature  premixed  and  non-premixed  flames
[188].  However,  in  LTC modes,  autoignition  and  cool flames  play  an
important role in combustion characteristics due to a higher degree of
fuel-air premixing. Ju et al. [188] reviewed several studies for a detailed
understanding of cool flames in LTC mode and reported that cool flames
are affected by parameters such as EGR, fuel structure, etc. EGR reduces
the  flame  temperature  in  LTC  mode  since  it  has  a  dominant  role  in
suppressing  hot  flames.  This  results  in  dominant  cool  flames  in  LTC
mode  because  a  transition  between  cool  and  hot  flames  during  com-
bustion  affects  the  engine  performance  and  emission  characteristics
[189]. Agarwal et al. [190] reviewed the fuel combustion chemistry and
reported that PRFs (n-heptane and iso-octane) behave differently during
auto-ignition  in  LTC  engines.  N-heptane  is  reactive  straight-chain
paraffin with a low octane number and lower auto-ignition resistance.
Compared  to  n-heptane,  iso-octane  is  a  less  reactive  branched-chain
paraffin with a higher octane number [191]. They explained the com-
bustion  characteristics  of  LTC  and  reported  two-stage  combustion  in
which  the  first  stage  is  related  to  the  LTHR.  The  second  or  the  main
combustion  is  associated  with  the  HTHR  (Fig.  12).  The  first  stage  of
ignition is regarded as a ‘cool flame’  with a negative temperature co-
efficient (NTC) [192].

The analysis of chemical reactions during the combustion of hydro-
carbon  fuels  in  ICEs  shows  three  main  reaction  routes,  depending  on
temperature.  Below  750  K,  reactions  are  dominated  by  chain-
propagating  steps,  including  oxygen  molecules  and  the  generation  of
partially  oxidized  species  [193].  Between  800  and  950  K,  the  chain
propagating  steps  of  the  ‘O’  molecule yielding  conjugate alkenes  and
HO2  radicals  [193].  Above  1000  K,  the  main  fuel  radical  reactions
include thermal decomposition of C-C bond breakage, formation of al-
kenes and smaller radicals [194]. In previous studies, two different re-
gions of chain reactions were defined as: (i) a low-temperature kinetics
region  or  ignition process  below  950 K  and  (ii) the  high-temperature
kinetics  region,  where  the  bulk  chemical  energy  is  released  [192].
However, the introduction of alternative fuels, such as alcohols, ethers,
biodiesel, etc., has shown slightly different LTC kinetics due to different
molecular  sizes,  molecular  structures,  bond  energies  and  functional
groups [195–199].

The cool flames in combustion have been investigated extensively;
however, after introducing LTC modes, they have become more relevant
due  to  a  relative  dominance  of  low-temperature  reactions  (LTR)  and
high-temperature  reactions  (HTR)  in  the  LTC  mode.  Pease  [200,201]
reported that in the LTC mode, radical formation is sensitively affected
by  the  temperature,  decreasing  with  increasing  temperature  due  to
faster dissociation of chain-branching intermediates. In this context, fuel

Many previous studies reviewed the fundamentals of cool flames and
their  applications  in  different  combustion  models  [203–205].  Most
studies  reported  that  the  temperature  and  radical  production  rate
affected the oxidation of fuels having low-temperature reactivity [203,
204]. The chain branching processes also affect the ignition of hydro-
carbons, which occurs in two stages. In the first stage, partial oxidation
of fuel occurs, resulting in intermediate species like C2H4, CH2O, and
CH3CHO.  The  first  stage  of  the  ignition  process  is  controlled  by  the
low-temperature  peroxy  chemistry  [195,204,206],  and  it  does  not
contribute  to  the  temperature  rise.  The  first  stage  ignition  process
further progresses by the oxidation of intermediate species, which raises
the temperature to a critical limit, where the second stage ignition starts.
In this stage, complete oxidation of fuel results in the formation of CO2
and H2O along with a significant temperature rise. This is a major reason
why the second ignition stage is also known as high-temperature igni-
tion  (HTI).  In  conventional  combustion  modes,  significantly  higher
initial  temperatures  result  in  only  HTI;  however,  LTI  and  HTI  both
contribute  to  LTC  modes.  Their  relative  dominance  depends  on  tem-
perature and pressure conditions. In most studies related to cool flames,
their  behaviour  depends  on  the  initial  temperature  and  the  chain
branching  chemistry.  This
three  categories:
low-temperature,
intermediate-temperature,  and  high-temperature
routes.  At  lower  temperatures  (up  to  750  K), OH,  O,  or  HO2  radicals
start the fuel oxidation by H-abstraction from the fuel molecule (RH)
and generate fuel radicals (R). These fuel radicals react with O2 and form
RO2, which undergoes internal isomerization, resulting in the formation
of  QOOH.  Decomposition  of  QOOH  leads  to  many  OH  radicals,
depending  on  the  low-temperature  pathway.  Due  to  the  formation  of
these large numbers of radicals, chain branching becomes rapid, which
adds  more  energy  and  OH  radicals  to  the  system  [207].  The
low-temperature reactions are exothermic, which further increase OH
radical formation due to increasing temperature [191].

is  divided

into

R→RO2→QOOH→O2QOOH→OQ

′

O + 2OH

With increasing temperature, the chain-propagating pathways sup-
press  the  chain-branching  pathways,  in  which  peroxy  hydroperoxyl
alkyl radicals (O2QOOH) are replaced by cyclic ether via the following
reaction.

R→RO2→QOOH→OH + cyclicether

However, the NTC affects the above reaction due to reverse reactions
and significantly reduces the formation of radicals. Pilling et al. [208]
reported  another  feature  of  the  low-temperature  reactions.  The
chain-branching reactions do not act as actual chain-branching because
of the formation of either one or no radials at low temperatures. They
suggested that this behaviour of chain branching at low temperatures is
common  to  all  test  fuels.  However,  few  oxygenated  fuels,  including
diethyl  ether,  dibutyl  ether,  etc.,  exhibit  differences  in  the  two  NTC
regions. The main reason for the first NTC is the dominance between the
second O2 addition and QOOH decomposition. The competition between
the first O2 addition and direct beta scission for the fuel radicals is the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102813

A.K. Agarwal et al.

main reason for the second NTC [209]. The tendency of the dual NTC
effect is mainly controlled by C-O bond energy. Rodriguez et al. [210]
explored the low-temperature behaviour of DME and reported that the
NTC effect for DME starts at ~550 K; however, it becomes significantly
noticeable in the temperature range of 600-750 K. In this temperature
region, fuel oxidation becomes slow due to dominant contributions of
O2QOOH,  QOOH,  and  RO2  decomposition  reactions.  At  intermediate
temperature (900-1100 K), high-temperature chemical reactions domi-
nate the low-temperature reactions, resulting in chain branching, where
fuel  oxidation  is  thought  to  be  governed  by  a  branching  process
involving HO2 [192].

RH + HO2→H2O2 + R

H2O2 + M→OH + OH + M

Here, M is a non-reactive third-body. For initiating these reactions,

HO2 is mainly formed by the following reactions:

RO2→ alkene + HO2

QOOH→ cyclicether + OH→ alkene + HO2

The  reaction  progresses  with  the  formation  of  OH  radicals  by
decomposition of RO2 and QOOH and reaction between aldehyde radi-
cals and O2. Most of the time, the formation of these lower aldehydes is a
possible reason for the faint blue luminescence of cool flames [200,201].
At  intermediate  temperatures,  the  chain-branching  reactions  produce
multiple OH radicals; however, these reactions are highly sensitive to
heat loss and oxygen concentration.

CH2O→HCO→HO2→H2O2→2OH

In some cases (at relatively higher temperatures), this intermediate
chain-branching  reaction  is  surpassed  by  a  multi-stage  warm  flame,
where both cool and hot flames can exist [211]. Mostly the LTC lies in
the H2O2 concentration history, which is produced at ~1000 K by low
and  intermediate  temperature  reactions.  Li  et  al.  [212]  suggested  a
prominent pathway of H2O2 formation, as given below:

HO2 + ⋅HO2→H2O2 + O2

H2O2  concentration  increases  steadily,  with  H2O2  decomposition
much slower than its production. H2O2  decomposes rapidly at temper-
atures around 1000 K, yielding many OH radicals. An increase in OH
radicals  consumes  any  remaining  fuel,  resulting  in  the  ignition.  The
important requirement for cool flames to induce in-cylinder combustion
is the energy required so that low-temperature reactions can increase the
chamber  temperature  to  the  high-temperature  region.  When  the  re-
actions become slower during the NTC period, high cylinder tempera-
ture  can be increased sufficiently by external factors such as external
heating or increasing CR, which forces the engine operation towards a
high-temperature regime by increasing the compression work during the
compression stroke. As shown below, a different chain-branching reac-
tion occurs at extremely high temperatures (above 1100 K).

Fig. 13. Evolution of characteristic events and associated time scales for igni-
tion  in  high-pressure  spray  flames  (Reprinted  from  [217]  with  permission
of Elsevier).

important in the high-temperature regime because the products contain
more  radicals  than  the  reactants.  Similar  to  previous  experiments,
Mancaruso  and  Vaglieco  [214]  performed  UV–Visible  imaging  and
spectroscopic  measurements,  and  they  detected  the  chemical  species
involved in the LTC. They injected bio-ethanol in the intake manifold
and mineral diesel directly into the cylinder, similar to RCCI combustion
mode. They reported that the SoC of the homogeneous fuel-air mixture
in LTC was mainly controlled by OH radicals generated during the in-
termediate  temperature  chain  branching  pathways  of  LTC.  The  con-
centration of OH radicals was directly controlled by the temperature and
type of reactions, e.g. at low, intermediate or high temperature. Liu et al.
[215] explored the fuel kinetics of RCCI combustion mode and reported
that CH2O and HCO (formyl radical) are the two most effective species
that  play  an  important  role  in  conducting  the  reactions  in  the  HTHR
stage. Even in diesel engines, it has been revealed by the stabilization
mechanism and overall ignition process that the LTHR pattern is similar
to the LTC engines, which progresses towards a dominant HTHR. Kris-
man  et  al.  [216]  experimentally  demonstrated  this  behaviour,  where
thermal and molecular diffusion gradually transitioned from the LTHR
to flame stabilized autoignition (HTHR).

Dahms et al. [217] related these combustion regimes and suggested
that LTC reactions and cool flames cannot be neglected in diesel engines
because the ignition process is associated with these reactions (Fig. 13).
This sub-section showed the general fuel combustion kinetics followed
in  LTC  and  the  importance  of  cool  flames  and  NTC  in  different  LTC
modes. The next sub-sections discuss details of these reaction mecha-
nisms, where the effects of different features of LTC kinetics on com-
bustion, performance, and emissions are elaborated.

H + O2→OH + O

2.2. Emissions from RCCI Combustion Mode

This  reaction  dominates  the  overall  reaction,  leading  to  the  main
ignition, identical to all test fuels. This is the unique chemical kinetics of
all  test  fuels  at  high  temperatures  where  chain  branching  reactions
become fuel independent. Since molecular oxygen participates in this
reaction, lean fuel mixtures are more reactive in this high-temperature
regime. In contrast, rich fuel-air mixtures are oxidized quickly at low
temperatures  due  to  chain  branching,  which  depends  on  the  radical
species formed directly from the parent fuel molecules [213]. The con-
sumption and production pathways of O2 and OH (radical pool) reveal
that the major O2 consumption reactions related to the LTC chemistry of
hydrocarbons  directly  contribute  to  the  heat  release.  Heat  release  re-
actions are related to O2, implying the significance of the fuel mixing
process  for  the  LTC.  These  radical-branching  reactions  are  very

Researchers have explored several techniques to resolve the issue of
higher  emissions  of  CO  and  HC  from  RCCI  combustion  mode  engine.
This  section  summarizes  the  studies  wherein  the  performance  and
emission characteristics of the RCCI combustion mode engine are the
primary focus. Wai et al. [218] investigated a diesel-methanol dual-fuel
(DMDF) combustion strategy to control the engine-out emissions. They
conducted  experiments  using  a  pilot  injection  to  achieve  stable  com-
bustion at a high methanol substitution ratio (MSR). They examined the
effects of pilot injection parameters, such as the start of pilot injection
timing, pilot injection quantity, etc. They reported that these parameters
could  effectively  control  the  DMDF  combustion,  resulting  in  superior
fuel economy, especially at higher MSR. Zhang et al. [219] performed a
similar experiment on a mineral diesel-methanol dual-fuel engine and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102814

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 14. (a) Number-size distributions of particulates, (b) Correlation between the total particulate mass and NOx emitted in RCCI combustion mode at different
engine loads and rp  (Reprinted from [171] with permission of SAGE).

reported that methanol fumigation exhibited a significant reduction of
NOx and PM emissions; however, the charge cooling effect of methanol
enhanced incomplete combustion, leading to relatively higher HC, CO
and formaldehyde emissions.

Although RCCI combustion mode emits significantly lower PM than
other conventional combustion modes, however, PM emitted by RCCI
combustion mode cannot be neglected. Therefore, PM emissions from
RCCI  combustion  mode  engines  were  routinely  investigated.  Splitter
et  al.  [220]  reported  that  RCCI  combustion  mode  engines  emitted
approximately two orders of magnitude lower PM mass emissions than
conventional CI engines. Singh et al. [171] performed RCCI combustion
mode investigations intending to explore the permissible limits of the rp
of methanol at different engine loads. They reported that the increasing
rp  of  methanol  first  improved  the  engine  performance;  however,  it
exhibited  relatively  inferior  performance  at  higher  rp  of  methanol
(>75%). To investigate the RCCI combustion mode and emission char-
acteristics further at extreme limits (combining engine load and rp), they
measured the particle number (PN) concentrations emitted by the RCCI
combustion mode engine vis-`a-vis baseline CI combustion mode engine

(Fig. 14). They reported that the number of particles emitted by RCCI
combustion mode was significantly lower than baseline CI combustion
mode. RCCI combustion mode emitted more nucleation mode particles
(NMP) size range [171]. The relative dominance of particles in various
size ranges, namely nanoparticles (NP), NMP, and accumulation mode
particles  (AMP) in the two  combustion modes, showed  an interesting
trend.  Fig.  14  shows  that  higher  engine  loads  exhibited  higher  AMP
concentrations  in  both  combustion  modes,  and  NMP  concentration
decreased when increasing engine load. Variations in the number of NP
followed  a  mixed  trend  at  different  engine  loads,  and  maximum  NP
concentration was found at the maximum engine load (BMEP of 4 bar).
Higher peak in-cylinder temperature at maximum engine load might be
a possible reason for the emission of a higher number of NPs. A signif-
icant fraction of NPs was generated due to the pyrolysis of lubricating
oil.

In another study [221], the results showed a very low soot emission
(<0.01 g/kW-hr) from a light-duty engine operating in RCCI combustion
mode. Prikhodko et al. [222] compared the effectiveness of the DOC on
different advanced combustion techniques. They concluded that DOCs

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102815

A.K. Agarwal et al.

combustion mode. The relatively lower in-cylinder temperature was the
main reason for the higher SOF of the PM emitted  by the RCCI com-
bustion mode engine, which remained the same even at higher engine
loads; however, SOF in the PM emitted by the baseline CI combustion
mode reduced significantly at higher engine loads.

Morphological analysis of the particulates using transmission elec-
tron microscopy (TEM) was done by Storey et al. [224], which revealed
the presence of condensed hydrocarbon droplets in the PM samples from
the RCCI combustion mode engine. This analysis also indicated that the
PM  from  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  engine  had  lower  carbonaceous
material  than  the  soot  emitted  by  the  baseline  CI  combustion  mode
engine. The absence of graphitic structure in the PM emitted by the RCCI
combustion mode engine indicated a different PM formation mechanism
than the baseline CI combustion mode. For investigating the effect of
fuel pairs on the particulate characteristics, chemical characterization
(organic carbon (OC)/total carbon (TC) ratio) of the PM emitted from CI
and RCCI combustion mode engines fueled with different fuel pairs was
performed. It was concluded that the fuel chemistry did not affect the
RCCI  combustion  mode  because  all  fuel  pairs  showed  similar  OC/TC
ratios. Smoke meter measurements showed a consistent and significant
reduction in BC content of the PM emitted by the RCCI combustion mode
engine. However, this does not accurately represent the TPM since the
smoke meter only assesses the BC. Kolodziej et al. [225] investigated the
RCCI combustion mode when both fuels (LRF and HRF) were directly
injected  into  the  combustion  chamber.  Their  results  showed  that  PM
emitted by the RCCI combustion mode had a bimodal particle size dis-
tribution (PSD), which was sensitive to the SoI timings of gasoline and
gasoline-diesel ratio. They also concluded that advancing the SoI timing
of gasoline resulted in lower NMP concentration; however, AMP con-
centration increased. Increasing the gasoline-diesel ratio decreased the
TPN emissions. Storey et al. [224] also investigated the PSD sensitivity
to the fuels used in the RCCI combustion mode by employing three fuels
pairs:  diesel-gasoline,  diesel-E85  (85%  ethanol  + 15%  gasoline),  and
B20  (20%  biodiesel  + 80%  diesel)-gasoline.  There  was  no  significant
difference in the PSD among these fuel pairs, indicating that PSDs from
the  RCCI  combustion  mode  were  largely  insensitive  to  the  test  fuel
properties. Agarwal et al. [16] compared the particulate characteristics
of  different  LTC  modes  vis-`a-vis  baseline  CI  combustion  mode.  They
used  mineral  diesel  to  achieve  PCCI  and  CI  combustion  modes  and  a
combination of methanol and mineral diesel as HRF and LRF to achieve
the  RCCI  combustion  mode.  They  reported  significantly  lower  PN
emissions  from  both  LTC  modes  than  baseline  CI  combustion  mode;
however, the RCCI combustion mode emitted relatively higher PN than
the  other  two  combustion  modes  (Fig.  16  a).  They  suggested  that
fuel-rich  zones  in  the  combustion  chamber  and  a  dominant  diffusion
combustion  phase  in  the  baseline  CI  combustion  mode  were  the  two
prime factors for higher PN emission from the RCCI combustion mode
than  baseline  CI  combustion  mode.  However,  homogeneous  fuel-air
mixing  in  RCCI  combustion  mode  resulted  in  fewer  fuel-rich  zones,
leading to dominant premixed combustion.

Statistical analysis of particulate results exhibited that the number
concentration of particles was higher in CI combustion mode; however,
the RCCI combustion mode emitted relatively higher particulate mass
(Fig. 16 b). The particulate number-mass distribution showed that the
PCCI  combustion  mode  emitted  lower  PN  and  mass  than  RCCI.  Rela-
tively superior in-cylinder conditions in the PCCI combustion mode than
in RCCI combustion mode might be a possible reason for this behaviour,
promoting homogeneous fuel-air mixing, leading to lesser  soot nuclei
formation. Their study concluded that all LTC modes could reduce both
PM and NOx emissions; however, the RCCI combustion mode was more
dominant in NOx and PM reduction due to the combined effects of LTC
and the use of oxygenated fuels. Particulate bound trace metal analysis
was  another  important  aspect  related  to  particulate  toxicity.  Agarwal
et al. [16] compared the particulate bound trace metal concentrations
emitted in the PCCI, RCCI, and baseline CI combustion modes and re-
ported  significantly  lower  trace  metals  from  the  PCCI  and  RCCI

Fig.  15. (a)  Comparison  of  PM  samples  collected  on  the  filter  papers  from
conventional CI, diesel PCCI, and dual-fuel RCCI combustion modes (Reprinted
from [222] with permission of SAE), and (b) Gravimetric analysis of PM mass
collected  on  the  filter  papers  from  CI,  PCCI,  and  RCCI  combustion  modes
(Reprinted from [16] with permission of Elsevier).

could  reduce  the  emission  of  small-sized  particles  effectively.  They
collected the PM samples (on filter paper) from the CI, PCCI, and RCCI
combustion mode engines operated at identical speed and load condi-
tions.  The  filter  papers  exhibited  the  PM  sampling  with  the  lightest
colour from the RCCI combustion mode engine; however, the PM mass
collected on the filter paper was higher than that collected on the PCCI
combustion mode engine filter (Fig. 15).

In a similar study by Agarwal et al. [16], a comparison of the physical
appearance of the particulate-laden filter papers and PM mass emitted
by PCCI, RCCI, and CI combustion modes was done. They reported that
the RCCI combustion mode resulted in a slightly higher PM mass on the
filter paper, in which a significant fraction of the PM included volatile
substances. The physical appearance of these filters also exhibited the
presence of black carbon (BC) to be the maximum in the CI combustion
mode, followed by the PCCI combustion mode.

Jiang  et  al.  [223]  performed  RCCI  combustion  experiments  to
investigate the particulate emissions by gravimetric measurements and
reported slightly lower total particle mass (TPM) than the baseline CI
combustion.  They  reported  that  PM  mass  emitted  by  the  RCCI  com-
bustion mode engine was significantly lower than the baseline CI com-
bustion mode engine. At higher engine loads, TPM emitted by the RCCI
combustion mode engine was reduced substantially (by ~57%) due to a
higher rp of LRF because of improved fuel-air mixing. Due to emissions
of condensable HC species, PM emitted by the RCCI combustion mode
engine contained higher soluble organic fraction (SOF) than baseline CI

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102816

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 16. (a) Number-size distribution of particulates and (b) Qualitative correlation between the number-size and mass-size distribution of particles, and (c) Par-
ticulate bound trace metals emitted in CI, PCCI, and RCCI combustion modes at varying engine loads (Reprinted from [16] with permission of Elsevier).

combustion modes than in the baseline CI combustion mode (Fig. 16 c).
They suggested that relatively lower peak in-cylinder temperature was a
major factor responsible for lesser trace metals such as Ni, Ar, Pb, Cr,
etc., in both these LTC modes.

This section covers the findings of the experimental investigations of
the RCCI combustion mode, particularly emissions. Attention was given
to higher HC and CO emissions than other combustion modes, such as
baseline CI combustion mode, even when using fuel combinations such
as diesel and methanol (formaldehyde was also detected). Additionally,
detailed  studies  on  the  emission  characterization,  particularly  PM
emission, were summarized, concluding that the RCCI combustion mode
emitted lesser BC but might emit a higher mass of non-BC particles. It
also emerged that the chemical characterization of particulate matter in
terms of OC/TC ratio was not affected by the fuel chemistry. Finally, the
RCCI combustion mode exhibited fewer trace metals than the baseline CI
combustion mode.

2.3. Alternative Fuels for RCCI Combustion Mode

Alternative fuel utilization potential is an important feature of the
RCCI  combustion  mode.  RCCI  combustion  mode  can  utilize  many
alternative  fuels,  ranging  from  high-cetane  to  low-cetane.  The  RCCI
combustion mode with alternative fuels exhibits higher efficiency and
cleaner combustion than CDC. This feature makes the RCCI combustion
mode suitable in the current scenario when the transport sector is bat-
tling energy security and emissions issues. In the last few years, a wide
range  of  alternative  fuels  has  been  investigated  in  RCCI  combustion
mode. These are divided into two main categories: alternative fuel usage
as (i) HRFs, and (ii) LRFs.

2.3.1. Alternative Fuels as HRFs in RCCI Combustion Mode

Most RCCI combustion mode investigations were carried out using
mineral diesel as HRF. To explore the effects of HRF properties on RCCI
combustion mode, Ryskamp et al. [226] carried out RCCI combustion
mode experiments using nine different compositions of mineral diesel,
having  different  CN,  aromatic  content,  and  distillation  temperatures.
They reported that the CN of HRF was dominant compared to other fuel
properties. They concluded that a lower CN of HRF resulted in higher
NOx and PRR; however, higher cetane fuels showed greater potential for
higher engine load operation. Therefore, in the RCCI combustion mode,
higher cetane alternative fuels are preferred [227–233] to compensate
for the  combustion delay that is typical to this mode due to elevated
proportions of LRF. Many alternative fuels, such as biodiesel, DME, etc.,
have been explored as alternatives to mineral diesel [227–241]. Recent
studies have focused on biodiesel types, achieving a superior reactivity
stratification due to  the higher  CN  of biodiesel  than baseline  mineral
diesel.  The  CN  of  biodiesel  depends  on  the  saturation  and  molecular
structure of the constituent hydrocarbons from the feedstock oils or fats,
affecting  the  oxygen  its  molecules  can  contain.  In  biodiesel,  the
oxygenation of the molecules is generally higher. However, there is high
variability  in  the  determination  of  this  metric  even  with  two  fuels
coming from the same feedstock [242]. Wang et al. [232] used PODEn as
HRF and gasoline as LRF to achieve RCCI combustion mode at higher
engine  loads.  They  reported  that  biodiesel’s  higher  CN  created  more
reactivity stratification than baseline mineral diesel. This helped achieve
superior  combustion  control,  especially  at  higher  engine  loads.  The
relatively higher PM reduction potential of PODEn than mineral diesel is
another reason why PODEn was extensively explored as HRF in the RCCI
combustion  mode.  Tong  et  al.  [154]  compared  the  RCCI  combustion
mode  and  performance  characteristics  of  a  heavy-duty  engine  fueled
with  gasoline-PODEn  and  gasoline-diesel.  They  concluded  that

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102817

A.K. Agarwal et al.

gasoline-PODEn  RCCI  combustion  mode  exhibited  more  stable  com-
bustion  characteristics.  Near-zero  PM  emissions  from  the  gaso-
line-PODEn-fueled  RCCI  combustion  mode  were  another  important
finding of their study; however, they did not discuss these characteristics
elaborately. To further explain the reasons for superior emission char-
acteristics of PODEn as the directly injected HRF in the RCCI combustion
mode,  Wang  et  al.  [233]  performed  detailed  simulations  of  the
in-cylinder fuel distribution of gasoline-PODE3 fueled RCCI combustion
mode. They reported relatively superior management of the in-cylinder
equivalence ratio and reactivity distribution of PODE3 for improving the
RCCI combustion mode engine performance more flexibly than baseline
mineral diesel. García et al. [234] explored the potential of PODEn in the
RCCI combustion mode, wherein they used diesel-PODEn blends as HRF
and gasoline as the premixed LRF in different rp. They concluded that
the higher blends of PODEn with mineral diesel complied with the EURO
VI emission regulations even at higher engine loads (up to 80% load). In
a  few  other  studies,  this  technique  was  also  explored,  where  lower
blends  of  PODEn  with  mineral  diesel  resulted  in  superior  combustion
efficiency  for  the  same  NOx  levels.  This  increase  in  combustion  effi-
ciency led to higher brake thermal efficiency (BTE) [237].

Song  et  al.  [235]  evaluated  the  suitability  of  PODEn  in  the  RCCI
combustion mode by comparing emissions from natural gas-diesel and
natural  gas-PODEn-fueled  RCCI  combustion  mode  engines.  They
demonstrated  that  a  combination  of  natural  gas-PODEn  resulted  in
significantly lower HC, CO, NOx, and PM emissions and superior engine
performance.  The  higher  difference  in  reactivities  of  natural  gas  and
PODEn  might  be  a  possible  explanation  for  this  trend.  Hararia  et  al.
[228] explored a new strategy in which they used a mixture of CNG and
compressed biogas (CBG) as the LRF, and different blends of thevetia-
peruviana  methyl  ester  (TPME)  were  used  as  the  HRF.  The  main
objective of this research was to enhance the load limit of RCCI com-
bustion  mode.  They  reported  that  this  fuel  combination  resulted  in
relatively  higher  BTE  and  NOx  emissions  than  the  reference  RCCI
combustion mode fueled with CNG-mineral diesel; however, CO and HC
emissions  were  marginally  lower.  Aydin  [243]  used  CNG  as  LRF  and
biodiesel  as  HRF  in  the  RCCI  combustion  mode.  They  used  a  higher
fraction of safflower biodiesel (up to 95%) to achieve RCCI combustion
and compared the results with conventional CI combustion mode. They
reported that the RCCI combustion mode with a higher fraction of bio-
diesel as HRF resulted in a shorter combustion duration than the con-
ventional CI combustion mode.

Due to the significant effect of fuel properties of HRF on the RCCI
combustion  mode,  researchers  also  used  DME  as  HRF  in  the  RCCI
combustion mode. Kakoee et al. [229] investigated the RCCI combustion
mode using natural gas as LRF and DME as HRF. They added hydrogen
to the natural gas to improve global reactivity and reactivity stratifica-
tion control. They reported that DME decomposition during the RCCI
combustion mode was an important phenomenon that affected the fuel
mixture’s CN and the HRR. A higher CN of DME becomes less effective in
such conditions due to these changes in the mixture properties before
the combustion, leading to lower combustion quality, higher emissions,
and  lower  power  output  than  baseline  diesel  [229].  Jin  et  al.  [230]
performed detailed experimental investigations to understand the igni-
tion dynamics of the DME-methane mixture, which were explored as a
potential fuel pair in the RCCI combustion mode. They explained the
ignition characteristics of the DME-methane mixture and reported that
the initial ignition events were similar in all cases of RCCI combustion
mode. However, for the DME-methane case under turbulent conditions,
the formation of high-temperature autoignition kernels was relatively
advanced  compared  to  a  homogeneous  mixture.  They  indicated  the
existence of typical tetrabranchial flames, such as cool flames, fuel-rich
premixed flames, diffusion flames, and fuel-lean premixed flames, where
the  fuel-lean  premixed  flame  branches  finally  trigger  the  premixed
methane-air  flames.  Krisman  et  al.  [244]  also  performed  similar  in-
vestigations  using  DME  as  HRF  and  reported  that  DME  exhibited  a
two-stage ignition in a turbulent mixing layer. They reported that cooler

regions in the combustion chamber affect the timings and location of
ignition in the second stage auto-ignition.

Park et al. [231] explored the RCCI combustion mode characteristics
using  DME  and  ethanol  as  HRF  and  LRF,  respectively.  Few  other  re-
searchers  used  DME  in  R-RCCI  combustion  mode  to  achieve  superior
combustion control than the RCCI combustion mode. They reported that
the  DME-ethanol  fueled  RCCI  combustion  mode  resulted  in  lower
emissions than biodiesel-ethanol and diesel-ethanol dual-fuel combus-
tion. They reported a significant reduction in ISNOx in the DME-ethanol
fuel pair without deterioration of ISsoot. Yao et al. [149] and Chen et al.
[181] assessed DME as HRF in a modified single-cylinder diesel engine,
in which methanol was injected directly into the combustion chamber as
LRF.  Yao  et  al.  [149]  reported  that  premixed  DME  enhanced  the
in-cylinder thermal atmosphere, which resulted in superior combustion
to conventional RCCI combustion mode. Chen et al. [181] investigated
methanol-DME fueled RCCI combustion mode by varying fuel injection
parameters  such  as  fuel  injection  timings  of  methanol,  FIP,  etc.  They
reported that varying SoI timings of methanol exhibited a weak effect on
the  LTHR  in  the  DME  as  HRF;  however,  it  significantly  affected  the
HTHR.  They  suggested  that  the  overall  combustion  duration  of
methanol-DME  fueled  RCCI  combustion  mode  could  be  reduced  by
increasing the FIP of methanol [181].

RCCI combustion mode can be enhanced by using HRF, other than
mineral  diesel.  HRFs  such  as  PODEn  have  fuel  properties  that  aid  in
making  the  combustion  more  controllable,  thus  allowing  to  cater  to
higher load operating points in the LTC mode. With biodiesel, higher
combustion  efficiency  and  BTE  can  be  achieved.  Additionally,  these
alternative fuels enhance the potential of reducing soot emissions while
keeping the same level of NOx emissions as the baseline mineral diesel.

2.3.2. Alternative Fuels as LRFs in RCCI Combustion Mode

In the past five decades, many alternative fuels have been extensively
explored for IC engines. Among those alternative fuels, alcohols have
shown significant potential to be utilized as an alternative to mineral
diesel and gasoline. However, alcohols have been promoted more as an
alternative  to  gasoline  for  practical  applications.  In  many  countries,
gasoline has been replaced with alcohol blended gasoline, in which 20%
(v/v) alcohols are blended with gasoline. Unlike gasoline engines, the
use of alcohol in diesel engines is challenging. In many studies, alcohols
have been explored as a direct replacement of mineral diesel in CDC;
however, igniting alcohols in diesel engines is very difficult due to their
lower  CN. In  the  literature,  many  techniques have  been  proposed  for
alcohol  utilization,  such  as  fuel  blending  [238–241,244,245],  port
fumigation [246–252], and dual-fuel emulsions [218]. The blending of
alcohols  with  mineral  diesel  has  attracted  researchers  due  to  its
simplicity.  In  most  blending  strategies,  the  suitability  of  alcohol  has
already been justified [253–255]. However, most studies concluded that
blending strategies can be used up to only a certain fraction of alcohol in
diesel engines since high alcohol proportions are closely related to rust
and corrosion issues in IC engines. In addition, due to the lower CN of
alcohols, their ignition is challenging, requiring higher proportions of
HRF. This reduces the advantage of RCCI combustion mode as higher
proportions of HRF pushes the combustion peak closer to the CDC. Moon
et al. [256] conducted experiments using mineral diesel-ethanol blends.
They reported that lower ethanol blends with mineral diesel (< 30% v/v
of ethanol) exhibited stable combustion without significant variations in
fuel  spray  atomization  characteristics.  However,  higher  blends  of
alcohol with diesel pose several serious issues such as phase separation
(especially  for  methanol),  inferior  fuel  spray  atomization,  poor  com-
bustion, engine performance, and serious material compatibility issues
with the fuel injection system. Therefore, alcohol blending with mineral
diesel  has  not  been  implemented  commercially.  Methanol  utilization
was  then  explored  using  diesel-methanol  compound  combustion
(DMCC) [247,248]. Yao et al. [247] performed DMCC experiments and
reported a significant reduction in the NOx and soot emissions simul-
taneously. Haribabu et al. [249] investigated a similar combustion mode

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102818

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 17. (a) In-cylinder pressure and HRR variations w.r.t. CAD, (b) Number-size and mass-size correlations of particles at different rp  of Methanol, Ethanol, and
Butanol at constant engine speed (1500 rpm) and load (3 bar BMEP) (Reprinted from [154] with permission of SAE).

using direct injection of methyl ester and port injection of methanol via
carburetion. They also reported relatively lower NOx and smoke emis-
sions and improved fuel economy.

The  RCCI  combustion  mode  showed  the  tremendous  potential  of
using alternative fuels in the last few years. In RCCI combustion mode,
CNG [257–260], syngas [261], alcohols including methanol [122,250,
262,263],  ethanol  [264,265],  and  butanol  [177,266,267]  have  been
injected into the port as LRF. These LRFs helped in extending the load
range of engine operation due to their higher resistance to auto-ignition
(less  knocking),  higher  reactivity  gradient  (optimum  combustion
phasing), and charge-cooling effect (due to their higher latent heat of
vaporization). In most preliminary investigations of the RCCI combus-
tion  mode,  methanol  was  used  as  the  LRF  due  to  its  lower  reactivity
(lower cetane), making it suitable for achieving a reactivity stratification
with  mineral  diesel.  The  gasification  of  coal  can  be  done  to  produce
methanol; however, in the last few years, production of methanol from
black  liquor  gasification,  biomass  gasification,  and  the  reaction  of
hydrogen and CO2 (directly from the atmosphere or from the coal-fired
power plants, industrial flue gases, etc.) is attracting significant global
attention [268]. The presence of relatively higher oxygen than the other
alcohols also makes it more suitable, promoting soot oxidation, leading
to lower particulate emissions [238].

Excessive LRF leads to incomplete combustion, resulting in higher

HC and CO emissions, especially at low loads. Sayin et al. [239–241]
investigated the RCCI combustion mode using a mineral diesel-methanol
fuel pair and reported a significant reduction in NOx and PM than the
CDC  mode.  They  also  emphasized  PM  reduction  due  to  the  use  of
methanol. They reported that the absence of a C-C bond was the main
reason  for  lower  PM  emissions  from  mineral  diesel-methanol-fueled
RCCI combustion mode. A few studies reported that the lack of a C-C
bond also reduces the formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs), which act as soot precursors.

Like methanol, ethanol is also a potential candidate for LRF in the
RCCI  combustion  mode.  Hanson  et  al.  [269]  performed  preliminary
RCCI  combustion  mode  investigations  on  a  light-duty,  multi-cylinder
diesel engine using a blend of ethanol and gasoline (E20) as the LRF.
They  reported  that  the  lower  reactivity  of  ethanol  was  suitable  for
achieving a sufficient reactivity gradient for the RCCI combustion mode.
They found lower PRR in E20-mineral diesel-fueled RCCI combustion
mode  than  in  gasoline-mineral  diesel-fueled  RCCI  combustion  mode.
Apart from these findings, they also reported that E20 also helped in
increasing  the  peak  power  output  because  ethanol  is  less  prone  to
auto-ignition. Qian et al. [270] conducted RCCI combustion mode ex-
periments using n-heptane as the HRF and three different LRFs, namely
ethanol,  n-butanol,  and  n-amyl  alcohol.  They  reported  that  all  three
LRFs  showed  similar  combustion  characteristics  at  the  lower  rp;

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102819

A.K. Agarwal et al.

however, ethanol-n-heptane fueled RCCI combustion mode resulted in
relatively retarded combustion events at higher rp. This was also visible
in the emissions characteristics, where n-heptane-ethanol-fueled RCCI
combustion mode exhibited a relatively greater reduction in NOx and
soot emissions than the other two fuel pairs. Agarwal et al. [150] per-
formed RCCI combustion mode using n-butanol to explore its potential
as  the  LRF.  They  performed  RCCI  combustion  mode  experiments  at
different  rp  of  n-butanol  at  varying  engine  loads.  They  reported  that
n-butanol exhibited relatively superior combustion characteristics even
at higher rp; however, they did not observe any significant variation in
the performance parameters. They suggested that the relatively higher
CN of n-butanol than other alcohols, such as methanol and ethanol, was
the main reason for superior engine performance. To further explore the
effect of fuel properties on the RCCI combustion mode, Agarwal et al.
[154] performed a detailed experimental study on the RCCI combustion
mode using methanol, ethanol, and n-butanol as the LRF.

They performed experiments at constant engine load and the rp of the
LRF. They found quite a similarity between the RCCI combustion mode
fueled with methanol and ethanol as the LRF; however, butanol fueled
RCCI  combustion  mode  exhibited  closer  similarity  with  the  CI  com-
bustion  mode  (Fig.  17  a).  This  was  also  remarkably  reflected  in  the
emission  characteristics,  where  methanol  and  ethanol-fueled  RCCI
combustion modes showed greater potential for PM reduction than the
butanol (Fig. 17 b). They concluded that all three alcohols could be used
as the LRF in the RCCI combustion mode to reduce NOx and PM emis-
sions simultaneously.

The  use  of  biogas  in  IC  engines  is  not  a  new  area;  however,  the
performance  of  biogas-fueled  engines  using  conventional  combustion
modes  has  not  been  found  satisfactory.  Therefore,  biogas  has  always
been used in dual-fuel combustion mode engines to achieve acceptable
performance and emissions. Prajapati et al. [271] investigated the po-
tential of biogas utilization as the LRF in the RCCI combustion mode.
They  reported  that  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  engine  fueled  with
mineral diesel-biogas fuel pair exhibited lower NOx and CO2 emissions
than the CDC mode. In another study by Bora et al. [272], a biogas-rice
bran biodiesel fuel pair was used in the RCCI combustion mode, deliv-
ering superior engine performance due to superior reactivity stratifica-
tion  between  the  biogas  and  the  biodiesel.  In  a  comparative
investigation  by  Verma  et  al.  [273,274],  the  effectiveness  of  biogas,
CNG, and hydrogen as the LRF was assessed. In the exergy analysis, it
was  observed  that  mineral  diesel-hydrogen-fueled  RCCI  engines
exhibited  better engine performance than the ones using biogas. This
might be due to higher free radicals such as O, H, and OH, enhancing the
net reaction rate and a higher net HRR [275]. The use of hydrogen in
RCCI  combustion  mode  is  also  beneficial  due  to  its  higher  laminar
burning velocity, leading to a shorter combustion duration. Though, the
replacement  of  mineral  diesel  with  biodiesel  showed  slightly  inferior
engine  performance. In  a  similar  investigation by  Khatri  et  al.  [276],
hydrogen addition in biogas in dual-fuel mode improved the engine’s
efficiency. Ebrahimi et al. [277] reported that the addition of hydrogen
also  helped  in  the  dissociation  of  methane  present  in  biogas,  which
resulted in a relatively shorter combustion duration of the RCCI com-
bustion  engine  fueled  with  biogas-mineral  diesel  fuel  pair.  They  also
reported the fuel chemistry related to hydrogen addition in RCCI com-
bustion  mode.  They  observed  that  the  formation  of  OH  radicals  was
delayed due to an increasing fraction of hydrogen, leading to a relatively
longer ignition delay.

For this reason, in many studies, reformed biogas was also investi-
gated  [278–280].  Mahmoodi  et  al.  [281]  investigated  reformed
biogas-mineral  diesel-fueled  RCCI  combustion  mode  using  3D  model-
ling. They used higher rp of reformed biogas and observed significantly
reduced mean combustion temperature in the RCCI combustion mode
than  in  the  baseline  CI  combustion  mode.  This  might  be  due  to  the
relatively weaker effect of CO2  present in biogas on the LTC strategies
than in the CDC mode [282]. CO2 present in the biogas also affected the
combustion  characteristics  due  to  the  dominant  role  of  thermal,

Fig. 18. Scheme  of  the combustion  chamber  and field of  view of  the  optical
diagnostics (Reprinted from [286] with permission of Elsevier).

reactive, and transport properties of CO2 on the ignition characteristics.
Nieman et al. [257] used the KIVA3V CFD software and CHEMKIN, the
chemical kinetics analysis tools, to investigate the diesel-CNG dual-fuel
RCCI combustion mode. They observed superior performance and lower
exhaust  emissions  in  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  at  low  engine  loads
without EGR. However, EGR controlled the RCCI combustion mode at
higher engine loads. Aydin [243] also used CNG as LRF in RCCI com-
bustion mode and reported that CNG could reduce high gas temperature,
useful for reducing NOx. They reported that biodiesel/CNG fueled RCCI
combustion mode reduced NOx emissions in proportion to the amount of
CNG. Martin et al. [283] used a blend of propane and DME as LRF to
achieve  RCCI  combustion.  They  reported  that  this  fuel  combination
could  result  in  an  intermediate  combustion  mode,  namely  premixed
dual-fuel combustion (PDFC), which lies in between CI and RCCI com-
bustion  modes.  This  study  found  relatively  higher  NOx  from  PDFC
compared  to  RCCI  combustion  mode.  However,  relatively  lower  PRR
makes this combustion technique more suitable at higher engine loads.
Relatively higher BTE of PDFC was another important finding of their
study.

This section reports the findings of several studies performed on the
RCCI  combustion  mode  using  LRF  other  than  gasoline.  It  could  be
concluded that though alcohols are potentially superior LRF than fossil
fuels, their higher concentrations could hamper the combustion stability
and cause complications such as fuel blend separation and other engine
operational issues. Since alcohols have a lower CN, their ignition in RCCI
combustion  mode  presents  some  challenges.  Other  alternative  LRFs
extend  the  operational  range  of  RCCI  combustion  mode  if  they  have
higher CN, higher resistance to auto-ignition, higher reactivity gradient,
and charge cooling effect, preventing some of the better-known issues of
RCCI combustion mode, such as probable knocking. Using some of these
alternate fuels as the LRF reduced soot emissions, especially when the C-
C bonds are absent in the test fuel. Hydrogen was also tested as the LRF
and helped enhance the RCCI combustion mode engine performance, as
reported by some studies, due to higher net HRR caused by free radicals
such as O, H, and OH.

2.4. Fundamental Investigations of RCCI Combustion Mode

Literature shows that LTC strategies have been extensively assessed
in  various  all-metal  engines,  including  heavy-duty  engines.  Most
experimental studies in metal engines have focused on improving the
combustion,  performance,  and  emission  characteristics  of  LTC  strate-
gies.  However,  RCCI  strategy  requires  a  finer  understanding  that  can
only be explored using fundamental experimental investigations. RCCI
combustion  mode  is  a  kinetically-controlled  combustion,  significantly

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102820

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 19. Time-resolved single-shot true-colour images and flame boundary evolution of PPC and RCCI combustion modes firing cycles. [Top] PPC [Bottom] RCCI
(Reprinted from [286] with permission of Elsevier).

affected  by  the  in-cylinder  processes,  including  charge  stratification,
reactivity  gradients,  ignition,  and  flame  evolution,  which  need  to  be
explored in detail using advanced optical diagnostic techniques [135,
284,285].  This  section  deals  with  the  methodology  and  results  of
fundamental  optical  investigations  using  different  test  fuels,  control
techniques, engine loads, etc.

Liu et al. [286] performed a comparative investigation of PPC and
RCCI combustion modes using different optical diagnostics techniques
such  as  fuel-tracer  planar  laser-induced  fluorescence  (PLIF)  imaging,
high-speed natural flame luminosity (NFL) imaging, and Formaldehyde
and  -OH  PLIF  imaging.  The  researchers  used  a  quartz  window-fitted
piston engine for the optical studies (Fig. 18).

Their objective was to focus on the flame development process and
assess  the  distribution  of  intermediate  combustion  products  and  free
radicals. The authors used iso-octane as the LRF and n-heptane as the
HRF to achieve the RCCI combustion mode; however, PRF70 was used as
the test fuel in the PPC mode. They kept most of the operating conditions
identical  in  both  combustion  modes.  The  RCCI  combustion  mode
exhibited a shorter ignition delay than the PPC mode. The RCCI com-
bustion case has a higher minimum equivalence ratio (0.54) and fuel-
rich regions with higher reactivity where the fuel is more easily auto-
ignited  (thus  reducing  the  ignition  delay).  Optical  investigations  of
NFL at 70% rp (70% LRF) revealed that RCCI combustion mode does not
exhibit  flame  front  propagation  (Fig.  19).  The  locally  high  reactivity
regions  in  the  RCCI  combustion  form  flames  in  the  periphery  of  the
cylinder  during  the  first  crank-angle  degrees  (CAD).  However,  in  the
central region of the cylinder, the reactivity of the mixture is lower. After
3.1
CAD, the flames reach the central region. In the case of PPC, auto-
CAD in local fuel-rich zones, which later
ignition kernels appear at 13.9
show flame fronts. The difference between the two modes in terms of
flame propagation lies in the fact that the fuel reactivity stratification of
the  RCCI  combustion  mode  induces  more  auto-ignition  in  the  earlier
combustion stages, which translates into a faster combustion rate than
PPC mode, whose auto-ignition depends on the local equivalence ratio

◦

◦

(the difference between fuel-rich and fuel-lean-regions). The researchers
later  increased  the  rp  (only  5%  of  the  input  energy  coming  from  the
HRF),  finding  that  the  rate  of  combustion  of  RCCI  combustion  mode
decreased. RCCI combustion with higher rp gets closer to the combustion
in SI engines. The increase in rp also results in a flame front propagation
in RCCI combustion mode; however, the laminar flame speed was lower
than  the  PPC  mode.  The  authors  concluded  that  the  degree  of  fuel
stratification  played  a  crucial  role  in  auto-ignition  and  flame  front
propagation  in  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  and  that  different  fuel  in-
jection strategies can control the degree of stratification.

In RCCI combustion mode, different optical diagnostics techniques
are  limited  by  the  PRR  and  soot  emissions.  In  most  optical  in-
vestigations, experiments are limited to a certain part-load condition,
depending  on  the  strength  of  optical  components.  The  optical  di-
agnostics  of  RCCI  combustion  mode  under  higher  engine  loads  have
higher  practical  significance  since  it  provides  vital  information  about
the  limiting  criteria.  Kokjohn  et  al.  [135,287]  performed  optical  ex-
periments  only  up  to  4.2  bar  gross  IMEP  due  to  the  limited  optical
strength of the optical components of the engine using high-speed im-
aging  and PLIF  techniques to investigate the  RCCI combustion mode.
They concluded that local fuel reactivity controlled the ignition sites.
They found that ignition sites were more dominant in high reactivity
zones; therefore, they appeared downstream of the injected fuel jets. In
such  conditions,  HRR  can  be  controlled  by  fuel  stratification.  They
further  extended  this  work  and  included  chemical  kinetics  modelling
[135]  to  explore  the  role  of  fuel  reactivity  stratification,  equivalence
ratio,  and  temperature  on  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  control.  They
concluded  that  the  fuel  reactivity  was  the  main  parameter,  which
controlled the ignition delay, and fuel concentration and temperature
stratification exhibited a relatively weaker effect on the combustion. The
combustion images captured by the high-speed camera also showed that
the RCCI combustion mode was significantly affected by the degree of
fuel stratification. Upon comparing high-speed imaging, they reported
that  PLIF  imaging  was  more  informative  and  provided  valuable

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102821

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 20. PLIF images acquired at -5
of Elsevier).

◦

CA aTDC with (a) PI and (b) DI. The results are averaged from 10 single-shot PLIF images (Reprinted from [288] with permission

Fig. 21. True-color natural luminosity (NL) image sequences for the cases of RCCI-90 (top), RCCI-25 (middle) and RCCI-10 (bottom), respectively (Reprinted from
[288] with permission of Elsevier).

information  about  forming  formaldehyde  and  OH  radicals  in  the
two-phase  (LTHR  and  HTHR)  ignition  of  RCCI  combustion  mode.
However,  the  high-speed  imaging  provided  only  a  two-dimensional
natural  flame  luminosity  in  a  three-dimensional  reaction  zone.  This
technique also had another limitation. It could not distinguish between
the LTHR and HTHR phases, an important aspect of RCCI combustion
mode. However, this issue of high-speed imaging was reported only in a
few studies related to RCCI combustion mode at different degrees of fuel
stratification.

Tang et al. [288] also explored the effects of fuel stratification on the
RCCI  combustion  mode  using  several  optical  diagnostics  techniques
such  as  PLIF  under  non-reactive  conditions,  Time-resolved  natural
combustion luminosity imaging, and single-shot OH PLIF imaging in a
light-duty  optical  engine.  PLIF  technique  was  used  to  quantify  the
fuel-air  equivalence  ratio  and  PRF  number.  Experiments  were  per-
formed at different injection timing (Fig. 20).

The authors reported that higher fuel concentration and reactivity
regions were affected by the SoI timing, which moved downstream to
the  edge  of  the  combustion  chamber  with  retarded  SoI  timing  of  n-
◦
heptane from -90
CA aTDC (RCCI-10
CA aTDC (RCCI-90 case) to -10

◦

case). They reported that combustion took place in two stages in the case
of  RCCI-10.  An  auto-ignition  was  observed  around  the  combustion
chamber in the first stage due to high reactivity regions. In the second
stage, auto-ignition occurred in the low reactivity regions in the central
part of the combustion chamber. This two-stage heat release process was
the main reason for relatively lower PRR in the RCCI combustion mode.
Formaldehyde  and  OH  PLIF  images  exhibited  a  more  stratified  fuel
distribution  in  retarded  SoI  timing  of  n-heptane.  Another  important
observation of their investigation was a relatively slower formaldehyde
consumption rate and formation of OH radicals at retarded SoI timings
of n-heptane.

In Fig. 21, a time-resolved, single-shot NL image sequence for each
case  from  a  typical  engine  cycle.  The  crank  angle  position  for  50%
(CA50) and 90% (CA90) cumulative heat-release (CHR) were marked on
the lower right side of each corresponding image. The boundary of the
combustion chamber is shown with a white circle at the start of each
image sequence. The field of view (FoV) used in the OH and formalde-
hyde PLIF imaging was shown with a white dashed line at a 6.6
crank
angle for the RCCI-10 case.

◦

Fig. 22 shows that the combustion duration (from CA10  to CA90) in

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102822

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 22. Fuel-air equivalence ratio (left column) and PRF number (right column) distribution under different n-heptane direct injection timings (Reprinted from
[288] with permission of Elsevier).

RCCI-10 was longer than RCCI-25 case. A higher degree of fuel strati-
fication was the main reason for a relatively longer combustion duration
in  RCCI-10,  promoting  higher  soot  production  and  reduced  PRR.  OH
PLIF images exhibited that the HTHR phase of RCCI combustion mode
could be extended up to the central part of the combustion chamber.
However, Musculus et al. [289] used a low-load LTC conceptual model
and suggested that no HTHR occurs in the central part of the combustion
chamber, where the HC forms mainly.

◦

◦
, and 7

Tang et al. [288] investigated the OH PLIF signal using different SoI
◦
timings (Fig. 23). They reported that OH radicals begin to emerge at 1
,
1
CA for RCCI-90, RCCI-25, and RCCI-10, respectively, in the
regions where formaldehyde vanishes. In RCCI-90, the most field of view
◦
was  occupied  by  the  OH  radicals  after  3
CA,  showing  a  uniform  OH
radical distribution. After that, the OH PLIF signal remained uniform for
the  next  several  crank  angle  degrees;  however,  the  signal  intensity
◦
became weak after 30
CA. A comparison of OH PLIF signals of different

SoI  cases  showed  relatively  slower  development  in  the  RCCI-10  case
◦
CA,  OH  radicals  first  occupied  the
than  in  the  other  two  cases.  At  8
regions around the combustion chamber, where n-heptane resides, fuel
reactivity was high, and there were no signs of OH radicals in the regions
of  lower  reactivity,  as  shown  by  white  dashed  lines  marked  by  ‘b’
(Fig. 23). However, in the following crank angles (9
, and 11
), a
◦
weak OH PLIF signal appeared gradually in this region. By 11
CA, OH
PLIF signal of intense non-uniformity occupied the most field of view.
Kokjohn et al. [135] explored the role of equivalence ratio, temperature,
and  fuel  reactivity  stratification  on  the  HRR  using  a  combination  of
optical  diagnostics  and  chemical  kinetics  modelling.  They  used
iso-octane as the LRF, injected during the intake stroke to provide suf-
ficient time for fuel-air premixing, and then injected n-heptane as the
HRF  at  the  end  of  the  compression  stroke.  Results  showed  that  the
ignition first occurred in the squish region and then expanded towards
the  centre  of  the  combustion  chamber.  They  also  used  PLIF  to  get

◦
, 10

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102823

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 23. HTHR process shown by single-shot false-colour images of OH-LIF for different direct injection timings (Top row: RCCI-90, Middle row: RCCI-25, Bottom
row: RCCI-10). The white dashed line marked by ‘‘b” shows low-reactivity regions not occupied by OH radicals (Reprinted from [288] with permission of Elsevier).

quantitative  information  about  the  fuel  concentration  distributions
before the ignition. PLIF showed that the combustion events followed
the direction of the reactivity gradient, which was an important char-
acteristic of the RCCI combustion mode (Fig. 24).

The researchers employed a modelling technique to explore the ef-
fects of temperature, equivalence ratio, and PRF number stratification
on the RCCI combustion mode. They reported that reactivity stratifica-
tion was the prime factor that controls the combustion chamber’s igni-
tion location and growth rate. Compared to reactivity stratification, a
relatively  weaker  effect  of  equivalence  ratio  and  temperature  on  the
RCCI  combustion  mode  was  another  important  finding  of  this
investigation.

In  other  studies,  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  was  compared  to  a
diesel-pilot  injected  natural  gas-fueled engine. A diesel  injection  near
the TDC is a strong ignition source for an overall lean natural gas-air
mixture.  In  diesel-pilot  initiated  combustion,  the  combustion  is  pre-
sumed to occur via deflagration [290]. Still, in RCCI combustion mode,
the role of flame propagation is unclear as only one study has experi-
mentally explored this question. Kokjohn [287] used laser ignition to
initiate flame propagation. It was found that flame propagation could
exist  in  the  RCCI  combustion  conditions,  as  high-speed  chem-
iluminescence  showed  luminous  regions  propagated  away  from  the
ignition spot. Flames did not propagate in every cycle, but the proba-
bility of successful flame kernels increased with increasing equivalence
ratio, suggesting that higher equivalence ratio regions were more likely
to support the flame propagation. The flame growth rate was similar to
the autoignition reaction fronts, indicating that flames could propagate
from the auto-ignition sites. Still, the two combustion fronts were not
discernable  with  current  optical  measurements.  KIVA  3D  CFD  tools
allowed newer insight into the combustion process, combustion of in-
termediate  species,  and  sources  of  inefficiency  and  losses.  RCCI  com-
bustion mode temperatures were much lower, and the peak temperature
locations  were  farther  away  from  the  piston  and  cylinder  walls.  This
reduced  the  heat  losses  to  the  cooling  system,  which  was  one  of  the
reasons  for  the  increased  thermal  efficiency  of  the  RCCI  combustion
mode [144].

Tang et al. [185] performed RCCI combustion mode investigations to
extract  detailed  information  about  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  and
chemical  interactions  between  the  LRF  and  HRF  in  different  engine
operating conditions. They performed experiments in an optical engine
using  premixed  iso-octane,  assisted  by  the  two-stage  reactions  of
n-heptane.  They  used  high-speed  imaging  to  visualize  the  NFL  and

Cantera-based  data  processing  to  understand  detailed  combustion  ki-
netics. They observed a shifting combustion behaviour from two-stage
ignition  to  three-stage  ignition  dominated  by  the  retarding  of  the
iso-octane  injection  timing  due  to  reduction  of  local  air-fuel  mixture
reactivity and weakening of chemical interaction between the HRF and
LRF, which lowers the HRR. These three stages of heat release corre-
spond  to  LTHR,  HCHR  and  PCHR.  The  Cantera  analysis  of  the  PCHR
showed that varying the HRF injection timings towards later injections
resulted  in  different  combustion  reactions  with  more  soot  precursor
formation potential (which is also observed in the higher luminosity of
the  NFL  results)  especially  in  the  primary  reacting  regions.  This  is
correlated  with  the  higher  stratification  of  both  the  fuel  and  flames
associated with earlier injections. Results in Fig. 25 exhibited that the
◦
advanced injection timings (SoI = (cid:0) 27
aTDC) resulted in
an earlier ignition kernel, primarily near the combustion chamber bowl.
◦
In  SoI  = (cid:0) 27
aTDC,  dominant  premixed  combustion  was  observed,
◦
which was seen as blue ignition kernels appearing at 3
CA. A significant
heat was released rapidly at this stage, due to which the whole com-
bustion  chamber  was  occupied  with  the  blue  flames  at  3.7
CA.  After
this, a dominant effect of fuel stratification was observed in the com-
◦
bustion images; however, after ~9
CA, the luminosity was dominantly
controlled by the soot oxidation.

◦
aTDC and (cid:0) 7

◦

A  combined  analysis  of  n-heptane  and  iso-octane  reaction  mecha-
nisms exhibited several reactive species formations from the premixed
n-heptane promoted iso-octane, which further accelerated combustion.
◦
aTDC)  was  similar,
The  consumption  of  n-heptane  (injected  at  -360
independent  of  the  SoI  of  iso-octane.  During  the  consumption  of  n-
heptane, CH2O and CO accumulated while OH remained at a low level
until a rapid consumption of iso-octane led to prompt heat release.

Tang  et  al.  [185]  investigated  the  predicted  distributions  of  tem-
perature and recalculated chemical HRR for three SoI cases at 10 mm
below the cylinder head (Fig. 26). They observed a much wider main
heat release region in the space, which approached the central part of
the  combustion  chamber  when  advancing  the  SoI  timings  for  the
iso-octane. The stratified heat release was observed at all SoI timings. At
retarded SoI timings, the primary reacting locations moved towards the
upstream spray, which is the fuel-rich region. The PCHR is dominated by
the combustion of the iso-octane, as the heat release contribution from
the  n-heptane  is  low.  In  the  premixed  combustion  of  n-heptane,  heat
release was predominantly controlled by the reaction: HCO + O2 = CO
+ HO2; however, this reaction shifted to hydrogen-oxygen reaction (H +
O2 (+M) = HO2 (+M)) in the presence of increased temperatures. Both

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102824

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 24. Sequence of ensemble-averaged PRF
maps at several crank angle positions during a
common-rail injection event (Reprinted from
[135] with permission of Elsevier). Each im-
age’s  upper  left-hand  corner  shows  the  time
in  crank  angle  degrees  after  TDC.  The  PRF
maps  were  generated  from  the  vapour-fuel
concentration  measurements  with  the  cam-
the
downward
era
cylinder-head  window.  The  relative  error  in
the PRF number images is approximately 7%
of the measured value with a filter size of 0.25
mm  and  3.4% of  the  measured  value  with  a
filter size of 1 mm.

through

viewing

reactions  belong  to  the  intermediate-temperature  reactions,  and  the
equivalence  ratio  of  the  premixed  mixture  was  low.  Thus,  the  HRR
remained low in these stages. The heat release was dominated by the
HO2 + OH = H2O + O2 reaction during the primary combustion stage.
The formation of OH is propitiated by the H + O2  (+M) = HO2  (+M)
reaction  surrounding  the  primary  reacting  kernels  and  furthers  the
combustion process.

Fig. 27 shows the mass fractions of NC7H16, IC8H18, CH2O, CO, and
OH at the TDC at different SoI timings for iso-octane. In advanced SoI
◦
timings (SoI = (cid:0) 27
aTDC), the availability of more time for premixing
resulted in relatively lower in-cylinder temperature and HRR, especially
in  the  HCHR  regions.  This  also  led  to  greater  cooling  of  the  spray,
resulting in higher non-reacting n-heptane and iso-octane. Results also
showed that more CH2O and CO were produced in advanced SoI timings
than in the SoI = 3
aTDC case. However, the formation regions for these
◦
species were different in all cases. For SoI = (cid:0) 27
aTDC case, CH2O and
◦
CO mainly formed in the large fuel regions; however, in SoI = (cid:0) 7
aTDC,
CH2O  and  CO  mainly  formed  around  the  spray  periphery.  They  also
reported the formation mechanism of these species and suggested that

◦

reactions C7H15  + O2  →C7H15O2  and AC8H17  + O2  => AC8H17O2  are
important in the presence of higher n-heptane and iso-octane. This was
mainly due to their close relationship with the low-temperature reaction
pathways.  However,  heat  release  at  a  higher  temperature  was  domi-
nated by the reaction HCO + O2 = CO + HO2, which laid the foundation
for intense HTHR. The higher reactivity is located in the CH2O-rich re-
gions, which the authors established a correlation to the whole mixture
reactivity. In the earlier SOI cases, the formation of CH2O is dominated
by C2H4 + OH = CH2O + CH3 in the high-temperature region (with the
◦
delayed  SoI  scenario).  The  precursors  are  CH2OH  for  the  SoI  = -27
◦
aTCD and CH3O for the SoI = -7
aTCD case. In all cases, it should be
highlighted that the reaction of iso-octane enhanced the formation of
reacting species that accelerated combustion.

In summary, this section focused on the fundamental investigations
of  RCCI  combustion  mode  using  optical  diagnostics  and  simulations
approach, explaining the combustion processes in totality, including the
kinematic  processes,  control  techniques,  and  flame  evolution,  among
other  descriptive  conditions  during  combustion.  Several  studies  that
implemented  optical  diagnostics  techniques  have  been  included,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102825

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 25. Experimentally measured natural flame luminosity images at various crank angle positions (Reprinted from [185] with permission of Elsevier).

indicating that the flame propagation under RCCI combustion mode was
highly sensitive to fuel stratification. Higher rp  promoted higher flame
propagation. It also emerged from the review that local fuel reactivity
controls ignition sites, with high reactivity zones being more likely to be
ignited first, e.g., downstream of injected HRF jets. Optical techniques
such as PLIF have some limitations regarding dimensionality and defi-
nition of the combustion phases. Some researchers provided information
about the spatial distribution of formaldehyde and OH radicals during
RCCI combustion mode. Also, using optical diagnostics, the effects of the
SoI on different stages of the RCCI combustion mode were investigated,
especially when the SoI was delayed more. In this case, the first stage
autoignition  occurred  at  the  perimeter  region  of  the  cylinder  (squish
region),  representing  higher  reactivity  gradients.  The  second  auto-
ignition  stage  occurred  in  the  combustion  chamber’s  central  region,
representing lower reactivity gradients. Delayed SoI exhibited a slower
rate of formaldehyde consumption and OH radical formation. A com-
bination  of  optical  and  modelling  techniques  was  also  undertaken  in
some studies, which provided elaborate new information on the chem-
ical kinetics of the RCCI combustion mode.

2.5. Effect of Control Parameters on RCCI Combustion Mode

Several studies investigated various parameters to control the RCCI
combustion mode, among which the LRF quantity was an important one.
A few studies indicated that RCCI combustion mode with optimum LRF
quantity  complied  with  steady-state  NOx  and  soot  emission  limits
imposed by the EURO VI emission regulations without using the after-
treatment  systems  [151,156,291].  The  LRF  quantity  must  be  low  at
low loads to increase the combustion stability and reduce the HC and CO
emissions.  At  medium  engine  loads,  a  relatively  higher  LRF  quantity
could  be  used  (which  may  reach  the  maximum  levels);  however,  a
moderated  LRF  quantity  should  be  used  to  control  the  maximum
in-cylinder pressure and the PRR [292]. Wang et al. [293] investigated
the RCCI combustion mode in different rp of methanol and reported that
high rp resulted in unstable combustion, especially at low engine loads.
This led to misfire and significant cyclic variations, resulting in higher
HC  emissions  and  reduced  fuel  economy.  Several  interventions,
including intake air heating, methanol heating, etc., were explored to
avoid such events. Pan et al. [294] performed RCCI combustion mode
investigations to explore the potential of intake air temperature varia-
tions as a control parameter. They reported that increasing intake air

temperature resulted in relatively superior combustion stability. RCCI
combustion mode exhibited lower HC, CO, and formaldehyde emissions
at  higher  intake  air  temperature,  especially  while  using  higher  pro-
portions of fumigated methanol. The overall objective of implementing
such  techniques  was  to  enhance  the  methanol  vaporization,  which
directly affected the degree of completion of combustion. It has already
been demonstrated that mineral diesel fuel injection parameters play an
important  role  in  modern  common  rail  direct  injection  (CRDI)  diesel
engines. In a diesel engine, fuel injection parameters directly affect the
spray  characteristics.  Fuel-droplet  size  distribution  in  the  combustion
chamber and fuel-air mixture homogeneity are critical for a diesel en-
gine’s good performance and emission characteristics. In diesel engines,
pilot injection results in relatively lower peak HRR, leading to smoother
combustion  [295].  The  pilot  injection  also  results  in  superior  engine
performance and lower HC emissions [295]. Therefore, the effect of fuel
injection parameters of the HRF, namely FIP, the SoI timing, and the
number of injections, were also assessed to optimize the RCCI combus-
tion mode for the varying engine load. Liu et al. [296] conducted the
DMDF  combustion  investigations  using  mineral  diesel  and  methanol.
They explored the effect of FIP of diesel on engine combustion, perfor-
mance, and emission characteristics. They reported that increasing FIP
of  mineral  diesel  resulted  in  relatively  superior  engine  performance
characteristics  due  to  optimized  combustion  phasing  (near  TDC)  and
shorter  combustion  duration.  Increasing  FIP  of  mineral  diesel  led  to
relatively lower HC, CO, and smoke emissions; however, NOx emissions
increased slightly. Higher CO2 emissions at higher FIP of mineral diesel
were observed due to improved DMDF combustion. The other important
finding of this study was a relatively more dominant response of varying
FIP in the DMDF combustion mode than in the CDC mode.

Singh et al. [152] explored the FIP variations of mineral diesel (as
HRF) on the RCCI combustion mode at different rp of methanol (as LRF).
They reported that increasing FIP led to higher knocking in baseline CI
combustion mode; however, RCCI combustion mode exhibited superior
engine  performance,  especially  at  higher  FIP  and  higher  rp.  Another
important observation was a relatively weaker effect of FIP variations on
the HC and CO emissions from the RCCI combustion mode. However, the
PM emissions correlated strongly with the FIP. Due to greater penetra-
tion  of  the  HRF  at  higher  FIPs,  increasing  FIP  resulted  in  lower  PM
emissions from the RCCI combustion mode. They also analyzed experi-
mental results to identify a suitable FIP for the RCCI combustion mode
(Fig. 28).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102826

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 26. Comparison of the predicted distributions of (a) temperature and (b) exothermic HRR at various crank angles. The predicted results are on a plane 10 mm
below the cylinder head (Reprinted from [185] with permission of Elsevier).

This  optimization  exercise  exhibited  that  the  engine  performance
and particulate characteristics of RCCI combustion mode were signifi-
cantly affected by the FIP of the HRF. Contour maps of TPN in Fig. 28 (a)
showed  a  weak  effect  of  FIP  variations  on  the  TPN  emitted  by  both
baseline  CI  and  RCCI  combustion  mode  engines;  however,  the  rp
exhibited  a  relatively  stronger  correlation  with  the  TPN,  which
decreased with increasing rp of methanol. Combined analysis of TPN and
TPM contours exhibited that a combination of 750 bar FIP at 0.50 < rp<
0.75 of the LRF was the optimum range for the lowest TPN and TPM
emitted  by  the  RCCI  combustion  mode.  Fig.  28(b)  showed  a  strong
correlation  of  NOx  emissions  with  the  rp  of  methanol;  however,
increasing FIP did not significantly reduce NOx emissions. Walker et al.
[297]  also  explored  the  effect  of  FIP  of  mineral  diesel  on  RCCI  com-
bustion mode. They reported that increasing the FIP of mineral diesel led
to superior control over the combustion phasing. Li et al. [250] explored
the effect of the SoI timings of mineral diesel on the RCCI combustion
mode. They reported that advancing the SoI timings of mineral diesel
resulted in relatively more stable combustion. At higher rp of methanol,
advancing the SoI timings of mineral diesel led to superior fuel economy.
Mohammadian  et  al.  [176]  explored  a  single  fuel  RCCI  combustion
mode strategy fueled with isobutanol + 20% DTPB. They performed a
detailed investigation to explore the effect of different DI parameters,
namely SoI timing, FIP, and spray cone angle of the HRF and the rp of the

◦

LRF. They reported that SoI timing was an essential parameter in single
fuel  RCCI  combustion  mode,  which  exhibited  that  advancing  the  SoI
◦
bTDC) resulted in superior
bTDC to 88
timing of the HRF (from 58
engine performance and reduced emissions than the baseline case (SoI
◦
timing= 58
bTDC).  The  pilot  injection  was  the  other  important
parameter for controlling the RCCI combustion mode. Results showed
that  pilot  injection  and  main  injection  resulted  in  relatively  higher
in-cylinder  temperature  and  pressure  than  a  single  injection,  which
promoted the combustion at lower engine loads and higher rp of the LRF.
Suh  et  al.  [298]  reported  that  pilot  injection  provided  favourable
conditions for the main injection, leading to superior ignition. Due to
these  advantages  of  pilot  injection,  several  researchers  explored  the
optimum pilot fuel quantity with respect to main injection fuel quantity
because too much pilot injection quantity results in lower engine effi-
ciency.  Wei  et  al.  [218]  reported  that  increasing  pilot  fuel  injection
quantity resulted in relatively higher peak in-cylinder temperature. The
use of pilot injection also changes the HRR pattern in the RCCI com-
bustion  mode,  which  becomes  bimodal  for  higher  pilot  fuel  injection
quantity. The HRR characteristics also depend on the rp  of methanol.
Increasing the rp of methanol changes the HRR pattern from bimodal to
uni-modal for a constant pilot fuel injection quantity. Wei et al. [218]
suggested  that  the  charge  cooling  effect  of  methanol  (due  to  higher
latent heat of vaporization) was the main reason for this trend, leading

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102827

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 27. Comparison of predicted distributions of mass fractions of NC7H16, IC8H18, CH2O, CO, and OH at TDC at different SoI timings (Reprinted from [185] with
permission of Elsevier).

to dominant premixed phase combustion, resulting in a single peak in
the HRR curve. SoI timing of pilot injection was also explored by many
researchers, who reported that advancing pilot injection timing resulted
in higher peak in-cylinder temperature. Wei et al. [218] concluded that a
relatively larger pilot fuel injection quantity at advanced pilot injection
timing was suitable for achieving higher fuel efficiency from the RCCI
combustion  mode at a  higher  rp  of methanol (M50).  Their  study also
reported that most emissions, including CO, HC, and unregulated spe-
cies,  decreased  with  increasing  pilot  fuel  injection  quantity  and
advancing pilot injection timings. Jia and Denbratt [172] explored the
effect  of  different  methanol  injection  strategies  in  RCCI  combustion
mode. They compared the performance and emission characteristics of
the  RCCI  combustion  mode  achieved  by  port-injected  and
direct-injected methanol. They reported that port injection of methanol
resulted in lower CO and HC emissions along with higher BTE. They also
varied  different  control  parameters  to  check  the  suitability  of  direct
methanol  injection  and  reported  that  port  injection  of  methanol  was
superior in most conditions. Zhao et al. [186] also explored the potential
of direct injection of LRF in RCCI combustion mode by using a combi-
nation of butanol and biodiesel. They performed the experiments using
different biodiesel injection timings, butanol energy ratios and butanol
injection pressures. They reported that direct injection of both LRF and
HRF  provided  better  control  on  combustion  due  to  two-stage  heat
release, including premixed combustion of butanol and biodiesel in the
first phase and diffusion combustion of remaining biodiesel in the sec-
ond phase. These two phases can be adjusted by controlling biodiesel
and butanol injection parameters, along with the rp of butanol.

Several studies evaluated boosting and EGR to achieve RCCI com-
bustion  mode  at  higher  engine  loads.  Wang  et  al.  [299]  investigated
biodiesel-gasoline-fueled RCCI combustion mode using boosting, EGR,
and late intake valve closing (LIVC) control and reported a significant
improvement  in  the  upper  load  limit  of  the  RCCI  combustion  mode.
However,  biodiesel-gasoline-fueled  RCCI  combustion  mode  exhibited
inferior  engine  performance  at  higher  load  operation  than  mineral

diesel-gasoline-fueled  RCCI  combustion  mode.  The  charge  dilution
using air and EGR was also explored to improve RCCI combustion mode
performance (lower torque output). Although EGR dilution is preferred
for achieving RCCI combustion mode due to its simplicity, air dilution
exhibited higher thermal efficiency. This was mainly due to a relatively
higher specific heat ratio with air dilution than the EGR dilution [232].
Wang  et  al.  [232]  performed  RCCI  combustion  mode  investigations
using  experiments  and  theoretical  thermodynamic  modelling  to  eval-
uate the effects of air and EGR dilutions at high loads on the ITEg.

The authors reported that ITEg increased with decreasing EGR at a
fixed intake air pressure of 240 kPa. The relatively stronger effect of EGR
than the intake air pressure on ITEg was another important observation
of this study, reflecting a more promising contribution of air dilution on
ITEg  improvement (Fig.  29).  To  better compare  air  and EGR dilution
effects on ITEg, Wang et al. [232] used ‘fuel-to-charge base equivalence
ratio (Φ′
),’ which decreased with increasing EGR. Therefore, for main-
taining  a  constant  Φ’,  Φ  should  be  increased  with  increasing  EGR.
Fig. 29 showed that the ITEg contours were closely related to air and
EGR dilution at similar engine loads and combustion phasing. Results
showed that ITEg increased with decreasing EGR; however, at a constant
mass  of  air,  ITEg  decreased  with  increasing  EGR  dilution.  They
concluded  that  the  thermal  efficiency  increased  with  increasing  air
dilution;  however,  thermal  efficiency  was  hampered  by  the  EGR
dilution.

Olmeda et al. [142] also investigated the effects of mineral diesel’s
rp, EGR, and SoI timing sweep. They reported that both EGR and rp  of
gasoline affected the combustion efficiency significantly. Increasing the
EGR beyond 20% at higher rp  of gasoline (more than 70%) resulted in
inferior combustion, leading to higher HC and CO emissions. Although
varying SoI timing of mineral diesel provided insights into its effects on
the heat losses, however, for SoI timing variations from 30 to 60
bTDC,
the heat losses did not show significant variations.

◦

Desantes et al. [300] focused on the thermal efficiency of the RCCI
combustion  mode at  lower engine  loads.  They  performed  simulations

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102828

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 29. Experimentally measured ITEg plot as a function of EGR and intake
pressure (Reprinted from [232] with permission of Elsevier).

the  combined  effect  of  EGR  and  ICT  variations  could  be  an  effective
solution to achieving a stable RCCI combustion mode along with lower
HC and CO emissions (Fig. 30).

This section presented an overview of recent literature on the effect
of control parameters on RCCI combustion mode. By the definition of
RCCI, the main control parameter explored is the reactivity that defines
this  combustion  mode;  hence  the  quantities  of  LRF  and  HRF  were
extensively investigated. Some studies indicated that by optimizing the
proportions of LRF to HRF, the RCCI combustion mode engine should
easily comply with steady-state EURO VI regulations for NOx and soot. It
was revealed that the optimum rp  was dependent on the engine load,
being the highest possible at medium loads since at low loads, higher
proportions of LRF may lead to higher CO and HC emissions or unstable
combustion.  In  contrast,  at  high  loads,  it  could  lead  to  excessive
maximum pressure and PRR. Some other combustion control strategies
were explored to enhance the combustion control and prevent relying
exclusively on the reactivity gradients of the fuels. One such strategy
was to increase the intake air’s temperature, which resulted in higher
combustion stability depending on the proportion of the LRF. Another
commonly explored strategy was to optimize the fuel injection timing,
the number of injections, and the FIP of the HRF. It was concluded that
for  the  RCCI  combustion  mode,  higher  FIP  could  be  beneficial  for
improving  the  combustion  stability  and  reducing  the  PM  emissions,
contrary to the CDC mode. However, FIP didn’t greatly influence CO and
HC  emissions. Advancing  the  SoI of  the HRF also  improved  the  com-
bustion stability of the RCCI combustion mode. Pilot injection controlled
the RCCI combustion mode, especially at lower loads, increasing the in-
cylinder temperature and pressure, allowing higher rp. Air management
strategies studied by researchers to control the combustion and emis-
sions  in  RCCI  combustion  mode  were  EGR  and  boosting.  Albeit  ITEg
reportedly increased with reducing EGR rate. EGR helped to maintain a
more stable RCCI combustion mode, though.

3. Challenges and Limits of RCCI Combustion Mode

HCCI and PCCI combustion modes have several drawbacks. The main
difficulties  lie  in  the  combustion  control,  high  load  operating  range
extension, and high CO and HC emissions at low load. Diesel (or HRFs)
facilitates the auto-ignition and combustion under the PCCI combustion
mode  at  low  loads;  however,  combustion  phasing  and  excessive  PRR
pose a challenge at high loads. The RCCI combustion mode adopts in-
cylinder fuel mixing using a PFI to induct the LRF and DI to induct the
HRF. An ideal fuel reactivity stratification can be obtained by varying
the LRF/HRF proportions over a wide range of engine loads and speeds
[301]. This concept was preceded by Inagaki et al. [104], who worked
on  PCI  combustion.  Gradual  combustion  progress  was  achieved  by

Fig.  28. (a)  TPM  and  TPN  emissions,  and  (b)  TPM  and  NOx  emissions  from
RCCI combustion mode at different rp of methanol and FIPs of mineral diesel w.
r.t.  baseline  CI  combustion  mode  (Reprinted  from  [152]  with  permission
of ASME).

and  experimental  investigations  to  explore  the  effect  of  oxygen  con-
centration on the RCCI combustion mode. They reported an improve-
ment of ~1.5% in combustion efficiency using the combined effect of
oxygen concentration and in-cylinder fuel blending (ICFB). Bora et al.
[272] performed the RCCI combustion mode investigations to assess the
effect of CR on the RCCI combustion mode and reported relatively su-
perior  engine  combustion  and  performance;  however,  NOx  and  CO2
emissions  increased  with  increasing  CR.  This  increase  was  due  to
improved combustion mainly, leading to higher peak in-cylinder tem-
perature. Singh et al.  [148] also explored the EGR and intake charge
temperature (ICT) as control parameters to effectively control the RCCI
combustion mode.

The authors performed experiments at different rp and reported that
increasing EGR resulted in relatively more stable combustion (Fig. 30 a);
however,  at  higher  rp  of  methanol,  combustion  degraded  due  to  the
excessive cooling effect of the EGR. In contrast to EGR, the effects of ICT
were significant at higher rp to reduce the in-cylinder cooling and charge
cooling effects of EGR and methanol, respectively. They concluded that

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102829

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 30. Qualitative correlation between the combustion, performance, emissions, and particulate characteristics of RCCI combustion mode (at rp = 0.50) at varying
(a) EGR rates and (b) ICT (Reprinted from [148] with permission of SAE).

precise  in-cylinder  stratification,  using  a  PFI  system  to  supply  the
iso-octane and a DI system for diesel supply, and adjusting the mixture
reactivity  to  meet  the  load  requirements.  This  study  effectively
demonstrated  that  the  operational  map  for  the  LTC  concepts  derived
from the HCCI combustion concept could be extended for maintaining
the soot and NOx at low levels and keeping the PRR under control. The
PCI combustion concept evolved into the RCCI combustion concept after
the advancements made by Kokjohn et al. [106,123,144], who coined
this term and verified the results by Inagaki. Their work indicated the
domination of the combustion sequence by successive ignition of zones
having different mixture reactivities, from the most reactive to the least
reactive  ones.  It  was  established  that  controlling  the  fuel  blend  for
spatial stratification of the fuel reactivity could control the combustion
duration. Several researchers stressed that the RCCI combustion mode
could  overcome  many  limitations  of  the  HCCI  and  PCCI  combustion
mode [130,302]. RCCI combustion mode, however, was not immune to
drawbacks.  It  has  been  extensively  studied,  and  several  reviews have
been done on this topic [25,303], which cover some of the drawbacks
and  potential  of  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  concept.  However,  a
comprehensive  review  on  overcoming  the  challenges  and  real-world
applicability  is  unavailable  in  the  open  literature.  The  next  section
summarizes studies related to the challenges which must be addressed
for the commercial use of the RCCI combustion mode concept, proposed
solutions to various challenges, a few examples of real-world applica-
tions, and the prospects of this new concept.

3.1. Challenges in Implementing RCCI Combustion Concept in Real
Engines

There  is  general  agreement  in  the  scientific  community  about  the
main issues faced in the commercialization of RCCI combustion mode.
These include higher CO and unburned HC emissions at low loads and
excessive PRR at high loads. Other identified problems include slower
flame  propagation,  knocking,  lower  thermal  efficiency  at  low  loads,
lower  exhaust  gas  temperature  (EGT),  which  reduce  the  efficiency  of
after-treatment systems, and increased complexity for the fuel injection
system  and  controls.  Other  issues  include  higher  specific  fuel  con-
sumption,  which  is  closely  related  to  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  en-
gine’s efficiency. However, the main issue lies in the operating range
since both high and low loads cause undesired effects. Often, the stra-
tegies to extend the range in one direction negatively impact the other

load extremes. Solutions proposed for the range issue are from hybrid
combustion concepts that operate under one combustion mode or others
depending  on  the  load  demands,  such  as  the  dual-mode  dual-fuel
(DMDF)  concept  given  by  Benajes  et  al.  [304],  to  the  utilization  of
alternative fuels with attractive properties that could potentially offset
the negative effects at low and high loads [303], and the implementation
of the so-called single fuel RCCI combustion mode, where through the
addition of cetane improvers or reforming of the fuel on board, a fuel
derivate with different properties can be obtained. The problems asso-
ciated  with  RCCI  combustion  mode  are  identified,  and  solutions  are
discussed to develop this concept closer to reality.

3.2. Engine Speed-Load Limits in RCCI Combustion Mode

RCCI combustion mode is an LTC that uses at least two fuels with
different  reactivities  to  control  combustion  timing  and  phasing.  This
control is achieved by varying the ratio of the two fuels and adjusting
their injection timing. This same principle also has undesirable side ef-
fects; for example, a high fraction of premixed combustion at high loads
promotes  excessive  PRR,  knock,  and  noise.  The  low  combustion  tem-
perature at low loads does not allow complete fuel-air mixture oxidation
and  increases  the  CO  and  HC  emissions.  Another  unforeseen  conse-
quence of the advanced LTC concept is the low exhaust temperatures, at
times lower than the lighting-off temperature of DOC and air manage-
ment system requirements. These requirements are almost impossible to
achieve outside the test rigs, therefore requiring some complex system
additions.

Defined  operational  limits  for  RCCI  combustion  mode  have  been
investigated [305]. They reported that on a 17.1:1 CR, serial production
1.9 L engine platform at 1000 rpm, the combustion concept limits were
within 2-5 bar BMEP, while at 3000 rpm, the limits were from 4-8 bar
BMEP. These limits respect limitations such as smoke under 0.1 filter
smoke number (FSN) and NOx below 0.4 g/kWh. However, the problem
remains in extending the operational limit to the ranges of conventional
CI  and  SI  engines.  For  this  reason,  the  main  limiting  factors  are
focus  can  be
addressed
objective-oriented. These limiting factors of discussed in the following
sub-sections.

this  review  paper  so

that

the

in

3.2.1.

Intake Air Loop Requirements (EGR and Turbocharging)

For resolving the issue of excessive HRR, the researchers have been

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102830

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 31. Operational parameters and associated exhaust emissions corresponding to the maximum load conditions in RCCI combustion mode at each engine speed
investigated (Reprinted from [307] with permission of Elsevier).

prompted to increase the charge dilution, and for managing this, excess
air and EGR are proposed quite often. Wu and Reitz [306] reported that
combustion and emissions improved with a higher boost while simul-
taneously  reducing  EGR  requirement  and  sensitivity  to  emissions  in
RCCI combustion mode at high loads. High inlet pressures bring some
implementation  difficulties  to  the  light.  While  a  boosted  engine  is
necessary to induct excess air, the existing turbochargers cannot always
supply  the  required  inlet  air  pressure  and  flow  rates.  This  can  be
resolved  by  using  a  large  air  management  system  that  surpasses  any
commercially  installed  turbocharger  capacity.  For  a  real-world  appli-
cation, the design of a higher capacity air management system would be
necessary or a significant improvement in the control of RCCI combus-
tion mode to not require high air-flow rates.

On  the  other  hand,  EGR  induces  similar  flow  problems  with  an
additional factor of temperature limitations; hence any new system must
consider these constraints. EGR reduces the PRR; however, RCCI com-
bustion mode is greatly sensitive to variations in EGR rate, especially at
high  loads.  Nevertheless, an  early  diesel  injection can  slightly reduce
EGR sensitivity compared to a late diesel injection [306]. In this case,
the early injection changes the charge composition, reducing the chan-
ces  for  auto-ignition  of  the  premixed  charge  of  the  LRF.  It  is  worth
mentioning that contradictory results have been reported for boosting
and  EGR  for  HCCI  combustion  mode  (and  by  extension  to  other  LTC
methods, like RCCI combustion mode). Some studies reported that the
mixture dilution by Boost and EGR could help the combustion remain
within  peak  pressure  and  PRR  limits.  In  contrast,  some  other  studies
reported  an  increase  in  both  these  parameters.  These  contradictions
have been noted [63]. The latter effect was attributed to reducing the
heat transfer to the cylinder walls, increasing the combustion speed. It is,

however, generally agreed that EGR extends the load limits for the LTC
modes without breaching the imposed limits for peak pressure or the
PRR.

High EGR rates are necessary to extend the load range. Nonetheless,
large quantities of EGR at low loads must be accompanied by increasing
the HRF fraction. Low load diesel-fueled LTC (IMEP ~0.23-0.26 MPa)
has  been  investigated  and  compared  with  the  diesel-gasoline  RCCI
strategy  [307]  on  a  single-cylinder  heavy-duty  engine.  The  results
indicated  that  the  proposed  method  was  suitable  for  low  load  opera-
tions,  albeit  produced  slightly  higher  NOx  and  soot  than  RCCI  com-
bustion mode. In Fig. 31 a, an increase in EGR was necessary for the
increased load, and the injection timings were more advanced to prevent
the  LRF  from  generating  knock.  Fig.  31  b  shows  the  emissions  and
maximum PRR, which is of particular interest in this study. A plateau
existed at medium loads and speeds for HC and CO emissions.

With the application of EGR in RCCI combustion mode, CO and HC
emissions reportedly increased in another study [227]. However, with
an early diesel injection, a slight reduction in HC and CO was observed
with a penalty of higher NOx emissions [306]. EGR rate is also highly
dependent on the initial temperature [308]. If the initial temperature is
high, EGR is essential to extract the NOx benefits and prevent undesir-
able  autoignition  of  the  LRF.  EGR,  however,  has  some  effect  on  the
ringing intensity of the engine when maintaining a constant combustion
phasing. At different (higher) loads, only a small fraction of EGR would
be required, further indicating that a fraction of LRF can control com-
bustion  [308]. RCCI combustion mode regime  needs  increased global
reactivity of the in-cylinder charge (in the same way as CDC mode) to
extend  the  low-load  operating  range.  However,  this  neither  prevents
higher  CO  and  HC  emissions  nor  higher  fuel  consumption  that  LTC

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102831

A.K. Agarwal et al.

3.2.2. Mechanical Limitations (PRR and Noise)

High  speed  and  high  load  conditions  are  problematic  due  to  the
mechanical limitations related to the structural integrity of the engine.
Higher PRR and peak pressures are often a consequence of more efficient
combustion, which heavily affect the engine noise characteristics and
lead to higher stresses on the engine components, reducing their dura-
bility [312]. PRR is an important factor affecting engine knock and is an
issue in SI engines. However, PRR can also affect the CI engines with
premixed combustion in LTC modes. It is generally accepted that high
PRR  occurs  because  of  the  auto-ignition  of  gasoline  (in  this  case,  the
LRF) before the flame front initiated by the spark plug (or autoignition of
the HRF) reaches the combustible mixture. This, in turn, causes a ringing
sound  originating  from  detonation  waves.  Prolonged  knocking  may
cause high wear of piston rings, cylinder-head erosion, the disintegra-
tion of the piston, and piston melting.

Hence PRR also limits the thermal efficiency achieved, besides un-
desirable  noise  [313].  High  peak  in-cylinder  pressure  is  undesirable
since  it  can  exceed  the  safe  operating  pressure  range,  causing  high
stresses and fatigue in the engine components and adversely affecting
the engine. High HRR in RCCI combustion mode at high-speed, high--
load conditions can cause ringing. Studies on charge stratification by Li
et al. [314] concluded that peak PRR could be reduced by retarding the
injection timing. Researchers [307] examined the operational range for
RCCI  combustion  mode  from  900  to  2500  rpm  engine  speed  and
concluded that the engine load limit increases with the engine speed.
Limiting factors for extending the high-load limit of RCCI combustion
mode were excessive NOx formation at low engine speeds (because the
LRF fraction needs to be reduced), excessive PRR at moderate speeds,
and unacceptable in-cylinder peak pressure at high speeds. The explo-
ration campaign found a low fuel consumption of 168.6 g/kWh at 1900
rpm  speed  and  a  56%  EGR  rate.  The  importance  of  boosting  for
extending the operational range of RCCI combustion mode at low speeds
was assessed. It reduced fuel consumption but generated excessive PRR.
A high EGR rate and gasoline fraction were required at high speeds, and
advanced diesel injection was required at low speeds to extend the RCCI
combustion mode operating range. Fig. 32 shows the PRR achieved with
and  without  the  EGR  [311].  The  images  show  how  EGR  aided  in
reducing  problematic  levels  of  PRR  across  the  entire  operating  map,
reaching levels >12 bar/deg only in the higher load range. The absence
of EGR promoted these values at medium loads for low and high engine
speeds.

3.2.3. Engine-Out HC and CO Emissions and Aftertreatment System
Efficiency

One  of  the  main  issues  for  RCCI  combution  mode  is  the  higher
emissions  of  incomplete  oxidation  products,  i.e.,  HC  and  CO.  The
injected and premixed LRF at advanced crank angles in the RCCI com-
bustion mode can get trapped in the crevices [19], increasing the un-
burned  HC  emissions  due  to  incomplete  burning.  This  can  happen
particularly at lower engine loads because the combustion propagation
is weaker due to insufficient fuel-air mixing. RCCI combution and other
LTC modes suffer from reduced CO conversion, posing challenges to the
after-treatment systems. Although RCCI combution mode can help avoid
the need for SCR after-treatment system due to its very low NOx emis-
sion levels; however, the DPF and the DOC become important to convert
the higher quantities of CO and HC that remain unoxidized in the LTC
modes.  After-treatment  systems  need  suitable  boundary  conditions  to
operate satisfactorily, and inlet temperature is one of those important
boundary conditions. The EGT of the RCCI combustion mode engine is
the inlet temperature for the after-treatment system. Obtaining adequate
inlet  temperature  has  been  a  challenge  for  efficient  operation  of  the
DOC, more so at low engine loads. Hence unburned emissions of HC and
CO remain disproportionally higher. DPF regeneration also suffers from
negative consequences because of lower inlet air temperature, leading to
inefficient  passive  regeneration.  The  lower  soot  and  the  NO2  concen-
trations  do  not  properly  activate  efficient  passive  regeneration.

Fig. 32. MPRR for EGR (top) and non-EGR (bottom) operations over the entire
engine operating map (Reprinted from [311] with permission of SAE).

strategies often suffer from [307]. A similar principle would be reviewed
later to extend the RCCI concept by incorporating multi-mode operation,
where  more  good  combustion  is  obtained  at  each  load  and  speed
condition.

High boost pressure requirement emerged as a limitation to realising
the  full  potential  of  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  concept  at  high  load
conditions [309] because the LRF fraction has to be reduced, and the
HRF fraction has to be increased to cater to the necessary load condi-
tions. However, a further study demonstrated that this might not be as
limiting as previously thought. At full load, the boosting and EGR rate
requirements  were  similar  to  those  required  in  the  production-grade
engine (3 bar boost and 30% EGR) [310]. Hanson et al. [311] demon-
strated the effect of these properties on the RCCI combustion mode while
investigating  the  emissions  and  performance  of  a  13L  multi-cylinder
heavy-duty diesel engine modified for dual-fuel operation (PFI of nat-
ural gas and direct injection of diesel) both with and without the EGR
over the EPA Heavy-Duty 13 mode supplemental emissions test. They
confirmed  that  EGR  reduced  the  engine  noise  to  below  97  dB  while
simultaneously reducing NOx emissions by 48%, even though a slight
increase in soot and thermal efficiency were observed. Using EGR in this
study was to achieve the lowest possible NOx without significant ther-
mal efficiency loss. Hence, only a minimum required EGR was applied to
control pumping losses and soot emissions. EGR also reduced HC and CO
emissions due to the engine’s lower exhaust mass flow rate. With EGR,
inlet temperature was also higher, which helped oxidize cycle-averaged
CO  and  HC.  With  EGR,  1.53  g/kWh  of  HC  emissions  were  observed,
while without EGR, they were 2.27 g/kWh.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102832

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Therefore,  active  regeneration  using  higher  oxygenation  at  higher
temperatures effectively cleans the DPF.

Several attempts have been made to reduce engine-out HC and CO
emissions before reaching the after-treatment devices. Among the op-
tions, direct injection of both the HRF and the LRF is thought to simplify
the  reactivity  and  equivalence  ratio  independently  [315],  controlling
the fuel quantity in the crevice regions and reducing unburned HC. This
strategy reduced higher NOx emissions than the traditional incorpora-
tion of LRF via PFI. However, direct injection of LRF did not show the
desired reduction of unburned HC and CO emissions. Appropriate spray
targeting and control of the crevice flow [19,144] reduced the CO and
HC emissions by reducing the localized fuel-rich zones.

Higher CO and HC emissions in RCCI combustion mode might not
impede  commercial  implementation  of  this  concept  [315,316].  The
oxidation of CO and HC can be achieved by using conventional DOCs
◦
with  RCCI  combustion  mode  ,  as  long  as  the  EGT  remain  >200
C  to
ensure catalytic activity. Advancing the evaluation of the performance
of DOCs with RCCI mode, Garcia et al. [317] developed and calibrated a
1-D model for the DOC with RCCI combustion mode to define the de-
vice’s size to comply with current emission standards. They analyzed the
response of DOC in a vehicle system simulation under different driving
cycles to find that the CO and HC emissions at the DOC outlet surpassed
the desired range. The researchers then sized the device to achieve an
acceptable  emission  level.  They  concluded  that  a  volume  four  to  six
times bigger would be necessary to comply with the prevailing emission
standards. It can be summarized from these studies that although DOC
reduces exhaust emissions, to comply with current and future emissions
regulations, resizing the DOC is necessary, along with fine-tuning the
combustion to reduce engine-out CO and HC emissions.

3.2.4. Transient Cycles and Control Systems

Consequently,  vehicle  operation  and  engine  operation  are  not
restricted  to  stationary  conditions.  Gross  and  Reitz  explored  the
complexity of transient RCCI combustion mode operation [318]. They
indicated an expressed need for additional controls to avoid undesirable
effects  to achieving  the RCCI combustion mode. A comprehensive re-
view of the transient operation under RCCI combustion mode was pre-
sented  by  Paykani  et  al.  [319].  The  main  theme  was  that  the  RCCI
combustion concept was mostly tested under stationary conditions, and
there could be differences under transient conditions. They showed how
open-loop (OL) control systems based on maps could be more expensive
to  calibrate  than  the  close-loop  (CL)  control  based  on  the  in-cylinder
pressure  signals.  The  authors  referred  to  Saracino  et  al.  [320]  and
Hanson [321] to suggest that CL systems can account for the variability
in  EGT  and  EGR  among  the  cylinders.  The  literature  indicated  that
transient operation in RCCI combustion mode is possible by adjusting
the EGR, airflow rate, engine speeds, intake pressure, and pedal position
for  a  wide  range  of  engine  operating  conditions.  Control  systems  are
vital for implementing the RCCI combustion concept. Controllers have
demonstrated an accurate tracking performance for desired combustion
phasing. The study focused on a single fuel RCCI combustion mode using
gasoline and a cetane improver to increase the reactivity of the directly
injected gasoline [318]. They performed a step change of load from 1 to
4  bar  BMEP  at  1500  rpm.  Before  transient  operation  investigations,
experiments  at  four  steady-state  points  helped  assess  engine  perfor-
mance and emissions. Intermediate points were interpolated to improve
smooth transitions in the instantaneous step changes. These points were
then calibrated by changing the injection strategy, EGR, and fuel rail
pressure to reach a predefined combustion phasing (CA50). A CL cali-
bration  was  used  for  these  tests  by  employing  a  next-cycle  (NC)
controller to adjust the PFI fraction of each cycle to obtain the preset
CA50 values. In contrast, engine parameters were adjusted following the
2-D maps. Results indicated that the single fuel transient operation is
possible without significantly increasing the emissions.

In summary, the RCCI combustion mode emerged as an important
LTC  mode  to  resolve  the  issues  posed  by  HCCI  and  PCCI  combustion

modes. RCCI combustion mode indicated that varying the HRF and LRF
quantities could obtain an ideal charge reactivity. However, researchers
also experienced some limitations that need to be resolved. This section
reflects  the  challenges  in  adopting  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  for
commercial applications. From the emissions perspective, it is generally
agreed  that  the  main  shortcoming  of  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  is
relatively higher CO and HC emissions. Charge dilution strategies such
as deploying higher EGR to increase the operational limits and prevent
other  problems  can  be  useful  if  EGTs  are  not  sufficiently  high.  Other
factors limit the RCCI combustion mode, such as knocking probability at
high loads and high rp, low thermal efficiency at low loads, and unstable
combustion. Low EGTs are the other effect of RCCI combustion mode,
which  remains  to  be  addressed.  Low  EGTs  can  hamper  the  after-
treatment system operations, such as for DOCs. With these main issues
in mind, appropriate solutions must be devised. These solutions include
superior spray targeting and control of crevice flows, which reportedly
reduce  HC  and  CO  emissions.  Several  studies  on  the  after-treatment
system  capacity  have  been  undertaken  to  assess  whether  higher  CO
and HC emissions are a limiting factor for the commercial application of
RCCI combustion mode. These studies considered reduced EGTs of the
RCCcombustion mode engines to find whether the after-treatment sys-
tems  could  efficiently  operate  within  these  limitations.  Finally,  the
control  systems  must  be  more  robust  for  operations  under  transient
conditions due to relatively higher injection system complexity for the
RCCIcombustion  mode  engines  than  the  CDC  mode  engines.  Experi-
mental studies have shown that though RCCI combustion mode opera-
tions  might  be  more  complex,  they  will  soon  be  a  real  commercial
possibility.

4. Implementation of RCCI Combustion mode in Real Engines

Most  studies  on  RCCI  combustion  mode  address  the  combustion
control issues in reactivity because it is the core of the working principle
of  LTC.  Li  et  al.  [322]  classified  reactivity  into  two  types:  (i)  global
reactivity  and  (ii)  reactivity  gradient  or  stratification.  The  first  was
determined by the quantity and characteristics of the fuel (CN, octane
number, LHV, etc.), while the second was dependent on the injection
strategy, spray penetration, and entrainment of the HRF in the premixed
charge.  Kokjohn  et  al.  [135]  found  that  reactivity  stratification  is  a
leading factor in controlling the combustion phasing and ignition loca-
tion, followed by equivalence ratio having a significant influence. At the
same time, the temperature stratification effect was negligible. Because
of the importance of the reactivities of the fuels in combustion charac-
teristics  of  the  RCCI  combustion  mode,  their  management,  injection
strategies, control, and concept extensions are worthy of investigations
for engine implementation. For the RCCI combustion concept to work, at
least two fuels with different reactivity are required. The source for these
can vary from a single fuel to multiple fuels. The need for different fuels
in  the  same  engine/  vehicle  platform  increases  control  system
complexity and cost. There are hurdles in adapting current generation
engines  to  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  or  designing  clean  sheet  RCCI
engines,  but  this  concept  has  become  feasible  for  commercialization.
Hanson  et  al.  [323,324]  demonstrated  the  RCCI  combustion  concept
using gasoline and ultra-low sulfur diesel in a hybrid platform on a 2009
Saturn Vue vehicle. Besides this, one engine control system supplier has
a commercially available vessel that affirms the RCCI combustion mode
retrofitting capabilities [325]. Recently, Argonon [326] showed prom-
ising  commercial  application  possibilities  of  the  RCCI  combustion
concept in large size engines by retrofitting a Caterpillar 3512 engine on
an inland vessel MTS, which reduced up to 10% energy consumption
when operated with biofuel instead of diesel while also complying with
emission regulations without the need for DPF. The vessel’s engine took
advantage of the fuel flexibility of the RCCI concept to refuel without
completely emptying the tank. This implied that it is possible to have a
commercially available RCCI engine that relies on the fuel flexibility of
the  RCCI  combustion  concept  for  its  use.  However,  it  is  important  to

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102833

A.K. Agarwal et al.

explore  possible  solutions  for  the  downsides  of  the  RCCI  combustion
concept using the current state-of-the-art technologies available.

4.1. Multi-Mode Concepts to Cover the Entire Engine Map

RCCI  combustion  concept  has  limitations  over  the  load  extremes,
both  high  and  low.  Hence  researchers  have  focused  their  efforts  on
finding a solution for these limitations without sacrificing benefits (such
as reduced NOx and PM emissions) or further deteriorating the weaker
aspects (such as higher HC and CO emissions). Another boundary con-
dition of RCCI combustion mode limits the peak pressure or PRR. The
multi-mode concept offers an alternate solution to this issue. The multi-
mode  concept  limits  RCCI  combustion  mode  operation  to  an  engine
operating range where the combustion is optimized. Then, the engine
transitions to another mode, which would offer superior performance
under other engine operating conditions. Not only have that, but mode-
switching RCCI combustion engines also retained the advantage of lower
NOx emissions compared to the CDC mode.

4.1.1. Dual-Mode Dual-Fuel (DMDF) Concept

The  dual-mode  dual-fuel  (DMDF)  combustion  mode  extends  the
RCCI  combustion  mode  over  the  high  and  low  loads.  Different  load
zones  are  then  catered  by  different  combustion  modes  depending  on
constraints imposed by the PRR, NOx, soot, and maximum in-cylinder
pressure. These modes could be fully premixed combustion and dual-
fuel diffusion combustion modes. PRR and in-cylinder pressure limita-
tions are imposed to prevent mechanical failures. The optimized multi-
mode combustion strategy combines a fully and highly premixed RCCI
combustion  regime  at  low  and  medium  loads  and  dual-fuel  diffusion
combustion  at  full  load  [155,156].  In  the  cited  studies,  the  authors
indicated  that  this  strategy  maintains  PRR  below  15  bar/CAD  and
maximum  in-cylinder  pressure  below  190  bar  while  simultaneously
covering the entire engine map with engine-out NOx emissions below
EURO VI limits [155]. The authors could reach up to 14 bar IMEP and
maintain soot emission under 0.8 FSN in most engine operational zones,
reaching values as low as 0.02 FSN at 7 bar IMEP. DMDF combustion
relies on reducing the CR to resolve the limitations of the RCCI com-
bustion mode at full load [327]. The reduced CR then helps mitigate the
undesirable  ignition  of  LRF and  reduce  the  PRR.  Benajes  et  al.  [327]
emphasized  extending  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  because  of  the
emission improvements in the entire global engine map. To do that, they
evaluated the RCCI/CDC mode-switching vis-`a-vis CDC, depending on
the  coverage  of  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  regime,  while  trying  to
maximize its share to complete the Real Driving Emission cycle. Garcia
et  al.  [291]  compared  the  DMDF  combustion  to  the  RCCI/CDC
mode-switching  combustion  to  cover  the  unattainable  load  range  of
RCCI  combustion  mode  with  CDC  mode.  They  reported  that  DMDF
reduced specific fuel consumption by 7%, and engine-out NOx emissions
complied with EURO VI limits and were 87% lower than the RCCI/CDC
mode. DMDF still showed higher CO and HC emissions (up to 10 times
higher than other modes) which could be addressed by using exhaust gas
after-treatment systems.

4.1.2. RCCI/CDC Mode Switching

Benajes et al. [301] explained that the dual-fuel RCCI/CDC concept
hinges upon switching between the RCCI combustion and CDC modes to
cover  the  entire  engine  map.  They  evaluated  the  performance  and
emissions of this concept by simulating vehicle systems operating under
different driving cycles (Real Driving Emissions (RDE) Cycle, Worldwide
Harmonized Light Vehicle Test Cycle (WHTC), Federal Test Procedure
(FTP-75), and Japanese cycle (JC08)), with the experimentally obtained
diesel-E85 and diesel-gasoline engine maps on a light-duty diesel engine
having a CR of 17.1. Their results indicated that this concept could be
used  in  flexible  fuel  vehicles  (FFV).  They  concluded  that  E85  as  LRF
could extend the operating limits of the RCCI combustion mode with
lower NOx and soot emissions but with higher HC and CO emissions.

Fig. 33. NOx and soot emissions mapping of RCCI combustion mode operation
on  a  high  CR  EURO  VI  engine  (Reprinted  from  [310]  with  permission
of Elsevier).

Another  interesting  conclusion  of  the  real-world  application  of  this
concept  was  that  the  amount  of  fuel  necessary  for  dual-mode  RCCI
combustion mode using gasoline was almost the same as required for the
CDC mode. Hence no additional fuel storage space would be required in
the vehicle. A 32.5 L tank for diesel and 27.5 L tank for gasoline would
be  sufficient  while  maintaining  the  same  vehicle  range  as  the  CDC.
Prikhodko  et  al.  [316]  and  Benajes  et  al.  [328]  indicated  dual-mode
RCCI  combustion  mode  as  an  alternative  combustion  mode  (CDC  in
this case) without the need to reduce the CR when the RCCI combustion
mode operating window was rather limited.

Benajes  et  al.  [310]  indicated  that  the  operating  range  of  RCCI
combustion mode was between 25% and 35% load because of the limits
imposed by PRR and peak in-cylinder pressure. The rest of the engine
operating  conditions  in  the  engine  map  were  catered  by  CDC  mode,
improving the overall oxidation of HC and CO while maintaining their
peak  values  at  ~37  g/kWh  and  23  g/kWh,  respectively.  It  is  worth
noting how  the CO and  HC  emissions  are superior  to the  results  pro-
duced by a higher CR engine [309]. The investigations were conducted
in a single-cylinder engine using a gasoline-ethanol blend (80%-20%) as
LRF and diesel with 7% biodiesel as HRF. The RCCI operational range
provided a 2% improvement in gross indicated efficiency. Very low NOx
and soot emissions from RCCI combustion mode complied with EURO VI
emission norms, as shown in Fig. 33.

Recent works on LTC mode switching explore how to cover the entire
engine  map  by  switching  between  CDC,  conventional  dual-fuel  com-
bustion, HCCI, RCCI, PCCI, PPCI, and piston-split dual-fuel combustion
(PDFC) modes [329]. The authors divide the operation modes according
to the proportion of LRF and HRF and the timing of the injections of the
HRF to early or advanced CAD, as shown in Fig. 34. Test and driving
cycle  simulation  results  indicated  that  selecting  the  correct  mode  for
each  zone  of  the  operational  engine  map  can  decrease  NOx  and  soot
emissions by ~20% compared to CDC and, as the thermal efficiency is
increased, also provide a reduction of ~1% CO2 emissions. It should be
understood that since the multi-mode concept uses the CDC approach to
expand the operating map of the RCCI combustion mode engine, the SCR
and DPF cannot be eliminated from the after-treatment system of the
engine. Finally, the RCCI combustion mode engine emerged as a very
attractive  concept  exhibiting  excellent  efficiency  and  reduced  fuel

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102834

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig.  35. The  combined  driving  cycle  for  evaluating  the  designed  EMC
(Reprinted from [333] with permission of MDPI).

the load range where the RCCI combustion mode has trouble.

Hybrid powertrains would allow RCCI combustion mode operation
with  its  load  constraints,  as  demonstrated  by  Solouk  and  Shahbakhti
[333].  They  designed  and  implemented  three  energy  management
control  (EMC)  strategies,  namely  rule-based  control  (RBC),  dynamic
programming (DP), and model-predictive control (MPC), to improve the
fuel economy of the hybrid system combined over a combined driving
cycle  entailing  the  urban  dynamometer  driving  schedule  (UDDS),
highway fuel-economy test (HWFET), and US06 driving cycles (Fig. 35)
[333].  The  investigators  considered  switching  modes  between  the
electric operation and combustion leads to a fuel penalty, adding this
insight into their results. The work was focused on fuel optimization,
and it was observed how the RCCI-series hybrid electric vehicle (SHEV)
exhibited superior fuel economy than a modern SI engine (12.6%) and a
CI  engine-based  HEV  (2.2%).  This  work  also  discussed  the  state  of
charge (SOC) influence on the fuel economy. A battery at low SOC in
charge  sustaining  mode  has  a  fuel  economy  advantage  over  a  higher
initial SOC. The authors indicated that the battery at low SOC demands
the engine to run longer to compensate for the higher battery energy
loss, providing the RCCI combustion mode with instances to save fuel
that the tested SI and CI combustion modes do not offer.

Advancements in hybrid powertrains combined with dual-fuel RCCI
combustion mode were explored by Benajes et al. [334]. They evaluated
Mild hybrid (MHEV), Full hybrid (FHEV), and Plug-in hybrid (PHEV)
vehicles with diesel-gasoline RCCI combustion mode using 0-D numer-
ical  modelling.  The  simulation  inputs  were  based  on  the  calibration
maps  of  a  CDC  mode  and  diesel-gasoline  dual-fuel  RCCI  combustion
mode of a GM 1.9L light-duty engine. The simulated vehicle consisted of
a  Class  D  passenger  car,  which  had  an  additional  electric  motor  and
battery  in  the  model  since  the  vehicle  was  not  originally  an  electric
vehicle. Hybrid powertrain results were compared to their non-hybrid
counterparts under the World Harmonized Light Vehicles Test Proced-
ure (WLTP). They demonstrated that it is possible to attain NOx and soot
levels below the EURO VI regulation. They achieved a 5% reduction in
fuel consumption for only dual-fuel combustion mode while maintain-
ing the NOx levels same as CDC mode. With the same fuel consumption
that  the  OEM  has,  a  30%  reduction  in  NOx  emissions  was  obtained
(Fig. 36). The dual-fuel combustion increased CO emission to 1.6 g/km
compared to 0.8 g/km from the CDC mode. It was possible to obtain
similar emissions from a hybrid powertrain as that of the OEM because
of the use of high BMEP for recharging the batteries, thus promoting CO
conversion. HC emissions did not improve by using a hybrid powertrain
and exhibited values higher than those reported by the OEM. Benajes
et al. [334] performed a lifecycle analysis (LCA) for these systems. They
indicated that the RCCI combustion mode-based PHEV reduced CO2e-
missions  by  30%  compared  to  the  baseline  CDC  mode  vehicle  in  the
cradle-to-grave approach.

Hanson et al. [323,324] tested a series-hybrid vehicle with an RCCI
engine coupled to a 90 kW AC motor that worked as a generator for a
14.1 kWh Li-ion traction battery pack powering a 75 kW drive motor
(Fig. 37). They reported that HC, CO, and NOx emissions were similar to
laboratory  tests.  With  appropriate
those  reported

in  previous

Fig. 34. The Manifold/ Early DI/ Late DI Triangle diagram or ‘MELT’’ diagram
plots the distribution of the total fuel energy into the three primary injection
types considered (a) shows isolines of fuel energy percentage, while (b) applies
acronyms from the literature of combustion modes that are expected to occur
with certain fuel distributions (Reprinted from [329] with permission of SAGE).

consumption.

4.1.3. Hybrid RCCI Combustion Mode Coupling

Electric  vehicles  (EVs)  are  supposedly  important  in  decarbonising
the transport sector and reducing urban air pollution. Light-duty vehi-
cles have been substituted by plug-in electric vehicles (PHEV) without
significantly impacting the end-user experience. New developments in
batteries and energy administration controls have increased the range to
a market average of 315 km [330]. The availability of publicly accessible
charging stations increased by 60% in 2019 compared to the previous
year [331], and energy costs have become comparable to conventional
vehicles [332]. Even though EVs are gaining relevance in the transport
sector [332], IC engines will remain the most important workhorses for
the  transport  sector  globally  in  the  near  and  medium-term  future.  IC
engines  have  not  yet  encountered  a  feasible  electric  powertrain  chal-
lenge to fulfil the distance-range and cargo-weight demands of the me-
dium- and heavy-duty vehicle segments while maintaining operational
and logistics costs. As more EVs penetrate the automotive fleet, an in-
termediate  step  between  full  electrification  and  straight  IC  engines  is
required. Hybrid Electric Vehicles can serve as a bridge between both
realms,  the  EVs  and  the  ICEs,  and  offer  a  superior  solution,  taking
advantage of both. A hybrid RCCI-electric powertrain is highly attractive
because of its potential to get emissions to regulation levels and even
lower while also reaping the benefits of lower fuel consumption. Addi-
tionally, the electric operation can serve as a primary power source in

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102835

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 36. (a) NOx emissions for the CDC mode calibration map and (b) reactivity-controlled compression ignition (RCCI) gasoline calibration map (Reprinted from
[334] with permission of Elsevier).

Fig. 37. UW hybrid vehicle drivetrain (Reprinted from [323] with permission
of SAE).

modifications, the vehicle could comply with US EPA Tier-2 bin-5 NOx
and CO levels for several test cycles with a fuel economy ranging from
4.4  L/100  km  to  7.47  L/100  km.  Additionally,  they  reported  that
exhaust gas after-treatment systems could reduce HC and CO emissions
by 98.5% in the HWFET with a hot start. During the ORNL HWFET, the
NOx  emissions  were  higher  than  the  steady-state  laboratory  tests
because of a probable unoptimized fuel injection calibration. Fuel con-
sumption  was  reduced  to  0.3  L/km  when  operating  at  higher  engine
power  demands  because  of  the  increased  thermal  efficiency  it
represented.

Solouk et al. [335] experimentally coupled different LTC modes with
an  Extended  Range  Electric  Vehicle  (EREV).  The  EREV  allowed  the
decoupling  of  the  engine  from  the  drivetrain,  thus  making  the  LTC
operation achievable only within its optimum limits. Their experimental
setup allowed HCCI, RCCI, and conventional SI combustion modes. They
used the data acquired to generate a BSFC map and determine the load
limits  for  each  combustion  mode  (Fig.  38).  Tests  were  performed  for
single-mode EREV coupling (HCCI-EREV, RCCI-EREV, and SI-EREV) and
a multi-mode LTC-EREV. They reported 9% and 10.3% improvements in
fuel  economy  in  a  single-mode  RCCI-EREV  compared  to  SI-EREV
coupling  for  the  city  driving  cycle  (UDDS)  and  the  highway  driving
cycle (HWFET), respectively. However, with HCCI-EREV, the improve-
ment was higher (12% and 13.1%). The improvement from one driving
cycle to the other was explained by the longer engine operation duration
in the high-power demand cycle (HWFET). There were no reported noise
vibration harshness (NVH) or ringing issues, primarily because the LTC
modes (RCCI and HCCI) were kept within the low engine speed range
where  these  issues  are  not  prominent.  The  LTC  modes  exhibited
improvement over the SI combustion mode since the LTC modes at low
vehicle  speeds  could  operate  at  low  engine  speeds  while  the  SI  com-
bustion mode has to do so at high engine speeds. Another conclusion
from  this  study  was  that  the  LTC-EREV  multi-mode  operation  could
improve  the  fuel  economy  in  the  vehicle  more  than  the  single-mode
operation could. Thus, the RCCI+SI-EREV emerged as the best combi-
nation  in  the  high-power  demand  driving  cycles,  and  HCCI+RCCI
emerged  as  the  best  in  the  low  to  mid-power  range  driving  cycles
(Fig. 39).

Fig. 38. BSFC map of multi-mode LTC-SI engine (Reprinted from [335] with
permission of SAE).

4.2. Single fuel RCCI Combustion mode

Functionally, the concept of RCCI combuston with two different fuels
can have substantial advantages in obtaining NOx and soot emissions

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102836

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 39. LTC-Hybrid electric powertrain experimental test-bed utilizing a double-ended 465 hp AC dynamometer at Michigan Technological University (Reprinted
from [335] with permission of SAE).

below the regulatory limits; however, operationally, the use of two fuels
can bring in some complications. These include (i) the need for two fuel
tanks in the vehicle, (ii) different depletion and recharging rates for the
fuels, which could potentially deter users from adopting the mode due to
slightly increased fuel recharge scheduling complications, (iii) increased
complexity of fuel injection control systems, as well as the use of two
separate  fuel  injection  systems,  which  would  increase  the  cost  of  the
vehicle. The single fuel RCCI combustion mode was explored as a viable
alternative for these reasons. There are several ways to realize single fuel
RCCI combustion mode. The main approaches for this include use of fuel
additives  and  reforming.  Both  methods  seek  changes  in  the  fuel
composition and reactivity of the primary fuel so that the derivate fuel
can act as a second fuel to manage the reactivity stratification. These
approaches are discussed in the following sub-sections.

4.2.1. Single fuel + Additives

To apply the RCCI combustion mode concept with a single fuel tank,
a method to change the reactivity of the fuel to allow reactivity strati-
fication can be used. Cetane improvers are the most common path to
achieving single fuel RCCI combustion mode. These additives could be
DTBP and 2-EHN [283]. Cetane improvers are applied to a portion of the
LRF, which is then directly injected into the cylinder as the HRF. The rest
of the LRF is injected through the PFI system [131,133]. Many studies
have  been  done  on  single  fuel  RCCI  combustion  mode  engines  using
cetane  improvers  [76,122,177].  Single  fuel  RCCI  combustion  mode
could be accomplished by using only the LRF (e.g., gasoline, methanol,
ethanol,  iso-butanol)  with  a  cetane  improver,  which  enhanced  the
autoignition characteristics of the LRF. The required fractions of cetane
improver  were reportedly  quite  low,  ranging between  0.75%  and  5%
v/v. However, the amount of secondary fuel (the HRF obtained by the
mixture of LRF and additives) will vary significantly from application to
application. In the case of iso-butanol with DTBP, high concentrations of
DTBP  were  required  to  raise  the  reactivity  sufficiently  [177].  Higher
quantities of DI fuel were required (60-70%) compared to lower diesel
quantities required for similar conditions (25-40%). Splitter et al. [133]
tested  DTBP  with gasoline  at  mid-load conditions  and used  relatively
smaller quantities of improver (0.75%, 1.75%, and 3.5% v/v). The same
study reported that a lower fuel injection pressure (400 bar) for the HRF
was necessary with gasoline-DTBP than a diesel counterpart (800 bar).
Peak  gross  indicated  efficiency  of  57%  was  obtained  with  acceptable
emissions in this study.

It  was  reported  by  Liotta  [336]  that  an  a2-EHN  fraction  increase
caused a linear increase in NOx emissions from the engine. The work
states  that  the  response  was  due  to  the  presence  of  the  nitrate  group
chemically bonded to the additive. To realize ultra-low NOx emissions
from conventional RCCI combustion engines, Kaddatz et al. [179] used a
light-duty  single-cylinder  engine  with  10%  ethanol-blended  gasoline
(E10)  and  2-EHN  as  an  additive  (up  to  3%v/v)  in  RCCI  combustion
mode. They then compared the results with dual-fuel RCCI combustion

using E10 and diesel. Since the percentage of 2-EHN in this study was
low, the NOx penalty was not very high due to single fuel and additive
use. NOx penalty was below 1 g/kWh over a range of loads. In addition,
the best peak indicated efficiency was quite similar to that of dual-fuel
RCCI  combustion  mode  at  50%  load  (9  bar  gross  IMEP).  Single  fuel
RCCI  was  also  investigated  under  transient  conditions  in  a  General
Motors (GM) Z19DTH 1.9-L diesel engine having a CR of 13.75 [318].
Gasoline  mixed  with  2-EHN  (3%  v/v)  was  compared  to  conventional
dual-fuel RCCI combustion mode under transient conditions. HC emis-
sions were maintained under 1500 ppm, NO below 10 ppm, and smoke
lower than 0.1 FSN while simultaneously keeping a 10 bar/CAD limit on
the PRR and a moderate maximum noise up to 95 dB during calibration.
The researchers proved that single fuel RCCI combustion mode opera-
tion could be achieved with similar HC levels to the dual-fuel RCCI mode
counterpart, but with NOx penalty, while using gasoline with 2-EHN as
the HRF.

Regarding cetane improvers, one aspect that should be highlighted is
the possible effects changing the fuel reactivity could cause into mix-
tures’ storage stability and safety. Cetane improvers have been included
in  fuels  since  1940  [336].  More  than  two  decades  ago,  using  these
peroxides with dual-fuel applications that included liquefied petroleum
gas (LPG) and diesel [337] was tested, revealing the thermal stability of
a 5% LPG-diesel CI engine configuration was comparable with an engine
running exclusively on diesel. It is important to comment that cetane
improvers usually are reactive and exothermically unstable peroxides in
large concentrations. It is conceivable that some of these properties can
be transferred to the fuel it is blended. Nonetheless, for applications of
RCCI combustion, concentrations of these composites remain relatively
low, and no significant effects were found on the fuel stability. Eng et al.
[338] tested concentrations as high as 15% v/v, finding that the addition
of larger concentrations (> 2%) did not produce large changes in the fuel
ignition timings.

4.2.2. Single fuel + Reformate

Although cetane improvers theoretically require only one fuel tank
for the RCCI combustion mode to work, the single fuel alternative does
require an additional tank of a similar size as that of a diesel exhaust
fluid  (DEF)  [319],  which  would  be  required  to  be  recharged  periodi-
cally. The fuel reformation strategy to obtain a secondary fuel having
different  reactivity  from  the  same  fuel  to  achieve  RCCI  combustion
mode has been proposed to bypass this hurdle completely. The concept
takes  a  fraction  of  the  primary  fuel  and  directs  it  to  an  onboard  fuel
reformer  to  produce  a  reformed  gaseous  mixture  of  partially  reacted
hydrocarbon species, hydrogen, and CO [339]. Catalytic partial oxida-
tion (CPOX) is a reforming where a rich fuel-air mixture is reacted over a
catalyst to produce CO, H2, and other partially combusted hydrocarbon
species [340]. Another reforming alternative is steam reforming (SR or
SMR  for  the  specific  case  of  methane).  This  option  requires  a
high-temperature  heat  source,  steam,  and  fuel  (methane),  which  are

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102837

A.K. Agarwal et al.

reacted over a catalyst to produce CO and H2 [339]. SMR and CPOX are
different.  The  first  is  endothermic,  while  the  second  is  exothermic.
Variable  valve  actuation  can  also  lead  to  in-cylinder  reforming  using
negative  valve  overlap  (NVO).  The  NVO  principle  increases  the
auto-ignition capabilities of high-octane fuels at a CR typical of SI en-
gines without the need to preheat the air [341] because the exhaust mass
is  compressed.  This  concept  is  useful  for  on-board  fuel  reforming
because the hot recompressed exhaust provides the necessary conditions
to  initiate  fuel  reformation  reactions  gas  [342].  The  last  reforming
method mentioned in this review is the thermo-chemical fuel reformer
(TFR)  from  dedicated  EGR  (D-EGR).  D-EGR  has  a  dedicated  cylinder
running  stoichiometrically,  whose  exhaust  gases  are  supplied  directly
into the intake manifold [289]. It can be concluded from various studies
that single fuel RCCI combustion mode is feasible by using onboard fuel
reforming. However, the addition of hardware elements increases the
complexity of the fuel and control systems.

4.3. Dual Direct Injection (DDI)

Research shows that the most common RCCI configuration is using
an engine with a DI injector in addition to a PFI. However, other con-
figurations  are  also  proposed,  e.g.,  the  dual  direct  injection  (DDI)
configuration. Unlike the DI/PFI configuration, the DDI involves direct
injections for the LRF and the HRF at different injection timings. The
intention behind direct injection of the LRF is to avoid fuel entrapment
in the crevice region, which would reduce CO and HC emissions [343].
Lim and Reitz [344] performed RCCI combustion mode engine simula-
tions using direct injection of iso-octane using a gasoline direct injection
(GDI) injector. The LRF injected directly into the cylinder reduced CO
and  HC  emissions  by  27.1%  and  7.1%,  respectively,  increasing  com-
bustion efficiency. DDI enhances the control over the mixing process and
combustion phasing. It provides greater flexibility in reactivity stratifi-
cation due to the possibility of distributing the LRF across multiple in-
jections  throughout  the  compression  stroke.  Some  of  the  previously
mentioned noise issues can be mitigated by this strategy while reducing
the  total  unburned  hydrocarbon  emissions  by  up  to  91%  [345].  The
direct dual-fuel stratification (DDFS) strategy reduced the combustion
noise and improved combustion stability with lesser EGR required than
conventional RCCI combustion mode, with a combustion phasing near
TDC [346].

Direct injection of the LRF and HRF stratifies the fuel directly in the
engine cylinder and reduces the charge premixing to maintain it under
desired  limits  [347].  This  approach  is  quite  different  from  GCI  com-
bustion since the RCCI combustion mode has superior control over the
combustion phasing. Besides this advantage, higher loads (up to 21 bar
IMEP) were attained in the simulation of DDI of the RCCI combustion
mode using iso-octane and n-heptane [348]. An ITEg of 48.7% was ob-
tained. On the other hand, n-heptane (as the HRF) mass and injection
timing were reported to have a larger effect on the injection control by
allocating a smaller quantity of HRF in the squish region before intro-
ducing the rest of the HRF to promote the ignition delay. Some draw-
backs  of  the  DDI  are  the  need  for  higher  injection  pressure  for  both
injectors, which adds complexity to the fuel injection and control sys-
tems. Additional space is also required in the cylinder head for mounting
both the injectors. Yang et al. [349] proposed a low-pressure dual-fuel
direct injection (LPDDI) concept based on air-assisted direct injection
(AADI) technology (Fig. 39). The AADI consists of a built-up nozzle that
incorporates a liquid injector and a gaseous injector, injecting diesel and
gas mixture. The work substituted the compressed air traditionally used
with the AADI system with methane, thus adapting the system for RCCI
combustion mode application. The proposed system can produce direct
injections for both the LRF and the HRF. The authors demonstrated that
LPDDI  could  achieve  RCCI  combustion  mode  with  diesel/CH4.  They
underscored the importance of the LRF, and the HRF injection timings
over the combustion phasing, specifying that optimized combustion was
◦
achieved by advancing the HRF timings ((cid:0) 250
CA aTDC) and retarding

◦

the LRF injection timing ((cid:0) 112

CA aTDC).
To summarize, commercially available RCCI engines are not yet a
reality. However, the real-world implementation of the RCCI combus-
tion  mode  has  made  significant  advances  in  recent  years.  One  of  the
main  tasks  to  implement  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  in  commercial
vehicles is adapting the dual-fuel injection system, but this increases the
complexity of the vehicle systems and the control paradigms. Even with
these  design  hurdles,  the  implementation  of  the  concept  has  already
been tested in cars and maritime vessels. In addition to the real-world
proof  of  concept,  other  alternatives  have  been  investigated  to  bring
the  RCCI  combustion  mode  closer  to  commercial  feasibility.  For
example, implementing multi-mode concepts, such as DMDF and RCCI/
CDC,  intends  to  resolve  the  limitations  of  the  operational  range  by
switching to another combustion mode when  RCCI combustion mode
proves to be inefficient or unattainable. Another proposed strategy was
combining RCCI combustion mode in hybrid form for road vehicles. In
particular, this strategy has proven to comply with US EPA Tier-2 bin-5
NOx and CO emissions in several driving cycles and indicated that the
after-treatment systems could address the CO and HC emissions.

On the other hand, some studies focused on simplifying the systems
necessary for obtaining the RCCI combustion mode. Strategies for single
fuel  RCCI  combustion  mode  required  improving  the  CN  of  the  LRF,
which  two approaches could obtain:  adding additives to  the LRF and
then using it as the HRF, and fuel reforming. Fuel reforming consisted of
applying  on-board  processes  to  modify  the  reactivity  of  the  LRF  to
facilitate controlled auto-ignition. Finally, the dual-direct injection was
applied to achieve RCCI combustion mode. Using DDI technology, it was
possible to reduce CO and HC emissions while maintaining high thermal
efficiencies.

5. Conclusions, Recommendations, and Way Forward

The RCCI combustion mode has gained significant attention from the
engine  research  community  in  the  last  few  years  due  to  its  excellent
combustion  stability,  efficiency,  and  emission  characteristics.  RCCI
combustion mode could be adopted in production-grade engines offer-
ing a unique possibility of adopting alternative fuels. This review article
has covered all features of RCCI combustion mode from end to end. The
basic  mechanism  of  all  LTC  variants  is  the  same;  however,  the  RCCI
combustion  mode  deals  with  the  reactivities  of  two  different  fuels,
which are mainly governed by chemical kinetics. In extensive research
related to LTC, it has emerged that all LTC modes have significant po-
tential  for  emission  reduction;  however,  a  comprehensive  analysis  of
HCCI and PCCI combustion modes of combustion revealed several lim-
itations, especially related to their application at higher engine loads.
RCCI combustion mode exhibited significantly greater potential in these
aspects, explored in many research studies off-late, including in-cylinder
combustion  and  optical  diagnostics.  This  review  article  discusses
detailed  experimental  methodologies,  conclusively  showing  that  the
RCCI combustion mode has great potential to be adopted in production-
grade engines. The dual-mode operation has been explored significantly
among various other techniques due to its lesser complexity and greater
applicability to cater to full engine load operations.

Research and development studies have demonstrated good poten-
tial  for  RCCI  combustion  mode  to  be  applied  to  various  engine  plat-
forms.  Both  light-duty  and  heavy-duty  applications  showed  that  the
engine-out NOx emission levels were well below the limits imposed by
stringent emissions regulations. In addition, lower soot emissions were
observed without the need for after-treatment devices such as DPF and
SCR.  RCCI  also  delivers  higher  thermal  efficiencies  than  other  LTC
modes. A flexible array of fuels can be used in this combustion mode,
which opens the possibility of using fuels synthesized from renewable
resources,  thus  reducing  the  overall  carbon  footprint  of  the  transport
sector. Besides these advantages, the RCCI combustion mode has some
challenges,  such  as  higher  HC  and  CO  emissions  at  lower  loads  and
excessive  PRR  at  higher  loads.  These  issues  restrict  the  full  map

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102838

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Fig. 40. Examples of dual-fuel and single fuel injection strategies for RCCI combustion mode (Reprinted from [131] with permission of SAE).

application to only medium engine loads. RCCI combustion mode offers
several  advantages; however, it  still has some problems to overcome.
These challenges limit the engine operation due to high PRR/knocking.
Before commercialising the RCCI combustion mode engines, these issues
must be resolved. Literature review shows that researchers are working
to resolve these problems to make the RCCI combustion engine work in a
low-environmental  impact  combustion  mode,  having  good  reliability
and higher energy conversion efficiencies. This could make these RCCI
combustion mode engines commercially attractive to the consumers and
reduce the CO2 footprint at the same time.

RCCI combustion offers very low NOx emissions, which can elimi-
nate dependence on SCR systems and reduce PM emissions. Higher HC
and  CO  emissions  are  a  penalty  because  of  low  combustion  tempera-
tures. However, the after-treatment systems have shown excellent con-
version efficiencies to comply with the emission legislation.

Various combustion control strategies have shown promising control
over  the  PRR,  such  as  retarding  the  HRF  injection  timings  and  intro-
ducing the EGR. These strategies help increase the mixture’s resistance
(previously introduced as LRF) to autoignition and help charge dilution.
Higher boost pressures have shown a reduction of PRR, which prompts
finding a way to obtain the required airflow under real-world operating
conditions. Pathways to resolving these issues are partially completed by
developing mixed combustion modes such as DMDF, which go from the
pure RCCI combustion mode concept to combustion suitable for varying
loads. Electrical hybridization of the RCCI combustion mode engine is
also  hugely  beneficial  since  the  electric  motor  can  work  over  a  load-
speed  range  where  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  engine  struggles.  The
transient operations were verified under the discussed concept. The next
logical step towards commercial implementation would be proving this
concept in real driving conditions. Retrofitting current engines has also
been  of  some  interest  to  researchers  and  manufacturers.  To  further
improve the prospect for this concept, the use of unconventional fuels
with suitable properties facilitating the RCCI combustion mode could be
explored. These would promote ultra-low soot emissions due to higher
oxygenation (like OMEx) or a closer to net neutral CO2 footprint due to
its production cycle and even tank-to-wheel operation but are aspects
that need to be explored further.

Once technical problems are resolved, commercial adoption of the
RCCI  combustion  mode  concept  would  require  addressing  functional
issues such as reliability and fuel flexibility. A technical solution should
be developed for an efficient control method to operate the engine in
different  combustion  modes  if  one  of  the  two  fuels  is  unavailable.
Further  research  and  development  of  a  single  fuel  RCCI  combustion
mode engine development would be a topic of interest for researchers,
which would resolve several hurdles of having different fuel systems for
the LRF and the HRF. Since costs are an important decision factor for the
consumer and corporations, reducing the complexity of the fuel injec-
the
tion  and  control  systems  would  also  be  essential

for

Fig. 41. Cross-section of AADI diesel/CH4  dual-fuel injector model (Reprinted
from [349] with permission of Elsevier).

commercialization  of  the  RCCI  combustion  mode  engine  technology.
With increasingly stringent emissions limitations, a methodology should
be  developed  to  assess  whether  the  improvements  in  NOx  and  soot
emissions are worth the CO and HC penalty and the increased system
complexity and possible costs of having two distinct fuel injection sys-
tems. Besides some of the representative examples of real-world oper-
ation,  the  concept  of  RCCI  combustion  has  not  been  commercially
widespread,  and  other,  simpler  alternatives  have  been  prioritized  by
manufacturers that can offer similar increases in thermal efficiency or
emissions. The conversion efficiency of the after-treatment systems for
the  dedicated  RCCI  combustion  mode  engine  would  be  an  important
development soon, as it could help determine whether the concept can
make possible the emissions reductions necessary to reach global tar-
gets. (Figs. 40 and 41)

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Supplementary materials

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101028.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102839

A.K. Agarwal et al.

References

[1] Vald ́es del Fresno M, Molina S. Introducci ́on Hist ́orica. Motores de Combusti ́on
Interna Alternativos, Valencia, Editorial Revert ́e, S.A. 2017:2–22 [Online].
Available: https://gdocu.upv.es/alfresco/service/api/node/content/workspace/
SpacesStore/130ad267-fe67-4ec7-8363-51b16ffe11a6/TOC_0809_04_01.pdf?
guest=true [Accessed 7 October 2020].

[2] Barbir F, Veziroǧlu TN, PlassJr HJ. Environmental damage due to fossil fuels use.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 1990;15(10):739–49. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0360-3199(90)90005-J.

[3] Gnecco I, Berretta C, Lanza L, La Barbera P. Storm water pollution in the urban
environment of Genoa, Italy. Atmospheric Research 2005;77(1-4):60–73. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2004.10.017.

[4] Broitman S, Portnov BA. Forecasting health effects potentially associated with the

relocation of a major air pollution source. Environmental Research 2020;182:
109088. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.109088.

[5] Ritchie H. Our World in Data 18 September 2020 [Online]. Available: https://our

worldindata.org/ghg-emissions-by-sector [Accessed 7 October 2020].

[6] European Environment Agency. 19 December 2019 [Online]. Available: https
://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/greenhouse-gas-emission-tre
nds-6/assessment-3 [Accessed 7 October 2020].

[7] Johnson T. Diesel Emission Control in Review. SAE Int. J. Fuels Lubr 2009;2(1):

1–12. https://doi.org/10.4271/2008-01-0069.

[8] Marchal V, Dellink R, Vuuren DV, Clapp C, Chateau J, Lanzi E, Magne B, Vliet JV.
OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050 Climate Change Chapter. 2011 [Online].
Available: https://www.oecd.org/env/cc/49082173.pdf [Accessed 7th  August
2021].

[9] Han S, Kim J, Bae C. Effect of air-fuel mixing quality on characteristics of

conventional and low-temperature diesel combustion. Applied Energy 2022;119:
454–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.12.045.

[10] V ́avra J, Bortel I, Tak ́ats M, Diviˇs M. Emissions and performance of diesel–natural
gas dual-fuel engine operated with stoichiometric mixture. Fuel 2017;208:
722–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.07.057.

[11] Turns SR. Understanding NOx formation in nonpremixed flames: Experiments

and modelling. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 1995;21(5):361–85.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(94)00006-9.

[12] Arr`egle J, Pastor JV, L ́opez JJ, García A. Insights on post injection-associated soot
emissions in direct injection diesel engines. Combustion and Flame 2008;154(3):
448–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.04.021.

[13] Mahla S, Dhir A, Gill KJ, Cho HM, Lim HC, Chauhan BS. Influence of EGR on the

simultaneous reduction of NOx-smoke emissions trade-off under CNG-biodiesel
dual-fuel engine. Energy 2018;152:303–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2018.03.072.

[14] Parravicini M, Barro C, Boulouchos K. Experimental characterization of GTL,

HVO, and OME based alternative fuels for diesel engines. Fuel 2021;292:120177.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120177.

[15] Hamedi M, Doustdar O, Tsolakis A, Hartland J. Thermal energy storage system for
efficient diesel exhaust after-treatment at low temperatures. Applied Energy
2019;235:874–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.11.008.

[16] Agarwal AK, Singh AP, Kumar V. Particulate characteristics of low-temperature

combustion (PCCI and RCCI) strategies in single-cylinder research engine for
developing sustainable and cleaner transportation solution. Environmental
Pollution 2021;284:117375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117375.

[17] Dallmann T, Posada F, Bandivadekar A. Costs of Emission Reduction

Technologies for Diesel Engines Used in Non-Road Vehicles and Equipment. The
International Council on Clean Transportation 2018. 2018-10[Online]. Available:
https://theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/Non_Road_Emission_Control_
20180711.pdf [Accessed 24th  December 2020].

[18] Vrabie V, Scarpete D, Zbarcea O. The new exhaust after-treatment system for

reducing NOx emissions OF diesel engines: lean NOx trap (LNT). A study. Trans
Motauto World 2016;1(4):35–8 [Online]. Available: https://stumejournals.com/
journals/tm/2016/4/35 [Accessed 24th  December 2020].

[19] Reitz RD, Duraisamy G. Review of high efficiency and clean reactivity controlled
compression ignition (RCCI) combustion in internal combustion engines. Progress
in Energy and Combustion Science 2015;46:12–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2014.05.003.

[20] Administration Energy Information. Energy and the environment explained. EIA

11 August 2020 [Online]. Available: https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/e
nergy-and-the-environment/where-greenhouse-gases-come-from.php [Accessed
11 November 2020].

[21] European Federation for Transport and Environment AISBL, "Transport &

Environment,". European Federation for Transport and Environment AISBL. 2020
[Online]. Available: https://www.transportenvironment.org/what-we-do/elect
ric-cars [Accessed 21 November 2020].

[22] Boretti A. Advantages and Disadvantages of Diesel Single and Dual-Fuel Engines.

Front. Mech. Eng. 2019;5(64):2297–3079. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmech.2019.00064.

[23] Ratcliff MA, Dane AJ, Williams A, Ireland J, Luecke J, McCormick RL, et al. Diesel
particle filter and fuel effects on heavy-duty diesel engine emissions. Environ Sci
Technol 2010;44:8343–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/es1008032.

[24] Koebel M, Elsener M, Kleemann M. Urea-SCR: a promising technique to reduce

NOx emissions from automotive diesel engines. Catal Today 2000;59:335–45.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0920-5861(00)00299-6.

[25] Pachiannan T, Zhong W, Rajkumar S, He Z, Leng X, Wang Q. A literature review

of fuel effects on performance and emission characteristics of low-temperature

combustion strategies. Applied Energy 2019;51:113380. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113380.

[26] UNEP, UNEP Copenhagen Climate Centre (UNEP-CCC). Emissions Gap Report

2021: The Heat Is On – A World of Climate Promises Not Yet Delivered. UN
environment programme, Nairobi 2021.

[27] Beatrice C, Bertoli C, Del Giacomo N, Migiaccio M. Potentially of Oxygenated
Synthetic Fuel and Reformulated Fuel on Emissions from a Modern DI Diesel
Engine. SAE Technical Paper No. 1999-01-3595 1999.

[28] Miyamoto N, Ogawa H, Nabe MN. Approaches to extremely low emissions and
efficient diesel combustion with oxygenated fuels. Int. J Engine Research 2000;1
(1):71–85.

[29] Larsson T, Mahendar SK, Christiansen-Erlandsson A, Olofsson U. The Effect of

Pure Oxygenated Biofuels on Efficiency and Emissions in a. Gasoline Optimised
DISI Engine. Energies 2021;14:3908.

[30] García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Villalta D, Guzm ́an-Mendoza M. Parametric
assessment of the effect of oxygenated low carbon fuels in a light-duty
compression ignition engine. Fuel Processing Technology 2022;229:107199.
[31] No SY. Application of biobutanol in advanced CI engines – a review. Fuel 2016;

183:641–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.06.121.

[32] Saxena S, Bedoya ID. Fundamental phenomena affecting low-temperature

combustion and HCCI engines, high load limits and strategies for extending these
limits. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 2013;39(5):457–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pecs.2013.05.002.

[33] Han D, Ickes AM, Bohac SV, Huang Z, Assanis DN. HC and CO emissions of

premixed low-temperature combustion fueled by blends of diesel and gasoline.
Fuel 2012;99:13–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2012.04.010.

[34] Akihama K, Takatori Y, Inagaki K, Sasaki S, Dean AM. Mechanism of the

smokeless rich diesel combustion by reducing temperature. SAE Technical Paper
No. 2001-01-0655 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/2001-01-0655.

[35] Ramesh N, Mallikarjuna JM. Evaluation of in-cylinder mixture homogeneity in a

diesel HCCI engine – A CFD analysis. Engineering Science and Technology. an
International Journal 2016;19(2):917–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jestch.2015.11.013.

[36] United States Environmental Protection Agency. Nitrogen Oxides (NOx), Why

and How They Are Controlled. North Carolina: United States Environmental
Protection Agency; 1999 [Online]. Available: https://www3.epa.gov/ttn/catc/
dir1/fnoxdoc.pdf [Accessed 24th  December 2020].

[37] Duan H, Jia M, Bai J, Li Y. Combined effects of fuel reactivity, φ-sensitivity, and

intake temperature on the performance of low-temperature gasoline/
polyoxymethylene dimethyl ethers combustion. Fuel 2021;288:119612. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119612.

[38] Zhong S, Xu S, Bai X-S, Hadadpour A, Jangi M, Zhang F, Du Q, Peng Z.

Combustion characteristics of n-heptane spray combustion in a low-temperature
reform gas/air environment. Fuel 2021;293:120377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2021.120377.

[39] Wang H, Zheng Z, Yao M, Reitz RD. An experimental and numerical study on the

effects of fuel properties on the combustion and emissions of low-temperature
combustion diesel engines. Combustion Science and Technology 2014;186(12):
1795–815. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2014.920836.

[40] Dijkstra R, Di Blasio G, Boot M, Beatrice C, Bertoli C. Assessment of the effect of

low cetane number fuels on a light-duty CI engine: preliminary experimental
characterization in PCCI operating condition. SAE Technical Paper No. 2011-24-
0053 2011. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-24-0053.

[41] Feng H, Wang X, Zhang J. Study on the effects of intake conditions on the exergy

destruction of the low-temperature combustion engine for a toluene reference
fuel. Energy Conversion and Management 2019;188:241–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2019.02.090.

[42] Jain A, Singh AP, Agarwal AK. Effect of split fuel injection and EGR on NOx and
PM emission reduction in low-temperature combustion (LTC) mode diesel engine.
Energy 2017;122:249–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.01.050.
[43] B  ̈o ̆grek A, Has ̧imo ̆glu C, Calam A, Aydo ̆gan B. Effects of n-heptane/toluene/
ethanol ternary fuel blends on combustion, operating range, and emissions in
premixed low-temperature combustion. Fuel 2021;295:120628. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120628.

[44] Wang Y, Liu L, Yao M. Experimental and numerical study on the impact of low-

temperature reforming products of BD60 on engine combustion and emission
characteristics. Fuel 2021;288:119621. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.119621.

[45] Zhang M, Derafshzan S, Richter M, Lundgren M. Effects of different injection

strategies on ignition and combustion characteristics in an optical PPC engine.
Energy 2020;203:117901. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117901.
[46] Broatch A, Margot X, Novella R, Gomez-Soriano J. Combustion noise analysis of
partially premixed combustion concept using gasoline fuel in a 2-stroke engine.
Energy 2016;107:612–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2016.04.045.

[47] Sun RRT, Gray CL. An HCCI Engine: Power Plant for a Hybrid Vehicle. SAE

Technical Paper No. 2004-01-093 2004. https://doi.org/10.4271/2004-01-0933.
[48] Stanglmaier RH, Roberts CE. Homogeneous Charge Compression Ignition (HCCI):
Benefits, Compromises, and Future Engine Applications. SAE Technical Paper No.
1999-01-3682 1999. https://doi.org/10.4271/1999-01-3682.

[49] Najt P, Foster D. Compression-Ignited Homogeneous Charge Combustion. SAE

Technical Paper No. 830264 1983.

[50] Ishii H, Koike N, Suzuki H, Odaka M. Exhaust Purification of Diesel Engines by
Homogeneous Charge with Compression Ignition Part 2: Analysis of Combustion
Phenomena and NOx Formation by Numerical Simulation with Experiment. SAE
Technical Paper No.970315 1997. https://doi.org/10.4271/970315.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102840

A.K. Agarwal et al.

[51] Khandal S, Banapurmath N, Gaitonde V. Performance studies on homogeneous
charge compression ignition (HCCI) engine powered with alternative fuels.
Renewable Energy 2019;132:683–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2018.08.035.

[52] Polat S. An experimental investigation on combustion, performance and ringing
operation characteristics of a low compression ratio early direct injection HCCI
engine with ethanol fuel blends. Fuel 2020;277:118092. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118092.

[53] Flowers DL, Aceves SM, Martinez-Frias J, Dibble RW. Prediction of carbon

monoxide and hydrocarbon emissions in iso-octane HCCI engine combustion
using multizone simulations. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2002;29:
687–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1540-7489(02)80088-8.

[54] Machrafi H, Cavadias S, Amouroux J. A parametric study on the emissions from
an HCCI alternative combustion engine resulting from the auto-ignition of
primary reference fuel. Applied Energy 2008;85:755–64. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2008.02.005.

[55] Gan S, Ng HK, Pang KM. Homogeneous Charge Compression Ignition (HCCI)

combustion: Implementation and effects on pollutants in direct injection diesel
engines. Applied Energy 2011;88(3):559–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2010.09.005.

[56] Onishi S, Jo SH, Shoda K, Do Jo P, Kato S. Active thermo-atmosphere combustion
(ATAC)-a new combustion process for internal combustion engines. SAE
Technical Paper No. 790501 1979. https://doi.org/10.4271/790501.
[57] Thring RH. Homogeneous-charge compression-ignition (HCCI) engines. SAE
Technical Paper No. 892068 1989. https://doi.org/10.4271/892068.
[58] Christensen M, Johansson B, Einewall P. Homogeneous charge compression

ignition (HCCI) using isooctane, ethanol and natural gas-a comparison with spark
ignition operation. SAE Technical Paper No. 972874 1997. https://doi.org/
10.4271/972874.

[59] Stanglmaier RH, Roberts CE. Homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI):
benefits, compromises, and future engine applications. SAE Technical Paper No.
1999-01-3682 1999. https://doi.org/10.4271/1999-01-3682.

[60] Maurya RK, Agarwal AK. Experimental investigation on the effect of intake air
temperature and air-fuel ratio on cycle-to-cycle variations of HCCI combustion
and performance parameters. Applied Energy 2011;88(4):1153–63. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2010.09.027.

[61] Ryan III TW, Callahan TJ. Homogeneous Charge Compression Ignition of Diesel
Fuel. SAE Technical Paper No. 961160 1996. https://doi.org/10.4271/971676.

[62] Cheng null SY, Min X, Yong G, Yi C, Lei S, Yao null DK. Effects of injection
pressure, exhaust gas recirculation, and intake pressure on the cycle-to-cycle
variations of HCCI combustion. Journal of the Energy Institute 2016;89:293–301.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joei.2015.01.017.

[63] Hunicz J, Mikulski M, Geca MS, Rybak A. An applicable approach to mitigate

pressure rise rate in an HCCI engine with negative valve overlap. Applied Energy
2020;257:114018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.114018.
[64] Parthasarathy M, Ramkumar S, Isaac JoshuaRameshLalvani J, Elumalai P,

Dhinesh B, Krishnamoorthy R, Thiyagarajan S. Performance analysis of HCCI
engine powered by tamanu methyl ester with various inlet air temperature and
exhaust gas recirculation ratios. Fuel 2020;282:118833. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118833.

[75] Splitter DA, Reitz RD. Fuel reactivity effects on the efficiency and operational
window of dual-fuel compression ignition engines. Fuel 2014;118:163–75.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.10.045.

[76] Zehni A, Saray RK. Comparison of late PCCI combustion, performance, and

emissions of diesel engine for B20 and B100 fuels by KIVA-CHEMKIN coupling.
Renewable Energy 2018;122:118–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2018.01.046.

[77] Murata Y, Kusaka J, Odaka M, et al. Emissions suppression mechanism of

premixed diesel combustion with variable valve timing. International Journal of
Engine Research 2007;8(5):415–28. https://doi.org/10.1243/
14680874jer01007.

[78] Mohammadi A, Kee S, Ishiyama T, Kakuta T, Matsumoto T. Implementation of

Ethanol Diesel Blend Fuels in PCCI Combustion. SAE Technical Paper No. 2005-
01-3712 2005. https://doi.org/10.4271/2005-01-3712.

[79] Torregrosa AJ, Broatch A, García A, M ́onico LF. Sensitivity of combustion noise
and NOx and soot emissions to pilot injection in PCCI diesel engines. Appl. Energy
2013;104:149–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.11.040.
[80] Park SH, Youn I, Lim Y, Lee C. Effect of Bioethanol Blended Diesel Fuel and
Engine Load on Spray, Combustion, and Emissions Characteristics in a
Compression Ignition Engine. Energy & Fuels 2012;26:5135–45. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef300894h.

[81] Esfahanian V, Salahi MM, Gharehghani A, Mirsalim M. Extending the lean

operating range of a premixed charged compression ignition natural gas engine
using a pre-chamber. Energy 2017;119:1181–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2016.11.071.

[82] d’Ambrosio null S, Ferrari A. Effects of exhaust gas recirculation in diesel engines

featuring late PCCI type combustion strategies. Energy Conversion and
Management 2015;105:1269–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2015.08.001.

[83] Srihari S, Thirumalini S, Prashanth K. An experimental study on the performance
and emission characteristics of PCCI-DI engine fueled with diethyl ether-
biodiesel-diesel blends. Renewable Energy 2017;107:440–7. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.renene.2017.01.015.

[84] Lilik GK, Boehman A. Advanced Diesel Combustion of a High Cetane Number Fuel
with Low Hydrocarbon and Carbon Monoxide Emissions. Energy & Fuels 2011;
25:1444–56. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef101653h.

[85] Hunicz J, Mikulski M, Shukla PC, Gęca MS. Partially premixed combustion of

hydrotreated vegetable oil in a diesel engine: Sensitivity to boost and exhaust gas
recirculation. Fuel 2022;307:121910. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2021.121910.

[86] Elkelawy M, Bastawissi HAE, Shenawy EE, Shams MM, Panchal H, Sadasivuni KK,
et al. Influence of lean premixed ratio of PCCI-DI engine fueled by diesel/
biodiesel blends on combustion, performance, and emission attributes; a
comparison study. Energy Conversion and Management 2021;10:100066.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2020.100066.

[87] Huiquan D, Jia M, Li Y, Wang T. A comparative study on the performance of

partially premixed combustion (PPC), reactivity-controlled compression ignition
(RCCI), and RCCI with reverse reactivity stratification (R-RCCI) fueled with
gasoline and polyoxymethylene dimethyl ethers (PODEn). Fuel 2021;298:
120838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120838.

[65] Singh AP, Agarwal AK. Combustion characteristics of diesel HCCI engine: an

experimental investigation using external mixture formation technique. Applied
Energy 2012;99:116–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.03.060.

[88] Noehre C, Andersson M, Johansson B, Hultqvist A. Characterization of partially
premixed combustion. SAE Technical Paper No. 2006-01-3412 2006. https://doi.
org/10.4271/2006-01-3412.

[66] Agarwal AK, Singh AP, Lukose J, Gupta T. Characterization of exhaust

[89] Zhang F, Yu R, Bai XS. Direct numerical simulation of PRF70/air partially

particulates from diesel-fueled homogenous charge compression ignition
combustion engine. Journal of Aerosol Science 2013;58:71–85. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jaerosci.2012.12.005.

premixed combustion under IC engine conditions. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35(3):
2975–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.09.004.

[90] Kalghatgi GT, Risberg P, Ångstrom HE. Partially pre-mixed auto-ignition of

[67] Singh G, Singh AP, Agarwal AK. Experimental investigations of combustion,

performance and emission characterization of biodiesel fueled HCCI engine using
external mixture formation technique. Sustainable Energy Technologies and
Assessments 2014;6:116–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2014.01.002.
[68] Nakai E, Goto T, Ezumi K, Tsumura Y, Endou K, Kanda Y, et al. Mazda Skyactiv-X
2.0 L Gasoline Engine. In: Proceedings of the 28th Aachen colloquium automobile and
engine technology, Aachen; 2019.

[69] Singh AP, Agarwal AK. Split injection strategies for biodiesel-Fueled premixed

charge compression ignition combustion engine—Part I: Combustion,
performance, and emission studies. Journal of Energy Resources Technology
2020;142(12):122303. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4047315.

[70] Singh AP, Jain A, Agarwal AK. Fuel-injection strategy for PCCI engine fueled by
mineral diesel and biodiesel blends. Energy & Fuels 2017;31(8):8594–607.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b03393.

[71] Salahi MM, Gharehghani A. Control of combustion phasing and operating range
extension of natural gas PCCI engines using ozone species. Energy Conversion and
Management 2019;199:112000. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2019.112000.

[72] Natarajan S, Shankar SA, Sundareswaran AM. Early Injected PCCI Engine Fueled
with Bio-Ethanol and Diesel Blends – An Experimental Investigation. Energy
Procedia 2017;105:358–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.03.326.
[73] Kiplimo R, Tomita E, Kawahara N, Yokobe S. Effects of spray impingement,

injection parameters, and EGR on the combustion and emission characteristics of
a PCCI diesel engine. Applied Thermal Engineering 2012;37:165–75. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2011.11.011.

[74] Musculus MPB, Miles PC, Pickett LM. Conceptual models for partially premixed
low-temperature diesel combustion. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science
2013;39(2–3):246–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2012.09.001.

gasoline to attain low smoke and low NOx at high load in a compression ignition
engine and comparison with a diesel fuel. SAE Technical Paper No. 2007-01-0006
2007. https://doi.org/10.4271/2007-01-0006.

[91] Kalghatgi GT, Hildingsson L, Harrison AJ, Johansson B. Autoignition quality of
gasoline fuels in partially premixed combustion in diesel engines. Proc Combust
Inst 2011;33(2):3015–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.07.007.

[92] Wang S, van der WK, Somers B, de Goey P. Experimental study on the potential of

higher octane number fuels for low load partially premixed combustion. SAE
Paper Technical 2017-01-0750 2017. https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-01-0750.

[93] Vedharaj S, Vallinayagam R, An Y, Izadi Najafabadi M, Somers B, Chang J,

Johansson B. Combustion homogeneity and emission analysis during the
transition from CI to HCCI for FACE I gasoline. SAE Technical Paper No. 2017-01-
2263 2017. https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-01-2263.

[94] Vallinayagam R, Hlaing P, Al-Ramadan AS, An Y, Sim J, Chang J, Johansson B.
The physical and chemical effects of fuel on gasoline compression ignition. SAE
Technical Paper No. 2019-01-1150 2019. https://doi.org/10.4271/2019-01-
1150.

[95] Han D, Ickes AM, Assanis DN, Huang Z, Bohac SV. Attainment and load extension
of high-efficiency premixed low-temperature combustion with dieseline in a
compression ignition engine. Energy Fuels 2010;24(6):3517–25. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef100269c.

[96] Han D, Ickes AM, Bohac SV, Huang Z, Assanis DN. Premixed low-temperature

combustion of blends of diesel and gasoline in a high-speed compression ignition
engine. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33(2):3039–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2010.07.045.

[97] Liu JL, Shang HY, Wang H, Zheng ZQ, Wang QP, Xue ZZ, et al. Investigation on
partially premixed combustion fueled with gasoline and PODE blends in a
multicylinder heavy-duty diesel engine. Fuel 2017;193:101–11. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2016.12.045.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102841

A.K. Agarwal et al.

[98] Singh AP, Agarwal AK. Performance and emission characteristics of conventional

[122] Dempsey AB, Walker NR, Reitz RD. Effect of Cetane Improvers on Gasoline,

diesel combustion/partially premixed charge compression ignition combustion
mode switching of biodiesel-fueled engine. International Journal of Engine
Research 2021;22(2):540–53. https://doi.org/10.1177/1468087419860311.
[99] Law D, Kemp D, Allen J, Kirkpatrick G, Copland T. Controlled combustion in an

IC-engine with a fully variable valve train. SAE Technical Paper No. 2001-01-
0251 2001 [Online]. Available: www.jstor.org/stable/44724298 [Accessed 16
Aug. 2021].

[100] Agrell F, Ångstrom H-E, Eriksson B, Wikander J, Linderyd J. Integrated simulation
and engine test of closed-loop HCCI control by aid of variable valve timings. SAE
Technical Paper No. 2003-01-0748 2003. https://doi.org/10.4271/2003-01-
0748.

[101] Haraldsson G, Tunestål P, Johansson B, Hyvonen J. HCCI combustion phasing in a
multi-cylinder engine using variable compression ratio. SAE Technical Paper No.
2002-01-2858 2002. https://doi.org/10.4271/2002-01-2858.

[102] Bessonette P, Schleyer C, Duffy K, Hardy W, Liechty M. Effects of Fuel Property

Changes on Heavy-Duty HCCI Combustion. SAE Technical Paper No. 2007-01-
0191 2007. https://doi.org/10.4271/2007-01-0191.

[103] Lu A, Zhang C, Ji P, et al. Effect of gasoline additive on combustion and emission

characteristics of an n-butanol Partially Premixed Compression Ignition engine
under different parameters. Sci Rep 2021;11(2021):1904. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-021-81490-3.

[104] Inagaki K, Fuyuto T, Nishikawa K, Nakakita K, Sakata I. Dual-Fuel PCI

Combustion Controlled by In-Cylinder Stratification of Ignitability. SAE Technical
Paper No. 2006-01-0028 2006. https://doi.org/10.4271/2006-01-0028.
[105] Shim E, Park H, Bae C. Comparisons of advanced combustion technologies (HCCI,
PCCI, and dual-fuel PCCI) on engine performance and emission characteristics in
a heavy-duty diesel engine. Fuel 2020;262:116436. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2019.116436.

[106] Kokjohn SL, Hanson RM, Splitter DA, Reitz RD. Experiments and modelling of

dual-fuel HCCI and PCCI combustion using in-cylinder fuel blending. SAE
Technical Paper No. 2009-01-2647 2009. https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-
2647.

[107] Nazemi M, Shahbakhti M. Modeling and analysis of fuel injection parameters for

combustion and performance of an RCCI engine. Applied Energy 2016;165:
135–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.11.093.

[108] Hanson RM, Kokjohn SL, Splitter DA, Reitz RD. An Experimental Investigation of
Fuel Reactivity Controlled PCCI Combustion in a Heavy-Duty Engine. SAE
Technical Paper No. 2010-01-0864 2010. https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01-
0864.

[109] Kobashi Y, Tanaka D, Maruko T, Kato S, Kishiura M, Senda J. Effects of Mixedness
and Ignition Timings on PCCI Combustion with a Dual-fuel Operation. SAE
Technical Paper No. 2011-01-1768 2011. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-
1768.

Ethanol, and Methanol Reactivity and the Implications for RCCI Combustion. SAE
Int. J. Fuels Lubr. 2013;6(1):170–87. https://doi.org/10.4271/2013-01-1678.
[123] Kokjohn S, Reitz RD, Splitter D, Musculus M. Investigation of Fuel Reactivity
Stratification for Controlling PCI Heat-Release Rates Using High-Speed
Chemiluminescence Imaging and Fuel Tracer Fluorescence. SAE Int. J. Engines
2012;5(2):248–69. https://doi.org/10.4271/2012-01-0375.

[124] Kokjohn SL. Doctoral dissertation. University of Wisconsin - Madison; 2012.
[125] Kokjohn SL, Hanson R, Splitter D, Kaddatz J, Reitz RD. Fuel Reactivity Controlled
Compression Ignition (RCCI) Combustion in Light- and Heavy-Duty Engines. SAE
Int. J. Engines 2011;4(1):360–74. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-0357.
[126] Curran S, Hanson R, Wagner R. Effect of E85 on RCCI Performance and Emissions
on a Multi-Cylinder Light-Duty Diesel Engine. SAE Technical Paper No. 2012-01-
0376 2012. https://doi.org/10.4271/2012-01-0376.

[127] Dempsey AB. Doctoral dissertation. University of Wisconsin - Madison; 2013.
[128] Dempsey AB, Adhikary BD, Viswanathan S, Reitz RD. Reactivity Controlled

Compression Ignition Using Premixed Hydrated Ethanol and Direct Injection
Diesel. In: ASME 2011 Internal Combustion Engine Division Fall Technical
Conference; 2001. p. 963–75. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4006703.
[129] Dempsey AB, Adhikary BD, Viswanathan S;, Reitz RD. Characterization of

Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition (RCCI) Using Premixed Hydrated
Ethanol and Direct Injection Diesel in Heavy-Duty and Light-Duty Engines. In:
THIESEL 2012 Conference on Thermo- and Fluid Dynamic Processes in Direct
Injection Engines, Valencia, Spain; Sept. 2012.

[130] Splitter D, Hanson R, Kokjohn S, Reitz RD. Reactivity Controlled Compression

Ignition (RCCI) Heavy-Duty Engine Operation at Mid-and High-Loads with
Conventional and Alternative Fuels. SAE Technical Paper No. 2011-01-0363
2011. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-0363.

[131] Hanson R, Kokjohn S, Splitter D, Reitz RD. Fuel Effects on Reactivity Controlled
Compression Ignition (RCCI) Combustion at Low Load. SAE Int. J. Engines 2011;4
(1):394–411. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-0361.

[132] Hanson RM. Doctoral dissertation. University of Wisconsin - Madison; 2013.
[133] Splitter D, Reitz RD, High Efficiency Hanson R. Low Emissions RCCI Combustion
by Use of a Fuel Additive. SAE Int. J. Fuels Lubr. 2010;3(2):742–56. https://doi.
org/10.4271/2010-01-2167.

[134] Liu H, Tang Q, Yang Z, Ran X, Geng C, Chen B, et al. A comparative study on

partially premixed combustion (PPC) and reactivity controlled compression
ignition (RCCI) in an optical engine. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37(4):4759–66.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.004.

[135] Kokjohn SL, Musculus MPB, Reitz R. Evaluating temperature and fuel

stratification for heat-release rate control in a reactivity-controlled compression-
ignition engine using optical diagnostics and chemical kinetics modelling.
Combust. Flame 2015;5162:2729–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2015.04.009.

[110] Kokjohn SL, Reitz RD. A Modeling Study of Charge Preparation and Combustion

[136] Bhagatwala A, Sankaran R, Kokjohn S, Chen JH. Numerical investigation of

in an HCCI Engine Using a Variable Pressure Pulse (VPP) Injection System and
Optimized PRF Blends. Corpus ID: 1975216. In: In 11th International Conference
on Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems; July 2009 [Online]. Available: http://
www.erc.wisc.edu/documents/1-Kokjohn-Reitz-UW.pdf [Accessed 24th
December 2020].

[111] Kokjohn SL, Splitter DA, Hanson RM, Reitz RD, Manente V, Johansson B.

Modeling Charge Preparation and Combustion in Diesel Fuel, Ethanol, and Dual-
Fuel PCCI Engines. Atomization and Sprays 2011;21(2):107–19. https://doi.org/
10.1615/atomizspr.2011002836.

[112] Splitter DA, Kokjohn SL, Rein K, Hanson RM, Sanders S, Reitz RD. An Optical
Investigation of Ignition Processes in Fuel Reactivity Controlled PCCI
Combustion. SAE Technical Paper No. 2010-01-0345 2010. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2010-01-0345.

[113] Walker NR, Dempsey AB, Andrie MJ, Reitz RD. Use of Low-Pressure Direct-
Injection for Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition (RCCI) Light-Duty
Engine Operation. SAE Int. J. Engines 2013;6(2):1222–37. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2013-01-1605.

[114] Splitter DA, Wissink ML, Hendricks TL, Ghandhi JB, Reitz RD. Comparison of

RCCI, HCCI, and CDC Operation from Low to Full Load. In: THIESEL Conference
on Thermo and Fluid Dynamic Processes in Direct Injection Engines; 2012.

[115] Wissink M L. Doctoral dissertation. University of Wisconsin - Madison; 2015.
[116] Wissink ML, Reitz RD. Direct Dual-fuel stratification, a path to combine the

benefits of RCCI and PPC. SAE Technical Paper No. 2015-01-0856 2015. https://
doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-0856.

[117] Singh AP, Sharma N, Satsangi DP, Kumar V, Agarwal AK. Reactivity-Controlled
Compression Ignition Combustion Using Alcohols. Advanced Engine Diagnostics.
Singapore: Springer; 2019. p. 9–28. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-3275-
3_2.

[118] Curran S, Prikhodko V, Cho K, Sluder CS, Parks J, Wagner R, Kokjohn S, Reitz RD.
In-Cylinder Fuel Blending of Gasoline/Diesel for Improved Efficiency and Lowest
Possible Emissions on a Multi-Cylinder Light-Duty Diesel Engine. SAE Technical
Paper No. 2010-01-2206 2010. https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01-2206.
[119] Curran S, Hanson R, Wagner R, Reitz R. Efficiency and Emissions Mapping of

RCCI in a Light-Duty Diesel Engine. SAE Technical Paper No. 2013-01-0289 2013.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2016-01-2309.

[120] Splitter DA, Hanson RN, Kokjohn SL, Reitz RD. Improving Engine Performance by
Optimizing Fuel Reactivity with a Dual-fuel PCCI Strategy. In: THIESEL
Conference on Thermo and Fluid Dynamic Processes in Diesel Engines; 2010.

[121] Walker NR, Dempsey AB, Andrie MJ, Reitz RD. Experimental Study of Low-

Pressure Fueling Under RCCI Engine Operation. In: Americas 24th Annual
Conference on Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems; May 2012.

spontaneous flame propagation under RCCI conditions. Combust. Flame 2015;
162:3412–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.06.005.

[137] Wang H, Zhao X, Tong L, Yao M. The effects of DI fuel properties on the

combustion and emissions characteristics of RCCI combustion. Fuel 2018;227:
457–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.04.025.

[138] Benajes J, Molina S, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J. Effects of low reactivity fuel
characteristics and blending ratio on low load RCCI (reactivity controlled
compression ignition) performance and emissions in a heavy-duty diesel engine.
Energy 2015;90:1261–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.06.088.
[139] Ryskamp R, Thompson G, Carder D, Nuszkowski J. The Influence of High
Reactivity Fuel Properties on Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition
Combustion. SAE Technical Paper No. 2017-24-0080 2017. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2017-24-0080.

[140] Splitter DA, Reitz RD. Fuel reactivity effects on the efficiency and operational

window of dual-fuel compression ignition engines. Fuel 2014;118:163–75.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.10.045.

[141] Hendricks TL, Splitter DA, Ghandhi JB. Experimental investigation of piston heat
transfer under conventional diesel and reactivity-controlled compression ignition
combustion regimes. Int. J. Engine Res. 2014;15:684–705. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1468087413512310.

[142] Olmeda P, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Sari RL. Experimental investigation on
RCCI heat transfer in a light-duty diesel engine with different fuels: Comparison
versus conventional diesel combustion. Applied Thermal Engineering 2018;144:
424–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.08.082.

[143] Dempsey AB, Curran SJ, Wagner RM. A perspective on the range of gasoline

compression ignition combustion strategies for high engine efficiency and low
NOx and soot emissions: Effects of in-cylinder fuel stratification. International
Journal of Engine Research 2016;17(8):897–917. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1468087415621805.

[144] Kokjohn SL, Hanson RM, Splitter DA, Reitz RD. Fuel reactivity controlled

compression ignition (RCCI): A pathway to controlled high-efficiency clean
combustion. Int J Engine Res 2011;12:209–26. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1468087411401548.

[145] Liu X, Kokjohn S, Li Y, Wang H, Li H, Yao M. A numerical investigation of the
combustion kinetics of reactivity controlled compression ignition (RCCI)
combustion in an optical engine. Fuel 2019;241:753–66. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2018.12.068.

[146] Lu X, Ji L, Ma J, Zhou X, Huang Z. Combustion characteristics and influential

factors of isooctane active-thermal atmosphere combustion assisted by two-stage
reaction of n-heptane. Combust Flame 2011;158:203–16. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.08.009.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102842

A.K. Agarwal et al.

[147] Liu H, Ma G, Ma N, Zheng Z, Huang H, Yao M. Effects of charge concentration and

[170] Singh AP, Kumar V, Agarwal AK. Evaluation of Reactivity Controlled

reactivity stratification on combustion and emission characteristics of a PFI-DI
dual injection engine under low load condition. Fuel 2018;231:26–36. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.05.027.

Compression Ignition Combustion mode Engine Using Mineral Diesel/Gasoline
Fuel Pair. Fuel 2021;301:120986. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120986.

[171] Singh AP, Sharma N, Kumar V, Agarwal AK. Experimental investigations of

[148] Singh AP, Kumar V, Agarwal AK. Reactivity-Controlled Compression Ignition
Combustion at Different Intake Charge Temperatures and Exhaust Gas
Recirculation. SAE Int. J. Engines 2021;14(6). https://doi.org/10.4271/03-14-
06-0046.

mineral diesel/methanol-fueled reactivity controlled compression ignition engine
operated at variable engine loads and premixed ratios. International Journal of
Engine Research 2021;22(7):2375–89. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1468087420923451.

[149] Yao M, Chen Z, Zheng Z, Zhang Q. Investigation of the effects of injection timing
on thermo-atmosphere combustion of methanol. SAE Technical Paper No. 2007-
01-0197 2007. https://doi.org/10.4271/2007-01-0197.

[172] Jia Z, Denbratt I. Experimental investigation into the combustion characteristics
of a methanol-diesel heavy-duty engine operated in RCCI mode. Fuel 2018;226:
745–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.03.088.

[150] Agarwal AK, Singh AP, Kumar V. Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition

Engine Fueled With Mineral Diesel and Butanol at Varying Premixed Ratios and
Loads. ASME. J. Energy Resour. Technol. 2021;144(2):022304. https://doi.org/
10.1115/1.4051037.

[151] Wang Y, Yao M, Li T, Zhang W, Zheng Z. A parametric study for enabling

reactivity controlled compression ignition (RCCI) operation in diesel engines at
various engine loads. Appl Energy 2016;175:389–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2016.04.095.

[152] Singh AP, Sharma N, Satsangi DP, Agarwal AK. Effect of Fuel Injection Pressure

and Premixed Ratio on Mineral Diesel-Methanol Fueled Reactivity Controlled
Compression Ignition Combustion mode Engine. ASME. J. Energy Resour.
Technol. December 2020;142(12):122301. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4047320.

[153] Liu H, Tang Q, Ran X, Fang X, Yao M. Optical diagnostics on the reactivity

controlled compression ignition (RCCI) with micro direct-injection strategy. Proc
Combust Inst 2019;37:4767–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.180.
[154] Agarwal AK, Singh AP, Kumar V, Sharma N, et al. Alcohol-Fueled Reactivity-

Controlled Compression Ignition Combustion for Partial Replacement of Mineral
Diesel in Internal Combustion Engines. SAE Int. J. Engines 2021;14(6). https://
doi.org/10.4271/03-14-06-0047.

[155] Benajes J, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Boronat V. Achieving clean and efficient

engine operation up to full load by combining optimized RCCI and dual-fuel
diesel gasoline combustion strategies. Energy Convers Manage 2017;136:142–51.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2017.01.010.

[156] Benajes J, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Boronat V. An investigation on the

particulate number and size distributions over the whole engine map from an
optimized combustion strategy combining RCCI and dual-fuel diesel-gasoline.
Energy Convers Manage 2017;140:98–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2017.02.073.

[157] Boyer RL. Status of Dual-fuel Engine Development. SAE Technical Paper No.

[173] Singh AP, Kumar V, Agarwal AK. Evaluation of comparative engine combustion,
performance, and emission characteristics of low-temperature combustion (PCCI
and RCCI) modes. Applied Energy 2020;278:115644. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2020.115644.

[174] Han X, Zheng M, Tjong JS, Li T. Suitability study of n-butanol for enabling PCCI
and HCCI and RCCI combustion on a high compression-ratio diesel engine. SAE
Technical Paper No. 2015-01-1816 2015. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-
1816.

[175] Hanson R, Kokjohn S, Splitter D, Reitz RD. Fuel effects on reactivity controlled
compression ignition (RCCI) combustion at low load. SAE Int J Engines 2011;4:
394–411. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-0361.

[176] Mohammadian A, Chehrmonavari H, Kakaee A, Paykani A. Effect of injection

strategies on a single fuel RCCI combustion fueled with isobutanol/isobutanol +
DTBP blends. Fuel 2020;278:118219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.118219.

[177] DelVescovo D, Wang H, Wissink M, Reitz RD. Isobutanol as both low reactivity
and high reactivity fuels with addition of di-tert butyl peroxide (DTBP) in RCCI
combustion. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2015;8:329–43. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-
01-0839.

[178] Chuahy FD, Kokjohn SL. Effects of reformed fuel composition in “single” fuel
reactivity controlled compression ignition combustion. Appl Energy 2017;208:
1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.10.057.

[179] Kaddatz J, Andrie M, Reitz RD, Kokjohn S. Light-duty reactivity controlled

compression ignition combustion using a cetane improver. SAE Technical Paper
No. 2012-01-1110 2012. https://doi.org/10.4271/2012-01-1110.

[180] Ji L, Lü X, Ma J, Huang C, Han D, Huang Z. Experimental study on influencing

factors of iso-octane thermo-atmosphere combustion in a dual-fuel stratified
charge compression ignition (SCCI) engine. Energy Fuels 2009;23(5):2405–12.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1468087412440908.

490018 1949. https://doi.org/10.4271/490018.

[181] Chen Z, Yao M, Zheng Z, Zhang Q. Experimental and numerical study of

[158] Elliott MA, Davis RF. Dual-Fuel Combustion in Diesel Engines. Ind. Eng. Chem.

1951;43(12):2854–64. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie50504a056.

methanol/dimethyl ether dual-fuel compound combustion. Energy Fuels 2009;23:
2719–30. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef8010542.

[159] Eichmeier J, Bach F, Sauer C, Wagner U. Gasoline Auto Ignition with Diesel Pilot

[182] Lu X, Yang Z, Zhou X, Huang Z. Auto-ignition and combustion characteristics of

Injection. MTZ Worldw 2013;74:58–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s38313-013-
0043-2.

[160] Ishiyama T, Shioji M, Mitani S, Shibata H. Improvement of Performance and

Exhaust Emissions in a Converted Dual-Fuel Natural Gas Engine. SAE Technical
Paper No. 2000-01-1866 2000. https://doi.org/10.4271/2000-01-1866.
[161] Srinivasan KK, Krishnan SR, Qi Y. Cyclic Combustion Variations in Dual-fuel
Partially Premixed Pilot-Ignited Natural Gas Engines. In: ASME 2012 Internal
Combustion Engine Division Spring Technical Conference; ICES2012-81145:133-
144; 2022. https://doi.org/10.1115/ICES2012-81145.

[162] Weaver S, Turner SH. Dual-fuel Natural Gas/Diesel Engines: Technology,

Performance, and Emissions. SAE Technical Paper No. 940548 1994. https://doi.
org/10.4271/940548.

[163] Thiyagarajan S, Sonthalia A, Edwin Geo V, Prakash T, Karthickeyan V, Ashok B,
et al. Effect of manifold injection of methanol/n-pentanol in safflower biodiesel
fueled CI engine. Fuel 2020;261:116378. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2019.116378.

[164] Parthasarathy M, Ramkumar S, Elumalai PV, Murugu Nachippan N, Dhinesh B.
Control strategies on HCCI engine performance and emission characteristics by
combined effect of exhaust gas recirculation with blend of biodiesel and n-
heptane. Energy Source Part A 2020. https://doi.org/10.1080/
15567036.2020.1850924.

[165] Bui TT, Balasubramanian D, Hoang AT, Konur O, Nguyen DC, Tran VN.

Characteristics of PM and soot emissions of internal combustion engines running
on biomass-derived DMF biofuel: A review. Energy Source Part A 2020. https://
doi.org/10.1080/15567036.2020.1869868.

[166] Balasubramanian D, Hoang AT, PaplaVenugopal I, Shanmugam A, Gao J,

Wongwuttanasatian T. Numerical and experimental evaluation on the pooled
effect of waste cooking oil biodiesel/diesel blends and exhaust gas recirculation in
a twin-cylinder diesel engine. Fuel 2021;287:119815. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.119815.

[167] Ramalingam K, Balasubramanian D, Chellakumar PJTJS, Padmanaban J,

Murugesan P, Xuan T. An assessment on production and engine characterization
of a novel environment-friendly fuel. Fuel 2020;279:118558. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118558.

[168] Pellegrini L, Marchionna M, Patrini R, Beatrice C, Del Giacomo N, Guido C.
Combustion behaviour and emission performance of neat and blended
polyoxymethylene dimethyl ethers in a light-duty diesel engine. SAE Technical
Paper No. 2012-01-1053 2012. https://doi.org/10.4271/2012-01-1053.
[169] Li B, Li Y, Liu H, Liu F, Wang Z, Wang J. Combustion and emission characteristics
of diesel engine fueled with biodiesel/PODE blends. Appl Energ 2017;206:
425–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.08.206.

N-butanol triggered by low- and high-temperature reactions of premixed n-
heptane. Fuel 2013;112:1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.05.037.
[183] Lu X, Zhou X, Ji L, Yang Z, Han D, Huang C, et al. Experimental studies on the

dual-fuel sequential combustion and emission simulation. Energy 2013;51:
358–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2013.01.026.

[184] Cui Y, Zheng Z, Wen M, Tang Q, Geng C, Wang Q, et al. Optical diagnostics on the
effects of reverse reactivity stratification on the flame development in dual-fuel
combustion. Fuel 2021;287:119500. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.119500.

[185] Tanga Q, Liua X, Liub H, Wangb H, Yao M. Investigation on the dual-fuel active-
thermal atmosphere combustion strategy based on optical diagnostics and
numerical simulations. Fuel 2020;276:118023. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.118023.

[186] Zhao W, Li Z, Huang G, Zhang Y, Qian Y, Lu X. Experimental investigation of

direct injection dual-fuel of n-butanol and biodiesel on Intelligent Charge
Compression Ignition (ICCI) Combustion mode. Applied Energy 2020;266:
114884. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114884.

[187] Zhang H, Guo L, Yan Y, Sun W. Experimental investigation on the combustion and

emissions characteristics of an N-butanol/CTL dual-fuel engine. Fuel 2022;274
(1):117696. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117696.

[188] Ju Y, Reuter CB, Yehia OR, Farouk TI, Won SH. Dynamics of cool flames. Progress
in Energy and Combustion Science 2019:75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2019.100787.

[189] Liu D, Santner J, Togb ́e C, Felsmann D, Koppmann J, Lackner A, et al. Flame

structure and kinetic studies of carbon dioxide-diluted dimethyl ether flames at
reduced and elevated pressures. Combust Flame 2013;160:2654–68. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.06.032.

[190] Agarwal AK, Singh AP, Maurya RK. Evolution, challenges and path forward for
low-temperature combustion engines. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science
2017;61:1–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2017.02.001.

[191] Kelly-Zion P, Dec JE. A Computational Study of the Effect of Fuel-Type on Ignition
Time in HCCI Engines. In: 28th International Combustion Symposium. Edinburgh;
2000.

[192] Milovanovic N, Chen R. A review of experimental and simulation studies on

controlled auto-ignition combustion. SAE Technical Paper 2001; 2001-01-1890
2022. https://doi.org/10.4271/2001-01-1890.

[193] Pollard RT. Hydrocarbons. In: Bamford CH, Tipper CF, editors. Comprehensive

chemical kinetics: Gas-phase combustion, 1977; 17:249-367.

[194] Glassman I. Combustion. London: Academic Press, Inc.; 1996.
[195] Harper MR, Van Geem KM, Pyl SP, Marin GB, Green WH. Comprehensive reaction

mechanism for n-butanol pyrolysis and combustion. Combust Flame 2011;158:
16–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.06.002.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102843

A.K. Agarwal et al.

[196] Sarathy S, Thomson M, Togb ́e C, Dagaut P, Halter F, Mounaim-Rousselle C. An

experimental and kinetic modelling study of n-butanol combustion. Combust
Flame 2009;156:852–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.11.019.

[197] Herrmann F, Jochim B, Oßwald P, Cai L, Pitsch H, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K.

Experimental and numerical low-temperature oxidation study of ethanol and
dimethyl ether. Combust Flame 2014;161:384–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2013.09.014.

[198] Qin X, Ju Y. Measurements of burning velocities of dimethyl ether and air
premixed flames at elevated pressures. Proc Combus Inst 2005;30:233–40.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.251.

[199] Peralta-Yahya PP, Zhang F, Del Cardayre SB, Keasling JD. Microbial engineering
for the production of advanced biofuels. Nature 2012;488:320. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature11478.

[200] Pease RN. The negative temperature coefficient in the rate of propane oxidation.
J Am Chem Soc 1938;60:2244–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01276a061.

[201] Pease RN. Characteristics of the non-explosive oxidation of propane and the
butanes1. J Am Chem Soc 1929;51:1839–56. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja01381a035.

[202] Barusch M, Crandall H, Payne J, Thomas J. Identification of β-Dicarbonyl

Compounds. Ind Eng Chem 1951;43:2764–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie50504a037.

[203] Battin-Leclerc F. Detailed chemical kinetic models for the low-temperature

combustion of hydrocarbons with application to gasoline and diesel fuel
surrogates. Progress Energy Combust Sci 2008;34:440–98. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2007.10.002.

[204] Z ́ador J, Taatjes CA, Fernandes RX. Kinetics of elementary reactions in low-
temperature autoignition chemistry. Progress Energy Combust Sci 2011;37:
371–421. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2010.06.006.

[205] Ju Y, Sun W. Plasma assisted combustion: dynamics and chemistry. Progress

Energy Combust Sci 2015;48:21–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2014.12.002.

[206] Herbinet O, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK. Detailed chemical kinetic mechanism for the
oxidation of biodiesel fuels blend surrogate. Combust Flame 2010;157:893–908.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.10.013.

[207] Sanchez FP. PhD Thesis. Morgantown, West Virginia: West Virginia University;

2010.

[208] Pilling MJ. Low-temperature combustion and autoignition. Elsevier; 1997.
[209] Tran LS, Herbinet O, Li Y, Wullenkord J, Zeng M, Br ̈auer E, et al. Low-temperature

gas-phase oxidation of diethyl ether: fuel reactivity and fuel-specific products.
Proc Combus Inst 2019;37:511–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.135.
[210] Rodriguez A, Frottier O, Herbinet O, Fournet R, Bounaceur R, Fittschen C, et al.

Experimental and modelling investigation of the low-temperature oxidation of
dimethyl ether. J Phys Chem A 2015;119:7905–23. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpca.5b01939.

[211] Yehia OR, Reuter CB, Ju Y. Low-temperature multistage warm diffusion flames.

Combust Flame 2018;195:63–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2018.03.013.

[212] Li H, Prabhu SK, Miller DL, Cernansky NP. Auto-ignition chemistry studies on

primary reference fuels in a motored engine. SAE Technical Paper 1994:942062.
https://doi.org/10.4271/942062.

[213] Machrafi H. Experimental validation of a kinetic multi-component mechanism in

a wide HCCI engine operating range for mixtures of n-heptane, iso-octane and
toluene: Influence of EGR parameters. Energy Conversion and Management 2008;
49:2956–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2008.06.016.

[214] Mancaruso E, Vaglieco BM. Optical investigation of the combustion behaviour

inside the engine operating in HCCI mode and using alternative diesel fuel.
Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 2010;34(3):346–51. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2009.10.010.

[215] Liu X, Kokjohn S, Lu Y, Wang H, Li H, Yao M. A numerical investigation of the
combustion kinetics of reactivity controlled compression ignition (RCCI)
combustion in an optical engine. Fuel 2019;241:753–66. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2018.12.068.

Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Blending. SAE Int. J. Fuels Lubr. 2010;3(2):946–55.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01-2266.

[223] Jiang H, Wang J, Shuai S. Visualization and performance analysis of gasoline

homogeneous charge induced ignition by diesel. SAE Technical Paper No. 2005-
01-0136 2005. https://doi.org/10.4271/2005-01-0136.

[224] Storey JM, Curran SJ, Lewis SA, Barone TL, Dempsey AB, Moses-DeBusk M,

Hanson RM, Prikhodko VY, Northrop WF. Evolution and current understanding of
physicochemical characterization of particulate matter from reactivity controlled
compression ignition combustion on a multi-cylinder light-duty engine.
International J of Engine Research 2017;18(5-6):505–19. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1468087416661637.

[225] Kolodziej C, Wissink M, Splitter D, Hanson R, Reitz RD. Benajes J. Particle Size

and Number Emissions from RCCI with Direct Injections of Two Fuels. SAE
Technical Paper No. 2013; 2013-01-1661 2022. https://doi.org/10.4271/2013-
01-1661.

[226] Ryskamp R, Thompson G, Carder D, Nuszkowski J. The Influence of High
Reactivity Fuel Properties on Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition
Combustion. SAE Technical Paper No. 2017-24-0080 2017. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2017-24-0080.

[227] Liu H, Wang X, Zheng Z, Gu J, Wang H, Yao M. Experimental and simulation
investigation of the combustion characteristics and emissions using n-butanol/
biodiesel dual-fuel injection on a diesel engine. Energy 2014;74:741–52. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2014.07.041.

[228] Hararia PA, Yaliwal VS, Banapurmath NR. Effect of CNG and CBG as low

reactivity fuels along with diesel and TPME as high reactivity fuels in RCCI mode
of combustion by varying different loads. Materials Today 2021;47(10):2491–4.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.04.557.

[229] Kakoee A, Bakhshan Y, Gharehghani A, Salahi MM. Numerical comparative study

of hydrogen addition on combustion and emission characteristics of a natural-
gas/dimethyl-ether RCCI engine with pre-chamber. Energy 2019;186:115878.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.115878.

[230] Jin T, Wu Y, Wang X, Luo KH, Lu T, Luo K, Fan J. Ignition dynamics of DME/

methane-air reactive mixing layer under reactivity controlled compression
ignition conditions: Effects of cool flames. Applied Energy 2019;249:343–54.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.04.161.

[231] Park SH, Shin D, Park J. Effect of ethanol fraction on the combustion and emission
characteristics of a dimethyl ether-ethanol dual-fuel reactivity controlled
compression ignition engine. Appl. Energy 2016;182:43–252. 10.1016/j.
apenergy.2016.07.101.

[232] Wang H, Liu D, Ma T, Tong L, Zheng Z, Yao M. Thermal efficiency improvement
of PODE/Gasoline dual-fuel RCCI high load operation with EGR and air dilution.
Applied Thermal Engineering 2019;159:13763. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2019.113763.

[233] Wang H, Zhong X, Mi S, Yao MF. Numerical investigation on the combustion

characteristics of PODE3/gasoline RCCI and high load extension. Fuel 2020;263:
116366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.116366.

[234] García A, Gil A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Lago SR. OMEx-diesel blends as high

reactivity fuel for ultra-low NOx and soot emissions in the dual-mode dual-fuel
combustion strategy. Fuel 2020;275:117898. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.117898.

[235] Song H, Liu C, Li F, Wang Z, He X, Shuai S, et al. A comparative study of using
diesel and PODEn as pilot fuels for natural gas dual-fuel combustion. Fuel 2017;
188:418–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.10.051.

[236] Tang Q, Liu H, Ran X, Li M, Yao M. Effects of direct-injection fuel types and

proportion on late-injection reactivity controlled compression ignition. Combust
Flame 2020;211:445–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.10.018.

[237] Hanson R, Curran S, Wagner R, Reitz R. Effects of Biofuel Blends on RCCI

Combustion in a Light-Duty, Multi-Cylinder Diesel Engine. SAE Int. J. Engines
2013;6(1):488–503. https://doi.org/10.4271/2013-01-1653.

[238] Kumar S, Cho JH, Park J, Moon I. Advances in diesel–alcohol blends and their

effects on the performance and emissions of diesel engines. Renew Sustain Energy
Rev 2013;22:46–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.01.017.

[216] Krisman A, Hawkes ER, Talei M, Bhagatwala A, Chen JH. Polybrachial structures

[239] Sayin C, Ilhan M, Canakci M, Gumus M. Effect of injection timing on the exhaust

in dimethyl ether edge-flames at negative temperature coefficient conditions.
Proc Combus Inst 2015;35:999–1006. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2014.05.129.

[217] Dahms RN, Paczko GA, Skeen SA, Pickett LM. Understanding the ignition

mechanism of high-pressure spray flames. Proc Combus Inst 2017;36:2615–23.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.08.023.

[218] Wei H, Yao C, Pan W, Han G, Dou Z, Wu T, Liu M, Wang B, Gao J, Chen C, Shi J.

Experimental investigations of the effects of pilot injection on combustion and
gaseous emission characteristics of diesel/methanol dual-fuel engine. Fuel 2017;
188:427–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.10.056.

[219] Zhang ZH, Cheung CS, Chan TL, Yao CD. Experimental investigation on regulated

and unregulated emissions of a diesel/methanol compound combustion engine
with and without diesel oxidation catalyst. Sci Total Environ 2010;408:865–72.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2009.10.060.

[220] Splitter D, Hanson R, Kokjohn S, Wissink M, Reitz R. Injection effects in low load
RCCI dual-fuel combustion. SAE Technical Paper No. 2011-24-0047 2011.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-24-0047.

[221] Kokjohn S, Hanson R, Splitter D, Kaddatz J, Reitz RD. Fuel Reactivity Controlled
Compression Ignition (RCCI) Combustion in Light- and Heavy-Duty Engines. SAE
Int. J. Engines 2011;4(1):360–74. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-0357.
[222] Prikhodko V, Curran S, Barone T, Lewis S, Storey JM, Cho K, Wagner RM,

Parks JE. Emission Characteristics of a Diesel Engine Operating with In-Cylinder

emissions of a diesel engine using diesel–methanol blends. Renewable Energy
2009;34:1261–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2008.10.010.

[240] Sayin C, Ozsezen AN, Canakci M. The influence of operating parameters on the
performance and emissions of a DI diesel engine using methanol-blended diesel
fuel. Fuel 2010;89:1407–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2009.10.035.
[241] Sayin C. Engine performance and exhaust gas emissions of methanol and
ethanol–diesel blends. Fuel 2010;89:3410–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2010.02.017.

[242] Krisman A, EHawkes ER, Talei M, Bhagatwala A, Chen JH. Characterization of

two-stage ignition in diesel engine-relevant thermochemical conditions using
direct numerical simulation. Combust Flame 2016;172:326–41. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.06.010.

[243] Giakoumis E, Sarakatsanis C. A Comparative Assessment of Biodiesel Cetane

Number Predictive Correlations Bases of Fatty Acid Composition. Energies 2019;
12:422. https://doi.org/10.3390/en12030422.

[244] Aydin H. An innovative research on variable compression ratio in RCCI strategy
on a power generator diesel engine using CNG-safflower biodiesel. Energy 2021;
231:121002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.121002.

[245] Prashant GK, Lata DB, Joshi PC. Investigations on the effect of methanol blend on
the combustion parameters of dual-fuel diesel engine. ApplThermEng 2016;103:
187–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.11.051.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102844

A.K. Agarwal et al.

[246] Li YY, Zhang CH, Yu W, Wu H. Effects of rapid burning characteristics on the

vibration of a common-rail diesel engine fueled with diesel–methanol dual-fuel.
Fuel 2016;170:176–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.12.045.
[247] Yao CD, Cheung CS, Cheng CH, Wang Y, Chan TL, Lee SC. Effect of diesel/

methanol compound combustion on diesel engine combustion and emissions.
Energy Convers Manage 2008;49:1696–704. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2007.11.007.

[248] Zhang ZH, Cheung CS, Yao CD. Influence of fumigation methanol on the

combustion and particulate emissions of a diesel engine. Fuel 2013;111:442–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.05.014.

[249] Haribabu N, Apparao BV, Adinarayana S, Sekhar Y, Rambabu K. Performance and
emission studies on di-diesel engine fueled with Pongamia methyl ester injection
and methanol carburetion. J Eng Sci Technol 2010;5:30–40 [Online]. Available:
www.journaldatabase.info/articles/performance_emission_studies_on [Accessed
24th  December 2020].

[250] Li Y, Jia M, Liu Y, Xie M. Numerical study on the combustion and emission

characteristics of a methanol/diesel reactivity controlled compression ignition
(RCCI) engine. Appl Energy 2013;106:184–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2013.01.058.

[251] Ra Y, Reitz RD. A combustion model for IC engine combustion simulations with

multi-component fuels. Combust Flame 2011;158(1):69–90. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.07.019.

[252] Geng P, Yao CD, Wei LJ, Liu JH, Wang QG, Pan W, et al. Reduction of PM

emissions from a heavy-duty diesel engine with diesel/methanol dual-fuel. Fuel
2014;123:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.01.056.

[253] Cheung CS, Zhu L, Huang Z. Regulated and unregulated emissions from a diesel
engine fueled with biodiesel and biodiesel blended with methanol. Atmos Environ
2009;43:4865–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.07.021.

[254] Liu Y, Jiao W, Qi G. Preparation and properties of methanol–diesel oil emulsified

fuel under high-gravity environment. Renew Energy 2011;36:1463–8. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2010.11.007.

[255] Zhu L, Cheung CS, Zhang W, Huang Z. Emissions characteristics of a diesel engine

operating on biodiesel and biodiesel blended with ethanol and methanol. Sci
Total Environ 2010;408:914–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2009.10.078.

[256] Moon S, Tsujimura T, Oguma M, Chen Z, Huang Z, Saitou T. Mixture condition,
combustion and sooting characteristics of ethanol–diesel blends in diffusion
flames under various injection and ambient conditions. Fuel 2013;113:128–39.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.05.060.

[257] Nieman DE, Dempsey AB, Reitz RD. Heavy-duty RCCI operation using natural gas
and diesel. SAE Int. J. Engines 2012;5:270–85. https://doi.org/10.4271/2012-01-
0379.

[258] Walker NR, Wissink ML, DelVescovo DA, Reitz RD. Natural gas for high load dual-

fuel reactivity controlled compression ignition in heavy-duty engines. ASME J.
Energy Res. Technol. 2015;137:042202–042202-7. https://doi.org/10.1115/
ICEF2014-5620.

[259] Kakaee A-H, Rahnama P, Paykani A. Influence of fuel composition on combustion
and emissions characteristics of natural gas/diesel RCCI engine. J Natural Gas Sci
Eng 2015;25:58–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2015.04.020.

[271] Prajapati HN, Patel TM, Rathod GP. Emission analysis of biogas premixed charge
diesel dual-fueled engine. IOSR J Eng 2014;4(5):54–60. https://doi.org/10.9790/
3021-04535460.

[272] Bora BJ, Saha UK. Experimental evaluation of a rice bran biodiesel-biogas run
dual-fuel diesel engine at varying compression ratios. Renew Energy 2016;87:
782–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2015.11.002.

[273] Verma S, Das L, Kaushik S, Tyagi S. An experimental investigation of exergetic

performance and emission characteristics of hydrogen supplemented biogas-
diesel dual-fuel engine. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43(4):2452–68. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.12.032.

[274] Verma S, Das L, Bhatti S, Kaushik S. A comparative exergetic performance and

emission analysis of pilot diesel dual-fuel engine with biogas, CNG, and hydrogen
as main fuels. Energy Convers Manag 2017;151:764–77. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2017.09.035.

[275] Li J, Huang H, Osaka Y, Bai Y, Kobayashi N, Chen Y. Combustion and heat release
characteristics of biogas under hydrogen-and oxygen-enriched condition.
Energies 2017;10(8):1200. https://doi.org/10.3390/en10081200.

[276] Khatri N, Khatri KK. Hydrogen enrichment on diesel engine with biogas in dual-
fuel mode. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45(11):7128–40. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.12.167.

[277] Ebrahimi M, Jazayeri SA. Effect of hydrogen addition on RCCI combustion of a
heavy-duty diesel engine fueled with landfill gas and diesel oil. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2019;44(14):7607–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.02.010.
[278] Hernandez B, Martin M. Optimization for biogas to chemicals via tri-reforming.
Analysis of Fischer-Tropsch fuels from biogas. Energy Convers Manag 2018;174:
998–1013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2018.08.074.

[279] Van Ga B, Van Nam T, Tu BTM, Trung NQ. Numerical simulation studies on

performance, soot, and NO x emissions of dual-fuel engine fueled with hydrogen-
enriched biogas mixtures. IET Renew Power Gener 2018;12(10):1111–8. https://
doi.org/10.1115/1.4051574.

[280] Chung K, Chun K-M. Combustion characteristics and generating efficiency using

biogas with added hydrogen. SAE Technical Paper No. 2013-01-2506 2013.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2013-01-2506.

[281] Mahmoodi R, Yari M, Ghafouri Jafar, Poorghasemi Kamran. Effect of reformed
biogas as a low reactivity fuel on performance and emissions of a RCCI engine
with reformed biogas/diesel dual-fuel combustion. International Journal of
Hydrogen Energy 2020;46(30):16494–512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2020.09.183.

[282] Vasavan A, de Goey P, van Oijen J. Numerical study on the autoignition of biogas

in moderate or intense low oxygen dilution non-premixed combustion systems.
Energy & Fuels 2018;32(8):8768–80. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.8b01388.

[283] Martin J, Boehman A, Topkar R, Chopra S, et al. Intermediate Combustion Modes
between Conventional Diesel and RCCI. SAE. Int. J. Engines 2018;11(6):835–60.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2018-01-0249.

[284] Tanov S, Collin R, Johansson B, Tuner M. Combustion Stratification with Partially
Premixed Combustion, PPC, Using NVO and Split Injection in a LD - Diesel
Engine. SAE Int. J. Engines 2014;7:1911–9. https://doi.org/10.4271/2014-01-
2677.

[260] Paykani A, Kakaee A-H, Rahnama P, Reitz RD. Effects of diesel injection strategy

[285] Lu P, Zhao H, Herfatmanesh M. Cylinder Studies of High Injection Pressure

on natural gas/diesel reactivity controlled compression ignition combustion.
Energy 2015;90:814–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.07.112.

[261] Rahnama P, Paykani A, Reitz RD. A numerical study of the effects of using

hydrogen, reformer gas, and nitrogen on combustion, emissions, and load limits
of a heavy-duty natural gas/diesel RCCI engine. Appl Energy 2017;193:182–98.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.02.023.

[262] Li Y, Jia M, Chang Y, Xie M, Reitz RD. Towards a comprehensive understanding of

the influence of fuel properties on the combustion characteristics of a RCCI
(reactivity controlled compression ignition) engine. Energy 2022;99:69–82.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2016.01.056. 2106.

[263] Wei L, Yao C, Wang Q, Pan W, Han G. Combustion and emission characteristics of

a turbocharged diesel engine using high premixed ratio of methanol and diesel
fuel. Fuel 2015;140:156–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.09.070.
[264] Splitter D, Hanson R, Kokjohn S, Reitz RD. Reactivity Controlled Compression

Ignition (RCCI) Heavy-Duty Engine Operation at Mid-and High-Loads with
Conventional and Alternative Fuels. SAE Technical Paper No. 2011-01-0363
2011. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-0363.

[265] Benajes J, Molina S, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J. Effects of direct injection

timing and blending ratio on RCCI combustion with different low reactivity fuels.
Energy Convers. Manage 2015;99:193–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2015.04.046.

[266] Wang H, DelVescovo D, Yao M, Reitz RD. Numerical study of RCCI and HCCI

combustion processes using gasoline, diesel, iso-butanol, and DTBP cetane
improver. SAE Int J Engines 2015;8:831–45. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-
0850.

Gasoline Partially Premixed Combustion in a Single Cylinder Optical Engine. SAE
Technical Paper No. 2015-01-1819 2015. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-
1819.

[286] Liu H, Tang Q, Yang Z, Ran X, Geng C, Chen B, Feng L, Yao M. A comparative
study on partially premixed combustion (PPC) and reactivity controlled
compression ignition (RCCI) in an optical engine. Proceedings of the Combustion
Institute 2019;37:4759–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.004.

[287] Kokjohn S, Reitz R, Splitter D, Musculus M. Investigation of fuel reactivity
stratification for controlling PCI heat-release rates using high-speed
chemiluminescence imaging and fuel tracer fluorescence. SAE Int J Engines 2012;
5:248–69. https://doi.org/10.4271/2012-01-0375.

[288] Tang Q, Liu H, Li M, Geng C, Yao M. Multiple optical diagnostics on effect of fuel

stratification degree on reactivity controlled compression ignition. Fuel 2017;
202:688–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.04.136.

[289] Musculus MPB, Lachaux T, Pickett LM, Idicheria CA. End-of-injection over-mixing

and unburned hydrocarbon emissions in low-temperature-combustion diesel
engines. SAE Technical Paper No. 2007–01-0907 2007. https://doi.org/10.4271/
2012-01-0375.

[290] Xu Z, Jia M, Li Y, Chang Y, Xu G, Xu L, et al. Computational optimization of fuel

supply, syngas composition, and intake conditions for a syngas/diesel RCCI
engine. Fuel 2018;234:120–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.07.003.
[291] García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Rückert Roso V, Santos MM. Evaluating the

emissions and performance of two dual-mode RCCI combustion strategies under
the World Harmonized Vehicle Cycle (WHVC). Energy Convers. Manage 2017;
149:263–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2017.07.034.

[267] Gao T, Reader G, Tjong J, Zheng M. Energy Efficiency Comparison between

[292] Zhou DZ, Yang W, An H, Li J. Application of CFD-chemical kinetics approach in

Butanol and Ethanol Combustion with Diesel Ignition. SAE Technical Paper No.
2015-01-0859 2015. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-0859.

detecting RCCI engine knocking fueled with biodiesel/methanol. Appl. Energy
2022;145:255–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.02.058.

[268] Olah GA, Goeppert A, Prakash GS. Beyond oil and gas: the methanol economy.
2nd ed. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH; 2009. https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527627806.

[269] Hanson R, Curran S, Wagner R, Reitz RD. Effects of biofuel blends on RCCI

combustion in a light-duty, multi-cylinder diesel engine. SAE Technical Paper No.
2013-01-1653 2013. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-0859.

[270] Qian Y, Ouyang L, Wang X, Zhu L, Lu X. Experimental studies on combustion and
emissions of RCCI fueled with n-heptane/alcohols fuels. Fuel 2015;162:239–50.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.09.022.

[293] Wang QG, Wei LJ, Pan W, Yao CD. Investigation of operating range in a methanol-
fumigated diesel engine. Fuel 2015;140:164–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2014.09.067.

[294] Pan W, Yao C, Han G, Wei H, Wang Q. The impact of intake air temperature on

performance and exhaust emissions of a diesel methanol dual-fuel engine. Fuel
2015;162:101–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.08.073.

[295] Roh HG, Lee D, Lee CS. Impact of DME-biodiesel, diesel-biodiesel, and diesel fuels
on the combustion and emission reduction characteristics of a CI engine according

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102845

A.K. Agarwal et al.

to pilot and single injection strategies. J Energy Inst 2015;88:376–85. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.joei.2014.11.005.

ignition. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2013;6(2):329–35. https://doi.org/10.4271/2013-
01-0515.

[296] Liu J, Yao A, Yao C. Effects of diesel injection pressure on the performance and
emissions of a HD common-rail diesel engine fueled with diesel/methanol dual-
fuel. Fuel 2015;140:192–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.09.109.
[297] Walker NR, Dempsey AB, Andrie MJ, et al. In: Experimental study of low-pressure
fueling under RCCI engine operationILASS-Americas 24th  annual conference on
liquid atomization and spray systems, San Antonio, Texas; 2012 [Online].
Available: http://www.ilass.org/2/conferencepapers/80.pdf [Accessed 24th
December 2020].

[298] Suh HK. Investigations of multiple injection strategies for the improvement of

combustion and exhaust emissions characteristics in a low compression ratio (CR)
engine. Appl Energy 2011;88:5013–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2011.06.048.

[299] Wang H, Tong L, Zheng Z, Yao M. Experimental study on high-load extension of
gasoline/PODE dual-fuel RCCI operation using late intake valve closing. SAE Int.
J. Engines 2017;10:1482–90. https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-01-0754.

[300] Desantes JM, Benajes J, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J. The role of the in-cylinder

gas temperature and oxygen concentration over low load reactivity controlled
compression ignition combustion efficiency. Energy 2014;78:854–68. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.energy.2014.10.080.

[301] Benajes J, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Sari R. Fuel consumption and engine-out

emissions estimations of a light-duty engine running in dual-mode RCCI/CDC
with different fuels and driving cycles. Energy 2018;157:19–30. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2018.05.144.

[302] Fang W, Kittelson DB, Northrop WF. Optimization of reactivity-controlled

compression ignition combustion fueled with diesel and hydrous ethanol using
response surface methodology. Fuel 2015;160:446–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.fuel.2015.07.055.

[303] Dalha I, Said M, Abdul Karim Z, Aziz ARA, Firmansyah Z, Mhadi IA. Reactivity
Controlled Compression Ignition: An Advanced Combustion mode for Improved
Energy Efficiency. Energy Efficiency in Mobility Systems. Singapore: Springer
Singapore; 2020. p. 101–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-0102-9_6.
[304] Benajes J, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Boronat V. Gaseous emissions and

particle size distribution of dual-mode dual-fuel diesel-gasoline concept from low
to full load. Applied Thermal Engineering 2017;120:138–49. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.04.005.

[305] Benajes J, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Villalta D. Exploring the limits of the

reactivity controlled compression ignition combustion concept in a light-duty
diesel engine and the influence of the direct-injected fuel properties. Energy
Conversion and Management 2018;157:277–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2017.12.028.

[306] Wu Y, Reitz RD. Effects of Exhaust Gas Recirculation and Boost Pressure on
Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition Engine at High Load Operating
Conditions. Journal of Energy Resources Technology 2015;137(3):032210.
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4029866.

[307] Wang Y, Zhu Z, Yao M, Li T, Zhang W, Zheng Z. An investigation into the RCCI
engine operation under low load and its achievable operational range at different
engine speeds. Energy Conversion and Management 2016;124:399–413. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2016.07.026.

[308] Li Y, Jia M, Chang Y, Fan W, Xie M, Wang T. Evaluation of the necessity of

exhaust gas recirculation employment for a methanol/diesel reactivity controlled
compression ignition engine operated at medium loads. Energy Conversion and
Management 2015;101:40–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ENCONMAN.2015.05.041.

[309] Benajes J, Pastor JV, Garcia A, Monsalve-Serrano J. The potential of RCCI concept

to meet EURO VI NOx limitation and ultra-low soot emissions in a heavy-duty
engine over the whole engine map. Fuel 2015;159:952–61. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2015.07.064.

[310] Benajes J, Garcia A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Balloul I, Pradel G. An assessment of the
dual-mode reactivity-controlled compression ignition/conventional diesel
combustion capabilities in a Euro VI medium-duty diesel engine fueled with an
intermediate ethanol-gasoline blend and biodiesel. Energy Conversion and
Management 2016;123:381–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2016.06.059.

[311] Hanson R, Ickes A, Wallner T. Comparison of RCCI Operation with and without
EGR over the Full Operating Map of a Heavy-Duty Diesel Engine. SAE Technical
Paper No. 2016-01-0794 2016. https://doi.org/10.4271/2016-01-0794.
[312] Stoffels H. On the impact of the pressure rise rate on piston and connecting rod
dynamics in internal combustion engines. Proceedings of the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers, Part K: Journal of Multi-body Dynamics 2008;222(1):
31–48. https://doi.org/10.1243/14644193jmbd112.

[313] Zhen X, Wang Y, Xu S, Zhu Y, Tao C, Xu T, Song M. The engine knock analysis –
An overview. Applied Energy 2012;92:628–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2011.11.079.

[314] Li J, Yang W, An H, Zhou D, Yu W, Wang J, Li L. Numerical investigation on the

effect of reactivity gradient in a RCCI engine fueled with gasoline and diesel.
Energy Conversion and Management 2015;92:342–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enconman.2014.12.071.

[315] Wissink L, Lim JH, Splitter DA, Hanson RM, Reitz RD. Investigation of injection
strategies to improve high-efficiency RCCI combustion with diesel and gasoline
direct injection. In: Proceedings of ASME Internal Combustion Engine Division
Fall Technical Conference. ICEF2012-92107; 2012. p. 327–38. https://doi.org/
10.1115/ICEF2012-92107.

[317] Garcia A, Pedro P, Mosalve-Serrano J, Rafel LS. Sizing a conventional diesel

oxidation catalyst to be used for RCCI combustion under real driving conditions.
Applied Thermal Engineering 2018;140:62–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2018.05.043.

[318] Gross W, Reitz RD. Transient “Single fuel” RCCI Operation with Customized

Pistons in a Light-Duty Multicylinder Engine. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 2017;
139(3):032801. https://doi.org/10.1115/ICEF2015-1051.

[319] Paykani A, García M, Shahbakhti P, Rahnama Reitz RD. Reactivity controlled
compression ignition engine: Pathways towards commercial viability. Applied
Energy 2021;282(A):116174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.116174.
[320] Saracino R, Gaballo MR, Mannal S, Motz S, Carlucci A, Benegiamo M. Cylinder
pressure-based closed-loop combustion control: A valid support to fulfil current
and future requirements of diesel powertrain systems. SAE Technical Paper No.
2015-24-2423 2015. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-24-2423.
[321] Hanson R. Doctoral Thesis. University of Wisconsin-Madison; 2014.
[322] Li J, Yang W, Goh TN, An H, Maghbouli A. Study on RCCI (reactivity controlled
compression ignition) engine by means of statistical experimental design. Energy
2014;78:777–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2014.10.071.

[323] Hanson R, Spannbauer S, Gross C, Reitz RD, Curran S, Storey J, Shean H. Highway
Fuel Economy Testing of an RCCI Series Hybrid Vehicle. SAE Technical Paper No.
2015-01-0837 2015. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-0837.

[324] Hanson R, Curran S, Spannbauer S, Storey J, Huff S, Gross C, Reitz RD. Fuel

economy and emissions testing of an RCCI series hybrid vehicle. International
Journal of Powertrains 2017;6(3):259–81. https://doi.org/10.1504/
IJPT.2017.087894.

[325] "RCCI - Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition," ArenaRed, [Online].

Available: https://www.arenared.nl/cpbc+~+rcci. [Accessed 20 October 2020].
[326] Burke J. A Commercial First for RCCI Retrofits. Diesel & Gas Turbine Worldwide

09 September 2020 [Online]. Available: https://dieselgasturbine.com/a-comm
ercial-first-for-rcci-retrofits/ [Accessed 20 October 2020].

[327] Benajes J, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Villalta D. Benefits of E85 versus
gasoline as low reactivity fuel for an automotive diesel engine operating in
reactivity controlled compression ignition combustion mode. Energy Conversion
and Management 2018;159:85–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2018.01.015.

[328] Benajes J, García A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Balloul I, Pradel G. Evaluating the
reactivity controlled compression ignition operating range limits in a high-
compression ratio medium-duty diesel engine fueled with biodiesel and ethanol.
International Journal of Engine Research 2017;18(1-2):66–80. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1468087416678500.

[329] Martin J, Boehman A. Mapping the combustion modes of a dual-fuel compression

ignition engine. International Journal of Engine Research 2021.

[330] Electric Vehicle Database. 21 July 2020 [Online]. Available: https://ev-database.

org/cheatsheet/range-electric-car [Accessed].

[331] IEA. Global EV Outlook 2020. Paris: IEA; 2020 [Online]. Available: https://www.

iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-2021 [Accessed 28th  May 2021].

[332] Solouk A, Shahbakhti M. Modeling and energy management of an HCCI based
powertrain for series hybrid and extended range electric vehicles. Int J
Powertrains 2017;6(2). https://doi.org/10.1504/IJPT.2017.10001761.

[333] Solouk A, Shahbakhti M. Energy Optimization and Fuel Economy Investigation of

a Series Hybrid Electric Vehicle Integrated with Diesel/RCCI Engines. Energies
2016;9(2):1020. https://doi.org/10.3390/en9121020.

[334] Benajes J, Gacría A, Monsalve-Serrano J, Martínez-Boggio. Emissions reduction
from passenger cars with RCCI plug-in hybrid electric vehicle technology. Applied
Thermal Engineering 2020;164:114430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2019.114430.

[335] Solouk A, Shakiba-herfeh M, Kannan K, Solmaz H, Dice P, Bidarvatan M,

Kondipati NNT, Shahbakhti M. Fuel Economy Benefits of Integrating a Multi-
Mode Low-Temperature Combustion (LTC) Engine in a Series Extended Range
Electric Powertrain. SAE Technical Paper No. 2016-01-2361 2016. https://doi.
org/10.4271/2016-01-2361.

[336] Liotta J. A Peroxide-Based Cetane Improvement Additive with Favorable Fuel
Blending Properties. SAE Technical Paper No. 932767 1993. https://doi.org/
10.4271/932767.

[337] Goto S, Lee D, Wakao Y, Honma H, Mori M, Akasaka Y, et al. Development of an
LPG DI diesel engine using cetane number enhancing additives. SAE Trans 1999;
108(4):1941–50. https://doi.org/10.4271/1999-01-3602.

[338] Eng JA, Leppard WR, Sloane TM. The Effect of Di-Tertiary Butyl Peroxide (DTBP)
Addition. SAE Technical Paper No. 2003-01-3170 2003. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2003-01-3170.

[339] Hariharan D, Yang R, Zhou Y, Gainey B, Mamalis S, Smith RE, Lugo-Pimentel MA,
Castaldi MJ, Gill R, Davis A, Modroukas D, Lawler B. Single fuel reactivity
controlled compression ignition through catalytic partial oxidation reformation of
diesel fuel. Fuel 2019;264:116815. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.116815.
[340] Edwards N, Ellis SR, Frost JC, Golunski SE, van Keulen ANJ, Reinkingh JG. On-
board hydrogen generation for transport applications: the HotSpotTM methanol
processor. Journal of Power Sources 1998;71(1-2):123–8. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0378-7753(97)02797-3.

[341] Hunicz J. An experimental study of negative valve overlap injection effects and
their impact on combustion in a gasoline HCCI engine. Fuel 2014;117(A):236–50.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.09.079.

[342] Mikulski P, Balakrishnan R, Hunicz J. Natural gas-diesel reactivity controlled

[316] Prikhodko V, Curran S, Parks J, Wagner R. Effectiveness of diesel oxidation

compression ignition with negative valve overlap and in-cylinder fuel reforming.

catalyst in reducing HC and CO emissions from reactivity controlled compression

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102846

A.K. Agarwal et al.

Applied Energy 2019;254:113638. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2019.113638.

[343] Alger T, Mangold B. Dedicated EGR: A New Concept in High-Efficiency Engines.

SAE Int. J. Engines 2009;2(1):620–31. https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-0694.
[344] Lim JH, Reitz RD. Improving high-efficiency reactivity controlled compression

ignition combustion with diesel and gasoline direct injection. Proceedings of the
Institution of Mechanical Engineers Part D: Journal of Automobile Engineering
2013;227(1):17–30. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954407012456123.

[345] Sprenger FF, Eichlseder H. Experimental Optimization of a Small Bore Natural

Gas-Diesel Dual-fuel Engine with Direct Fuel Injection. SAE International Journal
of Engines 2016;9(2):1072. https://doi.org/10.4271/2016-01-0783.

[346] Wissink M, Reitz RD. Direct dual-fuel stratification, a path to combine the benefits
of RCCI and PPC. SAE International Journal of Engines 2015;8(2):878–89.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-0856.

[347] Luong MB, Sankaran R, Yu GH, Chung SH, Yoo SC. On the effect of injection

timing on the ignition of lean PRF/air/EGR mixtures under direct dual-fuel
stratification conditions. Combustion and Flame 2017;183:309–21. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.05.023.

[348] Lim JH, Reitz RD. High Load (21 Bar IMEP) Dual-fuel RCCI Combustion Using

Dual Direct Injection. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 2014;136(10):101514. https://
doi.org/10.1115/1.4027361.

[349] Yang B, Duan Q, Liu B, Zeng K. Parametric investigation of low pressure dual-fuel
direct injection on the combustion performance and emissions characteristics in a
RCCI engine fueled with diesel and CH4. Fuel 2020;260:116408. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2019.116408.

Lead-Author: Avinash Kumar Agarwal: Prof. Avinash Kumar Agarwal is serving as SBI
Endowed Chair Professor at Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Kanpur. He works in the areas of IC engines, combustion, conventional fuels,
alternative  fuels,  fuel  sprays,  optical  diagnostics,  laser  ignition,  LTC,  particulate  and
emission  control,  and  large  bore  engines.  Prof.  Agarwal  has  published  over  280  peer-
reviewed international journal and conference papers, 35 edited books, 63 books chap-
ters and has more than 9600 Scopus and more than 14500 Google scholar citations. He is
associate principle editor of “Fuel”.  For his outstanding contributions,  Prof. Agarwal is
conferred upon J C Bose National Fellowship (2019) by SERB, Clarivate Analytics India
Citation Award-2017 in Engineering and Technology, Prestigious Shanti Swarup Bhatna-
gar Prize (2016) in Engineering Sciences, among many awards. He is an elected Fellow of
Society  of  Automotive  Engineers  International,  USA,  American  Society  of  Mechanical
Engineers,  Indian  National  Academy  of  Engineering,  International  Society  for  Energy,
Environment and Sustainability, Royal Society of Chemistry, National Academy of Science
Allahabad and American Association for Advancement in Science.

Co-author: Akhilendra Pratap Singh: Dr. Akhilendra Pratap Singh is serving as Assistant
Professor at Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU),

Varanasi. He received his Master’s degree & and PhD in Mechanical Engineering from the
Indian  Institute  of  Technology  Kanpur  in  2010  and  2016,  respectively.  His  areas  of
research  include  advanced  low-temperature  combustion  (HCCI,  PCCI,  and  RCCI  mode
combustion);  optical  diagnostics  with  special  reference  to  engine  endoscopy  and  PIV;
combustion diagnostics; engine emissions measurement; particulate characterization and
their control; and alternative fuels. Dr. Singh has edited 10+ books and authored more
than 25+ book chapters, 60+ research articles in international journals and conferences.
He has published several articles in reputed journals like Applied Energy, International
Journal of Engine Research, Journal of Energy resource Technology and authored three
book chapters related to RCCI mode combustion. He has been awarded the “ISEES Best
PhD. Thesis Award” (2017), “SERB Indo-US Postdoctoral Fellowship” (2017), “IEI Young
Engineer Award” (2017), and “ISEES Young Scientist Award” (2018).

Co-Author: Antonio García Martinez: Dr. Antonio García is an Associate Professor in the
Department  of  Thermal  and  Reciprocating  Engines  at  the  Universitat  Polit`ecnica  de
Valencia, where he develops his teaching responsibilities in the framework of combustion
fundamentals.  During the last years,  his research activities  have been  focused on Low-
Temperature Combustion topics. In particular, an extensive research work on the use of
high-efficiency premixed combustion strategy using two-fuels with different auto-ignition
characteristics in CI engines. This effort has led to the publication of more than 90 peer-
reviewed articles, being an active member in SAE, acting as session organizer, reviewer
and author at different events. He received his M.S. and Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering
from the Universitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia. Professor Garcia has been a visiting professor
at the Combustion Engines division at Lund University, as well as a visiting researcher at
RWTH Aachen University, where he developed relevant works on the implementation of
advanced combustion systems on CI  engines. In addition, Antonio is Editor in Chief of
Results in Engineering Journal and Transportation Engineering Journal.

Co-Author: Javier Monsalve-Serrano: Dr. Monsalve-Serrano is Assistant Professor in the
Department  of  Thermal  and  Reciprocating  Engines  at  the  Universitat  Polit`ecnica  de
Valencia. He received his M.S. (2014) and PhD in Mechanical Engineering (2016) from the
same university, where he develops his teaching actives in the frame of combustion fun-
damentals,  thermodynamics  and  fluid  mechanics.  The  research  topic  of  Dr.  Monsalve-
Serrano during the past 7 years has been RCCI combustion. He developed his Doctoral
Thesis on the RCCI topic receiving the Cum Laude qualification and obtaining an Honor
Prize. Dr. Monsalve-Serrano has published more than 50 peer-reviewed journal papers in
the last 7 years, most of them about RCCI. He has sent more than 10 contributions on the
RCCI topic to different international congresses. He is an organization member of the in-
ternational  conference on Thermo-and  Fluid  Dynamic Processes in Direct  Injection En-
gines. He is also active member in SAE, acting as session organizer of different congresses
since the last 4 years. Moreover, he has been chairman of a session of the ILASS 2017 (28th
European  Conference  on  Liquid  Atomization  and  Spray  Systems).  He  participates  in
reviewing  articles  for  Q1  journals  and  SAE  congresses.  In  addition,  Javier  is  Associate
Editor of Transportation Engineering Journal.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102847
