Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Fiery ice: An overview of methane hydrate combustion

D. Dunn-Rankin a,*, Y.-C. Chien a,**, T. Ueda b, R. Ohmura b
a Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California Irvine, 4200 Engineering Gateway, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA
b Mechanical Engineering, Keio University, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 223-8522, Japan

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
Methane hydrate combustion
Hydrate flames
Gas hydrate combustion
Methane hydrate clathrate
Self-healing hydrate clathrate
Fire in the ice
In-situ combustion
Deep ocean power science

This article describes the combustion behavior of combustible gases as they are released from the clathrate cages
of a hydrate. Gas hydrates (clathrates) are ice-like crystalline solids that encapsulate guest gas molecules. It has
become known that a significant methane storehouse is in the form of methane hydrates on the sea floor and in
the arctic permafrost. There is great interest in this large fuel storehouse, particularly how to extract the methane
from the clathrates. One of the unique features of methane clathrate is that it is flammable, despite being 85%
water  –  fiery ice. While methane clathrates are the most prevalent in  nature, other combustible gas hydrates
(notably, propane and hydrogen) also have potential energy technology implications. In addition, carbon-dioxide
hydrates have been proposed as a potential post-combustion greenhouse gas sequestration strategy, and there is a
wide range of separation technologies and thermal management that take advantage of the unique thermody-
namic  and  kinetic  features  of  hydrate  formation.  To  better  understand  the  important  implications  of  direct
utilization of fuel clathrates and the related potential environmental consequences of CO2 hydrates, we describe
the  state-of-the-art  knowledge  regarding  the  formation  and  structure  of  gas  hydrates,  and  the  combustion
behavior of flammable gas hydrates. The combustion studies involve determining the rate of ice melt and water
evaporation during the hydrate burn, as well as the interesting phenomenon of self-healing, where the hydrates
stop burning by forming an ice sheet on their surface. Experimental results are used to estimate the heat transfer
from the flame into the hydrate and to calculate the amount of energy released to sustain the flame. This article
provides the reader with a comprehensive understanding of the basics and the subtleties of hydrates and their
combustion, thereby explaining the true meaning of fiery ice.

1. Introduction

Hydrates are an ubiquitous state of matter in nature, and as shown in
Fig. 1, adapted from Ref. [1], the scientific and technological universe of
hydrates is immense. It is not possible, nor relevant, to cover all of hy-
drate  science  in  this  review  so  we  concentrate entirely  on  the  funda-
mentals  and  understanding  necessary  for  hydrates  in  energy  and
combustion science only. Fig. 1 highlights that this subset of the field
includes the technologic utilization of fuel hydrates that will be the focus
of this review article.

1.1. Definition and structure of clathrate hydrates

Clathrate hydrate or simply hydrate is a type of porous material and
host-guest inclusion compound with functions that can be used in in-
dustry [2]. Because their framework consists of water molecules that are

hydrogen bonded to form host cages with guest molecules inside them,
hydrates  are  environmentally  friendly  compounds  [3].  As  shown  in
Fig. 2 from Ref. [4], there are three canonical crystallographic structures
of  hydrates;  structure  I,  structure  II,  and  structure  H.  The  crystallo-
graphic  structure  mainly  depends  on  the  molecular  size  of  the  guest
compounds encapsulated [5]. The unit cell of the structure I hydrate is
composed of 46 water molecules that form two 512 cages and six 51,262
cages encapsulating guest molecules [6]. The notation of a 51,262  cage
stands  for  the  water  molecule  polyhedron  having  twelve  pentagonal
faces and two hexagonal faces. In this way, the cages are distinguished
by the number of polygonal faces. A unit cell of the structure II hydrate is
composed of 136 water molecules forming sixteen 512  cages and eight
51,264 cages. The unit cell of the structure H hydrate comprises 34 water
molecules forming three 512  cages, two 435,663  cages, and one 51,268
cage [7]. Various compounds could be the guests for hydrate formation.
It is well known that lower hydrocarbons such as methane, ethane, and

* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: ddunnran@uci.edu (D. Dunn-Rankin), chieny@uci.edu (Y.-C. Chien).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101111
Received 1 March 2023; Received in revised form 5 June 2023; Accepted 19 July 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)101111Availableonline12January20240360-1285/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

Fig. 1. Topology of gas hydrate research topics. Adapted from Ref. [1].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011112

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

formed  under

propane could serve as guest compounds. The compounds constituting
air, that is, nitrogen, oxygen, argon, and carbon dioxide are also can-
didates  as  guest  compounds.  As  illustrated  by  the  guest  compounds
mentioned above, most of them are in the gaseous state when they are
equilibrated  with  hydrates.  Hence,  they  are  sometimes  called  as  “gas
hydrates”  [8]. However, since gas hydrate is an idiomatic expression,
clathrate  hydrate  is  appropriate  from the  view  of  physical  chemistry.
low-temperature  and
Generally,  hydrates  are
high-pressure conditions. For industrial applications of hydrates, using
hydrates with the lowest equilibrium pressure is desirable. One of the
methods to moderate the equilibrium pressure of hydrates is adding a
large-molecule guest compound (LMGC) to the hydrate-forming system.
LMGC is a guest compound which occupies only the large cages of the
binary hydrates formed with the smaller molecules. For instance, at 282
K, sI methane hydrate is stable at 6.7 MPa, whereas sII methane + tet-
rahydropyran hydrate is stable at 0.5 MPa and sH methane + methyl-
cyclohexane (MCH) hydrate is stable at 3.9 MPa at the same temperature
[9–11]. For  a specific small cage guest, the  equilibrium conditions of
binary sII hydrates are milder than those of the pure sI and binary sH
hydrates. It is interesting to recognize that clathrate hydrates are only
stable when the cages are occupied. If there is no guest molecule the cage
collapses to standard state of water containing simple dissolved gas.

1.2. Technological aspects of hydrates

Beginning with their first discovery by Sir Humphrey Davy in 1810
[12],  these  ice-like  hydrate  crystals  have  been  continuously  investi-
gated. Until the early 19th century, the clathrate hydrate was recognized
as “ice”  that can occur even at temperatures above the water freezing
point. The investigations in the early days were driven simply by sci-
entific curiosity as no application was identified. In the year of 1934,
hydrates were brought into dramatic contact with the industry as the
formation of hydrates were discovered to cause the significant plugging
of oil and gas pipelines [13]. The flow assurance in the pipelines of the
oil/gas industry has since been the major driver of the hydrate studies.
Flow  assurance  is  practically  implemented  by  avoiding  hydrate

formation through the injection of inhibitors or changing the operating
conditions  [14].  In  the  1960s,  the  existence  of  naturally  occurring
methane hydrate under the permafrost and on the continental shelves
under  the  ocean  was  discovered  [5].  Following  their  discovery,  and
recognizing their ubiquitous nature, research and development efforts
for recovering methane from naturally-occurring methane hydrate has
occurred over the decades since [15].

In recent years, hydrate-related technologies for industrial applica-
tions, beyond the exploitation of naturally occurring hydrate reservoirs,
have  attracted  attention  [16].  The  concept  of  hydrate-based  heat  en-
gines was first proposed by Nishimura [17]. Later Obara proposed uti-
lization  of  a  hydrate  engine  combined  with  a  proton  exchange
membrane fuel cell [18], which was followed by a detailed analysis of a
CO2  hydrate engine [19]. Hydrate based refrigeration systems, which
are  practically  just  reversing  hydrate  heat  engines,  was  studied  by
Ogawa  et  al.  [20].  Tetrabutylammonium  bromide  (TBAB)  hydrate,
which is one of the ionic semi-clathrate hydrates, is currently the only
commercialized  example  of  hydrate  as  a  phase  change  material  for
thermal energy storage [21]. Ionic semi-clathrate hydrates are a type of
hydrates where anions of guest compounds replace a part of the cage
formed with hydrogen-bonded water molecules and cations are enclosed
in the cage [22,23]. In addition, storage and transportation media for
natural gas utilizing high storage capacity of gas [22–26], capturing CO2
[27,28], ozone storage [29,30], and seawater desalination [31,32], are
further examples of utilizing commercially beneficial properties of the
hydrate [33]. These examples are included to show the opportunities for
exploiting hydrate-based processes for beneficial applications, but the
concentration of this current review is the very specific aspect of fuel
hydrates which permits them to directly burn – as in the so-called “fiery
ice.”

1.3. Historical development of hydrate combustion research

As  has  already  been  described,  methane  hydrates  have  been
considered a major alternative source of energy since their discovery in
nature.  Despite  this  energetic  prominence,  however,  there  have  been

Fig. 2. Most common crystal structures of clathrate hydrate. From Ref. [4]. Used with permission from AIP publishing.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011113

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

few studies on the direct combustion of this ice-like fuel. It is important
to recognize that the public record shows that the direct combustion of
hydrates was not studied formally until 1997. Even today, it is still a
rarely studied phenomenon, and hence this section presents a historical
roadmap of hydrate combustion research. We are using a growing tree
(as shown in Fig. 3, adapted from Ref. [34]) to represent the develop-
ment of hydrate combustion science, and considering the fundamentals
as  the  root,  this  section’s  roadmap  will  cover  the  limbs  of  research
groups  branching  out  from  the  significant  science  as  the  trunk.  The
details of  the  combustion research  (the foliage), along  with the  more
complete review of the literature occurs in subsequent sections where
the science topics best match the contents.

The very first research descriptions focused on hydrate combustion
were publicly presented (in Japanese) at the 1997 and 2001 Japanese
Combustion Symposia [35,36], soon after followed by the first report of
the research internationally (in English) at the 4th International Con-
ference on Gas Hydrates (ICGH) in Yokohama, Japan [37,38]. Although
the  first  report  in  1997  [35]  used  methane  hydrate  just  to  show  its
combustion, the other studies [36–38] used tetrahydrofuran (THF) hy-
drate  because  creating  uniform  and  reproducible  methane  hydrate  in
sufficiently  large  quantities  was  too  difficult  as  the  nascent  hydrate
combustion field began. THF hydrate is combustible and can be formed
at atmospheric pressure in a standard family freezer. It is not surprising
that  the  birth  of  hydrate  combustion  research  occurred  in  Japan,
because  that  country  has  had,  since  1993,  a  major  research  effort  in
methane  hydrates  as  a  potential  energy  resource  [39],  and  naturally
concerns for its safe extraction included its flammability and fire hazard.
Methane hydrate study extended to the combustion field as a natural
and novel component developing right at the end of the millennium, and
so the interest in methane hydrates as an energy source predated by at
least  a  decade  the  first  combustion  studies  reported.  There  are  some
early observations of burning hydrates as a novelty and for generating
website-worthy imagery. For example, the US Geological Survey (USGS)
[40,41]  and  GEOMAR  [42]  represent  two  substantial  government  or-
ganizations with groups involved in the mapping of naturally occurring
gas hydrates that used images of burning ice to generate visual interest
in  the  science.  Three  of  their  now  classical  public  domain  photos  of
burning  hydrate  from  1996,  2001,  and  2003,  respectively,  appear  in

Fig.  3. The  tree  structure  of  hydrate  science  with  direct  combustion  (image
adapted from Ref. [34]).

Fig.  4. Photographs  of  burning  hydrates:  (a)  USGS  public  domain  [41];  (b)
image  from  Ref.  [42],  used  with  permission  from  Wiley  Online;  (c)  Gulf  of
Mexico sample from SO174 cruise, 2003, public domain [43].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011114

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

Fig. 4. Images 4 (a) and (b) are from burning laboratory produced hy-
drates, and 4 (c) shows the burning of a hydrate from nature, collected
during a sampling expedition in the Gulf of Mexico [43,44].

Neither USGS nor GEOMAR were interested primarily in the funda-
mentals of hydrate combustion but they recognized that this remarkable
phenomenon  of  burning  ice  visually  and  dramatically  represents  the
enormous  potential  of  methane  clathrate/hydrate  deposits  for  energy
utilization.  Even though the  internet  is now  replete with a  myriad  of
burning  hydrate  images,  there  is  still  very  little  attention  paid  to  the
combustion science of the process.

The first combustion science investigation to appear in the discov-
erable literature examined the flames around a free burning cylinder of
hydrate, and was presented at the Japanese Symposium on Combustion
in  1997  [35],  as  mentioned  earlier.  Follow-on  studies  then  examined
experimentally hydrate flames in the more controlled flow conditions of
a  laminar  boundary  layer  above  a  hydrate  block  [36,38],  and  with  a
computational approach for the same configuration [37]. These studies
showed classical Emmons boundary layer flame behaviors [45,46] with
the  associated  flame  spread  phenomena  [47],  which  led  seven  years
later to the work published in Ref. [48]. This is one of the few earliest
peer-reviewed  published  studies  on  combustion  of  hydrates,  and  it
characterizes  the  propagation  of  a  flame  sustained  above  a  layer  of
methane hydrate in a flow vessel. By igniting the methane hydrate from
downstream (Fig. 5), the experiment showed flame propagation against
the  air  flow  and  found  it  to  be  independent  of  free  stream  velocity.
Consistent with other studies of flame spread across a horizontal fuel
surface  [47],  the  work  concluded  that  the  propagation  speed  of  a

Fig. 5. Study of methane hydrate flame characteristics at different free stream
velocity; from Ref. [48]; used with permission from ACS Publishing.

hydrate flame is determined by the rate of fuel release from the solid,
which in this case is governed by the dissociation rate of the methane
hydrate. The study also showed refreezing of the liquid water layer, a
phenomenon  described  in  the  literature  as  self-healing  of  hydrates
[49–54], which highlighted the importance of the liquid water phase in
hydrate combustion.

The  early  studies  of  hydrate  combustion  at  Keio  University  were
mainly focusing on flame spread, which was principally motivated by
the  concern  for  inadvertent  fire  hazards  during  transport  of  methane
hydrates.  In  addition  to  the  study  for  maintaining  safety,  the  work
sparked the idea of another important application of hydrates — their in
situ  combustion.  Knowing  that  there  are  large  quantities  of  methane
hydrate stored in the deep ocean, the conceptual potential application
was to intentionally burn some hydrate that then produces local heat to
dissociate more hydrates in sediment to release additional methane. This
concept has already been used in traditional fossil fuel reservoirs since
the 1950s [55–58] but did not appear in the literature until after the
millennium as a method applied to gas hydrates as a patent [59]. The
patent  was  then  followed  by  a  study  from  Columbia  University  [60].
Soon after, several researchers continued with the similar concept of in
situ  combustion  for  thermal  dissociation.  However,  instead  of  direct
combustion of the hydrate, they utilized gas combustion reactors fueled
by  hydrate  methane  [61–63].  The  development  of  the  latter  studies
transitioned  to  the  fundamental  exploration  of  thermal  stimulation,
without combustion, while the downhole combustion concept continued
to appear in a series of patents but has not as yet reached the scientific
literature [64–66].

Besides the research development initiated from Japan, a group of
researchers  from  Russia,  Misyura  and  co-workers,  also  contributed
significantly  to  the  understanding  of  gas  hydrate  combustion.  Their
work (which continues to the present) began appearing in 2013, with a
series of papers examining the role of porosity and self-preservation in
freely burning hydrates [67–70]. In 2015 a research group from China
provided a related study on the in situ burning of a sediment filled with
propane  hydrate  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  the  possibility  of
thermal  stimulation  for  production  of  methane  in  a  hydrate-bearing
permafrost environment [71]. Although pure propane hydrate is not a
major  component  of  the  naturally  occurring  hydrate  reservoirs,  it  is
easier  to  create  in  the  laboratory  than  methane  hydrate  (i.e.,  higher
temperatures and lower pressures needed). Propane hydrate combustion
is more difficult to discern, however, because liquid propane trapped in
ice pores burns very much  as could be expected from a true propane
hydrate where the propane is caged in ice-like structures. Nevertheless,
propane hydrates can be used for impressive visual burning-ice class-
room demonstrations [72].

With  a  handful  of  researchers  joining  this  fascinating  combustion
science  of  gas  hydrate,  the  Lasers,  Flames  &  Aerosols  (LFA)  research
group at the University of California, Irvine (UCI) began initial studies of
hydrate combustion in 2010, inspired in part by the work from Japan.
Like the early studies from Japan, the antecedent UCI work appeared in
theses,  conference  proceedings  papers  and  presentations  since  2011
[73–78]. The groups first peer-reviewed publication appeared in 2016
[79] after much M.S./Ph.D. graduate researcher dedicated effort. This
publication quantified for the very first time the amount of water vapor
driven  out  of  a  naturally  burning  hydrate  cake.  More  recently,  the
complexity of hydrate ignition and combustion, and its dependence on
both the hydrate porosity and initial conditions was described [80].

The major loci of hydrate combustion research are the groups out-
lined  above  (Japan,  Russia,  China,  and  the  US).  Naturally,  there  are
other researchers around the world who have contributed to the study of
hydrate combustion, and their work will be included in this review as it
develops  through  the  relevant  topical  aspects,  but  the  four  groups
identified above have the most sustained historical work in direct hy-
drate  combustion.  This  historical  introduction  to  the  combustion  of
methane hydrates also demonstrates the often erratic nature of scientific
inquiry.  Even  to  the  present,  hydrate  combustion  defies  simple

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011115

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

evaluation because, as is shown in the early studies, it is a process with a
complex fuel (somewhat analogous to coal) that is difficult to produce
uniformly, that involves a complex phase change mapping (similar to
supercritical combustion), and it often depends on a complex environ-
ment (porous,  sediment, non-uniform temperature,  etc.). This  current
review  will  help  outline  the  fundamentals  and  the  challenges  of  this
interesting topic.

It  is valuable as  a first step  to describe the  basic relationships  be-
tween  the  combustion  heat  from  burning  the  released  methane,  the
energy  needed  to  dissociate  the  hydrate,  and  the  energy  needed  to
evaporate  the  excess  water.  These  basics  are  described  in  the  next
section.

1.4. Key aspect in hydrate combustion – the role of water

1.4.1. Energy for phase changes

As was described above, methane hydrates (clathrates), which occur
naturally and abundantly in permafrost and deep ocean sediments, are
ice-like  structures  caging  guest  methane  molecules  at  an  ideal  molar
ratio  of  approximately  5.75:1  water/methane  [5]  but  the  actual  pro-
portion  can  never  reach  the  ideal  value,  and  it  is  generally  more
appropriate to use the maximum thermodynamic limit of 6.2:1 [81,82]
because the large and small cage filling fraction depends on the tem-
perature and pressure, and it is always less than unity. Experimentally, it
is  very  difficult  to  achieve  more  than  85%  saturation  of  the  hydrate
cages, so a practical combustion maximum is closer to 7:1. When the
hydrate is formed in sediment, the water-plus-sediment to methane ratio
is even higher. Despite this very high water fraction, however, qualita-
tive experiments (including those appearing as images on the internet)
have  shown  that  sediment-free  methane  hydrates  burn  steadily  and
nearly to completion when the hydrate is not strongly subcooled and
when some of the water melting from the hydrate can drain rather than
being forced to evaporate. A simple global energy balance shows that,
beginning with hydrate at ice freezing temperature, and with no energy
loss, the combustion heat released from the hydrate’s methane/air re-
action is sufficient theoretically to both melt and evaporate the water,
with  approximately  50–60%  of  the  combustion  thermal  energy  still
available,  depending  on  the  level  of  saturation  the  hydrate  reaches.
Table 1 identifies standard values for the relevant thermal properties for
methane  hydrates.  While  there  are  clearly  some  structure  effects  in
thermal transport properties of hydrate that lead to discrepancies in the
literature (e.g. Refs. [83,84]), the basic thermodynamic properties of ice
have been shown generally to provide a reliable value of these quantities
for hydrates [85] in the context of a global energy balance analysis of the
dissociation process.

Table 2 shows the level of energy needed for sensible heat changes
and phase changes in a methane hydrate. The table indicates that the
majority of heat energy would be used in the evaporation of the water
from the hydrate. For this specific analysis, the initial condition is taken
◦
as methane hydrate at 0.1 MPa and (cid:0) 20
C and the final condition will
◦
be all gas phase water and methane at the water boiling point of 100
C.

Table 1
Relevant thermal properties for methane hydrate.

Water thermal conductivity

Hydrate thermal conductivity
Water boiling temperature
Hydrate dissociation temperature
Hydrate initial temperature
Hydrate (ice) enthalpy of fusion
Water enthalpy of evaporation
Specific heat of water
Specific heat of hydrate (ice)
Specific heat of methane
Density of ideal hydrate
Lower heating value (LHV) of methane

0.6 W/m/K

0.6 W/m/K
373 K
273 K
253 K
333 kJ/kg
2260 kJ/kg
4.186 kJ/kg/K
2.11 kJ/kg/K
2.23 kJ/kg/K
0.9 g/cc
50 MJ/kg

The table shows, unsurprisingly, that the major energy sink in the
system is the water evaporation, and so the energy demand increases
substantially with water fraction in the hydrate. The table also indicates,
as  a  reference  value,  the  adiabatic  reaction  temperature  (assuming  a
flame does exist) for the different hydrate saturation levels based on the
reduced  heating  value  of  the  water-diluted  methane.  These  tempera-
tures  are  very  low,  and  the  observations  from  related  water-laden
methane/air  flame  experiments  and  computations  reported  in  the
literature [86–88] suggest that steady combustion requires flame tem-
peratures that correspond to water content less than half the total in the
ideal hydrate. Hence, it seems likely that continuous hydrate combus-
tion  requires  that  some  liquid  water  drains  away  and  not  be  entirely
evaporated into the flame zone.

1.4.2. Chemistry of water laden methane combustion

There  has  been  substantial  debate  regarding  the  role  of  water  in
combustion as it can be both a passive diluent and an active chemical
species. This debate has been complicated by the fact that the role of
water  is  described  in  a  wide  range  of  combustion  systems  and  the
variation  in  these  systems  can  obscure  the  details  of  the  water’s
behavior. Despite this debate, there is general agreement regarding the
primary reaction steps in which water participates in the production and
consumption of important chain branching and carrying radical species.
Hence,  most  chemical  kinetics  studies  confirm  that  any  standard
mechanism is sufficient to evaluate how water would behave in a hy-
drate fueled flame. There are differences between mechanisms relative
to 3rd body reactions and the chaperon efficiency but these effects are
not  primary  contributors  to  the  role  of  water  in  normal  atmospheric
hydrate flames. In addition, there is a consensus that water is primarily
acting physically  (as a  diluent and  heat sink)  rather than chemically,
except  very  close  to  extinction.  More  on  this  subject  is  provided  in
following sections.

1.4.3. Drainage of water

As mentioned in Section 1.3, the experimental results [48] showed
that some water did not evaporate and was left in the vessel in the case of
flame propagation experiments over a methane hydrate. Furthermore, it
is interesting to note that ice was formed in the vessel. This result in-
dicates that the cooling by the colder methane hydrate cake below the
melt region is larger than the heating from the flame above. This thermal
competition  may  be  one  cause  of  the  self-preserving  effect  discussed
later  where  an  ice  sheet  forms  over  a  hydrate  limiting  further
dissociation.

Water draining was also observed in the experiment of combustion of
a methane hydrate sphere [89]. In this case, due to the gravity effect,
water  flows  down  along  the  methane  hydrate  sphere  surface  and  a
suspended  water  droplet  (that  later  dripped  off)  was  formed  at  the
bottom of the sphere. It is also interesting to note that the methane from
the inside of methane hydrate by dissociation flows into a water area
and a water bubble wrapping methane is formed. When the amount of
methane is too large, the bubble is broken and a local flame propagation
is observed. This non-uniform release of fuel gas is one of the compli-
cations of analyzing direct hydrate combustion.

As mentioned in Sec. 1.4.1 and 1.4.2, the formation of water plays an
important role to determine the heat to use the dissociation of methane
hydrate. These results indicate that the water formation and behavior of
the water are very complex which is controlled by not only physical and
chemical mechanisms but also the geometry of methane hydrate and the
prevailing ambient conditions.  Thus, as  shown later in  this review, it
further work is required to predict water behavior precisely.

1.4.4. Porosity and self-healing effects

Self-healing is a well-studied phenomenon in general hydrate study
[50,51,54]. There are two basic concepts associated with self-healing. In
the first, more straightforward (and more common) case, the hydrate
cake is subcooled well below the freezing temperature of pure water.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011116

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

When the outer layer of hydrate dissociates leaving a water film, heat
loss  to  the  core  of  the  subcooled  hydrate  cake  freezes  the  water  film
creating a protective shell barrier to further dissociation and methane
escape. The second situation is when the hydrate is only slightly sub-
cooled, and in this case it is the thermodynamic energy minimization
driving  the  phase  change  (the  dissociation  of  the  hydrate).  The  only
source  of  energy  for  that  thermodynamically  dictated  demand  is  the
residual water film from the prior dissociation and so the film gives up
that energy as it refreezes, again forming a protective shell. Naturally,
there are transport properties and times involved in the details of this
process under both scenarios and the complexity of these details is one
reason that results and findings vary on the subject of self-preservation.
Nevertheless,  there  is  no  doubt  that  a  protective  ice  film  does  form
during  hydrate  dissociation  in  some  cases.  In  the  context  of  hydrate
combustion,  the  combustion  heat  is  enormous  in  comparison  to  the
enthalpy  needed  for  liquid/solid  phase  change  and  so  the  process  is
much more related to heat transfer from and to the hydrate cake and
water  film.  As  mentioned  earlier,  Misyura  and  co-workers  [68]  have
attempted to understand the role of hydrate porosity and self-healing
during  combustion.  Similarly,  as  shown  clearly  in  Ref.  [90],  flame
spread is far different over the range of initial hydrate cake temperature
from  (cid:0) 10  to  (cid:0) 80
C,  which  demonstrates  that  hydrate  combustion
behavior  and  self-healing  depends  significantly  on  the  geometry  and
level of sub-cooling of the hydrate cake.

◦

1.5. Summary of section 1

This first section is meant only to introduce the subject of hydrate
combustion and to give some indication of its complexity. The following
sections will dig more deeply into the fundamentals of hydrate structure
and how that structure can affect their direct combustion.

2. Theoretical considerations – ideal systems

To formalize the global hydrate combustion energy balance further,
this section introduces two simple 1-D models of hydrate combustion
that  provide  basic  insight  into  the  fundamental  hydrate  combustion
process and the energy partitioning that must be occurring for steady
burning.  Later  sections  will  incorporate  discussions  of  more  refined
modeling of these systems, but this section is to first provide an overall
perspective.

The first idealized configuration is a planar one-dimensional three-
layer hydrate/liquid water film/gas phase physical model. We can then
compute the heat flux needed from the heat source to conduct through
the liquid water and dissociate the hydrate at a sufficient rate to sustain
fuel flow to a flame. The second 1-D model is spherically symmetric and
follows the classical diffusion-controlled droplet burning analysis with
an adjustment for the heat of reaction and the heat of vaporization to
account for the high water content of the fuel. Figs. 6 and 7 show two
burning methane hydrates in modes that motivate the two 1-D models.
The  first  approximates  a  simple  planar  system  where  the  surface  re-
gresses below a flame. The second is a spherical model where the flame
surrounds the hydrate. The images show that buoyancy has an impor-
tant influence on the flame shape of a naturally burning hydrate but this
complication is avoided to provide a first-order analytical understanding
of the process.

In both geometries, steady hydrate burning suggests a steady efflux
of methane, which then suggests an approximately constant thickness
liquid  water film since  it is the heat flux through the water  film that
controls  the  hydrate  dissociation  rate.  That  is,  assuming  the  surface
◦
temperature of the water film is near boiling temperature (~100
C) and
◦
the dissociation interface is at hydrate freezing temperature (~0
C), the
heat flux into the hydrate to release methane is controlled by the thermal
gradient created by a temperature delta of approximately 100 K over the
thickness of this surface film.

Fig.  6. Approximately  planar  burning  of  a  methane  hydrate  column  (photo
from authors).

Fig.  7. Combustion  of  an  approximately  20  mm  diameter  spherical  methane
hydrate as described in Ref. [89]; color photo from authors.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011117

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

2.1. 1-D planar model – analytical solution

Qls =  ̇ms

(cid:0)

)
Lf + cps(Tls (cid:0) Ti)

The first 1-D model assumes a simple planar system, as illustrated in
Figs. 8 and 9. It involves three phases, gas (which will include methane
and water vapor), liquid (which will be water with some methane gas
bubbling  through  it),  and  solid  (which  is  the  hydrate,  with  methane
caged in its ice-like matrix). The flame provides heat to the surroundings
Qfs and transmits the rest toward the hydrate Qfh. The liquid phase has
thickness tl. The solid hydrate phase is assumed to be semi-infinite for
this  analysis,  which  is  a  very  good  practical  assumption  because  the
thermal transport in hydrate is very poor so there is little influence of the
distant  boundary.  The  analysis  involves  primarily  hydrate  (here
modeled as ice) melting with the water evaporating in the presence of a
heat  source,  and  methane  is  released  in  the  process.  There  are  three
interfaces: the flame sheet at temperature Tf, the gas-liquid boundary
(subscript  gl)  with  water  boiling  temperature  Tgl,  and  the  liquid-solid
boundary (subscript ls), with hydrate dissociation or melting tempera-
ture Tls. The problem is, therefore, a twin moving boundary problem, or
a three-phase Stefan problem [91], but the situation is less complicated
when  we  invoke  realistic  simplifications  associated  with  the  heat
transport in the phases.

The governing equations are the energy and mass balances at each
interface.  Beginning  first  with  the  solid/liquid  aspect,  the  hydrate  is
assumed  to  have  a  constant  melting  temperature  Tls  and  an  effective
latent heat of fusion Lf. The effective latent heat includes the effects of
the caged methane on the dissociation. The heat flux per unit area into
the  hydrate  cake  Qls  must  accommodate  the  heat  of  fusion  and  the
sensible heat associated with increasing the temperature of the hydrate
cake from its initial temperature Ti to its dissociation temperature Tls.

Fig. 8. 1-D planar model of hydrate combustion.

cps is the specific heat of the hydrate and   ̇ms  is the dissociation rate per
unit area of hydrate as it converts to liquid water and gaseous methane.
As mentioned earlier, the thermal conductivity of hydrate is very low so
we  can  safely  assume  that  all  the  energy  crossing  the  liquid/solid
interface  is  used  to  heat  and  melt  the  local  hydrate  layer;  no  heat  is
transferred deeper into the solid. Preliminary analysis suggests that this
is  indeed  the  case,  but  thermal  transport  properties  of  hydrates
(including  thermal diffusivity  and  dissociation  conditions) are  notori-
ously  difficult  to  determine  [83,85,92,93]  so  ultimate  verification  re-
quires experiments. As can be confirmed qualitatively in experiments,
however,  if  a  burning  hydrate  flame  is  extinguished,  the  solid  ice/-
hydrate remaining appears to have a liquid surface layer and then be
uniform  in  internal  structure  [48].  In  addition,  a  thermocouple
embedded in the hydrate while it is burning shows no significant tem-
perature change until the melt surface reaches it [94]. This low thermal
penetration for burning hydrate is also shown in the fairly recent work in
Ref. [70] and these results are consistent with the assumption of negli-
gible internal thermal transport into the cake core.

The heat flux per unit area into the liquid layer from the gas phase is:
(cid:0)
+ (1 (cid:0) α)

α(Lv + cpl

Tgl (cid:0) Tls

Tgl (cid:0) Tls

+ Qls

cpch4

))]

)

[

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

Qgl =  ̇mg

which incorporates the sensible heat required to increase the liquid and
methane temperature to boiling, the latent heat of vaporization, and the
heat passed into the hydrate solid to dissociate it. As is typical, and as
shown in Table 2, the sensible heat is a relatively small fraction of the
phase  change  heat  required.  The  α  is  the  mass  fraction  of  gas  that  is
water since there is no latent heat for the methane fraction. For a steady
system we need to have the dissociation rate equal to the gas release
rate, i.e.,   ̇mg =  ̇ms.

The heat generated by the flame is simply the methane flux multi-

plied by the methane/air heat of combustion:

Qf = (1 (cid:0) α)  ̇mgΔHc(cid:0) ch4/air

While this heat is ultimately absorbed by the environment, during
the  hydrate  burning  it  is  partitioned  into  some  outward  for  the  sur-
roundings Qfs and some inward toward the hydrate Qfh to release the fuel
gas from the solid hydrate matrix.

In  order  to  achieve  insight  through  an  analytical  solution  for  this
simplified case, it is valuable to assume an overall steady behavior with
a constant liquid layer thickness and steady heat flux from the source
into the various layers. This assumption can be evaluated a posteriori by
determining if the findings of the analysis are consistent with experi-
mental observations. A more detailed study of the timescales involved in
the problem support the assumption of steady state behavior for a ma-
jority  of  the  hydrate  combustion  time  [79].  Assuming  that  the  liquid
phase has constant thermal conductivity kl, and because the water film
layer is experimentally seen to be fairly thin tl, heat transfer through the
liquid  is  presumed  to  occur  by  conduction  only.  Convection  may  be
important  but  we  can  adjust  the  conductivity  to  account  for  such  an
effect if the first approximation neglecting convection gives unreason-
able results. Radiation might also be important but hydrate flames have
very low radiance as they are relatively cool and contain little soot. In
addition, snow (which is closest to the optical properties of the hydrate
samples) has an albedo of 0.9, reflecting most of the incoming radiation
[95,96]. In more refined analyses it would be appropriate to consider the
albedo of the melted water film (which is approximately half that of the
hydrate) and the consequent absorption, but for the present case the role
of radiation is not included. For steady state, the conduction heat flux
into the hydrate is:

Qls = kl

)

(cid:0)

Tgl (cid:0) Tls
tl

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011118

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

Fig. 9. Cartoon highlighting main features of how a 1-D hydrate burns.

Table 2
Energy needed to convert solid hydrate to all gas phase reactants.

Water to
methane
molar ratio

Mass
fraction
methane in
hydrate

Hydrate
lower
heating
value (MJ/
kg)

Energy needed
to reach melting
temperature
(MJ/kg)

Energy
needed to
melt ice
(MJ/kg)

Energy needed
to reach boiling
temperature
(MJ/kg)

Energy
needed to
evaporate
water (MJ/
kg)

Total energy
needed to
take hydrate
to gas phase
(MJ/kg)

Percentage of
combustion heat
needed for hydrate
transformation to
100% gas phase
reactants

Adiabatic
reaction
temperature of
methane/water
mixture in air (K)

5.75:1
6.2:1
7:1

0.134
0.125
0.113

6.69
6.27
5.63

0.04
0.04
0.04

0.288
0.291
0.295

0.392
0.394
0.397

1.96
1.98
2.01

2.64
2.66
2.70

39%
42%
48%

1432
1372
1252

The heat transfer from the flame into the liquid layer is presumed to
occur  by  convection,  although  the  precise  mechanism  of  the  heat
transfer is not critical for the energy balance findings,

(cid:0)

Qgl = hg

Tf (cid:0) Tgl

)

Since all of the liquid water must be vaporized,   ̇mg =  ̇ms, we need
only  select  a  water  layer  thickness,  and  the  rest  of  the  problem  is
determined. That is, the mass dissociation rate of hydrate, the energy
needed from the flame, and the heat energy produced by the methane
released from the dissociation are all determined.

The example properties used in the analysis are given in Table 1, and
using these properties with a water layer thickness of 1.5 mm (which is
typical  for  experimental  observations),  a  perfectly  saturated  sample
would need an effective convective heat transfer coefficient for the gas
phase of approximately 260 W/m2/K. The resulting liquid/solid surface
regression rate of approximately 0.11 mm/s could produce 66 W/cm2
from  burning  the  methane  steadily  released  from  the  planar  hydrate.
However, 40% of the combustion heat would be needed to maintain the
steady release of methane. As experiments show, with this much of the
combustion heat required just keep the flow of methane, it is unlikely to
be  a  stable  burn.  And,  if  the  clathration  is  only  85%  complete,  the
dropping flame temperature means that the effective convection coef-
ficient must rise to 320 W/m2/K and 50% of the combustion energy is
needed to steadily release the methane.

The  above-described  analysis  relies  heavily  on  an  assumed  and

steady  value  for  a  water  layer  thickness.  In  addition,  the  analysis  in-
dicates the importance of thermal transport through any liquid water
layer and the presumption of an effective convection coefficient for heat
flux from the flame to the water melt surface. It is this heat transfer, in
fact, which leads to the refreezing self-healing process noted by others
when the hydrate is sub-cooled. If the heat transfer from the gas phase
through the liquid layer above cannot keep up with the heat loss to the
sub-cooled hydrate cake, the water layer will freeze, and the hydrate will
self-heal. This phenomenon is not captured in the steady 1-D configu-
ration  because  the  flame  is  always  present,  and  the  liquid  layer  is  of
constant  thickness  which  ensures  that  the  heat  flux  from  above  con-
tinues to boil the liquid layer. If the flame were intermittent, however, or
if the liquid layer thickness were to grow, thereby reducing the disso-
ciation energy flux, self-healing could occur.

Relatively more recently, a 1-D analysis of a flat hydrate burning was
published [97]. It was a simple energy balance approach as above and
used the Shvab-Zeldovich approach for the combustion step rather than
relying on a simple energy formulation as above. This then provided a
flame standoff distance, but unfortunately, it could not include a liquid
layer (or liquid water fraction) and assumed all the water evaporated.
Another recent 1-D computation of a confined methane hydrate burning
followed a very similar path to the simple analysis introduced above,
and showed the same outcome, that a majority of the combustion heat is
needed for dissociation and evaporation [98]. Some of the limitations
for the 1-D planar configuration can be removed, and the more realistic
burning condition for hydrates where the flame envelopes the solid fuel

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011119

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

can be explored, by utilizing the classical spherically symmetric com-
bustion problem where the sphere is a methane hydrate.

2.2. 1-D spherical model – analytical solution

This model involves the combustion of a methane hydrate in air with
a spherically symmetric flame surrounding a hydrate sphere (modeled
essentially as a watery fuel droplet) in a quiescent, infinite medium, see
Fig. 10. The analysis assumes that the gas phase consists of three species,
fuel/water vapor, oxidizer, and combustion products. In this case it is
useful  to  think  of  the  fuel  as  water  and  methane  mixed  intimately
together, though only the methane provides combustion heat and only
the water requires vaporization heat (as described in the planar model
above). With this change, the analysis follows the textbook approach for
spherical droplet combustion (e.g. Ref. [99]).

The gas phase is separated into two zones: the inner zone between
the surface of the hydrate and the flame front, rs ≤ r ≤ rf , which con-
tains methane/water vapor and products, and the outer zone, rf ≤ r ≤
∞, which consists of oxidizer and products. There is a subtlety in the
inner zone in that some of the water vapor is associated with the fuel as it
comes  directly  from  the  hydrate  “droplet”  and  some  of  the  water  is
associated with the products of combustion. This distinction does not
affect the analysis since “fuel” is a lumped material as are “products.”
To  sustain  combustion,  heat  is  transferred  from  the  flame  to  the
surface of the hydrate (droplet). The heat vaporizes the water and re-
leases  the methane.  The fuel  and  water vapor  then diffuse  across the
inner zone to the flame where the methane reacts with oxygen to form
gaseous products, CO2 and H2O as seen in the stoichiometric reaction:

1
1 + b

CH4 +

b
1 + b

H2O +

2
1 + b

(O2 + 3.76N2) →

1
1 + b

CO2 +

2 + b
1 + b

H2O

+

1
1 + b

7.52N2

The gas phase reaction at the flame is modeled with a single step. The
heat of combustion ΔHc is based on the lower heating value for methane
in air since we presume the water remains in the vapor phase. As indi-
cated  earlier  the  effective  heat  of  combustion  for  the  watery  fuel  is
diminished  based  on  the  water  fraction.  If  we  assume  that  all  of  the
water in the hydrate must evaporate along with the release of methane,
then the effective heat of combustion varies from 5.6 to 6.7 MJ/kg of the
hydrate.  We  can  also  create,  artificially,  a  draining  water  system,
equivalent to the case where not all of the water must evaporate and
thereby extend the water/methane ratio beyond the range of a natural
hydrate. The stoichiometric ratio (defined here as the mass of air to the
mass of the methane and water in the fuel mixture) ranges from 17 to 1.9

as the water molar ratio with methane varies from zero (i.e., no water –
it effectively drains away entirely) to 7 (the maximum water level that
would occur for a typical clathration ratio). The ideal maximum clath-
ration molar ratio of 5.75:1 corresponds to a stoichiometric ratio of 2.5.
In the above equation b is defined as the number of moles of water per
mole of methane; for this analysis we examine a range of b between zero
and 7.

As in the classic droplet burning system, the problem is governed by
the following relationships: an energy balance at the droplet surface, (2)
an energy balance at the flame sheet, (3) oxidizer diffusion to the flame
in the outer region, (4) fuel vapor diffusion to the flame in the inner
region, and (5) phase equilibrium at the liquid vapor interface, generally
given by the Clausius-Clapeyron relation but in this simplified analysis
we  assume  that  the  liquid  vapor  interface  is  saturated  at  the  boiling
point of water. In this problem, we then determine the dependence of
combustion  characteristics,  including  flame  temperature  Tf,  effective
fuel  evaporation  rate   ̇mF,  and  flame  position  rf  with  various  water  to
methane  molar  ratios  using  a  heat  of  combustion  that  reflects  the
appropriate diminishment driven by the water fraction. The gas phase
thermal conductivity, specific heat, and density are all assumed constant
as given in Table 1. The droplet temperature is uniform and the tem-
perature at the surface is assumed to be at the boiling point of water. The
temperature of the medium at infinity is T∞ = 300K.

As in the classical model, the analysis employs species conservation
and the important diffusing species in the inner and outer regions of the
burning droplet. Assumptions include a quasi-steady flame sheet, unity
Lewis number, no net flux of products towards the fuel droplet surface, a
lumped parameter assumption for the droplet, and Fickian diffusion of
species in both the inner and outer regions. The approach and assump-
tions  lead  to  first  order  differential  equations  for  temperature,  along
with mass conservation, and energy balances at the droplet surface, and
at  the  flame  sheet.  These  relations,  along  with  the  liquid-vapor  equi-
librium at the surface, yields a determined system that can be solved
with proper boundary conditions for fuel flow rate   ̇mF, flame radius rf,
surface fuel mass fraction YF,s, and flame temperature Tf as a function of
surface temperature, Ts, and surface radius rs. Details of the approach
appear in Ref. [99].

The  fuel  burning  rate   ̇mF  (again  remembering  that  the  fuel  is  a

combination of methane and water) is given by:

 ̇mF =

4πkgrs
cpg

ln [1 + B]

where,

B =

ΔHc
ν + cpg(T∞ (cid:0) Ts)
hfg

ν is the mass-based coefficient that relates mass of oxidizer flow to
the mass of fuel flow for a stoichiometric reaction. This coefficient is
very important in the analysis because as the water fraction increases
less oxidizer is needed for the reaction even though the total mass flow
from the droplet increases. The flame temperature is,

Tf =

Qdiss + hfg
cpg(1 + ν)

(νB + 1) + Ts

In order to simulate the melting of the hydrate and the sensible heat of
raising the melted water from dissociation temperature to boiling tem-
perature, the fuel droplet maintains a constant energy sink Qdiss  per unit
mass  of  watery  fuel  released  into  the  system.  Even  when  the  water
fraction is zero, and the fuel is purely methane, the presumed heat of
fusion requires some of the combustion heat so the system does not have
a singularity at b = 0.

The normalized flame radius rf/ rs is,

Fig. 10. Geometry of spherically symmetric hydrate combustion.

rf
rs

=

ln [1 + B]
ln[(ν + 1)/ν]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111110

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

Fig. 11 shows a typical outcome from the analytical solution of the
spherical hydrate model, based on an initial hydrate radius of 1 mm,
though  the  results  are  size  independent.  The  figure  shows  how  the
increasing water fraction reduces the flame temperature. The figure also
shows that the normalized flame standoff distance must decrease as the
flame temperature decreases in order to continue providing sufficient
heat  to  the  hydrate  to  evaporate  the  water.  Because  the  assumptions
made in the analysis are significant, it can be expected that the absolute
values  of  the  results  will  differ  from  a  physical  system,  in  particular
because the effects of buoyancy are not negligible, but the results are
equally  valuable as  those obtained  for fuel  droplet combustion under
similar  assumptions. Since  transport is  entirely by  diffusion,  knowing
the flame radius and temperature specifies the temperature profiles in
the inner and outer zone (see Fig. 11).

It  is  worthwhile  noting  that  experiments  show  that  hydrate  flame
temperatures during steady burning do not seem to fall below 1700 K at
any time, suggesting that a practical value of b is around 2. Hence, there
must  be  a  substantial  water  drainage  (approximately  half  the  water).
The simple spherical model helps demonstrate that some of the water
must drain to keep the flame temperature at a level for sustained com-
bustion. There are more sophisticated simulations of spherical hydrate
combustion that will be reviewed in later sections. This introduction just
provides the energy balance baseline for those further discussions.

The  two  one-dimensional  energy  conservation-based  models  for
methane  hydrate  combustion  above  give  an  indication  of  the  overall
burning behavior limits when highly water-laden fuels burn. The results
are consistent with qualitative experiments in showing how strongly the
flame temperature is affected by the fraction of water evaporated from
the hydrate. Both models include a provision for simulating the condi-
tions where some of the hydrate water drains away rather than evapo-
rates.  This  behavior  is  seen  in  experiments  and  has  been  a  necessary
condition for steadily burning hydrates. The spherical model suggests
that the flame standoff distance can accommodate modest changes in
the heat load demand when varying amounts of water are evaporated
which may help with the flame stability.

2.3. Flame and ignition temperature – water carrying capacity

As is seen from the simple 1-D models, flame temperature is a sig-
nificant characteristic of hydrate flames because they contain substan-
tial amounts of water as diluent. Depending on the amount of water that

evaporates  along  with  the  methane,  the  fuel  heating  value  changes
significantly. Fig. 12 is a plot of the adiabatic flame temperature vari-
ation with water/methane mole fraction (assuming liquid water and fuel
initially at room temperature), where the methane and air are in stoi-
chiometric proportions and the water is added as a diluent. As shown in
the  1-D  planar  model,  there  is  relatively  little  effect  from  the  heat
needed to dissociate the hydrate since it is a small fraction of the heat of
vaporization and sensible heating to flame temperature. The plot also
shows the temperature required to ignite the homogeneous mixture of
methane/water/air in 0.01 s, chosen somewhat arbitrarily to represent
the  characteristic time of  the system  with a buoyant or  blowing flow
velocity of 1 m/s and a characteristic dimension of 1 cm. Both calcula-
tions used the series of online tools from Ref. [100] for chemical equi-
librium  and  homogeneous  kinetics  in  methane/oxygen/nitrogen.  The
figure indicates two important characteristics of the hydrate combustion
system. One is that the ignition temperature is fairly insensitive to the
water content and that there is a distinct water content that takes the
adiabatic flame temperature below the ignition temperature. The adia-
batic prediction displayed in Fig. 12 puts this level near a molar ratio of
4.5. We have seen experimentally that the actual flame temperature for
hydrate combustion, even in the initial stage where there is very little
water  evaporated,  is  substantially  below  the  adiabatic  value  and  the
amount of water evaporated is generally far less than this 4.5 M ratio
value. It does, however, match the water level that is sustainable in a
gaseous diffusion flame [87], so it remains an interesting puzzle how the
natural hydrate partitions the energy balance into the fuel. Further de-
tails for resolving this puzzle are in the following sections.

2.4. Numerical simulations of hydrate combustion

The above analytical solutions capture most of the key features of
methane hydrate combustion, but there are many subtleties that would
benefit from a more comprehensive numerical simulation, including all
three phases. Because of its fuel complexity, however, there have been
very few numerical solution attempts for hydrate burning. The first was
a paper presented at the Japanese Combustion Symposium to examine
numerically the combustion of methane hydrate in a laminar boundary
layer to match the early experimental configurations. It captured some
of the key features of the flame behavior but was not unique to hydrate
burning because the fuel boundary did not recede nor permit a mixture
of liquid water/ice to form as the methane fuel was released [101]. The

Fig. 11. Temperature profile from idealized spherical model of hydrate burning with different clathration ratios, b.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111111

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

on  their  composition  and  morphology.  This  variability  makes  natural
hydrates a difficult place to start any formal study of hydrate combus-
tion and so all studies to date have used manufactured hydrate.

3.1. Creating manufactured methane hydrates

The artificial formation of hydrates is quite  simple unless a single
crystal  is  required,  and  several  studies  employ  artificially  produced
hydrates  to  measure  characteristics  of  these  crystalline  compounds.
Essentially, all that is needed is to control the temperature and pressure
while allowing gaseous methane and water and/or ice to react with each
other to form the thermodynamically favored form of hydrate. There are
subtleties, however, and most importantly high contact areas between
the  hydrate  former  and  host  water.  In  the  following  subsections,
methods  of  hydrate  preparation  and  the  kinetics  of  formation  are
discussed.

3.1.1.

Ice versus water-based methods

Characterization  of  the  hydrate’s  crystallographic  properties  are
necessary  for  understanding  their  physical  and  chemical  properties.
Direct measurements, such as X-ray diffraction and 13C NMR spectros-
copy  measurements  enable  microscopic  studies  of  hydrate  structures.
Several papers report the reliability of the crystal’s direct measurement
with high reproducibility. However, the quality of the samples (inclu-
sion of the hydrate and others, low porosity, uniform grain size, etc.)
governs the reliability of results from the material testing. In all cases,
the gas hydrate is formed with the physical contact between water and
guest  compounds.  Some  gas  compounds,  including  methane,  have
limited solubility in water. This limited miscibility of water and guest
can be an obstacle to complete conversion from water to hydrate, which
likely results in unconverted water remaining with the hydrate sample.
It is important, therefore, to establish an experimental method to obtain
a reproducibly pure hydrate solid sample.

The  difficulty  of  hydrate  fabrications  could  be  overcome  by  the
following  two  experimental  devices:  the  mechanical  agitation  of  the
liquid water and guest fluid, and the mixing of finely powdered ice with
the  gaseous  guest.  In  this  section,  the  experimental  methods  either
employing ice seeds or aqueous water as the host compounds are pre-
sented for establishing artificial hydrate formation.

The most highly cited method for producing manufactured hydrates
comes  from  the  research  group of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey  (USGS)
who  reported  the  fabrication  of  hydrate  from  finely  ground  seed  ice
[40].  They  attempted  to  establish  the  formation  method  with  large
volume,  high  purity  and  uniform  grain  size  with  random  crystallo-
graphic  orientation.  These  are  the  suitable  sample  properties  for  the
material  testing  and  are  also  reasonable  properties  for  hydrate  com-
bustion  study.  The  following  describes  the  experimental  procedures
described in previous USGS reports [40,54]. Fig. 14 is presented as an
example  for  the  apparatus.  Before  inducing  the  forming  reaction  be-
tween gas and seed ice, the sample vessels and gas reservoir are cooled
down to a temperature of 250 K by the bath of ethanol. Distilled H2O is
frozen to a solid block and then finely ground and sieved to powder with
nominal size in the range of 180–250 μm. All the materials and equip-
ment involved are chilled below 250 K before any processing to main-
tain  the  phase  integrity.  The  sample  mold  is  then  packed  with
approximately  26  g  of  seed  ice  to  about  40%  porosity,  which  allows
sufficient space for the gaseous guest molecules to permeate the powder
ice cake and to access the ice interface. Initially the reservoir and sample
chambers are disconnected, then subsequently the test vessels contain-
ing seed ice are evacuated. During the pressure reduction by vacuum
pump and then elevation by pressurizing with methane gas, an upper
disk bears down on the granular ice to prevent any displacement of ice
particles. For the formation of methane hydrates, 35 MPa of methane is
preserved in a reservoir that has been cooled down to 250 K before in-
jection. By releasing a connecting bulb between the reservoir and sample
chamber, the pressure in the ice-packed vessel rises to around 23 MPa.

Fig. 12. Flame temperature and ignition temperature (ignition in less than 10
ms) for watery methane fuel mixtures.

most relevant attempt at comprehensive simulation (unfortunately, also
only  at  the  Japanese  Combustion  Symposium)  presented  a  vertically
oriented  cylindrical  hydrate  cake  burning  in  a  natural  convection
environment [102,103]. It employed cylindrical symmetry and one-step
chemistry but did not permit a split between melting and evaporating
water. It provided valuable insight into the thermal transport into the
hydrate cake as it burned.

Bar-Kohany  and  co-workers  contributed  two  numerical  solutions.
One was of a spherical hydrate burning without natural convection (i.e.,
equivalent  to  the  1-D  spherical  analytical  solution  above),  but  it
included  one-step  chemistry  and  transport  [104].  The  simulation
required a hot environment for sustained combustion, so it was not a
direct-burning simulation, and there was no consideration of evapora-
tion  versus  draining  because  the  environment  ensured  sufficient
enthalpy for evaporation of all the water. The second simulation was of
flame  propagation  through  a  methane  hydrate  aerosol,  making  it
essentially a spray burning problem with hydrate particles rather than
droplets  as  the  fuel  [105].  The  work  also  employed  a  hot  ambient
environment and focused more on the spray flame propagation aspects
than on the unique features of the hydrate fuel particles. The burning
foundation from the earlier single particle study [104] was used in this
2nd simulation.

The  most  complete  modeling  of  hydrate  combustion  that  includes
integrating the enthalpy of water phase change and the combustion heat
was published recently [106]. The work combined hydrate dissociation
with single step chemistry. This work combines the heat release from
combustion with the demanded heat for releasing methane fuel. It is the
only published work to combine these aspects (co-modeling) but it does
not include a liquid water management aspect which has been crucial in
experimental  observations.  With  its  relatively  simple  chemistry,  the
modeling work primarily confirms the findings of the 1-D planar anal-
ysis described in Section 2.1.

3. Experimental findings

The existence of hydrates in nature is confirmed widely under the
seabed  and  in  permafrost where  these  crystalline compounds form  in
relatively  severe  environments  where  low-temperature  and  high-
pressure  conditions  are maintained.  One  of  the  challenges for  experi-
ments  with  methane  hydrate  combustion  is  the  non-uniformity  and
variability  of hydrate samples.  As seen in Fig. 13 this variability also
occurs in nature, and so, like a less complex version of coal as a fuel,
methane hydrates can have different burning characteristics depending

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111112

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

Fig. 13. Examples of natural hydrates. Images all public domain.

temperatures below the freezing point, the pressure increases steadily
along  with  the  heating  process  due  to  the  volumetric  expansion  of
gaseous  guests.  At  temperatures  above  the  freezing  point,  where  the
hydrate constantly forms, the gaseous CH4 consumption into the hydrate
suppresses the pressure elevation. The best overall performance in hy-
drate  uniformity  is  found  to  follow  a  sequence  where  heating  and
cooling  cycles  are  controlled  continually.  Starting  from  250  K,  the
temperature is raised stepwise up to 289 K and held there for complete
conversion. The sample is then cooled to 250 K if it is to be dissociated or
to  77  K  if  it  is  to  be  stored  for  an  extended  time.  The  cyclic  heating
process  from  the  ice  melting  point  to  the  peak  temperature  takes  an
approximately 8 h period. The changes of the P-T curve’s slope indicate
the  occurrence  of  phenomena  other  than  the  heat  expansion  of  gas.
Although the conditions for hydrate formation are mildly in the real gas
region,  the  P-T  slope  provides  an  accurate  indication  of  hydrate  for-
mation  and  dissolution.  Detailed  P-T  behaviors  are  presented  in  the
USGS  reports  [40,54]  and  the  process  outlined  in  them  continues  to
serve as the standard practice for ice-based reproducible hydrate sample
production. Following their creation, samples extracted from the vessels
are
to  prevent  any
self-dissociation. The obtained samples have around 250 μm grain size
within the cohesive aggregates. In the reports of U.S. Geological Survey,
the  X-ray  diffraction  measurements  were  conducted  with  the  results
indicating the formation of virtually pure methane hydrates with less
than 3 mass% of the unconverted ice.

liquid  nitrogen

temperature

stored  at

Fig. 14. Typical ice-based hydrate forming apparatus.

Injected  methane  fills  the  pores  as  it  achieves  a  stoichiometric  molar
ratio of structure I hydrate. It is important to note that even though the
P-T conditions are already in the stable hydrate region, the solid ice seed
and gaseous guest coexist without a hydrate forming reaction because
the kinetics of this reaction are exceedingly slow. Hence, by raising the
temperature until the point where ice begins to gradually melt, hydrate
nucleation occurs rapidly. The precise mechanism of this process where
ice,  methane  gas,  liquid  water,  proto-hydrate,  and  hydrate  are  all
observed remains a subject of fundamental research inquiry [107]. At

While ice-based hydrate fabrication produces reproducible results it
is  a  cumbersome  multi-step  process.  Water-based  fabrication,  on  the
other hand, conveniently provides the host compounds in the aqueous
state  with  the  continuous  agitation  of  the  host  water  and  guest  com-
pounds within a temperature condition higher than the melting point.
The reactor used in this well-acknowledged aqueous-based method to
obtain  the  hydrate  by  the  agitation  of  liquid  water  and  guest  fluid  is
schematically shown in Fig. 15. This reactor was first designed in the
hydrate research group in AIST, located in Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan
[81]. Reactors with the same design have been continuously utilized in
the group of Keio University, Yokohama, Japan (e.g. Refs. [108,109]).
The  test  section  is  a  stainless-steel  cylindrical  vessel  equipped  with  a
magnetic stirrer.  The inner volume of  the test vessel is  200 cm3.  The

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111113

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

crystal  samples  is  an  experimental  challenge  that  requires  some  in-
genuity and well-engineered devices. This difficulty of hydrate forma-
tion  in  the  mechanistic  aspect  is  an  obstacle  for  hydrate  combustion
science in that generating reproducible samples can be difficult. It is also
an  obstacle  for  the  engineering  practice  of  hydrate  technologies.  The
difficulty  of  reproducible  and  rapid  hydrate  formation  arises  in  part
from the limits imposed by the equilibrium thermodynamics of hydrate.
Although  true  equilibrium  is  difficult  to  achieve  in  a  natural  hydrate
where there are so many connecting phase domains (i.e., hydrate/water,
water/gas,  hydrate/gas),  phase  equilibrium  of  hydrate  + aqueous
water/solid ice + gaseous guest is the critical condition dictating where
in phase space the hydrate can exist. Therefore, the P-T conditions with
elevated pressure and lower temperature than the equilibrium condition
are considered the primary driving force of crystallization [113,114].
Although the nucleation of hydrate crystals is a stochastic process, the
hydrate formation in the rapid growth phase can be enhanced by ad-
ditives  called  promotors.  The  mechanism  of  the  promotion  effect  is
separated into two distinct phenomena: thermodynamic promotion and
kinetic  promotion. Understanding  the promotors  and  their effects  are
important for the realization of any practical hydrate-based technolo-
gies. In addition, from a combustion standpoint, the promotors can also
affect  hydrate  flames  both  by  their  chemical  composition  and  by  the
changes  they induce  in hydrate  morphology.  The concepts  associated
with  additives  included  in  hydrate  formation  and  dissociation  is  an
enormous research field all by itself (driven in large part by the oil and
gas industry’s attempts to prevent hydrate formation in pipelines), and
so only a compact discussion of the elements most actively involved in
hydrate combustion are described here. Comprehensive details and re-
view of additive effects can be found, for example, in Ref. [115]. The
role of additives in efforts to use hydrates for carbon sequestration is
described in Ref. [116].

3.1.2.1. Mechanisms of formation promotion. Typically, hydrates form in
low temperature, high pressure conditions, and methane hydrate is no
exception. Single gas guest compounds form structure I (and partially
structure  II)  hydrates  depending  on  the  guest  molecule  sizes  and
configuration.  Since  the  P-T  phase  equilibrium  conditions  vary,  the
hydrate forming conditions differ depending on the guest compounds.
These severe conditions can only be achieved with highly durable ma-
chinery. The intensive mechanical loads can be an obstacle for imple-
formation  conditions
mentation;
thermodynamically, reduced demands of the apparatus and improved
formation efficiency can be accomplished.

therefore,  by  moderating

the

The key for thermodynamic promotion  of hydrate  formation is its
crystal structure transition, and hence, the hydrate equilibrium condi-
tions can be moderated by changing the crystallographic structure. By
incorporating additives which are often referred to as thermodynamic
promotors,  the  hydrate  conformation  results  in  more  thermodynami-
cally stable structures. These promotors have relatively large molecular
sizes compared to the gaseous guest compounds. The 512  small cage is
only capable of capturing a guest size around 0.5 nm (5 Å), which in-
cludes most gaseous guest compounds. By adding a large molecule guest
compound (or LMGC, larger than 0.6 nm (6 Å)) the hydrate structure
mutates to either structure II or structure H with large cages. In other
words, different guest compounds coexist within the hydrate crystals.
Therefore, binary hydrates tend to have more moderate P-T conditions
compared to those for simple gas hydrates. Thermodynamic stability of
the  hydrate  depends  on  the  host-guest  interaction  within  the  cages.
Loosely  fitting  guests  will  have  weaker  interaction  compared  to  the
tighter fitting guests. The enclosing of thermodynamic promotors inside
the large water cages enables a higher stability of hydrate, which ap-
pears as the moderated equilibrium conditions.

Taking notice of the nucleation process, the formation of hydrates
can also be promoted from the kinetic perspective. The initial stage of
the hydrate formation starts from a nucleation period at the gas-liquid

Fig. 15. Typical water based hydrate forming apparatus.

reactor is immersed  in a temperature-controlled bath to maintain the
temperature inside the vessel, T, at a prescribed level. Two temperature
sensors  are  typically  inserted  into  the  vessel  to  measure  the  gas  and
liquid temperatures. The pressure in the vessel, P, is measured with a
strain-gauge  pressure  transducer.  The  inner  impeller  of  the  vessel
continuously stirs the contents to promote the formation of hydrates. To
control the system temperature, the vessel is immersed in an ethyl-glycol
bath that has constant temperature maintained by a PID controller. The
water  containing  vessels  are  pressurized  by  the  chosen  gaseous  guest
while referring to the equilibrium pressure at the preparing temperature
conditions. As a result, a pressure reduction occurs when the hydrate
forms. Hence, the P-T conditions of system are monitored throughout
the  preparation  procedures.  By  checking  the  inner  chamber  tempera-
ture, the clear momentary temperature increase due to the exothermic
reaction of hydrate formation initiation can be confirmed as well.

Water-based methods are valid not only for simple gas hydrates but
also  for  systems  of  either  structure  II  or  H  binary  guest  hydrates.  By
controlling  the  continuous  pressurization  above  the  equilibrium  pres-
sure of the desired hydrate structure, not to exceed the simple structure I
equilibrium  pressure,  the  formation  of  hydrate  is  promoted  intermit-
tently. When the pressure reduction cannot be confirmed after adding
the guest gases, the water is confirmed to be fully reacted with the gases
into a final hydrate. Subsequently, the reactor is cooled down below 200
K by immersing it in liquid nitrogen. Carefully checking the temperature
conditions throughout the preparation, the reactor is immediately dis-
assembled, and the created samples are collected by a liquid nitrogen
cooled spoon. Unlike the solid cake prepared by the seed ice methods,
powdery samples with a fragile and vulnerable lump are formed with the
water-based  method.  Previous  reports  [110,111]  involved  sample
preparation  by  these  latter  methods  and  indicated  that  pure  hydrate
formation is possible with sufficient repetition of pressurization to allow
the free water to react with the gaseous guests. Structural investigations
employing powder X-ray diffraction measurements detected peak pat-
terns  diffracted  from  the  hydrate  frameworks,  with  very  little  signal
from  any  ice  structures  [112].  The  measurements  indicated  approxi-
mately 3% by mass of the total as being ice formed from a small amount
of residual free water. The hydrate samples collected from the vessel are
then stored in a container at a temperature below 100 K.

3.1.2. Formation promotors

As  mentioned  in  the  previous  section,  the  preparation  of  hydrate

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111114

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

interface followed by an onset of rapid growth of a hydrate film. Once
the hydrate film covers the interface, hydrate growth will slow down
due to the transport inhibition of feeding gas to the aqueous phase. The
time period needed for the first confirmed nucleation is defined as in-
duction time but practically this is really the time associated with the
onset of massive growth rather than a true nucleation time (which is
extremely rapid). The definition of induction time is a practical one that
is  dictated  by  the  detectability  of  hydrate  crystal  formation.  At  the
nucleation  phase,  the  hydrate  elements  are  too  small  to  identify  and
there is not a detectable change in the global properties usually being
monitored  (e.g.,  the  chamber  pressure  or  material  temperature).  Me-
chanical promotion can be achieved by agitating the compound mixture
or employing dynamic interaction methods such as water spray and gas
bubbling  [3].  These  methods  increase  the  heat  and  mass  transfer
occurring  at  the  interface,  and  they  have  been  found  to  be  valuable
despite the additional efforts necessary from the hardware perspective.
Kinetic promotors are the compounds which produce shortened induc-
tion  time  of  hydrates  when  they  are  added  to  the  system  in  small
quantities. The mechanisms by which the promotors work has not been
fully  explained,  but  these  additives,  such  as  surfactants  and  nano-
particles [117,118] accelerate the transfer rate of both heat and mass.
Mitarai  et  al.  [119]  observed  the  crystal  growth  of  hydrates  formed
within the interface of guests and water coexisting with surfactants. In
their work, the surfactants were seen to increase the wettability between
water-guest-hydrate  which  then  might  lead  to  the  detachment  of  hy-
drate crystals formed at the interface of water and guests. This detach-
ment would break the monolithic hydrate film barrier and maintain the
contact of water and guest compounds, thereby resulting in high hydrate
crystal production rates. The addition of surfactant enhanced both the
heat and mass transfer. Surfactants have also been seen to beneficially
enlarge single hydrate crystals.

Understanding promotors and their mechanisms are needed for the
ultimate utilization of hydrate-based technologies to ensure high effi-
ciency and lowered environmental cost. For each individual application,
however, the most suited sets of hydrate forming systems and promotors
must  be  selected.  At  present,  worldwide  research  is  ongoing  for  new
promotor candidates with unique effects. In the following section, some
issues  associated  with  examples  of  promotors  and  their  cooperation
toward hydrate formation are described. These promotors are common
during the production of hydrates for combustion and so it is important
to consider their impacts on flame behavior as well.

3.1.2.2. Typical promotors (THF, SDS). As a prominent thermodynamic
promotor  for  hydrate  formation,  tetrahydrofuran  (THF)  has  been
extensively studied. THF is a water-miscible LMGC which forms struc-
ture  II  hydrate  with  different  guest  gases.  Phase  equilibrium  data  of
hydrate-forming systems containing THF with several gases are avail-
able, including with methane [120–122], CO2 [121,123], nitrogen [124,
125], and hydrogen [126–128]. Fig. 16 shows the representative data of
phase equilibria in hydrogen + THF + water system under several THF
concentrations  in  water,  which  is  reported  by  Anderson  et  al.  [126].
Their  study  demonstrated  that  phase  equilibrium  conditions  in  the
presence of THF were moderated.

On the other hand, recovery of THF from aqueous solutions is diffi-
cult  due  to  its  high  solubility  in  water.  Tetrahydropyran  (THP)  and
cyclopentane have been considered as alternative LMGCs which have
lower solubility in water than that of THF and form structure II hydrate
[10,129,130]. Matsumoto et al. [129] conducted the phase equilibrium
condition for CO2 + CP binary hydrate. Iino et al. [10] performed phase
equilibrium measurements of methane or CO2  + THP + water system.
The measured data showed that THP moderated the equilibrium tem-
peratures  of  methane  or  CO2  hydrates  by  at  least  8  K  at  any  given
temperature.

As  other  thermodynamic  promotors,  methylcyclohexane  (MCH)
[11],  neohexane  (NH)  [131]  and  1-methylpiperidine  (1-MPD)  [132,

Fig.  16. Phase  Equilibria  in  hydrogen  + THF  + water  system.  under  several
THF concentrations in water. Adapted from data in Ref. [126].

133] which are LMGCs forming structure H hydrate have been consid-
ered.  Although  the  above  promotors  which  form  structure  H  hydrate
alleviate  hydrate  formation  conditions  less  than  structure  II  hydrate
formers such as THF, they have utility on specific conditions since the
gas storage capacity of structure H hydrate is larger than that of struc-
ture  II  hydrate.  Ohfuka  et  al.  [134]  reported  the  phase  equilibrium
conditions of krypton + MCH, NH, or 1-MPD + water systems. Kondo
et al. [132] reported the phase equilibrium data of HFC-32 + MPD +
water system below water freezing point. They reported that the phase
diagram of HFC-32 + MPD hydrate was under higher temperature and
lower pressure than that of the simple HFC-32 hydrate.

Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), which is a representative surfactant,
serves as a kinetic promotor for methane hydrate formation. As distinct
from the above thermodynamic promotors, SDS is not encapsulated in
hydrate cages due to its large size. Several studies which demonstrated a
promotion  effect  of  SDS  and  revealed  this  mechanism  include
[135–137].

Previous studies reported two contradictory effects of surfactants on
hydrate formation. The first effect is inhibition of hydrate agglomera-
tion. This effect contributes greatly to prevention of plugging in oil and
gas  pipelines  due  to  agglomeration  of  hydrates.  Aman  et  al.  [138]
measured adhesion forces between hydrate particles adding surfactants
such as sorbitan monooleate (Span 80) and reported that the surfactants
decreased the adhesion forces between hydrate particles. Li et al. [139]
demonstrated  that  a  small  amount  of  MeOH  in  the  hydrate-forming
system had an effect of anti-agglomeration among hydrate particles.

In contrast, and as shown by the references already cited, surfactants
increase the rate of hydrate formation which is ascribed to reduction of
the induction time of hydrate nucleation. Gayet et al. [140] performed
formation experiments of methane hydrate adding SDS. They demon-
strated that SDS improved the hydrate formation rate and the amount of
water  into  hydrate  in  comparison  with  the  experiments  without  SDS.
Watanabe et al. [141] confirmed increase in hydrate formation rate and
conversion rate of water into hydrate in HFC-32 + SDS aqueous solution
system. They also reported that the existence of the surfactant-micelle
did not influence promotion of hydrate formation.

To elucidate the physical mechanism of the above effects of surfac-
tants,  some  crystal  growth  observations  of  hydrates  with  surfactants
were performed. Mitarai et al. [119] conducted hydrate crystal growth
observations at the interface between water and cyclopentane adding
surfactants including polypropylene glycol, naphthenic acid, and Span
80. They visually recognized the detachment of formed hydrate crystals
from  the  liquid/liquid  interface  and  concluded  that  this  growth  dy-
namics  led  to  increase  in  the  amount  of  formed  hydrate  crystals  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111115

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

anti-aggregation of hydrate grains. Hayama et al. [142] observed crystal
growth of methane hydrate formed at the interface methane and SDS
solutions. They reported that the size of individual hydrate crystals in
the presence of SDS was smaller than that in pure water, which would be
caused by the enhancement of nucleation by SDS. They also reported the
capillary suction through pores among hydrate crystals would occur at a
high SDS concentration.

From the standpoint of hydrate combustion, at present the two most
important hydrate promotors are THF and SDS. The former is flammable
and was the foundation of the first hydrate combustion experiments. The
latter remains the most common growth promotor for methane hydrates
and  its  chemical  contribution  to  combustion  has  both  optical  and
physical effects, as will be seen in the examples of hydrate combustion
experiments included throughout this review article. It is important to
remember that all the images of hydrates burning likely include some
residual surfactant left over from their fabrication, and this surfactant
which will change the observed color of the flame, primarily through the
strong emission of sodium from SDS.

3.1.2.3. Novel surfactant  concepts for promoting hydrate formation. The
nucleation process is one of the major reaction steps of hydrate forma-
tion. Nucleation happens extremely rapidly at the interface between gas
and liquid water but when the hydrate nucleation occurs at the interface
with  only  pure  compounds  and  water  the  formed  hydrate  can  block
transport  channels  and  prevent  further  interfacial  access.  As  already
mentioned,  adding  surfactant  to  the  system  will  modify  hydrate  for-
mation at the interface and increase surface availability. In addition to
SDS  and  THF,  alternative  surfactants  are  either  manufactured  or
exhibited  in  nature.  There  are  bio-surfactants  which  are  decomposed
from  microorganisms  produced  by  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  and
synthetic-surfactants produced from petroleum/vegetable-bases [143].
Low molecular weight surfactants constructed on the basis of physical
solvents, like N-formyl-morpholine (NFM), are attractive because they
enhance  the  interface  thickness  and  dynamics  without  making  very
stable emulsions that could partly trap hydrate particles and clog pore
space [144]. Surfactants as surface active agents can increase the vol-
ume of gas trapped in the hydrate network by changing the thermody-
namic condition of hydrate formation, and at the same time they can
improve  the  rate  of  hydrate  growth  by  reducing  surface  tension  to
enhance the mass transfer from gas phase into the liquid water phase
[145]. Although there has been extensive exploration of various chem-
ical  promoters  for  methane  hydrate  formation  [115],  relatively  little

work  has explored  the morpholine  compounds. This is  due in part to
their impractical nature (hazardous and expensive) but a few promising
recent studies [144,146] suggest that the structure of these compounds
may be worth exploring in a more benign form.

3.2. Burning methane hydrates

3.2.1. Planar surface burning (burning in a boundary layer)

As mentioned in Sec. 1.3, and as shown in Fig. 17, the flame prop-
agation over a methane hydrate in a laminar boundary layer has been
experimentally investigated [48] and these experiments elucidated that
the flame propagation speed is insensitive to a free stream velocity. The
hydrates  were  manufactured  using  the  techniques  described  above
beginning with water and without surfactant promotors. Subsequently,
the effect of hydrate surface temperature on the flame propagation in a
laminar  boundary  layer  was  investigated  [90].  Results  showed  that
when the surface temperature is lower than the dissociation temperature
of methane hydrate, the flame propagation speed was a few mm/s while
it was around 1000 mm/s when the surface temperature was higher than
the  dissociation  temperature.  When  the  surface  temperature  is  lower
than the dissociation temperature, the methane hydrate surface is not
dissociated and then the flame propagation speed is determined by the
dissociation rate just upstream of the leading flame edge due to the heat
from the leading flame edge as shown in Fig. 18. As a result, the flame
propagation speed is very low. When the surface temperature is higher
than the dissociation temperature, the surface of the methane hydrate is
already dissociating and a premixture of methane and air forms over the
methane hydrate surface before ignition. As a result, when the premixed
mixture over a methane hydrate surface is ignited, a flame propagates

Fig.  18. Propagation  of  hydrate  flame  in  the  low  speed  mechanism.  From
Ref. [90]; used with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 17. Burning hydrate surface. From Ref. [48]; used with permission from ACS publishing.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111116

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

with very high speed as shown in Fig. 19. The flame propagation speed
in this case is the same order of magnitude of that when the gaseous
methane  is  injected  in  a  laminar  boundary  layer  of  air  flow  [147].
Similarly,  two  different  speed  flame  propagation  as  a  function  of  the
hydrate  surface  temperature  was  observed  in  a  natural  convection
condition  [94].  Nigmatov  et  al.  [148]  confirmed  numerically  that  a
uniform  methane  layer  is  formed  over  a  methane  hydrate  when  the
hydrate surface temperature is higher than the dissociation temperature
while such a layer is not formed when the hydrate surface temperature is
lower than the dissociation temperature.

3.2.2. Burning of piles (qualitative effects of porosity)

The  creation  of uniform  hydrates  suitable  for  combustion study  is
non-trivial as described above, and so it is not surprising that the com-
bustion behavior of hydrates is highly dependent on both the creation of
the hydrate and the geometry of the burning environment. One of the
major  centers  of  hydrate  combustion  experiments  is  the  Institute  of
Thermophysics  in  Novosibirsk,  and  particularly  the  group  of  Misyura
and co-workers. Their research has already been cited in the introduc-
tion but their ensemble of studies bears further examination.

The  first  four  studies  from  the  group  [67–70]  used  the  very  basic
configuration shown in Fig. 20 which was a container sitting on a scale.
The container was then filled with hydrate and ignited and the weight of
the  system  was  monitored  during  the combustion  process.  As  seen in
Fig. 20 the data collected comprised weight and qualitative images of
the  flame  and  hydrate  surface.  The  difficulty  with  controlling  and
replicating initial conditions of the hydrate fuel led to important, but not
surprising,  conclusions  that  the  system  is  non-uniform  and  therefore

Fig.  19. Propagation  of  hydrate  flame  in  the  high  speed  regime.  From
Ref. [90]; used with permission from Elsevier.

non-stationary. They also reported that the fluctuation in the combus-
tion  (as  determined  by  mass  loss)  is  affected  by  fissures,  crevices,
non-uniform  release  of  methane,  and  the  gradual  development  of  a
water pool in the basin. They find that the release of methane is slow
until  the  hydrate  sample  temperature  rises  to  near  the  dissociation
temperature and then the methane release and combustion rate is very
high. Again, this is not surprising but it is important to recognize that
until the core hydrate warms up there is insufficient methane released to
sustain  vigorous  burning.  This  same  phenomenon  is  documented  by
Ref. [89] where their spherical burning hydrate needed time to warm up
before ignition for steady burning. The difficulty with all of these studies
is that they can provide only limited fundamental insight into hydrate
combustion because the burning depends so heavily on the geometry of
the fuel sample (both its internal morphology and its physical extent –
block, powder in basin, etc.).

The  continued  work  by  Misyura  and  co-workers  repeated  the  key
theme  of  porosity  and  oxidizer  flow  conditions  as  affecting  the  com-
bustion  process.  The  same  apparatus  was  used  for  these  follow-on
studies [149–152] but with more care in defining the hydrate porosity
and  in controlling  the  flow over  the  hydrate  bed. The latest phase  of
studies  has  added  modeling  of  the  process  [106,153]  along  with
manipulation of the key parameters for affecting the overall combustion
performance of the hydrate system [154–157]. The system remains the
bed of hydrate with flow over the surface either blowing from the side or
naturally rising convection. This group of studies is the most extensive
series of hydrate combustion papers, and it is strongly evaluative of air
flow and porosity effects. While the findings on these parameters are no
doubt generally applicable, the role of liquid water is not included as a
major aspect of the work. Further studies that include specific evaluation
of this aspect would be a welcome addition from this group.

Additional studies of methane hydrate combustion with only natural
convection provided over a pile of hydrate (Fig. 21) explored the chal-
lenges of identifying an “ignition temperature” for hydrate [78,80] and
the role of surfactant used in the artificial hydrate manufacture [79].
The  “ignition”  of  a  hydrate  is  really  the  ignition  of  a  methane/air
mixture  near  the  hydrate.  Creating  that  flammable  mixture  (which
generally sinks, incidentally, because the temperature of the hydrate is
so low that buoyancy drives the cold dissociation gas downwards) re-
quires that the hydrate be warm enough to release sufficient methane. In
addition, the hydrate needs to be warm enough that the heat provided
by  the  flame  is  sufficient  to  continue  the  dissociation  process.  The
identification of an ignition condition is further complicated by the lack
of  standard  thermal  and  geometrical  configuration.  In  Ref.  [80]  the

Fig. 20. Experiments of burning hydrate cake to examine porosity effects. From Ref. [67]; used with permission from ACS publishing.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111117

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

ignition was modeled along the lines of the ASTM cup burner standard
[158]  with  the  recognition  that  hydrate  is  not  a  standard  condensed
phase fuel. The study concluded that for any meaningful ignition and
flammability information, it is important to create a standardized sam-
ple preparation and ignition method for methane hydrates. As has been
seen,  the  literature  describes  a  variety  of  hydrate  preparation  ap-
proaches, most of which leave a residual chill in the hydrate cake. This
subcooling  (often  from  liquid  nitrogen)  means  that  when  the  liquid
water forms as the hydrate dissociates, it is possible for the cold core to
freeze the water and block further fuel release. For the burning case, if
the  hydrate  core  has  reached  a  temperature  that  permits  continuous
dissociation,  this  blockage  will  not  occur  but  that  critical  initial  core
temperature may depend on hydrate morphology, shape, and level of
hydration.

Another  general  study  of  methane  hydrate  combustion  in  a  pile
examined the potential role of surfactant in the burning behavior [79].
Interestingly, as seen in Fig. 22, the SDS surfactant acted as a soap that
produced  a bubbling foam  surface that did  modify the  burning. With
600  ppm  surfactant  the  foam  layer  actually  quenched  the  flame.  The
residual hydrate increased linearly with surfactant with an intercept that
indicated no surfactant effect for less than 50 ppm surfactant, and so this
low concentration of surfactant is recommended for any hydrate to be
used for combustion study. Note also that the surfactant creates a very
distinctive  yellow  color  that  comes  from  the  atomic  emission  of  the

Fig. 21. Example of burning hydrate mound; base is 10 cm diameter initially.
Author’s photographs.

Fig.  22. Burning  hydrate  with  different  levels  of  surfactant.  From  Ref.  [79];
used with permission from Taylor and Francis publishing.

sodium D line, as was verified by spectrometry [80].

Unsurprisingly,  the  quantitative  data  available  from  the  naturally
variable fuel structure (including the level of clathration) and combus-
tion conditions of hydrate piles is limited. Hence, a necessary step is to
create a reproducible sample geometry with a verified level of clathrate
formation.

3.2.3. Burning of a cylindrical cake (differential mass)

The  work  described  in  Refs.  [76,77,79]  uses  a  cylindrical  hydrate
cake as the initial condition. Part of the cake is dissociated separately to
determine the level of clathration for the specific sample being burned.
Similar  to  the  hydrate  pile  combustion  work  described  above,  the
dissociation rate or burning rate is determined by monitoring the change
in  weight  of  the  hydrate  as  it  burns.  The  complication  of  the  direct
weight  measurement,  as  was  evident  in  the  work  of  Misyura  and
co-workers already cited, is that the weight loss includes both methane
release and water evaporated. If all the water were to vaporize it would
be  straightforward  to  calculate  the  amount  of  methane  released  by
simple proportion with the level of clathration in the sample. Unfortu-
nately, however, some of the water always remains as liquid and so a
second  measurement  is  required  to  separate  liquid  water  and  water
vapor  from  the  weight  change.  A  differential  weight  experiment,  as
shown in Fig. 23, provides this added information. As the figure shows,
both the change in the total weight of the hydrate sample and the weight
of liquid water draining from the sample are recorded simultaneously.
By  assuming  a  uniform  hydrate  cake  with  the  clathration  percentage
determined from the methane uptake, and then confirmed with a room
temperature (non-burning) dissociation, the ratio of water to methane in
the hydrate can be determined. In this way, after subtracting the weight
of liquid water collected, the remainder can be ascribed to water vapor
mass. The experiment then provides the weight change burning history
of  a  cylindrical  hydrate  cake.  Complete  details  of  the  experimental
method are available in Ref. [76].

The results of the experiment [76] are shown in Figs. 24–27. Fig. 24
shows  the  ignition  of  the  cake  and  the  initial  burning  phase;  Fig.  25
shows the steady burning phase of the hydrate, and Fig. 26 shows the
final burnout stage of the hydrate. Some of the images are more difficult
to  discern  because  they  have  less  contrast,  but  the  brightness  of  the
images  reflects  consistently  the  brightness  of  the  flame  as  the  image
conditions  are  kept  constant.  Fig.  27  shows  the  weight  change  mea-
surement  and  the  calculated  methane  release  rate  and  ratio  of  water
vapor to methane released during the steady burning phase. It is very
interesting to see that the ratio is remarkably close to 1:1, where every
mole  of  methane  is  accompanied  by  a  mole  of  water  vapor  and  the
remaining water (the large majority, in fact) remains as liquid water.
This relatively low percentage of water in the vapor phase as part of the
combustion process helps explain why the hydrate flame is stable and
capable of steady burning, and also why the flame temperatures recor-
ded  for  methane  hydrate  flames  are  much  higher  than  would  be  ex-
pected from a heavily water-diluted fuel flame.

3.2.4. Burning of a spherical hydrate sample

Improving  on  the  cylindrical  cake  geometry  (and  its  lack  of  sym-
metry), there have been attempts to create a uniform spherical hydrate
sample. In fact, burning of spherical hydrate samples of different size
would help explore the potential of a classical d2  burning behavior as
alluded  to  in  the  analysis  section  of  this  review.  Not  surprisingly,
creating a uniform spherical hydrate sample is non-trivial. The leading
effort  was  the  work  from  Keio  University  [89].  This  work  includes  a
careful description  of forming the uniform hydrate  and includes tem-
perature data from near the hydrate burning surface and at its center.
The results show how the center temperature of the hydrate has a sig-
nificant effect on the burning rate, adding yet another complexity to the
combustion  of  this  multiphase  fuel  compound.  The  study  also  shows
several burning phases of the hydrate, like as was described for the cy-
lindrical cake, where the flame heat warms the sample and enhances

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111118

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

Fig. 23. Apparatus to measure differential weight to determine the water melted versus evaporated during hydrate burning. From Ref. [76]; used with permission
from Taylor and Francis publishing.

Fig.  24. Ignition  and  initial  burning  stage  of  cylindrical  hydrate  cake.  From
Ref. [76]; used with permission from Taylor and Francis publishing.

dissociation. The photographic results demonstrate how the water drips
from the spherical fuel at the bottom of the sample and this dripping
interrupts the flame sheet and creates a pulsating flame.

The pair of studies [159,160] from Cui and co-workers duplicated
the  Keio  configuration  and  duplicated  the  differential  mass  approach
from Ref. [79] to try and get further details regarding the burning of
spherical  hydrates.  As  in  the  prior  works,  their  results  confirmed
different burning phases of the hydrate and that the center temperature
has a significant effect on burning rate. Interestingly, their differential
mass measurements showed essentially no water vapor (ratio of nearly
10:1 for methane to water mass ratio), indicating that in their configu-
ration  the  hydrate  dissociated  and  released  the  methane  and  drained

Fig. 25. Steady burning stage of cylindrical hydrate cake. From Ref. [76]; used
with permission from Taylor and Francis publishing.

away  the  liquid  water  at  nearly  the  dissociation  rate.  They  did  not
indicate why the spherical geometry might have such a difference from
the  cylindrical  system  in  this  regard  but  we  can  speculate  that  the
steeper flow angle  and lower porosity  (reducing capillary trapping of
water)  will  have  contributed.  The  discrepancy  shows  again  how  the
details  of  the  experimental  configuration  in  hydrate  combustion  can
have large impacts on the burning character. There was also an attempt
to determine  a  d-squared law based  on the  initial size  of the  hydrate
sphere but only a limited initial size variation was possible (1.2–2.7 cm)
and  the  size  change  could  only  be  followed  down  to  approximately
80–88%  of  the  initial  diameter  squared  or  90–93%  of  the  initial

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111119

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

3.3. Burning of simulated hydrate

As can be clearly seen from the experiments described in the prior
sections, the use of solid fuel hydrates to determine fundamental com-
bustion behaviors (including for comparison with simulations) is prob-
lematic. The challenges highlighted in the foregoing inspired research
into more controllable but still hydrate relevant combustion configura-
tions. These studies all burn a simulated hydrate gas, effectively incor-
porating a separate dissociation step so that only vapor/gas mixtures are
burned.

3.3.1. Staged dissociation of hydrate with methane burning

The  work  of  Wu  and  co-workers  from  National  Cheng  Kung  Uni-
versity  (NCKU)  [161,162]  is  one  example  of  this  approach.  Their
experiment used a solid methane hydrate sample behind a porous plug
that faced a stagnation flow normal to its surface, as shown in Fig. 28.
This  then  produces  a  stagnation  flame  which  has  the  advantage  of
analytical solutions and symmetry for efficient modeling. In their sys-
tem, however, the hydrate surface was not dissociated directly by heat
from the flame but rather the flame heated the enclosing structure and
the  hydrate  was  dissociated  in  its  bulk,  and  the  vapor  then  passed
through a porous plug to the reaction zone. A spring behind the hydrate
sample ensured that it was always in contact with the porous plug. The
amount of water vapor in the fuel was not quantified but the configu-
ration suggests  a  saturated condition  at the  temperature of  the water
jacket  controlling  the  burner  temperature.  This  experiment  is  a
reasonable approach to hydrate combustion in that direct combustion is
not a likely approach for energy utilization of fuel hydrate but rather
there would be a gas release step followed by burning, as is seen in the
NCKU experiments.

The next step in control and simplification is to examine watery fuel
flames  directly,  since  it  appears  that  the  phase  change  from  solid  to
liquid/gas/vapor  is  difficult  to  control  sufficiently  for  detailed
evaluation.

3.3.2. Burning of high water content methane fuel

As has been seen in all the forgoing studies (but rarely with explicit
measurement  of  the  water  vapor  content  in  the  flame  zone  of  the
burning hydrate) there is a limit to the amount of water vapor that can
dilute the methane and still maintain a stable flame. Substantial effort
has gone into the study of water dilution in flames for the purpose of
reducing emissions (both soot and NOx, most recently in gas flares, e.g.
Refs. [163,164]), controlling flame temperature and speed of hydrogen
combustion  in  engines  (e.g.  Ref.  [165]),  and  fire  suppression  (e.g.
Ref.  [166]).  Dryer  [167]  summarizes  much  of  the  water-addition

Fig. 26. Final burning stage of cylindrical hydrate cake. From Ref. [76]; used
with permission from Taylor and Francis publishing.

Fig.  27. Polynomial  fits  to  normalized  fraction  of  differential  weight  mea-
surement during the burning of a cylindrical hydrate cake. Experiment numbers
refer  to  repeats  showing  inherent  variability  in  hydrate  combustion  samples.
From Ref. [76]; used with permission from Taylor and Francis publishing.

diameter. This means that the experiment covered between 17 and 25%
of the initial mass loss. Considering that there are burning phases also
involved it would be difficult to expect a steady d2 behavior under these
circumstances.

Fig. 28. Stagnation flow hydrate combustion experiment. From Ref. [162]; used with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111120

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

literature at the end of the 1970s, and though some years have passed
the  review  remains  insightful,  appropriate,  and  relevant.  Most  of  the
prior work in water diluted diffusion flames included the water on the
air side while a hydrate will always have the water diluting the fuel. Two
configurations that have been used for water-diluted methane diffusion
flame studies are the counterflow and co-flow geometries because they
provide sufficient symmetry for numerical simulation. In the case of the
counterflow the geometry provides a nominally 1-D system that can be
used to interrogate detailed chemistry and the co-flow system is a 2-D
cylindrically  symmetric  system  that  permits  some  detailed  chemistry
along with important transport aspects of the combustion process.

Counterflow flames have been used for exploring the role of water
dilution on combustion including using water mist to determine the role
of  droplet  size  in  fire  extinguishment  (e.g.  Refs.  [168,169])  and  the
potential for water in NOx reduction ([170,171]). While these general
water  addition  studies  provide  a  background  and  context  for  work
relevant to hydrates there are two major differences: (1) water addition
on  the  fuel  side  of  the  non-premixed  counterflow  flame,  and  (2)  the
water  addition  level  is  very  high,  approaching the  extinction limit  to
determine how much water could be added to a methane flame from the
hydrate matrix for steady burning. The counterflow water-vapor added
research targeting the chemistry at work under the conditions of hydrate
flames include the work of Kwon and co-workers [74,88,170,172] and
most specifically [86]. The principal conclusion from these works is that
water  acts  primarily  as  a  physical  thermal  sink  and  diluent,  and
secondarily  has  a  role  in  the  radical  chemistry.  The  most  uncertain
aspect  of  the  work  is  the  potential  effects  of  3rd  body  chaperon  effi-
ciency of water.

Watery fuel combustion in co-flow flames is another useful subcat-
egory  of  simplified  hydrate  combustion.  As  with  counterflow  flames,
most  research  in  this  subdomain  adds  water  to  the  air  side  of  the
diffusion flame to examine soot reduction (e.g. Ref. [173]). The exper-
iments and modeling of co-flow diffusion flames with very high levels of
water addition as representative of hydrate flames are more limited [87,
174] and are ongoing ([175,176]). The focus of these latter works was to
determine the role of water in the chemistry of the flame, and particu-
larly  on  the  role  of  OH  in  the  combustion,  as  the  flame  approaches
extinguishment. The first discovery is that the water-laden co-flow flame
fuel can carry approximately 70% mole fraction before extinguishing.
This is then approximately 2:1 water vapor/methane. Since a hydrate
contains more than 5:1 water/methane, this finding confirms once again
that the hydrate flame cannot carry all of the water into the reaction –
some  must  drain  away  to  permit  steady  burning.  The  2:1  ratio  is
somewhat different than the free burning hydrate cylinder described in
Section 3.2.3 but the difference seems very likely to result from the fact
that the direct hydrate flame must dissociate the hydrate and vaporize
the  liquid  water  entirely  from  flame  energy  where  the  co-flow  flame
provides the water as vapor (and preheated vapor to make sure it re-
mains  in  the  vapor  phase)  so  the  thermal  demand  from  the  flame  is
lower, allowing more water to join the reaction before extinguishment.
The study also included the water fuel flame temperature and showed
that the effects on OH by water dilution are not substantially different
from those of other diluents except very near extinction. More research
is needed to understand this near-extinction regime.

3.4. Summary of section 3

To  summarize  the  critical  challenges  of  hydrate  combustion

research, there are 3 important steps/aspects to consider.

(1)  Making the hydrate (or using natural hydrate) –  the method of
formation  (liquid  versus  ice,  surfactant  or  not,  crushed  and
repacked or used as formed) affects not only the hydration level
but  also  the  porosity  and  structure  of  the  hydrate  which  then
changes the transport of liquid water and heat through the sys-
tem. Not to mention its composition

(2) The geometry of the burning configuration, including shape, ac-
cess  to  air,  initial  temperature,  contact  system  temperature,
forced versus free convection, and size of the sample

(3)  Dealing with the residual water –  can it drain freely or does it
collect in a pan? Can it refreeze either in the pores of the hydrate
or in  the base  substrate? How much water  evaporates into the
combustion zone and how much does not participate?

Despite these variables and the challenges with uniformity in sample
and system, the following describes and reviews the results from com-
bustion experiments in hydrates.

4. Understanding hydrate combustion

The  two  key  motivations  for  understanding  hydrate  combustion
were initially (1) a concern for fire safety when transporting methane in
the form of methane hydrates, and (2) the potential for an entirely clean
energy source where direct combustion of methane hydrate would be
followed by a capture and sequestration of any carbon dioxide produced
from the combustion. Within topic (1) were discussions of ignition and
flame  spread  over  surfaces,  and  within  topic  (2)  were  methods  for
extracting  methane  from  ubiquitous  hydrate  beds  using  in  situ  com-
bustion.  Ultimately,  and  with  substantial  research  efforts  and  discov-
eries, the significance of both of these topics was reduced. In the former
because methane hydrate flames were found to be relatively weak and
easily managed, with little to no explosion risk, and in the latter because
combustion  of  methane  (including  any  inadvertent  release  of  uncol-
lected methane) was seen as a potential major contributor to greenhouse
gas emissions  (despite its low carbon/hydrogen  ratio), and  so further
production of hydrate fuel beds was seen as untenable. Hence, with a
few notable exceptions, hydrate science drifted away from combustion
and focused on geologic implications and more traditional flow assur-
ance aspects. Despite the current ebb state of hydrate combustion sci-
ence enthusiasm, there remain some very valuable fundamental findings
that, as with all fundamental science and technology, can be generalized
to future creative environments, including those that may be important
for  understanding  hydrates  on  other  planets.  At  the  heart  of  this  un-
derstanding  is  the  basic  three-phase  nature  of  hydrate  combustion,
where a fuel gas is burning to release heat that dissociates the solid water
cage structure to liquid and vapor water. The transport phenomena and
energy balance in hydrates mimics, therefore, solid fuels, liquid fuels,
and gaseous fuels. Furthermore, the initial conditions of the hydrate fuel
(both  chemical  and  physical)  can  have  profound  effects  on  the  com-
bustion  process,  and  this  lesson  is  another  important  one  for  all
condensed fuels that have variable structure.

4.1. Understanding provided by experiments

First and foremost, experiments that explore the burning of methane
hydrates have shown the enormous impact of variability on the com-
bustion  behavior.  The  variability  includes  hydrate  properties,  initial
conditions, and the combustion environment. The experiments have also
shown  that  hydrates  burn  in  a  unique  manner  because  of  their  high
water content. That water can in some cases refreeze, creating a barrier
to further gas release and in other cases can smother the flame under a
liquid  blanket.  Water  dripping  from  burning  hydrates  creates  local
extinction and unsteady burning behavior. These aspects are reviewed
in the following subsections.

4.1.1. Variability of hydrate conditions

4.1.1.1. Composition. As  was  shown  in  the  energy  balance  of  the
opening  section,  at  its  most  basic  level,  the  heat  of  combustion  of  a
methane hydrate depends on the amount of methane in the hydrate as
compared to the amount of water. This is the level of hydration. An ideal

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111121

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

methane hydrate contains a molar ratio of 5.75:1 water:methane but as
noted earlier achieving this ideal is not practical under realistic condi-
tions  and  time  constraints.  The  best  practices  can  achieve  a  level  of
(LH  = (methane/water)actual/(methane/water)ideal)  of
hydration
approximately 0.90. Unfortunately, the actual level of hydration is not
easily predicted (a typical variability is 10%) and so to be certain of the
LH in any experiment a separate test is needed of the sample. The three
methods  for  identifying  hydration  level  are  to  monitor  the  pressure
change of methane gas during formation, to examine the sample using a
materials  tool  (e.g.,  NMR,  Raman,  or  X-ray  diffraction),  or,  in  some
cases, the formed hydrate sample can be split into parts with one part left
to  melt  naturally.  The  mass  of  liquid  water  is  then  measured  and
compared  to  the  mass  of  initial  hydrate.  Even  this  straightforward
measurement is sensitive because without attention to the environment,
water  can  evaporate  or  condense  into  or  from  the  surroundings  pro-
ducing errors in the results. Careful efforts, however, keep this water
vapor aspect to a level below 1%.

Taking a sampling of the hydrate  combustion literature, it is  rela-
tively rare to find the LH specified. In their spherical hydrate combustion
experiment  [89]  showed  that  the  original  methane  hydrate  source
powder had an LH (they referred to it as αH) of 91.8 ± 4.6%, and that of
the sphere was 70.3 ± 5.2%. They concluded that during the fabrication
of  the  sphere,  about  20%  of  the  methane  was  lost.  This  is  another
cautionary tale for working with hydrates where the final sample may
not be identical to the source when time and geometry are changing. In
some of the recent work from Misyura and co-workers (e.g. Ref. [155])
X-ray  diffraction  is  used  to  confirm  1–2%  residual  ice  and  9–10%
methane in their samples. Assuming that this percentage is by mole, the
9–10%  is  equivalent  to  an  LH  of  0.6–0.68.  Note  that  this  level  is
significantly lower than that assumed in other experimental studies. For
example, in Ref. [68] the mass of methane was found to be 12.1% in the
artificial hydrates and 11.5% in natural hydrates. Since an ideal hydrate
has a methane mass percentage of 13.4%, these levels correspond to LH
0.9  and  0.85,  respectively.  The  combustion  of  hydrates  described  in
Ref.  [79]  is  based  on  the  experimental  details  in  Ref.  [76],  which
identified an LH of 0.82 ± 0.034. These examples show that care should
be  exercised  in  assuming  methane  content  of  any  hydrate  sample,
particularly  if  that  sample  has  undergone  further  treatment  after  its
formation.

Another variable in the composition can occur if the hydrate growth
is  accelerated  with  a  surfactant.  Reference  [79]  shows  the  effect  of
surfactant level on the burning behavior of a methane hydrate. When the
surfactant concentration is significant, it can create a foamy surface (like
dish  soap  bubbles)  as  the  methane  escapes,  and  this  foam  acts  as  a
barrier to combustion (see Fig. 22). Even at very small concentrations,
the  sodium  in  the  surfactant  (typically  SDS)  changes  the  color  of  the
flame as it adds the very distinctive Sodium “D”  line atomic emission
[80] to the typical blue excited CH chemiluminescent emission. At suf-
ficiently  low  concentrations  of  surfactant  there  appears  to  be  no  sig-
nificant  difference  in  the  burning  behavior,  and  the  time  saving  in
forming  the  hydrate  is  substantial.  Hence,  most  hydrate  experiments
employ some accelerating former and the inclusion of such an accelerant
can have an effect on the combustion behavior.

4.1.1.2. Porosity. Methane  hydrate  unit  cells  are  ice-like  structures  of
rigid hydrogen bonded cages stabilized by interior guest methane. Despite
this crystalline form at the molecular level the macro structure of hydrate
depends on the growth, formation, creation process, which is remarkably
varied as it depends often on the same kinds of random processes associ-
ated  with  nucleation  and  growth  that  produce  snowflakes  (also  with
enormous variety). One of the most variable aspects of the formation is the
porosity of the sample. To complicate the situation further, methane hy-
drate snow is often formed by pressing powder into molds or trays which
affects the sample porosity. The porosity can also vary if the hydrate is
formed in sediment, which has its own background native porosity.

Porosity is a critical property for hydrate combustion because it af-
fects: (a) thermal transport; (b) mass transport of gas; (c) liquid drainage
and capillary forces holding liquid water; (d) overall energy density of
the  hydrate;  and  (e)  the  potential  for  trapped  gas  in  pores.  After
reviewing the typical sequence of hydrate combustion it is evident that
porosity plays an important role in all aspects. Porosity affects include:
the thermal transport from the flame into the hydrate bed for dissocia-
tion; the escape of fuel gas from the hydrate as it dissociates percolating
through  any  undissociated  hydrate;  liquid  water  draining  out  of  the
hydrate as gravity competes with capillary forces to remove the liquid;
the heat released per unit volume of hydrate (note that mass-based de-
terminations are not sensitive to porosity but behaviors that depend on
physical  dimensions  –  such  as  buoyancy  –  can  be  affected);  and  the
amount of obfuscation generated by burning jets of trapped gas in pores
as  compared  to  true  hydrate  combustion  increases  with  porosity  and
nonuniformity of that porosity. This latter phenomenon can be an un-
derappreciated  complication  for  experiments  since  the  effective  fuel
density  between  gas  pressurized  to  the  hydrate  formation  pressure  is
40% of that for the hydrate itself. If pockets of this pressurized gas form
and  are  sealed  in  with  ice  boundaries  (effectively  a  self-preservation
effect that occurs during hydrate formation) then it can jet out during
combustion [80]. This points out that the significance of hydrates for
fuel storage is more that a high-density gaseous fuel can be stored at
effectively  atmospheric  surrounding  pressure  (at  low  temperature)
rather than the absolute benefit of energy dense storage.

Reference  [80]  describes  experiments  with  different  levels  of
porosity created by compacting samples to different degrees to show the
effects  on  ignition,  burning,  and  water  drainage.  Misyura  [177]  ad-
dresses the effect of porosity on dissociation explicitly, with the recog-
nition that variations in micro and macro structure affect gas hydrate
dissociation. The work examines four sample types: hydrate granules as
formed; pressed hydrate granules with reduced porosity; hydrate in coal
pores; and hydrate within silica sand pores. The results show differences
in the time and scale of dissociation between these types but the overall
behavior  is  not  fundamentally  different  in  character.  It  is  likely  that
under combustion conditions the variety of structure will lead to more
differences. In Ref. [150] the authors attempt a more systematic eval-
uation of the effects of porosity on hydrate combustion by varying the
granule size of the hydrate in the burned samples. The work shows that
highly variable granule size produces unsteady burning. In addition, and
as mentioned earlier, all experiments use a particular configuration that
can also affect the burning behavior. In this case the configuration is a
bed of hydrate burning in still air (no liquid drainage and subcooling
that permits some self-preservation for thicker samples). The variability
of the process leads the authors to conclude, “Thus, it is impossible to
simulate  accurately  the  non-stationary  hydrate  combustion  excluding
the tasks of CH4 hydrates dissociation because the boundary conditions
of the task are conjugated by the thermal and mass flows.” In an attempt
to remove one of the complicating variables, later work [152] used a
single grain size and nominally the same porosity of the hydrate with
variable transverse airflows across a burning hydrate surface (similar to
the  original  configuration  of  [36,48]).  Interestingly,  even  attempts  at
producing  uniform  porosity  are  stymied  by  the  formation  of
non-uniform pores during the dissociation and burning. The effects of
configuration  is  described  in  Ref.  [178]  with  five  different  burning
systems and approaches. The work shows clearly how variable the re-
sults  can  be  depending  on  the  experimental  configuration  employed.
Hence,  a  challenge  remains  to  develop  a  standard  methane  hydrate
sample with known porosity and uniformity to evaluate accurately the
transport and drainage effects on combustion even in a well-prescribed
airflow condition like a boundary layer.

4.1.1.3. Hydrate  in  sediment. While  there  is  a  substantial  amount  of
information about the dissociation of methane hydrates within a sedi-
ment matrix [179–185], there is no information in the peer-reviewed

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111122

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

literature  regarding  the  combustion  of  hydrate  within  sediment.  Pre-
liminary work presented at conferences and qualitative observations of
burning  hydrates  in  artificial  and  natural  sediment,  however,  suggest
that sediments affect hydrate combustion in mostly the same ways that
are seen with porosity. In particular, the thermal transport is affected,
the  mass  transport of  both  gas  and  liquid  is  affected, and  the  overall
energy density (both by volume and mass) changes when the hydrate is
interspersed in sediment. To first order, the burning behavior of pure
hydrate  and  sediment  hydrate  is  the  same  with  the  major  difference
being the lower methane content of the latter case. Hence, the burning is
less  vigorous  and  more  prone  to  extinction.  The  combustion  of  sedi-
mentary hydrate is an open area of potential study and one with sig-
nificant  practical  importance  if  in-situ  combustion  of  natural  hydrate
beds is to be employed for extracting natural gas as a resource.

4.1.1.4. Geometry of sample. In addition to the effects of internal micro-
characteristics  of  hydrate  samples  (i.e.,  level  of  hydration,  porosity,
sediment) there is also the macro characteristic of the overall sample
geometry. Vigorous burning has been shown when hydrate is ground to
a powder and piled up (Fig. 21) where there is free drainage of any re-
sidual water. If that same powder is placed into a tray with limited water
drainage,  the  resulting  combustion  is  less  robust  and  does  not  fully
consume  the  hydrate.  The  most  comprehensive  experimentation  has
used  the  hydrate  combustion  geometry  of  a  powdered  hydrate  in  a
closed tray (e.g. Refs. [36,69,94,101,106,151]). While the tray config-
uration is more controlled than the loose hydrate pile, it is still a situ-
ation where the combustion is less reliant on the internal characteristics
of the fuel and more on the environment in which the fuel finds itself.
Free standing samples of hydrate cake are preferable but bring their
own challenges since the creation of the sample geometry often requires
pressing hydrate into a mold and this pressing modifies the porosity and
can, in some cases, produce sufficient mechanical heating to partially
dissociate  the  hydrate  even  before  external  heating  and  ignition.
Nevertheless, with care, reproducible cylindrical [79] and spherical [89,
159] hydrate samples have been achieved. One advantage of these ge-
ometries is that they are less influenced by the mounting environment
than is the tray configuration.

4.1.1.5. Initial  temperature. One of the most complicating variables in
the direct burning of methane hydrates is the initial temperature of the
hydrate sample under study. To preserve hydrates after their formation
it is common to subject them to storage at liquid nitrogen temperatures.
This storage creates a deeply subcooled sample where even when the
sample is burning at the outer reaches the core can be well below ice
freezing temperature. This deeply subcooled condition means that the
phenomenon  of  “self-healing”  is  not  entirely  accurate.  As  described
earlier, the concept of self-healing is that the heat required to dissociate
hydrate from its solid phase to released gas and liquid water comes from
surrounding liquid water. The heat extracted from this surrounding is
sufficient to freeze the water to create an ice shell that prevents heat and
mass transfer and effectively stops the dissociation process. However,
the energy difference between the heat of fusion and the heat of hydrate
dissociation is relatively small and would not generally lead to a thick
layer of ice that would isolate the hydrate. When the hydrate is deeply
subcooled then there is a heat sink into the subcooled hydrate that can
freeze the water and shut down dissociation. The work from Refs. [90,
94] demonstrate this effect using combustion of methane hydrate in a
laminar boundary layer. The results show clearly that the initial tem-
perature  of the  hydrate cake significantly affects the  dissociation and
release  of  further  fuel  gas.  Similarly  [106,154],  show  an  influence of
“negative” temperatures on self-healing regimes in hydrate combustion.
Here, “negative” refers to sub-freezing for water ice. The latter reference
attempts to model some of these processes.

When a hydrate is only moderately sub-cooled, there is no evidence
of self-healing during combustion and hydrates burn to completion. This

observation shows that it is more likely the heat lost to the subcooled
substrate than the loss of heat to hydrate dissociation that is responsible
for self-healing in the extreme heat conditions of hydrate combustion.
Another important element of the subcooling is how the liquid water
resulting from dissociation is treated. If that water can be removed from
the surface, rather than being allowed to percolate through the porous
hydrate  where  it  can  freeze  (if  the  hydrate  is  sub-cooled)  a  different
burning behavior and higher temperature flames are observed [157].

In addition to the significance of initial hydrate temperature for self-
healing through sub-cooling, there is also an important level of warming
needed to permit an effective balance between thermal heat from the
flame being sufficient to dissociate a layer of hydrate that then further
supports combustion. Experimentally, the initial temperature needed for
ignition and complete burning was found in spherical hydrate burning
studies to be 253 K [89]. Similarly [160] studied the effects of internal
temperature  on  hydrate  sphere  burning,  and  all  hydrate  combustion
studies show that some level of warming is needed to ensure ignition and
burning (e.g. Refs. [80,90,153]). It is clear from these various studies
that  the  internal  heat  transfer  and  the  coupling  of  the  external  heat
source (flame) to the hydrate fuel will control the burning behavior but
it is another area of complexity in hydrate combustion that is open for
further study.

4.1.1.6. Water  drainage. As  was  shown  in  the  early  thermal  energy
balance, there is insufficient energy from the combustion of the methane
in a hydrate to fully evaporate the water cage matrix. There is sufficient
energy to dissociate the hydrate and to evaporate some of the water, but
not all of it. Hence, all hydrate combustion must permit a mechanism for
water drainage. Without it, the water will pool into a thicker and thicker
layer that will eventually quench the combustion since the heat from the
flame  can  no  longer  reach  the  hydrate  surface  at  sufficient  rate  to
dissociate it. This phenomenon has been confirmed both quantitatively
and  qualitatively.  All  hydrate  combustion  experiments  have  residual
water. What happens to that water varies depending on the experiment
and the conditions of combustion.

In [79], a hydrate cylinder is burned on a mesh and residual water
drains from the surface and through the cake by gravity to drip from the
support  mesh  into  a  collecting  basin.  By  measuring  the  mass  of  this
draining water (with an appropriate time shift based on the capillary
delay generated in the mesh) it is possible to determine the ratio of water
vapor to methane leaving the hydrate during steady burning. Santacana
[76]  and  Roshandell  et  al.  [79]  show  this  steady  condition  to  be
approximately 1:1 methane:water vapor by moles, which is consistent
with the flame temperature expected for steady burning. This work is the
only study that attempted to determine the water vapor content of the
fuel gas leaving the hydrate during combustion.

In [68,106,149] and in the similar works from the Misyura group, the
experiment  is  a  powder  bed  of  hydrate  in  a  container  that  does  not
permit  water  drainage  so  the  burning is  never complete  as  the  water
collects in the basin and quenches the flame. In their later studies, care
was taken to monitor the water vapor in the process but the behavior of
the residual water is not considered in a significant way. There is one
study that remarks on a difference in combustion temperature when the
water film is removed from the surface of the burning hydrate sample
[157] but the method for measuring this temperature is not identified,
and  the  interaction  of  any  liquid  water  throughout  the  basin  is  not
included in the discussion.

In  [89]  (and  in  the  following  work  of  others  [159,160,186]),  the
spherical burning of hydrate allowed the water to drip from the bottom
of the sphere. The researchers found that the dripping led to an inter-
ruption in the flame surface and an unsteady burning of the hydrate and
that the water film on the hydrate had an important influence [159]. In
Ref. [157] the authors remark that the flowing of water from the surface
of the hydrate sphere reduces the liquid water which then reduces the
water  vapor  content  in  the  gas  phase  which  increases  the  burning

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111123

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

temperature. They show a similar phenomenon when they artificially
remove some of the water film in their tray burning geometry. It seem
apparent, however that an ideal experiment would draw liquid water
away from the dissociating surface as the hydrate dissociates but such an
experiment has not yet been accomplished.

chemistry because it is likely to be at unusually high concentration.

4.2. Comparisons of experiments with comprehensive modeling and
simulation

4.1.1.7. Flow  of  oxidizer. As  with  any  nonpremixed  combustion  pro-
cess, the flow of oxidizer and its mixing with the fuel flow has a strong
influence on the reaction outcome. As can be seen in the foregoing, most
experiments  of  methane  hydrate  combustion  use  a  laminar  boundary
layer configuration where the fuel is a flat surface in contact with an
oxidizer  flow.  The  first  studies  created  an  intentionally  laminar
boundary layer for effective analysis [36]. Other studies, notably those
of Misyura and co-workers, used a similar fuel surface configuration but
permitted  a  natural  upward  convection  flow  to  entrain  and  mix  the
dissociating methane fuel [69]. Later, the work transitioned to a more
careful  flat  plate  flow  environment  similar  to  that  of  Ueda  and
co-workers.  The  work  culminated  in  the  recognition  that  the  flow
environment  created  different  burning  modes  [106,187,188].  To  this
point, there have not been any studies of stagnation flow onto a burning
hydrate surface, and this is another configuration open for study. There
has been (as will be described in a later section) a stagnation flow study
using an artificially dissociated hydrate where the methane was released
using flame heat but not directly from the interaction of the flame with
the hydrate but rather through a heat transfer to a hydrate cake source
[162].

The spherical [89,186] and cylindrical [77,79] free standing geom-
etry studies employed only natural convective flows. There remains a
need for research using a controlled ambient air flow in the free-standing
(i.e.,  not filled-tray surface) geometry. Some preliminary  results have
been attempted for such an experiment [189] but even very low flow
rates  can  extinguish  the  self-supporting  hydrate  flames  in  such
configurations.

4.1.2. Steady burning and self-healing processes

The literature shows that hydrate flames generally burn in progres-
sive periods, with an initial period just after ignition, a steady burning
period, and then a degrading period. This sequence shows very clearly in
the case of the cylindrical hydrate cake [76]. The initial period has a
large flame and burst of reaction as the initial cold methane envelops the
hydrate and burns vigorously. Fig. 24 shows the initial burning period.
As the heat from the flame reaches the solid hydrate further dissociation
and warming leads to a steady flame that progressively burns layers of
hydrate. Fig. 25 shows the typical steady burning behavior. Once the
hydrate is depleted, the combination of a growing liquid water film and
a  reduced  heat  transfer  to  the  cake  reduces  dissociation  and  flame
diminishment, until ultimately extinction. Fig. 26 shows the extinction
period.

Although  the  example  is  for  a  cylindrical  hydrate  cake,  the  same
sequence  is  seen  in  the  spherical  geometry,  in  the  flat  plate/cake
configuration,  and  in  pile  burning hydrates.  If  the  original  hydrate  is
severely subcooled, the refreezing of the water film from heat loss to the
subcooled hydrate structure below can shut off the flow of methane and
contribute to the extinction.

4.1.3. The role of water

One of the unique features of methane hydrate as a fuel is that it is
mostly water, and understanding all of the ways that water influences
the combustion of hydrates is therefore critically important to under-
standing  fiery  ice  burning.  As  described  above,  water  acts  thermody-
namically by requiring heat for phase changes; it acts physically creating
a thermal barrier to heat transfer from the flame; it can be a thermal sink
to potentially refreeze to a solid that prevents fuel release; and in the
vapor phase, the water acts as a diluent to the fuel leaving the hydrate. In
addition, there is a suspicion that the water has a role in the combustion

Faced with the complexity of the fuel and combustion process, it is
not surprising that there has not yet been a full CFD simulation of hy-
drate burning, where full simulation includes the solid fuel, transport of
the liquid water, detailed chemistry of the watery fuel combustion, and
fluid  mechanics  in  the  surroundings  that  includes  buoyancy.  Perhaps
even  more  importantly,  it  is  not  clear  what  a  complete  simulation  of
hydrate combustion would provide in terms of fundamental or practical
insights.  Earlier  in  this  article,  the  major  comprehensive  numerical
simulation attempts are outlined. The following reiterates some of the
findings from these simulations. The more effective experiment/simu-
lation  comparisons  occur  in  simplified  systems  discussed  in  the  next
section, where hydrate combustion is replaced with watery-fuel diffu-
sion flames.

4.2.1. Boundary layer model

The first numerical simulation of a hydrate flame (found only in the
paper presented at the Japanese Combustion Symposium - in Japanese)
was developed to examine numerically the combustion of methane hy-
drate in a laminar boundary layer under conditions that matched com-
panion experiments [37,101]. The goal of this simulation was driven by
a concern for flame spread across a hydrate surface if methane hydrate
was the shipboard transport mode for natural gas in competition with
LNG.  The  models  did  capture  some  of  the  key  features  of  the  flame
behavior  but  was  not  unique  to  hydrate  burning  because  the  fuel
boundary  did  not  recede  nor  permit  a  mixture  of  liquid  water/ice  to
form  as  the  methane  fuel  was  released.  The  model  did  effectively
simulate a flame over a surface that released fuel in a manner similar to
hydrate but there was no coupling of the thermal and physical condi-
tions  deep  in  the  hydrate  cake  with  the  release  of  the  fuel.  Both  the
simulation  and  the  experiment  showed  that  methane  hydrate  surface
flames are weak and unlikely to create a major fire hazard alone. An
additional simulation effort followed the original [148] to provide some
detailed insight  regarding flame  spread as  a  function of  hydrate cake
conditions, but the ultimate conclusion of all the work is that the com-
bination  of  limited  fuel  release,  demand  of  dissociation  energy,
self-healing behavior, surface water buildup, and water-diluted fuel all
combine to minimize the fire hazard.

4.2.2. Co-modeling boundary layer combustion

The most complete modeling of hydrate combustion in a boundary
layer flow that includes integrating the enthalpy of water phase change
and  the  combustion  heat  was  published  recently  [104].  The  work
combined  hydrate  dissociation  with  single  step  chemistry  and  impor-
tantly it also includes a porous media pathway for the methane released
to  reach  the  environment.  The  work  is  ambitious  in  its  objectives  of
combining the heat release from combustion with the demanded heat for
releasing  methane  fuel  and  the  understanding  of  the  thermophysical
properties of the solid hydrate as a fuel source. It is the only published
work to combine these aspects (co-modeling). Unfortunately, it does not
have  a  mechanism  for  managing  with  liquid  water  separately  from
evaporated water, and this water transport has been crucial in experi-
mental  observations.  The  paper’s  own  images  and  descriptions  show
how important the internal methane transport is, showing how fissures
and cavities form to produce bursts of methane and flame instabilities
that cannot be captured in the model, as seen in Figs. 29 and 30 [106,
152].  The  main  findings  of  the  work  reference  the  rate  of  methane
release  under  different  external  flow  conditions.  In  the  end,  with  its
relatively simple chemistry and the missing liquid water management,
there are no clear conclusions provided by the simulation beyond what
can  be  identified  from  experimental  observation  and  the  1-D  planar
analyses earlier described.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111124

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

laden fuel flame. There is also the component of the combustion pro-
cess where flame heat is required to dissociate the hydrate and evapo-
rate some of the water but the chemical kinetics and flame dynamics
aspects  can  be  evaluated  from  a  preheated/prevaporized  watery-fuel
flame system. Adding water as diluent in combustion (e.g., as liquid in
emulsified  fuels,  as  dilution  for  NOx  control,  or  through  exhaust  gas
recirculation) has a long and robust history. The special features of the
water-laden fuel diffusion flames representing hydrate combustion are
that the dilution is on the fuel side of the flame and that the level of
water  addition  can  be  extremely  high  (up  to  90%  if  all  the  water  is
evaporated).

4.3.1. Counterflow configuration

It is unlikely that a true stagnation flow flame from a methane hy-
drate can be sustained. The strain rate produced by even very low flow
velocities  will  likely  prevent  steady  burning.  Hence,  to  create  an
appropriate  1-D stagnation  flow  modeling  environment  some  form of
simulated hydrate flame is needed. This means either dissociating the
hydrate upstream of the stagnating surface or adding water to methane
in the gas phase. Two experiments attempt these approaches.

4.3.1.1. Hydrate burner. The group at National Cheng Kung University
(NCKU)  constructed  a  special  hydrate  burner  where  artificially  pro-
duced hydrate is loaded into a special chamber behind a porous burner
surface as seen in Fig. 33 [161] and Fig. 34 [162]. These configurations
provide an alternative heat flux path from the flame to the hydrate for
dissociation that then allow water-laden methane fuel to pass through
the  porous  surface  to  face  the  incoming  stagnation  flow  of  air.  This
creates  a  water-laden  methane/air  diffusion  flame  that  is  indirectly
fueled by a hydrate cake. The experiments were not able to determine
the amount of water that evaporated as compared to that draining away.
The former configuration is a cylindrical cake in a buoyant upflow of air
and the latter is a stagnating counterflow configuration. Both of these
configurations produced a  sufficiently symmetric and  steady flame to
permit a companion CFD simulation. Both studies included a measure-
ment  of  the  flame  temperature  (1700  K)  which  corresponded  to  an
equivalent water mass fraction of 0.6. This level is comparable to the
level  of  water  vapor  seen  in  the  natural  combustion  of  methane  hy-
drates, which indicates that the opposed flow porous burner approach
may be capable of capturing the thermal and chemical processes that
occur in humidified flames.

4.3.1.2. Counterflow burner. Without knowing how much water vapor
is being added to the flow, the dissociating hydrate cake approach from
NCKU  suggested an  even more fundamental  step  which  was  to artifi-
cially  add  water  vapor  to  methane  in  a  non-premixed  counterflow
burner configuration. The advantage of this system is that it represents
the  stagnation  flow  1-D  configuration  that  is  ideal  for  evaluating
chemical kinetics as a function of water addition to the fuel side of a
methane/air diffusion flame. This was the goal of the early research by
Padilla and co-workers [74,88,190] culminating in a combined experi-
mental  and  theoretical  study  [86].  Fig.  35  shows  the  experimental
configuration  from  the  work.  The  steady  flame  and  nominally  1-D
symmetry of the counterflow system permitted a very detailed evalua-
tion of the flame’s thermal structure using thin filament pyrometry and
of the flame’s chemical structure using corrected OH fluorescence. By
combining  the  experimental  and  theoretical  approaches  the  study
concluded  that the  water addition was  primarily a  thermal effect  but
that  very  near  extinction  there  may  be  important  chemical  effects,
particularly through the poorly quantified third-body efficiency of water
in the flame. As seen in Fig. 36, the study also confirmed peak flame
temperature  of  approximately  1700  K  for  high  water  addition  (near
extinction – 0.6 mass fraction water in fuel stream) and low strain rate
(as would be seen in naturally buoyant systems). At higher strain rates
the results showed higher temperatures.

Fig. 29. Apparatus schematic for studying methane hydrate burning in flows
over a surface. Adapted from Ref. [152]; used with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 30. Apparatus and results from naturally entrained flows over a hydrate
cake showing effects of internal porosity structure on the flame behavior. From
Ref. [106]; used with permission from Elsevier.

4.2.3. Natural convection hydrate burning: simulation versus experiments
The most relevant attempt at comprehensive simulation was also one
of the first such efforts. Unfortunately, the work was also only in Japa-
nese and presented at the Japanese Combustion Symposium [102,103].
It presented a vertically oriented cylindrical hydrate cake burning in a
natural  convection  environment.  The  model  employed  cylindrical
symmetry  and  one-step  chemistry  but  did  not  permit  a  split  between
melting and evaporating water. The analytical and computational setup
is  shown in Fig. 31 and the results of  the modeling in comparison  to
experiments are shown in Fig. 32. It provided insight into the thermal
transport into the hydrate cake as it burned and it showed very good
qualitative agreement with the burning behavior seen experimentally.
The good comparison is due in part to the limited time of the process
where the hydrate cake has not changed size and any water issues are
minimized by dripping away without affecting the process substantially.
These natural simplifications suggest that any truly insightful modeling
effort will begin with a simplified system that controls the geometry, the
internal structure, and the liquid water in some fashion.

4.3. Watery fuel combustion

As can be seen from the forgoing variability in hydrate fuel samples,
reaching fundamental  conclusions regarding  the direct combustion  of
fuel  hydrates  is  difficult using natural or  even laboratory constructed
samples. This challenge led to taking a step back towards an essential
hydrate flame as the appropriate starting point for combustion study.
The essence of hydrate combustion is that it is a highly diluted water-

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111125

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

Fig. 31. Early numerical simulation of vertically oriented cylindrical hydrate cake. From Ref. [102]; used with permission from the Japanese Combustion Society.

Fig. 32. Comparison of modeling and experiments for a vertically oriented hydrate cylindrical cake burning in a natural convection environment. From Ref. [103];
used with permission used with permission of the Japanese Combustion Society.

The counterflow flame provided some valuable insights but the flow
rates of water and fuel needed, particularly if higher pressure is of in-
terest,  made  continued  studies  challenging  so  attention  moved  to  a
capillary coflow flame system.

4.3.2. Coflow configuration

Coflow flames are not 1-D but they are nominally 2-D and cylindri-
cally symmetric. In addition, coflow flames have the advantage of low

strain rate at the reaction interface and they can be small enough to run
at even very high pressure without significant mass flow demands. This
latter benefit was important when one of the motivations for hydrate
combustion research was its in situ burning in the deep ocean [191]. The
most  comprehensive  experimental  work  on  highly  water  diluted
methane coflow combustion is due to Vicariotto and co-workers ([87,
174]). Fig. 37 shows images of the water diluted flames over the range of
dilution  studied.  The  level  of  dilution  achievable  before  extinction  is

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111126

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

close to that observed in natural methane hydrate flames, though it is
unsurprisingly  higher  since  the  evaporative  heat is  not  needed in  the
co-flow flame tests with preheated gases. The work confirmed that the
most significant role of the water is dilution, followed by thermal effects,
and  then  very  near  extinction  the  possibility  of  a  chemical  influence
begins  to  arise.  Many  of  the  conclusions  are  obtained  by  comparing
water-diluted fuel flames to carbon-dioxide and argon diluted flames.
Over a very large range of the dilution, these flames all behave similarly
when the dilution is thermal capacitance matched. The chemical effect
that was noted was confirmed in a detailed experimental study of OH
fluorescence in water diluted fuel coflow flames [192] that is ongoing.

4.3.2.1. Comparison  between  simulation  and  experiment. One  of  the
values of the experiments where symmetry and boundary conditions are
clearly identified is the opportunity to use the results of the experiments
in comparison with computations to understand the fundamental phe-
nomena involved in hydrate combustion. As has been seen in even the
qualitative experiments, the main feature of hydrate combustion is the

Fig. 33. NCKU experimental apparatus image for the cylindrical porous burner.
From Ref. [161] used with permission from Taylor and Francis publishing.

Fig. 34. NCKU experimental apparatus image counterflow/stagnation flow porous burner: (a) The schematic shows the position of the SiC fiber and burner (b) SiC
fiber inclined across the methane hydrate flame. From Ref. [162]; used with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 35. Experiment configuration of water-laden counterflow diffusion flame. From Ref. [86]; used with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111127

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

provide only reasonable physical insight rather than validated details.
A  more  comprehensive  comparison  between  experiments  and  1D
counterflow  flame  calculations,  and  the  current  state-of-the-art,  is
described  in  Ref.  [86].  This  study  built  and  improved  upon  the  prior
work,  with  a  more  intensive  evaluation  of  the  flame  thermal  profiles
using thin filament pyrometry and measurements of OH fluorescence.
Computationally, the effect of water on the radical chemistry, particu-
larly  including  considerations  of  the  chaperon  efficiency  for  water  in
relevant  3-body  reactions  was  evaluated.  The  results  of  this  study
showed good agreement with all details far from flame extinction, again
confirming that water acts primarily as a diluent except at the conditions
very  near  extinction.  Near  extinction,  there  is  evidence  that  water
chemistry  is  playing  a  role,  affecting  the  concentration  and  trade-off
between O, H, and OH radicals. The paper hypothesizes that the main
uncertainty comes from poorly known third-body efficiency values for
water. In order to explore this effect further, however, and particularly
when considering the possible extension of the study to higher pressures,
a different geometry is needed, and so the experiments and computa-
tions evolved to the 2-D coflow flame configuration with high levels of
water addition to the fuel.

The coflow flame studies using high levels of water in the fuel are
ongoing, and so far only a single paper on this subject has appeared in
the literature [87]. Other information is available, however, from con-
ferences  [175,176,192],  theses  [193],  and  dissertations  [174],  and
because they are relevant those ongoing studies are included here (with
the expectation that future publications will appear).

The  primary  experimental  findings  from  the  water-laden  coflow
flame described above were compared to 2-D simulations using Pele-LM
[194–196]. In these simulations the oxidizer is always normal air (i.e., a
mixture of nitrogen and oxygen) while the fuel is methane that is then
diluted with different levels of water vapor. PeleLM was developed at
the  Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Laboratory  (LBNL);  it  uses  adaptive
meshing  for  solving  low  Mach  number  reacting  flows  [197].  The
advantage of this code is that it allows the users to adjust the refinement
level of the mesh and the desired location on which the calculations are
made. The code is also computationally efficient, and the results have
shown a good quantification of the measured values on the desired zone
of the flame. In its standard configuration, PeleLM is equipped to pro-
vide information of 53 species, and it utilizes the GRI 3.0 mechanism
chemistry. While this mechanism is not the most recent nor complete
chemistry  for  methane,  prior  research  has  shown  it  to  be  a  sufficient
mechanism for non-premixed laminar flame combustion, and particu-
larly the prior results [86] showed that the difference of major species,
and the important O, H and, OH radicals were minimal in comparison
with the results obtained from a more comprehensive mechanism [198].
One important detail about the simulation/experiment comparison
is that the burner has an extruded fuel tip (to allow for OH fluorescence
measurements) while the PeleLM simulations are run with fuel and air
gases entering the domain at the zero vertical height. Initially, the re-
sults showed good agreement between measured and calculated flame
shape  and  position  at  low  water  addition  but  did  not  capture  the

Fig. 36. Peak temperature as a function of water addition in counterflow flame
from Ref. [86]; used with permission from Elsevier.

need to dissociate the hydrate and deal with the liquid water, either by
evaporating  it  or  draining  it  away.  After  these  physical  processes  are
accounted  for,  the  chemistry  and  combustion  appears  to  be  a  fairly
standard  methane/water  vapor/air  reaction  system.  This  section  de-
scribes the efforts to simulate water-laden flames motivated by hydrate
combustion and the findings that resulted.

The first attempt to match the water-laden fuel conditions typical of
hydrate  combustion employed  the  1D counterflow  configuration.  The
motivating experimental work was presented in 2012 [74], and the first
published computational study initiated by those experiments appeared
in 2015 [88]. The experiments only could provide global information,
including  peak  flame  temperatures  and  extinction  limits,  where  the
water level reached the point that the flame could not be sustained. The
computations were able to explore the effect of strain rate on the flame,
and with the clever inclusion of non-reactive water (i.e., water that had
all the thermal characteristics of natural water but was excluded from
any reactions) it was possible to isolate the thermal and dilution effects
from the chemical ones. Unfortunately, the results were not conclusive
because it was not possible to simultaneously match water addition and
strain  rate  for  direct  comparison  to  experiments.  Nevertheless,  the
comparison gave reasonable agreement with the level of water addition
that  could  be  sustained  before  extinction  and  the  computations  indi-
cated that the chemical effect of the water addition was not significant.
The  computational  work  extended  to  higher  pressure  [172]  and  an
exploration  of  the  effect  of  water  on  NOx  emission  [170],  all  with
somewhat expected results (e.g., reduced levels of soot precursor and
NOx with the lower flame temperature from water dilution). Without
direct  experimental  results  for  comparison,  however,  the  calculations

Fig. 37. Images of a methane/air diffusion flame highly diluted with water vapor in the fuel. Laminar water-laden methane/air co-flow flame at different water
dilution levels: XH2O  = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6. From Ref. [174]; used with permission of the author.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111128

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

measured flame liftoff at higher water addition conditions. The differ-
ence was attributed to the difference in geometry, and this difference
was  corrected  by  artificially  producing  an  inlet  hyperbolic  velocity
profile near the burner fuel inlet tip. The approach produced very good
agreement suggesting that the difference was due to mixing behavior at
the inlet boundary. Fig. 38 from Ref. [174] compares the computational
and experimental coflow flames after the inlet boundary modification.
These results show an excellent qualitative match, suggesting that the
computational approach can provide insight into the post-evaporation
behavior of methane hydrate flames. The next stage of these studies is
to  repeat  them at higher  pressure conditions.  There  appears to  be no
significant difference in the general findings as pressure increases [175,
176].

4.3.2.2. Water  versus  CO2  as  diluent. As can be seen from the general
theme running through all of the water-addition research, there remains
the  question  of how  much  of the  effect  of  water is  from thermal and
direct dilution and how much of it is from any special change on the
chemistry. This question is not strictly a hydrate combustion question
since it is only relevant once the water from the hydrate dissolution has
evaporated into the fuel gas stream but it is a question of general interest
for any steam-dilution combustion processes. One method to determine
if water is a special diluent is to compare the behavior of flames when
water is the diluent to flames when a different diluent is used. As has
been mentioned, numerically, it is possible to create a fake diluent that
has  all  the  physical  properties  of  water  but  that  is  chemically  inert.
Experimentally, however, this is not possible so a decision must be made
regarding what aspect of the dilution to match – in particular, matching
the dilution (i.e., the molar ratio of diluent/fuel) or matching the ther-
mal  properties  (i.e.,  the  same  thermal  capacitance  as  water  but  with
different molar ratio).

The  only  experimental  results  that  compare  directly  the  highly
diluted co-flow flames using water and CO2  as diluent is in Ref. [192]
with PeleLM computations of these conditions, including high pressure
appearing  in  Ref.  [175].  In  the  temperature  range  of  400–600  K,  the
specific heat of CO2 is 0.94–1.07 J/g-K and for water is 1.9–2.0 J/g-K, so
water has approximately twice the specific heat based on mass. On a
molar  basis, however, CO2  is approximately  44 J/mol-K  and water is

similar at around 37 J/mol-K as they are both triatomic molecules. At
first glance, this makes CO2  a good “inert”  substitute for water, but a
detailed evaluation of the results shows that like water, CO2 participates
in the chemistry so the substitution of water with CO2 simply shifts the
thermal/chemical aspect of the dilution to different reactions. Despite
this complication, the results continue to show that matching the ther-
mal  conditions  of  different  diluents  produces  very  similar  flame
behavior except very near extinction. This is entirely reasonable since at
extinction conditions is where the flame has little opportunity to recover
from reaction upset.

4.4. Summary of understanding

Methane hydrate combustion has the unique feature of high water
content  and  that  water  content  is  variable  depending  on  the  burning
configuration.  Despite  the  variability  of  the  experiments  in  hydrate
combustion,  a  few  key  findings  have  resulted.  Most  importantly,  the
results  consistently  show  that  hydrate  flames  are  relatively  weak.  In
addition, they do not produce soot, not all of the hydrate water evapo-
rates, and flame temperatures are in the range of 1500 K–1700 K. Next
generation experiments in hydrate combustion will need to identify a
canonical hydrate sample (with measurable features of hydration level
(LH), size, porosity, shape, mounting, initial temperature, and oxidizer
flow).

Table  3  collects  some  of  the  experiments  to  date  in  a  brief  table
showing  the  variation  of  conditions  and  the  need/opportunity  for
standardization.

5. Combustion implications of other hydrates

The direct combustion of a hydrate requires that the guest molecule be
a fuel, with methane the most prevalent and most significant from both
energy  and  environmental  perspectives.  Other  gas  hydrates,  however,
have tangential but important significance to combustion since hydrates
can be used to separate and purify gases and can also be used to sequester
greenhouse gases. Carbon dioxide hydrates are particularly important in
these uses. In addition, hydrates can be used to safely store highly reactive
gases, and this application is also described in this section.

Fig. 38. Comparison between experimental OH PLIF images (left half) and computational OH concentration levels (right half) for water addition into methane in a
co-flow burner. From Ref. [174]; used with permission of the author.

Table 3
Hydrate variations – partial list showing lack of uniformity in conditions.

Flat plate

Spherical/Cylindrical

Simulated Hydrate

Level of hydration

No data [48,90]

Porosity
Surfactant
Initial temperature

Bulk density

◦

No data [48,90]
None [48,90]
(cid:0) 80
C [48]
◦
(cid:0) 10 to (cid:0) 80
0.045kg/(0.04 m × 0.12 m × 0.02 m)=469 kg/m3 [48], [90]

C [90]

Powder 91.8 ± 4.6% [89]
Sphere 70.3 ± 5.2% [89]
No data [89]
None [89]
Center temperature 193–253 K [89]
Surface temperature 233–263 K [89]
510 ± 10 kg/m3.

N/A

N/A
N/A

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111129

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

5.1. CO2  hydrates

When  a  fossil  fuel  is  burned  in  order  to  deliver  thermal  energy,
carbon dioxide, CO2, is formed and it is generally emitted into the at-
mosphere as flue gas. It has become clear that this emitted flue gas is a
major  anthropogenic  contributor  to  the  increase  in  atmospheric  con-
centration  of  CO2  and  the  resulting  effects  of  climate  change.  One
mitigation  strategy  for  the  influence  of  CO2  emission  on  climate  by
combustion systems is the approach to separate and capture CO2  from
flue gas and store it in geological structures, such as in the deep ocean
and  in  the  sediment  of  the  sea  floor.  One  concern  against  geological
storage of CO2 is the possibility of its leakage, and a process that could
lead to permanent capture of CO2 is one that leads to the trapping of CO2
in solid stable form as a CO2  hydrate. Thus, CO2  hydrate studies have
appeared along with CH4 hydrate in relation to combustion.

A patent by Spencer [199] appears to be a first published document
which indicated the possibility of CO2 removal from flue gas using CO2
clathrates. Since then, many researchers have evaluated CO2  removal
from  flue  gas,  CO2  sequestration  and  CH4  recovery,  CO2  hydrate  for-
mation  promoter  development,  the  potential  of  geological  sequestra-
tion, especially in depleted natural gas reservoirs, and so on. There has
been a steady increase in the number of publications related to the above
topics over time, with a particularly significant increase in the number of
papers recently, indicating that the interest in CO2 increase in ambient
air has increased, and that the potential of using CO2 hydrate in this field
is a growing focus.

5.1.1. CO2  hydrates for separation

At  the  appropriate  conditions,  CO2  tends  to  be  encapsulated  in  a
hydrate, which fulfills the expectation of CO2 separation from mixed gas
with  hydrates  as  an intermediary  step.  Since the  added  compound  to
capture CO2 is exclusively water, hydrate-based CO2 separation has an
advantage  in  environmental-friendliness  compared  to  conventional
separation methods such as chemical absorption, which utilize an amine
solution. In addition, the operational cost of hydrate-based CO2  sepa-
ration can be comparable to other methods, including membrane sep-
aration. Furthermore, hydrate-based CO2  separation can be applied to
pre-  and  post-combustion  capture  from  fuel  and  flue  gas  mixtures  in
power plants [28,200–203] and to the utilization of low quality natural
gases such as sour gas [204–207]. Table 4 shows the properties of each
CO2  separation  method  for  pre-combustion  capture  in  power  plants.
Previous studies report some types of hydrate-based separation experi-
ments  such  as  batch  [208],  semi-batch  [200–203],  and  continuous
separation [204,209,210]. Linga et al. [201] conducted CO2  capturing
experiments from H2 + CO2 and N2 + CO2 mixed gases in a semi-batch
stirred  vessel  aiming  at  pre-  and  post-combustion  capture  in  an  inte-
grated gas combined cycle. Li et al. [200] and Babu et al. [208] per-
formed CO2 capture experiments from H2 + CO2 mixed gases in a batch
system, adding tetra-n-butyl-ammonium bromide (TBAB) to reduce the
required operating pressure. Their experiments investigated separation
efficiency  by  measuring  CO2  uptake  and  compositions  of  CO2  in  the
hydrate  phase,  and  they  showed  the  viability  of  CO2  separation  with

Table 4
Properties of pre-combustion separation.

Energy
consumption
GJ/ton CO2

Capturing
cost $/ton
CO2

CO2
recovery
ratio %

Maintenance
difficulty

Chemical

1.93~

47~

absorption
[242]
Membrane
[243]
Hydrate-
based
[244–246]

2.09–4.25

37~75

1.75

31

90

93

90

○

×

○

hydrates.  On  the  other  hand,  considering  commercial  feasibility,
continuous separation in long-term operation is the most appropriate.
Tomita et al. [205] executed hydrate-based continuous CO2 separation
from  a  CH4  + CO2  gas  mixture,  which  is  a  model  of  unconventional
natural gases. They also confirmed the reliability of the obtained results
by thermodynamic simulation. Horii and Ohmura [209] conducted ex-
periments in hydrate-based continuous CO2  separation from H2  + CO2
gas with sI hydrate and ionic hydrate under a H2 + CO2 + H2O system
and a H2 + CO2 + TBAB + H2O system, respectively. The experimental
results demonstrated the feasibility of CO2 separation in the above two
hydrate-forming systems. Kiyokawa et al. [210] proposed an improved
model of CO2  separation from H2  + CO2 gas mixtures by adding tetra-
hydropyran which forms sII hydrate, and they performed CO2 separation
experiments in the proposed system. As predicted, the obtained results
showed  higher  CO2  uptake  value  than  that  of  sI  and
ionic
hydrate-forming systems.

CO2 hydrate formation is in general too slow for practical use in the
direct  CO2  separation  from  flue  gas.  However,  some  additives  which
enhance  the  CO2  hydrate  formation  have  been  explored  that  show
promise in increasing the formation rate to sufficiently high levels for
practical utilization. Tetrabutyl ammonium bromide (TBAB) and mix-
tures were widely investigated by Sun et al. [211], Bai et al. [212], and
Yang et al. [213,214], using a flue gas or simulated flue gas. TBAB/CP
with  glucoamylace  solution showed  more  gas  uptake  and  accelerated
the hydrate  formation compared to the TBAB/CP  system of Bai et al.
[212]. Additionally, TBAB/THF (THF: tetrahydrofuran) additives pro-
mote hydrate formation, as shown by Yang et al. [213,214]. The tech-
nological  economics  of  these  promotor-based  approaches  depends  on
how  carbon  capture  and  sequestration  is  valued  with  the  continuing
global  challenges  of  climate  change  but  they  all  represent  promising
avenues for further study.

In any fuel/air combustion system, a major species in the flue gas is
nitrogen, and it is the separation of CO2 from N2–CO2 mixture gas that
poses the most significant application challenge. CO2 hydrate formation
in such a circumstance was experimentally investigated in Ref. [215].
Some impurities such as SO2, H2S, and unburnt CH4 were also included
in the flue gas. The effect of SO2  on the CO2  hydrate formation is dis-
cussed using the molecular dynamics (MD) thermodynamic integration
method in Ref. [216]. These MD results show that the hydrate equilib-
rium shifts to low pressures and high temperatures in the presence of a
small amount of SO2. In addition, the presence of SO2  helps the ther-
modynamics and kinetics of the hydrate formation process. Therefore,
complete removal of any SO2  impurity is not necessary as it can be a
positive factor for the capture and geological sequestration of CO2 in the
form  of  hydrates.  Although  SO2  is  a  pollutant  with  potential  health
consequences,  its  dual  role  as  hydrate  promotor  and  co-sequestration
species with CO2 could be a fortuitous benefit.

5.1.2. Sequestration

In  this  section,  replacement  of  CO2  and  CH4  in  a  CH4  hydrate
reservoir and CO2 sequestration in a depleted methane hydrate reservoir
are discussed. Zhou et al. [217] investigated CO2 storage with different
N2 concentrations in depleted natural gas hydrate reservoirs with excess
water.  Experimental  results  showed  that  N2  was  beneficial  for  quick
hydrate formation while pure CO2  was most efficient for hydrate for-
mation from a long-term perspective. A portion of CO2 was stored in the
form of gas; and a small amount of CO2 was dissolved in the pore water.
Saeidi et al. [218] showed in a very complex experiment starting with
methane  hydrate  formed  in  a  porous  medium  that  CO2  substitution
directly into a methane hydrate is aided significantly by the addition of
surfactant.  The  study  confirmed  the  theoretical  concept  that  heat
released  during  the  exothermic  formation  of  CO2  hydrate  can  locally
provide the heat needed to dissociate methane hydrate so that intersti-
tial water acts as the conduit for carbon dioxide to penetrate into the
core of the hydrate cake.

Hassanpouryouzband  et  al.  [219,220]  experimentally  investigated

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111130

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

the CO2  capture efficiency at different injection pressures from 2.6 to
23.8 MPa and hydrate reservoir temperatures from 273.2 to 283.2 K in
the presence of two different saturations of methane hydrate. The results
showed that more than 60% of the CO2 in the flue gas was captured and
stored as CO2  hydrate or CO2-mixed hydrates, while methane-rich gas
was produced. The sequestration of CO2 in a realistic conditions of the
Arctic regions [221] and more than 100 depleted natural gas reservoirs
located  in  Alberta,  Canada  [222]  have  been  done.  In  all  cases,  this
sequestration is limited by transport and local thermal conditions. The
analysis of hydrate for carbon sequestration is rightfully the subject of an
entirely different review article, so the current review only includes the
combustion  behavior  of  fuel  hydrate.  The  broader  environmental  im-
plications of hydrate are just provided as context for the significance of
this interesting solid material.

5.1.3. Fire extinguishment

Another  interesting  clathrate  hydrate  related  to  combustion  is  to
consider  a  carbon  dioxide  hydrate  as  a  fire  extinguisher.  The  carbon
dioxide  hydrate  consists  of  nonflammable  carbon  dioxide  and  water,
and  this  combination  suggests  that  carbon  dioxide  hydrate  may  be
suitable for use as a fire extinguishing agent superior to either carbon
dioxide or water alone. In particular, the carbon dioxide released from
the dissociated hydrate prevents the supply of oxygen to the flame base
and the water is useful to decrease the temperature of burning materials.
In  addition,  the  condensed  phase  nature  of  the  hydrate  allows  the
extinguishing agents to penetrate through any buoyant flow plume.

Experimental investigations to extinguish pool flames using carbon
dioxide hydrate have been reported [223,224]. From the experimental
results, it was found that the critical mass of carbon dioxide hydrate to
extinguish  the  flame  increases  when  the  size  of  the  pool  flame  is
increased, which is not surprising. However, the critical mass of carbon
dioxide  hydrate  to  extinguish  the  same  size  pool  flame  includes  less
water compared to that of an ordinary ice and requires less release of
carbon dioxide compared to that of dry ice.

Sasakura et al. [224] elucidated that the spreading of carbon dioxide
to the flame base plays an important role on the flame extinction as well
as the methanol cooling by water. They concluded that the extinction is
not a “blowoff” but the extinction occurs due to weakening the flame.
Sasakura et al. [225] and Sugihara et al. [226] were interested in the
effects of the boiling point (BP) of fuels. They tried to extinguish pool
◦
flames of Ethanol (BP: 78.4
C) and 1-Hexanol
◦
(BP: 157
C). They found that less
mass of carbon dioxide hydrate is necessary to extinguish the flame of
higher  BP  fuel.  They  hypothesize  that  the  effect  is  likely  because  the
hydrate water dissociation and evaporation cools down the fuel which
decreases its evaporation.

◦
C), in addition to Methanol (BP: 64.7

◦
C), 1-Propanol BP: 97.4

While  very  much  in  its  infancy,  these  initial  research  studies
demonstrate the potential of fire extinction by carbon dioxide hydrate.
There remain difficult experimental design challenges [227] to create an
even footing for testing different extinguishment materials (e.g., water,
ice,  dry-ice,  hydrate)  but  such  modifications  are  possible.  Naturally,
there are also significant practical aspects associated with the design of a
continuous  CO2  hydrate  formation  system  to  supply  such  an  extin-
guisher but the concept of combining CO2  and water via a hydrate re-
mains a novel and interesting one.

5.2. Ozone hydrates

While  not  strictly  a  combustion  product,  Ozone  (O3)  is  a  strong
oxidant that naturally and spontaneously decomposes into oxygen (O2).
These characteristics make O3 a major element of the health and prop-
erty damage caused by photochemical oxidant (SMOG) associated with
atmospheric  reactions  involving  regulated  combustion  emissions.  On
the  positive  side,  however,  these  same  properties  enable  O3  to  be  an
environmental-friendly sterilizing disinfectant of water and food which
can replace more conventional chemical disinfectants, such as alcohol

and chlorinated compounds. Unfortunately, storage and preservation of
O3 is extremely difficult due to its spontaneous decomposition reaction
to O2 at normal temperature and pressure [228]. Hydrate can provide a
unique  storage  medium  for  O3  which  achieves  long-term  and
high-concentrated O3 preservation since isolated O3 molecules caged in
the hydrate are prevented from self-decomposition because they cannot
make contact with another O3 molecules.

McTurk and Waller [229] first proposed the idea of storing O3  in
hydrates  in  1964.  They  formed  O3-containing  hydrate  with  carbon
tetrachloride.  After  this  discovery,  there  were  no  remarkable  de-
velopments  on  O3  storage  technology  with  hydrates  for  about  40
years. Revisited research proceeded in Japan in the 21st century. In a
Japanese  patent  application  document  [230]  it  was  reported  that
formation  of  O3-containing  hydrate  from  an  O3  + O2  gas  mixture
would require an extremely high pressure and a low temperature, e.g.,
13 MPa and 248 K. Utilizing helper guest compounds has been seen as
one of the effective methods to alleviate the severe formation condi-
tions of O3-containing hydrate. Some helper  guest compounds  have
been proposed under a constraint condition that such guests cause no
chemical reaction with O3  [29,231,232]. Muromachi et al. [29,231]
performed formation experiments of O3-containing hydrate with car-
bon  tetrachloride,  xenon  or  1,1-dichloro-1-fluoroethane  as  a  helper
guest and measured phase equilibrium conditions. The above helper
guests have a disadvantage in their toxicity to humans, high cost, and
environmental impacts. CO2 has been proposed as the most promising
helper  guest  which  overcomes  these  disadvantages.  Nakajima  et  al.
[30,233]  conducted  formation  and  preservation  experiments  of
O3-containing hydrate formed from O3 + O2 + CO2 gas mixtures. They
reported that O3  concentration in the hydrate was maintained at 0.6
mass% at 248 K under atmospheric pressure for 20 days. This value
was 103 to 104 times higher than the conventional technologies of O3
storage  such  as  ozonated  water  and  ice.  Shishido  et  al.  [234]
attempted to increase O3 concentration in the hydrate with increasing
O3 fraction in the gas phase. Their experiment showed 2.15 mass% as
the highest O3  concentration in the hydrate and revealed a positive
correlation  between  O3  concentration  in  the  gas  phase  and  in
hydrates.

Several  theoretical  studies  on  O3  hydrate  were  also  conducted
[235–237]. Subbotin et al. [235] studied O3 storage capacity in hydrates
formed from O3  + O2  + N2  + CO2  gas mixtures with theoretical simu-
lation. Their calculation demonstrated that the storage capacity of O3 +
O2 + N2 + CO2 hydrate was higher than that of nitrogen-free O3 + O2 +
CO2  hydrate. Watanabe  et  al.  [237]  performed  thermodynamic  simu-
lation of continuous O3 hydrate formation to clarify the influence of the
fraction  of  the  discharged  gas  from  the  reactor  and  the  fraction  of
captured gas transformed into hydrate on the O3 storage capacity. They
demonstrated that O3 concentration in hydrate increased with a rise in
the fraction of the discharged gas from the reactor.

Recently, detailed studies for implementing continuous formation of
O3-containing hydrate were reported. Hatsugai et al. [238] developed a
bench-scale continuous formation system of O3 + O2 + CO2 hydrate and
evaluated the performance of the system. The obtained operational data
indicated  a  commercial  feasibility  of  continuous  formation  of  O3  hy-
drate. Matsuura et al. [239] observed crystal growth of O3 + O2 + CO2
hydrate  and  revealed  the  crystal  growth  dynamics  and  crystal
morphology of the hydrate, which provided fundamental knowledge to
determine  the  appropriate  operation  condition  for  optimizing  O3  hy-
drate formation. Despite this progress, the use of hydrate for the novel
application of ozone storage and transport has not been heavily studied
nor implemented.

6. Concluding remarks and opportunities for further study

The  foregoing  demonstrates  and  documents  the  important  role  that
caged-molecule hydrates play across a range of energy and environmental
topics.  To  treat  comprehensively  all  of  these  aspects,  including  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111131

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

importance  of  hydrates  in  the  extraterrestrial  environments  of  other
planets, asteroids, and moons, is not possible nor relevant to the focused
domain of Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, and so this review
concentrates on the direct combustion of fuel hydrates, with just a few
introductory forays into other relevant hydrates and hydrate-based tech-
nologies. Because the key novel feature of hydrates as fuel is their struc-
ture, the review includes substantial introductory material that brings the
reader to an understanding sufficient to explicate the physical processes
controlling the formation of hydrates and their subsequent combustion.
The review includes an analysis of idealized methane hydrate com-
bustion along with the attempts in the literature to model and measure
the process. The review also includes efforts by researchers to isolate
some of the key features of hydrate combustion hypothesized, and in this
way demonstrate the how the scientific methods to extract the essence of
a  problem  (as  described  very  effectively,  for  example,  in  Refs.  [240,
241])  are  implemented  with  reductive  examples.  Currently,  the  full
portfolio of hydrate combustion study leaves more questions than an-
swers  (as  is  common  in  complex  scientific  problem  solving)  but  also
highlights the potential for interesting ongoing study. In addition, and
independent of any practical technological value, the combustion of this
chemically simple but structurally complex fuel provides an exemplar
for fundamental understanding in multiphase combustion science.

6.1. Scientific challenges and questions that arise from the reviewed
material

6.1.1. Role of water remains paramount

All  of  the  challenges  associated  with  fuel  hydrate  combustion  are
linked  to  the  dominant  physical  presence  of  water  in  the  hydrate.  The
dominance begins with the large molar ratio of water to fuel. The solid
water  cage  matrix  must  be  dissociated  to  release  the  energy  rich  fuel
captured  inside,  which  requires  thermal  energy  from  the  surroundings.
The water also restricts thermal transport from the surface of the hydrate
into the core (even if the water is a liquid layer at the surface). This re-
striction then means that thermal loss to a subcooled core can create an ice
layer preventing fuel release (the self-healing process). If the dissociation is
effectively achieved, there is a large volume of liquid water from which
any fuel would have to escape, creating at the very least a fully saturated
fuel stream. More likely is that additional water will evaporate into the
fuel/air mixture created as the hydrate burns, and that water serves as a
further  substantial  thermal  sink  and  diluent.  Managing  the  amount  of
evaporative  water  controls  the  steady  burning  of  hydrates.  Finally,  the
highly  humidified  fuel  combustion  that  results  from  hydrates  can  have
different chemical pathways, particularly near the extinction limits and at
high pressures where 3-body reactions involving water can be important.
Much more study on the role of water from the initial physical aspects
through to the chemical aspects are needed.

6.1.2. Uniform samples and canonical appropriate geometry for
combustion

As with many combustion problems, fundamental understanding of
systems often relies on a canonical configuration relevant for that study.
Examples of such configurations that extend back to the first symposia
on  combustion  include  spherically  expanding  and  Bunsen  premixed
flames for flame speed measurement. Further examples in the laminar
regime include the Burke-Schumann flame, flames propagating in open
or closed tubes, suspended (or microgravity) droplets, the counterflow
configuration, and flames in boundary layers over flat plate solid fuels.
Canonical turbulent combustion is  more challenging,  but the  interna-
tional TNF workshop and its associated databases provide the kinds of
data  that  can  be  used  for  modeling  and  fundamental  understanding,
with clearly identified flow and boundary conditions. This kind of ca-
nonical configuration does not yet exist for hydrate flames.

As can be seen from the review, creating a canonical hydrate com-
bustion  experiment  for  interlaboratory  and  modeling  comparison  is
challenging because every part of the problem needs to be controlled

and duplicated. A canonical hydrate combustion experiment would need
an  agreement  on  the  following:  fuel  content  and  morphology  (i.e.,
porosity  and  hydration  level),  geometry  (including  shape  and  size),
liquid water management, oxidizer flow conditions (velocity and tem-
perature),  initial  condition  (e.g.,  sample  temperature)  and  heat  flux
boundary condition (i.e., control of heat from or to the hydrate from the
support  structure),  These  last  two  elements  are  very  important  since
subcooling of the hydrate and any heat extraction or provision from the
structure will change the outcome. Whatever configuration is chosen,
the  system  should  naturally  incorporate  the  heat  from  the  flame  to
dissociate the hydrate and evaporate any water as needed to create the
full  direct  hydrate  combustion  behavior.  Any  system  that  externally
heats  the  hydrate  or  fuel/vapor  mixture  might  be  useful  for  some
chemistry study but it will not capture hydrate combustion dynamics.

6.1.3. Enhanced use of simulation

The  simulation  of  hydrate  flames  is  in  its  infancy.  While  different
subsets of the combustion process have been modeled, the fully coupled
problem  with  heat  loss  to  the  boundaries,  dissociation,  evaporation,
drainage,  surface  water,  and  natural  combustion  has  not  yet  been
attempted. Part of the reason is the lack of canonical data for hydrates as
described  earlier,  including  the  challenge  of  creating  a  reduced  dimen-
sionality system. Buoyancy driven flows nearly always involve all three
dimensions, and for hydrates, because the fuel is usually much colder than
the surroundings, there is downward flow from the fuel and upward flow
driven by the flame. The hydrate combustion chemistry does not appear to
be  the  major  challenge  (though  including  a  comprehensive  mechanism
into  the  rest  of  the  complexity  is  always  computationally  intensive).  A
completely coupled CFD simulation with a reduced chemical mechanism
for a simplified geometry is achievable with attention.

6.2. Potential methods, emphasis, and resources required to address these
questions

It seems clear that the first order of business is to converge on an
ideal hydrate combustion configuration. The next step will be to develop
a  database  from  that  configuration  that  can  be  used  to  develop  a
comprehensive numerical simulation. This combination will then lead to
insights in how the water of hydrates can be managed for most effective
combustion.

6.2.1. Recommended experimental configuration

Despite  its  challenges,  the  spherically  suspended  hydrate  configu-
ration, with a forced upward flow of air, and a controlled drain tube to
draw surface water away has the best chance for meeting the needs of
canonical study. We had proposed to do this experiment in zero gravity
to further eliminate any complications of buoyancy, and this is still a
good  strategy  but  experimentally  difficult.  The  suspended  hydrate
eliminates the uncertainty of boundary heat flux affecting the surface
dissociation process. The spherical sample should be created using the
ice-based hydrate formation method without surfactants, and improved
molding and integrating the suspension mount (with internal thermo-
couple) is needed. In all cases, samples should be run in parallel and
random selection of some samples for melting to determine the level of
hydration is necessary.

6.2.2. Recommended simulation approach

Any of the standard CFD packages can be used to simulate a spherical
hydrate  fuel  in  an  upward  flow.  The  simulation  should  couple  and
include the phase change of dissociation and evaporation but a simpli-
fied treatment of dripping can be assumed, where only a fraction of the
water is allowed to evaporate and the rest is assumed drawn away from
draining. A standard methane combustion kinetics scheme is also suf-
ficient to capture the burning.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111132

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

6.3. Concluding comment

Data availability

The direct burning of fuel hydrates represents a complex and inter-
esting  material  and  combustion  phenomenon.  It  is  probable  that  the
direct  combustion  of  hydrates  will  not  be  of  practical  technological
significance,  but  hydrates  can  serve  as  a  clean  surrogate  for  complex
multi-phase  change  fuels.  Hydrates  allow  a  low-sooting  fuel  to  be
released  in  fixed  proportion  from  a  solid  matrix  (like  clean  coal).  In
addition,  the  hydrate  structure itself has  many other energy/environ-
mental elements both terrestrial and in the cosmos, and understanding
its behavior through combustion can bring important understanding to
behaviors in these unusual conditions.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

No data was generated as part of this review article.

Acknowledgments

The colleagues and researchers who have supported the study of fuel
hydrate combustion are too numerous to mention but they are all rep-
resented in the references documented throughout this review article,
and  the  authors  thank  them  all.  The  authors  thank  Shin  Oguro,  Riku
Matsuura, Yuri Kondo, Hitoshi Kiyokawa and Meku Maruyama, grad-
uate students in Keio University, for their assistance in the preparing the
manuscript.  The  authors  also  deeply  appreciate  the  support  from  the
National  Science  Foundation  and  the  W.M.  Keck  Foundation  for  the
Deep  Ocean  Power  Science  Laboratory  at  UCI.  NEDO,  the  National
Research and Development Agency of Japan has also been a longtime
supporter of hydrate research represented in this article.

Nomenclature

heat flux per unit area from the liquid layer into the solid hydrate (W/m2)
hydrate dissociation rate per unit area (kg/s/m2)
effective latent heat of fusion for the hydrate (J/kg)
specific heat of the hydrate (J/kg/K)
hydrate cake initial temperature (K)
dissociation temperature of hydrate (K)
heat flux per unit area from the gas into the liquid layer (W/m2)
mass fraction of gas that is water
gas (water vapor and methane) mass release rate per unit area (kg/s/m2)
latent heat of evaporation for water (J/kg)
specific heat of liquid water (J/kg/K)
temperature of evaporation from liquid to vapor (K)
specific heat of methane (J/kg/K)
heat per unit area generated by combustion of methane from hydrate (W/m2)

Qls
 ̇ms
Lf
cps
Ti
Tls
Qgl
α
 ̇mg
Lv
cpl
Tgl
cpch4
Qf
ΔHc(cid:0) ch4/air heat of combustion for methane in air (J/kg)
Qfs
Qfh
kl
tl
hg
Tf
b
 ̇mF
kg
cpg
B
rs
rf
T∞
Ts
ν
Qdiss
hfg
LH

heat per unit area from combustion directed towards the surroundings (W/m2)
heat per unit area from combustion directed towards the hydrate (W/m2)
conductivity of liquid water (W/m/K)
thickness of liquid water layer (m)
convective heat transfer coefficient for gas to liquid interface (W/m2)
temperature of hydrate flame (K)
fraction of vapor from hydrate that is water (kg/kg)
fuel vaporization rate (kg/s)
thermal conductivity of gas (water vapor plus methane) (W/m/K)
specific heat of gas (water vapor plus methane) (J/kg/K)
classical mass transfer number for vaporization
radius of solid hydrate sphere (m)
radius of flame zone (m)
temperature of the surroundings (K)
temperature at the surface of the hydrate sphere (K)
mass-based stoichiometric coefficient relating mass of oxidizer to mass of fuel
heat of dissociation per mass of watery fuel released into system (J/kg)
heat of vaporization for water (J/kg)
level of hydration in hydrate; i.e., (methane/water)actual/(methane/water)ideal

Subscripts
l
s
ls

liquid
solid
liquid/solid interface or phase transition

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111133

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

i
g
gl
ch4
f

initial
gas
gas/liquid interface or phase transition
methane
flame

References

[1] Makogon YF. Hydrates of natural gas. Tulsa, Okla: PennWell Books. ix; 1981.

p. 237.

[2] Englezos P. Clathrate hydrates. Ind Eng Chem Res 1993;32(7):1251–74.
[3] Mori YH. Recent advances in hydrate-based technologies for natural gas storage-a

review. J Chem Ind Eng 2003;54:1–17.

[4] Warrier P, Khan MN, Srivastava V, Maupin CM, Koh CA. Overview: nucleation of

clathrate hydrates. J Chem Phys 2016;145(21).

[5] Sloan ED, Koh CA. Clathrate hydrates of natural gases. In: Clathrate hydrates of

natural gases. third ed., vol. 119; 2008. p. 1–701. Third Edition.

[6] Tezuka K, Taguchi T, Alavi S, Sum AK, Ohmura R. Thermodynamic stability of
structure H hydrates based on the molecular properties of large guest molecules.
Energies 2012;5(2):459–65.

[7] Takeya S, Ohmura R. Phase equilibrium for structure I and structure H hydrates
formed with methylfluoride and methylcyclohexane. J Chem Eng Data 2007;52
(2):635–8.

[8] Kondo W, Ohtsuka K, Ohmura R, Takeya S, Mori YH. Clathrate-hydrate formation
from a hydrocarbon gas mixture: compositional evolution of formed hydrate
during an isobaric semi-batch hydrate-forming operation. Appl Energy 2014;113:
864–71.

[9] Adisasmito S, Frank RJ, Sloan ED. Hydrates of carbon-dioxide and methane

mixtures. J Chem Eng Data 1991;36(1):68–71.

[10] Iino K, Takeya S, Ohmura R. Characterization of clathrate hydrates formed with

CH4 or CO2 plus tetrahydropyran. Fuel 2014;122:270–6.

[11] Nakamura T, Makino T, Sugahara T, Ohgaki K. Stability boundaries of gas

hydrates helped by methane-structure-H hydrates of methylcyclohexane and cis-
1,2-dimethylcyclohexane. Chem Eng Sci 2003;58(2):269–73.

[12] Davy HI. The Bakerian Lecture. On some of the combinations of oxymuriatic gas
and oxygene, and on the chemical relations of these principles, to inflammable
bodies. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond 1811;101:1–35.

[13] Hammerschmidt EG. Formation of gas hydrates in natural gas transmission lines.

Ind Eng Chem 1934;26:851–5.

[14] Ke W, Kelland MA. Kinetic hydrate inhibitor studies for gas hydrate systems: a

review of experimental equipment and test methods. Energy Fuels 2016;30(12):
10015–28.

[15] Chong ZR, Yang SHB, Babu P, Linga P, Li XS. Review of natural gas hydrates as an
energy resource: prospects and challenges. Appl Energy 2016;162:1633–52.
[16] Yang L, Zhao JF, Liu WG, Yang MJ, Song YC. Experimental study on the effective
thermal conductivity of hydrate-bearing sediments. Energy 2015;79:203–11.
[17] Nishimura K, Morita H. Gas clathrate engine no teian. Kagaku Kogaku 1982;46:

49–51 (in Japanese).

[18] Obara S. Development of a hybrid compressed gas engine/PEFC power system
using the dissociation expansion characteristics of gas hydrate. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2010;35(19):10604–12.

[19] Obara S, Yamada T, Matsumura K, Takahashi S, Kawai M, Rengarajan B.

Operational planning of an engine generator using a high pressure working fluid
composed of CO2 hydrate. Appl Energy 2011;88(12):4733–41.

[20] Ogawa T, Ito T, Watanabe K, Tahara KI, Hiraoka R, Ochiai JI, Ohmura R,

Mori YH. Development of a novel hydrate-based refrigeration system: a
preliminary overview. Appl Therm Eng 2006;26(17–18):2157–67.

[21] Ogoshi H, Takao S. Air-Conditioning system using clathrate hydrate slurry. In:

JFE technical report; 2004.

[22] Mori T, Mori YH. Characterization of gas hydrate formation in direct-contact cool
storage process. International Journal of Refrigeration-Revue Internationale Du
Froid 1989;12(5):259–65.

[23] Wang XL, Dennis M, Hou LZ. Clathrate hydrate technology for cold storage in air
conditioning systems. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2014;36:34–51.
[24] Mimachi H, Takeya S, Yoneyama A, Hyodo K, Takeda T, Gotoh Y, Murayama T.
Natural gas storage and transportation within gas hydrate of smaller particle: size
dependence of self-preservation phenomenon of natural gas hydrate. Chem Eng
Sci 2014;118:208–13.

[25] Rehder G, Eckl R, Elfgen M, Falenty A, Hamann R, Kahler N, Kuhs WF,

Osterkamp H, Windmeier C. Methane hydrate pellet transport using the self-
preservation effect: a techno-economic analysis. Energies 2012;5(7):2499–523.

[26] Thomas S, Dawe RA. Review of ways to transport natural gas energy from
countries which do not need the gas for domestic use. Energy 2003;28(14):
1461–77.

[27] Dashti H, Yew LZ, Lou X. Recent advances in gas hydrate-based CO2 capture.

J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2015;23:195–207.

[28] Seo YT, Moudrakovski IL, Ripmeester JA, Lee JW, Lee H. Efficient recovery of

CO2 from flue gas by clathrate hydrate formation in porous silica gels. Environ
Sci Technol 2005;39(7):2315–9.

[29] Muromachi S, Ohmura R, Takeya S, Mori YH. Clathrate hydrates for ozone

preservation. J Phys Chem B 2010;114(35):11430–5.

[30] Nakajima T, Akatsu S, Ohmura R, Takeya S, Mori YH. Molecular storage of ozone
in a clathrate hydrate formed from an O-3+O-2+CO2 gas mixture. Angew Chem
Int Ed 2011;50(44):10340–3.

[31] Babu P, Nambiar A, He TB, Karimi IA, Lee JD, Englezos P, Linga P. A review of
clathrate hydrate based desalination to strengthen energy-water nexus. ACS
Sustainable Chem Eng 2018;6(7):8093–107.

[32] Ho-Van S, Bouillot B, Douzet J, Babakhani SM, Herri JM. Cyclopentane hydrates -

a candidate for desalination? J Environ Chem Eng 2019;7(5).

[33] Koyama R, Arai Y, Yamauchi Y, Takeya S, Endo F, Hotta A, Ohmura R.

Thermophysical properties of trimethylolethane (TME) hydrate as phase change
material for cooling lithium-ion battery in electric vehicle. J Power Sources 2019;
427:70–6.

[34] Dictionaries, O.L.s. [cited 2023 May 30, 2023]; Available from: https://www.

oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/us/definition/english/tree.

[35] Kaneko H, Okui T, Kagami H. Combustion of methane hydrate. In: 35th

Symposium (Japanese) on combustion; 1997. p. 462–4. Tokyo, Japan.
[36] Iwata M, Ueda T. Combustion behavior of combustible clathrate hydrate in a

laminar boundary layer. In: 39th Symposium (Japanese) on combustion; 2001.
p. 201–2. Yokohama, Japan.

[37] Kitamura K, Nakajo K, Ueda T. Numerical calculation of a diffusion flame formed
in the laminar boundary layer over methane-hydrate. In: 4th international
conference on gas hydrate (ICGH 2002); 2002 [Yokohama, Japan].

[38] Iwata M, Ueda T. Combustion behavior of a combustible clathrate hydrate in a
laminar boundary layer over a flat plate. In: 4th international conference on gas
hydrates; 2002 [Yokohama, Japan].

[39] Oyama A, Masutani SM. A review of the methane hydrate program in Japan.

Energies 2017;10(10).

[40] Stern LA, Kirby SH, Durham WB. Peculiarities of methane clathrate hydrate

formation and solid-state deformation, including possible superheating of water
ice. Science 1996;273(5283):1843–8.

[41] Stern LA, Kirby S. Usgs - Science for a changing world. 2012. Available from:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U46XOoU0DrM.

[42] Gutt C, Press W, Bohrmann G, Greinert J, Hüller A. Brennendes Eis: Methanhydrat
— Energiequelle der Zukunft oder Gefahr fürs Klima? Phys Bl. 2001;57:49–54.
https://doi.org/10.1002/phbl.20010570917.

[43] GEOMAR. Burning hydrate image from expedition SO174. 2003 [cited 2020

September 22]; Available from: https://www.geomar.de/en/discover/articles/ga
s-hydrate-research-advanced-knowledge-and-new-technologies.

[44] Heeschen KU, Hohnberg HJ, Haeckel M, Abegg F, Drews M, Bohrmann G. In situ
hydrocarbon concentrations from pressurized cores in surface sediments,
Northern Gulf of Mexico. Mar Chem 2007;107(4):498–515.

[45] Emmons HW. The film combustion of liquid fuel. ZAMM - Journal of Applied
Mathematics and Mechanics/Z Angew Math Mech 1956;36(1-2):60–71.
[46] Emmons HW. Combustion - an aeronautical science. J Aero Sci 1958;25(12):

730–41.

[47] Fernandez-Pello AC, Hirano T. Controlling mechanisms of flame spread. Combust

Sci Technol 1983;32(1–4):1–31.

[48] Nakamura Y, Katsuki R, Yokomori T, Ohmura R, Takahashi M, Iwasaki T,

Uchida K, Ueda T. Combustion characteristics of methane hydrate in a laminar
boundary layer. Energy Fuels 2009;23:1445–9.

[49] Uchida T, Ikeda IY, Takeya S, Ebinuma T, Nagao J, Narita H. CO2 hydrate film
formation at the boundary between CO2 and water: effects of temperature,
pressure and additives on the formation rate. J Cryst Growth 2002;237:383–7.
[50] Takeya S, Ebinuma T, Uchida T, Nagao J, Narita H. Self-preservation effect and

dissociation rates of CH4 hydrate. J Cryst Growth 2002;237:379–82.
[51] Shimada W, Takeya S, Kamata Y, Uchida T, Nagao J, Ebinuma T, Narita H.
Texture change of ice on anomalously preserved methane clathrate hydrate.
J Phys Chem B 2005;109(12):5802–7.

[52] Stern LA, Circone S, Kirby SH, Durham WB. Temperature, pressure, and

compositional effects on anomalous or "self" preservation of gas hydrates. Can J
Phys 2003;81(1–2):271–83.

[53] Stern LA, Circone S, Kirby SH, Durham WB. Reply to "Comments on ’Anomalous

preservation of pure methane hydrate at 1 atm”. J Phys Chem B 2002;106(1):
228–30.

[54] Stern LA, Circone S, Kirby SH, Durham WB. Anomalous preservation of pure

methane hydrate at 1 atm. J Phys Chem B 2001;105(9):1756–62.

[55] Prats M. Current appraisal of thermal recovery. J Petrol Technol 1978;30(Aug):

1129–36.

[56] Al-Honi M, Greaves M, Zekri AY. Enhanced recovery of medium crude oil in

heterogeneous reservoirs using air injection/in situ combustion - horizontal well
technology. Petrol Sci Technol 2002;20(5–6):655–69.

[57] Castanier LM, Brigham WE. Upgrading of crude oil via in situ combustion.

J Petrol Sci Eng 2003;39(1–2):125–36.

[58] Hascakir B, Ross CM, Castanier LM, Kovscek AR. Fuel Formation and conversion

during in-situ combustion of crude oil. SPE J 2013;18(6):1217–28.

[59] Pfeffrle WC. Method of natural gas production. Precision Combustion, Inc; 2005.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111134

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

[60] Castaldi MJ, Zhou Y, Yegulalp TM. Down-hole combustion method for gas
production from methane hydrates. J Petrol Sci Eng 2007;56(1–3):176–85.
[61] Cranganu C. In-situ thermal stimulation of gas hydrates. J Petrol Sci Eng 2009;65

(1–2):76–80.

[62] Schicks JM, Spangenberg E, Giese R, Luzi-Helbing M, Priegnitz M, Beeskow-

Strauch B. A counter-current heat-exchange reactor for the thermal stimulation of
hydrate-bearing sediments. Energies 2013;6(6):3002–16.

[63] Schicks JM, Spangenberg E, Giese R, Steinhauer B, Klump J, Luzi M. New

approaches for the production of hydrocarbons from hydrate bearing sediments.
Energies 2011;4(1):151–72.

[64] Pfeffrle WC. Method for natural gas production. Precision Combustion, Inc; 2008.
[65] Pfeffrle WC. Method for producing fuel and power from a methane hydrate bed

using a fuel cell. 2008.

[66] Pfeffrle WC. Method for natural gas production. Precision Combustion Inc; 2009.
[67] Misyura SY, Nakoryakov VE. Nonstationary combustion of methane with gas

hydrate dissociation. Energy Fuels 2013;27(11):7089–97.

[94] Yoshioka T, Suemitsu M, Yokomori T, Ohmura R, Ueda T. Flame propagation over

a methane hydrate with surface temperature variation in a natural convective
flow field. Mechanical Engineering Letters 2015;1. 15-00370-15-00370.

[95] Grenfell TC, Neshyba SP, Warren SG. Representation of a nonspherical ice

particle by a collection of independent spheres for scattering and absorption of
radiation: 3. Hollow columns and plates. J Geophys Res, [Atmos] 2005;110(D17).

[96] Neshyba SP, Grenfell TC, Warren SG. Representation of a nonspherical ice

particle by a collection of independent spheres for scattering and absorption of
radiation: 2. Hexagonal columns and plates. J Geophys Res, [Atmos] 2003;108
(D15).

[97] Davletshina MR, Stolpovsky MV, Gimaltdinov IK. Simulation of combustion of a

flat layer of methane hydrate. J Phys Conf 2020;1679:052099.

[98] Gimaltdinov IK, Bayanov IM, Stolpovskii MV, Chiglintseva AS. On the confined

combustion of a hydrate. J Eng Phys Thermophys 2022;95:591–8.

[99] Turns SR. An introduction to combustion : concepts and applications. third ed.

New York: McGraw-Hill. xvii; 2012. p. 732.

[68] Nakoryakov VE, Misyura SY. The features of self-preservation for hydrate systems

[100] Dandy D. Combustion computational tools online. 2020. September 12, 2020];

with methane. Chem Eng Sci 2013;104:1–9.

[69] Nakoryakov VE, Misyura SY, Elistratov SL, Manakov AY, Shubnikov AE.
Combustion of methane hydrates. J Eng Thermophys 2013;22(2):87–92.
[70] Nakoryakov VE, Misyura SY, Elistratov SL, Manakov AY, Sizikov AA. Methane

combustion in hydrate systems: water-methane and water-methane-isopropanol.
J Eng Thermophys 2013;22(3):169–73.

[71] Chen XR, Li XS, Chen ZY, Zhang Y, Yan KF, Lv QN. Experimental investigation
into the combustion characteristics of propane hydrates in porous media.
Energies 2015;8(2):1242–55.

[72] Prado MR, Pham A, Ferazzi RE, Edwards K, Janda KC. Gas clathrate hydrates

experiment for high school projects and undergraduate laboratories. J Chem Educ
2007;84(11):1790–1.

Available from: http://navier.engr.colostate.edu/index.html.

[101] Yamagishi Y, Nakai Y, Ueda T. Numerical calculation of a laminar boundary layer

diffusion flame propagated over the methane-hydrate. In: 42nd Symposium
(Japanese) on combustion. Gifu; 2004. p. 305–6.

[102] Kushida G, Honda H, Nakamura Y. Numerical analysis on decomposition and

combustion characteristics of methane hydrate. In: 44th Symposium (Japanese)
on combustion; 2006. p. 416–7. Hiroshima.

[103] Kushida G, Aoyama Y, Nakamura Y. Comparison between numerical analysis and
experiment in combustion of methane hydrate. In: 45th Symposium (Japanese)
on combustion; 2007. p. 462–3. Sendai.

[104] Bar-Kohany T, Sirignano WA. Transient combustion of a methane-hydrate sphere.

Combust Flame 2016;163:284–300.

[73] Roshandell M, Glassman J, Khalil M, Taborek P, Dunn-Rankin D. Burning ice -

[105] Dagan Y, Bar-Kohany T. Flame propagation through three-phase methane-hydrate

direct combustion of fuel clathrates. In: 7th US national combustion meeting;
2011 [Atlanta, GA].

[74] Dunn-Rankin D, Kwon OC, Lee S, Padilla R, Pham TK. Counterflow water-laden
flames to simulate fuel hydrate combustion. In: Western states section/the
combustion Institute spring meeting. Tempe, AZ: Arizona State University; 2012.

[75] Roshandell M. Combustion of methane hydrate. In: Mechanical and Aerospace

engineering. Irvine: University of California; 2013.

[76] Santacana-Vall J. Water evaporation during methane hydrate combustion. Irvine:

University of California; 2014.

particles. Combust Flame 2018;193:25–35.

[106] Misyura SY, Donskoy IG. Co-modeling of methane hydrate dissociation and
combustion in a boundary layer. Combust Flame 2022;238:111912.

[107] Botimer JD, Dunn-Rankin D, Taborek P. Evidence for immobile transitional state

of water in methane clathrate hydrates grown from surfactant solutions. Chem
Eng Sci 2016;142:89–96.

[108] Kodera M, Takeya S, Lassiege M, Alavi S, Ohmura R. Characterization of clathrate
hydrate formed in H2+CO2+tetrahydropyran plus water system as carbon
capture materials. Fuel 2021:295.

[77] Santacana-Vall J, Dunn-Rankin D. Methane hydrate combustion. In: 25th

[109] Yasuda K, Takeya S, Sakashita M, Yamawaki H, Ohmura R. Binary ethanol-

international colloquium on the dynamics of explosions and reactive systems.
Leeds, England: Leeds University; 2015.

[78] Chien YC, Dunn-Rankin D. The visualization and combustion characteristics of
artificial methane hydrate flames. In: 10th U.S. National Combustion Meeting:
College Park, MD; 2017.

[79] Roshandell M, Santacana-Vall J, Karnani S, Botimer J, Taborek P, Dunn-Rankin D.
Burning ice-direct combustion of methane clathrates. Combust Sci Technol 2016;
188(11–12):2137–48.

[80] Chien YC, Dunn-Rankin D. Combustion characteristics of methane hydrate

flames. Energies 2019;12(10).

[81] Uchida T, Hirano T, Ebinuma T, Narita H, Gohara K, Mae S, Matsumoto R. Raman
spectroscopic determination of hydration number of methane hydrates. AIChE J
1999;45(12):2641–5.

[82] Kvamme B, Zhao JZ, Wei N, Sun WT, Saeidi N, Pei J, Kuznetsova T. Hydrate
production philosophy and thermodynamic calculations. Energies 2020;13(3).

[83] Waite WF, Stern LA, Kirby SH, Winters WJ, Mason DH. Simultaneous

determination of thermal conductivity, thermal diffusivity and specific heat in sI
methane hydrate. Geophys J Int 2007;169(2):767–74.

[84] Rosenbaum EJ, English NJ, Johnson JK, Shaw DW, Warzinski RP. Thermal

conductivity of methane hydrate from experiment and molecular simulation.
J Phys Chem B 2007;111(46):13194–205.

[85] Selim MS, Sloan ED. Heat and mass-transfer during the dissociation of hydrates in

porous-media. AIChE J 1989;35(6):1049–52.

[86] Padilla RE, Escofet-Martin D, Pham T, Pitz WJ, Dunn-Rankin D. Structure and
behavior of water-laden CH4/air counterflow diffusion flames. Combust Flame
2018;196:439–51.

[87] Vicariotto M, Dunn-Rankin D. Temperature profiles and extinction limits of a
coflow water-vapor laden methane/air diffusion flame. Exp Fluid 2018;59(9).

[88] Lee S, Padilla R, Dunn-Rankin D, Pham T, Kwon OC. Extinction limits and

structure of counterflow nonpremixed H2O-laden CH4/air flames. Energy 2015;
93:442–50.

[89] Yoshioka T, Yamamoto Y, Yokomori T, Ohmura R, Ueda T. Experimental study on

combustion of a methane hydrate sphere. Exp Fluid 2015;56(10).
[90] Maruyama Y, Fuse MJ, Yokomori T, Ohmura R, Watanabe S, Iwasaki T,

Iwabuchi W, Ueda T. Experimental investigation of flame spreading over pure
methane hydrate in a laminar boundary layer. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:
2131–8.

[91] Carslaw HS, Jaeger JC. Conduction of heat in solids. 2d ed. Oxford: Clarendon

Press; 1959. p. 510.

[92] Mori YH. Estimating the thickness of hydrate films from their lateral growth rates:
application of a simplified heat transfer model. J Cryst Growth 2001;223(1–2):
206–12.

[93] Uchida T, Kvamme B, Coffin RB, Tenma N, Oyama A, Masutani SM. Review of
fundamental properties of gas hydrates: breakout sessions of the international
workshop on methane hydrate research and development. Energies 2017;10(6).

methane clathrate hydrate formation in the system CH4-C2H5OH-H2O:
confirmation of structure II hydrate formation. J Phys Chem C 2009;113(28):
12598–601.

[110] Murayama K, Takeya S, Alavi S, Ohmura R. Anisotropic lattice expansion of

structure H clathrate hydrates induced by help guest: experiments and molecular
dynamics simulations. J Phys Chem C 2014;118(37):21323–30.

[111] Murayama K, Takeya S, Ohmura R. Phase equilibrium and crystallographic

structure of clathrate hydrate formed in argon+2,2-dimethylbutane plus water
system. Fluid Phase Equil 2014;365:64–7.

[112] Narayanan TM, Imasato K, Takeya S, Alavi S, Ohmura R. Structure and guest

dynamics in binary clathrate hydrates of tetrahydropyran with carbon dioxide/
methane. J Phys Chem C 2015;119(46):25738–46.

[113] Englezos P, Kalogerakis N, Dholabhai PD, Bishnoi PR. Kinetics of formation of
methane and ethane gas hydrates. Chem Eng Sci 1987;42(11):2647–58.
[114] Vysniauskas A, Bishnoi PR. A kinetic-study of methane hydrate formation. Chem

Eng Sci 1983;38(7):1061–72.

[115] Rossi F, Gambelli AM. Thermodynamic phase equilibrium of single-guest hydrate
and formation data of hydrate in presence of chemical additives: a review. Fluid
Phase Equilibria 2021:536.

[116] Sun Q, Kang YT. Review on CO2 hydrate formation/dissociation and its cold
energy application. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2016;62:478–94.
[117] Li DL, Peng H, Liang DQ. Thermal conductivity enhancement of clathrate hydrate

with nanoparticles. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2017;104:566–73.

[118] Wang XL, Dennis M. An experimental study on the formation behavior of single
and binary hydrates of TBAB, TBAF and TBPB for cold storage air conditioning
applications. Chem Eng Sci 2015;137:938–46.

[119] Mitarai M, Kishimoto M, Suh D, Ohmura R. Surfactant effects on the crystal
growth of clathrate hydrate at the interface of water and hydrophobic-guest
liquid. Cryst Growth Des 2015;15(2):812–21.

[120] Kumar A, Vedula SS, Kumar R, Linga P. Hydrate phase equilibrium data of mixed
methane-tetrahydrofuran hydrates in saline water. J Chem Thermodyn 2018;117:
2–8.

[121] Lee YJ, Kawamura T, Yamamoto Y, Yoon JH. Phase equilibrium studies of

tetrahydrofuran (THF) + CH4, THF + CO2, CH4 + CO2, and THF + CO2 + CH4
hydrates. J Chem Eng Data 2012;57(12):3543–8.

[122] Zhang Q, Chen GJ, Huang Q, Sun CY, Guo XQ, Ma QL. Hydrate formation

conditions of a hydrogen plus methane gas mixture in tetrahydrofuran plus water.
J Chem Eng Data 2005;50(1):234–6.

[123] Delahaye A, Fournaison L, Marinhas S, Chatti I, Petitet JP, Dalmazzone D,

Furst W. Effect of THF on equilibrium pressure and dissociation enthalpy of CO2
hydrates applied to secondary refrigeration. Ind Eng Chem Res 2006;45(1):391–7.

[124] Seo YT, Kang SP, Lee H. Experimental determination and thermodynamic

modeling of methane and nitrogen hydrates in the presence of THF, propylene
oxide, 1,4-dioxane and acetone. Fluid Phase Equil 2001;189(1–2):99–110.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111135

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

[125] Yang HJ, Fan SS, Lang XM, Wang YH. Phase equilibria of mixed gas hydrates of
oxygen plus tetrahydrofuran, nitrogen plus tetrahydrofuran, and air plus
tetrahydrofuran. J Chem Eng Data 2011;56(11):4152–6.

[157] Misyura SY, Morozov VS. Influence of air velocity on non-isothermal decay and

combustion of gas hydrate. J Eng Thermophys 2021;30(3):374–82.

[158] ASTM. Standard test method for flash and fire points by cleveland open cup tester.

[126] Anderson R, Chapoy A, Tohidi B. Phase relations and binary clathrate hydrate
formation in the system H-2-THF-H2O. Langmuir 2007;23(6):3440–4.
[127] Florusse LJ, Peters CJ, Schoonman J, Hester KC, Koh CA, Dec SF, Marsh KN,
Sloan ED. Stable low-pressure hydrogen clusters stored in a binary clathrate
hydrate. Science 2004;306(5695):469–71.

[128] Hashimoto S, Sugahara T, Sato H, Ohgaki K. Thermodynamic stability of H-2 +

tetrahydrofuran mixed gas hydrate in nonstoichiometric aqueous solutions.
J Chem Eng Data 2007;52(2):517–20.

[129] Matsumoto Y, Makino T, Sugahara T, Ohgaki K. Phase equilibrium relations for

binary mixed hydrate systems composed of carbon dioxide and cyclopentane
derivatives. Fluid Phase Equil 2014;362:379–82.

[130] Trueba AT, Rovetto LJ, Florusse LJ, Kroon MC, Peters CJ. Phase equilibrium

measurements of structure II clathrate hydrates of hydrogen with various
promoters. Fluid Phase Equil 2011;307(1):6–10.

[131] Beltran JG, Servio P. Equilibrium studies for the system methane plus carbon

dioxide plus neohexane plus water. J Chem Eng Data 2008;53(8):1745–9.
[132] Kondo Y, Alavi S, Murayama K, Ruiz A, Takeya S, Ohmura R. Effect of help-guest

size and hydrogen bonding on the stability of N-methylpiperidine structure H
clathrate hydrate. J Phys Chem C 2020;124(11):5978–86.

[133] Matsuura R, Alavi S, Ohmura R. Crystal growth of structure-H hydrate with
water-soluble large molecule guest compound: 1-methylpiperidine as a case
study. Cryst Growth Des 2021;21(2):1351–7.

[134] Ohfuka Y, Fukushima N, Chen ZG, Fukuda M, Takeya S, Ohmura R. Phase

West Conshohocken, PA, USA: ASTM International; 2013.

[159] Cui G, Dong Z, Wang S, Xing X, Shan T, Li Z. Effect of the water on the flame

characteristics of methane hydrate combustion. Appl Energy 2020;259:114205.
[160] Cui G, Wang S, Dong ZR, Xing X, Shan TX, Li ZL. Effects of the diameter and the
initial center temperature on the combustion characteristics of methane hydrate
spheres. Applied Energy 2020:257.

[161] Wu FH, Chao YC. A study of methane hydrate combustion phenomenon using a

cylindrical porous burner. Combust Sci Technol 2016;188(11–12):1983–2002.
[162] Wu FH, Padilla RE, Dunn-Rankin D, Chen GB, Chao YC. Thermal structure of
methane hydrate fueled flames. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36(3):4391–8.
[163] Anufriev IS. Review of water/steam addition in liquid-fuel combustion systems
for NOx reduction: waste-to-energy trends. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev
2021;138:110665.

[164] Bello OW, Zamani M, Abbasi-Atibeh E, Kostiuk LW, Olfert JS. Comparison of

emissions from steam- and water-assisted lab-scale flames. Fuel 2021;302:
121107.

[165] Shinde BJ, Karunamurthy K. Recent progress in hydrogen fuelled internal

combustion engine (H2ICE) – a comprehensive outlook. Mater Today Proc 2021;
51:1568–79.

[166] Zhigang L, Kim AK. A review of water mist fire suppression systems—

fundamental studies. J Fire Protect Eng 1999;10(3):32–50.

[167] Dryer FL. Water addition to practical combustion systems Concepts and

applications. Symp (International) Combust 1977;16:279–95.

equilibria for Kr hydrate formed with 2,2-dimethylbutane, methylcyclohexane
and 1-methylpiperidine. J Chem Thermodyn 2018;117:21–6.

[168] Seshadri K. Structure and extinction of laminar diffusion flames above condensed

fuels with water and nitrogen. Combust Flame 1978;33(2):197–215.

[135] Liu GQ, Wang F, Luo SJ, Xu DY, Guo RB. Enhanced methane hydrate formation
with SDS-coated Fe3O4 nanoparticles as promoters. J Mol Liq 2017;230:315–21.

[136] Partoon B, Javanmardi J. Effect of mixed thermodynamic and kinetic hydrate

promoters on methane hydrate phase boundary and formation kinetics. J Chem
Eng Data 2013;58(3):501–9.

[137] Zhang JS, Lee S, Lee JW. Kinetics of methane hydrate formation from SDS

solution. Ind Eng Chem Res 2007;46(19):6353–9.

[138] Aman ZM, Dieker LE, Aspenes G, Sum AK, Sloan ED, Koh CA. Influence of model
oil with surfactants and amphiphilic polymers on cyclopentane hydrate adhesion
forces. Energy Fuels 2010;24(10):5441–5.

[139] Li XK, Negadi L, Firoozabadi A. Anti-agglomeration in cyclopentane hydrates

from bio- and Co-surfactants. Energy Fuels 2010;24(9):4937–43.

[140] Gayet P, Dicharry C, Marion G, Graciaa A, Lachaise J, Nesterov A. Experimental

determination of methane hydrate dissociation curve up to 55 MPa by using a
small amount of surfactant as hydrate promoter. Chem Eng Sci 2005;60(21):
5751–8.

[141] Watanabe K, Imai S, Mori YH. Surfactant effects on hydrate formation in an

unstirred gas/liquid system: an experimental study using HFC-32 and sodium
dodecyl sulfate. Chem Eng Sci 2005;60(17):4846–57.

[142] Hayama H, Mitarai M, Mori H, Verrett J, Servio P, Ohmura R. Surfactant effects
on crystal growth dynamics and crystal morphology of methane hydrate formed
at gas/liquid interface. Cryst Growth Des 2016;16(10):6084–8.

[143] Kaczorek E, Pacholak A, Zdarta A, Smułek W. The impact of biosurfactants on

microbial cell properties leading to hydrocarbon bioavailability increase. Colloids
and Interfaces 2018;2. https://doi.org/10.3390/colloids2030035.

[169] Lentati AM, Chelliah HK. Physical, thermal, and chemical effects of fine-water

droplets in extinguishing counterflow diffusion flames. Symposium
(International) on Combustion 1998;27(2):2839–46.

[170] Lee S, Shin CH, Choi S, Kwon OC. Characteristics of NOx emissions of counterflow
nonpremixed water-laden methane/air flames. Energy 2018;164:523–35.
[171] Zhao D, Yamashita H, Kitagawa K, Arai N, Furuhata T. Behavior and effect on

NOx formation of OH radical in methane-air diffusion flame with steam addition.
Combust Flame 2002;130(4):352–60.

[172] Lee S, Ha H, Dunn-Rankin D, Kwon OC. Effects of pressure on structure and

extinction limits of counterflow nonpremixed water-laden methane/air flames.
Energy 2017;134:545–53.

[173] Qiu L, Zheng Y, Hua Y, Zhuang Y, Qian Y, Cheng X. Effects of water vapor
addition on the flame structure and soot formation in a laminar ethanol/air
coflow flame. Combust Sci Technol 2021;193(4):626–42.

[174] Vicariotto M. Water vapor addition in high concentrations to the fuel side of a

two-dimensional methane-air diffusion flame. In: Mechanical and Aerospace
engineering. Irvine: University of California; 2019.

[175] Esquivias B, Dunn-Rankin D, Chien Y-C. Numerical simulation of water-vapor

addition into a methane diffusion flame at high pressures. In: 12th U.S. National
combustion meeting - virtual; 2021 [College Station, TX, USA].

[176] Girodon HaC, Chien Y-C. Water addition for a coflow burner using PeleLM. In:

International colloquium on the dynamics of explosions and reactive systems.
Italy: Naples; 2022.

[177] Misyura SY. The influence of porosity and structural parameters on different kinds

of gas hydrate dissociation. Sci Rep 2016;6.

[144] Selvag J, Kuznetsova T, Kvamme B. Molecular dynamics study of surfactant-

[178] Misyura SY, Manakov AY, Nyashina GS, Gaidukova OS, Morozov VS, Skiba SS.

modified water-carbon dioxide systems. Mol Simulat 2018;44(2):128–36.
[145] Kumar A, Bhattacharjee G, Kulkarni BD, Kumar R. Role of surfactants in

promoting gas hydrate formation. Ind Eng Chem Res 2015;54(49):12217–32.

[146] Saeidi N. Fundamental studies of CO2 substitution in methane hydrate. In: Civil

and environmental engineering. Irvine: University of California; 2022.

[147] Takeuchi M, Ueda T, Amari T, Mizomoto M. Stability of diffusion flame formed in
a laminar flate plate boundary layer (Effect of fuel dilution). Transactions of the
JSME (B) 1998;45(626):3485–90.

[148] Nigmatov O, Nishiki S, Ueda T. Numerical calculation of the flame propagation
over a methane hydrate surface. In: Asia-pacific conference on combustion 2021.
Abu Dhabi-UAE: ADNEC; 2021.

[149] Misyura SY. Efficiency of methane hydrate combustion for different types of

oxidizer flow. Energy 2016;103:430–9.

[150] Misyura SY, Donskoy IG. Methane hydrate combustion by using different granules

composition. Fuel Process Technol 2017;158:154–62.

[151] Misyura SY, Voytkov IS, Morozov VS, Manakov AY, Yashutina OS, Ildyakov AV.
An experimental study of combustion of a methane hydrate layer using thermal
imaging and particle tracking velocimetry methods. Energies 2018;11(12).
[152] Misyura SY. Non-stationary combustion of natural and artificial methane hydrate

at heterogeneous dissociation. Energy 2019;181:589–602.

[153] Gaydukova OS, Misyura SY, Strizhak PA. Investigating regularities of gas hydrate
ignition on a heated surface: experiments and modelling. Combust Flame 2021;
228:78–88.

[154] Misyura SY, Donskoy IG. Dissociation kinetics of methane hydrate and CO2
hydrate for different granular composition. Fuel 2020;262:116614.

[155] Misyura SY, Donskoy IG. Dissociation and combustion of a layer of methane

hydrate powder: ways to increase the efficiency of combustion and degassing.
Energies 2021;14(16).

[156] Misyura SY, Donskoy IG, Manakov AY, Morozov VS, Strizhak PA, Skiba SS,

Sagidullin AK. Studying the influence of key parameters on the methane hydrate
dissociation in order to improve the storage efficiency. J Energy Storage 2021:44.

Gas hydrate combustion in five method of combustion organization. Entropy
2020;22(7):710.

[179] Uchida T, Ebinuma T, Takeya S, Nagao J, Narita H. Effects of pore sizes on

dissociation temperatures and pressures of methane, carbon dioxide, and propane
hydrates in porous media. J Phys Chem B 2002;106(4):820–6.

[180] Zhou Y, Castaldi MJ, Yegulalp TM. Experimental investigation of methane gas

production from methane hydrate. Ind Eng Chem Res 2009;48(6):3142–9.
[181] Fitzgerald GC, Castaldi MJ, Schicks JM. Methane hydrate formation and thermal
based dissociation behavior in silica glass bead porous media. Ind Eng Chem Res
2014;53(16):6840–54.

[182] Zhao JF, Fan Z, Dong HS, Yang Z, Song YC. Influence of reservoir permeability on

methane hydrate dissociation by depressurization. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2016;
103:265–76.

[183] Wang Y, Feng JC, Li XS, Zhang Y. Experimental investigation of optimization of
well spacing for gas recovery from methane hydrate reservoir in sandy sediment
by heat stimulation. Appl Energy 2017;207:562–72.

[184] Feng JC, Wang Y, Li XS. Dissociation characteristics of water-saturated methane
hydrate induced by huff and puff method. Appl Energy 2018;211:1171–8.
[185] Wang Y, Zhan L, Feng JC, Li XS. Influence of the particle size of sandy sediments
on heat and mass transfer characteristics during methane hydrate dissociation by
thermal stimulation. Energies 2019;12(22).

[186] Wang S, Cui G, Bi H, Liu C, Dong Z, Xing X, Li Z, Liu J. Effect analysis on flame

characteristics in the combustion of methane hydrate spheres under natural
convective flow conditions. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2020;83:103578.

[187] Cui G, Dong ZR, Xie K, Wang S, Guo T, Liu JG, Xing X, Li ZL. Experimental study
on the effect of airflow conditions on the combustion characteristics of methane
hydrate. Fuel 2021:300.

[188] Cui G, Guo T, Xie K, Dong ZR, Wu D, Yin JR, Li ZL. Combustion experiment and
numerical simulation of methane hydrate sediment under different airflow
environments. Fuel 2023:333.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111136

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

[189] Chien YC, Cathary F, Saeidi N, Dunn-Rankin D. Emission characteristics from CH4
hydrate combustion. In: 10th international conference on gas hydrates (ICGH10);
2020 [Singapore - pandemic cancelled].

[190] Padilla RE, M M, Jaimes D, Garman J, Dunn-Rankin D, Pham TK. Thin filament
pyrometry for temperature measurements in fuel hydrate flames and non-
premixed water-laden methane-air flames. In: 8th US National Combustion
Meeting: Salt Lake City, UT; 2013.

[191] Chien YC WM. Keck Deep Ocean power science laboratory (DOPSL). 2015 [cited

2023; Available from: https://deepocean.eng.uci.edu.

[192] Vicariotto M, Dunn-Rankin D. Effects of H2O and CO2 fuel dilution on a coflow

methane/air diffusion flame. In: 11th US national combustion meeting; 2019
[Pasadena, CA].

[193] Rodriguez BE. Numerical Simulation of water-vapor Addition into a methane
diffusion Flame at high pressures using PeleLM. In: Civil and environmental
engineering. Irvine: UCI: University of California; 2021.

[219] Hassanpouryouzband A, Yang JH, Tohidi B, Chuvilin E, Istomin V, Bukhanov B,

Cheremisin A. CO2 capture by injection of flue gas or CO2-N-2 mixtures into
hydrate reservoirs: dependence of CO2 capture efficiency on gas hydrate reservoir
conditions. Environ Sci Technol 2018;52(7):4324–30.

[220] Hassanpouryouzband A, Yang JH, Tohidi B, Chuvilin E, Istomin V, Bukhanov B,

Cheremisin A. Insights into CO2 capture by flue gas hydrate formation: gas
composition evolution in systems containing gas hydrates and gas mixtures at
stable pressures. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng 2018;6(5):5732–6.

[221] Hassanpouryouzband A, Yang JH, Okwananke A, Burgass R, Tohidi B, Chuvilin E,
Istomin V, Bukhanov B. An experimental investigation on the kinetics of
integrated methane recovery and CO2 sequestration by injection of flue gas into
permafrost methane hydrate reservoirs. Sci Rep 2019;9.

[222] Sun D, Englezos P. Determination of Co2 storage density in a partially water-

saturated lab reservoir containing Ch4 from injection of captured flue gas by gas
hydrate crystallization. Can J Chem Eng 2017;95(1):69–76.

[194] Day MS, Bell JB. Numerical simulation of laminar reacting flows with complex

[223] Hatakeyama T, Aida E, Yokomori T, Ohmura R, Ueda T. Fire extinction using

chemistry. Combust Theor Model 2000;4(4):535–56.

carbon dioxide hydrate. Ind Eng Chem Res 2009;48(8):4083–7.

[195] LBNL.. Regents of the University of California. 2019 [cited 2019 November];

Available from: https://amrex-combustion.github.io/PeleLM/.

[196] Nonaka A, Bell JB, Day MS, Gilet C, Almgren AS, Minion ML. A deferred

correction coupling strategy for low Mach number flow with complex chemistry.
Combust Theor Model 2012;16(6):1053–88.

[197] Wimer NT, Day MS, Lapointe C, Makowiecki AS, Glusman JF, Daily JW,

Rieker GB, Hamlington PE. High-resolution numerical simulations of a large-scale
helium plume using adaptive mesh refinement. arXiv; 2019.

[198] Petersen EL, Kalitan DM, Simmons S, Bourque G, Curran HJ, Simmie JM.
Methane/propane oxidation at high pressures: experimental and detailed
chemical kinetic modeling. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31:447–54.

[199] Spencer DF. In: Methods of selectively separating CO2 from a mulitcomponent

gaseous stream. USA: U.P. Office; 1997.

[200] Li SF, Fan SS, Wang JQ, Lang XM, Wang YH. Clathrate hydrate capture of CO2

from simulated flue gas with cyclopentane/water emulsion. Chin J Chem Eng
2010;18(2):202–6.

[201] Linga P, Kumar RN, Englezos P. Gas hydrate formation from hydrogen/carbon
dioxide and nitrogen/carbon dioxide gas mixtures. Chem Eng Sci 2007;62(16):
4268–76.

[202] Gholinezhad J, Chapoy A, Tohidi B. Separation and capture of carbon dioxide

from CO2/H-2 syngas mixture using semi-clathrate hydrates. Chem Eng Res Des
2011;89(9):1747–51.

[203] Kim SM, Lee JD, Lee HJ, Lee EK, Kim Y. Gas hydrate formation method to capture

the carbon dioxide for pre-combustion process in IGCC plant. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2011;36(1):1115–21.

[204] Akatsu S, Tomita S, Mori YH, Ohmura R. Thermodynamic simulations of hydrate-
based removal of carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide from low-quality natural
gas. Ind Eng Chem Res 2013;52(43):15165–76.

[205] Tomita S, Akatsu S, Ohmura R. Experiments and thermodynamic simulations for

continuous separation of CO2 from CH4 + CO2 gas mixture utilizing hydrate
formation. Appl Energy 2015;146:104–10.

[206] van Denderen M, Ineke E, Golombok M. CO2 removal from contaminated natural

gas mixtures by hydrate formation. Ind Eng Chem Res 2009;48(12):5802–7.

[207] Dabrowski N, Windmeier C, Oellrich LR. Purification of natural gases with high

CO2 content using gas hydrates. Energy Fuels 2009;23(11):5603–10.
[208] Babu P, Chin WI, Kumar R, Linga P. Systematic evaluation of tetra-n-butyl

ammonium bromide (TBAB) for carbon dioxide capture employing the clathrate
process. Ind Eng Chem Res 2014;53(12):4878–87.

[209] Horii S, Ohmura R. Continuous separation of CO2 from a H-2 + CO2 gas mixture

using clathrate hydrate. Appl Energy 2018;225:78–84.

[210] Kiyokawa H, Horii S, Alavi S, Ohmura R. Improvement of continuous hydrate-

based CO2 separation by forming structure II hydrate in the system of H-2 + CO2
+ H2O + Tetrahydropyran (THP). Fuel 2020:278.

[211] Sun SC, Hao YC, Zhao JR. Analysis of gas source for the replacement of CH4 with

CO2 in gas hydrate production from the perspective of dissociation enthalpy.
J Chem Eng Data 2018;63(3):684–90.

[212] Bai J, Zhen X, Xie GB, Li P, Fang SQ, Chang C, Gu X. Kinetics investigation of

hydrate-based CO2 capture from simulated flue gas by using an improved
combinatorial promoter. Energy Fuels 2018;32(10):10822–9.

[213] Yang MJ, Jing W, Zhao JF, Ling Z, Song YC. Promotion of hydrate-based CO2
capture from flue gas by additive mixtures (THF (tetrahydrofuran) plus TBAB
(tetra-n-butyl ammonium bromide)). Energy 2016;106:546–53.

[214] Yang MJ, Zhou H, Wang PF, Song YC. Effects of additives on continuous hydrate-

based flue gas separation. Appl Energy 2018;221:374–85.

[215] Giavarini C, Maccioni F, Santarelli ML. CO2 sequestration from coal fired power

plants. Fuel 2010;89(3):623–8.

[216] Nohra M, Woo TK, Alavi S, Ripmeester JA. Molecular dynamics Gibbs free energy
calculations for CO2 capture and storage in structure I clathrate hydrates in the
presence of SO2, CH4, N-2, and H2S impurities. J Chem Thermodyn 2012;44(1):
5–12.

[217] Zhou H, Chen BB, Wang SL, Yang MJ. CO2/N-2 mixture sequestration in depleted

natural gas hydrate reservoirs. J Petrol Sci Eng 2019;175:72–82.
[218] Saeidi N, Dunn-Rankin D, Kvamme B, Chien YC. Experimental studies on

combined production of CH4 and safe long-term storage of CO2 in the form of
solid hydrate in sediment. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2021;23(40):23313–24.

[224] Sasakura K, Murai M, Fukioka S, Yokomori T, Ohmura R, Ueda T. Mechanism of
pool fire extinction by carbon dioxide hydrate. In: 7th international conference on
gas hydrates; 2011 [Edinburgh, United Kingdom].

[225] Sasakura K, Kado S, Yokomori T, Ohmura R, Ueda T. The effect of boiling point on
fuels with carbon dioxide hydrate. In: 9th asia-pacific conference on combustion.
Korea: Gyeongju; 2013.

[226] Sugahara A, Nakano H, Yokomori T, Ohmura R, Ueda T. Effect of fuel boiling

point of pool flame for the flame extinction by CO2 hydrate. In: 10th asia-pacific
conference on combustion; 2015 [Beijing, China].

[227] Jeon E, Tahim GS, Saeidi N, Chien Y-C. Initial investigation of carbon dioxide

hydrate fire extinguishment. In: Spring meeting of the western states section/the
combustion Institute; 2022 [Stanford, CA].

[228] Waller JG, Mcturk G. Storage of compressed gaseous ozone. J Appl Chem 1965;15

(8):363–+.

[229] Mcturk G, Waller JG. Ozone-carbon tetrachloride double hydrate. Nature 1964;

202(493):1107 [&].

[230] Masaoka T, Yamamoto A, Motoi K. In: Storing method of ozone, method of

producing solid material incorporating ozone, food preservation material and
food preserving method. Japan: J.P. Publication; 2007.

[231] Muromachi S, Nakajima T, Ohmura R, Mori YH. Phase equilibrium for clathrate
hydrates formed from an ozone plus oxygen gas mixture coexisting with carbon
tetrachloride or 1,1-dichloro-1-fluoroethane. Fluid Phase Equil 2011;305(2):
145–51.

[232] Muromachi S, Ohmura R, Mori YH. Phase equilibrium for ozone-containing

hydrates formed from an (ozone plus oxygen) gas mixture coexisting with gaseous
carbon dioxide and liquid water. J Chem Thermodyn 2012;49:1–6.

[233] Nakajima T, Kudo T, Ohmura R, Takeya S, Mori YH. Molecular storage of ozone in
a clathrate hydrate: an attempt at preserving ozone at high concentrations. PLoS
One 2012;7(11).

[234] Shishido K, Muromachi S, Nakamura R, Takeya S, Ohmura R. Increasing

molecular O-3 storage capacity in a clathrate hydrate. New J Chem 2014;38(7):
3160–5.

[235] Subbotin OS, Bozhko YY, Zhdanov RK, Gets KV, Belosludov VR, Belosludov RV,
Kawazoe Y. Ozone storage capacity in clathrate hydrates formed by O-3 + O-2 +
N-2 + CO2 gas mixtures. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2018;20(18):12637–41.

[236] Subbotin OS, Adamova TP, Belosludov RV, Mizuseki H, Kawazoe Y,

Belosludov VR. Theoretical investigation of ozone hydrate formation conditions.
J Struct Chem 2012;53(4):627–33.

[237] Watanabe K, Nagashima HD, Nakamura R, Ohmura R. Thermodynamic

simulation for continuous formation of ozone hydrate. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng
2018;6(9):11624–32.

[238] Hatsugai T, Nakayama R, Tomura S, Akiyoshi R, Nishitsuka S, Nakamura R,

Takeya S, Ohmura R. Development and continuous operation of a bench-scale
system for the production of O-3 + O-2 + CO(2)Hydrates. Chem Eng Technol
2020;43(11):2307–14.

[239] Matsuura R, Ozawa K, Alavi S, Ohmura R. Crystal growth of clathrate hydrate

with ozone: implication for ozone preservation. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng 2020;
8(41):15678–84.

[240] Mahajan S. Street-fighting mathematics : the art of educated guessing and

opportunistic problem solving. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press; 2010. p. 1. electronic
resource (xv, 134 pages).

[241] Mahajan S. The art of insight in science and engineering : mastering complexity.

Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press; 2014. p. 1. electronic resource (xvi,
389 pages).

[242] Nagasaki N, Takeda Y, Akiyama T, Kumagai T. Progress toward commercializing
new technologies for coal use —oxygen-blown IGCC+CCS. Hitachi Rev 2010;59
(3):77–82.

[243] Rezvani S, Huang Y, McIlveen-Wright D, Hewitt N, Mondol JD. Comparative
assessment of coal fired IGCC systems with CO2 capture using physical
absorption, membrane reactors and chemical looping. Fuel 2009;88(12):
2463–72.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111137

D. Dunn-Rankin et al.

[244] Kiyokawa H, Horii S, Alavi S, Ohmura R. Improvement of continuous hydrate-

based CO2 separation by forming structure II hydrate in the system of H-2 + CO2
+ H2O + Tetrahydropyran (THP). Fuel 2020:278.

[245] National Energy Technology Laboratory. Simteche hydrate CO2 capture process.
Office of Scientific and Technical Information, US Department of Energy; 2006.
[246] White CM, Strazisar BR, Granite EJ, Hoffman JS, Pennline HW. Separation and

diagnostics techniques. Chien supervises graduate research theses/dissertations, and un-
dergraduate projects/individual research. She focuses her efforts on bridging the gap be-
tween  conventional  course  work  and  academic  research  with  various  curricula  she
created. She is dedicated to ADEI (Access, Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion) and she serves
as a faculty PI for the UCI CAMP (California Alliance for Minority Participation) program
and SWE-UCI counselor (Society of Women Engineers).

capture of CO2 from large stationary sources and sequestration in geological
formations - coalbeds and deep saline aquifers. J Air Waste Manag Assoc 2003;53
(6):645–715.

Derek  Dunn-Rankin,  Professor  (emeritus)  and  former  Chair  in  the  Department  of  Me-
chanical and Aerospace Engineering at the University of California, Irvine (UCI). He is
director of the UCI Masters of Engineering program and faculty director for CAMP, the
California Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, a program designed to increase
minority representation in science and technology. Dr. Dunn-Rankin’s research is in novel
concepts in combustion and energy, droplet and sprays, and applications of laser diag-
nostic techniques to practical engineering systems.

Yu-Chien (Alice) Chien, Chien is Project Scientist in the Department of Mechanical Engi-
neering at the University of California, Irvine. Her research interests include gas hydrate
studies for combustion, fire extinguishment and CO2  sequestration, electrical aspects of
combustion  in  microgravity,  aerosols  and  spray  holographic  imaging,  and  optical

Toshihisa Ueda, Professor for many years in Mechanical Engineering at Keio University,
Japan. Currently Professor at Teikyo University. His research interests include Reactive
Flow  /  Combustion  /  Chaotic  Advection  /  Thermal  Engineering.  He  has  served  as  an
editorial member and reviewer of several international reputed journals. He is a member of
many international affiliations and has authored or co-authored numerous papers in the
field of combustion and energy.

Ryo Ohmura, Professor Ohmura is in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Keio
University in Japan. His research group accomplishes fundamental and applied experi-
mental  studies  to  reveal  physical  properties  and  characteristics  of  clathrate  hydrates,
thereby contributing to energy and environment technologies. Physicochemical as well as
engineering  aspects  of  hydrates  are  widely  investigated  for  the  development  of  novel
energy  and  environment  technologies  utilizing  hydrates,  such  as  storage/transport  of
natural gas in the form of hydrates and efficient thermal technology.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10111138
