Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Progress and challenges on the thermal management of electrochemical 
energy conversion and storage technologies: Fuel cells, electrolysers, 
and supercapacitors 

Saman Rashidi b, Nader Karimi c, d, Bengt Sunden e, *, Kyung Chun Kim f, Abdul Ghani Olabi g, 
Omid Mahian a 
a School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China 
b Department of Energy, Faculty of New Science and Technologies, Semnan University, Semnan, Iran 
c School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, London, E1 4NS, UK 
d James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK 
e Department of Energy Sciences, Lund University, P.O. Box 118, Lund SE-22100, Sweden 
f School of Mechanical Engineering, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea 
g Sustainable and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Thermal management 
Electrochemical heat generation 
Fuel cells 
Electrolysers 
Supercapacitors 
Green hydrogen 
Electrified transport 

It is now well established  that electrochemical systems can optimally  perform only within  a narrow range of 
temperature.Exposure to temperatures outside this range adversely affects the performance and lifetime of these 
systems.  As  a  result,  thermal  management  is  an  essential  consideration  during  the  design  and  operation  of 
electrochemical  equipment  and,  can  heavily  influence  the  success  of  electrochemical  energy  technologies. 
Recently,  significant  attempts  have  been  placed  on  the  maturity  of  cooling  technologies  for  electrochemical 
devices.  Nonetheless,  the  existing  reviews  on  the  subject  have  been  primarily  focused  on  battery  cooling. 
Conversely, heat transfer in other electrochemical systems commonly used for energy conversion and storage has 
not been subjected to critical reviews. To address this issue, the current study gives an overview of the progress 
and  challenges  on  the  thermal  management  of  different  electrochemical  energy  devices  including  fuel  cells, 
electrolysers and supercapacitors. The physicochemical mechanisms of heat generation in these electrochemical 
devices  are  discussed  in-depth.  Physics  of  the  heat  transfer  techniques,  currently  employed  for  temperature 
control, are then exposed and some directions for future studies are provided.   

1. Introduction 

A shift from fossil fuel-based energy technologies to those based on 
renewable  resources  is  a  crucial  prerequisite  to  sustainability  [218]. 
Energy conversion and storage have proven to be the key requirements 
for  such  a  transition  to  be  possible.  This  is  particularly  due  to  the 
intermittency of renewable power generation, which has in turn spiked 
major  interest  in  development  of  carbon-free  energy  vectors  such  as 
hydrogen. They are also a key requirement because of the major diffi-
culties encountered in the large-scale storage of electricity [314] and the 
possibility of generation of electricity from hydrogen by employing fuel 
cells  or  combustion  engines  [268].  Currently,  there  are  extensive  ac-
tivities on production of hydrogen from the surplus of renewable power 
(the  so-called  ‘power-to-gas’  technology)  [180].  This  is  part  of  the 

ambitious  plans  to  replace  natural  gas  with  hydrogen  as  a  future 
carbon-free fuel for generation of electricity and heat [277]. Production 
and conversion of hydrogen by using electrolysers and fuel cells are the 
essential elements for such plans. Robustness of these electrochemical 
technologies  directly  influences  the  speed  of  transition  to  hydrogen 
[252].  Aside  from  exploring  hydrogen  as  a  renewable  energy  carrier, 
there are also vast, ongoing efforts being put into the storage of elec-
tricity. Batteries are the primary directives for this to be made possible 
[189].  Alternative  technologies,  such  as  super-capacitors,  are  also 
gaining increasing attention [256]. 

There  exist  a  large  number  of  studies  concerned  with  different 
technologies  of  fuel  cells  ([238,  270,  313],b),  electrolysers  [83,194], 
and  supercapacitors  [318, 339].  A common  issue  with all  these  tech-
nologies, however, is their high sensitivity to temperature, emphasizing 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: bengt.sunden@energy.lth.se (B. Sunden).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100966 
Received 7 December 2020; Received in revised form 3 August 2021; Accepted 21 September 2021   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)100966Availableonline4October20210360-1285/©2021TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

the need for them to all be operating within a narrow temperature range. 
This  is  particularly  well  known  for  batteries  [155]  but  can  also  be 
applied to fuel cells, electrolysers and super-capacitors. Generation and 
transfer  of  heat  in  electrochemical  systems  cover  a  wide  range  of 
physical and electrochemical processes at nano, micro and macro scales 
[271,  320].  These  include  interfacial  phenomena  on  the  surface  of 
electrodes, electrochemical kinetics, conduction, and single and multi-
phase convection of heat. Immense efforts have already been placed on 
the  development  of  cooling  technologies  for  electrochemical  devices. 
Several passive and active cooling techniques have been implemented 
on electrochemical systems, all of which have resulted in varying de-
grees of success. Nevertheless, temperature control in electrochemical 
energy devices continues to be a major challenge, and calls for further 
research. This paper delivers a comprehensive and critical review con-
cerning temperature control in electrochemical energy devices. It em-
phasizes the less explored but imperative areas of temperature control, 
such as: the fundamentals of heat generation in electrochemical devices, 
the  alternation  between  cooling  and  heat  generation  and  the  recent 
progresses made on the design of cooling systems for electrochemical 
devices.  Batteries  are  excluded  from  this  work,  as  there  are  already 
extensive reviews on their temperature control [14, 15, 51, 58, 139, 155, 
162, 253, 258, 276, 335, 340]. The focus of this review is on fuel cells, 
electrolysers and super-capacitors. 

2. Fuel cells 

Fuel  cells  are  an  alternative  to  the  conventional  combustion  tech-
nologies for power generation that often have low efficiencies [26]. Fuel 
cells  offer  several  benefits  over  combustion  engines  such  as  no  toxic 
combustion  products  (e.g.  CO  or  NOx),  good  efficiencies  and  small 
emissions of greenhouse gases. Further, due to having no moving part, 
they  operate  almost  silently.  Fuel  cells  find  applications  in  vehicles, 
power generation systems, and aerospace systems [118, 294]. Further, 
they  have  potentials  for  integration  with  other  energy  technologies 
leading  to  improved  efficiencies  [74,  206].  As  an  energy  conversion 
technology,  fuel  cells  feature  certain  advantages  in  comparison  with 
wind and photovoltaic technologies. Their capacity factor is about 95%, 
while  those  of  wind  and  solar  systems  are  17.5%  and  25.8%,  respec-
tively [69]. In addition, they have relatively short payback periods [69]. 
The efficiency of the fuel cells is directly related to different factors such 

as type of fuel and electrode, and the operating conditions. The latter is 
the  route  through  which  the  working  temperature  can  influence  fuel 
cells. 

Usually, different criteria are considered for classifying the fuel cells 
such as type of fuel, electrolyte, temperature, and applications. Proton 
Exchange  Membrane  Fuel  Cell  (PEMFC),  Molten-Carbonate  Fuel  Cell 
(MCFC), Phosphoric Acid Fuel Cell (PAFC), Alkaline Fuel Cell (AFC), and 
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC) are the common types of fuel cells. In this 
review, PEMFCs and SOFCs receive the most attention. This is because, 
as Fig. 1 shows, the market is currently dominated by these two types of 
fuel cell [93]. PEMFCs and SOFCs are widely useable in both stationary 
and moving applications covering a broad spectrum from small devices 
(micro-cogeneration modules) to large power and propulsion units [93]. 
Further, PEMFC has the greatest share of the total FC capacity installed 
in recent years [93]. Furthermore, recently, there has been a major in-
crease in the practical use of SOFC units. For example, in 2014 instal-
lation  of  about  2700  SOFC  units  was  reported,  while  in  2018  this 
reached 27,800 units 87; 93). Other types of fuel cells, such as DMFC, 
MCFC and PAFC have received comparatively much less attention lately, 
while the work on them is ongoing [93]. 

2.1. Thermal management of fuel cells 

In fuel cells a considerable part of the fuel energy is transformed to 
heat. Removal of this heat is essential for smooth operation of fuel cells. 
In  addition,  each  type  of  fuel  cell  operates  within  a  certain  range  of 
temperature,  which  further  reflects  the  importance  of  an  effective 
thermal management. A variety of cooling techniques are employed for 
the cooling of fuel cells. These include heat pipes, cooling channels and 
fins with large values  of thermal conductivity.  The working tempera-
tures of different types of fuel cell are compared in Fig. 2. This figure also 
shows  the  relationship  between  the  working  temperature,  efficiency, 
system complexity, fabricating costs, and materials costs of different fuel 
cells.  According  to  Fig.  2,  as  the  working  temperature  increases,  the 
efficiency  enhances,  while  the  materials  cost  drops  [293].  The  high 
operating temperature of molten-carbonate fuel cells and SOFCs boosts 
the quality of waste heat and allows for the improvement of thermo-
dynamic  efficiencies  by  utilizing  combined  heat  and  power  systems 
[207]. Further details of the heat recovery process from SOFCs will be 
provided in section 2.2.9. 

Fig. 1. Shipments of different types of fuel cell [93].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009662S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2. Comparison between the working temperatures of various types of fuel cells [293].  

2.1.1. Heat generation mechanism in fuel cells 

Qtot

reac = ΔGtot(T, P) (cid:0) ΔHtot(T, P) = (cid:0) TΔStot

rev(T, P)

(1)  

2.1.1.1. Heat  generation  mechanisms  in  proton  exchange  membrane  fuel 
cells. Heat generation and removal from the stacks is amongst the most 
important issues in PEMFCs. This is because fuel cells can generate an 
amount of heat comparable to their electrical power output [143,147]. 
In PEMFCs (see Fig. 3) heat is generated by the following mechanisms 
[329]:  

where ΔG, ΔS, and ΔH are changes in Gibbs free energy, entropy, and 
enthalpy, respectively. The corresponding heat flux can be calculated 
by: 

˙Q

tot
reac =

i
2F

Qtot
reac

(2)  

• Reversible  heat  generated  by  electrochemical  reactions,  known  as 

entropic heat 

in  which  i  and  F  are  the  current  density  and  Faraday’s  constant, 
respectively.  

Thermodynamics of fuel cell assert that even in an ideal case, gen-
eration of some waste heat is unavoidable [232]. The reversible heat can 
be determined as the difference between the total chemical energy of the 
reactants  and  the  highest  useful  energy  based  on  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics. To maintain a constant temperature when electrical 
current  flows,  thermal  energy  should  be  removed  from  the  electrode 
chamber. The reversible heat caused by the global reaction of hydrogen 
oxidation can be obtained by [232]: 

• Heat generated due to irreversibilities in reactions 

The irreversible heat is generated by the irreversible electrochemical 
reactions in the fuel cell. Based on the activated complex theory [2], the 
electrochemical reactions occurring in the fuel cell lead to heat dissi-
pation. These irreversibilities can be calculated at the anode and cathode 
by [2]: 

Qa

act = (cid:0) TΔSa

irr(T, P),

(3) 

Fig. 3. The outputs of proton exchange membrane fuel cells [134].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009663S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Qc

act = (cid:0) TΔSc

irr(T, P).

(4) 

They cause the over-potentials at the electrodes, which are related to 
geometrical parameters, current density, and reactants properties such 
as pressure, temperature, and concentration [232]. The generated heat 
fluxes due to irreversibilities of reactions at the anode and cathode are 
determined by: 

˙Q

˙Q

a

act = Qa

act

c

act = Qc

act

i
2F

,

i
2F

.

(5)  

(6) 

In general, source of irreversibilities in fuel cells are the followings. 
Activation overpotential: This irreversibility is due to the transfer of 
charge, which occurs in the course of the electrochemical reaction on the 
surface of electrode. The loss is caused by the slowness of the reaction 
taking place on the electrode surface [5]. 

Mass transport overpotential: This irreversibility occurs because of 
the reduction in the concentration of the reactant at the interface be-
tween electrodes and electrolyte. As a result of diffusion and convection 
of the electrolyte, the reactants concentration change. Accumulation of 
the reaction products further dilutes the reactants. The resultant con-
centration  gradient  can  reduce  the  electrode  activities  and  hence  the 
terminal voltage drops [152]. 

Fuel crossover overpotential: Fuel crossover commonly occurs in an 
alcohol  fuel  cell  [82].  Although  the  electrolytes  do  not  conduct  elec-
tricity and are practically impermeable to reactant gases, a part of fuel 
diffuses  from  the  anode  towards  the  cathode  to  react  with  oxygen, 
leading to fewer electrons in the created electron current, which move 
via  the  external circuit [63].  Because of this  motion, the cathode  po-
tential decreases leading to degradation of the overall conversion effi-
ciency  of  the  fuel  cell.  This  can  occur  when  the  concentration  of  the 
intermediate  species  produced  by  the  fuel  oxidation  exceeds  that  of 
oxygen at the cathode. The rise in temperature intensifies the crossover 
influence [230]. 

Ohmic  overpotential:  Electrolytes  in  fuel  cells  often  contribute  to 
ohmic resistance, due to the ionic nature of their conductivity. Also, an 
electrode involves resistance to the current of electrons and there is a 
contact resistance at the cell terminals [152]. As expected, large values 
of  electrical  conductivity  of  fuel  cell  components  are  favorable  in 
decreasing the ohmic heat that is produced by resistance of electrons to 
flow  through  the  system.  Proton  transport  between  the  anode  and 
cathode through the membrane leads to enthalpy variations because of 
the  membrane  conductivity.  The  heat  released  during  this  process  is 
calculated by [232]: 
H+ (cid:0) 2ΔHa
H+

QJ = 2ΔHc

(7)    

• Heat generated by condensation of the produced water vapor 

In  fuel  cells,  water  vapor  can be  condensed  as  its  partial  pressure 
reaches the saturation pressure. Hence, an extra heat source associated 
with water evaporation/condensation in the gas diffusion layers should 
be  considered.  In  practice,  low  gas  stoichiometry  results  in  water 
condensation  inside  the  channels  or/and  in  the  gas  diffusion  layers 
[232]. The heat generated by water evaporation/condensation can be 
easily calculated from the latent heat Lv(T) at temperature T: 

lv(T) = ΔHf

H2Oliq

(cid:0) ΔHf

H2Ovap

(8) 

During  condensation  (or  evaporation)  of  water  in  the  system,  a 
specific amount of heat is released (or consumed), which is not directly 
linked to the cell voltage [232]. However, accumulation of large amount 
of water in the gas diffusion layer leads to flooding of the electrode and a 
subsequent drop of voltage [232]. It is worthy to note that the generated 
heat due to water vapor condensation is significantly lower as compared 

with the heat generated by other sources [101]. Irreversible, ohmic and 
entropic heats account for 35%, 10%, and 55% of the total heat gener-
ated [108, 146]. The total heat generation is directly related to the ef-
ficiency and output power of PEMFCs [108, 146]. 

Fig. 4 shows the variations of heat and power generation with the 
current densities. Clearly, heat generation rates increase at higher cur-
rent densities or lower cell voltage. Here, current density is defined as 
the amount of current supplied by a fuel cell divided by the total area of 
the fuel cell electrode. For a single cell, the overall heat generation rate 
(W•cm
q′′ = (Etn (cid:0) Ecell) × i

(cid:0) 2) is estimated by [171, 192]: 

(9)  

where  Etn  indicates  the  thermoneutral voltage  or  the  thermal  voltage 
that shows the hypothetical voltage of the fuel cell with the unrealistic 
assumption that all change in the enthalpy of reactions is converted to 
electricity. i and Ecell  indicate the current density and the cell working 
voltage, respectively. Etn can be calculated based on the higher heating 
value  of  the  fuel  with  the  assumption  that  the  generated  water  is  in 
liquid phase or according to the lower heating value when the generated 
water is in the gaseous phase. As indicated in Eq. (9), the rate of heat 
generation can increase as the current density rises or the cell voltage 
drops. Consequently, at larger values of the current density, the rates of 
heat generation in PEMFCs exceed those of electricity generation. This 
poses major challenges in the thermal management of stacks, particu-
larly for automotive applications that need to operate at larger current 
densities.  In  addition,  Fig.  3  shows  that  the  cell  voltage  drops  as  the 
current  density  increases  [192].  As  for  all  generators,  fuel  cells  have 
their internal resistances and therefore the voltage drops as the current 
increases. 

Fig. 5 represents a typical temperature profile across a PEMFC where 
the  mechanisms  of  heat  transfer  between  different  components  are 
indicated.  The  thermal  properties  vary  considerably  with  materials, 
polytetrafluoroethylene content in gas diffusion substrate, compression, 
and  water  content.  In  PEMFC,  the  heat  transfer  in  the  cells  includes 
conduction in the solid matrix and convection in the pores under the 
local thermodynamic equilibrium between the two phases [146]. The 
influences  of  heat  adsorption/generation  during  the  phase  change  of 
water should be also considered [319]. 

2.1.1.2. Heat generation mechanisms in solid oxide fuel cells. The mech-
anisms  of  heat  generation  in  SOFC  are  somehow  similar  to  those  of 
PEMFC. Fig. 6 shows the energy generation in a typical SOFC. The major 
source of heat in a SOFC system is the cells. Certain portion of the heat is 
released due to the electrochemical reactions at the electrodes while the 
overpotential losses further boost the cells temperature. Since not all the 
supplied fuel is consumed in SOFCs, combustion of the unreacted fuel 
exhausted from the cells. Fuel usage factor, or the fuel consumption rate, 
is usually about 0.8 or less and the remaining fuel is fulminated down-
stream of the cells, generating extra heat [317]. 

As displayed in Fig. 7, there are three overpotentials in the SOFCs. 
Overpotentials are oriented from the nature of the fuel cell voltages in 
response to the loading conditions. The electrochemical reactions in the 
SOFC can cause the fall in potential owing to the activation resistance or 
activation polarization. The second drop in potential is due to the ohmic 
resistances in the components of the fuel cell when the electrons and 
ions  are  conducted  in  the  electrodes  and  electrolyte,  respectively. 
Finally, the third drop, which is considerable for larger values of current 
density, is attributed to the mass transport resistances or concentration 
polarizations in the flow of the fuel and oxidant [170]. Joule heating or 
ohmic loss is assigned by the internal resistances of the cells consisting of 
electrode overpotential and electrical resistance. The ohmic loss is due 
to the ionic conduction resistance of the electrolyte layer and the electric 
resistances  of  the  electrodes  and  the  current  collection  components. 
Accordingly,  the  current  collecting  pathway  and  conductivity  of  cell 
materials are two parameters affecting the overall ohmic loss of SOFCs 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009664S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 4. The variations of heat generation and power generation with current densities for a PEMFC [217].  

Fig. 5. The mechanisms of heat transfer between different components of a PEMFC [146].  

[170]. 

Recently,  Guk  et  al.  [113]  investigated  the  effects  of  different  pa-
rameters on the thermal characteristics of SOFCs. They concluded that 
the temperature increase is more noticeable near the air/fuel inlet and it 
gradually declines towards the fuel outlet. Due to its relatively larger 
partial  pressure,  hydrogen  leakages  are  more  likely  near  the  inlet, 
causing more direct oxidation and thus higher heat release. Increases in 
the temperature make the gas components more active and increases the 
pressure. Both of these lead to leakage of gas and, consequently, direct 

oxidation  happens  and  the  corresponding  temperature  increases.  The 
increase in the temperature also occurs as the flow rate increases under 
the same operating temperature. This is, again, due to the undesired fuel 
crossover through the electrolyte leading to direct hydrogen oxidation. 
Oxygen ions, decreased at the cathode by free electrons or the electron 
crossover,  travel  from  cathode  to  anode  or  hydrogen  from  anode  to 
cathode  and  lead  to  the  exothermic  reactions  between  oxygen  and 
hydrogen. In addition, electrochemical cell reactions can increase the 
temperature of the cell electrode. Guk et al. [113] found that the direct 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009665S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 6. The heat generation in a typical SOFC [317].  

Fig. 7. Conjectured description of the overpotentials in an SOFC [170].  

oxidation of hydrogen by fuel crossover is the main reason for increasing 
the cell mean temperature during open circuit and loading condition. 
Yet, under loading, electrochemical oxidation of hydrogen is responsible 
for the cell temperature gradient. 

Fig.  8  depicts  the  mechanisms  of  heat  transfer  between  the  main 
components of a SOFC, including heat transfer by species transportation, 
conduction between two solid structures, convection between the solid 
and gas structures, and radiation between two solid surfaces [55]. 

Finally,  it  is  noted  that  the  operation  principles  of  the  fuel  cells 

involve  thermodynamics,  hydrodynamics,  mass  transfer  and  electro-
chemistry. Any comprehensive model should consider the transport of 
electron, proton, oxygen, and water together with the temperature in-
fluences and electrochemical reactions [270]. These establish a complex 
nonlinear  system  with  multi-input  and  multi-output  for  which  devel-
opment  of  mathematical  models  and  control  strategies  are  difficult 
[275].  This  implies  that  the  temperature  considerations  should  be 
included  at  the  design  stage  and  provides  yet  another  reason  for  un-
derstanding the mechanisms of heat generation and transfer in fuel cells. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009666S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 8. The mechanisms of heat transfer between different components of an SOFC [55].  

It is known that the cell temperature features a nonlinear relationship 
with gas fluxes, the gas temperatures, and the environmental tempera-
ture [173]. 

2.1.2. Governing equations 

Many physical phenomena occurring in fuel cells can be represented 
by the equations for the conservation of mass and momentum as well 
those for the transport of energy, chemical species and current. These 
equations are presented in Table 1. 

It should be noted that the source term in the transport of energy can 
include heat of reaction, ohmic heat, and/or heat of condensation and 
evaporation for the phase change processes. This source term is different 
in the various components of fuel cells [24]:  

• In  the  ducts with  gas flow,  phase  change  is  the only  feasible  heat 
source or sink. This includes condensation of water vapor in the gas 
streams  as  a  source  of  heat  or  evaporation  of  liquid  water  in  the 
ducts, as a sink of heat. Indeed, evaporation takes place only if the 
liquid water in the gas stream is in contact with unsaturated vapor. 
Conversely,  existence  of  saturated  water  vapor  is  essential  for  the 
condensation to happen. Condensation can also occur when gaseous 
reactants or their constituents, i.e., oxygen or hydrogen, disappear in 
the electrochemical reactions over a catalyst substrate.  

• In substrates for gas diffusion, the ohmic resistance of solid and phase 

change within the pores are the sources of heat.  

• In catalyst substrates, the sources of heat include the heat release by 
the electrochemical reactions, heat provided by the electronic and 
ionic resistances and the enthalpy of evaporation. 

The only source of heat, in membranes, is the ohmic resistance. It is 
further  noted  that  radiation  heat  transfer  within  the  electrode  and 
electrolyte  substrates  and  also  surface-to-surface  radiation  within  the 
fuel and oxygen flow channels can considerably affect the temperature 
fields and the overall operational condition of SOFCs [67]. 

2.1.3.

Importance of thermal management of fuel cells 

2.1.3.1. Importance of thermal management of proton exchange membrane 
fuel  cells. As  discussed  earlier,  an  effective  thermal  management  is 
central to optimal performance in PEMFCs [20]. Thermal management 
aims  to  maintain  the  working  temperature  of  the  stack  within  the 
favorable range and setting uniform temperature distributions across the 
stacks and their individual components [8]. It should be noted that the 
stack efficiency diminishes when fuel cells work under high tempera-
tures due to the degradation of the catalyst and membrane [240, 328]. 
On the other hand, it is expected that at low temperatures the reaction 
kinetics occur slowly which may result in flooding of water with low 
saturation pressure. This is a critical issue from the water management 
viewpoint  in  fuel  cells  [66,  140].  PEMFCs  have  received  significant 
attention as the ideal automotive power sources due to their high effi-
ciency  and  zero  emissions  [238].  At  high  powers  under  typical  auto-
motive operating conditions, some hot spots may form on the bipolar 
plates and the cathode. These accelerate thermal aging of the membrane 
and catalyst sintering in the cathode [238] reflecting the importance of 
thermal management for this type of fuel cells. 

2.1.3.2. Importance of thermal management of solid oxide fuel cells. The 
thermal  management  of  SOFCs  is  an  essential  requirement  for  the 
operation  and  maintenance  of  the  device.  The  local  reaction  rates  in 
SOFCs  are  highly  related  to  the  local  temperature  distribution  [326]. 
Temperature non-uniformity damages SOFCs. When the temperature in 
SOFCs  exceeds  the  critical  value,  it  leads  to  electrode  sintering  and 
unwanted reactions happen between electrodes and electrolytes [124, 
201]. The SOFC efficiency lessens by reducing the reactive sites caused 
by the sintering of the electrode pore structures [312]. In addition, the 
thermal stresses produced by the temperature gradients and sintering 
lead  to  thermal  cracking  and  delamination  in  the  system  [202,  310]. 
Meanwhile,  the  high  local temperatures  and  gradients  can also  cause 
sealing  failure.  To  ensure  adequate  electrochemical  activities  without 
excessive  degradations,  the  temperature  ranges  for  SOFCs  should  be 
kept  within  particular  limits  [92].  The  SOFC  temperature  range  is 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009667S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 1. 
The conservation equations to represent physical phenomena in the fuel cells 
[157].  

Component 

Gas flow duct, gas 
diffusion substrate, 
catalyst substrate 

Gas flow duct, gas 
diffusion substrate, 
catalyst substrate 

All components 

intricate task. 

2.1.4. Different techniques used for thermal management of fuel cells 

The techniques used for the control of temperature across fuel cell 
components are directly related to the size and power capacity of the 
fuel  cell.  Edge  cooling  [248],  cooling  with  separate  airflow  [99],  air 
cooling [175], liquid cooling [219], cooling with phase change [57] and 
cooling employing the cathode air supply [49] are the main methods 
used for fuel cells thermal management. In general, for fuel cells that 
work  with  a  power  larger  than  10  kW,  the  cooling  of  the  system  is 
performed by using a liquid while for powers less than 2 kW the cooling 
can be done by air. The benefits and restrictions of cooling methods used 
for thermal management of fuel cells are summarized in Table 2. Most 
broadly, the cooling methods of fuel cells are classified into two groups 
of passive and active. Passive cooling methods refer to those technolo-
gies that do not require power consuming devices such as pump or fan. 
Hence, passive cooling technology are often simple [329]. Edge cooling 
and cooling with heat pipe are two examples of passive cooling methods. 
Unlike  passive  methods,  active  cooling  methods  consume  power  by 
employing pumps or fans to provide forced convection of liquids or air. 

Gas flow duct, gas 
diffusion substrate, 
catalyst substrate 

2.1.4.1. Thermal  management  of  proton  exchange  membrane  fuel  cells. 
Shah [254] reported that the flow of reactants is sufficient to cool down 

Table 2. 
The advantages and restrictions of cooling methods used for thermal manage-
ment of fuel cells [329].  

Cooling method 

Electrodes and external 
electric circuit 

Cathode air 

Fuel cell 
power 

Less 
than 0.1 
kW 

Simple structure 
Without coolant loop 
Inexpensive 

Advantages 

Challenges/limitations 

Catalyst substrate and 
membrane  

Separate airflow 

0.2 to 2 
kW 

Simple structure 
Without coolant loop 
Small parasitic powers 

Name 

Equation 

Conservation of 

mass 

Conservation of 
momentum 

Conservation of 

energy 

Conservation of 

species 

Conservation of 
electric charge 

Conservation of 
ionic charge 

+ ∇.(ρv) = 0 

∂ρ
∂t
ρ: Density 
v: Velocity  
∂(ρv)
∂t

+ ∇.(ρvv) = (cid:0) ∇p + ∇.

(μeff ∇v) + Sm 
p: Fluid pressure 
μeff: Mixture average viscosity 
Sm: Momentum source term  

∇xi)

+ (ρcp)

eff v.∇.(T) = ∇.

: Fickian diffusion of species in a 

+ ∇.(vερxi) = ∇.(ρDeff
i

∂T
(ρcp)
eff
∂t
(keff ∇T) + Se 
cp: Mixture-averaged specific heat 
capacity 
T: Temperature 
k: Thermal conductivity 
Se: Energy source term 
eff: Effective properties in the 
porous media  
∂(ερxi)
∂t
+ Ss,i 
xi: Mass fraction of gas species 
Ss,i: Source or sink terms for the 
species 
Deff
i
porous medium 
ε: Prosity 
eff: Effective properties for the 
porous media  
∇.(keff
s ∇ϕs
keff
: Electrical conductivity of the 
s
solid 
φs: Solid phase potential 
Sϕs : Source term, which represents 
the volumetric transfer of current at 
the anode and cathode catalyst 
substrates  
∇.(keff
m ∇ϕm
) = Sϕm 
keff
m : Ionic conductivity in the 
ionomer phase 
φm: Electrolyte phase potential 
Sϕm : Any volumetric source term in 
either of anode or cathode Sϕm
Sϕs  

) = Sϕs 

=

mainly dominated by the oxygen ion conductivity across the electrolyte 
material.  Different  electrolyte  materials  have  different  optimal  tem-
perature range allowing for efficient ion transport. Typical SOFCs have 
8%  mol  yttria-stabilized  zirconia  electrolyte  for  which  the  optimal 
conductivity  is  in  the  range  of  1023  K  to  1123  K.  Currently,  there  is 
active  research  on  new  electrolyte  materials  operating  at  lower  tem-
peratures  to  lower  the  cost  of  the  cell,  whilst  maintaining  the  good 
performance achieved at high temperatures ([187] and [188]). During 
the starting-up and operation of SOFCs, it is essential to have a uniform 
temperature  distribution  across  the  unit  [12,  237].  For  instance,  the 
temperature difference along the axis direction of a typical 1.5-m-long 
tubular  SOFC  by  Siemens-Westinghouse  was  about  200  K  [245].  The 
reasons  for  avoiding  high  temperature  gradients  in  SOFCs  include 
decreasing  thermal  stress  and  the  resultant  brittle  failures,  homoge-
nizing  current  distributions,  decreasing  the  maximum  temperature  to 
hinder decay of the cells and the interconnected materials and, simpli-
fying the operational models and control techniques [282]. It is further 
noted  that  thermal  management  of  SOFCs  could  increase  the 
electro-chemical activities that in turn enhances the efficiency [89]. It 
follows  that  the  thermal  management  of  fuel  cells  is  a  critical  and 

Edge cooling 

About 1 
kW 

Phase change 
with boiling 
process 

About 1 
kW 

Phase change 

with 
evaporation 
process 

0.5 to 
75 kW 

Single phase 

liquid cooling 

More 
than 10 
kW 

Simple structure 
Good overall system 
reliability 
Small parasitic powers 
Without coolant 
scaling issues 

Eliminating coolant 
pump 
Decreasing coolant 
flow rates 
Providing uniform 
working temperature 
Employing 
refrigeration fields and 
electronic equipment 
and components 
Simple structure 
Cold starting abilities 
Internal humidifying 
process 

Great cooling capacity 
Flexible control of 
cooling capacity 
Cooling improvement 
capacity employing 
various techniques 
Employing in 
automotive usages 

Needing stacks with big 
size and high weight 
Without controlling 
temperature stack 
Natural convection 
cannot be employed to 
remove heat 
Impractical method 
Trade-off between 
cooling efficiency and 
parasitic powers  

Limitation in heat 
transfer length 
Lack of affordable 
materials with great 
mechanical attributes 
and very large value of 
thermal conductivity 
Two-phase flow 
instabilities 
Coolant boiling 
temperatures should be 
lower stack working 
temperature (particular 
coolant) 
Incompatible with 
automotive powertrains 

Needing a particular 
design 
Dynamic controlling for 
water evaporation rates 
Thermal mass of liquid 
water on cold startup 
Radiator size and weight 
High parasitic powers 
Requiring extra 
equipment  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009668S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

the  PEMFCs  with  power  less  than  0.1  kW.  The  separate  air  channels 
along with reactant streams are suitable for cooling down the PEMFC 
with the power in the range of 0.2–2 kW while, PEMFCs with powers 
larger  than  10  kW  need  liquid  coolant.  The  schematic  view  of  the 
various cooling techniques applied to PEMFCs is displayed in Fig. 9. The 
suitable power levels for cooling techniques of PEMFCs are displayed in 
Fig. 10. 

2.1.4.1.1. Active cooling methods. Active or forced cooling methods 

include the following sub-categories. 

Forced cooling by cathode air flow 
For PEMFCs with small sizes, the stacks can be cooled down only by 
using  the  cathode  air  flow.  Normally,  this  cooling  method  is  not 
employed for fuel cells with electrical power larger than 5 kW [164]. 
Fig. 11 shows a schematic view of this cooling method. With their many 
advantages  over  ordinary  lead-acid  batteries  and  diesel  generators, 
air-cooled fuel cells are commonly used in portable and backup energy 
generation. These include extended runtime, higher reliability, higher 
performance,  and  reduced  environmental  impact  [255].  In  these  fuel 
cells, the external surface area of the stack is much larger than the active 
surface area, e.g., air breathing PEMFC stacks. This enables the stacks to 
dissipate thermal energy at the rates comparable to those of heat gen-
eration. This method features the drawback of requiring relatively large 
channel size for cathode side of the stack in comparison with the anode 
side that can eventually lead to larger volume of the stacks. De las Heras 
et al. [70] designed three configurations for an air-cooled fuel cell. These 
configurations and their features are presented in Table 3. Four fans are 
used in  configuration 1, which  are divided into  two groups. The first 
group  is  always  in  use  when  fuel  cell  is  operating,  while  the  second 
group  is  switched  on  only  when  the  stack  temperatures  exceed  the 
optimal value. It should be noted that such an optimal value varies with 
the operational condition [306]. In configuration 2, both groups of fans 
are  monitored  by  measuring  the  difference  between  the  actual  stack 
temperature  and  the  ideal  temperature  provided  by  the  company.  In 
configuration 3, a flow adapter and adjustable fan speed are used. In this 
case, only one fan is used, which operates with a variable speed by a 
control procedure. This makes configuration 3 the most effective of all 
configurations listed in Table 3. 

Qiu et al. [228] performed a numerical study to investigate a PEMFC 

cooled with cathode air flow. They considered two cathode flow ducts, 
as disclosed in Fig. 12. Two designs were assessed for the cathode duct, 
including those with opening at the side and curved features. Qiu et al. 
concluded that using wavy surfaces at the bottom of the flow ducts re-
sults in the efficiency enhancement of the fuel cell. This is because it 
could increase the mass transfer between the duct and catalytic layer by 
inducing a vertical velocity component of the air flow. The contact area 
between the air and gas diffusion layer is increased by using the open 
cathode  flow  duct.  Although  more  surface  of  gas  diffusion  layer  is 
exposed  to  air  flow  in  the  duct,  this  configuration  may  not  provide 
higher  efficiency  as  compared  with  the  fuel  cell  with  an  unmodified 
duct. It is important to note that the smaller contact between the bipolar 
plates (will be described in detail in section 2.2.6) and gas diffusion layer 
intensifies the contact resistance, which can then offset the efficiency 
enhancement caused by the higher mass transfer rates. 

Cooling with separate air flow 
For a stack with power larger than a few hundred watts, separate 
cooling  ducts  are  required  in  which  air  blows  to  dissipate  the  heat 
generated  by  the  exothermic  reactions  occurring  in  the  fuel  cells  as 
discussed  in  section  2.2.1  [120].  A  schematic  view  of  this  cooling 
method is shown in Fig. 13. It should be noted that the membrane might 
be dried as the supply of cooling air to the cathode increases. Accord-
ingly, it is required to design separate ducts for the cooling air [163]. 
This method is usually suitable for PEMFC stacks with powers between 
0.1  kW  and  2  kW  [163].  It  offers  the  possibility  of  extracting  more 
thermal energy from the stack without affecting the airflow. 

Liquid cooling 
It is well known that generally liquids have higher specific heat and 
thermal conductivity than gases. As a result, it is reasonable to use liq-
uids  instead of  air  for  cooling  the  stacks  with  higher  heat  generation 
rates (greater than 2 kW). In large scale applications such as automotive 
in  which  high  powers  are  needed  (~100  kW),  for  cooling  of  PEMFC 
stacks it is recommended to use separate channels with a liquid as the 
coolant ([100]). Deionized water would be a suitable choice due to its 
(cid:0) 1. For operation in cold cli-
high specific heat, i.e., 4181.8 J.kg
mates, an antifreeze coolant such as a mixture of water and ethylene 
glycol can be used [272]. The coolant should also have low electrical 
conductivity  to  avoid  current  leakage  through  the  cooling  loop  and 

(cid:0) 1.K 

Fig. 9. The various cooling techniques employed for PEMFCs [120].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)1009669S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 10. The suitable power levels for cooling techniques of PEMFCs [57].  

module, heat is removed from the stack by forced convection of liquid 
water through circular ducts inside the bi-polar plates. A conventional 
liquid  to  air  cross-flow  louvered  fin  radiator  was  also  employed  for 
rejection of waste heat to the environment. The stack temperature can 
be controlled by feedback control of the radiator by a bypass valve. The 
temperature  rise  of  the  coolant  across  the  stack  was  kept  at  the 
maximum value of 5 K employing a variable flow rate pump. The inlet 
cathode gas is wetted by employing a vapor exchange module from the 
cathode exhaust while the anode is dead ended. 

Nanofluid cooling 
Water as a conventional liquid for cooling PEMFCs has some disad-
vantages, including its low thermal conductivity [134]. Thus, nanofluids 
containing uniformly distributed nanoparticles could serve as an alter-
native to water in cooling applications. High ratio of contact surface area 
to volume of nanoparticles that are added to the base coolant leads to 
significant  improvement  of  thermal  conductivity  and  diffusivity  of 
nanofluids [11,114]. Nonetheless, nanoparticles also boost the viscosity 
of the liquid. In order to enhance the heat transfer rate in ordinary liq-
uids by a factor of two, the pump power should be boosted about tenfold. 
However, if the thermal conductivity of liquids is doubled by employing 
nanoparticles, the pumping power often does not increase beyond three 
times. As a result, a large boost in thermal conductivities of coolants by 
employing  nanoparticles  leads  to  saving  a  large  amount  of  pumping 
power [56, 134]. Nanofluids can make the cooling system smaller, for 
example, the frontal area of the radiators can be reduced by about 10% 
[134]. They can further decrease the freezing point in comparison with 
the base coolant, which is desirable in automotive applications [263]. 
The electrical conductivity of water with ions is much larger than 
that of pure water, which leads to interruption of the electrical current 
throughout the fuel cell stack [17]. When water is passed through the 
closed loop, it is in contact with the material and might be contaminated 
by  a  large  number  of  ions.  As  a  result,  it  is  important  to  employ 
de-ionizing filters when employing water or mixture of water/ethylene 
glycol as coolants [17]. Deionization process removes cations, including 
calcium, sodium, copper, iron and also anions, including chloride, ni-
trate,  sulfate.  Deionization  faces  some  important  challenges,  most 
notably the high capital and operational costs [295]. By the usage of a 
nanofluid in the cooling loop, there is no need to use de-ionizing filter. 

Fig. 11. Cooling with cathode air flow [95].  

decay  of  the  bipolar  plates  [247].  However,  incompatibility  with  the 
aluminum  heat  exchangers  is  an  important  issue  associated  with  the 
usage of deionized water as coolant [102]. 

Generally, the costs and weights of this cooling technique are higher 
than those of air cooling, as extra components including coolant loop, 
heat exchangers, pumps, flow regulation valves, and deionizing filters 
are required [267]. Lin et al. [176] designed a liquid cooling for PEMFC 
stacks, as shown in Fig. 14. They considered various configurations of 
coolant and hydrogen channels. The authors indicated that for a better 
management  of  water,  a  counter-flow  configuration  for  the  hydrogen 
channels could be used. Further, to improve temperature control of the 
system, the counter-flow arrangement was recommended for the coolant 
channels. In addition, both counter-flow configurations of the coolant 
and hydrogen channels could further enhance the temperature unifor-
mity of the stack. 

Fig. 15 shows a liquid cooled module designed for PEMFCs. In this 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096610S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3. 
The configurations and their features discussed by De las Heras et al. [70]. The cooling system was designed for a PEMFC with the power of 3.4 kW and operating 
temperature in the range of 299 K to 339 K.  

Structures 

Costs 
(€) 

Auxiliary power 
consumption (kW) 

Air-flow 
control 

Homogenous 
temperature 
distribution 

Performance (Ratio of Electrical 
power to hydrogen 
consumption) 

Four fans without controling system: 

~800 

0.3648 

No 

No 

30% 

Four fans with controling system: 

~800 

0.3648 

Yes 

No 

42% 

One fan with speed controling system: 

~200 

0.091 

Yes 

Yes 

50%  

Fig. 12. The cathode flow ducts considered by Qiu et al. [228], the cooling system was designed for a PEMFC with the operating temperature of 333 K.  

Free ions will be neutralized after reacting with nanoparticles dispersed 
in the coolant, and, hence, have no effect on the electrical conductivity 
(See  Fig.  16).  Nanoparticles  are  designed  for  immobilization  of  both 

negative and positive ions in the fluid but remain active until they are 
saturated with the ions [79]. 

To employ nanofluids for cooling of PEMFCs, they should meet the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096611S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 13. Cooling with separate air flow [95].  

following requirements [267]:  

• Having smaller values of dielectric since an external electrical field 
can polarize them, this may lead to electricity leakage through the 
coolant flow.  

• Having low freezing point to be useable in all climates.  
• Having saturation temperature by about 10 K to 20 K lower than the 

optimized operating temperature of the stack [107].  

• Adding nanoparticles to the base coolant generally ameliorates the 
heat  transfer  rate;  however,  to  neutralize  the  negative  effect  of 
nanoparticles  on  pumping  power,  an  optimal  concentration  for 
nanoparticles should be selected.  

• The nanofluids should be non-explosive, non-flammable, and have 

no toxicity for humans and the environment. 

Although nanofluids could enhance the performance of the cooling 
system in PEMFCs, sedimentation of nanoparticles (instability of nano-
fluid)  and  clogging  the  channels can  affect  the  efficiency  of  PEMFCs. 
Adding surfactants to the base fluid or functionalizing nanoparticles can 
improve the stability of nanofluids. Nanofluids with lower ionic strength 
offer  improvements  in  electrical  conductivity,  while  this  declines  at 
higher  ionic  strength  [134].  Al2O3-water  [158],  CuO-water  [243], 
Al2O3–water  ethylene  glycol  mixture  [324],  SiO2-ethylene  glycol  and 
SiO2-glycerol ([9] et al., 2018) are examples of the nonofluids used for 
thermal management of fuel cells. 

Finally, it should be noted that nanofluids are yet to be commercially 
used  in  PEMFCs.  Before  commercialization  of  nanofluids  for  use  in 
PEMFCs, the following issues should be addressed [126, 234, 244]:  

• A  high-quantity  nanofluid  with  excellent  long-term  and  high- 

temperature stability should be provided.  

• Effective  methods  should  be  employed  to  retain  the  stability  of 
nanofluids  in  real  time  as  sedimentation  of  nanoparticles  is  un-
avoidable after a long-term running. Re-dispersion of the aggregation 
of  nanoparticles  through  using  dispersion  devices  in  the  cooling 

system with functions of agitation or of ultrasound could be a proper 
choice.  

• Although surfactants can be employed to enhance the dispersion and 
adhesion efficiency of nanoparticles in fluid, the effects of surfactant 
on the physical properties and efficiency of cooling system should be 
considered.  

• The  environmental  issues  associated  with  nanofluids  containing 
heavy metals, toxic substances, and other hazardous materials, have 
limited their applications as coolants in fuel cells. 

Evaporative cooling 
The heat of vaporization can become the basis of a cooling process by 
injection of water to the reactant flow of PEMFCs. Water absorbs the 
heat generated by the electrodes and evaporates while the temperature 
remains constant. This cooling technique features some superiorities to 
liquid cooling, including decreasing the coolant flow rate, simplification 
of module layout, and omitting coolant pump [107, 266]. It also takes 
advantage of the latent heat of phase change, which is generally very 
large. As a result, application of this method reduces the coolant flow 
rate, which in turn, makes the cooling system more compact and less 
expensive. The coolant circulation can be provided by a pressure dif-
ference,  density  difference  or  hydrophilic  wicking.  In  some  cases,  for 
example,  circulation  provided  by  density  difference  or  hydrophilic 
wicking, there is no need to use a coolant pump. This cooling technique 
can also help preventing drying of the  membrane through  a constant 
supply of water. 

In  general,  phase-change  cooling  processes  include  boiling  and 
evaporating [235, 236]. In the evaporation, the stack temperature is less 
than the boiling temperature of the coolant. However, in the boiling, the 
boiling temperature of the coolant should be lower than the temperature 
of stack. Fig. 17 shows an evaporatively cooled stack with the usage of 
liquid water at the cathode. 

In their study of evaporative stack cooling, Barbir [24] analyzed the 
effects of water injection at the cathode. Fig. 18 displays the water in-
jection rates needed at various working conditions for the evaporative 
cooling of the stacks. They reported that at higher loads the required 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096612S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 14. a) The PEMFC considered by Lin et al. [176]; b) various configurations of the coolant channel; c) various configurations of the hydrogen channel. The 
cooling system was designed for a PEMFC with the power density in the range of 2.23 kW.L 

(cid:0) 1  to 2.39 kW.L 

(cid:0) 1. 

water injection to achieve saturation conditions at the outlet increased. 
An evaporatively cooled thermal management system designed for 
PEMFCs is displayed in Fig. 19. In this design, the liquid water is added 
into the cathode flow ducts. The water evaporates and humidifies the 
cells and removes the waste heat. The cathode exhaust is then cooled 
and  the  evaporated  water  condenses  along  with  some  of  the  product 
water. Then, the condensed water is separated in the cyclone and stored 
in a water reservoir for reusing. The system further employs a louvered 
fin radiator for removing heat from the cathode exhaust. 

Fly and Thring [96, 97] compared the evaporative and liquid cooling 
techniques for fuel cell vehicles. They concluded that the radiator frontal 
area needed to provide thermal and water balance for an evaporatively 
cooled module is about 27% less than that with a liquid cooling module. 
This  is  due  to  larger  values  of  the  heat  transfer  coefficient  in  the 

condensing radiator. For the boiling approach, HFE-7100 with boiling 
temperature of 334 K at 1 atm was identified as a good option [46]. Choi 
et  al.  [57]  investigated  experimentally  the  boiling  heat  transfer  of 
HFE-7100  in  a  mini-channel  and  its  cooling  efficiency  for  fuel  cells. 
These  authors  found  that  the  boiling  heat  transfer  coefficient  of 
HFE-7100  in  the  mini-channel  is  mostly  related  to  the  heat  flux  and 
vapor quality. However, it has a lower sensitivity to the mass flux. It was 
also observed that the dominant boiling mechanism of this coolant, in 
the mini-channel, is nucleate boiling. For the usual heat generation rates 
in fuel cells, the boiling-based cooling technique can maintain the wall 
temperatures below 336 K with a spatial variation of less than 0.5 K. 
Nonetheless, this is provided that the system does not reach the critical 
heat flux conditions. At the critical heat flux, the wall temperature in-
creases above 364.5 K at the pressure of 1 bar. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096613S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 15. A liquid cooled module designed for PEMFCs [97], the cooling system was designed for a PEMFC with the power of 60 kW.  

Fig. 16. Nanoparticles absorbing the ions when used as coolant in PEMFCs [79].  

Choi et al. [57] further investigated the influences of coolant channel 
pressure on the performance of the cooling process. It was observed that 
the wall temperature increases in the range of 336.5 K to 344.5 K as the 
channel pressure increases from 1 to 1.5 bar. It is important to note that 
the cooling system should be controlled properly to avoid the critical 
heat  flux.  In  addition,  the  pressure  of  the  coolant  channel  should  be 
controlled  to  optimize  the  working  temperatures.  At  the  critical  heat 
flux, the boiling regime transits from nucleate to film boiling. The vapor 
film  acts  as  a  barrier  between  the  wall  and  liquid,  which  leads  to 
reduction of the heat flux with further increase in the temperature until 
the Leiden-frost point is reached. This destructive phenomenon can be 
avoided by supplying extra cooling liquid, finding the point in which the 
critical heat flux occurs and considering a proper safety factor [95]. 

2.1.4.1.2. Passive  cooling  methods. Passive cooling methods in fuel 

cells include the followings. 

Cooling with heat spreaders 
Another approach to cooling of fuel cells is the use of heat spreaders, 

which act like a heat sink. Heat spreaders have high thermal conduc-
tivity and are employed near the flow channel plate (see Fig. 20). In heat 
spreaders, heat is firstly transferred by conduction and subsequently it is 
dissipated  to  the  environment  by  forced  or  free  convection.  In  large 
stacks, the use of spreaders reduces the size of the cooling system. Wen 
et al. [297] examined experimentally the potentials of pyrolytic graphite 
sheets, with high thermal conductivity, as heat spreaders in a single cell 
and 10-cell stack. They showed that the maximum power of the 10-cell 
stack can be increased up to 15% using five pyrolytic graphite sheets as 
the  heat  spreaders.  To  avoid  high  temperature  gradients  across  the 
active area; the thermal conductivities of the cooling plates should be 
very large. Because of their large thermal conductivity and small den-
sity, graphite based materials such as pyrolytic and expanded graphite 
are frequently used for heat spreading in PEMFCs. In a combined pas-
sive/active technique, Wen et al. [298] used pyrolytic graphite sheets 
and fans for the thermal management of a PEMFC stack. The weight-
lessness,  thinness,  and  large  value  of  thermal  conductivity  were 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096614S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 17. Evaporatively cooled stack with cathode liquid water usage [95].  

Fig. 18. The rates of water injection needed at various working conditions for the evaporative cooling of the stacks [24].  

identified  as  the  advantage  of  graphite  sheets.  Further,  they  reported 
that with the expense of higher power consumption by the fans, cooling 
performance of the stack improves at higher airflows. 

Compared  with  the  thermal  management  of  low-temperature 
PEMFC,  that  with  a  heat  spreader  for  high-temperature  PEMFCs  is 
simpler. Working temperatures higher than 373 K makes this thermal 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096615S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 19. An evaporatively cooled thermal management system designed for PEMFCs [97]. The cooling system was designed for a PEMFC with the power of 60 kW.  

Fig. 20. Heat spreader made by pyrolytic graphite sheets aligned with the serpentine flow channel plate [296]. The cooling system was designed for a PEMFC with 
the power of 1 kW. 

management strategy practical for PEMFCs with larger active areas [16, 
251]. 

clearly reflects the importance of the design of the flow distributors for 
heat spreading in stacks of fuel cells. 

Recently, Tolj et al. [279] used heat spreaders to cool down a 1000 W 
PEMFC stack. The stack, shown in Fig. 21, included 60 cells and was 
cooled with air. The annotated air-coolant flow directions through the 
edge-cooling  fins  are  displayed  in  Fig.  21  (Blue  arrows).  The  authors 
concluded that the geometry of the heat spreader fin has a considerable 
effect on the overall temperature distributions. The maximal cell tem-
perature drops as the guide vanes for the air flow are installed on the side 
plates. Therefore, the mass flow of the reactants can be quite uniformly 
distributed  along  the  stack  height.  This  leads  to  a  relatively  higher 
forced convection airflow rate that results in uniform temperature pro-
file along the stack height. The highest temperature and mean temper-
ature of the stack reduced in the ranges of 350.5 K to 336.5 K and 330.5 
K to 319.5 K, respectively as the heat spreader fins were redesigned. This 

Cooling with heat pipes 
Heat pipes are used widely for cooling purposes in many industries. 
The structure of a heat pipe can be divided into three zones of evapo-
rator, adiabatic, and condenser on the basis of the dominant mode of 
heat transfer. Thanks to their great capability in heat conduction they 
can deliver high amount of thermal energy over a large distance with no 
extra  power  inputs  [90].  Therefore,  heat  pipes  could  be  used  to  cool 
down PEMFC stacks [242]. However, the design and fabrication of these 
devices  for  incorporation  with  PEMFCs  have  been  a  challenge.  The 
literature confirms an acceptable performance of heat pipes in cooling of 
fuel cells. For example, it was reported that using a pulsating heat pipe (a 
kind of heat pipe with snake-shaped structure) could enhance the heat 
transfer rate from a PEMFC stack to the environment. In this design, the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096616S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 21. The fuel cell stack investigated by Tolj et al. [279]. The cooling system was designed for a PEMFC with the power of 1 kW and an operating temperature of 
333 K. 

Fig. 22. Cooling system designed by Vinício Oro and Bazzo [287]. The cooling system was designed for a PEMFC with the thermal power in the range of 2 to 14 W 
and an operating temperature in the range of 343 K to 363 K. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096617S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

evaporator part of the heat pipe is in contact with the bipolar plates and 
the condenser is in contact with the stack [60]. Clement and Wang [60] 
suggested that their pulsating heat pipe had the potential to be used in a 
200 cm2 fuel cell, and could provide cooling in the range of 100 to 120 
W. Vinício Oro and Bazzo [287] investigated the potentials of a flat heat 
pipe for PEMFC cooling. The heat pipe was placed in the active area of 
the  stack,  see  Fig.  22.  They  found  that  this  design  could  successfully 
meet  the  heat  dissipation  and  working  temperature  requirements  of 
PEMFCs. 

It  should  be  noted  that  mini/micro  heat  pipes  can  be  used  as 
advanced thermal controllers for mini fuel cells with power generation 
in the range of 10 W to 100 W. Loop heat pipes, sorption heat pipes, and 
pulsating heat pipes can control the temperatures of portable fuel cells 
where  the  power  generation  exceeds  100  W  [284].  Ultra-thin  vapor 
chambers  are  essentially  heat  pipes  that  benefit  from  weightlessness, 
geometric  flexibility,  and  very  large  thermal  conductivity.  Luo  et  al. 
[184] used these chambers for thermal management of PEMFCs. In this 
study, the bipolar plates of the fuel cell were combined with the evap-
orator section and the condenser section was extended out of the fuel 
cell.  In  PEMFCs,  the  bipolar  plates  supply  fuel  and  oxidant  to  the 
membrane electrode assembly, removes water, and collects the electrons 
generated. This arrangement led to heat elimination by free or forced 
convection. Luo et al. found that employing ultra-thin vapor chambers 
results  in  uniform  temperature  distributions.  Particularly  for  forced 
convection  conditions,  the  lowest  temperature  difference  on  the  sub-
strate surface for the gas diffusion in the cathode could drop to 0.3 K 
[184]. 

Free cooling with cathode airflow 
For smaller fuel cells, the cathode air flow can operate under free 
convection mode. This is the simple technique for cooling the cells and 
evaporating  water  at  the  cathode,  conducted  with  the  rather  open 
structures at the cathode sides which lead to the increase of stack size. 
For  the  smaller  PEMFCs,  less  than  100  W,  free  convection  from  air 
breathing is enough [255]. 

Cooling with other passive methods 
Generally, the bipolar plates with larger thickness should be used for 
air or water ducts formed at the back of the bipolar plates leading to 

increase in the cost of cooling system. In addition, the whole stack is 
pressurized to decrease the contact resistance. As a result, conduction of 
electricity and provision of coolant ducts by the plates is related to the 
applied  compression  force.  This  is  restricted  by  other  constraints, 
including the characteristics and properties of the materials in the fuel 
cells stacks. 

Odabaee and Hooman [213] and Odabaee et al. [214] designed an 
effective air-cooled heat exchanger for fuel cells, which also decreases 
the contact and electrical resistances (See Fig. 23). Their design resulted 
in lowering the cost and minimizing the size of the fuel cell stack. A thin 
substrate  of  aluminum  metal  foam  was  placed  between  two  adjacent 
cells. The thermal conductivity of the metal foam was up to 200 times 
larger than that for air and 20 times larger than that of water. The metal 
foam also provides excellent electrical conductivity between the cells, 
even in comparison with bipolar graphite plates [65], and therefore can 
improve  the  power  generation.  The  manufacturing  of  the  developed 
design is simpler as it eliminates the serpentine ducts cut on the back of 
the bipolar plate and replaces them with a metal foam substrate with 
larger values of the thermal conductivity. The use of the metal foam as 
heat exchanger was found to improve heat transfer rates and the uni-
formity of temperature distributions and, a maximum temperature dif-
ference of 6 K was reported. 

Sasmito et al. [249] employed phase change materials and thermal 
insulator  for  the  thermal  management  of  PEMFC  stacks  under  cold 
climate condition of sub-freezing. In cold weather conditions, the stacks 
of a PEMFC may experience freeze-thaw cycle operations so that they 
cannot  work  with  the  maximum  efficiency  for  a  long  period  of  time. 
Also, the start-up may encounter some problems. The passive thermal 
management strategy, employed by Sasmito et al. [249], is displayed in 
Fig. 24. In this study, phase change materials were employed for alle-
viating stack from freeze-thaw cycles. In addition, the insulator was used 
to keep the temperature of the stack above the freezing point. The heat 
exchange between the stack and environment is governed by conduction 
and convection, at the molten state in the phase change material while 
the heat transfer mode in the insulator is conduction. The stack remains 
hot since the phase-change material acts as a heat source. Further, the 
insulator minimizes the heat dissipation to the ambient. Therefore, by 

Fig. 23. The air-cooled heat exchanger designed for the fuel cells by Odabaee and Hooman [213]. The cooling system was designed for a PEMFC with the thermal 
power in the range of 10 to 60 W and operating temperature in the range of 303 K to 363 K. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096618S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 24. Passive thermal management strategy for fuel cell in cold climate condition presented by Sasmito et al. [249]. The cooling system was designed for a PEMFC 
with the operating temperature of 333 K. 

applying this strategy, the temperature of the stack could be kept above 
the  freezing  point for a  longer time.  In addition, the  system  becomes 
more compact and less power is consumed compared with other designs. 
The temperature of the stack would be kept above the freezing point for 
about two days making this design suitable for automotive applications 
[249]. 

2.1.4.1.3. Bipolar plates for proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Bi-
polar plates are important and multifunctional components of PEMFCs. 
Fig. 25 shows an example of a bipolar plate in PEMFC. Bipolar plates are 
used  for  uniform  distribution  of  the  gaseous  fuel  and  air,  conducting 
electrical current between cells, removing heat from the active area, and 
preventing  leakage  of  gases  and  coolant  [71].  The  surfaces  of  these 
plates generally contain a “flow field,” that is a set of channels machined 
or  stamped  into  the  plate  to  allow  gases  to  flow  over  the  membrane 
electrode assembly. Additional channels inside each plate are employed 
for circulation of the coolant. 

Bipolar plates have several major functions as follows [71].  

• Homogeneous distribution of fuel and oxidant inside the cell.  
• Facilitating thermal and water management of the unit.  
• Separating individual cells inside the stack.  
• Carrying electrical current away from the cell. 

Bipolar plates play a key role in determining the final size, weight, 

Fig. 25. Example of a bipolar plate used in PEMFC [203].  

(cid:0) 2. 

(cid:0) 4cm3.s 

(cid:0) 2 mA.cm

and costs of PEMFC stacks. The materials used for bipolar plates have 
different  physical and  chemical  properties  corresponding  to  the  func-
tions of the plate (see Table 4). The coefficient of thermal expansion, 
density, and hydrophobicity are also amongst the key physical proper-
ties of the bipolar plate material. The following properties have been 
recommended for the materials used in the bipolar plates [127]: Plate 
(cid:0) 1  Ω.cm2, large thermal conductivity, hydro-
resistance lower than 10
(cid:0) 2,  corrosion  rate 
(cid:0) 1.cm
gen/gas  permeability  lower  than  10
(cid:0) 2, compressive strength larger than 22 lb. 
lower than 1.6 × 10
in

(cid:0) 2, and density lower than 5 gm.cm
2.1.4.1.4. Heat  recovery  options  for  proton  exchange  membrane  fuel 
cells. As  discussed  earlier,  a  significant  amount  of  heat  is  produced 
during the operation of PEMFCs. Fig. 26 shows that such heat can be 
utilized  by  several  combined  cooling/heating  and  power  generation 
technologies.  Heat  recovery  from  the  PEMFCs,  to  supply  heat  and 
power, enhances the overall energy efficiency of PEMFCs [132, 205]. 
This enhanced efficiency reaches 30% to 50% for the power supply alone 
and up to 70% to 90% for combined heat and power (CHP) applications 
[206]. It has been shown that heat recovery from the stack of PEMFCs 
could enhance the overall efficiency of a hydrogen-based energy system 
to  around  50%  [206].  Fig.  27  shows  schematically  this  multi-vector 
energy conversion and storage system wherein heat is extracted from 
a fuel cell, an electrolyser and a natural gas reformer. 

The  heat  generated  by  PEMFCs  can  be  used  for  driving  sorption 
refrigeration cycles in combined heat and power (CCP) and, combined 
cooling,  heating,  and  power  (CCHP)  applications.  Adsorption  cooling 
systems  using  vapor/solid  pairs,  such  as  water/silica  gel  can  be  inte-
grated with a stack of PEMFCs. It is then possible to achieve an overall 
CCP/CCHP  efficiency  of  about  60%  to  65%  [206].  Thermoelectric 
generator (TEG), organic Rankine cycle (ORC), and thermally regener-
ative electrochemical cycle (TREC) can turn the heat generated by fuel 
cells into power [121, 181, 336]. Combining PEMFCs with these tech-
nologies is technically conceivable. For a constant temperature of the 

Table 4. 
The function and pertinent physical properties of bipolar plate materials [127].  

Functions 

Pertinent Physical properties 

Distributing and managing fuel and oxidants 

and residual gases and liquids. 

Conducting electrical current. 
Facilitating thermal management. 
Separating the individual cells in the stack. 

Hydrogen permeability, bubble 
pressure Corrosion resistance 
Electrical conductivity 
Thermal conductivity 
Compressive strength  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096619S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 26. Heat recovery options for PEMFCs [206].  

Fig. 27. A multi-vector energy system based on PEMFC [206].  

heat source, integrating PEMFCs with TREC offers higher overall effi-
ciency as compared with ORC or TEG [206]. The waste heat recovery 
from PEMFCs with higher operation temperatures, i.e., 393 K to 473 K, is 
more  suitable  for  the  usage  in  the  power  cogeneration  systems  in 

comparison  with  PEMFCs  with  lower  operating  temperatures  [104]. 
Recent  investigations  have  shown  that  the  waste  heat  captured  from 
PEMFCs for the usage in power cogeneration improves the overall effi-
ciency of the hybrid systems. For hybrids with TEG or ORC by about 3% 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096620S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

to  5%  and  5%  to  9%  for  low  temperature-PEMFCs  and  high 
temperature-PEMFCs, respectively [206]. 

equalized. As already discussed in Section 2.2.3, this is momentous for 
enhancing electrochemical activities and decreasing degradation. 

◦
C to 1000 

2.1.4.2. Thermal management of solid oxide fuel cells. SOFCs operate at 
◦
500 
C and their thermal management faces the challenge of 
satisfying  the  high  temperature reaction  requirements  while avoiding 
intense  temperature  gradients  [89].  In  addition,  holding  the  stack 
temperature at a specified level is essential for achieving a suitable ion 
conductivity  of  the  electrolyte  [317].  Further,  Laurencin  et  al.  [165] 
showed that there is a strong relation between the temperature distri-
bution and operating conditions in SOFCs. In addition, a good usage of 
heat is essential for achieving an effective distributed power generation, 
which  is  often  the  reason  for  employing  SOFCs.  Yet,  poor  thermal 
management could result in thermal stresses and efficiency decline with 
the subsequent shortening of the fuel cell lifetime. 
Thermal management of SOFCs by heat pipes 
Heat  pipes  have  been  used  to  control  the  temperature  in  SOFCs 
resulting in elimination of strong temperature gradients and the need for 
expensive high-efficiency catalysts [285, 326]. The planar heat pipes are 
integrated into the stacks of SOFCs to prevent degradation promoting 
hotspots and performance deterrent cold regions [76]. The concept of 
integrating heat pipes into SOFCs has already been successfully tested 
within the EU-research project BioCellus [76]. Dillig and Karl [75] re-
ported  that  integrating  an  isothermal  heat  pipe  into  the  solid  oxide 
electrolyser/fuel  cell  stack  considerably  reduces  the  temperature  gra-
dients  inside  the  cells.  The  extent  of  this  reduction  is  related  to  the 
number of cell layers between the two heat pipe layers. Dillig [77] in-
tegrated a liquid metal heat pipe device into the planar stack structure of 
a  SOFC  (as  shown  in  Fig.  28).  As  a  consequence  of  the  con-
densation/evaporation  cycle  of  the  liquid  metal  in  the  heat  pipe,  the 
interconnector became isothermal. Significant heat transfer in the heat 
pipe  allows  heat  distribution  inside  the  stack  and  an  extraction  of 
high-temperature  heat  from  the  stack.  This  technique  can  flatten  the 
internal temperature profile of the stack and decrease the stack internal 
gradient in the range of 43 K to 15 K. 

Zeng et al. [326] incorporated a heat pipe with liquid sodium metal 
into the design of a SOFC for smoothing the temperature distributions 
and enhancing the electrochemical efficiency. A thermally unified heat 
pipe/SOFC with five substrates including current-collecting, heat func-
tional,  electrolyte,  cathode  and  anode  substrates  was  designed  (see 
Fig.  29).  It  was  found  that  by  using  liquid  sodium  metal  as  the  heat 
transfer  medium,  the  temperature  distribution  in  the  SOFC  could  be 

Thermal management of SOFCs by airflow 
The flow ducts on the cathode side of the SOFCs are responsible for 
supplying oxygen to the cells and, can be further used to remove extra 
heat  generated  by  the  electrochemical  reactions.  This  idea  has  been 
investigated in a few studies. 

Tan et al. [274] used airflow alternation to control the temperature 
in the SOFC short stack. They found that the airflow alternation is most 
effective in attaining a uniform and higher cell temperature and thus, 
lowering dispersion of the current density. An alternate airflow parallel 
to  the  fuel  flow  could  provide  the  maximum  voltage  performance  of 
0.797  V,  while  alternate  airflow  perpendicular  to  the  fuel  flows 
decreased the risk of local fuel depletion in comparison with crossflow 
stacks. As a result, proper selection of the airflow configuration inside 
the stacks could improve the efficiency. 

Thermal management of SOFCs by using novel materials 
New  materials  have  been  developed  and  used  in  different  compo-
nents  of  SOFCs  to  uniform  the  temperature  distributions  inside  these 
devices. Tucker and Cheng [282] suggested a strategy to eliminate the 
hot  spots  and  reduce  the  temperature  gradients  in  SOFCs.  They  used 
materials  with  a  positive  temperature  coefficient,  which  exhibit  sub-
stantial changes in their electrical resistance near the desired highest cell 
temperatures. It should be noted that the positive temperature coeffi-
cient materials show a resistivity, which could rapidly increase when the 
temperature rises above the Curie temperature. This is the temperature 
at  which  a  transition  between  the  paramagnetic  and  ferromagnetic 
phases occurs [220]. 

Zhan et al. [327] used a metal foam as the cathode flow distributor to 
manage  the  temperature  in  an  SOFC.  They  performed  a  comparison 
between the results of SOFCs with and without metal foams as displayed 
in  Fig.  30.  Their  results  showed  that  because  of  the  significant  heat 
conduction  and  uniform  electron  transport,  uniform  temperature  dis-
tributions with lower values could be achieved. In addition, the metal 
foam  with  larger  permeability  renders  better  fuel  cell  efficiency  but 
features higher-pressure drop. 

Finally, it should be mentioned that recently, Promsen et al. [224] 
evaluated the cooling SOFC stacks with phase change heat transfer of 
saturated  water.  They  observed  that,  compared  to  air  cooling,  water 
cooling considerably improves the temperature distribution in the stack 
leading to superior electrochemical performance 

2.1.4.2.1. Heat  recovery  options  for  solid  oxide  fuel  cells. As SOFCs 

Fig. 28. Cooling system designed by Dillig [77]. The cooling system was designed for an SOFC with an operating temperature in the range of 923 K to 1143 K.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096621S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 29. A thermally unified heat pipe/SOFC designed by Zeng et al. [326]. The cooling system was designed for a SOFC with the operating temperature in the range 
of 1073 to 1203 K. 

Fig. 30. SOFCs with and without metal foams considered by Zhan et al. [327]. The cooling system was designed for an SOFC with an operating temperature of 
1073 K. 

involve  high  temperatures,  their  waste  heat  could  be  used  for  fuel 
reforming [74]. This process includes conversion of hydrocarbons into 
H2 and CO. The exhaust gas in SOFCs is very hot (around 1073 K to 1173 
K) and hence can manage fuel pretreatment processes. SOFCs could be 
also integrated into gas turbines or micro gas turbines 174 53. Fig. 31 
shows a schematic view of an SOFC–micro-gas turbine hybrid system. 
The air pressure is initially increased by the compressor, C, and then the 
temperature  is  further  increased  in  a  recuperator,  RC,  before  being 
supplied  to  the  SOFC  stack.  Upon  expansion  in  the  turbine,  T,  the 
exhaust  gas  from  the  SOFC  is  cooled  in  the  recuperator  and  fuel 
reforming  unit.  Two  flue  gas  streams,  extracted  from  the  recuperator 
and reforming units, are then employed for vaporization of the fuel/-
water mixture in the fuel vaporizer, FV. As a result, the low-temperature 
waste heat can be recovered. In the fuel reformer, RF, the endothermic 

steam reforming occurs, and the superheater SH in which the vaporized 
fuel/water mixture is heated to the temperature required for reforming 
[61].  Generally,  an  SOFC  combined  with  a  gas  turbine  represents  a 
combined power cycle. Unreacted fuel from a topping SOFC combusts 
and the heat is used by a downstream heat engine [48]. Such systems 
have large conversion efficiency. For example, an electrical efficiency is 
better  than  60%  and  the  system  efficiency,  including  waste  heat  re-
covery for co-generation, is higher than 80% could be achieved by using 
an internal-reforming hybrid SOFC-gas turbine system [174]. SOFCs on 
their own can attain 50% net electrical efficiency and are already used in 
combination with multi-MW gas turbines, to attain larger efficiency for 
electricity generation [53, 64, 174]. 

2.1.4.2.2. Options to decrease the operating temperature of solid oxide 
fuel cells. SOFCs operate within the temperature range of 873 K to 1273 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096622S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 31. A schematic view of the externally reformed SOFC–micro-gas turbine hybrid system [61].  

K. This high temperature complicates the design of external reformers, 
piping,  heat  exchangers  and  pumps.  In  addition,  long  start  up  time, 
costly  metallic  interconnects  and  sealants  and  less  durability  of  cell 
components  [94,  216] constitute  other problems.  These  issues  hinder 
commercialization  of  SOFCs.  Consequently,  several  efforts  have  been 
made  to  reduce  the  working  temperature  of  SOFCs  down  to  673  K 
to1073  K  [84, 105].  There  are  two  options  to decrease  the operating 
temperature  of  SOFCs,  while  still  achieving  comparable  efficiency  to 
those operating at higher temperatures. First, the thickness of the elec-
trolyte is reduced. This leads to smaller area specific resistances of the 
fuel  cell.  Second,  new  materials  are  developed  to  generate  a  similar 
behavior. In this option, the ionic conductivities of the electrolytes are 
improved at lower temperatures. Several approaches have been taken to 
improve the ionic conductivity of ceria-based electrolytes for interme-
diate  temperature-SOFCs.  These  approaches  are  manipulating  ionic 
defects by doping or co-doping with aliovalent cations, nanocomposites, 
and tailoring the strain of the hetero-structure interface in the electro-
lyte  thin  film  [7]  while  improving  the  performance  of  the  electrodes 
[40]. 

It is important to note that decreasing the operating temperature of 
SOFCs  suppresses  kinetics  of  the  electrodes  and  degrades  the  system 
performance.  Yet,  the  performance  of  SOFCs  at  lower  operating  tem-
peratures could be enhanced by improving the electrode materials. For 
example, it has been demonstrated that the nanostructure engineering of 
electrodes could enhance the catalytic performance [78]. This is through 
minimizing the electrode polarization resistance for oxygen reduction 
and fuel oxidation reactions at the nanoscales in comparison with the 
conventional  electrode  designs  [78].  It  should  be  noted  that  by 
decreasing the operating temperature of SOFCs, a wider range of ma-
terials become employable. This results in cheaper fabrication, partic-
ularly regarding the interconnect and balance-of-plant components. For 
example,  low-temperature  SOFCs,  with  operating  temperature  lower 
than  923  K,  can  further  decrease  the  system  costs  due  to  the  wider 
material  options  for  interconnect  and  compressive  ceramic  seal-
s/nonglass. In addition, for operating temperatures lower than 873 K, 
both  radiative  heat  transfer  and  sintering  rate  are  exponentially 
reduced. These facts decrease the insulation cost and the primary effi-
ciency degradation mechanisms. At even lower operating temperatures, 

lower  than  623  K,  inexpensive  stamped  stainless-steel  interconnect, 
elastomeric/ polymeric seals such as Kapton, and off-the-shelf BOP can 
be used [291]. 

Another reason to decrease the operational temperatures of SOFCs is 
to  approach  the  maximum  theoretical  efficiency.  In  contrast  to  the 
temperature dependence of internal combustion engines, the theoretical 
fuel cell performance increases as the temperature drops [291]. As an 
example,  the  maximum  theoretical  efficiency  of  an  SOFC  employing 
carbon monoxide as fuel, is increased from 63% at temperature of 1173 
K to 81% for temperature of 623 K [291]. The readers are referred to the 
work  of  Kaur  [161]  for  further  information  on  the  new  materials 
employed within SOFCs. 

Operating at lower temperatures (<623 K) also allows faster start-up 
and  shut-down,  decreased  corrosion  rates  of  metallic  components, 
enhanced  durability  (sintering  and  component  inter-diffusion  are 
accelerated  at  larger  values  of  temperature),  stronger  construction 
through  the  usage  of  compressive  seals  and  metallic  interconnects 
[291].  Introducing  SOFCs  with  lower  operating  temperatures,  in  the 
range  of  773  K  to  1023  K,  can  open  new  arenas  for  applications  in 
mobile,  remote  telecommunications,  and  IT  applications  [161].  In 
addition,  intermediate  temperature-SOFCs  can  be  used  for  other 
important  applications,  including  regenerative  fuel  cells,  truck  APUs, 
genes replacement, and power for isolated communities in developing 
intermediate 
countries. 
temperature-SOFCs are in the power range of sub-10 kW [161]. It has 
been demonstrated that the intermediate temperature-SOFCs operation 
with considerably low cell resistances and high-power densities under 
the working temperatures of 673 K to 873 K is feasible [130, 292]. There 
are  a  few  commercial  developers  of  intermediate  temperature-SOFCs 
such  as  Mitsubishi  Materials  Corporation  and  Kansai  Electric  Power 
Company  [259]  and  Ceres  Power  Ltd.  [88].  For  further  information 
about  the  commercialization  of  intermediate  temperature-SOFCs, 
readers are referred to [88]. 

the  major  applications  of 

In  general, 

2.1.4.3. Machine learning techniques to control temperature of fuel cells. 
Machine learning techniques such as Artificial Neural Network (ANN) 
could  be  employed  as  an  alternative  to  high-fidelity  modeling  of 
complicated non-linear systems such as fuel cells. In general, machine 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096623S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

learning  requires  input  training  data  obtained  experimentally  and 
computationally.  According  to  the  inputs,  the  machine  learning  tech-
niques can be used to generate meaningful solutions for complex prob-
lems,  see  for example Mohebbi Najm Abad  et  al. [196]  and Alizadeh 
et al. [10]. These techniques are also capable of producing mathematical 
correlations  for  highly  complex  configurations  with  large  number  of 
input  parameters.  Such  correlations  can  be  employed  by  fuel  cell  de-
signers for optimization purposes under particular operating conditions 
[106]. 

Since the performance of fuel cells is strongly temperature depen-
dent, it is important to dynamically control their temperature. As dis-
cussed  in  section  2.2.1.,  the  cell  temperature  features  nonlinear 
relationships  with  gas  fluxes,  gas  temperatures,  and  the  surrounding 
temperature. This makes the temperature control in fuel cells a highly 
cumbersome  problem  that  is  not  amenable  to  traditional  control  ap-
proaches  [28,  128].  ANN  has  been  found  suitable  for  controlling  the 
nonlinear and intermittent problems. Dong et al. [81] designed a tem-
perature  controller  for  PEMFC  by  the  oxygen,  hydrogen,  and 
water-cooling  flow  rates.  These  flow  rates  have  distinct  effects  and 
accordingly, a divided-area controller should be used. The fuzzy logic 
type  was  used  as  the  activation  function  of  the  neural  network.  The 
Sugeno fuzzy logic system was also applied to identify the controller. 
Dong et al. [81] observed very smooth flowrate control and low fluc-
tuations during the transitional period. 

Tao et al. [275] developed learning fuzzy neural networks to keep 
the  temperature  of  a  PEMFC  by  the  gas  flow  rate.  The  neuron-fuzzy 
controller  adjusts  the  anode  and  cathode  flows  to  control  the  stack 
temperature. Controlling the temperature by the gas flow might impart 
some effects on the flow rates of the reactant gases. However, these ef-
fects were found negligible in this study in which the system featured 
low flow rates.  The controller was  regulated via the  backpropagation 
algorithm and based on the residual temperature error. The suggested 
design was tested in the start-up simulation and the tests showed that the 
system  could  readily  reach  the  desired  temperature  of  353  K  with 
minimal fluctuations. 

Li  et  al.  [173]  employed  ANN  to  control  the  temperature  of  a 
low-power  PEMFCs.  Their  results  showed  that  this  technique  was  su-
perior  to  the  traditional  PID  control  techniques.  A  PID,  (proportional 
integral derivative) controller employs the control loop feedback and is 
usually  recognized  as  the  most  stable  and  accurate  controller.  This 
controller is widely used in industrial applications to control tempera-
ture, pressure, flow, speed and other process variables. Li et al. [173] 
used a gas heating resistance to control the temperature. The PID pa-
rameters  were  varied  over  time  showing  minor  overshoot  and  good 
stability, yet the temperature convergence time was slow. [91] used the 
feedforward ANN with three layers to investigate the temperature ef-
fects of the cell and reactant gases on the voltage. These authors found 
that their model could predict the experimental data very well and that 
the  best  efficiency  could  be  obtained  as  temperatures  of  the  cell  and 
reactant gases approach each other. Note that when the cell temperature 
is  higher  than  that  of  gases,  the  membrane  dries  out  and  this  affects 
considerably the proton conductivity. Further, when the cell is colder 
than  the  reactant  gases,  the  membrane  might  be  flooded.  An  extra 
amount of water fills up the pores and prevents access to active sites and 
blocks the transport of products and gaseous reactants. 

A  survey  of  literature  reveals  that  only  few  adaptive  neural  ap-
proaches  so  far  have  been  developed  for  the  dynamic  temperature 
control in fuel cells. The existing studies in this field indicate that the 
neural PID controller is an excellent control tracking for high current 
with relatively low over-shoots. However, for low currents, the neural- 
feedback can provide better performance [177]. 

2.1.4.4. Thermal  management  of  other  types  of  fuel  cells. As  stated 
earlier,  the  bulk  of  literature  on  fuel  cell  cooling  is  concerned  with 
PEMFC and SOFC. Studies on the cooling of other types of fuel cell are 

far  less  frequent.  In  this  section,  the  existing  studies  on  the  thermal 
management of other types of fuel cells are reviewed. It is important to 
note that the scarcity of these studies impedes finding clear trends and 
making systematic conclusions. Nonetheless, an attempt is made here to 
present the findings of each study. 

Water vaporization in the cathode for cooling: 
Dohle et al. [80] investigated water vaporization in the cathode for 
the thermal management of a direct methanol fuel cell. They considered 
the  operating  temperature  range of  333  K  to  403  K  for  this  fuel  cell. 
Expectedly,  vaporization  of  liquid  water  was  more  intense  at  higher 
temperatures  of  the  fuel  cell  stack  boosting  the  cooling  process.  In 
addition,  the  generated  heat  by  the  fuel  cell  could  be  recovered  by 
including a heat exchanger in the anode loop. It was found that increases 
in the operating temperatures cause a considerable drop in the thermal 
efficiency due to the heat loss as a result of vaporization of water in the 
cathode. It should be noted that the thermal efficiency was defined as 
the thermally useful energy relative to the heating value of methanol. In 
direct  methanol fuel  cells,  the  liquid  methanol can  generally act as  a 
coolant for the stack and as a result, this type of fuel cell can be effec-
tively  cooled  by  the  liquid  fuel  itself  [191].  This  means  that  direct 
methanol  fuel  cells  do  not  need  any  dedicated  system  for  thermal 
management of stack and cooling is done without any parasitic power 
loss [191]. 

Thermal control system: 
Yuan et al. [323] investigated an anode self-adaptive thermal control 
for the usage in the passive direct methanol fuel cells. It is noted that in 
such passive fuel cells, external pumps or other auxiliary equipment are 
not used for the supply of oxidizer and fuel. In their design, the heating 
unit  was  controlled  by  a  single  chip  microcomputer  and  a  relay  that 
could maintain the operation of direct methanol fuel cell at the optimal 
temperature. It was shown that the optimal operating temperature of 
passive direct methanol fuel cells is 2 to 3 times larger than the room 
temperature in 

C [323]. 

◦

Usage  of  simulation  to  provide  temperature  maps  of  fuel  cells  for 

cooling system 

Methanol crossover in direct methanol fuel cells is closely related to 
the  evolution  of  the  transient  temperature  as  the  methanol  crossover 
rate increases with temperature and methanol concentration. The anode 
and  cathode  kinetic  parameters  improve  with  a  virtual  increase  in 
temperature in direct methanol fuel cells but thermal runaway, which 
occurs when the amount of heat produced within a cell exceeds its heat- 
dissipation  capacity,  is  greatly  exacerbated  by  insufficient  heat  dissi-
pation. As a result, a detailed theoretical investigation on the unsteady 
thermal behavior of direct methanol fuel cells is necessary to obtain a 
better understanding of these complex interactional phenomena. Such 
investigation helps to optimize the material and component design of 
direct  methanol  fuel  cells  and  eventually  accelerate  the  commerciali-
zation of direct methanol fuel cells technologies [54]. 

Chippar  et  al.  [54]  developed  a  1D  unsteady  model  for  the  direct 
methanol fuel cells to investigate the unsteady thermal characteristic of 
this type of fuel cell under different operating conditions. The results 
indicated that the cell performance and efficiency were highly related to 
the water, methanol, and heat transfer in the fuel cell. It was suggested 
that  increasing  transient  cell  temperatures  in  a  fuel  cell  would  be 
beneficial  as  it  would  increase  mass  transfer  and  chemical  kinetics. 
Temperature increase could also lead to an increase in methanol cross-
over  from  the  anode  to  the  cathode,  which  could  increase  the  mixed 
cathode  overpotential,  ultimately  reducing  the  fuel  cell’s  efficiency. 
High concentration of methanol-feed and/or low external heat transfer 
coefficient  in  the  direct  methanol  fuel  cell,  could  lead  to  thermal 
runaway phenomenon. This is a situation in which increasing the cell 
temperature increases the rate of methanol crossover which then leads 
to further temperature elevation and damages the fuel cell. As a result, 
the model shows the necessity of an efficient cooling module for stabi-
lization of cell operation and improving cell performance. The cooling 
module  is  more  necessary  at  higher  concentration  of  methanol  in 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096624S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

portable applications of direct methanol fuel cells. 

Bosio et al. [39] focused on the thermal management of the molten 
carbonate  fuel  cell.  This type of  fuel  cell operates  at the  temperature 
range  of  925  to  955  K.  The  input  anodic  and  cathodic  gas  with  the 
temperature of about 855 K is required for good ionic conduction in the 
cells. In addition, a maximum local temperature larger than 960 K must 
be avoided as the higher temperature may lead to electrolyte evapora-
tion and corrosion [233]. The first issue is manageable, while resolving 
the second one requires providing many local measurements or, more 
properly, reliable detailed simulations [39]. Bosio et al. [39] used the 
SIMFC (Simulation of Fuel Cells) to calculate the temperature distribu-
tion on the cell plane of a molten carbonate fuel cell. They found that the 
temperature  map  of  the  plane  could  be  very  irregular  and  that  some 
sections of the cell might operate under critical conditions. This could 
happen even if the mean temperature was not too high. Various methods 
can be applied to achieve a more uniform temperature distribution on 
the  cell  plane.  It  was  shown  that  the  fluid-dynamics  of  cathodic  and 
anodic gases on the cell plane could dominate the cooling process [273]. 

Usage of double pipe heat exchanger design 
Ariyanfar et al. [18] used double pipe heat exchangers to cool down 
the alkaline fuel cells. In general, the electrolyte has a cooling role in this 
type  fuel  cell.  In  their  employed  heat  exchanger,  the  electrolyte  and 
water were the hot and cold fluids and flowed through the inner and 
outer  pipes,  respectively.  Their  results  showed  that  decreasing  the 
electrolyte temperature from 343 to 313 K leads to about 2% improve-
ment in the overall efficiency of fuel cell. 

Usage of separator 
Kim  et  al.  [153]  performed  a  numerical  study  to  investigate  the 
potentials  of  a  separator  for  controlling  the  stack  temperature  in  the 
molten carbonate fuel cell. A separator with three flow paths was used to 
control the stack temperature while keeping a high cell potential. This 
included two flow paths for the electrodes and one path at the center of 
the separator for the flow of nitrogen for cooling. It was found that the 
separator could control the stack temperature of a co-flow stack with an 
external reformer under atmospheric pressure. 

Heat recovery option 
Ishizawa et al. [133] designed an efficient heat recovery module for 
phosphoric  acid  fuel  cells.  In  their  design,  a  shell-and-tube  heat 
exchanger  and  a  direct-contact  cooler  were  used  to  recover 
high-temperature heat and water efficiently. The reformer and cathode 
exhaust gases were firstly supplied to the heat exchanger and then to the 
cooler.  The  high  temperature  heat  in  the  range  of  333  to  358  K  was 
recovered,  and  the  heat  recovered  from the  coolant  was  utilized  in  a 
dual-heat-input absorption refrigerator. The water required to operate 
the fuel cell was also recovered from the exhaust gases. Wu et al. [305] 
used  the  thermoelectric  generator  and  the  thermoelectric  cooler  to 
recover the waste heat of a phosphoric acid fuel cell. Combining ther-
moelectric  generator  and  the  thermoelectric  cooler  allows  recovering 
the  waste  heat  to  be  then  used  for  cooling  generation.  Wu  et  al. 
concluded that the efficiency and power density of the hybrid system 
increase by about 2.8% and 2.3% compared with a stand-alone phos-
phoric acid fuel cell. Zhang et al. [330] used an absorption refrigerator 
to recover the waste heat generated by a molten carbonate fuel cell. It 
was  shown  that,  compared  to  single  molten  carbonate  fuel  cell,  hy-
bridization  improved  the  maximum  power  density  and  efficiency  by 
3.2%  and  3.8%,  respectively.  Abdollahipour  and  Sayyaadi  [3]  used 
regenerative electrochemical cycles for heat recovery from molten car-
bonate  fuel  cell  and  extra  power  generation.  They  showed  that  the 
higher operating temperatures of the fuel cell could improve the power 
output and efficiency of the hybrid system. 

3. Electrolysers 

Electrolysers employ electrical energy to electrochemically decom-
pose a substance, e.g. water into oxygen and hydrogen. By using water 
electrolysers, ultra-pure hydrogen is produced in a carbon free process 

when  the  electricity  is  provided  by  renewable  energy  sources.  The 
produced  ‘green  hydrogen’  can  be  subsequently  converted  back  to 
electricity in fuel cells, or be mixed with natural gas to produce a low- 
carbon  fuel  blend  for  heat  and  power  generation  [86].  Production  of 
green hydrogen is a rapidly growing application of electrolysers [204], 
as there are active plans for the partial and eventually total replacement 
of  natural  gas  with  hydrogen  [86].  Often  electrolysers  consume  the 
surplus  of  the  renewable  power  to  produce  hydrogen  as  a  means  of 
resolving  the  inherent  intermittency  issue  of  the  renewables.  In  this 
context, electrolysers are effectively energy storage devices that store 
electricity  in  the  form  of  an  energetic  molecule  (hydrogen)  [150].  It 
follows  that  the  performance  of  electrolysers  directly  affects  the  effi-
ciency of the energy storage and is therefore of high significance. 

The operating parameters of electrolysers including temperature and 
pressure vary from one type to another. Polymer electrolyte membrane 
and alkaline electrolysers operate at moderate temperatures lower than 
353 K and 493 K, respectively. However, the solid oxide electrolysers 
operate at higher temperatures, larger than 873 K. The key operating 
parameters and efficiencies for all types of electrolysers are summarized 
in Table 5. 

3.1. Basic thermodynamics of water and carbon dioxide electrolysis 

Both carbon dioxide and water electrolysis are highly endothermic 
processes  and  require  3.50  and  3.07  kWh  of  heat  per  Nm3  of  carbon 
dioxide and hydrogen, respectively, at 1023 K. 

H2O→H2 +

(cid:0)

1
2

O2

ΔH1023 K = 248.1 kJmol(cid:0) 1

)

CO2→CO +

1
O2 (ΔH1023 K = 282.5 kJmol(cid:0) 1
2

(10)  

(11) 

The enthalpy of these reactions is quite weakly temperature depen-

dent. According to Gibbs relation 

ΔH = ΔG + T × ΔS,

(12)  

where ΔG is the Gibbs free energy change that should be supplied in the 
form of electrical energy. The entropic part, T × ΔS, should be provided 
as  thermal  energy  (Bøgild  [34]).  ΔS  has  a  positive  value  for  both  re-
actions emphasizing the fact that the reactions do not occur spontane-
ously. Fig. 28 displays the energy demands for water and carbon dioxide 
electrolysis. Evidently, the electrical energy demand or ΔG decreases as 
the temperature increases. For example, at a temperature of 353 K, ΔG is 
93% of ΔH. However, at a temperature of 1023 K, it drops to 77% of ΔH 
(Bøgild  [34]).  The  required  heat  in  electrolysers  can  be  supplied  by 
external sources, including nuclear reactors, solar thermal systems, and 
exothermic  chemical  reactions  in  stacks  of  SOECs.  In  addition,  in  a 
simple process, heat is supplied by Joule heating due to the loss mech-
anisms in the stacks of electrolyser. These loss mechanisms are normally 
lumped together in the so-called ‘area specific resistance’, ASR, which 
consists  of  ohmic  resistances  and  activation  over-potentials  at  both 
anode  and  cathode.  The  activation  over-potentials  include  two  parts: 
over-potential of kinetic activation energy and over-potential by mass 
transport  limitation  (Bøgild  [34]).  As  shown  in  Fig.  32,  at  high  tem-
peratures,  a  considerable  part  of  the  heat  needed  for  the  electrolysis 
process is supplied by the system itself [137]. This provides an oppor-
tunity to utilize the heat inevitably generated by the passage of electrical 
current  through  the  cells,  and  to  reduce  the  overall  electricity  con-
sumption and cost of hydrogen generation. In fact, part of the energy 
required for the dissociation of water is now supplied in the form of heat. 
As  a  result,  from  the  thermodynamics  viewpoint,  electrolysis  can  be 
enhanced by operating at higher temperatures [137]. 

There  are  high  temperature-PEMEs,  operating  at  about  433  K.  In 
comparison with low temperature-PEMEs, the electrical energy demand 
of  the  high  temperature-PEMEs  is  smaller  as  a  portion  of  the  energy 
input  is  in  the  form  of  heat.  This  makes  high  temperature-PEMEs 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096625S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 5 
The main type of electrolysers with their characteristics and common operating conditions [103, 168, 199].  

Electrolysers  Working 

Working pressure 

Cathode gas 

Electrolyte/ membrane 

Anode gas 

temperature 

PEM 

313 K to 323 K 

Lower than 30 bar  Hydrogen 

Alkaline 

338 K to 493 K 

Lower than 30 bar  Hydrogen, 

steam 

Solid Oxide 

873 K to 1273 K 

Lower than 10 bar  Hydrogen, 

steam 

Hydrogen generation 
Efficiency 

/Polymer Electrolyte 

+
Nafion® H
Membrane 
OH

(cid:0)

/KOH Electrolyte 

O2(cid:0)

/ZrO2, La0.5Sr0.2Ga0.5Mg0.2O3 

Oxygen, 
water 
Oxygen, 
water 
Oxygen 

50 to 70% 

65 to 75% 

70 to 90%  

Fig. 32. Energy demands for water and carbon dioxide electrolysis at high temperature [137].  

suitable for utilization of industrial waste heat. SOEs often operate at 
around 1073 K and therefore require very high-grade waste heat that 
limits their application for waste heat utilization [141]. The capability of 
high temperature-PEMEs to use a wider range of waste heat, has turned 
them  into  a  promising  technology  for  hydrogen  generation.  This  is 
particularly the case, when they are driven by nuclear, wind or solar 
power [141]. 

3.2. Electrical, transport, and reaction resistances in electrolysers 

The efficiency of electrolysers depends strongly on their resistances. 
Generally,  the  resistances  in  electrolysers  could  be  categorized  into 
three groups related to electrical, transport, and reactions. Electrical and 
transport resistances lead to heat production based on Joule’s law and 
transport phenomena. Energy losses due to these resistances are known 
as the Ohmic losses [31, 215]. 

3.2.1. Electrical resistance 

In  electrolysers,  the  electrical  resistance is  directly  responsible  for 
heat  generation  that  results  in  the  dissipation  of  electrical  energy  to 
heat.  Electrical  resistance  in  a  water  electrolysis  module  features  the 
following three basic parts [325]:  

• The resistance within the system circuit.  
• The  mass  transfer  phenomenon  such  as  ions  exchange  in  the 

electrolyte.  

• The  gas  bubbles,  which  cover  the  surface  of  the  electrode  and 

diaphragms. 

With the progress of the electrolysis, O2  and H2  bubbles appear on 
the  surfaces  of  the  anode  and  cathode,  respectively.  These  bubbles 
detach  from  the  surfaces  when  they  are  big  enough.  Coverage  of  the 
electrode surface by the gas bubble can directly increase the electrical 
resistances of the whole module. This is by reducing the connection of 

the electrolyte and the electrodes, preventing the electron transport, and 
boosting the ohmic losses of the whole module. It should be noted that 
the resistances of electrodes and connection circuit are specified by the 
types  and  sizes  of  the  materials,  manufacturing  techniques,  and  the 
conductivity of the individual components [325]. 

3.2.2. Transport resistance 

Convective transport has a critical role in the transfer of ions, heat 
wastage,  temperature  distribution,  and  characteristics  of  gas  bubbles 
within the electrolyte. Viscosity of the fluid and flow fields around the 
electrolyte dominates the ion transfer process, temperature distributions 
and  the  bubble  size.  Further,  detachment  of  bubbles  and  increasing 
velocity affect the current and potential distributions in the cells. With 
the progress of the electrolysis, electrolyte concentration increases and 
fluid viscosity rises [325]. 

3.2.3. Electrochemical reaction resistance 

In  anodes  and  cathodes,  the  reaction  resistance  results  from  over-
potentials  required  to  overcome  the  activation  energies  of  electrons 
forming on the surface of oxygen and hydrogen. This leads to an increase 
in the overall potential of the cell. These are the intrinsic energy barri-
cades  of  the  reactions,  which  determine  the  kinetics  of  the  electro-
chemical  reactions  [25].  Reaction  resistance  or  overpotential  is  the 
intrinsic resistance of the electrochemical reaction related to the surface 
activity of the electrodes [182]. Clearly, the strategies in any effort to 
enhance the energy efficiency of electrolysers should involve minimi-
zation of these resistances. 

3.3. Temperature effects on the efficiency of electrolysers 

Temperature  strongly  influences  the  efficiency  of  the  electrolysis 
cells. Electrolysis is more efficient at higher temperatures [209]. Ther-
modynamics of a water molecule indicate that as temperature increases, 
the  splitting  reaction  potentials  decline.  Further,  ionic  conductivities 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096626S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

and  surface  reactions  of  electrolytes  increase  at  higher  temperatures 
[283]. Water electrolysis at higher temperatures requires less energy to 
the 
achieve  any  given  current  density  as  compared  with 
low-temperature electrolytic processes [33, 269]. 

Hence, the theoretically rapid adaption to electrical load in electrolysers 
is strongly limited by inertial thermal adaptation of the cells and stacks 
[45].  It  is,  therefore,  essential  to  develop  temperature  management 
strategies to combine electrolysers and electric power sources. 

Alkaline  water  electrolysis  [325],  solid  oxide  electrolysis  [208], 
microbial  electrolysis  cells  [144],  and  polymer  electrolyte  membrane 
water  electrolysis  [98]  are  the  existing  electrolysis  technologies  for 
hydrogen generation. Fig. 33 displays the effects of temperature on the 
cell potentials to generate hydrogen by water electrolysis [33, 288]. The 
map of cell potential temperature consists of three areas, separated by 
equilibrium voltage and thermo-neutral voltage lines. The equilibrium 
voltage represents the theoretically lowest potential that is needed for 
dissociation of water by electrolysis. The equilibrium voltage drops as 
the temperature increases. The thermo-neutral voltage is the real lowest 
voltage, which should be applied to the electrolysis cells. Above this line 
the  electrolysis  is  exothermic  and  below  that,  it  is  endothermic.  The 
thermo-neutral voltage consists of the over potential of the electrodes 
that are weakly related to temperature. As a result, the thermo-neutral 
voltage  only  increases  slightly  with  temperature.  In  Fig.  33,  if  water 
electrolysis occurs in the shaded area, the reaction is endothermic [325]. 
In a numerical study, Kai et al. [145] investigated the influence of 
temperature  on  the  performance  of  polymer  electrolyte  membrane 
water electrolysers (PEMWE). It was found that operation at high tem-
peratures, particularly at those higher than the saturation temperature, 
reduces the saturated liquid leading to shortage of water and an increase 
in  the  over-voltages.  Boosting  the  temperature  with  pressurization 
monotonically decreases the anode activation overvoltage. For example, 
increasing the temperature in the range of 373 K to 393 K and boosting 
the pressure in the range of 0.13 MPa to 0.22 MPa leads to decrease in 
the electrolysis voltage from 1.57 V to 1.51 V. It should be noted that 
operation at high temperatures can improve the economy of PEMWEs. 
Increasing  the  operational  temperatures  activates  electrochemical  re-
actions in PEMWEs and reduces the electrolysis voltage, facilitating high 
current density with a smaller electrode area [311]. 

3.4. Thermal management of electrolysers 

Coupling of electrolyser with electricity sources implies large load 
gradients  and  changes  in  the  rates  of  internal  heat  generation/con-
sumption, leading  to changes in the temperature profiles of the stack 
[75].  This  causes  thermal  stress  in  the  ceramic  cell  and  induces 
micro-cracking  with  a  subsequent  decrease  in  the  cell  lifetime  [75]. 

3.4.1. Low temperature electrolysers and their thermal management 

Low temperature electrolysers, such as PEMs and alkaline electro-
lysers,  require  constant  cooling  to  keep  the  stack  within  a  desirable 
temperature range under all feasible conditions. Temperature in small- 
scale electrolysers is usually controlled externally, while the tempera-
ture  of  large-scale  electrolysers  designed  for  industrial  applications 
should  be  internally  managed.  This  is  because  of  the  extensive  cell 
surface area (about 1000 cm2) in industrial electrolysers compared to 
that of small-scale electrolysers (lower than 100 cm2) [278]. 

In  this  review,  among  low  temperature  electrolysers,  it  is  mainly 
focused on PEM electrolysers. It is expected that PEM electrolysers will 
continue to operate at a higher current density in the near future than 
alkaline technology. The latter, however, has remained stagnant. Hav-
ing a high current density also indicates heat accumulation, which im-
plies that there is more load on the cooling system. Therefore, current 
density is a critical parameter in the analysis of low temperature elec-
trolysers  where cooling  and heat  recovery happen.  It is  shown that a 
cooling  solution  for  PEM  electrolysers  may  be  easier  to  adapt  to  an 
alkaline electrolyser than the other way around [278]. 

Usually,  two  techniques  are  employed  for  internal  thermal  man-
agement of electrolysers. The temperature of electrolysers can be either 
controlled by the surplus of process water or by the cooling fluid running 
in a separate circuit. A combination of the two methods is also feasible 
and  is  useful  for  sharing  the  load  when  cooling  is  the  sole  purpose. 
Nonetheless,  for  reusing  the  heat  in  other  processes,  it  is  essential  to 
control the heat in closed circuits. Thus, in this case, it is better to use 
only one technique [278]. 

3.4.1.1. Surplus flow of the process water. The main benefit of control-
ling the temperature with the surplus of process water is the consider-
able rate of heat transfer between cell and water. In this case, the current 
collectors and electrodes are perforated to retain the membrane moist 
and  to  enhance  reaction  kinetics  by  providing  a  large  contact  area. 
Accordingly,  this  method  offers  the  advantage  of  highly  efficient 
transport of heat. The major drawback is the risk of pollution. A system 
cooled by process water would need large circulations of demineralized 
water.  Consider  a  system  fully  relying  on  process  water  cooling.  The 

Fig. 33. The effects of temperature on the cell potentials for generation of hydrogen by water electrolysis [325].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096627S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

following equation shows the molar-based flow of cooling water needed 
for each mole of water consumed [286]: 

σH2O =

2F
MH2OCP,H2OΔT

(Ucell (cid:0) Utn)

(13)  

where MH2O  and CP,H2O  are the molar mass and specific heat of water, 
respectively. ΔT denotes the desired temperature difference between the 
inlet and outlet. Further, Ucell and Utn demonstrate the cell voltage and 
the thermoneutral voltage under the operating conditions, respectively. 
The flow rate has an inverse relation with the temperature difference, 
ΔT, between the outlet and inlet of the cells of electrolyser. There exist a 
few reasons for minimization of ΔT. Villagra and Mille [286] reported 
that the degradation and aging rate increase with increasing tempera-
ture gradients across the cells. In addition, several cell characteristics 
such  as  activation  overpotential  or  ohmic  resistance  are  temperature 
dependent.  Hence,  strong  temperature  gradients  within  the  cells 
(ΔT>10 K) lead to heterogeneous loading of the cell, which adversely 
affects  the  efficiency.  As  an  example,  ΔT=10  K  for  the  electrolyser 
operating  at  the  cell  voltage  of  Ucell  = 1.9v  leads  to  a  feed  factor  of 
σH2O ∼ 105. This means that for each mole of water used by the cells, 
105 mol of cooling water is required. In addition to the possible issues 
concerning pressure drop, a large feed factor intensifies the hazard of 
pollution. From the process water leaving the electrolyser, heat can be 
captured  prior  to  recycling  it  back  into  the  cell.  On  average,  a  water 
molecule  is  circulated  105  times  before  splitting  into  oxygen  and 
hydrogen. It is, finally, noted that this cooling method might introduce 
major practical difficulties, as demineralized water is a powerful solvent 
for many materials used in the system. 

3.4.1.2. Separate  cooling  circuit. There are no pollution concerns with 
the separate cooling systems. This cooling method stretches the range of 
design parameters because it does not interfere directly with the cells. 
However, some extra ducts are required for cooling of the fluid some-
where in the stack. This type of ducts can be placed in the bipolar plates 
separating  the  cells.  However,  since  electrolysers  are  already  quite 
compact,  there  is  a  limited  space  for  cooling  ducts.  This  renders  the 
separate  cooling  circuits  more  applicable  to  fuel  cells  [278].  Two 
structured thin plates are combined into a bipolar plate to manufacture 
ducts  for  distribution  of  the  flow  over  the  outer  surface  and  internal 
cooling ducts (See Fig. 34). 

3.4.1.3. Bipolar  plates  and  channels. There  exist  several  methods  for 
designing  an  integrated  cooling  system  for  electrolysers.  Firstly,  the 
plates are connected to the cells inside the stack in series to ensure that 
the cooling ducts inside the plate do not occupy a large volume. This 
causes  an  increase  in  the  ohmic  resistance  of  the  bipolar  plates  and 
hence, the stack efficiency drops. In addition, the flow distribution of the 
process water and produced gases are managed by the bipolar plates. 
The precise shape of the ducts for distribution of the flow is distinctive 
for each electrolyser and is directly related to the design factors such as 
size of the system, operating temperature, number of cells, cathode and 
anode pressures and the load range. The design details for the cooling 
networks  are  protected  by  the  designers  and  a  standard  large-scale 
design can be hardly found in open literature. Tiktak [278] designed a 
cooling  system  for  the  medium  to  large-scale  polymer  electrolyte 
membrane based electrolysers. Fig. 35 shows the schematic view of the 
proposed cooling system. The thickness of each substrate and the size of 
the ducts were selected according to the data available in the literature 
[167, 185]. 

3.4.2. High temperature electrolysers and their thermal management 

High  temperature  electrolysers  operate  at  the  temperature  in  the 
range of 500 and 900 
C [85]. In general, the performance of electro-
lysers can be enhanced by operating at high temperature. This reduces 
the  electricity  consumption  but  demands  a  heat  input  and  calls  for 

◦

Fig.  34. Simple  manufacturing  for  bipolar  plates  equipped  with  ducts  for 
cooling and distribution of flow in the cathode and the anode chamber [227]. 

recovering of the waste heat from the products of electrolysis. As dis-
cussed  earlier,  some  of  the  energy  needed  for  water  splitting  can  be 
supplied  by  heat  instead  of  electricity,  thus  decreasing  the  overall 
electrical  energy  consumption.  Heat  can  be  supplied  by  coupling  the 
electrolyser with high temperature reactors or renewable sources of heat 
such  as  geothermal  energy.  Provision  of  heat  to  electrolysis  by  a 
geothermal  source  is  often  much  more  economic  than  that  by  high 
temperature  reactors  [186].  Nonetheless,  operation  at  high  tempera-
tures adversely affects the materials durability owing to micro-structural 
defects, thermal stresses and chromium migration. 

Based  on  the  energy  balance  at  the  electrolyser  level,  there  exist 
three  operational  modes  for  high  temperature  electrolysers.  These 
include  endothermal,  isothermal,  and  exothermal  modes.  Under  the 
endothermal mode, the steam temperature drops from the input of the 
electrolyser to the output. This mode offers the best energy efficiency yet 
features  the  highest  generation  cost  as  endothermal  electrolysers  are 
much  more  expensive  than  exothermal  ones.  Under  the  isothermal 
mode, the steam temperatures the input and output are the same. The 
energy efficiency is superior to that of the exothermal mode. However, 
the electrolyser cost is so high that outweighs the improved efficiency 
[186]. Finally, under the exothermal mode, the steam temperature in-
creases from the input to the output of the electrolyser. This mode has 
the  poorest  energy  efficiency  amongst  all  categories,  but  offers  the 
cheapest generation as its investment costs are the lowest of the three 
categories [260]. Central to improving the efficiency of high tempera-
ture electrolysers is the recuperation of heat at the system outlet by heat 
exchangers.  Stainless  steel  heat  exchangers  can  be  used  at  medium 
◦
temperatures (<650 
C), while nickel based heat exchangers are suitable 
for  high  temperatures  (between  650 
C).  Finally,  ceramic 
◦
based heat exchangers can be used for very high temperatures (>850 
C) 
[260]. 

C  to  850 

◦

◦

The  electrolysis  reaction  itself  is  an  endothermic  reaction  [222]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096628S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 35. Cross-sectional view of the cooling ducts between two-membrane electrode assembly [278].  

Therefore, if the supply of electricity is insufficient to meet the energy 
requirements,  the  electrolytic  process  will  draw  heat  from  the  gases 
passing through the cells leading to a temperature drop in the chamber. 
This manifests the endothermic mode of operation [222]. Solutions have 
been developed for operation of high-temperature electrolysers under 
endothermic  mode.  For  instance,  Laurencin  et  al.  [166]  introduced  a 
technique in which energy is stored during the exothermic mode and 
consumed during the endothermic mode of operation in the electrolyser. 
The duration of exothermic and endothermic modes is determined by 
the operator. 

There is currently a rapidly growing interest in using the surplus of 
renewable power (chiefly from wind and photovoltaic) for electrolysis of 
water and production of hydrogen [52, 169, 239]. However, renewable 
electricity  sources  are  usually  intermittent,  which  do  not  allow  for 
steady  operation  of  electrolysers.  In  addition,  electrolysers  comprise 
some elements that are highly sensitive to thermal gradients. As a result, 
any strong temperature variation in the electrolyser can lead to deteri-
oration and failure of these elements. When electrolysis energy is sup-
plied by intermittent renewable power, encountering an energy deficit is 
quite likely. The electrolytic process then draws the missing energy from 
the  environment  where  it  takes  developing  a  thermal  gradient  in  the 
enclosure.  [222].  Such  thermal  gradients  can  reach  about  50  K/cm 
[222] 

Perret [221] developed a technique to manage the thermal gradient 
in the cell stacks constituting the electrolysers at higher temperatures. In 
their  design,  the  water  vapor  is  circulated  in  the  cell  stacks  by  inde-
pendent  channels  for  homogenization  of  the  temperature  before 
directing  it  towards  the  cathodes.  Under  the  exothermic  mode,  the 
surplus  of  heat  can  be  transferred  from  the  cell  by  circulation  of  a 
relatively  cooler  water  vapor.  Vapor  circulation,  yet  with  relatively 
higher  temperature  than  the  call,  can  be  utilized  to  supply  the  heat 
deficit  under  the  endothermic  mode.  Clearly,  availability  of  a  high 
temperature steam is a prerequisite of this technique. Yet, it features a 
drawback of requiring a flow circuit throughout the electrolyser making 
it architecturally complex. [21] put forward a thermal control strategy 
for electrolyser adoptable to both endothermic and exothermic modes. 
This included measuring the cell temperature and altering the applied 
voltage to the cell correspondingly such that the temperature remains 
within  a  certain  range.  When  the  cell  temperature  was  below  a  pre-
determined upper temperature threshold, the controller decreased the 
operational voltage to a value lower than the thermoneutral voltage of 

the  electrolyser.  However,  when  the  cell  temperature  falls  below  a 
lower  temperature,  the  operational  voltage  was 
predetermined 
increased to a value larger than the thermoneutral voltage. 

A control strategy was proposed by Colombo [62] to manage the cell 
temperature during the dynamic operation of a high temperature SOEC. 
In their study, temperature was controlled by manipulating the air flow 
rate at the anode side. Here, the air flow was, first, used to remove the 
oxygen generated by the electrolysis process. This method is suitable for 
production of hydrogen, not oxygen, as separating oxygen and nitrogen 
in air is an energy intensive process. Second, it provided active cooling 
or heating for the stack. Two different strategies, including constant PEN 
(Positive  electrode-  electrolyte-  negative  electrode)  average  tempera-
ture strategy and constant air inlet temperature strategy, were imple-
mented as Proportional Integral (PI) feedback controls for the system 
response to fluctuations in input power (see Fig. 35). The first strategy 
aims to hold the mean operating temperature of the cell at 750 
C. The 
◦
C, 
maximum  and  minimum  cell  temperatures  are  766 
respectively. In this strategy, the controller reacts to temperature change 
by manipulating the inlet air flow. Power consumption of the blower and 
air inlet temperature are regulated to manipulate the inlet air flow. The 
first control strategy is displayed in Fig. 36a. The second control strategy 
maintains the air inlet temperature and volumetric flow constant under 
different ranges of the operating conditions. Here, the cell mean tem-
perature is varied between a maximum and a minimum values. When 
the difference between air inlet and outlet temperatures reaches one of 
the set points, the air flow increases to cool or heat the cell and maintain 
the  cell  operating  temperature  within  the  required  safety  range.  This 
control strategy is disclosed in Fig. 36b. 

C  and  733 

◦

◦

For  the  SOECs  operating  in  the  endothermic  mode,  there  are  two 
procedures to control their thermal gradients. These include (i) heating 
by recovery of the stored thermal energy under the exothermic mode, 
(ii) using the thermal energy of high-temperature fluids inside the stack. 
Petipas et al. [223] used airflow regulation for the thermal management 
of SOECs (see Fig. 37). Their system had two units, including SOEC and 
Balance of Plant (BoP). At the SOEC inlet, steam at 1073 K was supplied 
and a conversion of vapor to hydrogen with the fixed rate of 75% was 
achieved,  indicating  that  the  flow  of  vapor  was  proportional  to  the 
supplied power. The produced gases at the cathode were a mixture of 
vapor (25%) and hydrogen (75%), while those at the anode included a 
mixture of air sweep and oxygen. To restrict the temperature gradients 
within the cell to 10 K/cm, the exit temperature varied in the range of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096629S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 36. The control strategies applied to the cell temperature during the dynamic operation of high temperature SOEC [62].  

Fig. 37. Schematic view of the SOEC considered by Petipas et al. [223].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096630S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

973 K to 1173 K setting the lowest power of SOEC unit to 0.633 MW 
(endothermic mode) and the largest power of 1.101 MW (exothermic 
mode).  BoP  had  different  components,  including  compressor,  heat 
exchanger, pump and heater. The gases at the outlet were cooled by the 
inlet water using a heat exchanger. Temperature of the gases exiting the 
SOEC unit dropped from 1073 to 373 K and 30% of the unreacted vapor 
was condensed. Further decrease in this temperature from 373 K to 298 
K was achieved by pumping the cooling water. The produced hydrogen 
was subsequently compressed and cooled down to 3000 kPa and 298 K, 
respectively. Also, part of the recovered heat was used for heating up the 
inlet gases. Liquid water entered BoP with the temperature of 288 K and 
the heat recovered from the outlet gases and hydrogen compression was 
used  to  vaporize  80–95%  of  that.  An  electrical  heater  ensured  more 
vaporization and a temperature rise from 373 K to 1073 K. It was shown 
that, in endothermic mode, employing air flow could reduce the thermal 
gradients throughout the cell from (cid:0) 3.25 K/cm to (cid:0) 1 K/cm. A stronger 
drop from 4.55 K/cm to 1.55 K/cm was reported in exothermic mode. 
The flow rate of air should be regulated in accordance with the thermal 
requirements of the electrolyser and for efficiency enhancement. 

3.4.3. Reversible solid oxide cells 

The reversible solid oxide cells, RSOCs, are single devices, which can 
act as SOFC and SOEC [109]. Under SOFC mode, it produces electricity 
and heat by establishing an electrochemical reaction between air and a 
fuel such as H2, natural gas, hydrocarbons or syngas at high tempera-
tures in the range of 1023 K to 1173 K [190]. Under SOEC mode coupled 
with a power source, they generate chemical energy by electrolysis of 
H2O, CO2  or H2O+ CO2  [6, 109]. The working temperature of RSOCs 
varies in the range of 923 and 1270 K. This temperature range permits 
the use of only solid substrates, reaching a good conductivity through 
solid state diffusion mechanisms [6]. Ceramic materials generally show 
good stability and conductivity at high temperatures and therefore, it is 
(cid:0) 1  by 
possible to achieve a target electrolyte resistance of 0.01 Ω(cid:0) 1cm
using these materials. Fig. 38 displays the voltage-current characteristic 
for  RSOCs.  In  this  figure,  the  current  is  negative  under  SOEC  mode, 
while it is positive under SOFC mode. The cell voltage under each mode 
of  operation  can  be  calculated  as  a  deviation  from  the  open  circuit 
voltage by a current-dependent overpotential, η [59]: 

VSOFC = EN (cid:0) η

VSOEC = EN + η

(14)  

(15) 

In  practice,  RSOCs  are  not  strictly  isothermal  because  of  the  tem-
perature gradients associated with spatially varying driving potentials 
related to heat transfer, charge transfer, species transport, and in-situ 
reforming  reactions.  In  this  context,  thermoneutral  voltage  is  defined 
as the cell voltage that leads to equal gas temperature at the inlet and 
outlet of the cells [149]. 

3.4.3.1. Thermal  management  of  reversible  solid  oxide  cells. Thermal 
management is an essential requirement for RSOCs. In the SOFC mode, 
the reactor is strongly exothermic, while operation under SOEC mode 
makes  it  highly  endothermic  [246].  Several  techniques  are  used  for 
thermal management of RSOCs. Bierschenk et al. [30] proposed the solid 
oxide  cell,  SOC,  storage  chemistry  where  the  fuel  cycles  between 
water–carbon  dioxide-rich  and  methane–hydrogen-rich  gases.  Fig.  39 
shows  the  schematic  diagram  of  the  RSOC  considered  by  Bierschenk 
et  al.  [30].  The  electrical  energy  can  be  stored  as  the  water–carbon 
dioxide-rich  mixture  is  electrolyzed  (dashed  arrows),  while  the  elec-
tricity  is  generated  (solid  arrows)  in  SOFC  mode  using  the  resulting 
methane–hydrogen-rich fuel. Pure oxygen is produced during electrol-
ysis and is stored for use during fuel-cell operation. The unique feature 
of this method is formation of methane during the electrolysis, a less 
endothermic  process  than  the  usual  hydrogen  or  carbon  monoxide 
forming  reactions,  enabling  enhancement  of  efficiency.  Note  that  in 
SOEC  mode,  the  energy is  stored  in a  fuel,  and  then under the  SOFC 
mode, energy of this fuel is partially converted back to electricity. The 
efficiency  is  defined  here  as  the  ratio  of  energy  supplied  during  dis-
charging to energy consumed during charging. Bierschenk et al. found 
that a thermal balance could be achieved by coupling the exothermic 
methanation reaction, with the endothermic electrolysis reaction in the 
SOC  reactor.  Through  utilizing  this  technique,  the  thermo-neutral  or 
even exothermic operation of SOC reactor under the SOEC mode could 
be attained. A similar strategy for thermal management has been used in 
more recent studies [138, 149, 300]. Nonetheless, this technique faces 
some challenges. Thermodynamically,  most applicable exothermic re-
actions,  including  methanation,  need  a  combination  of  low  reaction 
◦
C and/or high pressure of about 
temperature in the range of 400 to 650 
30  bar.  As  a  result,  one  needs  to  develop  a  SOC  reactor  with  small 
electrochemical  loss  at  that  reaction  temperature  while  operating  at 
high  pressure.  Low  and  intermediate  temperatures  SOC  reactors  are 
currently under construction and in the developing phase [246]. 

Santhanam  et  al.  [246]  developed  a  novel  technique  for  thermal 
management  of  RSOCs.  Fig.  40  shows  the  schematics  of  the  process 
proposed  by  Santhanam  et  al.  [246]  under  SOFC  and  SOEC  modes. 
Integration  of heat storage  with RSOC  helps store the  heat generated 
during  the  exothermic  operation  of  RSOC.  The  stored  heat  can  be, 
subsequently,  employed  during  the  endothermic  operation  of  RSOC 
(SOEC  mode)  or  to  supply  thermal  energy  for  other  interlinked  pro-
cesses. The integration of high-temperature heat sources is suitable for 
endothermic  electrolysis  operation,  enabling  higher  roundtrip  effi-
ciencies [41, 212]. In the future, one can envisage a heat storage inte-
grated RSOC energy system in industrial and chemical processes where 
high temperature heat is utilized or generated [1, 38, 119]. 

RSOCs can be a cost effective technology for electrical energy storage 
with  a  good  roundtrip  efficiency,  more  than  70%,  and  higher  energy 
density  as  compared  with  batteries  [331].  They  feature  two  distinct 
modes  of  fuel  generation  (electrolysis  mode)  and  power  generation, 

Fig. 38. Representative voltage-current characteristic of RSOC [59].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096631S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 39. Schematic diagram of the RSOC considered by Bierschenk et al. [30].  

low 

temperature  conditions.  This  means 

(fuel cell mode,) can be observed. A stand-alone energy storage system is 
realized from this technology as these two operating modes are coupled 
with intermediate storage of reactants and products. An essential char-
acteristic  of  RSOCs  that  enables  high  roundtrip  efficiency  is  the  pro-
duction  of  methane  in  electrolysis  mode  for  offsetting  the  typically 
endothermic  conversion  process.  Methanation  is  promoted  by  high 
pressure  and 
that 
intermediate-temperature RSOCs with the operating temperatures lower 
◦
than 700 
C are important for a good performance [299]. The roundtrip 
efficiency of RSOCs, used as electric energy storage, can be improved by 
a  suitable  thermal  management  strategy.  Different  thermal  behaviors 
during SOFC and SOEC modes can induce thermal stress, which damages 
the cells. [72] proposed a novel thermal management strategy for the 
RSOC  used  as  an  electricity  storage  system.  They  stored  the  heat 
generated under SOFC mode as latent and sensible heat in a PCM and 
high  density  and  high specific  heat material,  respectively.  The stored 
thermal  energy  could  be  employed  during  the  electrolysis  operation. 
Heat was stored directly inside the stack employing sensible heat storage 
for a small size electrical energy storage plant or a PCM thermal storage 
for the large size one. They used aluminum oxide as the ceramic material 
and the eutectic metal alloy with good thermal conductivity and small 
volume changes as the PCM. A schematic view of their stack configu-
ration is shown in Fig. 41. The thermal storage material was placed near 
the  stack,  and 
thermal  resistance, 
micro-channels were employed, rendering higher heat transfer rates and 
lower thermal gradients. It should be pointed out that due to the high 
operating  temperatures  of  RSOCs,  the  stack  requires  heating  when 
performing electrolysis. This heat can be stored when the cell generates 
electricity leading to increases in the roundtrip efficiency. It should be 
noted  that  the  resultant  thermal  stress  under  SOFC  and  SOEC  modes 
could damage the cells [72]. 

to  decrease 

the  contact 

Mottaghizadeh  et  al.  [197]  integrated  the  cascaded  latent  heat 
storage  module  with  suitable  PCMs  with  the  commercially  available 
RSOC.  A  downstream  process  like  methanation  was  also  used  in  the 
system for further enhancement of thermal management. This resulted 
in a fully thermally self-sustained process in the RSOC reactor. For this 
purpose,  the  heat  produced  during  the  SOFC  mode  was  stored  and 

utilized during the SOEC mode. It was found that employing PCMs could 
facilitate the thermal management of the system and eliminate the need 
for external heat sources. It should be noted that melting point of the 
employed PCM should be very close to the storage temperature of sys-
tem. Mottaghizadeh et al. [197] used LiF with the melting temperature 
◦
◦
C as the 
C and fluoride salt with the melting temperature of 749 
of 848 
PCM. 

In their recent work on RSOCs, Weng et al. [301] proposed a strategy 
for  reducing  the  cell  operating  temperature  by  porosity  control.  The 
performance of RSOCs is affected by the quality of anode. In general, the 
anode components in RSOCs should have a porosity to function properly 
[125]. The anode acts as a transport medium for the hydrogen oxidation 
process  and  serves  as  the  catalyst  in  the  electrochemical  process 
occurring inside the RSOCs [302]. Hence, it should have a permeable 
structure. Decreasing the cell operating temperature enables use of less 
costly materials for the cell fabrication. It was found that the operating 
temperature decreases from 800 
C as the cell porosity de-
creases from 40% to 30%. It should be noted that lower cell porosity 
results  in gas  starvation, while  it offers  high electronic/ionic conduc-
tivity. Weng et al. [301] also found that SOFC mode shows high sensi-
tivity  to  porosity  changes;  however,  SOEC  mode  is  more  sensitive  to 
temperature changes. Hence, porosity control is preferred for tempera-
ture reduction under the SOFC mode. 

C to 750 

◦

◦

Most  recently,  Mottaghizadeh  et  al.  [198]  employed  a  network  of 
heat  exchangers  to  control  SOFC  mode  of  RSOC.  In  their  design,  the 
SOFC  meets  the  building  electricity  requirement  and  heat  generated 
during its electrochemical reactions can be transferred to the SOEC for 
endothermic  operation  and  standby  demands.  It  was  shown  that  the 
mean  temperature  and  local  temperature  gradients  of  the  SOFC  and 
SOEC modes stay within the desired ranges. 

It should be pointed out that operating at or near the thermoneutral 
voltage can simplify the thermal management of the stack of RSOCs as 
no excess gas flow is needed and thermal stress in components is mini-
mum. Indeed, in the electrolyser mode, there is no demand of air flow for 
supporting the reactions. The pure oxygen resulting from electrolysis is 
often stored as a valuable commodity in large-scale electrolysis plants. 
However, there are reasons for employing a sweep gas on the oxygen 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096632S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 40. Schematic diagram of the process proposed by Santhanam et al. [246] in a) SOFC mode; b) SOEC mode.  

side.  First,  employing  a  sweep  gas  the  performance  does  not  reduce 
significantly  due  to  minor  leakage  of  hydrogen  from  the  hydrogen/ 
steam side to the oxygen side of the cell. Second, handling of pure ox-
ygen  at  high  temperatures  imposes  serious  materials  issues.  Lastly, 
employing  sweep  gas  on  the  oxygen  side  of  the  electrolyser  cell  de-
creases the partial pressure of oxygen and mean mole fraction. Thus, it 
reduces the open cell potential and makes the electrolysis process more 
efficient.  There  are  a  number  of  extra  thermodynamic  implications 
related  to  the  thermoneutral  voltage.  In  general,  operation  of 

electrolysers at or above the thermoneutral voltage eliminates the need 
for  high  temperature  electrolysis,  wherein  the  input  heat  provides  a 
fraction  of  the  total  energy  demand  [211].  To  operate  isothermally 
above thermoneutral voltage, heat rejection is required [211]. 

4. Supercapacitors 

In contrast to ordinary capacitors, supercapacitors utilize electrode 
materials with high surface area and thin dielectric materials to achieve 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096633S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

although  exhibiting  high  specific  power  because  of  the  significant 
electron mobility within the conductive plates, cannot deliver a large 
specific  energy  for  long-range  applications  [262].  Therefore,  super-
capacitors can fill the gap between the fuel cells, batteries and capacitors 
in  the  Ragone  plot.  A  supercapacitor  exhibits  much  bigger  specific 
power in comparison with the fuel cells and batteries and larger specific 
energy in comparison with the ordinary capacitors. 

4.1. Structure of supercapacitors 

The  general  architecture  of  a  supercapacitor  is  shown  in  Fig.  42. 
There  are  two  electrodes  in  a  supercapacitor,  with  a  separator  sand-
wiched between them. Symmetric cells have similar electrodes, while 
asymmetric cells can have different electrodes. The separator is wetted 
by electrolyte and is used to prevent the electrical connection between 
the  electrodes.  The  materials  usually  used  for  separators  are  ion- 
permeable to allow ionic charge transfer. At the same time, the mate-
rials should have high electrical resistance, high ionic conductance, and 
low  thickness  to  provide  the  maximum  performance.  In  most  cases, 
paper or polymer separators are employed together with organic elec-
trolytes, while ceramic or glass fiber separators are generally integrated 
with  aqueous  electrolytes  [257].  There  is  a  voltage  restriction  at  one 
electrode  due  to  the  electrolyte  breakdown  potential.  The  equivalent 
series resistance of the cells is highly related the electrolyte conductiv-
ity. Aqueous electrolyte has the breakdown voltage of about 1 V that is 
considerably  lower  than  that  accessible  with  an  organic  electrolyte 
(about  3  V).  However,  the  conductivity  of  an  aqueous  electrolyte  is 
higher than that of an organic electrolyte that can be suitable for high 
power devices. Aqueous electrolyte also has favorable features such as 
low costs and easy handling [110]. 

4.2. Effects of temperature on supercapacitors 

The operating  temperature  of  the  supercapacitors leaves  consider-
able effects on their components and performance characteristics. These 
effects are briefly reviewed in this section. 

4.2.1. Effects of temperature on electrolytes 

The temperature range of the electrolytes is normally between 233 
and 343 K. Temperature affects electrolyte thermophysical properties as 
follows.  

• Ionic  conductivity:  With  a  rise  in  temperature,  ions  move  more 

freely, increasing the ionic conductivity of electrolytes.  

• Viscosity:  The  viscosity  of  electrolytes  drops  as  the  temperature 
increases and has an inverse relation with the ionic conductivity as 
can be observed from Walden’s rule [322].  

• Diffusion  coefficient:  Increasing  ion  mobility  results  in  a  higher 

diffusion coefficient for electrolytes at higher temperatures. 

Temperature  also  affects  the  stability  of  electrolytes.  Beyond  the 
temperature  range  of  233  K  to  343  K,  the  ionic  conductivity  of  elec-
trolyte  considerably  drops  or  decomposition  in  electrolytes  occurs 
(releasing  toxic  gases),  causing  a  decay  in  the  electrochemical 
performance. 

4.2.2. Effects of temperature on separators 

Separators can be used for preventing direct contact between nega-
tive and positive electrodes, while allowing fast transportation of ionic 
charge carriers. For applications at higher temperatures, the mechanical 
strengths of separators are generally important and should endure the 
demanding operational environments. As decomposition temperatures 
are  approached,  separator  begins  to  shrink,  causing  short  circuiting 
between the electrodes and an eventual thermal runaway. Apart from 
high thermal stability, separators should have strong shutdown features. 
This  is  because  above  a  certain  temperature,  the  separator  melts  and 

Fig. 41. Stack configuration considered by [72].  

greater capacitance [315]. Supercapacitors can be employed indepen-
dently  or  in  a  combined  system  together  with  modern  batteries  to 
enhance  the  overall  performance  [68].  It  should  be  highlighted  that 
combining  a  supercapacitor  and  a  battery  allows  for  fast  release  of  a 
large amount of electrical energy, enlarging the specific power signifi-
(cid:0) 1)  [261].  Usually,  supercapacitors  provide  about 
cantly  (~104  W.kg
five times the specific power rendered by an ordinary lead-acid battery 
[68]. Thus, under large power conditions, such as high discharge rate, 
the supercapacitors provide larger values of specific energy as compared 
with lead-acid batteries. Further, a supercapacitor could be incorporated 
into a battery-based energy storage module for decoupling the power 
and energy specifications. This leads to size reduction and prolonging 
the lifetime of the entire energy storage module [110]. Supercapacitors 
are further used in the photovoltaic systems [27] as well as a number of 
portable electronic equipment. In addition, supercapacitors are usable 
as the primary source of energy with the advantage of quick recharging. 
Importantly, supercapacitors are usable over a wide range of tempera-
ture, 233 K to 358 K, while an ordinary battery is limited to a much 
narrower  range  of  temperature.  For  example,  lithium-ion  batteries 
operate between 263 K to 313 K [341]***. In contrast with batteries, the 
electrode materials employed in a supercapacitor do not undergo phase 
change or/and chemical reactions during charging/discharging cycles. 
Consequently,  supercapacitors  exhibit  a  very  high  cyclability  and  life 
span because of their inherent reversible mode of operation [156]. 

In general, fuel cells and batteries exhibit very large values of specific 
energy but with small specific powers. However, an ordinary capacitor 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096634S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 42. Architecture of a supercapacitor Gonz´alez et al. [110].  

transforms to a thin film, stopping the pathways of ionic conduction by 
elimination  of  pores  and  an  eventual  prevention  of  thermal  runaway 
[225]. In addition to thermal stability, performance indicators including 
capacitance,  ESR  and,  therefore,  power  densities  are  influenced  by 
porosity  of  the  separator  materials  and  their  thickness  at  excessive 
temperatures. When the temperatures is very low, i.e. <243 K, the ions 
mobility  decreases.  Under  this  condition,  porosity  of  the  separator 
membrane plays a critical role in the overall performance, particularly 
for a system with a more viscous electrolyte [309]. 

4.2.3. Effects of temperature on electrodes 

Electrode used in supercapacitors generally consists of active elec-
trode  material,  binder,  and  conducting  agent.  Thermal  stability  and 
thermal conductivity considerably affect the thermal performance of the 
supercapacitors, particularly at high temperatures. In this section, the 
thermal  conductivity  and  stability  of  the  materials  used  in  super-
capacitors electrodes are discussed. 

4.2.3.1. Active materials. It has been shown that the main contributor to 
the  thermal  resistance of  supercapacitors is  their  electrodes  [122].  In 
practice, many factors, including structures, morphologies, and testing 
conditions, affect thermal conductivity of the electrode used in super-
capacitors  even for the same materials. As a result,  it is  important to 
understand  the  thermal  characteristics  of  electrode  materials  when 
designing a supercapacitor [112]. Further, it should be mentioned that 
the thermal conductivities of the electrode with or without liquid elec-
trolyte  are  very  different.  In  general,  the  electrodes  can be  wetted  to 
efficiently dissipate heat in supercapacitors. Using electrodes with high 
porosity is usually not helpful for conduction of heat, while it contrib-
utes  to  the  storage  of  charge  over  the  surface  of  electrodes.  Higher 
pressures applied during manufacturing, enhance the thermal conduc-
tivity of the electrodes made of activated carbon [44]. At higher pres-
sure, a reduction in thermal resistance is gained as more carbon fibers 
are in contact with the current collector. It follows that these aspects 
should be considered when electrode materials are adopted with large 
pore volumes or low packing densities (e.g., nanofibers). For the purpose 

of electrode manufacturing and amongst transition metal oxides, MnO2 
offers a good thermal stability [229], while RuO2 coated electrodes have 
also shown favorable thermal stability [154]. During heating of RuO2 
electrodes,  capacitance  increases  due  to  enhanced  proton/electron 
transport. This could be because of an increase in the number of reaction 
sites,  or a decrease in  the active electrodes’  mass due  to dehydration 
[129].  Electrically  conductive  polymers,  including  polypyrrole  also 
have high thermal stability. It is worth mentioning that the electrodes’ 
thermal stability is determined by the employed materials as well as the 
binders. This is due to the fact that electrode materials and binder are 
usually in direct contact. The following section focuses on the thermal 
stabilization of binder. 

4.2.3.2. Binder. Electrode  thermal  characteristics  in  supercapacitors 
are significantly affected by binder thermal stability. Carbon black and 
activated  carbon  may  be  used  at  high  temperatures  without  experi-
encing  any  problems.  Binders  (usually  PVDF),  which  are  highly  inert 
and pure fluoropolymers, have a relatively low melting point of 450 K. 
As  a result, the  operating temperature range of  the electrodes can be 
limited by the melting temperatures of the binders. By carbonating the 
electrodes/binders at a higher temperature, greater than 873 K, under 
an inert atmosphere, the electrochemical performance of the electrodes 
may be improved [241]. This may be due to the constriction provided at 
the entrance of the porous lattice owing to the decomposition of binder 
and enhanced electrical conductivity [241]. Further, the binder mate-
rials also affect the thermal conductivity of the electrode. As an example, 
the  polymer  binders,  used  for  coating  of  carbon  nanotube  networks, 
form one or multiple conductive substrates with thickness in nanometer 
level that can improve the thermal conductivity of electrodes [183]. 

4.2.3.3. Current  collectors. Current  collector  materials  are  generally 
metal  foils  or  carbon  materials.  Current  collectors  have  high  thermal 
conductivity  and  stability,  so  their  use  in  low  or  high  temperature 
supercapacitors is not a problem [309]. Carbon current collectors with 
high conductivity and contiguous growth of petals over carbon fibers 
boost  the  transfer  of  charge  [29].  For  a  wide  range  of  temperatures, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096635S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

these  freestanding  carbon  electrodes  are  excellent  options  for  use  in 
flexible supercapacitors as active materials and current collectors. 

4.2.3.4. Lignin. Lignin can be used as the electrode material in super-
capacitors  [339]. In  general,  the  plentiful  oxygen  atoms  in  lignin  are 
advantageous to increase electrolyte ions adsorption and produce redox 
reactions for supercapacitors. Many oxygen atoms in lignin can be lost 
during  the  pyrolysis  at  large  values  of  temperatures.  As  a  result,  the 
optimum  carbonization and activation processes should be developed 
that  can  provide  lignin  derived  electrodes  with  high  degrees  of 
carbonization and proper amount of oxygen atoms [339]. Lignin can be 
also thermally degraded as the carbonization temperature is increased 
that leads to a decrease in yield [339]. 

4.2.4. Effect of temperature on self-discharge 

The supercapacitors charged to a specified value of voltage and held 
under the open-circuit conditions exhibit tendencies to experience loss 
of  voltage,  or  the  so  called  ‘self-discharge’.  The  Gibbs  free  energy  in 
charged supercapacitors is higher than that in discharged ones. This sets 
a  thermodynamic  force  for  discharging  the  open-circuit  conditions 
[210]. The rate of self-discharge is usually maximum at the early stages 
and  then  deteriorates  gradually  to  reach  the  steady-state  values.  The 
shelf  life  of  supercapacitors  is  dominated  by  the  self-discharge  rates. 
Self-discharge  rates  are  also  indicative  of  the  health  condition  of 
supercapacitors. Compared to the new ones, aged supercapacitors show 
considerably  higher  self-discharge  rates.  As  a  result,  self-discharge  is 
usually employed as a factor for quantifying aging in supercapacitors 
[73]. Operating temperatures of supercapacitors have considerable ef-
fects  on  the  rates  of  self-discharging.  At  high  temperatures,  the  ions 
mobility  is  enhanced  which  intensifies  of  the  current  leakage  and 
self-discharge rates [22]. 

4.3. Supercapacitors aging mechanisms in operation at high temperatures 

• Pressure evolution: Operation of supercapacitors at high tempera-
tures lead to thermal decomposition and electrochemical degrada-
tion of the electrolyte. This leads to the evolution of decomposition 
gases,  including  hydrogen,  carbon  monoxide,  and  other  organic 
byproducts. Pressure builds up because the gases are accumulated at 
the top of the electrolyte. Pressure rise is a critical safety issue that 
should be addressed through appropriate cell design [117]. Failure 
of  the  safety  valves  due  to  the  rise  of  internal  pressure  is  quite 
common  in  supercapacitors  [42].  Further,  diffusion  of  toxic  gases 
into  the  atmosphere  is  an  environmental  concern.  As  an  example, 
toxic  gas  evolution  has  been  reported  with  aqueous  electrolyte  in 
excess of 2 V [43].  

• Increase in pore resistance: Operation of supercapacitors at high 
temperatures speeds up the decomposition reactions on the interface 
between the electrolyte and electrode. The solid particles produced 
by reduction/oxidation of the carbon electrodes and electrolytes are 
deposited over the electrodes surfaces and block the pores. Hence, 
the  effective  surfaces  in  the  electrodes  decline  which  can  cause 
capacitance  reduction.  Bittner  et  al.  [32]  carried  out  porosimetry 
investigations on the aged electrode and found that obstruction of 
the pores that have sizes analogous to those of the solvated ions could 
lead to the reduction in capacitance.  

• Increase in ESR and Joule heating: Stronger Joule heating causes 
elevated  temperatures  that  further  accelerates  the  aging  process 
[35]. As a result, this could be considered a cyclic process.  

• Appearance of oxides: Oxidization in the current collector occurs at 
elevated temperatures that cause large contact resistances between 
the current collector and electrode. This, in turn, intensifies ESR as 
confirmed by EIS measurements [160].  

• Evaporation in electrolytes: The electrolyte may evaporate at high 
temperatures,  while  the  evaporation  rate  can  be  detected  through 

detecting  the  weight  loss.  As  an  example,  a  25%  weight  loss  was 
reported  in  the  supercapacitors  operating  at  3  V  and  343  K  for 
12,000 s [160]. 

• Overvoltage: In power cycling with constant current, if the capaci-
tance  declines  because  of  aging  at  higher  temperatures  while 
charging is unchanged, the voltage increases rapidly causing further 
aging [36]. 

4.4. Extreme-temperature performances 

There exists an increasing need for the design of power storage de-
vices that can operate at extreme temperatures with very limited or even 
no  thermal  management.  The  applications  include  space  avionics 
modules, electric and unmanned aircrafts, electric and hybrid vehicles. 
Extreme-temperature performances, in particular ESR and capacitance, 
are important for the use of supercapacitor in these applications. 

4.4.1. Extreme low-temperature performance 

At low-temperatures, energy storage modules with large powers are 
highly  demanded  for  electronic  systems,  cold-cranking  internal  com-
bustion engines, and hybrid vehicle. For some special applications, such 
as space-related electronics, these systems should operate well at 218 K 
or even lower. In these applications, the low-temperature energy storage 
modules  should  be  compact  and  have  a  simple  thermal  management 
system [172, 337]. 

4.4.2. Performance at extreme high-temperatures 

For specific applications, such as space, military and petroleum in-
dustry, performance  of  power supplies  at  high-temperatures  is  of  sig-
nificance. For example, the operating temperature of downhole drilling 
is  larger  than  393  K).  The  limiting  factor  for  the  high-temperature 
operation  of  supercapacitors  is  the  stability  of  the  electrolyte  [178]. 
Organic  electrolyte  employed  in  a  commercial  supercapacitor  is  not 
suitable  at  high temperatures  as  it  is  flammable  and  the  evolution  of 
toxic gases is also possible. Even in hybrid vehicles in which the working 
temperature exceeds 333 K, the supercapacitors with organic electrolyte 
struggle due to lower electrochemical stability of organic solvents. In 
addition,  the  high  vapor  pressure  of  acetonitrile  based  electrolyte  re-
quires an accurate and costly thermal management module. Ionic liquids 
can be usually employed in applications with higher temperatures due to 
their higher thermal stability and lower vapor pressure [19]. This causes 
thermal  reliability  by  intercepting  thermal  runaway  and  pressure 
build-up when the system operates at higher temperatures. Packaging is 
made easier by neat ionic liquid electrolytes due to the absence of any 
solvent at higher temperature. Ionic liquid electrolytes can be further 
enhanced by adding inorganic fillers, including clay, due to their supe-
rior  thermal  stability,  sorption  capacity,  active  surface  area,  and 
permeability [37]. The worst-case problem in a supercapacitor can be 
overcharging. Upon overcharging, the system usually builds up a pres-
sure until it is finally vented, leaking gases and electrolyte [131]. In this 
situation, the system should not supply current as the continuous current 
supply  after  venting  turns  the  capacitor  into  a  large  resistor  that  can 
generate a large amount of heat. Thermal runaways are not observed in 
a  supercapacitor  due  to  the  lack  of  self-propagating  chain  reactions 
[131]. The high temperature supercapacitors, with operating tempera-
ture in the range of 233 K to 358 K, high voltage of 5.5 V, and good 
reliability have been already commercialized [226]. 

4.5. Thermal management of supercapacitors 

4.5.1. Heat generation mechanism in supercapacitors 

Fig. 43 shows the equivalent circuit corresponding to heat transport 
in  supercapacitors.  In  general,  convection,  conduction  and  radiation 
heat transfer can be observed in a supercapacitor. Heat generated in the 
supercapacitor is transferred through conduction from the center of the 
supercapacitor  towards  the  external  wall  and  it  is  transferred  by 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096636S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 43. The supercapacitor equivalent circuit for heat transport [309].  

radiation  and  convection  from  the  external  wall  to  the  surrounding 
environment. 

Generation  of  heat  in  supercapacitors  occurs  through  two  mecha-
nisms:  an  irreversible  resistive  (Joule)  heating  and  a  reversible  heat 
variation. The irreversible Joule heating, qJoule, in supercapacitors can 
be expressed by [309]: 

considerable  effects  especially  at  the  extremes  and,  a  safe  operating 
temperature in the range of 233 K to 343 K is usually recommended by 
the supercapacitor manufacturers. The heat dissipated on the walls of 
supercapacitors should be maximized for preventing the cells from being 
overheated. The thermal dissipation improves as the surface-to-volume 
ratio increases [309]. 

The temperature distribution in supercapacitors is governed by the 

(16) 

following energy equation [111]: 

dqJoule
dt

= I2Rs

In Eq. (17), Rs and I are the equivalent series resistance and charging 
current, respectively. There are different resistances in supercapacitors, 
including  interfacial  resistance  between  the  current  collectors  and 
electrode, that of electrode material, diffusion and resistance of ions as 
they pass through the pores of electrode, the resistances of electrolyte 
and ions migrating throughout the separator [308]. 

In supercapacitors, the reversible generation of heat provided by the 
entropic  effect  can  occur  in  the  course  of  discharge/charge  process. 
Unlike irreversible heat generation, the reversible generation of heat is 
positive in the charging process, while it is negative during the discharge 
process. In general, the reversible heat can become important when the 
thermal  mass  of  the  supercapacitors  is  reduced,  and  the  duration  of 
discharge/charging  is  increased.  Reversible  generation  of  heat  is 
dominated by the ion’s behavior [250]. During charging process, ions 
migrate to the electrodes to compensate for the positive and negative 
charge on the electrodes. In the charging process, the ions are in the state 
of maximum order and minimum entropy. This makes the ions release 
heat  to  the  contacts,  causing  an  increase  in  the  temperature  of  those 
surfaces.  However,  in  the  discharging  process,  the  ions  are  dispersed 
into  the  electrolyte  and  reach  the  maximum  entropy.  In  this  process, 
heat is absorbed by the ions from the contacting surfaces and accord-
ingly  cool  these.  As  a  result,  the  contacts  alternately  are  heated  up 
during charging and cooled during discharging [309]. 

Usually, a supercapacitor supports a current of about 400 A or more 
based on the cells capacitance and employed technologies. Although the 
equivalent series resistance in supercapacitors is in the range of mΩ, the 
repeating charging and discharging cycles in the supercapacitors lead to 
a considerable heat generation [13]. The influence of irreversible heat is 
more  important  in  the  supercapacitors  in  which  the  charge  and 
discharge  processes  are  exothermic  and  endothermic,  respectively 
[111]. An electric model could be used to calculate the Joule thermal 
losses in the supercapacitors. Conduction of heat takes place inside the 
cells,  while  there  are  convection  and  thermal  radiation  between  the 
capacitor  wall  and  the  surroundings.  The  ambient  temperature  has 

ρC

dT
dt

= ∇(k∇T) +

Q(t)
,
VCell

(17)  

wherein ρ, C, and k are density, specific heat, and thermal conductivity, 
respectively. T and t are the temperature and time respectively, Q is the 
amount of heat generated inside the cell and VCell is the cell volume. 

To  work  out  the  reversible  temperature  distribution  in  super-
capacitors, the entropy change should be calculated. The variation of 
entropy in the supercapacitors is given by [111]: 

ΔS =

2kB
e

(

C.ΔU.ln

)

,

VH
Ve

(18)  

in which, ΔS and kB  are the entropy of the system and the Boltzmann 
constant, respectively. e and ΔU are the electron charge and the voltage 
variation  of  the  supercapacitor,  respectively.  C  indicates  the  super-
capacitor capacitance. VH and Ve are the volume of the Helmholtz layer 
and the total electrolyte volume, respectively. 

4.5.2. Purpose of the thermal management of supercapacitors 

An even increase in the temperature is considered being favorable as 
the electrolyte conductivity is enhanced. Electrolytes are usually man-
ufactured by an organic solution in which the solvent evaporates at 293 
K.  From  this  viewpoint,  a  loss  of  solvent  can  occur  by  increasing  the 
electrolyte temperature [281]. Further, the lifespan of supercapacitors 
decreases down to half by addition of every 10 K at temperatures above 
298 K [250]. Hence, it is necessary to keep the maximum temperature 
below 323 K and the temperature difference inside the module less than 
5  K  for  a  full  lifetime  [332].  Supercapacitor  resistances  lead  to  heat 
production  during  the  charge  process  and  cause  overheating  [159], 
showing  the significance  of  thermal management. This  is  particularly 
the case in supercapacitor modules where the cells are packed close to 
each other to keep the temperature distribution uniform or nearly uni-
form. Packed arrangement may also add extra mass, volume, and cost, 
and  reduce  the  energy  densities  of  the  systems  [309].  As  a  result,  a 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096637S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

cooling module is often added to supercapacitors when there is a pos-
sibility of exceeding 338 K, as the maximum allowable operating tem-
perature  [13].  Conversely,  supercapacitors  feature  an  excellent 
low-temperature efficiency, even at temperatures below 233 K [309], 
while no heating system is needed. 

4.5.3. Different techniques used for thermal management of 
supercapacitors 

The cooling modules of supercapacitors are broadly categorized into 
two groups, of active and passive [309]. Usually, active cooling modules 
in  supercapacitors  use  forced  convection  by  air.  These  simple  active 
cooling  modules  have  compact  structures  with  cost-effective  features 
[142]. The supercapacitors employed in these modules are usually cy-
lindrical  in  shape.  A  flow  of  air  over  the  cylindrical  objects  in  a 
perpendicular direction can effectively manage their temperatures [47, 
115, 116]. 

In  passive  cooling  modules for  supercapacitors,  phase  change  ma-
terials are often used to dissipate the heat produced inside the cells by 
conduction. Ideally, the phase change materials used for cooling should 
have a melting point between 303 K to 333 K, large values of latent heat, 
and narrow melting temperature ranges. Among different phase change 
materials,  paraffin  wax  is  mostly  used  as  it  is  cheap  and  has  good 
chemical  stability.  Xia  et  al.  [307]  designed  a  cooling  air  duct  of  a 
supercapacitor package (see Fig. 44) and showed that it could maintain 
the maximum temperature difference within the supercapacitor group at 
5 K. Such system was able to meet the cooling needs of hybrid electric 
vehicles. 

Voicu et al. [289] used forced air-cooling to manage the temperature 
distribution  in  a  supercapacitor  stack.  They  considered  a  staggered 
configuration for the supercapacitors and found that the arrangement 
with  the  lowest  spacing  could  provide  the  highest  cooling  efficiency. 
Zhang  et  al.  [332]  optimized  the  air-cooling  system  used  in  a  super-
capacitor  module  compartment  designed  for  an  electric  bus.  In  their 
design, cooling air flows through the supercapacitor from the passenger 
cabin, and exits from the air outlets placed on the hull side of the bus. It 
was  found  that  the  maximum  temperature  of  the  supercapacitor 
increased in the range of 300 K to 321 K in the optimized compartment. 
Yet, it was still lower than the maximum allowable temperature of 323 
K. 

As  shown  in  Fig.  45,  Voicu  et  al.  [290]  investigated  the  thermal 
management  of  a  staggered  supercapacitor  stack  by  using  air-cooling 
modules.  They  reported  that  among  all  rows  of  supercapacitors,  the 
best cooling could be achieved in the second row, despite the central 
location  of  this  row.  However,  the  poorest  cooling  performance  was 
reported for the first row. Further, there was no considerable tempera-
ture difference between the first and last rows of the supercapacitor. The 
lower temperature of the second row was attributed to the induced flow 
fluctuations as the air passes the first row. This leads to enhancement of 
heat transfer in the second row and therefore reduces the temperature. 
In the third row, there are no major influences of the flow fluctuations 
and the local heat transfer coefficient on the temperature distribution of 
the supercapacitor remains unaffected. This appears due to the increase 
in air temperature as it flows through the first and second rows, which 
reduces the heat transfer potentials. The cooling of the third row is also 
less effective as compared with the second one. As a result, the highest 
surface  temperature  is  likely  to  appear  in  the  last  row  of  the  super-
capacitor because in the last row the local heat transfer rate is reduced 
by a downstream recirculating flow. 

A problem associated with the cooling methods discussed so far, is 
that they require the capacitors to be hold by external casings. This leads 
to obstruction of the major section of the supercapacitor for effective 
cooling  process.  The  issue  can  be  resolved  by  perforating  the  bottom 
plate to permit cooling fluid to flow throughout the system. The cells 
employed in the packs of supercapacitors are often designed as cylinders 
with terminals located at the end of the cell. Hence, the major portion of 
heat created in the discharge/charge process is transferred to the sur-
rounding environment by the ends of the cells. A forced flow air through 
the cylindrical body of each cell can effectively decrease the temperature 
of the cells with cylindrical shape. In another design, a two-phase system 
was employed in which the coolant was pumped through a closed loop 
[200]. In the modified version of this design [316], the capacitors were 
pressed against the cold plates by using a spring plate. This flexible plate 
facilitates the movement of cold plates for engaging objects of different 
heights. The pipe’s serpentine shape also permits flexicurity, to position 
the cold plates. It is also possible to employ a temperature sensor instead 
of a thermal management module, which will reduce the charging cur-
rent  upon  recognition  of  overheating  conditions  [303].  In  general,  a 
smaller cooling system is required for the supercapacitors as compared 

Fig. 44. Cooling air duct of supercapacitor package considered by Xia et al. [307].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096638S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 45. The supercapacitors considered by Voicu et al. [290], a) supercapacitors module, b) configuration characteristics.  

with batteries [195]. Further to active cooling methods, passive tech-
niques employing PCMs are also in use to prevent sharp increases in the 
module  temperature.  The  heat  stored  by  PCM  can  warm  the  super-
capacitors  during the  charging process or  in cold weather. The PCMs 
used for cooling supercapacitors must have the melting point matched 
with the operating temperatures of supercapacitors, good latent heat, 
and  narrow  range  of  melting  temperature.  As  an  attractive  option, 
paraffin waxes feature low costs and high chemical stability, while other 
options include combination of bromobenzene and chlorobenzene [193] 
and stearic acid [123]. PCMs are also suitable for preventing thermal 
runaways in a single cell, which may lead to failures [151]. 

4.5.4. Thermal management of cellulose nanofibril-based supercapacitors 
A double electric layer is created on the solid/liquid interface due to 
the electronic and ionic conductivities of the electrodes and electrolyte. 
Internal resistances exist at the interface between the electrodes and the 
electrolyte and the generated heat is accumulated around the electrodes. 
This matter further necessitates heat diffusion from the electrodes. To 
avoid heat generation, the ripple current in supercapacitors should be 
reduced during the charge and discharge processes [4]. Improving the 
structures  and  materials  of  the  electrodes  is  also  of  importance.  The 
porous electrodes and current collectors are useful to extend the contact 
surface  between  electrodes  and  electrolyte  [321].  This  leads  to 
enhancement of the power densities of the supercapacitors and provides 
an efficient diffusion channel. Cellulose nanofibril-based electrode ma-
terials  are  employed,  as  pseudo  capacitor  electrode  materials,  in 
supercapacitors to achieve higher capacitances and energy densities as 
compared with the double layer capacitor [231]. Combining cellulose 
nanofibrils and other conductive materials in the form of a composite 
material leads to higher compatibility. Electric charge can be transferred 
on the surface and inside of the cellulose nanofibrils-based electrodes, 
producing  a  capacitance  [333].  In  comparison  with  the  costly  metal 
oxide pseudo-capacitor electrodes, cellulose nanofibrils materials offer 
lower costs and controllable microstructures. The composite of cellulose 
nanofibrils enhances the ion and charge transferring rates, which in turn 
increase  the  power  density  and  provide  an  efficient  means  of  heat 
evacuation [333, 338]. 

4.5.5.

Improving heat dissipation ability of supercapacitors 

Large  amount  of  heat  are  produced  during  the  supercapacitors 
charging  and  discharging,  particularly  at  high  current  densities.  This 
could  considerably  accelerate  the  capacity  fading,  lead  to  human 
discomfort and ultimately to serious safety issues including explosion of 
the unit. Zhao et al. [334] used electrodes based on graphene-MnO2 film 
with high thermal conductivity for the supercapacitor. These electrodes 
(cid:0) 1) compared 
have much larger thermal conductivity (613.5 W.m 

(cid:0) 1.K 

(cid:0) 1). 
to that of the traditional MnO2  slurry electrodes (1.1 W.m 
Zhao et al. concluded that the use of these electrodes significantly en-
hances the heat dissipation during charging and discharging processes. 
They also featured good cycling performance and great rate capacity for 
(cid:0) 1 and a large current density of 10 A. 
specific capacities up to 218.8 F.g 
(cid:0) 1. 
g 

(cid:0) 1.K 

4.5.6. Thermal management of lithium ion capacitors 

Lithium ion capacitors are hybrid energy storage systems in which 
energy  storage  mechanism  of  lithium  ion  batteries  and  the  electrical 
double-layer capacitors are combined. In such systems, some advantages 
of both lithium ion batteries and capacitors are offered while some of 
their  disadvantages  are  eliminated.  They  offer  good  power  density, 
higher voltage operation than supercapacitors, and high durability (over 
2  million  cycles)  [265].  Even  with  these  advantages,  lithium  ion  ca-
pacitors  are  prone  to  overheating  due  to  excessive  heat  generation 
during  high  current  applications  [264].  As  a  result,  it  is  necessary  to 
develop suitable thermal management systems for this technology. Both 
active and passive cooling topologies are employed for lithium ion ca-
pacitors.  In  active  techniques,  external  power  is  consumed  for  hea-
ting/cooling  and  the  coolants  include  air  and  liquids  [280]  while, 
passive approaches are diverse [179] and involve the use of PCMs [23]. 
These techniques are discussed in the followings. 

Air cooling 
The air cooling based thermal management systems are one amongst 
the  popular  methods  for  lithium  ion  capacitors  due  to  its  low 
manufacturing costs, simple layout needs and high reliabilities. Soltani 
et  al.  [265]  designed  an  air  cooling  system  for  the  integration  into  a 
commercial  lithium  ion  capacitor,  consisting  12  cells.  They  observed 
that without using the cooling system, the temperature increased very 
rapidly.  Their  thermal  management  method  was  implemented  in  a 
modular hardware-case design and revealing that the cooling capacity of 
the thermal management system is highly related to the flow behaviors, 
fan locations, gap spaces and the air flow velocity in the system. For the 
evaluation of the effects of air direction on the cooling capacity, four 
inlet  and  outlet  locations  were  considered  (See  Fig.  46).  Side-cooling 
with two fans with the velocity of 5 m/s with the space of 5 mm was 
identified as the best design. 

Liquid cooling 
It  has  been  demonstrated  that  liquid  cooling  is  the  most  efficient 
thermal management technique to eliminate excessive heat with lower 
flow rate for lithium ion capacitors . Even by addition of extra compo-
nents including piping, pump, and heat exchanger, liquid cooling is still 
amenable  to  compact  designs,  but  they  usually  add  more  weight  as 
compared  with  their  air-based  peers.  Moreover,  addition  of  liquid 
coolants in direct proximity to high-voltage components of lithium ion 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096639S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 46. Four air cooling topologies for lithium-ion capacitor proposed by Soltani et al. [265].  

capacitors  leads  to  some  challenges.  For  all  operation  and  crash  sce-
narios, a safe insulation between coolant and live connectors should be 
guaranteed,  while  during  production,  operation  and  maintenance, 
continuous  leakage  sensing  is  necessary.  Jaguemont  et  al.  [135] 

developed a three-dimensional thermal model integrated with the liquid 
cooling  plates  for  thermal  management  of  the  lithium  ion  capacitor. 
They  considered  three  domains,  including  battery,  cooling-plate,  and 
module  domains.  Within  the  battery  domain,  the  energy  balance 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096640S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 46. (continued). 

equation  of  the  cell  is  employed  for  the  description  of  the  unsteady 
thermal distribution in the lithium ion capacitor, where the amount of 
produced heat should be stored in the cell or transferred from the cell to 
its surrounding. The heat produced by the battery is transferred to the 
cooling plates, and evacuated throughout the cooling ducts. They also 

considered the stack of 12 cells spaced by the length of the cooling plate 
as the module. Their results showed that this liquid cooling strategy can 
successfully control the maximum temperature and decrease the tem-
perature  gradient  owing  to  the  high  surface  connection  between  the 
cooling  duct  and  plates.  This  results  in  a  more  uniform  temperature 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096641S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 47. The lithium ion capacitor cell designed by Jaguemont et al. [136].  

◦

C compared to when only paraffin was used. 
temperature for about 5 
However, an extra active system, including liquid-cooled plates, should 
be combined with this cooling system for regeneration of PCMs, while 
such combination is yet to be studied. Karimi et al. [148] employed a 
similar  methodology  for  the  dual  cell  lithium  ion  capacitor  module. 
They  optimized  the  thickness  of  PCM  and  combined  two  PCMs  with 
distinct phase change temperatures. These authors compared the per-
formance of this combination with that of pure PCM showing that the 
maximum surface temperature of the module dropped over 2 

C. 

◦

Fig. 48. The thermal management strategy used by Karimi et al. [148].  

distribution of the cells in the pack. 
Usage of phase change materials 
Jaguemont  et  al.  [136]  employed  paraffin  as  PCM  for  thermal 
management of small lithium ion capacitor with two cells (See Fig. 47). 
To  enhance  the  thermal  conductivity  of  paraffin,  they  added  an 
aluminum mesh to the paraffin (See Fig. 48) which reduced the module 

5. Conclusions 

Thermal  management  can  heavily  influence  the  performance  of 
electrochemical  energy  technologies  and  is, therefore,  of  high signifi-
cance. Understanding the fundamentals of heat generation and transport 
in electrochemical processes is central to achieving an effective control 
of temperature in electrochemical devices. There are also a large number 
of techniques for cooling of different electrochemical energy technolo-
gies. This review attempted to provide an in-depth coverage of the state- 
of-the-art in these fields with an emphasis on fuel cells, electrolysers and 
supercapacitors.  The  main  findings  of  this  review  are  summarized  as 
follows. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096642S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

• The  rate  of  heat  generation  in  PEMFCs  increases  as  the  current 
density rises or the cell voltage drops. Consequently, at larger current 
densities,  the  rates  of  heat  generation  in  PEMFCs  exceed  those  of 
electricity  generation. This  poses major  challenges  on  the  thermal 
management of stacks, particularly for automotive applications that 
need to operate at high current densities. 

• Working temperatures higher than 373 K makes the thermal man-
agement with heat spreaders practical for PEMFCs with larger active 
areas.  

• The SOFC temperature range is mainly dominated by the oxygen ion 
conductivity  across  the  electrolyte  material.  Currently,  there  exit 
research activities on new electrolyte materials operating at lower 
temperatures  to  lower  the  cost  of  the  cell  without  jeopardizing 
performance.  

• Liquid cooling is suitable for PEMFCs with high powers that can be 
implemented in electric vehicles, while air cooling can be used for 
PEMFCs with low powers employed in portables devices.  

• De-ionizing filters are necessary when employing water or mixture of 
water/ethylene glycol as coolants in fuel cells. Deionization, how-
ever, features high capital and operational costs. Using nanofluid in 
the cooling loop can eliminate the need for de-ionizing filters.  
• To avoid high temperature gradients across the active area of fuel 
cells; the thermal conductivities of the cooling plates should be very 
large. Because of their large thermal conductivity and small density, 
graphite based materials such as pyrolytic and expanded graphite are 
quite popular for the usage as the heat spreader in PEMFCs.  

• Despite  the  low  qualities  of  the  heat  captured  from  PEMFCs,  the 
amount of heat in the coolant stream is suitable to be recovered and 
used  in  a  number  of  applications.  These  include  CHP,  cooling  in 
CCHP/CCP and power generation systems as well as preheating the 
inlet reactants and thermal management of metal hydride canister. 
• New  materials  are  being  developed  to  reduce  the  operating  tem-
perature of SOFCs, while maintaining the efficiency close to those 
operating  at  higher  temperatures.  This  requires  improving  ionic 
conductivities  of  the  electrolytes  at  lower  temperatures.  Different 
approaches  have  been  taken  to  improve  the  ionic  conductivity  of 
ceria-based electrolytes for intermediate temperature-SOFCs. These 
include  manipulating  ionic  defects  by  doping  or  co-doping  with 
aliovalent  cations,  nanocomposites,  and  tailoring  the  strain  of  the 
hetero-structure  interface  in  the  electrolyte  thin  film,  while 
improving the electrodes’ performance. 

• In direct methanol fuel cells, a virtual increase in temperature en-
hances  both  anode  and  cathode  kinetic  parameters,  however,  the 
lack  of  the  suitable  dissipation  of  heat  considerably  increases  the 
potential of thermal runaway.  

• Two main strategies to limit thermal gradients in order to thermal 
management  in  the  endothermic  mode  of  SOECs  were  (i)  heating 
through the recovery of heat stored in the exothermic mode and(ii) 
heating by hot fluids flowing inside the stack.  

• Operating  at  or  near  the  thermo-neutral  voltage  can  simplify  the 
thermal management of the stack of RSOC as no considerable excess 
flow  of  gas  is  needed  and  thermal  stress  in  the  components  is 
minimized.  

• PCMs  used  in  the  cooling  process  of  supercapacitors  must  have  a 
narrow range of melting temperature matching the operating tem-
peratures of supercapacitors and, feature good latent heat. Paraffin 
waxes are attractive options due to their low costs and high chemical 
stabilities.  

• Cellulose  nanofibril  materials  in  supercapacitors  offer  lower  costs 
and  controllable  microstructures 
thermal  management, 
compared to the costly metal oxide pseudo-capacitor electrodes. The 
composite  of  cellulose  nanofibrils  enhances  the  ion  and  charge 
transferring  rates,  which  in  turn  increase  the  power  density  and 
provide an efficient means of heat evacuation.  

for 

• Operating temperatures of supercapacitors leave considerable effects 
on  the  rate  of  self-discharging  in  supercapacitors.  Ion  mobility 

enhances  at  higher  temperatures,  causing  strong  leakage  currents 
and tehrefore faster self-discharging. 

6. Future needs 

Finally, the following future directions of research are proposed.  

• Most of the existing strategies for thermal management of PEMFCs 
have  been  developed  for  steady  operation.  However,  in  practice, 
PEMFCs usually face a variety of complex operating conditions, and 
experience the transient loads. For example, the operation of vehicles 
includes starting, idling, accelerating, and shutting down processes. 
As  a  result,  the  temperature  trends  should  be  detected  under  the 
transient conditions and thermal management strategies of PEMFCs 
should be developed for such unsteady loads.  

• Water-cooling particularly employing the phase change of saturated 
water  has  never  been  used  for  SOFCs  stack  design.  High  thermal 
conductivity  and  large  latent  heat  of  water  enable  thermal  man-
agement  and therefore,  water-cooling of  SOFCs sounds  promising. 
The reason for not using SOFCs is not exactly known. However, it 
might  be  due  to  the  significant  temperature  difference  between 
SOFCs  and  the  low  saturation  temperature  of  water  at  working 
pressure of SOFCs. SOFC stack can operate under the pressure of 5 to 
10 atmosphere for the high power density. Hence, the challenge in 
water-cooling of SOFC would be to remove heat without overcooling. 
Further experimental studies are required to detect and address the 
challenges associated with water-cooling in the SOFCs.  

• Heat recovery options from fuel cells have been studied extensively. 
However, comparatively less attention has been paid to the economic 
assessment  of  these  systems.  Performing  exergy  analysis  for  these 
systems helps understanding the thermo-economic performance of 
fuel cells heat recovery systems. In addition, utilizing the waste heat 
of fuel cells for desalination purposes deserves further studies.  
• The existing thermal management techniques applied to SOFCs are 
highly focused on enhancing the overall heat transfer performance 
instead  of  efficient  cooling  for  places  with  large  heat  generation. 
Further  investigations  on  the  local  heat  transfer  improvement  are 
recommended  to  control  the  temperature  gradients  in  the  SOFCs 
stacks.  

• The long start-up time and heavy stainless steel envelop of heat pipes 
are  two  main  challenges  for  their  integration  with  fuel  cells. 
Addressing these issues will significantly accelerate adoption of heat 
pipes in fuel cells used for mobile applications.  

• There are only few studies on managing the electrical and thermal 
energies of SOFCs simultaneously for attaining both safety and high 
thermal performance.  

• Durability  issues  regarding  thermal  management  require  more 
attention.  Currently,  the  physics  behind  the  detected  degradation 
related to thermal management are not fully understood. Nonethe-
less,  the  correlations  between  material  attributes  and  thermally 
related degradation are most useful for designing more durable fuel 
cell materials.  

• Micro-supercapacitors have high potentials for the usage in future 
electronic systems. This type of supercapacitors is still in the initial 
steps of development. Further studies on the thermal management of 
micro-supercapacitors  are  required.  In  particular,  new  models 
should be developed to further understand thermal transport in such 
small-scale structures. 

• Currently, there is no a comprehensive physics-based model for un-
derstanding  thermal  behavior  of  supercapacitors.  Such  a  model 
should consider thermophysical attributes of all employed materials 
and  the  heat generated  from all sources.  This  can facilitate devel-
opment of new effective cooling strategies to avoid overheating and 
to  diminish  the  associated  problems  including  aging  and  perfor-
mance decay. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096643S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

• More studies should be conducted on the aging and degradation rates 
at  different  operating  conditions  of  electrolysers.  In  electrolysers, 
high  temperature  usually  helps  improving  electrochemical  effi-
ciency, while it may also accelerate the degradation rates. Informa-
tion about the aging and degradation rate is useful for finding the 
optimal operating points under different situations. 

• The surplus heat generated by electrolysers can be potentially uti-
lized.  Combining  the  cooling  systems  of  electrolysers  with  higher 
temperature heat sources might be a viable option to increase the 
quality of surplus heat from electrolysers.  

• The PCMs seem to be attractive for absorption of the heat generated 
in lithium ion capacitors. However, when the tests are changed from 
cells to packs, PCMs cannot receive all the waste heat. As a result, an 
innovative  hybrid  cooling  system  composed  of  PCMs  and  active 
cooling  technique  (air  cooling  or  liquid  cooling)  would  be  quite 
effective.  Future  studies  can  investigate  such  systems  for  vehicle 
applications. 

• Supercapacitors,  as  high-performance  electrochemical  energy stor-
age equipment, are designed to combine the benefits of rechargeable 
batteries with the benefits of supercapacitors [318]. Future studies 
can investigate the thermal management of these equipment. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

On behalf of all co-authors, I wish to confirm that there are no known 
conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been 
no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced 
its outcome. 

I  confirm  that  the  manuscript  has  been  read  and  approved  by  all 
named  authors  and  that  there  are  no  other  persons  who  satisfied  the 
criteria for authorship but are not listed. I further confirm that the order 
of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all co-authors. 

Acknowledgment 

N.  Karimi  acknowledges  the  financial  support  by  the  Engineering 
and  Physical  Science  Research  Council  (EPSRC)  through  the  grant 
number EP/V036777/1. Kyung Chun Kim acknowledges the finnacial 
supprot  by  the  National  Research  Foundation  of  Korea  (NRF)  grant, 
funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (no. 2020R1A5A8018822). 
Bengt  Sunden  acknowledges  financial  support  from  the  Scientific 
Council of Sweden (VR). 

References 

[1] Abdelaziz EA, Saidur R, Mekhilef S. A review on energy saving strategies in 

industrial sector. R Sustain Energy Rev 2011;15:150–68. 

[2] Abderezzak B. Heat transfer phenomena. introduction to transfer phenomena in 

PEM. Fuel Cell 2018:125–53. 

[3] Abdollahipour A, Sayyaadi H. Thermal energy recovery of molten carbonate fuel 
cells by thermally regenerative electrochemical cycles. Energy 2021;227:120489. 

[4] Abeywardana DBW, Hredzak B, Agelidis VG. Battery-supercapacitor hybrid 
energy storage system with reduced low frequency input current ripple. In: 
International Conference on Renewable Energy Research and Applications. 
(ICRERA); 2015. 

[5] Acharya PR. An advanced fuel cell simulator [thesis]. Houston-Dallas-Austin, TX: 

Texas A&M University; 2004. 

[6] Addo PK, Molero-Sanchez B, Chen M, Paulson S, Birss V. CO/CO2  study of high 
performance La0.3Sr0.7Fe0.7Cr0.3O3-δ  reversible SOFC electrodes. Fuel Cells 
2015;15:689–96. 

[7] Ajith Kumar S, Kuppusami P. Enhancing the ionic conductivity in the ceria-based 
electrolytes for intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells, chapter 5 in book 
of electrolytes, electrodes and interconnects. Elsevier; 2020. p. 113–63. 
[8] Akbari M, Tamayol A, Bahrami M. Thermal assessment of convective heat 

transfer in air-cooled PEMFC stacks: an experimental study. Energy Procedia 
2012;29:1–11. 

[9] Akilu S, Baheta AT, Sharma KV. Evaluation on thermo-electrical characteristics of 
Sio2 nanofluids for fuel cell cooling application in automobiles. Int J Eng Technol 
2018;7:137–40. 

[10] Alizadeh R, Mohebbi Najm Abad J, Fattahi A, Alhajri ES, Karimi N. Application of 
machine learning to investigation of heat and mass transfer over a cylinder 

surrounded by porous media-The radial basic function network. J Energy Resour 
Technol 2020;142:112109. 

[11] Alizadeh R, Mohebbi Najm Abad J, Fattahi A, Mohebbi MR, Doranehgard MH, 

Li LKB, et al. A machine learning approach to predicting the heat convection and 
thermodynamics of an external flow of hybrid nanofluid. ASME J Energy Resour 
Technol 2021. In press. 

[12] Al-Masri A, Peksen M, Blum L, Stolten D. A 3D CFD model for predicting the 
temperature distribution in a full scale APU SOFC short stack under transient 
operating conditions. Appl Energy 2014;135:539–47. 

[13] Al Sakka M, Gualous H, Mierlo JV, Culcu H. Thermal modeling and heat 

management of supercapacitor modules for vehicle applications. J Power Source 
2009;194:581–7. 

[14] Al-Zareer M, Dincer I, Rosen MA. A review of novel thermal management systems 

for batteries. Int J Energy Res 2018;42:3182–205. 

[15] An Z, Jia L, Ding Y, Dang C, Li X. A review on lithium-ion power battery thermal 

management technologies and thermal safety. J Therm Sci 2017;26:391–412. 

[16] Andreasen SJ, Ashworth L, Remn IN, Rasmussen PL, Nielsen MP. Modeling and 

Implementation of a 1 kW, air cooled HTPEM fuel cell in a hybrid electrical 
vehicle. ECS Trans 2008;12:639–50. 

[17] APEC. Water Deionization Process Explained. Available at: http://www.freedr 

inkingwater.com/water-education2/49-water-di-process.htm, 2014. 

[18] Ariyanfar L, Ghadamian H, Baghban Yousefkhani M, Ozgoli HA. A double pipe 
heat exchanger design and optimization for cooling an alkaline fuel cell system. 
Iran J Hydrog Fuel Cell 2014;4:223–31. 

[19] Armand M, Endres F, MacFarlane DR, Ohno H, Scrosati B. Ionic-liquid materials 
for the electrochemical challenges of the future. Nat Mater 2009;8:621–9. 
[20] Atan R, Najmi WM WA. Temperature profiles of an air-cooled pem fuel cell stack 
under active and passive cooling operation. Procedia Eng 2012;41:1735–42. 
[21] Atreya S, Mata ME, Balan C. Thermal management of a high temperature fuel cell 

electrolyzer. Patent 2010. US8231774. 

[22] Ayadi M, Eddahech A, Briat O, Vinassa JM. Voltage and temperature impacts on 
leakage current in calendar ageing of supercapacitors. In: 4th international 
conference on power engineering Istanbul; 2013. p. 1466–70. 

[23] Bahiraei F, Fartaj A, Nazri GA. Electrochemical-thermal modeling to evaluate 

active thermal management of a lithium-ion battery module. Electrochim Acta 
2017;254:59–71. 

[24] Barbir F. PEM fuel cells: theory and practice. Amsterdam: Elsevier Academic 

Press; 2005. 

[25] Bard AJ, Faulkner LR. Electrochemical methods fundamentals and applications. 

2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 2001. 

[26] Baroutaji A, Wilberforce T, Ramadan M, Olabi AG. Comprehensive investigation 
on hydrogen and fuel cell technology in the aviation and aerospace sectors. 
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;106:31–40. 

[27] Barsukov IV, Johnson CS, Doninger JE, Barsukov VZ. New carbon mased 

materials for electrochemical energy storage systems: batteries, supercapacitors 
and fuel cells. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands; 2006. 

[28] Berning T, Lu DM, Djiali N. Three-dimensional computation analysis of transport 

phenomena in a PEM fuel cell. J Power Source 2002;106:284–94. 

[29] Bhuvana T, Kumar A, Sood A, Gerzeski RH, Hu J, Bhadram VS, Narayana C, 
Fisher TS. Contiguous petal-like carbon nanosheet outgrowths from graphite 
fibers by plasma CVD. ACS Appl Mater Inter 2010;2:644–8. 

[30] Bierschenk DM, Wilson JR, Barnett SA. High efficiency electrical energy storage 
using a methane-oxygen solid oxide cell. Energy Environ Sci 2011;4:944–51. 

[31] Bird RB, Stewart WE, Lightfoot EN. Transport phenomena. 2nd ed. New York: 

John Wiley & Sons; 2007. 

[32] Bittner AM, Zhu M, Yang Y, Waibel HF, Konuma M, Starke U, et al. Ageing of 

electrochemical double layer capacitors. J Power Source 2012;203:262–73. 

[33] Bockris JOM, Conway BE, Yeager E, White RE. Comprehensive treatise of 

electrochemistry. New York: Plenum Press; 1981. 

[34] Hansen JB. Solid oxide electrolysis–a key enabling technology for sustainable 

energy scenarios. Faraday Discuss 2015;182:9–48. 

[35] Bohlen O, Kowal J, Sauer DU. Ageing behaviour of electrochemical double layer 

capacitors Part I. Experimental study and ageing model. J Power Source 2007; 
172:468–75. a. 

[36] Bohlen O, Kowal J, Uwe SD. Ageing behaviour of electrochemical double layer 
capacitors Part II. Lifetime simulation model for dynamic applications. J Power 
Source 2007;173:626–32. b. 

[37] Borges RS, Reddy ALM, Rodrigues MTF, Gullapalli H, Balakrishnan K, Silva GG, 
C. Sci Rep-Uk 2013;3. https://doi. 

◦

Ajayan PM. Supercapacitor operating at 200 
org/10.1038/srep02572. 

[38] Boroumandjazi G, Rismanchi B, Saidur R. A review on exergy analysis of 

industrial sector. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2013;27:198–203. 

[39] Bosio B, Marra D, Arato E. Thermal management of the molten carbonate fuel cell 

plane. J Power Source 2010;195:4826–34. 

[40] Brandon NP, Matian M, Marquis AJ, Adjiman CS. Thermal management issues in 
fuel cell technology. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Heat Transfer 
Conference IHTC14; August 8-13, 2010. 

[41] J. E. O’Brien, Thermodynamic Considerations for Thermal Water Splitting 
Processes and High Temperature Electrolysis, Proceedings of the 2008 
International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, IMECE2008, 
October 31 – November 6, 2008, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 

[42] El Brouji H, Briat O, Vinassa J-M, Henry H, Woirgard E. Analysis of the dynamic 
behavior changes of supercapacitors during calendar life test under several 
voltages and temperatures conditions. Microelectron Reliab 2009;49:1391–7. 
[43] Brousse T, Toupin M, B´elanger D. A hybrid activated carbon-manganese dioxide 
capacitor using a mild aqueous electrolyte. J Electrochem Soc 2004;151:A614. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096644S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[44] Burheim OS, Pharoah JG, Lampert H, Vie PJS, Kjelstrup S. Through-plane thermal 
conductivity of PEMFC porous transport layers. J Fuel Cell Sci Technol 2011;8: 
021013. 

[45] Cai Q, Brandon NP, Adjiman CS. Modelling the dynamic response of a solid oxide 

steam electrolyser to transient inputs during renewable hydrogen production. 
Front Energy 2010;4:211–22. 

[46] Caney N, Marechal A, Marty P. Study of a new geometry for fuel cells cooling. 

Mecanique Ind 2007;8:545–9. 

[47] Çengel YA, Ghajar AJ. Heat and mass transfer fundamentals and applications. 

[77] Dillig M. Thermal management of solid oxide cell systems with integrated planar 
heat pipes, a thesis submitted to the faculty of engineering. University of 
Erlangen-Nuremberg; 2016. 

[78] Ding H. Nanostructured electrodes for high-performing solid oxide fuel cells. 
book: nanostructured materials for next-generation energy storage and 
conversion. 2018. 

[79] DoE. Program Plans, Roadmaps, and Vision Documents: the Department of 
Energy Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program Plan. Available at: http://www. 
hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/program_plan2011.pdf, 2011. 

fourth ed. New York, USA: McGraw Hill Inc.; 2011. 

[80] Dohle H, Mergel J, Stolten D. Heat and power management of a direct-methanol- 

[48] Chan SH, Ho HK, Tian Y. Modelling of simple hybrid solid oxide fuel cell and gas 

fuel-cell (DMFC) system. J Power Source 2002;111:268–82. 

turbine power plant. J Power Source 2002;109:111–20. 

[81] Dong W, Cao GY, Zhu XJ. Nonlinear modelling and adaptive fuzzy control of 

[49] Chang HC, Gustave W, Yuan ZF, Xiao Y, Chen Z. One-step fabrication of binder- 

PEMFC. Engineering Modelling 2003;16:13–21. 

free air cathode for microbial fuel cells by using balsa wood biochar. Environ 
Technol Innov 2020;18:100615. 

[50] Chen M, Sun Q, Li Y, Wu K, Liu B, Peng P, Wang Q. A thermal runaway simulation 
on a lithium titanate battery and the battery module. Energies 2015;8:490–500. 

[51] Chen J, Kang S, E J, Huang Z, Wei K, Zhang B, et al. Effects of different phase 
change material thermal management strategies on the cooling performance of 
the power lithium ion batteries: a review. J Power Source 2019;442:227228. 

[82] M.C. Dos Santos, L.S. Parreira, F. DeMoura Seuza, J. Camarge Junior, T. Gentil, 
Fuel Cells: hydrogen andEthanol Technologies. In: S. Hashmi, Editor, Reference 
module in materials science and materials engineering. Oxford: Elsevier; 2017. p. 
1–21. DOI:10.1016/8978-0-12-803581-8.09263-8. 

[83] Dos Santos AL, Cebola MJ, Santos DMF. Towards the hydrogen economy –A 
review of the parameters that influence the efficiency of alkaline water 
electrolyzers. Energies 2021;14. 

[52] Chi J, Yu H. Water electrolysis based on renewable energy for hydrogen 

[84] Dziurdzia B, Magonski Z, Jankowski H. Commercialisation of solid oxide fuel 

production. Chin J Catal 2018;39:390–4. 

cells-opportunities and forecasts. Mater Sci Eng 2016;104:012020. 

[53] Chinda P, Brault P. The hybrid solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) and gas turbine (GT) 

[85] Elder R, Cumming D, Bjerg Mogensen M. High temperature electrolysis, carbon 

systems steady state modeling. Int J Hydrog Energy 2012;37:9237–48. 

dioxide utilisation. Closing Carbon Cycle 2015;35:183–209. 

[54] Chippar P, Ko J, Ju H. A global transient, one-dimensional, two-phase model for 
direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) - Part II: analysis of the time–dependent 
thermal behavior of DMFCs. Energy 2010;35:2301–8. 

[55] Chnani M, P´era MC, Glises R, Kauffmann JM, Hissel D. Transient thermal 

behaviour of a solid oxide fuel cell. In: The Fifth International Conference on Fuel 
Cell Science, Engineering and Technology; Jun 2007. p. 28. hal-00582364. 
[56] Choi SU, Eastman J. Enhancing thermal conductivity of fluids with nanoparticles. 

IL (United States): Argonne National Lab; 1995. 

[57] Choi EJ, Park JY, Kim MS. Two-phase cooling using HFE-7100 for polymer 

electrolyte membrane fuel cell application. Appl Therm Eng 2019;148:868–77. 
[58] Choudhari VG, Dhoble AS, Sathe TM. A review on effect of heat generation and 

various thermal management systems for lithium ion battery used for electric 
vehicle. J Energy Storage 2020;32:101729. 

[59] Christopher P, Wendel H, Kazempoor P, Braun RJ. A thermodynamic approach 

for selecting operating conditions in the design of reversible solid oxide cell 
energy systems. J Power Source 2016;301:93–104. 

[86] Eveloy V, Gebreegziabher T. A review of projected power-to-gas deployment 

scenarios. Energies 2018;11:1824. 

[87] European Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology Platform, Strategic Research 

Agenda.Availableonline: https://www.fch.europa.eu/sites/default/files/docu 
ments/hfp-sra004_v9-2004_sra-report-final_22jul2005.pdf (accessed on 23 July 
2019). 

[88] Fallah Vostakola M, Horri BA. Progress in material development for low- 
temperature solid oxide fuel cells: a review. Energies 2021;14:1280. 

[89] Faghri A, Guo Z. Challenges and opportunities of thermal management issues 
related to fuel cell technology and modeling. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2005;48: 
3891–920. 

[90] Faghri A, Guo Z. Integration of heat pipe into fuel cell technology. Heat Transf 

Eng 2008;29:232–8. 

[91] Falc˜ao DS, Pires JCM, Pinho C, Pinto AMFR, Martins FG. Artificial neural network 
model applied to a PEM fuel cell. In: IJCCI 2009 - Proceedings of the International 
Joint Conference on Computational Intelligence; 2009. October 5-7. 

[60] Clement J, Wang X. Experimental investigation of pulsating heat pipe 

[92] Fardadi M, McLarty DF, Jabbari F. Investigation of thermal control for different 

performance with regard to fuel cell cooling application. Appl Therm Eng 2013; 
50:268–74. 

[61] Cocco D, Tola V. Externally reformed solid oxide fuel cell–micro-gas turbine 
(SOFC–MGT) hybrid systems fueled by methanol and di-methyl-ether (DME). 
Energy 2009;34:2124–30. 

[62] Colombo P. Solid oxide electrolysis system: Dynamic modelling and microgrid 
integration. Master’s degree thesis in Energy and Nuclear Engineering. 
Polytechnic University of Turin; 2018. 

[63] Edited by Corre GPG, Irvine JTS. High temperature fuel cell technology. In: 

Stolten D, editor. Hydrogen and fuel cells: fundamentals, technologies and 
applications. Wenham: Wiley-VCH Verlag; 2010. p. 61–88. 

[64] Costamagna P, Magistri L, Massardo AF. Design and part-load performance of a 
hybrid system based on a solid oxide fuel cell reactor and a micro gas turbine. 
J Power Source 2001;96:352–68. 

[65] Cuevas FG, Montes JM, Cintas J, Urban P. Electrical conductivity and porosity 

relationship in metal foams. J Porous Mater 2009;16:675–81. 

[66] Dai W, Wang H, Yuan X-Z, Martin JJ, Yang D, Qiao J, et al. A review on water 
balance in the membrane electrode assembly of proton exchange membrane fuel 
cells. Int J Hydrog Energy 2009;34:9461–78. 

SOFC flow geometries. Appl Energy 2016;178:43–55. 

[93] Felseghi RA, Carcadea E, Simona Raboaca M, Trufin CN, Filote C. Hydrogen fuel 

cell technology for the sustainable future of stationary applications. Energies 
2019;12:4593. 

[94] Fergus JW. Materials challenges for solid-oxide fuel cells. JOM 2007;59:56–62. 
[95] Fly A. Thermal and water management of evaporatively cooled fuel cell vehicles, 
a doctoral thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the award 
of. Degree of Doctor of Philosophy of Loughborough University; 2015. 
[96] Fly A, Thring RH. Temperature regulation in an evaporatively cooled proton 
exchange membrane fuel cell stack. Int J Hydrog Energy 2015;40:11976–82. 

[97] Fly A, Thring RH. A comparison of evaporative and liquid cooling methods for 

fuel cell vehicles. Int J Hydrog Energy 2016;41:14217–29. 

[98] Foteini Sapountzi M, Jose Gracia M, (Kees-Jan) Weststrate CJ, Hans, 

Fredriksson OA, (Hans) Niemantsverdriet JW. Electrocatalysts for the generation 
of hydrogen, oxygen and synthesis gas. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;58:1–35. 

[99] Franco A. Optimization of separate air flow cooling system for Polymer 

Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) Fuel Cells. In: 27th UIT Heat Transfer Conferene, 
Reggio Emilia; 2009. 

[100] Fuel Cells 2000. Fuel cell vehicles (from auto manufacturers), http://www. 

[67] Damm DL, Fedorov AG. Radiation heat transfer in SOFC materials and 

fuelcells.org/info/charts/carchart.pdf; 2011. 

components. J Power Source 2005;143:158–65. 

[101] Frano B. PEM fuel cells: theory and practice. Academic, Burlington Google 

[68] Da Silva LM, Cesar R, Moreira CMR, Santos JHM, De Souza LG, Pires BM, et al. 
Reviewing the fundamentals of supercapacitors and the difficulties involving the 
analysis of the electrochemical findings obtained for porous electrode materials. 
Energy Storage Mater 2020;27:555–90. 

[69] Das V, Padmanaban S, Venkitusamy K, Selvamuthukumaran R, Blaabjerg F, 

Siano P. Recent advances and challenges of fuel cell based power system 
architectures and control – a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2017;73:10–8. 
[70] De las Heras A, Vivas FJ, Segura F, Redondo MJ, Andújar JM. Air-Cooled fuel 

cells: keys to design and build the oxidant/cooling system. Renew Energy 2018; 
125:1–20. 

[71] Deyab MA, Mele G. Stainless steel bipolar plate coated with polyaniline/Zn- 

Porphyrin composites coatings for proton exchange membrane fuel cell. Sci Rep 
2020;10:3277. 

[72] Di Giorgio P, Desideri U. Potential of reversible solid oxide cells as electricity 

storage system. Energies 2016;9:662. 

[73] Diab Y, Venet P, Gualous H, Rojat G. Self-discharge characterization and 

Scholar; 2005. 

[102] Fronk MH, Wetter DL, Masten DA, Bosco A. PEM fuel cell system solutions for 

transportation. SAE Int J Fuel Lubr 2000;109:212–9. 

[103] Gallandat N, Romanowicz K, Züttel A. An analytical model for the electrolyser 
performance derived from materials parameters. J Power Energy Eng 2017;5: 
34–49. 

[104] Gao X, Andreasen SJ, Kær SK, Rosendahl LA. Optimization of a thermoelectric 
generator subsystem for high temperature PEM fuel cell exhaust heat recovery. 
Int J Hydrog Energy 2014;39:6637–45. 

[105] Gao Z, Mogni LV, Miller EC, Railsback JG, Barnett SA. A perspective on low- 
temperature solid oxide fuel cells. Energy Environ Sci 2016;9:1602–44. 

[106] Garg A, Vijayaraghavan V, Mahapatra SS, Tai K, Wong CH. Performance 

evaluation of microbial fuel cell by artificial intelligence methods. Expert Syst 
Appl 2014;41:1389–99. 

[107] Garrity PT, Klausner JF, Mei R. A flow boiling microchannel evaporator plate for 

fuel cell thermal management. Heat Transf Eng 2007;28:877–84. 

modeling of electrochemical capacitor used for power electronics applications. 
IEEE Trans Power Electron 2009;24:510–7. 

[108] Goebel SG. Evaporative cooled fuel cell. Google Patents; 2005. 
[109] G´omez SY, Hotza D. Current developments in reversible solid oxide fuel cells. 

[74] Dicks AL, Fellows RG, Mescal CM, Seymour C. A study of SOFC-PEM hybrid 

systems. J Power Source 2000;86:501–6. 

[75] Dillig M, Karl J. Thermal management of high temperature solid oxide 
electrolyser cell/fuel cell systems. Energy Procedia 2012;28:37–47. 

[76] Dillig M, Leimert J, Karl J. Planar high temperature heat pipes for SOFC/SOEC 

stack applications. Fuel Cells 2014;14:479–88. 

Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;61:155–74. 

[110] Gonz´alez A, Goikolea E, Barrena JA, Mysyk R. Review on supercapacitors: 
technologies and materials. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;58:1189–206. 

[111] Gualous H, Louahlia H, Gallay R. Supercapacitor characterization and thermal 

modelling with reversible and irreversible heat effect. IEEE Trans Power Electron 
2011;26:3402–9. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096645S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[112] Gualous H, Gallay R. Supercapacitor module sizing and heat management under 

[145] Kai J, Saito R, Terabaru K, Li H, Nakajima H, Ito K. Effect of temperature on the 

electric, thermal, and aging constraints. Wiley. KGaA 2013. 

[113] Guk E, Venkatesan V, Babar S, Jackson L, Kim JS. Parameters and their impacts 
on the temperature distribution and thermal gradient of solid oxide fuel cell. Appl 
Energy 2019;241:164–73. 

[114] Guthrie DG, Torabi M, Karimi N. Combined heat and mass transfer analyses in 

catalytic microreactors partially filled with porous material-The influences of 
nanofluid and different porous-fluid interface models. Int J Therm Sci 2019;140: 
96–113. 

performance of polymer electrolyte membrane water electrolysis: numerical 
analysis of electrolysis voltage considering gas/liquid two-phase flow. 
J Electrochem Soc 2019;166:F246–54. 

[146] Kandlikar SG, Lu Z. Fundamental research needs in combined water and thermal 
management within a proton exchange membrane fuel cell stack under normal 
and cold-start conditions. J Fuel Cell Sci Technol 2009;6:044001. 

[147] Kandlikar SG, Lu Z. Thermal management issues in a PEMFC stack–A brief review 

of current status. Appl Therm Eng 2009;29:1276–80. 

[115] Habib R, Karimi N, Yadollahi B, Doranehgard MH, Li LKB. A pore-scale 

[148] Karimi D, Behi H, Jaguemont J, Sokkeh MA, Kalogiannis T, Hosen MS, et al. 

assessment of the dynamic response of forced convection in porous media to inlet 
flow modulations. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2020;153:119657. a. 

Thermal performance enhancement of phase change material using aluminum- 
mesh grid foil for lithium-capacitor modules. J Energy Storage 2020;30:101508. 

[116] Habib R, Yadollahi B, Karimi N, Doranegard MH. On the unsteady forced 
convection in porous media subject to inlet flow disturbances-A pore-scale 
analysis. Int Commun Heat Mass Transf 2020;116:104639. b. 

[117] Hahn M, K¨otz R, Gallay R, Siggel A. Pressure evolution in propylene carbonate 
based electrochemical double layer capacitors. Electrochim Acta 2006;52: 
1709–12. 

[118] Han J, Yu S. Ram air compensation analysis of fuel cell vehicle cooling system 

under driving modes. Appl Therm Eng 2018;142:530–42. 

[149] Kazempoor P, Braun R. Model validation and performance analysis of 

regenerative solid oxide cells: electrolytic operation. Int J Hydrog Energy 2014; 
39:2669–84. 

[150] Kharel S, Shabani B. Hydrogen as a long-term large-scale energy storage solution 

to support renewables. Energies 2018;11:2825. 

[151] Khateeb SA, Farid MM, Selman JR, Al-Hallaj S. Design and simulation of a 

lithium-ion battery with a phase change material thermal management system for 
an electric scooter. J Power Source 2004;128:292–307. 

[119] Hasanuzzaman M, Rahim NA, Hosenuzzaman M, Saidur R, Mahbubul IM, 

[152] Khotseng L. Fuel Cell Thermodynamics. IntechOpen 2019. https://doi.org/ 

Rashid MM. Energy savings in the combustion based process heating in industrial 
sector. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2012;16:4527–36. 

[120] Hashmi SMH. Cooling strategies for pem fc stacks, thesis. Universit¨at der 

Bundeswehr Hamburg; 2010. 

10.5772/intechopen.90141. 

[153] Kim DH, Kim BJ, Lim HC, Lee CG. Numerical studies of a separator for stack 

temperature control in a molten carbonate fuel cell. Int J Hydrog Energy 2011;36: 
8499–507. 

[121] Hasani M, Rahbar N. Application of thermoelectric cooler as a power generator in 

[154] Kim IH, Kim KB. Electrochemical characterization of hydrous ruthenium oxide 

waste heat recovery from a PEM fuel cell–an experimental study. Int J Hydrog 
Energy 2015;40:15040–51. 

thin-film electrodes for electrochemical capacitor applications. J Electrochem Soc 
2006;153:A383–9. 

[122] Hauge HH, Presser V, Burheim O. In-situ and ex-situ measurements of thermal 

[155] Kim J, Oh J, Lee H. Review on battery thermal management system for electric 

conductivity of supercapacitors. Energy 2014;75:373–83. 

vehicles. Appl Therm Eng 2019;149:192–212. 

[123] Hawes DW, Feldman D. Absorption of phase change materials in concrete. Sol 

[156] Ko R, Carlen M. Principles and applications of electrochemical capacitors. 

Energy Mater Sol Cells 1992;27:91–101. 

Electrochim Acta 2000;45:2483–98. 

[124] Haynes C, Wepfer WJ. Characterizing heat transfer within a commercial-grade 

tubular solid oxide fuel cell for enhanced thermal management. Int J Hydrog 
Energy 2001;26:369–79. 

[125] Hedayat N, Du Y, Ilkhani H. Pyrolyzable pore-formers for the porous-electrode 
formation in solid oxide fuel cells: a review. Ceram Int 2018;44:4561–76. 

[126] Hemmat Esfe M, Afrand M. A review on fuel cell types and the application of 
nanofluid in their cooling. J Therm Anal Calorim 2020;140:1633–54. 

[127] Hermann A, Chaudhuri T, Spagnol P. Bipolar plates for PEM fuel cells: a review. 

Int J Hydrog Energy 2005;30:1297–302. 

[128] Hsing I, Futerko P. Two-dimensional simulation of water transport in polymer 

electrolyte fuel cells. Chem Eng Sci 2000;55:4209–18. 

[157] Kone1 JP, Zhang X, Yan Y, Hu G, Ahmadi G. Three-dimensional multiphase flow 
computational fluid dynamics models for proton exchange membrane fuel cell: a 
theoretical development. J Comput Multiph Flow 2017;9:3–25. 

[158] Kordi M, Jabari Moghadam A, Afshari E. Effects of cooling passages and nanofluid 

coolant on thermal performance of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. 
J Electrochem Energy Convers Storage 2019;16:031001. 

[159] K¨otz R, Hahn M, Gallay R. Temperature behavior and impedance fundamentals of 

supercapacitors. J Power Source 2006;154:550–5. 

[160] Kotz R, Ruch PW, Cericola D. Aging and failure mode of electrochemical double 
layer capacitors during accelerated constant load tests. J Power Source 2010;195: 
923–8. 

[129] Hu CC, Chen WC, Chang KH. How to achieve maximum utilization of hydrous 

[161] Kuar G. Intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells electrolytes, electrodes 

ruthenium oxide for supercapacitors. J Electrochem Soc 2004;151:A281–90. 
[130] Huang Y-H, Dass RI, Xing Z-L, Goodenough JB. Double perovskites as anode 

materials for solid-oxide fuel cells. Science 2006;312:254–7. 
[131] Huang S, Zhu X, Sarkar S, Zhao Y. Challenges and opportunities for 

supercapacitors. APL Mater 2019;7:100901. 

[132] Hwang JJ, Zou ML, Chang WR, Su A, Weng FB, Wu W. Implementation of a heat 

recovery unit in a proton exchange membrane fuel cell system. Int J Hydrog 
Energy 2010;35:8644–53. 

[133] Ishizawa M, Okada S, Yamashita T. Highly efficient heat recovery system for 

phosphoric acid fuel cells used for cooling telecommunication equipment. 
J Power Source 2000;86:294–7. 

[134] Islam MR, Shabani B, Rosengarten G, Andrews J. The potential of using 

nanofluids in PEM fuel cell cooling systems: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 
2015;48:523–39. 

[135] Jaguemont J, Ghamraoui A-M, Omar N, Hergazy O, Ronsmans J, Soltani M, Van 
Den Bossche P, Van Mierlo J. Liquid thermal management of a lithium-ion 
capacitor module. In: EVS 2017 - 30th Int. Electr. Veh. Symp. Exhib; 2017. 

and interconnects. Book: published by Elsevier; 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
C2018-0-00575-7. 

[162] Kumar P, Chaudhary D, Varshney P, Varshney U, Yahya SM, Rafat Y. Critical 

review on battery thermal management and role of nanomaterial in heat transfer 
enhancement for electrical vehicle application. J Energy Storage 2020;32: 
102003. 

[163] Larminie J, Dicks A. Fuel cell systems explained. 2 editor. Chichester, West 

Sussex: John Wiley & Sons; 2003. 

[164] Larminie J, Dicks A. Fuel cell systems explained. 2nd ed. Wiley; 2006. 
[165] Laurencin J, Kane D, Delette G, Deseure J, Lefebvre-Joud F. Modelling of solid 
oxide steam electrolyser: impact of the operating conditions on hydrogen 
production. J Power Source 2011;196:2080–93. 

[166] Laurencin J, Delette G, Reytier M. High-temperature or fuel-cell electrochemical 
system having improved thermal management. Patent, 2013. WO2013/060869. 
[167] S.K. Lee, Y.H. Han, W. Lee, W. Ryu, Cooperation Foundation, US Patent, 2015. htt 

ps://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/09/a3/33/a880d4ce5b18a4/US96 
44277.pdf. 

[136] Jaguemont J, Karimi D, Van Mierlo J. Investigation of a passive thermal 

[168] Lewandowska-Bernata A, Desideri U. Opportunities of power-to-gas technology. 

management system for lithium-ion capacitors. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2019;68: 
10518–24. 

[137] Jensen SH, Larsen PH, Mogensen M. Hydrogen and synthetic fuel production from 

renewable energy sources. Int J Hydrog Energy 2007;32:3253–7. 
[138] Jensen SH, Graves C, Mogensen M, Wendel C, Braun R, Hughes G, Gao Z, 

Barnett SA. Large-scale electricity storage utilizing reversible solid oxide cells 
combined with underground storage of CO2 and CH4. Energy Environ Sci 2015;8: 
2471–9. 

[139] Jiang K, Liao G, Jiaqiang E, Zhang F, Chen J, Leng E. Thermal management 

technology of power lithium-ion batteries based on the phase transition of 
materials: a review. J Energy Storage 2020;32:101816. 

[140] Jiao K, Li X. Water transport in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. Prog 

Energy Combust Sci 2011;37:221–91. 

Energy Procedia 2017;105:4569–74. 

[169] Li J, Liu W, Qi W. Hydrogen production technology by electrolysis of water and its 
application in renewable energy consumption. In: E3S Web of Conferences. 236; 
2021. p. 02001. 

[170] Li PW, Chyu MK. Electrochemical and transport phenomena in solid oxide fuel 

cells. J Heat Transf 2005;127:1344–62. 

[171] Li X. Principles of fuel cells. New York: Taylor & Francis; 2006. 
[172] Li X, Liu L, Wang X, Sik Ok Y, Elliott JAW, Chang SX, Chung HJ. Flexible and self- 

healing aqueous supercapacitors for low temperature applications: 
polyampholyte gel electrolytes with biochar electrodes. Sci Rep 2017;7:1685. 

[173] Li Y, Wang H, Dai Z. Using artificial neural network to control the temperature of 
fuel cell. In: International Conference on Communications, Circuits and Systems; 
2006. 

[141] Jiao K, Ni M. Challenges and opportunities in modelling of proton exchange 

[174] W. Lin, Waste heat recovery system for fuel cell system, Project Report 2009 

membrane fuel cells (PEMFC). Int J Energy Res 2017;41:1793–7. 
[142] Jilte RD, Kumar R. Numerical investigation on cooling performance of Li- 

ionbattery thermal management system at high galvanostatic discharge, 
Engineering Science and Technology. Int J 2018;21:957–69. 

[143] Ju H, Meng H, Wang C-Y. A single-phase, non-isothermal model for PEM fuel 

cells. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2005;48:1303–15. 

[144] Kadier A, Simayi Y, Abdeshahian P, Farhana Azman N, Chandrasekhar K, 

Kalil MdS. A comprehensive review of microbial electrolysis cells (MEC) reactor 
designs and configurations for sustainable hydrogen gas production. Alex Eng J 
2016;55:427–43. 

TRRF05 Fuel Cell Technology, 2009, Lund, Sweden. 

[175] Liang J, Wu Z. Simulation and optimization of air-cooled PEMFC stack for 

lightweight hybrid vehicle application. Math Probl Eng 2015;2015:1–12. 
[176] Lin C, Yan X, Wei G, Ke C, Shen S, Zhang J. Optimization of configurations and 
cathode operating parameters on liquid cooled proton exchange membrane fuel 
cell stacks by orthogonal method. Appl Energy 2019;253:113496. 

[177] Lin-Kwong-Chon C, Grondin-P´erez B, Amangoua Kadjo JJ, Damour C, Benne M. 
A review of adaptive neural control applied to proton exchange membrane fuel 
cell systems. Annu Rev Control 2019;47:133–54. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096646S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[178] Lin R, Taberna PL, Fantini S, Presser V, P´erez CR, Malbosc F, et al. Capacitive 

C using an ionic liquid electrolyte. J Phys Chem 

◦
energy storage from (cid:0) 50 to 100 
Lett 2011;2:2396–401. 

[179] Liu H, Wei Z, He W, Zhao J. Thermal issues about Li-ion batteries and recent 

progress in battery thermal management systems: a review. Energy Convers 
Manage 2017;150:304–30. 

[180] Liu W, Wen F, Xue Y. Power-to-gas technology in energy systems: current status 
and prospects of potential operation strategies. J Mod Power Syst Clean Energy 
2017;5:439–50. 

[181] Long R, Li B, Liu Z, Liu W. A hybrid system using a regenerative electrochemical 
cycle to harvest waste heat from the proton exchange membrane fuel cell. Energy 
2015;93:2079–86. 

[182] Lu J, Yin S, Shen PK. Carbon-encapsulated electrocatalysts for the hydrogen 

evolution reaction. Electrochem Energy Rev 2019;2:105–27. 

[210] Niu J, Conway BE, Pell WG. Comparative studies of self-discharge by potential 
decay and float-current measurements at C double-layer capacitor and battery 
electrodes. J Power Source 2004;135:332–43. 

[211] J.E. O’Brien, C.M. Stoots, J.S. Herring, M.G. McKellar, E.A. Harvego, M.S. Sohal, 
K.G. Condie, High temperature electrolysis for hydrogen production from nuclear 
energy–technology summary, A report prepared for the U.S. Department of 
Energy Office of Nuclear Energy Under DOE Idaho Operations Office Contract DE- 
AC07-05ID14517, (2010). 

[212] O’Brien J, McKellar M. High-temperature electrolysis for large-scale hydrogen 
and syngas production from nuclear energy - system simulation and economic 
analyses. Hydrog Energy 2010;35:4808–19. 

[213] Odabaee M, Hooman K. Metal foam heat exchangers for thermal management of 
fuel cell systems. In: Porous Media and Its Applications in Science, Engineering, 
and Industry, AIP Conf. Proc. 1453; 2012. p. 237–42. 

[183] Luo J, Glatkowski P, Wallis P. Polymer binders for flexible and transparent 

[214] Odabaee M, Mancin S, Hooman K. Metal foam heat exchangers for thermal 

conductive coatings containing carbon nanotubes. United States; 2005. 
[184] Luo L, Huang B, Bai X, Cheng Z, Jian Q. Temperature uniformity improvement of 
a proton exchange membrane fuel cell stack with ultra-thin vapor chambers. Appl 
Energy 2020;270:115192. 

[185] MacKinnon SM, Paone MP, Kingma RJ, Montie GJ. Reactant flow channels for 

electrolyzer applications. US Patent; 2017. 

[186] Mansilla C, Sigurvinsson J, Bontemps A, Marechal A, Werkoff F. Heat 

management for hydrogen production by high temperature steam electrolysis. 
Energy 2007;32:423–30. 

[187] Mastropasqua L, Campanari S, Brouwer J. Solid oxide fuel cell short stack 

performance testing - Part A: experimental analysis and μ-combined heat and 
power unit comparison. J Power Source 2017;371:225–37. a. 

[188] Mastropasqua L, Campanari S, Brouwer J. Solid oxide fuel cell short stack 
performance testing - part B: operation in carbon capture applications and 
degradation issues. J Power Source 2017;371:238–48. b. 

[189] May GJ, Davidson A, Monahov B. Lead batteries for utility energy storage: a 

review. J Energy Storage 2018;15:145–57. 

management of fuel cell systems – An experimental study. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 
2013;51:214–9. 

[215] Oldham KB, Myland JC. Fundamentals of electrochemical science. 1nd ed. San 

Diego: Academic Press; 1993. 

[216] Ormerod RM. Solid oxide fuel cells. Chem Soc Rev 2003;32:17–28. 
[217] Owejan JP, Owejan JE, Gu W, Trabold TA, Tighe TW, Mathias MF. Water 

transport mechanisms in PEMFC gas diffusion layers. J Electrochem Soc 2010; 
157:B1456–64. 

[218] Owusu PA, Asumadu-Sarkodie S. A review of renewable energy sources, 

sustainability issues and climate change mitigation, 3. Cogent Engineering; 2016. 
p. 1–14. 

[219] Park H. Numerical assessment of liquid cooling system for power electronics in 

fuel cell electric vehicles. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2014;73:511–20. 

[220] V. Pasquale, Curie Temperature, In: Gupta H.K. (eds) Encyclopedia of solid earth 

geophysics, encyclopedia of earth sciences series. Springer, Dordrecht. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-8702-7_109. 

[221] C. Perret, High temperature water electrolysis device with improved 

[190] Mermelstein J, Posdziech O. Development and demonstration of a novel 

performance, Patent, ES2477520T3, (2010). 

reversible SOFC system for utility and micro grid energy storage. Fuel Cells 2016; 
306:59–70. 

[191] Mench MM, Wang ZH, Bhatia K, Wang CY. Design of a micro direct methanol fuel 
cell (μDMFC). In: Proceedings of the IMECE’01, International Mechanical 
Engineering Congress and Exposition (IMECE); 2001. November 11-16. 

[192] Mench MM. Fuel cell engines. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons; 2008. 
[193] Michaud F, Mondieig D, Soubzmaigne V, Negrier P, Haget Y, Tauler E. A system 
C 

◦
with a less than 2 degree melting window in the range within (cid:0) 31 
chlorobenzene-bromobenzene. Mater Res Bull 1996;31:943–50. 

◦
C and (cid:0) 45 

[194] Milewski J, Kupecki J, Szczę´sniak A, Uzunow N. Hydrogen production in solid 
oxide electrolyzers coupled with nuclear reactors. Int J Hydrog Energy 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.11.217. 

[195] Miller JR, Burke AF. Electrochemical capacitors: challenges and opportunities for 

real-world applications, 17. Electrochemical Society Interface; 2008. p. 53–7. 

[196] Mohebbi Najm Abad J, Alizadeh R, Fattahi A, Doranehgard MH, Alhajri E, 

Karimi N. Analysis of transport processes in a reacting flow of hybrid nanofluid 
around a bluff-body embedded in porous media using artificial neural network 
and particle swarm optimization. J Mol Liq 2020;313:113492. 

[197] Mottaghizadeh P, Santhanam S, Heddrich MP, Andreas Friedrich K, Rinaldi F. 
Process modeling of a reversible solid oxide cell (r-SOC) energy storage system 
utilizing commercially available SOC reactor. Energy Convers Manage 2017;142: 
477–93. 

[198] Mottaghizadeh P, Fardadi M, Jabbari F, Brouwer J. Thermal management of a 

reversible solid oxide system for long-term renewable energy storage. ASME Int 
Mech Eng Congr Expo 2020. November 16-19Virtual, Online. 

[199] Motylinski K, Wierzbicki M, Jagielski S, Kupecki J. Investigation of off-design 
characteristics of solid oxide electrolyser (SOE) operated in endothermic 
conditions. In: E3S Web of Conferences. 137; 2019. p. 01029. 

[200] N.P. Myers, T.C. Trent, Cooling system and method, (2013), Google Patents. 
[201] Nagata S, Momma A, Kato T, Kasuga Y. Numerical analysis of output 

characteristicsof tubular SOFC with internal reformer. J Power Source 2001;101: 
60–71. 

[202] Nakajo A, Stiller C, H¨arkegård G, Bolland O. Modeling of thermal stresses and 

probability of survival of tubular SOFC. J Power Source 2006;158:287–94. 
[203] Neto DM, Oliveira MC, Alves JL, Menezes LF. Numerical study on the formability 
of metallic bipolar plates for Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) Fuel Cells. Metals 
(Basel) 2019;9:810. 

[204] News Green Hydrogen. Apex starts up green hydrogen plant with McPhy 

electrolyser. Fuel Cells Bull 2020;2020:11. 

[205] Nguyen HQ, Aris AM, Shabani B. PEM fuel cell heat recovery for preheating inlet 
air in standalone solar-hydrogen systems for telecommunication applications: an 
exergy analysis. Int J Hydrog Energy 2016;41:2987–3003. 

[206] Nguyen HQ, Shabani B. Proton exchange membrane fuel cells heat recovery 
opportunities for combined heating/cooling and power applications. Energy 
Convers Manage 2020;204:112328. 

[207] Ni M. Modeling of solid oxide fuel cells. Sci Bull 2016;61:1311–2. 
[208] Ni M, Leung MKH, Leung DYC. Technological development of hydrogen 

production by solid oxide electrolyzer cell (SOEC). Int J Hydrog Energy 2008;33: 
2337–54. 

[209] Nikolic VM, Tasic GS, Maksic AD, Saponjic DP, Miulovic SM, Marceta 

Kaninski MP. Raising efficiency of hydrogen generation from alkaline water 
electrolysis – Energy saving. Int J Hydrog Energy 2010;35:12369–73. 

[222] F. Petipas, A. Brisse, C. Bouallou, Control of a high-temperature electrolyzer, 

Patent, WO2015059404A1, (2015). 

[223] Petipas F, Brisse A, Bouallou C. Thermal management of solid oxide electrolysis 

cell systems through air flow regulation. Chem Eng Trans 2017;61:1069–74. 

[224] Promsen M, Komatsu Y, Sciazko A, Kaneko S, Shikazono N. Feasibility study on 
saturated water cooled solid oxide fuel cell stack. Appl Energy 2020;279:115803. 
[225] Qin B, Han Y, Ren Y, Sui D, Zhou Y, Zhang M, et al. A ceramic-based separator for 

high-temperature supercapacitors. Energy Technol 2017;6:1–7. 

[226] Nichicon Corporation. 2021. https://www.nichicon.co.jp/english/products/ 

alm_chip/index.html. 

[227] Qiu D, Yi P, Peng L, Lai X. Study on shape error effect of metallic bipolar plate on 
the GDL contact pressure distribution in proton exchange membrane fuel cell. Int 
J Hydrog Energy 2013;38:6762–72. 

[228] Qiu D, Peng L, Tang J, Lai X. Numerical analysis of air-cooled proton exchange 

membrane fuel cells with various cathode flow channels. Energy 2020;198: 
117334. 

[229] Ragupathy P, Park DH, Campet G, Vasan HN, Hwang SJ, Choy JH. 

N. Munichandraiah Remarkable capacity retention of nanostructured manganese 
oxide upon cycling as an electrode material for supercapacitor. J Phys Chem C 
2009;113:6303–9. 

[230] Rajput RK. Engineering thermodynamics. 3rd ed. New Delhi: Laxmi; 2007. p. 922. 
[231] Rakhi RB, Chen W, Cha D, Alshareef HN. Substrate dependent self-organization of 

mesoporous cobalt oxide nanowires with remarkable pseudocapacitance. Nano 
Lett 2012;12:2559–67. 

[232] Ramousse J, Lottin O, Didierjean S, Maillet D. Heat sources in proton exchange 

membrane (PEM) fuel cells. J Power Source 2009;192:435–41. 

[233] Rashidi R. A Thesis Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the 
Degree of Master of Applied Science in The Faculty of Engineering and Applied 
Science. Mechanical Engineering Program, University of Ontario Institute of 
Technology; December 2008. 

[234] Rashidi S, Mahian O, Languri EM. Applications of nanofluids in condensing and 

evaporating systems. J Therm Anal Calorim 2018;131:2027–39. 

[235] Rashidi S, Hormozi F, Sarafraz MM. Fundamental and subphenomena of boiling 
heat transfer. J Therm Anal Calorim 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10973-020- 
09468-3. a. 

[236] Rashidi S, Hormozi F, Sarafraz MM. Potentials of boiling heat transfer in 

advanced thermal energy systems. J Therm Anal Calorim 2020. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10973-020-09511-3. b. 

[237] Razbani O, Wærnhus I, Assadi M. Experimental investigation of temperature 

distribution over a planar solid oxide fuel cell. Appl Energy 2013;105:155–60. 
[238] Ren P, Pei P, Li Y, Wu Z, Chen D, Huang S. Degradation mechanisms of proton 

exchange membrane fuel cell under typical automotive operating conditions. 
Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;80:100859. 

[239] Rezaei M, Mostafaeipour A, Qolipour M, Momeni M. Energy supply for water 
electrolysis systems using wind and solar energy to produce hydrogen: a case 
study of Iran. Front Energy 2019;13:539–50. 

[240] Rodatz P, Buchi F, Onder C, Guzzella L. Operational aspects of a large PEFC stack 

under practical conditions. J Power Source 2004;128:208–17. 

[241] Ruiz V, Blanco C, Granda M, Men´endez R, Santamaría R. Effect of the thermal 

treatment of carbon-based electrodes on the electrochemical performance of 
supercapacitors. J Electroanal Chem 2008;618:17–23. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096647S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[242] Rulliere R, Lefevre F, Lallemand M. Prediction of the maximum heat transfer 

capability of two-phase heat spreaders - Experimental validation. Int J Heat Mass 
Transf 2007;50:1255–62. 

[243] Saeedan M, Ziaei-Rad M, Afshari E. Numerical thermal analysis of nanofluid flow 
through the cooling channels of a polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell filled 
with metal foam. Int J Energy Res 2020. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.5332. 
[244] Saidura R, Leong KY, Mohammad HA. A review on applications and challenges of 

nanofluids. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2011;15:1646–68. 

[245] S´anchez D, Mu˜noz A, S´anchez T. An assessment on convective and radiative heat 

[274] Tan WC, Iwai H, Kishimoto M, Yoshida H. Quasi-three-dimensional numerical 
simulation of a solid oxide fuel cell short stack: effects of flow configurations 
including air-flow alternation. J Power Source 2018;400:135–46. 

[275] Tao S, Si-jia Y, Guang-yi C, Xin-jian Z. Modelling and control PEMFC using fuzzy 

neural networks. J Zhejiang Univ-SCIENCEA 2005;6:1084–9. 

[276] Tete PR, Gupta MM, Joshi SS. Developments in battery thermal management 

systems for electric vehicles: a technical review. J Energy Storage 2021;35: 
102255. 

[277] Thomas JM, Edwards PP, Dobson PJ, Owen GP. Decarbonising energy: the 

transfer modelling in tubular solid oxide fuel cells. J Power Source 2007;169: 
25–34. 

developing international activity in hydrogen technologies and fuel cells. 
J Energy Chem 2020;51:405–15. 

[246] Santhanam S, Heddrich MP, Riedel M, Friedrich KA. Theoretical and 

[278] Tiktak WJ. Heat management of pem electrolysis, a study on the potential of 

experimental study of Reversible Solid Oxide Cell (r-SOC) systems for energy 
storage. Energy 2017;141:202–14. 

[247] Sasmito AP, Birgersson E, Mujumdar AS. Numerical evaluation of various thermal 

management strategies for polymer electrolyte fuel cell stacks. Int J Hydrog 
Energy 2011;36:12991–3007. 

[248] Sasmito AP, Shamim T, Birgersson E, Mujumdar AS. Computational study of edge 

cooling for open-cathode polymer electrolyte fuel cell stacks. J Fuel Cell Sci 
Technol 2012;9:061008. 

[249] Sasmito AP, Shamim T, Mujumdar AS. Passive thermal management for PEM fuel 
cell stack under cold weather condition using phase change materials (PCM). Appl 
Therm Eng 2013;58:615–25. 

[250] Schiffer J, Linzen D, Sauer DU. Heat generation in double layer capacitors. 

J Power Source 2006;160:765–72. 

excess heat from medium- to large-scale PEM electrolyisis and the performance 
analysis of a dedicated cooling system. Delft University of Technology; 2019. A 
master thesis at the. 

[279] Tolj I, Penga ˇZ, Vukiˇcevi´c D, Barbir F. Thermal management of edge-cooled 1 kW 
portable proton exchange membrane fuel cell stack. Appl Energy 2020;257: 
114038. 

[280] Tong W, Somasundaram K, Birgersson E, Mujumdar AS, Yap C. Numerical 

investigation of water cooling for a lithium-ion bipolar battery pack. Int J Therm 
Sci 2015;94:259–69. 

[281] Torregrossa D, Paolone M. Modelling of current and temperature effects on 
supercapacitors ageing. Part II: state-of-Health assessment. J Energy Storage 
2016;5:95–101. 

[282] Tucker MC, Cheng L. Integrated thermal management strategy and materials for 

[251] Scholta J, Zhang W, Jorissen L, Lehnert W. Conceptual design for an externally 

solid oxide fuel cells. J Power Source 2011;196:10074–8. 

cooled HT-PEMFC stack. ECS Trans 2008;12:113–8. 

[252] Scott K. Introduction to Electrolysis, Electrolysers and Hydrogen Production. 
Electrochemical methods for hydrogen production. Book Series: Energy and 
Environment Series; 2019. p. 1–27. 

[283] Udagawa J, Aguiar P, Brandon NP. Hydrogen production through steam 

electrolysis: model-based steady state performance of a cathode-supported 
intermediate temperature solid oxide electrolysis cell. J Power Source 2007;166: 
127. 

[253] Shahjalal M, Shams T, Islam MdE, Alam W, Modak M, Bin Hossain S, et al. 

[284] Vasiliev LL, Vasiliev Jr LL. Heat pipes to increase the efficiency of fuel cells. Int J 

A review of thermal management for Li-ion batteries: prospects, challenges, and 
issues. J Energy Storage 2021;39:102518. 

[254] Shah RK. Heat exchangers for fuel cell systems. In: The 4th International 

conference on Compact Heat Exchangers and Enhancement Technology for the 
Process Industries; 2003. 

[255] Shahsavari S. Thermal analysis of air-cooled pem fuel cells, a master thesis. Simon 

Fraser University; 2011. 

Low-Carbon Technol 2009;4:96–103. 

[285] Venkataraman V. Thermal modelling and coupling of a heat pipe integrated 

desorber with a Solid Oxide Fuel Cell. Appl Therm Eng 2019;147:943–61. 

[286] Villagra A, Millet P. An analysis of PEM water electrolysis cells operating at 

elevated current densities. Int J Hydrog Energy 2019;44:9708–17. 
[287] Vinício Oro M, Bazzo E. Flat heat pipes for potential application in fuel cell 

cooling. Appl Therm Eng 2015;90:848–57. 

[256] Shanmuga Priya M, Divya P, Rajalakshmi R. A review status on characterization 

[288] Viswanath RP. A patent for generation of electrolytic hydrogen by a cost effective 

and electrochemical behaviour of biomass derived carbon materials for energy 
storage supercapacitors. Sustain Chem Pharm 2020;16:100243. 

[257] Sharma P, Bhatti T. A review on electrochemical double-layer capacitors. Energy 

Convers Manage 2010;51:2901–12. 

[258] Shen ZG, Chen S, Liu X, Chen B. A review on thermal management performance 
enhancement of phase change materials for vehicle lithium-ion batteries. Renew 
Sustain Energy Rev 2021;148:111301. 

[259] Shibata M, Murakami N, Akbay T, Eto H, Hosoi K, Nakajima H, Kano J, 

Nishiwaki F, Inagaki T, Yamasaki S. Development of intermediate-temperature 
SOFC modules and systems. ECS Trans 2007;7:77–83. 

[260] Sigurvinsson J, Mansilla C, Arnason B, Bontemps A, Mar´echal A, Sigfusson TI, 
et al. Heat transfer problems for the production of hydrogen from geothermal 
energy. Energy Convers Manage 2006;47:3543–51. 

[261] Simon P, Gogotsi Y. Materials for electrochemical capacitors. Nat Mater 2008;7: 

845–54. 

and cheaper route. Int J Hydrog Energy 2004;29:1191–4. 

[289] Voicu I, Louahlia H, Gualous H, Gallay R. Thermal management and forced air- 

cooling of supercapacitors stack. Appl Therm Eng 2015;85:89–99. 

[290] Voicu I, Rizk R, Louahlia H, Bode F, Gualous H. Experimental and numerical 
study of supercapacitors module with air-cooling. Appl Therm Eng 2019;159: 
113903. 

[291] Wachsman ED, Lee KT. Lowering the temperature of solid oxide fuel cells. Science 

2011;334:935–9. 

[292] Wang L-S, Li C-X, Li G-R, Yang G-J, Zhang S-L, Li C-J. Enhanced sintering 
behavior of LSGM electrolyte and its performance for solid oxide fuel cells 
deposited by vacuum cold spray. J Eur Ceram Soc 2017;37:4751–61. 

[293] Wang S, Jiang SP. Prospects of fuel cell technologies. Natl Sci Rev 2017;4:163–6. 
[294] Wei M, Smith SJ, Sohn MD. Experience curve development and cost reduction 

disaggregation for fuel cell markets in Japan and the US. Appl Energy 2017;191: 
346–57. 

[262] Simon P, Brousse T, Favier F. Supercapacitors based on carbon or 

[295] Weinstein L, Dash R. Capacitive deionization: challenges and opportunities. 

pseudocapacitive materials. Wiley-ISTE; 2017. 

Desalination Water Reuse 2013:34–7. 

[263] Singh D, Toutbort J, Chen G, et al. Heavy vehicle systems optimization merit 

[296] Wen CY, Huang GW. Application of a thermally conductive pyrolytic graphite 

review and peer evaluation. Argonne National Laboratory; 2006. 
[264] Soltani M, Ronsmans J, Kakihara S, Jaguemont J, Van den Bossche P, van 

Mierlo J, et al. Hybrid battery/lithium-ion capacitor energy storage system for a 
pure electric bus for an urban transportation application. Appl Sci 2018;8:1176. 
[265] Soltani M, Berckmans G, Jaguemont J, Ronsmans J, Kakihara S, Hegazy O, Van 
Mierlo J, Omar N. Three dimensional thermal model development and validation 
for lithium-ion capacitor module including air-cooling system. Appl Therm Eng 
2019;153:264–74. 

[266] Song TW, Choi KH, Kim JR, Yi JS. Pumpless thermal management of water-cooled 

high-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells. J Power Source 2011; 
196:4671–9. 

sheet to thermal management of a PEM fuel cell. J Power Source 2008;178: 
132–40. 

[297] Wen CY, Lin YS, Lu CH. Performance of a proton exchange membrane fuel cell 

stack with thermally conductive pyrolytic graphite sheets for thermal 
management. J Power Source 2009;189:1100–5. 

[298] Wen CY, Lin YS, Lu CH, Luo TW. Thermal management of a proton exchange 

membrane fuel cell stack with pyrolytic graphite sheets and fans combined. Int J 
Hydrog Energy 2011;36:6082–9. 

[299] Wendel CH. Design and analysis of reversible solid oxide cell systems for electrical 
energy storage. Ph.D.Thesis. USA: Colorado School of Mines, Arthur Lakes 
Library, Golden, CO; 2015. 

[267] Soupremanien U, Person SL, Favre-Marinet M, Bultel Y. Tools for designing the 
cooling system of a proton exchange membrane fuel cell. Appl Therm Eng 2012; 
40:161–73. 

[300] Wendel CH, Kazempoor P, Braun RJ. A thermodynamic approach for selecting 
operating conditions in the design of reversible solid oxide cell energy systems. 
J Power Source 2016;301:93–104. 

[268] Staffell I, Scamman D, Velazquez Abad A, Balcombe P, Dodds PE, Ekins P, 

Shahd N, Ward KR. The role of hydrogen and fuel cells in the global energy 
system. Energy Environ Sci 2019;12:463–91. 

[301] Weng FB, Dlamini MM, Jung G, Lian CX. Analyses of reversible solid oxide cells 
porosity effects on temperature reduction. Int J Hydrog Energy 2020;45: 
12170–84. 

[269] Stojic DL, Marceta MP, Sovilj SP, Miljanic SS. Hydrogen generation from water 

[302] Widiyanto A, Sulistyo, Tony Suryo Utomo MSK. Analysis of the effect of anode 

electrolysis—Possibilities of energy saving. J Power Source 2003;118:315–9. 
[270] Sui PC, Zhu X, Djilali N. Modeling of PEM fuel cell catalyst layers: status and 

outlook. Electrochem Energy Rev 2019;2:428–66. 

[271] Sund´en B. Hydrogen, batteries and fuel cells. Academic Press; 2019. https://doi. 

org/10.1016/C2018-0-01247-5. 

porosity on temperature distribution on planar radial type SOFC. In: E3S Web of 
Conferences. 73; 2018. p. 01010. ICENIS 2018. 

[303] Wilk MD, Stone KT, Quintana NAV. High-power ultracapacitor energy storage 

pack and method of use. patent citation, ise corporation. Poway CA, United 
States; 2009. 

[272] Takashiba T, Yagawa S. Development of fuel cell coolant. Honda R&D Techn Rev 

[304] Winter M, Brodd RJ. What are batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors? Chem 

2009;21:58–62. 

Rev 2004;104:4245–70. 

[273] Syu-Fang L, Chu HS, Yuan P. Effect of inlet flow maldistribution on the thermal 
and electrical performance of a molten carbonate fuel cell unit. J Power Source 
2006;161:1030–40. 

[305] Wu M, Zhang H, Zhao J, Wang F, Yuan J. Performance analyses of an integrated 
phosphoric acid fuel cell and thermoelectric device system for power and cooling 
cogeneration. Int J Refrig 2018;89:61–9. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096648S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[306] Wu Q, Li H, Yuan W, Luo Z, Wang F, Sun H, Zhao X, Fu H. Performance evaluation 
of an air-breathing high-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cell. Appl 
Energy 2015;160:146–52. 

[336] Zhao P, Wang J, Gao L, Dai Y. Parametric analysis of a hybrid power system using 

organic Rankine cycle to recover waste heat from proton exchange membrane 
fuel cell. Int J Hydrog Energy 2012;37:3382–91. 

[307] Xia Z, Zhou C, Shen D, Ni H, Yuan Y, Ping L. Study on the cooling system of super- 
capacitors for hybrid electric vehicle. Appli Mech Mater 2014;492:37–42. 
[308] Xiong GP, Meng CZ, Reifenberger RG, Irazoqui PP, Fisher TS. A review of 

[337] Zhou Y, Ghaffari M, Lin M, Xu H, Xie H, Kood CM, Zhang QM. High performance 
supercapacitor under extremely low environmental temperature. RSC Adv 2015; 
5:71699–703. 

graphene-based electrochemical microsupercapacitors. Electroanalysis 2014;26: 
30–51. 

[309] G. Xiong, A. Kundu, T.S. Fisher, Thermal effects in supercapacitors, 2015, First 

edition, Published by Springer International Publishing. doi: http://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-319-20242-6_1. 

[310] Xu M, Li TS, Yang M, Andersson M, Fransson I, Larsson T, et al. Modeling of an 
anode supported solid oxide fuel cell focusing on thermal stresses. Int J Hydrog 
Energy 2016;41:14927–40. 

[338] Zhe G, Zhu H, Gillette E, Han X, Sang BL. Natural cellulose fiber as substrate for 

supercapacitor. ACS Nano 2013;7:6037–46. 

[339] Zhu J, Yan C, Zhang X, Yang C, Jiang M, Zhang X. A sustainable platform of 
lignin: from bioresources to materials and their applications in rechargeable 
batteries and supercapacitors. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;76:100788. 

[340] Zichen W, Changqing D. A comprehensive review on thermal management 

systems for power lithium-ion batteries. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021;139: 
110685. 

[311] Xu W, Scott K, Basu S. Performance of a high temperature polymer electrolyte 

[341] Hakeem Akinlabi AA, Solyali D. Configuration, design, and optimization of air- 

membrane water electrolyser. J Power Source 2011;196:8918–24. 

[312] Yan D, Zhang C, Liang L, Li K, Jia L L, Pu J, Jian L, Li X, Zhang T. Degradation 

analysis and durability improvement for SOFC 1-cell stack. Appl Energy 2016; 
175:414–20. 

[313] Yan WM, Lee CY, Li CH, Li WK, Rashidi S. Study on heat and mass transfer of a 
planar membrane humidifier for PEM fuel cell. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2020;152: 
119538. a. 

[314] Yao L, Yang B, Cui H, Zhuang J, Ye J, Xue J. Challenges and progresses of energy 
storage technology and its application in power systems. J Mod Power Syst Clean 
Energy 2016;4:519–28. 

[315] Yassine M, Fabris D. Performance of commercially available supercapacitors. 

Energies 2017;10:1340. 

[316] A.I. Yatskov, J. Marsala, Cooling system and method, (2011), Google Patents. 
[317] Yoshida H, Iwai H. Thermal management in solid oxide fuel cell systems. In: 

Proceedings of Fifth International Conference on Enhanced, Compact and Ultra- 
Compact Heat Exchangers: Science, Engineering and Technology. Engineering 
Conferences International; September 2005. editors R.K. Shah, M. Ishizuka, T.M. 
Rudy, and V.V. Wadekar. 

[318] Yu L, Chen GZ. Supercapatteries as high‑performance electrochemical energy 

storage devices. Electrochem Energy Rev 2020;3:271–85. 

[319] Yuan J, Faghri M, Sund´en B. On heat and mass transfer phenomena in PEMFC and 

SOFC and modeling approaches. In: Sund´en B, Faghri M, editors. Chapter 4 in 
transport phenomena in fuel cells. WIT Press; 2005. p. 133–74 (eds). 
[320] Yuan J, Sund´en B. On continuum models for heat transfer in micro/nano-scale 
porous structures relevant for fuel cells. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2013;58:441–56. 
[321] Yuan J, Sund´en B. On mechanisms and models of multi-component gas diffusion 
in porous structures of fuel cell electrodes. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2014;69: 
358–74. 

[322] Yuan WL, Yang X, He L, Xue Y, Qin S, Tao GH. Viscosity, conductivity, and 

electrochemical property of dicyanamide ionic liquids. Front Chem 2018;6:1–12. 

[323] Yuan Z, Chuai W, Guo Z, Tu Z, Kong F. Investigation of self-adaptive thermal 

control design in passive direct methanol fuel cell. Energy Storage 2019;1:e64. 
[324] Zakaria IA, Michael Z, Mamat AMI, Mohamed WANW. Thermal and electrical 

experimental characterization of Ethylene Glycol and water mixture nanofluids 
for a 400 w Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell. In: 2014 IEEE International 
Conference on Control System, Computing and Engineering (ICCSCE 2014); 2014. 

[325] Zeng K, Zhang D. Recent progress in alkaline water electrolysis for hydrogen 
production and applications. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2010;36:307–26. 
[326] Zeng H, Wang Y, Shi Y, Cai N, Yuan D. Highly thermal integrated heat pipe-solid 

oxide fuel cell. Appl Energy 2018;216:613–9. 

[327] Zhan R, Wang Y, Ni M, Zhang G, Du Q, Jiao K. Three-dimensional simulation of 

solid oxide fuel cell with metal foam as cathode flow distributor. Int J Hydrog 
Energy 2020;45:6897–911. 

[328] Zhang J, Xie Z, Zhang J, Tang Y, Song C, Navessin T, et al. High temperature PEM 

fuel cells. J Power Source 2006;160:872–91. 

[329] Zhang G, Kandlikar SG. A critical review of cooling techniques in proton exchange 

membrane fuel cell stacks. Int J Hydrog Energy 2012;37:2412–29. 
[330] Zhang H, Chen B, Xu H, Ni M. Thermodynamic assessment of an integrated 

molten carbonate fuel cell and absorption refrigerator hybrid system for 
combined power and cooling applications. Int J Refrig 2016;70:1–12. 
[331] Zhang X, Chan SH, Ho HK, Tan SC, Li M, Li G, et al. Towards a smart energy 

network: the roles of fuel/electrolysis cells and technological perspectives. Int J 
Hydrog Energy 2015;40:6866–919. 

[332] Zhang X, Wang W, He H, Hua L, Heng J. Optimization of the air-cooled 

supercapacitor module compartment for an electric bus. Appl Therm Eng 2017; 
112:1297–304. 

[333] Zhang Y, Hao N, Lin X, Nie S. Emerging challenges in the thermal management of 
cellulose nanofibril-based supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries and solar cells: a 
review. Carbohydr Polym 2020;234:115888. 

[334] Zhao B, Fu XZ, Sun R, Wong CP. Highly thermal conductive graphene-based 
electrodes for supercapacitors with excellent heat dissipation ability. Sustain 
Energy Fuel 2017;10:1–12. 

[335] Zhao G, Wang X, Negnevitsky M, Zhang H. A review of air-cooling battery 

thermal management systems for electric and hybrid electric vehicles. J Power 
Source 2021;501:230001. 

cooled battery thermal management system for electric vehicles: A review. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2020;125:109815.  

Dr Rashidi received his BA and MS degrees in Mechanical En-
gineering  at  Semnan  University,  Iran  in  2010  and  2013, 
respectively.  He  received  PhD  degree  in  Mechanical  Engi-
neering,  Energy  Conversion  Field,  at  Ferdowsi  University  of 
Mashhad, Iran in 2016. He is currently the assistant professor 
of  the  Department  of  the  Energy  in  Semnan  University.  His- 
research  interests  are  about  the  thermal  energy  systems, 
investigation  of  different  techniques  used  for  efficiency 
improvement of various thermal systems, entropy generation 
analysis, transport phenomena, solar thermal energy systems. 
He  has  published  about  100  refereed  journal  papers  in  Do-
mestic and International Journals.  

Dr  Karimi  is  currently  a  Reader  (Associate Professor)  in  Me-
chanical Engineering at the School of Engineering and Mate-
rials  Science,  Queen  Mary  University  of  London  where  his 
research is in the broad area of thermofluids. Prior to this, he 
received  his  PhD  from  University  of  Melbourne,  Australia 
(2009) and, completed two post-doctoral works at Darmstadt 
University of Technology in Germany (2011) and University of 
Cambridge, UK (2013) and further served as an assistant pro-
fessor  at  James  Watt  School  of  Engineering,  University  of 
Glasgow.  His-research  experiences  and  interests  include 
Experimental and Theoretical Studies on Chemically Reacting 
Flows, Heat and Mass Transfer and, Energy Conversion and   

Storage. Dr Karimi has authored/co-authored three book chapters and over 140 articles in 
the leading international scientific journals and conferences. He has also delivered invited 
seminars in the key research institutes around the world including GE Global Research in 
NY, United States and Technical University of Munich, Germany.  

Bengt Sunden received his M.Sc. in 1973, Ph.D. in 1979 and 
became  Docent  in  1980,  all  from  Chalmers  University  of 
Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. He was appointed Professor 
of Heat Transfer at Lund University, Lund, Sweden in 1992 and 
served  as  Head  of  the  Department  of  Energy  Sciences,  Lund 
University for 21 years, 1995–2016. He has served as Professor 
Emeritus and Senior Professor since 2016. The research activ-
ities mainly include various heat transfer enhancement tech-
niques, gas turbine heat transfer, computational modeling and 
analysis of multiphysics and multiscale transport phenomena 
for fuel cells,  nano-and microscale  heat transfer, boiling and 
condensation, aerospace heat transfer, thermal management of  

batteries. He has supervised 51 PhD. students and many post docs as well hosted many 
visiting scholars and Ph.D. students. He serves as Guest or Honorary Professor of several 
prestigious universities. He is a Fellow of ASME, a regional editor for Journal of Enhanced 
Heat Transfer since 2007, an associate editor of Heat Transfer Research since 2011, ASME 
J.  Thermal  Science,  Engineering  and  Applications  in  2010–2016  and  ASME  J.  Electro-
chemical Energy Conversion and Storage 2017–2023. He was a recipient of the ASME Heat 
Transfer Memorial Award 2011 and Donald Q. Kern Award 2016. He received the ASME 
HTD 75th Anniversary Medal 2013. He has edited 30+ books and authored three major 
textbooks. He has published more than 500 papers in well-established and highly ranked 
journals. The h-index is 49 and the number of citations is more than 12000.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096649S. Rashidi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Prof Kim received his BA degree at Pusan National University, 
Korea  in  1979.  He  received  MS  and  PhD  degrees  at  KAIST, 
Korea in 1981 and 1987 respectively. Since 1983, he was hired 
as  a  faculty  member  in  Pusan  National  University  (PNU), 
Korea.  He  was  invited  as  a  visiting  professor  from  Ottawa 
University in Canada for 1989–1990. He joined at the depart-
ment of theoretical and applied mechanics in University of Il-
linois,  Urbana-Champaign,  USA  as  an  invited  professor  for 
1996–1997.  Prof  Kim  was  selected  as  a  PNU  Distinguished 
Professor in 2018. During 37 years at PNU, he has published 
in  Domestic  and 
journal  papers 
about  640  refereed 
International  Journals  and  supervised  206  MS  and  PhD  

Prof  Olabi  is  Chair  and  Head  of  Sustainable  and  Renewable 
Energy  Engineering  Department  “SREE”  at  the  University  of 
Sharjah “UOS”. Before  joining UOS,  he  was the director and 
founding member of the Institute of Engineering and Energy 
Technologies  at  the  University  of  the  West  of  Scotland.  Prof 
Olabi received his M.Eng and Ph.D. from Dublin City Univer-
sity, since 1984 he worked at different national and interna-
tional institutes such as; National Research Centre-Italy “CNR”, 
Research  Centre  of  FIAT-Italy  “CRF”,  Dublin  City  University 
“DCU”  and Institute of Engineering and Energy Technologies 
“IEET” at UWS. 

Prof Olabi is an Academic Expert Reviewer, he acted as   

students. His-research interests include Fuel Cell, Two-Phase Flows, Flow Visualization, 
PIV,  LIF, PSP,  TSP,  CFD,  Heat Transfer,  Thermal  System Simulation  and  Optimization, 
Multi-scale  Multi-Physics  Analysis  and  Measurement  Techniques,  and  Artificial 
Intelligence.  

member and chairman for several accreditation panels. 

Prof  Olabi  has  supervised  postgraduate  research  students  (38  PhD)  to  successful 
completion. Prof Olabi has edited more than 30 proceedings and has published more than 
400  papers  in  peer-reviewed  international  journals  and  international  conferences,  in 
addition  to  more  than 45  book chapters.  In the  last  4  years  Prof Olabi  has  patented 2 
innovative  projects.  Prof  Olabi  is  the  founder  of  the  International  Conference  on  Sus-
tainable Energy and Environmental Protection SEEP, www.seepconference.com and the 
International  Conference  on  Materials  Science  and  Smart  Materials.  He  is  the  Subject 
Editor of the Elsevier Energy Journal, Editor in Chief of the Encyclopedia of Smart Ma-
terials (Elsevier), Editor of the Reference Module of Materials Science and Engineering 
(Elsevier), Editor in Chief of Renewable Energy section of Energies and board member of a 
few other journals. Prof Olabi has coordinated different National, EU and International 
Projects. He has produced different reports to the Irish Gov. regarding: Hydrogen and Fuel 
Cells and Solar Energy.  

Prof Mahian is a professor and doctoral supervisor at School of 
Chemical Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University. His-research 
interests  are  Renewable  Energies,  Modeling  of  Thermal 
Equipment  for  Temperature  Management,  and  Nanotech-
nology (Especially Nanofluids). He is currently a member of the 
editorial  board  of  Energy  and  Renewable  Energy  journals 
published  by  Elsevier.  He  is  also  a  senior  associate  editor  of 
Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry, and an associate 
editor in Alexandria Engineering Journal (Elsevier) and Jour-
nal of Thermal Science (Springer). To date, he has published 
more than 160 SCI papers, with an H-index (H-index) of 49, 
and the article has been cited more than 8000 times. He was   

selected as a highly cited scientist for three consecutive years since 2018 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience88(2022)10096650