Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Polyurethane-based membranes for CO2  separation: A
comprehensive review

Farhad Ahmadijokani a, *, Hossein Molavi b, **, Salman Ahmadipouya a,c,
Mashallah Rezakazemi d, Ahmadreza Ghaffarkhah a, Milad Kamkar e, Akbar Shojaei c,
Mohammad Arjmand a, ***
a Nanomaterials and Polymer Nanocomposites Laboratory, School of Engineering, University of British Columbia, Kelowna, British Columbia, V1V 1V7, Canada
b Department of Chemistry, Institute for Advanced Studies in Basic Science (IASBS), Gava Zang, Zanjan, 45137-66731, Iran
c Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
d Faculty of Chemical and Materials Engineering, Shahrood University of Technology, Shahrood, Iran
e Multi-scale Materials Design Centre, Department of Chemical Engineering and Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L
3G1, Canada

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
Polyurethane
Poly(urethane-urea)
Membrane
Gas separation
Mixed-matrix membranes

The  membrane  process  has  been  considered  a  promising  technology  for  effective  CO2  capture  due  to  its
outstanding  features,  including  a  small  environmental  footprint,  reduced  energy  consumption,  simplicity  of
operation,  compact  design,  ease  of  scalability  and  maintenance,  and  low  capital  cost.  Among  the  developed
polymeric materials for membrane fabrication, polyurethane (PU) and poly(urethane-urea) (PUU) as multi-block
copolymers have exhibited great potential for CO2 capture because of their excellent mechanical properties, high
thermal stability, good film formation ability, favorable permeation properties, and a large diversity of mono-
mers  (i.e.,  polyol,  diisocyanate,  and  chain  extender)  for  the  synthesis  of  desired  polymers  with  prescribed
properties. However, PU- and PUU-based membranes’ gas selectivity is relatively low and thus not attractive for
practical gas separation (GS) applications. Therefore, the present review scrutinizes the main influential factors
on the gas transport properties and GS performance of these membranes. In this regard, we summarize the recent
progress in the PU-based membranes in view of (I) design and synthesis of new PUs, (II) blending with other
polymeric matrices, (III) cross-linking PU membranes, and (IV) fabricating PU-based mixed-matrix membranes
(MMMs) with deep insight into an increase in CO2 permeability, as well as CO2/other gases selectivity. Finally,
the challenges and future direction of PU-based membranes will be presented.

1. Introduction

Carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere has dramatically increased
in the past century, and its rapid emission has become one of the sig-
nificant  concerns  worldwide  [1–3].  Therefore, there  has  been  a  great
focus on developing advanced techniques to lower CO2  emissions into
the atmosphere [4–8]. Post-combustion CO2 separation from flue gases
is an important practice for CO2 emission reduction [7–9].

In  this  area,  membrane-based  separation  technology  is  acknowl-
edged as an economical and energy-efficient technique for the reduction
of CO2  emission into the environment, mainly because of its superior

properties, i.e., relatively low capital and operational costs, easy scal-
ability,  appropriate  stability  at  high  pressures,  reduced  energy  con-
sumption compared to traditional amine-based absorption techniques,
compact  system,  and  ease  of  operation  and  maintenance  [10–12].
However, traditional polymeric-based membrane materials are limited
by the trade-off between permeability and selectivity, which Robeson
first proposed [13,14]. Accordingly, polymeric-based membranes with
relatively high gas permeation show low gas selectivity and vice versa.
Polyurethane (PU) based membranes are regarded as high-performance
polymeric membranes for gas separation (GS) due to their flexibility in
tailoring their properties through changing the polymer chemistry [15].

* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.
*** Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: farhad.ahmadijokani@ubc.ca (F. Ahmadijokani), h.molavi@iasbs.ac.ir (H. Molavi), Mohammad.arjmand@ubc.ca (M. Arjmand).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101095
Received 4 June 2021; Received in revised form 12 February 2023; Accepted 28 March 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)101095Availableonline19April20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Therefore,  to  improve  the  GS  performances  of  PU-based  membranes,
several efforts have been made, including (I) designing and fabrication
of  new  PU-based  membranes,  (II)  blending  polymers  with  PU,  (III)
physical  post-modification  of  PU-based  membranes  via  thermal
annealing, (IV) chemical post-treatment of the PU-based membranes by
cross-linking,  (V)  using  inorganic  fillers  to  produce  mixed-matrix
membranes  (MMMs),  and  (VI)  designing  and  synthesizing  block  co-
polymers that contain various blocks with different properties [11,12,
16–24].

1.1. Gas permeation mechanism through dense membranes

Based on the structure of the membranes, they can be categorized
into two types, i.e., dense or nonporous membranes and porous mem-
branes [7]. The solution-diffusion mechanism is a well-known mecha-
nism for describing gas transport through dense polymeric membranes
(Fig. 1) [25]. According to this model, shown in Fig. 1b, the gas mole-
cules come in contact with the membrane surface, are then adsorbed and
subsequently  dissolved  within  the  membranes  on  the  high-pressure
upstream side. The dissolved molecules diffuse across the thickness of
the membranes, driven by the concentration gradient, and are finally
desorbed on the other side of the membrane (low-pressure downstream
surface  of  membrane),  where  the  diffusion  of  gas  molecules  is  in  a
non-equilibrium  state  (Fig.  1b  (III)).  After  a  while,  the  gas  diffusion
reaches an equilibrium state (Fig. 1b (IV)), in which, at this time, the gas

flux across the membrane shows linearity that can be explained by Fick’s
law [26]:

Flux = (cid:0) D

dC
dL

(1)

where D and C are the diffusion coefficient and concentration of the gas
molecules inside the dense membrane, respectively, and L is the thick-
ness of the membrane. Accordingly, the pure gas permeability (P) of the
membrane  at  a  steady-state  can  be  determined  using  the  following
equations [27]:

P =

flux × L
ΔP

(2)

(cid:0) 2  s

(cid:0) 10  cm3  (STP)  cm  cm

where  P is  the  pure gas  permeability  expressed in barrer  (1 barrer =
(cid:0) 1),  flux  is  the  molar  flux  of
(cid:0) 1  cm  Hg
10
penetrant,  L  is  the  thickness  of  the  dense  membrane,  and  ΔP  is  the
pressure difference across the dense membrane. Based on Henry’s law,
the concentrations of the gas molecules at upstream and downstream are
C1 and C2, respectively, and can be expressed as [28]:

Ci = S × pi

(3)

where S is the solubility of specific gas molecules in the membrane in an
equilibrium  state,  and  p  is  the  gas  pressure  on  the  upstream  and
downstream sides. Therefore, based on the solution-diffusion model, the
permeability  depends  on solubility (S) and  diffusivity (D)  coefficients
and can be determined using the following equation [19,29]:

P = S × D

(4)

Accordingly, the ideal selectivity of a membrane toward a gas pair is

determined by the ratio of the permeability of pure gases [19]:

αA/B =

PA
PB

=

SA
SB

×

DA
DB

(5)

where the SA/SB and DA/DB are the solubility selectivity and diffusivity
selectivity, respectively. It is worth mentioning that the ideal selectivity
for pure  gases is  different from the actual selectivity  of gas mixtures.
Accordingly,  the  actual  selectivity  or  separation  factor  (αʹ
A/B)  of  a
membrane  in  a  binary  gas  mixture  is  determined  using  the  following
equation [30]:
yA/yB
xA/xB

A/B =
α

′

(6)

where y and x are the mole fractions of gases in the permeate and feed,
respectively. The difference between ideal selectivity and actual selec-
tivity is attributed to the complex interdependent transport of mixture
gases  through  the  membranes  [31].  Moreover,  the  enhancement  or
reduction of the actual selectivity compared to the ideal selectivity can
be attributed to the difference in solubility and diffusivity coefficients of
gases. Accordingly, the permeability of a specific gas through a mem-
brane depends on the solubility and diffusivity coefficients. Therefore,
the  gas  selectivity  of  dense  membranes  based  on  this  model  can  be
determined via solubility selectivity and diffusivity selectivity.

Generally,  the  possible  interactions  between  gas  molecules  and
polymer chains determine the solubility selectivity [32,33]. In polymers
in  the  glassy  state,  the  gas  selectivity  is  largely  determined  by  the
diffusion coefficient ratio, which is mainly dependent on the molecular
sizes of the gases. Whereas, in polymers in the rubbery state, the solu-
bility  coefficient  is  the  main  factor  that  is  mainly  dependent  on  the
condensability  of  the  gas  molecules  and  the  interactions  of  the  gas
molecules with the polymer chains [34]. Accordingly, for highly con-
densable gases like CO2, the concentration of gas molecules within the
membrane can be calculated using the Flory-Huggins model:

Fig.  1. (a)  Schematic  illustration  of  solution-diffusion  mechanism  in  dense
membranes [35]. Copyright 2012, Reproduced with permission from RSC. (b)
Schematic illustration of permeation mechanism: (I) contact of gas molecules
with membrane surface on the upstream side, (II) adsorption and dissolution of
gas molecules into the surface of the membrane, (III) diffusion of dissolved gas
molecules across the thickness of the membranes because of the concentration
gradient,  and  (IV)  the  gas  molecules  achieved  a  diffusion  equilibrium  with  a
linear  concentration  gradient  through  the  membrane  [28].  Copyright  2021,
Reproduced with permission from MDPI.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010952

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

properties, phase-separated domain morphology, glass transition tem-
peratures  (Tg),  mechanical  properties,  and  density  [96].  Moreover,  it
was reported that PU-based membranes have been widely applied for GS
mainly due to their good mechanical properties, high thermal stability,
and favorable permeation properties [56,91,97–100].

Although numerous studies have been performed on the GS perfor-
mance of PU-based membranes, a comprehensive review paper on this
topic is missing. Therefore, this paper presents a detailed discussion of
the  morphology,  structure,  and  GS  properties  of  the  PU-based  mem-
branes and their modified derivatives. Also, the dominant factors in the
GS of PU-based membranes are reviewed, and the applicable techniques
for improving their GS performance are delineated. Finally, the avail-
able data on PU-based membranes for CO2 separation is analyzed, and
the improvements in CO2 permeability and CO2/other gases selectivity
are discussed.

2. Polyurethane-based membranes

2.1. Structure and properties of PU-based membranes

PU  is  composed  of  alternating  macrodiol  soft  segment  (SS)  and
urethane-rich hard segment (HS), which are chemically linked together
along  a  macromolecular  backbone  (Fig.  2a)  [101].  HSs  are  usually
constructed  from  the  reaction  of  diisocyanates  with  chain  extenders
(diamine or diol) and include strongly hydrogen-bonded urea, urethane,

ln

p
psat

= ln φ2 + (1 (cid:0) φ2) + χ(1 (cid:0) φ2)2

(7)

where psat refers to the saturated vapor pressure under the experiment
temperature, χ refers to the Flory-Huggins coefficient, and φ2  refers to
the volume fraction of the gas dissolved within the polymer matrix [28].

1.2. Selection of suitable polymer for CO2  separation

Up to now, many research studies have been performed on designing
and  developing  polymeric  membranes  to  prepare  a  high-performance
membrane  with  high  CO2  permeability  and  high  CO2/gas  selectivity
[36–40].  In  CO2/separation,  there  is  a  consensus  among  most  re-
searchers to use polymeric membranes with high solubility selectivity
[19,21,41–43]. Based on this strategy, rubbery polymeric membranes
with  high solubility  for  acidic gases,  e.g., poly(ethylene  oxide) (PEO)
containing  polymers  such  as  poly(ethylene(oxide)-poly(butylene  tere-
phthalate)  multi-block  copolymers  (PEO-PBT),  polyether  block  amide
(PEBA  or  PEBAX),  and  polyurethanes  (PUs),  have  been  known  as  an
excellent choice for CO2  separation [44–54]. It is well known that the
CO2  molecules  can  interact  with  the  polar  groups  in  the  membrane
matrix via quadrupole-dipole interactions due to their high quadrupole
moment [55–57]. It is reported that the polymeric membranes with high
solubility selectivity are good candidates for CO2/N2  separation, while
the  diffusivity  selectivity  does  not  play  an  important  role  in  CO2/N2
separation [42,43,58]. However, the high CO2 solubility membranes are
essential for selective CO2/H2 separation because the smaller size of H2
molecules compared to CO2 molecules results in undesirable diffusivity
selectivity  [59,60].  Therefore,  to  selectively  separate  CO2  from  H2,  a
membrane  with  strong  CO2  interactions  and  poor  size  sieving  ability
would be considered a good candidate [61]. However, due to the small
kinetics  diameter  of  H2,  only  rubbery  polymeric  membranes  show
higher CO2  permeability than H2, and glassy polymers are not a good
choice for this separation process [23,58].

Polymers containing ether groups, i.e., poly (propylene oxide) (PPO),
PEO, and poly (tetramethylene oxide) (PTMO), have a high affinity to-
ward  CO2  molecules  due  to  dipole-quadrupole  interactions,  and  they
provide a good balance between CO2 permeability and CO2/other gases
selectivity  [7,62–66].  Thus,  ether  group-containing  polymeric  mem-
branes are regarded as one of the best polymeric membranes for CO2
separation from other light gas mixtures like flue gas [67,68]. However,
the polymers mentioned above, especially PEO, have a great ability to
crystallize, resulting in reduced CO2 permeability as crystalline domains
are impermeable [69]. Additionally, these polymers’  poor mechanical
properties  and  film-forming  ability  are  other  limiting  parameters  for
their use as membranes [55,70–72]. Therefore, many researchers have
focused  on  preparing  ether-groups-containing  membranes  with  high
mechanical  properties,  good  film-forming  ability,  and  low  crystalline
domains [73–79]. Synthesizing phase-separated block copolymers con-
taining ether groups, like PU, PEBAX, and PEO-PBT is one of the com-
pure
mon
ether-group-containing  polymers  mentioned  above  [80–88].  Table  S1
summarizes  the  GS  performance  of  these  phase-separated  block
copolymers.

techniques

drawbacks

overcome

the

to

of

PU-based membranes are regarded as high-performance polymeric
membranes for gas separation. This attribute is due to the flexibility in
tailoring their properties via controlling their chemistry. Moreover, the
presence of polar urea, urethane, and electron-donating –NH groups in
the structure of PU membranes can increase the solubility coefficient of
CO2 via strong dipole-quadrupole interactions between polar groups and
CO2  molecules  [55,58,89,90].  PU  is  a  block  copolymer  that  contains
hard  segments  (urea/urethane  groups)  and  soft  segments  (poly-
ester/polyether  groups)  [91,92].  Accordingly,  the  morphology  and
structure of PU can be adjusted using various monomers, initial com-
positions, and different synthesis methods [93–95]. Therefore, it would
be  easy  to  control  the  final  properties  of  PU  membranes,  e.g.,  GS

Fig.  2. (a)  Schematic  illustration  of  a  segmented  PU,  (b)  Hydrogen  bonding
between  the  –N-H  and  –C=O  groups  of  the  urethane  of  neighboring  chains
promoting the phase separation, and (c) Hydrogen bonding between the –N-H
groups of urethane and the polar groups of the SSs, leading to phase interfer-
ence [19,96]. Copyright 2018, Reproduced with permission from Elsevier Sci-
ence Ltd., Oxford, UK.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010953

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

and urethane urea groups, which have crystalline melting temperatures
(Tm) or Tg  above room temperature. The urethane groups of HSs can
form hydrogen bonds and hence determine the PU membranes’ rigidity
and mechanical properties [102–105]. While, the SSs are generally low
molecular weight polyols (polyester or polyether), which have Tg below
the ambient temperature. The SSs of PU are more flexible and longer
than  the  HSs  and  show  relatively  low  intermolecular  interactions,
determining  the  flexibility  and  elasticity  of  the  PU  membranes
[106–109]. Because of the thermodynamic instability between the hard
and  soft  segments,  phase  separation  between  these  domains  occurs,
determining the overall properties of PU membranes [95]. The proper-
ties of the PU membranes are significantly dependent on the type and
percentage of the soft and hard segments and the degree of phase sep-
aration between these phases [91,110–112].

As shown in Fig. 2b, the interactions between HSs of the neighboring
chains are significantly stronger than the interactions between HSs and
SSs.  The  urethane  groups  of  HSs  can  interact  via  hydrogen  bonds,
forming phase-separated PU membranes [19]. Accordingly, the possible
hydrogen bonding interactions between various phases can be signifi-
cantly determined using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy.
Therefore, the degree of phase separation (DPS) between soft and hard
segments can be calculated as follows [113,114]:

DPS =

R
R + 1

(8)

where R is the carbonyl hydrogen bonding index, which can be deter-
mined as follow [19]:

R =

Abonded
Afree

=

A1702
A1730

(9)

where A1702  and A1730  are the absorbance intensity of the bonded and
free carbonyl groups, respectively. Accordingly, increasing the number
of hydrogen bonds between the –N-H and –C=O groups of the urethane
leads to an increase in DPS and permeability of gases through the PU
membranes [55,89,115]. However, as it is obvious from Fig. 2c, the HS
and  SS  can  interact  via  inter-urethane  hydrogen  bonds  between  the
polar (ether or ester) groups of SSs and the –N-H groups of the HSs. Due
to this phenomenon, the hard phases or domains are relatively dissolved
in the soft domains, and phase mixing occurs [19,116]. In this condition,
the chain mobility of the SSs and the total free volume of the PU matrix
significantly decrease. Therefore, by limiting the chain mobility of the
SSs  and  decreasing  the  free  volume  of  the  PU  membrane,  the  gas
permeation of the PU membrane decreases while its gas selectivity in-
creases.  Accordingly,  it  can  be  expected  that  the  possible  interaction
between SSs and HSs and the DPS between these phases are the main
parameters controlling the GS performance of PU membranes.

2.2. GS performance of the PU-based membranes

Up  to  now,  many  investigations  have  been  performed  on  the  GS
performance  of  the  PU  membranes.  The  main  goal  of  these  in-
vestigations was to find a logical relationship between the microstruc-
ture  of  the  PU  membranes  and  their  GS  performances.  Different
parameters,  e.g.,  type  of  reactants,  their  initial  composition,  and  the
synthesis  methods,  affect  the  structure  and  morphology  of  the  PU
membranes. These parameters subsequently can affect the DPS between
SSs and HSs, degree of cross-linking, Tg, density, and GS performance of
PU membranes [80,117–120]. Therefore, the relationship between the
structure and final properties of the PU membranes should be known to
design and synthesize PU membranes with better GS performance.

Based on the results previously reported, the type and length of the
hard and soft segments, as well as the type and length of the chain ex-
tenders, which determine the percentage of the soft and hard segments
and,  consequently,  the  DPS,  affect  the  GS  properties  of  the  PU  mem-
branes  [121,122].  Moreover,  it  was  reported  that  by  increasing  the

amount of HSs, the percentage and size of the free volume within the PU
membranes decrease [112,123–125]. A direct relationship between the
gas permeability of the PU membranes and the free volume was pro-
posed by Wang et al. [126]. They found that the permeation of gases
through the PU membranes increases by increasing the free volume and
size.

2.2.1. Effect of hard segments on GS performance

Generally, HSs are responsible for the required mechanical strength
of the PU and PUU membranes, while the gas permeation through these
membranes dominantly occurs through the SSs. Usually, there are some
soft  (or  hard)  segments  dissolved  in  hard  (or  soft)  domains  in  these
membranes. As a result, the presence of rigid HSs within the flexible SSs
domains  has  been  proposed  to  restrict  the  chain  mobility  of  the  SSs,
resulting in a reduction in the permeability of gases through PU mem-
branes [127–130]. Therefore, a reduction in the gas permeability of PU
membranes with increasing the fraction of HS suggests that the HSs are
usually  impermeable  because  of  their  highly  compact  structure.
Generally, the HS is formed by reacting with a different terminal dii-
-methylenebis
socyanate  (i.e.,  isophorone  diisocyanate  (IPDI),  4,4
(phenyl  isocyanate)  (MDI),  toluene  diisocyanate  (TDI),  4,4
-diisocya-
nate  dicyclohexylmethane,  (H12MDI),  hexamethylene  diisocyanate
(HDI), etc. (Fig. 3a),) with various low molecular weight diamines or
diols as chain extenders.

′

′

Semsarzadeh and coworkers reported that the permeability of CO2,
CH4, and N2 gases through PU membranes increased with decreasing the
amount  and  length  of  HSs,  while  the  ideal  CO2/CH4  and  CO2/N2  se-
lectivities  decreased  [122].  Accordingly,  it  was  found  that  the  PU
membrane  containing  43  wt%  HS  showed  CO2  permeability  of  38.2
barrer and CO2/N2 selectivity of 33.21 (see Table S2). Whereas, the CO2
permeability of the PU membrane containing 26 wt% HS increased to
79.5 barrer, and its CO2 selectivity over N2 decreased to 20.9. Moreover,
the results obtained from the GS of PU membranes containing the same
HS  content  but  various  SS  lengths  revealed  that  by  increasing  the  SS
length,  the  gas  permeability  increases  while  the  gas  selectivity  de-
creases.  Similarly,  Grabczyk  and  coworkers  reported  that  with
increasing  the  content  of  HSs  in  the  structure  of  PU  membranes,  the
percentage  and  size  of  free  volumes,  as  well  as  the  percentage  of
permeable  domains,  decreased,  resulting  in  a  decrease  in  the  gas
permeability and an increase in the gas selectivity [80]. They also re-
ported that the membranes prepared from PUs with shorter and more
polar  SS,  or  using  a  chain  extender,  showed  lower  gas  permeability.
Ruaan and coworkers [131] and Huang and Lai [120] also investigated
the  effect  of  HS  content  of  hydroxyl-terminated  polybutadiene
(HTPB)-based  PU membranes on the  GS properties of  synthesized PU
membranes.

Since the chain mobility of the HSs may increase the DPS between
soft  and  hard  segments,  replacing  aromatic  diisocyanates  with  linear
and  aliphatic  diisocyanates  results  in  an  increase  in  phase  separation
rate  and  the  DPS  between  soft  and  hard  segments  [132,133].  For
instance, Sadeghi and coworkers reported that changing diisocyanates
structure from aromatic and alicyclic to aliphatic leads to an increase in
DPS and a reduction in Tg of different segments [115]. Accordingly, the
HDI-based PU membranes exhibited higher DPS and gas permeability
than  IPDI-based  PU  membranes,  whereas  IPDI-based  PU  membranes
showed  higher  gas  permeability  than  TDI-based  PU  membranes.  The
fundamental and main reason for higher DPS in HDI- and IPDI-based PU
membranes compared to TDI-based PU membranes is their high ability
to form ordered structures in their HSs. Moreover, the linear structure of
HDI and its ability to form hydrogen bonds and crystallization are other
reasons for the higher DPS of HDI-based PU membranes.

2.2.2. Effect of soft segments on GS performance

As reported previously, the soft domains or SSs are responsible for
the gas permeation through the PU membranes [91]. Therefore, higher
phase separation between the soft and hard segments is preferred for

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010954

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Fig. 3. Chemical structure of various (a) diisocyanates, (b) SSs, and (c) chain extenders.

rendering  membranes  with  a  higher  gas  permeability.  Different  poly-
mers,  including  poly  (ethylene  glycol)  (PEG),  polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS), poly (tetramethylene glycol) (PTMG), poly (propylene glycol)
(PPG),  polycaprolactone  (PCL),  hydroxyl-terminated  polybutadiene
(HTPB),  etc.,  have  been  widely  used  as  SS  for  the  preparation  of  PU
membranes (Fig. 3). A high CO2  permeability but a relatively low CO2
selectivity  was  obtained  for  the  PDMS-based  PU  membranes  [102,
134–136]. PDMS is one of the most important highly permeable poly-
mers,  which  has  been  extensively  used  as  SS  for  preparing  PU  mem-
branes. Generally, PDMS-based PU membranes exhibit a high DPS, as
well as high CO2  permeability, because of low compatibility between
soft  and  hard  segments  [137].  However,  it  was  found  that  the  CO2
selectivity of PDMS-based PU membranes containing two types of SSs is
dramatically higher than those containing only PDMS as the sole SS [98,
102,136,138]. Accordingly, adding different polyethers (i.e., PEO, PPO,
and  PTMO)  to  the  PDMS-based  PU  membranes  decreased  the  CO2
permeability but increased the CO2/N2 selectivity [102].

Moreover, it was reported that by increasing the PDMS content in
PU, the gas permeability of PPO-based PU membranes increased due to
the high content of highly permeable siloxane segment, low aggregation
of urethane/urea groups, and low degree of cross-linking [136]. Pour-
naghshband Isfahani et al. synthesized a series of PU membranes based
on mixtures of PPG and PEG and different PEG-PPG triblock copolymers
(PEG-b-PPG) as SSs [58]. It was found that the PPG segments prevented
the crystallization of PEG, and rendered amorphous PU membranes at
various  temperatures  (25–50
C).  The  PU  membranes  containing
PEG-b-PPG  triblock  copolymers  as  SS  exhibited  higher  GS  selectivity
than  PEG-based  PU  membranes,  while  the  presence  of  PPG  pendant
methyl  group  prevented  local  crystallization.  Accordingly,  because  of
the  absence  of  the  crystalline  SSs,  the  prepared  PU  membranes  con-
taining PEG-b-PPG triblock copolymers showed higher chain mobility,
which resulted in higher gas permeability.

◦

Many studies have reported that ether-based PU membranes are a
good candidate for separating acidic gases like H2S and CO2 from other
gases [45,66,139–142]. For instance, Sadeghi and coworkers fabricated
a series of PU membranes based on HDI and 1,4-butanediol as HSs, and a
mixture of PEG (molecular weight of 2000 g/mol) and PTMG (molecular
weight of 2000 g/mol) as SS with various weight ratios of PEG/PTMG (i.
e., 100/0, 75/25, 50/50, 25/75, and 0/100) [55]. It was found that with
increasing the content of PEG in the PU membranes, the DPS and chain
mobility  decreased, while the  Tg  of  SS increased,  which resulted  in a
decrease in the CO2 permeability and an increase in the CO2 selectivity.
Comparing the PEG- and PTMG-based PU membranes revealed that the

PEG-based PU  membranes  showed  lower  gas  permeability  because of
the  semi-crystalline  structure  of  PEG  SS  and  strong  hydrogen  bonds
between soft and hard segments due to the presence of higher ethereal
groups in PEG-based PU membranes.

Moreover,  it  was  reported  that  poly(ether-urethane)  membranes
showed more favorable GS performances in comparison with the poly
(ester-urethane) membranes, mainly as a consequence of the presence
of ethereal linkages, which leads to higher phase separations [115,120].
Accordingly, it was found that by changing the SS from PCL to PMTG
and  PPG,  the  DPS  between  soft  and  hard  segments  increased,  which
resulted in increased gas permeability of PU membranes [115]. Among
these three SSs, the PPG-based membranes exhibited the highest DPS
and  gas  permeability.  In  another  study,  Semsarzadeh  and  coworkers
investigated the effect of SS length on the GS performance of PU mem-
branes [122]. The obtained results revealed that the longer SS created a
larger  soft  domain  size,  showing  higher  DPS,  and  higher  gas  perme-
ability compared to the shorter SS. Similarly, Park et al. [102] and Li
et al. [66] studied the effect of polyol type on the microstructure and gas
permeation  properties  of  PU  membranes,  in  which  they  reported  an
increase  in  fractional  free  volume  and  gas  permeability  through  PU
membranes  with  increasing  the  molecular  weight  of  polyether  and
increasing the SS content.

2.2.3. Effect of chain extenders on GS performance

The  type  and  length  of  chain  extenders  affect  the  DPS,  density,
crystallinity, Tg, and the GS properties of PU membranes [89,122,143,
144]. Various common chain extenders, i.e., 1,4-butane diamine (BDA),
tetraethylenepentamine  (TEPA),  1,10-decane  diol  (DDO),  1,4-butane
diol  (BDO),  4,9-dioxa-1,12-dodecanediamine  (dioxa-DDDA),  N-meth-
yldiethanolamine (MDEA), 1,6-hexane diamine (HDA) 4,7,10-trioxa-1,
13-tridecanediamine (dioxa-TDDA), ethylene diamine (EDA), ethylene
glycol  (EG),  1,6-hexane  diol  (HDO),  3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanediamine
(dioxa-ODA),  1,8-octanediamine
(ODA),  3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanediol
(dioxa-ODO), etc. (Fig. 3), have been widely used for the preparation
of PU membranes. For instance, Sadeghi et al. studied the effect of urea
and  urethane  content  on  the  GS  performance  of  poly(urethane-urea)
(PUU)  membranes  by  using  different  amounts  of  BDA  and  BDO  as
chain extenders [89]. The obtained results from FTIR and differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC) analyses revealed that with increasing the
urea content in the membranes, the DPS between soft and hard segments
and the flexibility of SSs increased. Due to this microphase separation,
the gas permeability through the PUU membranes increased while their
gas  selectivity  decreased.  Therefore,  the  authors  suggested  that  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010955

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

membranes containing BDA as a chain extender would show higher DPS
and gas permeability in comparison to that containing BDO as a chain
extender. Additionally, this group also reported that the DPS, as well as
the  gas  permeability  of  PU  membranes,  increased  by  increasing  the
length of chain extenders [122]. They also found that with changing the
length of chain extenders, the CO2/N2 selectivity changed significantly,
while  the  CO2/CH4  selectivity  did  not  show  any  marked  changes.
Therefore, based on these observations, they proposed that solubiliza-
tion  is  the  main  mechanism  in  gas  permeation  through  the  PU
membranes.

In  another  work,  Pournaghshband  Isfahani  et  al.  investigated  the
effect of different diamine and diol chain extenders with various chain
lengths and ether-linkage contents (i.e., BDO, BDA, ODA, dioxa-ODO,
dioxa-ODA,  dioxa-DDDA,  and  dioxa-TDDA)  on  the  phase  separation
and GS properties of PU and PUU membranes [91]. It was found that in
the presence of ethereal linkages in the chain extenders, the DPS and the
gas permeability of the prepared PU and PUU membranes significantly
decreased.  They  suggested  that  at  this  condition,  the  interactions  be-
tween HSs and SSs increased, which resulted in enhanced miscibility of
the soft and hard segments and phase interference. Furthermore, they
reported that the PUU membranes with improved GS properties would
be achieved using longer chain extenders or diamine as chain extenders.
Accordingly, the octanediamine-based PUU membrane with the highest
DPS showed the highest CO2 permeability (≈160 barrer) and moderate
CO2/N2 selectivity (≈30).

Moreover, Fakhar and coworkers reported that by using bulkier and
more rigid chain extenders, higher-performance PUU membranes would
be obtained as a result of inducing more incompatibility between soft
and hard segments [97]. Therein, they used two bulky chain extenders
based  on  cyanuric  chloride,  naphthylamine/aniline,  and  hydrazine  to
prepare PUU membranes (Fig. 4). Based on the FTIR, DSC, and atomic
force microscopy (AFM) analyses, the bulkier PUU membranes exhibited
better  gas  permeation  ability  which  is  correlated  to  the  higher  DPS,
larger fractional free volume, and lower Tg. As shown in Fig. 4c, in the
bulkier PUU membranes, the space between the neighboring chains in
the  hard  domains  is  significantly  larger  than  that  of  the  linear  PUU
membranes. Therefore, the hard domains can contribute to gas perme-
ation  in  this  condition,  leading  to  higher  gas  permeability.  More
importantly,  it  was  found  that  by  using  bulkier  chain  extenders,  gas
permeability increased and gas selectivity enhanced.

In  another  work,  the  same  research  group  used  three  novel  chain
extenders  containing  various-length  aliphatic  side  chains  (Fig.  5a)  to
prepare  PUU  membranes  with  high  gas  permeability  and  selectivity
[145].  Although  the  fractional  free  volumes  of  the  prepared  PUU
membranes  decreased  with  lengthening  the  side  chain  of  chain  ex-
tenders,  the  DPS  between  soft  and  hard  segments  increased,  which
resulted  in  increased  pure  and  mixed  gas  permeabilities  of  the  PUU
membranes. The authors proposed that the migration of the side chains

to the surface of hard domains, shielding the hard domains, and filling
the  hard/soft  interface  are  the  main  reasons  for  this  observation
(Fig. 5b). Since the aliphatic side chains are intrinsically hydrocarbons
[146], they are not compatible with the HSs, but they have more affinity
to interact with SSs, which results in the migration of the side chains to
the  surface  of  hard  domains.  Additionally,  their  shielding  effect  may
result  in  less  accessible  –N-H  groups  in  the  HSs  interacting  with  the
ethereal groups of SSs via hydrogen bonding; thereby, higher DPS be-
tween soft and hard segments would occur. Moreover, it was found that
the improvement in the gas permeability of PUU membranes with longer
side chains and lower fractional free volumes may be due to the higher
chain mobility and plasticizing effect of side chains. Eventually, based
on the obtained results, the authors suggested that the transport of gas
molecules through the polymeric membranes depends on various fac-
tors, such as chain mobility, the DPS between soft and hard segments,
diffusion barriers, free volume, and the purity of the phases.

2.3. Modification of PU-based membranes via chemical cross-linking

PUs with good film-forming ability and excellent GS performance are
promising candidates for fabricating GS membranes. However, the low
thermomechanical  stability  and  weak  CO2  plasticization  resistance
under realistic GS conditions limit the industrial applications of these
membranes [147,148]. Therefore, to overcome these drawbacks, several
studies have been performed on PU membranes so far [19,41,99,100,
149,150].  For  instance,  Norouzbahari  and  Gharibi  prepared  a
cross-linked  PEG-based  PU  membrane  via  thiol-epoxy  click  polymeri-
zation reaction using epoxy-terminated PEG-based urethane prepolymer
(EPU)  and  a  tetrathiol  cross-linker,  namely  pentaerythritol  tetrakis
(3-mercaptopropionate) (PETMP) in the presence of poly(ethylene gly-
col)  diglycidyl  ether  (PEGDE)  (Fig.  6a)  [99].  It  was  claimed  that  the
optimal  membrane  (EMT2)  showed  an  excellent  CO2  separation  per-
formance  compared to various PEG-based PU membranes reported in
the literature (Table S2). It was found that the thioether linkages in the
HS of EMT2 membrane enhanced the chain mobility and could interact
with CO2  molecules, which increases the CO2  solubility, as well as the
CO2  permeability  coefficient.  Additionally,  the  presence  of  polar  and
electron-rich  ether  oxygen  units  in  the  SS,  originating  from  EPU  and
PEGDE, increases the CO2  permeability and  CO2/light gas  selectivity,
especially  for  CO2/N2,  reaching  near  the  CO2/N2  Robeson’s  upper
bound (Fig. 6b).

In  another  work,  Pournaghshband  Isfahani  et  al.  used  a  series  of
cross-linking agents (i.e., EG, BDO, HDO, ODO, EDA, BDA, HDA, and
ODA) with various chain lengths and functionalities to cross-link PU via
an esterification-based reaction (Fig. 7a) [100]. It was found that the
chemical  cross-linking  rigidified  the  PU  chains  and  exhibited  a
three-fold enhancement in CO2  plasticization resistance in comparison
with  the  non-cross-linked  PU  and  commercial  PEBAX®  2533

Fig. 4. Schematic representation steps for the synthesis of (a) aniline-based chain extender and (b) naphthylamine-based chain extender, and (c) schematic illus-
tration  of  increased  HS  chain  spacing  in  the  bulkier  PUU  membranes  in  comparison  to  the  linear  ones  based  on  fractional  free  volume  [97].  Copyright  2019,
Reproduced with permission from Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010956

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Fig. 5. (a) Schematic synthesis steps of (I) Hexylamine-, (II) Dodecylamine-, and (III) Octadecylamine-based chain extenders. (b) The proposed shielding effect of
aliphatic side chains on the main chain of HSs [145]. Copyright 2020, Reproduced with permission from Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK.

Fig.  6. (a)  Thiol-epoxy  click  polymerization  process  for  synthesized  cross-linked  membranes  and  (b)  comparison  of  the  prepared  cross-linked  membranes  with
Robeson’s upper bound [99]. Copyright 2020, Reproduced with permission from Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK.

membranes (Fig. 7b). Moreover, the mechanical results revealed a great
improvement in Young’s modulus (≈600%) and hardness (≈200%) for
the cross-linked PU membranes compared to the non-cross-linked ones.
This improvement in the mechanical properties of the cross-linked PU
(XPU) membranes can be due to the strong interactions between the HSs
of PU chains, which result in higher DPS between soft and hard segments
of XPU membranes. However, it was obvious that the CO2 permeability
of the cross-linked PU membranes was significantly lower than that of
non-cross-linked PU membranes, while their CO2/N2  and CO2/CH4  se-
lectivities were slightly higher than the pristine PU membrane. Although
the  CO2  permeability  of  the  XPU-HDA  membrane  decreased  slightly,
good  mechanical  properties  and  the  film-forming  ability  of  the  XPU
polymer facilitate its application as a thin film on the alumina support
(Fig. 7d). Based on the obtained results, the authors proposed that the
prepared membranes have great potential as highly durable membranes
for industrial GS applications like CO2 capture from flue gas, natural gas,
and  syngas  purification.  However,  using  these  membranes  at  higher
pressures (plasticization limits) is not recommended. Therefore, these
membranes are not suitable for applications under high pressures, high

temperatures, and those that require high gas permeability. Moreover,
the raw material is more expensive. One of the possible ways to over-
come this issue is post-cross-linking technique. Nevertheless, the diffi-
cult  processes  for  removing  byproducts,  complicated  cross-linking
reactions,  and  moisture-sensitive  materials  make  post-cross-linking
technique  unfavorable,  particularly  for  designing  and  developing
thin-film GS membranes. Another possible strategy to solve this issue is
to convert impermeable hard segments (IHSs) to permeable hard seg-
ments  (PHSs)  in  the  chemical  structure  of  the  polymeric  membranes.
Generally,  the  hard  segments  of  polymeric  membranes  are  imperme-
able. The rigid backbone changes the soft segment dynamics and can
affect the permeability of polymeric membranes. The crystalline IHSs
provide  strong  mechanical  properties  and  good  CO2  plasticization
resistance [151]. Hence, designing and developing new PU membranes
with PHSs is critical.

In this  area,  Pournaghshband Isfahani and  coworkers  developed  a
more facile method than the post-cross-linking technique. They used the
direct  synthesis  of  the  novel  PU  structure  containing  rigid  functional
groups to produce PU membranes with high mechanical properties and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010957

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Fig. 7. (a) Schematic illustration of the PU
cross-linking  reaction,  (b)  CO2  perme-
ability  of  cross-linked  PU  (XPU)  with
various  crosslinking  agents,  pristine  PU,
and  PEBAX®  2533  as  a  function  of  CO2
feed  pressure,  (c)  CO2/N2  and  CO2/CH4
ideal  selectivity  and  separation  factor  for
XPU-HDA membrane as a function of feed
pressure  at  35
C  and  various  feed  gas
compositions, and (d) cross-sectional SEM
image  of  the  thin  film  composite  mem-
brane  of  XPU-HDA  on  α-alumina  porous
support  [100].  Copyright  2016,  Repro-
duced with permission from RSC.

◦

enhanced  CO2  plasticization  resistance  [150].  They  developed  PU
membranes with high CO2  plasticization resistance using the pentipty-
cene diamine (PEN-NH2) as a bulky chain extender (Fig. 8a–c). The rigid
structure  of  this  bulky  chain  extender  with  five  arene  rings  and  an
H-shaped structure hinders the chain packing in the HSs of PU mem-
branes efficiently. Accordingly, the PEN-PUU50 thin-film PU membrane

with  a  thickness  of  about  100  nm  exhibited  a  high  CO2  permeability
(450 GPU) and a CO2/N2  selectivity of 25.5, which was slightly lower
than  the  thick  membranes  with  CO2/N2  selectivity  of  28.2.  More
importantly, the bulk and thin-film membranes of PEN-PUU50 showed
high plasticization resistance toward CO2 pressure up to 28 and 16 bar
(Fig. 8d).

Fig. 8. (a) Schematic synthesis of pentiptycene diol (PEN-OH) and pentiptycene diamine (PEN-NH2), (b) schematic illustration of the synthesized PU structure, (c)
chain  threading  of  the  PU  backbone  via  the  pentiptycene  clefts,  (d)  comparison  of  the  CO2/N2  and  CO2/H2  selectivities  of  the  bulk  and  thin-film  composite
membranes of TOL-PUU and PEN-PUU50, and (e) CO2 plasticization of the bulk and thin-film composite membranes of TOL-PUU and PEN-PUU50 [150]. Copyright
2018, Reproduced with permission from ACS.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010958

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Ultraviolet  (UV)-curable  polyurethane,  which  is  completely  cross-
linked with UV light within only a few seconds under ambient condi-
tions,  is  another  important  polymer  that  has  been  widely  used  for
different  applications,  including  coatings,  adhesives,  sealants,  and
membranes [152]. Basically, acrylate-terminated polyurethane (APU),
as a common UV-curable polymer, is a PU molecule end-capped with
vinyl  monomers,  making  APU  a  cross-linkable  polymer.  Usually,  for
cross-linked APU membranes, the reactive APU oligomers were diluted
with  different  reactive  diluents  like  acrylate  monomers  to  improve
processability [152–154]. Moreover, it is worth noting that the reactive
diluents contribute to the final cross-linked APU membranes, resulting
in the fabrication of cross-linked membranes with higher thermal, me-
chanical,  and  physical  properties  than  conventional  PU  membranes
[41].

Based on this strategy, Molavi et al. prepared a series of composite
membranes  based  on  APU  as  solvent-free  and  UV-curable  composite
polymeric membranes for CO2/N2  separation [19]. Therein, the APUs
were synthesized using PEG with various molecular weights (i.e., 600,
1000, 1500, 2000, and 4000 g/mol), TDI, and 2-hydroxyethyl methac-
rylate  (HEMA), while the composite membranes were prepared  using
UV-curable APU/acrylate diluent (APUA) as a selective layer and pol-
yester/polysulfone (PS/PSF) as a porous support layer. The results ob-
tained from DSC and FTIR analyses revealed that the DPS between the
soft  and  hard  segments  increased  with  the  molecular  weight  of  PEG.
Moreover, the experimental GS results indicated that the gas permeation
behavior of the synthesized APUA membranes was dominantly similar
to rubbery membranes. At the same time, their morphological charac-
teristics  like  cross-linking  density and  DPS  significantly  affected  their
overall  GS  behavior.  More  importantly,  the  composite  membrane
showed long-term gas permeation stability and strong adhesion to the
support  layer  without  delamination  between  two  layers  even  after
soaking  in  water  for  4  days,  mainly  because  of  its  stable  structure,
originating from the cross-linked network.

3. Polyurethane-based blend membranes

For practical GS applications like CO2  separation from natural and
flue  gases,  developing  high-performance  membranes  with  high  CO2
permeability  and  selectivity  is  of  utmost  importance  [30,155].
Designing new block copolymers, polymer blending, chemically modi-
fied  polymers,  and  MMMs  is  an  attractive  method  for  developing
membranes with high GS performance [12,17,77,156–161]. However, it
is  feasible  to  achieve  favorable  properties  of  different  materials  and
combine the benefits of highly selective and highly permeable polymers
by simple blending of different polymers [162–165]. Generally, polymer
blending is an efficient technique to obtain new polymeric membranes
with better physicochemical properties than individual polymers [164,
166–168]. This technique offers a cost- and time-effective combination
of  various  polymers  with  different  physicochemical  and  separation
properties to achieve the favorable superior properties not found in the
individual  polymers  [169–171].  The  polymer  blends  are  usually  pre-
pared by melt mixing, solution mixing, extrusion, and molding processes
[172].

Generally,  the  polymer  blend  morphology  can  be  categorized  as
miscible  and  phase-separated  (partially  miscible)  blends  [173].  In
miscible blends, the polymer pairs are wholly dissolved into each other
at  molecular  levels  and  make  a  homogeneous  single-phase  mixture.
While  in  phase-separated  blends,  the  polymer  pairs  are  not  dissolved
into each other and are separated by an interface between two phases
[174]. Usually, these two phases have a weak polymer-polymer inter-
face, which results in inferior thermo-mechanical properties of immis-
cible  blends  [175–177].  The  DSC,  X-ray  or  light  scattering,  and
microscopy imaging analyses can study the phase behavior of polymeric
blends. Usually, a miscible and homogeneous blend exhibits a single Tg,
while a phase-separated one shows two distinct Tg’s, originating from
individual polymers [172]. Miscible polymeric blends have been widely

applied  for  GS  membranes  on  the  laboratory  scale.  Their  separation
properties strongly depend on the morphology, composition, shape, and
size of the dispersed and continuous phases and testing conditions (i.e.,
pressure, temperature, gas mixture, etc.) [178].

As mentioned above, PU has a good film-forming ability and high gas
permeability. In contrast, the gas selectivity of PU membranes is rela-
tively low and not attractive for practical GS applications. Thus, PU is
blended with other highly gas-selective polymers to achieve a satisfac-
tory GS performance. For instance, Patr’ıcio and coworkers investigated
the effect of blend composition on the GS properties and morphology of
PU/poly(methyl  methacrylate)  (PU/PMMA)  blend  membranes  [164].
The  PU/PMMA  blend  membranes  were  partially  miscible  due  to
hydrogen favorable interactions between PMMA and urethane groups.
The positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) results indicated
a reduction in the average free volume size of the PU/PMMA blends with
increasing  PMMA  contents,  thereby  leading  to  a  decrease  in  gas
permeability (Table S3). However, it was found that the gas selectivity,
especially H2/N2  selectivity, increased with increasing PMMA content,
which was probably attributed to an increment in the rigid amorphous
phases  and  the  phase  arrangement  induced  by  the  glassy  polymer.
Moreover,  it  was  reported  that  the  gas  permeability  of  these  blend
membranes increased with increasing temperature. At the same time,
the  pressure  did  not  have  an  obvious  effect  on  the  permeability  and
selectivity of these membranes [157].

Similarly, Kim and coworkers studied morphology and GS properties
of  PU/poly(amide-imide)  (PU/PAI)  and  PU/polyetherimide  (PU/PEI)
blend membranes [179]. They chose PAI and PEI as the blend polymers
because of their high CO2 selectivity compared to pure PU membranes.
The  morphology  of  the  blend  membranes  was  investigated  by  SEM,
where  the  results  revealed  that  the  membranes  were  immiscible  and
phase separation occurred as the content of PU decreased. It was found
that the CO2 permeability of the blend membranes decreased while their
CO2/N2  selectivity  increased  with  decreasing  the  amount  of  PU.  In
another work, Shahzamani et al. studied the relationship between the GS
properties  and  structural  characteristics  of  PU-based  on  PCL  and
PU/PCL blend membranes [180]. Therein, pure PCL, PU, and PU/PCL
blend  membranes  containing  20  and  40  wt%  PCL  were  prepared
through a solution blending method, then the permeability of CO2, N2,
CH4, and O2  gases at various feed pressures (12–16 bar) and the room
temperature was determined. FTIR, XRD, and DSC analyses confirmed
the  miscibility  and  good  distribution  of  PCL  in  the  SSs  of  PU.  Addi-
tionally, the XRD results revealed that the amorphous structure of PU
converted  to  a  crystalline  one  by  adding  PCL.  Therefore,  as  a  conse-
quence  of  this  structure,  the  gas  permeability  of  the  blend  PU/PCL
membranes decreased with increasing the content of PCL, while their
gas selectivity did not change significantly.

Semsarzadeh et al. studied the gas transport properties of PU/poly-
vinyl  acetate  (PU/PVAc)  blend  membranes  for  the  separation  of  CO2
from other gases (i.e., CH4, N2, and O2) [181,182]. It was found that the
CO2  permeability  of  the  PU  membranes increased  with  adding  PVAc,
mainly  because  of  the  presence  of  polar  carbonyl  groups  on  the
repeating  unit  of  PVAc  that  can  interact  with  CO2  molecules  via
dipole-quadrupole interactions; this can increase the CO2  solubility in
the PU/PVAc blend membranes. However, at higher PVAc loadings (10
and 15 wt%), the CO2 permeability decreased, which may be attributed
to a decrease in diffusivity rather than the solubility and the formation of
crystalline  impermeable  domains  in  the  structure  of  PU  membranes.
Accordingly, the blend membrane with 5 wt% PVAc exhibited higher
CO2 permeability (≈73 barrer) than the pure PU membrane. Moreover,
it was found that by adding PEO-PPO-PEO triblock copolymer (Pluronic)
into  the  PU/PVAc  blend,  the  compatibility  between  both  polymers
increased,  resulting in a decrease in the  domain size  of the dispersed
PVAc phase and also disrupting the crystalline structure of PU/PVAc.
Therefore,  the  CO2  permeability  of  blend  membranes  significantly
increased,  leading  to  an  increase  in  CO2  selectivity,  particularly  for
CO2/N2 selectivity, with GS performances close to the Robeson line.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010959

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Polyamide 12-block-polytetramethylene glycol (PA12-b-PTMG) is a
block  copolymer  containing  ether  oxygen  units  as  poly(amide-block-
ether),  which  can  interact  with  CO2  molecules  and  increase  the  CO2
solubility,  resulting
in  highly  selective  CO2-philic  membranes
[183–185]. Thus, this block copolymer is a good candidate for preparing
blend  membranes  with  high  CO2  selectivity.  Based  on  this  strategy,
Vakili  and  coworkers  prepared  different  blend  membranes  based  on
synthesized PU (TDI and BDO as HS, and PTMG and PDMS as SS) and
PA12-b-PTMG  via  a  simple  solution  casting  technique  [186].  It  was
found that the CO2 permeability of PU/PA12-b-PTMG blend membranes
was significantly higher than pure PU membranes. In comparison, they
had  lower  permeability  to  other  gases  (i.e.,  CH4,  N2,  and  O2),  which
resulted  in  higher  CO2/N2  and  CO2/CH4  selectivity.  Accordingly,  the
blend  membrane  containing  20  wt%  PA12-b-PTMG  exhibited  the
highest CO2  (≈105 barrer) permeability, as well as CO2/N2  (≈53) and
CO2/CH4  (≈10)  selectivity,  in  comparison  to  other  prepared  blend
membranes.

Similarly, Shirvani et al. prepared a series of blend membranes based
on PUU (IPDI and BDA as HS and PTMG as SS) and poly(vinyl alcohol)
(PVA)  with  different  molecular  weights  (from  15,000  to  200,000  g/
mol).  They  studied  their  gas  transport  performances  to  separate  CO2
from other gases (i.e., N2, CH4, and O2) [187]. Therein, PVA was chosen
because  of  its  high  chemical  strength,  good  film-forming  ability,  and
intrinsic hydrophilicity due to the presence of the hydroxyl group in its
repeating  unit  [188]. The  results revealed  that the  PUU/PVA  (90:10)
blend membranes were immiscible, and their immiscibility was reduced
by  increasing  the  PVA  molecular  weight  in  the  blend  membranes.
Moreover, it was found that increasing the PVA molecular weight in the
PUU/PVA  blend  membranes  decreased  the  permeability  of  all  gases.
Furthermore,  the  permeability  of  non-condensable  gases  (i.e.,  N2  and
O2) and the gas with larger molecular size (CH4) decreased more than
the condensable and smaller molecular size gas (CO2), thereby leading
to an increase in the CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 selectivity.

Mozaffari  and  coworkers  prepared  a  series  of  blend  membranes
based on PU (IPDI, BDO, and BDA as HS, and PTMG with a molecular
weight of 2000 g/mol as SS) and two types of poly(ether-block-amide)
(PEBA)  (i.e.,  MH1657  and  MV3000).  They  investigated  the  effects  of
blend composition on the permeability of CO2, N2, CH4, and O2 [174].
Based  on  the  SEM  images  of  the  prepared  blend  membranes,  the
PU/PEBA blend membranes are miscible systems. Moreover, the FTIR
results  revealed  that  the  DPS  between  hard  and  soft  segments  of  PU
decreased  by  increasing  the  amount  of  PEBA  in  blend  membranes.
Additionally, the XRD results of the blend membranes indicated that the
crystallinity increased by increasing the amount of PEBA. Therefore, due
to these phenomena, the permeability of all gases decreased with the
amount of PEBA in the PU/PEBA blend membranes, whereas the CO2/N2
and CO2/CH4 selectivity increased.

4. Polyurethane-based mixed-matrix membranes

Despite  many  attempts  to  optimize  the  GS  performance  of  PU
membranes  by  varying  the  molecular  structure  of  PU,  blending  with
other polymers, cross-linking by chemical or photochemical methods,
etc.,  the  PU  membranes  still  suffer  from  their  relatively  low  gas
permeability  and  selectivity.  Many  scholars  have  attempted  to  incor-
porate filler particles into the PU matrix to overcome such limitations,
rendering  so-called  MMMs.  Generally,  MMMs  are  hybrid  membranes
where the inorganic phase or filler is incorporated into the continuous
polymer  phase  or  polymer  matrix  to  enhance  the  permeability  and
selectivity simultaneously. Therefore, the MMMs combine the flexibility
and simple processability of polymers with inorganic fillers’ high ther-
mal and mechanical strength [189,190].

The  interfacial  interaction  of  filler  particles  with  polymer  matrix
significantly  affects  the  GS  performance  of  MMMs.  Thus,  the  main
challenge  in  fabricating  MMMs  is  poor  interfacial  adhesion  between
filler  particles  and  polymer  matrix,  which  creates  defects  and  non-

selective  micro-voids  at  the  interface  of  polymer/filler,  thereby  lead-
ing to a reduction in the MMMs’ performance [191,192]. On the other
hand, the strong interfacial interaction between the polymer matrix and
filler particles may rigidify the polymer chains around the filler parti-
cles,  creating  more  selective  and  less  permeable  regions,  thereby
increasing  the  selectivity  of  small  gases  over  larger  ones  [193,194].
Thus, to overcome these challenges and increase the interfacial adhesion
of filler particles with polymer matrices, several techniques, including
annealing the MMMs at temperatures near the Tg of the polymer matrix,
surface functionalization of filler particles, decreasing the particle size of
fillers to prevent the sedimentation of filler particles, in situ polymeri-
zations of the polymer matrix in the presence of filler particles, in situ
synthesis of filler particles in the presence of polymer matrix, one-step
synthesis  of  polymer-filler  MMMs,  etc.,  have  been  proposed  [17,23,
195–200].

Up to now, different inorganic particles, i.e., silica (SiO2), alumina
(Al2O3),  zeolites,  titanium  dioxide  (TiO2),  carbon  nanotubes  (CNTs),
nickel oxide (NiO), clay, zinc oxide (ZnO), graphene oxide (GO), metal-
organic  frameworks  (MOFs),  mesoporous  silica,  etc.,  have  been
employed  as  a  filler  for  fabricating  MMMs  [201–211].  Generally,  the
fillers  used  for  fabricating  MMMs  can  be  categorized  into  two  main
types, including porous and non-porous particles [212–215]. The pres-
ence  of  non-porous  or  impermeable  filler  particles  in  polymer  mem-
branes can introduce three main effects: (I) increasing the free volume in
the  polymer  matrix  by  disrupting  polymer  chain  packing,  thereby
increasing the gas permeation, (II) increasing the interaction between
gas molecules and membrane surface due to the presence of adsorbent
moieties, which increases the solubility coefficient and permeation of
specific gases, and (III) increasing the tortuous gas pathway, making the
diffusion of larger gas molecules through the MMMs more difficult [28,
216].  In  addition  to  the  above-mentioned  phenomena,  incorporating
porous fillers into the polymer matrix can provide more channels for gas
transport, originating from the porous structure of filler particles [217].
Therefore,  based  on  the  pore  architecture  of  porous  fillers,  they  can
contribute  to  secondary  transport  mechanisms  like  surface  diffusion,
molecular sieving, and Knudsen diffusion (Fig. 9) [35].

Moreover, it should be noted that the incorporation of filler particles
into the PU matrix can change the DPS between the hard and soft seg-
ments,  thereby  controlling  the  overall  GS  performance  of  PU-based
MMMs. Therefore, studying the effect of filler particles on the micro-
phase  separation  of  PU-based  MMMs  is  of  great  importance.  Gener-
ally, in the PU-based MMMs, there are two phases, i.e., hard and soft
phases, for  the distribution of filler particles. Because of  the inherent
crystalline and impermeable nature of the hard domains, the distribu-
tion of filler particles in this phase may result in different effects on the
gas permeation properties of PU-based MMMs as follows: (I) decreasing
the  gas  permeation  due  to  the  formation  of  highly  crystalline  phase
within the membranes, and  (II) increasing the gas permeation due to
hindrance in the creation  of crystalline phase  by disturbing  the regu-
larity and density of the nearby chains and thus decreasing the overall
crystallinity of PU-based MMMs [218].

The effects of filler particles distributed in the soft domains on gas
permeation properties of PU-based MMMs significantly depend on the
porosity (porous or non-porous fillers) of the filler particles and their
interfacial interaction with SSs. Usually, the distribution of porous filler
particles in the soft domains increases the gas permeation of MMMs due
to  the  permeable  nature  of  soft  domains  and  the  porous  structure  of
incorporated  filler particles, which  provides extra  channels. Whereas,
the homogenous distribution of non-porous fillers in the soft domains
usually reduces the gas permeation through MMMs [219,220].

Sadeghi  and  coworkers  investigated  the  effect  of  filler  functional
groups on the dispersion of filler particles in the soft and hard segments
[193]. They incorporated cyanuric chloride (CC) nanoparticles and their
derivatives,  such  as  melamine  and  2,4,6-trihydazino-1,3,5-triazine
(THDT)  nanoparticles,  into  the  PU  matrix.  The  results  indicated  that
the  CC  nanoparticles  were  mostly  dispersed  in  the  HSs,  while  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109510

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Fig. 9. Schematic illustration of different GS mechanisms: (a) surface diffusion, (b) molecular sieving, and (c) Knudsen diffusion [35]. Copyright 2012, Reproduced
with permission from RSC.

melamine and THDT nanoparticles were distributed in the SSs. It was
found that the CC nanoparticles have a great affinity to form hydrogen
bonds  with urethane  amine groups  in  the  HSs  compared  to the  ether
groups in the SSs, which results in the formation of stronger hydrogen
bonds between CC nanoparticles and PU chains (Fig. 10a). This strong
interaction may disrupt the hydrogen bonding of urethane amine with
carbonyl groups, thereby decreasing the crystallinity of HSs. Therefore,
the  hard domains can also  contribute to gas transport, increasing the
diffusion  coefficients  of  gases.  Moreover,  it  was  reported  that  as  the
content of CC nanoparticles in the MMMs increased, CO2  permeability
and  CO2/N2  and  CO2/CH4  selectivity  increased.  However,  the  intro-
duction of impermeable melamine and THDT nanoparticles into the SSs
reduced the chain mobility. They prevented the gas transport pathways,
decreasing the gas permeation by increasing the content of these fillers.
Meanwhile, the CO2-philic nature of these nanoparticles increased the
solubility coefficient of CO2 at lower filler loadings, thus increasing the
CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 selectivity.

4.1. Silica nanoparticles

In the last decade, inorganic non-porous particles like silica nano-
particles  have  been  extensively  incorporated  into  the  polymeric
matrices  to  improve  their  physical  and  chemical  properties  such  as
mechanical  properties,  heat  resistance,  electrical  properties,  and

radiation  resistance  [194,221,222].  Moreover,  some  research  studies
used silica nanoparticles to decrease the permeability of the polymeric
films to improve their gas barrier performances, which are beneficial for
use in food packaging. In these polymeric films containing silica nano-
particles, the reduction in gas and water vapor permeability increased
the tortuous path of gas or water vapor across the film thickness [219,
223].  Additionally,  several  researchers reported  increased  gas  perme-
ability of polymeric membranes containing fumed silica nanoparticles
[224,225].  This  improvement  in  the  GS  performance  of  MMMs  con-
taining  silica  nanoparticles  indicated  that  the  silica  particles  could
disrupt the polymer chain packing and increase the fractional free vol-
ume available for gas molecule transport [226–229].

The effect of silica nanoparticles on the GS performance of various
polymeric membranes indicated that incorporating silica nanoparticles
into  the  polymeric  membranes  significantly  enhances  CO2  selectivity
[228,230–232]. For instance, the effect of silica nanoparticles on the GS
properties of polyether-based PU-silica MMMs was studied by Sadeghi
et al. [218]. The polyether-based PU was synthesized via bulk two-step
polymerization using HDI and BDO as HS and PPG as SS in mole ratios of
3:2:1. Silica nanoparticles were synthesized via the sol-gel method by
the  hydrolysis  of  tetraethoxysilane  (TEOS).  Finally,  the  MMMs  were
prepared using a simple blending and casting method. The experimental
GS results demonstrated a reduction in permeability of all studied gases
(i.e., CO2, N2, CH4, and O2), while an enhancement in ideal CO2/N2 and

Fig. 10. Schematic illustration of the dispersion of (a) cyanuric chloride and (b) melamine nanoparticles into the PU matrix, and possible hydrogen bonds between
incorporated nanoparticles and PU backbone [193]. Copyright 2018, Reproduced with permission from Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109511

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

CO2/CH4 selectivities were observed with increasing the content of sil-
ica nanoparticles in MMMs. Accordingly, the MMM containing 20 wt%
silica  nanoparticles  showed  a  high  CO2/N2  selectivity,  approximately
1.6  times  higher  than  the  pure  PU  membrane.  In  contrast,  the  CO2
permeability reduction of this MMM was 35.6% compared to the pure
PU membrane (Table S4).

It was reported that in the PU-silica composite membranes, there are
two regions (i.e., soft and hard segments) for the distribution of silica
nanoparticles. According to the entropic point of view, the silica nano-
particles have an affinity to be distributed in the HS of PU membranes
[233].  Therefore,  the  presence  of  silica  nanoparticles  in  the  HS  can
introduce the following effects: (I) they can contribute to the formation
of highly crystalline domains within the HS of PU membranes, or (II)
they  can  hinder  the  creation  of  crystalline  phases  by  disturbing  the
regularity and density of the neighboring chains and thus decreasing the
overall amount of crystallinity of PU membranes [234]. Based on the
FTIR  and  gas  permeation  results,  the  authors  suggested  that  a  major
population of silica nanoparticles was distributed in the SSs. Thus, the
distribution of these nanoparticles in the SSs may reduce the permeation
of gases through MMMs because of silica nanoparticles’ non-porous and
impermeable nature. Moreover, the presence of silica nanoparticles in
the SSs of PU membranes can reduce the free volume of SSs and even-
tually decrease the passage areas of gas molecules [235]. Therefore, the
reduction in gas permeability of MMMs containing silica nanoparticles
can be due  to the dispersion  of silica nanoparticles in  the SSs, which
increases the tortuous gas pathway, thereby resulting in more obstacles
in the diffusion of larger gas molecules through the MMMs [218].

Similarly, in another work, Sadeghi and coworkers studied the effect
of  silica  nanoparticles  on  the  gas  permeation  properties  of  polyester-
based PU (HDI and BDO as HS and PCL as SS) membranes [236]. Gas
permeation  performances  of  these  PU  membranes  with  various  silica
loadings (0–30 wt%) were studied for pure CO2, N2, CH4, and O2 gases.
The experimental GS results revealed a reduction in the gas permeability
of all gases and an enhancement in CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 selectivities.
Moreover,  it  was  found  that  the  CO2  permeability  of  pure  and
silica-filled PU membranes significantly increased with increasing feed
pressure, indicating the penetrant-induced plasticization of the PU ma-
trix.  Accordingly,  the  CO2  permeability  of  the  pure  PU  membrane
increased from 78.85 to 86.27 barrer when the feed pressure increased
from 6 to 10 bar, which increased the CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 selectivity.
Additionally, this group also studied the hydrocarbon separation prop-
erties of polyether (HDI and BDO as HS, and PPG as SS) and polyester
(HDI  and  BDO  as  HS,  and  PCL  as  SS)  based  PU-silica  nanocomposite
[237].

In another work, Babaei et  al. prepared  a series of  PUU (HDI and
MOCA (4,4-methylenebis(2-chloroaniline)) as HS and PCL as SS) based
MMMs  with  different  loadings  (0–15  wt%)  of  silica  nanoparticles  to
selectively separate CO2  from N2  [220]. By incorporating silica nano-
particles into the PUU matrix, the Tg  of the polymer increased mainly
due to the decrease in the DPS between soft and hard segments. More-
over, the XRD results indicated the presence of small crystalline regions
in the hard and soft segments of the PUU structure. Therefore, due to
these  phenomena,  the  CO2  permeability  significantly  decreased  from
58.91 barrer in the pure PUU membrane to 37.64 barrer in the MMMs
containing 10 wt% silica nanoparticles. The authors suggested that this
reduction in gas permeability resulted from a reduction in the fractional
free volume, an increase in phase mixing, and a partial agglomeration of
silica nanoparticles within the PUU matrix. Moreover, it was found that
the CO2 permeability of the prepared MMMs increased with increasing
the feed pressure, while the N2  permeability decreased, leading to an
enhancement  in  CO2/N2  selectivity.  On  the  contrary,  increasing  the
temperature  caused  a  significant  increase  in  the  permeability  of  all
gases, thus declining the CO2/N2 selectivity.

Similarly, in another work, this group used MOCA as chain extender
and  silica  nanoparticles  as  filler  to  prepare  polyesterurethane  (PCL/
MOCA/HDI)/silica  and  polyetherurethane  (PTMG/MOCA/HDI)/silica

nanocomposite membranes for separation of CO2 from other gases (i.e.,
N2 and O2) [238]. Therein, the permeation properties of pure gases (i.e.,
CO2, N2, and O2) through all prepared MMMs were measured using a
constant  pressure/variable volume method  at  various pressures  (6, 8,
and  10  bar)  and  temperatures  (25,  35,  and  45
C).  The  experimental
permeation results exhibited that increasing the loading (0–15 wt%) of
silica  nanoparticles  in  the  matrices  decreases  the  permeability  of  all
gases and enhances the CO2/N2 selectivity. This observation may be due
to the presence of silica nanoparticles in the SSs of the PU membranes,
which  restricted  the  free  spaces  of  those  segments  and  increased  the
phase mixing, reducing the gas permeation. Moreover, it was found that
the  CO2  permeability  and  CO2/N2  selectivity  of  the  prepared  MMMs
increased with raising the feed pressure.

◦

Contrary  to  the  above-reported  results,  Hassanajili  and  coworkers
reported that the CO2  permeability, as well as CO2/CH4  selectivity, of
polyesterurethane  (ESPU)  and  polyetherurethane  (ETPU)-based  silica
nanocomposite membranes increased with increasing the loading (from
0 to 15 wt%) of silica nanoparticles [239]. Moreover, the ESPU-based
nanocomposite  membranes  exhibited  higher  CO2  permeability  and
CO2/CH4  selectivity than the ETPU-based nanocomposite membranes.
Based on the obtained results from the FTIR analysis, the authors pro-
posed  that  the  silica  nanoparticles  can  interact  with  PU  chains  via
forming  hydrogen  bonds  with  -N-H  groups  of  HSs  in  PU  (Fig.  11).
Therefore, such an interaction can change the micro-phase morphology
of ESPU  and ETPU  toward partial phase mixing (Fig.  11), which  was
further confirmed by XRD and DSC results. Moreover, at this condition,
the  free  volume  of  the  PU  matrix  increased  due  to  chain  packing
disruption.  Additionally,  because  of  the  interaction  between  silica
nanoparticles and CO2  molecules, the CO2  solubility coefficient in the
PU membranes containing silica nanoparticles is more enhanced than
CH4 molecules, which have low interaction with MMMs. As a result, the
selectivity of CO2  over CH4  significantly increased with increasing the
loading of silica nanoparticles.

It was reported by Chen et al. that the Tg, hardness, and adhesion
between the various layers of PU would be dramatically improved by in
situ polymerizations of PU in the presence of silica nanoparticles [240].
Therein, the silica nanoparticles were added to the polyether polyol, and
then the polymerization reaction was completed by adding IPDI to the
mixture. Based on the results from TGA and FTIR analyses, it was found
that  in  the  case  of  in  situ  polymerization  technique,  the  silica  nano-
particles and SSs of PU interact more than that of the simple solution
blending method. In addition, the obtained results also revealed that the

Fig. 11. Schematic illustration of the micro-phase morphological change of PU
in the presence of silica nanoparticles and possible interaction between silica
nanoparticles  and  PU  chains  [239].  Copyright  2013,  Reproduced  with
permission from Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109512

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

thermal,  mechanical,  and  physical  properties  of  PU-silica  nano-
composites prepared by the in situ method were better than those pre-
pared by the simple solution blending method [241,242].

Moreover,  it  was  reported  that  the  in-situ  preparation  of  silica
nanoparticles  in  the  presence  of  polymer  chains  or  surfactants  would
increase the interaction between silica nanoparticles and polymer ma-
trix. Based on this strategy, Semsarzadeh et al. [243] and Ghalei et al.
[244]  used  PVA/cetyltrimethyl  ammonium  bromide  (CTAB)  and
PVA/polyethylene-block-poly  propylene  (Pluronic)  as  templating
agents, respectively, for the in situ preparation of silica nanoparticles,
and then incorporated the modified nanoparticles into the PU matrix to
prepare highly CO2 selective MMMs. Therein, PVA was chosen as tem-
plating and modifier agent of silica nanoparticles, mainly because of its
polarity,  hydrophilicity,  and  CO2  affinity  [245–248].  Numerous  –OH
groups of PVA caused an increase in the density of polar groups on the
surface  of silica nanoparticles (Fig. 12).  This increased the interfacial
interaction of modified silica nanoparticles and PU matrix, enhancing
the interaction with CO2  molecules and thus increasing the CO2  solu-
bility in the MMMs. The FTIR results indicated the existence of PVA in
the final structure of silica nanoparticles, while the SEM images showed
the  nano-scale  distribution  of  silica  nanoparticles  in  the  PU  matrix.
Additionally, the GS results exhibited a reduction in the diffusivity co-
efficient of all gases through the membrane and an increase in the sol-
ubility coefficient by increasing the loading of silica nanoparticles in the
PU matrix. As a result, the permeability of condensable CO2 molecules
was increased, while the permeability of other non-condensable gases (i.
e., CH4, N2, and O2) decreased, which resulted in an increase in the CO2
selectivity.  Accordingly,  the  MMM  containing  10  wt%  silica  nano-
particles  showed  the  highest  CO2/N2  (≈70.7)  and  CO2/CH4  (≈10.1)
selectivities [243].

Similarly, Gharibi and coworkers used the sol-gel method to prepare
desired  organic-inorganic  hybrid  membranes  containing  silica  nano-
particles for the selective separation of CO2 from H2 and CH4 gases [56].
Therein,  the  methoxysilane  end-functionalized  urethane  prepolymers
based on PEG (Si-PPUs) were prepared and then cross-linked via sol-gel
hydrolysis and condensation of hydrolysable methoxysilane moieties in

the  prepared  Si-PPUs  prepolymer.  This  resulted  in  the  formation  of
inorganic siloxane (Si–O–Si) network composition with a silylated ure-
thane moiety within the polymer matrix (Fig. 13). The authors proposed
that the presence of inorganic siloxane domains within the PU matrix
improved the mechanical, thermal, and GS properties of the prepared
membranes. Accordingly, the PU-siloxane membrane with a PEG con-
tent of 71 wt% showed the highest CO2 permeability (≈104 barrer) and
CO2/CH4  (≈21)  and  CO2/H2  (≈7)  selectivities  at  35
C  and  a  feed
pressure of 4 bar.

◦

In  another  work,  Hassanajili  and  coworkers  used  three  different
types of fumed silica nanoparticles (i.e., non-modified silica, octylsilane-
modified silica, and PDMS-modified silica (Fig. 14a)) and incorporated
them into the PU matrix to study the gas transport behavior of the PU/
silica nanocomposite membranes [249]. The SEM results indicated that
the surface modification of silica nanoparticles with long hydrophobic
chains  reduced  the  agglomeration  and  sedimentation  of  silica  nano-
particles and further improved the dispersion of silica nanoparticles into
the MMMs. Moreover, the GS results showed that CO2 permeability and
selectivity enhanced with increasing the content of silica nanoparticles
in the PU matrix, regardless of the type of surface modification of silica
nanoparticles. The authors suggested that the fumed silica nanoparticles
disrupted  chain  packing  and  increased  fractional  free  volume  in  the
MMMs, thus enhancing CO2 permeability.

Based  on  the  GS  results,  the  authors  proposed  that  adding  non-
modified silica nanoparticles (Si-Un) with a larger size and hydrophil-
ic surface into the PU matrix can induce better performance than the
other modified silica nanoparticles with hydrophobic groups. Thus, in
the case of MMMs containing hydrophilic silica nanoparticles, the acidic
and more condensable gas molecules (CO2) can selectively get adsorbed
and dissolved, thereby diffusing through the membranes, while the less
adsorbable gas molecules (CH4) permeate through the membranes more
slowly.  Therefore,  among  the  different  silica  nanoparticles,  the  non-
modified  silica  nanoparticles  with  hydroxyl  groups  on  their  surface
exhibited better performance for CO2/CH4 separation.

More recently, Fakhar et al. prepared two types of PUU-based MMMs
containing  surface-modified  silica  nanoparticles  with  hyper-branched

Fig. 12. The schematic representation for the preparation of silica/CTAB-PVA nanoparticles: (a) formation mechanism of silica/CTAB-PVA hybrid nanoparticles and
(b) schematic flow diagram of the synthesis steps for silica nanoparticles preparation [243]. Copyright 2013, Reproduced with permission from Elsevier Science Ltd.,
Oxford, UK.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109513

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Fig.  13. (a) Synthesis route for  the preparation  of  Si-PPU prepolymers  and (b) preparation  of  PU/siloxane  membranes [56].  Copyright  2018, Reproduced with
permission from Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK.

Fig. 14. (a) Schematic illustration of three different silica nanoparticles: (I) non-modified silica ((Si-Un), (II) octylsilane-modified silica (Si-OS), and (III) PDMS-
modified  silica  (Si-PDMS)  [249].  Copyright  2014,  Reproduced  with  permission  from  Elsevier  Science  Ltd.,  Oxford,  UK.  (b)  Schematic  preparation  steps  of  G2
[250]. Copyright 2020, Reproduced with permission from Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK.

structures (Fig. 14b) [250]. The results revealed that incorporating silica
nanoparticles into the PUU matrix changed the DPS between soft and
hard segments, increased the Tg of SSs, and reduced the chain order of
MMMs.  Moreover,  it  was  found  that  the  presence  of  long  adsorbent
chains with –NH groups on the surface of modified silica nanoparticles
can  improve  the  particle  distribution  in  the  PUU  matrix,  thereby
enhancing  the  CO2  permeability  and  CO2/N2  selectivity.  However,  at
higher silica nanoparticle loadings (more than 7.5 wt%), the agglom-
eration  of  silica  nanoparticles  led  to  the  formation  of  non-selective
micro-voids  within  the  MMMs,  which  increased  the  diffusion  of  all
gases and aggravated the GS performance and mechanical properties of

MMMs.

Mesoporous  silica  (i.e.,  MCM-41,  MCM-48,  SBA-15,  and  SBA-16)
with high porosity, fine pore size distribution, ordered pore structure,
large specific surface area, and simple preparation has achieved great
attention for being used as filler for fabricating MMMs [251,252]. For
instance, Ghalei et al. synthesized three mesoporous silica particles with
various  structures  and  pore  sizes,  including  MCM-41,  MCM-48,  and
SBA-16. Then, they functionalized them with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysi-
lane (APTES) and subsequently incorporated the modified particles into
the PU (TDI and BDO as HS, and PTMG as SS) matrix to prepare MMMs
[253]. The mesoporous silica particles were functionalized with APTES

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109514

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

to  decrease  the  interaction  between  silica  particles,  increase  the
particle-polymer  chains  interactions,  and  provide  the  possibility  of
MMMs preparations at high filler loadings (up to 20 wt% silica loading)
without any silica particle agglomeration and sedimentation. The high
porosity  of  silica particles  after modification and  interaction between
amine groups of modified silica particles and the PU matrix enhance the
adhesion  of  silica  particles  to  the  PU  matrix.  The  obtained  results
exhibited strong interfacial interaction between modified silica particles
and the PU matrix, which resulted in good distribution of these particles
within the PU membranes. Therefore, as a consequence of this structure,
the thermal stability and Tg  of the prepared MMMs were higher than
those of the pure PU membranes. Moreover, the GS results indicated that
the gas permeability of MMMs increased with increasing the amount of
modified silica loading, mainly due to the presence of highly porous and
amine-functionalized silica particles, which enhanced the gas diffusivity
and  solubility  (particularly  for  CO2)  through  the  MMMs.  However,  it
was  found  that  the  presence  of  modified  silica  particles  into  the  PU
matrix did not significantly affect the gas selectivity.

4.2. Metal oxide nanoparticles

Metal  oxide  nanoparticles  like  Al2O3,  ZnO,  TiO2,  NiO,  etc.,  are
emerging  fillers  because  of  their  great  potential  applications  for  GS
membranes [209,254,255]. Their small particle sizes and large specific
surface  areas  result  in  good  particle  distribution  within  the  polymer
matrix  and  prevent  the  formation  of  non-selective  voids  in  the  metal
oxide particles/polymer interface. As a result, these materials have great
potential to be distributed individually or in nanoscale aggregates [256].
Usually, the addition of these metal oxides into polymer matrix shows a
similar effect  as impermeable silica nanoparticles, in which  the alter-
ation in the GS performance of metal oxides-filled MMMs is because of
the chain packing disruption, phase mixing, formation of non-selective
voids, and prolonged tortuous gas pathway [251,257,258].

Monsefi  and  coworkers  studied  the  effect  of  SiO2  and  TiO2  nano-
particles on the GS performance of PU-based MMMs [203]. In this re-
gard, they prepared pure PU (based on HDI/IPDI and MOCA as HS and
PCL/PTMG  as  SS),  PU-TiO2,  PU-SiO2,  and  PU-SiO2-TiO2  flat  sheet
asymmetric  MMMs  via  phase  inversion  method,  and  studied  their
permeation behavior for CO2, N2, CH4, and O2 gases. SEM images of the
prepared  MMMs  indicated  the  uniform  distribution  of  TiO2  and  SiO2
nanoparticles  within  the  PU  matrix  at  20  wt%  loading,  while  the
agglomerated nanoparticles could be observed at higher SiO2 loadings in
the  MMMs  with  various  SiO2/TiO2  ratios.  Moreover,  the  GS  results
showed  that  both  TiO2  and  SiO2  nanoparticles  could  increase  the
permeability of all gases when incorporated separately or in a hybrid.
More interestingly, it was reported that the improvement in GS perfor-
mance of MMMs containing both nanoparticles was much greater than
those containing only one (TiO2  or SiO2) nanoparticle. It was also re-
ported by Sadeghi et al. that the gas permeability of MMMs containing
TiO2  nanoparticles  decreased,  whereas  the  CO2/N2  and  CO2/CH4  se-
lectivities increased by increasing TiO2 content [259].

Similarly,  Chen  and  coworkers  reported  that  the  gas  permeation
coefficients through thermo-sensitive (thermo-responsive polymer) PU
(TSPU)  membranes  increased  dramatically  as  the  content  of  TiO2
nanoparticles increased [260]. Based on the membrane formation tem-
perature  (Tmf),  completely-opposite  gas  transport  properties  of  the
TSPU/TiO2 MMMs were observed. It was found that when Tmf was lower
than the melting point (Tm) of SS in the TSPU, the gas permeation co-
efficient of MMMs significantly increased with raising TiO2 content, not
following the prediction of the conventional composite theory. In this
case, the rigid TSPU chains could not pack completely around the TiO2
nanoparticles as the solvent evaporated, thereby leading to a larger free
volume at the interface of polymer/particles relative to the bulk polymer
regions (Fig. 15a). Such specific morphology had a subtle effect on the
solubility  coefficients  of  gases,  while  increased  free  volume  allowed
faster penetrant diffusion, which increased the overall gas permeation of

Fig. 15. (a) Schematic illustration of the possible morphologies of TSPU-TiO2  MMMs and the corresponding mechanism [260]. Copyright 2011, Reproduced with
permission from Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK. (b) Schematic illustration of the effect of ZnO nanoparticles on the permeation behavior of PU membranes [261].
Copyright 2017, Reproduced with permission from MDPI.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109515

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

TSPU-TiO2 MMMs. However, when the Tmf was higher than the Tm of SS,
flexible TSPU chains could pack around the TiO2  nanoparticles as effi-
ciently as in the bulk polymer (Fig. 15a). In this case, the gas permeation
properties  of  the  TSPU-TiO2  MMMs  followed  the  prediction  of  the
conventional  composite  theory.  Therefore,  the  TSPU-TiO2  MMMs
showed  a  reduction  in  gas  permeation  coefficients  because  the  gas
molecules had to travel a more tortuous path across the MMMs.

Soltani  and  Asghari  incorporated  different  amounts  of  ZnO  nano-
particles (0–1.0 wt%) into the PU matrix [261]. They observed that the
CO2  permeability of the MMM containing 0.5 wt% ZnO nanoparticles
increased by 31%, while MMM with 1.0 wt% ZnO nanoparticles showed
34% reduction in permeability compared to the pure PU membranes.
They proposed that at low ZnO loadings (0.25 and 0.50 wt%), the DPS
between the soft and hard segment increased, while at a high loading
(1.0 wt%), the presence of ZnO nanoparticles led to phase mixing due to
the increased interaction between soft and hard segments via hydrogen
bonding.  Accordingly,  due  to  the  presence  of  1.0  wt%  ZnO  nano-
particles, both phase mixing of soft and hard segments and reduction of
the free volume of SSs could cause the gas molecule diffusion pathway to
be  more  tortuous  (Fig.  15b).  Moreover,  the  AFM  results  show  the
smoother  surface  of  PU-ZnO  1.0  wt%  MMM  resulted  in  reduced  in-
teractions between membrane surface and gas molecules, leading to a
decrease in gas permeability. Molki et al. also observed similar results by
incorporating NiO nanoparticles into the PU matrix [208].

A decrease in gas permeability along with an increase in gas selec-
tivity by Al2O3 nanoparticles-filled PU membranes was also reported by
Ameri et al. [207]. The GS results indicated a reduction in CO2 perme-
ability and an increment in the CO2/N2  and CO2/CH4  selectivity with
increasing Al2O3 nanoparticle content. This observation was attributed
to the interfacial chain rigidification, which was confirmed by FTIR and
DSC  analyses,  associated  with  an  increase  in  phase  mixing  and  an
increment in Tg of MMMs.

4.3. Zeolite nanoparticles

Zeolite-filled membranes have been extensively applied for a broad
spectrum  of  applications  because  of  specific  properties  of  zeolite,
including adsorption capacity, ion-exchange capacity, molecular sieving
effect, and hydrophilic/hydrophobic character [262–271]. The concept
of preparation of membranes containing two different materials (i.e., a
polymer as a matrix and a sieve as filler) emerged more than two de-
cades ago, and many researchers have focused on this field [251,272].
Usually,  incorporating  a  small  amount  of  a  molecular  sieve  into  a
polymeric  matrix  significantly  improves  the  membrane  selectivity
[273–277]. Adams and coworkers used Zeolite 4A as a molecular sieve
and PVAc as a polymer matrix to prepare highly zeolite-loaded MMMs
[278]. A mixture of CO2 and CH4 was used to study the GS performance
of the prepared MMMs in the case of natural GS. The gas permeation
results revealed that the CO2 permeability at high CO2 partial pressures
did not effectively change, while the CO2/CH4 selectivity was increased
significantly (≈63%). Tirouni et al. investigated the effect of ZSM-5 and
Zeolite 4A on the PU/zeolite-based MMMs to separate C3H8  and C2H6
from CH4  [279]. The gas permeation results of PU-zeolite (4Å) MMMs
demonstrated an increase in the CH4 permeability, with a reduction in
C3H8/CH4 and C2H6/CH4 selectivity by raising the filler loading to 10 wt
%. However, a significant enhancement in the C3H8  and C2H6  perme-
ability and their selectivity over CH4 was observed by adding ZSM-5 into
the  PU  matrix.  Maximum  C3H8/CH4  (3.63)  and  C2H6/CH4  (2.21)  se-
lectivities were found for MMM containing 20 wt% ZSM-5.

Silicoaluminophosphate crystal (SAPO-34) is another type of zeolite
that has been considered for many applications, e.g., catalytic applica-
tions, separation applications, and adsorption applications, thanks to its
high chemical and thermal stability, narrow particle size distribution,
molecular sieve properties, and large specific surface area [280–284].
Sodeifian et al. studied the effect of SAPO-34 nanocrystals on the gas
permeation properties of PU membranes [285]. In this regard, different

amounts  of  SAPO-34  nanocrystals  (i.e.,  5,  10,  and  20  wt%)  were
incorporated into the PU matrix, and the permeation properties of CO2,
N2, and CH4 gases were investigated. The permeation results indicated a
reduction  in  the  permeability  of  all  gases  and  an  increment  in  the
CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4  selectivity by adding SAPO-34 nanocrystals into
the  PU  matrix.  Accordingly,  the  presence  of  20  wt%  SAPO-34  nano-
crystals in the PU matrix resulted in 4.45, 40.2, and 18.24% reduction in
the  permeability  of  CO2,  N2,  and  CH4,  respectively.  Moreover,  it  was
reported that the CO2 permeation increased by raising the feed pressure,
whereas the N2 and CH4 permeation remained nearly unchanged.

Similarly,  Taheri  Afarani  and  coworkers  investigated  the  effect  of
three types of zeolite (i.e., 3A, 4A, and ZSM-5) on the GS performance of
PU-based  MMMs  [286,287].  The  GS  results  showed  a  remarkable
enhancement  in  the  permeation  of  all  gases  and  the  CO2/N2  and
CO2/CH4  selectivities, increasing the loading of zeolite particles in the
PU-based MMMs. Amongst the prepared MMMs, the PU-zeolite 4A (12
wt%) exhibited the best GS performance in terms of CO2  permeability
(≈82 barrer) and CO2/N2 (≈24) and CO2/CH4 (≈7) selectivity at 25
C
and 10 bar [287].

◦

4.4. Carbon-based nanostructures

Carbon-based  nanostructures  like  carbon  nanotubes  (CNTs),  gra-
phene oxide (GO), nanodiamond (ND), etc., have received great atten-
tion  for  polymer-based  nanocomposite  preparation  [12,288–296].
Among  them,  single-walled  CNTs  (SWCNTs)  and  multi-walled  CNTs
(MWCNTs) have achieved much attention since gas transport through
these materials is faster than any other reported materials [297,298]. Up
to now, CNTs have been used in many research works to prepare MMMs
[299–302].  For  instance,  Gheimasi  and  coworkers  functionalized
MWCNTs with tetraethylene pentamine (TEPA) and then incorporated
them into the PU matrix to prepare PU-MWCNT-TEPA MMMs for the
separation of CO2 from CH4 [206]. The CO2 and CH4 permeabilities of
the prepared MMMs were measured at various MWCNT-TEPA contents,
operating pressures, and temperatures. They observed an enhancement
in CO2 permeability and CO2/CH4 selectivity by adding MWCNT-TEPA
into  the  PU  matrix.  Particularly,  in  the  case  of  MMMs  containing  10
wt% MWCNT-TEPA, the CO2 permeability increased by 99.8%, and the
CO2/CH4 selectivity increased by only 9.6%. The authors suggested that
the interaction between MWCNT-TEPA and polymer chains can disturb
polymer chain packing, enhancing the permeability of all gases through
the MMMs. However, at higher loadings (more than 6 wt%) and higher
disruption of the PU chains, some interfacial defects like non-selective
micro-voids  may
of
formed
polymer/MWCNT-TEPA, which results in a decrease in the membranes’
selectivity.

interface

the

be

at

On the other hand, the higher gas permeability of MWCNT-TEPA-
filled MMMs compared to the  pure PU membrane  may be due to the
penetration of gas molecules through the lower mass transfer resistance
region of MWCNT-TEPA. Moreover, the amine groups on the surface of
MWCNT-TEPA,  which  can  interact  with  CO2  molecules,  can  further
improve  the  GS  performance  of  MMMs.  The  reduction  in  CO2/CH4
selectivity at high MWCNT-TEPA loadings (more than 6 wt%) could be
due  to  the  agglomeration  of  nanoparticles  and  the  formation  of  non-
selective micro-voids at the interface of the MWCNT-TEPA/PU matrix.
In  addition,  GS  experiments  at  different  operating  temperatures
exhibited an enhancement in CO2 permeability and a reduction in CO2/
CH4 selectivity by increasing the operating temperature. While both CO2
permeability and CO2/CH4 selectivity of the prepared MMMs increased
with raising the operating temperature.

Despite many advantages of CNTs, their weak interfacial interaction
with the polymer matrix and high affinity to get aggregated restrict their
applications  for  preparing  high-performance  GS  MMMs  [299–301].
However,  modification  of  the  surface  of  these  nanomaterials  with
different functional groups via covalent and/or non-covalent function-
alization methods can improve their properties and dispersibility within

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109516

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

the polymer matrix [303–305]. In this regard, Iranagh and coworkers
modified MWCNTs with different functional groups (-COOH and –NCO)
to increase their interaction with the PU matrix and prevent their ag-
gregation in the MMMs (Fig. 16a) [306]. The good dispersion of func-
tionalized MWCNTs throughout the PU matrix was observed by FESEM
images at lower loadings (0–0.5 wt%), but at higher loadings (1.0 wt%),
some agglomerations were observed within the MMMs. The prepared
MMMs exhibited an increment in the gas permeability of all gases by
increasing the MWCNTs loading from 0.1 up to 0.3 wt%, whereas further
loading  up  to  1.0  wt%  decreased  the  gas  permeability  of  MMMs
(Fig. 16b).

The authors proposed that the MWCNTs can form a longer diffusion
path and a more tortuous pathway at higher loadings, decreasing the
diffusion of gas molecules. In addition, the DPS between the soft and
hard segments decreased at higher filler loadings, which can be another
reason for reducing the gas permeability. Among the prepared MMMs,
the MWCNT–NCO–filled MMMs showed the best GS performance due to
the high polarity of –NCO groups, increasing the solubility coefficient of
CO2, and their strong interaction and better compatibility with the PU
matrix.  Accordingly,  the  CO2  permeability  and  CO2/N2  and  CO2/CH4
selectivity  of  MMMs  containing  0.3  wt%  MWCNT-NCO  exhibited  an
enhancement of 5, 51, and 14%, respectively, compared to the pure PU
matrix (Table S4).

Graphene  has  received  great  attention  in  different  applications
because  of  its  large  surface  area  and  exceptional  optical,  electrical,
mechanical,  and  thermal  properties  [307].  GO  is  an  atomic  sheet  of
graphite  functionalized  with  different  oxygen-containing  functional
groups, having a hybrid structure combining a mixture of sp2  and sp3
hybridized carbon atoms [308]. To date, many researchers reported the
application of GO individually or in combination with other materials
for gas adsorption, storage, and separation [12,309–313]. For instance,
Wang et al. prepared a series of MMMs via in situ polymerizations of PU
in  the  presence  of  different  GO  types  and  studied  their  separation

performance toward CO2/N2  separation. It was reported that the CO2
permeability  and  CO2  selectivity  of  the  PU  membranes  increased  by
raising the loadings of GO from 0 to 2 wt% (Fig. S1). Moreover, it was
found that the formation of GO aggregates in the PU/GO MMMs reduced
the GS performance of MMMs at higher GO contents (more than 2 wt%)
[314].

4.5. Metal-organic frameworks

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), as an emerging class of crystal-
line materials, are periodic structures that are composed of metal ions/
clusters connected by organic linkers to create highly porous structures
[315–318]. Due to their large surface area, well-defined pore size, large
pore  volume,  simple  functionalization,  good  chemical  and  thermal
properties,  and  the  diversity  of  available  organic  ligands  and  metals
[319–322], MOFs have achieved great attention for organic dye removal
[323–327],  gas  storage/separation  [1],  drug  adsorption/delivery
[328–334],  heavy  metals  removal  [335,336],  chemical  sensing  [337,
338],  heterogeneous  catalysis  [339–341],  etc.  Moreover,  MOFs  have
shown great potential to be used as a filler in the preparation of MMMs
for selective CO2 separation, mainly because of their large surface area,
high porosity, high affinity toward CO2 adsorption, diversity in synthesis
and modification, and good compatibility with polymeric matrices [17,
189,342–345]. Besides, using MOF in GS MMMs has more advantages
over other porous and non-porous nanomaterials [346,347]. The inter-
facial  interaction  of  MOF  nanoparticles  and  polymer  chains  can  be
simply controlled, as the organic part of these materials has a high af-
finity  to  the  polymeric  matrices.  This  good  compatibility  reduces  the
formation of non-selective voids in the MOF/polymer interface, which is
one  of  the  most  important  challenges  in  MMM  fabrication  [192,348,
349]. More interestingly, the shape, size, and chemical functionality of
MOFs surface and cavities can be readily tuned via the choice of suitable
organic  ligands  in  the  synthesis  step  or  after  synthesis  through

Fig. 16. (a) Schematic illustration of MWCNTs functionalized with (I) –COOH and (II) –NCO groups. (b) The GS results of PU/MWCNT-NCO MMMs, (I) CO2, (II) N2
and CH4 permeability, and the (III) CO2/N2 and (IV) CO2/CH4 selectivity [306]. Copyright 2020, Reproduced with permission from Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109517

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

post-synthetic modification (PSM) [350–352].

The  GS  performance  of  PU-based  MMMs  strongly  depends  on  the
filler type and its interfacial interaction with the PU matrix. For instance,
Amedi and Aghajani investigated the effect of three different fillers (i.e.,
silica,  ZSM-5,  and  ZIF-8)  on  the  GS  performance  of  PU  membranes
[353]. It was reported that the prepared MMMs containing ZIF-8 showed
the best performance in CO2  permeability (74.6 barrer) and CO2/CH4
selectivity (19.1), mainly because of the narrower pore size and better
compatibility of ZIF-8 nanoparticles with the PU matrix compared to the
other fillers. The decrease in CO2 permeability and CO2/CH4 selectivity
were also reported for PU-γ-CD-MOF (gamma-cyclodextrin MOF) MMMs
at high filler loadings (more than 0.4 wt%) [354]. These reductions in
permeability and selectivity of MMMs at high γ-CD-MOF loadings may
be  attributed  to  the  low  compatibility  of  filler  particles  with  the  PU
matrix, which resulted in poor dispersion and aggregation of filler par-
ticles in the PU membranes.

PUU-HDC (HDC = hexamethylenetetramine dicyanamide cadmium)
membranes with different HDC loadings (0–2.5 wt%) were developed by
Sadeghi et al. to separate CO2  from N2, O2, and CH4  gases selectively
[355]. This MOF was chosen as filler because HDC, as a 2D MOF with a
rectangular grid structure, has been found to selectively adsorb CO2 in
the presence of N2  and CH4  gases [356]. The MMMs containing HDC
showed a high enhancement in CO2 permeability, as well as CO2/N2 and
CO2/CH4 selectivity, due to the good dispersion of HDC nanoparticles in
the PUU matrix as a result of their good compatibility. Moreover, the
FTIR and  DSC analyses indicated  that most of  the HDC  nanoparticles
were  dispersed  in  the  SSs  of  the  PUU  membranes,  which  is  another
reason  for  increased  CO2  permeability  at  higher  HDC  loadings.  The
PUU-HDC-2.5 (containing 2.5 wt% HDC) showed a CO2 permeability of
140.0 barrer, a CO2/N2 selectivity of 30.4, and a CO2/CH4 selectivity of
9.0, which are approximately 89, 38, and 22% higher than those of the
pure PUU membrane (Table S4).

Pournaghshband  Isfahani  et  al.  studied  the  effect  of  UiO-66  and
amino-functionalized UiO-66 (UiO-66-NH2) nanoparticles on the phase
separation  and  gas  transport  properties  of  PU  membranes  (Fig.  17a)
[357]. In addition to remarkable CO2 adsorption on the surface of MOF
nanoparticles, tuning the phase separation of PU membranes by adding
UiO-66-NH2  nanoparticles renders more available adsorption sites for
CO2 molecules, thus, increasing the solubility coefficient of CO2 and its
selectivity over N2. FTIR, AFM, and DSC analyses confirmed the incre-
ment in the DPS between the soft and hard segments of PU in MMMs.
Accordingly, FTIR analysis indicated the formation of hydrogen bonds
between  the  carbonyl  groups  of  HSs  and  the  nanoparticles  of
UiO-66-NH2. This reduced the possibility of HSs interacting with SSs,
increasing  the  DPS  between  hard  and  soft  segments.  Moreover,  AFM
images  showed  an  increase  in  the  soft  domains  from  30  to  50  to
100–200 nm with increasing the content of UiO-66-NH2  nanoparticles
from 0 to 5 wt%. This demonstrated that the SSs were more susceptible
to self-assembly into larger soft domains and HSs were more prone to
interact with UiO-66-NH2  nanoparticles, leading to higher phase sepa-
ration. Furthermore, the reduction in the Tg of MMMs indicated the low
interactions of SSs with HSs and UiO-66-NH2 nanoparticles, which was
another reason for increasing the DPS with the addition of UiO-66-NH2
nanoparticles  into  the  PU  matrix.  The  MMMs  containing  20  wt%
UiO-66-NH2 nanoparticles showed the best performance for separation
of  CO2  from  N2,  with  CO2  permeability  of  ≈163  barrer  and  CO2/N2
selectivity  of  ≈71,  surpassing  the  2008  Robeson’s  upper  bound
(Fig. 17b).

The main challenge in the fabrication of MMMs is poor interfacial
interaction between filler nanoparticles and polymer matrix, which can
cause several obstacles like filler particles aggregation/sedimentation,
defects/non-selective voids at the polymer/filler interface, and polymer
chain rigidification, leading to poor mechanical properties and GS per-
formance of MMMs. Therefore, various techniques have been developed
to improve the interfacial interaction between the polymer matrix and
filler particles [359]. For instance, Yao et al. fabricated a new chemical

Fig. 17. (a) Schematic illustration of the chemical structure of PU and the ef-
fect of UiO-66-NH2  nanoparticles on the morphology and gas transport prop-
erties of PU-based MMMs: gas A = CO2 and C4H10, and gas B = CH4, N2, and H2.
(b)  Comparing  the  CO2/N2  selectivity  of  PU-UiO-66-NH2  MMMs  with  other
reported membranes, PU in the literature [100,139,358], and Robeson’s upper
bound [357]. Copyright 2020, Reproduced with permission from RSC.

by

post-synthetic

polymerization

cross-linked  MMM
of
imidazolium-decorated  UiO-66-type  MOF  nanoparticles  and  PU  olig-
omer  (Fig.  18)  [360].  It  was  reported  that  the  covalent  binding  in-
teractions  between  the  MOF  nanoparticles  and  the  PU  matrix
dramatically improved the dispersion of MOF nanoparticles, interfacial
interaction  of  polymer/MOF,  mechanical  properties,  and  membrane
processability. Due to this morphology, the MMMs containing 50 wt%
MOF  showed  higher  affinity  toward  CO2  molecules,  higher  CO2
permeability, and higher CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 selectivity than the pure
polymer support.

Recently, several researchers have tried to develop new techniques
for  fabricating  MMMs  at  room  temperature  and  without  tedious  and
time-consuming procedures for the evaporation of the solvent. Molavi
and  Shojaei  presented  a  rapid  and  simple  synthesis  approach  to  pre-
paring  MMCMs.  MOF  nanoparticles  and  polymer  were  functionalized
with  acrylate-terminated  functional  groups  to  create  strong  covalent
bonds between MOF nanoparticles and polymer matrix [18]. As shown
in  Fig.  19,  the  NH2-UiO-66  nanoparticles  were  functionalized  with
glycidyl  methacrylate  (GMA)  to  prepare  acrylate-terminated-UiO-66
(GMA-UiO-66),  which  can  react  with  APU  during  the  cross-linking
process  under  UV  irradiation,  resulting  in  strong  interfacial  adhesion
between MOF nanoparticles and polymer matrix. GS results of the pre-
pared  MMCMs  indicated  that  the  permeability  of  CO2  and  N2  gases
increased by raising MOFs’ content and showed a sharp increment at the
higher loadings where the MOF nanoparticles started to agglomerate.
This enhancement in gas permeability may be attributed to an increase
in  the  DPS,  an  increase  in  the  free  volume  by  disrupting  the  chain

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109518

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Fig. 18. Schematic illustration for the synthesis of (a) L, (b) UiO-66-IL-X nanoparticles with various counter ions, (c) chemically cross-linked MMMs based on UiO-
66-IL-ClO4  nanoparticles and PU oligomer, and (d) various views of UiO-66-IL-ClO4-based MMMs [360]. Copyright 2017, Reproduced with permission from ASC.

packing of polymer, and the localization of MOF nanoparticles in the soft
domain.  These  parameters  provide  more  channels  for  gas  transport,
originating from the porous structure of MOF nanoparticles (Fig. 20a).
Moreover,  it  was  found  that  the  CO2/N2  selectivity  of  MMCMs
significantly increased with raising the content of MOF, especially for
the  functionalized  UiO-66  nanoparticles  with  GMA.  The  authors  pro-
posed that this enhancement in the CO2/N2  selectivity of MMCMs by
incorporating  GMA-UiO-66  was  due  to  the  following  properties:  (I)
excellent  dispersion  of  GMA-UiO-66  into  the  polymer  matrix  without
any agglomeration or sedimentation (Fig. 20b), (II) formation of no non-
selective micro-voids at the interface of polymer/GMA-UiO-66 because
of  the  strong  interfacial  interaction  originating  from  covalent  bonds,
(III) increase in the adsorption, as well as solubility coefficient, of CO2
molecules due to the presence of abundant polar functional groups (i.e.,
amine, ester, and hydroxyl) on the surface of GMA-UiO-66, (IV) increase
in the cross-linking density and gel content of MMCMs because of the
cross-linking ability of GMA-UiO-66 due to the presence of vinyl group
on its surface, and (V) partial blockage of the pores of GMA-UiO-66 due
to the penetration of huge APU chains into the pores, dominating the

molecular sieving mechanism.

5. Conclusions, future prospects, and challenges

The outstanding properties of polyurethane (PU) and poly(urethane-
urea)  (PUU)  membranes  enable  their  promising  performance  toward
CO2  separation. This paper critically discusses the physical, chemical,
structural, and morphological properties and also other parameters that
influence  the  GS  performance  of  PU  and  PUU-based  membranes.
Moreover,  a  general  methodology  and  precious  information  are  pro-
vided  for  designing  and  synthesizing  PU-based  membranes  with
controlled morphology and enhanced GS performances. We summarized
the  recent  progress  in  PU-based  membranes  in  different  strategies,
including  (I)  design  and  synthesis  of  new  PU-based  polymer,  (II)
blending PU with other polymer matrices, (III) cross-linking PU mem-
branes,  and  (IV)  fabricating  PU-based  MMMs  with  deep  insight  into
enhanced CO2 permeability and CO2 selectivity (i.e., CO2/N2, CO2/CH4,
and  CO2/H2).  Therefore,  based  on  reviewing  different  works  in  this
field, the following conclusions can be drawn.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109519

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Fig.  19. Schematic  illustration  of  reaction  steps  for  synthesizing  APU-g-GMA-UiO-66-based  MMM  and  its  TEM  images  [18].  Copyright  2020,  Reproduced  with
permission from ASC.

(I)  As the molecular weight of the soft segment (SS) increases, the
DPS increases, leading to an increment in CO2 permeability and a
reduction in CO2 selectivity. Increasing the chain extender length
has  a  similar  effect  on  the  DPS,  as  well  as  the  membrane  GS
performance.

(II)  As  the  polarity  of  SS  increases,  the  phase  mixing  increases,
resulting in a decrease in CO2 permeability and an increase in CO2
selectivity.  The increasing  polarity  of  the  chain  extender  has a
similar  effect  on  the  DPS  as  well  as  the  membrane  GS
performance.

(III) Poly  (ether-urethane)  membranes  showed  better  GS  perfor-
mances  than  poly(ester-urethane)  membranes,  mainly  due  to
ethereal linkages, leading to higher phase separations.

(IV)  Replacing a diol chain extender with a diamine one increases the
DPS, thereby enhancing CO2  permeability. Substituting a linear
and flexible chain extender with a bulky and rigid one, replacing
a conventional chain extender with ones containing length-alkyl
side chains, and replacing aromatic diisocyanates with linear and
aliphatic  ones  have  similar  effects  on  DPS  as  well  as  CO2
permeation.

(V)  The characteristic properties of fillers, i.e., shape, particle size,
porous nature, and surface functionality, significantly affect the

interfacial adhesion between filler particles and the PU chains.
The strong interfacial interaction between filler particles and PU
matrix  can  effectively  decrease  the  formation  of  non-selective
micro-voids  in  the  PU-based  MMMs,  which  increases  CO2
selectivity.

(VI)  The porous and permeable fillers in the PU-based MMMs allow
gas  molecules  to  penetrate  the  pores  of  the  fillers  by  surface
diffusion, molecular sieving, and Knudsen diffusion mechanisms.
(VII)  The non-porous and impermeable filler particles can enhance the
GS  performance  of  PU-based  MMMs  by  changing  the  DPS  and
polymer chain orientation.

(VIII)  The  MMMs  containing  surface-functionalized  filler  particles
showed  better  GS  performance  than  those  containing  un-
functionalized filler particles.

(IX)  Among  different  fillers  used  in  PU-based  MMMs,  MOFs  are
considered versatile fillers to overcome the trade-off limitation of
conventional  PU  membranes.  MOFs  increase  CO2  permeability
more  than  other  used  fillers  due  to  their  exceptional  textural
properties. Moreover, the GS performance of MOFs is close to or
surpasses Robeson’s upper bound (Fig. 21).

Of  note,  the  current  research  about  PU-based  membranes  for  GS

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109520

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Fig. 20. (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed pathways for gas molecules transport through MMCMs. (color code: N2: green and CO2: red). (b) Cross-sectional
FESEM images of the MMCMs containing different UiO-66s [18]. Copyright 2020, Reproduced with permission from ACS.(For interpretation of the references to
colour in this figure legend, the reader is reffered to the web version of this article).

applications  is  still  relatively  new.  Numerous  emerging  opportunities
and  challenges  exist  in  understanding  the  separation  mechanisms  to
develop  high-performance  PU  membranes.  Most  fabricated  PU-based
membranes  have  only  been  tested  at  the  lab  scale  for  pure  gases  at
low temperatures and pressures, which do not represent the true per-
formance of the PU-based membranes for mixed GS applications at high
temperatures and pressures. Additionally, simple and facile scaling up
and  different  modules  should  be  studied  to  make  this  polymer  more
practically  feasible.  Therefore,  further  research  is  required  to  materi-
alize industrial applications of PU-based membranes for CO2 separation.
Moreover, the durability and long-term GS stability of PU-based mem-
branes need further evaluation.

Combined,  the  UV-curable  acrylate  polyurethane  (APU)  featuring
good film-forming ability, great long-term GS stability, excellent inter-
facial  adhesion  to  support  porous  layer,  environmentally  friendly  na-
ture, ease of processing, and fast synthesis reactions, could be deemed as
excellent  candidates  for  fabricating  efficient  and  cost-effective  thin
composite membranes. However, most  of the cross-linked PU or  APU
membranes  have  a  relatively  large  thickness  (≈30–200  μm),  and  the
applicability  of  conventional  fabrication  techniques  (i.e.,  dip-coating,
drop-coating, spin-coating, etc.) is not yet investigated for the fabrica-
tion of these composite membranes. Although, in recent years, some thin

composite membranes based on PU have been fabricated for selective
CO2 separation, the effect of the micro-phase separation structure of PU
on  the  GS  performance  of  these  membranes  is  yet  to  be  explored.
Therefore, the feasible methods to achieve adjustable micro-phase sep-
aration  in  the  PU-based  membranes  at  the  microscale  and  nanoscale
should be carefully explored.

The  fabrication  of  defect-free  PU-based  MMMs  is  still  one  of  the
ongoing  and  challenging  initiatives  in  MMMs  development.  Accord-
ingly, good interfacial interaction between filler particles and PU matrix,
the appropriate particle size of fillers, uniform dispersion of filler par-
ticles  within  the  PU  matrix,  and  the  right  loading  of  filler  particles
within the PU matrix are some of the current challenges in the fabrica-
tion of MMMs. Moreover, the poor dispersion of filler particles into the
PU matrix, especially at higher filler loadings, results in creating large
agglomerates in the PU matrix. This leads to non-selective micro-voids
or channels at the filler particles/PU matrix interface, thereby deterio-
rating the separation performance of MMMs. Therefore, intensive and
comprehensive research is needed to address the challenges mentioned
in future works.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109521

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

References

[1] Ahmadijokani F, Ahmadipouya S, Molavi H, Rezakazemi M, Aminabhavi TM,

Arjmand M. Impact of scale, activation solvents, and aged conditions on gas
adsorption properties of UiO-66. J Environ Manag 2020;274:111155. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.111155.

[2] Molavi H, Eskandari A, Shojaei A, Mousavi SA. Enhancing CO2/N2 adsorption
selectivity via post-synthetic modification of NH2-UiO-66(Zr). Microporous
Mesoporous Mater 2018;257:193–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
micromeso.2017.08.043.

[3] Molavi H, Joukani FA, Shojaei A. Ethylenediamine grafting to functionalized
NH2-UiO-66 using green aza-michael addition reaction to improve CO2/CH4
adsorption selectivity. Ind Eng Chem Res 2018;57:7030–9. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.iecr.8b00372.

[4] Lau CH, Li P, Li F, Chung TS, Paul DR. Reverse-selective polymeric membranes
for gas separations. Prog Polym Sci 2013;38:740–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
progpolymsci.2012.09.006.

[5] Amooghin AE, Sanaeepur H, Pedram MZ. New advances in polymeric membranes
for CO2 separation. Polym Sci Res Adv Pract Appl Educ Asp 2016:354–68.
[6] Chawla M, Saulat H, Masood Khan M, Mahmood Khan M, Rafiq S, Cheng L, et al.
Membranes for CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 gas separation. Chem Eng Technol 2020;
43:184–99. https://doi.org/10.1002/ceat.201900375.

[7] Bernardo P, Drioli E, Golemme G. Membrane gas separation: a review/state of the

art. Ind Eng Chem Res 2009;48:4638–63. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie8019032.

[8] Baker RW, Low BT. Gas separation membrane materials: a perspective.

Macromolecules 2014;47:6999–7013. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma501488s.
[9] Luis P, Van Gerven T, Van Der Bruggen B. Recent developments in membrane-
based technologies for CO 2 capture. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2012;38:419–48.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2012.01.004.

[10] Merkel TC, Zhou M, Baker RW. Carbon dioxide capture with membranes at an

IGCC power plant. J Memb Sci 2012;389:441–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2011.11.012.

[11] Wang M, Zhao J, Wang X, Liu A, Gleason KK. Recent progress on submicron gas-
selective polymeric membranes. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:8860–86. https://doi.
org/10.1039/c7ta01862b.

[12] Feijani EA, Tavassoli A, Mahdavi H, Molavi H. Effective gas separation through
graphene oxide containing mixed matrix membranes. J Appl Polym Sci 2018;135:
1–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.46271.

[13] Robeson LM. Correlation of separation factor versus permeability for polymeric
membranes. J Memb Sci 1991;62:165–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/0376-7388
(91)80060-J.

[14] Robeson LM. The upper bound revisited. J Memb Sci 2008;320:390–400. https://

doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2008.04.030.

[15] Sadeghi M, Talakesh MM, Arabi Shamsabadi A, Soroush M. Novel application of a
polyurethane membrane for efficient separation of hydrogen sulfide from binary
and ternary gas mixtures. ChemistrySelect 2018;3:3302–8. https://doi.org/
10.1002/slct.201703170.

[16] Zhu L, Swihart MT, Lin H. Tightening polybenzimidazole (PBI) nanostructure via
chemical cross-linking for membrane H2/CO2 separation. J Mater Chem A 2017;
5:19914–23. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ta03874g.

[17] Molavi H, Shojaei A, Mousavi SA. Improving mixed-matrix membrane

performance: via PMMA grafting from functionalized NH2-UiO-66. J Mater Chem
A 2018;6:2775–91. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ta10480d.

[18] Molavi H, Shojaei A. Mixed-matrix composite membranes based on UiO-66-

derived MOFs for CO 2 separation. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11:9448–61.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b20869.

[19] Molavi H, Shojaei A, Mousavi SA. Photo-curable acrylate polyurethane as

efficient composite membrane for CO2 separation. Polymer 2018;149:178–91.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2018.06.074.

[20] Vinoba M, Bhagiyalakshmi M, Alqaheem Y, Alomair AA, P ́erez A, Rana MS.
Recent progress of fillers in mixed matrix membranes for CO2 separation: a
review. Sep Purif Technol 2017;188:431–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
seppur.2017.07.051.

[21] Liu J, Hou X, Park HB, Lin H. High-performance polymers for membrane CO2/
N2Separation. Chem Eur J 2016;22:15980–90. https://doi.org/10.1002/
chem.201603002.

[22] Ali Z, Pacheco F, Litwiller E, Wang Y, Han Y, Pinnau I. Ultra-selective defect-free
interfacially polymerized molecular sieve thin-film composite membranes for H2
purification. J Mater Chem A 2017;6:30–5. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ta07819f.

[23] Song Q, Nataraj SK, Roussenova MV, Tan JC, Hughes DJ, Li W, et al. Zeolitic

imidazolate framework (ZIF-8) based polymer nanocomposite membranes for gas
separation. Energy Environ Sci 2012;5:8359–69. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c2ee21996d.

[24] Nafisi V, H ̈agg MB. Development of nanocomposite membranes containing

modified Si nanoparticles in PEBAX-2533 as a block copolymer and 6FDADurene
diamine as a glassy polymer. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2014;6:15643–52.
https://doi.org/10.1021/am500532a.

[25] Liu SL, Shao L, Chua ML, Lau CH, Wang H, Quan S. Recent progress in the design
of advanced PEO-containing membranes for CO2 removal. Prog Polym Sci 2013;
38:1089–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2013.02.002.

[26] Ghosal K, Freeman BD. Gas separation using polymer membranes: an overview.

Polym Adv Technol 1994;5:673–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/
pat.1994.220051102.

[27] Tanh Jeazet HB, Staudt C, Janiak C. Metal-organic frameworks in mixed-matrix

membranes for gas separation. Dalt Trans 2012;41:14003–27. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c2dt31550e.

Fig. 21. Representative (a) CO2/N2  and (b) CO2/CH4  separation performance
of  reported  PU-based  membranes  compared  to  Robeson’s  upper  bound.  The
data used for plotting these images are listed in Tables S1, S2, S3, and S4. The
MOF/PU membranes refer to membranes containing ZIF-8, γ-CD-MOF, MIL-101
(Cr), UiO-66, or their derivatives and the related GS data are listed in Table S4.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the Research Deputy of the Sharif
University  of  Technology  501100002398  and  Institute  for  Advanced
Studies in Basic Science (IASBS) for providing financial support for this
research.  Dr.  Arjmand  is  also  grateful  to  the  Canada  Research  Chairs
program for financial aid.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101095.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109522

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

[28] Li S, Liu Y, Wong D, Yang J. Recent advances in polymer-inorganic mixed matrix
membranes for co2 separation. Polymers 2021;13:2539. https://doi.org/
10.3390/polym13152539.

[29] Yampolskii Y. Polymeric gas separation membranes. Macromolecules 2012;45:

3298–311. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma300213b.

[30] Ahmadi Feijani E, Tavasoli A, Mahdavi H. Improving gas separation performance

of poly(vinylidene fluoride) based mixed matrix membranes containing metal-
organic frameworks by chemical modification. Ind Eng Chem Res 2015;54:
12124–34. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.5b02549.

[31] Malakhov AO, Volkov VV. Mixed-gas selectivity based on pure gas permeation

measurements: an approximate model. Membranes 2021;11. https://doi.org/
10.3390/membranes11110833.

[32] Robeson LM. Polymer membranes. Elsevier B.V.; 2012. https://doi.org/10.1016/

B978-0-444-53349-4.00211-9.

[33] Freeman BD, Pinnau I. Polymer membranes for gas and vapor separation. 1999.

https://doi.org/10.1021/bk-1999-0733.fw001. i–iv.

[34] Ismail AF, Khulbe KC, Matsuura T. Gas separation membranes: polymeric and
inorganic. Gas Sep Membr Polym Inorg 2015:1–331. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-01095-3.

[35] Tanh Jeazet HB, Staudt C, Janiak C. Metal-organic frameworks in mixed-matrix

membranes for gas separation. Dalt Trans 2012;41:14003–27. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c2dt31550e.

[36] Kinoshita Y, Wakimoto K, Gibbons AH, Isfahani AP, Kusuda H, Sivaniah E, et al.
Enhanced PIM-1 membrane gas separation selectivity through efficient dispersion
of functionalized POSS fillers. J Memb Sci 2017;539:178–86. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.memsci.2017.05.072.

[37] Li S, Jo HJ, Han SH, Park CH, Kim S, Budd PM, et al. Mechanically robust
thermally rearranged (TR) polymer membranes with spirobisindane for gas
separation. J Memb Sci 2013;434:137–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2013.01.011.

[38] Kim S, Lee YM. Rigid and microporous polymers for gas separation membranes.

Prog Polym Sci 2015;43:1–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
progpolymsci.2014.10.005.

[39] Alghunaimi F, Ghanem B, Alaslai N, Mukaddam M, Pinnau I. Triptycene

dimethyl-bridgehead dianhydride-based intrinsically microporous hydroxyl-
functionalized polyimide for natural gas upgrading. J Memb Sci 2016;520:240–6.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2016.07.058.

[40] Farnam M, bin Mukhtar H, bin Mohd Shariff A. A review on glassy and rubbery
polymeric membranes for natural gas purification. ChemBioEng Rev 2021;8:
90–109. https://doi.org/10.1002/cben.202100002.

[41] Molavi H, Shojaei A, Mousavi SA, Ahmadi SA. Effect of reactive diluent on gas

https://doi.org/10.1002/1099-0488(20000801)38:15<2051::AID-
POLB100>3.0.CO;2-D.

[55] Talakesh MM, Sadeghi M, Chenar MP, Khosravi A. Gas separation properties of

poly(ethylene glycol)/poly(tetramethylene glycol) based polyurethane
membranes. J Memb Sci 2012;415–416:469–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2012.05.033.

[56] Gharibi R, Ghadimi A, Yeganeh H, Sadatnia B, Gharedaghi M. Preparation and

evaluation of hybrid organic-inorganic poly(urethane-siloxane) membranes with
build-in poly(ethylene glycol) segments for efficient separation of CO2/CH4 and
CO2/H2. J Memb Sci 2018;548:572–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2017.11.058.

[57] Saha S, Chandra S, Garai B, Banerjee R. Carbon dioxide capture by metal organic
frameworks. Indian J Chem - Sect A Inorganic, Phys Theor Anal Chem 2012;51:
1223–30.

[58] Isfahani AP, Sadeghi M, Wakimoto K, Gibbons AH, Bagheri R, Sivaniah E, et al.
Enhancement of CO2 capture by polyethylene glycol-based polyurethane
membranes. J Memb Sci 2017;542:143–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2017.08.006.

[59] Azizi M, Mousavi SA. CO2/H2 separation using a highly permeable polyurethane
membrane: molecular dynamics simulation. J Mol Struct 2015;1100:401–14.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2015.07.029.

[60] Lin H, Freeman BD. Materials selection guidelines for membranes that remove

CO2 from gas mixtures. J Mol Struct 2005;739:57–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molstruc.2004.07.045.

[61] Lin H, Van Wagner E, Freeman BD, Toy LG, Gupta RP. Plasticization-enhanced
hydrogen purification using polymeric membranes. Science 2006;80(311):
639–42. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1118079.

[62] Zhu B, Jiang X, He S, Yang X, Long J, Zhang Y, et al. Rational design of poly

(ethylene oxide) based membranes for sustainable CO2capture. J Mater Chem A
2020;8:24233–52. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ta08806d.

[63] He R, Cong S, Xu S, Han S, Guo H, Liang Z, et al. CO2-philic mixed matrix
membranes based on low-molecular-weight polyethylene glycol and porous
organic polymers. J Memb Sci 2021;624:119081. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2021.119081.

[64] Coutinho FMB, Delpech MC, Garcia MEF. Evaluation of gas permeability of

membranes obtained from poly(urethane-urea)s aqueous dispersions based on
hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene. Polym Test 2002;21:719–23. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0142-9418(01)00147-7.

[65] Lin H, Freeman BD. Gas solubility, diffusivity and permeability in poly(ethylene

oxide). J Memb Sci 2004;239:105–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2003.08.031.

separation behavior of photocurable acrylated polyurethane composite
membranes. J Appl Polym Sci 2020;137:48293. https://doi.org/10.1002/
app.48293.

[66] Li H, Freeman BD, Ekiner OM. Gas permeation properties of poly(urethane-urea)s

containing different polyethers. J Memb Sci 2011;369:49–58. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.memsci.2010.11.024.

[42] Reijerkerk SR, Arun A, Gaymans RJ, Nijmeijer K, Wessling M. Tuning of mass

[67] Yave W, Car A, Funari SS, Nunes SP, Peinemann KV. CO2-Philic polymer

transport properties of multi-block copolymers for CO2 capture applications.
J Memb Sci 2010;359:54–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2009.09.045.

membrane with extremely high separation performance. Macromolecules 2010;
43:326–33. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma901950u.

[43] Hirayama Y, Kase Y, Tanihara N, Sumiyama Y, Kusuki Y, Haraya K. Permeation

properties to CO2 and N2 of poly(ethylene oxide)-containing and crosslinked
polymer films. J Memb Sci 1999;160:87–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-
7388(99)00080-0.

[44] Pegoraro M, Penati A, Zanderighi L. Polyurethane membrane for gas

fractionation. J Memb Sci 1986;27:203–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388
(00)82057-8.

[45] Chatterjee G, Houde AA, Stern SA. Poly(ether urethane) and poly(ether urethane
urea) membranes with high H2S/CH4 selectivity. J Memb Sci 1997;135:99–106.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(97)00134-8.

[46] Bondar VI, Freeman BD, Pinnau I. Gas sorption and characterization of poly

(ether-b-amide) segmented block copolymers. J Polym Sci Part B Polym Phys
1999;37:2463–75. https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1099-0488(19990901)37:
17<2463::aid-polb18>3.3.co;2-8.

[47] Huang SL, Lai JY. Gas permeability of crosslinked HTPB–H12MDI-based

polyurethane membrane. J Appl Polym Sci 1995;58:1913–23. https://doi.org/
10.1002/app.1995.070581029.

[48] Huang SL, Ruaan RC, Lai JY. Gas permeability of cupric ion containing HTPB
based polyurethane membranes. J Memb Sci 1997;123:71–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0376-7388(96)00202-5.

[49] Kim JH, Ha SY, Lee YM. Gas permeation of poly(amide-6-b-ethylene oxide)

copolymer. J Memb Sci 2001;190:179–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388
(01)00444-6.

[50] McBride JS, Massaro TA, Cooper SL. Diffusion of gases through polyurethane
block polymers. J Appl Polym Sci 1979;23:201–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/
app.1979.070230118.

[51] Teranaka S, Ishii T, Matsunaga Y, Koyama A, Kamura K, Sakamoto S, et al.

Skeletonization of renal cysts of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
using magnetic resonance imaging. J Med Imaging Heal Informatics 2017;7:
568–73. https://doi.org/10.1166/jmihi.2017.2068.

[52] Liu L, Chakma A, Feng X. CO2/N2 separation by poly(ether block amide) thin
film hollow fiber composite membranes. Ind Eng Chem Res 2005;44:6874–82.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie050306k.

[53] Halim A, Fu Q, Yong Q, Gurr PA, Kentish SE, Qiao GG. Soft polymeric

nanoparticle additives for next generation gas separation membranes. J Mater
Chem A 2014;2:4999–5009. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ta14170e.

[54] Bondar VI, Freeman BD, Pinnau I. Gas transport properties of poly(ether-b-amide)
segmented block copolymers. J Polym Sci Part B Polym Phys 2000;38:2051–62.

[68] Ghadimi A, Norouzbahari S, Vatanpour V, Mohammadi F. An investigation on gas
transport properties of cross-linked poly(ethylene glycol diacrylate) (XLPEGDA)
and XLPEGDA/TiO2 membranes with a focus on CO2 separation. Energy Fuel
2018;32:5418–32. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.8b00545.

[69] Reis RA, Pereira JHC, Campos ACC, Barboza EM, Delpech MC, Cesar DV, et al.
Waterborne poly(urethane-urea) gas permeation membranes for CO2/CH4
separation. J Appl Polym Sci 2018;135:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1002/
app.46003.

[70] Sridhar S, Smitha B, Ramakrishna M, Aminabhavi TM. Modified poly(phenylene
oxide) membranes for the separation of carbon dioxide from methane. J Memb
Sci 2006;280:202–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2006.01.019.

[71] Arun A, Gaymans RJ. Hydrophilic poly(ethylene oxide)-aramid segmented block

copolymers. Eur Polym J 2009;45:2858–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eurpolymj.2009.07.002.

[72] Tena A, Marcos-Fern ́andez A, Palacio L, Pr ́adanos P, Lozano AE, de Abajo J, et al.
On the influence of the proportion of PEO in thermally controlled phase
segregation of copoly(ether-imide)s for gas separation. J Memb Sci 2013;434:
26–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2013.01.036.

[73] Lin H, Kai T, Freeman BD, Kalakkunnath S, Kalika DS. The effect of cross-linking

on gas permeability in cross-linked poly(ethylene glycol diacrylate).
Macromolecules 2005;38:8381–93. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma0510136.
[74] Kusuma VA, Freeman BD, Borns MA, Kalika DS. Influence of chemical structure of
short chain pendant groups on gas transport properties of cross-linked poly
(ethylene oxide) copolymers. J Memb Sci 2009;327:195–207. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.memsci.2008.11.022.

[75] Reijerkerk SR, Nijmeijer K, Ribeiro CP, Freeman BD, Wessling M. On the effects of

plasticization in CO2/light gas separation using polymeric solubility selective
membranes. J Memb Sci 2011;367:33–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2010.10.035.

[76] Luo S, Stevens KA, Park JS, Moon JD, Liu Q, Freeman BD, et al. Highly CO2-
selective gas separation membranes based on segmented copolymers of poly
(ethylene oxide) reinforced with pentiptycene-containing polyimide hard
segments. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2016;8:2306–17. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.5b11355.

[77] Yang Z, Peng H, Wang W, Liu T. Crystallization behavior of poly(ε-caprolactone)/
layered double hydroxide nanocomposites. J Appl Polym Sci 2010;116:2658–67.
https://doi.org/10.1002/app.

[78] Deng J, Dai Z, Yan J, Sandru M, Sandru E, Spontak RJ, et al. Facile and solvent-
free fabrication of PEG-based membranes with interpenetrating networks for CO2

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109523

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

separation. J Memb Sci 2019:455–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2018.10.031. 570–571.

[79] Cong H, Yu B. Aminosilane cross-linked PEG/PEPEG/PPEPG membranes for cO
2/N2 and CO2/H2 separation. Ind Eng Chem Res 2010;49:9363–9. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ie1012568.

[80] Woli ́nska-Grabczyk A, Jankowski A. Gas transport properties of segmented

polyurethanes varying in the kind of soft segments. Sep Purif Technol 2007;57:
413–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2006.03.025.

[81] Teo LS, Kuo JF, Chen CY. Permeation and sorption of CO2 through amine-

contained polyurethane and poly(urea-urethane) membranes. J Appl Polym Sci
1996;59:1627–38. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-4628(19960307)59:
10<1627::AID-APP15>3.0.CO;2-T.

[82] Ghadimi A, Gharibi R, Yeganeh H, Sadatnia B. Ionic liquid tethered PEG-based
polyurethane-siloxane membranes for efficient CO2/CH4 separation. Mater Sci
Eng C 2019;102:524–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2019.04.057.
[83] Taheri P, Raisi A, Maleh MS. CO2-selective poly (ether-block-amide)/

polyethylene glycol composite blend membrane for CO2 separation from gas
mixtures. Environ Sci Pollut Res 2021;28:38274–91. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-021-13447-y.

[84] Metz SJ, Mulder MHV, Wessling M. Gas-permeation properties of poly(ethylene
oxide) poly(butylene terephthalate) block copolymers. Macromolecules 2004;37:
4590–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma049847w.

[85] Wang L, Li Y, Li S, Ji P, Jiang C. Preparation of composite poly(ether block amide)

membrane for CO2 capture. J Energy Chem 2014;23:717–25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S2095-4956(14)60204-7.

[86] Wong KC, Goh PS, Ismail AF. Enhancing hydrogen gas separation performance of

thin film composite membrane through facilely blended polyvinyl alcohol and
PEBAX. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:19737–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2020.09.079.

[87] Salehi Maleh M, Raisi A. Comparison of porous and nonporous filler effect on
performance of poly (ether-block-amide) mixed matrix membranes for gas
separation applications. Chem Eng Res Des 2019;147:545–60. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cherd.2019.05.038.

[88] Luo Z, Zhang L, Jiang J. Atomistic insight into micro-phase separation and gas
diffusion in PEO-PBT multiblock copolymers. Mol Simul 2013;39:902–7. https://
doi.org/10.1080/08927022.2013.775441.

[89] Sadeghi M, Semsarzadeh MA, Barikani M, Ghalei B. The effect of urethane and

urea content on the gas permeation properties of poly(urethane-urea)
membranes. J Memb Sci 2010;354:40–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2010.02.070.

[90] Santos GHG, Rodrigues MA, Ferraz HC, Moura LC, Miranda JL. A more

sustainable polyurethane membrane for gas separation at room temperature and
low pressure. Mater Sci Forum 2019;965 MSF:125–32. https://doi.org
/10.4028/www.scientific.net/MSF.965.125.

[91] Isfahani AP, Ghalei B, Bagheri R, Kinoshita Y, Kitagawa H, Sivaniah E, et al.
Polyurethane gas separation membranes with ethereal bonds in the hard
segments. J Memb Sci 2016;513:58–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2016.04.030.

[92] Palomba JM, Wirth DM, Kim JY, Kalaj M, Clarke EM, Peterson GW, et al. Strong,

ductile MOF-poly(urethane urea) composites. Chem Mater 2021;33:3164–71.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04874.

[93] Trentini A, da Silva Biron D, Duarte J, dos Santos V. Polyurethane membranes

reinforced with calcium carbonate and oyster powder for application in the
separation of CH4/CO2 from greenhouse gases. Brazilian J Chem Eng 2021;38:
585–603. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43153-021-00112-7.

[94] Fakhar A, Sadeghi M, Dinari M, Lammertink R. Comparative assessment of
hydrocarbon separation performance of bulky poly(urethane-urea)s toward
rubbery membranes. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2022;98:104356. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jngse.2021.104356.

[95] Cheng BX, Gao WC, Ren XM, Ouyang XY, Zhao Y, Zhao H, et al. A review of

microphase separation of polyurethane: characterization and applications. Polym
Test 2022;107:107489. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymertesting.2022.107489.
[96] Joshi M, Adak B, Butola BS. Polyurethane nanocomposite based gas barrier films,

membranes and coatings: a review on synthesis, characterization and potential
applications. Prog Mater Sci 2018;97:230–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pmatsci.2018.05.001.

[97] Fakhar A, Sadeghi M, Dinari M, Lammertink R. Association of hard segments in
gas separation through polyurethane membranes with aromatic bulky chain
extenders. J Memb Sci 2019;574:136–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2018.12.062.

[98] Zheng Y, Hu Y, Yang X, Yuan M, Zhang J, Zhang Y, et al. Synthesis and CO 2
separation of novel polyurethane membranes containing urea linkages. J Appl
Polym Sci 2019;136:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.47723.

[99] Norouzbahari S, Gharibi R. An investigation on structural and gas transport

properties of modified cross-linked PEG-PU membranes for CO2 separation. React
Funct Polym 2020;151:104585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
reactfunctpolym.2020.104585.

[100] Isfahani AP, Ghalei B, Wakimoto K, Bagheri R, Sivaniah E, Sadeghi M.

Plasticization resistant crosslinked polyurethane gas separation membranes.
J Mater Chem A 2016;4:17431–9. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ta07820f.
[101] Yilg ̈or I, Yilg ̈or E, Wilkes GL. Critical parameters in designing segmented

polyurethanes and their effect on morphology and properties: a comprehensive
review. Polymer (Guildf) 2015;58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymer.2014.12.014. A1–A36.

[102] Ho BP, Choon KK, Young ML. Gas separation properties of polysiloxane/polyether

mixed soft segment urethane urea membranes. J Memb Sci 2002;204:257–69.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(02)00048-0.

[103] Hsieh KH, Tsai CC, Tseng SM. Vapor and gas permeability of polyurethane

membranes. Part I. Structure-property relationship. J Memb Sci 1990;49:341–50.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(00)80647-X.

[104] Hsieh KH, Tsai CC, Chang DM. Vapor and gas permeability of polyurethane
membranes. Part II. Effect of functional group. J Memb Sci 1991;56:279–87.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(00)83038-0.

[105] Khosravi A, Sadeghi M. Separation performance of poly(urethane-urea)

membranes in the separation of C2 and C3 hydrocarbons from methane. J Memb
Sci 2013;434:171–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2013.01.025.

[106] Furukawa M, Mitsui Y, Fukumaru T, Kojio K. Microphase-separated structure and

mechanical properties of novel polyurethane elastomers prepared with ether
based diisocyanate. Polymer (Guildf) 2005;46:10817–22. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.polymer.2005.09.009.

[107] Yingjie L, Kang W, Stoffer JO, Chu B. Effect of hard-segment flexibility on phase
separation of segmented polyurethanes. Macromolecules 1994;27:612–4. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ma00080a043.

[108] Velankar S, Cooper SL. Microphase separation and rheological properties of

polyurethane melts. 3. Effect of block incompatibility on the viscoelastic
properties. Macromolecules 2000;33:395–403. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ma9908189.

[109] Khan SU, Hafeez S, Sultan M, Islam A, Iqbal SS, Khan RU, et al. Impact of soft
segment size on structural and permeation properties of polyurethane
membranes. J Polym Environ 2020;28:1944–53. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10924-020-01745-4.

[110] Ulubayram K, Hasirci N. Polyurethanes: effect of chemical composition on
mechanical properties and oxygen permeability. Polymer 1992;33:2084–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-3861(92)90874-V.

[111] Bagdi K, Moln ́ar K, Saj ́o I, Puk ́anszky B. Specific interactions, structure and

properties in segmented polyurethane elastomers. Express Polym Lett 2011;5:
417–27. https://doi.org/10.3144/expresspolymlett.2011.41.

[112] Wang ZF, Wang B, Qi N, Ding XM, Hu JL. Free volume and water vapor

permeability properties in polyurethane membranes studied by positrons. Mater
Chem Phys 2004;88:212–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matchemphys.2004.07.012.

[113] Barkoula NM, Alcock B, Cabrera NO, Peijs T. Flame-retardancy properties of
intumescent ammonium poly(phosphate) and mineral filler magnesium
hydroxide in combination with graphene. Polym Polym Compos 2008;16:101–13.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pc.

[114] Aurilia M, Piscitelli F, Sorrentino L, Lavorgna M, Iannace S. Detailed analysis of
dynamic mechanical properties of TPU nanocomposite: the role of the interfaces.
Eur Polym J 2011;47:925–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2011.01.005.
[115] Sadeghi M, Semsarzadeh MA, Barikani M, Ghalei B. Study on the morphology and
gas permeation property of polyurethane membranes. J Memb Sci 2011:76–85.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2011.09.024. 385–386.

[116] Sami S, Yildirim E, Yurtsever M, Yurtsever E, Yilgor E, Yilgor I, et al.

Understanding the influence of hydrogen bonding and diisocyanate symmetry on
the morphology and properties of segmented polyurethanes and polyureas:
computational and experimental study. Polymer 2014;55:4563–76. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.polymer.2014.07.028.

[117] SantosMiranda ME, Marcolla C, Rodriguez CA, Wilhelm HM, Sierakowski MR,
BelleBresolin TM, et al. I . The role of N-carboxymethylation of chitosan in the
thermal stability and dynamic. Polym Int 2006;55:961–9. https://doi.org/
10.1002/pi.

[118] Diani J, Gall K. Finite strain 3D thermoviscoelastic constitutive model. Society;

2006. p. 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.

[119] Mondal S, Hu JL. Structural characterization and mass transfer properties of
nonporous segmented polyurethane membrane: influence of hydrophilic and
carboxylic group. J Memb Sci 2006;274:219–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2005.08.016.

[120] Huang SL, Lai JY. On the gas permeability of hydroxyl terminated polybutadiene
based polyurethane membranes. J Memb Sci 1995;105:137–45. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0376-7388(94)00319-T.

[121] Chattopadhyay DK, Sreedhar B, Raju KVSN. Effect of chain extender on phase

mixing and coating properties of polyurethane ureas. Ind Eng Chem Res 2005;44:
1772–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie0492348.

[122] Parsa Moghaddam M, Abdi H, Javidi MH. Probabilistic OPF approach for

transmission expansion planning in restructured power systems, Iran. J Electr
Comput Eng 2008;7:23–8. https://www.sid.ir/en/journal/ViewPaper.aspx?
id=134784.

[123] Marques MFF, Gordo PM, De Lima AP, Queiroz DP, De Pinho MN, Major P, et al.

Free-volume studies in polycaprolactone/poly(propylene oxide) urethane/urea
membranes by positron lifetime spectroscopy. Acta Phys Pol A 2008;113:
1359–64. https://doi.org/10.12693/aphyspola.113.1359.

[124] Ferreira Marques MF, Lopes Gil C, Gordo PM, Kajcsos Z, De Lima AP, Queiroz DP,
et al. Free-volume studies in polyurethane membranes by positron annihilation
spectroscopy. Radiat Phys Chem 2003;68:573–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0969-806X(03)00234-2.

[125] Mondal S, Hu JL, Yong Z. Free volume and water vapor permeability of dense

segmented polyurethane membrane. J Memb Sci 2006;280:427–32. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.memsci.2006.01.047.

[126] Wang ZF, Wang B, Yang YR, Hu CP. Correlations between gas permeation and
free-volume hole properties of polyurethane membranes. Eur Polym J 2003;39:
2345–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0014-3057(03)00181-2.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109524

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

[127] Amani M, Amjad-Iranagh S, Golzar K, Sadeghi GMM, Modarress H. Study of

nanostructure characterizations and gas separation properties of poly(urethane-
urea)s membranes by molecular dynamics simulation. J Memb Sci 2014;462:
28–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2014.03.018.

[128] Karimi MB, Khanbabaei G, Sadeghi GMM. Vegetable oil-based polyurethane

membrane for gas separation. J Memb Sci 2017;527:198–206. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.memsci.2016.12.008.

[129] Shahrooz M, Sadeghi M, Bagheri R, Laghaei M. Elucidating the significance of

segmental mixing in determining the gas transport properties of polyurethanes.
Macromolecules 2016;49:4220–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
macromol.6b00617.

[130] Assis Silva FC, da Costa Lourenço T, van der Spoel D, Aparicio S, Azevedo dos

Reis R, Costa LT. The structure of CO2 and CH4 at the interface of a poly(urethane
urea) oligomer model from the microscopic point of view. J Chem Phys 2021;155.
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0049007. 1ENG.

[131] Ruaan RC, Wen-Chung M, Chen SH, Lai JY. Microstructure of HTPB-based

polyurethane membranes and explanation of their low O2/N2 selectivity. J Appl
Polym Sci 2001;82:1307–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.1965.

[132] Hood MA, Wang B, Sands JM, La Scala JJ, Beyer FL, Li CY. Morphology control of
segmented polyurethanes by crystallization of hard and soft segments. Polymer
2010;51:2191–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2010.03.027.
[133] Yingjie L, Gao T, Chu B. Synchrotron SAXS studies of the phase-separation
kinetics in a segmented polyurethane. Macromolecules 1992;25:1737–42.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ma00032a018.

[134] Madhavan K, Reddy BSR. Poly(dimethylsiloxane-urethane) membranes: effect of

hard segment in urethane on gas transport properties. J Memb Sci 2006;283:
357–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2006.07.005.

[135] Gomes D, Peinemann KV, Nunes SP, Kujawski W, Kozakiewicz J. Gas transport

properties of segmented poly(ether siloxane urethane urea) membranes. J Memb
Sci 2006;281:747–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2006.05.002.

[136] Queiroz DP, De Pinho MN. Structural characteristics and gas permeation

properties of polydimethylsiloxane/poly(propylene oxide) urethane/urea bi-soft
segment membranes. Polymer 2005;46:2346–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymer.2004.12.056.

[137] Yilg ̈or  ̇I, McGrath JE. Polysiloxane containing copolymers: a survey of recent
developments. Polysiloxane Copolym Polym 2005:1–86. https://doi.org/
10.1007/bfb0025274.

[138] Jiang X, Ding J, Kumar A. Polyurethane-poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PU-PVDF) thin

film composite membranes for gas separation. J Memb Sci 2008;323:371–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2008.06.048.

[139] Yoshino M, Ito K, Kita H, Okamoto KI. Effects of hard-segment polymers on

CO2N2 gas-separation properties of poly(ethylene oxide)-segmented copolymers.
J Polym Sci Part B Polym Phys 2000;38:1707–15. https://doi.org/10.1002/1099-
0488(20000701)38:13<1707::AID-POLB40>3.0.CO;2-W.

polymer stiffness, strength, and ductility. Macromolecules 2006;39:3350–8.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ma060047q.

[152] Lv C, Hu L, Yang Y, Li H, Huang C, Liu X. Waterborne UV-curable polyurethane

acrylate/silica nanocomposites for thermochromic coatings. RSC Adv 2015;5:
25730–7. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ra01687h.

[153] Alishiri M, Shojaei A, Abdekhodaie MJ. Biodegradable polyurethane acrylate/

HEMA-grafted nanodiamond composites with bone regenerative potential
applications: structure, mechanical properties and biocompatibility. RSC Adv
2016;6:8743–55. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ra19669h.

[154] Alishiri M, Shojaei A, Abdekhodaie MJ, Yeganeh H. Synthesis and

characterization of biodegradable acrylated polyurethane based on poly
(ε-caprolactone) and 1,6-hexamethylene diisocyanate. Mater Sci Eng C 2014;42:
763–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2014.05.056.

[155] Feijani EA, Mahdavi H, Tavasoli A. Poly(vinylidene fluoride) based mixed matrix
membranes comprising metal organic frameworks for gas separation applications.
Chem Eng Res Des 2015;96:87–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cherd.2015.02.009.

[156] Ahmad NNR, Mukhtar H, Mohshim DF, Nasir R, Man Z. Effect of different organic

amino cations on SAPO-34 for PES/SAPO-34 mixed matrix membranes toward
CO2/CH4 separation. J Appl Polym Sci 2016;133:1–6. https://doi.org/10.1002/
app.43387.

[157] de Sales JA, Patrício PSO, Machado JC, Silva GG, Windm ̈oller D. Systematic

investigation of the effects of temperature and pressure on gas transport through
polyurethane/poly(methylmethacrylate) phase-separated blends. J Memb Sci
2008;310:129–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2007.10.045.

[158] Feijani EA, Mahdavi H, Tavassoli A. Synthesis and gas permselectivity of CuBTC-

GO-PVDF mixed matrix membranes. New J Chem 2018;42:12013–23. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C8NJ00796A.

[159] Chen SH, Yu KC, Houng SL, Lai JY. Gas transport properties of HTPB based

polyurethane/cosalen membrane. J Memb Sci 2000;173:99–106. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0376-7388(00)00357-4.

[160] Azizi A, Feijani EA, Ghorbani Z, Tavasoli A. Fabrication and characterization of
highly efficient three component CuBTC/graphene oxide/PSF membrane for gas
separation application. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:2244–54. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.10.025.

[161] Maleh MS, Kiani S, Raisi A. Study on the advantageous effect of nano-clay and
polyurethane on structure and CO2 separation performance of polyethersulfone
based ternary mixed matrix membranes. Chem Eng Res Des 2022;179:27–40.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2022.01.011.

[162] Lue SJ, Ou JS, Kuo CH, Chen HY, Yang TH. Pervaporative separation of azeotropic
methanol/toluene mixtures in polyurethane-poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PU-PDMS)
blend membranes: correlation with sorption and diffusion behaviors in a binary
solution system. J Memb Sci 2010;347:108–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2009.10.012.

[140] Mohammadi T, Moghadam MT, Saeidi M, Mahdyarfar M. Acid gas permeation

[163] Saedi S, Madaeni SS, Hassanzadeh K, Shamsabadi AA, Laki S. The effect of

behavior through poly(ester urethane urea) membrane. Ind Eng Chem Res 2008;
47:7361–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie071493k.

[141] Wilks B, Rezac ME. Properties of rubbery polymers for the recovery of hydrogen
sulfide from gasification gases. J Appl Polym Sci 2002;85:2436–44. https://doi.
org/10.1002/app.10881.

[142] Nebipasagil A, Park J, Lane OR, Sundell BJ, Mecham SJ, Freeman BD, et al.

Polyurethanes containing Poly(arylene ether sulfone) and Poly(ethylene oxide)
segments for gas separation membranes. Polymer 2017;118:256–67. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.polymer.2017.03.017.

[143] Teo LS, Chen CY, Kuo JF. The gas transport properties of amine-containing

polyurethane and poly(urethane-urea) membranes. J Memb Sci 1998;141:91–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(97)00293-7.

[144] Teo LS, Kuo JF, Chen CY. Study on the morphology and permeation property of

amine group-contained polyurethanes. Polymer 1998;39:3355–64. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0032-3861(97)10090-8.

[145] Fakhar A, Sadeghi M, Dinari M, Zarabadipoor M, Lammertink R. Elucidating the
effect of chain extenders substituted by aliphatic side chains on morphology and
gas separation of polyurethanes. Eur Polym J 2020;122:109346. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2019.109346.

[146] Savoca AC, Surnamer AD, fong Tien C. Gas transport in poly(silylpropane): the
chemical structure point of view. Macromolecules 1993;26:6211–6. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ma00075a013.

[147] Ali Pournaghshband Isfahani RB. Morteza Sadeghi, Behnam Ghalei,

Plasticization-resistant polyurethane membrane and preparation method thereof.
US11202986B2; 2021. https://patents.google.com/patent/US11202986B2/en.

polyurethane on the structure and performance of PES membrane for separation
of carbon dioxide from methane. J Ind Eng Chem 2014;20:1916–29. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jiec.2013.09.012.

[164] Patrício PSO, De Sales JA, Silva GG, Windm ̈oller D, Machado JC. Effect of blend
composition on microstructure, morphology, and gas permeability in PU/PMMA
blends. J Memb Sci 2006;271:177–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2005.06.064.

[165] Zavastin D, Cretescu I, Bezdadea M, Bourceanu M, Drǎgan M, Lisa G, et al.

Preparation, characterization and applicability of cellulose acetate-polyurethane
blend membrane in separation techniques. Colloids Surfaces A Physicochem Eng
Asp 2010;370:120–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2010.08.058.

[166] Huang MR, Xu QW, Gu SY, Wu YH, Dong ZQ, Wang J, et al. Oxygen enrichment
across blend membranes of bipyridine and ethyl cellulose. J Appl Polym Sci 2002;
87:1371–81. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.11416.

[167] Matsumoto T, Hori N, Takahashi M. Microscopic phase separation and long-time
relaxation behavior in three-component heterogeneous blend systems. Langmuir
1996;12:5563–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/la9602269.

[168] Ahmadi M, Masoumi S, Hassanajili S, Esmaeilzadeh F. Modification of PES/PU
membrane by supercritical CO 2 to enhance CO 2/CH 4 selectivity: fabrication
and correlation approach using RSM. Chinese J Chem Eng 2018:2503–15.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjche.2017.11.018.

[169] Hasanajili S, Latifzadeh M, Bahmani M. Permeation properties of CO2 and CH4 in

asymmetric polyethersulfone/polyesterurethane and polyethersulfone/
polyetherurethane blend membranes. Chinese J Chem Eng 2017:1750–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cjche.2017.07.011.

[148] Mansouri M, Ghadimi A, Gharibi R, Norouzbahari S. Gas permeation properties of
highly cross-linked castor oil-based polyurethane membranes synthesized
through thiol-yne click polymerization. React Funct Polym 2021;158:104799.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reactfunctpolym.2020.104799.

[170] Kapantaidakis GC, Koops GH. High flux polyethersulfone-polyimide blend hollow
fiber membranes for gas separation. J Memb Sci 2002;204:153–71. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0376-7388(02)00030-3.

[171] Kapantaidakis GG, Kaldis SP, Dabou XS, Sakellaropoulos GP. Gas permeation

[149] Hunger K, Schmeling N, Jeazet HBT, Janiak C, Staudt C, Kleinermanns K.
Investigation of cross-linked and additive containing polymer materials for
membranes with improved performance in pervaporation and gas separation.
Membranes 2012;2:727–63. https://doi.org/10.3390/membranes2040727.

[150] Pournaghshband Isfahani A, Sadeghi M, Wakimoto K, Shrestha BB, Bagheri R,
Sivaniah E, et al. Pentiptycene-based polyurethane with enhanced mechanical
properties and CO2-plasticization resistance for thin film gas separation
membranes. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:17366–74. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsami.7b18475.

[151] Tsui NT, Paraskos AJ, Torun L, Swager TM, Thomas EL. Minimization of internal
molecular free volume: a mechanism for the simultaneous enhancement of

through PSF-PI miscible blend membranes. J Memb Sci 1996;110:239–47.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0376-7388(95)00265-0.

[172] Mannan HA, Mukhtar H, Murugesan T, Nasir R, Mohshim DF, Mushtaq A. Recent
applications of polymer blends in gas separation membranes. Chem Eng Technol
2013;36:1838–46. https://doi.org/10.1002/ceat.201300342.

[173] Robeson LM. Polymer blends in membrane transport processes. Ind Eng Chem Res

2010;49:11859–65. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie100153q.

[174] Mozaffari V, Sadeghi M, Fakhar A, Khanbabaei G, Ismail AF. Gas separation
properties of polyurethane/poly(ether-block-amide) (PU/PEBA) blend
membranes. Elsevier B.V.; 2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2017.05.028.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109525

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

[175] DeMeuse MT. Polysulfones as a reinforcement in high temperature polymer
blends. Woodhead Publishing Limited; 2014. https://doi.org/10.1533/
9780857099013.165.

[176] Markovic G, Visakh PM. Polymer blends: state of art. Elsevier Ltd; 2017. https://

doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100408-1.00001-7.

[177] Rabiee H, Ghadimi A, Abbasi S, Mohammadi T. CO2 separation performance of

poly(ether-b-amide 6)/PTMEG blended membranes: permeation and sorption
properties. Chem Eng Res Des 2015;98:96–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cherd.2015.03.026.

[178] Mazinani S, Ramezani R, Darvishmanesh S, Molelekwa GF, Di Felice R, Van Der
Bruggen B. A ground breaking polymer blend for CO2/N2 separation. J CO2 Util
2018;27:536–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.2018.08.024.

[179] Kim MJ, Sea B, Youm KH, Lee KH. Morphology and carbon dioxide transport
properties of polyurethane blend membranes. Desalination 2006;193:43–50.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2005.07.047.

[180] Shahzamani M, Golshan Ebrahimi N, Sadeghi M, Mostafavi F. Relationship
between the microstructure and gas transport properties of polyurethane/
polycaprolactone blends, Iran. J Chem Eng 2016;13. http://www.ijche.com
/article_15289.html.

performance. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2014;6:5609–18. https://doi.org/
10.1021/am500081e.

[201] Xue M, Wang X, Duan L, Gao W, Ji L, Tang B. A new nanoprobe based on FRET
between functional quantum dots and gold nanoparticles for fluoride anion and
its applications for biological imaging. Biosens Bioelectron 2012;36:168–73.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2012.04.007.

[202] Shamini G, Yusoh K. Gas permeability properties of thermoplastic polyurethane
modified clay nanocomposites. Int J Chem Eng Appl 2014;5:64–8. https://doi.
org/10.7763/ijcea.2014.v5.352.

[203] Monsefi MA, Sadeghi M, Aroon MA, Matsuura T. Polyurethane mixed matrix

membranes for gas separation: a systematic study on effect of SiO 2/TiO 2
nanoparticles. J Membr Sci Res 2019;5:33–43. https://doi.org/10.22079/
JMSR.2018.80692.1175.

[204] Zhang Y, Ma J, Bai Y, Wen Y, Zhao N, Zhang X, et al. The preparation and

properties of nanocomposite from bio-based polyurethane and graphene oxide for
gas separation. Nanomaterials 2019;9. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano9010015.

[205] Karimi MB, Hassanajili S. Short fiber/polyurethane composite membrane for gas

separation. J Memb Sci 2017;543:40–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2017.08.043.

[181] Ghalei B, Semsarzadeh MA. A novel nano structured blend membrane for gas

[206] Mohammad Gheimasi K, Bakhtiari O, Ahmadi M. Preparation and

separation. Macromol Symp 2007:330–5. https://doi.org/10.1002/
masy.200750354. 249–250.

[182] Semsarzadeh MA, Ghalei B. Characterization and gas permeability of

characterization of MWCNT-TEPA/polyurethane nanocomposite membranes for
CO2/CH4 separation: experimental and modeling. Chem Eng Res Des 2018;133:
222–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2018.03.028.

polyurethane and polyvinyl acetate blend membranes with polyethylene oxide-
polypropylene oxide block copolymer. J Memb Sci 2012:97–108. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.memsci.2012.01.035. 401–402.

[207] Ameri E, Sadeghi M, Zarei N, Pournaghshband A. Enhancement of the gas

separation properties of polyurethane membranes by alumina nanoparticles.
J Memb Sci 2015;479:11–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2015.01.018.

[183] Liu L, Chakma A, Feng X. Propylene separation from nitrogen by poly(ether block

[208] Molki B, Aframehr WM, Bagheri R, Salimi J. Mixed matrix membranes of

amide) composite membranes. J Memb Sci 2006;279:645–54. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.memsci.2005.12.058.

[184] Tocci E, Gugliuzza A, De Lorenzo L, Macchione M, De Luca G, Drioli E. Transport

properties of a co-poly(amide-12-b-ethylene oxide) membrane: a comparative
study between experimental and molecular modelling results. J Memb Sci 2008;
323:316–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2008.06.031.

[185] Car A, Stropnik C, Yave W, Peinemann KV. PEG modified poly(amide-b-ethylene
oxide) membranes for CO2 separation. J Memb Sci 2008;307:88–95. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.memsci.2007.09.023.

[186] Vakili E, Semsarzadeh MA, Ghalei B, Khoshbin M, Nasiri H. Characterization and

gas permeation properties of synthesized polyurethane-polydimethylsiloxane/
polyamide 12-b-Polytetramethylene glycol blend membranes. Silicon 2016;8:
75–85. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12633-015-9312-9.

[187] Shirvani H, Sadeghi M, Taheri Afarani H, Bagheri R. Polyurethane/Poly(vinyl
alcohol) blend membranes for gas separation. Fibers Polym 2018;19:1119–27.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-018-1023-6.

[188] Halake K, Birajdar M, Kim BS, Bae H, Lee CC, Kim YJ, et al. Recent application

developments of water-soluble synthetic polymers. J Ind Eng Chem 2014;20:
3913–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2014.01.006.

[189] Daglar H, Keskin S. High-throughput screening of metal organic frameworks as
fillers in mixed matrix membranes for flue gas separation. Adv Theory
Simulations 2019;2. https://doi.org/10.1002/adts.201900109.

[190] Ahmadipouya S, Ahmadijokani F, Molavi H, Rezakazemi M, Arjmand M. CO2/
CH4 separation by mixed-matrix membranes holding functionalized NH2-MIL-
101(Al) nanoparticles: effect of amino-silane functionalization. Chem Eng Res Des
2021;176:49–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2021.09.011.

[191] Zhang Y, Wang H, Liu J, Hou J, Zhang Y. Enzyme-embedded metal-organic

framework membranes on polymeric substrates for efficient CO2 capture. J Mater
Chem A 2017;5:19954–62. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ta03719h.

[192] Dong G, Li H, Chen V. Challenges and opportunities for mixed-matrix membranes
for gas separation. J Mater Chem A 2013;1:4610–30. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c3ta00927k.

[193] Sadeghi M, Arabi Shamsabadi A, Ronasi A, Isfahani AP, Dinari M, Soroush M.

Engineering the dispersion of nanoparticles in polyurethane membranes to
control membrane physical and transport properties. 2018. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ces.2018.08.030.

[194] Fakhar A, Sadeghi M, Dinari M. Stepwise surface modification of mesoporous
silica and its use in poly(urethane-urea) composite films. Polym Int 2022;71:
107–16. https://doi.org/10.1002/pi.6290.

[195] Ahmadijokani F, Ahmadipouya S, Molavi H, Arjmand M. Amino-silane-grafted

NH2-MIL-53(Al)/polyethersulfone mixed matrix membranes for CO2/CH4
separation. Dalt Trans 2019;48:13555–66. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9dt02328c.

[196] Zhu H, Wang L, Jie X, Liu D, Cao Y. Improved interfacial affinity and CO2

separation performance of asymmetric mixed matrix membranes by incorporating
postmodified MIL-53(Al). ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2016;8:22696–704. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b07686.

[197] Benzaqui M, Semino R, Menguy N, Carn F, Kundu T, Guigner JM, et al. Toward an

understanding of the microstructure and interfacial properties of PIMs/ZIF-8
mixed matrix membranes. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2016;8:27311–21. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b08954.

[198] Le Calvez C, Zouboulaki M, Petit C, Peeva L, Shirshova N. One step synthesis of
MOF-polymer composites. RSC Adv 2016;6:17314–7. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c5ra25238e.

[199] Kertik A, Wee LH, Pfannm ̈oller M, Bals S, Martens JA, Vankelecom IFJ. Highly
selective gas separation membrane using in situ amorphised metal-organic
frameworks. Energy Environ Sci 2017;10:2342–51. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c7ee01872j.

[200] Lin R, Ge L, Hou L, Strounina E, Rudolph V, Zhu Z. Mixed matrix membranes with

strengthened MOFs/polymer interfacial interaction and improved membrane

polyurethane with nickel oxide nanoparticles for CO2 gas separation. J Memb Sci
2018;549:588–601. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2017.12.056.

[209] Fakhar A, Maghami S, Sameti E, Shekari M, Sadeghi M. Gas separation through
polyurethane– ZnO mixed matrix membranes and mathematical modeling of the
interfacial morphology. SPE Polym 2020;1:113–24. https://doi.org/10.1002/
pls2.10023.

[210] Ilyas A, Muhammad N, Gilani MA, Vankelecom IFJ, Khan AL. Effect of zeolite
surface modification with ionic liquid [APTMS][Ac] on gas separation
performance of mixed matrix membranes. Sep Purif Technol 2018;205:176–83.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2018.05.040.

[211] Herrera-Alonso JM, Marand E, Little JC, Cox SS. Transport properties in

polyurethane/clay nanocomposites as barrier materials: effect of processing
conditions. J Memb Sci 2009;337:208–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2009.03.045.

[212] Chung TS, Jiang LY, Li Y, Kulprathipanja S. Mixed matrix membranes (MMMs)
comprising organic polymers with dispersed inorganic fillers for gas separation.
Prog Polym Sci 2007;32:483–507. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
progpolymsci.2007.01.008.

[213] Ahmadijokani F, Molavi H, Bahi A, Wuttke S, Kamkar M, Rojas OJ, et al.

Electrospun nanofibers of chitosan/polyvinyl alcohol/UiO-66/nanodiamond:
versatile adsorbents for wastewater remediation and organic dye removal. Chem
Eng J 2023;457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2022.141176.

[214] Abdi B, Shojaei A, Molavi H. Superior fatigue and mechanical properties of

ethylene-propylene diene monomer rubber incorporated with Zr-based
metal–organic framework. J Polym Res 2023;30. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10965-022-03415-6.

[215] Ahmadijokani F, Molavi H, Bahi A, Fern ́andez R, Alaee P, Wu S, et al. Metal-

organic frameworks and electrospinning: a happy marriage for wastewater
treatment. Adv Funct Mater 2022;32:1–67. https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.202207723.

[216] Salahshoori I, Nasirian D, Rashidi N, Hossain MK, Hatami A,

Hassanzadeganroudsari M. The effect of silica nanoparticles on
polysulfone–polyethylene glycol (PSF/PEG) composite membrane on gas
separation and rheological properties of nanocomposites. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg; 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00289-020-03255-8.

[217] Kamble AR, Patel CM, Murthy ZVP. A review on the recent advances in mixed

matrix membranes for gas separation processes. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021;
145:111062. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111062.

[218] Sadeghi M, Semsarzadeh MA, Barikani M, Pourafshari Chenar M. Gas separation

properties of polyether-based polyurethane-silica nanocomposite membranes.
J Memb Sci 2011;376:188–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2011.04.021.
[219] Nematollahi MH, Babaei S, Abedini R. CO 2 separation over light gases for nano-

composite membrane comprising modified polyurethane with SiO 2
nanoparticles. Korean J Chem Eng 2019;36:763–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11814-019-0251-9.

[220] Babaei S, Nematollahi MH, Abedini R. Pure and mixed gas permeation study of

silica incorporated polyurethane-urea membrane modified by MOCA chain
extender. Can J Chem Eng 2020;98:1543–57. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cjce.23724.

[221] Picard E, Vermogen A, G ́erard JF, Espuche E. Barrier properties of nylon 6-

montmorillonite nanocomposite membranes prepared by melt blending: influence
of the clay content and dispersion state. Consequences on modelling. J Memb Sci
2007;292:133–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2007.01.030.

[222] Merkel TC, Freeman BD, Spontak RJ, He Z, Pinnau I, Meakin P, et al.

Ultrapermeable, Reverse-Sel Nanocompos Membr 2002;296:519–23.

[223] De Sitter K, Winberg P, D’Haen J, Dotremont C, Leysen R, Martens JA, et al. Silica
filled poly(1-trimethylsilyl-1-propyne) nanocomposite membranes: relation
between the transport of gases and structural characteristics. J Memb Sci 2006;
278:83–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2005.10.046.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109526

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

[224] Merkel TC, He Z, Pinnau I, Freeman BD, Meakin P, Hill AJ. Effect of nanoparticles

on gas sorption and transport in poly(1-trimethylsilyl-1-propyne).
Macromolecules 2003;36:6844–55. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma0341566.
[225] Merkel TC, Freeman BD, Spontak RJ, He Z, Pinnau I, Meakin P, et al. Sorption,
transport, and structural evidence for enhanced free volume in poly(4-methyl-2-
pentyne)/fumed silica nanocomposite membranes. Chem Mater 2003;15:109–23.
https://doi.org/10.1021/cm020672j.

[226] Kusakabe K, Ichiki K, Hayashi JI, Maeda H, Morooka S. Preparation and

characterization of silica-polyimide composite membranes coated on porous
tubes for CO2 separation. J Memb Sci 1996;115:65–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0376-7388(95)00290-1.

[227] Joly C, Goizet S, Schrotter JC, Sanchez J, Escoubes M. Sol-gel polyimide-silica

composite membrane: gas transport properties. J Memb Sci 1997;130:63–74.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(97)00008-2.

[228] Semsarzadeh MA, Ghalei B, Fardi M, Esmaeeli M, Vakili E. Structural and

transport properties of polydimethylsiloxane based polyurethane/silica particles
mixed matrix membranes for gas separation. Korean J Chem Eng 2014;31:841–8.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11814-013-0292-4.

[229] Kusakabe K, Yoneshige S, Morooka S. Separation of benzene/cyclohexane

mixtures using polyurethane-silica hybrid membranes. J Memb Sci 1998;149:
29–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(98)00185-9.

[230] Kim JH, Lee YM. Gas permeation properties of poly(amide-6-b-ethylene oxide)-
silica hybrid membranes. J Memb Sci 2001;193:209–25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0376-7388(01)00514-2.

[231] Moaddeb M, Koros WJ. Gas transport properties of thin polymeric membranes in
the presence of silicon dioxide particles. J Memb Sci 1997;125:143–63. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(96)00251-7.

[232] Nunes SP, V Peinemann K, Ohlrogge K, Alpers A, Keller M, Pires ATN. Membranes

of poly(ether imide) and nanodispersed silica. J Memb Sci 1999;157:219–26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(98)00379-2.

[233] Arungalai Vendan LGS, Natesh M. Akhil garg, introduction to polymer science.

Am Chem Soc Polym Prepr Div Polym Chem 1984. https://doi.org/10.1515/
9783110666762-002.

[234] Chen W, Su Y, Zhang L, Shi Q, Peng J, Jiang Z. In situ generated silica

nanoparticles as pore-forming agent for enhanced permeability of cellulose
acetate membranes. J Memb Sci 2010;348:75–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2009.10.042.

[235] Karimi MB, Khanbabaei G, Mir Mohamad Sadeghi G, Jafari A. Effect of nano-silica
on gas permeation properties of polyether-based polyurethane membrane in the
presence of esterified canola oil diol as a nucleation agent for hard segments.
J Appl Polym Sci 2018;135:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.45979.
[236] Sadeghi M, Mehdi Talakesh M, Ghalei B, Shafiei M. Preparation, characterization

and gas permeation properties of a polycaprolactone based polyurethane-silica
nanocomposite membrane. J Memb Sci 2013;427:21–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.memsci.2012.07.036.

[237] Khosravi A, Sadeghi M, Banadkohi HZ, Talakesh MM. Polyurethane-silica

nanocomposite membranes for separation of propane/methane and ethane/
methane. Ind Eng Chem Res 2014;53:2011–21. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie403322w.

[238] Matavos-Aramyan S, Jazebizadeh MH, Babaei S. Investigating CO2, O2 and N2
permeation properties of two new types of nanocomposite membranes:
polyurethane/silica and polyesterurethane/silica. Nano-Structures and Nano-
Objects 2020;21:100414. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoso.2019.100414.
[239] Hassanajili S, Masoudi E, Karimi G, Khademi M. Mixed matrix membranes based

PU/PVA blend membranes. Membranes 2019;9. https://doi.org/10.3390/
membranes9070082.

[249] Hassanajili S, Khademi M, Keshavarz P. Influence of various types of silica

nanoparticles on permeation properties of polyurethane/silica mixed matrix
membranes. J Memb Sci 2014;453:369–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2013.10.057.

[250] Fakhar A, Dinari M, Lammertink R, Sadeghi M. Enhanced CO2 capture through
bulky poly(urethane-urea)-based MMMs containing hyperbranched triazine based
silica nanoparticles. Sep Purif Technol 2020;241:116734. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.seppur.2020.116734.

[251] Bastani D, Esmaeili N, Asadollahi M. Polymeric mixed matrix membranes

containing zeolites as a filler for gas separation applications: a review. J Ind Eng
Chem 2013;19:375–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2012.09.019.

[252] Ahn J, Chung WJ, Pinnau I, Guiver MD. Polysulfone/silica nanoparticle mixed-
matrix membranes for gas separation. J Memb Sci 2008;314:123–33. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.memsci.2008.01.031.

[253] Ghalei B, Pournaghshband Isfahani A, Sadeghi M, Vakili E, Jalili A. Polyurethane-
mesoporous silica gas separation membranes. Polym Adv Technol 2018;29:
874–83. https://doi.org/10.1002/pat.4198.

[254] Zhu W, Liu F, Gou M, Guo R, Li X. Mixed matrix membrane containing metal

oxide nanosheets for efficient CO2 separation. Green Chem Eng 2020. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gce.2020.11.009.

[255] Safarpour M, Arefi-Oskoui S, Khataee A. A review on two-dimensional metal

oxide and metal hydroxide nanosheets for modification of polymeric membranes.
J Ind Eng Chem 2020;82:31–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2019.11.002.

[256] Rahman MM. Polyurethane/zinc oxide (PU/ZnO) composite-synthesis, protective

property and application. Polymers 2020;12. https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym12071535.

[257] Goh PS, Ismail AF, Sanip SM, Ng BC, Aziz M. Recent advances of inorganic fillers
in mixed matrix membrane for gas separation. Sep Purif Technol 2011;81:
243–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2011.07.042.

[258] Xiao Y, Yu Wang K, Chung TS, Tan J. Evolution of nano-particle distribution

during the fabrication of mixed matrix TiO2-polyimide hollow fiber membranes.
Chem Eng Sci 2006;61:6228–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2006.05.040.

[259] Sadeghi M, Afarani HT, Tarashi Z. Preparation and investigation of the gas

separation properties of polyurethane-TiO2 nanocomposite membranes. Korean J
Chem Eng 2015;32:97–103. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11814-014-0198-9.
[260] Chen Y, Wang R, Zhou J, Fan H, Shi B. Membrane formation temperature-

dependent gas transport through thermo-sensitive polyurethane containing in
situ-generated TiO2 nanoparticles. Polymer 2011;52:1856–67. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.polymer.2011.02.021.

[261] Soltani B, Asghari M. Effects of ZnO nanoparticle on the gas separation

performance of polyurethane mixed matrix membrane. Membranes 2017;7.
https://doi.org/10.3390/membranes7030043.

[262] Cheng C, Liu F, Yang HK, Xiao K, Xue C, Yang ST. High-performance n-butanol

recovery from aqueous solution by pervaporation with a PDMS mixed matrix
membrane filled with zeolite. Ind Eng Chem Res 2020;59:7777–86. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.iecr.9b06104.

[263] Ciobanu G, Carja G, Ciobanu O. Structure of mixed matrix membranes made with

SAPO-5 zeolite in polyurethane matrix. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2008;
115:61–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micromeso.2008.01.049.

[264] Zou C, Lin LC. Potential and design of zeolite nanosheets as pervaporation

membranes for ethanol extraction. Ind Eng Chem Res 2020;59:12845–54. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.0c01171.

on polyetherurethane and polyesterurethane containing silica nanoparticles for
separation of CO2/CH4 gases. Sep Purif Technol 2013;116:1–12. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.seppur.2013.05.017.

[265] Min B, Yang S, Korde A, Jones CW, Nair S. Single-step scalable fabrication of
zeolite MFI hollow fiber membranes for hydrocarbon separations. Adv Mater
Interfac 2020;7:1–7. https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.202000926.

[240] Chen X, You B, Zhou S, Wu L. Surface and interface characterization of polyester-
based polyurethane/nano-silica composites. Surf Interface Anal 2003;35:369–74.
https://doi.org/10.1002/sia.1544.

[266] Caro J, Noack M. Zeolite membranes - recent developments and progress.

Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2008;115:215–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
micromeso.2008.03.008.

[241] Chen Y, Zhou S, Yang H, Wu L. Structure and properties of polyurethane/
nanosilica composites. J Appl Polym Sci 2005;95:1032–9. https://doi.org/
10.1002/app.21180.

[242] Chen X, Wu L, Zhou S, You B. In situ polymerization and characterization of

polyester-based polyurethane/nano-silica composites. Polym Int 2003;52:993–8.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pi.1176.

[243] Semsarzadeh MA, Ghalei B. Preparation, Characterization and gas permeation
properties of polyurethane-silica/polyvinyl alcohol mixed matrix membranes.
J Memb Sci 2013;432:115–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2013.01.005.
[244] Ghalei B, Isfahani AP, Nilouyal S, Vakili E, Salooki MK. Effect of polyvinyl alcohol

modified silica particles on the physical and gas separation properties of the
polyurethane mixed matrix membranes. Silicon 2019;11:1451–60. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12633-018-9959-0.

[245] Sairam M, Naidu BVK, Nataraj SK, Sreedhar B, Aminabhavi TM. Poly(vinyl

alcohol)-iron oxide nanocomposite membranes for pervaporation dehydration of
isopropanol, 1,4-dioxane and tetrahydrofuran. J Memb Sci 2006;283:65–73.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2006.06.013.

[246] Lin H, Watanabe Y, Kimura M, Hanabusa K, Shirai H. Preparation of magnetic
poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) materials by in situ synthesis of magnetite in a PVA
matrix. J Appl Polym Sci 2002;87:1239–47. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.11520.

[247] Lpez D, Cendoya I, Torres F, Tejada J, Mijangos C. Preparation and

characterization of poly(vinyl alcohol)-based magnetic nanocomposites. 1.
Thermal and mechanical properties. J Appl Polym Sci 2001;82:3215–22. https://
doi.org/10.1002/app.2180.

[248] Shirvani H, Maghami S, Isfahani AP, Sadeghi M. Influence of blend composition

and silica nanoparticles on the morphology and gas separation performance of

[267] Oh JW, Cho KY, Kan MY, Yu HJ, Kang DY, Lee JS. High-flux mixed matrix

membranes containing bimetallic zeolitic imidazole framework-8 for C3H6/C3H8
separation. J Memb Sci 2020;596:117735. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2019.117735.

[268] He PY, Zhang YJ, Chen H, Han ZC, Liu LC. Low-cost and facile synthesis of
geopolymer-zeolite composite membrane for chromium(VI) separation from
aqueous solution. J Hazard Mater 2020;392:122359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2020.122359.

[269] Kurs ̧un F. Application of PVA-b-NaY zeolite mixture membranes in pervaporation

method. J Mol Struct 2020;1201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molstruc.2019.127170.

[270] Sulaiman KO, Sajid M, Alhooshani K. Application of porous membrane bag

enclosed alkaline treated Y-Zeolite for removal of heavy metal ions from water.
Microchem J 2020;152:104289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2019.104289.

[271] Li W, Chuah CY, Bae T-H. Hierarchical 5A zeolite-containing carbon molecular
sieve membranes for O2/N2 separation. Membrane J 2020;30:260–8. https://doi.
org/10.14579/membrane_journal.2020.30.4.260.

[272] Zagho MM, Hassan MK, Khraisheh M, Al-Maadeed MAA, Nazarenko S. A review
on recent advances in CO2 separation using zeolite and zeolite-like materials as
adsorbents and fillers in mixed matrix membranes (MMMs). Chem Eng J Adv
2021;6:100091. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceja.2021.100091.

[273] An W, Swenson P, Wu L, Waller T, Ku A, Kuznicki SM. Selective separation of

hydrogen from C1/C2 hydrocarbons and CO2 through dense natural zeolite
membranes. J Memb Sci 2011;369:414–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2010.12.025.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109527

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

[274] Zeng C, Zhang L, Cheng X, Wang H, Xu N. Preparation and gas permeation of
nano-sized zeolite NaA-filled carbon membranes. Sep Purif Technol 2008;63:
628–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2008.07.009.

[275] Kumbar SM, Selvam T, Gellermann C, Storch W, Ballweg T, Breu J, et al.

ORMOCERs (organic-inorganic hybrid copolymers)-zeolite Beta (BEA)
nanocomposite membranes for gas separation applications. J Memb Sci 2010;347:
132–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2009.10.014.

[276] Funk CV, Lloyd DR. Zeolite-filled microporous mixed matrix (ZeoTIPS)

membranes: prediction of gas separation performance. J Memb Sci 2008;313:
224–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2008.01.002.

[277] Gorgojo P, Uriel S, T ́ellez C, Coronas J. Development of mixed matrix membranes

based on zeolite Nu-6(2) for gas separation. Microporous Mesoporous Mater
2008;115:85–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micromeso.2007.11.046.
[278] Adams RT, Lee JS, Bae TH, Ward JK, Johnson JR, Jones CW, et al. CO2-CH4
permeation in high zeolite 4A loading mixed matrix membranes. J Memb Sci
2011;367:197–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2010.10.059.
[279] Tirouni I, Sadeghi M, Pakizeh M. Separation of C3H8 and C2H6 from CH4 in

polyurethane-zeolite 4Å and ZSM-5 mixed matrix membranes. Sep Purif Technol
2015;141:394–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2014.12.012.
[280] Makertihartha IGBN, Kencana KS, Dwiputra TR, Khoiruddin K, Mukti RR,
Wenten IG. Silica supported SAPO-34 membranes for CO2/N2 separation.
Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2020;298:110068. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
micromeso.2020.110068.

[281] Haider B, Dilshad MR, Atiq Ur Rehman M, Vargas Schmitz J, Kaspereit M. Highly
permeable novel PDMS coated asymmetric polyethersulfone membranes loaded
with SAPO-34 zeoilte for carbon dioxide separation. Sep Purif Technol 2020;248:
116899. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2020.116899.

[282] Chen Y, Zhang Y, Zhang C, Jiang J, Gu X. Fabrication of high-flux SAPO-34

membrane on α-Al2O3 four-channel hollow fibers for CO2 capture from CH4.
J CO2 Util 2017;18:30–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.2017.01.005.

[283] Xu J, Haw KG, Li Z, Pati S, Wang Z, Kawi S. A mini-review on recent

developments in SAPO-34 zeolite membranes and membrane reactors. React
Chem Eng 2021;6:52–66. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0re00349b.

[284] Ahmad MS, Cheng CK, Bhuyar P, Atabani AE, Pugazhendhi A, Chi NTL, et al.

Effect of reaction conditions on the lifetime of SAPO-34 catalysts in methanol to
olefins process – a review. Fuel 2021;283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.118851.

[285] Sodeifian G, Raji M, Asghari M, Rezakazemi M, Dashti A. Polyurethane-SAPO-34
mixed matrix membrane for CO 2/CH 4 and CO 2/N 2 separation. Chinese J Chem
Eng 2019:322–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjche.2018.03.012.

[286] Taheri Afarani H, Sadeghi M, Moheb A, Esfahani EN. Optimization of the gas
separation performance of polyurethane–zeolite 3A and ZSM-5 mixed matrix
membranes using response surface methodology. Chinese J Chem Eng 2019:
110–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjche.2018.03.013.

[287] Afarani HT, Sadeghi M, Moheb A. The gas separation performance of

polyurethane–zeolite mixed matrix membranes. Adv Polym Technol 2018;37:
339–48. https://doi.org/10.1002/adv.21672.

[288] Molavi H, Pourghaderi A, Shojaei A. Experimental study on the influence of initial

pH, ionic strength, and temperature on the selective adsorption of dyes onto
nanodiamonds. J Chem Eng Data 2019;64:1508–14. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.jced.8b01091.

[289] Molavi H, Shojaei A, Pourghaderi A. Rapid and tunable selective adsorption of
dyes using thermally oxidized nanodiamond. J Colloid Interface Sci 2018;524:
52–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2018.03.088.

[290] Raeiszadeh M, Hakimian A, Shojaei A, Molavi H. Nanodiamond-filled chitosan as
an efficient adsorbent for anionic dye removal from aqueous solutions. J Environ
Chem Eng 2018;6:3283–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2018.05.005.
[291] Karami P, Salkhi Khasraghi S, Hashemi M, Rabiei S, Shojaei A. Polymer/

nanodiamond composites - a comprehensive review from synthesis and
fabrication to properties and applications. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2019;269:
122–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2019.04.006.

[292] Cheng Y, Pu Y, Zhao D. Two-Dimensional membranes: new paradigms for high-

performance separation membranes. Chem Asian J 2020;15:2241–70. https://
doi.org/10.1002/asia.202000013.

[293] Huang M, Wang Z, Jin J. Two-Dimensional microporous material-based mixed
matrix membranes for gas separation. Chem Asian J 2020;15:2303–15. https://
doi.org/10.1002/asia.202000053.

[294] Ali A, Pothu R, Siyal SH, Phulpoto S, Sajjad M, Thebo KH. Graphene-based

membranes for CO2 separation. Mater Sci Energy Technol 2019;2:83–8. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.mset.2018.11.002.

[295] Amirabad R, Ramazani Saadatabadi A, Siadati MH. Preparation of polyaniline/

graphene coated wearable thermoelectric fabric using ultrasonic-assisted dip-
coating method. Mater Renew Sustain Energy 2020;9:21. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s40243-020-00181-7.

[296] Amirabad R, Ramazani Saadatabadi A, Pourjahanbakhsh M, Siadati MH.

Enhancing Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity of polyaniline/carbon
nanotube–coated thermoelectric fabric. J Ind Text 2022;51:3297S–308S. https://
doi.org/10.1177/15280837211050516.

[297] Ismail AF, Goh PS, Sanip SM, Aziz M. Transport and separation properties of
carbon nanotube-mixed matrix membrane. Sep Purif Technol 2009;70:12–26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2009.09.002.

[298] Skoulidas AI, Ackerman DM, Johnson JK, Sholl DS. Rapid transport of gases in
carbon nanotubes. Phys Rev Lett 2002;89:13–6. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.89.185901.

[299] Zhang Q, Li S, Wang C, Chang HC, Guo R. Carbon nanotube-based mixed-matrix
membranes with supramolecularly engineered interface for enhanced gas

separation performance. J Memb Sci 2020;598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2019.117794.

[300] Amirkhani F, Mosadegh M, Asghari M, Parnian MJ. The beneficial impacts of
functional groups of CNT on structure and gas separation properties of PEBA
mixed matrix membranes. Polym Test 2020;82:106285. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.polymertesting.2019.106285.

[301] Rashed AO, Merenda A, Kondo T, Lima M, Razal J, Kong L, et al. Carbon nanotube
membranes – strategies and challenges towards scalable manufacturing and
practical separation applications. Sep Purif Technol 2021;257. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.seppur.2020.117929.

[302] Davood Abadi Farahani MH, Vatanpour V. Polymer/carbon nanotubes mixed
matrix membranes for water purification. Elsevier Inc.; 2018. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-813926-4.00009-4.

[303] Jian W, Lau D. Understanding the effect of functionalization in CNT-epoxy

nanocomposite from molecular level. Compos Sci Technol 2020;191:108076.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2020.108076.

[304] Gogoi R, Sethi SK, Manik G. Surface functionalization and CNT coating induced

improved interfacial interactions of carbon fiber with polypropylene matrix: a
molecular dynamics study. Appl Surf Sci 2021;539:148162. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.148162.

[305] Abousalman-Rezvani Z, Eskandari P, Roghani-Mamaqani H, Salami-Kalajahi M.

Functionalization of carbon nanotubes by combination of controlled radical
polymerization and “grafting to” method. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2020;278:
102126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2020.102126.

[306] Rayekan Iranagh F, Asghari M, Parnian MJ. Dispersion engineering of MWCNT to
control structural and gas transport properties of PU mixed matrix membranes.
J Environ Chem Eng 2020;8:104493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jece.2020.104493.

[307] Dikin DA, Stankovich S, Zimney EJ, Piner RD, Dommett GHB, Evmenenko G, et al.

Preparation and characterization of graphene oxide paper. Nature 2007;448:
457–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06016.

[308] Liu Z, Li J, Sun ZH, Tai G, Lau SP, Yan F. The application of highly doped single-
layer graphene as the top electrodes of semitransparent organic solar cells. ACS
Nano 2012;6:810–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn204675r.

[309] Chen M, Soyekwo F, Zhang Q, Hu C, Zhu A, Liu Q. Graphene oxide nanosheets to

improve permeability and selectivity of PIM-1 membrane for carbon dioxide
separation. J Ind Eng Chem 2018;63:296–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jiec.2018.02.030.

[310] He R, Cong S, Wang J, Liu J, Zhang Y. Porous graphene oxide/porous organic

polymer hybrid nanosheets functionalized mixed matrix membrane for efficient
CO2 capture. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11:4338–44. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsami.8b17599.

[311] Li X, Cheng Y, Zhang H, Wang S, Jiang Z, Guo R, et al. Efficient CO2 capture by

functionalized graphene oxide nanosheets as fillers to fabricate multi-
permselective mixed matrix membranes. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2015;7:
5528–37. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.5b00106.

[312] Shen Y, Wang H, Liu J, Zhang Y. Enhanced performance of a novel polyvinyl

amine/chitosan/graphene oxide mixed matrix membrane for CO2 capture. 2015.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.5b00409.

[313] Qiao Z, Wang Z, Zhang C, Yuan S, Zhu Y, Wang J. PVAm–PIP/PS composite
membrane with high performance for CO2/N2  separation. AIChE J 2012;59:
215–28. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.

[314] Wang T, Zhao L, Shen JN, Wu LG, Van Der Bruggen B. Enhanced performance of
polyurethane hybrid membranes for CO2 separation by incorporating graphene
oxide: the relationship between membrane performance and morphology of
graphene oxide. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:8004–11. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.est.5b00138.

[315] Mahdavi H, Ahmadian-Alam L, Molavi H. Grafting of sulfonated monomer onto
an amino-silane functionalized 2-aminoterephthalate metal-organic framework
via surface-initiated redox polymerization: proton-conducting solid electrolytes.
Polym Int 2015;64:1578–84. https://doi.org/10.1002/pi.4955.
[316] Ahmadijokani F, Mohammadkhani R, Ahmadipouya S, Shokrgozar A,

Rezakazemi M, Molavi H, et al. Superior chemical stability of UiO-66 metal-
organic frameworks (MOFs) for selective dye adsorption. Chem Eng J 2020;399:
125346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.125346.

[317] Aghajanzadeh M, Zamani M, Molavi H, Khieri Manjili H, Danafar H, Shojaei A.

Preparation of metal–organic frameworks UiO-66 for adsorptive removal of
methotrexate from aqueous solution. J Inorg Organomet Polym Mater 2018;28:
177–86. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10904-017-0709-3.

[318] Molavi H, Hakimian A, Shojaei A, Raeiszadeh M. Selective dye adsorption by

highly water stable metal-organic framework: long term stability analysis in
aqueous media. Appl Surf Sci 2018;445:424–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apsusc.2018.03.189.

[319] Ahmadijokani F, Molavi H, Rezakazemi M, Tajahmadi S, Bahi A, Ko F, et al. UiO-
66 metal–organic frameworks in water treatment: a critical review. Prog Mater
Sci 2022;125:100904. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2021.100904.
[320] Mirzaei K, Jafarpour E, Shojaei A, Salkhi Khasraghi S, Jafarpour P. An

investigation on the influence of highly acidic media on the microstructural
stability and dye adsorption performance of UiO-66. Appl Surf Sci 2023:156531.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2023.156531.

[321] Barjasteh M, Mohsen Dehnavi S, Ahmadi Seyedkhani S, Yahya Rahnamaee S,

Golizadeh M. Synergistic wound healing by novel Ag@ZIF-8 nanostructures. Int J
Pharm 2022;629:122339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2022.122339.

[322] Mirzaei K, Mohammadi A, Jafarpour E, Shojaei A, Moghaddam AL. Improved
adsorption performance of ZIF-8 towards methylene blue dye by hybridization

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109528

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

with nanodiamond. J Water Process Eng 2022;50:103254. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jwpe.2022.103254.

[323] Molavi H, Neshastehgar M, Shojaei A, Ghashghaeinejad H. Ultrafast and

simultaneous removal of anionic and cationic dyes by nanodiamond/UiO-66
hybrid nanocomposite. Chemosphere 2020;247:125882. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.125882.

[324] Ahmadipouya S, Heidarian Haris M, Ahmadijokani F, Jarahiyan A, Molavi H,

Matloubi F, et al. Magnetic Fe3O4@UiO-66 nanocomposite for rapid adsorption
of organic dyes from aqueous solution. J Mol Liq 2021;322:114910. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.molliq.2020.114910.

[325] Neshastehgar M, Rahmani P, Shojaei A, Molavi H. Enhanced adsorption removal

performance of UiO-66 by rational hybridization with nanodiamond.
Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2020;296:110008. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
micromeso.2020.110008.

[326] Mousavi DV, Ahmadipouya S, Shokrgozar A, Molavi H, Rezakazemi M,

[345] Fan ST, Qiu ZJ, Xu RY, Zhang SX, Chen ZH, Nie ZJ, et al. Ultrahigh carbon

dioxide-selective composite membrane containing a γ-CD-MOF layer. ACS Appl
Mater Interfaces 2021;13:13034–43. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c18861.
[346] Venna SR, Lartey M, Li T, Spore A, Kumar S, Nulwala HB, et al. Fabrication of
MMMs with improved gas separation properties using externally-functionalized
MOF particles. J Mater Chem A 2015;3:5014–22. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c4ta05225k.

[347] Shah Buddin MMH, Ahmad AL. A review on metal-organic frameworks as filler in
mixed matrix membrane: recent strategies to surpass upper bound for CO2
separation. J CO2 Util 2021;51:101616. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcou.2021.101616.

[348] Sutrisna PD, Hou J, Zulkifli MY, Li H, Zhang Y, Liang W, et al. Surface

functionalized UiO-66/Pebax-based ultrathin composite hollow fiber gas
separation membranes. J Mater Chem A 2018;6:918–31. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c7ta07512j.

Ahmadijokani F, et al. Adsorption performance of UiO-66 towards organic dyes:
effect of activation conditions. J Mol Liq 2021;321:114487. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.MOLLIQ.2020.114487.

[349] Kang Z, Fan L, Sun D. Recent advances and challenges of metal-organic

framework membranes for gas separation. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:10073–91.
https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ta01142c.

[327] Mirzaei K, Jafarpour E, Shojaei A, Molavi H. Facile synthesis of Polyaniline@UiO-
66 nanohybrids for efficient and rapid adsorption of methyl orange from aqueous
media. Ind Eng Chem Res 2022. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00919.

[350] Molavi H, Moghimi H, Taheri RA. Zr-based MOFs with high drug loading for
adsorption removal of anti-cancer drugs: a potential drug storage. Appl
Organomet Chem 2020;34:4–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/aoc.5549.

[351] Kalaj M, Cohen SM. Postsynthetic modification: an enabling technology for the
advancement of metal-organic frameworks. ACS Cent Sci 2020;6:1046–57.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.0c00690.

[352] Mandal S, Natarajan S, Mani P, Pankajakshan A. Post-synthetic modification of
metal–organic frameworks toward applications. Adv Funct Mater 2021;31:1–22.
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202006291.

[353] Amedi HR, Aghajani M. Gas separation in mixed matrix membranes based on

polyurethane containing SiO2, ZSM-5, and ZIF-8 nanoparticles. J Nat Gas Sci Eng
2016;35:695–702. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2016.09.015.

[354] Mehmood O, Farrukh S, Hussain A, Rehman A, Liu Y, Butt S, et al. Optimization
analysis of polyurethane based mixed matrix gas separation membranes by
incorporation of gamma-cyclodextrin metal organic frame work. Chem Pap 2020;
74:3527–43. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11696-020-01179-1.

[355] Sadeghi M, Isfahani AP, Shamsabadi AA, Favakeh S, Soroush M. Improved gas
transport properties of polyurethane–urea membranes through incorporating a
cadmium-based metal organic framework. J Appl Polym Sci 2020;137:1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1002/app.48704.

[356] Tabrizi L, Chiniforoshan H, McArdle P, Tavakol H, Rezaei B, Dehcheshmeh MM.
Selective gas sorption and electrochemical properties of a dicyanamide
coordination polymer: insight from experimental and theoretical study.
Polyhedron 2014;69:84–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poly.2013.11.029.
[357] Pournaghshband Isfahani A, Sadeghi M, Nilouyal S, Huang G, Muchtar A, Ito MM,
et al. Tuning the morphology of segmented block copolymers with Zr-MOF
nanoparticles for durable and efficient hydrocarbon separation membranes.
J Mater Chem A 2020;8:9382–91. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ta02587a.
[358] Talakesh MM, Sadeghi M, Chenar MP, Khosravi A. Gas separation properties of

poly(ethylene glycol)/poly(tetramethylene glycol) based polyurethane
membranes. J Memb Sci 2012;415–416:469–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
memsci.2012.05.033.

[359] Winarta J, Meshram A, Zhu F, Li R, Jafar H, Parmar K, et al. Metal–organic
framework -based mixed-matrix membranes for gas separation: an overview.
J Polym Sci 2020;58:2518–46. https://doi.org/10.1002/pol.20200122.
[360] Yao BJ, Ding LG, Li F, Li JT, Fu QJ, Ban Y, et al. Chemically cross-linked MOF

membrane generated from imidazolium-based ionic liquid-decorated UiO-66 type
NMOF and its application toward CO2 separation and conversion. ACS Appl
Mater Interfaces 2017;9:38919–30. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b12697.

Farhad was born in Shiraz, Iran, in 1990. He received his B⋅Sc.
in  Chemical  Engineering  from  Shiraz  University  and  MSc  in
Polymer Engineering from the Sharif University of Technology
and  currently  is  doing  his  Ph.D.  study  in  mechanical  engi-
neering  at  the  University  of  British  Columbia.  His  Ph.D.
research  focuses  on  the  MOF  composites  process  (mainly
electrospinning and 3d printing) for removing emerging con-
taminants from wastewater and gas separation. During his Ph.
D.  he  has  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  working  with  Prof.
Mohammad Arjmand (supervisor, UBC Okanagan), Frank KO
(UBC), Orlando Rojas (UBC), and Milad Kamkar (University of
Waterloo).

er=A0AtnksAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao

Google  Scholar:  https://scholar.google.com/citations?us

[328] Ahmadijokani F, Tajahmadi S, Rezakazemi M, Sehat AA, Molavi H,

Aminabhavi TM, et al. Aluminum-based metal-organic frameworks for adsorptive
removal of anti-cancer (methotrexate) drug from aqueous solutions. J Environ
Manag 2021;277:111448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.111448.

[329] Ahmadijokani F, Tajahmadi S, Haris MH, Bahi A, Rezakazemi M, Molavi H, et al.
Fe3O4@PAA@UiO-66-NH2 magnetic nanocomposite for selective adsorption of
Quercetin. Chemosphere 2021;275:130087. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2021.130087.

[330] Molavi H, Zamani M, Aghajanzadeh M, Kheiri Manjili H, Danafar H, Shojaei A.
Evaluation of UiO-66 metal organic framework as an effective sorbent for
Curcumin’s overdose. Appl Organomet Chem 2018;32:1–10. https://doi.org/
10.1002/aoc.4221.

[331] Barjasteh M, Vossoughi M, Bagherzadeh M, Pooshang Bagheri K. Green synthesis
of PEG-coated MIL-100(Fe) for controlled release of dacarbazine and its
anticancer potential against human melanoma cells. Int J Pharm 2022;618:
121647. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2022.121647.

[332] Tajahmadi S, Molavi H, Ahmadijokani F, Shamloo A, Shojaei A, Sharifzadeh M,
et al. Metal-organic frameworks: a promising option for the diagnosis and
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. J Contr Release 2023;353:1–29. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2022.11.002.

[333] Barjasteh M, Vossoughi M, Bagherzadeh M, Pooshang Bagheri K. MIL-100(Fe) a

potent adsorbent of Dacarbazine: experimental and molecular docking
simulation. Chem Eng J 2023;452:138987. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2022.138987.

[334] Tajahmadi S, Shamloo A, Shojaei A, Sharifzadeh M. Adsorption behavior of a Gd-
based metal-organic framework toward the quercetin drug: effect of the
activation condition. ACS Omega 2022;7:41177–88. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsomega.2c04800.

[335] Ahmadijokani F, Tajahmadi S, Bahi A, Molavi H, Rezakazemi M, Ko F, et al.
Ethylenediamine-functionalized Zr-based MOF for efficient removal of heavy
metal ions from water. Chemosphere 2021;264:128466. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128466.

[336] Ahmadijokani F, Molavi H, Rezakazemi M, Aminabhavi TM, Arjmand M.

Simultaneous detection and removal of fluoride from water using smart metal-
organic framework-based adsorbents. Coord Chem Rev 2021;445:214037.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2021.214037.

[337] Yeung HH, Yoshikawa G, Minami K, Shiba K. Strain-based chemical sensing using

metal–organic framework nanoparticles. J Mater Chem A 2020;8:18007–14.
https://doi.org/10.1039/D0TA07248F.

[338] Qu XL, Yan B. Cd-based metal-organic framework containing uncoordinated
carbonyl groups as lanthanide postsynthetic modification sites and chemical
sensing of diphenyl phosphate as a flame-retardant biomarker. Inorg Chem 2020;
59:15088–100. https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.inorgchem.0c02044.
[Accessed 9 March 2022].

[339] Zhuang Z, Wang Y, Chen Z, Wang D, Chen C, Peng Q, et al. MOF derived high-
density atomic platinum heterogeneous catalyst for C–H bond activation. Mater
Chem Front 2020;4:1158–63. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0QM00040J.

[340] Mutiah M, Rochat S, Amura I, Burrows AD, Emanuelsson EAC. Immobilisation of

L-proline onto mixed-linker zirconium MOFs for heterogeneous catalysis of the
aldol reaction. Chem Eng Process - Process Intensif 2021;161:108315. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2021.108315.

[341] Ahmadijokani MAF, Molavi H, Tajahmadi S, Rezakazemi M, Amini M, Kamkar M,

et al. Coordination chemistry of metal–organic frameworks: detection,
adsorption, and photodegradation of tetracycline antibiotics and beyond. Coord
Chem Rev 2022;464:214562. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2022.214562.
[342] Qian Q, Asinger PA, Lee MJ, Han G, Mizrahi Rodriguez K, Lin S, et al. MOF-based
membranes for gas separations. Chem Rev 2020;120:8161–266. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00119.

[343] Shi Y, Liang B, Lin RB, Zhang C, Chen B. Gas separation via hybrid metal–organic
framework/polymer membranes. Trends Chem 2020;2:254–69. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.trechm.2020.01.002.

[344] Duan P, Moreton JC, Tavares SR, Semino R, Maurin G, Cohen SM, Schmidt-

Rohr K, et al. Polymer infiltration into metal-organic frameworks in mixed-matrix
membranes detected in situ by NMR. J Am Chem Soc 2019;141:7589–95. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jacs.9b02789.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109529

F. Ahmadijokani et al.

Hossein Molavi received his B.Sc. in Applied Chemistry from
Bu Ali Sina University in 2012. Then, he received his MSc. in
Nano Science and Nano Technology-Nano Chemistry from the
University  of  Tehran  (UT)  in  2014.  In  2014  he  joined  Prof.
Akbar Shojaei’s group as a Ph.D. student at Sharif University of
Technology.  His  research  focuses  on  fabricating  new  metal-
organic  frameworks  (MOFs)  and  mixed-matrix  membranes
(MMMs) for gas storage and separation. His Ph.D. thesis was
selected as a 2nd rank top Ph.D. thesis in the Iranian Chemical
Engineering Society in 2019. In 2020, he started working as a
research  associate  with  Dr.  Mohammad  Arjmand’s  group  at
UBC.  His  recent  research  focuses  on  synthesizing  and  devel-
oping multifunctional MOFs and polymer nanocomposites. He
is selected as a young scientist in two consecutive years to participate in the 70th Lindau
Nobel Laureate Meeting taking place from 28 June to 3 July 2020 and 2021 in Lindau,
Germany. He has first-authored and co-authored more than 36 articles. He is an assistant
professor  of  Nano  Chemistry  at  the  Institute  for  Advanced  Studies  in  Basic  Sciences
(IASBS).

https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=kDqDvaQAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao
Homepage: https://iasbs.ac.ir/personalpage?id=42140staff=0&staff=0&lang=en

Salman  Ahmadipouya  received  a  bachelor’s  degree  from
Arak  University  in  Arak,  Iran,  in  2016.  He  is  a  researcher
passionate  about  membrane  separation  processes  and  their
applications in water treatment and gas separation. In 2019, he
earned  his  M.Sc.  in  Chemical  Engineering  from  the  Sharif
University  of  Technology  (SUT)  in  Tehran,  Iran.  He  worked
extensively on membrane processes at SUT and gained valu-
able knowledge. After finishing his M.Sc., he collaborated with
Dr.  Arjmand’s  group  at  the  University  of  British  Colombia,
Kelowna,  BC,  Canada,  since  2019  on  projects  relating  to
applying nanomaterials in adsorption, water remediation, and
gas  separation.  Salman  eventually  joined  Dr.  McCutcheon’s
group in 2022, where he has been making substantial contri-
butions to the field of membrane research. Salman’s key research interests include the
development of membranes and their applications in water treatment and gas separation.
His  research  focuses  on  synthesizing  and  characterizing  nanomaterials  such  as  metal-
organic  frameworks  (MOFs),  zeolites,  and  carbon-based  materials,  their  application  in
mixed-matrix membranes (MMMs), and membrane separation for various applications.

Google  Scholar:  https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=ZNkKtwMAAAAJ&h

l=en&oi=ao

Dr.  Mashallah  Rezakazemi  received  his  BSc.  and  MSc.  de-
grees in 2009 and 2011, respectively, both in Chemical Engi-
neering, from the Iran University of Science and Technology
(IUST),  and his  Ph.D.  from  the University  of Tehran (UT)  in
2015. In his first appointment, Rezakazemi has been served as
professor of the Faculty of Chemical and Materials Engineering
at  the  Shahrood  University  of  Technology  since  2016.  He  is
being named a top 1% most Highly Cited Researcher by Web of
Science (ESI).

Dr.  Rezakazemi’s  research  is  in  the  general  area  of  the
water-energy nexus, CO2 capture, gas separation, desalination,
to  the  service  of  the  broad  areas  of  learning  and  training.
Specifically,  his  research  in  engineered  and  natural  environ-
mental systems involves: (i) membrane-based processes for energy-efficient desalination,
CO2  capture,  gas  separation,  and  wastewater  reuse,  (ii)  sustainable  production  of  the
riched  gas  stream,  water,  and  energy  generation  with  the  engineered  membrane,  (iii)
environmental applications and implications of nanomaterials, and (iv) water and sani-
tation in developing countries.

He has co-authored in more than 145 highly cited journal publications, conference
articles, and book chapters. He has received major awards and grants from various funding
agencies  in  recognition  of  his  research.  Notable  among  these  is  the  Khwarizmi  Youth
Award from the Iranian Research Organization for Science and Technology (IROST) in
2012.

Mashallah is associate editor in Environmental Chemistry Letter, Frontiers in Chem-
ical Engineering, and Environmental Sciences Europe. He is also serving as the editorial
board member of Frontiers in Chemistry, Current Analytical Chemistry, Materials Science
for Energy Technologies, SN Applied Sciences, Frontiers in Chemistry. He was also the
editor of Energy Reports.

https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=zzSt6fYAAAAJ&h

Google
l=en&oi=ao

scholar:

Ahmadreza Ghaffarkhah is a Ph.D. student in the School of
Engineering at the University of British Columbia, Okanagan
Campus. His research interests include the synthesis of carbon-
based  nanomaterials  and  MOFs,  polymer  processing  and
forming, and intrinsically conductive polymers. Additionally,
he  works  on  3D  printing  and  liquid-in-liquid  printing  of
carbon-based hydrogels and inks.

Google  scholar:  https://scholar.google.com/citations?us

er=bZSCwa4AAAAJ&hl=en

Assistant Professor Milad Kamkar works in the Department
of Chemical Engineering at the University of Waterloo, having
previously served as a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of
British Columbia and a Visiting Scholar at Stanford University.
He  currently  leads  the  Multi-scale  Materials  Design  Centre,
where his team focuses on additive manufacturing of soft ma-
terials,  including  hydrogels,  polymer  nanocomposites,  and
liquids,  based  on  advanced  nanomaterials  such  as  graphene,
MXene,  and  cellulose  nanocrystals.  Their  research
is
application-driven and aimed at creating 3D structured func-
tional materials for electromagnetic shields, wearable sensors,
and wastewater treatment systems.

er=fpx9yI0AAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao

Google  Scholar:  https://scholar.google.com/citations?us

Homepage:  https://uwaterloo.ca/chemical-engineering/

people-profiles/milad-kamkar

Akbar Shojaei is a professor in the Department of Chemical
and Petroleum Engineering of Sharif University of Technology.
He received his Ph.D. degree in polymer composite processing
from Amirkabir University of Technology in 2002. He joined
Sharif  University  of  Technology  in  2003  as  an  assistant  pro-
fessor and initiated a focused research program on polymeric
systems. His main research interests are to develop advanced
functional polymer nano/composites for various applications
such as biomedical, smart/active surface coating, friction ma-
terial,  shape  memory  polymers,  water  treatment.  Mainly,
processing, fabrication and unearthing relationships between
micro/molecular  structure  and  macroscopic  properties  of
polymer  composites  are  under  intensive  investigation.  Dr.
Shojaei has published more than 100 refereed journal articles and given many scientific
talks at international conferences.

https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=4ypboRcAAAAJ&h

Google
l=en&oi=ao

Scholar:

Homepage: http://che.sharif.edu/~pcrg/dr.shojaei.html

Dr.  Mohammad  Arjmand  is  a  leading  and  award-winning
researcher  in  the  areas  of  nanotechnology  and  polymer  sci-
ence  and  engineering.  Dr.  Arjmand  is  an  assistant  professor
(since 2018) at the University of British Columbia, Okanagan
campus  (UBCO).  He  is  also  a  Canada  Research  Chair  in
Advanced Materials and Polymer Engineering and the technical
lead  of  the  Plastic  Recycling  Research  Cluster  at  UBCO.  Dr.
Arjmand directs Nanomaterials and Polymer Nanocomposites
Laboratory (NPNL), which focuses on the synthesis and engi-
neering of multifunctional nanomaterials and  polymer  nano-
composites.  Prior  to  joining  UBCO,  Dr.  Arjmand  was  a
postdoctoral fellow at the Universities of Calgary and Toronto.
Google  Scholar:  https://scholar.google.com/citations?us

er=HTU9JxMAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao

Homepage: https://npnl.ok.ubc.ca/people/

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10109530
