Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Synthesis and characterization of emulsion fuels –Implications to spray and
engine studies

Sudarshan Gowrishankar a, Preetika Rastogi b, Anand Krishnasamy a, *, Madivala
G. Basavaraj b, **, Niket Kaisare b, Indrapal Singh Aidhen c
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India
b Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India
c Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
Water-in-diesel
Microemulsions
Kinetic stability
Micro-explosion
Emissions

Conventional diesel combustion is a mixing-limited process that passes through high temperature and fuel-rich
zones, leading to oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and particulate matter (PM) formation. Simultaneous reduction of NOx
and PM is difficult due to NOx-PM trade-off. As alternative fuels, emulsions of water-in-diesel offer several ad-
vantages, including a simultaneous reduction in NOx  and PM formation. There are, however, disparities in the
reported  engine  performance  and  emission  characteristics,  as  they  appear  to  depend  on  the  constituents  and
microstructure  of  the  emulsion  fuel  used  and  engine  conditions.  Studies  on  engine  performance  and  exhaust
emissions were often carried out without adequate characterization of the emulsions. Therefore, the paucity of
cohesive data can be circumvented by standardizing the protocols for emulsion fuels, tailoring their morphology,
structure, and characterization, and optimizing engine conditions. This review article recapitulates the salient
features of emulsion fuels, from their synthesis, microstructure, characterization, and macroscopic spray char-
acteristics to performance and emissions in diesel engines. A critical analysis of the current state of knowledge is
also presented, emphasising the tunability of droplet size and characterization of emulsion stability. The review
concludes by suggesting the path forward to utilizing emulsion fuels.

1. Introduction

Adding water to fuel is a potential method to mitigate the harmful
impact  of  fossil  fuel  combustion  on  the  environment.  Water-in-diesel
emulsion  fuels  are  known  to  reduce  NOx  and  PM  formation  simulta-
neously [1–5], which is otherwise difficult to achieve in diesel engines.
Another  advantage  of  emulsion  fuels  is  that  no  engine  or  fuel  trans-
portation  system  retrofitting  requirement  is  required.  In  contrast  to
these benefits, the emulsion does reduce fuel energy density, although
an  increase  in  engine  efficiency  has  been  reported  [4,6–8].  For  these
reasons, studies on emulsion fuels have received considerable interest,
and investigations into the combustion of multicomponent water-in-oil
emulsions  started  decades  ago  [9,10].  The  initial  stimulus  was,  how-
ever,  motivated  by  producing  fire-safe  fuels  that  possess  a  “self--
extinguishing” character since an increase in the flashpoint due to water
addition contributed to safer operating conditions [11–13].

Micro-explosion  occurs  in  multicomponent  emulsions  due  to  the

presence of the dispersed phase (water) with a lower boiling point than
the continuous phase (oil/diesel). Such a difference causes the vapor-
ization and expansion of the dispersed water droplets first, resulting in
the  fragmentation  of  the  primary  atomized  fuel  droplets  into  smaller
droplets  [1,9,10,14].  This  secondary  disintegration  enables  faster
vaporization and produces a more uniform fuel distribution inside the
combustion  chamber.  Hence,  emulsion  fuels  burn  more  cleanly  and
rapidly  than  neat  fuels  [10].  Another  interesting  aspect  is  that  the
combustion of a single macroemulsion fuel drop under high pressure and
temperature  mimics  compression  ignition  engine  conditions  [15].
Macroemulsion  fuels  with  water  concentrations  >8  % result  in  lower
soot  emissions  than  the  base  fuel  and  a  significant  decrease  in  NOx
formation.  Introducing  water  in  the  fuel  can  also  generate  a  higher
concentration of hydroxyl radicals that accelerate combustion [2,7,16,
17]. Hydroxyl radicals suppress unburnt hydrocarbons and particulate
matter emissions from diesel engines. The reduction of thermal NO is
achieved by lowering the combustion chamber peak temperature, again
due to water addition [5,8,18]. The effects of water concentration [2,8,

* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: anand_k@iitm.ac.in (A. Krishnasamy), basa@iitm.ac.in (M.G. Basavaraj).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101133
Received 2 April 2021; Received in revised form 20 November 2023; Accepted 24 November 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)101133Availableonline3January20240360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Acronyms and nomenclature

a/v
AOT
CO
BSEC
BSFC
BTE
DLS
HC
HLB
ID
K
ml
NOx
PHRR
PPRR
PP
SANS
SAXS
SLS
UHC

Area per unit volume
Aerosol OT Sodium-Bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate
Carbon Monoxide
Brake Specific Energy Consumption
Brake Specific Fuel Consumption
Brake Thermal Efficiency
Dynamic Light Scattering
Hydrocarbon
Hydrophilic Lipophilic Balance
Ignition Delay
Kelvin
Milliliter
Oxides of Nitrogen
Peak Heat Release Rate
Peak Pressure Rise Rate
Peak Pressure
Small-Angle Neutron Scattering
Small Angle X-ray Scattering
Static Light Scattering
Unburned Hydrocarbon

15,19,20],  surfactant concentration [2,15], dispersed phase  structure,
and the size of emulsion drops [17,19], engine operating conditions such
as  speed  and  load  [8,15,17],  and  spray  temperature  [21]  have  been
studied to understand the mechanism of emission reduction. There have
been conflicting results regarding carbon monoxide (CO) and unburned
hydrocarbon (UHC) emissions. Notably, the performance and emission
characteristics  of  an  engine  fueled  with  emulsions  depend  on  their
constituents, and microstructure and engine conditions [22]. The lack of
careful characterization of emulsions led to controversial results. To this
end, it should be noted that cohesive observations are possible only if a
standardized  protocol  is  available  for  emulsion  fuels  with  tailored
morphology and structure, proper characterisation, and optimized en-
gine operations. This review article recapitulates emulsion fuels’ salient
features, from their synthesis, microstructure, and characterization, to
their performance and emissions in engine application. This article also
suggests a path forward for the rational utilization of emulsion fuels.

2. Key benefits of emulsions

2.1. Introducing water as the dispersed phase

Microexplosion is the catastrophic tearing-up of the parent droplet
into several smaller fragments [2]. This phenomenon was reported by
Ivanov  and  Nefedov  [9].  When  an  emulsion  drop  is  introduced  in  a
high-temperature  environment,  the  dispersed  water  droplets  in  the
parent  drop  undergo  vaporization  early  in  the  fuel  droplet  lifetime,
reducing the cylinder temperature and suppressing NOx formation. They
argued that this process, called microexplosion, would be violent and
shatter the parent fuel drop into many sub-droplets. This secondary at-
omization to droplets of smaller size increases the surface area-to-volume
ratio,  resulting  in  improved  air-fuel  mixing.  This  reduces  the
soot-formation tendency. Thus, a vital significance of the emulsion fuel,
from the diesel engine perspective, is the simultaneous reduction of NOx
and smoke, a challenge that has been evading researchers in the past
(see Fig. 1).

Sjorgen [23] postulated that if the water is finely dispersed in the
fuel, a minimal quantity of water, 2–3 %, can cause microexplosion and
provide the expected benefits. In the case of coarse dispersion, higher
amounts of water in the 12–15 % range are required to achieve the same
benefit. Law et al. [21] showed that microexplosion would occur quickly
in  a  drop  without  internal  circulation,  whereas  internal  circulation
would require the drop to be heated to superheated conditions before
losing  all  the  water  inside.  Mattiello  et  al.  [24]  observed  injected
emulsion drops (with 10 and 20 % v/v of water) using laser light scat-
tering. Microexplosion was observed a few milliseconds after the fuel
injection, and correspondingly, the level of soot formed was also lower.
Tsue et al. [25] and Wang and Chen [26] showed that the time for onset
of microexplosion decreased with increasing volatility between the base
fuel and water. Likewise, higher water concentrations in a heavier base
fuel  would  trigger  earlier  microexplosion  because  the  emulsion  drop
would  be  elevated  to  higher  temperatures  exceeding  the  superheated
conditions of water, resulting in instant vaporization inside the droplet.
However,  even  for  emulsions  where  the  difference  in  boiling  points
between the base fuel and water was minimal [27], the presence of the
surfactant  aided  in  raising  the  droplet  temperature  to  a  value  high
enough  to trigger microexplosion. Watanabe et  al. [28] revealed  that
just  before  microexplosion,  ~70  %  of  the  water  inside  the  emulsion
droplet evaporated instantaneously. Kadota et al. [29] observed that the
time for the onset of microexplosion decreased with an increase in the
boiling point of base fuel, an increase in ambient pressure or tempera-
tures  and increased  water quantities. Recent  studies [30,31] revealed

Fig. 1. Schematic of microexplosion process highlighting the advantages concerning engine combustion, performance and emission processes.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011332

S. Gowrishankar et al.

that  microexplosion  occurred  for  the  samples  with  lower  surfactant
concentrations while puffing occurred for those with higher surfactant
concentrations.  Although  this  indicates  the  need  for  lower  surfactant
concentration,  it  negatively  affects  the  stability  of  the  prepared
emulsion.

Antonov et al. [32] compared microexplosion in water-in-diesel and
water-in-biodiesel emulsions and found that the base fuel type (diesel or
biodiesel) also affected the onset of microexplotion.

There  is  a  rapid  increase  in  the  liquid  surface  area  during  micro-
explosion, which increases the rate of the evaporation process and re-
sults in decreased physical ignition delay controlled by breakup, heating
and evaporation of droplets [33]. However, water addition reduces the
rate of chemical reactions, thereby prolonging the delay. The final effect
depends  on the  more dominant  phenomenon  and  significantly affects
combustion and emission. A simultaneous reduction in NOx and smoke
emissions  can  be  achieved  due  to  reduced  temperature  due  to  water
evaporation  and  microexplosion-induced  improved  air-fuel  mixing
without  sacrificing  engine  performance.  The  emulsion  characteristics
directly  impact  the  engine  characteristics  through  the  emulsion  fuel
properties, water content, surfactant concentration, and dispersed water
droplet size. Systematic investigations into the effect of these parameters
and careful preparation of the emulsion fuel are warranted to study the
application of such fuels in engines.

2.2. Emerging use of emulsions as microreactors

With a goal towards sustainable synthesis of chemical and pharma-
ceutical products, reducing the use of solvents has emerged as a critical
application in the last two decades. The micron and nano-sized droplets
encapsulated within environmentally benign continuous phase serve as
compartments  for  small-scale  and  high  throughput  reactors  [34,35].
Droplets have a high surface-to-volume ratio, providing superior control
of reaction chemistry and thermodynamic parameters [36]. This results
in accelerating reaction kinetics in chemical and biochemical systems
where  the  reactions  are  observed  to  proceed  spontaneously,  as
compared to bulk solutions [37,38]. Recent works have shown unusual
reaction properties in microdroplets compared to bulk water or other
solvents. However, precise control of the droplet size and distribution
plays  a  vital  role  in  determining  reaction  chemistry  and  engineering
complex multi-functional materials [39–41]. The stability, preparation
and characterization aspects of emulsions elucidated in the subsequent
sections also provide a handle on the droplet morphology for applica-
tions in other fields.

3. Emulsion fuels

The emulsion is a liquid consisting of two or more immiscible liquids.
One or more of the liquids are in the form of drops with sizes ranging
from  nanometers  to  millimeters.  In  emulsified  fuels,  water  or  water
drops  are  usually  finely  dispersed  in  the  fuel.  An  advantage  of  such
emulsions is that engine modifications are not required when used as
fuels. Diesel-in-water emulsions are unfavorable as fuels because excess
water  lowers  the  energy  density  of  the  fuel,  and  can  damage  critical
engine  components  such  as  the  fuel  filter,  pump,  and  lines  and
contaminate lubricating oil, thus reducing engine performance.

3.1. Surface-active additives for emulsion fuel formulation

Emulsion  fuels  are  formulated  with  water,  fuel  and  additive(s)  in
desirable  proportions.  Hydrocarbons  are  hydrophobic  and  immiscible
with water. One strategy to obtain a homogeneous dispersion of water
drops in fuel is to use a suitable surfactant as the additive. Surfactant
molecules of interest here have bulky heads and a slender hydrocarbon
tail, as shown schematically in Fig. 2(a). The head groups could be ionic
or nonionic.

Surfactants  alter  interfacial  tension  between  two  liquids  and

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of (a) surfactant molecule (b) surfactant sta-
bilized water-in-oil (W/O) emulsion. Here, oil refers to any liquid fuel, such as
diesel or hydrocarbons.

facilitate the stabilization of oil-water interfaces by forming a surfactant
monolayer, thus stabilizing the emulsion by preventing it from coales-
cence. The sizes of water droplets can vary from a few nanometers to
several hundreds of microns, depending on the method and parameters
used during their formulation, as will be discussed later. Surfactants that
have  been  considered  in  the  formulation  of  water-in-diesel  emulsion
fuels are listed in Table 1. Commercially available non-ionic surfactants
Span© and Tween© (see Fig. 3 for their structures) are the most popular

Table 1
A list of type, chemical formula and HLB of different surfactants used for the
formulation of water-in-diesel emulsion fuels.

Surfactant

aAOT
b CTAC
Span©20

Span©60

Span©80

Span©83

Span©85

Tween©20

Tween©60

Tween©80

Tween©85

Sucrose laurate

Triton©-X/iso-

octylphenoxypolyethoxy
ethanol

c C14E3

(Alfonic 1214 GC-3)

c C11E3

c C11E5

NP-9 (nonylphenol

ethoxylate)

polyethylenglycol monoleate

Type

HLB  Mol. formula

Refs.

–
–

8.6

C20H37NaO7S
C19H42ClN
C18H34O6

[42]
[43]
[44,45]

4.7

C24H46O6

[17,45]

4.3

C24H44O6

3.7

C66H130O18

[8,15,19,20,
42,45–67]
[31,68,69]

1.8

C60H108O8

[45,70,71]

16.7

C26H50O10

[45,72]

14.9

C32H62O10

[17,45]

15.0

C32H60O10

11.0

C14H13NO6S2

[8,19,20,42,
45–49,61,62,
64,65,68,73,
74]
[15,63,66]

16.0

C24H44O12

[75,76]

13.5

C16H26O2

[77–79]

8.0

C20H42O4

[80,81]

C17H36O4

[80]

C21H44O6

[51,54,80]

12.9

C33H60O10

[82]

11.4

C20H38O3

[69]

Ionic
Ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic

Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic

Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic
Non-
ionic

a AOT: Sodium Bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate.
b CTAC: Cetyltrimethyl-ammonium chloride.
c CnEm: m- (ethylene glycol) n-alkyl ether.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011333

S. Gowrishankar et al.

since their formation is thermodynamically favoured. As seen in Fig. 4,
the surfactant lowers the Gibbs free energy of water-in-oil dispersions
through  interfacial  free  energy  reduction.  Such  emulsions  form  spon-
taneously  and  exhibit  ultra-long  stability.  These  thermodynamically
stable  emulsions  can  contain  cylindrical  micelles,  bilayers  and  other
liquid crystal phases in addition to the common spherical and reverse
micelles; the micelle structures can be altered by varying the tempera-
ture  or  composition  [84].  We  are  primarily  interested  in  the
reverse-micellar
in  which
for
surfactant-stabilized water drops are dispersed in an oil medium.

emulsion

system

fuels,

Fig. 3. Molecular structures of (a) Tween©20 and (b) Span©80, which are fatty
acid  esters  of  polysorbates  and  sorbitol,  respectively.  Note  the  significantly
larger oxygenated head-group of Tween, which results in a higher value of HLB
and higher hydrophilic nature.

choices. Non-ionic surfactants that contain only carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen have been predominantly used. Ionic surfactants often contain
nitrogen  or  sulfur,  which  can  lead  to  higher  NOx  and  SOx  emissions,
respectively. Ionic surfactants release counter-ions into the water phase,
which  can  be  anionic  or  cationic,  depending  on  the  surfactant.  Some
common counter-ions are Na
. An ionic surfactant such as
AOT produces emulsion fuels of ultra-long storage stability [42], but the
hetero-elements  chemical  species  are  expected  to  impact  emissions.
Although  less  studied,  emulsions  stabilized  by  ionic  surfactants  can
serve as model systems for investigating the fundamental processes of
spray and combustion.

(cid:0)
, and Br

, Cl

+

(cid:0)

In  Table  1,  the  hydrophilic-lipophilic  balance  (HLB)  measures  the
affinity of a non-ionic surfactant to water or oil. The HLB is defined as
[83]:

HLB= 20

Mw,h
Mw,h + Mw,t

(1)

where Mw,h and Mw,t are the molecular weights of the hydrophilic head
(Mw,h) and hydrophobic tail in a surfactant. A lower HLB value indicates
that the surfactant has a higher lipophilicity, and the resulting emulsions
are more likely to be water-in-oil. On the other hand, if the surfactant is
more  soluble  in  the  water  phase  (higher  HLB  value),  the  resulting
emulsions  are  more  likely  to  be oil-in-water.  The Bancroft  rule  states
that the continuous phase is one in which the surfactant is more soluble.
Therefore, the affinity of the surfactant to the oil phase is an essential
factor in formulating water-in-oil emulsions in addition to the volume
ratio of water and oil. Two or more surfactants may be used in formu-
lating water-in-oil emulsions. The HLB of a surfactant mixture can be
calculated as a weighted average [20]:

∑

HLBmix =

(HLB)iXi

(2)

i

where HLBi and Xi  respectively refer to the HLB value and mass fraction
of ith surfactant in the mixture of surfactants used for emulsification.
Multiple surfactants often provide better emulsion stability than a single
surfactant of a similar HLB [84]. Studies [20,42,45,46,61,62,64,65,73]
show  that  a  combination  of  Span©  and  Tween©  gives  rise  to
water-in-diesel emulsions with varying degrees of stability that depends
on the mechanical energy used during emulsification, mixing duration,
the concentration of surfactants, and the water-to-fuel volume ratio.

3.2. Microemulsions, nanoemulsions and aspects of stability

Danielsson and Lindman [85] defined microemulsion as: “A system
of water, oil and amphiphile, which is a single optically isotropic and
thermodynamically stable liquid solution”. Microemulsions are different
from  conventional  emulsions  (e.g.,  simple  oil-vinegar  salad  dressing)

Nanoemulsions and macroemulsions are thermodynamically unsta-
ble since the separated phases have a lower Gibbs free energy than the
emulsion (see Fig. 4). On the other hand, kinetically stable emulsions are
possible, but they require external energy to mix water, oil and surfac-
tants, which drives the system to a metastable, kinetically-trapped state
[86,87]. Since water and oil tend to separate, the surfactant provides a
kinetic  or  steric  barrier  that  delays  macroscopic  phase  separation.
Kinetically stable emulsion drops are always spherical. Nanoemulsions
formed this way can exhibit reasonably good stability. The adsorption
and  desorption
lead  to
surfactant-free  high-energy  interfaces,  forming  larger  droplets  after  a
specific period [87] and eventually destabilising emulsions and driving a
kinetically  stable  system  towards  the  more  preferred  thermodynamic
phase-separated state with increasing time.

interface  can  momentarily

from

the

A comparison of visual appearance, microstructure and droplet size
distribution  of  microemulsions  and  nano-  and  macroemulsions  are
presented in Fig. 5, whereas Table 2 lists their essential features. Visu-
ally,  microemulsion  fuels  are  transparent;  nanoemulsion  fuels  are
transparent or translucent, depending on the size of the droplets, and
macroemulsion fuels are turbid. A key feature of kinetically stable nano-
and macroemulsions is their wide droplet size distributions. The poly-
dispersity index, a measure of the spread of the size distribution, is the
lowest for microemulsions, as illustrated in Fig. 5. Table 2 also lists the
methods  used  to  characterize  microemulsions,  nanoemulsions  and
macroemulsions, to be discussed in Section 4.

4. Preparation and characterization of emulsions

4.1. Methods of preparation

Emulsions are typically prepared by mixing two immiscible liquids,
which  do  not  chemically  react  with  each  other,  with  one  or  more
emulsifying agents. In some formulations, co-solvents may also be added
to  the  immiscible  liquids.  A  surfactant  reduces  interfacial  tension  be-
tween  the  immiscible  liquids,  improves  interface  compatibility  and
stabilizes the dispersed phase droplets by forming a film at the interface
that  inhibits  coalescence  [84].  Typical  parameters  varied  during  the
preparation of emulsions are (i) the volume ratio of the dispersed and
the continuous phases, (ii) the type and concentration of the emulsifiers,
(iii)  the  temperature,  and  (iv)  the  energy  required  for  creating  new
interface area [86]. Since the total interfacial area in an emulsion system
is vast, strategies to produce large interfacial areas are an inherent part
of the emulsion preparation process, some of which are summarized in
this section.

4.1.1. Homogenization

High energy mixing uses mechanical agitators to apply high shear,
thus  creating  large  interfacial  areas  by  breaking  liquids  into  small
droplets without any a priori treatment of the constituents. The rapid
shearing action generates disruptive forces due to longitudinal, radial
and rotational velocity gradients. This technique is preferred for liquids
having  low  to  medium  viscosity  [86,90].  The  intensity  and  time  of
mixing  dictate  the  final  size  of  the  emulsion.  The  diameter  of  the
dispersed phase decreases with increased speed and/or homogenization
time,  eventually  reaching  a  plateau [86].  Commercially  available ho-
mogenizers can be operated at speeds up to 30000 rpm and can process

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011334

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 4. Schematic indicating free energy of microemulsion, nanoemulsion and macro-emulsion. Unlike regular emulsions, microemulsions are thermodynamically
stable and can form spontaneously.

Fig. 5. A comparison of visual appearance, microstructure and droplet size distribution in water-in-oil microemulsions, nanoemulsions and macroemulsions. The
micrographs of nanoemulsions and microemulsions are only representative as the oil phase used is not diesel and are taken from references [88,89].

volumes  ranging  from a  few  ml  to several  liters  at  a  time.  A primary
concern is the high polydispersity of the emulsions. However, the size
distribution of the emulsion droplets can be modulated to some extent
by tuning energy input, surfactants and fuel-to-water ratio [78].

4.1.2. Ultrasonication

Ultrasonication,  a  laboratory-scale  method,  induces  microscale
mixing and drop generation. The size of the droplets can be tailored by

optimizing  the  amplitude  and  frequency  (20–50  kHz)  of  sonication.
Typical volume that can be processed in laboratory sonicators ranges
from  100  ml.  The  acoustic  field  applied  to  the  oil-water-surfactant
mixture induces cavitation, thus enabling emulsion formation [73,86].
Sonication  is  typically  carried  out  in  either  bath  [91]  or  probe-type
sonicators [92]. In probe sonication, the energy introduced around the
tip of the sonicator can lead to a significant increase in local tempera-
ture.  It  may  be  necessary  to  provide  adequate  cooling  to  prevent  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011335

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Table 2
Characteristics of microemulsions and nano- and macro-emulsion fuels.

Microemulsions

Nanoemulsions

Macroemulsions

Preparation

Droplet sizes
Polydispersity
Stability

Shelf life
Interfacial
tension

Interfacial a/v
Characterisation

Flow behaviour

Spontaneous
formation;
high surfactant
10–100 nm
Very low
Thermodynamic
stability
Ultra-long
Ultra-low
(~10
m)
High
SLS, DLS, SANS/
SAXS, NMR, cryo-
TEM
Usually Newtonian

(cid:0) 4 to 10

(cid:0) 6 N/

High energy;
moderate
surfactant
20 nm–500 nm
Moderate to high
High kinetic
stability
Reasonably long
(cid:0) 3 N/
Low (~10
m)

High
SLS, DLS, SANS/
SAXS, NMR, cryo-
TEM
Newtonian or
non-Newtonian

High/low energy;
low surfactant

1–100 μm
Very high
Low kinetic
stability
Short
Moderate
(~10
N/m)
Low
Optical
Microscopy, SLS

(cid:0) 1 to 10

(cid:0) 2

Newtonian or
non-Newtonian

degradation of surfactants [86].

4.1.3. Microfluidic methods

Microfluidic methods are low-energy methods to produce emulsions
continuously  [93].  The  technique  is  ideal  for  producing  emulsion
droplets with a narrow size distribution and can generate interfacial area
using specially designed channel configurations [94]. In particular, the
channel  geometry  (such  as  co-flow,  T–junctions,  Y–junctions,
flow-focusing, etc.) can be used to control the droplet size and emulsion
morphology  as a  function of viscosities,  liquids flow rates, stabilizing
agents, interfacial tension, and the microfluidic channel material [93].
However, scaling up this method remains challenging due to the high
cost of precision machining required to fabricate the channels.

4.1.4. Low energy methods

Emulsion  inversion  point  (EIP)  and  phase  inversion  temperature
(PIT)  [95]  are  commonly  used  low-energy  methods  for  preparing
microemulsions. EIP occurs when an already prepared macroemulsion is
altered to the point that the concentration ratio of the dispersed to the
continuous  phase  favours  the  formation  of  a  reverse  emulsion.  For
instance, when a water-in-oil macroemulsion is diluted with water, the
high free-energy interface passes through a low interfacial tension state,
resulting
the
oil-water-surfactant  mixture  [95].  Similarly,  the  PIT  method  changes
the temperature, causing changes in interfacial curvature and solubility
of the surfactant. A water-in-oil emulsion initially prepared is cooled to
achieve PIT, causing it to undergo phase inversion, forming an in-water
microemulsion [86]. The energy requirement is small in both methods,
but  high  surfactant-to-oil  ratios  are  required  compared  to  the
high-energy methods.

compositional

spontaneous

change

in  a

in

4.1.5. Vapour condensation method

It is possible to produce water-in-oil emulsions by condensing water
vapour  into  a  surfactant-laden  oil.  This  scalable  vapour  condensation
method leads to emulsions with nano-sized droplets without applying
any  mechanical  energy  [96].  The  technique  involves  reducing  the
temperature of the surfactant-oil mixture in a high-humidity environ-
ment  below  the  dew  point,  thus  condensing  the  water  vapour  as
surfactant-stabilized  droplets.  If  the  surfactant  concentration  is  above
the  critical  micelle  concentration,  the  emulsions  exhibit  low  poly-
dispersity  with  high  stability  [96].  The  use  of  such  a  method  for  the
production of water-in-diesel emulsion, however, remains unexplored.

physicochemical  properties,  such  as  emulsion  type,  dispersed  phase
droplet  size  and  bulk  properties,  such  as  density  and  shear  viscosity
[97]. Some widely employed analytical techniques to characterize the
emulsion systems are discussed next.

4.2.1. Emulsion type determination

We  illustrate  the  need  for  careful  determination  of  emulsion  type
using Fig. 6, which shows the visual appearance of two vials containing
emulsions  formulated  with  the  same  quantity  of  water  (10  %  v/v),
surfactant (2 % v/v) and diesel. The emulsions formulated using either
Span©80 (Fig. 6(a), HLB = 4.3) or Tween©80 (Fig. 6(b), HLB = 15) as
the stabilizing agent appear the same macroscopically. However, a test
of emulsion type reveals that the emulsion in Fig. 6(a) is water-in-fuel
type,  whereas that in  Fig. 6(b) is  fuel-in-water  type. The  latter is  not
suitable as a fuel.

Emulsion type can be determined by various analytical techniques,
such as (i) drop/dilution test, (ii) conductivity test, or (iii) dye solubility
test.  In  the  drop/dilution  test,  a  small  aliquot  of  the  emulsion  is
dispensed into a small beaker containing water or oil phase; the water-
in-oil emulsion drop disperses in the oil phase and sinks in water [84].
The drop test conducted on the emulsion shown in Fig. 6(b) is presented
in Fig. 7.

The ionic conductivity measurement can be used to determine the
emulsion  type  [84,86].  The  emulsion  is  poorly  conducting  when  the
continuous  phase  is  non-polar  (water-in-oil)  and  highly  conducting
when the continuous phase is polar (oil-in-water emulsions). Typically,
the  conductivity  of  an  oil-in-water  emulsion  is  approximately  1000
times higher than that of a water-in-oil emulsion. Fig. 8(a) shows that a
rapid change in conductivity marks the transition from water-in-oil to
oil-in-water emulsion [98].

In  the  dye  solubility  test,  an  oil-soluble  dye  with  no  solubility  in
water (or,  conversely, a water-soluble dye) is  introduced. Optical mi-
croscopy  can  then  be  used  to  visualize  the  continuous  and  dispersed
phases in the sample of interest [99] (see Fig. 7(b)).

4.2.2. Measurement of density

Conventional  specific  gravity  bottles  or  commercial  densitometers
can be used to measure the density of emulsion fuels. Measurement of
the  density  of  emulsion  fuels  is  important  owing  to  its  role  in  the
determination of the heating value of the fuel.

4.2.3. Measurement of viscosity

The viscosity of the emulsion fuel that is charged  into any engine
needs to be measured because it influences in: (i) the delivery of emul-
sion fuel from the storage tank to the engine through fuel flow lines, (ii)
leakage losses in the fuel pump and (iii) the atomization of the emulsion
fuel.  Besides,  due  to  the  presence  of  water  drops,  the  viscosity  of
emulsion fuels will be higher than the viscosity of both water and fuel
[100],  which  may  result  in  higher  pressure  losses  and  can  even  be
detrimental  to  the  fuel  pump.  The  falling  or  rolling  ball  viscometers,
rotational viscometers and rheometers can be used to measure the vis-
cosity  of  emulsions  [101–104].  In  using  falling  ball  and  rolling  ball
micro viscometers for measurement of the viscosity of emulsions, it is
necessary  to  ensure  that  the  diameter  of  the  emulsion  drops  is  much
smaller than the diameter of the capillary and the solid probe particle.
The  emulsions  with  droplet  diameters  larger  than  a  few  microns  are
prone to sedimentation or creaming (discussed further in later sections),
and  therefore,  caution  should  be  exercised  to  adopt  appropriate  pro-
tocols such that these effects do not lead to erroneous results [103].

4.3. Droplet size distribution

4.3.1. Microscopy

4.2. Characterization of emulsions

The  emulsions  formulated  must  be  characterized  for  various

Microstructure  and  morphology  of  macroemulsions  with  droplets
typically larger than 1 μm may be imaged in real-time with bright-field
optical microscopy [105]. For a large enough sample size, a droplet size

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011336

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 6. (a) Water-in-diesel and (b) diesel-in-water emulsions formulated under identical conditions but different surfactants look the same visually in both vials. The
use of (a) Span©80 gives water-in-diesel emulsions, and (b) Tween©80 gives diesel-in-water emulsions.

Fig. 7. A drop of oil-in-water emulsion introduced in a beaker with water. The figures from left to right show that the emulsion drop disperses in pure water.

Fig. 8. (a) Conductivity vs. volume fraction of water in water-toluene emulsions (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [98]) and (b) Fluorescent dye staining
method to probe the emulsion type using optical microscopy (Reproduced with permission from Ref. [99]). The tetradecane oil phase was stained with Nile Red dye
(oil soluble) and water was stained with Fluorescein (water-soluble), confirming a tetradecane-in-water emulsion.

distribution may be determined from micrographs, yielding mean size,
standard deviation, and polydispersity [87,105]. Careful dilution of the
emulsion by the continuous-phase liquid may be required as emulsions
with large droplets are opaque. Other imaging techniques include phase
contrast microscopy, cryo-scanning and cryo-transmission electron mi-
croscopy, and confocal laser scanning microscopy [97].

4.3.2. Scattering methods

Scattering  techniques  are  powerful  and  indispensable  tools  for
providing structural information on multicomponent emulsion systems
ranging from a few nanometers to hundreds of micrometers. Static light

scattering  (SLS),  dynamic  light  scattering  (DLS),  X-ray  and  neutron
scattering are frequently used as complementary tools to estimate the
size, shape, polydispersity and droplet interactions in emulsions [87].
These techniques enable capturing quantitative information about phase
behaviour and phase transitions when parameters such as temperature
or  composition  are  altered.  The  scattering  technique  for  probing  the
emulsions’ structural characteristics depends on the size of the dispersed
species, i.e., the scatterers. It has been established that when an elec-
tromagnetic wave (light, X-ray or neutrons) is incident on a structure,
the intensity of the scattered beam depends on the wavelength of the
incident radiation, the angle of observation, the optical properties of the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011337

S. Gowrishankar et al.

dispersion in addition to the shape and size of the scatterers. An in-depth
understanding of the relationships among these variables and scattering
principles can be found elsewhere [87,106–109]. Here is an overview of
some prominent scattering techniques for structural analysis of emul-
sions and other soft matter systems.

In this technique, the intensity of the laser light scattered from the
dispersed species is collected using an array of many detectors placed at
different  angles  (See  Fig.  9).  The  time-averaged  scattered  intensity
recorded  as  a  function  of  the  scattering  angle  is  analyzed  using  the
principle of Mie scattering to determine the size of the emulsion droplets
or  any  dispersed  component  in  a  wide  range  of  sizes  from  tens  of
nanometers to a few millimeters [87]. It is known that the scattering
angle is inversely proportional to the size of the scatterer. In commer-
cially available instruments, a few drops of a highly diluted emulsion (to
avoid the possibility of multiple scattering [110] are enough to char-
acterize the droplet size distribution and concentration of the dispersed
phase  within a few minutes. The scattering from only the continuous
phase is subtracted as the blank to give information about the dispersed
phase.

4.3.2.1. Static light scattering (SLS).

4.3.2.2. Dynamic  light  scattering (DLS). DLS, also called photon corre-
lation spectroscopy, is a versatile technique to obtain the size of nano-
particles,  micelles,  droplets  and  polymers  dispersed  in  a  liquid.  This
technique can be used when the size of the dispersed species is in the
range of a few nanometers to a few microns. In contrast to static light
scattering, the fluctuation in the scattered intensity reaching a photo-
detector positioned at a fixed scattering angle is recorded as a function of
time in dynamic light scattering. The fluctuations in the scattered in-
tensity arising from the Brownian motion of dispersed species  can be
used  to  estimate  its  diffusion  coefficient  and  dimensions.  An  electric
field  autocorrelation  function  quantifies  the  fluctuation  in  intensity
g1(t). The decay of the electric field autocorrelation function (a measure
of  intensity  fluctuation)  is  faster  for  a  smaller  particle  (higher  trans-
lational  diffusion  coefficient  D)  than  for  larger  particles  [87,108],  as
shown in Fig. 10. For spherical monodispersed droplets, g1(t) is related
to  translational  diffusion  coefficient  using  a  single  exponential  fit,
whereas for polydispersed droplets (<0.1) [111,112], a departure from
the single exponential fit (Equation 4) is expected. This information of
the  diffusion  coefficient  is  related  to  the  size  of  the  scatterer  via  the
Stokes-Einstein relationship [108]. Like the SLS technique, the sample to
be analyzed should be dilute enough to avoid multiple scattering events.

The  viscosity  correction  must  be  employed  in  the  case  of  moderately
concentrated systems [42] for the accurate estimation of droplet sizes.

4.3.2.3. Small-angle  X-ray  and  neutron  scattering. Multiple  scattering
events  can  be  neglected  in  x-ray  and  neutron  scattering  since  the
wavelength  of  the  radiation  (x-rays  or  neutrons)  is  very  small,  and
consequently,  dilution  of  samples  is  unnecessary.  While  microscopy
gives images that depict the microstructure of the sample in real space,
scattering techniques provide microstructural information in the Fourier
space. These techniques can probe the structures in the length scales of
1–1000  nm  or  more.  The  length  scale  accessible  by  these  radiations
depends on the distance between the sample and the detector used to
record the scattered radiation. The SAXS/SANS techniques have been
extensively used to understand the form (size, shape or dimensions) and
the  structure  (spatial  arrangement  of  dispersed  species)  in  multiple
material systems [113–118] to cover a wide range of q values [119].
Fig.  11  elucidates  a  schematic  representation  of  a  typical  small-angle
neutron  (SANS)  instrument.  Other  scattering  techniques,  such  as
SAXS, have a similar working principle. In a SAXS setup, X–rays probe
the material system under consideration. The scattering intensity I(q) is
usually expressed as a function of scattering vector (q) and is propor-
tional to the  “intra”  particle  form factor P(q)  and the  “inter”  particle
structure factor S(q) [120]. While P(q) contains information about the
form (size and shape) of individual scatterers, S(q) enfolds details about
the  particle-particle  interactions  in  a  sample.  The  contrast  matching
technique  unique  to  neutron  scattering  for  emulsions  provides  an
additional  advantage  over  other  techniques  [121].  Deuteration  can
selectively make " visible " components of interest in a multi-component
system. This technique is often employed to study the microstructure,
droplet interactions, shape fluctuations and so forth. Generating neutron
beams requires a nuclear reactor facility; therefore, access to such fa-
cilities is limited and expensive.

4.3.3. Nuclear magnetic resonance

The  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  (NMR)  approach  can  be  used  to
study the microstructure, phase behaviour, dynamics and phase transi-
tions in emulsion systems [122]. The information about the molecular
arrangement,  size,  and  interactions  can  be  derived  from  the  NMR
spectra, particularly using two techniques: NMR relaxation studies and
NMR self-diffusion studies. Relaxation studies provide information on
estimating the change in dimensions and shape of the microemulsion
droplets even when they are considerably concentrated, unlike the light
scattering technique since it probes the rotational diffusion of droplets

Fig. 9. Schematic representation of the principle of Static Light Scattering.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011338

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 10. Schematic representation of the principle of Dynamic Light Scattering.

Fig. 11. Schematic representation of a typical neutron scattering instrument, comprising of a neutron source, velocity selector to select the λ, collimator to guide the
neutron beam and a detector that can be moved horizontally within the detector tube that is maintained under vacuum. Other scattering methods (such as X-ray) also
have similar working principles. Note that the figure is not to scale.

[123].  In  the  NMR  Pulsed  Gradient  Spin  Echo  (PGSE)  self-diffusion
technique,  the  diffusive  motion  is  investigated  by  applying  spatially
varying  pulsed  magnetic  field  gradient  of  strength  G  for  a  specific
duration  (δ),  with  Δ  being  the  duration  of  separation  between  two
successive  gradient  pulses.  More  often  than  not,  1H  NMR  is  used  for
particle sizing since the 1H nucleus is highly sensitive and yields strong
signals.  The  attenuation  of  the  magnetic  resonance  signal  over  the
observation time scale is recorded [100,124]. The translational diffusion
coefficient  (D)  is  usually  obtained  using  the  Stejskal-Tanner  relation-
ship, where the intensity attenuation is related to the applied gradient
(G) [125]:

[
= exp

I(G)
I(0)

(

(cid:0) γ2δ2G2D

Δ(cid:0)

)]

δ
3

(10)

where,  I(G)  is  the  magnetic  resonance  signal  intensity  at  applied
gradient  G,  I(0)  is  the  magnetic  signal  intensity  when  no  gradient  is
applied, and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio of the monitored spin (1H in case
of H NMR).

Typically, the mean square displacement of a dispersed species (xrms)
in a particular observation time (t) is related to its translational diffusion
coefficient (D) as xrms =
. Due to the interfacial boundary of sur-
factant molecules around the droplets, if the time scales of observation

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2Dt

√

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)1011339

S. Gowrishankar et al.

are short (t≪d2/2D), the molecules of the dispersed phase experience an
unobstructed motion inside the droplets, whereas, at longer observation
times, the motion of the molecules in the dispersed phase is restricted by
the interfacial boundary of the surfactant molecules. The measurement
of the attenuated NMR signal as a function of time gives information
about the time at which the motion of the molecules in the dispersed
phase becomes restricted. The size of the dispersed phase (i.e., emulsion
drops)  can  therefore  be  deduced  by  the  Stokes-Einstein  relationship
(Equation (7)).

5. Emulsion stability

5.1. Assessment of stability

A  phase  diagram  of  the  water–diesel  surfactant  system  must  be
constructed to identify the compositions at which the ternary mixture
forms thermodynamically stable microemulsions. A recent study shows
a close resemblance between the ternary phase diagrams of the widely
studied  water–decane–AOT  [126–129]  and  water–diesel–AOT  [42]
mixtures. AOT is an anionic surfactant with two tails that easily forms
water-in-decane reverse micelles called microemulsions (μE) [130]. The
compositions corresponding to L2 in Fig. 12(a) are particularly impor-
tant for emulsion fuel formulation as these represent water-in-oil μE.

focused

A comparison of the visual appearance of decane and diesel to the
water-in-decane  μE  and  water-in-diesel  μE  formulated  at  identical
composition marked is depicted in Fig. 12. Although “microemulsion” is
a portmanteau of “micro”  and “emulsion”, the term “micro”  does not
refer  to  the  size  of  droplets.1  Microemulsions  visually  have  the  same
appearance as that of the neat fuel and, therefore, have the advantage of
higher consumer acceptability. Microemulsion fuels are formed at suf-
ficiently  high  concentrations  of  surfactant-to-oil  ratios  [131]  and  are
stable for ultra-long periods. Although more suitable than their kineti-
cally  stable  counterparts  for  storage  and  stability,  only  a  handful  of
studies  have
towards  designing  microemulsions.  The
water-in-diesel microemulsions formulated using a non-ionic surfactant,
polyoxyethylene alkyl ethers (typically represented by CnEm) with and
without co-surfactants have also received considerable interest [54,80].
The high-energy mixing of water, fuel and surfactants leads to the
formation of kinetically stable emulsion fuels. When the concentration
of surfactants used is sufficiently high, emulsions with droplets in a few
hundred nanometers can be generated when water, fuel and surfactants
are sheared at a relatively low rotational speed of the mixing device of
the order of a few thousand rpm. Fig. 13 shows the logarithm of electric
field autocorrelation function vs. delay time data recorded using a dy-
namic  light  scattering  (DLS)  technique  for  a  water-in-diesel  emulsion
obtained by homogenizing water and diesel taken in 1:9 vol ratio and 10
vol % surfactant (equal volumes of Span©80 and Tween©80) at 2500
rpm for 2 min. It is to be noted that unlike microemulsions shown in
Fig. 11, the water-in-diesel emulsions obtained in this case, as shown in
the inset of Fig. 13 are nanoemulsions, translucent and found to have a
mean droplet diameter of 159 ± 5 nm. Phase separation is expected to
occur if stored sufficiently long [95].

Common strategies used to tune the droplet sizes in the kinetically
stable  emulsion  fuels  include  variation  of  (i)  total  surfactant  concen-
tration, (ii) HLB (Hydrophilic-Lipophilic Balance), (iii) energy input, (iv)
fuel  to  water  ratio,  and  other  process  parameters.  Fig.  14(a)  and  (b)
show  the  microstructure  of  water-in-diesel  emulsion  obtained  under
conditions identical to those used to formulate nanoemulsions shown in
Fig. 13, except at a lower total surfactant concentration of 2 % and 5 %
by volume, respectively. The sizes of the emulsion drops are much larger
and  can  be  visualized  with  the  help  of  an  optical  microscope.  Such

1  This unfortunate misconception is because the term “nanoemulsion”, which
was coined almost half a century later, indicates an emulsion with droplet size
of the order of hundred nanometers.

emulsion fuels with droplet diameters ranging from a few microns to a
few millimeters exemplify macroemulsions. They appear opaque or milky
white  (see  the  inset  in  Fig.  14)  and  are  predominantly  characterized
using optical methods such as microscopy and static light scattering. The
variation of mean droplet size in the water-in-diesel macroemulsions as
a  function  of  the  composition  of  the  surfactants  in  the  mixture  (and
hence  HLB)  and  the  microstructure  of  the  emulsions  at  the  selected
composition is shown in Fig. 15. The results suggest that the average
droplet size in the water-in-diesel emulsion fuel was obtained by varying
relative concentrations of Span©80 (HLB = 4.3) and Tween©80 (HLB =
15.0) in the mixed surfactant system. The symbol ∅T  plotted on x-axis
represents  the  volume  ratio  of  Tween©80  to  the  total  volume  of  the
surfactants  in  the  mixture  (Span©80+Tween©80).  Emulsion  drops  of
smaller sizes are obtained at intermediate compositions. Fig. 16 shows a
microscopy  image  of  the  diesel-in-water-in-diesel  (D/W/D)  emulsions
prepared  by  a  two-stage  emulsification  process  using  a  mixture  of
Span©80 and Tween©80 as emulsifiers [132]. The method involves the
preparation of diesel-in-water (D/W), a dispersion of diesel drops in a
continuous water phase as a first step. In the second stage, a relatively
large quantity of diesel is added to the D/W, and the system is further
emulsified  to  obtain  diesel-in-water-in-diesel  emulsions.  The  micro-
structure of the diesel-in-water-in-diesel (D/W/D) emulsions in Fig. 16
shows smaller diesel droplets nested in larger water drops dispersed in
diesel.  Similar  to  single  emulsions,  these  emulsions  prepared  by  me-
chanical agitation are kinetically stable and exhibit limited stability.

Although emulsion fuels are advantageous from the engine perfor-
mance  and emissions  point  of view,  their stability  aspect,  given their
engine application, has not received the required attention. The design,
composition, and  microstructure of  the  emulsion fuels would  directly
affect  the  stability,  efficiency,  combustion  phenomena,  and  emission
benefits [19]. For an efficient design of emulsion fuels, a rigorous un-
derstanding of the fundamental aspects of emulsion science is required.
Here is a brief discussion of the different processes [133] that lead to the
de-stabilization of the kinetically stable emulsion fuels.

Sedimentation and Creaming: Sedimentation and creaming are the
primary mechanisms by which the emulsion droplets segregate and ul-
timately  destabilize.  The  droplets  whose  density  is  higher  than  the
continuous  phase  (such  as  water  drops  in  fuel)  would  settle,  and  the
drops whose density is lesser than the continuous phase (such as fuel
drops in water) would cream to the top, especially when the droplets are
relatively large in size. There would also be size-dependent segregation
of the drops within the settled or creamed emulsion phase.

Coalescence:  The  coarsening  of  kinetically  stable  liquid-in-liquid
dispersions occurs through coalescence [87]. A thin film of the contin-
uous liquid typically separates the droplets in an emulsion. The liquid
film between the drops drains when droplets in an emulsion are brought
sufficiently close, leading to rupture of the liquid film and coalescence of
droplets,  forming  larger  drops.  This  process  can  continue  until  the
emulsions completely phase separate [134].

Ostwald ripening: When the droplets in an emulsion are of different
sizes, bigger droplets tend to grow further at the expense of the smaller
droplets  [135].  Ostwald  ripening  is  another  route  to  destabilising
emulsion fuels, predominant in nanoemulsions.

Flocculation: When the droplets in an emulsion are in close prox-
imity,  drops  can  clump  together  due  to  attractive  interaction  energy
(such as van der Waals interaction). Therefore, several droplets can form
flocs, a collection of droplets. Unlike coalescence, flocculation does not
cause a significant reduction of interfacial area. The flocs in the emul-
sion move together as a single unit [87] and are prone to sedimentation
and creaming due to their larger size.

The de-stabilization of the nano and macroemulsions involves sedi-
mentation, creaming and flocculation that bring the droplets in the vi-
cinity of each other, followed by joining or merging the drops due to
coalescence and Ostwald ripening, resulting in fewer larger drops. The
emulsion fuels before engine studies should be evaluated for different
stability aspects. These include storage stability (during storage in the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113310

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 12. (a) The phase diagram of water–decane–AOT system and (b) water-diesel-AOT system. The vials show the visual appearance of (a) water-decane-AOT and
(b) water-diesel-AOT microemulsions at identical compositions (ω = 25 and Φ = 0.10, where ω is the molar ratio of water to AOT and Φ is the dispersed phase volume
fraction). A schematic representation of nano-sized water drops stabilized by a monolayer of AOT dispersed in diesel is shown in (b). Reproduced from reference 23.

Fig.  13. The  result  of  dynamic  light  scattering  measurements  on  water-in-
diesel  nanoemulsion  fuel  prepared  by  homogenizing  water  and  diesel  taken
in  1:9  vol  ratio  and  10  vol  %  surfactant  (equal  volumes  of  Span®80  and
Tween®80) at 2500 rpm for 2 min. The inset shows the visual appearance of the
vial soon after preparation.

fuel  tanks  and  storage  vessels),  stability  during  handling  and  trans-
portation  (stability  when  subjected  to  shearing  action,  vibration  and
other types of motion during flow, mixing, pumping, etc.) and temper-
ature stability. While storage stability has been studied, stability during
handling,  transportation,  and  temperature  stability  requires  more
attention. The latter is vital because temperatures in the fuel line just
before injection into the combustion chamber can be relatively high. Tem-
perature can influence the adsorption and desorption of surfactants from
the surface of emulsion drops, and reduced viscosity at higher temper-
atures  can  also  affect  coalescence  and,  hence,  emulsion  stability.
Therefore,  it  is  essential  to  substantiate  the  temperature  stability  of
emulsion fuels.

Fig. 14. The microstructure of water-in-diesel emulsion obtained by homoge-
nizing water and diesel taken in a 1:9 vol ratio at 2500 rpm for 2 min. The total
concentration of equal volumes of Span©80 and Tween©80 used in the emul-
sification process is (a) 2 vol % and (b) 5 vol % used for emulsification. Taken
from [46].

A comparison of typical storage stability of micro, nano and macro
emulsions is presented in Figs. 17 and 18. Fig. 17 (a) and (b) show the
DLS  measurements  for  water-in-diesel  microemulsions  and  nano-
emulsions  stabilized  by  AOT  and  Span©80/Tween©80  mixture.  The
electric  field  autocorrelation  functions  for  the  water–diesel–AOT
microemulsions stored for six months show negligible shifts with time,
pointing to ultra-long storage stability (Fig. 17(a)). The hydrodynamic
diameter  (Dh)  of  the  water  droplets  in  the  microemulsions  (μEs)
extracted  by  fitting  the  autocorrelation  functions  to  an  exponential
function plotted in Fig. 17(c) remains nearly constant during the storage
period. A water-in-diesel nanoemulsion shows a shift in autocorrelation
function  versus  delay  time,  represented  by  an  arrow  in  Fig.  17(b).  A
delayed decay of the autocorrelation function manifests the increase in
the hydrodynamic diameter of the water droplets. However, the rate at
which the diameter of the water droplets in diesel nanoemulsion fuels
increases is much lower when compared to the case of macroemulsions,
as can be inferred from Fig. 18. The microscopy and quantitative image
analysis of the water-in-diesel macroemulsions stabilized by Span©80/
Tween©80 mixture (2 % surfactant concentration, 1:9 water and diesel
volume ratio, equal volumes of Span©80 and Tween©80, 2500 rpm, 2

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113311

S. Gowrishankar et al.

the contributions from various authors (highlighted in Table S1), it is
also emphasized whether characterization and stability studies on the
fuel have been undertaken before testing the formulations in a practical
setting.

5.2. Parameters affecting the formation and stability of emulsions

Controlling the properties of emulsion fuels during their storage and
application  period is  a  prerequisite  for  their  usage  in  combustion ap-
plications. The type and concentration of the emulsifiers, formation as
well as storage temperature, the ratio of dispersed to continuous phase,
time  of  emulsification,  and  pH  of  the  formulation  strongly  affect  the
properties and dynamics of emulsion systems [86]. The design of stable
emulsion fuels requires optimization of several parameters. Otherwise,
emulsions destabilize, leading to complete or partial phase separation
due  to  several  particulate  processes  such  as  coalescence,  creaming,
sedimentation and Ostwald ripening [95].

A comprehensive collection of the scientific literature on water-in-
diesel emulsions is summarized in Table S1 of the supporting informa-
tion. This compilation of contributions by various authors on emulsion
fuels emphasizes the emulsion type and characterization and focuses on
whether studies on the stability aspect of emulsion fuels are carried out
by  researchers  before  performing  engine  or  emission  studies.  The  in-
formation provided  in Table  S1 draws attention to  the fact  that most
literature  is  skewed  towards  engine  studies.  Essential  aspects  such  as
characterization  of  the  droplet  size  and  evaluation  of  time  and  tem-
perature stability of the prepared emulsion fuel formulations have been
reported by few authors and, hence, sparsely investigated. Based on the
extensive survey in Table S1, it can be concluded that in-depth studies of
emulsion fuels with emphasis on the effect of the microstructure on the
stability aspect of the fuel, performance, and combustion characteristics,
as  resultant  emissions  are  required  to  propagate  the  utilization  and
introduction of emulsion fuels in consumer markets.

5.2.1. Microemulsions

a

in

in  the

single-phase  microemulsions

Proprietary  additive  emulsifier  was  used  as  stabilizers  to  prepare
macroemulsion and microemulsion of diesel fuel [52]. However, details
regarding the droplet sizes or the characterization methodology of the
macro- and microemulsions of diesel were not provided. The role of the
addition of co-surfactants, various types of alcohols, to the surfactant
formation  of
cetyltrimethylammonium  chloride  (CTAC)
water-in-diesel microemulsions based on equilibrium thermodynamics
has also been investigated [43]. The dilution method is used, and the
thermodynamic parameters are calculated at various compositions and
temperatures to predict the most suitable co-surfactant. The formation
ternary  mixture  of
of
diesel-water-Tween80-butanol  [74]  is  confirmed  visually  based  on
turbid  to  transparent  transitions.  The  variation  of  the  area  of  the
single-phase region is recorded at different surfactant to co-surfactant
ratios
cloud  points  during
temperature-dependent phase separation. The formation of diesel-based
microemulsion fuels by adding various co-surfactants has also been re-
ported  [76].  The  study  optimized  the  surfactant  concentration,
co-surfactant type, and composition based on the monophasic area from
◦
pseudo-ternary phase diagrams at 25
C. Microemulsions of diesel were
prepared  using  non-ionic alkyl  polyglycol ethers in  combination with
alcohol  ethoxylates  [80].  The  microemulsions  are  presumed  to  form
based on transparent appearance and birefringence using cross polar-
izers. Various other structures, such as the bicontinuous phase and liquid
crystals,  are  reported  at  different  chain  lengths  and  compositions  of
surfactants.

in  addition

recording

the

to

Nevertheless, no information on the droplet size is available from the
characterization reported, and microemulsion formation is deduced just
from visual appearance. Phase diagrams of water-diesel-propanol and
the  formation  of  surfactant-free  water-in-diesel  microemulsions  have
been  reported  [136].  Though  the  droplet  sizes  at  different  propanol

Fig. 15. The variation of the average droplet size and the microstructure of the
water-in-diesel em ulsion fuels are obtained using a mixture of Span©80 (HLB
= 4.3)  and  Tween©80  (HLB  = 15.0).  The  composition  of  Span©80  and
Tween©80 in the mixture is varied. The symbol φT  represents the volume ratio
= 0,
of  Tween©80  in  the  mixture  to  the  total  volume  of  the  surfactants  (φT
= 0.5, equal volumes of Span©80 and Tween©80 as
Span©80 as emulsifier; φT
an emulsifier; and φT

= 1, Tween©80 as emulsifier). Taken from [46].

Fig. 16. A microscopy image of kinetically stable diesel-in-water-in-diesel (D/
W/D) emulsions prepared by a two-stage emulsification process [132].

min mixing) presented in Fig. 18, point to limited storage stability. The
sedimentation of large water drops, visually observable phase separa-
tion, size-based segregation of droplets, and increase in the width of the
droplet size distribution due to coalescence, sedimentation, and other
droplet processes are evident from Fig. 18. Thus, macroemulsion fuels
exhibit shorter shelf life than nano and microemulsion fuels.

Despite their limited stability, macroemulsion fuels are most widely
employed  for  engine,  emissions,  spray,  and  microexplosion  studies
across emulsion fuels literature. Surprisingly, most works have not re-
ported  their  appropriate  characterization,  the  stability  aspect  of  such
fuels, and changes in droplet size over time before undertaking practical
studies in the engine. To substantiate this, in addition to summarizing

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113312

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 17. Auto-correlation function for water-in-diesel (a) microemulsions [42] and (b) nanoemulsions at various storage times in days [46] and (c) the variation in
hydrodynamic diameter (Dh) of the water droplets vs. storage time for the obtained from the analysis of the autocorrelation functions of the two formulations.

compositions  are  not  reported,  the  authors  demonstrated  microstruc-
tural  transitions  from  single  phase  to  bicontinuous  phase  using
self-diffusion coefficients obtained from NMR spectra. In a recent work
[137] by Ashikhmin et al., emulsifier concentration ranging from ~10 %
to 40 % is employed to prepare diesel microemulsion fuels. The authors
explored  the  effect  of  parameters  such  as  the  co-surfactant  type  and
concentration,  water  concentration,  and  temperature  in  the  range  of
◦
(cid:0) 21
C on the phase behaviour of the samples. However, do not
characterize the droplet sizes or confirm the microemulsion structure of
the formulations.

C–73

◦

On the other hand, the investigation of the structure to confirm the
formation of small water droplets in the form of reverse micelles in the
continuous  diesel  phase,  appropriate  characterization  of  the  micro-
structure  and  reports  of  the  droplet  sizes  are  limited  to  only  a  few
studies.  Clear  diesel  microemulsions  are  developed  using  a  versatile
surfactant package [138]. The water droplets in the microemulsion fuel,
characterized using the light scattering technique, have sizes in the 10
nm–70 nm range. It has been reported that the microemulsion fuel is
◦
stable for more than a year when stored at temperatures as high as 60
C.
To circumvent the stability drawback, another study [54] reported the
formation  of  water-in-diesel  microemulsions  stabilized  by  a  combina-
tion of two non-ionic surfactants (C11E5  and sorbitan monoleate). The
relative  compositions  of  the  two  surfactants,  the  water  concentration
and the temperature, are varied, and phase diagrams are plotted to trace
the  single-phase  microemulsion  region.  The  microstructure  and  the
diffusion  coefficients  are  characterized  using  NMR  diffusometry  mea-
surements.  Various  other  works  have  presented  the  structure  and
droplet size of water-in-diesel microemulsions using nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) [51,53] and dynamic light scattering analysis [42,75,
137].  It  is  to  be  noted  that  recent  contributions  [46,137]  have  high-
lighted the droplet size evolution with temperature, the “swelling”  of
droplets  in  the  microemulsion  fuel,  as  well  as  the  viscosity  variation

when the molar ratio of water to surfactant is altered.

Thus,  appropriate  characterization  and  parameters  controlling  the
microstructural  evolution  of  diesel-based  microemulsions  are  sparse.
Hence, further studies that present extensive fuel formulation analysis
are  warranted  since  they  dictate  the  emulsion  fuel  combustion  and
performance in the end application.

5.2.2. Nanoemulsions

With the advantage of a higher surface area of water in contact with
the  fuel  and  considerably  long  stability,  nanoemulsions  emerge  as
promising  formulations  for  usage  as  emulsion  fuels.  While  nano-
emulsions have been attractive in many pharmaceutical  and food ap-
plications  [139,140],  they  have  received  little  attention  in  the  fuels
community.  Few  systematic  studies  [46,62]  on  the  formation  of
water-in-diesel nanoemulsions highlight the parameters that control the
morphology of the final product. Notably, the authors have quantified
the initial droplet dimensions using dynamic light scattering technique
as  well  as  tracked  the  change  in  nanoemulsions  microstructure  as  a
function of time using models [62] for coalescence or Ostwald’s ripening
or by tracking the evolution of the electric field autocorrelation function
data  obtained  from  light  scattering  [46].  Attia  et  al.  [17]  prepared
water-in-diesel  nanoemulsions  of  different  water  droplet  sizes
(measured  using  a  light  scattering  technique)  using  a  mixture  of  two
non-ionic  surfactants,  and  they  are  reported  to  be  stable  for  over  a
month. The nanoemulsion fuels prepared by Bidita et al. [77] using a
Triton X emulsifier are stable for approximately 16 days, and the change
in  the  droplet  size  of  nanoemulsions  is  quantified  by  modelling  Ost-
wald’s ripening mechanism.

Thus, nanoemulsions appear attractive for emulsion fuel application
due  to  their  excellent  stability.  Moreover,  the  formulation  of  nano-
emulsions requires a lower surfactant concentration than that required
for microemulsions, all other conditions being the same. Furthermore, a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113313

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 18. Phase separation, microstructure and evolution of droplet size in water-in-diesel macroemulsions.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113314

S. Gowrishankar et al.

higher  contact  surface  area  due  to  significantly  smaller  droplet  size
enables  higher  shelf  life  and  slower  kinetics  of  destabilization  when
compared to kinetically stable macroemulsions.

5.2.3. Macroemulsions

Sheng  and  co-workers  [141]  prepared  diesel  fuel  emulsions.
Although the water concentration and the initial diameter range of the
dispersed phase droplets are reported, no details on the characterization
technique or the time and temperature stability of the tested fuels are
provided. Another comprehensive study [142] used the macroemulsion
formulation of different grades of PuriNOxTM from Lubrizol Corporation.
Since the additive package and the details regarding the emulsion fuel
were proprietary, details regarding the time stability or structure are not
provided. In their work, Bertola and coworkers [127] employed “opaque
and milky” formulations of water-in-diesel emulsions of different water
concentrations in the dispersed phase. The mean size of the prepared
droplets  in  the  emulsion  fuels  is  0.2  μm–0.3  μm.  However,  further
investigation  on  the  evolution  of  droplet  size  with  time  and  overall
emulsion stability has not been performed. In an attempt to understand
the role of double emulsions (diesel-in-water-in-diesel) in contrast to the
traditional water-in-diesel emulsions and standard diesel fuel, Lin and
Wang [19] prepared and used single and double emulsions. This work
reinforces  that  the  structure  of  the  emulsion  largely  determines  the
behaviour of the emulsion in the engine setting. It is to be noted that
oversight of droplet size after preparation, its temporal evolution and
consequently  the  stability  aspect  of  macroemulsion  fuels  in  many
existing studies [31,63,67,72,73] has led to a lack of generality of the
reported results.

Apart from recording the initial size using optical microscopy, Gol-
lahalli et al. [15] reported that the stability of their formulations is up to
three weeks, in addition to minimal change in the microstructure when
the temperature is varied. Another method to evaluate the stability of
the macroemulsion fuels adopted by several authors [19,45,49,53,55,
64,78] is to measure the height of the bottom layer due to coalescence,
sedimentation  and  eventual  destabilization  of  water  droplets  as
compared to the initial total emulsion height. Most emulsions appear
stable only for a few hours until the height of the sedimentation layer
starts  appearing,  becoming  visible  and  measurable.  Therefore,  this
method  is  not  an  accurate  depiction  of  the  stability  of  the  macro-
emulsions since the evolution of microstructure with time is continuous.
Furthermore, since the fuel itself is subjected to dynamic conditions, it is
difficult  to  conceive  a  realistic  picture  during  practical  combustion
studies,  and  hence,  the  results  are  expected  to  change.  The  work  of
Califano et al. [50] draws attention to the effect of macroemulsion sta-
bility and droplet size on the temperature range of microexplosions and
the temperature of the droplet and combustion process. One systematic
experimental  evidence  and  supporting  data  of  change  in  droplet  size
have  been  highlighted  in  recent  work  on  assessing  the  stability  and
microstructural transitions in macroemulsions [46]. Even though there
have been several reports on the initial size of droplets in emulsion fuels
formulated and claims that their stability ranges from weeks [17,20,50,
58]  to  months  [51,53],  much  still  needs  to  be  done  with  regards  to
tracking  the  microstructure  with  time  to  assess  the  characteristics  of
these fuels.

5.3. Effect of temperature

Emulsion fuels, or any other emulsions, are generally sensitive to an
external perturbation. On engine applications, it is worthwhile to rein-
force  the  temperature  stability  of  the  prepared  formulations  during
storage and usage. Fuels are typically subjected to varied temperature
environments during their transportation, storage in fuel tanks and the
fuel flow line until it reach the engine cylinder for combustion. Since
emulsions  are  multi-component  systems  consisting  of  dispersed  and
continuous phases, the external perturbation can lead to various phys-
icochemical  phenomena  that  induce  microstructural  fluctuations  and

transitions, resulting in swelling and contraction of water domains, ag-
gregation, coalescence, sedimentation, phase separation and so on. In
addition,  varying the temperature can alter the fuel cloud points and
flow  characteristics.  Although  temperature  fluctuations  can  cause
discernible changes in the fuel morphology, only a few studies have paid
attention to this aspect. Also lacking is the effort to investigate the in-
fluence of temperature on the storage stability of emulsion fuels.

Fig. 19 shows results from the studies that report the effect of tem-
perature on the formation of microemulsions and droplet size fluctua-
tions  [54].  The  shaded  area  in  Fig.  19  (a)  corresponds  to  the  region
where the water-in-diesel microemulsions depend on water concentra-
tion, a 1:1 surfactant mixture of C11E5 and sorbitan monooleate (SMO)
and  temperature.  The  microemulsion  region  narrows  down  with  a
decrease in surfactant concentration. Similar results have been demon-
strated using fish diagrams in a recent work [137] shown in Fig. 19(b),
for microemulsions generated by considering diesel and water in a 90:10
ratio  stabilized  a  mixture  of  surfactant  (Neonol  AF  9-6)  and
co-surfactant  (2-ethylhexanol).  The  authors  also  demarcate  the
single-phase (microemulsion) regions by pointing out the phase inver-
◦
sion temperature (36
C) and the upper and lower cloud points indicated
by  T1  and  T2,  respectively.  The  cloud  point  of  diesel  (CPD),  the  con-
centration of the emulsifier at PIT, the phase inversion point (ΦS*, 7.2
%) and the concentration of the emulsifier in the region where T2 falls
sharply (ΦS2, 14 %) are marked in Fig. 19(b).

The temperature ranges where water-in-diesel microemulsions form
due to various factors such as concentration of co-surfactants (different
types of alcohol), surfactant to co-surfactant and diesel to water ratios,
and  other  factors  additives  have  recently  been  investigated.  With  a
reduction  in  water  concentration,  the  temperature  band  wherein
microemulsions form widens significantly [143]. The swelling (increase
in size) and shrinking (decrease in size) of droplets in water-in-diesel
microemulsions  when  the  temperature  is  increased  or  decreased,
respectively, has been revealed in another recent study [42]. Fig. 19(c)
elucidates  that  the  droplet  size  decreases  to  0.7  times  the  original
droplet size (DT = 0.7 D25
C to 10
◦
C.  In  the  heating  cycle  from  10
C,  the  droplet  regains  its
◦
original diameter at 25
C followed by an increase to approximately 2.4
C)  when  the  tem-
times  the  original  droplet  diameter  (DT  ~  2.4  D25
perature is further increased from 25
C. The water-in-diesel
microemulsion samples at a fixed composition exhibit a thermorever-
sible nature, albeit over a small temperature range.

◦
C) when the sample is cooled from 25
◦

C  to  25

C to 35

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

6. Viscosity of water-in-diesel emulsion fuels

The viscosity of emulsion fuels dictates fluid mechanics (i.e., rate of
delivery, spray structure and characteristics) and combustion chemistry
aspects (for example, air-fuel interaction in the engine). Several studies
have measured and reported the dynamic viscosity and kinematic vis-
cosity, the ratio of dynamic viscosity to density, of different emulsion
fuel formulations. The accuracy of kinematic viscosity data depends on
the  precise  determination  of  the  density  of  the  emulsion  fuel  under
identical measurement conditions. The kinematic viscosity of water-in-
fuel (mixture of diesel and ethanol) microemulsions increases with an
increase in surfactant concentration for a given water-to-fuel ratio [4].
The dynamic viscosity of the water-in-diesel macroemulsions stabilized
by Span©60 and Tween©60 increases the water concentration [17]. The
dynamic  viscosity  of  the  diesel  fuel  (ηD),  water-in-diesel  macro-
emulsions (ηME) and water-in-diesel (ημE) microemulsions are found to
◦
decrease with an increase in temperature in the range from 25 to 70
C.
At  any  given  temperature,  the  dynamic  viscosity  of  emulsion  fuels  is
higher  than that of  neat fuel, and microemulsion  fuels exhibit  higher
viscosity than the other two fuels [51]. Fig. 20(a) and (b) respectively
show  the  variation  of  kinematic  viscosity  and  density  of  the  micro-
emulsion fuels represented in the form of contour plots superimposed on
the  pseudo  ternary  phase  diagram  of  water–diesel–Neonol  AF
9-6/2-ethyl hexanol (taken in 9:1 ratio) at 25
C. The labels W-1, W-2

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113315

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 19. (a) The size of the microemulsion region (shaded) when the surfactant (1:1: C11E5 & SMO) and water concentrations are changed with temperature [54]. It
is to be noted that at low water and high surfactant concentration, the single-phase microemulsion region extends to a larger range of temperatures. (b) Fish diagram
of water-in-diesel microemulsion (90:10 diesel: water ratio) at different temperatures versus emulsifier concentration (Φs). The diagram indicates upper (T1) and
lower (T2) cloud point as well as the phase inversion temperatures, Reproduced with permission from Ref. [137]. (c) Thermoreversible nature of water-in-diesel
microemulsions  showing  two  heat  and  cool  temperature  cycles  [42].  The  initial  droplet  size  (D25
C)  when  samples  are  cooled
C, the droplet size increases to DT (=2.4 x
from 25
D25

C and subsequently returns to D25
C  on cooling to 25

C to 10
C) and returns to D25

C)  decreases  to  DT  (=0.7  × D25

C. In the heating cycle from 25

C  on heating back to 25

C to 35

C.

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

Fig. 20. The variation in (a) kinematic viscosity and (b) density of the water-in-diesel microemulsion fuels stabilized by Neonol AF 9-6/2-ethylhexanol (taken in 9:1
ratio) at 25

C. Reproduced with permission from [137].

◦

and W-3 are marked to correspond to different concentrations of water,
2.9, 16.7, and 30.6 %, respectively, and the ratio of diesel fuel to sur-
factant ratio in the microemulsions is kept constant at 60:40. The data in
Fig. 20(a) shows that the concentration of the emulsifier only slightly
influences the dynamic viscosity but strongly depends on the fraction of
the  water  phase  in  the  microemulsions.  However,  the  density  of  the
microemulsions,  as  shown  in  Fig.  20(b),  is  found  to  increase  with  an
increase in the concentration of the emulsifier and water.

The  dynamic  viscosity  of  water–diesel–AOT  microemulsions  and
water–decane–AOT  microemulsions  as  a  function  of  shear  rates
measured at ω (defined as the molar ratio of water to AOT) ranging from
10 to 30 at a dispersed phase volume fraction Φ (defined as the ratio of

the volume of water and AOT to the volume of water, Aerosol-OT and
diesel), Φ = 0.05 to 0.20 is shown in Fig. 21. For a combination of ω and
Φ considered in this work, the dynamic viscosity is independent of the
applied shear rate, typical of Newtonian liquids, as shown in Fig. 21(a)
and (c). The zero-shear viscosity of the two microemulsions is plotted in
Fig.  21(b)  and  (d).  It  must  be  noted  that  the  shaded  region  in  these
figures corresponds to the dynamic viscosity of the fuel prescribed for
commercial usage as per Euro VI norms. The dynamic viscosity of the
water-in-diesel microemulsions formulated at ω = 25 and Φ = 0.2 fall
outside this prescribed range. Since the viscosity of the emulsion fuels
can significantly impact the spray structure and characteristics, this will
be considered in the next section.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113316

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 21. The dynamic viscosity of water-in-diesel microemulsion fuels and water-in-decane microemulsions. Taken from [42].

7. Engine studies

Diesel  engines  are  predominantly  mixing  controlled  combustion
systems. Thus, investigations on fuel spray characteristics carry signifi-
cance  in  diesel  combustion  systems  as  they  influence  air-fuel  mixing.
Depending  on  the  prevailing  conditions  in  the  engine  cylinder  at  the
time of fuel injection, the fuel penetrates up to a particular distance in
the  axial  direction (the  concerned  parameter  is  the  spray  penetration
length) and disperses in the radial direction (the concerned parameter is
the  spray  cone  angle)  [144].  These  parameters  are  referred  to  as
macroscopic spray characteristics. Besides in-cylinder conditions at fuel
injection,  differences  in  fuel  physical  properties  also  affect  the  spray
penetration length and cone angle [145]. Adding water to the fuel leads
to differences in the fuel properties, such as density, viscosity, volatility,
and surface tension, that affect spray characteristics. The existing liter-
ature on the effect of emulsion fuels on macroscopic spray characteris-
tics is discussed in this section.

7.1. Fuel spray characteristics

7.1.1. Spray penetration length

Investigations under high-pressure, low-temperature chamber con-
ditions  [146]  and  high-pressure,  high-temperature  conditions  [51]
indicate that increasing the injection pressure or the ambient tempera-
ture results in similar spray penetration between diesel and diesel-water
emulsions. However, the penetration of “ligaments” or droplets varied,
with the emulsion exhibiting a higher value. It was observed [147] that
at a relatively low temperature of 800 K, there was a slight difference
between  the  spray  penetration  for  diesel  and  its  emulsions  at  two
different injection pressures. However, at a high temperature of 1200 K,
there  was  no  significant  difference  in  the  penetration  lengths,  irre-
spective of the injection pressure. It leads to the inference that although

the fuel property influences the spray penetration length, it also depends
significantly on the chamber conditions into which the fuel is injected
[148]. Similar observations were also reported elsewhere [20], wherein
a  remarkable  decrease  in  the  spray  penetration  length  was  observed
with an increase in temperature from 800 K to 1200 K. Further, it was
observed  that  with  an  increase  in  the  chamber  gas  temperature,  the
variations in spray penetration length between diesel and its emulsions
was negligible. In both cases [20,147], a higher water concentration of
up to 20 % was added to diesel. It can be inferred from the literature
reports that at low ambient temperatures, the effects due to fuel prop-
erties dominate, leading to an increase in the spray penetration length
owing to increased viscosity and density for the emulsion fuels. How-
ever,  at  higher  temperatures  near  900
C  or  more,  the  effects  of  fuel
properties  are  suppressed  by  the  high  temperature,  and  the  spray
penetration  length  decreases  with  emulsions  than  the  base  fuel.  A
generic  trend  of  variations  in  the  spray  penetration  length  with  the
ambient temperature is shown in Fig. 22.

◦

The significance of the ambient temperature is also emphasized in
several  other  works  available  in  the  literature  [58,141,149].  The
ambient  temperature  also  influences  the  spray  penetration  length  in
conjunction with the fuel volatility. A high-volatility fuel penetrates less
under  high-temperature  conditions  [148].  Water-blended  fuel  is  ex-
pected to penetrate more since the volatility reduces with water addi-
tion.  However,  if  a  microexplosion  occurs,  the  effect  of  volatility  or
viscosity  may  be  counteracted.  Under  non-evaporating  conditions,
water-blended  fuel  penetrates  more  than  diesel.  In  contrast,  under
evaporating conditions, the spray penetration for both fuels was similar
[57], meaning that the high temperature mitigated the influence of fuel
viscosity and volatility on spray penetration. Investigations with a low
water concentration of up to 10 % [150,151] under conventional diesel
engine-like conditions and low-temperature conditions revealed that the
spray  penetrations  for  the  emulsions  of  water-in-dodecane  were

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113317

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 22. Effect of ambient temperature in influencing the spray penetration length for emulsion fuels.

two

commercial

comparable  to  that  of  diesel.  Similar  spray  penetration  lengths  are
attributed to the fact that the fuel’s momentum flux was similar as long
as the injection pressure was the same. An independent study concluded
that the spray penetration depended more on the momentum flux than
fuel  properties  like  density  and  viscosity  [152].  The  effect  of  two
different types of surfactants and three injection pressures was studied
[67],  wherein
surfactants,  Span  80  and
Polyglyceryl-4-oleate (PGO), were used to prepare emulsions with 10 %
and 20 % water concentrations. The spray studies were conducted in a
chamber with an ambient pressure of 40 bar and injection pressures of
800–1200 bar. The results indicated that the spray penetration profiles
overlapped  as  the  injection  pressure  increased,  except  for  the  10  %
emulsion prepared with PGO, which exhibited the lowest penetration
value. It leads to an inference that the surfactant type also influences the
spray  penetration apart from the water  content. It is crucial in diesel
engines, where an overly increased spray penetration can cause a sig-
nificant increase in unburned hydrocarbon (UHC) emissions and poor
combustion efficiency due to spray wall wetting.

In  conclusion,  an  increase  in  the  density, viscosity,  or  decrease in
volatility  due  to  adding  water  to  fuel  increases  the  spray  penetration
under low-temperature conditions. However, these effects are much less
significant  at  higher  temperatures  experienced  at  conventional  diesel
engine  conditions.  At  those  higher  temperatures,  the  consequence  of
evaporation and the  dependency of the spray penetration on the mo-
mentum flux render the effect of the fuel properties insignificant. Thus,
emulsions  and  base  fuels  tend  to  have  similar  penetration  lengths.
Simultaneously,  increasing  the  fuel  injection  pressure  increases  the
penetration length, whereas increasing the ambient density reduces the
spray penetration. Recent experiments [150] with emulsions containing
5 % and 10 % water reveal that at high ambient temperatures, the spray
penetration lengths are comparable (refer to Fig. 23). The experiments
were conducted at an injection pressure of 100 MPa with a common rail
system in a constant-volume combustion chamber.

7.1.2. Spray cone angle

The  spray  cone  angle  is  defined  as  the  angle  between  the  outer
boundary of the spray. It is also referred to as the dispersion of the spray.
It  defines  the  extent  to  which  the  spray  spreads  into  the  combustion
chamber, which is essential for mixing air and fuel in the combustion
chamber.  The  consensus  is  that  the  initial  spray  cone  angle  for  the
emulsions is lower than that of the base fuel due to higher density and

Fig. 23. Effect of water concentration on the spray penetration length at high
ambient temperatures. Reprinted from Ref. [150] with permission of Elsevier.

viscosity.  The  higher  values  of  these  properties  lead  to  lower  air
entrainment  into  the  spray,  resulting  in  a  lower  spray  cone  angle  for
emulsion fuels. Higher chamber pressure results in a larger spray cone
angle  because higher resistance inhibits the  spray development along
the axial direction, forcing the spray to spread along the radial direction
[148,153].  Increasing  the  ambient  pressure  increases  the  air  entrain-
ment  rate  and,  thus,  the  spray  cone  angle.  When  emulsion  fuels  are
injected into a high-temperature environment, heat is convected rapidly
on the surface of droplets [154]. With the lower boiling temperature of
water  than  the  base  fuel,  the  water  molecules  evaporate  rapidly,
reaching the superheated state and creating vapour expansion, resulting
in the quick breakdown of droplet molecules [60]. It results in a higher
spray dispersion, i.e., a higher cone angle. It is expected to improve the
atomization and the rate of fuel-air mixing.

The effect of injection pressure in a low-temperature ambience was
studied [146], and it was observed that although the spray cone angle
was lower for emulsions at low injection pressure, the spray cone angles
were comparable at high injection pressures. However, at high injection
pressures, a high-temperature ambience seems to cause microexplosion,
resulting in a higher cone angle for the microemulsion fuel than the base
fuel [51]. The spray cone angle was similar for diesel and its emulsion at
about 5.8 mm from the injector, whereas further downstream, at 15.8

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113318

S. Gowrishankar et al.

mm,  the  cone  angle  increased  for  the  emulsion  fuel.  The  injection
pressure was 1200 bar, with an 830 K ambient temperature. An inter-
esting observation was reported using diesel emulsified with 10 % and
20 % water [20]. Experiments were conducted by injecting the diesel
and  emulsified  fuels  into  a  high-pressure,  high-temperature  chamber.
The temperature was maintained at 1200 K with fuel injection pressures
ranging from 70 MPa to 130  MPa in steps of 20 MPa. Up  to 90 MPa
injection pressure for both the emulsions, disruptive glowing spots were
observed just downstream of the injector. It was considered to occur due
to  secondary atomization,  increasing the  spray  spreading and  air-fuel
mixing. However, this was not observed for the 20 % water emulsion
at injection pressures beyond 110 MPa and 130 MPa for the 10 % water
emulsion. This led to the conclusion that the interplay between the in-
jection  conditions  that  influence  primary  breakup  and  the  physical
properties of emulsion that influence secondary breakup resulted in the
observed spray characteristics. An important conclusion from this study
was that the emulsion could influence the primary breakup depending
on the injection pressures. At very high injection pressures, a more vi-
olent  primary  breakup  occurs  due  to  the  aerodynamic  shear  stress,
which, when it happens faster than the time required for microexplosion
phenomena, the latter phenomenon is masked. The findings are sum-
marized in Table 3.

Spray studies conducted at high-temperature conditions [141] indi-
cated that the secondary atomization is strong enough to eject fragments
of torn droplets at a distance away from the spray boundary at a much
higher  speed,  greatly  expanding  the  spray  head  and  spray  angle  and
improving  fuel-air  mixing. At low temperatures of around 400 K, the
spray  cone  angle  was  less  for  the  emulsions  than  the  spray  volume.
However, at temperatures near 900 K, the cone angle was slightly higher
for  the  emulsions  than  for  diesel  [58].  The  cone  angle  for  diesel  had
reduced compared to the value at the lower temperature, whereas it had
increased for the emulsions, indicating that the emulsions had spread
out more than that at low temperatures (refer to Fig. 24). An increase in
the cone angle with emulsion was attributed to fuel fragmentation at
high temperatures.

Thus, it is evident that the fuel properties influence the spray cone
angle at lower ambient temperatures, whereas it is insignificant at high
temperatures. The increase in the spray cone angle is more significant at
higher ambient temperatures and lower injection pressures. The effect of
ambient temperature on the spray cone angle is shown in Fig. 25. At very
high ambient temperatures, the effect of microexplosion results in an
increased cone angle. However, ultra-high injection pressures leading to
very  high  shearing  and  droplet  breakup  rates  may  mask the  effect of
secondary atomization.

7.1.3. Microscopic spray properties

An  attempt  was  made  to  study  the  spray  droplet  behaviour  for
emulsified fuels using the shadowgraphy technique combined with very
high magnification [155]. Experiments were performed under an inert
gas environment at 673 K. Emulsified n-dodecane was injected into the
hot  environment  at  a  very  low  pressure  of  0.8  MPa.  No  evidence  for
complete microexplosion was observed, although the emulsion droplets
were puffing. Unlike single droplet studies, it was attributed to the short
time  scales  for  observing  the  droplets  in  a  fuel  spray.  Puffing  also

Table 3
Duration  of  disruptive  combustion  of  diesel  and  water-in-diesel  emulsions  at
various injection pressures [20].

Fuel

Duration of observed droplet combustion (ms)

70 (MPa)

90 (MPa)

110 (MPa)

130 (MPa)

D100
W10

W20

–
1.66 ± 0.6 to
3.33 ± 1.3
1.80 ± 0.6 to
3.33 ± 1.3

–
1.86 ± 0.6 to
2.26 ± 0.6
1.73 ± 0.6 to
2.93 ± 0.6

–
1.86 ± 0.4 to
2.00 ± 0.4
–

–
–

–

Fig. 24. Effect of ambient temperature on the spray cone angle. Reprinted from
Ref. [58] with permission of Elsevier.

Fig. 25. Effect of ambient temperature on the spray cone angle.

improved the spray flow’s size distribution, as seen from the average
droplet diameters downstream of the spray. Another inference drawn
from the study was that as the dispersed water droplets’ size increased
from 2 to 2.9 μm, the puffing effect was more pronounced, resulting in a
more  refined  droplet  distribution.  The  authors  concluded  that  the
dispersed water droplets’ initial size played an essential role in the spray
characteristics  of  the  emulsified  fuel  spray.  The  droplet  behaviour  in
sprays of emulsified fuel was further studied [156] using n-dodecane as
the base fuel. Fuel sprays were generated using an ultrasonic atomizer.
The spray study was carried out using a high-speed camera. The lumi-
nous flame was observed for the base fuel, whereas the luminous flame
and bright spots were observed for the emulsion. These bright spots were
thought to be due to the occurrence of secondary atomization. Obser-
vation of droplet groups revealed that some of the droplets underwent
puffing  alone,  while  others  underwent  partial  microexplosion,  and  a
large  part  of  the  droplet  underwent  the  fragmentation  process.  Some
others  underwent  complete  microexplosion,  where  the  entire  droplet
tears down into smaller fragments. It was observed that the frequencies
of secondary atomization increased in the downstream region where the
luminous flame was formed. It occurred in droplets of various sizes in
the downstream region, whereas it occurred in only small droplets in the
upstream region where the luminous flame was not formed.

While the above study was conducted in a quiescent environment,
Bolszo  et  al.  [157]  studied  the  penetration  and  droplet  distribution
characteristics for emulsion fuels prepared with diesel and filtered tap
water with 23 and 38 % water fractions by mass. The emulsions were

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113319

S. Gowrishankar et al.

prepared without any surfactant and used immediately. Air was the fluid
used in the crossflow experiment. The results indicated that the liquid
penetration of the fuel depended significantly on the momentum flux
ratio and showed a weak dependence on fluid density. Regarding the
droplet size distribution, the results indicated an earlier jet breakup for
the emulsions than base fuel and a more significant number of larger
droplets within the spray. This was attributed to the additional inter-
facial  tension  between  the  two  immiscible  liquids.  The  difference,
however, was higher, with the sample having a more significant water
quantity, which would have had a larger initial droplet diameter. The
authors  concluded  that  the  presence  and  size  of  the  dispersed  phase
within the spray played a significant role in the resulting spray plume
droplet  distribution.  This  fact  can  be  corroborated  with  the  work  of
Ismael et  al. [158], who injected  the emulsion fuel  at 500, 1000 and
1500 bar using a common rail injection system, collected the fuel from
the injector outlet and examined the droplet sizes. It was reported that
the dispersed droplet sizes were lower at the injector outlet than in the
fuel tank. This was attributed to the shearing forces experienced by the
fuel within the high-pressure fuel injection system. The occurrence of
microexplosion was also studied [158], and it was seen that the prob-
ability of microexplosion was lower with the higher injection pressures
due to smaller water droplets in the fuel at the injector nozzle exit. The
temperature  required  for  microexplosion  was  also  found  to  increase
with  injection  pressure.  This  suggests  that  lower  injection  pressure  is
more favourable for extracting the maximum benefit of microexplosion
from emulsions. Therefore, using emulsions either in the form of pre-
pared microemulsions or in-situ-made macroemulsions can be a viable
option  for  stationary  engines  where  the  injection  pressures  are  lower
than modern automotive engines.

Table  4  and  Table  5  highlight  the  results  from  various  spray  and

droplet-related investigations carried out using emulsion fuels.

7.2. Effect of emulsions on engine characteristics

7.2.1. Engine combustion characteristics

Fuel  properties  such  as  the  density,  viscosity,  surface  tension  and
heating value are modified by adding water to the base fuel. A signifi-
cant increase in the ignition delay would primarily occur due to water
absorbing  energy,  equivalent  to  latent  heat,  for  vaporization  [162].
Therefore, the level of premixing and the portion of the fuel burnt in the
premixed phase increase. Consequently, the diffusive phase combustion
is reduced, the extent of which depends on the fuel injection time and
corresponding burn duration. As a result, the evolution of the cylinder
pressure and the energy release rate would differ for the emulsion from
the base fuel. Such variations in the combustion characteristics would
reflect a change in combustion phasing for the emulsion compared to the
base  fuel.  However,  the  combustion  phasing  should  be  maintained
similarly to the base fuel to compare the emulsion effects precisely. It
necessitates appropriate modifications in the engine operating param-
eters, primarily the fuel injection timings. For achieving a similar igni-
tion  delay  as  the  base  fuel,  the  emulsion  requires  higher  ambient
temperatures at the instant of fuel injection than the base fuel. Retar-
dation of the fuel injection timing results in higher ambient tempera-
tures, reduced ignition delay, and maintained combustion phasing like
the base fuel. It should be noted that most investigations do not involve
such optimization for engine operation with the emulsion. Instead, the
operating parameters are generally maintained similarly for both fuels.
The  following  section  provides  insight  into  the  combustion  trends
observed with emulsion fuels based on investigations in different engine
types and water concentrations.

7.2.1.1. Ignition  delay. The  fueling  rate  increases  with  an  increase  in
engine load in a diesel engine, and the air-fuel mixture tends towards

Table 4
Summary of literature studies on spray characterization of diesel emulsion and its surrogates.

Ref.

Fuel Typea,b

[159]

[141]

[149]

[51]

[155]

[20]

[67]

[55]

[10,

11]

[150]

Fuel: Gas oil
W(<60) + E(0.5)
W(10,12)

Lubrizol PuriNOx®
W(20)
μE: W(10)

Fuel: n-dodecane
S: Span80
W(10) + E(.75)
W(10,20) + E(2)

W(10,20)
E1: Span 80(1)
E2: PGO(2)
W(10)

W(10,20,30) + E
(3,6,9)
S: Span80+Op10
Fuel: n-dodecane
S:Span80+Tween80
W(5,10) + E(3.1)

Experiments

Apparatus

LITAc

CVCCd

Optical engine

Spray rig;
dnozzle: 0.14 mm

CVCC

Conditionse

Ambient

Pamb: 1–50
Tamb: 723–923
1200, 1680 rpm
IMEP: 2.9–4
Pamb: 50
Pinj: 1200
Tamb: 830
Pamb: 8
Tamb: 800

CVCC
dnozzle: 0.14 mm

Tamb: 800-1200
Pinj: 700-1300

Spray rig

CVCC
Common rail fuel
injection
CVCC

CVCCd;
dnozzle: 0.104 mm

Pamb: 8
Tamb: Ambient

Tamb: 730
Pinj: 500, 1000, 1500
bar
Tamb: 383, 900

ρamb: 22.8
Tamb: 860
Pinj: 1000-1190

a W: Water, E: Emulsifier, and the rest is diesel expressed in % w/w.
b WDE: water in diesel (macro)emulsion; nE: nanoemulsion; μE: microemulsion.
c LITA: Liquid injection technique apparatus.
d CVCC: Constant volume combustion chamber.
e Pressures are given in bar, temperatures in Kelvins, and density in kg/m.3.
f Results for emulsions are expressed in relation to the base fuel.

Parameters and Resultsf

Spray Penetration

Cone Angle

Micro-explosion

Decreased

–

Decreased

–

Increased

Maximum at 773 K

Increased

Decreased

μE > WDE > diesel

WDE > diesel > μE

–

–

–

Low Tamb: Increased
High Tamb:
Comparable
WDESpan80 > WDEPGO >
Diesel

–

–

Increased for finer water
drops

Favoured at low Pinj, high
Tamb

Increased

–

–

–

Delay increased with Pinj

Low Tamb: Increased
High Tamb:
Comparable
Comparable

Low Tamb: Decreased
High Tamb:
Increased
Decrease for 10 %
water

Occurred after ignition

–

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113320

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Table 5
Summary of literature studies on droplet characterization of diesel emulsion and
its surrogates.

Ref.

Fuel Typea,b

Apparatus

Conditionsc

[47]

Fuel: dodecane,
tetra-decane,
hexadecane
W(<30)

Flat flame
burner

Tamb:
1000–1200
ddrop:
200–300 μm

[160]

Various
hydrocarbons and
diesel, with W(<50)

Thermocouple
for drop
suspension

Heat flux:
0.15–0.3
W/mm3

Hot plate

Tplate: 540-
620

Micro-
explosiond

More violent if
fuel is less
volatile
Increases with
temperature
Increases with
pressure
Increases with
fuel chain
length and
heat transfer
rate
Occurs earlier
with higher
temperature

[161]

[26]

[29]

[50]

Fuel: n-decane n-
dodecane,
hexadecane
S:
Span80+Tween80
W(10,20,40) + E(3
%)
Fuel: n-heptane, n-
decane, n-
dodecane, n-
hexadecane
S:
Span80+Tween80
W(10,20,30) + E(4
%)
Fuel: n-decane, n-
dodecane, n-
tetradecane and n-
hexadecane
S: Polyoxyethylene
nonylphenyl ether
W(10,30) + E
(0.75–5)
S: Span80

High
temperature
furnace

Tfurnace:
1053, 1124

Occurs earlier
with higher
temperature

High-pressure
combustion
chamber

Pamb: 1 to 5
Tamb: 650-
750

Increases with
temperature
and pressure

Single drop
combustion
chamber

Frequency
was maximum
for 30 % water

Pamb:
ambient
Tamb:
continuous
heating

a W: Water, E: Emulsifier, and the rest is diesel expressed in % w/w.
b WDE:  water

(macro)emulsion;  nE:  nanoemulsion;  μE:

in  diesel

microemulsion.

c Pressures are given in bar, temperatures in Kelvins and drop diameter in μm.
d Results for emulsions are expressed in relation to the base fuel.

stoichiometry. It increases the tendency to form a flammable mixture,
and this fact, combined with higher in-cylinder temperatures at higher
loads, reduces the ignition delay period [163]. However, when water is
present  in the  fuel, the in-cylinder  energy content is  absorbed  by the
higher latent heat of vaporization of water, thus lowering the temper-
ature. It leads to a slower chemical reaction rate, thus prolonging the
ignition  delay.  It  is  speculated  that  the  absorption  of  latent  heat  of
vaporization by the water present in the fuel causes inhibition of specific
ignition mechanisms of the hydrocarbon chain.

On the other hand, the presence of water is known to result in an
increased production of OH radicals [7,164,165], leading to accelerated
reaction rates. However, studies reporting an increase in the OH radicals
during the ignition delay period are not available in the literature. An
increase or decrease in the ignition delay due to water addition depends
on  all  these  factors.  Fundamental  studies  like  those  with  suspended
droplets [166], optical engine experiments [166], and flame studies in
constant  volume  chambers [167]  revealed  an increase  in  the ignition
delay for emulsion fuels. Engine experiments conducted without modi-
fying  the  operating  parameters  with  emulsion  and  the  base  fuel  also
showed a longer ignition delay with emulsion [168–170]. Experiments
with varying compression ratios [171,172] revealed decreasing ignition
delays with increasing compression ratios (refer to Fig. 26). Increasing
the compression ratio leads to higher pressure and temperature at fuel

Fig.  26. Influence  of  compression  ratio  on  the  ignition  delay  time  with  base
fuel and emulsion. Adapted from [171].

injection, which reduces the ignition delay. Similarly retarding the in-
jection timing would lead to higher ambient pressures and temperature
at the instant of injection, which is expected to reduce the ignition delay.
This was confirmed in an independent investigation [173], where it was
observed that at retarded injection timing, the ignition delay was hardly
affected even with higher water concentrations. In contrast, the ignition
delay increased with water concentrations for advanced injection tim-
ings. This effect is shown in Fig. 27. Similar trends were reported else-
where  [174]  based  on  experiments  conducted  using  diesel-water
emulsions in a rapid compression machine.

It  should  be  noted  that  an  increase  in  the  ignition  delay  would
simultaneously  increase  the  lift-off  length,  thereby  improving  air-fuel
mixing  in  diesel  engines.  However,  an  unduly  long  ignition  delay
could  also  lead  to  delayed  combustion  phasing and  loss of  expansion
work. Thus, there seems to be a trade-off between improved mixing due
to a longer ignition delay and retarded combustion phasing that must be
optimized  based  on  the  engine  design  and  emission  constraints.  The
necessary modifications of the fuel injection parameters would help to a
great extent to achieve a better trade-off in the above aspect.

7.2.1.2. Combustion  pressure. As  discussed  earlier,  with  the  introduc-
tion of water in the engine cylinder, the ignition delay and premixed
combustion fraction increase [175] under similar operating conditions
to base fuel. Thus, the rise of cylinder pressure occurs with a slight phase
delay  for  the  emulsion,  but  the  peak  pressure  value  can  be  higher
depending on the actual injection timing. A longer ignition delay with
higher peak pressure was reported for water-fuel emulsions with higher
water content [173]. Reports of similar trends are also available [176]
based  on  experiments  conducted  on  a  heavy-duty  diesel  engine  with

Fig. 27. Influence of injection timings on the ignition delay time with base fuel
and emulsion. Adapted from [173].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113321

S. Gowrishankar et al.

varying concentrations of water added to diesel. With increased water
concentration  added to diesel, combustion was delayed, but the peak
pressure value was higher due to the increased premixed burn fraction.
However, the injection pressure was increased to maintain similar fuel
energy in these cases. This could have contributed to the higher peak
pressure  value.  Increased  injection  pressure  would  also  aid  in  better
atomization and air-fuel mixing, leading to better combustion.

On the contrary, cylinder pressure reduction has also been reported
[82,177,178]  with  emulsions,  wherein  the  injection  parameters  were
not altered. A reduction in the cylinder pressure is attributed to water
carrying  away  the  in-cylinder  energy  content  in  the  latent  heat  of
vaporization [82]. Another observation made was that the heating value
of  the  emulsion  was  lower  than  that  of  diesel,  and  thus,  less  energy
would be released during the combustion process. Therefore, the peak
pressure was further reduced with increased water content. These trends
signify the importance of fuel injection pressure and, thereby, the in-
jection duration in influencing the combustion progress with emulsion
fuels. Higher injection pressure, ensuring a similar injection duration as
the base fuel, can result in higher combustion pressure despite a longer
ignition delay.

7.2.1.3. Energy  release  rate. An investigation was carried out into the
combustion characteristics of a diesel engine operated on diesel fuel and
its emulsion at two different loads at a given engine speed [177]. The
premixed energy release peak for the emulsion was lower than diesel at
both  loads.  The  injection  parameters  were  not  optimized  with  the
emulsion. The emulsion exhibited a retarded injection due to variations
in the bulk modulus of fuel with water addition that resulted in a similar
ignition delay as diesel owing to better in-cylinder conditions at the time
of fuel injection. It resulted in a lower mass of fuel being prepared during
the  delay  period,  and  thus,  a  reduced  peak  energy  release  rate  was
observed. The trend mentioned above was obtained even at higher en-
gine loads. It is worthwhile to mention that although the energy release
rate trends for the emulsion exhibit a lower peak, the peak cumulative
energy release is almost on par with diesel at high loads. The authors
opined that the burn rate for the emulsion intensified during the diffu-
sive stage, resulting in a higher rate of combustion progress and a similar
total energy release as diesel.

Contradictory  trends  were  observed  when  experiments  were  con-
ducted with a similar energy delivery rate for diesel and the emulsions
[176] by adjusting the injection pressure, i.e., increasing the injection
pressure  with  increased  water  concentration.  However,  the  injection
timing was not altered. The primary effect was increased ignition delay
with  increased  water  concentration,  increasing  the  premixed  burn
fraction  and  causing  a  higher  energy  release  rate.  These  effects  were
significant  when  the  water  concentration  was  30  %  of  the  total  fuel
amount. The results are shown in Fig. 28. Thus, it was concluded that
adding  water  to  the  fuel  increased  the  premixed  burn  fraction  and

Fig.  28. Effect  of  injection  pressure  and  water  concentration  on  the  energy
release rate. Adapted from [176].

energy  release  peak.  Further,  the  energy  release  rates  depend  on  the
water quantity, emulsion characteristics and the engine operating con-
ditions,  especially  the  injection  parameters.  Under  similar  operating
conditions as base fuel, emulsions exhibit a longer ignition delay and
higher premixed burn fraction unless the injection parameters are suit-
ably  modified.  It  would  also  be  interesting  to  examine  the  effect  of
emulsion under conditions of similar energy delivery rate as the base
fuel, i.e., with increased injection pressure and at a retarded injection
timing. However, such a study is not available and is recommended to be
conducted.

7.2.2. Engine performance characteristics

After  the  emulsion  fuel  is  injected  into  the  engine  cylinder,  the
pressure  and  temperature  of  the  emulsion  droplets  are  subject  to  in-
crease. Based on the influence of several variables, viz. differences in the
boiling points of water and base fuel, water content, and pressure [28,
29,47,160],  the  prevailing  in-cylinder  temperature  could  exceed  the
boiling point of water, resulting in the phase transformation for water.
This condition is called the metastable state. Beyond this state, a slight
temperature  increase  leads  to  vigorous  vapour  phase  expansion,
breaking  the  fuel  droplets  into  several  fragments,  commonly  called
microexplosion [28]. At this stage, the sudden expansion of the vapour
phase in the fuel spray droplets may exert an additional force on the
piston  [72,179,180].  If  this  phenomenon  occurs  at  an  appropriate
instant, engine torque and fuel consumption benefits can be improved.
Moreover, an optimal water concentration for each engine operating
condition may exist, resulting in a maximum benefit [181]. The litera-
ture also opined that the emulsion requires less compression work than
the corresponding base fuel because of a longer ignition delay during the
compression  stroke.  It  would  help  obtain  higher  peak  pressures  after
TDC to produce higher power output in the expansion stroke [182]. The
following  subsections summarize the results  from engine  experiments
with emulsion fuels.

7.2.2.1. Engine  brake  power/torque. Engine  experiments  conducted
[138,178] with water addition to diesel (10 % by volume) show slightly
reduced power with the emulsion than the base fuel. The brake power
reduction was less than 10 % with emulsion than diesel across the engine
operating  speed  and  load  range.  The  reduction  in  brake  power  is
attributed to the lower calorific value of the emulsion. Minimal quan-
tities of water of 2 %–8 % were used with diesel-biodiesel blends [179],
and the results revealed that the engine performance was more or less
similar with up to 4 % water, whereas increasing it further deteriorated
the engine performance. Similar results were observed elsewhere [183,
184]. It was thought to be due to increased viscosity with the relatively
higher water content, diminishing the positive effects of water addition.
A slight increase in engine torque with 5 % water added to diesel was
reported  [185],  whereas  an  apparent  decrease  was  observed  with  a
further  increase  in  water  quantity.  It  seems  to  corroborate  with  the
postulates that the reduction in calorific value at higher water concen-
trations is more dominant over other effects [186,187].

On  the  contrary,  an  improvement  in  the  engine  torque  with  an
emulsion containing 10 % water was obtained [188], whereas, with 5 %
water, it deteriorated compared to diesel. The engine torque increased
with the emulsion at a lower engine speed range. Beyond 3600 rpm, the
engine  torque decreased  below  that  of  diesel.  The  cycle  time may  be
insufficient  to  experience  the  benefit  of  the  water  addition  and  its
contribution to combustion improvements at high engine speeds.

7.2.2.2. Engine brake thermal efficiency and fuel consumption. There are
contradicting results on engine brake thermal efficiency with emulsion
wherein  both  higher  [17,82,172,177,179,187,189–192]  and  lower
values  [69,178,185,193,194]  are  reported  in  the  literature.  The
increased  brake  thermal  efficiency  with  emulsion  was  attributed  to
enhanced  fuel  atomization and  improved  air-fuel  mixing, resulting  in

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113322

S. Gowrishankar et al.

greater  combustion  efficiency  [189].  The  corresponding  results  are
shown in Fig. 29. A marked increase in the engine efficiency with the
emulsion  at  high  loads was  also  reported in  the  literature  [175,190].
Improvements in the engine thermal efficiency with emulsified fuels can
also be realized by optimizing the engine design and operating param-
eters  [172,191],  such  as  the  compression  ratio  and  the  fuel  injection
timing.

The effects of emulsion on brake specific fuel consumption depend
on the interplay between increased combustion efficiency and reduced
calorific  value.  If  the  former  factor  dominates,  the  specific  fuel  con-
sumption will reduce and vice versa. If the specific fuel consumption is
calculated accounting only for diesel, it is lower for emulsion [8,68,179,
195]. Moreover, a decrease in specific fuel consumption depends on the
engine  operating  conditions  and  optimization  strategy  [141].  For
instance, if the engine is optimized to operate under high loads, higher
water  concentrations can lead to an  excessive increase in  the fuel  in-
jection duration [141,142,176,177] that can reduce the efficiency unless
the  injection  parameters  are  optimized  accordingly  [165,172].  It  was
concluded that the changes in the mean value of the heat supply rate
during the fuel injection influence the efficiency [196], and a significant
drop in this value results in reduced efficiency (refer to Fig. 30(a)).

A  significant  change  in  the  injection  duration  with  a  commercial
emulsion fuel, “PuriNOx”, was observed [142]. The engine performance
varied according to the modifications in the fuel injection timings. Be-
sides, air utilization seems to have a role in the final effect of emulsion
[166]. Emulsion improves performance in engines where air utilization
is poor by promoting better air-fuel mixing. In contrast, water addition
deteriorates  engine  performance  and  fuel  consumption  for  engines
where air utilization is already optimized. These trends are observed in
Fig. 30(b), where the results of two engines with different airflow pat-
terns are shown. Adding water to fuel for an engine with poor air uti-
lization maintains the BSEC while providing other benefits. However,
for an engine where air utilization is already optimal, adding water to
fuel increases the BSEC.

With increasing water concentration, the injection duration must be
increased to maintain energy delivery like the base fuel. If fuel injection
extends  significantly  into  the  expansion  stroke,  the  combustion  effi-
ciency would be reduced, leading to higher fuel/energy consumption.
Under similar operating conditions as the base fuel, several researchers
observed increased brake-specific fuel/energy consumption with emul-
sion  [178,187,197,198].  It  is  important  to  note  that  a  shorter  heat
release duration associated with water-fuel emulsion has the potential of
fuel-saving  only if the  fuel injection timing is optimized  [199].  Thus,
selecting the optimal water quantity for a particular engine operating
condition and any necessary change in the fuel injection parameters are
critical  factors  in  deciding  the  maximum  benefit  obtained  through
emulsion fuels. Table 6 summarizes the effects of different parameters

Fig. 29. Increase in BTE with water-in-diesel emulsion. Adapted from [189].

on engine performance and suitable countermeasures, if applicable.

7.2.3. Engine emission characteristics

Conventional diesel combustion suffers from the NOx-PM trade-off
wherein  any  attempt  to  decrease  one  of  these  pollutants  through  in-
cylinder  control strategies  would invariably  increase the  other [200].
Some of the most commonly used strategies to mitigate these pollutants
include  injection  parameter  optimization,  using  alternative  fuels,
adopting  high pressure  cooled  EGR,  utilizing  lean NOx  trap,  selective
catalytic  reduction,  diesel  particulate  filters,  and  low-temperature
combustion  [201].  For  example,  optimizing  injection  pressure  and
combustion  chamber  design  leads  to  controlling  the  soot  emission.
However, the NOx  emissions increased due to higher combustion tem-
peratures [202].

Combining in-cylinder and exhaust after-treatment control strategies
is often used to reduce NOx and soot emissions simultaneously. In such
cases, the benefits are counteracted by an increase in the brake specific
fuel consumption or higher cost due to the utilization of after-treatment
devices  [203].  An  effective  way  to  mitigate  this  trade-off  has  been
identified  as  water-in-fuel  emulsions.  Introducing  water  separately  or
with fuel as the emulsion is an effective NOx control measure [204,205].
This mitigation happens because the water in the fuel absorbs energy
from the latent heat of vaporization and lowers the cylinder tempera-
ture.  The  lowering  of  temperature  reduces  the  NOx  formation  rate
through  the  thermal  route.  On  the  other  hand,  fuel  fragmentation  is
speculated to occur in the engine cylinder with water addition to fuel,
resulting  in  finer  fuel  droplets.  Additionally,  the  air  entrainment  in-
creases due to increased spray jet momentum. A better air utilization
scenario is thus envisaged [63]. The reduction in the soot formation is a
direct consequence of the same.

Generally, the CO and HC emissions from a diesel engine are lower,
except at full load conditions where the fueling rate is high. However, a
longer  spray  penetration  with  emulsion  may  lead  to  spray  wall
impingement,  increasing  HC  emissions.  A  longer  ignition  delay  and
subsequent overmixing can result in very lean regions, increasing HC
emissions [173]. On the other hand, the enhanced fuel atomization re-
sults in better combustion, reducing the HC emissions. The injected fuel
mass per cycle increases to meet the load demand at high loads. Pro-
portionally, the water quantity also increases. The corresponding higher
heat of absorption through the latent heat of vaporization results in a
significant drop in the in-cylinder temperature, inhibiting CO oxidation
reactions [206]. However, adequate mixing and better mixture distri-
bution inside the cylinder can mitigate an unwarranted increase in CO
emissions.  Thus,  optimal  water  concentration  and  injection  schedule
according to engine operating load and speed conditions can simulta-
neously reduce more pollutants [207–209]. Various degrees of success
have been obtained by the researchers so far. A concise summary of the
investigations with diesel-water emulsion on the diesel engine emissions
is provided next.

7.2.3.1. NOx  emissions. The  in-cylinder  gas  temperature primarily  in-
fluences the NOx formation rate in the engine cylinder, and any effort to
reduce the same benefits NOx. When emulsion fuel is injected into the
engine cylinder, water evaporates ahead of the fuel because of its lower
boiling temperature. It causes the fuel droplets to explode into smaller
fragments.  More importantly,  the evaporation of  the water  molecules
leads to reduced cylinder temperature. It inhibits thermal NO formation,
thus reducing the overall NOx emission in the engine exhaust. Literature
indicates  several  investigations  carried  out  with  emulsions,  with
different engine types, at varying engine speeds and loads, reported a
reduction in the exhaust NOx emission [68,178,183,185,190,197,210].
Generally,  reducing  engine  cylinder  temperature  promotes  a  higher
degree of premixed combustion by prolonging the ignition delay. While
this  reduced  particulate  matter  formation,  it  tends  to  increase  NOx.
Thus, the final level of NOx and PM formation with emulsions depends

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113323

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 30. Effect of water addition on (a) the mean value of heat supplied during injection. Adapted from Ref. [196] and (b) energy consumption for two different
engines. Adapted from [166].

Table 6
Effect of emulsion on engine performance.

Parameter

Lower calorific value

Water vapour exerts an

additional force on the
piston

Microexplosion

Increased injection

duration

Increased burning rate

Effect on engine
performance

Reduced power/
torque
Increased power/
torque

Improved
combustion
efficiency
Deteriorated
performance
Increased BSFC
Improved BSFC

Countermeasures, if any

Limit the water concentration

Appropriate injection timing

–

Increase the injection pressure
to control the duration

Appropriate injection timing

upon the interaction between these counteracting phenomena.

Adjusting the fuel injection timing for the emulsion to compensate
for the increased ignition delay may have more beneficial effects on the
NOx formation. However, in the available studies, the injection timings
are not optimized for the emulsion, thus resulting in a different com-
bustion  phasing  than  diesel.  Experiments  were  conducted  on  a  four-
cylinder direct injection diesel engine using 10 % water-in-diesel fuel
[178]. The cylinder temperatures were lower at low loads, leading to
reduced  NOx  emissions.  The  emulsion  produced  slightly  lower  NOx
emissions  than  diesel.  The  effects  of  water  in  the  fuel  on  the  NOx
emission were significant at high loads. Similar results were observed
[211] with 10 % and 20 % water in diesel, as shown in Fig. 31. Using
EGR alongside emulsions effectively controls NOx while maintaining the
PM and BSFC/BSEC within acceptable limits [196]. EGR combined with
water emulsion resulted in a similar brake specific energy consumption
(BSEC) as diesel, while the smoke emission was slightly increased [196].
Apart  from  the  engine  studies,  investigations  on  constant  volume
chambers and flame images corroborate a reduction in the temperature
with  water  added  to  the  fuel  [57,167,194].  In  the  studies  above,  the
flame images indicated that the base fuel (diesel) burned with high lu-
minosity,  whereas the emulsion burned a lot ‘cooler’. It indicates the
reduced flame temperature with emulsion, directly influencing the NOx
formation rate. The colour images indicating the flame development are
shown in Fig. 32 [167]. Further analysis examined the high-temperature
areas  [134]  and  the  flame  intensity  [194].  The  flame  temperature,
high-temperature  region,  flame  luminosity,  luminous  flame  area,  and
residence  time  of  the  luminous  flame  with  the  emulsified  fuel  were

Fig. 31. Reduction in NOx emissions with water-in-diesel emulsions. Reprinted
from Ref. [211] with permission of Elsevier.

Fig. 32. Spray flame images taken in a constant volume combustion chamber.
Adapted from [167].

reduced than diesel. Consequently, the thermal NOx  formation rate is
reduced for the emulsified fuel than diesel.

7.2.3.2. Smoke/PM/soot emissions. The primary effect of water addition
to  fuel  is  the  reduced  in-cylinder  temperature,  suppressing  the  NOx
formation rate. However, secondary atomization enhances the mixing

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113324

S. Gowrishankar et al.

rate,  suppressing  the  formation  of  solid  particulate  emissions  [24].
Moreover, including water in the fuel has been shown to entrain higher
amounts of air and increase the flame lift-off distance from the injector
[51,149]. The resulting increase in fuel-air premixing before the start of
combustion aids in reducing the fuel-rich zones inside the combustion
chamber, lowering soot particle formation [149]. Adding water to fuel
also  leads  to  a  longer  injection  duration,  which  may  counteract  the
benefits  of  microexplosion  and  better  mixing  if  it  is  not  kept  under
check.

The mixing time for diesel and its emulsion with water was computed
using a two-zone model validated with experiments [176]. The results
indicated  that  the  mixing  time  was  reduced  in  emulsions  (refer  to
Fig. 33), indicating a higher degree of mixing. It was reflected in the
calculated soot quantity, lower for the emulsions with increased water
content.  Moreover,  since  the  water  added  to  the  fuel  displaces  an
equivalent amount of fuel, the initial amount available for forming soot
precursors is lower.

The amount of soot formed can also be correlated to the KL factor
[212,213],  which  is  measured  based  on  the  intensity  of  light  passing
through the combustion gases, according to the principle of Beer Lam-
bert’s  law.  This  technique  requires  optical  access  to  the  combustion
chamber. The soot variation during combustion regarding the KL factor
was  presented  [212].  A  substantial  decrease  in  the  KL  factor  was
observed with increased water added to the fuel, indicating lower soot
formation. This was attributed to an increase in the ignition delay and
the subsequent increase in fuel-air premixing with emulsion.

Consequently,  with  increasing  water  concentration,  the  KL  factor
was reduced further. It was found that even if the in-cylinder tempera-
ture for diesel fuel combustion was reduced to match the energy release
pattern of an emulsion with 10 % water, the KL factor for the emulsion
was substantially lower [213]. This confirms that the presence of water
chemically alters the combustion mechanism, inhibiting the formation
rate of soot precursors. The reduction in the KL factor for the emulsion
than diesel combustion is shown in Fig. 34. The area under the curve is
reduced with increased water concentration for the emulsion, indicating
a lower soot formation rate (see Fig. 34).

The particle size and number concentration with emulsified fuels are
reported  in  a  few  literature  [176,214].  Experimental  observations
revealed a shift to smaller particle diameters when using water-diesel
emulsions at low and medium engine loads. There was no appreciable
change in the particulate size distributions at high engine loads. Also,
the particle sizes decreased with increasing engine load. On the other
hand, a contradicting trend was reported in the literature [68], wherein
it was observed that the particle sizes increased with an increase in the
water concentration at both low and high loads with emulsified diesel in
a generator application. However, the accumulated particle concentra-
tion  decreased  for  the  emulsion  at  a  high  load,  indicating  that  it

Fig. 33. Variations in fuel-air mixing time with increased water concentration
in water-in-diesel emulsions. Adapted from [176].

Fig. 34. Variations  in KL  factor with  increased water  concentration in  emul-
sified fuel. Adapted from [213].

produced less number of large-sized particles. In lieu of this contradic-
tion,  it  is  worthwhile  to  mention  that  the  experiments  reported  in
Ref.  [176]  involved  increasing  the  injection  pressure  while  using
emulsion to match the injection rate of diesel, whereas that was not the
case for the latter. Though it is unclear if this directly impacts the results,
it is plausible that the increased injection pressure would lead to finer
atomization  in  the  emulsions,  which  could  affect  the  particulate
formation.

In  addition  to the  effects  mentioned above,  emulsion  fuels  have  a
shorter combustion duration [166,194]. It implies that the extension of
combustion into the expansion stroke can be avoided with proper in-
jection scheduling. Therefore, the formation of fuel-rich pockets can be
avoided to a larger extent using emulsion fuels than diesel. Results of
smoke opacity, particulate matter and/or soot concentration have been
reported, indicating the  effectiveness of emulsions in this regard [60,
138,166,168,175,194,196,197,215,216]. However, the extent of smoke
reduction depends on the type of engine as well [168]. The improved
air-fuel mixing resulting from secondary atomization reduced the par-
ticulate matter formation with emulsion for engines with relatively less
air motion. In the case of engines with a higher swirl ratio/air motion, a
critical water concentration existed until the benefits could be observed,
beyond which the smoke emission deteriorated.

Applying emulsified fuels also improves the trade-off between NOx
and  PM,  as  revealed  through  several  investigations  [63,176,196,213,
217,218]. Even with the application of EGR, the trade-off is improved.
As  postulated  by  researchers,  the  most  significant  advantage  is  the
possibility of retarding the fuel injection timing without affecting the PM
emissions and/or BSFC. Improved in-cylinder conditions with retarded
fuel injection ensure quick initiation of combustion. The effect of water
lowers  the  in-cylinder  temperature  to  reduce  NOx  emissions.  Micro-
explosion and the subsequent faster combustion progress keep the PM
emissions under control.

Experiments were conducted with diesel and its emulsion with 20 %
water in a common rail direct injection engine [63], where two injection
strategies  were  followed:  (i)  the  injection  pressure  was  maintained
similarly for both fuels, and the injection duration was increased for the
emulsion to maintain engine power (ii) the injection pressure increased
to maintain the duration of injection at a given power. Using the first
strategy  and  EGR,  the  trade-off  between  NOx  and  PM  improved  with
emulsion than diesel, as shown in Fig. 35. The operating point repre-
sented is that from an extra-urban driving cycle. It can be seen that the
trade-off curve for the emulsion (shown in blue colour legend) lies lower
than that for diesel fuel. Also indicated in the Figure are the BSFC values,
highlighting the advantage of emulsions.

A marked improvement in the NOx-PM trade-off was noticed [226],
even with retarded injection timing. Although NOx reduction is expected

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113325

S. Gowrishankar et al.

emissions. An increased compression ratio seemed to exploit the benefits
of emulsions, resulting in lower HC emissions [172]. Similarly, retarded
injection timing with emulsions reduced the HC emissions [220]. The
higher-density  cylinder  charge  and  increased  temperature  possibly
prevented the increased spray penetration that aided in mitigating HC
emissions.

A significant reduction in the HC emissions at all the load conditions
was observed [189], attributed to improved atomization and combus-
tion  with  emulsions.  Similar  observations  of  decreased  HC  emissions
were  reported  when  using  20  %  water-in-diesel  fuel  [218].  A  violent
disintegration of fuel droplets occurs due to differences in base fuel and
water volatility attributed to reducing HC emissions [69,216]. However,
increased HC emissions with increasing water content have also been
reported. Based on the results obtained, it was postulated that incom-
plete combustion due to the lower cylinder gas temperatures increased
HC emissions [175]. Similar reasoning was opined elsewhere [73] with
water-emulsified  diesel,  wherein  a  nearly  constant  increase  in  HC
emissions  was observed. Apart  from the lower cylinder temperatures,
the increase in HC emissions was also attributed to the higher viscosity
of emulsified diesel, which increases the fuel impinging on the cylinder
wall, causing incomplete combustion of some of the fuel [73]. An in-
dependent study [154] sought to explain the increase in HC emissions
with emulsions than base diesel based on the differences in fuel den-
sities, in-cylinder temperatures, and ignition delays. It was also opined
that  insufficient  mixing  of  the  fuel  and  air  could  lead  to  higher  HC
emissions. Similar results were observed with higher water concentra-
tions added to diesel fuel, as seen in Fig. 37 [221]. These trends seem to
lead to a possible conclusion that when emulsion fuels are employed,
limiting the water concentration to less than 10 %, retarding the injec-
tion  timing, and  operating at  higher  engine loads can prevent  an un-
mitigated increase in HC emissions.

7.2.3.4. Carbon monoxide (CO) emissions. The formation of CO in diesel
engines is affected by the cylinder pressure, temperature, local equiva-
lence ratio, and ignition delay. Moreover, the interaction between the
fuel spray and cylinder wall and spray-to-spray interaction also affects
CO  formation  [178]. Adding  water  to  diesel  can disintegrate  the  fuel
droplet  into  much  smaller  fragments,  enhancing  fuel-air  mixing.  It
would  aid  in  higher  combustion  efficiency  and  reduce  CO  emissions.
Retarding  the  fuel  injection  timing  to  reduce  the  ignition  delay  with
emulsion  fuels  results  in  fuel  being  injected  into  a  high-temperature
ambience, increasing the possibility for droplet fragmentation.

Higher  combustion  efficiency  also  results  in  higher  cylinder  tem-
perature,  which  is  essential  since  the  oxidation  of  CO  to  CO2  would
freeze at temperatures below 1400 K [206]. It highlights the necessity to
investigate CO emissions with emulsions at low load conditions, wherein

Fig.  35. Better  NOx-smoke  and  NOx-BSFC  trade-off  with  water-in-diesel
emulsion and EGR. Reprinted from Ref. [63] with permission of Elsevier.

with water addition and retarded fuel injection, PM emissions are still
under control, which highlights the advantage of using emulsion fuels. It
can be seen in Fig. 36 that for diesel fuel, retarding the injection timing
reduces  NOx  but  increases  PM  emissions.  However,  with  the  use  of
emulsified  diesel,  the  trade-off  is  pushed  towards  the  origin,  high-
lighting the advantage of water addition, which favours the reduction of
cylinder  temperature,  increasing  the  level  of  premixing,  and  simulta-
neously  causing  fuel  droplet  fragmentation,  all  of  which  result  in
reduced NOx and PM emissions.

7.2.3.3. Hydrocarbon  (HC)  emissions. The  HC  emissions  occur  due  to
incomplete  combustion of  fuel. The engine  exhaust  gases consist of a
wide range of hydrocarbons, more than 100 to 150 in number [219].
The local fuel-air ratio strongly influences the formation of HC emissions
in the cylinder. Over-lean mixtures lead to higher HC emissions from the
engine. Generally, an increase in the spray penetration length can in-
crease  the  HC  emissions  if  spray  wall  wetting  occurs,  particularly  in
modern  diesel  engines  with  advanced  injection  timings.  However,  an
unmitigated increase can be avoided if sufficient time is available for the
fuel to vaporize and mix with the surrounding air [149]. Adding water to
fuel has been shown to increase the spray penetration length leading up
to  the  cylinder  wall  [67].  It  works  against  reducing  HC  emissions.
However,  air-fuel  mixing  can  be  improved  by  forming  smaller  fuel
droplets [141] and longer lift-off lengths, which aid in entraining more
air into the fuel spray [149]. It works in favour of HC reduction. Sub-
sequently, the final level of HC emissions is based on both phenomena,
with the dominant one dictating the net outcome. Factors such as the
compression  ratio  and  the  fuel  injection  timing  influence  the  HC

Fig.  36. Effects  of  water-in-diesel  emulsion  on  NOx-PM  trade-off.  Adapted
from [213].

Fig.  37. Increase  in  HC  emissions  with  increased  water  concentration  in  the
emulsion. Adapted from [221].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113326

S. Gowrishankar et al.

reducing in-cylinder temperatures would be more significant. One such
investigation [178] showed a significant increase in CO emissions with
the emulsion at low speed and load conditions. As the engine speed was
increased, the CO emissions were reduced with emulsion. Increasing CO
emissions with emulsions attributed to reduced temperature negatively
affects  CO  oxidation.  Another  investigation  [211]  revealed  that  CO
emissions increased with emulsions at low and high loads at low engine
speeds. At higher engine speeds, the higher cylinder temperatures aid in
the oxidation process, and the effect of water addition to fuel was not so
dominant as that at low-speed conditions. It is worth noting that the fuel
injection  timings  were  not  optimized  for  the  emulsion.  The  observed
results are shown in Fig. 38.

CO  emissions  increased  with  diesel-water  emulsion  than  diesel  at
two  different  engine  speeds  was  observed  [222].  This  increase  was
attributed to the excess fueling required to maintain the engine power
with emulsions. Also, adding water would lower the cylinder tempera-
ture, leading to incomplete combustion. However, the increase in the CO
emission varied with engine speed, suggesting the influence of engine
operating conditions. The engine operating conditions also influence CO
emission [28], which is significantly higher with emulsions at low en-
gine loads and close to the values obtained with diesel at high loads.
Contrary  to  the  above  results,  experiments  with  10  %  water-in-diesel
[189] revealed decreased CO emissions at all the loads except idling.
The primary reason for the decrease in CO emissions was the increased
combustion efficiency due to improved air-fuel mixing, a direct conse-
quence of enhanced fuel atomization.

For  a  given  engine  operating  point,  water  addition  may  initially
decrease the CO emissions and reverse the trend at higher concentra-
tions [221]. The CO emissions will be reduced so long as the tempera-
ture  reduction  effect  due  to  water  addition  does  not  dominate  other
effects.  Beyond  that,  however,  the  reduced  temperature  offsets  the
combustion efficiency improvement, leading to lower oxidation of CO,
resulting in higher emissions. As observed [221], CO emissions reduce
up to 15 % of water concentration in emulsion, beyond which it tends to
increase. Further, it is worth noting that the optimal water concentration
in emulsion for CO emission reduction depends upon the engine type.
Two  independent  studies  [19,223]  showed  that  the  CO  emissions
decreased with increasing engine load for small quantities of water in
the emulsion. It was attributed to the higher temperature, sufficient for
the  oxidation  of  CO.  As  the  engine  load  increases,  the  engine’s  fuel
consumption also increases. More water is also injected for an engine
running  with  emulsions,  resulting  in  a  more  cooling  effect.  It  could
hinder CO oxidation, but if the effects of improved mixing and higher
engine temperature at high load conditions dominate, the final CO level
could  be  significantly  reduced.  Another  critical  factor  is  the  engine
speed. The time available for the microexplosion effect at higher engine
speeds is less. Furthermore, at higher engine speeds, higher turbulence
dominates, resulting in an enhanced mixing rate. If sufficient mixing is

Fig.  38. Increase  in  CO  emissions  with  increased  water  concentration  in  the
emulsion. Reprinted from Ref. [211] with permission of Elsevier.

available, the effect on CO emissions would be beneficial as a combined
effect.  The injection  timing also plays  a  significant  role,  affecting  the
ignition delay and the level of premixing. An optimal range of injection
timing may exist on either side wherein the CO emissions increase for
any water concentration in the emulsion [220].

In conclusion, adding water to the fuel decreases the cylinder tem-
perature,  thereby  contributing  to  a  monotonic  lowering  of  the  NOx
emission level. In general, water addition to fuel reduces PM emissions
by improving mixing brought about by secondary atomization, longer
ignition delay, and increased lift-off length. However, a very high water
concentration can significantly increase the smoke emission when the
injection duration is extended. It can be overcome using common rail
direct injection systems to increase the injection pressure to maintain
the base fuel delivery rate. The increase or decrease in the HC and CO
emissions depends on the interplay between the improvement in air-fuel
mixing and the reduction in temperature hampering the oxidation pro-
cess. The dominant phenomenon decides the outcome.

An  in-depth  analysis  of  the  variations  of  engine  emissions  with
diesel-water  emulsion  compared  to  diesel  reported  by  various  re-
searchers  reveals  that  NOx  and  smoke  emissions  decrease  universally
except for one or two exceptional cases. In contrast, HC and CO emis-
sions tend to increase more than decrease, as shown in Fig. 39. It could
be because HC formation and oxidation depend on various contradicting
engine  design  and  fluid  dynamic  factors,  as  discussed  previously.
Moreover, flame quenching due to water and/or increased spray pene-
tration can result in HC emissions. The CO emission is primarily affected
by the air-fuel ratio and reduced temperatures due to the presence of
water in the emulsion. Although there seems to be no work on utilizing
emulsions in turbocharged (TC) engines with variable compression ra-
tios, in hindsight, an increase in CR would increase the cylinder tem-
perature  even  in  TC  engines.  Increased  temperatures  would  promote
earlier  and  more  violent  microexplosions,  positively  impacting  the
emissions compared to the base TC engine configuration.

A detailed summary of investigations carried out with water-diesel
emulsions  is  provided  in  the  Supplementary  material,  Table  S2.  The
differences seen in the HC and CO emission trends mentioned above can
be  inferred  from  these  investigations.  The  type  of  engine  used,  the
emulsion prepared, stability information if available, and combustion,
performance, and emission results are presented. Table 7 summarizes
the  effect  of  emulsion  parameters  on  engine  emissions  and  suitable
countermeasures, if any.

It  is  worth  noting  that  all  of  the  positive  impacts  mentioned  for
“emulsions” pertain to the water-in-diesel emulsion. Once stable, these
fuels  are  similar  to  diesel-ethanol  blends,  where  the  effects  of  micro-
explosion and latent heat of vaporization are significant. However, the
loss of heating value is not substantial as observed with water-in-fuel
emulsions. A one-to-one comparison of ethanol-in-diesel and water-in-
diesel emulsions subjected to similar conditions would prove very use-
ful in understanding the critical differences between two such fuels. A
couple of studies provide some insight regarding this particular issue.
Cui et al. [154] performed engine experiments and CFD simulations with
ethanol-diesel  and  water-diesel  emulsions.  In  both  cases,  ethanol  and
water concentrations were fixed at 10 % (w/w), with 2 % (w/w) addi-
tive in diesel. Despite the higher latent heat of vaporization of water, the
ignition  delay  with  ethanol-diesel  emulsion  was  higher.  In  contrast,
Wang et al. [57] study with similar emulsions concluded that the igni-
tion  delay  is  longer  for  water-diesel  emulsions  than  ethanol-diesel
emulsions.  This  was  inferred  based  on  microexplosions  that  occurred
in both emulsions but occurred late with water, increasing flame lift-off
length. However, it should be noted that the spray studies were carried
out  in  a  quiescent  environment.  Further,  the  spray  study  concluded
lower soot emissions with water-in-diesel emulsions owing to a longer
ignition delay and lower natural luminosity signals.

However,  the  engine  experiment  suggested  otherwise,  with  the
calculated temperature values being lower for water emulsion, leading
to higher smoke emissions. Such contradicting results indicate the need

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113327

S. Gowrishankar et al.

Fig. 39. The percentage variations in engine-out emissions with emulsion compared to diesel. The numbers at the bottom indicate the total number of studies based
on which estimates are made; red and green colour indicate an increase and decrease in emissions, respectively.

Table 7
Effects of emulsion parameters on engine emissions.

Parameter concerning emulsion

Effect on emission

Countermeasures, if any

Lower cylinder temperature
Increased premixed combustion

NOx

Decrease
Increase

Retard injection timing

fraction

Microexplosion
Formation of OH radicals
Increased ignition delay
Increased injection duration

Microexplosion
Formation of OH radicals
Lower cylinder temperature/

flame quenching

Increased spray penetration
Microexplosion
Formation of OH radicals
Lower cylinder temperature

Deteriorated combustion

Soot

HC

CO

Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
Increase

Decrease
Decrease
Increase

Increase
Decrease
Decrease
Increase

Increase

Increase injection
pressure

Limit water
concentration
Retard injection timing

Limit water
concentration
Adjust operating
parameters

for further detailed studies examining the effect of ethanol- and water-
in-diesel  under  varying  engine  configurations  and  operating  condi-
tions. A critical difference that could have influenced the obtained re-
sults is the differences in the injected fuel mass per cycle, i.e., the energy
value to get similar engine torque with both fuels. In contrast, the in-
jection duration was maintained for the spray study. Due to the lower
energy content, a higher injected fuel mass per cycle would have been
required for the water-in-diesel emulsion. This would mean increased
spray momentum and better air-fuel mixing, resulting in lower ignition
delay. The droplet size distribution for the emulsions could have also
been different based on the onset and intensity of microexplosion, which
would affect the obtained results. The essential differences between such
emulsions would arise from the variations in latent heat of vaporization,
volatility, and heating value. Further, as mentioned above, the droplet
size  distribution  would  influence  the  onset  and  intensity  of  micro-
explosion.  Experiments  that  systematically  investigate  the  effect  of
emulsions,  taking  these  parameters  into  account,  would  provide  the
required critical insight into the phenomena that occur with these fuels.
Such studies are not available in the literature and should be considered
prospects.

8. Challenges and perspectives

8.1. Commercialization of emulsion fuels

The critical issues regarding the commercialization of emulsion fuel
arise  due  to  emulsion  stability,  the  need  for  surfactants  in  sufficient
quantity to ensure stability over extended periods, and the subsequent
additional  cost  of  the  fuel  [56].  Besides  the  cost  and  stability,  final
considerations should include engine durability, interchangeability with
diesel  and  vehicle  driveability.  From  the  end  user’s  perspective,  it  is
imperative to consider the cost/benefit analysis of available technolo-
gies  to  reduce  exhaust  emissions  from  automotive  engines.  From  the
manufacturer’s  end,  a  comprehensive  understanding  and  planning  of
fuel  preparation  and  distribution  systems  are  required  to  ensure
continuous fuel supply in the long term to the end-users [138].

Microemulsions have exhibited stability over long periods, such as a
year  [52].  This  required  the  preparation  of  emulsions  with  the  right
combination of surfactant ‘packages’  combining hydrophilic and lipo-
philic  components  [224].  The  surfactant  package  blend  must  be
designed considering a multivariate analysis of toxicity and biodegrad-
ability,  apart  from  performance  and  cost  considerations.  However,
higher  concentrations  of  surfactant  required  for  forming  micro-
emulsions would increase the production cost of such fuels [52,138]. On
the  other  hand,  experimental  results  using  an  in-situ  combination  of
water and diesel, without surfactants, have also yielded positive results.
A proof-of-concept study [225] showed a reduction in NOx  and PM
concentrations  using  onboard  blended  diesel  and  2  %  water.  The
blending was carried out by a unique method of rapid homogenization
using ultrasonic cavitation. The low-emission capability of this method
was  confirmed  through  open-air  combustion  experiments  combined
with  novel  optical  diagnostics  and  image-processing  techniques.  In
recent years, non-surfactant water-diesel blends have also been tested in
real-time  on  engines  for  steady-state  experimental  conditions  and  ve-
hicles mounted on chassis dynamometers [56,226]. The fuel was pre-
pared  by  introducing  water  and  diesel  to  a  high-shear  mixer  with  a
high-speed  rotor  and  stator.  After  this,  the  prepared  mixture  was
passed  through  an  ultrasonic  transducer  before  entering  the  engine
cylinder.  The  emulsion  fuel  demonstrated  significant  NOx  and  PM
reduction in both cases, while the brake thermal efficiency was on par
with diesel fuel operation. Both these studies demonstrated the efficacy
of emulsions in simultaneously  reducing NOx  and  PM emissions  from
diesel engines without compromising performance. Therefore, the use of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113328

S. Gowrishankar et al.

advanced  technologies  and  electronic  control  can  certainly  aid  in
bringing  emulsion  fuel  to  the  forefront  as  a  promising  alternative  to
diesel.

From the perspective of long-term durability, early studies involving
the application of water-diesel emulsion in commercial vehicles for over
2,30,000 km showed no detrimental effects on the engine components
[208]. In a separate investigation, a 1000-h severe-duty engine dyna-
mometer test and engine field tests over two years indicated no adverse
effects  on  engine  components  [209].  Steady-state  continuous  engine
tests for over 200 h, as a combination of low load (1 bar BMEP) and high
load (3 bar BMEP) for 100 h each, revealed that the carbon deposits on
the engine piston were lower with emulsion fuel containing 10 % water
[211].  An  earlier  study  [227]  also  demonstrated  that  emulsion  fuel
delayed  the  degradation  of  lubricant  oil  by  controlling  the  total  acid
number (TAN), which was reduced by 14 % with diesel emulsion con-
taining 10 % water. The viscosity of the lubricating oil at the end of a
200-h  steady-state  test  was  also  higher  than  a  sample  taken  from  an
engine  operated  with  diesel  under  similar  conditions.  However,  it  is
worth considering that the long-term durability tests were conducted on
engines with mechanical fuel injection systems. Studies are warranted
with engines equipped with modern high-pressure common rail injec-
tion  systems.  In  such  components,  the  tolerances  are  lower,  injector
orifices are smaller, and thus, the emulsion fuel would experience higher
shearing forces at very high pressures [158].

A crucial aspect of adopting emulsions for direct use in engines is the
effect  on  the  real-world  fuel  economy,  the  wear  and  tear  of  engine
components and the overall operating costs. Real-world fuel economy
can be best assessed by using the fuels in vehicles on-road to monitor the
effect  of  the  emulsions.  A  study  in  this  direction  was  carried  out  by
Tzirakis et al. [228], who prepared and used water-in-diesel emulsion
with 13.5 % water-by-volume in city buses. Four different buses oper-
ating  on  different  routes  experiencing  varying  traffic  conditions  were
used for the study. The fuel economy results revealed that the average
fuel consumption increased by 2 % for the emulsion. This includes the
water  in  the  fuel.  Therefore,  eliminating  the  water  content  from  the
calculations  revealed  that  the  diesel  consumed  was  lower  with  the
emulsion. An earlier investigation [229] using water-in-diesel emulsion
having  20  %  by  weight  of  water  showed  that  the  fuel  consumption
improved by 4–12 % for the emulsion. The test used two modes from the
13-mode EPA test cycle.

Bandbafha et al. [230] used the life cycle assessment framework to
assess  the  impact  of  emulsion  fuel.  They  concluded  that  the  overall
impact of the emulsion on resource consumption was lower than neat
diesel. However, it is pertinent to note that the amount of water used
was only 3 % by fuel weight. It is also important to note that the fuel
injection  system  was  conventional  in  all  the  cases  mentioned  above,
unlike the high-pressure common rail direct injection systems used in
present-day  automotive  engines.  Kim  et  al.  [231]  investigated  the
damage severity of a common rail direct injection system using experi-
mental  and  statistical  methods  when  subjected  to  different  emulsion
fuels  at  various  engine  operating  conditions.  Emulsions  with  water
content  ranging  from  1.5  to  20  %  were  tested,  and  these  fuels  were
produced onboard using an overhead stirrer. The positive effects of the
emulsion on engine emissions notwithstanding, it was noticed that there
was  considerable  wear  on  the  common  rail  direct  injection  system
components, especially the valve piston, nozzle needle, and ball seat of
the  injector.  This  was  attributed  to  the  lower  lubricating  ability  of
water-blended diesel. However, these effects were significant beyond a
water concentration of 10 % and an engine speed of 1500 RPM, sug-
gesting  that lower water quantities may be used safely at low engine
speeds. A summary of current challenges and the methods to overcome
those  challenges  for  the  commercialization  of  emulsion  fuels  are  as
follows:

• The use of emulsion fuels provides significant benefits in emissions
reduction  and  real-world  fuel  economy.  However,  the  significant

shortcomings concerning the higher cost of stable emulsion prepa-
ration and the effect on the components of the common rail direct
injection systems must be addressed.

• The preparation of stable emulsions is still an area that needs active
research.  One  of  the  major  focus areas  is  the  development  of  sur-
factants that can be used in minimal quantities to provide a stable
emulsion that exhibits long-term stability.

• Emulsions  with  small  water  quantities,  such  as  3  %  and  6  %  by
weight  preferably,  and  not  exceeding  10  %  by  weight,  have  been
shown  to  exhibit  long  stability  periods  and,  thus,  could  be  of  im-
mediate interest for commercial applications.

• Emulsions can currently be restricted to stationary low-speed diesel
engine  applications,  such  as  those  used  in  agricultural  and  power
generation, and heavy-duty engines used in trucks and off-road ap-
plications.  These  engines  generally  use  mechanical  fuel  injection
systems to handle emulsion fuels long-term. If required, occasional
flushing with neat diesel can be carried out to prevent any deposit
build-up in the fuel injection system.

• Engines equipped with common-rail direct injection systems should
be made to handle emulsions with ultra-low water quantities, and for
such engines, a regular diesel-flush operation is recommended. Until
the  satisfactory  development  of  oxidation-resistant  materials  for
designing the fuel injection systems is accomplished, modern diesel
engines  should  handle  emulsions  with  smaller  water  quantities,
preferably less than 10 % by weight.

• The development of onboard  emulsion preparation systems  would
ensure that the shortcomings above are taken care of, wherein the
water quantity in the emulsion is kept under control with a capacity
to cut off water regularly for a flushing operation. This would ensure
that the benefits of water addition to fuel are reaped while extending
the life of the fuel injection system components.

Much work in emulsions was carried out earlier, and the prevailing
diesel engine emission targets have changed significantly. However, a
one-to-one comparison of base fuel and its emulsion in modern common-
rail diesel engines designed for current emissions standards would yield
positive results in favour of the emulsion. Unfortunately, experiments
that  implement  changes  in  the  injection  schedule  and  compare  the
performance  of  emulsions  with  the  base  fuel  are  not  available  in  the
literature,  and  that  is  one  of  the  present  review’s  recommendations.
Investigations must maintain a similar combustion phasing of the base
fuel  and  emulsions  to  evaluate  emulsion  fuel  performance  fairly.
Moreover,  in  countries  like  India,  where  the  utilization  of  stationary
diesel engines in agriculture and small utility power generation sectors is
most  common,  applying  stable  emulsions  provides  significant  advan-
tages, as demonstrated recently [232].

Moreover, active research is currently pursued to optimize parame-
ters that influence the production of stable emulsions [233] and their
application in engines [263], which is encouraged by the commercial
interest in such fuels. The present review has revealed that the emulsion
fuels are well-adapted for stationary diesel engine applications, whether
prepared  ahead  or  in  situ.  However,  active  research  is  still  urgently
required for long-term use in automotive common-rail direct injection
engines.  The  long-term  application  of  such  engines  seems  to  have  a
deteriorative  impact  on  the  fuel  injection  system  components;  hence,
research into new materials needs to be pursued. Developing surfactants
that  can  improve  the  lubricity  characteristics  of  stable  emulsions  can
promote their use in modern engines.

8.2. Relevance of emulsion fuels in the current scenario

The legislative bodies are currently imposing increasingly stringent
constraints  on  tailpipe  emissions  and  fuel  consumption  for  internal
combustion engines [234]. While the Indian norms dictate a reduction
in NOx  and PM in the range of 68 % and 82 %, respectively, from the
previous  BS-IV  emission  norms,  the  Euro  norms  for  the  emission

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113329

S. Gowrishankar et al.

regulation  involve  a  reduction  of  28  %  in  NOx  for  the  Euro  6  norms
compared to Euro 5 for light-duty diesel engines. In contrast, it is 78 %
and 58 % for NOx and PM for heavy-duty diesel engines [235,236]. As
per  a  2018  report,  the  cost  to  reach  the  required  emission  standard
would reach nearly $1000 per engine, primarily driven by DPF and SCR
systems  [237].  To  minimize  the  cost  and  complexity  of  exhaust
after-treatment  systems  and  reduce  fuel  economy  penalties,  consider-
able  research  should  focus  on  the  in-cylinder  control  of  emissions
through the fuel modification route, such as emulsion technology. In this
regard, investigations concerning the formulation, characterization, and
effect of emulsions on engine combustion, performance, and emission
characteristics are paramount. A critical summary of up-to-date studies
is a valuable contribution for research groups to have prior knowledge of
existing  work,  which  can  be  used  to  further  progress  towards  novel
contributions.  This  was  the  focus  of  the  present  review,  holistically
presenting aspects concerning preparing stable emulsion fuels, charac-
terization  of  emulsion  stability  and  their  applications  in  compression
ignition engines. It is worth considering that although numerous studies
put  forth  emulsion  as  a  viable  substitute  for  diesel,  most  of  the  in-
vestigations  are  conducted  at  the  laboratory  level  under  steady-state
conditions.  One  of  the  very  impactful  outcomes  is  the  understanding
that while emulsion fuels can be used as a realistic replacement for diesel
in engines used for stationary applications, their use on a long-term basis
on  modern  automotive  engines  equipped  with  common-rail  injection
systems  poses  challenges  in  terms  of  component  wear  even  though
emissions benefits are reaped.

Moreover,  studies  on  engine  performance  and  exhaust  emissions
have  been  carried  out  with  not  adequately  characterised  emulsions.
Thus, the present review also fills in a lack of cohesive data concerning
the  protocols  for  tailoring  the  morphology,  structure,  and  character-
ization of emulsion fuels and optimization of the engine conditions. It
provides the reader with a conclusive view of the current state-of-the-art
applications of emulsion fuels and future directions.

9. Concluding remarks and outlook

The  diesel-water  emulsions  can  mitigate  the  NOx-PM  trade-off  in
diesel engines without any significant penalty on the brake specific fuel
consumption. The other two regulated pollutants, namely HC and CO,
can  also  be  reduced  with  emulsion  by  suitably  optimizing  the  water
concentration and the fuel injection parameters depending on the en-
gine type and the operating conditions. The primary favourable feature
of emulsion is that it can reduce all the major pollutants without the
need  for  cost  and  energy-intensive  engine  hardware  modifications,
which  is  usually  the  case  with  combustion  mode  or  after-treatment-
based  pollutant  reduction  methods  [213,218,229].  However,  to
wholly reap the benefits of diesel-water emulsion on the performance
improvement and emission reduction in diesel engines, careful consid-
eration must be made regarding the preparation of emulsions. The pri-
mary factor that needs to be considered is the stability of the emulsions.
If  the  emulsions  can  be  made  stable  over  an  extended  period,  the
requirement for an onboard mixing system can be avoided, leading to a
less complex fuel supply and handling system. Depending on the avail-
ability of surfactant, cost, and energy considerations, the emulsions can
be prepared as macro-, micro-, or nanoemulsions, with distinct charac-
teristics. The literature on diesel-water emulsion preparation and char-
acterization, spray, engine performance, and emission characteristics is
scrutinized  in  the  present  review  article.  The  concluding  remarks  on
each of these aspects of diesel-water emulsion are as follows:

9.1. Perspectives on the emulsion preparation and characterization

i. While there is a plethora of contributions and expertise on pre-
paring  and  characterizing  emulsions  in  soft  matter  scientific
literature, its various facets have not been extended to the current
emulsion fuels research. This review article reinforces that it is

interesting and imperative to exploit the concepts from the soft
matter community for an effective design of emulsions as plau-
sible fuels.

ii.  Multiple factors such as dispersed phase volume fraction or water
concentration  in  diesel,  emulsion  fuel  constituents  and  compo-
sitions, surfactant type and various engine operating conditions,
to name a few, impact the combustion chemistry and, therefore,
introduce additional complexity.

iii.  The variability of microstructure and lack of characterization of
emulsion fuels using appropriate techniques has led to inconsis-
tent and contrasting results across literature, thus escalating the
difficulty in obtaining conclusive data. This review article reveals
the prominent emulsion preparation and testing techniques for a
complete characterization of the morphology and microstructure
of emulsion fuels.

iv. Although  there  have  been  significant  advances  in  the  develop-
ment and utilization of emulsion fuels for laboratory-scale bench
tests,  appropriate  efforts  are  crucial  to  delivering  well-
characterized,  cost-effective  emulsion  fuels  in  a  commercial
setting  that  adheres  to  government-regulated  guidelines  and
mandates.  Thus,  improvements  are  possible  by  optimizing  and
standardizing preparation protocols since such studies have not
been pursued as much. This review attempts to bridge the earlier
gaps by integrating standard procedures from the emulsion sci-
ence community into the fuels community.

v.  Although the preparation and characterization of emulsion fuels
remain  a  subject  of  investigation  in  many  works,  the  scale-up,
thorough characterization, and  testing of  the formulations  at a
large scale remain unexplored.

9.2. Future considerations on the choice of surfactants

This review also emphasizes surfactants’ role in preparing emulsion
fuels. The choice of the surfactant (or co-surfactant, if added) is essen-
tial. Most commercial surfactants are expensive; more often than not,
the selection and concentration of the surfactant dictate the overall cost-
effectiveness of the fuel. Previous sections summarize that many studies
have  prepared  emulsion  fuels  using  non-ionic  surfactants.  The  possi-
bility of exploring ionic and other bio-surfactants creates new research
opportunities. Many surfactants of natural origin, particularly from the
microbial world, display excellent surface modifying properties, leading
to natural wetting, emulsification, foaming and dispersion [238,239].
These surfactants, aptly referred to as bio-surfactants, are lipopeptides,
nucleolipids  or  glycolipids,  containing  lipophilic  hydrocarbon  chains
(with or without unsaturation) covalently attached to a short peptide or
a nucleobase/nucleotide/short oligonucleotide or carbohydrate moiety
as  a  neutral  polar  head  group.  The  peptide  unit  in  lipopeptides  is
covalently linked through amide functionality.

In contrast, in nucleolipid, a nucleobase or a nucleotide or a short
oligonucleotide is covalently attached to saturated or unsaturated hy-
drocarbon chains through C–N or C–O bonds. The carbohydrate moiety
in  glycolipids  is  covalently  attached  to  the  lipophilic  group  mainly
through C–O bonds. Glycolipids are further classified based on the na-
ture and structure of carbohydrate moieties. A few prominent examples
are  rhamnolipids,  cellobiolipids,  sophorolipids  and  trehalolipids,
wherein the carbohydrate moiety are rhamnose, cellobiose, sophorose
and  trehalose.  Despite  their  promise  as  environmentally  friendly  sur-
factants, due to their low toxicity and good biodegradability, wide ap-
plications  have  been  severely  restricted  due  to  the  high  cost  of
production,  low  efficiency  of  separation  and  purification  of  several
components  contained  therein.  Although  the  present  juncture  awaits
sustainable  and  large-scale  production  of  glycolipids,  presumably
through  genetically  engineered  strains  or  otherwise  [240,241],  their
exploration and potential commercial applications in emulsion fuels are
foreseen in future. Directed efforts to delineate the critical design vari-
ables and implications of the chemical structure of surfactants on their

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113330

S. Gowrishankar et al.

emission characteristics is an open question and is yet to be understood.

9.3. Perspectives on the stability of emulsion fuels

i.  A  substantial  portion  of  this  review  article  encompasses  the
various facets pertaining to evaluating the stability of emulsion
fuels before their utilization. Since the inherent nature of diesel
and water is to phase separate due to the immiscibility of the base
components, an overarching feature of this article highlights the
importance of the stability criteria and that it must be considered
for usage in engines as fuels.

ii.  The kinetic and thermodynamic stability concepts of emulsions
have  been  reinforced,  and  their  essential  features  have  been
presented.  Several  phenomena  known  to  destabilize  emulsions
have been articulated to understand the mechanisms associated
with  the  destabilization  of  emulsion  fuels.  Understanding  the
underlying  destabilization  mechanism  is  crucial  to  designing
effective, stable emulsion fuels for the desired application.
iii.  Evaluation of emulsion fuels for time and temperature stability
has been highlighted from a handful of studies carried out thus
far,  which  are  likely  to  form  an  essential  direction  for  future
research of such fuels. It is interesting and desirable to explore the
effect  of  external  factors  on  the  overall  morphology,  phase
behaviour, droplet size evolution, and microstructure of emulsion
fuels.

9.4. Fuel spray characteristics of diesel-water emulsions in comparison to
diesel

i.  An  increased  density  and  viscosity  of  emulsion  leads  to  longer
spray penetration length; however, this effect is prominent only
at  lower  chamber  temperatures.  The  spray  penetration  lengths
are comparable at higher temperatures closer to engine operating
conditions.

ii.  The spray cone angle for the emulsion is lower during the initial
fuel injection period. However, after a transient period, the spray
expands, attributed to the microexplosion phenomena that aid in
improved atomization and better mixing.

iii.  The  flame  images  of  emulsions  taken  from  constant  volume
combustion  chambers  revealed  that  the  extent  of  high-
temperature  regions  is  significantly  reduced  with  emulsion.  It
corroborates that the combustion gas temperatures are reduced
with emulsion.

iv.  The spray momentum and the air entrainment into the spray zone
were  generally  higher  with  an  emulsion  that  has  a  favourable
influence on the diesel engine combustion characteristics.

v.  Although  macroscopic  spray  characteristics  are  extensively
investigated with emulsions, studies on microscopic spray char-
acteristics are sparse, which carries significance to examining and
quantifying the benefits due to microexplosion phenomena

9.5. Engine performance and emissions with diesel-water emulsions in
comparison to diesel

i.  The combustion gas temperatures are significantly reduced with
an emulsion that directly impacts the formation rate of oxides of
nitrogen, resulting in its reduction.

ii.  The  ignition  delay  is  longer,  increasing  the  degree  of  fuel-air
premixing  and  reducing  particulate  matter  emissions  with
emulsion. For  the same reason, there is a  tendency to increase
NOx  emissions. A trade-off between the cooling effect resulting
from the higher latent heat of vaporization of water in emulsion
and the effects due to increased premixing almost always favours
the dominant influence of the former effect.

injection duration with an emulsion that favours a reduction in
the soot formation.

iv.  Due to significant differences in the boiling temperatures of water
and diesel in the emulsion, the micro-explosion phenomena result
in  a  sudden  burst  of  water  molecules,  leading  to  smaller  fuel
fragments and better air-fuel mixing. It helps to reduce the rate of
formation of soot precursors.

v.  A higher burn rate with emulsion reduces the extent to which the
combustion  event  progresses  during  the  expansion  stroke.
Further, soot oxidation at higher temperatures is also promoted.
vi.  The chemical kinetic pathway of emulsion fuels leads to more OH
radical  formation,  which  promotes  the  oxidation  of  soot
precursors.

vii.  Although  the  engine  cylinder  temperature  reduction  is  not
favourable for CO oxidation, with smaller quantities of water in
the emulsion, the advantage of the improved air-fuel mixing may
outweigh the former, resulting in lower CO emissions.

viii. An  increased  spray  penetration  due  to  higher  density  and  vis-
cosity of emulsion may lead to spray wall wetting, especially in
small-bore diesel engines. It has a direct influence on increasing
HC emissions. However, optimizing the fuel injection parameters
specific  to engine  type and  operating  conditions can reduce  or
eliminate this effect.

ix. To  improve  the  engine  performance  and  reduce  exhaust  emis-
sions with emulsions, injection parameter optimization, exhaust
gas  recirculation,  compression  ratio  changes,  and  combustion
chamber modifications are suggested.

x.  The steady-state and transient tests conducted with emulsions are
short-term tests for engine performance improvement and emis-
sion reduction. However, long-term durability tests must be un-
dertaken with emulsions to examine corrosion effects in the fuel
injection system and the engine components.

xi.  More  studies  must  be  conducted  on  the  emulsion  in  modern
common rail direct injection diesel engines with flexible injection
schedules.  The  combustion  phasing  for  the  base  fuel  and  the
emulsion should be maintained by adjusting the injection timing
and  fuel  quantity.  Considering  the  current  emission  standards,
such  studies  would  yield  interesting  and  pertinent  results  con-
cerning the benefit of emulsions over the base fuel.

xii.  A one-to-one comparison of diesel-water emulsions with diesel-
methanol  and  diesel-ethanol  emulsions  should  be  made  under
similar  engine  operating  conditions,  using  various  engine  and
fuel  injection  system  types  to  evaluate  the  relative  merits  and
shortcomings. Systematic investigations would help in deciding
the appropriate fuel for the intended applications.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Sudarshan  Gowrishankar:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,
Formal  analysis,  Investigation,  Methodology,  Software,  Validation,
Visualization, Writing – original draft. Preetika Rastogi: Conceptuali-
zation,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Investigation,  Methodology,
Software,  Validation,  Writing  –  original  draft.  Anand  Krishnasamy:
Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Project  administration,  Resources,
Software, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Madivala G. Basa-
varaj: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration,
Resources,  Software,  Supervision,  Writing  –  review  &  editing.  Niket
Kaisare:  Conceptualization,  Funding  acquisition,  Project  administra-
tion,  Resources,  Software,  Supervision,  Writing  –  review  &  editing.
Indrapal  Singh  Aidhen:  Funding  acquisition,  Project  administration,
Resources, Software, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

iii.  An  increased  premixed  burn  results  in  shorter  diffusion  burn
duration,  so  long  as  there  is  no  unprecedented  increase  in  the

X The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113331

S. Gowrishankar et al.

the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the Department of Science and
Technology, Government of India, for funding the present work through
the research grants, MEE/17-18/395/DSTX/KANN, EMR/2016/002630
and CRG/2019/005732.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101133.

References

[1] Law CK. A model for the combustion of oil/water emulsion droplets. Combust Sci

Technol 1977;17:29–38.

[2] Dryer FL. Water addition to practical combustion systems-Concepts and

applications. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1977;16:279–95.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(77)80332-9.

[3] Gillberg G, Friberg S. Microemulsions as diesel fuels. Evaporation—Combustion
of Fuels; 1978. p. 221–31. https://doi.org/10.1021/ba-1978-0166.ch015.

[4] Boruff PA, Schwab AW, Goering CE, Pryde EH. Evaluation of diesel fuel —

ethanol microemulsions. Transactions of the ASAE 1982;25:47–53. https://doi.
org/10.13031/2013.33474.

[5] Ricardo & SulNox Research and Development Ltd. Diesel emulsion fuels and their

impacts in diesel engines - a review and commentary. 2016.

[6] Canfield CA. Effects of diedel—water emulsion combustion on diesel engine NOx

emissions. 1999.

[7] Kadota T, Yamasaki H. Recent advances in the combustion of water fuel

emulsion. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2002;28:385–404. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0360-1285(02)00005-9.

[8] Abu-Zaid M. Performance of single cylinder, direct injection Diesel engine using
water fuel emulsions. Energy Convers Manag 2004;45:697–705. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0196-8904(03)00179-1.

scattering. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1992;24:1573–8. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80183-9.

[25] Tsue M, Kadota T, Segawa D, Yamasaki H. Statistical analysis of onset of

microexplosion for an emulsion droplet. Symposium (International) on
Combustion 1996;26:1629–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(96)80386-
9.

[26] Wang CH, Chen JT. An experimental investigation of the burning characteristics

of water-oil emulsions. Int Commun Heat Mass Tran 1996;23:823–30. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0735-1933(96)00065-6.

[27] Jackson GS, Avedisian CT. Combustion of unsupported water-in-n-heptane

emulsion droplets in a convection-free environment. Int J Heat Mass Tran 1998;
41:2503–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0017-9310(97)00316-5.

[28] Watanabe H, Suzuki Y, Harada T, Matsushita Y, Aoki H, Miura T. An experimental

investigation of the breakup characteristics of secondary atomization of
emulsified fuel droplet. Energy 2010;35:806–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2009.08.021.

[29] Kadota T, Tanaka H, Segawa D, Nakaya S, Yamasaki H. Microexplosion of an

emulsion droplet during Leidenfrost burning. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31 II:
2125–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.001.

[30] Shen S, Sun K, Che Z, Wang T, Jia M, Cai J. Mechanism of micro-explosion of

water-in-oil emulsified fuel droplet and its effect on soot generation. Energy
2020;191:116488. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116488.
[31] Moussa O, Tarlet D, Massoli P, Bellettre J. Parametric study of the micro-

explosion occurrence of W/O emulsions. Int J Therm Sci 2018;133:90–7. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2018.07.016.

[32] Antonov DV, Kuznetsov GV, Strizhak PA, Rybdylova O, Sazhin SS. Micro-

explosion and autoignition of composite fuel/water droplets. Combust Flame
2019;210:479–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.09.004.
[33] Sazhina EM, Sazhin SS, Heikal MR, Babushok VI, Johns RJR. A detailed modelling

of the spray ignition process in diesel engines. Combust Sci Technol 2000;160:
317–44. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200008935806.

[34] Vollenbroek JC, Nieuwelink AE, Bomer JG, Tiggelaar RM, van den Berg A,

Weckhuysen BM, et al. Droplet microreactor for high-throughput fluorescence-
based measurements of single catalyst particle acidity. Microsyst Nanoeng 2023;
9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41378-023-00495-2.

[35] Liu L, Xiang N, Ni Z. Droplet-based microreactor for the production of micro/
nano-materials. Electrophoresis 2020;41:833–51. https://doi.org/10.1002/
elps.201900380.

[36] Leamon JH, Link DR, Egholm M, Rothberg JM. Overview: methods and
applications for droplet compartmentalization of biology, vol. 3; 2006.
[37] Nam I, Lee JK, Nam HG, Zare RN. Abiotic production of sugar phosphates and

uridine ribonucleoside in aqueous microdroplets. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2017;
114:12396–400. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1714896114.

[38] Meng Y, Gnanamani E, Zare RN. Direct C(sp3)-N bond formation between toluene
and amine in water microdroplets. J Am Chem Soc 2022;144:19709. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jacs.2c10032. –13.

[9] Ivanov VM, Nefedov PI. Experimental investigation of the combustion process of

[39] Guo P, Huang J, Zhao Y, Martin CR, Zare RN, Moses MA. Nanomaterial

natural and emulsified liquid fuels. 1965.

[10] Dryer FL. Fundamental concepts on the use of emulsions as fuels. 1975.
[11] Weatherford WD, Naegeli DW. Study of pool burning self-extinguishment

mechanisms in aqueous diesel fuel microemulsions. J Dispersion Sci Technol
1984;5:159–77. https://doi.org/10.1080/01932698408943215.

[12] Henrikson KG. Fire-resistant fluids and mobile equipment. SAE Technical Papers

1965;74:244–64. https://doi.org/10.4271/650671.

[13] LePera ME, Quillian Jr RD, Weatherford Jr WD, Fodor GE, Ecklund EE. Fire safe

diesel fuel emulsions. 1960.

[14] Gollahalli SR. An experimental study of the combustion of unsupported drops of
residual oils and emulsions. Combust Sci Technol 1979;19:245–50. https://doi.
org/10.1080/00102207908946886.

[15] Gollahalli SR, Rasmussen ML, Moussavi SJ. Combustion of drops and sprays of

No. 2 diesel oil and its emulsions with water. Symposium (International) on
Combustion 1981;18:349–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(81)80040-9.

[16] Miller CA, Srivastava RK. Combustion of Orimulsion and its generation of air

pollutants. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2000;26:131–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0360-1285(99)00014-3.

[17] Attia AMA, Kulchitskiy AR. Influence of the structure of water-in-fuel emulsion on
diesel engine performance. Fuel 2014;116:703–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2013.08.057.

[18] Bemert L, Engelskirchen S, Simon C. Low emissions with microemulsion-fuels.

Am Chem Soc, Div Fuel Chem 2009;54:290–1.

[19] Lin CY, Wang KH. Diesel engine performance and emission characteristics using
three-phase emulsions as fuel. Fuel 2004;83:537–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2003.08.012.

[20] Huo M, Lin S, Liu H, Lee CFF. Study on the spray and combustion characteristics

of water-emulsified diesel. Fuel 2014;123:218–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2013.12.035.

[21] Law CK, Lee CH, Srinivasan N. Combustion characteristics of water-in-oil

emulsion droplets. Combust Flame 1980;37:125–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0010-2180(80)90080-2.

[22] Mondal PK, Mandal BK. A comprehensive review on the feasibility of using water

emulsified diesel as a CI engine fuel. Fuel 2019;237:937–60. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2018.10.076.

[23] Sjogren A. Burning of water-in-oil emulsions. Power Systems 1977:297–305.
[24] Mattiello M, Cosmai L, Pistone L, Beretta F, Massoli P. Experimental evidence for
microexplosions in water/fuel oil emulsion flames inferred by laser light

preparation by extrusion through nanoporous membranes. Small 2018;14.
https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201703493.

[40] Musyanovych A, Mail ̈a V, Landfester K. Miniemulsion droplets as single molecule
nanoreactors for polymerase chain reaction. 2005. https://doi.org/10.1021/
bm050084.

[41] Zhang M, Ettelaie R, Dong L, Li X, Li T, Zhang X, et al. Pickering emulsion droplet-
based biomimetic microreactors for continuous flow cascade reactions. Nat
Commun 2022;13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28100-6.

[42] Rastogi P, Kaisare NS, Basavaraj MG. Diesel emulsion fuels with ultralong

stability. Energy Fuel 2019;33:12227–35. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.9b02870.

[43] Wang F, Fang B, Zhang Z, Zhang S, Chen Y. The effect of alkanol chain on the

interfacial composition and thermodynamic properties of diesel oil
microemulsion. Fuel 2008;87:2517–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2008.01.027.

[44] Vellaiyan S, Amirthagadeswaran KS, Vijayakumar S. Combustion of stable water-
in-diesel emulsion fuel and performance assessment. Energy Sources, Part A
Recovery, Util Environ Eff 2017;39. https://doi.org/10.1080/
15567036.2016.1233304.

[45] Patil H, Gadhave A, Mane S, Waghmare J. Analyzing the stability of the water-in-
diesel fuel emulsion. J Dispersion Sci Technol 2015;36:1221–7. https://doi.org/
10.1080/01932691.2014.962039.

[46] Rastogi P, Mehta PS, Kaisare NS, Basavaraj MG. Kinetic stability of surfactant
stabilized water-in-diesel emulsion fuels. Fuel 2019;236:1415–22. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.09.074.

[47] Wang CH, Law CK. Microexplosion of fuel droplets under high pressure. Combust
Flame 1985;59:53–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(85)90057-4.

[48] Lin CY, Wang KH. Effects of an oxygenated additive on the emulsification

characteristics of two- and three-phase diesel emulsions. Fuel 2004;83:507–15.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2003.08.014.

[49] Lin CY, Chen LW. Engine performance and emission characteristics of three-phase
diesel emulsions prepared by an ultrasonic emulsification method. Fuel 2006;85:
593–600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2005.09.007.

[50] Califano V, Calabria R, Massoli P. Experimental evaluation of the effect of

emulsion stability on micro-explosion phenomena for water-in-oil emulsions. Fuel
2014;117:87–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.08.073.

[51] Ochoterena R, Lif A, Nyd ́en M, Andersson S, Denbratt I. Optical studies of spray
development and combustion of water-in-diesel emulsion and microemulsion
fuels. Fuel 2010;89:122–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2009.06.039.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113332

S. Gowrishankar et al.

[52] Lif A, Skoglundh M, Gjirja S, Denbratt I. Reduction of soot emissions from a direct
injection diesel engine using water-in-diesel emulsion and microemulsion fuels.
2007 SAE Technical Papers 2007. https://doi.org/10.4271/2007-01-1076.
[53] Lif A, Stark M, Nyd ́en M, Holmberg K. Fuel emulsions and microemulsions based
on Fischer-Tropsch diesel. Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp 2010;354:91–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2009.08.020.

[54] Lif A, Nyd ́en M, Holmberg K. Water-in-diesel microemulsions studied by NMR
diffusometry. J Dispersion Sci Technol 2009;30:881–91. https://doi.org/
10.1080/01932690802644079.

[55] Ismael MA, Heikal MR, Aziz ARA, Crua C, El-Adawy M, Nissar Z, et al.

Investigation of puffing and micro-explosion of water-in-diesel emulsion spray
using shadow imaging. Energies 2018;11. https://doi.org/10.3390/en11092281.
[56] Ithnin AM, Yahya WJ, Ahmad MA, Ramlan NA, Abdul Kadir H, Sidik NAC, et al.
Emulsifier-free Water-in-Diesel emulsion fuel: its stability behaviour, engine
performance and exhaust emission. Fuel 2018;215:454–62. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2017.11.061.

[78] Ghannam MT, Selim MYE. Stability behavior of water-in-diesel fuel emulsion.

Petrol Sci Technol 2009;27:396–411. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10916460701783969.

[79] Selim MYE, Ghannam MT. Combustion study of stabilized water-in-diesel fuel
emulsion. Energy Sources, Part A Recovery, Util Environ Eff 2010;32:256–74.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15567030802467621.

[80] Kayali I, Karaein M, Qamhieh K, Wadaah S, Ahmad W, Olsson U. Phase behavior
of bicontinuous and water/diesel fuel microemulsions using nonionic surfactants
combined with hydrophilic alcohol ethoxylates. J Dispersion Sci Technol 2015;
36:10–7. https://doi.org/10.1080/01932691.2014.886513.

[81] Kayali I, Karaeen M, Ahmed W, Qamhieh K, Olsson U. Alternative diesel fuel:

microemulsion phase behavior and combustion properties. J Dispersion Sci
Technol 2016;37:894–9. https://doi.org/10.1080/01932691.2015.1071267.
[82] Yang WM, An H, Chou SK, Vedharaji S, Vallinagam R, Balaji M, et al. Emulsion
fuel with novel nano-organic additives for diesel engine application. Fuel 2013;
104:726–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2012.04.051.

[57] Wang Z, Wu S, Huang Y, Huang S, Shi S, Cheng X, et al. Experimental

[83] Ohshima H, Yamashita Y, Sakamoto K. Hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB):

investigation on spray, evaporation and combustion characteristics of ethanol-
diesel, water-emulsified diesel and neat diesel fuels. Fuel 2018;231:438–48.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.05.129.

[58] Wang Z, Shi S, Huang S, Tang J, Du T, Cheng X, et al. Effects of water content on
evaporation and combustion characteristics of water emulsified diesel spray. Appl
Energy 2018;226:397–407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.06.023.

[59] Leng L, Yuan X, Zeng G, Wang H, Huang H, Chen X. The comparison of oxidative
thermokinetics between emulsion and microemulsion diesel fuel. Energy Convers
Manag 2015;101:364–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.05.071.
[60] Ithnin AM, Ahmad MA, Bakar MAA, Rajoo S, Yahya WJ. Combustion performance
and emission analysis of diesel engine fuelled with water-in-diesel emulsion fuel
made from low-grade diesel fuel. Energy Convers Manag 2015;90:375–82.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2014.11.025.

[61] Sharma A, Kumar N, Vibhanshu V, Deep A. Emission studies on a VCR engine

using stable diesel water emulsion. 2013. https://doi.org/10.4271/2013-01-
2665. SAE Paper 2013-01-2665.

[62] Noor El-Din MR, El-Hamouly SH, Mohamed HM, Mishrif MR, Ragab AM. Water-
in-diesel fuel nanoemulsions: preparation, stability and physical properties.
Egyptian Journal of Petroleum 2013;22:517–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejpe.2013.11.006.

[63] Maiboom A, Tauzia X. NOx and PM emissions reduction on an automotive HSDI
Diesel engine with water-in-diesel emulsion and EGR: an experimental study. Fuel
2011;90:3179–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2011.06.014.

classical indexation and novel indexation of surfactant. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Encyclopedia of Biocolloid and Biointerface Science 2V Set 2016;1:570–4.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119075691.ch45.

[84] Rosen MJ. In: Surfactants and interfacial phenomena. third ed. john Wiley & Sons

Ltd.; 2004.

[85] Danielsson I, Lindman B. The definition of microemulsion. Colloid Surface 1981;

3:391–2. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-6622(81)80064-9.

[86] McClements DJ. In: Food emulsions: principles, practices, and techniques. third

ed. . CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group; 2016.

[87] Hiemenz PC, Rajagoplan R. In: Principles of colloid and surface chemistry. third

ed. . Marcel Dekker, Inc.; 1997.

[88] Nam YS, Kim JW, Shim J, Han SH, Kim HK. Nanosized emulsions stabilized by

semisolid polymer interphase. Langmuir 2010;26:13038–43. https://doi.org/
10.1021/la102084f.

[89] Liu D, Kobayashi T, Russo S, Li F, Plevy SE, Gambling TM, et al. In vitro and in

vivo evaluation of a water-in-oil microemulsion system for enhanced peptide
intestinal delivery. AAPS J 2013;15:288–98. https://doi.org/10.1208/s12248-
012-9441-7.

[90] Tadros TF. Emulsion science and Technology. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.

KGaA Weinheim; 2009.

[91] Stepiˇsnik Perdih T, Zupanc M, Dular M. Revision of the mechanisms behind oil-
water (O/W) emulsion preparation by ultrasound and cavitation. Ultrason
Sonochem 2019;51:298–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2018.10.003.

[64] Basha JS, Anand RB. An experimental study in a CI engine using nanoadditive

[92] Abbas S, Hayat K, Karangwa E, Bashari M, Zhang X. An overview of ultrasound-

blended water-diesel emulsion fuel. Int J Green Energy 2011;8:332–48. https://
doi.org/10.1080/15435075.2011.557844.

assisted food-grade nanoemulsions. Food Eng Rev 2013;5:139–57. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12393-013-9066-3.

[65] Zhang W, Chen Z, Shen Y, Shu G, Chen G, Xu B. Influence of water emulsified
diesel & oxygen-enriched air on diesel engine NO-smoke emissions and
combustion characteristics. Energy 2013;55:369–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2013.03.042.

[66] Afify EM, Korah NS, Dickey DW. The effect of air charge temperature on

performance ignition delay and exhaust emissions of diesel engines using W/O
emulsions as fuel. International Congress and Exposition; 1987.

[67] Park S, Woo S, Kim H, Lee K. The characteristic of spray using diesel water

emulsified fuel in a diesel engine. Appl Energy 2016;176:209–20. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.05.069.

[68] Syu JY, Chang YYM, Tseng CH, Yan YL, Chang YYM, Chen CC, et al. Effects of
water-emulsified fuel on a diesel engine generator’s thermal efficiency and
exhaust. J Air Waste Manage Assoc 2014;64:970–8. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10962247.2014.905508.

[69] Armas O, Ballesteros R, Martos FJ, Agudelo JR. Characterization of light duty

Diesel engine pollutant emissions using water-emulsified fuel. Fuel 2005;84:
1011–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2004.11.015.

[70] Samec N, Kegl B, Dibble RW. Numerical and experimental study of water/oil

emulsified fuel combustion in a diesel engine. Fuel 2002;81:2035–44. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0016-2361(02)00135-7.

[93] Shah RK, Shum HC, Rowat AC, Lee D, Agresti JJ, Utada AS, et al. Designer
emulsions using microfluidics. Mater Today 2008;11:18–27. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S1369-7021(08)70053-1.

[94] Maan AA, Schro ̈en K, Boom R. Spontaneous droplet formation techniques for

monodisperse emulsions preparation - perspectives for food applications. J Food
Eng 2011;107:334–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2011.07.008.
[95] Gupta A, Eral HB, Hatton TA, Doyle PS. Nanoemulsions: formation, properties

and applications. Soft Matter 2016;12:2826–41.

[96] Guha IF, Anand S, Varanasi KK. Creating nanoscale emulsions using

condensation. Nat Commun 2017;8:1–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-
01420-8.

[97] Mikula RJ. Emulsions: fundamentals and applications in the petroleum industry.

1992.

[98] Binks BP, Lumsdon SO. Catastrophic phase inversion of water-in-oil emulsions
stabilized by hydrophobie silica. Langmuir 2000;16:2539–47. https://doi.org/
10.1021/la991081j.

[99] Mathapa BG, Paunov VN. Cyclodextrin stabilised emulsions and

cyclodextrinosomes. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2013;15:17903–14. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c3cp52116h.

[100] Fanun M. MICROEMULSIONS properties and applications. CRC Press Taylor &

[71] Kegl B, Pehan S. Reduction of diesel engine emissions by water injection. SAE

Francis Group; 2009.

Technical Papers. 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/2001-01-3259.

[72] Alahmer A, Yamin J, Sakhrieh A, Hamdan MA. Engine performance using

emulsified diesel fuel. Energy Convers Manag 2010;51:1708–13. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2009.11.044.

[101] Chhabra RP, Gurappa B. Coulson and richardson’s chemical engineering: volume
2A: particulate systems and particle Technology. Sixth Edit. Butterworth-
Heinemann; 2019.

[102] Barnes HA, Hutton JF, Walters K. An introduction to rheology. Third Edit.

[73] Chen Z, Wang X, Pei Y, Zhang C, Xiao M, He J. Experimental investigation of the

Elsevier Science Publishers B V; 1993.

performance and emissions of diesel engines by a novel emulsified diesel fuel.
Energy Convers Manag 2015;95:334–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2015.02.016.

[103] Jan Mewis, Wagner NJ. Colloidal suspension rheology. Cambridge University

Press; 2012.

[104] Bird BR, Stewart WE, Lightfoot EL. In: Transport phenomena. second ed. John

[74] Acharya B, Guru PS, Dash S. Tween-80-n-Butanol-Diesel-Water microemulsion

Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2012.

system-A class of alternative diesel fuel. J Dispersion Sci Technol 2014;35:
1492–501. https://doi.org/10.1080/01932691.2013.858348.

[105] Schramm LL. In: Emulsions, foams, suspensions, and aerosols: microscience and

applications. second ed. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.; 2014.

[75] Kayali I, Khawla Q, Monzer F, Salam W, Kunhatta JC, Kanan K. Transport

[106] Van de Hulst HC. Light Scattering by small particles. Dover Publications, Inc.;

properties of alternative fuel microemulsions based on sugar surfactant.
J Dispersion Sci Technol 2017;38:917–22.

[76] Kanan K, Fanun M, Wadaah S, Kayali I. Formulation of microemulsions based on
sugar surfactant as an alternative fuel. J Dispersion Sci Technol 2015;36:
1009–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/01932691.2014.945123.

[77] Bidita BS, Suraya AR, Shazed MA, Salleh MAM, Idris A. Preparation,

characterization and engine performance of water in diesel nanoemulsions.
J Energy Inst 2016;89:354–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joei.2015.03.004.

1981.

[107] Glatter O. Scattering methods and their application in colloid and interface

science. Elsevier Inc.; 2018.

[108] Berne BJ, Pecora R. Dynamic light scattering: with applications to chemistry,

biology, and physics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2000.

[109] Dhont JKG. An introduction to dynamics of colloids. Elsevier Science B. V.; 1996.
[110] Hu YT, Ting Y, Hu JY, Hsieh SC. Techniques and methods to study functional
characteristics of emulsion systems. J Food Drug Anal 2017;25:16–26. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jfda.2016.10.021.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113333

S. Gowrishankar et al.

[111] Hassan PA, Rana S, Verma G. Making sense of Brownian motion: colloid

[140] Rao J, McClements DJ. Food-grade microemulsions, nanoemulsions and

characterization by dynamic light scattering. Langmuir 2015;31:3–12. https://
doi.org/10.1021/la501789z.

[112] Stetefeld J, McKenna SA, Patel TR. Dynamic light scattering: a practical guide and
applications in biomedical sciences. Biophys Rev 2016;8:409–27. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12551-016-0218-6.

[113] Arleth L, Pedersen JS. Droplet polydispersity and shape fluctuations in AOT [bis

(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate sodium salt] microemulsions studied by contrast
variation small-angle neutron scattering. Phys Rev E 2001;63:1–18. https://doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRevE.63.061406.

[114] Basavaraj MG, McFarlane NL, Lynch ML, Wagner NJ. Nanovesicle formation and
microstructure in aqueous ditallowethylesterdimethylammonium chloride
(DEEDMAC) solutions. J Colloid Interface Sci 2014;429:17–24. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcis.2014.04.064.

[115] Walker LM. Scattering from polymer-like micelles. Curr Opin Colloid Interface Sci

2009;14:451–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cocis.2009.08.001.

[116] Weiss TM, Narayanan T, Wolf C, Gradzielski M, Panine P, Finet S, et al. Dynamics
of the self-assembly of unilamellar vesicles. Phys Rev Lett 2005;94:1–4. https://
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.038303.

[117] Amann M, Diget JS, Lyngsø J, Pedersen JS, Narayanan T, Lund R. Kinetic

pathways for polyelectrolyte coacervate micelle formation revealed by time-
resolved synchrotron SAXS. Macromolecules 2019;52:8227–37. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.macromol.9b01072.

emulsions: fabrication from sucrose monopalmitate & lemon oil. Food
Hydrocolloids 2011;25:1413–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodhyd.2011.02.004.

[141] Sheng H, Chen L, Wu C. The droplet group micro-explosions in W/O diesel fuel
emulsion sprays. 1995. https://doi.org/10.4271/950855. SAE Technical Paper.
[142] Matheaus AC, Ryan TW, Daly D, Langer DA, Musculus MPB. Effects of PuriNOx TM
water-diesel fuel emulsions on emissions and fuel economy in a heavy-duty diesel
engine. 2002. https://doi.org/10.4271/2002-01-2891. SAE Technical Paper.

[143] Ashihmin A, Piskunov M, Roisman I, Yanovsky V. Thermal stability control of the

water-in-diesel microemulsion fuel produced by using a nonionic surfactant
combined with aliphatic alcohols. J Dispersion Sci Technol 2020;41:771–8.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01932691.2019.1634583.

[144] Klein-Douwel RJH, Frijters PJM, Somers LMT, Boer WA De, Baert RSG.

Macroscopic diesel fuel spray shadowgraphy using high speed digital imaging in a
high pressure cell. Fuel 2007;86:1994–2007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2006.11.039.

[145] Siebers DL. Scaling liquid-phase fuel penetration in diesel sprays based on mixing-
limited vaporization. 1999. https://doi.org/10.4271/1999-01-0528. SAE
Technical Paper.

[146] Emberson DR, Ihracska B, Imran S, Diez A. Optical characterization of Diesel and
water emulsion fuel injection sprays using shadowgraphy. Fuel 2016;172:253–62.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.01.015.

[118] Ganguly R, Aswal VK, Hassan PA, Gopalakrishnan IK, Yakhmi JV. Sodium

[147] Lin S, Chang Y-C, Guo T-Y. Greener diesel fuels developed from water macro

chloride and ethanol induced sphere to rod transition of triblock copolymer
micelles. J Phys Chem B 2005;109:5653–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0468408.

emulsions : stability and spray property. Advances in Nano, Biomechanics,
Robotics, and Energy Research 2013:918–32.

[119] Feigin LA, Svergun DI. Structure analysis by small-angle X-ray and neutron

[148] Liu J, Feng L, Wang H, Zheng Z, Chen B, Zhang D, et al. Spray characteristics of

scattering. Plenum Press; 1987. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-6624-0.

[120] Pedersen JS. Analysis of small-angle scattering data from colloids and polymer
solutions: Modeling and least-squares fitting. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 1997;70:
171–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0001-8686(97)00312-6.

[121] Hammouda B. Probing nanoscale structures - the SANS toolbox. National Institute

of Standards and Technology; 2016.

[122] S ̈oderman O, Stilbs P, Price WS. NMR studies of surfactants. Concepts Magn Reson
Part A Bridg Educ Res 2004;23:121–35. https://doi.org/10.1002/cmr.a.20022.

[123] Kumar P, Mittal KL. Handbook of microemulsion science and Technology. Marcel

Dekker Inc.; 1999.

[124] Law SJ, Britton MM. Sizing of reverse micelles in microemulsions using NMR

measurements of diffusion. Langmuir 2012;28:11699–706. https://doi.org/
10.1021/la300796u.

[125] Wolf L, Hoffmann H, Linders J, Mayer C. PFG-NMR self-diffusion measurements
in the single phase channels of a microemulsion system with an anionic-nonionic
surfactant mixture. Soft Matter 2012;8:6731–9. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c2sm07301c.

[126] Domschke M, Kraska M, Feile R, Stühn B. AOT microemulsions: droplet size and
clustering in the temperature range between the supercooled state and the upper
phase boundary. Soft Matter 2013;9:11503–12. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c3sm51632f.

[127] Bergenholtz J, Romagnoli AA, Wagner NJ. Viscosity, microstructure, and

interparticle potential of AOT/H2O/n-Decane inverse microemulsions. Langmuir
1995;11:1559–70. https://doi.org/10.1021/la00005a025.

[128] Berg RF, Moldover MR, Huang JS. Quantitative characterization of the viscosity

of a microemulsion. J Chem Phys 1987;87:3687–91. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.453715.

[129] Kim MW, Dozier WD, Klein R. Light scattering measurements in a dilute
microemulsion. J Chem Phys 1985;84:5919–21. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.449904.

[130] Larche FC, Delord P. Structures and stability of isotropic phases in the aot-decane-
water system. Fluid Phase Equil 1985;20:257–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-
3812(85)90043-3.

[131] McClements DJ. Nanoemulsions versus microemulsions: terminology, differences,
and similarities. Soft Matter 2012;8:1719–29. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c2sm06903b.

[132] Lin CY, Wang KH. The fuel properties of three-phase emulsions as an alternative
fuel for diesel engines. Fuel 2003;82:1367–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-
2361(03)00021-8.

[133] Isacsson U. A compilation of laboratory methods for studying stability of bitumen
emulsions. Mater Struct 1985;18:228–36. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02472975.
[134] Pays K, Giermanska-Kahn J, Pouligny B, Bibette J, Leal-Calderon F. Coalescence
in surfactant-stabilized double emulsions. Langmuir 2001;17:7758–69. https://
doi.org/10.1021/la010735x.

[135] Butt H-J, Kappl M. In: Surface and interfacial forces. second ed. Wiley VCH; 2018.
[136] Kayali I, Jyothi CK, Qamhieh K, Olsson U. Surfactant-free alternative fuel: phase
behavior and diffusion properties. J Colloid Interface Sci 2016;463:173–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2015.10.040.

[137] Ashikhmin A, Piskunov M, Yanovsky V, Yan WM. Properties and phase behavior
of water-in-diesel microemulsion fuels stabilized by nonionic surfactants in
combination with aliphatic alcohol. Energy Fuel 2020;34:2135–42. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b03493.

[138] Gonz ́alez DMA, Rivas H, Guti ́errez X, Le ́on A. Performance and emissions using
water in diesel fuel microemulsion. International Fall Fuels and Lubricants
Meeting and Exposition; 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/2001-01-3525.

[139] Mason TG, Wilking JN, Meleson K, Chang CB, Graves SM. Nanoemulsions:

formation, structure, and physical properties. J Phys Condens Matter 2006;18.
https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/18/41/R01.

gasoline/PODE and diesel/PODE blends in a constant volume chamber. Appl
Therm Eng 2019;159:113850. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2019.113850.

[149] Musculus MPB, Dec JE, Tree DR, Daly D, Langer D, Ryan TW, et al. Effects of

water-fuel emulsions on spray and combustion processes in a heavy-duty DI diesel
engine. 2002. https://doi.org/10.4271/2002-01-2892. SAE Technical Paper.

[150] Wuethrich D, von Rotz B, Herrmann K, Boulouchos K. Spray, combustion and soot
of water-in-fuel (n-dodecane) emulsions investigated in a constant volume
combustion chamber part 1: influence of low water content. Fuel 2019;236:
912–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.09.060.

[151] Wuethrich D, von Rotz B, Herrmann K, Boulouchos K. Spray, combustion and soot
of water-in-fuel (n-Dodecane) emulsions in a constant volume combustion
chamber; Part II: effects of low temperature conditions and oxygen
concentrations. Fuel 2019;248:104–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2019.03.036.

[152] Desantes JM, Payri R, Salvador FJ, Gimeno J. Prediction of spray penetration by

means of spray momentum flux. Termicos CMTM, Valencia UP De. 2006. SAE
Technical Paper.

[153] Ma Y, Huang S, Huang R, Zhang Y, Xu S. Spray and evaporation characteristics of
n-pentanol–diesel blends in a constant volume chamber. Energy Convers Manag
2016;130:240–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2016.10.063.
[154] Cui X, Helmantel A, Golovichev V, Denbratt I. Combustion and emissions in a
light-duty diesel engine using diesel-water emulsion and diesel-ethanol blends.
2009. p. 4970. https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-2695. SAE Technical Papers.

[155] Watanabe H, Okazaki K. Visualization of secondary atomization in emulsified-fuel
spray flow by shadow imaging. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:1651–8. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.07.005.

[156] Watanabe H, Shoji Y, Yamagaki T, Hayashi J, Akamatsu F, Okazaki K.

Observation of droplet behavior of emulsified fuel in secondary atomization in
flame. J Therm Sci Technol 2014;9:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1299/
jtst.2014jtst000.

[157] Bolszo CD, Mcdonell VG, Gomez GA, Samuelsen GS. Injection of water-in-oil
emulsion jets into a subsonic crossflow : an experimental study. Atomization
Sprays 2014;24:303–48.

[158] Ismael MA, Heikal MR, Aziz ARA, Syah F, Zainal AEZ, Crua C. The effect of fuel

injection equipment on the dispersed phase of water-in-diesel emulsions. Appl
Energy 2018;222:762–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.03.070.

[159] Hayashi S, Kubota Y, Sawa N, Kajitani S, Enoki K. Fluidity, spray and injection
rate characteristics of unstable water/gas-oil emulsion fuel. W/O); 1990. https://
doi.org/10.4271/900839. SAE Paper.

[160] Tsao KC, Yong X. A further look on micro-explosion of water emulsion fuel

droplets. 1989. https://doi.org/10.4271/891883. SAE Technical Paper.
[161] Chung SUKH, Kim JS. Twenty-third symposium (international) on combustion.

The Combustion Institute; 1990. p. 1431–5. 1990:1431–5.

[162] Abrar I, Bhaskarwar AN. Microemulsion fuels for compression ignition engines : a

review on engine performance and emission characteristics. Fuel 2019;257:
115944. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.115944.

[163] Radwan MS, Salem H. A study of some combustion characteristics of gas oil/water

emulsions in a swirl chamber diesel engine. 1989. https://doi.org/10.4721/
892056. SAE Technical Paper.

[164] Ballester JM, Fueyo N, Dopazo C. Combustion characteristics of heavy oil-water
emulsions. Fuel 1996;75:695–705. https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-2361(95)
00309-6.

[165] Hountalas DT, Mavropoulos GC, Zannis TC, Mamalis SD. Use of water emulsion

and intake water injection as NOx reduction techniques for heavy duty diesel
engines. 2006. https://doi.org/10.4271/2006-01-1414. SAE Technical Paper
2006-01-1414.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113334

S. Gowrishankar et al.

[166] Yoshimoto Y. Performance of DI diesel engines fueled by water emulsions with

[190] Baskar P, Senthil Kumar A. Experimental investigation on performance

equal proportions of gas oil-rapeseed oil blends and the characteristics. 2006.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2006-01-3364. SAE Technical Paper 2006-01-3364.
[167] Ogawa H, Shibata G, Noguchi Y, Numata M. Visualization analysis of diesel

combustion with water and diesel fuel emulsified blend in a constant volume
chamber vessel. 2014. https://doi.org/10.4271/2014-32-0127. SAE Paper,
Copyright.

[168] Yoshimoto Y, Onodera M, Tamaki H. Reduction of NOx , smoke , and BSFC in a
diesel engine fueled by biodiesel emulsion with used frying oil. 1999. https://doi.
org/10.4271/1999-01-3598. SAE Technical Paper.

[169] Subramanian KA. A comparison of water-diesel emulsion and timed injection of
water into the intake manifold of a diesel engine for simultaneous control of NO
and smoke emissions. Energy Convers Manag 2011;52:849–57. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2010.08.010.

[170] Masimalai S, Nandagopal S. Combined effect of oxygen enrichment and

characteristics of a diesel engine using diesel-water emulsion with oxygen
enriched air. Alex Eng J 2017;56:137–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aej.2016.09.014.

[191] Debnath BK, Sahoo N, Saha UK. Adjusting the operating characteristics to

improve the performance of an emulsified palm oil methyl ester run diesel engine.
Energy Convers Manag 2013;69:191–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2013.01.031.

[192] Yang WM, An H, Chou SK, Chua KJ, Mohan B, Sivasankaralingam V, et al. Impact
of emulsion fuel with nano-organic additives on the performance of diesel engine.
Appl Energy 2013;112:1206–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2013.02.027.

[193] Iwai M, Koji Y, Akira I, Hideo S. Study on performance of diesel engine applied

with emulsified diesel fuel -the influence of fuel injection timing and water
contents-. 2011. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-32-0606. SAE Paper.

emulsification techniques on performance, emission and combustion of a WCO
based CI engine. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2016;9:306–14. https://doi.org/10.4271/
2016-01-1265.

[194] Park S, Woo S, Kim H, Lee K. Effect of diesel-water emulsified fuel on the NOxand
PM emissions of a diesel engine. Energy Fuel 2016;30:6070–9. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b00089.

[171] Tsukahara M, Yoshimoto Y. Reduction of NOx , smoke , BSFC , and maximum

[195] Hasannuddin AK, Wira JY, Sarah S, Ahmad MI, Aizam SA, Aiman MAB, et al.

combustion pressure by low compression ratios in a diesel engine fuelled by
emulsified fuel. 1992. https://doi.org/10.4271/920464. SAE Technical Paper.
[172] Vellaiyan S, Amirthagadeswaran KS. Influence of water-in-diesel emulsion fuel

and compression ratio on combustion, performance and emission characteristics
of diesel engine. Journal of Sustainable Energy Engineering 2016;3:238–53.
https://doi.org/10.7569/JSEE.2015.629515.

[173] Park JW, Huh KY, Park KH. Experimental study on the combustion characteristics
of emulsified diesel in a rcem, vols. 1–6. Seoul 2000 FISITA World Automotive
Congress; 2000. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.204
-210.1351.

[174] Kee S-S, Mohammadi A, Hirano H, Kidoguchiu Y, Miwa K. Experimental study on

combustion characteritics and emission reduction of emulsified fuels in diesel
combustion using a rapid compression machine. 2003. https://doi.org/10.4721/
2003-01-1792. SAE Paper.

[175] Subramanian KA, Ramesh A. A study on the use of water-diesel emulsions in a DI
diesel engine. 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/2001-28-0005. SAE Paper.
[176] Bertola A, Li R, Boulouchos K. Influence of water-diesel fuel emulsions and EGR
on combustion and exhaust emissions of heavy duty DI-diesel engines equipped
with common-rail injection system. 2003. https://doi.org/10.4271/2003-01-
3146. SAE Technical Paper.

[177] Ghojel J, Honnery D, Al-Khaleefi K. Performance, emissions and heat release

characteristics of direct injection diesel engine operating on diesel oil emulsion.
Appl Therm Eng 2006;26:2132–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2006.04.014.

[178] Fahd MEA, Wenming Y, Lee PS, Chou SK, Yap CR. Experimental investigation of
the performance and emission characteristics of direct injection diesel engine by
water emulsion diesel under varying engine load condition. Appl Energy 2013;
102:1042–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.06.041.

[179] Khalife E, Kazerooni H, Mirsalim M, Shojaei TR, Mohammadi P, Salleh AM, et al.

Experimental investigation of low-level water in waste-oil produced biodiesel-
diesel fuel blend. Energy 2017;121:331–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2017.01.003.

[180] Debnath BK, Saha UK, Sahoo N. A comprehensive review on the application of
emulsions as an alternative fuel for diesel engines. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2014;42:196–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.10.023.

[181] Kumar INN, Prasad SC, Rao BVA. Heat release rate analysis of a DI diesel engine
using diesel and seawater semi-stable emulsion. 2002. https://doi.org/10.4271/
2002-01-2719. SAE Technical Paper.

[182] Senthil Kumar M, Bellettre J, Tazerout M. The use of biofuel emulsions as fuel for
diesel engines: a review. Proc Inst Mech Eng A J Power Energy 2009;223:729–42.
https://doi.org/10.1243/09576509JPE758.

[183] Maawa WN, Mamat R, Najafi G, Majeed Ali O, Aziz A. Engine performance and
emission of compression ignition engine fuelled with emulsified biodiesel-water.
IOP Conf Ser Mater Sci Eng 2015;100. https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/100/
1/012061.

[184] Seifi MR, Hassan-Beygi SR, Ghobadian B, Desideri U, Antonelli M. Experimental

investigation of a diesel engine power, torque and noise emission using water-
diesel emulsions. Fuel 2016;166:392–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2015.10.122.

[185] Alahmer A. Influence of using emulsified diesel fuel on the performance and

pollutants emitted from diesel engine. Energy Convers Manag 2013;73:361–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2013.05.012.

[186] Koc AB, Abdullah M. Performance and NOx emissions of a diesel engine fueled
with biodiesel-diesel-water nanoemulsions. Fuel Process Technol 2013;109:70–7.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2012.09.039.

[187] Nadeem M, Rangkuti C, Anuar K, Haq MRU, Tan IB, Shah SS. Diesel engine

performance and emission evaluation using emulsified fuels stabilized by
conventional and gemini surfactants. Fuel 2006;85:2111–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2006.03.013.

[188] Yilmaz E, Solmaz H, Polat S, Uyumaz A, S ̧ ahin F, Salman MS. Preparation of diesel

emulsion using auxiliary emulsifier mono ethylene glycol and utilization in a
turbocharged diesel engine. Energy Convers Manag 2014;86:973–80. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.enconman.2014.06.033.

[189] Kumar N, Sharma A, Vibhanshu V. Performance analyses of diesel engine at

different injection angles using water diesel emulsion, vol. 7; 2013. https://doi.
org/10.4271/2013-01-2170. SAE Technical Paper.

Durability studies of single cylinder diesel engine running on emulsion fuel.
Energy 2016;94:557–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.10.144.

[196] Yoshimoto Y, Tamaki H. Reduction of NOx and SmoKE emissions in a diesel

engine fueled by biodiesel emulsion combined with EGR. 2001. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2001-01-0649. SAE Technical Paper.

[197] Elsanusi OA, Roy MM, Sidhu MS. Experimental investigation on a diesel engine
fueled by diesel-biodiesel blends and their emulsions at various engine operating
conditions. Appl Energy 2017;203:582–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2017.06.052.

[198] Tan YH, Abdullah MO, Nolasco-Hipolito C, Zauzi NSA, Abdullah GW. Engine

performance and emissions characteristics of a diesel engine fueled with diesel-
biodiesel-bioethanol emulsions. Energy Convers Manag 2017;132:54–64. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2016.11.013.

[199] Hsu BD. Combustion of water. In: Diesel emulsion in an experimental medium

speed diesel engine; 1986. https://doi.org/10.4721/860300. SAE Technical
Paper.

[200] Thangaraja J, Anand K, Mehta PS. Biodiesel NOx penalty and control measures - a

review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;61:1–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2016.03.017.

[201] Kozina A, Radica G, Niˇzeti ́c S. Analysis of methods towards reduction of harmful
pollutants from diesel engines. J Clean Prod 2020;262:121105. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121105.

[202] Sener R, Yangaz MU, Gul MZ. Effects of injection strategy and combustion

chamber modification on a single-cylinder diesel engine. Fuel 2020;266:117122.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117122.

[203] Anand K, Sharma RP, Mehta PS. Experimental investigations on combustion,

performance and emissions characteristics of neat karanji biodiesel and its
methanol blend in a diesel engine. Biomass Bioenergy 2011;35:533–41. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2010.10.005.

[204] Kapadia H, Brahmbhatt H, Dabhi Y, Chourasia S. Investigation of emulsion and

effect on emission in CI engine by using diesel and bio-diesel fuel: a review.
Egyptian Journal of Petroleum 2019;28:323–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejpe.2019.06.004.

[205] Mukhtar MNA, Hagos FY, Noor MM, Mamat R, Abdullah AA. Tri-fuel emulsion

with secondary atomization attributes for greener diesel engine – a critical
review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;111:490–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rser.2019.05.035.

[206] Heywood JB. Internal combustion engine fundamentals. McGraw-Hill Inc.; 1988.
[207] Crookes RJ, Nazha MAA, Janota MS, Storey T. Investigation in the combustion of

water/diesel fuel emulsions. 1980. SAE Paper 800094.

[208] Barnaud F, Schmelzle P, Schulz P. Aquazole: an original emulsified water-diesel
fuel for heavy-duty applications. 2000. https://doi.org/10.4271/2000-01-1861.
SAE Technical Paper.

[209] Ravikumar TS, Basar PD, Attfield MJ. Emulsified diesel - an immediate and

effective solution for diesel exhaust emission reduction. 2001. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2001-28-0037. SAE Paper.

[210] Marchitto L, Calabria R, Tornatore C, Bellettre J, Massoli P, Montillet A, et al.

Optical investigations in a CI engine fueled with water in diesel emulsion
produced through microchannels. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2018;95:96–103. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2018.02.008.

[211] Hasannuddin AK, Yahya WJ, Sarah S, Ithnin AM, Syahrullail S, Sugeng DA, et al.
Performance, emissions and carbon deposit characteristics of diesel engine
operating on emulsion fuel. Energy 2018;142:496–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.energy.2017.10.044.

[212] Song KH, Lee YJ, Litzinger TA. Effects of emulsified fuels on soot evolution in an

optically-accessible DI diesel engine. 2000. https://doi.org/10.4271/2000-01-
2794. SAE Technical Paper.

[213] Langer DA, Petek NK, Schiferl EA. Maximizing the effectiveness of water blended

fuel in reducing emissions by varying injection timing or using after-treatment
device. 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/2001-01-0513. SAE Technical Paper.

[214] Hall D, Thorne C, Goodier S. An investigation into the effect of a diesel/water

emulsion on the size and number distribution of the particulate emissions from a
heavy-duty diesel engine. 2003. https://doi.org/10.4271/2003-01-3168. SAE
Paper 2003-01-3168.

[215] Basha SJ, Anand RB. An experimental investigation in a diesel engine using

carbon nanotubes blended water-diesel emulsion fuel. Proc Inst Mech Eng A J
Power Energy 2011;225:279–88. https://doi.org/10.1177/2041296710394247.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113335

S. Gowrishankar et al.

[216] Raheman H, Kumari S. Combustion characteristics and emissions of a

compression ignition engine using emulsified jatropha biodiesel blend. Biosyst
Eng 2014;123:29–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2014.05.001.

[217] Lif A, Holmberg K. Water-in-diesel emulsions and related systems. Adv Colloid
Interface Sci 2006;123–126:231–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2006.05.004.

[218] Basar PD, Duncan DA, Langer DA. Step forward in diesel engine emissions

reduction: system incorporating a novel low emission diesel fuel combined with a
diesel oxidation catalyst. 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/2001-01-2491. SAE
Technical Paper.

[219] Ferguson CR, Kirkpatrock AT. Internal combustion engine applied
thermosciences. Third Edit. john Wiley & Sons Ltd.; 2016.

biodiesel fueled light-duty diesel engine. Fuel 2022;308:121926. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2021.121926.

[233] Woo S, Kim W, Lee J, Lee K. Fuel properties of water emulsion fuel prepared using

porous membrane method for low pollutant engine at various temperatures.
Energy Rep 2021;7:6638–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2021.09.082.
[234] Zhu S, Hu B, Akehurst S, Copeland C, Lewis A, Yuan H, et al. A review of water

injection applied on the internal combustion engine. Energy Convers Manag
2019;184:139–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2019.01.042.

[235] Krishnasamy A, Gupta SK, Reitz RD. Prospective fuels for diesel low temperature

combustion engine applications : a critical review. Int J Engine Res 2021;22:
2071–106. https://doi.org/10.1177/1468087420960857.

[220] Park JW, Huh KY, Lee JH. Reduction of NO , smoke and brake specific fuel

[236] Williams M, Minjares R. Report: a technical summary of Euro 6/VI vehicle

consumption with optimal injection timing and emulsion ratio of water-
emulsified diesel. Proc Inst Mech Eng - Part D J Automob Eng 2001:83–94.
https://doi.org/10.1243/0954407011525476.

[221] Psaila AF, Grimes PM, Ellis RL. Improving biodiesel blended fuels: overcoming the
NOx penalty and enhancing the engine’s regulated emissions profile. SAE Int J
Fuels Lubr 2011;5. https://doi.org/10.4271/2011-01-1949. 2011-01–1949.
[222] Husnawan M, Masjuki HH, Hatim MDI. Exhaust emission evaluation of a single
cylinder diesel engine fueled by crude palm oil (CPO) water emulsions. 2003. SAE
Paper 2003-01-1931.

[223] Lin CY, Lin SA. Effects of emulsification variables on fuel properties of two- and
three-phase biodiesel emulsions. Fuel 2007;86:210–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2006.06.007.

[224] Dinesha P, Kumar S, Rosen MA. Combined effects of water emulsion and diethyl
ether additive on combustion performance and emissions of a compression
ignition engine using biodiesel blends. Energy 2019;179:928–37.

[225] Kojima K, Kojima J. On-board ultrasonic water-in-diesel emulsion (WiDE) fuel

system for low-emission diesel engine combustion. Ohio J Sci 2018;118:43.
https://doi.org/10.18061/ojs.v118i2.6443.

[226] Mazlan NA, Yahya WJ, Ithnin AM, Hasannuddin AK, Ramlan NA, Sugeng DA,
et al. Effects of different water percentages in non-surfactant emulsion fuel on
performance and exhaust emissions of a light-duty truck. J Clean Prod 2018;179:
559–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.143.

[227] Hasannuddin AK, Wira JY, Sarah S, Aqma WMNWS, Abdul Hadi AR, Hirofumi N,
et al. Performance, emissions and lubricant oil analysis of diesel engine running
on emulsion fuel. Energy Convers Manag 2016;117:548–57. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2016.03.057.

[228] Evangelos GT, Georgios K, Schinas P, Korres D, Karonis D. Diesel-water emulsion

emissions and performance evaluation in public buses. In: 9th international
conference on environmental science and Technology. vol. 6; 2005.

[229] Janakiraman G, Johnson JH, Bagley ST, Warner JR, Huynh CT, Khan A, et al.
Oxidation catalytic converter and emulsified fuel effects on heavy-duty diesel
engine emissions. 2002. https://doi.org/10.4271/2002-01-1277. SAE Technical
Paper.

[230] Hosseinzadeh-Bandbafha H, Tabatabaei M, Aghbashlo M, Khanali M, Khalife E,
Shojaei TR, et al. Consolidating emission indices of a diesel engine powered by
carbon nanoparticle-doped diesel/biodiesel emulsion fuels using life cycle
assessment framework. Fuel 2020;267:117296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.117296.

[231] Kim M-S, Akpudo UE, Hur J. A study on water-induced damage severity on diesel
engine injection system using emulsified diesel fuels. Electronics 2021;10:2285.

[232] Gowrishankar S, Krishnasamy A. A relative assessment of emulsification and
water injection methods to mitigate higher oxides of nitrogen emissions from

emission standards. The International Council on Clean Transportation; 2016.

[237] Dallmann T, Posada F, Bandivadekar A. Costs of emission reduction technologies

for diesel engines used in non-road vehicles and equipment. 2018.

[238] Liu K, Sun Y, Cao M, Wang J, Lu JR, Xu H. Rational design , properties , and
applications of biosurfactants : a short review of recent advances. Curr Opin
Colloid Interface Sci 2020;45:57–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cocis.2019.12.005.

[239] Jahan R, Bodratti AM, Tsianou M, Alexandridis P. Biosurfactants , natural
alternatives to synthetic surfactants : physicochemical properties and
applications. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2020;275:102061. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cis.2019.102061.

[240] Jimoh AA, Lin J. Biosurfactant : a new frontier for greener technology and

environmental sustainability. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 2019;184:109607. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.109607.

[241] Salek K, Euston SR. Sustainable microbial biosurfactants and bioemulsifiers for
commercial exploitation Karina. Process Biochem 2019;85:143–55. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.procbio.2019.06.027.

Sudarshan Gowrishankar has completed his PhD in the Department of Mechanical Engi-
neering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras under the guidance of Dr. Anand Krish-
nasamy and is currently working with Scania CV AB Sverige. Preetika Rastogi is currently
pursuing  PhD  in  the  Department  of  Chemical  Engineering  under  the  guidance  of  Dr.
Madivala G. Basavaraj and Professor Niket Kaisare. Dr. Anand Krishnasamy is currently
working  as  Associate  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering,  Indian
Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India. His research interests are on alternative
fuels  for  Internal  Combustion  engine  applications,  advanced  high  efficiency  and  clean
combustions  modes  for  diesel  engines  and  development  of  surrogate  fuel  models  for
automotive engine combustion modelling. Dr. Madivala G. Basavaraj is currently working
as  Associate  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Chemical  Engineering,  Indian  Institute  of
Technology Madras, Chennai, India. His current research interests are on Complex fluids
and Soft materials. Dr. Niket Kaisare is currently working as Professor in the Department of
Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India. His current
research interests are on Model Predictive Control, Approximate Dynamic Programming,
Artificial  Lift  Optimization  in  Natural  Gas  Reservoirs,  Catalytic  Combustion  in  Micro-
Reactors  and  Multi-Scale  Modeling.  Dr.  Indrapal  Singh  Aidhen  is  currently  working  as
Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chen-
nai, India. His current research interests are on Synthetic Carbohydrate Chemistry, Syn-
thesis  of  Biologically/Medicinally  Important  Compounds,  Developing  New  Building
Blocks  based  on  Weinreb  -  amide  Functionality  and  Developing  Enantiopure  Chiral
Building Blocks.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience101(2024)10113336
