Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Some fundamental aspects of laminar flames in nonvolatile solid 
fuel suspensions 

Samuel Goroshin, Jan Paleˇcka, Jeffrey M. Bergthorson * 

Department of Mechanical Engineering, McGill University, 817 Sherbrooke Street West, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 0C3, Canada   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Nonvolatile fuels 
Metal fuels 
Particulate suspensions 
Flame speed 
Experimental methods 
Quasi-continuum flame theory 
Discrete flame theory 
Experimental data 
Binary-suspensions 
Solid fuel-combustible gas hybrid flames 
Flame instability 
Role of radiation heat transfer controversy 

This paper critically reviews the theoretical and experimental literature regarding the fundamental aspects of 
flames in nonvolatile solid fuel suspensions. Unlike volatile fuels that form continuous premixed gaseous flame 
sheets, flame fronts in nonvolatile suspensions are driven by heterogeneous reactions localized on the surface, or 
near the surface, of individual particles. Practically all peculiarities of heterogeneous flames can be linked to this 
“flame-inside-the-flame” combustion front structure. These localized reactions enable particles to self-heat and 
transition  from  kinetically  to  diffusion-limited  heterogeneous  reaction  during the  process  of  particle ignition. 
After ignition, burning particles behave as individual diffusion micro-reactors that are insensitive to the bulk gas 
temperature  and  overall  heat  loss  from  the  system.  Relatively  small  quenching  distances  of  the  flame  in  sus-
pensions, long plateaus in the dependence of burning velocity on fuel concentration stretching to very fuel-rich 
mixtures, and the discrete flame propagation regime, where burning velocity is insensitive to particle combustion 
time  and  the  flame-front  structure  is  rough  and  nonuniform,  are  all  manifestations  of  particle  ignition  and 
combustion in the diffusion-limited regime. This review summarizes the key experimental evidence of laminar 
flame  structure  and  flame  speed  from  a  variety  of  experimental  apparatus  both  in  the  laboratory  and  under 
microgravity  conditions,  and  interprets  these  results  in  terms  of  relatively  simple  theoretical  models.  Hetero-
geneous flames are observed to exhibit many of the thermodiffusive and hydrodynamic instabilities of homo-
geneous flames, as well as several new instabilities that arise from the multiphase nature of the fuel and particle 
ignition and extinction. Flames of binary mixtures of heterogeneous fuels, or gaseous and solid fuel mixtures, are 
also  reviewed  and  it  is  shown  that  a  simple  model  based  on  matching  the  flame  speed  between  thermally 
interacting fronts can capture the key physics. Finally, the last chapter of the review discusses why the important 
or even crucial role of radiation heat transfer predicted by theoretical models for flames in suspensions is not 
supported by the available experimental evidence. It is argued that large spatial scales of radiation heat transfer 
do not permit separation of the radiation transfer problem from boundary conditions and flow configuration, 
making  one-dimensional  flame  models  that  include  radiation  inadequate  for  the  description  of  flames  in  the 
laboratory and even in relatively large unconfined dust clouds.   

1. Introduction 

1.1. Preface 

Combustion and flames have been a part of everyday life from the 
onset of human civilization. In common language, the term “flame” is 
generally  associated  with  bright  luminous  gases  or  incandescent  soot 
generated by combustion. In contrast, heterogeneous combustion of a 
solid  with  no  visible  gaseous  flame,  such  as  burning  chunks  of  non- 

volatile  coal  in  old-fashioned  home  furnaces  or  charred  logs  in  a 
campfire, is often referred to as a fire, but not a flame. As shown in Fig. 1, 
which depicts a methane and aluminum Bunsen flame, the appearance 
of  a  heterogenous  laminar  flame  can  be,  nonetheless,  almost  undis-
tinguishable from a laminar gaseous flame if the solid fuel burns as a 
suspension of micron-size particles. For many combustion scientists, a 
laminar flame in a solid fuel suspension remains, however, a theoretical 
construct they seldom encounter in their laboratory practice. We start 
laminar 
this  review,  therefore,  with  a  chapter  showing  how 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: jeffrey.bergthorson@mcgill.ca (J.M. Bergthorson).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.100994 
Received 16 July 2021; Received in revised form 26 January 2022; Accepted 1 February 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100994Availableonline7April20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

gaseous fuels, which by the clear majority are hydrocarbons with similar 
reaction chemistry and thermodynamics, solid fuels are chemically more 
diverse  and  are  often  comprised  of several  chemically  dissimilar  sub-
stances. In addition to the chemical diversity, the combustion of solid 
fuels  is  complicated  by  a  variety  of  phase  transformations,  such  as 
melting, boiling, sublimation, and gasification of the fuel itself, as well 
as  the  melting,  evaporation,  dissociation,  and  physical  and  chemical 
condensation of the combustion products. 

The  diversity  of  chemical  compositions  and  physical  properties  of 
solid  fuels  poses  a  considerable  challenge  to  combustion  science  in 
providing a unified methodology for both experimental and theoretical 
research.  Without  an  established  and  commonly  accepted  theoretical 
background,  similar  to  the  qualitative  theory  of  gaseous  combustion, 
research in the field of solid-fuel combustion has become fragmented 
into largely isolated fields that often emphasize chemical and physical 
peculiarities of a particular solid fuel (i.e., coal, metal, biomass, organic 
dusts, etc.) and a particular practical application (i.e., industrial safety, 
propulsion, material synthesis, etc.) at the expense of the commonality 
of  the  underlying combustion  physics. Thus,  the  main purpose  of  the 
current review is to summarize research that aims at establishing gen-
eral  laws  of  heterogeneous  combustion  science  that  supersede  any 
distinctive features of a particular fuel. In comparison to combustion of 
gases  and  sprays,  the  research  on  heterogeneous  flames  is  relatively 
under-represented in the literature, which has provided an additional 
impetus for the current review. 

1.3. Volatile and nonvolatile solid fuels. Heterogeneous flames 

The common formal classification of aerosolized condensed fuels by 
their liquid or solid state at standard conditions, specifically making a 
distinction  between  liquid  sprays  and  solid  dust  suspensions,  is  quite 
superficial as it does not reflect the underlying combustion physics of the 
fuel. Thus, for example, combustion of plastics that are solid at room 
temperature, such as polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) [13], is similar 
to the combustion of hydrocarbon sprays [14,15], since the plastics melt 
and volatilize easily within the preheat zone and premix with air [16]. 
On  the  other  hand,  combustion  of  liquid  sprays  of  some  metals  with 
relatively low melting and boiling points, such as sodium, potassium, or 
lithium, is more similar to the combustion of other metals having higher 
melting and boiling points. 

In  order  to  classify  a  fuel  as  burning  homogeneously  or  heteroge-
neously in a flame, the key parameter is the ability or inability of the 
condensed fuel to volatilize and form a premixed gaseous fuel-oxidizer 
mixture  prior  to  combustion.  Obviously,  having  a  boiling/volatiliza-
tion temperature below the flame temperature is a necessary criterion 
for the fuel to form a premixed gaseous fuel-oxidizer mixture prior to its 
reaction in the flame combustion zone. Many plastics and some other 
easily  volatilized  organic  and  inorganic  combustibles  satisfy  this 
requirement. Some complex fuels, such as coal, may have a large content 
of easily volatilized components that can burn within a gaseous flame 
while the solid residue (char) burns heterogeneously, thereby forming 
complex  hybrid  homogeneous/heterogeneous  flames  [2–4].  Having  a 
boiling/decomposition temperature below the flame temperature is an 
essential but still insufficient criterion to ensure that a solid fuel will be 
able to burn in a homogeneous gaseous flame mode. The other necessary 
requirement is the stability of premixed fuel-vapor/oxidizer mixtures at 
temperatures  close  to  the  fuel  boiling  point.  In  comparison  to  hydro-
carbons, reactions of metal vapors with oxygen are often fast already at 
room  temperature  [17].  At  temperatures  close  to  the  metal  boiling 

Fig.  1. a.  Methane-air  and  b.  aluminum-air  Bunsen  flames  stabilized  on  the 
same conical nozzle. Adapted from [1] with permission of the American Insti-
tute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. 

heterogeneous flames can be reliably reproduced in the laboratory and 
can be studied using methods that, to a large degree, parallel the his-
torical path of gaseous flame research. 

Similarity  in  flame  appearance,  however,  does  not  always  corre-
spond to a similarity in the combustion physics. We have composed this 
review to focus on a few distinctive properties of heterogeneous flames 
that are the result of the non-premixed nature of heterogeneous com-
bustion at the microscale, i.e., at the scale of an individual particle. Due 
to emerging novel practical applications of metal combustion, the field 
of heterogenous combustion is experiencing a revival attracting many 
new  young  researchers.  We  hope  that  they  will  find  the  conceptual 
approach  of  this  review  useful  in  navigating  the  fascinating  field  of 
heterogeneous flame research. 

1.2. Solid fuels: Their diversity and the quest for a common combustion 
background 

Combustion of solid fuels is as ubiquitous in modern industries and 
technologies as combustion of gases. Coal and other solid hydrocarbons 
are  traditionally  used  for  large-scale  power  generation  and  domestic 
heating [2–4]. The ever-present explosion hazard posed by powdered 
combustible  solids  needs  to  be  mitigated  in  mining,  food  processing, 
chemical,  metallurgical,  and  transportation  industries.  Light  metals, 
such as magnesium, aluminum, titanium, along with boron and silicon, 
are the main energetic components of solid propellants and explosives in 
civilian and military applications [5–7]. Heterogeneous combustion of 
various solids is also widely employed in material synthesis and material 
processing technology [8,9]. The recent identification of metallic fuels 
as efficient recyclable carriers of clean renewable energy [10,11] opens 
up  the  possibility  for  a  dramatic  increase  in  scale  and,  therefore, 
importance  of  metal-fuel  combustion  in  future  carbon-free  energy 
systems. 

To increase reaction rates and make combustion efficient, most solid 
fuels  are  burned  as  suspensions  of  small  particles.  The  large  specific 
surface  area  of  micron-size  particulate  suspensions  makes  reaction  of 
solids  almost  as  rapid  as  combustion  of  premixed  gases  [12].  Unlike 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009942S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

points, it is anticipated that the metal vapors will react with oxygen in 
the  air  practically  instantly,  preventing  the  formation  of  a  premixed 
fuel-vapor/air mixture in the flame preheat zone prior to combustion. 
For this reason, most metals, irrespective of their boiling point or flame 
temperature,  tend  to  react  within  the  flame  heterogeneously,  i.e., 
without the formation of a continuous premixed gaseous flame sheet. 
Depending on the combustion regime of the fuel particles, the ther-
mal  structure  and  behavior  of  flames  with  heterogeneously  reacting 
particles can be, however, similar or dissimilar to homogeneous flames. 

solid-fuel  combustion  must  go  beyond  studies  of  individual  particle 
combustion and include experimental and theoretical research of dust 
cloud combustion and heterogeneous flames. The importance of cloud/ 
suspension  combustion,  and  the  need  to  understand  heterogeneous 
flame  propagation  mechanisms  and  flame  speeds,  within  propulsion 
system  design  was  repeatedly  underlined  by  Merrill  K.  King  and  the 
corresponding approach was systematically implemented in his boron 
combustion research program [26]. Unfortunately, King’s vision has not 
yet become widely understood or adopted by the research community. 

1.4. Changing the research paradigm: From combustion of a single 
isolated particle to a flame in suspension 

1.5. Selection of the reviewed topics and literature 

With  a  notable  exception  of  coal  combustion  [2–4],  the  flame 
propagation problem in solid fuel suspensions, particularly metals, has 
been primarily the domain of industrial safety research. The reaction of 
powdered metal fuels in application to various propulsion devices has 
traditionally  been  studied  not  as  a  flame  propagation  problem,  but 
rather  as  the  combustion  of  individual  isolated  particles  [5,19].  The 
implicit premise behind this approach is the assumption that the com-
bustion  physics  and  combustion  parameters  discerned  from  research 
with single particles are sufficient for the prediction of the combustion 
behavior  of  the  metal  fuel  in  a  practical  device,  where  the  solid  fuel 
typically burns as a dense suspension. 

As is apparent from the research results summarized in this review, 
the single-particle approach is seldom justified and may even result in 
erroneous  recommendations  when  applied  to  practical  devices  where 
solid fuels are burned at concentrations close to stoichiometry [20]. For 
example,  the  high  ignition  temperature  of  boron  and  aluminum  is 
frequently cited as a major obstacle for their efficient utilization in solid 
propellants.  Thus,  the  often  stated  “obvious  requirement”  used  in 
choosing  propellant  compositions  is  that  combustion  of  an  organic 
binder  with  an  oxidizer  must  generate  temperatures  that  exceed  the 
ignition temperature of a single metal-fuel particle [12]. In line with the 
same ideology, numerous research efforts have been undertaken aimed 
at  reducing  the  ignition  temperature  of  difficult-to-ignite  metals,  by 
alloying them with other metals [21], coating particles with reactive and 
non-reactive  films  promoting  ignition,  etc.[22,23].  These  recommen-
dations and efforts often miss the point that, as a rule, the flame tem-
perature  of  a  dense  metal  suspension  far  exceeds  the  ignition 
temperatures  of  a  single  particle.  Therefore,  a  metal-fuel  suspension, 
burning as a stabilized turbulent flame or in the recirculation regions of 
a combustor [24–26], is fully capable of supporting its own ignition and 
combustion either through upstream conductive heat transfer, or due to 
efficient  mixing  with  combustion  products,  just  like  in  traditional 
gas-phase flames. 

Experiments show that efficient combustion of aluminum or boron 
suspensions  can  be  achieved  within  self-sustained  dust  flames  propa-
gating in non-heated, room-temperature fuel suspensions without any 
hydrocarbon fuels or even pilot flames [27–29]. Moreover, as shown in 
papers reviewed here, particle ignition by itself is not a prerequisite for 
the efficient combustion of a solid fuel within a dense suspension. At the 
high temperatures generated by the flame itself, the combustion can be 
efficient  even  when  fuel  particles  react  in  the  flame  in  the  kinetic 
combustion mode, i.e., without ignition of individual particles [24,26]. 
With the realization that efficient combustion of solid-fuel suspen-
sions in practical devices requires the formation and stabilization of a 
dust flame, a change in research paradigm for heterogeneous combus-
tion is required. To be relevant to practical needs, academic research on 

The history of solid-fuel combustion research spans almost 100 years 
and has generated a vast literature spreading across several technical 
fields, including industrial safety, propulsion, pyrotechnics, coal com-
bustion, material synthesis, etc. It is virtually impossible to discuss or 
even  just  mention  all  relevant  papers  in  this  review.  Hence,  we  have 
opted to review only a limited number of selected works which, in our 
opinion, have attempted to address the fundamental aspects of hetero-
geneous flame science that are relevant irrespective of the properties, or 
practical application, of a particular solid fuel. 

It  is  widely  recognized  in  the  combustion  community  that  experi-
mental difficulties in reproducing heterogeneous laminar flames in the 
laboratory  are  the  primary  reason  for  which  the  field  of  solid-fuel 
combustion  is  relatively  underdeveloped  in  comparison  to  the  highly 
advanced field of gaseous combustion. Thus, the Second Chapter of this 
review is dedicated to the description and discussion of the experimental 
methods, apparatus, and diagnostic tools whose development holds the 
key to future progress in advancing heterogeneous combustion science. 
In the Third Chapter, we discuss perhaps the most important feature 
of heterogenous combustion: the ability of particles to ignite and burn 
within individual diffusion micro-flames. The implication of this phe-
nomenon on the flame structure and properties is discussed in the frame 
of  a  simple  heterogeneous  flame  model,  where  particles  react  via  a 
single-step Arrhenius surface reaction. We also discuss the validity of the 
ad hoc analytical expressions for the heterogeneous flame burning ve-
locity often used in various technical fields. Finally, the repercussions of 
the particle combustion regime on flame quenching is discussed at the 
end of this chapter. 

In the Fourth Chapter, the theoretical predictions of the qualitative 
behavior of laminar flames in solid-fuel suspensions is compared with 
the available experimental data. We have focused the discussion on the 
results of experiments aimed at identifying the regime of particle com-
bustion in the flame, assessing the validity of introducing the notion of 
the  burning  velocity  for  the  flame  in  suspension,  and  measuring  the 
dependence of the flame speed on dust and oxygen concentration and 
initial temperature. We have also compared predictions of the simple 
model  of  flame  quenching  in  a  narrow  channel  with  experimental 
results. 

The Fifth Chapter is dedicated to works that consider combustion of 
binary fuel mixtures, where one of the fuels can be a combustible gas and 
the other a combustible solid, or where both fuels are dispersed solids 
which  have different chemical natures or/and different particle  sizes. 
Binary  fuel  mixtures  are  rather  the  rule  than  the  exception  in  most 
practical  applications.  In  fact,  most  of  the  solid  organic  substances, 
including  coal,  are  binary  fuels.  They  generate  volatiles  in  the  flame 
preheat zone that can burn in a gaseous flame sheet, leaving behind a 
char residue that burns heterogeneously. We avoid the complexity of the 
devolatilization  process  by  considering,  in  this  review,  only  pre- 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009943S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

prepared  hybrid  binary  mixtures  where  a  solid  nonvolatile  fuel  is 
already dispersed within a gaseous mixture of a combustible gas and an 
oxidizer. 

The  Sixth  Chapter  discusses  the  available  experimental  data  on 
heterogeneous-flame  instabilities.  So  far,  experimental  observations 
indicate  that  practically  all  types  of  flame  instabilities  observed  in 
gaseous  flames  are  also  found  in  heterogeneous  flames.  We  discuss 
experimental  data  on  thermoacoustic  instabilities  of  dust  flames, 
experimental evidence for the various thermodiffusive instabilities, and 
some  specific  instabilities  that  have  been  predicted  theoretically  for 
heterogeneous flames that have not yet been observed experimentally. 
The Seventh Chapter reviews models of heterogeneous flames that 
question  the  so-called  continuous  flame  approximation,  in  which 
discrete heat sources in the governing reaction-diffusion equation are 
approximated by a continuous function of spatial coordinates. Models 
with explicit description of the source coordinates show that, for fast 
burning fuels, the combustion front can propagate in a so-called discrete 
flame  regime.  Recent  experimental  data  show  that  the  discrete  flame 
propagation  regime  is  not  a  purely  theoretical  construct  and  that 
discrete flames can be observed on the ground and in microgravity en-
vironments with fast-burning metal fuels. 

In the Eighth Chapter, we review theoretical models that consider 
radiation heat transfer in heterogeneous flames. Practically all theoret-
ical models regard radiation heat transfer to be an important, if not the 
dominant, feature of flames in solid-fuel suspensions. At the same time, 
no conclusive experimental evidence on radiation-driven flames has yet 
to be presented in the literature. We discuss the reasons for this apparent 
discrepancy  and the  shortcomings  of the  existing modeling  efforts  on 
radiation heat transfer in heterogeneous flames. 

The review closes with a summary of the key physics of heteroge-
neous flames and a set of open research questions that can guide future 
research efforts in this field. 

2. Recreating laminar dust flames in the laboratory: Equipment, 
methods, and diagnostics 

Combustion is an experimental science. The experimental validation 
of  a theoretical construct  or  a model provides the  sole criteria for its 
adequacy  to  describe  reality.  With  recent  proliferation  of  advanced 
numerical methods and easily accessible sophisticated computing soft-
ware,  publications  presenting  various  theoretical  models  outnumber 
experimental works that can validate them. This is especially true in the 
reviewed topic of combustion of solid fuel suspensions where reliable 
experimental results are scarce. 

The  experimental  research  on  gaseous  laminar  flames  forms  the 
backbone  of  combustion  science.  Extending  this  research  towards 
laminar flames in solid-fuel suspensions seems like a natural path that 
allows bringing well-tested experimental ideologies and methods to bear 
on the investigation of this more complex phenomenon. The success of 
this  approach,  however,  critically  depends  on  the  ability  to  reliably 
stabilize  laminar  heterogeneous  flames  in  the  laboratory.  Experimen-
tation with heterogeneous flames requires specific skills and knowledge 
that are largely empirical in nature and are often hidden in the back-
ground of scientific publications. Here, we attempt to review some of 
these  experimental  methods,  emphasizing  hardware  requirements, 
while  the  experimental  results  obtained  with  these  methods  will  be 
analyzed  and  compared  with  theoretical  predictions  in  the  following 
chapters. 

2.1. Standard equipment for testing dusts explosibility 

There is a substantial body of data accumulated in industrial safety 
manuals  on  various  dusts  [34,35]  that  were  tested  for  their  “explosi-
bility” in accordance with agreed-upon industrial safety standards [36, 

37]. The most frequently used testing apparatuses either derive from the 
so-called Hartmann tube and Siwek sphere (or bomb). Some examples 
are shown in Fig. 2. 

The closed vessels are typically 20-L or 1-m3  bombs where a stored 
dust sample is dispersed by an air pulse, followed by the central ignition 
of  the  mixture  by  an  electrical  spark  or  a  small  pyrotechnic  match. 
Usually, the only measured combustion parameter is the pressure trace. 
The  closed  vessels  are  used  to  classify  the  explosibility  of  dusts  in 
accordance  with  the  maximum  attained  pressure  (Pmax)  and  the 
maximum speed of the pressure rise (Kst). The Hartmann tube is used to 
measure minimum ignition energy (MIE) of the spark required to initiate 
a visually observable flame propagating in a glass or quartz tube [38]. 
These  explosive  combustion  characteristics  depend,  however,  on  the 
testing equipment and procedure (vessel size and shape, ignition delay, 
dust  dispersion  technique,  etc.)  [39].  Thus,  in  order  to  meaningfully 
rank  dusts  by  their  potential  danger,  the  parameters  of  the  testing 
equipment and procedure are standardized. As will be shown later in 
this  Chapter,  the  commonly  used  delay  time  between  dispersion  and 
ignition of several hundred milliseconds is insufficient to complete the 
dust dispersion process and allow the flow turbulence to decay. Longer 
delay times, on the other hand, can lead to considerable settling of the 
dust suspension, even for micron-sized particles, making the fuel con-
centration  in  the  suspension  unknown  and,  often,  too  low  to  support 
flame propagation. Uniformity of the dust dispersion in the vessel and 
the symmetry of the flame propagation are often assumed but usually 
are not verified. Finally, even for gas combustion, where the turbulence 
and the mixture uniformity are not a problem, the pressure trace from 
constant volume combustion is not a reliable source for the extraction of 
the  burning  velocity  [38–41].  Attempts  to  estimate  burning  velocity 
using the Hartmann tube apparatus [38] are questionable due to resid-
ual  turbulence  after  pulsed  dispersion  and  nonuniformity  of  the  dust 
concentration.  Though  the  disconnect  between  requirements  for  ex-
periments  in  fundamental  combustion  research  and  tests  adopted  in 
explosion safety classifications have been recognized for a long time (see 
Introduction in [42]), this problematic situation remains unmitigated to 
date.  Hence,  in  this  review,  only  experimental  methods  that  permit 
extraction of fundamental flame parameters from visual observation of 
flames in well-characterized laminar dust flows or quiescent dust clouds 
are reviewed below. 

2.2. Stabilized Bunsen-type flames 

The  bulk  of  the  early  research  on  premixed  gaseous  flames  was 
performed using Bunsen flames, i.e., conical flames stabilized at the exit 
of a tube or nozzle. In early times, the simplest and the safest device 
allowing  creation  of  a  premixed  flame  was  the  Bunsen  burner  from 
which a premixed conical flame derives its name. The first documented 
research  on  Bunsen-type  flames  in  solid  fuel  suspensions,  to  the 
knowledge of the authors, was published in 1948 by Hans Cassel from 
the US Bureau of Mines [43]. A detailed description of Cassel’s research 
on  heterogeneous  combustion,  which  also  discusses  improved  equip-
ment design, was summarized in [44]. Unlike for gases, where uniform 
mixing of the fuel and the oxidizer is uncomplicated, obtaining a uni-
form, laminar flow of a solid-fuel suspension presents a complex engi-
neering  problem.  The  design  of  Cassel’s  powder  dispersion  setup 
capable  of  generating  a  laminar  flow  of  micron-size  particles  in  sus-
pension is illustrated in Fig. 3 [27]. Fig. 3 also depicts a Bunsen-type 
aluminum dust flame stabilized at the exit of a vertical tube using Cas-
sel’s dispersion system [27]. 

In order to maintain a continuous and uniform suspension flow, the 
dust dispersion system must include two parts: a powder feeder and a 
dispersion unit. The powder feeder supplies metal fuel at a prescribed 
constant rate to the dispersion unit, where it is pulverized and mixed 
uniformly with a carrier gas. In Cassel’s system (Fig. 3), powder is fed by 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009944S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 2. Typical equipment for the safety classification of combustible dusts: a. Hartmann tube, b. closed bomb (Siwek sphere), and c. typical pressure and pressure 
rise traces during testing in a closed bomb. Adapted from [30–34] with permission of Elsevier and Springer Nature. 

Fig.  3. a.  Cassel’s  dust  dispersion  system:  dust  receptacle  (1),  displacement 
body (2), emery paper lining (3), gas supply tubing (4), lid (5), refill manifold 
and stopper (6), dust layer (7), hypodermic needle (8) and b. the picture of the 
Bunsen-type aluminum dust flame stabilized at the exit of the dust cloud outlet 
tube (9). Adapted from [27]. 

rotating the plenum of a powder bed to a slot at the bottom of a vertical 
tube where it is dispersed by an impinging high-speed air flow from a 
thin needle. The ascending flow is laminarized in 75-cm long 2-cm ID 
vertical  tube.  The  long  tube  also  works  as  a  natural  “gravity”  filter, 
allowing large particle agglomerates to sediment before they can reach 
the flame. 

The concentration of the metal fuel in the flow was determined by 
aspiration of the suspension through a thick mineral wool filter for a few 
seconds and then dividing the weight of collected powder by the volume 
of gas passed through the flame tube exit. The notable shortcoming of 
Cassel’s design was the absence of an online concentration monitoring 
system, which is known by the authors to demonstrate considerable drift 
over time and which depends on difficult to control parameters, such as 
the powder rheology which is a strong function of the atmospheric hu-
midity. It is interesting to note that, by employing a special Mach-Hebra 
profiled  nozzle  [43],  Cassel  was  also  able  to  stabilize  almost  flat 
button-like dust flames. This technique, however, has not been repro-
duced by other researchers. 

After  Cassel’s  pioneering  work,  Bunsen-type  dust  flames  were 
revisited more than 25 years later by researchers at Odessa State Uni-
versity (Ukraine) [45,46]. The powder dispersion system designed for 
this study was also used in the following work on diffusion aluminum 
dust  flames  [47].  An  improved  dust  burner  design  equipped  with  an 
in-line laser dust concentration monitoring system and a linear actuator 
driven by a computer-operated step motor, allowing precise metal dust 
feeding, is shown in Fig. 4 and has been used by McGill researchers in 

Fig. 4. Schematics of the dust burner used in [48,49]: a. experimental setup, b. 
aluminum Bunsen-type flame stabilized on the coil and photographed through a 
dense neutral density optical filter is shown on the top photo, c. the dust flow 
through a water-cooled coil with a laser light beam illuminating the flow be-
tween  the  nozzle  and  the  ring.  Adapted  from  [49]  with  permission  of  the 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics,  Inc,  and  from  personal 
archives of S. Goroshin. 

several works on metal and hybrid metal-methane Bunsen dust flames 
[44,48,49]. A slightly compacted column of powder stored in a cylinder 
(Fig.  4a  bottom)  is  pushed  upward  by  a  piston  connected  to  an  elec-
tromechanical linear actuator. The powder is then dispersed at the base 
of  the  conical  contraction  by  an  “air  knife”,  which  is  an  impinging 
concentric air jet issued from a radial 50-micron-wide slot. The slot is 
formed between two polished opposing surfaces of the lower and upper 
portions of the disperser assembly, separated by several strips of 50-µm 
shim foil. The shear force generated by the concentric sonic-speed flow 
removes powder from the feeding column layer by layer, and turbulently 
mixes it with the carrier gas in the conical contraction. The suspension 
flow is then expanded in a 7∘-cone, to minimize separation, and is then 
laminarized in a 70-cm long, 25.4-mm-ID polished steel tube. 

The flow rate through the nozzle is regulated by bypassing part of the 
flow through the side tube with the help of a calibrated ejector. Flow 
bypassing allows the nozzle flow rate to be varied without changing the 
operational regime of the dispersion unit. The dust concentration in the 
flow is monitored by a laser light-attenuation probe having an expanded 
collimated laser beam traversing the suspension either inside the nozzle 
through film protected windows [48,49] or, if the flame is stabilized on a 
water-cooled metal ring as in [44] (see Fig. 4c), in the space between the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009945S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 5. Bunsen flames of various metallic suspensions in air compared to a methane-air flame. Reprinted from [10] with permission of Elsevier.  

flame holder and the nozzle. Similarly to Cassel’s work, the laser-light 
attenuation probe is calibrated by collecting all particles from the flow 
for 3–5 seconds with a filter comprised of several stacked layers cut from 
a medical mask. The signal from the laser probe is synchronized with 
photo/video and spectral recordings, so that the fuel concentration at 
the moment of the measurement is known [48,49]. 

An attempt at directly controlling the concentration of the powder 
was made in the work of Shoshin et al. [50,51]. In the so-called lifted 
flame aerosol burner (LLFAB), the suspension was first electrostatically 
fluidized  between  the  electrodes  of  a  plate  capacitor  before  being 
directed out of the tube by a controlled jet. A flame was then stabilized at 
a location determined by the flame speed and the decelerating aerosol 
jet. The variations of the DC current allowed the researchers to control 
the  powder  concentration  and  to  measure  flame  speeds  over  a  large 
range of equivalence ratios. However, the small diameter of the flame 
comparable to the flame thickness and the complex fluid mechanics of 
the aerosol jet represent a significant source of uncertainty in deriving 
flame burning velocity. 

Bunsen-type  dust  flames  have  been  stabilized  with  micron-size 
powders of Al, Fe, Zr, B, etc., as shown in Fig. 5 [10]. A Bunsen flame 
in a boron particle suspension was also stabilized in [29] using a mixture 
of  30%  O2  and  70%  He  as  a  carrier  gas,  with  a  small  annular 
propane-oxygen flame as a flame holder at the base of a conical nozzle. 
Researchers at Pennsylvania State University used a setup similar to that 
shown  in  Fig.  4  to  stabilize  dust  flames  in  binary  suspensions  of 
micron-size  and  nano-size  aluminum  particles  [52],  as  well  as  in 
aluminum/water-vapor  suspensions  [53].  Most  researchers  derived 
burning velocity from the ratio of the flow rate through the nozzle to the 
total surface area of the inner cone of the Bunsen flame. The notable 
exception is the recent work using Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) to 

determine the local value of the burning velocity at the straight part of 
the flame cone [54]. 

2.3. Counterflow flame technique for observing flat dust flames 

Due to a variable curvature and stretch, heat losses to the nozzle, and 
difficulties  in  accurately  identifying  flame  boundaries  in  a  highly  lu-
minous  and  light  scattering  media,  the  Bunsen-type  flame  is  not  a 
particularly  accurate  method  for  burning  velocity  measurements  in 
particle suspensions, unless PIV is employed. The Bunsen-flame geom-
etry  is  also  ill-suited  for  optical  diagnostics  of  the  flame  structure 
because of the cylindrical symmetry and relatively large optical thick-
ness (see below). For gaseous-flame research, several different burners 
have been developed that allow creation of a flat flame and a flame with 
controlled heat loss allowing accurate measurement of the burning ve-
locity [55,56]. For obvious reasons, some of these methods that employ 
multiple thin channels or porous media are not suitable for flames in 
suspensions. On the other hand, a counterflow technique allowing sta-
bilization  of  a  flat  flame  in  a  diverging  flow  field  formed  by  two 
opposing jets or a stagnation surface can be readily employed for sus-
pensions.  Thus,  the  counterflow  flat  flame  technique  in  combination 
with  PIV  (see  Fig.  6)  was  used  to  measure  burning  velocities  in 
aluminum suspensions [57]. 

In a counterflow flame arrangement, the gas velocity along the flow 
centreline first decreases, but then starts to increase due to heating right 
at the flame location. The burning velocity is identified as the lowest gas 
flow  corresponding  to  the  minimum  of  the  velocity  profile  [57].  In 
gaseous  flames,  inert  ceramic  particles  are  usually  used  as  tracers  to 
measure flow velocity by PIV. These particles are typically on the order 
of 1 µm in size, such that they have low Stokes numbers and, thus, have 

Fig. 6. Dust flame counterflow apparatus and diagnostics: a. schematics showing (1) the top nozzle with air co- flow, (2) the bottom nozzle and (3) the bottom co- 
flow,  (4)  the  PIV  green  laser,  (5)  the  beam  expansion  optics,  (6)  a  high-speed  camera,  (7)  the  laser  of  the  light  attenuation  probe,  (8)  the  photodiode,  (9)  the 
aluminum flame; b. flat aluminum flame on a counterflow burner (top) and still frame from PIV image data showing the illuminated particles before the flame front 
(bottom); c. velocity profile measured from aluminum particle traces and the gas velocity profile reconstructed using an experimentally determined effective Stokes 
number of the particles visible by the PIV. Adapted from [57] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009946S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

negligible slip velocity with the gas. In contrast, in dust flames, the fuel 
particles themselves must be used as tracers and are often considerably 
larger.  The  velocity  difference  between  the  particles  and  the  gas  is 
difficult to calculate theoretically because metal powders usually have a 
relatively wide particle size distribution, while the PIV system is natu-
rally biased towards the more visible larger particles. Thus, the effective 
value of the Stokes number of the particles  “seen”  by the PIV system 
needs  to  be  determined  experimentally.  An  experimental  procedure, 
developed  in  [57],  allows  finding  the  effective  Stokes  number  of  the 
metal powder in the PIV system by comparing velocity profiles deter-
mined  with  usual  micron-size  tracers  and  the  metal-fuel  powder  in  a 
laminar  impinging-jet  flow.  A  comparison  of  the  velocity  profile 
measured using aluminum particles and the reconstructed profile of the 
gas velocity using an effective Stokes number of the visible aluminum 
particles  in  the  PIV  system  are  shown  in  Fig  6c.  In  later  works,  the 
counterflow flat flame technique was used to measure the burning ve-
locity in iron suspensions [58], the dependence of the burning velocity 
in aluminum suspensions on the initial flow temperature [59], and to 
study the structure of aluminum and aluminum-methane hybrid flames 
using emission and laser-absorption spectroscopy [60]. 

2.4. Flames in tubes and channels 

Experience shows that flames can be readily stabilized on burners, 
such  as  those  described  above,  only  if  they  have  a  burning  velocity 
above 10–15 cm/s [61]. For aluminum dust flames, this usually requires 
particle  sizes  below  15  µm  and  fuel  concentrations  close  to  or  above 
stoichiometry. Propagating flames, for example gaseous flames in tubes, 
can be observed over a wider range of burning velocities than stabilized 
flames [62]. The first attempt to visualize the combustion of dust clouds 
in  tubes  (2.5-cm-ID  and  1-m-long)  with  flames  propagating  from  the 
open to the closed end of the tube was made by H. Cassel et al. [43]. 
Numerous studies that followed have attempted to use transparent tubes 
and channels filled with fine quiescent or coarse sedimenting dust sus-
pensions  for  the  visualization  of  flames  in  organic  dusts  clouds  (e.g., 
[63–65]),  coal  [66,67]  and  metal  dust  suspensions  (e.g.,  [68–71]). 
Contrary to expectations, it soon became apparent that tube apparatuses 
do not provide the expected advantage in observing flames over a wider 
range of particle sizes and fuel concentrations than stabilized flames. 

Fig.  14  (shown  in  Section  2.6  below)  shows  images  of  the  flame 
propagation process using the same iron dust and oxidizing gas mixture 
in  the  laboratory  at normal  gravity, under  the low-gravity  conditions 
obtained  on  a  parabolic-flight  aircraft,  and  the  high-quality  micro-
gravity  obtained  aboard  a  sounding  rocket.  The  flame  structure  and 
speed are clearly affected by the presence or absence of gravitational 
forces. 

In addition to buoyancy forces that are known to affect slow-burning 
flames in gaseous mixtures [61], dust flames are affected by additional 
gravitational effects. The most important appears to be the recirculating 
flows that are induced by settling of the suspension. As shown in Fig. 7, 
the flow of large sedimenting particles induces drag on the gases in the 
tube  resulting  in  formation  of  a  number  of  paired  recirculating  cell 
structures  [66,72,73].  These  recirculation  cells  influence  the  flame 
propagation process and prevent the observation of laminar dust flames 
even under the low-gravity conditions of parabolic-flight aircraft for the 
slower flames associated with larger dust sizes. 

A flame propagating upwards from the open tube end explores this 
recirculating  flow  pattern  and,  assisted  by  the  buoyancy  caused  by 
natural convection, ascends at speeds well exceeding the flame burning 
velocity. Thus, flames propagating in suspensions of 30-µm iron particles 
sedimenting through oxygen-xenon gas mixtures in 30-mm-ID tubes in 
the  sounding  rocket  apparatus  described  later in  this chapter  demon-
strate ascending flame speeds in the range of 30–40 cm/s on the ground, 
and 5–7 cm/s on parabolic flight aircraft, whereas the real flame prop-
agation speed in a quiescent suspension in microgravity is on the order 
of 1 cm/s [74,75]. In early experimental works, the high speed observed 

Fig. 7. Effect of gravity on dust dispersion and combustion: dust and air flow 
patterns between upper and lower cells observed in a vertical tube apparatus. 
Adapted from [72] with permission of IOP Publishing. 

for flames ascending in tubes filled with coarse suspensions were even 
ironically described as radiation-driven flames [63,68] (see Chapter 8 
for discussion on radiation in heterogeneous flames). Even suspensions 
of relatively small particles with low sedimentation speeds are unstable 
in  a  confined-tube  environment  at  high  fuel  concentrations  when  fed 
from the upper tube end [73,76,77]. After considering different variants 
of the suspension feeding direction versus direction of the flame prop-
agation, Greene and O’Donnell [66] came to the conclusion that the only 
reliable  arrangement  that  allows  observation  of  a  laminar  flame  in 
suspensions in a tube is when the dust flow of small particle sizes is fed 
through the closed bottom end of the tube and the suspension is ignited 
at the open top end with the flame propagating downwards towards the 
closed  end.  To  bypass  the  difficulty  in  creating  stable  dust  clouds  in 
tubes,  some  researchers  have  resorted  to  a  pulsed  dust  dispersion 
through a system of tubes with multiple holes running the entire length 
of the channel or tube [76,77]. This method of powder dispersion re-
sults,  however,  in  a  highly  non-uniform  and  largely  unknown  dust 
concentration  and  some  residual  flow  turbulence  that  does  not  fully 
decay before ignition. 

Yet another obstacle often hampering the observation of an unper-
turbed laminar flame in a tube is the frequently observed flame coupling 
with strong  acoustic oscillations  (we discuss  the acoustic flame  insta-
bility in detail in Chapter 6). Often, an unperturbed laminar flame can 
only be observed within a short distance from the open tube end before 
the onset of a strong acoustic flame excitation [158]. Despite the short 
observation time of unperturbed flames, vertical tube apparatuses as, for 
example, the one shown in Fig. 8, were used to measure flame speeds 
and  quenching  distances 
in  hybrid 
aluminum-methane fuel suspensions [78]. 

in  aluminum  [71]  and 

As  in  the  dust  burner  apparatus,  the  powder  can  be  dispersed 
continuously from the lower closed end and the dust concentration in 
the tube can be monitored by a calibrated laser light-attenuation probe 
at  the  tube  exit.  In  [71]  and  [78],  the  flame  quenching  distances  in 
aluminum dust clouds and aluminum-methane-air hybrid mixtures were 
measured by placing an assembly of equally spaced 0.5-mm-thick steel 
plates in the upper part of the tube. The plates in the assembly were 
connected and soldered together by four thin pins or assembled using 
two brass rings with equally spaced machined slots (see Fig. 8c). The 
plate  assembly  blocks  a  negligible  part  of  the  tube  horizontal  cross--
section ensuring unobstructed flow of the suspension and an equal fuel 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009947S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

aluminum-propane-air  mixtures.  The  apparatus  employs  the  same 
dispersion system as the tube apparatus and a narrow-angle 3D-printed 
special profile diffuser, which allows a uniform expansion of the flow 
into the high-aspect ratio (1 cm × 20 cm) cross-section of the 50 cm-long 
vertical  Hele-Shaw  cell.  The  entry  to  the  cell  is  divided  into  narrow 
channels  by  a  set  of  parallel  steel  plates  to  laminarize  the  flow.  The 
Hele-Shaw apparatus has allowed the observation of intrinsic thermo-
diffusive instabilities within aluminum and aluminum-propane flames 
and  the  visualization  of  the  dynamic  coupling  and  decoupling  of 
aluminum and propane flame fronts [79]. 

2.5. Freely propagating flames in transparent balloons and unconfined 
dust clouds 

One of the well-known methods, developed almost a hundred years 
ago,  that  allows  accurate  measurement  of  the  burning  velocity  in  a 
constant-pressure environment over a wide range of fuel concentrations 
is the so-called soap bubble method [81]. In this method, a soap bubble 
filled  with  a  combustible  gas  mixture  is  ignited  at  the  center  by  an 
electrical spark and a propagating spherical gas flame is registered by a 
streak camera [82] or, in later works, by digital cameras using a shad-
owgraphic or Schlieren setup [83]. As a direct analog to the soap bubble 
method in gases, the use of transparent latex balloons for the study of 
nearly  constant-pressure  combustion  in  suspensions  was  proposed  in 
[69,70,84]. It was fully implemented in [80] for the study of the flame 
propagation  in  aluminum  dust  clouds  with  analysis  of  the  dust  con-
centration history and turbulence decay prior to the flame initiation. A 
photo and schematic of the 30-cm diameter and 14-liter initial volume 
latex balloon experiment from [80] is shown in Fig. 10a. Fig. 10b shows 

Fig.  8. Flame  tube  and  quenching  distance  apparatus:  a.  experimental  appa-
ratus,  b.  dispersion  system,  c.  quenching  plates  assemblies,  d.  hybrid  flames 
entering  the  quenching  plate  assembly.  Adapted  from  [78]  with  permission 
of Elsevier. 

concentration  inside  and  outside  of  the  plate  assembly.  The  flame 
propagation in the tube and inside the quenching plate assembly was 
visible and was registered with high-speed digital cameras (see Fig. 8d). 
The flame burning velocity was estimated by dividing the flame speed by 
the  estimated  flame  area.  For  light  metals,  such  as  aluminum  and 
magnesium,  light  scattering  of  the  nano-oxide  combustion  products 
makes it difficult to define the flame borders, especially near the tube 
wall.  This  makes  estimation  of  the  flame  surface  area  uncertain  and, 
consequently,  the  flame  burning  velocity  obtained  is  not  particularly 
accurate. 

Recently, a modified Hele-Shaw cell [79] (see Fig. 9a), i.e., a narrow 
channel  with  a  large  width-to-thickness  aspect  ratio  and  transparent 
glass  walls  that  allow  visual  observation  of  a  quasi-two-dimensional 
flame  (Fig.  9b),  was  used  for  the  study  of  flames  in  aluminum  and 

Fig. 9. Hele-Shaw cell for the observation of the quasi-2D flame in solid fuel 
suspensions: a. diagram of the apparatus, b. snapshots of the hybrid propane- 
aluminum  flames  at  different  gas  equivalence  ratios  and  powder  concentra-
tions propagating down the cell. Adapted from [79] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 10. a. Photo and schematics of the rubber balloon setup to study constant- 
pressure  flames  in  dust  clouds.  b.  Evolution  of  the  fuel  concentration  in  the 
balloon measured with laser light attenuation probe. Adapted from [80] with 
permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009948S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

the evolution of the dust concentration during and after dust dispersion 
measured  by  the  laser  light  attenuation  probe  across  the  balloon 
midsection.  Frames  from  high-speed  filming  in  Fig.  11  illustrate  the 
process  of  the  micron-size  dust  dispersion  and  the  propagation  of  a 
spherical flame. 

Flame experiments with methane-air mixtures performed in the same 
apparatus have shown that up to 5 seconds is required for the turbulence 
introduced by the dispersion system to decay [80]. The same 5 seconds 
delay time requirement, for extinguishing the turbulence generated by 
the dispersion system, was found in microgravity dust combustion ex-
periments in a closed 5-liter bomb [85]. Measurements with the light 
attenuation probe have also shown that, after a 5-second ignition delay 
time,  the  dust  concentration  can  be  up  to  two  times  lower  than  the 
nominal level calculated from the mass of the dispersed powder sample. 
These experiments have confirmed that the short (typically below 0.5 
seconds)  delay  times  customarily  used  in  industrial  safety  testing  of 
combustible dusts in closed bomb apparatus, lead to the flame propa-
gating in a turbulent and highly non-uniform dust suspension. The re-
sults of the experiments performed in [80] with the balloon apparatus 
will be discussed in following chapters. Here we just mention that the 
light scattering by the unburned dust cloud ahead of the flame makes it 
difficult  to  discern  the  flame  boundary,  even  in  relatively  small  dust 

Fig.  11. Dispersion  of  the  5-micron  aluminum  powder  and  the  flame  propa-
gation at aluminum concentration close to stoichiometry (310 g/m3). Reprinted 
from [80] with permission of Elsevier. 

clouds  in  balloons  shown  above.  Infra-red  cameras,  polarized-light 
Schlieren  [86],  and  the  emerging  technique  of  ballistic  light  imaging 
[87] may be used in the future to increase contrast of the flame fronts 
inside medium-size dust clouds. 

The experiments undertaken by Shevchuk et al. [88] with large metal 
dust  clouds  on  the  order  of  about  2  m  in  diameter  in  open  air  have 
detected  and  measured  propagation  speeds  of  mostly  turbulent  flame 
fronts. The dispersion of the metal powder by a powerful air pulse from 
four separate funnels resulted in large spatial non-uniformities in dust 
cloud concentration, intense initial turbulence that did not sufficiently 
decay  before  ignition,  and  incomplete  powder  de-agglomeration.  The 
authors  also  pointed  out  that  attempts  to  reduce  the  influence  of  the 
initial turbulence by increasing the ignition delay time was hampered by 
the  unreliable  timing  of  the  spark  ignition  and,  (as  we  can  guess)  an 
ever-present wind promptly distorting the cloud in open air. 

In  order  to  ensure  a  more  uniform  powder  dispersion  without 
agglomeration,  and  a  visual  observation  of  large-scale  propagating 
flames,  McGill  researchers  [80]  have  used  the  field  setup  shown  in 
Fig.  12.  In  this  setup,  large-scale  dust  clouds  were  generated  by  a 
scaled-up continuous dust dispersion system similar to one used previ-
ously  with  dust  burners  [48,49].  To  protect  the  dust  cloud  from  the 
wind, the experiments were performed in a large fire tower available at 
the Fire Research Laboratory of the National Research Council of Canada 
(Mississippi  Mills,  Ontario,  Canada).  The  tower  is  approximately 
10-story (35 m) high and has about 200 m2  of floor area. Feeding of the 
metal  powder  and  gas  at  constant  rate  during  dispersion  allows  the 
generation of a large, 4 to 5 m-tall and 1 to 2 m-wide, dust cloud with a 
prescribed  and  uniform  fuel  concentration.  Due  to  high  shear  of  the 
sonic-speed dispersing “air-knife” flow, the suspension was also practi-
cally free from agglomerates. The dispersion process of about 1 kg of 
aluminum powder illustrated in frames from video footage in Fig. 12 
takes less than one second. The experiments were performed within a 
narrow 0.4-second time window, after the 1 s-long dispersion process, 
when the flow turbulence sufficiently decays but the cloud instability 
due to the bulk cloud motion has not started yet. The movie frames in 
Fig.  13  illustrate  the  influence  of  the  flow  turbulence  by  comparing 
flame propagation through the cloud ignited with zero and 0.4-seconds 
delay after dispersion. Thermocouples of different junction sizes were 

Fig. 12. Experimental setup for generation of large-scale metal dust clouds and still frames illustrating dynamics of the cloud formation. Adapted from [80] with 
permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009949S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

conditions  were  carried  out  with  a  similar  10-m  drop  tower  [92]. 
NASA  started  planning  for  dust  combustion  research  on  permanent 
s and, in preparation, sponsored tests with 
orbital platforms in the 1970
lycopodium  dust  clouds  at  the  drop  tower  at  NASA  Glenn  Research 
Center [93] and on LearJet parabolic flights [94,95]. Scientists at the 
Japan Microgravity Centre (JAMIC) 10-second drop tower filmed flame 
propagation  in  PMMA  particle  clouds  [96].  More  recently,  the 

′

Fig. 13. Flame propagation through the large aluminum dust cloud with a 0- 
second  (upper  row)  and  a  0.4-second  delay  after  the  end  of  the  powder 
dispersion.  The  time  is  indicated  in  ms.  Adapted  from  [80]  with  permission 
of Elsevier. 

used  to  estimate  the  cloud  radiation  heating  ahead of  the  flame.  The 
results  of  these  measurements  will  be  discussed  in  the  following 
chapters. 

2.6. Studying laminar dust flames in reduced-gravity environments 

As was discussed above, the experimental difficulty in generating a 
uniform,  stable,  and  laminar  dispersion  of  dust  over  a  wide  range  of 
particle sizes and fuel concentrations is the major reason for the scarcity 
of fundamental data on laminar dust flames. Performing experiments in 
a reduced-gravity environment can largely eliminate particle sedimen-
tation and the bulk instability of a dense dust cloud. The low-gravity 
environment  also  diminishes  buoyancy-induced  convective  flows, 
permitting  low  flame  speeds  to  be  observed  in  suspensions  of  large 
particles and slow-burning, nonvolatile fuels. Fig. 14 shows the effect of 
the gravity on the mode of flame propagation and on flame speed in iron 
suspensions. For the same mixture and comparable concentrations, the 
flame  speed  driven  by  convection  is  approximately  25  cm/s  on  the 
ground  (see  Fig.  14a),  5  cm/s  in  the  reduced-gravity  environment 
(cid:0) 2g (see 
aboard a parabolic flight aircraft with g-jitters of up to 5 ×10
Fig. 14b), and around 1 cm/s aboard sounding rockets in a true micro-
(cid:0) 5g) (see Fig. 14c). 
gravity environment (10

The  potential  for  a  reduced-gravity  environment  to  facilitate  the 
study of dust combustion was recognized by combustion scientists well 
before the establishment of the modern microgravity research programs 
by major national space agencies. The pioneering work by Kumagai [90] 
employed a custom-built laboratory drop tower to study droplet com-
bustion  in  a  reduced-gravity  environment.  Ballal  [91]  investigated 
flames  in  coal  and  metal  particulate  suspensions,  using  a  10-m  drop 
tower that provided only of about 1.4 seconds of reduced gravity time. 
Experimental attempts at observing coal/air flames under low-gravity 

Fig.  15. Elements  of  the  combustion  tube  assembly  and  the  vertical  experi-
mental  rack  with  four  mounted  combustion  tubes.  Adapted  from  [89]  with 
permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 14. Effect of gravity on the propagation of flames in suspensions of low-volatility particles in oxidizing gases at different levels: Snapshots at regular intervals of 
the flame propagating a. on the ground, b. in parabolic flights, c. aboard a sounding rocket. Images obtained during the experiments of iron suspensions in oxygen- 
xenon gas mixtures, described in and adapted from [74,75] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099410S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

combustion of metallic suspensions in the reduced-gravity environment 
was  observed  with  aluminum  [85,97],  magnesium  [98,99],  and  iron 
[100]  suspensions. Most  of these microgravity  experiments, however, 
have  not  progressed  beyond  the  demonstration  stage  to  a  systematic 
study of the flame and combustion physics. 

Only  in  this  century,  after  several  modifications of  the  dust flame 
microgravity apparatus were tested aboard NASA DC-9 parabolic flights 
[97], a more permanent experimental setup was built and was accom-
modated  within  the  smaller  Falcon-20 parabolic  flight  aircraft jointly 
operated by the National Research Council of Canada and the Canadian 
Space Agency [89,100]. The apparatus permitted a systematic study of 
flame propagation and quenching in mostly iron dust clouds over a wide 
range  of  particle  sizes  from  3  to  40  microns.  Over  500  experimental 
parabolas have been performed totalling nearly 3 hours of microgravity 
test time. The apparatus design shown in Fig. 15 and its installation and 
operation on the Falcon-20 aircraft are shown in Fig. 16. The operational 
principle of this apparatus was similar to the ground-based laboratory 
tube apparatus (see Fig. 8). The 65-cm long, 5-cm-ID Pyrex tube is fed 
with  particle  suspension  using  the  “piston  feeder-air  knife”  dust 
dispersion system and is ignited at the open tube end by an electrically 
heated tungsten coil. Each combustion tube assembly was equipped with 
an individual dust dispersion system, ignition coil, and filters to capture 
the solid combustion products. There were 4 flame tubes installed in the 
vertical panel facing the optical diagnostics rack. The flame tubes were 
fired  one  by  one  over  consecutive  parabolas.  This  was  followed  by  a 
5-minute horizontal flight during which the spent tube assemblies were 
replaced by fresh ones from the storage rack. There were 12 flame-tube 
assemblies  in  total.  Two  sets  of  quenching-plate  assemblies,  having 
different plate spacings, were installed at about 20 and 40 cm from the 

open tube end. The flame propagation process was filmed by low-speed 
and high-speed digital cameras and flame spectra were acquired by a 
miniature  fiber  optic  spectrometer.  Both  dust  dispersion  and  flame 
propagation  were  performed  within  about  20–22  seconds  of  reduced 
gravity time typical for a jet aircraft flying along a parabolic trajectory. 
The parabolic flight aircraft environment has frequent g-jitters with 
(cid:0) 2g and, therefore, can be used to study 
gravity levels of up to ×5 × 10
flames with propagation speeds above 5 cm/s [101]. As was shown in 
[75], this level of residual acceleration still strongly affects both flame 
speed and its structure at flame propagation speeds lower than 5 cm/s. 
Due to the dependence of buoyancy-driven flow on gravity, the minimal 
observable unperturbed flame speed is proportional to g1/3  [101]. Thus, 
to  reduce  the  flame  speed  limit  from  that  which  can  be  studied  on 
parabolic flight aircraft by a factor of ten necessitates gravity levels on 
(cid:0) 5g. This level of residual gravity in combination with the 
the order of 10
required observation time can only be achieved in space experiments on 
sub-orbital  or  orbital  microgravity  platforms.  Thus,  microgravity  ex-
periments  aimed  at  the  observation  of  very  low  speed  flames  propa-
gating in the discrete flame regime through suspensions of coarse iron 
particles in oxygen-xenon mixtures were performed in the high-quality 
microgravity  environment  of  suborbital  sounding-rocket  flights  [75] 
(see Chapter 7). The experiment that was flown first on the European 
Space Agency (ESA) MAXUS-9 rocket in 2017 and on the smaller ESA 
TEXUS-56 rocket in 2019 employed the same semi-open tube design as 
demonstrated in previous parabolic flight experiments (see Fig. 17). The 
MAXUS-9 apparatus built by the Defense and Space Division of Airbus in 
Germany  had  2  tube  carousels  with  9  flame  tubes  each,  whereas  the 
scaled-down TEXUS-56 apparatus had only one carousel with 9 tubes. 
Each  tube  can  be  used  twice  within  the  12  minutes  of  microgravity 
during the MAXUS mission and 6 minutes of TEXUS microgravity time. 
The other differences between the setups were a modified flow expan-
sion cone in TEXUS-56, and the use of a hot-wire ignition system in the 
TEXUS-56 mission compared to a propane ignition system used in the 
MAXUS-9 experiment. 

The  high-quality  microgravity  environment  obtained  onboard 
sounding rockets has allowed the study of flame propagation in iron- 
oxygen-xenon suspensions of large 25-30-micron particles that demon-
strated  flame speeds  around 1  cm/s (see  Fig. 14c). The results  of the 
sounding-rocket-flight tests will be presented in Chapter 7 discussing the 
discrete flame-propagation regime. 

2.7. Optical diagnostics in dust flames 

The  development  of  diagnostic  techniques  that  enable  the  mea-
surement  of  the  thermal  and  chemical  structures  of  dust  flames  is  a 
challenging  task.  Unlike  gas  flames,  where  deviation  from  thermal 
equilibrium between species is small and typically negligible [103], the 
flame  in  suspension  is,  by  its  nature,  a  multi-temperature  media  (see 

Fig.  16. Dust  combustion  apparatus  on  board  Falcon-20  parabolic  flight 
aircraft  and  flame  in  suspension  of  iron  particles  in  air  propagating  in  the 
combustion tube shortly after ignition by the tungsten coil. Adapted from [89] 
with permission of Elsevier and from S. Goroshin’s private archive. 

Fig. 17. Dust combustion apparatus for MAXUS-9 and its modification for the 
TEXUS-56 sounding rocket microgravity experiments. Adapted from [75] with 
permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099411S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 18. a. Schematics of the scanning spectral apparatus from [102], b. photographs of aluminum-air and aluminum-oxygen-helium flame with identification of the 
scanned cross-section, and c. flame spectra at different distances from the Bunsen flame centerline. Adapted from [102] with permission of Elsevier. 

Chapter 3 below). Particles, diffusion micro-flames surrounding burning 
particles, and the gas media in between particles may have temperatures 
that differ by hundreds of degrees. The problem is aggravated by the 
intense light scattering from nanosize oxide particles formed in flames of 
light  metals,  such  as  Al  or  Mg.  Due  to  this  light  scattering,  the  light 
emission  from  every  point  in  the  metal  flame  is  a  mix  of  the  local 
emission and the light emission from other flame regions. In addition, 
the dust flame, as a rule, is not only physically, but also optically much 
thicker than gas flames. Thus, the large optical thickness of an aluminum 
flame within the AlO molecular lines considerably reduces the accuracy 
of temperature measurements from molecular spectra [60]. The optical 
thickness of these flames also makes the inverse Abel transform of the 
Bunsen flame spectra unreliable [60]. 

The first study of the spectral structure of an aluminum-dust Bunsen 
flame  was  attempted  in  [102]  using  optical  schematics  illustrated  in 
Fig.  18a.  Light  emission  spectra  were  obtained  with  the  scanning 

apparatus shown in Fig. 18b across the flame middle cross-section. As 
mentioned  above,  due  to  the  difficulties  caused  by  the  large  optical 
thickness of the AlO molecular spectra, light scattering, and the general 
instability of the inverse Abel transform of a cylindrically symmetrical 
object  with  minimum  light  emissivity  at  the  center  (Bunsen  flame) 
[102], the resulting flame spectra did not allow reliable identification of 
the  particle  combustion  regime  or  the  flame  thickness.  The  derived 
flame temperatures from both continuous and AlO molecular spectra, 
however, demonstrated good correlation with theoretical prediction of 
the maximum temperature of the particle diffusion micro-flame in air, 
oxygen-helium, and oxygen-argon mixtures. 

The use in [57] of the counterflow flat aluminum dust flame instead 
of the Bunsen flame eliminated the need for the inverse Abel transform 
and allowed imaging spectroscopy along the flame centreline by CCD 
cameras, as illustrated in Fig. 19. The difficulties with the large optical 
thickness of AlO molecular spectral lines still remained and forced the 

Fig. 19. Counterflow flat flame setup: a. aluminum flame, b. position of the laser sheet and flame, c. schematics of the absorption and emission imaging spectroscopy 
setup. Adapted from [60] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099412S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 20. a. Image of AlO B2Σ+ (cid:0) X2Σ+
thin regions. Adapted from [60] with permission of Elsevier. 

flat flame spectral system and b. fitting theoretically calculated and experimental spectra from optically thick and optically 

authors to use, as illustrated in Fig. 20, the scattered light from the flame 
preheat  zone  for  accurate  measurement  of  the  maximum  flame  tem-
perature. The light scattered from the flame preheat zone was minimally 
affected by the optical thickness of the flame and could be compared to 
an optically thin spectral model. 

Emission and absorption of the aluminum line spectra in the near UV 
range has also allowed estimation of the width of the reaction zone, as 
well  as  detection  of  the  particle  combustion  regime,  in  aluminum-air 
and  aluminum-methane-air  flames  [60].  These  results  will  be  dis-
cussed in Chapter 4. 

Specialized PIV diagnostics, combined with flame tomography, have 
also been recently developed for the Bunsen flame geometry in [54]. The 
system, shown in Fig. 21, allowed the researchers to estimate the flame 
stretch and to obtain measurements of the flame speed in aluminum-air 
flames. 

Holographic interferometry was employed in [46] to reconstruct the 
temperature field of the gaseous phase in the Bunsen aluminum flame 
cone  as  shown  in  Fig.  22.  Unlike  classical  laser  interferometry  that 
require  high-precision  optics,  the  dual  exposure  holographic  interfer-
ometry produces quality interferograms even with standard lenses and 
windows [104]. 

The change of the refractive index in the flame vertical cross-section 

Fig.  21. Flame  speed  determination  by  Lomba  et  al.  [54]:  a.  Experimental 
Bunsen flame setup, b. tomography image of an aluminum-air flame. Adapted 
from [54] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig.  22. Interferogram  of  the  aluminum-air  Bunsen  flame  and  the  recon-
structed flame temperature field (see [46] for details). Courtesy of S. Goroshin 
(Private archive). 

was calculated from interferogram using inverse Abel transform [29]. 
The flame refractive index mostly depends on the refractive index of the 
gas in the space between particles, because the micro-diffusion flames 
around particles occupy a relatively small volume. The temperature field 
of  the  Bunsen  flame  shown  in  Fig.  22  was  reconstructed  from  the 
refractive  index  by  assuming  that  it  depends  mostly  on  the  gas  tem-
perature of nitrogen since the concentration of other gaseous species, 
such as AlO and Al vapors, was estimated to be relatively low. 

3. Flames within a flame: The essence of heterogeneous 
combustion 

Most important part of doing physics is the knowledge of approximation. 
Lev Landau 

Due  to  the  complexity  of  heterogeneous  combustion  and  the  di-
versity  of  solid  fuels,  the  primary  attention  in  this  review is  given  to 
theoretical works  that  examine the basic,  fundamental, and  universal 
aspects  of  a  heterogeneous  flame  leaving  secondary  effects  or  effects 
specific to a particular fuel for further considerations. Unlike complex 
“realistic”  numerical  constructs  that  tend  to  consider  multiple  effects 
simultaneously and are often fuel-specific, such basic idealistic models 
are  transparent in providing  unambiguous qualitative explanations of 
the flame characteristics and can be readily verified experimentally. 

First, we should consider a critically important fundamental ques-
tion:  is  there  any  essential  difference  between  a  gaseous  flame  and  a 
flame in a nonvolatile suspension when both are driven by molecular 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099413S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

heat conductivity? The short answer to this question is that the ability of 
particles  to  ignite  and  react  within  individual  diffusive  micro-flames 
around each particle, i.e., “flames within a flame”, is the most essen-
tial feature of heterogeneous combustion that distinguishes it from ho-
mogeneous combustion. 

3.1. Particle ignition in a fuel suspension versus reaction onset in a 
homogeneous mixture 

Although  the  concept  of  particle  ignition  is  central  to  the  under-
standing of the nature of heterogeneous flames, it is rarely analyzed in 
detail in the modelling literature. Instead, ignition is often colloquially 
referred to as a rapid transition from inert particle heating to intense 
reaction. It is also frequently assumed, as a given, that the temperature 
at which this transition occurs coincides with the ignition temperature 
of an individual particle and, therefore, can be determined (calculated or 
experimentally measured) outside of the flame propagation problem. In 
contrast,  the  notion  of  an  externally  defined  ignition  temperature, 
common in early gaseous flame models since Mallard and Le Chˆatelier 
[105],  was  abandoned  after  the  pioneering  works  of  Zel’dovich  and 
Frank-Kamenetskii demonstrated that the reaction onset point in a flame 
cannot be characterized as an ignition because it lacks criticality and is a 
function of the initial temperature of the mixture [106]. 

The effect of particle combustion regime on the flame speed in sus-
pensions of a nonvolatile fuel was first analyzed by Goroshin, Shoshin 
et al. [107]. In this pioneering work, the authors predicted a non-trivial 
dependence of the flame speed on particle size in fuel-lean mixtures in 
the transitional region between diffusion and kinetic particle combus-
tion regimes. The problem in a similar formulation has been recently 
revisited  by  Soo  et  al.  [108]  who  not  only  reproduced  results  of  the 
above-mentioned work but also discovered a specific oscillating flame 
propagation regime in the diffusion-to-kinetic transitional region. The 
results of this work will be discussed in detail in the present Chapter. Soo 
et  al.  [109,110]  have  also  investigated  the  relationship  between  the 
ignition of an individual particle and the onset of intense reaction in an 
ensemble of particles, i.e., a suspension, in the frame of the same simple 
model. The model also uses the unified diffusion-kinetic heterogeneous 
reaction rate written in a quasi-steady approximation initially proposed 
by D. Frank-Kamenetskii [111] and further developed by L. Vulis [112]. 
It combines both kinetic, k, and diffusion, β, reaction rates to define the 
rate of particle reaction with an oxidizer in a single expression: 

dm
dt

= A C∞ k β Da∗, whereDa∗ =

k
k + β

(3.1)  

Fig.  23. Modified  Semenov  diagram  illustrating  particle  ignition  (I)  at  some 
critical  temperature  and  transition  to  the  diffusion  limit  (D).  Extinction  (E) 
occurs as the particle shrinks and undergoes the reverse transition to the kinetic 
limit  (K).  Stable  states  are  shown  by  filled  symbols  while  unstable  states  are 
denoted by open symbols. Inset: ignition temperature as a function of particle 
size showing critical radius below which ignition is impossible. Reprinted with 
from [108] with permission of Elsevier. 

Once  ignited,  the  particle  may  also  quench  (point  E)  if  rapidly  intro-
duced  into  a  much  cooler  gas  or  due  to  burnout  that  increases  the 
relative  heat-loss  rate  as  particle  size  decreases.  In  Fig.  24,  particle 
ignition and extinction points are shown on a so-called S-curve diagram 
[110,112]  that  show  the  relationship  of  a  normalized  quasi-steady 
particle  temperature  versus  gas  temperature  for  different  particle 
sizes. As can be seen, with a decrease of particle size (1 → 4), the process 
of ignition starts to degenerate and, below some critical particle size, 
ignition becomes impossible at any temperature of the surrounding gas. 
The dependence of the ignition temperature on the particle size and the 
critical particle diameter below which particles cannot ignite are shown 
in the inset to Fig. 23. 

The inability of small particles to ignite and transfer to the diffusion- 
limited combustion regime does not mean that they cannot efficiently 
burn  in  a  kinetic  regime  within  a  dense  fuel  suspension.  If  the  fuel 
concentration in suspension is sufficiently high, in relation to stoichi-
ometry, the fuel suspension will undergo a rapid reaction onset due to 

∗ = Da

Here A is the particle surface area and C∞  is the concentration of the 
oxidizer  far  from  the  particle  surface.  The  dimensionless  Damk¨ohler 
∗
, is related to the traditional Damk¨ohler number Da (Da =
parameter Da
∗
k/β) by the expression Da
is close to unity 
(1+Da). The value of Da
when  the  particle  reaction  rate  is  controlled  by  the  diffusion  of  the 
∗≪1 
oxidizer (i.e., the diffusion reaction regime is when k≫β) and Da
when  the  rate  of  particle  oxidation  is  determined  by  the  Arrhenius 
surface  reaction  rate  (i.e.,  the  kinetic  regime  where  β≫k).  Using  the 
unified  reaction  rate,  ˙ω = γC∞kβ/(k +β) = γC∞β  Da
(where  γ  is  the 
stoichiometric coefficient), the traditional Semenov diagram for particle 
ignition  [108,109]  can  be  modified  to  analyze  particle  temperature 
history also after the ignition point as shown in Fig. 23. 

∗

As can be seen from Fig. 23, particle ignition occurs at a temperature 
defined by the tangential point of the heat loss and heat release curves 
(point I) and has a clear meaning: it is a rapid transition (bifurcation) 
from a slow oxidation controlled by Arrhenius kinetics, at a temperature 
close to the temperature of the surrounding gas, to a steady combustion 
regime controlled by oxygen diffusion to the particle/flame (point D). 
The particle temperature during the full-fledged diffusion combustion is 
close to the adiabatic temperature of the stoichiometric mixture and can 
exceed the particle ignition temperature by a thousand degree or more. 

Fig. 24. Dependence of particle temperature on gas temperature (S-curves) for 
a range of particle sizes. At a critical size, ignition degenerates, and the particle 
reaction is limited to the kinetic regime. Reprinted from [110] with permission 
of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099414S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 25. Reaction of particle suspension in an instantly heated gas: a. particle size is below critical ignition size, b. particle size is above but close to the critical size, c. 
particle size is much larger than critical size. Reprinted from [110] with permission of Elsevier. 

self-heating that will result in a fast reaction at high temperatures after 
some  adiabatic  delay  time  [113]  as  shown  in  Fig.  25a.  The  process  of 
reaction onset in a suspension of small particles reacting kinetically is 
completely analogous to the reaction onset in an adiabatic gaseous fuel 
mixture,  such  as  observed  in  a  shock  tube  or  rapid-compression  ma-
chine. The term reaction onset is introduced in [110] to differentiate it 
from  the  ignition  of  individual  particles.  Theoretically,  an  isolated 
adiabatic suspension will undergo reaction onset at any initial tempera-
ture, although the delay times at low temperatures are unrealistically 
long. Thus, the reaction onset in a suspension of small particles in the 
absence of heat losses from the system lacks criticality, in contrast to the 
ignition of an individual particle for which a critical particle size and 
temperature are required (see Fig. 23 and Fig. 24). 

For  suspensions  with  particle  sizes  considerably  larger  than  the 
critical particle size for particle ignition, the transition to intense com-
bustion  in  the  suspension  is  primarily  driven  by  the  ignition  of  indi-
vidual particles, see Fig. 25c. For the region of particle sizes bordering 
the  critical  size,  both  the  reaction-onset  and  particle-ignition  mecha-
nisms are important and are mutually reinforcing. 

3.2. Thermal structure and speed of the flame in nonvolatile fuel 
suspensions 

Accounting for both the kinetic and diffusive resistances in the rate of 
a  heterogeneous  reaction  allows  the  construction  of  a  flame  model 
without introduction of any externally defined particle combustion pa-
rameters, such as the ignition temperature and combustion time. This 
approach was used in several numerical flame models in coal combus-
tion  [114–116].  However,  the  complexity  of  multi-stage  coal  flames, 
which include de-volatilization and homogeneous combustion of vola-
tiles  and  the  heterogeneous  combustion  of  char,  makes  it  difficult  to 
determine general physics of heterogeneous flames applicable beyond 
coal.  The  thermal  structure  of  the  flame  in  an  asymptotic  case  when 
particles ignite and burn in the diffusion-controlled combustion regime 
was  discussed  by  Rumanov et  al. [117],  Ozerova et  al.  [118], and  by 
Yarin and Hetsroni [119]. These works, however, have not investigated 
flame behavior in the transitional region of particle sizes where diffusion 
and kinetic reaction rates are comparable. 

Soo  et  al.  [108]  have  recently  used  the  unified  kinetic-diffusive 
expression  (3.1)  for  the  particle  reaction  rate  in  a  numerical  flame 

Fig. 26. Flame structure profiles. Top: gas and particle temperature normalized with Ta = Ea/R; Middle: normalized oxidizer mass fraction, Y, and particle radius, r; 
Bottom: reaction heat release rate,  ˙q, and Da* for three different particle sizes in a fuel-lean flame at fuel equivalence ratio 0.5. The arrow indicates direction of 
propagation. Reprinted from [108] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099415S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

model that allows comparison of flame structures across a wide range of 
particle  sizes  where  a  particle  can  burn  in  the  diffusive,  kinetic  or 
transient  regimes.  The  model  used  an  unsteady  (Spalding  [120]) 
formulation, which also permits investigation of unstable flame propa-
gation regimes. Fig. 26 from this work shows examples of flame struc-
tures  in  fuel-lean  suspensions  with  different  particle  sizes  at  some 
“typical” set of kinetic and thermodynamic parameters. 

As  can  be  seen,  the  flame  thermal  structure  is  fundamentally 
different  for  small  (r0  =1  µm)  kinetically  reacting  particles  and  large 
particles (r0  =10 µm) that ignite and burn in the diffusive regime. In the 
case  of  small  particles,  the  temperature  difference  between  solid  and 
gaseous phase is small and the flame structure resembles the structure of 
a homogeneous gaseous flame where the reaction is localized in a nar-
row temperature region within one characteristic temperature interval, 
RT2/Ea, down from the maximum flame temperature. In contrast, the 
temperature  of  large  particles  after  ignition  is  close  to  the  adiabatic 
temperature of the stoichiometric mixture and exceeds the gas temper-
ature  in fuel-lean mixtures by  several hundred degrees. The diffusion 
particle combustion starts with ignition at relatively low gas tempera-
ture and spans a wide temperature interval of the gaseous media. For 
intermediate particle sizes (4 µm for the numerical example shown in 
∗ ∼ 0.5), where 
Fig. 26b), the particle burns in a transitional regime (Da
both the kinetic and diffusive rates are important. 

̅̅
r

√

For  fuel concentrations near stoichiometry, the dependence of the 
flame burning velocity on particle size demonstrates a smooth transition 
from a ub ∼ 1/r dependence characteristic for particles burning in the 
diffusive  regime  to  ub ∼ 1/
for  particles  reacting  kinetically [108]. 
For lean mixtures, however, the transition is more complex. The inter-
play between diffusion and kinetic reaction rates results in a non-trivial 
dependence of the flame speed on particle size in the transitional region, 
i.e., near the critical particle size for particle ignition. As can be seen 
from Fig. 27, the flame speed in some regions can be almost independent 
of particle size or even can slightly decrease with decrease of particle 
size. With fuel concentrations below some level, there is an expanding 
region of particle sizes where the smooth transition from the diffusive to 
the kinetic particle combustion regime breaks down. In this region, the 
flame  propagates  in  a  pulsating  manner  with  particle  combustion 
alternating between primarily diffusion-controlled followed by primar-
ily kinetic-controlled combustion regimes [108]. 

The  peculiarities  of  the  transition  from  diffusion  to  kinetically 
limited combustion also affects the dependence of the flame speed on 
fuel-oxygen equivalence ratio. For kinetically reacting small particles, 

Fig. 27. Burning velocity, as a function of particle size for different fuel-oxygen 
equivalence  ratios.  Hatched  area  corresponds  to  regions  of  pulsating  flame 
propagation. Reprinted from [108] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 28. Burning velocity as a function of equivalence ratio for two different 
initial particle sizes: 1 and 10 µm. The expanded view shows the intersections of 
burning velocity for lean equivalence ratios for various particle sizes. Reprinted 
from [108] with permission of Elsevier. 

this  dependence  is  quite  like  the  bell-shaped  curve  in  homogeneous 
mixtures  (see  Fig.  28).  Some  “asymmetrical  stretch”  towards  larger 
equivalence ratios reflects the fact that in solid suspensions, unlike in gas 
mixtures, the fuel occupies negligible volume and, therefore, an increase 
in  fuel  concentration  does  not  displace  oxygen.  Since  the  total  heat 
production in fuel-rich mixtures depends solely on the oxygen content, 
the heat release remains constant with increase of the fuel equivalence 
ratio above stoichiometry. 

The  shallower  decrease  of  the  speed  with  a  decrease  of  the  fuel 
equivalence ratio below stoichiometry for large particles reflects the fact 
that the particle combustion rate in the diffusive regime is insensitive to 
the temperature of the gas. Thus, the flame speeds for particle sizes on 
different sides  of  the  particle  ignition  limit start to  converge  and  can 
even intersect as the fuel equivalence ratio decreases, as shown in the 
inset to Fig. 28. This is a manifestation of the same “anomalous” speed 
behavior  shown  in  Fig.  27.  We  will  discuss  this  “anomalous”  flame 
behavior, and some experimental results that seemingly demonstrate it, 
in Chapter 4. 

The flame thermal structure for different particle sizes in fuel-rich 
suspensions, shown in Fig. 29, is considerably different from one in a 
fuel-lean  suspension.  In  stochiometric  and  fuel-rich  suspensions,  the 
temperature  of  the  particles  burning  in  the  diffusion  mode  can  only 
exceed gas temperature locally but is always below the flame equilib-
rium temperature. The differences between particle  and gas tempera-
tures are also considerably smaller than in fuel-lean flames due to the 
low concentration of oxidizer in the combustion zone. 

3.3. Working analytical expressions for the estimation of the laminar 
flame burning velocity 

Numerical flame models that explicitly use reaction kinetics, such as 
the flame model of Soo et al. [108] discussed above, do not require input 
of any external particle-combustion parameters besides the kinetic pa-
rameters of the heterogeneous reaction. In practice, however, the reac-
tion kinetics of the particle oxidation process are often complicated by 
protective oxide films, and their phase transitions, leading to Arrhenius 
parameters of the heterogeneous reaction that are different in different 
temperature ranges and which are seldom known at higher temperatures 
the 
[121].  Calculation  of 
time-consuming  Spalding-type  non-stationary  numerical  algorithm  is 
also impractical for engineering purposes. Thus, the majority of engi-
neering  expressions  for  the  burning  velocity  assume  the  diffusion 
particle-combustion regime a priori and use external parameters, such as 
the  ignition  temperature  and  combustion  time of  a  single  particle,  to 

the  flame  burning  velocity  using 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099416S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 29. Flame structure profiles for three different particle sizes in a fuel-rich mixture (ϕ = 1.5). Reprinted from [108] with permission of Elsevier.  

estimate the flame speed. The most frequently used expression (3.2) for 
the  burning  velocity  can  be  traced  back  to  Mallard  and  Le  Chˆatelier 
[105]. The expression (3.2) is derived from an ad hoc equation   (3.3) 
balancing  the  convective and  molecular  heat  flows on  the  border  be-
tween the flame preheat and combustion zones [27,117]: 

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
λ
cρ

Tad (cid:0) Ti
τc(Ti (cid:0) Tu)

ub =

cρub(Ti (cid:0) Tu) = λ

Tad (cid:0) Ti
ubτc

(3.2)  

(3.3) 

Here cρ is the total specific heat of the suspension that includes both 
the solid fuel and the gas, λ is the molecular heat conductivity of the gas, 
Ti  and  τc  are  an  externally  defined  particle  ignition  temperature  and 
combustion time of an individual isolated particle, and Tad  is the tem-
perature of an adiabatic flame. 

Two major assumptions used in deriving expression (3.3) should be 
mentioned: 1) the temperature of the gas at the particle ignition point Ti 
is equal to the ignition temperature of a single particle and 2) the heat 
flux  from  the  combustion  zone  can  be  estimated  assuming  a  linear 
temperature profile in the reaction zone. As discussed  below, both of 
these assumptions are generally not justified. 

Under Semenov’s definition of particle ignition (Fig. 23), the delay 
time at the ignition point is infinite. The residence time of particles in the 
flame preheat zone is on the order of α/u2
b  (here α  [cm2/s] is the gas 
thermal conductivity) and is short, only about a few milliseconds for a 
typical flame speed on the order of 10–30 cm/s. To accommodate such 
short delay times, the particle ignition temperature in a flame needs to 
be  considerably  higher  than  the  particle  autoignition  temperature 
defined by the Semenov diagram. Since the width of the flame preheat 
zone depends on the flame speed, i.e., it shrinks with an increase of the 
flame speed, the ignition temperature is also a function of the burning 
velocity,  i.e.,  is  also  an  eigenvalue  of  the  flame  propagation  problem 
together with the burning velocity. Only when the activation energy of 
the reaction is substantial (in theory infinite) and the ignition delay time 
shrinks to almost zero, will the particle ignition temperature in the flame 
approach the ignition temperature of a single particle. In other words, 
the  assumption  of  the  same  ignition  temperature  in  the  flame  as  in 
Semenov’s definition is an asymptotic approximation for large values of 
the reaction activation energy. In order to bypass this problem, Ruma-
nov et al. [117] proposed to identify ignition in the flame preheat zone as 
a point when the heating rate provided by the reaction starts to exceed 
the rate of the inert heating. This ignition criterion, however, requires 
the  knowledge  of  the  reaction  parameters  and  largely  defeats  the 

purpose of the engineering approximation. 

Unlike the assumption for the ignition temperature, which at least 
can be justified for reactions with large activation energy and has no 
practical alternative, the second assumption of the linear temperature 
profile in the combustion zone is not only unjustifiable but also unnec-
essary. As was shown by Paleˇcka et al. [122], the temperature profile in 
the  combustion  zone  can  never  be  linear  and  is  always  exponential, 
whether  the  particles  burn  in  the  diffusive,  kinetic,  or  intermediate 
regime. The assumption of a linear temperature profile in the combus-
tion zone does not allow the temperature gradients on the border of the 
preheat and combustion zones to be matched accurately and results not 
only in an under-prediction of the absolute value of the burning velocity, 
but also suggests the  wrong shape of the  flame speed  dependence on 
concentration  (concave  instead  of  convex).  This  assumption  is  also 
easily avoidable, as the heat transfer equation in the flame for diffusively 
burning particles is linear and can be integrated analytically, resulting in 
an analytical expression for the flame burning velocity [122]. With the 
simplest  approximation  of  the  heat  release  profile  in  the  combustion 
zone being a step function, W(x) = BQ
τc , (here Q is the heat of reaction and 
B is the fuel concentration) the implicit expression defining the flame 
speed obtained by matching temperature profiles and heat fluxes on the 
border between the preheat and combustion zones [71,122,123] takes a 
simple form: 

κ2
μ

= 1 (cid:0) e(cid:0) κ2

(3.4)  

BQ

b τc
where  κ2 = u2
α ,  κ  being  the  non-dimensional  burning  velocity,  μ =
cρ(Ti(cid:0) Tu) is the non-dimensional fuel concentration and α = λ
cρ  [cm2/s] is 
the thermal diffusivity. Only for fast flames [122] when κ≫1, i.e., when 
the width of the combustion zone is much larger than the width of the 
preheat zone (ubτc≫ α
ub), can expression (3.4) be reduced to a form that is 
similar, but not identical, to expression (3.2). For κ≫1, the exponential 
part  of  the  expression  (3.4)  is  small  and  thus  can  be  neglected.  By 
cρ = Tad (cid:0) Tu, the expression for the flame speed than 
considering that BQ
can be written as: 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
α(Tad (cid:0) Tu)
τc(Ti (cid:0) Tu)

(3.5) 

ub =

√

Expression (3.5) is similar to expression (3.3) but, unlike in (3.3), the 
numerator under the square root in (3.5) is not the difference between 
flame temperature and the ignition temperature but between the flame 
temperature and the temperature of the unburned mixture. Thus, it does 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099417S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

not predict zero flame speed when Tad→Ti  because it is not valid for slow 
flames. The full expression (3.4), however, rightly predicts that ub→0 
when Tad→Ti. 

For the case of small particles burning in the purely kinetic regime, 
the  burning  velocity  can  be  calculated  using  the  classical  analytical 
expression formulated by Zel’dovich and Frank-Kamenetskii [106] and 
modified for a suspension with a single-step, first-order heterogeneous 
surface reaction [49]. 

The  dependence  of  the  flame  speed  on  particle  size  in  fuel-lean 
mixtures  predicted  by  the  engineering  analytical  expression  (3.4)  for 
particles burning in the diffusion regime, and the modified Zel’dovich 
expression for particles burning in the kinetic regime, are compared in 
Fig. 27 with results from the full numerical model previously shown in 
Fig. 24 [108]. The particle ignition temperatures and combustion times 
needed as external parameters for expression (3.4) were calculated using 
particles with a radius of 1 µm, and 25 µm for the kinetic and diffusive 
model, respectively. 

As can be seen from Fig. 30, the dependence of the burning velocity 
on particle size predicted by engineering expressions qualitatively co-
incides with the predictions of the numerical model in case of a “pure” 
kinetic  or  a  “pure”  diffusion  combustion  regime.  The  full  numerical 
model, however, must be used in the range of particle sizes where both 
kinetic and diffusion reaction “resistances”, or rates, are comparable. 

The expression (3.4) for the flame speed is only valid for fuel-lean 
mixtures,  i.e., for  fuel-oxygen  equivalence ratios  well  below  unity. In 
fuel-rich  mixtures,  the  characteristic  combustion  time  is  not  the  time 
when the particle size goes to zero, i.e., the combustion time of a single 
particle, but the time it takes for the burning suspension to completely 
consume the gaseous oxidizer (Fig. 29). As can be seen in Fig. 29, due to 
oxygen consumption, particles in a fuel-rich mixture ignite and burn at 
oxygen concentrations well below the original oxygen concentration in 
the unburned mixture. Goroshin et al. [71] have obtained an approxi-
mate  analytical  solution  (3.6)  for  the  burning  velocity  in  a  fuel-rich 
mixture  using  the  same  algorithm  as  for  derivation  of  the  equation 
(3.4) in a fuel-lean mixture. 

3μϕ = 2Aκ2(1 + ϕν)(ϕν + A), whereA = 1 (cid:0)

Le
2

+

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Le2
ϕ
3
κ2
2
4

Le

+

(3.6) 

local  reaction  rate,  the  heat  transfer  equation  was  paired  with  the 
equation for the oxygen diffusion across the flame. Both equations are 
linear  and  were  solved  analytically.  Ignition  temperature  of  a  single 
particle  at  the  initial  oxygen  concentration  was  corrected  [71]  to 
correlate  with  the  oxygen  concentration  at  the  border  between  the 
preheat  and 
the  Frank-Kamentskii 
transformation. 

zones  using 

combustion 

3.4. Flames with heat losses and flame quenching 

The simple flame model used to obtain working equation  (3.4) for 
the  flame  burning  velocity  in  a  lean  suspension  was  extended  to  the 
flame with heat losses in [71,122]. The model formulation and the so-
lution  algorithm  are  identical  to  that  initially  proposed  by  Forman 
Williams [19] for the description of flame quenching in a homogeneous 
mixture with introduction of the ignition temperature. The heat losses in 
the 1-D flame model can be introduced as a negative volumetric heat 
source that linearly depends on the local flame temperature. The source 
term  for  the  heat  production  by  diffusively  reacting  particles  can  be 
represented  by  a  step  function,  as  shown  in  Fig.  31.  To  obtain  the 
expression for the flame speed, the flame is divided into three zones: the 
preheat  zone,  the  combustion  zone  and  the  post-flame  zone.  In  each 
zone, the second-order heat transfer equation is linear and can be easily 
integrated.  Five  equations  result  from  matching  heat  fluxes  and  tem-
peratures on the two borders between the preheat and combustion zones 
and the combustion and product zones, as well as the boundary condi-
tion  at  infinity  in  the  post  flame  zone,  where,  due  to  heat  loss,  the 
temperature  of  the  flame  products  returns  to  the  initial  temperature. 
These  five  equations  are  sufficient  not  only  for  determination  of  all 
unknown integration constants but also the flame propagation velocity. 
The resulting equation  (3.7) for burning velocity has the same dimen-
sionless  parameters  as  equation   (3.4)  and  an  additional  heat  loss 
parameter η = 2αNuτc/d2, which is the ratio of the combustion time to 
the  characteristic  heat  transfer  time  in  a  channel  of  diameter  d.  The 
value of the Nusselt number, Nu, depends on the channel’s geometry. 

The  new  parameters  in  equation   (3.6),  in  addition  to  the  ones 
already used in equation  (3.4) are the Lewis number, Le, the fuel/ox-
ygen equivalence ratio, ϕ, and ν = csBst
cgρg , which is the ratio of the heat 
capacity of the solid phase at stoichiometric fuel concentration to the 
heat capacity of the gas. 

In derivation of equation  (3.6), it was assumed that the transient rate 
of particle reaction in the flame follows the local oxygen concentration 
and the change of particle radius can be neglected. Thus, to define the 

Fig. 30. Comparison of the burning velocity calculated with expression (3.4) 
for diffusive particle combustion regime and modified Zel’dovich expression for 
the kinetic combustion regime with the predictions of the full numerical model. 
Reprinted from [108] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 31. a. Flame structure with single stepwise reaction and heat loss, and b. 
qualitative  dependence  of  the  flame  speed  on  heat  loss  parameter.  Adapted 
from [122] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099418S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

1
μ

=

1
P

√

1 (cid:0) exp( (cid:0) P)
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 + 4 η
κ2

, whereP =

(

1 +

κ2
2

√

)

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
η
1 + 4
κ2

(3.7) 

As shown in Fig. 31(b), equation   (3.6) has two solutions: the one 
shown  as  the  solid  line  is  stable  and  the  one  with  the  dashed  line  is 
unstable.  At  some  critical  heat  loss  parameter  value,  known  as  the 
bifurcation point, they merge and the flame quenches. 

The mechanism of flame quenching in suspensions due to heat loss is 
no  different  from  that  first  analyzed  by  Spalding  for  homogeneous 
flames [124]. However, because the introduction of the ignition tem-
perature in heterogeneous flames is more justified than in gases, at least 
for large values of the activation energy, the mathematical description 
obtained with the step source model is simpler. It is also important to 
note that, just as for flames in gases, the minimal flame speed before 
̅̅̅
√
times smaller than the flame speed 
quenching is not zero and is only 
e
√
̅̅̅
in the adiabatic case. Thus, the 
rule does not reflect the Arrhenius 
e
nature of the reaction rate, but rather is a fundamental property of the 
Poincar´e-Andronov-Hopf type bifurcation [125]. 

For  fuel-rich  mixtures,  a  similar  expression  to  (3.7)  for  the  flame 
speed  with  heat  losses  describing  flame  quenching  was  obtained  by 
Goroshin et al. [71] using similar assumptions. The flame speed depends 
on the same parameters, as shown in equation  (3.8), and we refer the 
reader to the original publication for the explicit expression. 

f (κ, μ, η, Le, ϕ, ν) = 0

(3.8) 

Fig.  32  from  [71]  presents  the  dependence  of  the  dimensionless 
burning velocity on fuel-oxygen equivalence ratio under different values 
of the heat loss parameters both in fuel-lean and fuel rich mixtures. As 
can be seen from Fig. 32, flames in fuel-rich mixtures are more “resis-
tant”  to  heat  loss,  i.e.,  they  quench  at  larger  values  of  the  heat  loss 
parameter than in fuel-lean mixtures. This “resistance” to heat loss is a 
direct reflection of the shorter reaction time in fuel-rich mixtures than in 
lean  mixtures  for  particles  burning  in  the  diffusive  regime  (compare 
Figs. 26 and 29 for heat production curves for 10-µm particles in lean 
and rich mixtures). It is even possible that, for some large values of the 
heat loss parameter, both the “lean” and “rich” flame propagation limits 
in a suspension may fall within the fuel-rich range of the fuel concen-
tration (ϕ > 1). 

4. Qualitative interpretation of experimental data based on the 
particle combustion regime 

In this chapter, the available experimental data on laminar flames in 
nonvolatile fuel suspensions is interpreted using the models discussed in 
the  previous  section.  The  discussion  focuses  on  the  evidence  for  the 
“flames-inside-a-flame”  structure  of  heterogeneous  flames  and  is 

primarily of a qualitative nature. More accurate quantitative compari-
son with experimental results would require future numerical models to 
consider  the  exact  distribution  of  particle  sizes  and  other  specific 
properties of the fuel, as well as an accurate description of the hydro-
dynamics and boundary conditions of a particular experiment. 

4.1. Detecting the regime of particle combustion in flames 

As  properties  of  the  flame  in  suspension  critically  depend  on  the 
particle combustion regime, experimental identification of the particle 
combustion  mode  in  different  flames  is  of  primary  importance.  It  is 
especially important for small particle sizes that may be suspected to be 
close  to  the  ignition  size  limit.  Often  for  small  particles  sizes,  as,  for 
example, aluminum particles below 10 µm [126,127] the evidence on 
the particle combustion regime is inconclusive. 

With  particle  number  density  in  the  range  of  millions  per  cubic 
centimeter  (1.75 × 106/cm3  for  5-µm  particles  in  a  stoichiometric 
aluminum-air suspension) and nano-oxide particles numbering in many 
billions per cc, the visual detection of the diffusion micro-flames around 
micron-size particle is challenging. Detection of the particle combustion 
regime, however, is straightforward in sufficiently fuel-lean mixtures by 
simply  measuring  the  flame  temperature  by  optical  means.  Experi-
mental results indicating a stable temperature not depending on the fuel 
concentration, and close to the flame temperature of the stoichiometric 
mixture, would undoubtedly point to the diffusion combustion regime. 
For kinetically reacting particles, however, the measured temperature 
would be close to the flame temperature for the actual concentration of a 
fuel-lean mixture, i.e., will be much lower and will also depend on the 
fuel concentration (see Fig. 23). Thus, temperatures measured in [58] in 
flames in oxygen-enriched iron-oxygen-argon suspensions from contin-
uous flame spectra and shown in Fig. 33 indicate temperatures that are 
considerably higher than the calculated adiabatic flame temperature at 
the  iron  concentrations  studied.  The  measured  flame  temperature  is 
close to the temperature for stoichiometric mixtures and, thus, indicates 
that  the  iron  particles  are  burning  with  individual  micro-diffusion 
flames.  This  evidence  suggests  that  even  micron-size  iron  particles 
(BASF iron carbonyl powder, d10 = 0.7 µm,  d50 = 1.4 µm, d90 = 2.5 
µm.) ignite and burn in the flame in a fully developed diffusion-limited 
regime. 

A sufficiently lean flame is, however, not always easy to reproduce in 
the laboratory as it is slow and thus easily quenched by the heat loss and 
natural convection. Moreover, inevitable fluctuations in particle number 

Fig.  32. Dependence  of  the  non-dimensional  flame  speed  κ  on  fuel-oxygen 
equivalence  ratio  ϕ  at  different  values  of  the  heat  loss  parameter  η  in  fuel- 
lean  (left)  and  fuel-rich  particle  suspensions.  Reprinted  from  [71]  with 
permission of Elsevier. 

Fig.  33. Measured  flame  temperatures  in  30%  and  40%  iron-oxygen-argon 
suspensions  compared  to  calculated  flame  temperatures  and  temperatures  of 
stoichiometric  mixtures.  The  average  size  of  the  iron  carbonyl  particles  was 
around 1.5 µm. Reprinted from [58] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099419S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

density lead to strong variations in flame speed that can cause flashback 
or blow-off. In addition, the particle combustion regime might also be 
different in fuel-lean and fuel-rich flames. The detection of the particle 
combustion  regime  near  stoichiometry  and  for  fuel-rich  suspensions 
poses, however, considerable experimental challenges. The temperature 
of particles burning in the diffusive regime exceeds only the local gas 
temperature in the flame combustion zone but not the final flame tem-
perature (see Fig. 29). Detection of this difference requires high accu-
racy, high spatial resolution, and simultaneous measurement of the gas 
and particle temperatures in the combustion zone. Thus, attempts un-
dertaken in [102] to identify the particle combustion regime in fuel-rich 
aluminum  Bunsen  flames  by  measuring  spatially  resolved  flame  tem-
peratures  with  emission  spectroscopy  was  not  particularly  successful 
due to insufficient accuracy and the difficulties with the inverse Abel 
transform and light scattering mentioned previously. 

Another method to identify the regime of particle combustion is the 
so-called argon-helium test [89]. The test is based on the premise that 
the  ratio of flame  speeds  in mixtures with argon  and helium  dilution 
should scale differently for particles burning in the diffusion and kinetic 
regimes  because,  in  the  diffusion  regime,  the  combustion  time  is 
(cid:0) 1) whereas, in 
inversely proportional to the oxygen diffusivity (τc ∼ D
the kinetic combustion regime, it does not depend on it. Thus, for par-
ticles  burning  in  the  diffusion  mode  the  flame  speeds  in  He  and  Ar 
mixtures should scale as (4.1)(A) and if they react in the flame kineti-
cally as (4.1)(B) [44]. 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(α⋅D)He
(α⋅D)Ar
√
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(α)He
(α)Ar

uHe
b
uAr
b

(4.1) 

uHe
b
uAr
b

(A)

(B)

√

=

=

The  experimental  results  on  the  burning  velocity  in  mixtures  of 
aluminum-oxygen suspensions with 79% Ar and He dilution are shown 
in  Fig.  34.  They  were  obtained  in  [44]  with  Bunsen-type  flames  by 
dividing volumetric flow rate by the total area of the inner flame cone. 
As can be seen, the ratio of experimentally measured burning velocities 
in  suspension  of  d32 = 5.4  µm  aluminum  powders  is  close  to  3.2 
compared to the ratio of about 3.9 predicted by (4.1)(A) and of about 2.2 
predicted by (4.1)(B) [44]. It is concluded in [44] that this result points 
to a purely diffusive mode of particle combustion in argon and probably 
a mixed combustion mode in helium mixtures. The deviation of exper-
imental data from the ad hoc prediction by the expression (4.1)(A) can 
be also the result of an additional dependence of the flame speed on the 
Lewis number in fuel-rich flames [see expression (3.6)]. 

Flame  speeds  in  iron-oxygen-helium  and  iron-oxygen-argon  sus-
pensions  were  measured  in  a  low-gravity  environment  provided  by 
parabolic flight aircraft with the apparatus pictured in Figs. 15–16. Five 
different iron powders with particle sizes ranging from 4 to 45 µm (d32) 

were used in experiments. It was found that the ratio of flame speeds in 
helium and argon considerably deviates from the value predicted by the 
expression (4.1)(A) only for the smallest 4-µm powder. The authors have 
concluded that this may indicate kinetically limited combustion at least 
in helium mixtures [128]. We should, however, mention that the flames 
in the suspensions of the smallest powder sizes demonstrated cellular 
structures  (see  Chapter  6)  and  therefore  may  not  follow  the  ad  hoc 
scaling (4.1) estimated for an unperturbed one-dimensional flame. It is 
worth noting that in similar experiments, performed in [58], the parti-
cles  in  both  gas  mixtures  were  observed  to  ignite.  This  apparent 
discrepancy can be explained by the larger concentration of oxygen in 
the mixtures. 

A spectroscopic method allowing practically direct identification of 
the  regime  of  particle  combustion  in  aluminum  flames  was  recently 
proposed by Soo et al. in [60]. The method is based on observation of the 
atomic Al-I lines at 394.4 and 396.15 nm emitted by aluminum vapors. 
Experiments were performed with counterflow flat flames stabilized in 
aluminum-air or aluminum-methane-air suspensions, as was shown in 
Fig.  6  and  19.  The  physical  principle  of  the  method  is  illustrated  in 
Fig.  35  and  is  based  on  the  phenomenon  of  the  line  self-reversal  by 
emitting media that has global or local temperature gradients along the 
line of sight. When particles burn in the diffusive regime, a large amount 
of vaporized aluminum is enclosed within the space between the evap-
orating aluminum droplet and the surrounding diffusion micro-flame. 
The  temperature  of  the  diffusion  micro-flames  enveloping  the 
aluminum  droplets  is  close  to  the  adiabatic  temperature  of  the  stoi-
chiometric aluminum-gas mixtures (≈3500 K), while the temperature of 
the  droplet  cannot  exceed  the  aluminum  boiling  point  (2792  K).  The 
temperature  difference  between  aluminum  vapors  emitting 
in 
high-temperature  micro-flames  and  absorbing  radiation  near  droplet 
surfaces causes line reversal (caving in of the line’s tip), due to a larger 
line  width  at  higher  temperatures  that  results  in  a  stronger  radiation 
absorption in the centreline than in the line “wings”. 

Strong  aluminum  atomic  lines  showing  reversal  at  the  tip  are 
observed  in  the  combustion  zone  of  aluminum-air  flames  (Fig.  36), 
indicating  not  only  the  diffusion  combustion  regime,  but  diffusion 
combustion  with  formation  of  lifted  vapor-phase  flames,  as  shown  in 
Fig. 35. 

In contrast, flames in hybrid aluminum-methane-air mixtures, with 
the  same  aluminum  powder,  demonstrate  thin  and  weak  aluminum 
emission lines with no evidence of line reversal, as shown in Fig. 37. The 
authors in [60] concluded that the absence of free oxygen in the stoi-
chiometric  methane-air  combustion  products  points  to  a  probable  ki-
netic  combustion  regime  of  aluminum  in  H2O  and  CO2,  the  main 
products of the hydrocarbon combustion. 

Fig. 34. Burning velocities in Al-O2-Ar and Al-O2-He mixtures at different fuel 
concentrations. Reprinted from [44] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 35. Physical explanation of the line reversal phenomenon in flames with 
diffusively burning particles. Reprinted from [60] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099420S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 36. (Left) Spectrogram of the aluminum atomic lines (Right) Intensity profiles of the spectrum taken at three different locations: (1) post-flame zone, (2) reaction 
zone, (3) pre-heat zone. Valimet H-2 spherical powder with 90% of particles smaller than 6.3 µm. Reprinted from [60] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 37. (Left) Aluminum atomic lines from the aluminum–methane–air flame (methane is in stoichiometric proportion with air) showing no self-reversal. (Right) 
Intensity profiles of the spectrum taken at three different locations: (1) post-flame zone, (2) reaction zone, (3) pre-heat zone. Reprinted from [60] with permission 
of Elsevier. 

4.2. Is the concept of burning velocity applicable to heterogeneous flames? 

The concept of the burning velocity as a physicochemical constant of 
a combustible mixture is central to combustion science [61]. It is defined 
as  the  speed  at  which  an  adiabatic,  laminar,  planar,  and  unstretched 
flame  front  propagates  relative  to  the  unburned  motionless  mixture 
ahead  of  it  [61].  Although  real  flames  seldom  satisfy  these  idealistic 
conditions,  experimental  results  show  that  converging  values  for  the 
burning velocity can be, nevertheless, extracted from measured flame 
speeds if the motion of the gas ahead of the flame, flame surface area, 
and hydrodynamic flame stretch are accounted for [129]. 

Flames in fuel suspensions are generally thicker than gaseous flames, 
are more sensitive to flow velocity gradients due to velocity slip between 
solid  and  gas  phases,  and  may  have  a  broader  preheat  zone  if  heat 
transfer by radiation is important (see Chapter 8). The usefulness of the 
burning velocity concept for flames in suspensions is, therefore, not self- 
evident and needs to be proven experimentally by comparing burning 

velocities  obtained  from  different  experimental  arrangements.  For 
flames  in  suspensions,  there  is,  however,  a  specific  difficulty  in 
comparing  results  obtained  by  different  researchers.  Unlike  premixed 
gaseous fuel mixtures, which are fully characterized by their chemical 
composition,  solid  fuel  suspensions  may  have  different  particle  sizes, 
particles shapes, oxide content and impurities. Most fuel powders are 
polydisperse with a unique particle size distribution that cannot be fully 
characterized by a single parameter, such as some average particle size. 
Thus, correct quantitative comparison of burning velocities obtained by 
different methods needs to be performed ideally with the same batch of 
fuel powder. 

To address this issue, burning velocities of aluminum-air flames were 
measured with different apparatuses over a span of more than 20 years 
using the same large batch of atomized Ampal 637 aluminum powder 
stored in a hermetically sealed container [80]. The results presented in 
Fig.  38  include  burning  velocities  measured  with  Bunsen-type  flames 
[44] (see Fig. 4), flames propagating downwards in vertical semi-open 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099421S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

burning  velocity  in  lean  mixtures  with  stabilized  Bunsen  flames 
(Fig.  39a).  Similar  measurements  were  performed  by  Ballal  [91]  but 
with flames propagating in tubes at low gravity (Fig. 39b). 

As can be seen, both results are quite similar and the dependence of 
the  burning  velocity  on  fuel  concentration  (B)  is  close  to  ub∝
,  as 
predicted  by  the  working  expressions  (3.4)  and  (3.5)  for  particles 
burning  in  the  diffusion  regime.  Note  that,  at  relatively  low  flame 
temperatures  in  fuel-lean  mixtures,  sublimation/dissociation  of  metal 
oxide is insignificant and thus in (3.4) Tad∝B. 

̅̅̅
B

√

While the dependence of the flame speed on fuel concentration in 
suspension and homogeneous mixtures is similar for fuel-lean mixtures, 
it  is  strikingly  different  for  fuel-rich  mixtures.  As  can  be  seen  from 
Fig.  28,  even  for  kinetically  reacting  small  particles,  it  is  not  a  sym-
metrical  bell-shape  curve  like  in  gases  [61],  but  decays  much  more 
gradually on  the rich side. This  behavior  simply reflects the  fact  that 
solid  fuel  occupies  practically  no  volume  due  to  the  more  than  three 
orders of magnitude higher density of solids compared to gas. Therefore, 
unlike in gas mixtures, increased concentration of fuel does not displace 
oxygen and, thus, the amount of fuel burned remains constant above the 
stoichiometric fuel concentration. As the fuel concentration increases in 
rich flames, the flame temperature decreases more gradually only due to 
the increase of the suspension specific heat capacity. For larger particles 
burning in the diffusive mode, the decrease of the flame temperature 
does  not  affect  the  combustion  rate,  making  the  dependence  of  the 
burning velocity on concentration even less pronounced than for small 
particles  (see  the  case  of  10-µm  particles  in  Fig.  28).  Finally,  for 
aluminum  and  other  light  metals,  the  dependence  of  the  flame  tem-
perature on concentration in fuel-rich mixtures is further weakened by 
the  dampening  effect  of  the  sublimation/decomposition  of  aluminum 
oxide at high flame temperatures [131]. All of these factors cumulatively 
lead to a long plateau of the dependence of the burning velocity on fuel 
concentration  in  fuel-rich  mixtures.  These  plateaus  were  first  experi-
mentally detected with aluminum Bunsen flames in [44] (see Fig. 40a) 
and lately confirmed by several researchers with various experimental 
setups  and  burning  velocities  extraction  techniques  [52,54].  The 
calculated burning velocity in fuel-rich mixtures using analytical equa-
tion  (3.6) presented in Fig. 40b correlates well with experimental data 
both  qualitatively  and  quantitatively  when  the  flame  temperature  is 
taken from equilibrium calculations [44]. 

Independent measurements on aluminum burning velocity using PIV 
in Bunsen-type flames have been published [54], as shown in Fig. 42. 

Fig.  38. Burning  velocity  in  air  for  suspensions  of  Ampal  637  aluminum 
powder  as  a  function  of  aluminum  concentration  for  different  measurement 
techniques that include Bunsen burner [44], flames in balloons [80], counter-
flow  burner  [57],  and  flames  propagating  in  tubes  [71].  Adapted  from  [57] 
with permission of Elsevier. 

tubes [71] (see Fig. 8), spherical flames in transparent rubber balloons 
[80] (see Fig. 10), and flat counterflow flames [57] (see Fig. 6). 

Burning velocity in Bunsen-type flames was calculated using the total 
surface  area of the flame inner cone and the volumetric flow rate. In 
tubes, it was calculated by dividing the observed flame speed by 2, an 
estimated ratio of the flame surface area to the area of the tube cross- 
section. In balloons, the burning velocity was derived by dividing the 
visible flame speed by the gas-expansion ratio estimated using thermo-
dynamic software. Burning velocity in counterflow flames was measured 
by  the  PIV  technique  as  the  minimum  flow  velocity  along  the  flame 
centreline just upstream of the combustion zone. The flat counterflow 
flame in combination with PIV is probably the most accurate method for 
measuring  burning  velocities  in  suspension,  although  these  measured 
flame  speeds  have  not been  corrected  for flame  stretch. The  least ac-
curate of these techniques, as was mentioned before, is probably flames 
in tubes because of the difficulties in estimating the flame surface area 
due to light scattering by aluminum particles and nano-size oxides. The 
burning  velocity  in  balloons  most  likely  is  underestimated,  since  the 
actual flame temperature is likely lower, due to radiative heat loss, than 
the estimated flame temperature from thermodynamic calculations. As 
for gases, the burning velocity in Bunsen flames calculated from the total 
flame area is also underestimated due to the reduced flame speed at the 
cone  base  because  of  heat  loss  to  the  nozzle  and  dilution  with  sur-
rounding  gas driven into the  flame by the  nozzle-wake vortices [61]. 
Despite  these  shortcomings,  the  burning  velocity  in  micron-size 
aluminum  suspensions  derived  with  different  techniques  demon-
strates, as can be seen in Fig. 38, only a moderately larger scattering than 
gaseous flames [130]. The scattering could likely be further reduced by 
accounting  for  flame  stretch,  but  theory  for  stretched  heterogeneous 
flames has yet to be developed. Summarizing, we can conclude that the 
burning velocity looks like a valid concept, at least for suspensions with 
particle sizes below 10 microns. 

4.3. Dependence of burning velocity on fuel and oxygen concentrations 

As  was  mentioned  before,  stabilization  of  fuel-lean  heterogeneous 
flames is difficult due to their low speeds and the sharp dependence of 
the flame speed on fuel concentration. Thus, most data on burning ve-
locity in lean mixtures was obtained using propagating flames. The only 
notable exception is Cassel’s early work where he managed to measure 

Fig.  39. Dependence  of  the  burning  velocity  on  fuel  concentration  in  lean 
aluminum-air suspensions obtained a. by Cassel [27] using Bunsen flames on 
1.4-cm- and 1.9-cm-diameter nozzles and 10 µm- and 30 µm-diameter particles, 
b.  by  Ballal  [91]  with  flames  in  tubes  in  low  gravity  for  10  µm-  and  38 
µm-diameter  particles  with  model  predictions.  Adapted  from  [27]  and  from 
[91] with permission of the Royal Society. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099422S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 40. Dependence of the burning velocity on fuel concentration in fuel-rich aluminum suspensions at different oxygen concentrations a. experimental results, b. 
calculated using equation  (3.6). Adapted from [44] with permission of Elsevier. 

These results also show the independence of flame speed on the con-
centration  for  fuel-rich  flames,  but  the  measured  flame  speeds  are 
higher, near 34 cm/s compared to 25 cm/s in Fig. 40a. The difference in 
results  may  be  partially  explained  by  the  use  of  direct  PIV  measure-
ments,  which  allowed  Lomba  et  al.  to  evaluate  the  flame  stretch  and 
report  values  much  closer  to  measurements  performed  previously  on 
counterflow flames [57]. However, tempting as it is, a direct comparison 
between [44] and [54] should be avoided due to the different powders 
used, with Sauter diameters of 5.4 µm and 7.1 µm, respectively. 

While  fuel-rich  flames  are  not  sensitive  to  fuel  concentration, 
increasing  the  oxygen  concentration  in  fuel-rich  mixtures  results  in  a 
relatively  sharp  increase  of  the  burning  velocity,  as  evident  from 
experimental results presented in Figs. 40a and 41a. In accordance with 
the  expression  (3.6),  this  increase  may  be  a  cumulative  result  of  two 
factors:  the  higher  flame  temperature  due  to  a  larger  amount  of  fuel 
burned at higher oxygen concentrations, and a faster fuel burning rate in 
the flame combustion zone. The fuel burning rate in the diffusion regime 
depends on the flux of oxygen to the diffusion micro flame around the 
particle, which is proportional to the oxygen concentration. 

A surprising result is observed for the dependence of flame speed on 
oxygen concentration in the oxidizing gas for fuel-lean flames [80]. As 
shown in Figs. 41a and 41b, an increase in the oxygen concentration 
and,  correspondingly,  the  combustion  rate  has  little  effect  on  the 
burning velocity in fuel-lean suspensions for both aluminum and iron. 
The observed independence of the flame speed on the fuel burning rate 
cannot be explained using continuous flame models and is a manifes-
tation of the discrete flame regime discussed further in Chapter 7. 

4.4. Effect of particle size on flame burning velocity 

As was discussed earlier in Chapter 2, even for fast burning fuels such 
as aluminum, experiments at normal gravity are generally restricted to 
particle sizes below 15 microns due to particle sedimentation. For larger 
particles, the cloud settling velocity is often in the same range or larger 
than  the  flame  speed,  which  makes  flame  propagation  downwards 
impossible.  For  upwardly  propagating  flames  of  large  particles,  the 
flame  is  distorted  by  both  natural  convection  and  the  vertical  flow 
induced by the settling suspension. At the same time, classification of 
powders  into  several  narrow  non-overlapping  fractions  in  the  0–15 
microns size range poses a difficult technical problem, especially when 
experiments require substantial amount of powder. Thus, most ground- 
based experiments that were aimed at detecting the effect of particle size 
on the flame burning velocity were performed with two powders having 
overlapping particle size distributions, such as Cassel’s experiments [27] 
shown in Fig. 39a. Only experiments in low gravity, such as those per-
formed by Ballal [91] on a small-scale laboratory drop tower, allowed 
the  comparison  of  burning  velocities  with  powders  having 
non-overlapping  size  distributions  with  average  particle  sizes  d32  of 
about 10 and 38–40 microns - Fig. 39b. Ballal’s results for aluminum 
show that the burning velocity scales with particle size close to ub∝1/d 
in  line  with  flame  models  for  the  diffusion  regime  of  particle 
combustion. 

Tang et al. performed experiments with 5 fractions of iron powder in 
the size range between 3 and 35 microns (d10  = 3.3, 7.0, 9.9, 26.8, 32.5 
µm)  [100,128]  in  low  gravity  experiments  on  board  parabolic  flight 
aircraft (see Figs. 15 and 16). The flame propagation speeds measured in 
these experiments are plotted in Fig. 43. As can be seen, the dependence 

Fig.  41. Burning  velocity  at  different  fuel  and  oxygen  concentrations  in  a.  aluminum  (spherical  flames  in  balloons,  in  [80])  and  b.  iron  suspensions  in  argon 
(counterflow flames, in [58]). Adapted from [80] and [58] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099423S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 42. Flame speed measurements of aluminum suspensions in air, performed 
in Bunsen flame tests by Lomba et al. by means of tomography (filled symbols) 
and  visualization  of  AlO  spectra  (open  symbols).  Reprinted  from  [54]  with 
permission of Elsevier. 

of  the  flame  speed  on  particle  size,  in  iron  suspensions  in  air, 
oxygen-argon, and oxygen-helium mixtures, closely follows the 1 /d law 
indicating the diffusive regime of particle combustion. 

The anomalous dependence of the flame speed on particle size pre-
dicted by the theory for fuel-lean suspensions near the critical particle 
size for ignition (see Figs. 27 and 28), i.e., decrease of the flame speed 
with decrease of particle size, has not yet been observed experimentally 
in nonvolatile metal dust clouds. However, some evidence for this pre-
diction was found by Horton et al. [132] for flames in coal-dust clouds. 
As can be seen from the graph in Fig. 44, the flame speeds for small 9-µm 
and large 27-µm coal particles indeed converge for the leanest mixtured, 
pointing to predominantly kinetic reaction mechanisms for small par-
ticles and diffusion regime of combustion for 27-micron particles. 

A similar phenomenon was also discovered in clouds of evaporating 
droplets by Burgoyne and Cohen almost 70 years ago [133] and has been 
later  confirmed  by  several  investigators  (see,  for  example,  [134]).  In 
their classical work, Burgoyne and Cohen found that the flame speed in 
suspensions of small tetralin droplets that evaporate in the flame preheat 
zone  can  be  lower  than  in  suspensions  of  large  droplets  that  do  not 
substantially  evaporate  and,  instead,  burn  individually  with  the  for-
mation  of  microdiffusion  flames.  The  physical  nature  of  this  peculiar 
flame behavior might evidently have the same explanation for volatile 
and nonvolatile suspensions. Due to the low flame temperature of a lean 
mixture, the rate of kinetic combustion of vapors in a premixed gaseous 
flame, or a flame with kinetically reacting solid particles, is lower than 
the  total  combustion  rate  within  microdiffusion  flames  surrounding 
each liquid droplet, or solid particle, with local micro-flame tempera-
tures close to the temperature of the stoichiometric mixture. 

4.5. Dependence of the flame burning velocity on the temperature of the 
suspension 

The dependence of the burning velocity on the initial temperature of 
the reacting suspension determines the sensitivity of the flame driven by 
molecular  heat  diffusivity  to  radiation  preheating  (see  discussion  in 
Chapter  8),  and  is  also  critical  for  the  stabilization  of  dust  flames  in 
various propulsion systems and industrial burners. To our knowledge, 
there are only two publications in the literature that have investigated 
the influence of the initial suspension temperature on the flame speed. 
Blais et al. [59] have recently used a counterflow flame and PIV tech-
nique  to  measure  the  effect  of  preheating  on  burning  velocity  in 
micron-size aluminum suspensions, whereas Goroshin et al. [29] studied 

Fig. 43. Flame speed in near stoichiometric suspensions of iron powders in air 
(d32  = 3.3. µm, 9.9 µm, and 26.8 µm). Solid and dash lines are the theoretical 
predictions in accordance with the expression (3.5). Photo is the flame in iron- 
air  suspension  with  d10 = 26.8  µm  particle  size  (low-gravity  parabolic  flight 
experiments,  S.  Goroshin’s  private  archive).  Reprinted  from  [128]  with 
permission of Elsevier. 

the  effect  of 
speed 
boron-oxygen-helium suspensions using Bunsen-type dust flames. 

temperature  on  flame 

initial 

the 

in 

Burning velocities in suspensions of Valimet H-2 spherical aluminum 
powder (d10 ≈ 3.5 µm) in air at different flow temperatures are plotted 
in Fig. 45 [59], whereas normalized burning velocities in methane-air 
mixtures  measured  with  the  same  apparatus  and  at  about  the  same 
fuel-oxygen equivalence ratio (ϕ ≈ 1.2) are plotted in Fig. 46. As can be 
seen  from  the  experimental  data,  the  burning  velocity  in  aluminum 
suspensions  is  much  less  sensitive  to  preheating  than  in  methane-air 
mixtures.  Whereas,  in  aluminum  suspensions,  the  dependence  of  the 
burning  velocity  on  temperature  is  proportional  to  about  T1.1
,  which 
u
barely compensates for the increase of the gas volumetric flow rate with 
heating,  in  methane  mixtures  it  is  proportional  to  T1.9
u  and  correlates 
well with CANTERA calculations with GRI 3.0 reaction kinetic mecha-
nism [135]. 

The increase of the methane-air burning velocity with preheating is 
primarily driven by the increase of reaction rates due to increase of the 
flame temperature. While the methane flame temperature does not in-
crease  by  the  same  temperature  value  as  the  initial  mixture  due  to 
dissociation effects, it, as shown in Fig. 47, nevertheless rises by almost 
250 K when unburned mixture is heated from 300 to 700 K. In contrast, 
the  flame  temperature  in  the  aluminum  suspension  with  the  same 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099424S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 44. Flame velocities for two sizes of the Pittsburgh coal dust suspensions in 
air.  Also  shown  are  the  best  fit  correlation  lines.  Reprinted  from  [132]  with 
permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 46. Burning velocities of methane-air flames in comparison to predictions 
by  CANTERA  calculations  with  GRI  3.0  kinetic  mechanism.  Reprinted  from 
[59] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

Fig.  45. Burning  velocities  of  aluminum-air  suspensions  at  different  initial 
temperatures of the unburned mixture. Reprinted from [59] with permission of 
Taylor & Francis. 

preheat barely rises by 20 K due to the strong dampening effect of the 
sublimation/decomposition of Al2O3. Thus, notwithstanding the mode 
of  particle  combustion,  i.e.,  kinetic  or  diffusion  control,  the  theory 
predicts a weak dependence of burning velocity on the initial temper-
ature [59] (see  Fig. 48), primarily due to the increase of the average 
thermal  diffusivity  in  the  flame  preheat  zone.  The  theoretically  pre-
dicted  burning  velocity  increase  is  even  weaker  than  found  experi-
mentally.  It  is  argued,  in  [59],  that  this  difference  can  be  further 
reconciled  by  considering  the  discrete  nature  of  heat  sources  in  sus-
pension (see Chapter 7). The theoretical prediction of the discrete flame 
model, which will be discussed later in the Chapter 7, is shown in Fig. 48 
by line “c”. 

In  contrast  to  aluminum-air  suspensions,  flames  in  suspensions  of 
micron-size (d10 = 3.5 µm) crystalline boron particles in oxygen-helium 
gas mixtures are almost as sensitive to preheating as methane-air flames, 
as  can  be  seen  from  the  burning  velocity  data  obtained  in  [29]  and 
presented in Fig. 49. There is a consensus in the literature that the re-
action  rate  of  micron-size  boron  particles  is  limited  by  the  surface 

Fig. 47. Adiabatic  flame temperatures  in  methane-air  and  aluminum-air sus-
pensions. Reprinted from [59] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

reaction  kinetics  [24,136],  which  are  highly  sensitive  to  the  flame 
temperature. Thus, the strong sensitivity of these flames to preheating 
was expected [24]. In addition, the boiling point of boron oxide (B2O3) 
is only 2130 K and is well below the flame temperature. Dissociation of 
the gaseous B2O3 does not provide the same damping effect on the flame 
temperature  as  evaporation-dissociation  of  the  condensed  aluminum 
oxide does, resulting in a stronger increase in flame temperature with 
preheating. As also evident from the boron flame picture presented in 
Fig. 49, condensation of the boron oxide occurs in the mixing zone with 
the outside cold air and, thus, has no effect on the inner Bunsen flame 
behavior. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099425S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

distance  for  flames  in  coal,  cornstarch  and  aluminum  suspensions, 
Goroshin et al. [44] observed flame quenching in narrow channels in 
suspensions of micron-size aluminum clouds at different fuel and oxygen 
concentrations,  and  Tang  et  al.  [128]  measured  flame  quenching  dis-
tance in iron dust clouds of various particle sizes in low-gravity exper-
iments performed on board parabolic flight aircraft. Here, in accordance 
with the topic of the current review, we discuss only experimental re-
sults obtained with nonvolatile solid fuels, namely aluminum and iron. 
The results obtained by Jarosinski et al. [76] are shown in Fig. 50. 
The  flame  quenching  results  were  obtained  with  dust  flames  freely 
propagating in a vertical tube from the open bottom end to the closed 
upper end. Somewhere in the middle of the tube, the flame entered a 
quenching-plate assembly similar to that described in Section 2.4. To 
generate the dust cloud in the tube, the authors used a pulse dispersion 
system [76], with numerous injection points distributed along the entire 
tube length. As can be seen from Fig.   50, the lean flame propagation 
limit  in  the  tube  both  for  flake  and  spherical  micron-size  particles  is 
above 400 g/m3, i.e., well above stoichiometric concentration of about 
310 g/m3. This observation contradicts experimental results obtained by 
other  researchers  (see  Section  4.3),  who  observed  freely  propagating 
aluminum flames in micron-size clouds at concentrations as low as 100 
g/m3  (see  Figs.  39  and  41).  Considering  that  flames  in  Jarosinski’s 
experiment also propagated in the tube upwards and, therefore, were 
assisted by natural convection, the lean flame propagation limit should 
be even lower. The most probable explanation for this discrepancy is 
that  the  actual  aluminum  concentration  in  the  suspension  was  well 
below that calculated assuming ideal dispersion, i.e., a uniform cloud, 
absence  of  agglomeration,  and  negligible  powder  loss  due  to  wall 
deposition. 

The problem with unknown fuel concentration encountered in [76] 
was alleviated in [71] by using the tube apparatus shown in Fig. 8 and 
described in Section 2.4. In this apparatus, the dust flow was generated 
by a dust dispersion system operated continuously (Figs. 4, 8) and the 
aluminum  concentration  in  the  ascending  dust  flow  was  constantly 
monitored with a calibrated laser probe. The flame was ignited at the 
open upper tube end and the flow was stopped right after ignition. The 
flame  propagated  downwards  to  the  closed  bottom  end  of  the  tube 
through a quiescent suspension. The results of flame quenching exper-
iments performed in [71] with Ampal 637 aluminum powder (d32 = 5.4 
µm) are shown in Fig. 51. 

As can be seen from Fig. 51, the dependence of the quenching dis-
tance on aluminum concentration practically mirrors the dependence of 

Fig. 48. Comparison of sensitivity of experimentally measured flame speed on 
initial  mixture  temperature  in  aluminum  suspensions  with  theoretical  pre-
dictions  for  flame  models  that  consider  a.  kinetically  reacting  particles,  b. 
particles  burning  in  the  diffusion  regime,  and  c.  the  discrete  flame  model. 
Reprinted from [59] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

4.6. Flame quenching in narrow channels 

The  flame  quenching  distance,  or  the  minimal  channel  diameter 
through  which  a  flame  can still  propagate,  is  important for  design  of 
flame  arrestors,  such  as  the  classical  Davy’s  lamp  [137].  The  flame 
quenching distance is also an important parameter for developing and 
validating laminar flame theory, since it is closely related to the char-
acteristic flame thickness, structure, and particle reaction mode. Unlike 
direct  measurements  of  the  flame  structure,  which  require  relatively 
sophisticated optical equipment (see Section 2.7), the flame quenching 
distance is easier to measure experimentally. There are, however, only a 
few works in the literature where the quenching distance of dust flames 
have been measured directly. Greene and O’Donnell [66] estimated a 
minimal  tube  diameter  for  the  flame  propagation  in  micron-size  coal 
suspensions, Proust and Vessier measured flame quenching distance in 
cornstarch dust clouds [65], Jarosinski et al. [76] measured quenching 

Fig.  49. Effect  of  boron  suspension  initial  temperature  on  flame  burning  velocity  and  a  photo  of  a  Boron  flame  (S.  Goroshin’s  private  archives).  Gas  mixture 
composition: 71%O2-29% He. Reprinted from [29] with permission of Begell House Inc. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099426S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 50. Quenching/propagation results for flames in air-aluminum clouds of 
flake  (15 × 15 × 0.1  µm)  and  spherical  (7.5–9.5  µm)  aluminum  particles  at 
different  aluminum  concentrations.  Reprinted  from  [76]  with  permission 
of Elsevier. 

the flame burning velocity on concentration shown in Figs. 40, 41 (note 
that  flame  propagation  and  quenching  experiments  were  performed 
with the same Ampal 637 aluminum powder). Just as the flame speeds 
plateau for concentrations above stoichiometry, the quenching distance 
also reaches a minimum value below 5 mm at a fuel concentration above 
stoichiometry and demonstrates a long plateau extending towards fuel- 
rich mixtures with fuel-oxygen equivalence ratio around 2. The greater 
resistance of the fuel-rich flame to heat loss results from the same rea-
sons why there is a plateau on the dependence of the burning velocity on 
fuel concentration: increase of the reaction surface area with fuel con-
centration makes the combustion zone shorter which compensates for 
the  slight  decrease  in  the  flame  temperature  that  results  from  its 
increasing  mixture  heat  capacity.  As  for  the  burning  velocity,  the 
quenching distance in fuel-rich mixtures is, however, a strong function 
of the oxygen concentration and increases to about 15 mm for mixtures 
with 11% of O2. 

The theoretical dependence of the quenching distance on fuel con-
centration obtained by stitching results derived from analytical expres-
sions  (3.7)  and  (3.8)  [71]  agrees  well  with  experimental  data  for 
aluminum-air  suspensions  but  starts  to  deviate  from  theoretical  pre-
dictions with decrease of the oxygen concentration (Fig. 51). This may 
be the result of the limit imposed by natural convection on the minimal 
flame speed in a tube for downward propagating flames. 

The mechanism of the flame quenching in a dust flame is similar to 
that in homogeneous mixtures, i.e., a feedback between flame speed and 
conductive heat losses [103]. However, because of the diffusive mech-
anism of aluminum-particle combustion, the minimal flame temperature 
at the quenching point is restricted only by the particle ignition tem-
perature. Thus, the temperature drop in suspension before quenching 
can be, in principle, much larger than the maximum temperature drop 
permitted  for  kinetically  controlled  flames  [138].  This  explains  why, 
despite  the  much  larger  flame  thickness,  the  quenching  distance  of 
aluminum-air flames with particle sizes around 6 microns is only about 
twice as large as the quenching distance of methane-air flames (2 mm 
[78]). 

Flame  quenching  distances  were  measured  by  Tang  et  al.  in  iron 
suspensions of four iron powders in low gravity experiments onboard 
parabolic flight aircraft using the apparatus depicted in Figs. 15 and 16. 
Iron  powders  had  mostly  non-overlapping  particle  size  distributions 
with average particle sizes: A - d10 = 3.3 µm, d32 = 4.3 µm; B - d10  = 7 

Fig. 51. Quenching distance as a function of dust concentration in aluminum- 
oxygen-nitrogen suspensions. Points and solid lines represent experimental re-
sults, dotted lines are the results of theoretical calculations. Vertical dotted lines 
point  to  the  experimentally  found  lean  flame  propagation  limit  in  the  tube. 
Photo:  aluminum  flame  inside  the  quenching  plate  assembly  ([97]).  Adapted 
from [71] with permission of Elsevier. 

µm, d32 = 9.6 µm; C - d10 = 9.9 µm, d32 = 13.7 µm; D - d10 = 26.8 µm, 
d32 = 44.6  µm  [100].  The  fuel  concentration  in  all  suspensions  was 
estimated to be the same and the fuel-oxygen equivalence ratios were in 
the range of ϕ = 1 (cid:0) 1.2. The measured flame quenching distances in 
iron-air, iron-21% O2-79% He, and iron-21% O2-79% Ar suspensions are 
plotted in Fig. 52 [100,128]. On the same graph, the theoretically pre-
dicted quenching distance vs particle size, obtained from the engineer-
ing expressions for the flame speed (3.7) and (3.8) is also plotted. The 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099427S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

quenching distance emerges as a turning (i.e., bifurcation) point in the 
solution for flame speed on the heat loss parameter. As can be seen, the 
experimental data agrees reasonably well with the linear dependence of 
the quenching distance on particle size predicted by the theory. Also, as 
predicted by the theory, the quenching distances in helium mixtures are 
larger than in argon mixtures or in air, despite the much higher flame 
speed in helium mixtures (see Fig. 34), due to faster heat-loss rates. 

Tang et al. have also measured flame speeds inside the quenching 
plate  assembly. These speeds  are plotted in Fig. 53 together with the 
theoretical prediction from equation  (3.7) for powders A and B as the 
ratio to the corresponding value for the speed of an unperturbed flame in 
the tube. As the bifurcation theory predicts [103], the flame speed is a 
sharp function of the heat loss (channel width), dropping to a minimal 
value of about 0.6, i.e., 1/

√
̅̅̅
, before quenching. 
e

5. Flames in binary suspensions and hybrid gas-solid fuel 
mixtures 

For many practical heterogeneous combustion systems, a mono-size, 
mono-fuel particulate suspension burning in a single-step reaction is not 
a suitable approximation. Most solid-fuel powders in industry and na-
ture are polydisperse, i.e., have a continuous spectrum of particle sizes 
that  span  a  wide  range.  Particle  size  distributions  of  some  industrial 
powders are often bimodal, i.e., the powder is a mixture of small and 
large particles. Often, fuels also  have complex chemical compositions 
and  may  consist  of  two,  or  more,  chemically  dissimilar  components. 
Some of these components can be volatile as, for example, liquid hy-
drocarbon slurry fuels, or can already be in the gas phase if introduced 
with  air  during  the  powder-dispersion  process.  Combustion  of  multi- 
size, multi-fuel, and  multi-phase suspensions are unified by  one com-
mon  feature—they  burn  in  stages.  Particles  of  different  sizes  do  not 
ignite  and  burnout  in  the  flame  simultaneously,  since  their  ignition 
temperature  and  combustion  time  are  functions  of  size.  Chemically 
different solid fuels, even of the same particle size, usually have different 
ignition temperatures and combustion times. 

Fig. 52. a. Dependence of the channel quenching distance on particle size for 
flames in iron-air and iron-21% O2-79% He, and iron-21%O2-79% Ar suspen-
sions. b. Iron flame entering quenching plate assembly (S. Goroshin’s private 
archives). Adapted from [100] and [128] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig.  53. Flame  speed  inside  the  quenching  plate  assemblies,  normalized  by 
open tube results for iron A and B powders (A - d10 = 3.3 µm, d32 = 4.3 µm; B - 
d10 = 7  µm,  d32 = 9.6  µm)  Inset  graph  shows  the  minimum  flame  speed 
observed in the quenching plate assemblies for all four iron dusts used. Curves 
are  the  predictions  of  the  theoretical  model.  Reprinted  from  [100]  with 
permission of Elsevier. 

Flames in homogeneous fuel mixtures with two parallel Arrhenius 
reactions  were  theoretically  investigated  by  Berman  and  Ryazantsev 
[139]; Clavin et al. [140], Margolis and Matkowsky [141]; and consec-
utive reactions by Berman and Ryazantsev [142], Berman et al. [143], 
Kapila  and  Lundford  [144],  Khaikin  et  al.  [145],  Margolis  and  Mat-
kowsky [146], and Pel´aez and Li˜n´an [147]. Using asymptotic analytical 
treatment,  they  have  shown  that  the  structure  of  a  one-dimensional 
adiabatic  flame  in  a  binary  mixture  is  comprised  of  either  spatially 
separated  combustion  zones  forming  two  distinctive  but  interacting 
flame fronts, or spatially merged combustion zones forming a unified 
single-front flame. Goroshin et al. [148] and Paleˇcka et al. [122] have 
shown that similar flame structures form in binary suspensions of fuel 
particles and have studied them using a simpler approach that extends 
the engineering flame model, based on particles burning in the diffusive 
regime and discussed in Section 3.3, towards flames in binary fuel sus-
pensions. We will discuss this model briefly below and use its results for 
qualitative interpretation of the available experimental data on flames 
in  binary  fuel  suspensions  and  hybrid  combustible  gas-solid  fuel 
mixtures. 

5.1. Simplified model for the flame in a binary fuel suspension 

A model for the combustion of a suspension of two fuels or/and two 
different particles  sizes, first proposed  in [148] and  then extended in 
[122] to systems with heat loss, is based on the approximation of the 
heat sources in the flame by a stepwise function, as shown in Fig. 54. 
Each fuel fraction starts to react when the flame temperature reaches its 
ignition temperature (Ti,1(cid:0) 2) and burns for some prescribed time (tc,1(cid:0) 2) 
with a constant thermal output. The mixture is considered to be overall 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099428S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig.  54. Flame  structure  in  a  binary  fuel  suspension  with  separated  (a)  and 
merged  (b)  combustion  zones  (shown  for  the  general  case  with  heat  losses. 
Adapted from [122] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

fuel-lean; therefore, consumption and diffusion of oxygen is neglected. 
As in gaseous mixtures, there are two possible stable flame config-
urations when both fractions are reacting in the flame. Fuel fractions can 
burn either in spatially separated reaction fronts (case “a”), or within a 
single  combustion  front  with  combustion  zones  merged  (overlapped) 
(case “b”). There is, of course, another possible case when only one fuel 
fraction, with the lower ignition temperature, burns while the second 
fraction plays the role of an inert diluent. This situation can occur for 
two reasons: when the total theoretical flame temperature, taking into 
account the heat released by both fuel fractions, is below the ignition 
temperature of the second fuel fraction or, alternatively, when the speed 
of  the second flame  front is  slower than the speed  at which products 
leave  the first flame front. For the  observer of a stabilized  flame, the 
second case is undistinguishable from the first. However, in the case of 
freely  propagating  transient  flames  in  a  binary-fuel  dust  cloud,  time- 
delayed  propagation  of  the  flame  through  suspension  of  the  second 
fuel preheated by combustion of the first fuel may still be observed. 

To determine which front configuration is realized for any given set 
of  system  parameters,  all  possible  flame  configurations  need  to  be 
considered. The algorithm for finding the problem solution, i.e., flame 
speed  in  each  flame  configuration,  is  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  the 
monofuel suspension discussed in Section 3.4. First, the flame is parti-
tioned into several zones whose borders coincide with the start and end 
of each stepwise heat source. The general form for the solution of the 
linear  heat  transfer  differential  equation  in  each  zone  are  known 
(exponential) functions, and can be written with unknown coefficients. 
The  algebraic  equations  defining  these  unknown  coefficients  are  sub-
sequently derived from matching temperatures and heat fluxes on the 
borders between the different zones and at ±∞. For the flame in a binary 
mixture, the number of obtained equations exceeds the number of un-
known coefficients by two. These two extra equations are then used to 
find the unknown flame speed, as well as the distance between the start 
of the first and the second reaction zones. It was found that each set of 
system parameters produces a single solution, i.e., the flame speed is a 
single-valued function in the absence of heat loss. We direct readers to 
the original publications [122,148] for the exact mathematical expres-
sions and will discuss here only the qualitative behavior of the flame 
speed  in  a  binary  fuel  suspension. Fig.  55  plots  the  theoretically  pre-
dicted dimensionless flame speed, κ, versus the relative concentration of 
the second fuel fraction. The second fuel fraction is defined to be the 
fraction that has the higher ignition temperature. 

As can be seen from Fig. 55, the flame speed initially decreases with 

Fig. 55. Dependence  of  the dimensionless  flame speed  κ  (see  Section 3.3  for 
definition) and flame configuration, i.e., one-front (thin orange curve) and two- 
front  (thick  blue  curve)  on  relative  concentration  of  the  second  fraction 
(B2/B1). Adapted from [122] with permission of Taylor &  Francis. (For inter-
pretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred 
to the web version of this article.) 

increasing fuel concentration of the second fraction (section 1–2 of the 
graph). In this range of the second fuel concentration, the second com-
bustion front cannot be coupled to the first front (separation regime), 
either because the flame temperature is below the ignition temperature 
of  the  second  fraction  (for  concentration  values  below  point  ϕII)  or 
because the flame propagation speed of the second front is still below the 
speed of the products leaving the primary front (concentrations between 
ϕII  and ϕIIe). In both these cases, the second fuel plays the role of an inert 
additive in a single front flame, shown as the “One front” line in Fig. 55. 
At a certain concentration of the second fuel fraction, ϕIIe, the flame 
speed of the second front matches the flame speed through the first fuel 
fraction (point 2) and both flame fronts can propagate in unison. At this 
point, however, the separation distance between fronts is theoretically 
infinite and the influence of the second front on the flame speed of the 
first front is negligible. With a further increase of the second fuel con-
centration,  the  separation  distance  between  the  two  fronts  rapidly 
shrinks and the heat generated by the second front starts to “push” the 
first. Due to this “push”, the second front appears to be dominating, and 
thus  this  flame  configuration  has  been  termed  the  “control  regime” 
[122,145,148]. With a further increase of the second fuel concentration, 
the two combustion fronts eventually overlap at point 3 (concentration 
ϕIIm),  leading  to  this  flame  configuration  being  named  the  “merging 
regime” [122,145,148]. 

5.2. Experiments on flame propagation in binary fuel suspensions 

Goroshin et al. [148] have used the simplified binary flame theory 
discussed above to shed light onto two often-asked questions. First, can 
the  addition  of  a  small  fraction  (by  mass)  of  fast  burning  and  easily 
ignitable  small  particles  considerably  change  the  flame  speed  of  the 
otherwise  coarse  suspension?  Second,  can  an average  particle  size  be 
used  to  calculate  the  flame  speed  in  a  polydisperse  suspension  using 
mono-size heterogeneous flame theory? 

To illustrate that the answer to both posed questions is no, the au-
thors  calculated  flame  speeds  in  a  suspension  of  two  fuel  fractions 
having  a  particle  size  ratio  of  about  4.  It  was  also  assumed  that  the 
smaller  particles  have  lower  ignition  temperature.  The  dimensionless 
flame speed, at different ratios of the second to the first fuel-mass con-
centrations,  obtained  with  the  binary-fuel  flame  model  is  plotted  in 
Fig. 56 as a solid line, whereas results calculated with a mono-size flame 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099429S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

model (Section 3.1), using the arithmetic (diameter-based) and mass- 
based  mean particle  sizes are plotted as dotted  lines. As can be seen, 
the binary fuel model predicts that addition of the small size fraction 
does not noticeably change the flame speed up to a relative concentra-
tion of about 40%. It is also clear from these results that the arithmetic- 
mean particle size is poorly suited for representing the behavior of bi-
nary fuel mixtures. Predictions using the mass-mean radius, however, 
practically coincide with the predictions of the binary model for mass 
concentrations of small particles below 50%. 

In the same work, Goroshin et al. [148] performed experiments with 
fuel-lean binary suspensions of aluminum and manganese powders with 
particle  sizes  of  r32 ≈ 3 (cid:0) 5  µm.  The  measured  flame  speeds  for  3 
different  binary  compositions  (33%,  50%,  and  67%  Mn,  balance  Al) 
normalized  by  the  flame  speed  in  pure  aluminum  suspensions  are 
plotted in Fig. 57 and compared to theoretical predictions. Note that the 
flame failed to propagate in suspensions with 67% of manganese powder 
content. The flame would also not propagate in a pure manganese sus-
pension in air, but did propagate in pure oxygen. Theoretical calcula-
tions  were performed  assuming an ignition  temperature of aluminum 
particles of about 2300 K and manganese particles of 1200 K [149]. The 
ratio of burning times of aluminum and manganese particles was theo-
retically estimated to be close to 3.5, with manganese having the longer 
burning  times.  The  binary-flame  theory  correctly  predicts  the  experi-
mentally observed declining flame speeds with increasing Mn concen-
tration. According to calculations at 33% Mn, the flame has a borderline 
merged fronts structure (vicinity of point 3 in Fig. 55), and the separated 
fronts structure (control regime) at 50% Mn. The theory also predicts 
flame quenching (zero speed) at a Mn concentration of about 70%. 

Huang,  Risha  et  al.  [52]  studied  burning  velocities  in  binary 

Fig. 57. (A) Comparison of the theoretically predicted (lines) and experimen-
tally observed (crosses) relative flame speeds in binary suspensions of manga-
nese and aluminum powders. (B) The distance between flame fronts normalized 
by the thickness of the aluminum combustion zone. Reprinted from [148] with 
permission of Elsevier. 

suspensions of micron size (5-8 µm) and nano-size (100 nm) aluminum 
particles using a Bunsen dust-flame apparatus similar to that shown in 
Fig. 4. The maximum mass content of the nano-size fraction was about 
30%.  The  experimentally  measured  burning  velocities  are  plotted  in 
Fig. 58 versus the mass fraction of nano-powder in the binary mixture. 
Pictures depicting flames in the micron-size suspension and in a binary 
micron-/nano-size  aluminum  suspension  are  shown  in  Fig.  58.  The 
theoretical estimate of the flame speed is plotted in Fig. 58 and is per-
formed using the binary flame model discussed in Section 5.1, assuming 
an  ignition  temperature  for  micron-size  particles  around  2350  K 
(melting point of aluminum oxide) and for nanoparticles of about 900 K. 
Burning  times  of  micron  and  nano-size  particles  were  deduced  from 
available  literature  data  [150].  As  can  be  seen,  the  model  correctly 
predicts  the  experimentally  observed  weak  dependence  of  the  flame 
speed on mass loading of nanoparticles below 40% of their relative mass 
concentration.  The  authors  also  speculated  that  a  visibly  wider 
appearance  of  the  flame  in  a  binary  suspension  is  the  result  of  the 
separated flame-front configuration predicted by the theory. 

Boichuk  et  al.  [151]  investigated  flame  propagation  in  a  binary 
suspension  of  spherical  aluminum  and  crystalline  boron  particles  of 
about the same particle size (∼6 µm) in air. Experiments (Fig. 59) were 
performed in a vertical tube apparatus similar to that depicted in Fig. 8. 
The burning velocities were deduced from measured flame  speeds by 
dividing  the  latter  by  the  ratio  of  the  flame  surface  area  to  the  tube 
cross-section area. Based  on the evidence  that the  flame speed  in the 
binary  aluminum-boron  suspension  declines  with  increasing  boron 
fraction,  and  is  even  lower  with  boron  than  in  mixtures  with  “inert” 
magnetite  iron  powder  (Fe3O4),  the  authors  in  [151]  concluded  that 
boron not only behaves as an inert additive in the flame, but also ex-
hibits  flame  retardant  properties.  This  conclusion  appears  to  be 

Fig.  56. Dependence  of  the  normalized  flame  speed  (A)  and  normalized  dis-
tance between flame fronts (B) on composition of the binary suspension of dusts 
with different particle sizes. Total mass concentration of the suspension remains 
constant,  dusts  are  chemically  equivalent,  and  the  particle  size  ratio  is  4:1. 
Reprinted from [148] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099430S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

with  iron  oxide  addition.  In  spite  of  the  low  flame  speeds  in  boron 
suspensions at room temperature, the strong dependence of the flame 
speed on the initial mixture temperature in boron suspension described 
in Section 4.5 points to the possible existence of linked aluminum and 
boron flame fronts, but further studies would be needed to confirm this 
hypothesis. 

5.3. Flames in hybrid gaseous-solid fuel mixtures 

Although the theory developed for flames in binary fuel mixtures was 
initially developed for suspensions where particles of both fuel compo-
nents ignite and burn in the diffusive regime, it has also recently been 
used  for  the  qualitative  interpretation  of  experimental  results  in 
methane-aluminum 
and  methane-iron  hybrid 
gaseous-solid fuel mixtures [152]. 

[48,78,79,152] 

Using the Bunsen dust flame setup depicted in Fig. 4, Soo et al. [48] 
and  Julien  et  al.  [152]  seeded  methane-air  flames  with  progressively 
increasing concentrations of aluminum particles (d32 = 5.6 µm), while 
simultaneously  monitoring  the  aluminum  concentration,  the  flame 
burning velocity, and temperature. The flame temperature was derived 
from the continuous part of the flame spectra, as well as from the AlO 
molecular lines when they become visible in the flame. Flame spectra 
were acquired with the scanning optical setup shown in Fig. 18 [48]. 
As can be seen from still photographs and the cinematographic re-
cord in Fig. 60, depicting the flame at different aluminum concentra-
tions, the aluminum flame front starts to be linked to the methane flame 
first at the flame tip at aluminum concentrations close to 150 g/m3  and 
envelops practically the whole flame at about 200 g/m3. 

The  rapid  formation  of  the  linked  methane  and  aluminum  flame 
fronts occurring at aluminum concentrations around 150–170 g/m3  is 
also evident from the flame temperature records shown in Fig. 61. As can 
be seen from Fig. 61, at aluminum fuel concentrations around 150 g/m3, 
the  flame  temperature  rapidly  changes  from  a  value  typical  of  the 
methane flame to a higher value close to the expected flame temperature 
of an aluminum flame burning in methane combustion products, indi-
cating the appearance of a linked aluminum flame at this critical con-
centration.  The  flame  burning  velocity  also  first  declines  with  an 
increase in aluminum concentration, at the same rate as with inert sil-
icon carbide powder (Fig. 62), until the linked aluminum flame front is 
formed.  With  a  linked  aluminum  flame,  it  becomes  insensitive  to 
aluminum concentration, whereas an increase in inert SiC concentration 
leads to flame quenching at about 170 g/m3. 

The theory predicts that the coupling of the methane and aluminum 
flame fronts starts when the flame speed of the aluminum suspension, 
propagating in the products of the primary methane flame, matches the 
speed of the methane-air flame products —  point 2 in Fig. 55. Julien 
et al. [49] have theoretically estimated the minimal concentration for 
front coupling by comparing speeds of the methane flame products (with 
aluminum  particles  as  inert  additives)  and  the  flame  speed  in  an 
aluminum  suspension  burning  in  the  combustion  products  of  the 
methane flame, see Fig. 63. The methane-air flame speed and the speed 
of  combustion  products  was  calculated  using  CANTERA  software, 
assuming aluminum particles simply increase the mixture heat capacity, 
while the flame speed in the aluminum suspension was calculated using 
a simple Zel’dovich formula assuming that the aluminum combustion is 
limited by the rate of the kinetic evaporation of aluminum droplets. As 
can be seen from Fig. 63, the theoretical estimation correctly predicts 
the minimal aluminum concentration with the evaporation coefficient 
value of about 0.5. For metals, the evaporation accommodation coeffi-
cient  is  proportional  to  the  relative  open  surface  of  the  droplet  not 
covered with melted aluminum oxide cap [153]. 

The  theory  also  predicts  that,  at  the  initial  coupling  point,  the 
aluminum and methane flame fronts are clearly separated and propagate 
in  a  controlled  regime  (Fig.  55).  Separate  flame  fronts  are,  however, 
undetectable  in  Bunsen  flames  due  to  the  extensive  difference  in 

Fig. 58. Experimental results from Huang et al. on aluminum-air flames with 
mixtures of micro- and nano-aluminum particles. a. Effect of mass percentage of 
nano  particles  in  fuel  formulation  on  flame  speed  and  structure  where  Z  is 
dimensionless distance between nano-size and micron-size particle combustion 
fronts. b. Images of flames in micron-size and bimodal (20% of nano particles) 
aluminum-air  suspensions  (bottom).  Adapted  from  [52]  with  permission 
of Elsevier. 

Fig.  59. Burning  flame  velocity  versus  fuel  concentration  in  binary  boron- 
aluminum  aero  suspensions  with  different  boron  content.  Reprinted  from 
[151] with permission of Springer Nature. 

overreaching, however, since a declining flame speed is not, as follows 
from  the  binary  flame  theory  and  demonstrated  in  Fig.  57,  sufficient 
evidence for the absence of a linked secondary combustion front. The 
sharper decline of the flame speed with boron, in comparison to iron 
oxide, can be explained by the higher (by more than 50%) specific heat 
capacity  of  boron  compared  to  magnetite.  Additionally,  the  possible 
thermite-type reactions, between magnetite and aluminum or aluminum 
vapors, might actually enhance the flame speeds of the aluminum flame 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099431S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 60. Flame images at different concentrations of aluminum (top) and still frames from high-speed recording of aluminum front formation process (bottom). 
Reprinted from [49] with permission of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. 

Fig. 61. Flame temperature derived from continuous spectra in stoichiometric 
methane-aluminum-air mixture and a mixture with an addition of 5% of free 
oxygen. Spectra were recorded at the midsection of the Bunsen cone. Reprinted 
from  [49]  with  permission  of  the  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  As-
tronautics, Inc. 

Fig. 62. Burning velocities of methane flames with addition of 5% of the free 
oxygen seeded with different concentrations of aluminum and silicon carbide 
(SiC) powders. Reprinted from [49] with permission of the American Institute 
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. 

brightness of aluminum and methane flames and strong light scattering. 
Separated  propane  and  aluminum  fronts  were  recently  detected  by 
Paleˇcka  et  al.  [79]  using  freely  propagating  propane-aluminum-air 
flames  in  the  Hele-Shaw  cell  apparatus,  as  shown  in  Fig.  64.  It  was 
found that the aluminum concentration at which the two fronts initially 
coupled is a function of the propane-air equivalence ratio as shown in 
Fig. 64a. Interestingly, the flame coupling is stronger for lower equiva-
lence ratios, suggesting that it is the speed of the aluminum flame in the 
propane-flame  products  that  determines  the  critical  concentration, 
rather than the temperature of the propane-air flame products. 

Qualitatively similar flame coupling phenomena were observed by 
Julien et al. [152] in hybrid methane-iron-air mixtures. Reaction of iron 
in the products of methane combustion is limited by heterogeneous ki-
netics  and  is  not  very  caloric;  therefore,  its  addition  to  the  methane 
flame does not appreciably increase the flame temperature, see Fig. 65. 
Iron, however, ignites at about 1000 K [154] and burns in the diffusive 
regime if the combustion products contain free oxygen. Thus, temper-
atures  derived  from  continuous  spectra  in  mixtures  with  5%  of  free 

oxygen content are higher by about 400 K than for those without excess 
oxygen. 

The appearance of an iron combustion front linked to the methane 
flame  was,  however,  insensitive  to  the  regime  of  particle  combustion 
and  was  detected  in  both  mixtures  at  iron  concentrations  of  about 
150–200 g/m3. As shown in Fig. 66, the separated methane and iron 
flame fronts are clearly detectable in methane-iron-air mixtures. As can 
be seen from the picture of linked fronts, see inset of Fig. 66, they are 
separated  by  a  dark  zone,  although  the  theory  does  not  predict  any 
temperature decline without heat loss. The appearance of the dark zone, 
instead of the expected luminosity plateau, is explained in [152] by gas 
expansion, which  leads to a  local decrease in iron concentration. Au-
thors in [152] also strongly underline the importance in distinguishing 
between  particle  ignition  and  the  formation  of  the  dust  flame  front. 
While the iron particles ignite in mixtures with excess free oxygen at any 
iron concentration (see Fig. 67a), the formation of the dust flame (see 
Fig. 67b) was still a critical phenomenon that occurs at a threshold dust 
concentration defined by the mutual dynamics of the methane and iron 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099432S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

propagating in the controlled or merged regimes. 

Fig.  63. Prediction  of  the  linked  fronts  formation  from  calculated  methane 
product  flow  speed  and  aluminum  suspension  burning  velocities.  Reprinted 
from  [49]  with  permission  of  the  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  As-
tronautics, Inc. 

flame fronts. The flame pictures and diagrams in Fig. 67c from [152] 
illustrate formation of the coupled methane-iron flame fronts under ki-
netic and diffusion particle combustion regimes. 

Freely propagating constant-pressure hybrid flames in balloons have 
been studied by Vickery et al. in [155] and also demonstrate the rapid 
onset of the linked methane and aluminum flame fronts at some critical 
concentration  of  the  aluminum  fuel.  Without  free  oxygen  left  after 
methane combustion, the measured flame propagation speeds show a 
steady decline with increase of aluminum concentration up to 100 g/m3 
and a steady plateau. 

One can also find evidence for the existence of the separation and 
controlled  flame propagation regimes in hydrogen-aluminum-air mix-
tures  that  have  been  studied  by  Denkevits  and  Hoess  [156]  in  the 
standard  20-L  closed  bomb  (Fig.  2).  The  authors  found  that,  at  low 
aluminum and hydrogen concentrations, the rate of pressure rise in the 
bomb often has double peaks, whereas a single peak and much higher 
total  pressure  was  observed  at  higher  aluminum  concentrations.  The 
double  peak  pressure  rise  might  be  the  signature  of  the  separation 
regime (see Fig. 55) when propagation of hydrogen and aluminum flame 
fronts  is  independent  and  is  separated  by  some  time  interval.  The 
single-peak pressure  rise trace, on the  other hand,  and the  high peak 
pressure, are evidence of linked hydrogen and aluminum flame fronts 

Fig. 65. Iron particle temperatures as a function of iron concentration in iron- 
methane flames without (21% O2) and with 5% (26% O2) free oxygen content. 
Reprinted from [152] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 66. Iron–methane–air flames at iron particle concentration of about a. 80 
g/m3, b. 150 g/m3, and c. 325 g/m3. Magnified part shows the double-flame 
front structure. Reprinted from [152] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 64. Dual-front structure in hybrid aluminum-propane flames. a. onset of the second front in aluminum-propane-air flames, b. detecting distance between fronts, 
Z, with instantaneous (top) and average (bottom) intensity profiles along the yellow dotted line shown in the image, which is normal to the leading edge of the flame 
cell, and c. separation Z for different propane-air equivalence ratios. Adapted from [79] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099433S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 67. Left: iron–methane flames with 5% free oxygen at a. iron concentra-
tion around 25 g/m3  showing visible particle ignition and no dust flame front; 
b. iron concentration of about 140 g/m3  showing coupled methane-iron flame 
fronts. c. Diagrams of the coupled methane and iron flames (top) in a control 
regime  in  mixtures  without  oxygen  excess  with  iron  reacting  in  the  kinetic 
mode,  (middle)  in  a  control  regime,  in  mixtures  with  free  oxygen  and  iron 
reacting in the diffusion mode, (bottom) in a merged regime, in mixtures with 
free oxygen and iron reacting in the diffusion mode. Adapted from [152] with 
permission of Elsevier. 

5.4. Hybrid flame quenching in narrow channels 

The  quenching  behavior  of  hybrid  aluminum-methane  flames  in 
narrow channels was experimentally studied by Paleˇcka et al. in [78]. 
The schematics of the setup used in these experiments is shown in Fig. 8 
and was similar to one used previously in [71] for the study of the flame 
quenching  in  aluminum  suspensions  described  in  Section  4.6.  The 
quenching of the 16.3% O2/8.1% CH4/75.6% N2  mixture seeded with 
aluminum particles (Ampal 637, d32 = 5.6 µm) was compared with the 
quenching behavior of the same gas mixture seeded with inert silicon 
carbide  particles  of  close  particle  size  (d32 = 4.2  µm).  The  mixture, 
seeded  with  SiC  or  Al  particles,  ascended  through  a  45-mm-ID  Pyrex 
vertical tube from the closed to the open end. After a uniform suspension 
of desired solid fuel concentration was achieved, the flow was halted, 
the  flame  was  ignited,  and  the  flame  propagated  down  through  the 
quiescent fuel-oxidizer mixture in the tube. Parallel and equidistant thin 
brass or steel plates, 50 mm in length, were installed at about 30 cm 
down  from  the  open  end  of  the  tube  and  formed  a  set  of  parallel 
flame-quenching channels of adjustable width. Flame propagation in the 
tube and in the channels was recorded by a high-speed digital camera. 
The  results  of  the  flame  propagation  and  quenching  events  in 
channels  with  different  separation  distance  between  plates  and  at 
different concentrations of the dispersed SiC powder is shown in Fig. 68. 
As can be seen, the quenching distance in a pure gas mixture is close to 4 
mm  and  monotonically  increases  to  about  9  mm  at  silicon  carbide 
concentration of about 250 g/m3. For concentrations above 300 g/m3, 
the flame fails to propagate even in the main tube with ID of about 48 
mm. The results for flames seeded with aluminum are shown in Figs. 69 
and  70  a.  Below  concentrations  of  about  300  g/m3,  the  flame  with 
aluminum behaves similarly to flames seeded with SiC and the color of 
the flame was similarly orange, see Fig. 69a. At aluminum concentra-
tions above 300 g/m3, the flame brightness in the tube rapidly increases 
many fold and the flame color changes to brilliant white, see Fig. 69b, 
suggesting the formation of a linked aluminum-methane hybrid flame. 
Upon  entering  the  quenching  plate  assembly,  however,  the  flame 
brightness became low and its color resorts back to orange, indicating 
quenching  of  the  aluminum  flame.  The  aluminum  flame  front  was 
observed to recouple to the primary methane flame when the methane 
flame  left  the  quenching  plate  assembly  (see  rightmost  image  in 
Fig.  69b).  These  cases  are  marked  in  Fig.  70a  by  filled  squares.  This 
behavior continues to aluminum concentrations of about 450 g/m3. At 

Fig. 68. Results of flame quenching experiments at different concentrations of 
silicon carbide dust in 16.3% O2/8.1% CH4/75.6% N2/SiC mixtures. Adapted 
from [78] with permission of Elsevier. 

aluminum concentrations above 450 g/m3, the flame, however, never 
resorts back to a weak yellow flame before quenching inside the plate 
assembly,  as  shown  in  Fig.  69c  and  marked  in  Fig.  70a  by  filled 
rhombuses. 

To  provide  a  qualitative  explanation  of  the  complex  quenching 
behavior of these hybrid flames, Paleˇcka et al. [122] extended the model 
of the flame in a binary suspension, described above in Section 5.1, to 
account for heat losses. With heat losses, the heat transfer equation in 
the flame remains linear, because the volumetric heat loss term depends 
on  the  temperature  linearly,  and  the  algorithm  for  finding  the  flame 
speed  for  different  flame  configurations  remains  unchanged  from  the 
model without heat loss discussed in Section 5.1. We will again refer 
readers to the original publication [122] for the detailed description of 
the  solution  procedure  and  mathematics,  which  although  simple  in 
method,  nevertheless  result  in  a  quite  intricate  picture  of  the  flame 
behavior. Thus, for example, unlike the problem of a single flame front 
with heat loss that has two solutions for the flame speed, one stable and 
one  unstable  (Section  3.4),  the  dual-flame-front  problem,  has,  under 
certain sets of parameters, up to 4 solutions (flame speeds). A map of the 
flame  propagation  regimes  predicted  by  the  model  are  presented  in 
Fig. 70b. The strip on top of the graphs illustrates the flame propagation 
regimes  in  the  flame  tube  (ID=48  mm),  which  is  considered  to  be 
equivalent to the flame without heat loss in the theoretical graph. 

As can be seen from Fig. 70, the flame in the range of aluminum fuel 
concentrations 1→2 propagates as a single methane flame front in the 
wide tube (separated flame regime in Fig. 55). With a decrease of the 
channel  width,  the  heat  losses  increase  and  eventually  the  flame 
quenches: line a→b (case A in Fig. 70). In this flame regime, aluminum 
plays the role of an inert additive and the quenching distance sharply 
increases  with  aluminum  concentration.  In  the  range  of  aluminum 
concentrations  2→3,  the  flame  in  the  tube  propagates  in  the  control 
regime  with  the  aluminum  front  trailing  the  methane  flame  front  at 
some distance. The speed of the aluminum flame in the control regime 
barely matches the speed of the methane flame and, thus, is sensitive to 
heat  losses.  Thus,  even  when  entering  relatively  wide  channels  (line 
c→d), the methane and aluminum fronts become even more separated 
and, with further decrease of the channel width, the aluminum flame 
quenches and the methane flame propagates alone (line e→f) (case B in 
Fig.  70).  The  theory  also  predicts  that,  for  methane-aluminum  flame 
fronts  merged  in  the  tube  (concentration  range  3→4)  and  in  wide 
channels (line g→h), the methane and aluminum flames may separate 
and  propagate  in  the  control  regime  before  quenching  (line  h→i).  At 
even  higher  aluminum  concentrations,  the  methane  and  aluminum 
flames  strongly  overlap  (merge)  and  cannot  propagate  without  each 
other  and,  therefore,  quench  together  similarly  to  that  observed  for 
single-front flames. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099434S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig.  69. Flames  passing  through  the  set  of 
quenching  plates  at  a.  low  aluminum  concen-
trations  with  aluminum  acting  as  an  inert  ad-
(around  50  g/m3);  b.  moderate 
ditive 
aluminum  concentration  of  around  400  g/m3 
showing  coupled  methane–aluminum  flame  in 
tube  and  methane  flamelets  with  quenched 
aluminum front inside the channels; c. flamelets 
with  coupled  methane–aluminum  fronts  prop-
agating  inside  channels  (around  450  g/m3). 
Reprinted from [122] with permission of Taylor 
& Francis.).   

Fig. 70. Map of the flame propagation regimes and quenching events in channels of different widths and at different concentrations of the fuel mixture: a. results of 
experiments at different concentrations of aluminum in 16.3% O2/8.1% CH4/ 75.6% N2/Al mixtures, showing events where the entire flame quenched (A - white 
circles), the CH4  front propagated & the Al front did not appear at all (B - orange circles), the CH4  propagated & the Al quenched (C - squares), both fronts propagated 
(D - rhombuses). b. Flame configurations predicted by the model. Adapted from [122] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

The  theory  also  predicts  a  sharp  drop  in  quenching  distance  with 
formation  of  the  strongly  linked  (merged)  aluminum  and  methane 
flames, whereas the linking of the fronts was registered experimentally 
merely as an inflection point with a transition to a plateau in quenching 
distance. The authors in [122] hypothesized that this difference between 
theory and experiment is the result of the model assumption that the 
mixture is overall fuel-lean while, in reality, the oxygen content in CO2 
and  H2O  methane  combustion  products  is  insufficient  to  completely 
oxidize aluminum at concentrations above 250 g/m3. 

6. Instability of flames in nonvolatile fuel suspensions 

As  discussed  in  the  pioneering  theoretical  works  of  Darrieus  and 
Landau  [159,160],  planar  laminar  deflagration  waves  in  gases  are 
inherently  unstable.  Smooth  laminar  flames  are,  under  certain  condi-
tions, an experimental reality [161], due to the counteracting stabilizing 
effects of diffusion, viscosity, and natural convection. These effects are 
often the driving force for a variety of flame instabilities, such as ther-
modiffusive  [162],  Rayleigh-Taylor,  Kelvin-Helmholtz,  etc.[163]. 
Excellent  reviews  of  the  state-of-the  art  research  on  instabilities  in 
gaseous flames were published by Matalon [161], Candel [164], Wil-
liams  [165]  and  others.  Although  naturally  free  from  hydrodynamic 
effects, deflagration waves in gasless solid combustion systems of com-
pacted powders (SHS, pyrotechnics) are also prone to thermodiffusive 
instabilities  that  manifest  themselves  as  pulsating,  spinning,  and 
multi-spin combustion waves. Reviews of experimental and theoretical 
research on gasless flame instabilities can be found in works of Merz-
hanov [166], Merzhanov and Rumanov [167], Ivleva and Merzhanov 
[168],  Volpert  et  al.  [169]  and  others  [170,171].  Studies  of  flame 

instabilities in fuel suspensions are rare in comparison and are mostly 
limited  to  sprays  [172,173]  or  volatilized  solids  [174].  Volatile  fuels 
form  premixed  gaseous  flame  fronts  and,  thus,  can  be  treated  in  the 
stability analysis as such by accounting for the evaporation dynamics 
[172]. 

Insufficient theoretical attention has been given to the formation of 
instabilities in heterogeneous flames of nonvolatile fuels suspended in 
gaseous oxidizers. Recent experiments have observed a variety of un-
stable  flames  in  nonvolatile,  mostly  metal,  fuel  suspensions.  These 
findings, although not yet systematic and often accidental observations, 
demonstrate a palette of flame instabilities that can potentially be even 
richer than in premixed gaseous flames. The theoretical analysis of flame 
instability  phenomena  in  nonvolatile  fuel  suspensions  will  need  to 
consider  the  physics  of  solid  fuel  combustion  discussed  in  previous 
chapters. In the present review, we will briefly summarize the available 
experimental  observations  of  the  thermoacoustic  and  thermodiffusive 
flame instabilities in metal fuel suspensions. We will also discuss two 
theoretically predicted, but not yet experimentally observed, flame in-
stabilities specific to solid suspensions that are the result of the diffusion- 
two-phase  flow 
kinetic  particle  reaction  mechanism  and 
hydrodynamics. 

the 

6.1. Thermoacoustic flame instability 

Thermoacoustic  flame  instabilities  occur  when  flame  heat  release 
fluctuations couple with the acoustic field in a positive feedback loop. 
Thermoacoustic instabilities are not, strictly speaking, a purely intrinsic 
property of the flame, since they also depend upon the configuration and 
the  operational  mode  of  the  combustor  [175].  Flame  feedback  to 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099435S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

acoustic perturbations responsible for coupling, does, however, reflect 
intrinsic flame instability mechanisms and, thus, provides a convenient 
mechanism for their study. Thermoacoustic instability of gaseous flames 
and flames in sprays were studied in detail in numerous works [157,176, 
177]. 

Metal additives to propellants were initially used to supress acoustic 
instabilities  in  solid  rocket  motors  [178].  In  some  cases,  however, 
instead of damping acoustics, metal additives increase the energy of the 
acoustic field [178]. Cassel was the first to observe acoustically coupled 
“chattering”  flames  propagating  through  aluminum  and  dextrin  sus-
pensions  in  tubes  [43],  recognizing  the  importance  of  acoustic  flame 
excitation for the transition to turbulent flames. After Cassel’s discovery, 
acoustically  coupled  heterogeneous  flames  have  been  encountered  in 
microgravity  experiments  with  lycopodium  suspensions  [95]  and 
investigated  in  laboratory  experiments  by  Goroshin  et  al.  [179],  who 
studied the onset of acoustic coupling as a function of the fuel concen-
tration and particle size in aluminum-air and magnesium-air dust flames 
propagating in tubes, by Aslanov et al. [158], who extended this study 
towards acoustically coupled flames in Fe, Zr and binary Al/Fe air sus-
pensions, and by Wright et al. [188], who observed acoustic flame in-
stabilities in micron-size suspensions of aluminum and iron at different 
oxygen concentrations. 

Goroshin et al. observed flames propagating upwards in 3.5-m-long 
and  50-mm-ID  tubes,  whereas  Aslanov  et  al.  and  Wright  et  al.  have 
studied flames propagating downwards in shorter 1.2-m and 0.6-m tubes 
of  about  the  same  internal  diameter.  In  all  three  works,  the  minimal 
metal concentration at which acoustic coupling starts was found to be 
noticeably higher than the lean flame propagation limit. Thus, oscilla-
tions  start at  about 80 g/m3  for  7-µm  magnesium  suspensions and  at 
about 120 g/m3 for 30-µm Mg particles [179]. For 50-µm Mg suspension 
only a few oscillation cycles occur at concentrations above 400 g/m3. As 
the particle size increases, the phase shift between radiance and pressure 
oscillations also increases from about 15∘-20∘  for 7-µm powder to about 
45∘  for  30-µm  powder.  In  aluminum-air  suspensions,  oscillatory  com-
bustion was only observed in suspensions with average particle size of 
about 6 µm at concentrations above 120 g/m3  whereas in 13 µm sus-
pension only several cycles can be noticed at concentrations above 250 
g/m3. For iron suspensions of 3-µm particles, oscillations were observed 
only at oxygen concentrations above 42% [188]. 

The flame behavior, and the time sequence for the onset of different 
stages  of  oscillating  flames,  was  found  to  be  similar  for  gaseous  and 
metal flames. Fig. 71a illustrates the time sequence for the development 

of an oscillating propane-air flame in 1.2-m tube [181], while the dia-
gram in Fig. 71b shows the development of an oscillating aluminum-air 
flame in a tube of similar length [158]. As can be seen, both propane and 
aluminum  flames  are  going  through  similar  stages  during  oscillatory 
flame propagation. As shown in Fig. 71, after ignition, flames in both 
mixtures first propagate unperturbed (“curved flame” and the sequence 
1 (cid:0) > 2),  then  briefly  oscillate  as  a  whole  retaining  their  parabolic 
shape,  then  flatten  with  a  rapid  reduction  of  the  flame  speed  (“flat 
flame”  and  2 (cid:0) > 3),  with  the  aluminum  flame  undergoing  second 
“curved flame”  (sequence 3 (cid:0) > 3a) and “flat-flame”  (sequence 4->5) 
phases, and finally both flames experience cellular oscillations (“cellular 
flame” and 5->6). The amplitude of the flame oscillations in the cellular 
flame reaches 1-1.5 cm and flame leaves characteristic “fish scale” im-
prints on the tube wall (Fig. 72). 

The formation of cells occurs due to the Rayleigh-Taylor instability 
when the flame is accelerated by the sound wave towards low density 
combustion products [182]. Periodical change of the flame surface area 
modulates the combustion rate and provides the feedback mechanism to 
amplify  sound  oscillations  if  the  Rayleigh  criteria  is  satisfied,  which 
states  that  if  pressure  and  heat  release  fluctuations  are  in  phase,  the 
instability is fed by the flame/acoustics coupling [183]. As hypothesized 

Fig.  72. a.  Oscillation  of  unperturbed  and  cellular  flames  in  suspension  of  7 
µm-Mg particles in air at fuel concentration 200 g/m3. Reprinted from [179] 
with permission of Springer Nature. b. “fish scale” imprint of the cellular flame 
(from S. Goroshin’s private archive). 

Fig. 71. a. Sound level and flame position in the tube as a function of time at the onset of acoustical instability in a propane-air flame (tube length of 1.2 m and 
propane-air equivalence ratio of 0.77) [157]; b. diagram of the flame propagating stages in aluminum-air suspension at about the same equivalence ratio as the 
propane flame in a. Reprinted from [157] and from [158] with permission of Taylor & Francis and Springer Nature , respectively. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099436S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

in [179], the reduction in the acoustic coupling with increasing particle 
size can be explained by the increase of the particle inertia, which in-
creases the phase shift between burning rate oscillations and pressure, 
thereby  eventually  violating  the  Rayleigh  criteria.  As  was  found  by 
Goroshin et al. in [97] and can be seen in Fig. 73, thermoacoustic os-
cillations  also  extinguish  when  an  aluminum  flame  enters  narrow 
channels (assembly of parallel steel quenching plates shown in Figs. 8 
and 52). This phenomenon can also be explained by the suppression of 
the Rayleigh-Taylor instability in a narrow channel. 

The  cell  formation  driven  by  the  Rayleigh-Taylor  instability  only 
starts when the amplitude of acoustic pulsations reaches some threshold 
value [182]. Thus, there should be some other mechanism responsible 
for  the  initial  triggering  of  the  acoustic  coupling.  This  mechanism, 
however, is difficult to pinpoint and even for gas flames different the-
ories still coexist [184]. Thus, there is an opinion that fluctuations of the 
burning rate in the sound field due to pressure and temperature oscil-
lations are sufficient to overcome dissipative forces and trigger the flame 
initial response [185]. Some researchers, however, support other trig-
gering mechanisms [184]. Thus, Kaskan in [186], pointed out that ve-
locity  pulsations  of  the  sound  wave  periodically  “stretch”  the  flame 
because part of the flame that is anchored inside the sound boundary 
layer at the tube wall does not move. Kaskan’s hypothesis was used by 
Goroshin  et  al.  in  [179]  to  explain  the  diminishing  of  the  acoustic 
coupling with an increase of particle size. They argued that, because the 
flame quenching distance increases with particle size (see Section 4.6), 
at some particle size, the flame eventually stops penetrating the sound 
boundary  layer,  thus  eliminating  Kaskan  feedback  mechanism.  This 
hypothesis does not, however, explain why flames in suspensions of fine 
2-3-µm  iron  particles  are  not  susceptible  to  the  thermoacoustic  insta-
bility despite having an almost two times smaller quenching distance 
(see Section 4.6) than the 5-µm aluminum suspensions that demonstrate 
a strong acoustic coupling. 

We  should  also  not exclude  the  possibility  of  the  combustion  rate 
feedback  through  temperature  and  pressure  oscillations  in  the  sound 
wave for particles burning the diffusive regime. Experiments performed 
in  [187,189]  show  that  particle  burning  rate  is  sensitive  to  the  flow 
speed oscillations if particles react with the formation of lifted diffusion 
flames of fuel vapor with the oxidizing gas. The oscillations in magne-
sium particle luminosity, which reflect the burning rate, in a sound field 
at 150 Hz are shown in Fig. 74 and explained in [187] by periodical 
flameout from the frontal point of the magnesium drop. This hypothesis, 
that the feedback mechanism for acoustic instabilities in heterogeneous 

flames  results  from  the  interaction  of  acoustics  with  the  lifted  flame 
structure, is also consistent with the fact that acoustic coupling in iron 
suspensions  starts  at  oxygen  concentrations  above  42%  [188].  As 
observed  in  [188],  a  40%-oxygen  concentration  is  the  borderline 
dividing  a  pure  heterogeneous  surface  reaction  and,  at  least  partial, 
vapor-phase iron combustion for larger 25-µm particles. 

Indeed, the formation of a diffusion flame lifted far from the surface 
of aluminum droplets at high oxygen concentrations may also explain 
the  high  sensitivity  of  the  aluminum  flame  to  acoustics  in  oxygen 
enriched  environments.  Thus,  at  oxygen  concentrations  above  42%, 
intense acoustic coupling of aluminum flames in a tube was observed by 
Wright et al. [188] almost immediately after ignition, with excitation of 
the higher tube harmonics (Fig. 75). 

For hybrid flames, yet another feedback mechanism that might be 
responsible for thermoacoustic flame instabilities is a periodic coupling 
of  gaseous  and  metal  flame  fronts  in  the  acoustic  field  observed  by 
Paleˇcka  et  al.  [79].  The  snapshots  of  the  acoustically  excited 
aluminum-propane  flame  in  Hele-Shaw  cell  are  shown  in  Fig.  76 
together with a graph (Fig. 76c) illustrating mutual positions of propane 
and aluminum flame front. The coupling has been observed to vary in 
intensity along the wrinkled flame, being generally stronger in the cusp 
regions  and  weaker  on  the  crests  where  the  propane  and  aluminum 
fronts  separate  more  easily.  This  sometimes  contributes  to  the  devel-
opment  of  more  complex  frontal  structures  and  pulsations  than  in 
single-front flames. 

6.2. Thermodiffusive instabilities of metal dust flames 

While  flame  instabilities  can  often  result  from  several  interacting 
mechanisms, the leading cause in many cases is rooted in thermodiffu-
sive effects caused by a mismatch between thermal and mass diffusion in 
the flame. Thermodiffusive instabilities can be roughly classified as one- 
dimensional  and  multidimensional.  The  so-called  pulsating  and  spin-
ning flames [169,191] belong to the first category, while cellular flames 
belong to the second. Whereas cellular flames have been known for a 
long time and were observed in many gaseous mixtures [61], pulsating 
flames  had  been  first  discovered  in  condensed  systems,  such  as  pro-
pellants  [192]  and  SHS  [193],  and  only  later  have  been  observed  in 
some non-acoustically coupled gaseous flames [194]. 

Non-acoustic pulsating dust flames were first observed by Hanai et al. 
[190]  in  microgravity  experiments  with  PMMA  suspensions  with  a 
particle size range from about 8 to 48 µm. They found that, right after 
initiation,  spherical  fuel-lean  flames  start  to  propagate  in  a  pulsating 
mode where stages of a bright flame and fast propagation alternate with 
stages when the flame is almost extinct, as shown in Fig. 77. Pulsations 
were found to be the most intense near the lean flame-propagation limit. 
With  increasing  fuel  concentration,  the  pulsation  frequency  increases 

Fig.  73. Pressure  oscillations  before,  inside  and  after  flame  passes  narrow 
channel plate assembly. Reprinted from [97]. 

Fig. 74. Luminosity oscillogram of 200 µm magnesium particle burning in 150 
Hz acoustic field. Adapted from [187] with permission of Springer Nature. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099437S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 76. Acoustically excited hybrid aluminum-propane-air flames in the Hele- 
Shaw cell: (a) consecutive frames of a flame in the cell, (b) pressure oscillations 
and  the  flame  position,  (c)  position  of  the  propane  (solid  line)  and  the 
aluminum (dash-dotted line) flame fronts and the intensity of the flame lumi-
nosity, and (d) frequencies of oscillations. Adapted from [79] with permission 
of Elsevier. 

Fig.  75. High  and  low  frequency  pressure  pulsations  observed  in  390  g/m3 
aluminum suspensions burning in 42% O2-58% Ar mixtures. (a) Frequency over 
time data, (b) Fast Fourier transform of the pressure oscillations. Adapted from 
[188] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

while the intensity decreases until, at some threshold fuel concentration, 
the flame propagation becomes smooth. 

Authors in [190] attempted to explain the phenomenon by linking 
the observed pulsating flames to a theory of pulsating flames caused by 
radiation heat transfer proposed by Joulin et al. [195]. This explanation, 
and  any role for radiation  in these flames, must be ruled out for  this 
experiment because the free-path length of radiation (radiation absor-
bance length) in 30-µm PMMA dust cloud far exceeds the vessel size, 
making radiation absorption by the unburned suspension negligible (see 
discussion in Chapter 8). 

Similar pulsating flames were observed in aluminum suspensions by 
Julien  et  al.  [80],  who  performed  experiments  in  transparent  rubber 
balloons with suspensions of Ampal 637 aluminum powder in mixtures 
of oxygen with N2, Ar and He (see Section 2.5). Still frames illustrating 
two periods of a pulsating flame in lean aluminum suspension is shown 
in Fig. 78. In moderately lean mixtures closer to stoichiometry, flame 
pulsations often fade away after a few cycles, as shown in Fig. 79, similar 
to the observations of Hanai et al. [190]. 

Similarly  to  the  pulsating  flames  in  PMMA  suspensions,  the 

Fig. 77. Photographs of a pulsating flame in a PMMA suspension in air (30.4- 
µm particles) and movement of pulsating flame front. Adapted from [190] with 
permission of Elsevier. 

frequency  of  pulsating  aluminum  flames  increases  linearly  with  fuel 
concentration (Fig. 80). It was also found that the pulsation frequency is 
practically independent of the gas composition, as long as the mixture 
remains fuel lean. Julien et al. recognized that the pulsating instability in 
dust flames is analogous to the pulsating flame in gasless systems and 
reflects the common feature of heterogeneous combustion: the absence 
of any molecular diffusion of the solid fuel. 

Julien et al. in [80] have also observed a variety of unstable flame 
structures at low aluminum concentrations near the lean flammability 
limit. Spiral waves, either superimposed on the pulsating flame front or 
seen isolated, can be clearly observed at the lowest fuel concentrations. 
They have been predicted theoretically [196] and are often referred to in 
the literature as spin combustion. For extremely lean mixtures, multiple 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099438S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig.  78. Two  pulsating  periods  of  an  aluminum  flame  in  a  lean  (280  g/m3)  aluminum  suspension  in  60%  O2/40%  Ar  gas  mixture.  Reprinted  from  [80]  with 
permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 79. Decaying pulsations in aluminum flames: a. Light intensity trace (about 450 g/m3  in 42% O2  and 58% Ar) and b. flame radius (around 280 g/m3  in 60% O2 
and 40% Ar). Reprinted from [80] with permission of Elsevier. 

spiral waves simultaneously generated from several independent sites 
can  be  seen  ascending  upwards  due  to  natural  convection.  For  these 
flames near the lean limit, these spiral flames are able to propagate even 
though no spherical flame is observed. 

An  unperturbed  smooth  spherical  flame  has  only  been  observed 
around stoichiometry in moderately lean or rich mixtures [80]. In suf-
ficiently rich mixtures at equivalence ratios above 2, a smooth spherical 
flame becomes cellular as shown in Fig. 81. Similar cellular structures 
were  observed  for  flames  propagating  in  tubes  in  fuel-rich  aluminum 
[188] and fuel-rich iron [128] micron-size suspensions (Fig. 81). 

Fig.  80. Dependence  of  the  flame  pulsation  frequency  on  aluminum  concen-
tration in argon-oxygen mixtures with different oxygen content. Reprinted from 
[80] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 81. Cellular flames in fuel-rich aluminum suspension in a balloon (db =
20 cm) [80] and in a tube (ID = 5 cm) [188], and the cellular iron-air flame in 
fuel-rich  suspension  in  a  tube  (ID  = 5  cm)  (experiments  in  [128],  from  S. 
Goroshin’s private archive). Adapted with permission from [80] with permis-
sion of Elsevier and from [188] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099439S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Previously, pulsating/spinning, and cellular flame instabilities have 
been observed separately in chemically different systems. As can be seen 
from the results discussed above, a nonvolatile solid fuel suspension is, 
in this sense, unique, since it can show both (all) types of thermodiffu-
sive  instabilities  within  the  same  chemical  composition  but  just  at 
different  fuel-oxygen  equivalence  ratios.  A  semi-qualitative  map  of 
stable and unstable flame-propagation regimes in coordinates of the fuel 
and oxygen concentrations is plotted in Fig. 82 [80] with indication of 
the Le number values. 

The  reason  for  the  rich  variety  of  instabilities  observed  in  these 
heterogeneous flames is a result of the negligible solid fuel diffusivity. 
For fuel-lean flames, the limiting combustion component is the solid fuel 
that has practically zero diffusivity. This corresponds to large values of 
Lewis number (Le = α/D) giving rise, as predicted by the theory, to the 
pulsating  flame  instability  [197].  With  increasing  fuel  concentrations 
towards  stoichiometry,  the  consumption  and  diffusion  of  oxygen 
become more important and the effective Le number approaches unity in 
the vicinity of the stoichiometric fuel concentration, where the flame is 
observed to be the most stable. Further increase in the fuel concentration 
above the stochiometric value results in a decrease of the Le number, 
eventually  leading  to  the  appearance  of  the  cellular  flame  structure, 
similar  to  the  observations  of  cellular  flames  in  fuel-lean  hydrogen 
flames  [61]  or  fuel-rich  propane  flames  [198].  The  Le  number  goes 
below unity for rich heterogeneous fuel mixtures due to the decrease of 
the mixture heat diffusivity α (cm2/s) with an increase of the fuel con-
centration B, since α = λ
cgρg+csB, where cg  and cs  are gas and solid specific 
heat capacities and λ is thermal conductivity of the gas. 

Of  course,  the  Lewis  number  alone  does  not  define  the  flame  sta-
bility.  The  well-developed  theory  of  thermodiffusive  instabilities  in 
gaseous flames also cannot be directly applied to flames in suspension. 
Future theoretical analysis of the thermodiffusive instabilities of flames 
in solid suspensions would need to consider the peculiarities of hetero-
geneous flames, such as particle ignition, large thermal thickness, effect 
of particle size, etc. As a first step in analyzing the interaction of the 
thermodiffusive instability with the discrete structure of heterogeneous 
flames  (see  Chapter  7),  the  theoretical  work  of  Mi  et  al.  [199]  has 
analyzed the thermodiffusive instability in a layered discrete reacting 
system. 

6.3. Other predicted flame instabilities 

A  new  type  of  flame  instability,  specific  for  nonvolatile  particle 
suspensions, has been theoretically predicted by Soo et al. [108], but has 
not yet been confirmed experimentally. Pulsating flame solutions were 
obtained using the flame propagation model discussed in Section 3.2, 
which considers both kinetic and diffusion resistances during particle 
reaction.  The  region  of  the  unstable  flame  propagation,  in  the  graph 
depicting  dependence  of  the  flame  speed  on  particle  size  at  different 
fuel-oxygen equivalence ratios, is marked in Fig. 27 by a hatched area. 
Unlike pulsating flames driven by the thermodiffusive instability, this 
instability only occurs in a narrow range of particles sizes bordering the 
particle size that separates the diffusion and kinetically controlled par-
ticle combustion regimes. The oscillations of the particle, gas tempera-
tures,  and  Damk¨ohler  number  within  one  cycle  are  shown  in  Fig.  83 
[108]. 

As can be seen from Fig. 83, the flame pulsations are characterized by 
a large variation in the temperature of the solid phase, whereas the gas 
temperature profile only changes in a relatively narrow range. Oscilla-
tions of the Damk¨ohler number, see bottom panel of Fig. 83, suggest that 
the particle combustion in this flame oscillates from predominantly ki-
netic to predominantly diffusion combustion in a complex pattern. 

Korol’chenko and Poletayev in [200] have examined hydrodynamic 
instabilities in two-phase flames, using a modified Darrieus and Landau 
approximation. The model predicts a separation of the condensed and 
gas phases in the preheat zone of the perturbed flame, as illustrated in 
Fig. 84, due to the slip between the particle trajectories and the flow 
streamlines. This particle slip introduces an additional flame instability 
at some critical combination of the system parameters. They attempted 
to  apply their  theory  to  explain the  observed increase  of  the  burning 
velocity with increasing droplet size in the Burgoyne and Cohen [133] 
experiments  with  tetralin  aerosol.  However,  those  results  can  also  be 
explained simply by the effect of kinetic vs. diffusion combustion of the 
droplets, as discussed previously in Section 4.4. 

Fig. 82. Map of the flame propagation regimes within fuel-oxygen concentra-
tion coordinates. Reprinted from [80] with permission of Elsevier. 

∗
Fig.  83. Instantaneous  profiles  of  gas  and  particle  temperatures  and  Da
number  at  different  instances  in  time  over  a  single  oscillation  period  of  an 
oscillating flame. Reprinted from [108] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099440S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

the  continuous  source  approximation,  the  standard  model  describing 
heat sources by a continuous function of spatial coordinates needs to be 
replaced  with a model that considers the exact positioning  of hetero-
geneous heat sources in space. 

7.1. Analytical flame model with a regular distribution of particles in 
space 

The role of the discrete nature of heat sources for flames in suspen-
sion was first investigated by Shoshin et al. [123,213] who considered 
the problem of a flame propagating in a system of regularly distributed 
point-like heat sources (particles) positioned at the nodes of an imagi-
nary cubic lattice, as shown in Fig. 85. We will describe this model in 
more detail because it permits an easy analytical solution and, despite 
being highly idealized, captures the basic details of the discrete-flame 
concept. 

Fig. 85 depicts a flat flame consisting of one or multiple layers of 
simultaneously  reacting particles  propagating from left  to right along 
the x-axis, with a fixed particle spacing of l. Each particle ignites when 
the temperature reaches some value, Ti, and burns with constant heat 
output during an externally prescribed combustion time, tc. It is assumed 
that a stable flame exists, i.e., that particles along the x-axis ignite at 
regular time intervals, τ, and the flame speed can be defined as v = l/τ. It 
is  also  assumed  that  the  heat  generated  by  each  particle  propagates 
through  the  system  independently  of  other  sources,  i.e.,  that  the  dif-
ferential  heat  transfer  equation  is  linear.  Some  justification  for  this 
assumption is provided by the fact that the gas expansion enlarges the 
distance between particles counterweighting, to a large degree, the in-
crease of the gas thermal diffusivity with temperature [123]. Assuming 
linearity of the heat diffusion equation, the temperature of the particle at 
the  instant  of  ignition,  Ti,  is  a  superposition  of  the  incremental  tem-
perature increases provided by all reacted sources in the infinite system: 

Ti = T0 +

∑∞

∑∞

∑∞

i=1

j=(cid:0) ∞

k=(cid:0) ∞

ΔTijk

(7.1)  

For fast-burning particles that closely resemble a δ-type source, both in 
space and in time, the ΔTijk  is a Green’s function and can be written as: 

ΔTijk =

Qmijk
cρ

(4παuiτ)(cid:0) 3

2exp

-

[

]

(il)2 + (jl)2 + (kl)2
4αuiτ

(7.2)  

Here,  m  is  the  particle  mass,  Q  is  the  heat  of  reaction,  and  αu  is  the 
mixture thermal diffusivity. 

Fig. 85. Model of a propagating flame in a 3-D regular distribution of reactive 
particles. Reprinted from [211] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

Fig. 84. Flow field near a curved flame front, 1) Fresh mixture; 2) combustion 
products. Dashed lines depict trajectories of the condensed phase and solid lines 
of the gaseous phase. Reprinted from [200] with permission of Springer Nature. 

7. Effect of the discrete nature of heat sources on flame in 
suspension 

Direct  microscopic  observation  of  flame  fronts  in  heterogeneous 
systems, such as reactive powder compacts, composite propellants, or 
pyrotechnics, often reveal hot spots and rough flame structures that are 
not  compatible  with  the  notion  of  a  continuous  uniform  flame 
[201–204].  In  an  attempt  to  reproduce  these  structures,  numerous 
works  have  attempted  to  model  heterogeneous  media  as  systems  of 
regular  or  randomly positioned  reacting  cells or  hot  spots interacting 
directly or through an inert heat conductive medium [205–209]. Due to 
the  complex  morphology  of  powder  compacts  and  the  often  poorly 
identified reaction mechanisms, the imposed hot spot structures [210] 
and the physical mechanisms of their formation and rules of interaction 
are,  however,  poorly  identified  and  are  often  arbitrary.  In  contrast, 
nonvolatile fuel particles in suspension are separated by large distances 
and  can  act  as  point-like  heat  sources.  The  “hot  spots”  formation  is 
identified  as  particle  ignition  which  is  the  transition  from  kinetic  to 
diffusion  combustion.  The  mechanism  of  particle  interaction  through 
the scalar temperature and oxygen concentration fields in the gas phase 
is  also  clearly  identified.  As  shown  below,  the  relative  simplicity  of 
solid-fuel suspensions allows physically transparent modeling that can 
account  for  the  discrete  nature  of  heat  sources  without  enlisting  any 
artificial assumptions. The resulting theory of the flame in suspension 
asymptotically  represents  both  the  discrete  and  continuous  flame 
propagation regimes, as well as all mixed modes in between [211]. 

The  only  difference  between  flame  models  describing  combustion 
fronts in  nonvolatile fuel suspensions reviewed in  Chapter 3,  and the 
classical model of a gaseous flame, is the source term in the governing 
equations for heat and mass diffusion. While, for the flame in gases, the 
source term is one or, if a complex kinetic scheme is considered, multiple 
Arrhenius  functions,  in  a  particulate  suspension  the  reaction  term  is 
derived from a subroutine describing the reaction of a single particle as a 
function of the local temperature and oxygen concentration. The source 
term is then written as the product of the local particle reaction rate and 
the local particle number density but remains, as in gases, a continuous 
function  of  spatial  coordinates.  With  this  approach,  the  real  discrete 
nature of heat sources, i.e., their localization in space and the fact that 
each reacting source (particle) generates a three-dimensional tempera-
ture  field  around  it,  are  ignored.  Some  authors  justify  this  quasi- 
continuous  approximation  by  estimating  characteristic  flame  di-
mensions, i.e., the thickness of the preheat and combustion zones, and 
claiming that they are, as a rule, much larger than the average inter- 
particle distance [212]. To estimate the characteristic flame thickness, 
they, however, use the same continuous flame model they attempt to 
justify. To break up this circular reasoning, and to analyze the validity of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099441S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Substitution  of  ΔTijk  in  (7.1)  by  the  expression  (7.2)  results  in 
equation  (7.3), which fully defines the flame propagation speed in the 
system. It can be written using non-dimensional parameters as follows 
[123,211]: 

θi =

1
μ

=

1
4π3

2

∑∞

∑∞

∑∞

(

i=1

j=(cid:0) ∞

k=(cid:0) ∞

)(cid:0) 3

2

i
η

(

exp

(cid:0)

)

i2 + j2 + k2
4i

(7.3)  

Here μ = BQ
cρ(Ti(cid:0) Tu) is the dimensionless concentration [same as defined in 
μ = θi  is the dimensionless ignition temper-
(3.4)] and correspondingly 1
ature,  whereas  η = vl/αu  is  the  dimensionless  flame  speed.  As  can  be 
seen from the solution of (7.3) plotted in Fig. 86, due to the finite time 
needed  for  the  heat  to  propagate  between  particles,  the  flame  speed 
remains finite even if the combustion time tends to zero. The comple-
mentary equation for the case of a finite combustion time is: 

θi =

1
μ

=

1
χ

1
4π3

2

∑∞

∑∞

∑∞

∫

(

(

)

(

) i

η t(cid:0) 3/2exp

(cid:0)

i=1

j=(cid:0) ∞

k=(cid:0) ∞

i
η(cid:0) χ

Θ

i
η(cid:0) χ

i2 + j2 + k2
4t

)

dt,

(7.4)  

where Θ is the Heaviside step function and χ = tcαu
l2  is a new parameter, 
defined as the ratio of the particle combustion time, tc, and the char-
acteristic time of heat diffusion between particles, l2 /αu. The parameter 
χ defines the importance of discrete effects in the system. Thus, as shown 
in Fig. 86, at χ≫1 and large fuel concentrations (small dimensionless 
ignition temperature) the flame speed defined by equation  (7.4) prac-
tically  coincides  with  the  speed  defined  by  equation   (3.4)  in  the 
continuous flame approximation. Note that dimensionless flame speed κ 
in (3.4) is connected to the dimensionless speed η  (not to be confused 
with the heat loss coefficient presented in Section 3.4) in (7.4) by the 
expression: κ2 = η2χ. 

As also can be seen from Fig. 86, the flame propagation speed that 
accounts  for  the  discrete  nature  of  the  heat  sources  is  systematically 
below the flame speed predicted by the homogeneous flame theory. This 
difference might reach quite large values at low fuel concentrations (1 

/μ ≈ 1)  for  discreteness  parameter  values  below  unity  (χ < 1).  The 
lower value of the flame speed in the discrete flame theory has a simple 
explanation.  Unlike  continuous  flame  theory,  the  discrete  flame 
formulation accounts for the heat “locked” within temperature gradients 
around  reacting  particles  that  does  not  contribute  to  the  flame  front 
propagation. 

The same “locked” heat is responsible for the appearance of a flame 
propagation limit that has no analog in the continuous flame theory, and 
which  was  initially  overlooked  in  [123,213].  Detailed  numerical  cal-
culations  performed  later  in  [211],  using  the  model  of  regularly 
distributed particles, reveal  that the solution presented in Fig. 86  be-
comes non-physical below some threshold value of the fuel concentra-
tion  and  low  values  of  the  discreteness  parameter  χ.  The  unphysical 
behavior is manifested by the requirement illustrated in Fig. 87 stipu-
lating that, in order to satisfy equation  (7.4), below some threshold fuel 
concentration,  particles  must  skip  ignition  at  point  1  (Fig.  87)  at  the 
rising  branch  of  the  non-monotonic  temperature  profile  and  ignite 
instead  at  point  2,  when  the  temperature  again  reaches  the  ignition 
temperature on the declining (cooling) branch. The unphysical region is 
presented in Fig. 88 by the grey shaded area in the η (cid:0) χ parameter space 
[214]. On the border of the shaded area, the flame becomes unstable 
through a Feigenbaum bifurcation [215], as was first discovered by Beck 
and Vol’pert [216,217] who considered a similar model for a mixture of 
reacting powders. 

The fuel concentration at which the flame stability limit is reached 
corresponds to θL
i ≈ 0.534  for χ→0. This  means that, for  fast burning 
particles, the flame propagation limit is almost twice as high as the so- 
called thermodynamic flame propagation limit, i.e., fuel concentration 
at  which  the  flame  temperature  is  equal  to  the  particle  ignition  tem-
perature (θL
i = 1, μ = 1). For χ≫1, the flame propagation speed, as can 
be  seen  in  Fig.  88,  practically  coincides  with  the  speed  derived  from 
expression  (3.4)  in  continuous  flame  theory.  For  large  values  of  the 
discreteness  parameter,  the  flame  propagation  limit  approaches  the 
thermodynamic limit (μ = 1) [211]. 

7.2. Discrete flames in suspensions with random distributions of particles 
in space 

A  real  suspension  of  particles  in  space  will  have  a  random  or  un-
controlled  spacing  and,  therefore,  any  flame  model  that  considers 
positioning of particles in space must take into account the statistical 
fluctuations in the inter-particle distance. So far, however, no analytical 
approach  to  this  problem  has  been  developed  and  the  behavior  of 
discrete flames in various random systems has been investigated only 
numerically [205,208,211,218,219]. 

Tang et al. [211,220] modeled flames in 2-D and 3-D random sus-
pensions  using  the  method  of  superposition  of  Green’s  functions 

Fig. 86. Flame speed, η, as a function of the dimensionless ignition temperature 
or reversed fuel concentration at different values of the discreteness parameter 
χ. Reprinted from [123] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig.  87. Illustration  of  the  unphysical  part  of  the  solution  to  equation   (7.4) 
that  requires  particle  ignition  on  the  declining  branch  of  the  tempera-
ture profile. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099442S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

shows  approximate  boundaries  of  regions  with  different  temporal 
behavior of the flame roughness. 

Recently,  Lam,  Mi,  and  Higgins  [223]  have  also  investigated  the 
implications of the discrete nature of heat sources on flame propagation 
limits in random particle suspensions with cylindrical and rectangular 
slab geometries confined by solid walls or by an inert cold gas. They 
found that, at low values of discreteness parameter χ, the flame propa-
gation and quenching became inherently statistical. Thus, the probabi-
listic flame quenching limit is defined as the system size at which there is 
a 50% probability of flame quenching from an ensemble averaging of 
results generated by multiple parallel simulations. While the scaling of 
the characteristic flame quenching dimensions in the continuum regime, 
for a cylinder with diameter d and a slab with width h, is practically 
independent of the system parameters and is close to 2, it was found that 
the scaling is a strong function of both the discreteness parameter and 
ignition temperature in the transitional region from the continuous to 
discrete flame-propagation regimes (see Fig. 92). In the purely discrete 
flame-propagation regime, the scaling ratio between cylindrical and slab 
geometries was  found to be about 3.  The authors propose to  use this 
breakdown  in  geometric  scaling  rules  as  a  diagnostic  tool  for  the 
experimental detection of the discrete flame propagation regime. 

Fig. 88. Dependence of the front speed η on the value of discreteness parameter 
χ  in a system with discrete heat sources and different ignition temperatures θi. 
The  solid  line  is  a  continuum  solution  in  which  the  sources  have  been  ho-
mogenized with the inert media. The dashed line is the solution for regularly 
spaced sources. Points represent the average front speed measured from mul-
tiple simulations with randomly distributed sources. The shaded area represents 
the region where flame propagation in regular systems is impossible. Reprinted 
from [214] with permission of IOP Publishing. 

discussed  in  the  previous  subsection.  While  this  approach  avoids  the 
necessity of solving the partial differential equation of heat diffusion, the 
analysis remains computationally intensive. Thus, simulations in [211, 
220] were performed using relatively small domains comprised of about 
8100 particles for 2-D simulations and from 8000 to 15,625 particles for 
3-D simulations. Later, Lam et al. [221] has expanded the 2-D compu-
tational  domain  to  about  40,000  particles  [221].  Snapshots  of  the 
discrete flame temperature field taken at different moments as the flame 
propagates through the 2-D computational domain are shown in Fig. 89. 
These  snapshots  reveal  a  highly  non-uniform  thermal  structure  con-
sisting  of  a  few  high-temperature  hot  spots,  formed  by  clusters 
comprised of several burning/burned particles. The non-uniform tem-
perature field persists behind the flame, and is seen to be still equili-
brating  even  after  the  flame  reaches  the  end  of  the  computational 
domain. 

As  shown in  Fig. 88, in  the random  system, flames  can propagate 
inside the η (cid:0) χ  region previously forbidden for the propagation in the 
regular system. Such behavior can be classified as a form of percolation, 
since flame propagation only becomes possible through exploitation of 
the  random  fluctuations  in  inter-particle  distance  [220].  At χ≪1,  the 
flame  also  becomes  highly  statistical  in  nature,  demonstrating  large 
speed  fluctuations  during  different  numerical  realizations.  The  scat-
tering  of  the  flame  arrival  times  also  shows  a  clear  tendency  of 
increasing along the domain length, see Fig. 90 [220]. 

This trend is closely related to the behavior of the flame roughness 
investigated in detail numerically in the work of Lam, Mi, and Higgins 
[221]. They found that the roughness of the flame front, for discreteness 
parameter  values  less  than  unity  and  low  ignition  temperatures,  in-
creases  with  time as  a  power law with  an exponent of β  = 1  /3 and, 
therefore,  belongs  to  the  so-called  Kardar-Parisi-Zhang  (KPZ)  univer-
sality  class  that  has  been  found  to  describe  frontal  roughening  in 
different  physical  phenomena  [222].  The  exponent  β,  however,  de-
creases to zero with an increase in parameters χ  and θi, and the front 
becomes smooth as the flame transitions from the discrete to continuous 
flame propagation modes. The map in θi (cid:0) χ parameter space in Fig. 91 

The present discussion regarding the theoretical analysis of discrete 
flame systems would be incomplete if we do not mention the ongoing 
debate in the literature regarding the existence of percolation effects in 
heterogeneous discrete flames [224]. Models that describe flame prop-
agation  through  direct  interaction  between  a  fixed  number  of  neigh-
boring cells, particles, or droplets [225,226] give positive answer to this 
question  as  they  reduce  the  problem  to  the  widely  studied 
site-percolation  problem  [227].  The  existence  of  a  percolation 
threshold, defined as the critical value of a parameter above which the 
flame can spread through infinite 2-D or 3-D domains, is, however, not 
so obvious for models where particles interact through the scalar field 
governed by diffusion in a continuous media. In such systems, ignition of 
each  particle  is  formally  influenced  by  all particles  that have  reacted 
before  the  moment  of  ignition,  albeit  with  weights  defined  by  the 
Green’s  function  and  the  distance/time  between  the  ignition  of  the 
present particle and those that have ignited before. Due to the random 
nature  of  the  particle  distribution,  the  number  of  particles  “substan-
tially” influencing each ignition event, by contributing say 90% of the 
needed thermal energy, also fluctuates. These effects make attempts to 
map 
that  consider  a 
pre-determined  number  of  interaction  sites  problematic.  While  theo-
retical efforts to address this problem seem to be underway [228,229], 
estimation of the percolation threshold can also be attempted numeri-
cally by looking for asymptotics in the flame behavior while systemat-
ically  expanding  the  domain  size.  This  procedure  would  probably 
require enlarging the system by at least an order of magnitude, even-
tually  calculating  flames  through  domains  comprised  of  millions  of 
particles. While this problem is numerically demanding, it is well within 
the realm of modern supercomputers. 

to  percolation  problems 

the  problem 

7.3. Experimental evidence of the discrete flame propagation regime 

For  the  majority  of  heterogeneous  systems,  such  as  powder  com-
pacts, propellants etc., the experimental detection of the discrete flame 
propagation regime, or identification of the degree to which the discrete 
structure influences flame propagation in the mixed flame propagation 
mode,  is  often  difficult  [203,212].  Despite  distinct  physical  features, 
both  homogeneous  and  discrete  flame  models  nevertheless  predict 
qualitatively  similar  (though  often  for  different  physical  reasons)  de-
pendences  of  the  flame  burning  velocity  on  basic  parameters  such  as 
particle size, composition, preheating etc[212]. Relying for the detec-
tion solely on the appearance of the flame microstructure (roughness) is 
also subjective and, for small grain sizes, the scale of the flame rough-
ness is often too small for detection and analysis [212]. 

As was shown in the paragraphs above, one of the most distinctive 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099443S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 89. Sequence of still-frames of a flame propagating through randomly distributed particles for θi = 0.10 and χ = 0 (2-D simulation). Reprinted from [211] with 
permission of Taylor & Francis. 

properties  of  the  flame  in the  discrete mode  is its  insensitivity  to the 
particle  combustion time. Unlike in  other heterogeneous systems, the 
particle combustion time in fuel-lean suspensions can be relatively easily 
regulated, while keeping all other parameters of the suspension practi-
cally  intact,  through  changing  the  oxygen  concentration  in  the  gas. 
Thus,  the  independence  of  the  flame  propagation  speed  on  oxygen 
concentration provides a clear indication of the discrete flame propa-
gation mode. 

In Chapter 4 (Fig. 41), we have already presented experimental re-
sults on flame propagation speeds in lean aluminum and iron suspen-
sions at different oxygen concentrations that cannot be explained in the 
frame  of  continuous-flame  theory.  Flames  propagating  through  lean 
aluminum  dust  clouds  in  balloons  demonstrate  practically  the  same 
speed within the oxygen concentration range from 15 to 30%, and sta-
bilized counterflow iron flames have the same burning velocity for ox-
ygen  concentrations  of  30%  and  40%.  Expanding  the  experimental 
range to higher oxygen concentration is prevented by the onset of the 
pulsating flame propagation regime for aluminum flames (see Chapter 
6), as well as by the flame instability and frequent flashbacks in iron 
counterflow  flames.  The  independence  of  the  flame  speed  on  oxygen 
concentration, within the same 15–30% range of oxygen concentration, 
was recently confirmed by Wright et al. [188] for flames propagating 
through  fuel-lean  aluminum  suspensions  in  tubes  (see  Fig.  93).  Here, 
again, expanding the experimental range to higher oxygen concentra-
tions  is  prevented  by  acoustic  flame  instabilities  that  begin  almost 
immediately  after  flame  initiation  for  oxygen  concentrations  above 
35–40%. 

Fig. 90. Scattering of the discrete flame arrival times during different numer-
ical realizations within the same set of problem parameters (χ  = 0, θi  = 0.3, 90 
×90  2-D  computational  domain).  Reprinted  from  [220]  with  permission  of 
IOP Publishing. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099444S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 91. A map of the flame roughening behavior in θi (cid:0) χ  parameter space. 
Each color-shaded region represents a category of front roughening behavior; 
each  symbol  represents  an  ensemble  of  simulations  with  a  specific  set  of  pa-
rameters. Reprinted from [221] with permission of IOP Publishing. 

Fig.  93. Normalized  aluminum  flame  speeds  with  comparison  to  continuous 
and  discrete  source  term  models.  Reprinted  from  [188]  with  permission  of 
Taylor & Francis. 

Fig. 92. Scaling ratio between critical diameter and critical thickness at 50% 
probability  of  propagation  plotted  as  a  function  of  discreteness  parameter  χ. 
The horizontal gray band indicates the range of values of scaling ratio obtained 
from  the  continuum  model.  Reprinted  from  [223]  with  permission  of  Taylor 
& Francis. 

Goroshin et al. [214] have attempted to detect the flame propagation 
regime  for  flames  in  suspensions  of  iron  in  oxygen-xenon  and 
oxygen-helium mixtures by probing the sensitivity of the flame speed to 
the  change  in  oxygen  concentration.  They  estimated  a  discreteness 
parameter for flames in helium mixtures at about χ = 3.2 while, in the 
low-heat-diffusivity  mixtures  of  oxygen  with  xenon,  the  discreteness 
parameter was estimated to be almost an order of magnitude lower at χ 
= 0.4. It was, therefore, expected that doubling the oxygen concentra-
tion in the helium mixture, where the flame propagates in the contin-
uous regime, would increase the flame speed by about 1.4 times (the 
square  root  of  the  theoretically  estimated  combustion  time  ratio) 
whereas, for flames propagating in the discrete mode in xenon mixtures, 

Fig. 94. Ratio of flame speeds between two different O2  concentrations in He 
and  Xe  mixtures.  The  inset  shows  experimental  measurements  of  the  flame 
speed in iron suspensions in 21% and 40% O2  in He and Xe. Reprinted from 
[214] with permission of IOP Publishing. 

the  flame-speed  ratio  should  be  about  unity.  The  experiments  were 
performed at reduced gravity aboard parabolic flight aircraft using setup 
depicted  in  Fig.  15  and  16.  The  results  obtained  with  particles  of 
different sizes are shown in Fig. 94. 

While the ratio of flame speeds with 40% and 21% O2  was found to 
be  relatively  close  to  one  in  xenon  mixtures,  pointing  to  the  discrete 
flame propagation regime, the large scatter in the experimental data has 
prevented  definite  conclusions  [214].  The  large  scatter  in  the 
flame-speed ratio was found to be caused by frequent g-jitters exceeding 
(cid:0) 2g  in  parabolic  flights  and  disproportionally  affecting  the 
5 × 10

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099445S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 95. Schematics of the PERWAVES experiment: flight module with an image of the flame in the tube, the positioning in the flight payload, and the rocket flight 
trajectory. Reprinted from [74] with permission of Elsevier. 

low-speed flames in xenon mixtures [75]. 

To eliminate any effects of the residual gravity, a similar experiment 
named  PERWAVES  was  performed  in  a  high-quality  microgravity 

(cid:0) 5g  aboard  the  European  Space 
environment  at  gravity  levels  of  10
Agency sounding rocket MAXUS-9 in 2017. The apparatus and the flight 
parameters are illustrated in Fig. 95 [74,75]. 

From 41 tests performed (with 25 successful propagation events), 16 
runs  were  used  for  flame  speed  measurements.  As  can  be  seen  from 
Fig. 96a, in accordance with the predictions of the discrete flame theory 

Fig. 96. Results of the PERWAVES experiment on MAXUS-9: a. experimental 
flame propagation speeds in suspensions of iron particles in O2/Xe gas mixtures 
at 20% and 40% oxygen content with respect to iron concentration; b. burning 
velocities predicted by the continuous and discrete flame models. Adapted from 
[74] with permission of Elsevier. 

Fig. 97. Images of the flame front in iron suspensions in 40% O2-60% Xe gas 
mixtures recorded by high-speed camera at (a) close to stoichiometric and (b) 
low iron concentration. Adapted from [75] with permission of Elsevier. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099446S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

(Fig. 96b), flame speeds in mixtures with 20% and 40% oxygen content 
were found to be practically identical, despite the approximately 3 times 
different particle combustion times measured experimentally (8.1 ms vs. 
2.7 ms) [74]. 

Images of the flame fronts recorded by a high-speed camera with the 
same apparatus and gas/particle mixtures in follow-up parabolic flight 
experiments show (see Fig. 97) a striking difference between the flame 
structure at high and low iron concentrations. Whereas, at concentra-
tions  close  to  and  above  stoichiometry,  the  flame  has  well-defined 
borders and the typical parabolic shape, its shape becomes rough and 
irregular in fuel-lean mixtures, especially at concentrations close to the 
lean  flame  propagation  limit.  This  flame  appearance  closely  mimics 
theoretical predictions of the discrete flame theory [211,221] demon-
strating stochastic behavior typical of percolating systems. 

8. The role of radiation heat transfer in dust flames 

No phenomenon is a real phenomenon until it is an observed phenomenon. 
John Archibald Wheeler 

Readers may be wondering why radiation heat transfer, which for a 
long time has been considered an important, if not the major, mecha-
nism driving flame propagation in solid fuel suspensions, is discussed 
only  in  the  last  chapter  of  this  review.  The  above  quote  from  John 
Wheeler indicates the reason. While multiple theoretical models have 
been proposed that predict the existence of radiation-driven flames or 
flames that are substantially influenced by radiative heat transfer, e.g., 
[115,230,231], there are practically no verified laboratory or field ex-
periments  that  confirm  these  predictions.  This  disconnect  between 
experiment  and  theory  has  never  been  adequately  addressed  and 
explained in the literature. Several possible reasons for this discrepancy 
are  indicated in  this review. The proposed arguments and  qualitative 
explanations, however, are by no means a substitute for detailed theo-
retical analysis. As will be explained later, to be experimentally verifi-
able, flame models considering radiation heat transfer need to depart 
from  an  idealistic  one-dimensional  flame  approximation  that  has  no 
realistic experimental analog. These models will need to consider the 
geometrical and flow characteristics of specific experiments, as well as 
the optical properties of a particular fuel and its combustion products. 
First,  let  us  discuss  some  typical  models  of  radiation-driven  and 
radiation-assisted  flames  that  have  been  proposed  by  several  genera-
tions of researchers over a span of almost hundred years. 

8.1. Models of radiation-driven, and radiation-assisted flames in solid 
suspensions 

Atomic  and  molecular  gases  are  largely transparent  to visible  and 
infra-red electromagnetic radiation, since they emit and absorb radia-
tion within narrow atomic lines and molecular bands that cover only a 
small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Thus, the role of radia-
tion heat transfer in gaseous flames is limited primarily to heat loss from 
sooty  flames  [232].  In  contrast,  suspensions  of  solid  particles  have 
continuum  emissivity  and  opacity  and,  thus,  can  efficiently  emit  and 
absorb thermal radiation. Nusselt in 1924 [233] was probably the first to 
point out that flames in solid fuel suspensions can be primarily driven by 
radiation heat transfer. His conclusion, as well as several authors after 
him [63,234], was based on the comparison of propagation speeds of 
flames  driven  by  radiation  or  molecular  conduction  obtained  using 
simple energy balance estimates. The speed of the flame with radiation 
heat transfer was roughly estimated from the energy balance equation, 
postulating  that  the  absorbed  radiation  heat  flux  needs  to  heat  the 
mixture flow from the initial temperature T0  to particle ignition tem-
perature Ti  [63,233]: 

ub =

ϵσT 4
R
cρ(Ti (cid:0) T0)

(8.1)  

Here ϵ is the emissivity coefficient of the combustion zone, σ is Stefan- 
Boltzmann  constant,  TR  is  the  effective  temperature  of  the  radiation 
emitters in the combustion zone, and cρ is the total specific heat capacity 
of  the  particles  and  gas  in  suspension.  Estimation  of  the  flame  speed 
made with expression (8.1) using some “typical” combustion parameters 
such as TR = 2500 K, ϵ = 0.5, Ti = 1000 K and cρ = 1000 J/K ⋅ m3 yield 
predicted  burning  velocities  around  1.5  m/s.  At  the  same  time,  esti-
mation of the burning velocity using the Mallard’s and Le Chˆatelier’s 
equation  (3.2)  produces  an  order-of-magnitude  smaller  value  around 
0.15 m/s for a “typical”  1-ms particle combustion time and the same 
2500-K  flame  temperature.  The  large  speed  disparity,  according  to 
Nusselt  and  others,  suggests  that  molecular  heat  transfer  is  either 
negligible or plays only a secondary role in dust flames. 

Essenhigh  [234]  has  further  developed  the  radiation-driven  flame 
model, pointing out that Nusselt’s calculations underestimate the flame 
speed of a radiation-driven flame. His model shows that, in fast flames, 
radiation heated particles may not have time to equilibrate with the gas 
and, therefore, will be heated to the ignition temperature within shorter 
time and produce even higher flame speeds. Todes, Gol’tsiker et al. in a 
series of  theoretical works  [63,64] have  investigated radiation-driven 
flames  in  solid  suspensions  with  gaseous  combustion  products.  They 
have pointed out that, in such flames, the only radiation emitters are 
particles  burning  in  the  combustion  front.  Radiation-driven  flames  in 
such  systems  need  to  be  fast,  producing  wide  combustion  zones  to 
generate a substantial radiation flux. In their analytical model, the flame 
speed increases with particle size and decreases with an increase of the 
fuel concentration. The flame velocity values reach tens of meters per 
second and the combustion zone is several meters thick, which means 
that such radiation-driven flames are highly transient and can only be 
observed in large-scale dust clouds [64]. Ozerova and Stepanov [118] 
have  developed  a  numerical  model  for  flames  in  carbon-particle  sus-
pensions  that  considers  both  conductive  and  radiation  heat  transfer. 
They found that a transition from a low-speed flame, primarily driven by 
molecular heat diffusivity, to a high-speed flame, primarily driven by 
radiation, occurs in a narrow range of particle sizes (see Fig. 98). 

Using a  nonstationary problem formulation, Krishenik  et al. [235] 
have  also  found  that  transition  from  the  low-speed  conductive  flame 
regime  to  the  much  faster  radiation-driven  flame  regime  occurs,  as 
shown in Fig. 99, in an explosion-like manner over a short time interval 
after ignition. Similarly to previous calculations [118], this model pre-
dicts fast flame acceleration and transition to a radiation-driven flame 
only for particles of a sufficiently large size. For smaller particles, in-
fluence of radiation remains negligible and the flame is driven by mo-
lecular heat diffusion. 

For  suspensions  with  condensed  combustion  products,  such  as 
metals, the relationship between conductive and radiation heat transfer 

Fig.  98. Dependence  of  the  burning  velocity,  v0,  and  flame  thickness  (l)  on 
particles size, δ0, in carbon suspensions. Dotted line indicates the flame speed of 
the  flame  with  molecular  heat  conductivity  only.  Reprinted  from  [118]  with 
permission of Springer Nature. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099447S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

ability to flow energy against temperature gradients. 

8.2. Why are there no experimental observations of radiation-driven dust 
flames? 

The authors of the present review are unaware of any experiments 
that directly validate any of the radiation flame models discussed above 
or,  more  generally,  that  provide  any  evidence  for  the  existence  of 
radiation-driven  dust  flames.  The  often  cited  [239]  tell-tale  signs  of 
radiation-driven flames, such as  high flame speeds  and multiple reig-
nition  points,  derived  from  unique  large-scale  accidental  events  are 
hardly  convincing,  since  they  do  not  permit  an  independent  experi-
mental verification of the proposed phenomena. The major reason why 
these theoretically predicted radiation flames have not been reproduced 
in the laboratory, or in any controlled field experiments, stems, in our 
opinion,  from  the  impossibility  to  experimentally  study  quiescen-
t/laminar dust suspensions with arbitrarily large particle sizes and di-
mensions,  as  are  assumed  a  priori  in  the  idealistic  1-D  models.  Using 
several concrete examples, we illustrate below how flow dynamics and 
the specific nature of radiation heat transfer in a finite media may affect 
the role of radiation in real experimental situations. 

Since  early  research  on  dust  combustion,  many  experiments  were 
performed with particle suspensions sedimenting in tubes [43,68,240, 
241]. The observed high flame speeds, sometimes reaching meters per 
second  with  large  particle  sizes,  have  often  been  attributed  to 
radiation-driven flames. Thus, Todes et al. [63] concluded that flames 
propagating in 150-200-µm polystyrene suspensions in 10 × 10 × 300 
cm vertical channels are radiation-driven due to observed flame speeds 
exceeding 1 m/s (they later reversed this conclusion in [64]). Similarly, 
Shevchuk  et  al.  [68]  attributed  an  increase  of  the  flame  speed  with 
particle size, in suspensions of magnesium particles in tubes, to radiation 
heating. As was already mentioned in Chapter 2, the observed dynamics 
of  the  dust  flame  in  tubes  is  the  result  of  the  combined  effects  of 
convective recirculation cells induced by the sedimenting dust flow [73] 
and natural convection. The recirculation cells are responsible for the 
relatively  high  flame  propagation  speeds  and  result  in  the  flame 
appearing as a long and sometimes disconnected flame brush (see Fig. 7 
and Fig. 14). The internal convection induced by gravity is not limited to 
flames in tubes and is intrinsic to all dense dust clouds, even those with 
smaller particle sizes [73]. 

The tube geometry is also not favorable to radiation heat transfer. 
Most of the radiation emitted by the flame is not absorbed by the cold 
suspension but is lost to the environment, if the tube diameter is less 
than the radiation absorption length. Let us illustrate this using a con-
crete example of a flame propagating in a tube through a stoichiometric 
suspension  (0.31  kg/m3)  of  10-micron  aluminum  particles  in  air. 
Neglecting  diffraction,  the  radiation  attenuation  length,  or  free-path 
length of the photons in dusty media, can be roughly estimated as L ≈ 1/
NS0  where N is the number of particles per unit volume and S0  is the 
cross-section of the spherical particles. For 10-micron particle size and a 
stoichiometric aluminum-air mixture, this value is close to L ≈ 60 mm 
and can be used to estimate the attenuation of the collimated laser light 
used  to  monitor  dust  concentrations.  Small  aluminum  particles  are, 
however, poor absorbers of the infra-red light that is characteristic of 
thermal  flame  radiation  (λ = 1 (cid:0) 5  µm),  since  they  have  absorption 
cross-sections  on  the  order  of  0.02-0.04  at  one-micron  wavelength 
[242].  This  means  that  photons  have  only  a  2–4%  probability  to  be 
absorbed by the particle within a single collision and will be eventually 
absorbed  by  the  media  only  after  multiple  scattering  events.  The  ab-
sorption length strongly depends on the angle distribution of the scat-
tered light [243] but with low absorption cross-section of aluminum can 
be roughly estimated to be ten times longer than the free-path length of 
photons, i.e., Lab ≈ 500 mm in a stoichiometric aluminum-air suspen-
sion  of  10  micron  particles.  At  the  same  time,  light  will  attenuate  at 
much shorter distances from the flame front due to geometry, as follows 
by the view factor (configuration factor) presented in Fig. 101, where 

Fig.  99. Rapid  increase  of  the  flame  speed  in  suspension  with  time  under 
transition from predominantly conductive to radiative flame propagation mode 
in  carbon  suspension  with  coarse  particles.  Reprinted  from  [235]  with 
permission of Elsevier. 

is  different from the  flame  with  gaseous  products  [236]. At  fuel  con-
centrations  close  to  stoichiometry,  the  radiation  temperatures  of 
condensed  products  and  particles  burning in the  diffusion regime  are 
similar. As the optical thickness of the product zone is practically infinite 
and  does  not  depend  on the  particle  size, the  radiation  flux from the 
product zone dwarfs radiation emitted by the combustion zone and can 
be a substantial part of the total heat flux, even for small particle sizes. 
The independence of the radiation flux from the product zone on particle 
size leads to a gradual transition from a predominantly conductive to 
predominantly radiation flame with increase of particle size [68,236]. 
The problem of radiation heat transfer in a suspension with solid com-
bustion products is similar to the problem of the gaseous flame seeded by 
inert solid particles investigated in detail by Joulin et al. [195,237]. The 
thermal structure of such a flame is illustrated in Fig. 100 [237]. 

As was underlined by Joulin [237], the most remarkable feature of 
such a flame is, as shown in Fig. 100, the possibility of super-adiabatic 
flame  temperatures  in  the  combustion  zone.  Normally,  this  energy 
recuperation effect can only be achieved through recirculation of heat 
from products to reactants, or through upstream heat transfer with an 
inert solid media, in excess-enthalpy burners [238]. In particle suspen-
sions,  radiation  provides  a  mechanism  for  upstream  energy  transfer, 
from products to reactants, without additional hardware because of its 

Fig.  100. Schematics  of  the  gas  and  particles  temperature  profiles  in  flame 
propagating  through  gas  mixture  seeded  with  inert  particles.  Reprinted  from 
[237] with permission of Taylor & Francis. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099448S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

decays as 1/r2  over distance, thus reducing the effect of the radiation 
heating even farther. The above factors drastically diminish the role of 
the radiation heat transfer in a spherical flame in comparison to theo-
retical models that customary assume the flat-flame geometry. 

As was shown with the above examples, due to the large character-
istic scale of radiation heat transfer, the role it plays in a given dust flame 
is  a  strong  function  of  the  system  geometry,  flow  pattern,  and  time. 
These  dependencies  are  contrary  to  the  definition  of  the  burning  ve-
locity, which is supposed to be a property of the combustible mixture 
and should be independent of the flow and boundary conditions. Thus, 
the  convergence  of  aluminum  flame  burning  velocities  derived  from 
different laboratory  experiments (see  Section  4.2) can be taken  as an 
indirect  proof  that  radiation  heat  transfer  plays  a  negligible  role  in 
laboratory-size aluminum flames. 

The  length  of  the  light  absorbance  is  proportional  to  the  particle 
density and, thus, decreases with pressure at stoichiometric conditions. 
Consequently,  the  role  of  radiation  heating  might  increase  in  high- 
pressure  propulsion  devices  burning  metal  suspensions.  However,  as 
was  shown  in  the  work  of  Ivanischeva  and  Stepanov  [246],  the  sub-
stantial working pressures and particle densities characteristic for un-
derwater  propulsion  systems  may  also  preclude  an  efficient  radiation 
heat exchange between combustion products and the fresh mixture. In 
such systems, the relatively cold layers of products at the beginning of 
the combustion zone may effectively block the radiation flux from the 
combustion-product zone. 

Finally, we will describe below results of the experiments performed 
by  Julien  et  al.  [80]  with  the  purpose  to  experimentally  assess  the 
maximum possible radiation heat transfer input into the propagation of 
aluminum dust flames using large-scale dust clouds with sizes consid-
erably larger than the estimated radiation absorption length. 

8.3. Experimental assessment of the role of radiation heat transfer in 
flames propagating in large-scale aluminum dust clouds 

The experimental setup used in field experiments [80] (Section 2.5) 
was able to generate 4-m long and 2-m wide aluminum dust clouds with 
concentrations close to stoichiometry. The schematics of the dispersion 
unit and  pictures of  the cloud  dispersion process and  combustion are 
shown in Figs. 12 and 13. Experiments were performed with Valimet 
spherical aluminum powders H-5 and H-10. Powder H-5 has a similar 
particle size distribution to the Ampal 637 powder (d32 ≈ 7 µm) used for 
the  laboratory  experiments  in  balloons  described  in  Section  2.5  and 
Section 4.3, while H-10 is larger (d32 ≈ 12 µm). The flame propagation 
speeds, as shown in Fig. 103, sharply decrease from about 10–12 m/s to 
about 2 m/s with an increase of the flame initiation delay time from 0 to 
0.4 s. The high-speed filming of the dispersion process indicated that the 
dispersion  turbulence  indeed  rapidly  decays  with  delay  time  and  is 
minimal at about 0.4 s delay after a second-long dust-dispersion event. 
With longer delays, some large-scale vortices start to appear near the 
cloud top due to the intrinsic instability of the cloud caused by particle 
sedimentation [73], preventing the use of longer ignition delay times. In 
these experiments, an assembly of 3 thermocouples, with bead sizes of 
75, 125 and 250 µm  positioned at about 5 mm from each other, was 
installed at a height of about 2 m from the cloud base. The thermocouple 
readings were extrapolated towards “0” thermocouple bead size to find 
the true temperature. This procedure allows for thermocouple inertia to 
be accounted for and is described in detail in the work of Frost et al. 
[247]. 

As can be seen from Fig. 104, the noticeable reading of the extrap-
olated  temperature  trace  starts  at  about  175  ms  ahead  of  the  flame, 
which, at the 2 m/s flame propagation speed (Fig. 103), is equivalent to 
a distance of about 40 cm from the flame front. This value agrees well 
with the previously estimated radiation absorption length of 50 cm for 
10-µm particles. The maximum temperature at the end of the radiation 
preheat  zone,  at  the  inflection  point  in  the  temperature  trace  that 

Fig.  101. View  (configuration  factor)  between  flame  represented  by  the 
diffusely emitting disc and a spherical particle. The plot shows the dependence 
of the view factor on the distance between particle and the flame. 

the flame is represented, for simplicity, by a diffusely emitting disc. As 
can be seen from the expression for the view factor between the disc 
(flame) and a sphere in Fig. 101, at a distance from the flame equal to the 
tube diameter, the particle can “see” less than 30% of the radiation flux 
in comparison to the infinitely large emitter (flame). This means that, in 
tubes with ID in the range 30–100 mm used for laboratory experiments, 
most of the photons emitted by the aluminum flame will be lost to the 
tube wall and surrounding environment before they have a chance to be 
absorbed by the dust suspension. 

Similar  estimates  with  the  same  result  can  be  made  for  other 
laboratory-size  dust  flames  with  characteristic  sizes  on  the  order  of 
several centimeters. The absence of any long-range radiation preheating 
in small-scale laboratory flames has been experimentally confirmed with 
interferometric (see Fig. 22) and PIV measurements in Bunsen [54] and 
counterflow flat aluminum and iron dust flames [57,58]. 

It can appear at first glance that the spherical flame geometry can 
alleviate shortcomings of the tube and is more favorable to the radia-
tion/conduction heating balance. This, however, is not the case, at least 
for the flame sizes below or on the order of the light absorption length. In 
spherical flame, the conductive heat transfer occurs in the gas layer that 
is moving with the same speed as the expanding flame bubble (zone 2 in 
Fig. 102). Thus, a conductive flame propagates with a burning velocity 
ub  relative to outward-moving gas. The speed of the gas pushed by the 
spherical flame, however, decays rapidly with distance as approximately 
1/r2  (if the speed of the expanding flame bubble is well below the speed 
of sound [244,245]). Thus, the flame propagates towards a suspension 
heated by radiation (zone 3 in Fig. 102) with the speed close to ub⋅k, 
where  k = Tad/T0  is  the  gas  expansion  coefficient.  Therefore,  if,  for 
example, the conductive and radiation heat flows produced by the flame 
are equal, the increase in temperature of the suspension heated by ra-
diation will be by k times lower than from conduction, i.e., almost by an 
order of magnitude for a stoichiometric metal suspension. In addition, 
the  radiation  flux  emitted  by  a  spherical  flame  is  also  divergent  and 

Fig. 102. Schematics of the radiation transfer in the spherical flame. 1-flame, 
2-gas layer moving with the flame, 3-radiation absorption zone. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099449S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

for  gas  expansion  in  cylindrical  geometry,  produced  a  slightly  higher 
value  of about 45 cm/s [80]. This remaining  deviation should be ex-
pected  considering  the  approximate  nature  for  the  estimation  of  the 
burning velocity in a large cloud, some possible residual turbulence, etc. 
The results of this experiment clearly demonstrate that, even in the most 
favorable  case  of  a  large-scale  dust  cloud  with  cylindrical  geometry, 
radiation plays a secondary role and only results in a moderate mixture 
preheating  for  the  flame  which  remains  driven  by  molecular  heat 
diffusion.  The  estimation  of  the  aluminum  flame  emissivity  can  be 
performed from a simple energy balance equation using the measured 
flame  speed of  about 2 m/s  and the  observed temperature rise. It in-
dicates an aluminum flame emissivity coefficient of about 0.06-0.1 for 
flame temperatures in the 3000-3500 K range. 

The nature of radiation heat transfer also suggests that its role will 
further diminish in turbulent flames. Indeed, turbulence increases the 
flame speed by intensifying heat transfer by conduction but cannot be 
expected  to  proportionally  increase  the  radiation  flux  emitted  by  the 
flame, thus resulting in a relative decrease in the mixture preheating by 
radiation. 

9. Remarks and outstanding problems 

The  key  feature  of  nonvolatile  fuel  combustion,  which  makes  it 
distinctive from combustion of gases, is the fact that individual particles 
can ignite and burn in the diffusion-limited regime where the particle 
combustion  rate  is  largely  insensitive  to  the  gas  temperature.  This 
important feature led to most of the literature focusing on the combus-
tion  physics  of  a  single  isolated  particle  with  the  premise  that  infor-
mation  gained  from  single-particle  research  is  sufficient  for  practical 
applications.  While  important  for  building  our  understanding  of  the 
heterogeneous  ignition  and  reaction  mechanisms,  the  combustion 
physics  of  an  isolated  particle  cannot  be  directly  transposed  to  com-
bustion  of  the  dense  suspensions  encountered  in  nearly  all  practical 
applications  of  solid  fuels,  from  propellants  to  energetic  materials  to 
carbon-free power-generation systems. Combustion of a dense suspen-
sion in a combustion chamber inevitably results in the formation of a 
laminar  or  turbulent  flame  front.  This  review  has  highlighted  the 
importance  of  understanding  the  combustion  of  nonvolatile  fuel  sus-
pensions  through  flame  theory,  rather  than  limiting  research  to  the 
ignition and combustion of an isolated single particle. While critically 
important  for  advancing  our  understanding  of  solid-fuel  combustion 
systems, there has been a lack of attention in the literature to flames in 
solid suspensions except for the work in a few isolated laboratories. In 
the  following,  we  list  some  selected  questions  and  topics  for  possible 
future research in this interesting and challenging field. 

Advancing combustion experiments of solid fuel suspensions 
While significant progress has been made in the laboratory recreat-
ing the same types of laminar solid-fuel flames as traditionally studied in 
gases (Bunsen flames, counterflow flat flames, spherical laminar flames, 
etc.)  several  experimental  challenges  remain  that  need  technical 
solutions:  

• Dispersion  systems  that  provide  de-agglomerated,  uniform,  and 
stable flows of solid fuel suspensions over long operating times for a 
variety of solid fuels and particle sizes.  

• Online and direct monitoring of the solid fuel concentration.  
• Optical diagnostics for optically thick light scattering media of metal 
flames to measure local gas-phase and solid-phase temperatures and 
average gas temperature over the flame cross-section.  

• Optical  visualization  of  the  flame  kernels  and  flame  fronts  inside 
optically dense particle clouds with the possible use of long-range 
infrared imaging, ballistic imaging, etc.  

• Design and operation of microgravity facilities permitting systematic 
study of laminar flames in suspensions of different solid fuels over 
wide ranges in particle sizes and fuel concentrations. 

Fig. 103. Dependence of the average flame speed in large-scale dust clouds on 
the ignition delay time after dispersion. Reprinted from [80] with permission 
of Elsevier. 

Fig. 104. Time history of thermocouples temperature reading before and just 
after  the  arrival  of  the  flame  front  in  the  large-scale  aluminum  dust  cloud, 
showing  evidence  of  radiation  preheating  in  the  cloud  by  165  ∘C.  Reprinted 
from [80] with permission of Elsevier. 

indicates the start of the conductive heating zone, is about 165 ∘C. The 
flame  burning  velocity  measured  with  a  similar  (but  not  equivalent) 
powder in balloons and with Bunsen dust burner is around 22 cm/s. As 
was mentioned in Section 4.5, the experimental work of Blais et al. [59] 
indicated a dependence of the aluminum flame burning velocity on the 
mixture initial temperature as Su∝T1.1
. Thus, the burning velocity with 
u
radiation preheating is expected to increase from 22 cm/s to about 37 
cm/s from room temperature to 165 ∘C. At the same time, the burning 
velocity extracted from the measured flame speed of 2 m/s, accounting 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099450S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Developing laminar flame models in suspensions of specific fuels 
within the continuous flame approximation 

As  was  reviewed,  the  simple  thermophysical  framework  that  con-
siders both the rate of oxidizer flow to the particle surface by diffusion 
and a single-step surface reaction, qualitatively captures the main pe-
culiarities  of  flames  in  nonvolatile  solid-fuel  suspensions.  This  frame-
work,  however,  has  only  been  studied  with  selected  representative 
parameters  and  has  yet  to  be  accurately  applied  to  predict  the  flame 
structure of actual practical fuels using realistic chemistry and thermo-
dynamics. Moving forward, the key challenges in modeling the reaction 
of solid fuels are:  

• Couple together realistic kinetic rates and thermodynamic data for 
actual solid fuels with accurate description of phase transitions and 
gas-phase transport models.  

• Consider the actual reaction process accompanied by growing oxide 
films, change of the reaction rates with phase transitions, multiple 
heterogeneous and gas-phase chemical reactions, etc.  

• Using  these  flame  models,  predict  laminar  burning  velocities  and 
flame structure for realistic fuels. From this, identify key experiments 
that will allow unambiguous validation of different models against 
each other and experiment.  

• Re-define the notion of the flame stretch for two-phase flames and 
examine its effect on the flame burning rate. Models are needed for 
classical  flame  configurations,  including  spherical,  Bunsen,  coun-
terflow, and stagnation flames. 

Experimental  study  of  the  fundamental  properties  of  solid-fuel 
flames 

This  review has demonstrated  that nearly all flame  configurations 
originally used to study gas-phase flames can be adapted for the study of 
solid-fuel  flames  and  has  made  the  case  that  experiments  must  be 
laminar  and  optically  accessible  to  enable  study  of  the  fundamental 
flame parameters. Unlike gaseous hydrocarbon fuels, that have the same 
physico-chemical  properties  anywhere  in  the  world,  the  particle  size 
distributions,  shapes,  and  purity  in  fuel  powders  purchased  from  na-
tional manufacturers and used in laboratories are unique, which poses a 
considerable  challenge  for  quantitative  comparison  of  experimental 
data  obtained  by  different  researchers.  Identifying  some  easily  acces-
sible powders as research standards is one way to mitigate this problem. 
In parallel, experimental and theoretical research on the influence of the 
powder polydispersity on key flame parameters can help to define par-
ticle size distribution averages (modes) suited to represent particle size 
in different flame phenomena (burning velocity, flame quenching, flame 
instability, etc.). Some other key questions that should be answered in 
future work are:  

• Can flame stretch be accurately accounted for in order to reconcile 
burning velocities obtained with different flame configurations with 
an accuracy comparable to that achieved for flames in gas mixtures?  
• Can the non-monotonic dependance of the flame speed on particle 
size  in  fuel-lean  solid  suspensions,  as  well  as  the  kinetic-diffusive 
flame  oscillating  instability,  predicted  by  theory,  be  observed 
experimentally?  

• What is the effect of preheat for different solid fuels, specifically fuels 
burning kinetically or having flame temperatures below the evapo-
ration/decomposition points of products?  

• What are the fuel-rich flame propagation limits in solid suspensions? 

Studying the fundamental properties of binary and hybrid solid-gas 
fuel flames 

In many propulsion and power generation applications, nonvolatile 
solid fuels are burned together with gaseous or volatile fuels. Powder 
mixtures of fast burning (e.g. aluminum) and slow burning (e.g. boron) 
fuels can be used to enable flame stabilization. The thesis that addition 
of relatively small amounts of easily ignited and rapidly reacting fine 

powdered  fuel  might  disproportionally  increase  burning  velocity  of 
coarse suspension is frequently raised in the literature and needs to be 
investigated  experimentally.  This  review  has  demonstrated  that  the 
efficient combustion of binary fuel mixtures critically depends upon the 
ability  of  the  two  combustion  fronts  to  couple  forming  a  stable  self- 
adjusting  structure.  Simplified  analytical  models  have  been  proposed 
for binary fuel systems that predict a variety of possible flame configu-
rations,  some  of  which  have  been  observed  through  experiments  in 
stabilized and freely propagating, as well as quenching, hybrid flames. 
Further efforts are needed to expand theoretical analysis towards fuel- 
rich  mixtures  where  fuels  compete  for  oxygen,  and  fuels  that  can 
interact with each other chemically. Experiments need to be performed 
with:  

• Binary solid fuel suspensions having the same chemical compositions 
but sufficiently different non-overlapping particle size distributions.  
• Binary  suspensions of  fast and  slow burning solid fuel  particles of 

similar size  

• Hybrid  metal-fuel  mixtures  with  hydrogen  and  CO  to  analyze  the 

relative role of H2O and CO2  oxidizers in metal flames.  

• Hybrid  flames  of  different  geometries  to  study  the  impact  of  the 

flame shape and flame stretch on front coupling. 

Unravelling the rich tapestry of instabilities in flames of nonvola-
tile fuels 

Nonvolatile solid fuels have no molecular diffusivity and, therefore, 
the  Lewis  number  for  fuel-lean  flames  can  be  much  larger  than  one 
(effectively infinite). Increasing the fuel concentration towards stoichi-
ometry brings the Lewis number through unity and increasing it on the 
rich side leads to Lewis numbers less than one due to the increased heat 
capacity of the gas/solid mixture. The fact that the same fuel can exhibit 
such a large range of Le numbers is unique to nonvolatile solid fuels and 
leads to a rich tapestry of flame instabilities, from cellular instability for 
fuel-rich  flames,  to  pulsating  and  spiral  (spin)  thermodiffusive  in-
stabilities for lean flames. For fuels that burn with lifted vapor-phase 
diffusion flames (aluminum, magnesium, etc.) high sensitivity to ther-
moacoustic coupling is observed. Modeling has also predicted new types 
of instabilities caused by the ability of the particles to ignite and quench 
in an oscillatory manner. Theory must be developed to predict the na-
ture  of  thermodiffusive  instabilities  in  solid-fuel  suspensions.  The 
following key questions arise for future study:  

• What is the mechanism of feedback between the acoustic field and 
the  combustion  rate  for  particles  having  lifted  diffusion  micro- 
flames?  What  is  the  mechanism  of  the  increasing  phase  shift,  be-
tween acoustic oscillations and flame burning rate, with increasing 
particle size?  

• Why does the oscillation frequency scale with particle concentration 
but is independent of oxygen concentration? How do discrete effects 
interact with thermodiffusive instabilities?  

• What is the effect of the flame stretch on suppressing these various 
instabilities, and how does the particle size and the flame thickness 
affect the characteristic dimensions of the instabilities?  

• Can  the  theoretically  predicted  particle  ignition-extinction  flame 
instability and the instability caused by the velocity slip between fuel 
particles and the gas be observed experimentally? 

Understanding  how  the  discrete  point-like  nature  of  the  heat 
sources affects flame propagation 

Theoretical analyses that consider the discrete point-like nature of 
the heat sources in flames in nonvolatile fuel suspensions predict the so- 
called discrete flame-propagation regime for a certain range of suspen-
sion  parameters.  Discrete  flames  have  no  direct  analog  in  “normal” 
homogeneous  flames  and  are  predicted  to  have  unusual  properties. 
While there have been a host of qualitative observations that cannot be 
explained using traditional flame theory, only the recent microgravity 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099451S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

experiment, performed on-board a sounding rocket, has provided direct 
evidence for this new type of flame. Many questions remain in this field, 
including the following: 

• What  is  the  so-called  percolation  threshold  (minimal  fuel  concen-
tration for flame propagation) for discrete flame, in infinite systems?  
• Can  a  discrete  flame  (reaction-diffusion  wave)  propagate  through 
“wormhole”  pathways  connecting  density fluctuations at  fuel  con-
centrations  with  average  flame  temperatures  below  the  ignition 
temperature of an individual particle?  

• How does the discreteness of heat sources influence the flame in fuel- 
rich  suspensions  and  suspensions  near  the  fuel-rich  propagation 
limit?  

• What  is  the  hydrodynamic  (flow)  structure  of  the  discrete  flame 
front? What is the effective flame thickness of a discrete flame?  
• What is the effect of flame discreteness on flame quenching in narrow 

channels? 

These  and  other  questions  on  the  nature  of  discrete  flames  have 
general  scientific  implications  and  are  currently  under  active  investi-
gation by theoretical physicists. Several properties of the discrete flames 
already predicted theoretically, such as changing of the flame roughness 
with time, abnormal geometrical scaling of quenching distances, etc., 
need to be validated experimentally. 

Clarifying the role of radiation heat transfer in solid-fuel flames 
Nowhere in the field of heterogeneous combustion is there as large of 
a disconnect between theory and experiment than in the question of the 
role of radiation heat transfer in dust flames. While for over a hundred 
years some researchers have predicted radiation to play a dominant role 
in such flames, no direct evidence has been presented to support these 
models. The available experimental data rather indicate that radiation 
primarily  acts  as  a  heat-loss  mechanism  for  flames  at  the  laboratory 
scale. Even in large-scale dust clouds with sizes exceeding the radiation 
absorption  length,  the  experimental  evidence  suggests  that  radiation 
plays  a  secondary  role,  providing  a  relatively  modest  mixture 
preheating. 

It seems that the primary reason that the role of radiation in dust 
flames was overestimated comes from the premise that radiation heat 
transfer  can  be  analyzed  using  one-dimensional  flame  models.  One- 
dimensional modelling of this problem is equivalent to assuming that 
the concept of the flame burning velocity, as a physico-chemical con-
stant  of  a  combustible  solid  suspension,  can  be  expanded  to  include 
radiation.  The  large  scale  of  radiation  heat  transfer  makes  this 
assumption impractical. 

Future theoretical research should abandon attempts at treating this 
problem  through  one-dimensional  modelling  and  recognize  that  all 
practical  flames have  finite  dimensions  and  boundary  conditions that 
the radiation problem cannot be decoupled from. It is also imperative to 
apply adequate radiation heat transfer models in emitting and scattering 
media, using real optical properties of radiation emitters and absorbers 
in flames that can have, as was shown using the example of sub-micron 
metal oxides, low emission cross-sections. 

One can also expect that the role of radiation will further diminish in 
turbulent flames. Indeed, though turbulence, especially small scale, in-
creases flame propagation speed by intensifying heat transfer from the 
flame,  it  may  not  increase,  at  least  proportionally,  the  radiation  flux 
emitted by the flame. As a result, preheating of the mixture by radiation 
will decrease inversely proportional to the increase of the flame speed by 
turbulence. 

10. Conclusions 

We have repeatedly underlined in this review that practically every 
major peculiarity distinguishing flames in nonvolatile fuel suspensions 
from gaseous flames can be traced back to the key feature of the het-
erogeneous flame: its “flame-inside-the-flame” structure resulting from 

ignition of individual particles. Thus, flames in suspensions with parti-
cles reacting kinetically without ignition are similar to a usual gas flame. 
Similarity,  nevertheless,  does  not  negate  some  important  differences. 
The  overheating  above  the  gas  temperature  for  particles  reacting 
kinetically is not negligible and can approach a hundred degrees. Unlike 
in gas flames, fuel concentration and temperature profiles in nonvolatile 
suspensions are also never similar as particles do not diffuse. Insignifi-
cant  volume  of  the  solid  fuel  and  phase  transitions  in  the  fuel  and 
products  can  also  distort  the  flame  thermal  structure  and  result  in  a 
different dependence of the flame temperature on fuel-oxygen equiva-
lence ratio in comparison to gas flames. 

Several  “secondary”  effects  that  were  not  discussed  in  the  current 
review, such as possible velocity slip between particles and gas in the 
flame preheat zone due to thermophoretic forces, dynamic agglomera-
tion of particles and products observed in some flames, particle move-
ment  induced  by  unsymmetrical  combustion  and  fragmentation,  may 
become important factors for some fuels and experimental situations. It 
was shown that the particle density fluctuations at the scale of the inter- 
particle  distance  make  flame  propagation  statistical  in  nature  in  the 
discrete flame propagation regime. Besides small-scale fluctuations, dust 
clouds  often  exhibit  large-scale  density  fluctuations  resulting  from  a 
violent turbulent dispersion process even after turbulence decays. Un-
like  small-scale fluctuations affecting only  discrete flames, large-scale 
density  variations  will  distort  both  discrete  and  quasi-continuous 
flames and need to be considered, especially for flames propagating in 
large-scale dust clouds. 

Finally, practical combustion systems will employ elevated pressures 
and  turbulent  flows.  Future  efforts  need  to  focus  on  reconciling  the 
understanding  gained  in  laminar  flame  experiments  with  the  physics 
observed for these practical systems tackling a difficult problem of two- 
phase reactive flow turbulence. This will require coordinated numerical 
modelling  and  simulation  efforts  with  advanced  experimental  tech-
niques,  employing  more-sophisticated  and  complex  diagnostics  than 
those already developed by the combustion community for the study of 
hydrocarbon flames. 

The field of heterogeneous combustion has important practical ap-
plications because of the high energy density of these solid fuels, making 
them interesting for propulsion and power generation applications. The 
fact that most nonvolatile solid fuels are metals, which contain no car-
bon, means that they can also play an important role in a future carbon- 
free energy system in order to transition society away from fossil fuels 
and  address  climate  change  and  provide  sustainable  energy  into  the 
future. The important practical applications of this science, coupled with 
the many open interesting research questions identified in this review, 
prompt us to invite junior and senior combustion researchers to join this 
research and technology-development effort. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgment 

The  authors  acknowledge  the  long-term  support  of  metal-flame 
research at McGill University by the Canadian Space Agency, the Eu-
ropean  Space  Agency,  the  Natural  Sciences  &  Engineering  Research 
Council of Canada and the Fonds de recherche du Qu´ebec — Nature et 
technologies.  The  authors  thank  Prof.  J.H.S.  Lee,  D.L.  Frost,  and  A.J. 
Higgins for insightful discussions during collaborative work on the topic 
over the years. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099452S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

References 

[1] Goroshin S, Higgins A, Kamel M. Powdered metals as fuel for hypersonic ramjets. 
37th joint propulsion conference and exhibit. 2001. https://doi.org/10.2514/ 
6.2001-3919. 

[2] Smoot LD, Smith PJ. Coal combustion and gasification. Boston, MA: Springer US; 

1985. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-9721-3. 

[3] Williams A, Pourkashanian M, Jones JM, Skorupska N. Combustion and 

gasification of coal. Routledge; 2018, ISBN 9781315139746. https://doi.org/ 
10.1201/9781315139746. 

[4] Bradley D, Lawes M, Park H-Y, Usta N. Modeling of laminar pulverized coal 
flames with speciated devolatilization and comparisons with experiments. 
Combust Flame 2006;144(1–2):190–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2005.07.007. 

[5] Glassman I. Metal combustion processes. Princeton Univ., NJ, James Forrestal 

Research Center; 1959. 

[6] Markstein GH. Combustion of metals. AIAA Journal 1963;1(3):550–62. https:// 

doi.org/10.2514/3.1595. 

[7] Yetter RA, Dryer FL. Metal Particle Combustion and Classification. Microgravity 

combustion, ISBN 0125981902. 

[8] Merzhanov A. History and recent developments in SHS. Ceram Int 1995;21(5): 

371–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/0272-8842(95)96211-7. 

[9] Upadhyaya GS. Powder metallurgy technology. Cambridge International Science 

Publishing; 2014. 

[10] Bergthorson J, Goroshin S, Soo M, Julien P, Palecka J, Frost D, Jarvis D. Direct 
combustion of recyclable metal fuels for zero-carbon heat and power. Appl 
Energy 2015;160:368–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.09.037. 
[11] Bergthorson JM. Recyclable metal fuels for clean and compact zero-carbon 

power. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;68:169–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pecs.2018.05.001. 

[12] Pokhil PF, Belyaev AF, Frolov YV, Logachev VS, Korotkov AI. Combustion of 

metal powders in active media. Technical Report AD0769576. Defense Technical 
Information Center; 1972.Transl. into English from ”Goreniye 
Poroshkoobraznykh Metallov v Aktivnykh Sredakh” USSR, 1–295 

[13] Zhang X, Yu J, Gao W, Zhang D, Sun J, Guo S, Dobashi R. Effects of particle size 
distributions on PMMA dust flame propagation behaviors. Powder Technol 2017; 
317:197–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2017.05.001. 

[14] Faeth G. Evaporation and combustion of sprays. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1983;9 

(1–2):1–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(83)90005-9. 

[15] Seth B, Aggarwal S, Sirignano W. Flame propagation through an air-fuel spray 

mixture with transient droplet vaporization. Combust Flame 1980;39(2):149–68. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(80)90014-0. 

[16] Seshadri K, Berlad A, Tangirala V. The structure of premixed particle-cloud 

flames. Combust Flame 1992;89(3–4):333–42.URL http://www.sciencedirect. 
com/science/article/pii/001021809290019L 

[17] Fontijn A. Gas phase metal reactions. Elsevier; 1992. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 

C2009-0-09056-4. 

[19] Williams FA. Combustion theory. REading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.; 

1965, ISBN 9780429494055.URL https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9780 
429962608 

[20] Price EW. Combustion of metalized propellants. Fundamentals of solid-propellant 
combustion. New York: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics; 
1984. p. 479–513. https://doi.org/10.2514/5.9781600865671.0479.0513. 
[21] Trunov MA, Hoffmann VK, Schoenitz M, Dreizin EL. Combustion of boron- 

titanium nanocomposite powders in different environments. J Propul Power 
2008;24(2):184–91. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.30483. 

[22] Jallo LJ, Schoenitz M, Dreizin EL, Dave RN, Johnson CE. The effect of surface 

modification of aluminum powder on its flowability, combustion and reactivity. 
Powder Technol 2010;204(1):63–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
powtec.2010.07.017. 

[23] Shafirovich E, Bocanegra PE, Chauveau C, G¨okalp I, Goldshleger U, Rosenband V, 
Gany A. Ignition of single nickel-coated aluminum particles. Proc Combust Inst 
2005;30(2):2055–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.107. 

[24] King MK. Predictions of laminar flame speeds in boron-oxygen-nitrogen dust 

clouds. Symp (Int) Combust 1975;15(1):467–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082- 
0784(75)80320-1. 

[25] Edelman RB, Harsha PT, Schmotolocha SN. Modeling techniques for the analysis 

of ramjet combustion processes. AIAA Journal 1981;19(5):601–9. https://doi. 
org/10.2514/3.50982. 

[26] King MK. A review of studies of boron ignition and combustion phenomena at 

atlantic research corporation over the past decade. International Journal of 
Energetic Materials and Chemical Propulsion 1993;2(1–6):1–80.URL 
http://www.dl.begellhouse.com/journals/17bbb47e377ce023,181301 
e53c3359b9,71caa0b01624f618.html 

[27] Cassel HM. Some Fundamental Aspects of Dust Flamesvol. 2. US Department of 

the Interior, Bureau of Mines; 1964. 

[28] Bryant JT. The combustion of premixed laminar graphite dust flames at 

atmospheric pressure. Combust Sci Technol 1971;2(5–6):389–99. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/00102207108952263. 

[29] Goroshin SV, Ageyev ND, Shoshin YL, Shevchuk VG. The premixed laminar 

flames in the boron dust clouds. International Journal of Energetic Materials and 
Chemical Propulsion 1993;2(1–6):469–77.URL http://www.dl.begellhouse. 
com/journals/17bbb47e377ce023,181301e53c3359b9,72177f3c452ff6e5.html 

[30] Wu H-C, Chang R-C, Hsiao H-C. Research of minimum ignition energy for nano 

Titanium powder and nano Iron powder. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2009;22(1): 
21–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2008.10.002. 

[31] Lin T-H, Lin S-Y, Hsueh K-H, You M-L, Shu C-M. Dust explosion parameters of 
polyester resin. J Therm Anal Calorim 2017;127(1):1037–45. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10973-016-5776-0. 

[32] Cesana C, Siwek R. Operating Instructions 20 L Apparatus. Tech. Rep. Adolf 

Kühner AG, Switzerland; 2000. 

[33] Cesana C, Siwek R. MIKE 3. Minimum Ignition Energy. Tech. Rep. Adolf Kühner 

AG, Switzerland; 2001. 

[34] Cashdollar KL. Overview of dust explosibility characteristics. J Loss Prev Process 

Ind 2000;13(3–5):183–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0950-4230(99)00039-X. 

[35] Eckhoff RK. Dust explosions in the process industries. Elsevier; 2003. https://doi. 

org/10.1016/B978-0-7506-7602-1.X5000-8. 

[36] ASTM E1226-19, Standard Test Method for Explosibility of Dust Clouds. Tech. 

Rep. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International; 2019. 

[37] ASTM E1515-14, Standard Test Method for Minimum Explosible Concentration of 

Combustible Dusts. Tech. Rep. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International; 
2014. https://doi.org/10.1520/E1515-14. 

[38] Hosseinzadeh S, Vanierschot M, Norman F, Verplaetsen F, Berghmans J. Flame 

propagation and flow field measurements in a Hartmann dust explosion tube. 
Powder Technol 2018;323:346–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
powtec.2017.10.001. 

[39] Mercer DB, Amyotte PR, Dupuis DJ, Pegg MJ, Dahoe A, de Heij WB, et al. The 

influence of injector design on the decay of pre-ignition turbulence in a spherical 
explosion chamber. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2001;14(4):269–82. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0950-4230(00)00051-6. 

[40] Eschenbach R, Agnew J. Use of the constant-volume bomb technique for 

measuring burning velocity. Combust Flame 1958;2(3):273–85. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/0010-2180(58)90048-8. 

[41] Dahoe A, de Goey L. On the determination of the laminar burning velocity from 
closed vessel gas explosions. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2003;16(6):457–78. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0950-4230(03)00073-1. 

[42] Essenhigh R. On the inter-influence of classical heterogeneous combustion 
research and related aerospace problems. Symp (Int) Combust 1967;11(1): 
291–308. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(67)80154-1. 

[43] Cassel H, Das Gupta A, Guruswamy S. Factors affecting flame propagation 
through dust clouds. Symposium on Combustion and Flame, and Explosion 
Phenomena 1948;3(1):185–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1062-2896(49)80024- 
9. 

[44] Goroshin S, Fomenko I, Lee JH. Burning velocities in fuel-rich aluminum dust 

clouds. Symp (Int) Combust 1996. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(96) 
80019-1. 

[45] Ageyev ND, Goroshin SV, Zolotko AN, Poletayev NI. Flame speed of the stationary 
flame in aluminum suspensions. Combustion of heterogeneous and gas systems, 
proceedings of the 9th all-union symposium on combustion and explosion, 
Suzdal, Russia. 1989. p. 83–5.(in Russian). 

[46] Goroshin SV, Shoshin YL, Ageyev ND, Poletayev NI. The premixed aluminum dust 

laminar flame structure. Flame structure 1991;1:213–7. 

[47] Ageyev ND, Vovchuk YI, Goroshin SV, Zolotko AN, Poletayev NI. Steady 

combustion of solid fuel gas-suspensions. laminar diffusion two-phase flame. 
Combust Explos Shock Waves 1990;26(6):669–77. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF00786504. 

[48] Soo M, Julien P, Goroshin S, Bergthorson JM, Frost DL. Stabilized flames in 

hybrid aluminum-methane-air mixtures. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34(2):2213–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.05.044. 

[49] Julien P, Soo M, Goroshin S, Frost DL, Bergthorson JM, Glumac N, et al. 

Combustion of aluminum suspensions in hydrocarbon flame products. J Propul 
Power 2014;30(4):1047–54. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.B35061. 
[50] Shoshin Y, Dreizin E. Particle combustion rates in premixed flames of 

polydisperse metal-air aerosols. Combust Flame 2003;133(3):275–87. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02)00571-0. 

[51] Shoshin Y, Dreizin EL. Laminar lifted flame speed measurements for aerosols of 

metals and mechanical alloys. AIAA Journal 2004;42(7):1416–26. https://doi. 
org/10.2514/1.4772. 

[52] Huang Y, Risha GA, Yang V, Yetter RA. Combustion of bimodal nano/micron- 

sized aluminum particle dust in air. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31(2):2001–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.08.103. 

[53] Risha G, Huang Y, Yetter R, Yang V, Son S, Tappan B. Combustion of aluminum 
particles with steam and liquid water. 44th AIAA aerospace sciences meeting and 
exhibit. Reston, Virigina: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics; 
2006, ISBN 978-1-62410-039-0. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2006-1154. 
[54] Lomba R, Laboureur P, Dumand C, Chauveau C, Halter F. Determination of 

aluminum-air burning velocities using PIV and Laser sheet tomography. Proc 
Combust Inst 2019;37(3):3143–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2018.07.013. 

[55] Mastorakos E, Taylor AMKP. Visualization of counterflow flames. Flow 

Visualization VI. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 1992. p. 580–4. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-84824-7_102. 

[56] Dyakov I, Konnov AA, Ruyck JD, Bosschaart KJ, Brock ECM, De Goey LPH. 
Measurement of adiabatic burning velocity in methane-oxygen-nitrogen 
mixtures. Combust Sci Technol 2001;172(1):81–96. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00102200108935839. 

[57] Julien P, Whiteley S, Soo M, Goroshin S, Frost DL, Bergthorson JM. Flame speed 
measurements in aluminum suspensions using a counterflow burner. Proc 
Combust Inst 2017;36(2):2291–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.06.150. 
[58] McRae M, Julien P, Salvo S, Goroshin S, Frost DL, Bergthorson JM. Stabilized, flat 
iron flames on a hot counterflow burner. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37(3):3185–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.134. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099453S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[59] Blais F, Julien P, Palecka J, Goroshin S, Bergthorson JM. Effect of initial reactant 
temperature on flame speeds in aluminum dust suspensions. Combust Sci Technol 
2020:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2020.1820496. 

[60] Soo M, Goroshin S, Glumac N, Kumashiro K, Vickery J, Frost DL, Bergthorson JM. 

Emission and laser absorption spectroscopy of flat flames in aluminum 
suspensions. Combust Flame 2017;180:230–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2017.03.006. 

[61] Lewis B, von Elbe G. Combustion, flames and explosions of gases. Elsevier; 2012. 
[62] Markstein GHE. Nonsteady flame propagation. Elsevier; 1964. 
[63] Todes OM, Gol’tsiker AD, Ionushas KK. Formation and development of a flame 
front in aerodisperse systems. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1974;10(1):71–5. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01463789. 

[64] Ionushas KK, Pronicheva NM, Todes OM, Gol’tsiker AD, Vodyanik VI, 

Kozhushkov NP. Development of the mechanism of the propagation of a flame in 
aerodisperse systems. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1979;15(5):600–4. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/BF00740590. 

[65] Proust C, Veyssiere B. Fundamental properties of flames propagating in starch 
dust-air mixtures. Combust Sci Technol 1988;62(4–6):149–72. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/00102208808924007. 

[66] Greene FT, O’Donnell JE. The quenching behavior of coal dust-air mixtures. 

[87] Paciaroni M, Linne M. Single-shot, two-dimensional ballistic imaging through 
scattering media. Appl Opt 2004;43(26):5100. https://doi.org/10.1364/ 
AO.43.005100. 

[88] Shevchuk VG, Bezrodnykh AK, Kondrat’ev EN, Gradetskii II, Ivanov VN. 

Combustion of airborne aluminum particles in free space. Combust Explos Shock 
Waves 1987;22(5):531–4. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00755520. 

[89] Goroshin S, Tang F-D, Higgins AJ, Lee JH. Laminar dust flames in a reduced- 
gravity environment. Acta Astronaut 2011;68(7–8):656–66. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.actaastro.2010.08.038. 

[90] Kumagai S, Sakai T, Okajima S. Combustion of free fuel droplets in a freely falling 
chamber. Symp (Int) Combust 1971;13(1):779–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0082-0784(71)80080-2. 

[91] Ballal DR. Flame propagation through dust clouds of carbon, coal, aluminium and 
magnesium in an environment of zero gravity. Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London A Mathematical and Physical Sciences 1983;385(1788):21–51. https:// 
doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1983.0003. 

[92] Gieras M, Klemens R, W´ojcicki S. Ignition and combustion of coal particles at zero 
gravity. Acta Astronaut 1985;12(7–8):573–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/0094- 
5765(85)90128-6. 

[93] Berlad AL. Combustion of particle clouds. In: Cochran TH, editor. Combustion 

Bureau of Mines, US Department of the Interior, Minerals Health and Safet; 1981. 
No. PB83-164665 

experiments in a zero-gravity laboratory. New York: AIAA Progress in 
Astronautics and Aeronautics; 1981. p. 91–127. 

[67] Slezak S, Fitch D, Krier H, Buckius R. Coal dust flame propagation in a laboratory 
flammability tube. Combust Flame 1983;54(1–3):103–19. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/0010-2180(83)90025-1. 

[68] Shevchuk VG, Goroshin SV, Klyachko LA, Ageyev ND, Kondrat’ev EN, 

Zolotko AN. Flame propagation rate in gaseous suspensions of magnesium 
particles. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1980;16(1):52–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/BF00756244. 

[69] Shevchuk VG, Kondrat’ev EN, Zolotko AN, Smirnov VV. Conditions of flame 
propagation in aerosuspensions of metallic particles. Combust Explos Shock 
Waves 1982;18(5):557–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00800624. 

[70] Shevchuk VG, Boychuk LV, Goroshin SV, Kostyshin YN. Comparative research of 
the flame propagation in boron and al, mg, zr, fe dust clouds. International 
Journal of Energetic Materials and Chemical Propulsion 1993;2(1–6):478–84. 
https://doi.org/10.1615/IntJEnergeticMaterialsChemProp.v2.i1-6.300. 

[71] Goroshin S, Bidabadi M, Lee J. Quenching distance of laminar flame in aluminum 

dust clouds. Combust Flame 1996;105(1–2):147–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
0010-2180(95)00183-2. 

[72] Mason WE, Saunders KV. Recirculating flow in vertical columns of gas-solid 

suspension. J Phys D Appl Phys 1975;8(14):1674–85. https://doi.org/10.1088/ 
0022-3727/8/14/011. 

[73] Guazzelli E, Morris JF, Pic S. A physical introduction to suspension dynamics. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2011. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
CBO9780511894671. 

[74] Paleˇcka J, Sniatowsky J, Goroshin S, Higgins AJ, Bergthorson JM. A new kind of 
flame: observation of the discrete flame propagation regime in iron particle 
suspensions in microgravity. Combust Flame 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2019.07.023. 

[75] Paleˇcka J, Goroshin S, Higgins AJ, Shoshin Y, de Goey P, Angilella J-R, 

Oltmann H, Stein A, Schmitz B, Verga A, Vincent-Bonnieu S, Sillekens W, 
Bergthorson JM. Percolating reaction–diffusion waves (PERWAVES)-Sounding 
rocket combustion experiments. Acta Astronaut 2020;177:639–51. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.07.033. 

[76] Jarosinski J, Lee J, Knystautas R, Crowley J. Quenching of dust-air flames. Symp 

(Int) Combust 1988;21(1):1917–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(88) 
80428-4. 

[77] Chanut C, Heymes F, Lauret P, Lopez C. Experimental determination of aluminum 
burning velocity during flame propagation in a tube. Chemical Engineering 
Transactions 2020;82:205–10. https://doi.org/10.3303/CET2082035. 

[78] Palecka J, Julien P, Goroshin S, Bergthorson JM, Frost DL, Higgins AJ. Quenching 

distance of flames in hybrid methane-aluminum mixtures. Proc Combust Inst 
2015;35(2):2463–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.06.116. 

[79] Paleˇcka J, Park J, Goroshin S, Bergthorson JM. Aluminum-propane-air hybrid 
flames in a Hele-Shaw cell. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38(3):4461–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.09.017. 

[80] Julien P, Vickery J, Goroshin S, Frost DL, Bergthorson JM. Freely-propagating 

flames in aluminum dust clouds. Combust Flame 2015;162(11):4241–53. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.07.046. 

[81] Fiock EF, Marvin CF. The measurement of flame speeds. Chem Rev 1937;21(3): 

367–87. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr60070a002. 

[82] Khitrin LN. The physics of combustion and explosionvol. 61. Israel Program for 

Scientific Translations; 1962. 

[83] Saif M, Wang W, Pekalski A, Levin M, Radulescu MI. Chapman-Jouguet 

deflagrations and their transition to detonation. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36(2): 
2771–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.122. 

[84] Skjold T, Olsen KL, Castellanos D. A constant pressure dust explosion experiment. 

J Loss Prev Process Ind 2013;26(3):562–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jlp.2012.08.003. 

[94] Ross HD, Facca LT, Berlad AL, Tangirala V. Feasibility of reduced gravity 

experiments involving quiescent, uniform particle cloud combustion. NASA Tech 
Memo 1989;101371. 

[95] Berlad A, Ross H, Facca L, Tangirala V. Particle cloud flames in acoustic fields. 
Combust Flame 1990;82(3–4):448–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(90) 
90015-J. 

[96] Kobayashi H, Ono N, Okuyama Y, Nioka T. Flame propagation experiment of 

PMMA particle cloud in a microgravity environment. Symp (Int) Combust 1994; 
25(1):1693–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80817-9. 

[97] Goroshin S, Kolbe M, Bellerose J, Lee J. Microgravity apparatus and ground-based 
study of the flame propagation and quenching in metal dust suspensions. Seventh 
international workshop on microgravity combustion and chemically reacting 
systems. 2003. p. 341. 

[98] Dreizin EL, Hoffmann VK. Constant pressure combustion of aerosol of coarse 
magnesium particles in microgravity. Combust Flame 1999;118(1–2):262–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(98)00144-8. 

[99] Dreizin EL, Hoffmann VK. Experiments on magnesium aerosol combustion in 
microgravity. Combust Flame 2000;122(1–2):20–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0010-2180(00)00099-7. 

[100] Tang F-D, Goroshin S, Higgins A, Lee J. Flame propagation and quenching in 

iron dust clouds. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32(2):1905–12. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2008.05.084. 

[101] Ronney PD. Understanding combustion processes through microgravity research. 
Symp (Int) Combust 1998;27(2):2485–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784 
(98)80101-X. 

[102] Goroshin S, Mamen J, Higgins A, Bazyn T, Glumac N, Krier H. Emission 

spectroscopy of flame fronts in aluminum suspensions. Proc Combust Inst 2007; 
31(2):2011–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.175. 

[103] Zeldovich YB, Barenblatt GI, Librovich VB, Makhviladze GM. The Mathematical 
Theory of Combustion and Explosions. Boston, MA: Springer US; 1985. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-2349-5. 

[104] Ostrovsky UI, Butosov MM, Ostrovskaya GV, Chiang FP. Interferometry by 
holography. J Appl Mech 1981;48(2). https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3157649. 
[105] Mallard E, LeChatelier H. Sur les vitesses de propagation de l’inflammation dans 

les m´elanges gazeux explosifs. Acad´emie des Sciences 1881;93:141–8. 
[106] Zeldovich YB. Theory of flame propagation. Zhur Fizi Khi 1948;22:27. 
[107] Goroshin SV, Shoshin YL, Zolotko AN. Modes of particle combustion and flame 

velocity in gas suspensions. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR 1991;321:548–51. 

[108] Soo MJ, Kumashiro K, Goroshin S, Frost DL, Bergthorson JM. Thermal structure 
and burning velocity of flames in non-volatile fuel suspensions. Proc Combust Inst 
2017;36(2):2351–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.06.043. arXiv:1 
609.00347. 

[109] Soo M, Goroshin S, Bergthorson JM, Frost DL. Reaction of a particle suspension in 
a rapidly-heated oxidizing gas. Propellants Explos Pyrotech 2015;40(4):604–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/prep.201400269. 

[110] Soo M, Mi X, Goroshin S, Higgins AJ, Bergthorson JM. Combustion of particles, 
agglomerates, and suspensions - A basic thermophysical analysis. Combust Flame 
2018;192:384–400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2018.01.032. 
[111] Frank-Kamenetskii D. Diffusion and heat exchange in chemical kinetics. Princeton 
University Press; 2015, ISBN 9781400877195.URL https://books.google.ca 
/books?id=ZivWCgAAQBAJ 

[112] Vulis LA. Thermal regimes of combustion. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1961. 
[113] Todes OM, Melent’ev P. The theory of thermal explosion. J Phys Chem 1939;13 

(7):52–8. 

[114] Douglas Smoot L, Duane Horton M. Propagation of laminar pulverized coal-air 
flames. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1977;3(4):235–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
0360-1285(77)90014-4. 

[85] Lee J, Peraldi O, Knystautas R. Microgravity combustion of dust suspension. 31st 
Aerospace Sciences Meeting. Reston, Virigina: American Institute of Aeronautics 
and Astronautics; 1993. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.1993-714. 

[115] Krazinski JL, Buckius RO, Krier H. Coal dust flames: a review and development of 
a model for flame propagation. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1979;5(1):31–71. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(79)90018-2. 

[86] Oppenheim AK. On the use of laser light sources in schlieren-interferometer 

systems. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A Mathematical and 
Physical Sciences 1966. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1966.0095. 

[116] Gurevich MA, Ozerova GE, Stepanov AM. Calculation of propagation rate of flame 
in gas suspension of solid fuel particles. Tech. Rep. FOREIGN TECHNOLOGY DIV 
WRIGHT-PATTERSON AFB OHIO; 1974. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099454S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[117] Rumanov ´E, Khaikin BI. Flame propagation over a suspension of particles in a gas. 

Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR 1971;201(1):104–16. 

[118] Ozerova GE, Stepanov AM. Effect of radiation on flame propagation through a gas 
suspension of solid fuel particles. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1973;9(5):543–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00742880. 

[119] Yarin LP, Hetsroni G, Mosyak A. Combustion of two-phase reactive media. 

Springer Science \& Business Media; 2004. 

[120] Spalding DB. The theory of flame phenomena with a chain reaction. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A, Mathematical and Physical 
Sciences 1956;249(957):1–25. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.1956.0013. 
[121] Birks N, Meier GH, Pettit FS. Introduction to the high-temperature oxidation of 
metals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2006. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
CBO9781139163903. 

[122] Palecka J, Goroshin S, Bergthorson JM. Propagation and quenching of dual-front 
flames in binary-fuel mixtures. Combust Sci Technol 2018;190(9):1557–79. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2018.1459583. 

[123] Goroshin S, Lee J, Shoshin Y. Effect of the discrete nature of heat sources on flame 
propagation in particulate suspensions. Symp (Int) Combust 1998;27(1):743–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80468-2. 

[124] Spalding DB. A theory of inflammability limits and flame-quenching. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London Series A Mathematical and Physical Sciences 1957; 
240(1220):83–100. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1957.0068. 

[125] Arnol’d VI. Catastrophe theory. Springer Science \& Business Media; 2003. 
[126] Bazyn T, Krier H, Glumac N. Evidence for the transition from the diffusion-limit in 
aluminum particle combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31(2):2021–8. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.161. 

[127] Melcher JC, Krier H, Burton RL. Burning aluminum particles inside a laboratory- 

scale solid rocket motor. J Propul Power 2002;18(3):631–40. https://doi.org/ 
10.2514/2.5977. 

[128] Tang F-D, Goroshin S, Higgins AJ. Modes of particle combustion in iron dust 

flames. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33(2):1975–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2010.06.088. 

[129] Law CK. Combustion physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2010, 

ISBN 9780511754517.URL http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ref/id/CBO9780 
511754517 

[130] Andrews G, Bradley D. Determination of burning velocities: a critical review. 
Combust Flame 1972;18(1):133–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(72) 
80234-7. 

[131] Glassman I, Papas P. Combustion thermodynamics of metal-complex oxidizer 
mixtures. J Propul Power 1999;15(6):801–5. https://doi.org/10.2514/2.5499. 

[132] Horton M, Goodson F, Smoot L. Characteristics of flat, laminar coal-dust flames. 
Combust Flame 1977;28:187–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(77)90024- 
4. 

[133] Burgoyne JH, Cohen L. The effect of drop size on flame propagation in liquid 

[148] Goroshin S, Kolbe M, Lee JH. Flame speed in a binary suspension of solid fuel 

particles. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28(2):2811–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082- 
0784(00)80703-1. 

[149] Breiter AL, Mal’tsev VM, Popov EI. Models of metal ignition. Tech. Rep.. 1978.4 
[150] Beckstead MW. Correlating aluminum burning times. Combust Explos Shock 

Waves 2005;41(5):533–46. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10573-005-0067-2. 

[151] Boichuk LV, Shevchuk VG, Shvets AI. Flame propagation in two-component 

aluminum-boron gas suspensions. Combustion, Explosion and Shock Waves 2002; 
38:651–4. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1021136126730. 

[152] Julien P, Whiteley S, Goroshin S, Soo MJ, Frost DL, Bergthorson JM. Flame 

structure and particle-combustion regimes in premixed methane-iron-air 
suspensions. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35(2):2431–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2014.05.003. 

[153] Braconnier A, Gallier S, Halter F, Chauveau C. Aluminum combustion in CO2-CO- 
N2 mixtures. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38(3):4355–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2020.06.028. 

[154] Hazenberg T, van Oijen J. Structures and burning velocities of flames in iron 
aerosols. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38(3):4383–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2020.07.058. 

[155] Vickery J, Julien P, Goroshin S, Bergthorson JM, Frost DL. Propagation of isobaric 
spherical flames in hybrid aluminum-methane fuel mixtures. J Loss Prev Process 
Ind 2017;49:472–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2017.05.027. 

[156] Denkevits A, Hoess B. Hybrid H2/Al dust explosions in Siwek sphere. J Loss Prev 
Process Ind 2015;36:509–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2015.03.024. 
[157] Searby G. Acoustic instability in premixed flames. Combust Sci Technol 1992;81 

(4–6):221–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102209208951803. 

[158] Aslanov SK, Shevchuk VG, Kostyshin YN, Boichuk LV, Goroshin SV. Oscillatory 
combustion of air suspensions. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1993;29(2):163–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00755874. 

[159] Darrieus G.. Propagation d’un front de flamme, presented at La Technique 

Moderne1938;. 

[160] Landau L. On the theory of slow combustion. Dynamics of Curved Fronts. 

Elsevier; 1988. p. 403–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-092523-3.50044- 
7. 

[161] Matalon M. Intrinsic flame instabilities in premixed and nonpremixed 

combustion. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 2007;39(1):163–91. https://doi.org/10.1146/ 
annurev.fluid.38.050304.092153. 

[162] Sivashinsky GI. Instabilities, pattern formation, and turbulence in flames. Annu 
Rev Fluid Mech 1983;15(1):179–99. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev. 
fl.15.010183.001143. 

[163] Zhou Y, Williams RJ, Ramaprabhu P, Groom M, Thornber B, Hillier A, Mostert W, 

Rollin B, Balachandar S, Powell PD, Mahalov A, Attal N. Rayleigh-Taylor and 
Richtmyer-Meshkov instabilities: a journey through scales. Physica D 2021;423: 
132838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2020.132838. 

aerosols. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A Mathematical and 
Physical Sciences 1954;225(1162):375–92. https://doi.org/10.1098/ 
rspa.1954.0210. 

[164] Candel S. Combustion dynamics and control: progress and challenges. Proc 

Combust Inst 2002;29(1):1–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1540-7489(02)80007- 
4. 

[134] Hayashi S, Kumagai S, Sakai T. Propagation velocity and structure of flames in 
droplet-vapor-air mixtures. Combust Sci Technol 1977;15(5–6):169–77. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/00102207708946782. 

[165] Williams FA. Combustion theory : the fundamental theory of chemically reacting 
flow systems. Menlo Park, California: The Benjamin /Cummings; 1985. 
[166] Merzhanov AG. Fundamentals, achievements, and perspectives for development 

[135] Goodwin DG. An open-source, extensible software suite for CVD process 

simulationvol. 14. Pennington, NJ: Electrochemical Soc.; 2003, ISBN 
1013810147.URL http://www.cantera.org 

of solid-flame combustion. Russ Chem Bull 1997;46(1):1–27. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/BF02495340. 

[167] Merzhanov AG, Rumanov EN. Physics of reaction waves. Rev Mod Phys 1999. 

[136] Zolotko AN. The ignition and combustion of boron dust systems. International 

https://doi.org/10.1103/revmodphys.71.1173. 

Journal of Energetic Materials and Chemical Propulsion 1993;2(1–6):455–68.URL 
http://www.dl.begellhouse.com/journals/17bbb47e377ce023,181301e53c 
3359b9,2bb30a5f301c66fc.html 

[137] Knight D. Humphry davy: science and power. Cambridge University Press; 1998. 
[138] Jarosi´nski J. Flame quenching by a cold wall. Combust Flame 1983;50:167–75. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(83)90059-7. 

[139] Berman V, Riazantsev I. Asymptotic analysis of stationary propagation of the front 
of parallel exothermic reaction. J Appl Math Mech 1975;39(2):286–96. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/0021-8928(75)90151-3. 

[140] Clavin P, Fife P, Nicolaenko B. Multiplicity and related phenomena in competing 
reaction flames. SIAM J Appl Math 1987;47(2):296–331. https://doi.org/ 
10.1137/0147020. 

[141] Margolis SB, Matkowsky BJ. Flame propagation with multiple fuels. SIAM J Appl 

Math 1982;42(5):982–1003. https://doi.org/10.1137/0142070. 

[168] Ivleva TP, Merzhanov AG. Three-dimensional modes of unsteady solid-flame 

combustion. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 2003;13 
(1):80–6. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1540772. 

[169] Vol’pert AI, Volpert VA, Volpert VA. Traveling wave solutions of parabolic 

systemsvol. 140. American Mathematical Soc.; 1994. 

[170] Buckmaster J. The structure and stability of laminar flames. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 
1993;25(1):21–53. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fl.25.010193.000321. 
[171] Bayliss A, Matkowsky BJ, Volpert VA. Spatiotemporal pattern formation in solid 

fuel combustion. Advances in Sensing with Security Applications. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2006. p. 247–82. https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020- 
4355-4_08. 

[172] Clavin P, Sun J. Theory of acoustic instabilities of planar flames propagating in 
sprays or particle-laden gases. Combust Sci Technol 1991;78(4–6):265–88. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102209108951752. 

[142] Berman VS, Ryazantsev YS. Asymptotic analysis of stationary distribution of the 

[173] Clanet C, Searby G, Clavin P. Primary acoustic instability of flames propagating in 

front of a two-stage consecutive exothermic reaction in a condensed medium. 
J Appl Mech Tech Phys 1973. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00850578. 

tubes: cases of spray and premixed gas combustion. J Fluid Mech 1999;385: 
157–97. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112099004231. 

[143] Berman VS, Ryazantsev YS, Shevtsova VM. Nonsteady propagation of two-stage 
sequential reaction in the condensed phase. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1981; 
17(6):646–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00784255. 

[144] Kapila A, Lundford G. Two-step sequential reactions for large activation energies. 
Combust Flame 1977;29:167–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(77)90105- 
5. 

[145] Khaikin BI, Filonenko AK, Khudyaev SI. Flame propagation in the presence of two 
successive gas-phase reactions. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1968;4(4):343–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00742578. 

[146] Margolis SB, Matkowsky BJ. Steady and pulsating modes of sequential flame 

propagation. Combust Sci Technol 1982;27(5–6):193–213. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/00102208208946988. 

[147] Pel´aez J, Li˜n´an A. Structure and stability of flames with two sequential reactions. 
SIAM J Appl Math 1985;45(4):503–22. https://doi.org/10.1137/0145030. 

[174] Buckmaster J, Clavin P. An acoustic-instability theory for particle-cloud flames. 

Symp (Int) Combust 1992;24(1):29–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784 
(06)80008-1. 

[175] Rauschenbach BV. Vibrational combustion. Moscow: Mir; 1961.(in Russian) 
[176] Emmert T, Bomberg S, Polifke W. Intrinsic thermoacoustic instability of premixed 
flames. Combust Flame 2015;162(1):75–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2014.06.008. 

[177] Dubey R, McQuay M, Carvalho J. An experimental and theoretical investigation 
on the effects of acoustics on spray combustion. Symp (Int) Combust 1998;27(2): 
2017–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80047-7. 

[178] Price E. Recent advances in solid propellant combustion instability. Symp (Int) 
Combust 1969;12(1):101–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(69)80395-4. 

[179] Goroshin SV, Shevchuk VG, Ageyev ND. Oscillatory combustion of gaseous 

suspensions. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1981;17(6):595–600. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/BF00784247. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099455S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[181] Searby G, Rochwerger D. A parametric acoustic instability in premixed flames. 
J Fluid Mech 1991;231:529–43. https://doi.org/10.1017/S002211209100349X. 

[182] Abrukov SA, Kurzhunov VV, Mezdrikov VN. Experimental study of wave 

formation in a flame front. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1989;24(5):575–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00755498. 

[183] Lord Rayleigh JWS. The explanation of certain acoustical phenomena. Nature 

1878;18:319–21.URL http://www.nature.com/articles/018319a0 

[184] Assier RC, Wu X. Linear and weakly nonlinear instability of a premixed curved 
flame under the influence of its spontaneous acoustic field. J Fluid Mech 2014; 
758:180–220. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2014.525. 

[185] Sklyarov VA, Furletov VI. Analysis of combustion self-excitation of a gas in a tube. 
Combust Explos Shock Waves 1977;13(1):115–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF00756032. 

[186] Kaskan W. An investigation of vibrating flames. Symp (Int) Combust 1953;4(1): 

575–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(53)80079-2. 

[187] Kornilov VN, Kondrat’ev EN. Effect of flameout on combustion of small particles 

in an acoustically oscillating flow. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2000;36(2): 
164–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02699354. 

[210] Rashkovskii SA. Hot-spot combustion of heterogeneous condensed mixtures. 

thermal percolation. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2005;41(1):35–46. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s10573-005-0004-4. 

[211] Tang FD, Higgins AJ, Goroshin S. Effect of discreteness on heterogeneous flames: 
propagation limits in regular and random particle arrays. Combust Theor Model 
2009. https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830802632184. 

[212] Rogachev AS, Mukas’yan AS. Experimental verification of discrete models for 

combustion of microheterogeneous compositions forming condensed combustion 
products (review). Combust Explos Shock Waves 2015;51(1):53–62. https://doi. 
org/10.1134/S0010508215010050. 

[213] Shoshin YL, Goroshin S, Zolotko A. Flame in a medium with discrete sources. Dokl 

Phys Chem (Engl Transl); (United States) 1987;291. 

[214] Goroshin S, Tang F-D, Higgins AJ. Reaction-diffusion fronts in media with 

spatially discrete sources. Physical Review E 2011;84(2):027301. https://doi.org/ 
10.1103/PhysRevE.84.027301. 

[215] Korsch HJ, Jodl H-J. Nonlinear Dynamics and Deterministic Chaos. Chaos. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 1999. p. 11–44. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-662-03866-6_2. 

[188] Wright A, Higgins AJ, Goroshin S. The discrete regime of flame propagation in 
metal particulate clouds. Combust Sci Technol 2016;188(11–12):2178–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2016.1211877. 

[216] Beck JM, Volpert VA. A simple model of two-dimensional solid flame 

microstructure. Combust Theor Model 2003;7(4):795–812. https://doi.org/ 
10.1088/1364-7830/7/4/009. 

[189] Tanabe M, Morita T, Aoki K, Satoh K, Fujimori T, Sato J. Influence of standing 

[217] Beck J, Volpert V. Nonlinear dynamics in a simple model of solid flame 

sound waves on droplet combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28(1):1007–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(00)80308-2. 

microstructure. Physica D 2003;182(1–2):86–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0167-2789(03)00119-2. 

[190] Hanai H, Maruta K, Kobayashi H, Niioka T. Pulsating flame propagation of PMMA 
particle cloud in microgravity. Symp (Int) Combust 1998;27(2):2675–81. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80123-9. 

[191] Merzhanov AG, Sirignano WA, De Luca L. Advances in combustion science: in 

honor of Ya. B. zeldovich. Reston,VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics; 1997. https://doi.org/10.2514/4.866456. 

[192] Novozhilov BV. Nonlinear oscillations of combustion velocity of powder. J Appl 
Mech Tech Phys 1966;7(5):19–25.URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/B 
F00912620 

[193] Merzhanov A, Rumanov ´E. Nonlinear effects in macroscopic kinetics. Uspekhi 

Fizicheskih Nauk 1987;151(4):553. https://doi.org/10.3367/ 
UFNr.0151.198704a.0553. 

[194] Pearlman H. Excitability in high-Lewis number premixed gas combustion. 

Combust Flame 1997;109(3):382–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(96) 
00192-7. 

[195] Joulin G, Cambray P. Temperature-lags and radiative-transfer in particle-laden 

gaseous flames part II: unsteady propagations. Combust Sci Technol 1987;52 
(4–6):397–412. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102208708952585. 

[196] Booty MR, Margolis SB, Matkowsky BJ. Interaction of pulsating and spinning 

waves in condensed phase combustion. SIAM J Appl Math 1986;46(5):801–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1137/0146050. 

[197] Matkowsky BJ, Sivashinsky GI. Propagation of a pulsating reaction front in solid 
fuel combustion. SIAM J Appl Math 1978;35(3):465–78. https://doi.org/ 
10.1137/0135038. 

[198] Alexeev MM, Semenov OY, Yakush SE. Experimental study on cellular premixed 

propane flames in a narrow gap between parallel plates. Combust Sci Technol 
2019;191(7):1256–75. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2018.1521394. 

[199] Mi X, Higgins AJ, Goroshin S, Bergthorson JM. The influence of spatial 

discreteness on the thermo-diffusive instability of flame propagation with infinite 
lewis number. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36(2):2359–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.proci.2016.06.095. 

[200] Korol’chenko AY, Poletayev NL. Stability of a limiting flame in an aerosol. 

Combust Explos Shock Waves 1984;20(4):366–71. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF00782382. 

[218] Bharath NT, Rashkovskiy SA, Tewari SP, Gundawar MK. Dynamical and statistical 
behavior of discrete combustion waves: a theoretical and numerical study. 
Physical Review E 2013;87(4):042804. https://doi.org/10.1103/ 
PhysRevE.87.042804. 

[219] Bharat NT, Mishra DP. Effect of disorderness in two-dimensional discrete 

adiabatic combustion waves in a heterogeneous solid medium under stable 
regime. Physical Review E 2019;99(6):062114. https://doi.org/10.1103/ 
PhysRevE.99.062114. 

[220] Tang F-D, Higgins AJ, Goroshin S. Propagation limits and velocity of reaction- 

diffusion fronts in a system of discrete random sources. Physical Review E 2012; 
85(3):036311. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.85.036311. 

[221] Lam F, Mi X, Higgins AJ. Front roughening of flames in discrete media. Physical 

Review E 2017;96(1):013107. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.96.013107. 
arXiv:1701.07167. 

[222] Kardar M, Parisi G, Zhang Y-C. Dynamic scaling of growing interfaces. Phys Rev 
Lett 1986;56(9):889–92. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.56.889. 
[223] Lam FY, Mi X, Higgins AJ. Dimensional scaling of flame propagation in discrete 
particulate clouds. Combust Theor Model 2020;24(3):486–509. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/13647830.2019.1703044. arXiv:1906.01138. 

[224] Rabinovich O, Grinchuk P, Khina B, Belyaev A. Percolation combustion: is it 
possible in SHS? International Journal of Self Propagating High Temperature 
Synthesis 2002;11(3):257–70. 

[225] Umemura A, Takamori S. Percolation theory for flame propagation in non- or less- 
volatile fuel spray: a conceptual analysis to group combustion excitation 
mechanism. Combust Flame 2005;141(4):336–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2004.11.014. 

[226] Grinchuk PS. Combustion of heterogeneous systems with a stochastic spatial 

structure near the propagation limits. J Eng Phys Thermophys 2013;86(4): 
875–87. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10891-013-0907-y. 

[227] Stauffer D, Aharony A. Introduction To Percolation Theory. Taylor & Francis; 

2018. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315274386. 

[228] Schiulaz M, Laumann CR, Balatsky AV, Spivak BZ. Theory of deflagration in 

disordered media. Physical Review E 2017;95(3):032103. https://doi.org/ 
10.1103/PhysRevE.95.032103. arXiv:1612.00763. 

[201] Mukasyan AS, Hwang S, Sytchev AE, Rogachev AS, Merzhanov AG, Varma A. 

[229] Schiulaz M, Laumann CR, Balatsky AV, Spivak BZ. Theory of combustion in 

Combustion wave microstructure in heterogeneous gasless systems. Combust Sci 
Technol 1996;115(4–6):335–53. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102209608935535. 

disordered media. Physical Review E 2018;97(6):062133. https://doi.org/ 
10.1103/PhysRevE.97.062133. arXiv:1803.10211. 

[202] Hwang S, Mukasyan AS, Rogachev AS, Varma A. Combustion wave 

microstructure in gas-solid reaction systems: experiments and theory. Combust 
Sci Technol 1997;123(1–6):165–84. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00102209708935626. 

[203] Mukasyan A, Rogachev A. Discrete reaction waves: gasless combustion of solid 

powder mixtures. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2008;34(3):377–416. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pecs.2007.09.002. 

[230] Bhaduri D, Bandyopadhyay S. Combustion in coal dust flames. Combust Flame 
1971;17(1):15–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(71)80133-5. 

[231] Mercer GN, Weber RO. Radiation enhanced combustion wave speeds. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering 
Sciences 1997;453(1962):1543–9. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1997.0082. 
[232] Tien C, Lee S. Flame radiation. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1982;8(1):41–59. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(82)90008-9. 

[204] Gallier S, Guery J-F. Regression fronts in random sphere packs: application to 

[233] Nusselt W. Der Verbrennungsvorgang in der Kohlenstaubfeuerung. Ver Deut Ing 

composite solid propellant burning rate. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32(2):2115–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2008.06.017. 

[205] Naine TB, Gundawar MK. Correlation between discrete probability and reaction 

front propagation rate in heterogeneous mixtures. Indian J Phys 2017;91(9): 
1061–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12648-017-1015-1. 

[206] Grinchuk PS, Rabinovich OS. Effect of random internal structure on combustion 
of binary powder mixtures. Physical Review E 2005;71(2):026116. https://doi. 
org/10.1103/PhysRevE.71.026116. 

[207] Provatas N, Ala-Nissila T, Grant M, Elder KR, Pich´e L. Scaling, propagation, and 
kinetic roughening of flame fronts in random media. J Stat Phys 1995;81(3–4): 
737–59. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02179255. 

[208] Provatas N, Ala-Nissila T, Grant M, Elder KR, Pich´e L. Flame propagation in 

random media. Physical Review E 1995;51(5):4232–6. https://doi.org/10.1103/ 
PhysRevE.51.4232. 

[209] Tarun Bharat N, Mishra DP, Gundawar MK. Effect of heat loss on propagation 

limits of combustion fronts in heterogeneous mixtures. Combust Sci Technol 
2020;192(3):391–415. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2019.1565534. 

1924;68:124–8. 

[234] Essenhigh RH, Csaba J. The thermal radiation theory for plane flame propagation 

in coal dust clouds. Symp (Int) Combust 1963;9(1):111–25. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0082-0784(63)80018-1. 

[235] Krishenik PM, Rumanov EN, Shkadinskii KG. Modeling of combustion wave 

propagation in a carbon dust/gas mixture. Combust Flame 1994;99(3–4):713–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(94)90066-3. 

[236] Sidorov AE, Shevchuk VG, Kondrat’ev EN. Conductive-radiative model of a 

laminar flame in dust suspensions. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2013;49(3): 
257–63. https://doi.org/10.1134/S0010508213030015. 

[237] Joulin G. Temperature-lags and radiative transfer in particle-laden gaseous flames 
Part I: steady planar fronts. Combust Sci Technol 1987;52(4–6):377–95. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/00102208708952584. 

[238] Weinberg FJ. The first half-million years of combustion research and today’s 

burning problems. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1975;1(1):17–31. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/0360-1285(75)90004-0. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099456S. Goroshin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Jan Paleˇcka is a PhD student in the Department of Mechanical 
Engineering at McGill University, Montreal, Canada. The topic 
of  his  Ph.D.  thesis  is  the  study  of  frontal  phenomena  in  the 
combustion of metallic suspensions.  

Jeffrey M. Bergthorson is the Panda Faculty Scholar in Sus-
tainable  Engineering  &  Design  and  is  a  Professor  in  the 
Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering  at  McGill  University 
(Montreal,  Canada),  where  he  leads  the  Alternative  Fuels 
Laboratory.  His  research  focuses  on  the  development  and 
experimental validation of models for the combustion proper-
ties of alternative and sustainable fuels, plasma-assisted com-
bustion, and the use of recyclable metal fuels as zero-emission 
clean energy carriers. 

[239] Proust C. A few fundamental aspects about ignition and flame propagation in dust 
clouds. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2006;19(2–3):104–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jlp.2005.06.035. 

[240] Cao W, Gao W, Liang J, Xu S, Pan F. Flame-propagation behavior and a dynamic 
model for the thermal-radiation effects in coal-dust explosions. J Loss Prev 
Process Ind 2014;29:65–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2014.02.002. 
[241] Christophe P, Rim BM, Mohamed G, Khashayar S, J´erˆome F. Thermal radiation in 
dust flame propagation. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2017;49:896–904. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jlp.2017.01.002. 

[242] Dombrovsky L.A.. Radiative properties of metal particles in infrared and 
microwave spectral ranges. 2010.. 10.1615/thermopedia.000150. 

[243] Howell JR, Mengüç MP, Daun K, Siegel R. Thermal radiation heat transfer. 

Seventh edition. | Boca Raton : CRC Press, 2021. | Revised edition of: thermal 
radiation heat transfer / John R. Howell, M. Pinar Menguc, Robert Siegel. Sixth 
edition. 2015.: CRC Press; 2020, ISBN 9780429327308. https://doi.org/10.1201/ 
9780429327308. 

[244] Taylor GI. The air wave surrounding an expanding sphere. Proceedings of the 

Royal Society of London Series A Mathematical and Physical Sciences 1946;186 
(1006):273–92. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1946.0044. 

[245] Deshaies B, Leyer J. Flow field induced by unconfined spherical accelerating 
flames. Combust Flame 1981;40:141–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180 
(81)90119-X. 

[246] Ivanishcheva LI, Stepanov AM. Calculation of flame propagation in a gaseous 

suspension of metal particles and water droplets. Combust Explos Shock Waves 
1981;17(1):41–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00772782. 

[247] Frost DL, Clemenson J, Goroshin S, Zhang F, Soo M. Thermocouple temperature 
measurements in metalized explosive fireballs. Propellants Explos Pyrotech 2021. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/prep.202000328.prep.202000328  

Dr.  Samuel  Goroshin  is  a  Senior  Research  Scientist  at  the 
Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering  at  McGill  University, 
Montreal,  Canada.  His  research  interests  include  metal  com-
bustion,  flame  propagation  in  particulate  suspensions,  solid 
propellants,  combustion  material  synthesis,  and  optical  di-
agnostics in combustion. Dr. Goroshin has been active in the 
Canadian reduced gravity research program since 1992 and has 
designed several combustion experiments performed on NASA 
and Canadian Space Agency parabolic flight aircraft.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099457