Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Chemical looping-based energy transformation via lattice oxygen
modulated selective oxidation

Zhao Sun a, b, Christopher K. Russell c, Kevin J. Whitty d, Eric G. Eddings d, Jinze Dai d,
Yulong Zhang e, Maohong Fan b,f, *, Zhiqiang Sun a,*
a School of Energy Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan Province 410083, China
b Departments of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA
c Davidson School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
d Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
e College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Henan Polytechnic University, Jiaozuo, Henan Province 454000, China
f School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Chemical looping
Oxygen carrier
Lattice oxygen
Selective oxidation
Energy transformation
Value-added chemicals

Modulating  anionic  oxygen in  metal oxides  offers  exceptional  opportunities for  energy  material  synthesis  via
redox looping; however, several challenges such as overoxidation and catalyst deactivation need to be solved.
This paper provides an overview of the state-of-the-art schemes for the selective synthesis of valuable chemicals
via  lattice oxygen-induced redox  looping. Compared with  previously published works,  this review  focuses on
lattice oxygen modulated energy transformation technologies via chemical looping. This review  discusses the
chemical looping-based selective oxidation of methane to syngas/methanol, the oxidative coupling of methane,
oxidative steam reforming of alcohols, and the oxidative dehydrogenation of hydrocarbons in the lattice oxygen-
induced  selective  oxidation  section.  Additionally,  moderate-  and  low-temperature  Ellingham  diagrams  are
extended to deduce the reactivity of the lattice oxygen based on thermodynamic calculation, which helps for
oxygen carrier selection and product modulation. Moreover, less-researched but potential approaches to produce
value-added  energy  materials  by  lattice  oxygen  are  proposed  in  the  perspective  section,  including  selective
oxidation  of  glycerol  to  glyceric  acid,  selective  oxidation  of  methanol  to  acetic  acid,  and  oxidative  methane
aromatization.  Finally,  implications  for  advanced  oxygen  carrier  material  design,  preparation,  and  character-
ization  are also  overviewed. This study expands  the scope of  the lattice oxygen regulated  energy conversion,
which  seeks  to  benefit both fundamental  research and industrial  applications of  value-added energy  material
generation via lattice oxygen modulated energy transformation.

1. Introduction

Selective oxidation, the incorporation of oxygen into targeted sites of
a product, is one of the key steps in the modern chemical industry [1–7].
For example, partial oxidation of hydrocarbons is the conversion of a
hydrocarbon  to  form  carbon  monoxide  and  hydrogen  [8,9].  Conven-
tionally, this process utilizes air as the source of oxygen, however, this
results  in  the  incorporation  of  nitrogen  into  the  products  [10,11].
Alternatively,  pure  oxygen  may  be  used,  but  this  requires  cryogenic
distillation  to  create  the  reactant  stream  [12–18].  Chemical  looping
processes  utilize  moderately  reducible  metal  oxides  as  an  oxygen
transfer  material  (i.e.  oxygen  carrier,  OC),  where  air  can  be  used  to

oxidize  the  OC,  which  is  then  reduced  in  the  hydrocarbon  reactor,
providing a source of pure oxygen without requiring cryogenic distil-
lation  [19–22].  This  allows  for  more  efficient  energy  conversion,
value-added  material  synthesis,  and  safer  operation  by  eliminating
exposure to molecular oxygen [23–27].

The  chemical  looping  process  was  initially  proposed  for  chemical
looping combustion (CLC), where the OC is circulated between an air
reactor (AR) and a fuel reactor (FR) [28–32].In the FR, fuel is combusted
on the surface of the OC particles, utilizing the lattice oxygen donated by
the OC [33–35]. The reduced OC is then transported from FR into the
AR,  where  it  is  re-oxidized  by  air  [36,37].  With  the  extension  of  the
chemical looping concept, various chemical looping strategies were put
forward, including chemical looping-based selective oxidation [38–40],

* Corresponding authors.

E-mail addresses: mfan@uwyo.edu (M. Fan), zqsun@csu.edu.cn (Z. Sun).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101045
Received 1 August 2021; Received in revised form 2 October 2022; Accepted 9 October 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)101045Availableonline10February20230360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

Z. Sun et al.

Abbreviations

Air reactor
Gadolinium-doped ceria
Chemical looping beyond combustion
Chemical looping combustion
Chemical looping dry reforming

AR
CGO
CLBC
CLC
CLDR
CL-OCM  Chemical looping oxidative coupling of methane
CL-ODH  Chemical looping oxidative dehydrogenation
CL-OSRE Chemical looping for oxidative steam reforming of ethanol
CL-OSRM Chemical looping oxidative steam reforming of methanol
CL-OSRG Chemical looping for oxidative steam reforming of

glycerol
Chemical looping with oxygen uncoupling
CLOU
CLPO
Chemical looping partial oxidation
CL-POM  Chemical looping partial oxidation of methane
COC
Cu-MAZ  Copper exchanged omega
Cu-MOR Copper exchanged mordenite
DFT
ECR
EIS

Density functional theory
Electrical conductivity relaxation
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy

Catalytic oxygen carrier

Ethylene oxide
Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
Fuel reactor
Glycerol
Glyceric acid

EO
EXAFS
FR
GLY
GLYA
GLYAD  Glyceraldehyde
HT-PEMFCs High-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel

cells
Low-energy ion scattering
Oxygen carrier
Oxidative coupling of methane
Oxidative dehydrogenation
Oxygen isotopic exchange

LEIS
OC
OCM
ODH
OIE
OSRM  Oxidative steam reforming of methanol
PDH
POM
RP
SE
SRM
TGA
XAS
XPS

Propane dehydrogenation
Partial oxidation of methane
Ruddlesden-Popper
Sorption enhanced
Steam reforming of methanol
Thermogravimetric analysis
X-ray absorption spectroscopy
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

chemical looping with oxygen coupling [41], thermochemical H2O/CO2
splitting  [42–47],  desulfurization  [48],  deoxygenated  gasification
[49–51], ammonia synthesis [52], etc. As it involves the consumption
and the supply of lattice oxygen, chemical looping selective oxidation
has become one of the primary strategies for chemical looping processes
due to its efficient energy conversion, the reduction of operating costs,
and  enhancement  of  process  safety  [53].  Specifically,  the  chemical
looping-based selective oxidation can be classified by the raw materials
that are oxidized and/or the types of products generated (e.g., oxidation
of methane, oxidative coupling of methane, oxidative steam reforming
of alcohols, oxidative dehydrogenation of hydrocarbons, etc.), as pre-
sented in Fig. 1 [54–59].

Lattice oxygen reactivity, mobility, and transferability play decisive

roles in chemical looping selective oxidation viability [60]. By rationally
modulating the transferability and reactivity of the lattice oxygen, the
product selectivity and distribution can be regulated [61–65]. Ellingham
diagrams  provide  preliminary  thermodynamic  information  as  to  the
stable  states  of  metal  oxides  based  on  temperature,  allowing  for  the
initial determination of feasible pathways for the looping of OCs [66].
Ellingham diagrams ranging from 600~1300
C have been previously
studied to determine whether the OC is suitable for chemical looping
with  oxygen  coupling,  full  oxidation,  or  partial  oxidation  [67].  How-
ever,  there  are  relatively  few  studies  calculating  the  oxygen  partial
pressure provided by OCs at low- or medium-temperature intervals for
value-added chemical synthesis via selective oxidation. To address this,
the oxygen partial pressure distributions were extended to include the

◦

Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of chemical looping processes: (a) selective oxidation of methane to syngas or methanol; (b) oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) to C2
products; (c) oxidative steam reforming of alcohols; (d) Oxidative dehydrogenation (ODH) of hydrocarbons (e.g. ODH of ethylbenzene to styrene).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010452

Z. Sun et al.

low-, medium-, and high-temperature ranges, as presented in Fig. 2a to
c.

The energy transformation pathways presented include the partial
oxidation of methane, methanol, ethanol, and glycerol (GLY); the OCM
to ethane and ethylene; the ODH of ethane and propene; the oxidative
cracking of n-hexane; and the epoxidation of ethylene. Various selective
oxidation-based chemical reactions have different requirements for re-
action  temperature  and  lattice  oxygen  activity  [68,69].  Thus,  it  is
important  to  be  able  to  predict  the  effects  of  the  reactivity  and  the
mobility of the lattice oxygen on the feedstock conversion and product
selectivity  for  chemical  looping-based  selective  oxidation.  However,
simply  having  appropriate  lattice  oxygen  activity  and  mobility  are
inadequate; additionally,  the bulk-phase  lattice oxygen transferability
and the surface oxygen activity would change as the oxygen depleted,
thus performing instability and uncertainty.

A recent perspective by Zhu et al. [1] provided a significant discus-
sion on chemical looping beyond combustion (CLBC) and the versatility
and transformational benefits of CLBC. Li et al. [70] amply summarized
the chemical looping-based conversion pathways of gaseous and liquid
fuels and the development of oxygen/nitrogen carrier materials, with a
primary  focus  on  published  research  in  China.  However,  additional
discussion  of  the  rational  selection  and  particular  design  of  the  func-
tionalized OC is needed. The changing relationship between lattice ox-
ygen properties and its impact on OC performance needs to be further
explored.  Therefore,  a  targeted  and  comprehensive  review  of  lattice
oxygen  modulated  selective  oxidation  via  chemical  looping  is  still
required. This review will focus on the state-of-the-art, challenges, and
prospects of the chemical looping selective oxidation processes, afford-
ing  valid  approaches  and  implications  for  lattice  oxygen  modulation.
The  objectives  of  this  review  are:  1)  to  illustrate  a  comprehensive
overview of chemical looping-based selective oxidation and provide the
state-of-the-art  lattice  oxygen  modulated  value-added  materials  syn-
thesis; 2) to provide guidance for advanced OC design and lattice oxygen
modulation, thus intensifying the selectivity of the target materials and
enhancing the carbon resistance and cyclic stability of the OC; and 3) to
stimulate novel chemical looping processes and promote the long-term
development  of  lattice  oxygen-induced  chemical  synthesis.  Specif-
ically,  this  study  not  only  circumstantially  sums  up  the  remarkable
contributions,  including  the  discovery  of  octahedral  distortion  on  the
bulk  oxygen  mobility  and  the  surface  oxygen  exchange  capability,
Operando characterization of the lattice oxygen, tandem-reaction-based
chemical  looping  methane  conversion  process,  etc.,  but  also  provides
valid strategies for functionalized OC design and potential pathways for
energy transformation.

types  of  value-added  energy  materials  that  can  be  selectively  synthe-
sized by the redox looping manner are critically overviewed. This in-
cludes  the  chemical  looping-based  selective  oxidation  of  methane
(Section 2.1), the OCM (Section 2.2), the oxidative steam reforming of
alcohols (Section 2.3), and the ODH of hydrocarbons (Section 2.4). For
each of these synthesis pathways of the energy materials, the various
merits and detriments of the current state-of-the-art and the compara-
tive advantages and/or disadvantages of utilizing the chemical looping
systems  are  introduced.  In  addition,  the  candidate  OCs  and  catalyst
systems are presented and analyzed. For the perspective part, section 3.1
presents other potential chemical looping approaches to produce value-
added energy materials. This includes the oxidative cracking of n-hex-
ane,  the  epoxidation  of  ethylene,  the  selective  oxidation  of  GLY  to
glyceric acid (GLYA), the selective oxidation of methane to acetic acid,
and the oxidative aromatization of methane. Section 3.2 describes the
implications  for  designing  functional  OCs.  This  includes  a  phase
reconfigurable composite OC, a specially structured OC, surface  reac-
tivity and bulk transferability investigation, and machine learning-based
OC screening. Additionally, the next steps in the chemical looping-based
energy transformation are provided. Finally, Section 4 summarizes the
key results of this review and suggests scopes for further research in this
field.

2. Lattice oxygen-induced selective oxidation

2.1. Chemical looping selective oxidation of methane

2.1.1. Partial oxidation of methane to syngas

Conventional partial oxidation of methane (POM) has the potential
for high conversion and selectivity even with short residence times, and
it is a relatively simple system [71–73]. However, it requires pure O2.
Chemical  looping  partial  oxidation  of  methane  (CL-POM)  provides  a
potential scheme for partially oxidizing methane with in situ air sepa-
ration [74–76]. Besides, the CL-POM maintains normal operation due to
the continuous oxygen supply and the regeneration of an OC [77]. In this
case, the OC provides lattice oxygen for the POM in the FR (see R1), and
the lattice oxygen-deficient OC can be regenerated in the AR (see R2)
[78–80], according to the following reactions [81–83].

1) POM:

CH4+MeO→Me + CO + 2H2

2) OC regeneration:

Me + 0.5O2→MeO

(R1)

(R2)

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, diverse

3) Overall reaction:

Fig. 2. Value-added materials synthesis from the selective oxidation in the (a) low-, (b) medium-, and (c) high-temperature regions.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010453

Z. Sun et al.

CH4+0.5O2→CO + 2H2

(R3)

Notably, the reactions in the FR and AR can operate exothermically,
which allows for an auto-thermal operation, and makes the system more
flexible  [84–86].  The  produced  H2/CO  mole  ratio  (approximately  2)
makes  the  CL-POM-derived  syngas  a  suitable  feedstock  for  methanol
production and Fischer-Tropsch synthesis [87–89]. The surface activity
and bulk-phase mobility of lattice oxygen form the core of CL-POM. This
affects the CH4 conversion, syngas selectivity, and heat duty distribution
[90,91]. Nickel-doped oxides are the primary OCs that have been pub-
lished in the literature [92–94], and these are discussed in great detail
below.

Chen  et  al.  [95]  designed  the  Ni-modified  WO3-based  OCs  for
CL-POM. The schematic illustration of the nickel-tungsten composite OC
modulated CL-POM is presented in Fig. 3. It is demonstrated that the
incorporation  of  nickel  cations  can  weaken  the  strength  of  the
tungsten-oxygen bond, thereby promoting the lattice oxygen availabil-
ity.  Specifically,  the  Ni0.5WOx/Al2O3  OCs  are  formed  through  nickel
doping into the WO3  lattice, which follows WO3→ WO2.96→ WO2.72→
WO2→  W→  WC as a function of methane partial oxidation time. This
corresponds  to  the  reaction  sequence  that  evolves  from  the  complete
oxidation of CH4→ partial oxidation of CH4→ the decomposition of CH4.
It can be concluded that the surface activity and the bulk-phase mobility
of  lattice  oxygen  are  the  core  of  CL-POM,  which  would  significantly
affect methane conversion and product selectivity. However, the diffu-
sion properties of lattice oxygen are generally unstable with the gradual
reduction of the OC or with the number of chemical looping cycles. As a
result, revealing the transferability characteristics of the lattice oxygen
and  evaluating  the  transformation  of  the  lattice  oxygen  is  still
challenging.

(cid:0) 1 g

Yttrium (Y) doped Fe2O3/Al2O3 OCs (abbreviated as x-Y2O3, where x
indicates the molar ratio of Y2O3 to Fe2O3, x = 0, 0.5, 1, and 1.5) were
developed  by  Kang  et  al.  [96]  for  CL-POM  (see  Fig.  4a).  It  has  been
demonstrated  that  the  incorporation  of  Y  results  in  the  generation  of
garnet structured Y3Fe2Al3O12, which is active for selectively converting
CH4  to  CO.  A  98%  CO  selectivity  with  a  CH4  conversion  of  approxi-
(cid:0) 1 in 5% methane was
mately 90% with a space velocity of 6000 h
achieved.  Their  results  also  indicate  that  the  amount  of  Fe3+
in  the
garnet structure is positively correlated with CO yield. The α-Fe2O3(001)
and Y3Fe2Al3O12(111 ̅) surfaces were conducted by density functional
theory (DFT) calculation for clarifying the origination of the improved
CO selectivity (see Fig. 4b-e). Results indicate that the high CO selec-
tivity is attributed to the enhanced oxygen vacancy formation energy
(1.40  eV  and  1.97  eV  for  fresh  α-Fe2O3(001)  and  1.5-Y2O3(111),
respectively). The enhanced oxygen vacancy formation energy resulted
from both the reducible Fe ions and the non-reducible Al and Y ones in
the  garnet  structure.  Similarly,  Qin  et  al.  [97]  reported  that  oxygen
vacancies play an essential role during CL-POM on the Fe2O3  surface.
Their results reveal that doping Cu on Fe2O3  significantly reduces the
methane activation barrier. As a result, the energy barrier decreased by

92.4  kJ/mol,  81.3  kJ/mol,  and  78.1  kJ/mol  in  comparison  to  the
undoped Fe2O3, Fe3O4, and FeO, respectively.

Tandem  reaction-based  chemical  looping  selective  oxidation  is  a
potential pathway to retain the stable transferability of the lattice oxy-
gen. Zhu et al. [98] proposed a four-step chemical looping dry reforming
(CLDR)  process,  as  presented  in  Fig.  5a  and  b.  In  each  stage,  the
iron-based OC underwent a shift in oxidation state as the reaction per-
formed changed according to the following sequence: CLC (Fe3+→Fe2+
),
dry reforming of methane (Fe2+→Fe0), steam splitting (Fe0→Fe3O4), and
air  oxidation  (Fe3O4→Fe3+
).  Their  preliminary  demonstration  of  the
feasibility  of  four-step  CLDR  indicates  that  at  33%  reduction,  the
iron-based OC can reach a methane conversion as high as 98.23%. By
increasing the CH4-to-CO2 mole ratio from one to three during the dry
reforming stage, the syngas H2/CO ratio can be modulated from 1.04 to
1.69. Carbon is inevitably deposited due to the insufficient lattice oxy-
gen  for  carbon  oxidation,  especially  at  high  CH4-to-CO2  ratios.  This
research puts forward new implications for the cascade utilization of the
OC  with  different  valences  by  tandem  reactions.  Additionally,  the
demonstration  of  this  relatively  simple  tandem  reaction  concept  pro-
vides new developing trends for chemical looping selective oxidation.
However, it is to be noted that the corresponding tandem reaction sys-
tems  would  be  more  complicated,  and  thus  is  worthy  of  comprehen-
sively considering.

et

al.

[102]

[99–101].  Ouyang

To determine the mechanisms between the OC and methane during
CL-POM,  experiments  and  characterizations  have  been  performed  on
many  OCs
prepared
Ni/gadolinium-doped  ceria  (Ni/CGO)  materials,  and  combined  the
methane pulses, in situ Raman spectroscopy with mass spectrometry to
clarify the interaction between methane and Ni/CGO (see Fig. 6a and b).
Their research points to the Mars-van-Krevelen type mechanism of POM,
in which methane is decomposed with carbon oxidation by the oxygen
from  CGO.  The  lattice  oxygen  participates  in  the  POM  and  simulta-
neously  suppresses  the  carbon  deposition.  According  to  their  in  situ
Raman and methane pulse results, methane oxidation on the Ni/CGO
surface can be divided into six steps (Fig. 6c, steps a-f): a) oxygen at the
CGO surface migrates to the Ni surface and adsorbs (see R4); b) methane
is decomposed into carbon with hydrogen production at the surface sites
of Ni (see R5); c) methane is fully oxidized by the adsorbed oxygen with
CO2  and H2O generation (see R6); d) the deposited carbon is partially
oxidized by the adsorbed oxygen with CO generation (see R7); e) oxygen
cumulatively migrates from bulk to surface CGO due to the difference in
oxygen chemical potential gradient (see R8); and f) as adsorbed carbon
builds up, it forms amorphous carbon according to R9.

Obulk

CGO→Osurface

CGO

CH4 (g)+S*

Ni→C + 2H2(g)

CH4 (g)+O*

Ni→CO2(g)+2H2O(g)

(R4)

(R5)

(R6)

Fig. 3. Schematic illustration of the bulk-phase lattice oxygen transportation and surface lattice oxygen participated in POM [95]. Reprinted with permission from
American Chemical Society, 2017.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010454

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 4. (a) Schematic illustration of the Y doped Fe2O3/Al2O3 OC in chemical looping methane oxidation; Computational models of Eov for the first oxygen vacancy
for fresh (b) α-Fe2O3(001) (c) and 1.5-Y2O3(111); (d) The second oxygen vacancy for the 1.5-Y2O3(111) surface; (e) The relationship between the CO selectivity of 0-
Y2O3-15, 1.5-Y2O3-15, and 1.5-Y2O3-330 and their corresponding Eov  [96]. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, 2018.

Fig. 5. Four-step chemical looping methane conversion  process. (a) Schematic of  the proposed CLDH process;  (b) Evolution of  iron oxide  in a reducer  and dry
reforming reactor [98]. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2020.

C + O*

Ni→CO(g)

Osurface

CGO →O*
Ni

C*

Ni→Camorphous

(R7)

(R8)

(R9)

Carbon  oxidation  can  be  divided  into  two  stages  based  on  the
different lattice oxygen distributions (surface and bulk). Initially, carbon
oxidation by the surface oxygen will occur; however, once the surface

oxygen  is  consumed,  bulk  oxygen  would  be  involved.  In  the  second
stage, the carbon is oxidized by the oxygen that migrated from the bulk
to  the  surface  of  the  CGO.  The  rate-determining  step  of  the  second
oxidation  stage  is  the  bulk-to-surface  migration  rate  (R4).  Thus,  un-
derstanding the mobility of the lattice oxygen is of key importance that
warrants further investigation.

While CL-POM has significant advantages, balancing the C-H acti-
vation  and  syngas  selectivity  remains  challenging  in  terms  of  modu-
lating  the  OC’s  lattice  oxygen  in  comparison  to  molecular  oxygen.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010455

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 6. In situ Raman methane pulse experiments. (a) CO signal from the mass spectrometer (black line) and the integrated CeIV-O F2g peak intensity (purple line)
with time; (b) The production/consumption amount of the gas species in the methane pulse experiment with in situ Raman by a mass spectrometer vs. the pulse
number; (c) The proposed mechanism for methane oxidation [102]. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2020.

Research  currently  is  focusing  on  regulating  the  structure  of  the  OC,
thereby  modulating  the  lattice  oxygen  mobility  and  transferability
[103]. Zhang et al. [104] discovered that the octahedral distortion of
FeO6 impacts the bulk oxygen mobility and the surface oxygen exchange
capability of La1-xCexFeO3  (see Fig. 7a to e). Oxygen mobility in La1-x-
CexFeO3  is  measured  using  electrical  conductivity  relaxation  (ECR)
measurements, where the surface exchange coefficient (kchem) and bulk
diffusion coefficient (Dchem) of oxygen are detected by modulating the
OC  conductivity  from  abruptly  changing  the  oxygen  partial  pressure.
Results  revealed  that  distorting  the  FeO6  octahedra  can  promote  the
migration  of  lattice  oxygen  in  La1-xCexFeO3,  thereby  lowering  the

oxygen vacancy formation energy and oxygen migration barrier. Spe-
cifically, La0.5Ce0.5FeO3 has the greatest observed distortion of the FeO6
octahedra,  which  results  in  the  highest  bulk  diffusion  coefficient  and
highest  surface  exchange  coefficient,  thus  accomplishing  improved
syngas  yield  (Fig.  7f  and  g).  This  demonstrates  that  lower  activation
energy (Ea) for lattice oxygen migration was achieved on La0.5Ce0.5FeO3
compared  with  that  of  LaFeO3  and  CeFeO3,  thereby  achieving  better
methane  conversion  and  syngas  selectivity  during  the  continuous
CH4/CO2 redox cycles. This implies that regulating the distortion of the
crystallographic distortion of the perovskites will allow the lattice ox-
ygen  performance  to  be  tailored,  which  will  substantially  promote

Fig. 7. Bond structure in the FeO6  octahedra of (a) LaFeO3; (b) La0.75Ce0.25FeO3; (c) La0.5Ce0.5FeO3; (d) La0.25Ce0.75FeO3; (e) CeFeO3; (f) Arrhenius plots of Dchem
substitution [104]. Reprinted with
over a temperature range from 650 to 850
permission from American Chemical Society, 2020.

C; (g) Evolutions of the FeO6  octahedral distortion and syngas yield with the Ce3+

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010456

Z. Sun et al.

reaction performance in chemical looping processes.

More recently, nanoscale iron-based OCs were designed by Liu et al.
[105]  for  CLPO.  During  this  process,  the  generation  of  CO2  can  be
dramatically suppressed by embedding the iron oxide nanoparticles into
a mesoporous silica matrix (see Fig. 8a). A stable CO2 concentration was
(cid:0) 1  with  the  applied  Fe2O3@SBA-15
reported  to  be  less  than  0.7%  gO
throughout CL-POM (Fig. 8b). Nearly 100% CO selectivity is achieved in
◦
a cyclic redox system at 750~935
C with a higher methane conversion
rate  in  comparison  to  unsupported  Fe2O3  (Fig.  8c).  DFT  calculations
were  conducted  to  compare  the  energy  profiles  on  a  Fe40O60  nano-
particle and Fe2O3(001) surface (Fig. 8d). The barrier for CO2C  forma-
(cid:0) 1, which is lower than the CO3C  formation
tion was only 37.2 kJ mol
barrier on the Fe2O3(001) surface. Moreover, the barrier for CO2  for-
(cid:0) 1  higher  than
mation  on  the  Fe40O60  nanoparticle  was  30.4  kJ  mol
Fe2O3(001). This is because of the surface stress of nanoparticles that are
induced by the surface atoms with unsaturated coordination. Thus, it is
indicated  that  the  low-coordinated  oxygen  atoms  on  the  surface  of  a
nanoscaled iron-based OC can significantly enhance CO formation.

As  a  novel  integration, plasma-assisted  CL-POM has  also attracted
much attention, especially for non-thermal plasmas [106]. They have
demonstrated higher energy efficiencies compared to thermal plasmas.
Non-thermal  plasma  technologies  can  be  categorized  as  gliding  arc,
microwave  plasma,  corona  discharge,  dielectric  barrier  discharge
(DBD),  among  others  [107].  Among  them,  DBD  has  been  broadly
explored because of its simple reactor configuration [108]. Zheng et al.
[109] conducted DBD plasma-assisted chemical looping hydrogen gen-
◦
eration from the POM at mild temperatures between 300~500
C. Four
POM OCs, Fe2O3, NiO/Fe2O3, SrFeO3-δ, and NiO/SrFeO3-δ  were inves-
tigated  as  packed materials  in  a  plasma reactor.  Results  indicate  that
both Fe2O3 and SrFeO3-δ  were inactive for syngas production. NiO was

found to enhance the methane partial oxidation inside the DBD reactor.
The  authors  proposed  that  metallic  Ni  was  responsible  for  catalyzing
methane  decomposition  with  hydrogen  generation  while  the  lattice
oxygen prevented the formation of carbon.

These findings suggest that plasma-assisted CL-POM can significantly
reduce  the  energy  transformation  temperature  required  for  methane
activation.  Nevertheless,  large-scale  operation  of  plasma-assisted
chemical looping processes is still a long-term goal. Firstly, the surface
reaction mechanisms, kinetics, and multiphase plasma fluid dynamics
are still not adequately understood. Secondly, new-generation OC ma-
terials need to be exploited in conjunction with plasma discharge and
low-temperature  energy  transformation  conditions.  Thirdly,  the  eco-
nomics  of  the  plasma-assisted  process  needs  to  be  further  evaluated.
Lastly,  plasma-assisted  chemical  looping  is  more  complicated,  thus
resulting in more complex (and potentially expensive) reactors.

2.1.2. Selective oxidation of methane to methanol

Selectively  synthesizing  methanol  from  methane  during  mild  con-
ditions  is  one  of  the  long-standing  challenges  in  chemistry.  This  is
attributed  to  the  high  C-H  bond  strength  of  methane,  its  negligible
electron  affinity,  and  low  polarizability;  yet,  it  is  an  economically
important  reaction  [110–114].  Copper  exchanged  zeolites  have  been
reported  to  be  active  in  forming  methanol  from  methane  [115–117].
Nonetheless, the selective partial oxidation of methane to methanol still
suffers  from  low  efficiency.  Notably,  the  methanol  product  is  more
susceptible to oxidization than methane [118–120]. Sushkevich et al.
[121] demonstrated that the direct oxidation of methane to methanol
with oxygen is challenging due to the low chemical activity of methane
and  the  coherent  tendency  of  methanol  oxidation  to  carbon  dioxide.
Additionally,  the  use  of  gaseous  oxygen  as  an  oxidant  suffers  from

Fig. 8. Nanoscaled iron-based OC for CL-POM. (a) Schematic of the chemical looping methane partial oxidation with comparisons of the conventional Fe-based OC
(CO selectivity ~90%) and Fe2O3@SBA-15 OC (CO selectivity>99%); (b) Concentrations of the products during the temperature-programmed reduction of Fe2O3 @
SBA-15 and the unsupported Fe2O3; (c) Cyclic conversion rate of Fe2O3@SBA-15 and the unsupported Fe2O3; (d) Energy profile of the partial methane oxidation on
the Fe40O60  nanoparticle and Fe2O3(001) surface [105]. Reprinted with permission from Springer Nature, 2019.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010457

Z. Sun et al.

unsatisfactory methanol selectivity, attributing to the favorable forma-
tion of carbon dioxide [122].

The stoichiometric oxidation of methane to methanol over copper-
exchanged zeolites has been reported to be a practical approach over
the mono-(μ-oxo) dicupric cores [123–125] or [Cu3O3]2+
trimeric sites
that  are  generated  by  feeding  anhydrous  oxygen  over  the  zeolite  at
◦
C [126–128]. The highly reactive electrophilic
temperatures above 450
metal-oxygen species activate the strong C-H bonds of methane with the
surface-bound  methoxy  group  production  at  temperatures  lower  than
◦
200
C. The formed methoxy groups can then be extracted as methanol
by  H2O  or  solvents  with  copper  site  deactivation  [113,129,130].
Therefore,  the  selective  oxidation  of  methane  to  methanol  with  the
Cu-exchanged zeolite fulfills the following three-step cyclic processes: 1)
zeolite  activation  in  oxygen  to  produce  reactive  copper-oxygen  in-
termediates; 2) selective oxidation of methane to methanol; 3) extrac-
tion  of  methanol  from  the  catalyst.  The  above-mentioned  procedure
involves redox looping, which belongs to the chemical looping process.
However, the “chemical looping” concept is not universally used as an
emphasized keyword in the oxidative methane-to-methanol process.

Of the copper-exchanged zeolites, copper exchanged mordenite (Cu-
MOR) and copper exchanged omega (Cu-MAZ) are two of the large-pore
zeolites that were reported to possess a high methane-to-methanol yield
[125,128,131,132]. However, the full cycle of the reaction still needs
further  clarification,  including  methane  activation,  water-assisted
methanol  desorption,  and  a  second  methane-to-methanol  reaction
with the active species. Mahyuddin et al. [133] calculated the reaction
energy  diagrams  of  the  methane  to  methanol  conversion  over
[Cu2(μ-O)]2+
-MOR and -MAZ. They also evaluated the catalytic ability
of the different bridging O atoms in [Cu3(μ-O)3]2+
-MOR and -MAZ to
abstract the H atom of methane on the basis of the DFT calculations. Two
distinct [Cu2O]2+
species in MOR (AlT2-SiT4-SiT4-AlT2  and AlT4-SiT2-Si-
T2-AlT4) show the activation energies for the C-H bond cleavage of 10.9
and 14.4 kcal/mol, which are comparable with the experimental results
(11.1  ± 0.5  and  14.7  ± 0.5  kcal/mol).  The  [Cu2O]2+
sites  of  AlT2--
SiT4-SiT4-AlT2 MOR are more reactive, whereas AlT4-SiT2-SiT2-AlT4 is less
reactive, as shown in Fig. 9. They also suggest that the existence of a
water  molecule  can  decrease  the  methanol  desorption  energies  over
[Cu2]2+
-MAZ by approximately 50% in comparison
to the values without the assistance of water.

-MOR and [Cu2]2+

The tedious heating and cooling steps that are performed throughout
the  redox  cycles  have  limited  the  applicability  of  the  pathway  and
prolonged the duration of the entire cycle, thus, making the isothermal
conversion highly desirable [134]. Tomkins et al. [135] implemented
the  direct  production  of  methanol  from  methane  by  using  molecular
oxygen under an isothermal temperature of 200
C. This was achieved
by using copper-exchanged mordenite (Cu-MOR, Si/Al=6, 4.7 wt% Cu)
C
according to a redox scheme, as presented in Fig. 10a. Firstly, 450

◦

◦

and [Cu3(μ-
active species [133]. Reprinted with permission from American Chem-

Fig. 9. Methane partial oxidation to methanol over [Cu2(μ-O)]2+
O)3]2+
ical Society, 2018.

activation was conducted, and it is indicated that the methanol yields
increase with the partial pressures of methane, whereas the methanol
yields have  a  decreasing tendency  as  the oxygen  partial pressures in-
crease. Then, Cu-MOR activation and  selective oxidation of methanol
◦
C. From Fig. 10c and d,
were carried out at a temperature as low as 200
the  methanol  yield  performs  a  slightly  decreasing  tendency  with  the
oxygen  partial  pressures  while  presenting  a  cumulatively  increasing
trend  as  a  function  of  methane  partial  pressure,  affirming  the  weak
impact of oxygen pressure and the strong effect of methane pressure on
the  methanol  yield.  Their  extended  X-ray  absorption  fine  structure
(EXAFS)  measurements  identified  the  active  species  as  dehydrated
copper  oxide  clusters,  not  necessarily  di-  or  tricopper  sites,  which
revealed an unprecedented reaction mechanism. This would also sug-
gest  that  a  wider  variety  of  methane-to-methanol  materials  can  be
designed than formerly proposed.

Sushkevich  et  al.  [136]  suggested  the  direct  functionalization  of
methane  into  methanol  with  97%  selectivity  over  Cu-MOR  by  using
water as the source of oxygen, namely anaerobic oxidation. It has been
reported that water serves as an oxidant for the partial oxidization of
methane, and it promotes active site regeneration, product desorption,
and reaction intermediate stabilization. The methane-to-methanol con-
version was conducted through a multiple-cycle pathway, as illustrated
◦
in Fig. 11a. This pathway is described as i) Cu-MOR treatment at 400
C
by applying a flow of oxygen or helium; ii) methane oxidation for 30 min
at 7 bars, where a ramping methane pressure was found to stimulate the
higher activity on Cu-MOR by utilizing the reactive oxygen in CuII-O--
CuII with methane to yield methoxy (CH3O*) while reducing CuII to CuI;
iii)  finally,  using  the  oxygen  in  the  water  molecule  to  reform  the
Cu-O-Cu  and  produce  hydrogen  while  simultaneously  desorbing  the
products. Two electrons were transferred from CuI to water with the CuII
reformation. The DFT results confirm the role of water during the redox
looping cycle: i) catalyst regeneration by providing an oxygen atom with
the  achievement  of  molecular  hydrogen  generation  through  a
two-electron reduction process. The unique configuration of the mono
(μ-oxo)dicopper active site enables water to act as an oxidant; ii) the
presence of water ensures energetically favorable desorption of meth-
anol  (Fig.  11d). Thus,  looping-based  methane-to-methanol  generation
can be summarized as CH4 activation (CuII-O-CuII)→ methanol produc-
tion  (CuI-OH2-CuI)→  methanol  desorption  with  molecular  hydrogen
formation (CuII-O-CuII). The method proposed was preliminarily proved
to be cost-effective and energy-efficient, which will substantially pro-
mote the industrialization of the methane-to-methanol process.

2.2. Chemical looping oxidative coupling of methane

The OCM is a promising method for the direct conversion of methane
to C2 products [137–140]. It has been recognized that the OCM process
includes  a  heterogeneous  catalytic  step,  which  activates  the  methane
and  oxygen,  and  a  homogeneous  gas-phase  step.  This  involves  the
coupling of CH3⋅  radicals to C2H6  and the dehydrogenation of hydro-
carbons  [137,141,142].  However,  high  methane  activation  tempera-
tures and a low conversion hinder its further utilization [143–145]. In
addition, the use of oxygen also leads to overoxidation [141,146]. Un-
like  the  co-feed  of  methane  and  molecular  oxygen,  chemical  looping
oxidative coupling of methane (CL-OCM) utilizes the lattice oxygen of
OCs  as  the  oxygen  source.  This  achieves  a  selective  production  of  C2
materials from methane coupling [147,148]. Similar to other types of
chemical looping  technologies, the main  advantage of  CL-OCM is  the
achievement of inherent air separation [149,150]. Moreover, having no
direct contact between methane and molecular oxygen reduces the risk
of  an  explosion  [151].  It  also  allows  for  better  control  of  the  oxygen
reactant concentrations, which can potentially reduce overoxidation.

OC materials modification and functionalization are one of the main
strategies for enhancing CL-OCM performance. Wang et al. [152] came
up with two strategies to improve the OCM activity and maintain the
olefin  selectivity  by  modifying  the  lanthanum  oxide  (La2O3)  catalyst.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010458

Z. Sun et al.

Fig.  10. Isothermal  cyclic  conversion  of
methane into methanol over copper-exchanged
zeolite  at  a  low  temperature.  (a)  Schematic
illustration  of  the  catalytic  cycle,  including
activation  of  the  catalyst,  the  methane-to-
methanol  conversion,  and
the  methanol
extraction; (b) Methanol yields after activation
at 450
C followed by the off-line extraction at
different pressures of oxygen and methane; (c)
Effect  of  the  oxygen  partial  pressures  on  the
methanol  yields  (methane  partial  pressure=6
bar);  (d)  Effect  of  the  partial  pressures  of
methane on the methanol yields (oxygen partial
pressure=1 bar) [135]. Reprinted with permis-
sion from Wiley, 2018.

◦

The heterolytic cleavage of the C(cid:0) H bond in methane and the presence
of the CH3⋅ intermediates can be promoted on the stepped La2O3(210)
surface,  which  has  exposed  lattice  oxygen  with  low  coordination.
Doping strontium and cerium into La2O3  can enhance the CH3⋅ forma-
tion and hinder its deactivation on the surface by altering the electronic
environment. The OCM can be divided into two stages as follows: i) The
lattice oxygen participates in methane oxidation to form hydrocarbons
and oxygen vacancies; ii) the molecular oxygen refills the oxygen va-
cancy  and  oxidizes  the  methane.  Cheng  et  al.  [153]  proposed  a  new
method for the enhancement of C2 selectivity over CL-OCM by using an
Mg-Mn composite OC (Mg6MnO8) with Li-doped oxygen vacancies. The
results indicate that the C2 product selectivity of Li-doped Mg6MnO8 OCs
is  universally  higher  than  the  un-doped  ones.  The  energy  barrier  of
Li-Mg6MnO8 is 34.13 kJ/mol higher than the CH3 dehydrogenation on
the undoped OC. This suggests that the Li-doped oxygen vacancy im-
pairs CH3 radical adsorption; thus, it hinders C-H bond activation.

On the basis of the research by Cheng et al., Baser et al. [154] further
proposed the co-doping of a Mg-Mn-based OC with lithium and tungsten
for  the  CL-OCM,  as  shown  in  Fig.  12a.  The  designed  codoped  OC
improved the OCM performance with a C2+ yield of 28.6% at 850
C
(Fig. 12b). This has been reported to be 80% higher than the combined
yields of the single Li- and W-doped Mg6MnO8  OC, and 330% higher
than the undoped one. Combined with solid characterization and DFT
calculations,  the  synergy  of  Li  and  W  codopants  has  been  confirmed,
which  can  not  only  promote  CH3  dimerization  but  also  suppress  CO2
formation,  attributing  to  the  inhabitation  of  the  unselective  oxygen
vacancies  according  to  the  DFT  results.  Their  research  provides  new
implications  for  designing  an  economically  and  environmentally
feasible CLOCM system.

◦

2.3. Chemical looping oxidative steam reforming of alcohols

Alcohols belong to a variety of organic compounds that are formed
by  replacing  one  or  more  hydrogens  in  hydrocarbon  molecules  with
hydroxyl groups. Through the oxidative steam reforming of alcohols, the
conversion  of  liquid  fuel  to  hydrogen  can  be  accomplished.  This  is

achieved  while  figuring  out  the  bottlenecks  of  hydrogen  production,
storage, and transportation in an integrated manner. In this section, the
chemical  looping-based  oxidative  steam  reforming  of  methanol,
ethanol,  and  GLY  will  be  introduced,  and  the  correlational  research
progress is summarized, as presented in Supplementary Table S1.

2.3.1. Oxidative steam reforming of methanol

◦

Compared with methane, a much lower temperature is required for
C [155–159]. Meth-
methanol reforming, generally no more than 300
anol is an ideal hydrogen carrier for synergistically achieving hydrogen
storage, transportation, and in situ supply due to its liquid state [160]. It
also  shows  the  superiorities  of  high  H/C  mole  ratio,  low  reforming
temperature, high hydrogen storage capacity, the absence of sulfur/ni-
trogen  impurities,  and  ease  of  transport  [161–165].  The  research  on
methanol-to-hydrogen production technologies will contribute to con-
structing  a  methanol-hydrogen-PEMFC  system,  thereby  solving  the
problems of transportation, storage, and in situ supply of hydrogen en-
ergy in an integrated manner. The methanol-to-hydrogen technologies
that have been reported mainly include steam reforming of methanol
(SRM),  POM,  oxidative  steam  reforming  of  methanol  (OSRM),  and
electro-catalytic  reforming  of  methanol  [166–173].  More  recently,  a
new  pathway,  the  chemical  looping  oxidative  steam  reforming  of
methanol (CL-OSRM), has been proposed based on the OSRM technol-
ogy proposed by Sun et al. [174,175], the detailed scheme was presented
in Fig. 13.

To  initially  analyze  the  oxygen  release  capacity  of  the  OC,  low-
temperature Ellingham diagrams are drawn for material screening, as
illustrated in Fig. 14. The lattice oxygen release capacity of the active
component unary and binary oxides follows the order of PdO> RuO2>
CuO> Rh2O3> CuV2O6> CuMoO4> Cu2O> Fe2O3> FeO> Ca2Fe2O5>
Fe3O4> Ca2V2O7> LaFeO3> CaMoO4. From this, the iron oxides such as
FeO, Fe3O4, as well as binary composite oxides such as Ca2Fe2O5  and
Ca2V2O7  are located between the methanol partial oxidation and com-
plete oxidation range, which could be considered suitable OC materials
for CL-OSRM.

Combinations of copper oxide and Ca2Fe2O5 have also been explored

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010459

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 11. Selective oxidation of methane to methanol using water as the oxidant via a redox looping scheme. (a) Schematic representation of the reaction conditions of
the POM by water; (b) The DFT simulated pathway, illustrating the thermodynamic (ΔG, the change in Gibbs free energy) and the kinetic feasibility of the proposed
mechanism [136]. Reprinted with permission from AAAS, 2017.

Fig. 12. (a) Schematic illustration of the lithium and tungsten codoped Mg6MnO8 OC for CL-OCM; (b) Comparison of the combined overall yield of Li-Mg6MnO8 and
(cid:0) 1  [154]. Reprinted with permission from America Chemical Society, 2021.
WMg6MnO8  with the overall yield of Li/W-Mg6MnO8  at 850
Reprinted with permission from American Chemistry Society, 2021.

C and a GHSV of 2400 h

◦

◦

for CL-OSRM that acts as a combined OC for redox looping and an active
catalyst for methanol reforming, hence, it is named as a catalytic oxygen
(cid:0) 1) at
carrier (COC). The highest productivity (37.6 μmol⋅H2⋅g
240
C was obtained over 40 mol% Cu loaded on Ca2Fe2O5. The COC
reduction (R10, R11) and regeneration (R12) reactions during CL-OSRM
are presented as follows:
COC reduction stage:

(cid:0) 1⋅COC⋅s

CH3OH + O2(cid:0)

lattice→CO2+2H2

CH3OH + H2O→CO2+3H2

COC regeneration stage:

(R10)

(R11)

O2→2O2(cid:0)

lattice

Overall reaction:

(R12)

CH3OH + (1 (cid:0) a)H2O + aO2(cid:0)

lattice→CO2+(3 (cid:0) a)H20 ≤ a ≤ 0.5

(R13)

In situ DRIFTS was carried out to investigate the methanol evolution
mechanism during CL-OSRM (Fig. 15a–c). Results from Fig. 15d indicate
that the CL-OSRM-based reaction pathways of methanol evolve from full
oxidation to a formaldehyde intermediate pathway, and subsequent to a
methyl-formate
intermediate  pathway,  where  the  reactions  are
exothermic→ auto-thermal→ endothermic, respectively [174]

Despite  that  integration  of  high-temperature  proton  exchange
membrane fuel cells (HT-PEMFCs) with methanol reforming has been

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104510

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 13. Schematic illustration of CL-OSRM. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2020.

◦
Fig. 14. Ellingham diagram of the metal oxides at low-temperature ranges from 100
pink line represents the POM.

◦
C to 300

C. The bold blue line indicates the complete oxidation and the bold

reported to be effective in hydrogen storage, transportation, and in situ
supply, there remain a variety of areas that must be addressed prior to its
industrial  application  [176–178].  Firstly,  optimization  of  the  con-
sumption  of  surface  lattice  oxygen  and  steam  is  needed  to  maximize
hydrogen generation efficiency. Secondly, the auto-thermal operation of
the  PEMFC-CL-OSRM  integrated  system  needs  to  be  resolved  consid-
ering  the  oxygen  release  is  unstable.  Thirdly,  CL-OSRM  involves
microchannel  reactors  that  still  need  to  be  designed  [179].  Fourth,
replenishment of the lattice oxygen in the micro-channel reactors is still
a  challenge  that  limits  the  development  of  CL-OSRM  technology.
Finally,
the
high-temperature PEMFC and the methanol reformer, it is necessary to
◦
reduce the methanol reforming temperature below 180

to  enable  energy  cascade  optimization  between

C.

Cobalt-based  and  Nickel-based  ferrites  (CoFe2O4  and  NiFe2O4
modified with CeZrO2) were synthesized by Dharanipragada et al. [180]
for  catalyst-assisted  chemical  looping  methanol  conversion.  Different
from the above-mentioned CL-OSRM process, methanol is fully oxidized
◦
by Co- and Ni-based ferrites at 550
C in the methanol reformer, and the
carbon  dioxide  dissociates  to  CO  at  the  regenerator.  Accordingly,
methanol first decomposes into CO and H2 followed by the reduction of
OC and the production of CO2  and H2O. Take CoFe2O4  as an example,
the main reactions during catalyst-assisted chemical looping methanol
conversion are listed below:

OC reduction:

CH3OH→CO + 2H2

CoFe2O4+CO + H2→(Co (cid:0) 2Fe)alloy+3H2O + CO2

(R14)

(R15)

During  the  regeneration  stage,  CO2  was  conducted  with  CO

generation:

(Co (cid:0) 2Fe)alloy+4CO2→CoFe2O4+4CO

(R16)

Moreover, a higher CO yield than the theoretical was obtained which

is assigned to deposited carbon oxidation by CO2.

C + CO2→2CO

(R17)

On the basis of their cyclic experiments, the reduced Co-based fer-
rites  can  be  oxidized  back  to  their  original  phases;  nevertheless,  the
phase  of  Ni-ferrites  segregated  into  Ni  and  Fe3O4  due  to  sintering,
leading to the loss of oxygen storage capacity and a decrease in CO yield,
highlighting  that  rational  design  of  OCs  to  prevent  sintering  and
agglomeration is a critical part of the chemical looping-based material
synthesis.

2.3.2. Oxidative steam reforming of ethanol

Hydrogen mixed with COx  generation from ethanol is an effective
approach  due  to  the  high  hydrogen  content  in  ethanol  and  the  raw
materials  can  be  converted  from  renewable  biomass  [181,182].
Compared with methanol steam reforming, the necessary temperature
◦
for ethanol activation increases, generally to higher than 450
C, due to
the  presence  of  the  C-C  bond  [183,184].  Conventional  active  compo-
nents  for  catalyzing  ethanol  reforming  consist  of  inexpensive  metals
such as Cu, Co, Ni, and precious metals including Ru, Rh, Pd, Pt, etc
[185,186].  The  oxygen-carrying  capacity  of  these  metal  oxides  is
calculated  as  presented  in  Fig.  16a,  in  which  acetaldehyde  (C2H4O),
ethyl  acetate  (C4H8O2),  acetone  (C3H6O),  ethylene  (C2H4),  ethane

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104511

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 15. Investigations on CL-OSRM. (a) and (b) In situ DRIFTS due to the chemical looping-based oxidative methanol steam reforming stage at 1-12 min and 10-30
min, respectively; (c) Reaction pathway evolutions of CL-OSRM [174]. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2020.

Fig. 16. Potential OCs screening for chemical looping ethanol reforming. The Ellingham diagram of the (a) ethanol oxidation to H2 and CO2, H2O and CO2, acetone,
ethyl acetate, and acetaldehyde. The ethanol oxidation to H2 + CO2 and H2O + CO2 are two main considerations since the formation of acetone, ethyl acetate, and
acetaldehyde should be difficult in the presence of steam; (b) Unary metal (Cu, Ni, Co, Ru, and Rh) oxides; and (c) binary metal (Ni-Ti, Ni-Fe, Co-Fe, Ni-Mn, Ni-Cr, Ni-
W, Ni-Al, Ni-Mo) oxides.

(C2H6), hydrogen (H2), CO2, and H2O were considered as products from
full oxidation or selective oxidation of ethanol. It can be concluded that
the  unary  metal  oxides,  CuO,  Cu2O,  RuO2,  and  Rh2O3,  show  high
equilibrium  oxygen  partial  pressure  values,  resulting  in  the  complete
oxidation of ethanol (Fig. 16b). Contrastingly, cobalt and nickel oxides
generate relatively low p(O2), but their oxygen partial pressures are still
adequate for the full oxidation of ethanol. On the basis of the equilib-
rium oxygen partial pressure distributions (Fig. 16c), the use of nickel
tungstate  (NiWO4),  nickel  molybdate  (NiMoO4),  cobalt
ferrite
(CoFe2O4)  could  be  prospective  choices  for  chemical  looping  ethanol
conversion and deserves further experimental investigation.

Chemical looping oxidative steam reforming of ethanol (CL-OSRE)
has  been  demonstrated  using  spinel  materials  as  OCs.  Carraro  et  al.
[187] used FeCo2O4 and CoFe2O4 nanoparticles as OCs for the chemical

looping reforming of ethanol. In operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy
(XAS)  was  performed  to  gain  atomic-scale  insight  into  the  chemical
properties of FeCo2O4  and CoFe2O4  under the chemical looping condi-
tions. Their investigations focused on the effects of the coordination and
the chemical nature of the cations on the catalytic performance. This
was achieved by applying Raman and M ̈ossbauer spectroscopies and in
operando XAS and the following discoveries were made. 1) The cations in
the tetrahedral sites of the spinel structure have higher reducibility than
the octahedral sites, which are independent of their chemical nature. 2)
The  wüstite  phase  (Fe1-xO)  and  FeCo  alloys  can  be  formed  from  the
reduction  of  FeCo2O4  and  CoFe2O4,  and  the  chemical  nature  of  the
cations affects the ratios between the Fe1-xO and FeCo metal alloys. The
total  reduction  of  Co2+
to  Co0  is  faster  than  Fe.  Meanwhile,  the
re-oxidation of cobaltite displays a converse regularity, in which water

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104512

Z. Sun et al.

splitting is ineffective with respect to Fe. These different behaviors of
cobalt and iron mixed spinel influence product selectivity and yields.

The effect of the support on CL-OSRE performance was investigated
by  Dou  et  al.  [188].  Four  Ni-based  OCs,  NiO/SBA-15,  NiO/MCM-41,
NiO/montmorillonite  (MMT),  and  NiO/Al2O3,  were  examined.  The
process  of  CL-OSRE  was  divided  into  lattice  oxygen-induced  OSRE,
steam reforming of ethanol, and OC regeneration, respectively. Among
the  tested  OCs,  mesoporous  NiO/SBA-15  presented  the  highest
hydrogen  selectivity  during  ethanol  reforming.  Compared  with
NiO/MMT  and  NiO/Al2O3,  the  NiO/MCM-41  and  NiO/SBA-15  OCs
perform faster air regeneration rates and less carbon deposition. Their
results reveal that the process of OC reduction by ethanol was controlled
by  the  surface  chemical  reaction  and  product  layer  diffusion.  Isar-
apakdeetham et al. [189] studied the chemical looping steam reforming
of  ethanol  by  using  a  Ni-based  OC  that  was  supported  on  CeO2  and
La2O3-modified Al2O3 to generate hydrogen. Their results indicate that
the suitable incorporation of Ce and La can enhance the carbon resis-
tance of the NiO/Al2O3 OC. Notably, La2O2CO3 would be formed during
the ethanol feed step under excessive La-doping (>50 mol%), resulting
in reduced stability of the modified OC. The results revealed that 7 wt%
La2O3-3wt% CeO2 modified OC displays the highest average H2 yields of
(cid:0) 1⋅C2H5OH with an 87% ethanol conversion during the
3.2 mol⋅H2 mol
(cid:0) 1⋅C2H5OH  with  an  88%  ethanol  con-
first  cycle  and  2.7  mol⋅H2  mol
version during the fifth cycle.

The  chemical  looping  oxidative  steam  reforming  combined  with
sorption-enhanced technology has also been investigated [190]. On the
one hand, the presence of lattice oxygen promotes ethanol conversion
and provides the heat required for SRE; on the other hand, the existence
of carbon dioxide sorbent drives the formation of high-quality hydrogen.
Dou et al. [191] studied sorption enhanced CLOSRE (SE-CLOSRE) using
◦
a mixture of NiO/Al2O3 OC and CaO-based sorbent at 600
C, 1 bar, and
a steam: carbon = 3: 1. Results include that 2< Ca/Ni< 3 formed the
highest purity hydrogen, revealing the superiorities of SE-CLOSRE from
the perspective of in situ CO2 removal with high-quality hydrogen pro-
duction.  However,  the  CO2  sorbents  were  deactivated  after  relatively
few absorption/desorption cycles [192,193]. Moreover, CO2 desorption
generally occurs at elevated temperatures, thus resulting in the sintering
and agglomeration of the OCs [194,195].

The cyclic stability of an OC in continuous units such as a fluidized
bed reactor is also to be considered. This includes molding and granu-
lation processes of OC materials, reactor design and structure modula-
tion, etc. Additionally, particle flow, heat and mass transfer, as well as a
chemical  reaction  in  the  reactor,  are  also  worth  considering  in  the
subsequent processes. [196].

2.3.3. Oxidative steam reforming of glycerol

◦

(>650

Chemical  looping  for  oxidative  steam  reforming  of  glycerol  (CL-
OSRG) is another feasible choice to generate hydrogen [197]. Catalytic
GLY steam reforming in the gas phase is generally performed at high
temperatures
C),  atmospheric  pressure,  and  a  high
steam-to-glycerol  ratio  [198–200].  This  is  performed  to  obtain  high
hydrogen yields. Martínez et al. [201] discussed the effect of ruthenium
on the physical and chemical properties of the CeZr and CeZrCo mixed
oxides for hydrogen production by performing steam reforming of GLY.
In  situ  Raman  spectroscopy  under  reductive  and  oxidative  conditions
was conducted to investigate the structural evolutions of the CeZr and
ZnCo mixed oxides. These were modified by the noble metals and were
used to clarify the beneficial effect of the noble metal addition to the
cobalt catalysts. By analyzing the intensity of the band that was located
(cid:0) 1,  their  results  suggest  that  the  oxygen  va-
at  470  cm
cancies are probably more favored on CeZrRh than CeZrRu, indicating
the positive effect of rhodium on the oxygen mobility of the CeZr sample
in comparison to ruthenium. It was also implied that the incorporation
of rhodium can suppress the segregation of cobalt more than ruthenium.
Recently,  Dang  et  al.  [202]  employed  a  phase-changing  catalyst,
the

to  generate  high-purity  hydrogen

(cid:0) 1  and  629  cm

calcium  cobalt,

from

sorption-enhanced chemical looping oxidative steam reforming of GLY
(see Fig. 17a). It is well known that solid sorbents have always suffered
from sintering and agglomeration, and to date reduction of their uptake
capacities has been inevitable. However, by designing phase-reversible
materials,  sintering  and  agglomeration  could  be  potentially  sup-
pressed.  In  situ  XRD  demonstrated  the  reversible  phase  transition
Ca3Co4O9  ↔  Co  + CaO,  thus  remaining  satisfied  redox  durability
(Fig.  17b).  Specifically,  their  designed  system  retained  stable  perfor-
mance across 120 carbonation/decarbonation cycles with no apparent
deactivation (see Fig. 17c). This study sheds light on a new paradigm for
designing functionalized redox materials with significant resistance to
sintering and agglomeration.

2.4. Chemical looping oxidative dehydrogenation of hydrocarbons

Alkenes  are  important  basic  raw  materials  for  the  generation  of
numerous value-added chemicals, which include oxygenates, polymers,
and  myriad  chemical  intermediates  [203–205].  Steam  cracking  of
various  feedstock  from  ethane  to  naphtha  is  generally  used  by  the
petrochemical industry to produce ethylene and propylene [206,207].
Moreover,  propane  dehydrogenation  (PDH)  is  increasingly  being
adopted [208–210]. Nonetheless, steam cracking and PDH are currently
limited by thermodynamic restrictions; thus, making them less attrac-
tive  than  some  alternatives.  First,  both  of  them  are  endothermic  re-
actions, there is an increase in the energy, cost, and requirements. In
addition, carbon deposition frequently occurs, which may affect product
selectivity and increase the cost of catalyst regeneration [211]. Unlike
PDH, the ODH of light alkanes is an exothermic reaction, which elimi-
nates  these  thermodynamic  constraints.  This  shows  the  potential  for
improving the olefin yield and it reduces the required dehydrogenation
temperature  [206].  In  this  section,  the  ODH  of  ethane,  propane,  and
ethylbenzene  with  an  applied  redox-looping  scheme  are  respectively
introduced. The performances of the diverse OCs in the CL-ODH of hy-
drocarbons are summarized in Supplementary Table S2.

2.4.1. Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane to ethylene

For the ODH of ethane, satisfactory ethylene yields that are greater
than  40%  have  been  reported  [212–217].  Ethylene  selectivity  and  a
yield of 81% and 75%, respectively, were obtained by using MoVTeNbO
as the catalyst [218]. However, a couple of notable challenges remain.
Firstly,  produced  molecular  oxygen  and  ethane  pose  a  safety  hazard
[219]. Secondly, feeding high-purity oxygen requires  costly air distil-
lation [219]. Thirdly, the downstream separation and purification are
complicated  and  energy  intensive  [219,220].  Again,  the  chemical
looping oxidative dehydrogenation (CL-ODH) of ethane has been pro-
posed to address these challenges [221–223]. Neal et al. [37] demon-
strated  the transformational  CL-ODH process by  using a  robust redox
catalyst  with  an  improved  ethylene  dehydrogenation  activity,  ethane
selectivity, as well as chemical and physical stability (see Fig. S1). The
comparison results among various ethylene production pathways such
as  OCM,  ODH,  steam  cracking,  and  CL-ODH  reveal  that  CL-ODH  can
reduce  the  issues  of  conventional  ODH  and  OCM.  Specifically,  it  has
been indicated that the CL-ODH process can offer 60%–87% emission
reduction by exergy optimization. Detailed performance of a prototype
redox catalyst in a fluidized-bed reactor was presented in Fig. 18. During
the 1400 redox looping cycles in a laboratory-scale fluidized bed reactor
C,  15–30  vol%  of  ethane,  and  GHSV
(16  g  of  the  catalyst,  845
–1),  only  a  slight  reduction  of  ethylene  selectivity  was
2000–3250  h
observed but is accompanied by an increase in the overall ethane con-
version, demonstrating the prospective CL-ODH system under a robust
redox catalyst.

◦

Excessive ethylene oxidation to carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide
has always been a primary obstacle in the further development of ODH.
To solve this problem, Gao et al. [224] reported a redox catalyst for the
anaerobic ODH of ethane. In this case, the redox catalyst is comprised of
a  molten  Li2CO3  layer  that  covers  the  redox-active  perovskite  oxides

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104513

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 17. Stable hydrogen generation from bio-
glycerol  when  using  calcium  cobaltate.  (a)
Schematic illustration of the sorption-enhanced
looping  of
GLY  reforming  via  the  redox
Co3+↔Co0 and calcium looping of Ca3Co4O9 ↔
CaO; (b) In situ XRD patterns of the Ca0.5Co0.5O
sample after the first SESRG cycle; (c) The dry-
basis  and  Ar-free  gaseous  product  concentra-
tions  and  the  GLY  conversions  over  the
Ca0.5Co0.5O  catalyst  that  were  determined  by
GC during the 120 reaction–decarbonation cy-
cles  [202].  Reprinted  with  permission  from
Royal Society of Chemistry, 2018.

Fig. 18. Intensified ethylene production from CL-ODH. (a) Ethane conversion, as well as the C2 and C3+ selectivity of the prototype catalyst over 1,400 cycles; (b)
Ethylene selectivity varies with the ethane conversion in a fluidized bed over 1,400 cycles; (c) Weight evolutions of prototype redox catalyst with a number of cycles
[37]. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2019.

La0.8Sr0.2FeO3. The involved reactions of the CL-ODH that are induced
by the molten Li2CO3 layer are summarized below.

Peroxide formation:

2Fe4++2O2(cid:0) →2Fe3++O2(cid:0)
2

ODH:

C2H6+O2(cid:0)

2 →C2H4 + O2(cid:0) + H2O

Peroxide reformation:

(R18)

0.5O2 + 2O2(cid:0) →O2(cid:0)
2

Thus, the overall reaction of CL-ODH is:

(R19)

(R20)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104514

Z. Sun et al.

4C2H6 + O2→4C2H4 + 2H2O

(R21)
It has been demonstrated by 18O2-exchange and EIS measurements
that the presence of molten Li2CO3  can promote the oxygen diffusion
from La0.8Sr0.2FeO3 bulk to the molten Li2CO3 surface while preventing
ethane overoxidation by covering the nonselective sites. As a result, up
to  92.2%  ethylene  selectivity  and  63.6%  ethane  conversion  were  ob-
tained, which indicates the potential of the core-shell redox catalyst for
intensified ethane dehydrogenation. By examining peroxide formation
with  Fe4+→Fe3+
and  Fe3+→Fe2+
redox  centers  on  La0.8Sr0.2FeO3  sur-
face,  it  is  revealed  that  the  Fe4+
reduction  to  Fe3+
(enthalpy  charge:
(cid:0) 0.84  eV,  Fig.  19a)  is  responsible  for  the  active  peroxide  formation
while the transition of Fe3+
in La0.8Sr0.2FeO3 is unlikely occurred
with the existence of Li2CO3 molten layer. These findings provide valid
strategies for functionalized redox catalyst design, which may substan-
tially promote CL-ODH performance with desired ethane conversion and
ethylene selectivity.

to Fe2+

2.4.2. Oxidative dehydrogenation of propane to propylene

Propylene  is  the  starting  material  for  synthesizing  polypropylene,
propylene oxide, acrylonitrile, butyraldehyde, etc., which serve as the
backbone  of  the  modern  polymer  and  pharmaceutical  industry  [225,
226]. With the development of shale gas supplies, the dehydrogenation
of propane has emerged as a state-of-the-art technique that substitutes
the  current,  energy-intensive,  low-yield  cracking  of  naphtha  that  is
employed in the petrochemical industry [227–229]. Similar to ethane
dehydrogenation,  two  main  pathways,  PDH  and  ODH,  are  used  for
propane  production.  Although  PDH  has  a  relatively  high  propene
selectivity, it is strongly endothermic and it potentially suffers from coke
deposition [230,231]. Comparatively speaking, ODH shows the poten-
tial  for  lower  operating  temperatures,  thermodynamic  favorability,
coking  resistance,  and  process  efficiency  improvements  due  to  the
presence  of  oxygen  [232–234].  Nevertheless,  the  ODH  still  faces  the
challenges  of  overoxidation  and  safety  problems;  thus,  hindering  its
industrial
lattice
oxygen-induced ODH is an emerging research technology that needs to
be further exploited. Chen et al. [235] recently reported ODH of propane
to  propylene  by  performing  chemical  looping  with  dual-functional
Mo-V-O  mixed  oxide.  Mo-V-O  mixed  oxide  reduction  can  be  divided
into three stages: overoxidation, ODH, and nonoxidative dehydrogena-
tion, as shown in Fig. 20a. The corresponding reactions are as follows:

applications.  Under

circumstances,

such

1) Overoxidation:

C3H8+10MoVOx

(cid:0)

)

V5+

→3CO2+4H2O + 10MoVOy

(cid:0)

)

V3+

2) ODH:

C3H8+MoVOx

(cid:0)

)
→C3H6 + H2O + MoVOy

(cid:0)

V5+

V3+

)

3) Nonoxidative dehydrogenation:

(cid:0)
C3H8 MoVO

V3+

)

C3H8 + H2

(R22)

(R23)

(R24)

Results  indicate  that  89%  propylene  selectivity  at  36%  propane
conversion can be obtained across 100 dehydrogenation/regeneration
cycles,  and  the  catalyst  performs  a  unique  preponderance  compared
with  the  previously  reported  ODH  ones.  Specifically,  in  situ  Raman
measurements were conducted to identify the role of various functional
groups in CL-ODH, and it was concluded that V=O and V-O-V species are
the oxygen source during ODH, while V3O and V-O-Mo play the role of
catalyzing  nonoxidative  dehydrogenation.  Moreover,  by  combining
pulse  injection  and  DFT  calculation,  the  Mo  doping  results  in  the
increased  binding  energy  of  V-O  bonds,  thereby  hindering  the  lattice
oxygen-induced  overoxidation.  The  precise  construction  of  the  bulk-
phase  lattice  oxygen  via  atomic-scale  doping  of  Mo  enables  the  im-
provements of chemical looping-based ODH of propane.

2.4.3. Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene to styrene

Styrene  is  an  organic  compound  that  is  formed  by  one  hydrogen
atom  that  has  benzene  substituted  ethylene  [236].  Styrene  is  also  an
important monomer for preparing synthetic resins, ion exchange resins,
and  synthetic  rubber  [237–241].  Currently,  ~90%  of  the  produced
styrene  worldwide  is  derived  from  the  catalytic  dehydrogenation  of
ethylbenzene.  Nevertheless,  this  approach  suffers  from  high  energy
consumption,  an  equilibrium-limited  ethylbenzene  conversion,  and  a
complex product separation [242]. Zhu et al. [243] recently reported an
ODH  strategy  with  an  applied  (Ca/Mn)1-xO@FeO2  core-shell  redox
catalyst, in which the process synergistically converts ethylbenzene to
styrene in a chemical looping manner (see Fig. 21a for detailed scheme).
The redox catalyst is composed of a catalytically active KFeO2  shell as
the active component for the ethylbenzene activation and a (Ca/Mn)1-xO
core for reversible lattice oxygen storage and donation. On the one hand,
the surface KFeO2 shell is responsible for activating ethylbenzene; on the
other hand, the bulk-phase, cation defected CaO-MnO solid solution has
been  designed  for  reversible  lattice  oxygen  donation  and  uptake.  A
single-pass  ethylbenzene  conversion  of  97%,  a  styrene  selectivity  of
94.2%,  and  a  H2  conversion  of  ~100%  were  achieved  without

Fig. 19. DFT calculation and reaction pathway during the ODH step with enthalpy changes labeled. (a) Fe4+
reaction mechanisms of CL-ODH with applied molten Li2CO3  modified LaxSr1-xFeO3  redox catalysts [224]. Reprinted with permission from AAAS, 2020.

reduction to Fe3+

; (b) Fe3+

reduction to Fe2+

; (c)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104515

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 20. Modulation of the lattice oxygen by the dual-functional Mo-V-O mixed oxide. (a) Schematic illustration of the alternative CL-ODH scheme; (b) In situ Raman
◦
spectra. The measurements were conducted from 50 to 500
C/min) under 20 vol% C3H8 in H2, and the Raman scans were taken every 10 min [235]. Reprinted
with permission from American Chemical Society, 2019.

◦
C (5

Fig.  21. CL-ODH  of  ethylbenzene  to  styrene  by  using  the  (Ca/Mn)1-xO@FeO2  core-shell  redox  catalyst.  (a)  Schematic  illustration  of  CL-ODH;  (b)  Ethylbenzene
conversion and styrene selectivity compared with the industrial catalytic dehydrogenation; (c) Long-term cyclic test using the fully reoxidized redox catalyst; (d-1)
Energy profiles of the dehydrogenation steps; (d-2) Energy profiles of the water formation and desorption steps; (e) Kinetic isotope effect study with the temperature-
programmed reduction and isothermal reduction of the redox catalyst when using ethylbenzene and deuterium ethylbenzene; (f) The styrene isotope distributions
[243]. Reprinted with permission from Springer Nature, 2021.

co-feeding  the  steam  (Fig.  21b).  Compared  to  the  commercial  dehy-
drogenation  of  ethylbenzene,  the  performance  of  the  redox-ODH
demonstrated yields of 72% that increase on a relative basis (see Fig.
S2). In addition, the 100-cycle continuous tests verified the satisfying
stability and durability of the redox catalyst (Fig. 21c). By conducting
DFT calculations, the evolution pathway of ethylbenzene to styrene on
the KFeO2  surface is summarized, which includes the C-H dissociation
from ɑ-C→ β-H dissociation→ styrene desorption (Fig. 21d). Moreover,
kinetic isotope effect (KIE) for the ODH reaction rates of ethylbenzene
(C8H10)  and  deuterated  ethylbenzene  (C8D10)  was  measured  for
detecting  the  rate-determining  step.  The  C-H  bond  activation  on  the
ethyl branch of ethylbenzene was confirmed to be the rate-limiting step.

3. Perspectives

3.1. Other potential chemical looping pathways

Except  for  the  above-mentioned  energy  transformation  pathways,
this section introduces other prospective energy conversion approaches
that are less investigated, also induced by the lattice oxygen in redox
looping manners. This includes the: chemical looping-based oxidative
cracking of n-hexane, the epoxidation of ethylene, the selective oxida-
tion of GLY to GLYA, the selective oxidation of methane to acetic acid,

and the oxidative aromatization of methane.

3.1.1. Oxidative cracking of n-hexane

Ethylene  can  be  produced  from  the  steam  cracking  of  the  hydro-
carbons  (e.g.,  naphtha),  however,  the  current  industrial  process  con-
sumes  a  significant  amount  of  energy,  which  requires  approximately
28.5 GJ/ton of ethylene that is produced from naphtha steam cracking
[244]. This also leads to large CO2 emissions and coke deposition, and
thus the reactor is required to be regularly shut down for removing coke
[245]. As the demand for ethylene continues to increase, implementing
a new ethylene production pathway from naphtha is urgently needed.
Chemical  looping  offers  an  alternative  strategy  for  the  oxidative
cracking of naphtha, in which the lattice oxygen uses naphtha cracking
instead  of  molecular  oxygen  [246].  Similar  to  replacing  any  other
oxidative treatment with chemical looping, this scheme has the poten-
tial to simultaneously reduce the hazard of mixing O2 and hydrocarbons.
It can also reduce the cost by eliminating the air distillation, and it in-
creases the desired product selectivity by reducing the over-combustion
via the optimization of the lattice oxygen binding strength and activity
[245].

While chemical looping-based oxidative cracking of n-hexane shows
promise, the design and the promotion of highly reactive, stable, cost-
effective,  and  environmentally  friendly  OCs  remains  challenging

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104516

Z. Sun et al.

[247]. The OC materials should be able to perform the following tasks: i)
undergo a repeated redox cycle, which allows for lattice oxygen to act as
a reactant to selectively convert n-hexane into ethylene [248]; ii) suf-
ficiently activate n-hexane, which catalyzes n-hexane through oxidative
cracking;  and  iii)  resist  the  formation  of  carbon  deposits  [245].  Tian
et  al.  [246]  demonstrated  that  the  Fe-substituted  barium  hex-
aaluminates (BaFexAl12-xO19) are viable OC candidates. In addition, they
showed that the Fe substitution (BaFexAl12-xO19, x=1, 2, 3, 4, or 6) is
beneficial in terms of obtaining a high oxygen-carrying capacity, but it
results in high COx yields. It is found that the incorporation of 20 wt%
Na2WO4 can hinder the COx formation (decreases to 3.7%) and convert
(cid:0) 1  at
the produced hydrogen during n-hexane cracking (GHSV=9000 h
700
C). Further, the near-surface cation atomic percentage was deter-
mined, which indicates that the movement of Ba can be suppressed in
the presence of Na2WO4 and the accumulation of Ba at the near-surface
may be the dominant determinant of the COx selectivity.

◦

C and 4500 h

Dudek  et  al.  [245]  proposed  a  similar  state-of-the-art  scheme,  in
which  the  oxidative  cracking  of  n-hexane  was  conducted  in  an
auto-thermal  manner  and  a  redox  looping  mode  (see  Fig.  22a).  By
applying  perovskite  oxide-based  redox  catalysts,  higher  olefin  yield
(55~58%)  can  be  obtained  compared  with  that  of  thermal  cracking
(cid:0) 1 (Fig. 22b). The low-energy ion scattering
◦
(34%) at 725
(LEIS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results revealed that
the  outermost  surface  layer  of  the  redox  catalysts  can  be  covered  by
Na2WO4 (Fig. 22c). This leads to the enrichment of the Na and W cations
and the deficit of the Mn cations. Moreover, the release of the lattice
oxygen  in  the  redox  catalysts  can  be  hindered  in  the  presence  of
Na2WO4, which significantly promotes the olefin yield due to the sup-
pression of the non-selective combustion. A 72% increase in the olefin
yields can be achieved over the Na2WO4  promoted CaMnO3  at 725
C
and 4500 h

(cid:0) 1.

◦

3.1.2. Epoxidation of ethylene

Ethylene  oxide  (EO)  is  another  important  building  block  in  the
chemical  industry  [249,250].  EO  is  mainly  used  to  manufacture
ethylene  glycol  (raw  material  for  making  polyester  fibers),  synthetic
detergents, nonionic surfactants, antifreeze agents, emulsifiers, etc. EO
is  also  widely  used  in  the  fields  of  washing  and  dyeing,  electronics,
medicine, pesticides, textiles, papermaking, automobiles, as well as oil
mining  and  refining  [251].  EO  is  generally  produced  via  the  direct
oxidation  of  gaseous  ethylene  over  silver-based  catalysts  at  relatively
low  temperatures  (450–550  K)  and  medium  pressures  (10–30  bar)
[252]. Research over the years has led to the significant promotion of EO

selectivity from 40% in 1949 to 85% in 2005 [253]. Nonetheless, the
per-pass ethylene conversion has generally remained around 4%–8% to
minimize  the  complete oxidation  of ethylene  and  to keep  the  oxygen
concentration at safe concentrations to avoid explosions, which would
occur if the conversion increased [254]. By adding reaction promoters to
the  catalyst  or  inhibitors  to  prevent  the  complete  combustion  of  the
gaseous feed, a selectivity of approximately 70%–90% can be achieved
[56].

Recently,  the  chemical  looping  epoxidation  of  ethylene  was  pro-
posed and demonstrated by Chan et al. [255], where the epoxidation of
ethylene is conducted by a redox looping route (see Fig. 23a and b). The
chemical  looping-based  epoxidation  of  ethylene  has  the  potential  for
higher ethylene conversions in a single pass, an inherent air separation,
and reducing the risk of an explosion risk. Particularly, 15 wt% Ag that
was  supported  on  SrFeO3  was  adopted  as  the  sole  oxidant  for  the
chemical looping epoxidation of ethylene. The synergy between Ag and
SrFeO3  can  be  observed  when  and  where  the  materials  are  in  direct
contact. This suggests the possible transportation of the lattice oxygen
from  SrFeO3-δ  to  Ag,  and  subsequently  occurs  the  epoxidation  of
ethylene on the Ag surface. Nevertheless, the solid-state transportation
of oxygen from SrFeO3  to Ag still deserved further verification. More-
over, i) the cyclic stability of the catalyst-OC system still requires im-
provements from the perspective of ethylene conversion and ethylene
oxide selectivity; ii) the effect of oxygen released on the instantaneous
TOF of ethylene and EO is to be further exploited.

Marek  et  al.  [56]  continued  the  research  on  chemical  looping
epoxidation, focusing on SrFeO3  or Ce-modified SrFeO3  supported sil-
ver. (CeO2)ss(SrFeO3) denotes the CeO2-SrFeO3 OC that was prepared by
the  solid-state  synthesis.  (CeO2)impr(SrFeO3)  stands  for  the  CeO2-Sr-
FeO3 OC that is prepared by incipient wetness impregnation. The cyclic
performance of chemical looping epoxidation in a packed bed reactor
was  studied.  It  is  visibly  indicated  that  the  (CeO2)ss(SrFeO3)  sample
shows the best catalytic activity and redox stability from ethylene con-
version and EO selectivity (see Fig. 24). Particularly, an EO selectivity of
~60% with an ethylene conversion of 10% can be achieved using (CeO2)
ss(SrFeO3). It was revealed that the introduction of CeO2 increased the
oxygen  release  capability  of  the  supports,  thereby  enhancing  the
reduction and regeneration rates during chemical looping epoxidation.

3.1.3. Selective oxidation of glycerol to glyceric acid

In  addition  to  hydrogen  production  from  the  oxidative  steam
reforming of GLY, GLY can also be transformed into various chemicals
such  as  dihydroxyacetone  (DHA),  glyceraldehyde  (GLYAD),  GLYA,

Fig. 22. Cyclic redox scheme for the oxidative cracking of n-hexane. (a) Comparisons of the unpromoted AMnO3 and Na2WO4 promoted AMnO3, A= Sr or Ca; (b)
Comparisons of the olefin and COx  yields under the different catalysts (blank, CaMnO3, and Na2WO4  promoted CaMnO3); (c) LEIS spectra for 20 wt% Na2WO4/
CaMnO3  when using a 3 keV He
sputter-etching and one sputter cycle that
corresponds to 0.5 × 1015  Ar

(cid:0) 2  [245]. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2021.

probe beam. The surface scans were carried out after varying amounts of 0.5 keV Ar

ions cm

+

+

+

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104517

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 23. Chemical looping epoxidation. (a) Schematic illustration of the chemical looping-based epoxidation of ethylene; (b) Lattice oxygen transportation of the
silver-modified OC; (c) Variation of the instantaneous selectivity with the reduction degree of the Ag/SrFeO3 OC; (d) Turnover frequencies on the basis of the C2H4
conversion and EO production rates with the reduction degree of the Ag/SrFeO3  OC during the first cycle [255]. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2018.

Fig. 24. Remarkable results from the chemical looping-based epoxidation of EO. (a) EO and CO2  profiles were collected in the first four cycles of the epoxidation
experiments in a packed bed; (b) Selectivity and conversion for SrFeO3, (CeO2)ss(SrFeO3), (CeO2)impr(SrFeO3), and CeO2 during the chemical looping epoxidation in
a packed bed [56]. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2020.

tartronic  acid  (TA),  and  others  [256–261].  Among  them,  GLYA  is  an
important intermediate for further producing deeply oxidized products
such as mesoxalic acid and tartronic acid [262,263]. Most of the con-
ducted investigations belong to the liquid-phase-based oxidation of GLY,
in which the catalyst that is suspended in the GLY solution is purged
with pure O2. In addition, an excessive amount of soluble base additives
(i.e., NaOH) must be added to obtain a high yield of GLYA. This requires
extra acidification and purification procedures, which can result in more
hazardous and expensive processes. Zhang et al. [264] proposed a se-
lective  base-free  glycerol-to-glyceric  acid  oxidation,  in  which  the
introduction of CeO2  hinders the deactivation of the Pt/CNT catalysts.

◦

Yan et al. [265] proposed the oxidation of GLY by using PtRu/MCM-41
nanocatalysts in a base-free medium, and the facilitating effect on CLY
oxidation is presented in Fig. 25. The Pt0.8Ru0.8/MCM-41 catalyst shows
(cid:0) 1 and a GLYA selectivity of 80.1% under
a satisfactory TOF of 823.9 h
the conditions of 80
C and 1.0 MPa O2. The catalyst shows strong in-
teractions between Pt and Ru, and it promotes the electron transfer from
Ru to Pt. This leads to the direct dissociation of molecular oxygen and
water to the hydroxyl group. Although the above research has produced
better results, Au-, Pd-, and Pt-based nanomaterials still suffer from se-
vere deactivation due to the strong adsorption of GLYA [266,267]. The
chemical  looping-based  selective  oxidation  of  GLY  to  GLYA  through

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104518

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 25. Possible mechanism of GLY oxidation to GLYA by using the Pt0.8Ru0.8/MCM-41 catalyst (GLY→GLYAD→GLYA). The incorporation of Ru enhances the
interactions of Pt and Ru, which results in the electron enrichment on the Pt surface and it promotes the direct dissociation of O2 and H2O to the OH group [265].
Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2019.

modulated lattice oxygen may be another possibility for GLYA synthesis.
Nonetheless,  these  issues  have  yet  to  be  considered  for  lattice
oxygen-induced  CLYA  generation.  Firstly,  the  reactivity  of  the  lattice
oxygen on the OC surface should be optimized for the adaptation; sec-
ond, the reaction performance (e.g., GLY conversion and GLYA selec-
tivity)  under  the  appropriate  conditions  deserves  an
in-depth
investigation; finally, an OC with significant cyclic stability needs to be
further designed and exploited.

3.1.4. Selective oxidation of methane to acetic acid

Selective functionalization of methane has always been of crucial,
economic,  environmental, and  scientific importance. Yet, the conven-
tional pathway of acetic acid synthesis requires three different reaction
steps: steam methane reforming, methanol preparation, and acetic acid
synthesis. These steps require different types of catalysts and tempera-
tures,  and  they  possess  a  large  energy  penalty.  Therefore,  selectively
synthesizing acetic acid in a single step by the direct conversion of CH4 is
highly desirable. It is to be noted that carbonylation agents such as CO
and CO2  are typically used when methane is used for directly synthe-
sizing acetic acid [268–270]. Narsimhan et al. [271] demonstrated the
feasibility  of  converting  methane
into  acetic  acid  by  using
copper-exchanged  mordenite  (Cu-MOR)  by  coupling  oxidation  with
carbonylation reactions as shown in Fig. 26. Their results indicate that
the  active  species  of  CuII-O-CuII  are  active  in  methane  oxidation  to
methanol, but they are inactive in carbonylation. However, new Cu2+
sites can be formed at a Cu/Al ratio below 0.2 in MOR, which are active
for methane oxidation. They are followed by an intermediate migration
to the Brønsted acid sites in the eight-membered ring pockets of MOR,
in  carbonylation.  By
where  the

intermediates  can  participate

constructing special copper-based active sites, it is feasible to selectively
convert methane to acetic acid through a chemical looping scheme. This
is achieved through 1) OC activation; 2) intermediate formation; and 3)
acetic acid synthesis by using carbonylation agents.

3.1.5. Oxidative aromatization of methane

By combining the OCM and C2 aromatization, the oxidative aroma-
tization  of  methane  could  be  realized.  Li  et  al.  [272]  simulated  a
high-temperature aromatization of methane by performing the OCM and
ethylene aromatization (Fig. 27). Their simulation results indicate that
the oxidative-coupling-assisted methane aromatization can be decom-
posed  into  OCM-based  ethylene  production  via  an  OH⋅-mediated
pathway and the subsequent C6H6 formation from C2H4 aromatization.
Their  research  illustrates  the  possibility  of  lattice  oxygen-induced
methane  aromatization  via  a  redox  looping  scheme,  which  would  be
worth further investigation.

3.2. Functional oxygen carrier design

In this section, the effective pathways for the OC design, screening,
preparation, as well as the lattice oxygen transfer characteristic modu-
lation, are summarized. This section aims to provide the implications for
the development of OC materials with tunable  lattice oxygen activity
and satisfied cyclic stability.

3.2.1. Phase reconfigurable composite oxygen carrier

With the development of chemical looping technology, researchers
have become more aware of the importance of OC materials. The OCs
commonly  suffer  from  sintering  and  agglomeration,  which  leads  to  a

Fig.  26. Methane  to  acetic  acid  conversion  over  the  Brønsted  acidity  that
possesses  Cu-exchanged  zeolites.  It  has  been  revealed  that  the  finely  con-
structed copper-exchanged mordenite zeolites can motivate methane oxidation
and its intermediates’ carbonylation reaction [271]. Reprinted with permission
from American Chemical Society, 2015.

Fig.  27. Oxidative-coupling-assisted  methane  aromatization  through  the  co-
feeding of  methane and molecular oxygen. C2  intermediates would be gener-
ated by the OCM followed by the intermediates’ aromatization [272]. Reprin-
ted with permission from American Chemical Society, 2019.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104519

Z. Sun et al.

decrease  in bulk  oxygen mobility  and surface  oxygen  exchange capa-
bility [273,274]. The anti-sintering and -agglomeration properties can
be, to some extent, promoted by decreasing the particle size of the OCs,
lowering the reaction temperatures, and introducing support materials
with a large surface area or specific skeleton structure [275–278]. Be-
sides,  chemical  looping-based  energy  conversion  technologies  are
generally  temperature-swing  processes.  Therefore,  enhancing  the
structural robustness and improving the lattice oxygen’s mobility of the
OCs  are  essential  [279].  Under  these  circumstances,  constructing  a
phase reconfigurable composite OC is an effective pathway to suppress
the sintering and agglomeration of the OCs. During the OC oxidation
stage, the separated phases can be homogenized into the composite OCs
under an atomic level. At the reduction stage, the composite OC can be
disintegrated into several phases. As a result, the particles remain small
sizes and thus show the ability for the suppression of sintering as well as
agglomeration [202].

a

For

example,

[279–286].

The redox looping of the ferrite-, cobaltite-, spinel-, and perovskite-
type OCs display stability, which provides guidance for the design of the
OCs
phase-reversible
NiyFe3-yO4-Ca2FexAl2-xO5  OC  was  designed  in  our  previous  work  for
chemical  looping  methane  decomposition  with  carbon  dioxide  reduc-
tion [287]. The nickel-containing OC resists agglomeration and sinter-
ing,  retaining  its  catalytic  activity  after  3,000  min  under  carbon
deposition conditions. This was attributed to the segregation and reor-
ganization  of  the  catalytic  OCs.  Zeng  et  al.  [288]  proposed  a  CoFeA-
lOx-based  OC  for  chemical  looping  hydrogen  production.  For  this
carrier,  the  active  components,  the  CoFe  alloy  particles,  can  be
embedded with a considerable depth in the host spinel support during
the CO/CO2 reduction. The controllable exsolution of the metal-support
interface shows strong confinement effects of the spinel support on the
exsolved CoFe alloy particles. As a result, the small particle sizes of the
OC  can  be  maintained  without  sintering  and  agglomeration  (see
Fig.  28).  The  80-cycle  test  adequately  confirmed  the  outstanding

durability of the CoFeAlOx OC under a restricted reduction atmosphere.

3.2.2. Specially structured oxygen carrier

The  construction  of  functionalized  redox  materials  has  recently
received attention, especially for the OCs that possess a stable nano- or
micro-  structure,  attributing  to  their  potential  superiorities  in  sup-
pressing  sintering  and  agglomeration.  Nevertheless,  maintaining  the
microstructure  and  the  chemical  properties  of  the  structured  OCs  re-
mains a challenge [289,290]. Hu et al. [291] investigated the origin of
the pressure-induced deactivation behavior in a double-zone reactor bed
using  Fe/Zr@Zr-Ni@Zr  and  Fe/Zr@Zr  OCs
for  CLDR.  The
pressure-induced deactivation of the Fe/Zr@Zr-Ni@Zr core-shell OC is
described.  Carbon  deposition  occurs  on  the  Ni  surface,  which  pro-
liferates  and  forms  carbon  filaments.  This  further  encapsulates  the
Ni-based particles and pushes them outward, which leads to the collapse
of the core-shell structure and is associated with severe particle sinter-
ing.  The  deactivation  of  Fe/Zr@Zr  mainly  occurs  during  the  phase
transformation in the reduction step. The formation of the intermediate
phase,  such  as  FeO,  can  decrease  the  melting  point  of  the  material,
thereby weakening its tolerance to sintering. In summary, the structural
damage of the OC could be attributed to i) the formation of new solid
products; ii) the blockage of the OC pores due to carbon deposition; and
iii) the formation of intermediates with relatively low Taman tempera-
tures. This occurs during the redox process, which can cause sintering
and agglomeration, and decreases the durability of the OC.

Core-shell  structured  nanoparticles,  one  class  of  multifunctional
materials,  are  widely  investigated  due  to  their  potential  application
prospects  in  chemistry,  physics,  biology,  energy,  and  environmental
science  [292].  Specifically,  core-shell  nanoparticles  can  offer  a  new
active interface and a potential synergistic effect between the core and
shell,  making  these  materials  highly  attractive  in  catalytic  energy
transformation [293]. However, there are relatively few studies on the
design and the preparation of the core-shell OCs due to complications

Fig. 28. TEM images of the: (a-c) freshly exsolved; and (d) 20-cycle CoFe alloy particles that are induced by CO and CO2 reduction, e-g) freshly exsolved, and h) 20-
cycled CoFe alloy particles that are induced by  CO reduction.  Schematic illustration of the interface structure during chemical looping after the i) CO and CO2
reduction and j) CO reduction, respectively [288]. Reprinted with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, 2018.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104520

Z. Sun et al.

that arise from phase evolution for chemical looping processes. Yin et al.
[294]  constructed  the  core-shell-structured Fe@Ce  OC, and  it  is  indi-
cated that this kind of OC is capable of providing more selective oxygen,
facilitating  oxygen  ion  migration  and  transportation.  Hosseini  et  al.
[295]  developed  the  Fe2O3@CeO2-Pt  material,  in  which  the  Pt  nano-
particles that are supported on CeO2 act as a catalyst, and the core-shell
Fe2O3@CeO2  is  designed  as  the  OC  during  the  drying  reforming  of
methane. The Fe2O3@CeO2-Pt material shows superiority in comparison
to  the catalysts that are synthesized  by co-precipitation. More  impor-
tantly,  the  spherical  structure  of  the  encapsulated  OC  was  preserved,
and the Pt nanoparticles were also homogeneously distributed on CeO2.
It is indicated that although the CeO2-supported Pt nanoparticles suffer
from  sintering  and  the  catalyst’s  performance  decayed  with  time  on
stream, its activity can be restored by air oxidation. This is attributed to
the  formation  of  mobile  platinum  oxide  species  and  it  achieves  the
re-dispersion  of  the  Pt  nanoparticles.  In  addition,  the  constructed
core-shell catalyst is expected to promote the uniform transmission of
lattice  oxygen.  At  the  present  stage,  our  cognition  of  the  OCs  with  a
core-shell  structure  is  insufficient.  This  needs  to  be  further  studied,
along  with  the  preparation,  structure  stability,  and  structure-activity
relationship of the core-shell structured OCs.

Metallic nanoparticles deposited on the surface of oxides have been
demonstrated to be effective in modulating and tailoring the catalytic
activity  of  materials  for  various  applications.  However,  nanoparticles
homogeneously  exsolved  or  submerged  within  the  bulk  of  materials
were rarely reported (Fig. 29a). Kousi et al. [296] recently put forward a
breathtaking concept that renders the extensive and controlled growth
of  metallic  nanoparticles  within  the  perovskite  oxide  lattice  and  its
surface (see Fig. 29b to e). It is illustrated that the endogenous nano-
particles  and  the  perovskite  lattice  become  reciprocally  strained  and
seamlessly  connected  in  the  emergent  nanostructure,  which  can
remarkably promote oxygen exchange capability. Their results indicate
that by modulating the perovskite reduction temperature and duration,
the  metal  loading  degree,  size,  and  interparticle  distance  of  the
embedded nanoparticles can be effectively regulated (Fig. 29f and g).
More  interestingly,  the  reduction  temperature  tunes  the  interparticle
distance;  as  the  reduction  temperature  reduces,  the  particles  become
smaller. Meanwhile, the amount of time spent at the reduction condi-
tions controls the particle size; the particle size increases as the duration
increases. To verify that the behavior of the submerged particle is from
the synergistic contribution of its surface and bulk, two variations were
conducted (Fig. 29h). First, the surface particles were removed (P1, no
activity),  and  second,  the  bulk  particles  were  removed  with  only  the
surface particles (P2, inactive). If either particle is removed, the activity

becomes  negligible,  indicating  that  synergy  between  the  surface  and
bulk  particles  plays  a  significant  role  in  dictating  the  activity  of  the
particles. Finally, the SEM image of the sample after the experiment in
Fig. 29h revealed the stability and the coke resistance in the presence of
confine  surface  particles  (Fig.  29i).  This  study  vividly  elucidates  the
extensive,  homogenous,  and  modulated  endogenous  growth  of  the
metallic  nanoparticles  at  nanoscale  proximity  within  the  perovskite
oxides.  The nanocluster  “doping”  of the  oxides  provides entirely  new
implications to tailor the specially structured materials for the selective
transformation of energy materials.

3.2.3. Surface reactivity and bulk transferability

Determining the surface reactivity and bulk transfer characteristics
of  the  lattice  oxygen  are  pivotal  to  the  predictive  design  of  the  OC,
followed by promoting the performance of chemical looping-based se-
lective  oxidation.  This  includes  lowering  the  reaction  temperatures,
increasing  the  raw  material  conversion,  enhancing  the  product  selec-
tivity, and suppressing carbon formation. On the one hand, the trans-
ferability of the oxygen ions can be affected by the reducing/oxidizing
atmosphere when considering external factors. Specifically, the oxygen
anions can permeate from the bulk to the surface or from the surface to
the bulk during the chemical looping processes on the basis of the ox-
ygen  chemical  potential  gradient  [66];  on  the  other  hand,  the  lattice
oxygen diffusion can also be influenced by the oxygen vacancy forma-
tion energy and oxygen ion migration energy that is affected by diverse
OC  structures.  Therefore,  it  is  possible  to  achieve  a  homogenous  and
stable transfer of the lattice oxygen between the bulk and the surface by
modulating  the  external  reaction  environment  and  the  intrinsic  OC
structure.

When  considering  the  research  on  the  bulk-phase  oxygen  trans-
ferability exploration, Zhang et al. [297] investigated the role of A-site
cations  in  regulating  the  oxygen  capacity  along  with  the  oxygen
donating  ability  of  the  iron-based  perovskite  for  chemical  looping
methane-to-syngas conversion. It was found that the A-site engineering
of La2-xSrxFe0.8Al0.2O3  oxides can effectively modulate the oxygen ca-
pacity from 1.0 mmol/g (x=0.1) to 2.7 mmol/g (x=0.5). Moreover, it is
shown  that  Sr  doping  at  the  A-site  (La)  induces  the  dynamic  crystal
reconstruction  from  the  perovskite  to  Fe0  and  LanSrFen-xO3n+1  oxides
with the Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) structure. As a result, the RP struc-
tured  oxides  appear  to  grow  around  the  Fe0  nanoparticles  with  the
formation  of  the  Fe0@RP  oxide  material  with  a  core-shell  structure
(Fig. 30a–d). This enhances its oxygen transport property and carbon
deposition resistance. The DFT calculation was conducted for clarifying
the effect of La/Sr ratio at A-site on the oxygen mobility of iron-based

Fig. 29. Perovskite oxide with endogenous nanoparticles. (a) Different particle immersion forms. b-d) SEM images; (b) An overview of the perovskite oxide surface
after exsolution; (c) Cross-sectional view showing the surface and bulk-phase particles; (d) Bulk-phase view of the particles after the exsolution; (e) TEM images of the
perovskite lattice before (left) and after (right) the exsolution; (f) SEM images ranging from a sample with no embedded particles to the samples with increasingly
higher bulk metal nanoparticle contents; (g) XRD diffraction details of the Ni peak with a different total Ni content; (h) CH4  consumption as a function of tem-
perature; (i) SEM image of the surface after methane activation [296]. Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 2020.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104521

Z. Sun et al.

Fig. 30. (a-c) TEM-EDS mapping images for the
La,  Fe,  Sr,  and  Al  distributions  of  the  reduced
La0.7Sr0.3Fe0.8Al0.2O3-δ  sample  after  the  20th
CH4  pulse; (d) Proposed evolution of the struc-
ture within  the methane-to-syngas process; (e)
Computational model of La0.2Sr0.5FeO3  (before
reduction)  and  La0.5Sr0.5FeO2.75  (after  reduc-
tion); (f) The proposed mechanisms during the
CL-POM. I and II denote the methane-to-syngas
stage, and III represents the regeneration stage
[297].  Reprinted  with  permission  from  Amer-
ican Chemical Society, 2020.

perovskite by quantitatively estimating their oxygen vacancy formation
energy (Fig. 30e). It is implied that the introduction of Sr can availably
reduce the oxygen vacancy formation energy, resulting in an enhanced
oxygen supply performance. The mechanism of La1-xSrxFe0.2Al0.2O3-δ for
enhanced oxygen capacity via Sr doping was proposed, attributing to the
synergistic  promotion  of  dynamic  structure  evolution  and  oxygen
mobility modulation (Fig. 30f). In general, A-site doping is an efficacious
approach  for  modulating  the  surface  activity  along  with  the  bulk
transferability of the OCs. This regulates the structure and also modu-
lates the oxygen mobility of the perovskite-type OCs.

◦

As previously described, Kousi et al. [296] developed the exsolution
concept  to  homogenously  grow  metallic  nanoparticles  on  the  surface
and  the  bulk  of  the  perovskite  oxides  that  display  strain.  It  has  been
reported  that  the  expansive  strain  can  render  the  reversible  oxygen
incorporation and/or release, in which a degree of 1% strain can pro-
mote  catalytic  activity  up  to  300%  [298].  Moreover,  the  embedded
nanoparticles can achieve a similar methane conversion and CO selec-
tivity at an approximately 300
C lowered temperature. It also demon-
strates satisfactory cyclic durability with a carbon deposition that is less
than  1%.  To  better  understand  the  procedure  of  reincorporating  the
oxygen and straining the rABO3 matrix, investigations were conducted
that combine the gas composition analysis as a function of the temper-
ature with real-time structure information. This was achieved by per-
forming Rietveld refinement of the synchrotron x-ray data. It has been
demonstrated that the lattice strain has a certain correlation with the
oxygen  capacity,  activity,  and  transfer  characteristics  of  the  OC.  This
was implemented by embedding the Ni nanoparticles into the bulk of the
perovskite material, in which the oxygen exchange capabilities can be
effectively  improved.  To  sum  up,  the  current  approaches  that  can
improve  the  surface  lattice  oxygen  reactivity  and  bulk  oxygen  trans-
ferability are structure modulation of the OC (e.g., A-site substitution,
“bulk”  nanocluster  doping,  etc.).  However,  understanding
the
bulk-phase oxygen transfer characteristics is necessary but insufficient.
In particular, the lattice oxygen transfer kinetics as a function of time
must be improved, which is currently limited by the lack of technology

that can characterize lattice oxygen diffusion performance. The evolu-
tionary laws and modulation methods of the surface oxygen activity in
the chemical looping process remain weak.

In response to the above bottleneck, new-generation techniques for
the in situ characterization of bulk-phase oxygen transferability, surface
oxygen reactivity, and their corresponding evolution discipline should
be further explored. Methods reported to investigate the surface oxygen
reactivity  and  bulk-phase  lattice  oxygen  mobility  include  electrical
conductivity  relaxation  (ECR)  [299–302],  electrochemical  impedance
spectroscopy  (EIS)  [303,304],  oxygen
isotopic  exchange  (OIE)
[305–307],  thermogravimetric  analysis  (TGA)  [308],  pulse  reactions
[151], and DFT calculation. Among them, thermogravimetric analysis
has been conducted for characterizing the migration rate of the lattice
oxygen on the basis of TG and DTG curves, thereby mastering the oxygen
transfer law of different OCs [308]. It is worth noting that the techniques
such as ECR and EIS were mostly applied in the fields of electrocatalysis,
solid oxide fuel cells, high-temperature sensors, and oxygen-transport
membrane  materials,  but  were  less  investigated  regarding  chemical
looping. While the technologies are all being improved to provide in situ
information about what they are characterizing, they cannot detect the
evolution of the oxygen migration characteristics in real time, limiting
their current utility.

The crystal structure of the OC is one of the most important factors
that determine its bulk-phase lattice oxygen transfer performance and
surface oxygen reactivity. By modulating the crystal structure of the OC,
the lattice oxygen transfer capability and reactivity can be strengthened
to some extent. Nevertheless, merely adjusting the crystal structure of
the OC is not sufficient to guarantee the stable and controllable trans-
mission of its lattice oxygen. The OC should also possess a specifically
micro-  or  nano-scaled  transmission  channel,  thereby  ensuring  the
orderly transformation of its lattice oxygen. Therefore, the multi-scale
regulation of its crystal structure and micro/nanostructure could be a
potential exploitation approach. By summarizing the above analysis, the
development  of  new-generation  OC  materials  can  be  conducted  by
performing the following steps. The first step is to preliminarily screen

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104522

Z. Sun et al.

out  suitable  OC  systems  through  a  thermodynamic  calculation-based
Ellingham  diagram;  the  second  step  is  to  explore  the  preparation
methods  for  differently  structured  OC  materials.  This  is  achieved  by
carrying  out  a  multi-scale  regulation  of  the  OCs  and  revealing  the
structure-activity  relationship  between  the  structure  of  the  OCs  and
their oxygen transfer characteristics; the third step is to investigate the
evolution law of the lattice oxygen performance of the OC as a function
of time based on the newly exploited oxygen diffusion characterization
method.

3.2.4. Machine learning-based oxygen carrier screening

Ellingham diagram was the most used means for OC screening. OCs
with high oxygen partial pressure indicate a high lattice oxygen dona-
tion capacity, which could be used for oxygen decoupling or complete
oxidation; while OC materials with low oxygen partial pressure would
be suitable for selective oxidation. Besides, DFT calculations were also
conducted  by  various  researchers  for  simulating  the  performances  of
chemical looping combustion [309], thermochemical H2O/CO2 splitting
[310], sulphur oxidation [311], etc. via computed oxygen vacancy for-
mation  energy  [312–314].  These  methods  provide  super-duper  effec-
tiveness  for  OC  materials  screening.  Nevertheless,  OC  optimization
involves  multifarious  considerations  such  as  oxygen  capacity  [315],
oxygen transfer kinetics [316], redox durability, environmental impact,
catalytic  activity  as  lattice  oxygen  supply  and  replenishment,  etc.
Therefore,  the  above-mentioned  methods  are  still  subject  to  the
following restrictions: i) Ellingham diagram prediction: the thermody-
namic  performances  were  commonly  evaluated  based  on  the  Gibbs
principle  of  minimum  free  energy,  which  may  not  able  to  accurately
predict the true behaviour of a material under specific reaction condi-
tions; ii) DFT identification: the materials were generally configurated
with  applied  specific  unit  cells  or  defect-free  model,  which  would  be
difficult to reflect the overall reaction performance and the evolution of
the  OC.  Various  possible  vacancy  and  substitution  site  combinations
were not comprehensively considered.

With  the  development  of  machine  learning  technology,  the  appli-
cation of this technology has spread to chemical looping technologies.
Recently, DFT and machine learning-based high-throughput screening
were conducted by Wang et al. [317] for rationally tailoring OC mate-
rials with suitable redox oxygen chemical potential. The procedures of
DFT-based  high  throughput  calculations  were  presented  in  Fig.  31a.
Specifically,  SrxA1-xFeyB1-yO3-δ  perovskites  with  2401  distinct  cation
compositions were investigated on the basis of DFT calculated Gibbs free
energy change at various oxygen non-stoichiometry and temperatures.
Further, the optimized results were used to develop a machine learning

model to predict the Gibbs free energy change of 227,273 high-entropy
perovskites  with  5  cation  elements.  Their  machine  learning  protocol
includes i) data preparation; ii) model selection; iii) model training; iv)
model evaluation; v) material  prediction; and vi) experimental verifi-
cation.  This  assists  to  screen  out  potential  OC  materials  for  chemical
looping-based  air  separation  and  CO2  splitting.  Notably,
the
high-throughput  approaches  have  resulted  in  many  nonobvious  OC
structures with progressive redox looping performance, which may be
difficult to be exploited under conventional material design approaches.
To this end, the machine learning-based high-throughput strategy pro-
vides new implications for the selection of OC materials, which is ex-
pected  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  field  of  chemical  looping
selective oxidation.

4. Conclusions

In summary, this review presents the state-of-the-art technologies,
the current challenges faced, and a perspective of chemical looping se-
lective  oxidation  technologies  induced  by  lattice  oxygen.  This  work
systematically overviews the recent advances in lattice oxygen-induced
selective  oxidation,  including  chemical  looping-based  selective  oxida-
tion of methane, OCM, oxidative steam reforming of alcohols, and ODH
of hydrocarbons. The outcome of selective oxidation reactions depends
on the OC properties, the feedstock, and the reaction conditions. Among
them, the applicability and the redox properties of the OCs play a critical
role in achieving high energy transformation efficiency. The following
conclusions were put forward: i) The thermodynamic properties of an
oxide or a composite oxide can be used for preliminary screening and
selection  of  OCs  that  meet  the  requirements.  In  the  present  review,
Ellingham  diagrams  were  extended  to  encompass  a  broader  range  of
reaction  conditions,  and  suitable  OCs  were  predicted  for  chemical
looping-based  oxidative  steam  reforming  of  methanol  and  ethanol.  It
can be concluded that the conversion of FeO→Fe, Ca2Fe2O5→Fe+CaO,
Fe3O4→FeO, and Ca2V2O7→CaO+V2O3  can release appropriate lattice
oxygen for CL-OSRM; and CoFe2O4, NiWO4, as well as NiMoO4 would be
appropriate  candidates  for  further  investigation  for  chemical  looping
oxidative steam reforming ethanol. ii) Since the phase  of the OC will
gradually evolve with selective oxidation, especially for the metal oxides
with multiple valence states such as Fe and W, the lattice oxygen reac-
tivity  corresponding  to  different  phases  will  also  change,  resulting  in
potentially unstable transformation. Noting this, designing and carrying
out tandem reactions according to the lattice oxygen activity at different
stages  is  a  new  approach  worth exploring.  For  example,  the  stepwise
reduction of Fe2O3 can be classified into three or four tandem reactions

Fig. 31. Flowcharts for high throughput OC materials screening. (a) DFT model configuration and high-throughput prediction, and experimental verification; (b)
machine learning procedures [317]. Reprinted with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, 2022.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104523

Z. Sun et al.

(Fe2O3→Fe3O4→FeO→Fe), thereby achieving a stable supply of lattice
oxygen. However, the possible increase in system complexity due to the
introduction of tandem reactions also needs to be taken into consider-
ation. iii) Plasma-assisted chemical looping selective oxidation is a po-
tential approach that makes it possible to achieve feedstock activation at
lower  temperatures.  However,  research  concerning  plasma-based
chemical looping selective oxidation is still in its nascence, and further
exploration is required. Using POM as an example, the effect of the OC
structure, the methane conversion mechanism in the presence of plasma,
and the impact of plasma discharge on the catalyst surface catalysis all
lack  experimental  and  theoretical  research.  iv)  As  for  liquid  fuel
involved processes such as CL-ORSM, selective oxidation of methane to
methanol, etc., the promotion and application of these technologies are
inseparable from the design and development of matched devices. Take
conventional steam methanol reforming as an example, this technology
generally adopts a micro-channel reactor, which specifically includes an
evaporation chamber, a reforming chamber, or is coupled with a PEMFC
power generation device. While for CL-OSRM, the OC must undergo a
redox reaction, and various coating methods may not able to achieve OC
stability. Therefore, it is necessary to come up with novel reactors that
match  the  CL-OSRM  scheme  to  achieve  a  broader  application  of  this
technology.

In  the  perspective  section,  other  potential,  but  less  researched,
chemical looping pathways were discussed. This is in particular for its
investigations  in  the  chemical  looping-based  oxidative  cracking  of  n-
hexane, epoxidation of ethylene, the selective oxidation of GLY to GLYA,
the  selective  oxidation  of  methane  to  acetic  acid,  and  the  oxidative
aromatization of methane, as introduced in Section 3.1. Thereafter, the
approaches for functional OC design were discussed in Section 3.2, and
the following recognitions were summarized: i) It has been recognized
that phase separation and recombination through redox chemistry is in
favor of maintaining the particle size of the OC. This can ensure better
cycling  stability  of  the  OC  materials.  Therefore,  functional  composite
OCs  that  can  undergo  segregation  and  reorganization,  and  simulta-
neously  maintain  their  original  phase  need  to  be  further  developed.
Additionally, some other challenges (i.e., OC wear resistance, thermal
losses, etc.) should also be considered to accelerate the industrialization
of the chemical looping technology. ii) The state-of-the-art preparation
for specially structured OC was critically discussed, offering intriguing
new  alternatives  for  designing  functionalized  OC  materials.  This  in-
cludes the construction of core-shell structured OCs and the modifica-
tion  of  the  nanoparticles  within  the  perovskite  oxide  lattice  and  its
surface. Additionally, major efforts have been made toward the design,
preparation,  and  performance  regulation  of  the  OC,  although  further
breakthrough in terms of OC materials is needed. iii) Machine learning-
based high-throughput material screening has drawn substantial atten-
tion  in  the  fields  of  catalysis,  energy,  environmental,  etc.,  but  is  less
applicate in chemical looping technologies. The combinations of ther-
modynamic simulation, DFT calculation, and high-throughput screening
provide  potential  approaches  to  accelerating  material  discovery,  and
thus is worthy of further extending to the processes of chemical looping
selective oxidation.

Finally, the perspectives for investigating the surface reactivity and
the bulk-phase transferability of the OC were put forward. It is supposed
that  techniques  for  characterizing  the  lattice  oxygen  transferability
should be further developed, specifically quantifying the oxygen diffu-
sion rate and surface exchange kinetics. On the one hand, approaches
that are used for investigating proton conducting oxide or cathode and
anode materials for solid oxide fuel cells are similar to that of chemical
looping,  which  deserves  migration  and  imitation;  on  the  other  hand,
lattice oxygen evolves in real time during chemical looping process, thus
in  situ  characterization  techniques  should  be  developed  to  probe  the
surface reactions and bulk diffusion of the lattice oxygen. It can also be
concluded that synthesizing an OC with a specific crystal structure and
micro/nano structure is conducive to maintaining a stable lattice oxygen
activity and migration rate during the evolution of a specific phase such

as  ABO3→ABO2.5.  However,  this  idea  also  has  complications.  During
redox looping, the structure of the OC may not be stable. Meanwhile, the
migration  properties  of  the  lattice  oxygen  of  the  OC  with  a  specific
micro-morphology still need to be explored in greater depth. To sum up,
this review is expected to provide a theoretical basis and guidance for
the  development  of  novel,  safe,  high-conversion,  highly  selective  and
energy-efficient  technologies  for  value-added  chemical  synthesis  via
lattice oxygen-induced selective oxidation.

Declaration of Competing Interest

There are no conflicts to declare.

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
(2022YFE0105900), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(52276093,  52106193),  the  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  Hunan
Province (2021JJ40756), the Science and Technology Innovation Pro-
gram  of  Hunan  Province  (2020GK2070,  2021RC4006),  and  the  Inno-
vation-Driven  Project  of  Central  South  University  (2020CX008).  This
work  is  also  supported  in  part  by  the  High  Performance  Computing
Center of Central South University.

Supplementary materials

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101045.

References

[1] Zhu X, Imtiaz Q, Donat F, Muller CR, Li FX. Chemical looping beyond combustion

- a perspective. Energy Environ Sci 2020;13:772–804.

[2] He Z, Ning X, Yang G, Wang H, Cao Y, Peng F, et al. Selective oxidation of

glycerol over supported noble metal catalysts. Catal Today 2020;365:162–71.
[3] Cao L, Dai P, Zhu L, Yan L, Chen R, Liu D, et al. Graphitic carbon nitride catalyzes
selective oxidative dehydrogenation of propane. Appl Catal B-Environ 2020;262:
118277.

[4] Winiwarter A, Silvioli L, Scott SB, Enemark-Rasmussen K, Saric M, Trimarco DB,
et al. Towards an atomistic understanding of electrocatalytic partial hydrocarbon
oxidation: propene on palladium. Energy Environ Sci 2019;12:1055–67.

[5] Deng M, Zhao G, Xue Q, Chen L, Lu Y. Microfibrous-structured silver catalyst for

low-temperature gas-phase selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol. Appl Catal B-
Environ 2010;99:222–8.

[6] Wu G, Zhang C, Li S, Huang Z, Yan S, Wang S, et al. Sorption enhanced steam

reforming of ethanol on Ni-CaO-Al2O3  multifunctional catalysts derived from
hydrotalcite-like compounds. Energy Environ Sci 2012;5:8942–9.

[7] Marinho ALA, Rabelo-Neto RC, Epron F, Bion N, Toniolo FS, Noronha FB.

Embedded Ni nanoparticles in CeZrO2  as stable catalyst for dry reforming of
methane. Appl Catal B-Environ 2020;268:118387.

[8] Diehl F, Barbier J, Duprez D, Guibard I, Mabilon G. Catalytic oxidation of heavy
hydrocarbons over Pt/Al2O3. Influence of the structure of the molecule on its
reactivity. Appl Catal B-Environ 2010;95:217–27.

[9] Krummenacher JJ, West KN, Schmidt LD. Catalytic partial oxidation of higher

hydrocarbons at millisecond contact times: decane, hexadecane, and diesel fuel.
J Catal 2003;215:332–43.

[10] Jiang X, Mira D, Cluff DL. The combustion mitigation of methane as a non-CO2

greenhouse gas. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;66:176–99.

[11] Werther J, Ogada T. Sewage sludge combustion. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci 1999;

25:55–116.

[12] Karakaya C, Kee RJ. Progress in the direct catalytic conversion of methane to

fuels and chemicals. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2016;55:60–97.

[13] Tao X, Bai M, Li X, Long H, Shang S, Yin Y, et al. CH4–CO2 reforming by plasma –
challenges and opportunities. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2011;37:113–24.
[14] Kathe M, Empfield A, Sandvik P, Fryer C, Zhang Y, Blair E, et al. Utilization of
CO2  as a partial substitute for methane feedstock in chemical looping methane-
steam redox processes for syngas production. Energy Environ Sci 2017;10:
1345–9.

[15] Araújo JCS, Oton LF, Bessa B, Neto ABS, Oliveira AC, Lang R, et al. The role of Pt

loading on La2O3-Al2O3  support for methane conversion reactions via partial
oxidation and steam reforming. Fuel 2019;254:115681.

[16] Lei L, Keels JM, Tao Z, Zhang J, Chen F. Thermodynamic and experimental
assessment of proton conducting solid oxide fuel cells with internal methane
steam reforming. Appl Energy 2018;224:280–8.

[17] Kang D, Lim HS, Lee M, Lee JW. Syngas production on a Ni-enhanced Fe2O3/

Al2O3 oxygen carrier via chemical looping partial oxidation with dry reforming of
methane. Appl Energy 2018;211:174–86.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104524

Z. Sun et al.

[18] Wu F, Argyle MD, Dellenback PA, Fan M. Progress in O2  separation for oxy-fuel
combustion–A promising way for cost-effective CO2  capture: a review. Prog
Energy Combust Sci 2018;67:188–205.

[19] Gu Z, Li K, Wang H, Qing S, Zhu X, Wei Y, et al. Bulk monolithic Ce–Zr–Fe–O/
Al2O3 oxygen carriers for a fixed bed scheme of the chemical looping combustion:
reactivity of oxygen carrier. Appl Energy 2016;163:19–31.

[47] Liao X, Long Y, Chen Y, Zangiabadi A, Wang H, Liu Q, et al. Self-generated Ni
nanoparticles/LaFeO3  heterogeneous oxygen carrier for robust CO2  utilization
under a cyclic redox scheme. Nano Energy 2021;89:106379.

[48] Sun Z, Liu J, Sun Z. Synergistic decarbonization and desulfurization of blast

furnace gas via a novel magnesium-molybdenum looping process. Fuel 2020;279:
118418.

[20] Sadykov VA, Kuznetsova TG, Alikina GM, Frolova YV, Lukashevich AI,

[49] Sun Z, Chen Z, Toan S, Sun Z. Chemical looping deoxygenated gasification: an

Potapova YV, et al. Ceria-based fluorite-like oxide solid solutions as catalysts of
methane selective oxidation into syngas by the lattice oxygen: synthesis,
characterization and performance. Catal Today 2004;93-95:45–53.

implication for efficient biomass utilization with high-quality syngas modulation
and CO2  reduction. Energy Convers Manage 2020;215:112913.
[50] Sun Z, Liu H, Bai H, Yu S, Russell CK, Zeng L, et al. The crucial role of

[21] Otsuka K, Wang Y, Sunada E, Yamanaka I. Direct partial oxidation of methane to

synthesis gas by cerium oxide. J Catal 1998;175:152–60.

[22] Cheng X, Li K, Zhu X, Wei Y, Li Z, Long Y, et al. Enhanced performance of
chemical looping combustion of methane by combining oxygen carriers via
optimizing the stacking sequences. Appl Energy 2018;230:696–711.

[23] Kathe MV, Empfield A, Na J, Blair E, Fan L-S. Hydrogen production from natural

gas using an iron-based chemical looping technology: thermodynamic
simulations and process system analysis. Appl Energy 2016;165:183–201.
[24] Xiang D, Li P, Yuan X. System optimization and performance evaluation of shale
gas chemical looping reforming process for efficient and clean production of
methanol and hydrogen. Energy Convers Manage 2020;220:113099.

[25] Lin S, Gu Z, Zhu X, Wei Y, Long Y, Yang K, et al. Synergy of red mud oxygen
carrier with MgO and NiO for enhanced chemical-looping combustion. Energy
2020;197:117202.

[26] Lulu W, Laihong S, Shouxi J, Tao S. Chemical looping gasification with

potassium-catalyzed petroleum coke for enhanced production of H2  and H2S.
Chem Eng J 2020;397:124631.

[27] Wang X, Zhao H, Su M. A comparative process simulation study of Ca-Cu looping
involving post-combustion CO2  capture. Chin J Chem Eng 2020;28(9):2382–90.
[28] Ad ́anez J, Abad A, Mendiara T, Gay ́an P, de Diego LF, García-Labiano F. Chemical
looping combustion of solid fuels. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;65:6–66.

[29] Gu ZH, Zhang L, Lu CQ, Qing S, Li KZ. Enhanced performance of copper ore

oxygen carrier by red mud modification for chemical looping combustion. Appl
Energy 2020;277:115590.

[30] Lu CQ, Deng RR, Xu RD, Zhao YN, Zhu X, Wei YG, et al. Design of hybrid oxygen
carriers with CeO2  particles on MnCo2O4  microspheres for chemical looping
combustion. Chem Eng J 2021;404:126554.

[31] Sarshar Z, Kleitz F, Kaliaguine S. Novel oxygen carriers for chemical looping

combustion: La1-xCexBO3  (B = Co, Mn) perovskites synthesized by reactive
grinding and nanocasting. Energy Environ Sci 2011;4:4258–69.

[32] Shijaz H, Attada Y, Patnaikuni VS, Vooradi R, SB Anne. Analysis of integrated
gasification combined cycle power plant incorporating chemical looping
combustion for environment-friendly utilization of Indian coal. Energy Convers
Manage 2017;151:414–25.

[33] Hammache S, Means N, Burgess W, Howard B, Smith M. Investigation of low-cost
oxygen carriers for chemical looping combustion at high temperature. Fuel 2020;
273:117746.

[34] P ́erez-Vega R, Abad A, García-Labiano F, Gay ́an P, de Diego LF, Izquierdo MT,
et al. Chemical looping combustion of gaseous and solid fuels with manganese-
iron mixed oxide as oxygen carrier. Energy Convers Manage 2018;159:221–31.
[35] Zeng L, Tong A, Kathe M, Bayham S, Fan L-S. Iron oxide looping for natural gas
conversion in a countercurrent moving bed reactor. Appl Energy 2015;157:
338–47.

[36] Liu R, Pei C, Zhang X, Chen S, Li H, Zeng L, et al. Chemical looping partial
oxidation over FeWOx/SiO2  catalysts. Chin J Catal 2020;41:1140–51.

[37] Neal LM, Haribal VP, Li F. Intensified ethylene production via chemical looping

deoxygenation in syngas refinement and carbon dioxide utilization during
chemical looping-based biomass gasification. Chem Eng J 2022;428:132068.

[51] Sun Z, Liu H, Toan S, Shi W, Cheng D, Sun Z. Deoxygenation-enhanced chemical
looping gasification: a new pathway to produce hydrogen from biomass. Green
Chem 2022;24:2613–23.

[52] Weng Q, Toan S, Ai R, Sun Z, Sun Z. Ammonia production from biomass via a
chemical looping–based hybrid system. J Clean Prod 2021;289:125749.

[53] Long Y, Li K, Gu Z, Zhu X, Wei Y, Lu C, et al. Ce-Fe-Zr-O/MgO coated monolithic
oxygen carriers for chemical looping reforming of methane to co-produce syngas
and H2. Chem Eng J 2020;388:124190.

[54] Bugrova TA, Dutov VV, Svetlichnyi VA, Cort ́es Corber ́an V, Mamontov GV.

Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane with CO2 over CrOx catalysts supported on
Al2O3, ZrO2, CeO2  and CexZr1-xO2. Catal Today 2019;333:71–80.
[55] Mitran G, Cacciaguerra T, Loridant S, Tichit D, Marcu I-C. Oxidative

dehydrogenation of propane over cobalt-containing mixed oxides obtained from
LDH precursors. Appl Catal A 2012;417-418:153–62.

[56] Marek EJ, Gabra S, Dennis JS, Scott SA. High selectivity epoxidation of ethylene

in chemical looping setup. Appl Catal B-Environ 2020;262:118216.

[57] Kubota Y, Inagaki S, Takechi K. Hexane cracking catalyzed by MSE-type zeolite as

a solid acid catalyst. Catal Today 2014;226:109–16.

[58] Song JH, Chen P, Kim SH, Somorjai GA, Gartside RJ, Dautzenberg FM. Catalytic
cracking of n-hexane over MoO2. J Mol Catal A: Chem 2002;184:197–202.
[59] Yusuf S, Neal L, Haribal V, Baldwin M, Lamb HH, Li F. Manganese silicate based
redox catalysts for greener ethylene production via chemical looping - oxidative
dehydrogenation of ethane. Appl Catal B-Environ 2018;232:77–85.

[60] Cheng Z, Qin L, Fan JA. Fan L-S. New insight into the development of oxygen

carrier materials for chemical looping systems. Engineering 2018;4:343–51.
[61] Du Y, Zhu X, Wang H, Wei Y, Li K. Synthesis gas generation by chemical-looping
selective oxidation of methane using Pr1(cid:0) xZrxO2(cid:0) δ  oxygen carriers. J Energy Inst
2016;89:745–54.

[62] Rastegarpanah A, Rezaei M, Meshkani F, Zhang K, Zhao X, Pei W, et al. Influence

of group VIB metals on activity of the Ni/MgO catalysts for methane
decomposition. Appl Catals B: Environ 2019;248:515–25.

[63] Tang M, Xu L, Fan M. Progress in oxygen carrier development of methane-based

chemical-looping reforming: a review. Appl Energy 2015;151:143–56.

[64] He H, Dai HX, Wong KW, Au CT. RE0.6Zr0.4(cid:0) xYxO2 (RE = Ce, Pr; x = 0, 0.05) solid
solutions: an investigation on defective structure, oxygen mobility, oxygen
storage capacity, and redox properties. Appl Catal A 2003;251:61–74.

[65] Adanez J, Abad A, Garcia-Labiano F, Gayan P, de Diego LF. Progress in chemical-
looping combustion and reforming technologies. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2012;
38:215–82.

[66] Zeng L, Cheng Z, Fan JA, Fan LS, Gong J. Metal oxide redox chemistry for

chemical looping processes. Nat Rev Chem 2018;2:349–64.

[67] Zhang J, He T, Wang Z, Zhu M, Zhang K, Li B, et al. The search of proper oxygen
carriers for chemical looping partial oxidation of carbon. Appl Energy 2017;190:
1119–25.

through an exergetically efficient redox scheme. Iscience 2019;19:894.

[68] Guo L, Yu J, Wang W, Liu J, Guo H, Ma C, et al. Small-sized cuprous oxide species

[38] Zheng Y, Li K, Wang H, Tian D, Wang Y, Zhu X, et al. Designed oxygen carriers

from macroporous LaFeO3  supported CeO2  for chemical-looping reforming of
methane. Appl Catal B-Environ 2017;202:51–63.

[39] Xu D, Zhang Y, Hsieh T-L, Guo M, Qin L, Chung C, et al. A novel chemical looping

partial oxidation process for thermochemical conversion of biomass to syngas.
Appl Energy 2018;222:119–31.

[40] Tian Y, Dudek RB, Westmoreland PR, Li F. Effect of sodium tungstate Promoter on
the reduction kinetics of CaMn0.9Fe0.1O3  for chemical looping – oxidative
dehydrogenation of ethane. Chem Eng J 2020;398:125583.

[41] Ad ́anez-Rubio I, Abad A, Gay ́an P, García-Labiano F, de Diego LF, Ad ́anez J. Coal
combustion with a spray granulated Cu-Mn mixed oxide for the chemical looping
with oxygen uncoupling (CLOU) process. Appl Energy 2017;208:561–70.
[42] Ma L, Qiu Y, Li M, Cui D, Zhang S, Zeng D, et al. Efficient hydrogen production

through the chemical looping redox cycle of YSZ supported iron oxides. Green
Energy Environ 2020;6(6):875–83.

[43] Sun Z, Wu X, Russell CK, Dyar MD, Sklute EC, Toan S, et al. Synergistic

enhancement of chemical looping-based CO2  splitting with biomass cascade
utilization using cyclic stabilized Ca2Fe2O5  aerogel. J Mater Chem A 2019;7:
1216–26.

[44] Sun Z, Zeng L, Russell CK, Assabumrungrat S, Chen S, Duan L, et al.

Solar–wind–bio ecosystem for biomass cascade utilization with multigeneration
of formic acid, hydrogen, and graphene. ACS Sustain. Chem Eng 2019;7:2558–68.
[45] Sun Z, Chen S, Russell CK, Hu J, Rony AH, Tan G, et al. Improvement of H2-rich
gas production with tar abatement from pine wood conversion over bi-functional
Ca2Fe2O5  catalyst: Investigation of inner-looping redox reaction and promoting
mechanisms. Appl Energy 2018;212:931–43.

[46] Yang K, Gu Z, Long Y, Lin S, Lu C, Zhu X, et al. Hydrogen production via chemical
looping reforming of coke oven gas. Green Energy Environ 2021;6:678–92.

on silica boost acrolein formation via selective oxidation of propylene. Chin J
Catal 2021;42:310–9.

[69] Zhang X, Corrˆea da Silva C, Liu C, Prabhakar M, Rohwerder M. Selective

oxidation of ternary Fe-Mn-Si alloys during annealing process. Corros Sci 2020;
174:108859.

[70] Li D, Xu R, Li X, Li Z, Zhu X, Li K. Chemical looping conversion of gaseous and
liquid fuels for chemical production: A Review. Energy Fuels 2020;34:5381–413.
[71] Hickman DA, Schmidt LD. Production of syngas by direct catalytic oxidation of

methane. Science 1993;259:343.

[72] Fathi M, Heitnes Hofstad K, Sperle T, Rokstad OA, Holmen A. Partial oxidation of
methane to synthesis gas at very short contact times. Catal Today 1998;42:205–9.
[73] Ranzi E, Dente M, Goldaniga A, Bozzano G, Faravelli T. Lumping procedures in
detailed kinetic modeling of gasification, pyrolysis, partial oxidation and
combustion of hydrocarbon mixtures. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2001;27:99–139.

[74] Bhavsar S, Veser G. Chemical looping beyond combustion: production of

synthesis gas via chemical looping partial oxidation of methane. RSC Adv 2014;4:
47254–67.

[75] Mihai O, Chen D, Holmen A. Chemical looping methane partial oxidation: the

effect of the crystal size and O content of LaFeO3. J Catal 2012;293:175–85.

[76] Zhang R, Cao Y, Li H, Zhao Z, Zhao K, Jiang L. The role of CuO modified
La0⋅7Sr0⋅3FeO3  perovskite on intermediate-temperature partial oxidation of
methane via chemical looping scheme. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45:4073–83.
[77] Li K, Wang H, Wei Y, Yan D. Partial oxidation of methane to syngas with air by
lattice oxygen transfer over ZrO2-modified Ce–Fe mixed oxides. Chem Eng J
2011;173:574–82.

[78] Ryd ́en M, Leion H, Mattisson T, Lyngfelt A. Combined oxides as oxygen-carrier
material for chemical-looping with oxygen uncoupling. Appl Energy 2014;113:
1924–32.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104525

Z. Sun et al.

[79] Shafiefarhood A, Hamill JC, Neal LM, Li F. Methane partial oxidation using

[109] Zheng Y, Marek EJ, Scott SA. H2  production from a plasma-assisted chemical

FeOx@La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-δ  core-shell catalyst - transient pulse studies. Phys Chem
Chem Phys 2015;17:31297–307.

[80] Fleischer V, Littlewood P, Parishan S, Schom ̈acker R. Chemical looping as reactor
concept for the oxidative coupling of methane over a Na2WO4/Mn/SiO2 catalyst.
Chem Eng J 2016;306:646–54.

[81] Tsang SC, Claridge JB, Green MLH. Recent advances in the conversion of methane

looping system from the partial oxidation of CH4 at mild temperatures. Chem Eng
J 2020;379:122197.

[110] Hammond C, Forde MM, Ab Rahim MH, Thetford A, He Q, Jenkins RL, et al.
direct catalytic conversion of methane to methanol in an aqueous medium by
using copper-promoted Fe-ZSM-5. Angew Chem Int Ed 2012;51:5129–33.
[111] Schwarz H. Chemistry with methane: concepts rather than recipes. Angew Chem

to synthesis gas. Catal Today 1995;23:3–15.

Int Ed 2011;50:10096–115.

[82] Ma Z, Perreault P, Pelegrin DC, Boffito DC, Patience GS. Thermodynamically

[112] Zhan CG, Nichols JA, Dixon DA. Ionization potential, electron affinity,

unconstrained forced concentration cycling of methane catalytic partial oxidation
over CeO2  FeCralloy catalysts. Chem Eng J 2020;380:122470.

[83] Zhang X, Su Y, Pei C, Zhao Z-J, Liu R, Gong J. Chemical looping steam reforming
of methane over Ce-doped perovskites. Chem Eng Sci 2020;223:115707.
[84] Ding H, Xu Y, Luo C, Wang Q, Shen C, Xu J, et al. A novel composite perovskite-
based material for chemical-looping steam methane reforming to hydrogen and
syngas. Energy Convers Manage 2018;171:12–9.

[85] Dai XP, Li RJ, Yu CC, Hao ZP. Unsteady-state direct partial oxidation of methane
to synthesis gas in a fixed-bed reactor using AFeO3  (A = La, Nd, Eu) perovskite-
type oxides as oxygen storage. J Phys Chem B 2006;110:22525–31.

[86] Li K, Wang H, Wei Y, Yan D. Syngas production from methane and air via a redox
process using Ce–Fe mixed oxides as oxygen carriers. Appl Catal B-Environ 2010;
97:361–72.

[87] Siang TJ, Jalil AA, Abdulrasheed AA, Hambali HU, Nabgan W. Thermodynamic
equilibrium study of altering methane partial oxidation for Fischer–Tropsch
synfuel production. Energy 2020;198:117394.

[88] Ding M, Tu J, Qiu M, Wang T, Ma L, Li Y. Impact of potassium promoter on Cu–Fe

based mixed alcohols synthesis catalyst. Appl Energy 2015;138:584–9.

[89] Liu Y, Lu F, Tang Y, Liu M, Tao FF, Zhang Y. Effects of initial crystal structure of
Fe2O3 and Mn promoter on effective active phase for syngas to light olefins. Appl
Catal B-Environ 2020;261:118219.

electronegativity, hardness, and electron excitation energy: molecular properties
from density functional theory orbital energies. J Phys Chem A 2003;107:
4184–95.

[113] Alayon EM, Nachtegaal M, Ranocchiari M, van Bokhoven JA. Catalytic conversion

of methane to methanol over Cu-mordenite. Chem Commun 2012;48:404–6.

[114] Liu C-C, Mou C-Y, Yu SSF, Chan SI. Heterogeneous formulation of the tricopper
complex for efficient catalytic conversion of methane into methanol at ambient
temperature and pressure. Energy Environ Sci 2016;9:1361–74.

[115] Groothaert MH, van Bokhoven JA, Battiston AA, Weckhuysen BM,

Schoonheydt RA. Bis(μ-oxo)dicopper in Cu-ZSM-5 and its role in the
decomposition of NO:  a combined in situ XAFS, UV(cid:0) Vis(cid:0) Near-IR, and kinetic
study. J Am Chem Soc 2003;125:7629–40.

[116] Al-Shihri S, Richard CJ, Al-Megren H, Chadwick D. Insights into the direct

selective oxidation of methane to methanol over ZSM-5 zeolytes in aqueous
hydrogen peroxide. Catal Today 2018;353:269–78.

[117] Wang G, Chen W, Huang L, Liu Z, Sun X, Zheng A. Reactivity descriptors of

diverse copper-oxo species on ZSM-5 zeolite towards methane activation. Catal
Today 2019;338:108–16.

[118] Jin Z, Wang L, Zuidema E, Mondal K, Zhang M, Zhang J, et al. Hydrophobic

zeolite modification for in situ peroxide formation in methane oxidation to
methanol. Science 2020;367:193.

[90] Tijani MM, Mostafavi E, Mahinpey N. Process simulation and thermodynamic

[119] Dinh KT, Sullivan MM, Serna P, Meyer RJ, Dinca M, Roman-Leshkov Y. Viewpoint

analysis of a chemical looping combustion system using methane as fuel and NiO
as the oxygen carrier in a moving-bed reactor. Chem Eng Process Process Intensif
2019;144:107636.

[91] Gür TM. Comprehensive review of methane conversion in solid oxide fuel cells:
prospects for efficient electricity generation from natural gas. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2016;54:1–64.

[92] Wolf J, Anheden M, Yan J. Comparison of nickel- and iron-based oxygen carriers
in chemical looping combustion for CO2 capture in power generation. Fuel 2005;
84:993–1006.

[93] L ̈ofberg A, Guerrero-Caballero J, Kane T, Rubbens A, Jalowiecki-Duhamel L. Ni/
CeO2 based catalysts as oxygen vectors for the chemical looping dry reforming of
methane for syngas production. Appl Catal B-Environ 2017;212:159–74.

[94] van Looij F, van Giezen JC, Stobbe ER, Geus JW. Mechanism of the partial

oxidation of methane to synthesis gas on a silica-supported nickel catalyst. Catal
Today 1994;21:495–503.

[95] Chen S, Zeng L, Tian H, Li X, Gong J. Enhanced lattice oxygen reactivity over Ni-

modified WO3-based redox catalysts for chemical looping partial oxidation of
methane. ACS Catal 2017;7:3548–59.

[96] Kang Y, Tian M, Huang C, Lin J, Hou B, Pan X, et al. Improving syngas selectivity

of Fe2O3/Al2O3  with yttrium modification in chemical looping methane
conversion. ACS Catal 2019;9:8373–82.

[97] Qin L, Guo M, Liu Y, Cheng Z, Fan JA, Fan L-S. Enhanced methane conversion in
chemical looping partial oxidation systems using a copper doping modification.
Appl Catal B-Environ 2018;235:143–9.

[98] Zhu M, Song Y, Chen S, Li M, Zhang L, Xiang W. Chemical looping dry reforming
of methane with hydrogen generation on Fe2O3/Al2O3 oxygen carrier. Chem Eng
J 2019;368:812–23.

[99] Ye Zheng, Liao X, Xiao H, Haribal V, Shi X, Huang Z, et al. Highly efficient

reduction of O2-containing CO2  via chemical looping based on perovskite
nanocomposites. Nano Energy 2020;78:105320.

[100] Otsuka K, Ushiyama T, Yamanaka I. Partial oxidation of methane using the redox

of cerium oxide. Chem Lett 1993;22:1517–20.

[101] Li RJ, Yu CC, Dai XP, Shen SK. Selective oxidation of methane to synthesis gas
using lattice oxygen from perovskite La0.8Sr0.2FeO3  catalyst. Chin J Catal 2002;
23:549–54.

[102] Ouyang MZ, Boldrin P, Maher RC, Chen XL, Liu XH, Cohen LF, et al.

A mechanistic study of the interactions between methane and nickel supported on
doped ceria. Appl Catal B-Environ 2019;248:332–40.

[103] Zhao H, Tian X, Ma J, Su M, Wang B, Mei D. Development of tailor-made oxygen

carriers and reactors for chemical looping processes at Huazhong University of
Science & Technology. Int J Greenhouse Gas Control 2020;93:102898.
[104] Zhang X, Pei C, Chang X, Chen S, Liu R, Zhao Z-J, et al. FeO6 octahedral distortion
activates lattice oxygen in perovskite ferrite for methane partial oxidation
coupled with CO2  splitting. J Am Chem Soc 2020.

[105] Liu Y, Qin L, Cheng Z, Goetze JW, Kong FH, Fan JA, et al. Near 100% CO

selectivity in nanoscaled iron-based oxygen carriers for chemical looping methane
partial oxidation. Nat Commun 2019;10:6.

[106] Holladay JD, Hu J, King DL, Wang Y. An overview of hydrogen production

technologies. Catal Today 2009;139:244–60.

[107] Paulmier T, Fulcheri L. Use of non-thermal plasma for hydrocarbon reforming.

Chem Eng J 2005;106:59–71.

[108] Kim SC, Chun YN. Production of hydrogen by partial oxidation with thermal

plasma. Renew Energy 2008;33:1564–9.

on the partial oxidation of methane to methanol using Cu- and Fe-exchanged
zeolites. ACS Catal 2018;8:8306–13.

[120] Ma C, Tan X, Zhang H, Shen Q, Sun N, Wei W. Direct conversion of methane to
methanol over Cu exchanged mordenite: effect of counter ions. Chin Chem Lett
2020;31:235–8.

[121] Sushkevich VL, van Boichoven JA. Methane-to-Methanol: activity descriptors in
copper-exchanged zeolites for the rational design of materials. ACS Catal 2019;9:
6293–304.

[122] Jamil MAR, Touchy AS, Rashed MN, Ting KW, Siddiki SMAH, Toyao T, et al. N-
Methylation of amines and nitroarenes with methanol using heterogeneous
platinum catalysts. J Catal 2019;371:47–56.

[123] Woertink JS, Smeets PJ, Groothaert MH, Vance MA, Sels BF, Schoonheydt RA,

et al. A [Cu2O]2+
methanol. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009;106:18908–13.

core in Cu-ZSM-5, the active site in the oxidation of methane to

[124] Li G, Vassilev P, Sanchez-Sanchez M, Lercher JA, Hensen EJM, Pidko EA. Stability

and reactivity of copper oxo-clusters in ZSM-5 zeolite for selective methane
oxidation to methanol. J Catal 2016;338:305–12.

[125] Vanelderen P, Snyder BER, Tsai M-L, Hadt RG, Vancauwenbergh J, Coussens O,
et al. Spectroscopic definition of the copper active sites in mordenite: selective
methane oxidation. J Am Chem Soc 2015;137:6383–92.

[126] Grundner S, Markovits MAC, Li G, Tromp M, Pidko EA, Hensen EJM, et al. Single-

site trinuclear copper oxygen clusters in mordenite for selective conversion of
methane to methanol. Nat Commun 2015;6:9.

[127] Grundner S, Luo W, Sanchez-Sanchez M, Lercher JA. Synthesis of single-site

copper catalysts for methane partial oxidation. Chem Commun 2016;52:2553–6.
[128] Vogiatzis KD, Li G, Hensen EJM, Gagliardi L, Pidko EA. Electronic structure of the

[Cu3(μ-O)3]2+
methanol oxidation. J Phys Chem C 2017;121:22295–302.

cluster in mordenite zeolite and its effects on the methane to

[129] Jovanovic ZR, Lange J-P, Ravi M, Knorpp AJ, Sushkevich VL, Newton MA, et al.

Oxidation of methane to methanol over Cu-exchanged zeolites: Scientia gratia
scientiae or paradigm shift in natural gas valorization? J Catal 2020;385:238–45.

[130] Xu J, Armstrong RD, Shaw G, Dummer NF, Freakley SJ, Taylor SH, et al.

Continuous selective oxidation of methane to methanol over Cu- and Fe-modified
ZSM-5 catalysts in a flow reactor. Catal Today 2016;270:93–100.

[131] Alayon EMC, Nachtegaal M, Bodi A, van Bokhoven JA. Reaction conditions of

methane-to-methanol conversion affect the structure of active copper sites. ACS
Catal 2014;4:16–22.

[132] Zhao Z-J, Kulkarni A, Vilella L, Nørskov JK, Studt F. Theoretical insights into the
selective oxidation of methane to methanol in copper-exchanged mordenite. ACS
Catal 2016;6:3760–6.

[133] Mahyuddin MH, Tanaka T, Shiota Y, Staykov A, Yoshizawa K. Methane partial

oxidation over [Cu2(μ-O)]2+
zeolites. ACS Catal 2018;8:1500–9.

and [Cu3(μ-O)3]2+

active species in large-pore

[134] Burnett L, Rysakova M, Wang K, Gonz ́alez-Carballo J, Tooze RP, García-

García FR. Isothermal cyclic conversion of methane to methanol using copper-
exchanged ZSM-5 zeolite materials under mild conditions. Appl Catal A 2019;
587:117272.

[135] Tomkins P, Mansouri A, Bozbag SE, Krumeich F, Park MB, Alayon EMC, et al.
Isothermal cyclic conversion of methane into methanol over copper-exchanged
zeolite at low temperature. Angew Chem Int Ed 2016;55:5467–71.

[136] Sushkevich VL, Palagin D, Ranocchiari M, van Bokhoven JA. Selective anaerobic

oxidation of methane enables direct synthesis of methanol. Science 2017;356:
523.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104526

Z. Sun et al.

[137] Zavyalova U, Holena M, Schloegl R, Baerns M. Statistical analysis of past catalytic
data on oxidative methane coupling for new insights into the composition of high-
performance catalysts. Chemcatchem 2011;3:1935–47.

[166] Wang C, Boucher M, Yang M, Saltsburg H, Flytzani-Stephanopoulos M. ZnO-
modified zirconia as gold catalyst support for the low-temperature methanol
steam reforming reaction. Appl Catal B-Environ 2014;154-155:142–52.

[138] Galadima A, Muraza O. Revisiting the oxidative coupling of methane to ethylene
in the golden period of shale gas: a review. J Ind Eng Chem 2016;37:1–13.
[139] Lim S, Choi J-W, Suh DJ, Song KH, Ham HC, Ha J-M. Combined experimental and

[167] Li C-L, Lin Y-C. Methanol partial oxidation over palladium-, platinum-, and

rhodium-integrated LaMnO3 perovskites. Appl Catal B-Environ 2011;107:284–93.
[168] Pojanavaraphan C, Nakaranuwattana W, Luengnaruemitchai A, Gulari E. Effect of

density functional theory (DFT) studies on the catalyst design for the oxidative
coupling of methane. J Catal 2019;375:478–92.

[140] Kwon D, Yang I, Sim Y, Ha J-M, Jung JC. A K2NiF4-type La2Li0.5Al0.5O4  catalyst
for the oxidative coupling of methane (OCM). Catal Commun 2019;128:105702.

[141] Karakaya C, Zhu H, Loebick C, Weissman JG, Kee RJ. A detailed reaction

mechanism for oxidative coupling of methane over Mn/Na2WO4/SiO2 catalyst for
non-isothermal conditions. Cataly Today 2018;312:10–22.

[142] Chen L, Pannala S, Broekhuis R, Gautam P, Gu T, West D, et al. Three-dimensional
CFD simulation of pattern formation in a shallow packed-bed reactor for oxidative
coupling of methane. Chem Eng J 2020;400:125979.

[143] Olivos-Suarez AI, Szecsenyi A, Hensen EJM, Ruiz-Martinez J, Pidko EA, Gascon J.

Strategies for the direct catalytic valorization of methane using heterogeneous
catalysis: challenges and opportunities. ACS Catal 2016;6:2965–81.
[144] Labinger JA, Bercaw JE. Understanding and exploiting C-H bond activation.

Nature 2002;417:507–14.

[145] Ghareghashi A, Sarrafi A, Ghader S. The effect of heat transfer on products of a

thermally coupled shell and tube reactor consisting of two processes: steam
reforming of methane and oxidative coupling of methane. Chem Eng Process -
Process Intensif 2018;133:263–77.

[146] Igenegbai VO, Meyer RJ, Linic S. In search of membrane-catalyst materials for

oxidative coupling of methane: Performance and phase stability studies of
gadolinium-doped barium cerate and the impact of Zr doping. Appl Cataly B:
Environ 2018;230:29–35.

[147] Qin L, Cheng Z, Fan JA, Kopechek D, Xu D, Deshpande N, et al. Nanostructure

formation mechanism and ion diffusion in iron-titanium composite materials with
chemical looping redox reactions. J Mater Chem A 2015;3:11302–12.

[148] Vandewalle LA, Lengyel I, West DH, Van Geem KM, Marin GB. Catalyst ignition
and extinction: a microkinetics-based bifurcation study of adiabatic reactors for
oxidative coupling of methane. Chem Eng Sci 2019;199:635–51.

[149] Parishan S, Littlewood P, Arinchtein A, Fleischer V, Schom ̈acker R. Chemical
looping as a reactor concept for the oxidative coupling of methane over the
MnxOy-Na2WO4/SiO2  catalyst, benefits and limitation. Cataly Today 2018;311:
40–7.

[150] Fleischer V, Simon U, Parishan S, Colmenares MG, G ̈orke O, Gurlo A, et al.

Investigation of the role of the Na2WO4/Mn/SiO2  catalyst composition in the
oxidative coupling of methane by chemical looping experiments. J Catal 2018;
360:102–17.

[151] Neal LM, Shafiefarhood A, Li F. Dynamic methane partial oxidation using a
Fe2O3@La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-δ  core–shell redox catalyst in the absence of gaseous
oxygen. ACS Cataly 2014;4:3560–9.

[152] Wang Z-Q, Wang D, Gong X-Q. Strategies to improve the activity while

maintaining the selectivity of oxidative coupling of methane at La2O3: a density
functional theory study. ACS Cataly 2020;10:586–94.

support composition and metal loading on Au/Ce1(cid:0) xZrxO2  catalysts for the
oxidative steam reforming of methanol. Chem Eng J 2014;240:99–108.
[169] de la Osa AR, Calcerrada AB, Valverde JL, Baranova EA, de Lucas-Consuegra A.
Electrochemical reforming of alcohols on nanostructured platinum-tin catalyst-
electrodes. Appl Catal B-Environ 2015;179:276–84.

[170] Gonz ́alez Carraz ́an SR, Wojcieszak R, Blanco RM, Mateos-Pedrero C, Ruiz P.
Modulation of the selectivity in partial oxidation of methanol over CuZnAl
catalysts by adding CO2  and/or H2  into the reaction feed. Appl Catal B-Environ
2015;168-169:14–24.

[171] Rabe S, Vogel F. A thermogravimetric study of the partial oxidation of methanol

for hydrogen production over a Cu/ZnO/Al2O3  catalyst. Appl Catal B-Environ
2008;84:827–34.

[172] Glisenti A, Galenda A, Natile MM. Steam reforming and oxidative steam

reforming of methanol and ethanol: the behaviour of LaCo0.7Cu0.3O3. Appl Catal
A-Gen 2013;453:102–12.

[173] de Lucas-Consuegra A, Gonz ́alez-Cobos J, Gacia-Rodriguez Y, Endrino JL,

Valverde JL. Electrochemical activation of the catalytic methanol reforming
reaction for H2  production. Electrochem Commun 2012;19:55–8.

[174] Sun Z, Zhang X, Li H, Liu T, Sang S, Chen S, et al. Chemical looping oxidative

steam reforming of methanol: a new pathway for auto-thermal conversion. Appl
Catal B-Environ 2020;269:118758.

[175] Zeng L, Wei D, Toan S, Sun Z, Sun Z. Sorption-enhanced chemical looping

oxidative steam reforming of methanol for on-board hydrogen supply. Green
Energy Environ 2022;7:145–55.

[176] Liu J, Zhou Z, Yue B, Sun Z, Sun Z. Chemical looping induced CH3OH–H2-PEMFC

[177]

scheme for fuel cell vehicle: parameter optimization and feasibility analysis.
J Power Sources 2020;479:228790.
 ̈
Ozcan O, Akın AN. Thermodynamic analysis of methanol steam reforming to
produce hydrogen for HT-PEMFC: an optimization study. Int J Hydrog Energy
2019;44:14117–26.

[178] Ribeirinha P, Abdollahzadeh M, Sousa JM, Boaventura M, Mendes A. Modelling of

a high-temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell integrated with a
methanol steam reformer cell. Appl Energy 2017;202:6–19.

[179] Lu W, Zhang R, Toan S, Xu R, Zhou F, Sun Z, et al. Microchannel structure design

for hydrogen supply from methanol steam reforming. Chem Eng J 2022;429:
132286.

[180] Dharanipragada N, Galvita VV, Poelman H, Buelens LC, Detavernier C, Marin GB.
Bifunctional Co- and Ni- ferrites for catalyst-assisted chemical looping with
alcohols. Appl Catal B-Environ 2018;222:59–72.

[181] de Lima SM, da Silva AM, da Costa LOO, Assaf JM, Mattos LV, Sarkari R, et al.
Hydrogen production through oxidative steam reforming of ethanol over Ni-based
catalysts derived from La1(cid:0) xCexNiO3  perovskite-type oxides. Appl Catal B
Environ 2012;121-122:1–9.

[153] Cheng Z, Baser DS, Nadgouda SG, Qin L, Fan JA, Fan LS. C2  selectivity

[182] Wu X, Kawi S. Steam reforming of ethanol to H2  over Rh/Y2O3: crucial roles of

enhancement in chemical looping oxidative coupling of methane over a Mg-Mn
composite oxygen carrier by Li-doping-induced oxygen vacancies. ACS Energy
Lett 2018;3:1730–6.

[154] Baser DS, Cheng Z, Fan JA, Fan L-S. Codoping Mg-Mn based oxygen carrier with

lithium and tungsten for enhanced C2  yield in a chemical looping oxidative
coupling of methane system. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2021;9:2651–60.
[155] Hu X, Lu G. Inhibition of methane formation in steam reforming reactions

through modification of Ni catalyst and the reactants. Green Chem 2009;11:
724–32.

[156] Guerrero L, Castilla S, Cobo M. Advances in ethanol reforming for the production

of hydrogen. Quim Nova 2014;37:850–6.

[157] Esposito DV, Forest RV, Chang Y, Gaillard N, McCandless BE, Hou S, et al.

Photoelectrochemical reforming of glucose for hydrogen production using a WO3-
based tandem cell device. Energ Environ Sci 2012;5:9091–9.

Y2O3  oxidizing ability, space velocity, and H2/C. Energy Environ Sci 2010;3:
334–42.

[183] Rodríguez C, Moreno S, Molina R. Oxygen mobility and its relationship with the
oxidative steam reforming of ethanol (OSRE). Appl Surf Sci 2019;485:293–303.
[184] Kim JH, Jang YS, Kim DH. Multiple steady states in the oxidative steam reforming

of methanol. Chem Eng J 2018;338:752–63.

[185] Efimov MN, Mironova EY, Vasilev AA, Muratov DG, Zhilyaeva NA, Ozkan SZ,

et al. Comparison of bimetallic Co-Ru nanoparticles supported on highly porous
activated carbonized polyacrylonitrile with monometallic ones in ethanol steam
reforming. J Environ 2021;9(6):106429.

[186] Espitia-Sibaja M, Mu ̃noz M, Moreno S, Molina R. Effects of the cobalt content of
catalysts prepared from hydrotalcites synthesized by ultrasound-assisted
coprecipitation on hydrogen production by oxidative steam reforming of ethanol
(OSRE). Fuel 2017;194:7–16.

[158] Naidja A, Krishna CR, Butcher T, Mahajan D. Cool flame partial oxidation and its

[187] Carraro F, Vozniuk O, Calvillo L, Nodari L, La Fontaine C, Cavani F, et al. In

role in combustion and reforming of fuels for fuel cell systems. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2003;29:155–91.

[159] Tartakovsky L, Sheintuch M. Fuel reforming in internal combustion engines. Prog

operando XAS investigation of reduction and oxidation processes in cobalt and
iron mixed spinels during the chemical loop reforming of ethanol. J Mater Chem
A 2017;5:20808–17.

Energy Combust Sci 2018;67:88–114.

[160] Sun Z, Sun Z-q. Hydrogen generation from methanol reforming for fuel cell

applications: a review. J Cent South Univ 2020;27:1074–103.

[161] Agrell J, Birgersson H, Boutonnet M, Meli ́an-Cabrera I, Navarro RM, Fierro JLG.
Production of hydrogen from methanol over Cu/ZnO catalysts promoted by ZrO2
and Al2O3. J Catal 2003;219:389–403.

[162] Turco M, Bagnasco G, Cammarano C, Senese P, Costantino U, Sisani M. Cu/ZnO/
Al2O3 catalysts for oxidative steam reforming of methanol: the role of Cu and the
dispersing oxide matrix. Appl Catal B-Environ 2007;77:46–57.

[163] S ́a S, Silva H, Brand ̃ao L, Sousa JM, Mendes A. Catalysts for methanol steam

reforming—a review. Appl Catal B-Environ 2010;99:43–57.

[188] Dou BL, Zhang H, Cui GM, Wang ZL, Jiang B, Wang KQ, et al. Hydrogen

production and reduction of Ni-based oxygen carriers during chemical looping
steam reforming of ethanol in a fixed-bed reactor. Int J Hydrog Energy 2017;42:
26217–30.

[189] Isarapakdeetham S, Kim-Lohsoontorn P, Wongsakulphasatch S, Kiatkittipong W,
Laosiripojana N, Gong J, et al. Hydrogen production via chemical looping steam
reforming of ethanol by Ni-based oxygen carriers supported on CeO2  and La2O3
promoted Al2O3. Int J Hydrog Energy 2020;45:1477–91.

[190] Sun Z, Shi W, Pei C, Russell CK, Cheng D, Sun Z, et al. Tailoring lattice oxygen
triggered NiO/Ca9Co12O28  catalysts for sorption-enhanced renewable hydrogen
production. Appl Catal B-Environ 2022;316:121642.

[164] Silva H, Mateos-Pedrero C, Ribeirinha P, Boaventura M, Mendes A. Low-

[191] Dou BL, Zhang H, Cui GM, Wang ZL, Jiang B, Wang KQ, et al. Hydrogen

temperature methanol steam reforming kinetics over a novel CuZrDyAl catalyst.
React Kinet Mech Cat 2015;115:321–39.

[165] Araya SS, Liso V, Cui X, Li N, Zhu J, Sahlin SL, et al. A review of the methanol

production by sorption-enhanced chemical looping steam reforming of ethanol in
an alternating fixed-bed reactor: sorbent to catalyst ratio dependencies. Energy
Conv Manag 2018;155:243–52.

economy: the fuel cell route. Energies 2020;13(3):596.

[192] Li Y, Su M, Xie X, Wu S, Liu C. CO2  capture performance of synthetic sorbent

prepared from carbide slag and aluminum nitrate hydrate by combustion
synthesis. Appl Energy 2015;145:60–8.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104527

Z. Sun et al.

[193] Ma X, Li Y, Yan X, Zhang W, Zhao J, Wang Z. Preparation of a morph-genetic CaO-
based sorbent using paper fibre as a biotemplate for enhanced CO2 capture. Chem
Eng J 2019;361:235–44.

[223] Yusuf S, Neal LM, Li F. Effect of promoters on manganese-containing mixed metal
oxides for oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane via a cyclic redox scheme. ACS
Catal 2017;7:5163–73.

[194] Sun Z, Xu C, Chen S, Xiang W. Improvements of CaO-based sorbents for cyclic CO2

capture using a wet mixing process. Chem Eng J 2016;286:320–8.
[195] Sun Z, Xiang W, Chen S. Sorption enhanced coal gasification for hydrogen

production using a synthesized CaO-MgO-molecular sieve sorbent. Int J Hydrog
Energy 2016;41:17323–33.

[196] Garcia-Labiano F, de Diego LF, Garcia-Diez E, Serrano A, Abad A, Gayan P, et al.
Combustion and reforming of ethanol in a chemical looping continuous unit. 12th
International Conference on Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies (GHGT).
Austin, TX2014 2014;63:53-62.

[197] Gallo A, Pirovano C, Ferrini P, Marelli M, Psaro R, Santangelo S, et al. Influence of

reaction parameters on the activity of ruthenium based catalysts for glycerol
steam reforming. Appl Catal B-Environ 2012;121-122:40–9.

[198] Delparish A, Koc S, Caglayan BS, Avci AK. Oxidative steam reforming of glycerol
to synthesis gas in a microchannel reactor. Catal Today 2019;323:200–8.
[199] Kamonsuangkasem K, Therdthianwong S, Therdthianwong A. Hydrogen

production from yellow glycerol via catalytic oxidative steam reforming. Fuel
Process Technol 2013;106:695–703.

[200] Yang G, Yu H, Peng F, Wang H, Yang J, Xie D. Thermodynamic analysis of

hydrogen generation via oxidative steam reforming of glycerol. Renew Energy
2011;36:2120–7.

[201] LMM T, Araque M, Centeno MA, Roger AC. Role of ruthenium on the catalytic

properties of CeZr and CeZrCo mixed oxides for glycerol steam reforming reaction
toward H2  production. Catal Today 2015;242:80–90.

[202] Dang CX, Li YH, Yusuf SM, Cao YH, Wang HJ, Yu H, et al. Calcium cobaltate: a
phase-change catalyst for stable hydrogen production from bio-glycerol. Energy
Environ Sci 2018;11:660–8.

[224] Gao Y, Wang X, Liu J, Huang C, Zhao K, Zhao Z, et al. A molten carbonate shell

modified perovskite redox catalyst for anaerobic oxidative dehydrogenation of
ethane. Sci Adv 2020;6(17):eaaz9339.

[225] Plotkin J S. The changing dynamics of olefin supply/demand. Catal Today 2005;

106:10–4.

[226] Agarwal A, Sengupta D, El-Halwagi M. Sustainable process design approach for

on-purpose propylene production and intensification. ACS Sustain Chem Eng
2018;6:2407–21.

[227] Cavani F, Ballarini N, Cericola A. Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane and
propane: how far from commercial implementation? Catal Today 2007;127:
113–31.

[228] Serykh AI, Agafonov YA. On the nature of active sites in alumina-supported zinc

propane dehydrogenation catalysts. Mol Catal 2020;493:111055.

[229] Wu X, Zhang Q, Chen L, Liu Q, Zhang X, Zhang Q, et al. Enhanced catalytic

performance of PtSn catalysts for propane dehydrogenation by a Zn-modified Mg
(Al)O support. Fuel Process Technol 2020;198:106222.

[230] Xiong H, Lin S, Goetze J, Pletcher P, Guo H, Kovarik L, et al. Thermally stable and
regenerable platinum–tin clusters for propane dehydrogenation prepared by atom
trapping on ceria. Angew Chem Int Ed 2017;56:8986–91.

[231] Sattler JJHB, Ruiz-Martinez J, Santillan-Jimenez E, Weckhuysen BM. Catalytic
dehydrogenation of light alkanes on metals and metal oxides. Chem Rev 2014;
114:10613–53.

[232] Bakare IA, Adamu S, Qamaruddin M, Al-Bogami SA, Al-Ghamdi S, Hossain MM.

Oxidative dehydrogenation of propane to propylene over VOx on mixed theta-
Al2O3/Alkaline earth metal oxide supports. Ind Eng Chem Res 2019;58:
10785–92.

[203] Liu M, Yi Y, Wang L, Guo H, Bogaerts A. Hydrogenation of carbon dioxide to

[233] Hu XY, Li CY, Yang CH. Studies on lattice oxygen utilization during catalytic

value-added chemicals by heterogeneous catalysis and plasma catalysis. Catalysts
2019;9(3):275.

[204] Schmitz M, Solmi MV, Leitner W. Catalytic processes combining CO2 and alkenes

into value-added chemicals. Top Organomet Chem 2019;63:17–38.

[205] Yusuf S, Neal L, Bao Z, Wu Z, Li F. Effects of sodium and tungsten promoters on
Mg6MnO8-based core–shell redox catalysts for chemical looping—Oxidative
dehydrogenation of ethane. ACS Catal 2019;9:3174–86.

[206] Loiland JA, Zhao Z, Patel A, Hazin P. Boron-containing catalysts for the oxidative
dehydrogenation of ethane/propane mixtures. Ind Eng Chem Res 2019;58:
2170–80.

[207] Ren Y, Guo G, Liao Z, Yang Y, Sun J, Jiang B, et al. Kinetic modeling with

automatic reaction network generator, an application to naphtha steam cracking.
Energy 2020;207:118204.

[208] Gu Y, Liu H, Yang M, Ma Z, Zhao L, Xing W, et al. Highly stable phosphine

modified VOx/Al2O3 catalyst in propane dehydrogenation. Appl Catal B-Environ
2020;274:119089.

[209] Hu Z-P, Wang Y, Yang D, Yuan Z-Y. CrOx  supported on high -silica HZSM-5 for

propane dehydrogenation. J Energy Chem 2020;47:225–33.

[210] Zhang Y, Zhao Y, Otroshchenko T, Perechodjuk A, Kondratenko VA, Bartling S,
et al. Structure-activity-selectivity relationships in propane dehydrogenation over
Rh/ZrO2  catalysts. ACS Catal 2020;10:6377–88.

[211] Sattler JJ, Ruiz-Martinez J, Santillan-Jimenez E, Weckhuysen BM. Catalytic

dehydrogenation of light alkanes on metals and metal oxides. Chem Rev 2014;
114:10613–53.

[212] Nieto JML, Botella P, Concepci ́on P, Dejoz A, V ́azquez MI. Oxidative

dehydrogenation of ethane on Te-containing MoVNbO catalysts. Catal Today
2004;91-92:241–5.

[213] Botella P, Garcı́a-Gonz ́alez E, Dejoz A, L ́opez Nieto JM, V ́azquez MI, Gonz ́alez-
Calbet J. Selective oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane on MoVTeNbO mixed
metal oxide catalysts. J Catal 2004;225:428–38.

[214] Kumar CP, Gaab S, Müller TE, Lercher JA. Oxidative dehydrogenation of light

alkanes on supported molten alkali metal chloride catalysts. Top Catal 2008;50:
156–67.

[215] Bodke AS, Henning D, Schmidt LD, Bharadwaj SS, Maj JJ, Siddall J. Oxidative
dehydrogenation of ethane at millisecond contact times: effect of H2  addition.
J Catal 2000;191:62–74.

[216] Heracleous E, Lemonidou AA. Ni–Nb–O mixed oxides as highly active and

selective catalysts for ethene production via ethane oxidative dehydrogenation.
Part I: characterization and catalytic performance. J Catal 2006;237:162–74.

[217] Yun YS, Lee M, Sung J, Yun D, Kim TY, Park H, et al. Promoting effect of cerium

on MoVTeNb mixed oxide catalyst for oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane to
ethylene. Appl Catal B-Environ 2018;237:554–62.

[218] Nieto JL, Botella P, V ́azquez M, Dejoz A. The selective oxidative dehydrogenation
of ethane over hydrothermally synthesised MoVTeNb catalysts. Chem Commun
2002;17:1906–7.

[219] Yusuf S, Haribal V, Jackson D, Neal L, Li F. Mixed iron-manganese oxides as redox
catalysts for chemical looping–oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane with
tailorable heat of reactions. Appl Catal B-Environ 2019;257:117885.

[220] Haribal VP, Neal LM, Li F. Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane under a cyclic

redox scheme – Process simulations and analysis. Energy 2017;119:1024–35.

[221] Gao Y, Neal LM, Li F. Li-Promoted LaxSr2–xFeO4(cid:0) δ  core–shell redox catalysts for

oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane under a cyclic redox scheme. ACS Catal
2016;6:7293–302.

[222] Neal LM, Yusuf S, Sofranko JA, Li F. Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane: a

chemical looping approach. Energy Technol 2016;4:1200–8.

conversion of n-heptane activated by V2O5/Al2O3. Chem Eng J 2015;263:113–8.

[234] Bakare IA, Mohamed SA, Al-Ghamdi S, Razzak SA, Hossain MM, de Lasa HI.

Fluidized bed ODH of ethane to ethylene over VOx-MoOx/gamma-Al2O3 catalyst:
Desorption kinetics and catalytic activity. Chem Eng J 2015;278:207–16.
[235] Chen S, Zeng L, Mu R, Xiong C, Zhao Z-J, Zhao C, et al. Modulating lattice oxygen
in dual-functional Mo-V-O mixed oxides for chemical looping oxidative
dehydrogenation. J Am Chem Soc 2019;141:18653–7.

[236] Miller RR, Newhook R, Poole A. Styrene production, use, and human exposure.

Crit Rev Toxicol 1994;24:S1–10.

[237] Burri DR, Choi K-M, Han D-S, Sujandi Jiang N, Burri A, et al. Oxidative

dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene to styrene with CO2  over SnO2–ZrO2  mixed
oxide nanocomposite catalysts. Catal Today 2008;131:173–8.

[238] de Morais Batista AH, de Sousa FF, Honorato SB, Ayala AP, Filho JM, de

Sousa FW, et al. Ethylbenzene to chemicals: Catalytic conversion of ethylbenzene
into styrene over metal-containing MCM-41. J Mol Catal A Chem 2010;315:
86–98.

[239] Delgado JJ, Chen X-W, Frank B, Su DS, Schl ̈ogl R. Activation processes of highly

ordered carbon nanofibers in the oxidative dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene.
Catal Today 2012;186:93–8.

[240] Feng L, Liu Y, Jiang Q, Liu W, Wu K-H, Ba H, et al. Nanodiamonds @ N, P co-
modified mesoporous carbon supported on macroscopic SiC foam for oxidative
dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene. Catal Today 2020;357:231–9.

[241] Kainthla I, Babu GVR, Bhanushali JT, Rao KSR, Nagaraja BM. Development of

stable MoO3/TiO2-Al2O3  catalyst for oxidative dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene
to styrene using CO2  as soft oxidant. J CO2  Util 2017;18:309–17.

[242] Kainthla I, Bhanushali JT, Keri RS, Nagaraja BM. Activity studies of vanadium,

iron, carbon and mixed oxides based catalysts for the oxidative dehydrogenation
of ethylbenzene to styrene: a review. Catal Sci Technol 2015;5:5062–76.
[243] Zhu X, Gao Y, Wang X, Haribal V, Liu J, Neal LM, et al. A tailored multi-functional

catalyst for ultra-efficient styrene production under a cyclic redox scheme. Nat
Commun 2021;12:1329.

[244] Ren T, Patel M, Blok K. Olefins from conventional and heavy feedstocks: Energy
use in steam cracking and alternative processes. Energy 2006;31:425–51.
[245] Dudek RB, Tian X, Blivin M, Neal LM, Zhao H, Li F. Perovskite oxides for redox
oxidative cracking of n-hexane under a cyclic redox scheme. Appl Catal B-Environ
2019;246:30–40.

[246] Tian X, Dudek RB, Gao YF, Zhao HB, Li FX. Redox oxidative cracking of n-hexane
with Fe-substituted barium hexaaluminates as redox catalysts. Catal Sci Technol
2019;9:2211–20.

[247] Tian X, Dudek RB, Gao Y, Zhao H, Li F. Redox oxidative cracking of n-hexane with
Fe-substituted barium hexaaluminates as redox catalysts. Catal Sci Technol 2019;
9:2211–20.

[248] Hao F, Gao Y, Neal L, Dudek RB, Li W, Chung C, et al. Sodium tungstate-promoted
CaMnO3  as an effective, phase-transition redox catalyst for redox oxidative
cracking of cyclohexane. J Catal 2020;385:213–23.

[249] Fazeli A, Naseri A, Eslamjamal F. Kinetic models of ethylene oxide production on

Ag catalysts: a review. Kinet Catal 2020;61:603–12.

[250] Maihom T, Choomwattana S, Wannakao S, Probst M, Limtrakul J. Ethylene

epoxidation with nitrous oxide over Fe–BTC metal–organic frameworks: a DFT
study. ChemPhysChem 2016;17:3416–22.

[251] Ren D, Xu H, Li J, Li J, Cheng D. Origin of enhanced ethylene oxide selectivity by

Cs-promoted silver catalyst. Mol Catal 2017;441:92–9.

[252] Ghanta M, Ruddy T, Fahey D, Busch D, Subramaniam B. Is the liquid-phase H2O2-

based ethylene oxide process more economical and greener than the gas-phase
O2-based silver-catalyzed process? Ind Eng Chem Res 2013;52:18–29.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104528

Z. Sun et al.

[253] Subramaniam B, Helling RK, Bode CJ. Quantitative sustainability analysis: a

[282] Liu G, Liao Y, Wu Y, Ma X. Evaluation of Sr-substituted Ca2Fe2O5  as oxygen

powerful tool to develop resource-efficient catalytic technologies. ACS Sustain
Chem Eng 2016;4(11):5859–65.

carrier in microalgae chemical looping gasification. Fuel Process Technol 2019;
191:93–103.

[254] Hess LG, Tilton VV. Ethylene oxide-hazards and methods of handling. Ind Eng

Chem 1950;42:1251–8.

[255] Chan MSC, Marek E, Scott SA, Dennis JS. Chemical looping epoxidation. J Catal

2018;359:1–7.

[256] Bivona LA, Vivian A, Fusaro L, Fiorilli S, Aprile C. Design and catalytic

applications of 1D tubular nanostructures: Improving efficiency in glycerol
conversion. Appl Catal B-Environ 2019;247:182–90.

[283] Long YH, Yang K, Gu ZH, Lin S, Li DY, Zhu X, et al. Hydrogen generation from
water splitting over polyfunctional perovskite oxygen carriers by using coke oven
gas as reducing agent. Appl Catal B-Environ 2022;301:120778.

[284] Lu C, Li K, Wang H, Zhu X, Wei Y, Zheng M, et al. Chemical looping reforming of

methane using magnetite as oxygen carrier: Structure evolution and reduction
kinetics. Appl Energy 2018;211:1–14.

[285] Zeng D, Cui D, Lv Y, Qiu Y, Li M, Zhang S, et al. A mixed spinel oxygen carrier

[257] Kobayashi H, Ito S, Hara K, Fukuoka A. Conversion of glycerol to acrolein by
mesoporous sulfated zirconia-silica catalyst. Chinese J Catal 2017;38:420–5.

with both high reduction degree and redox stability for chemical looping H2
production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45:1444–52.

[258] Konaka A, Tago T, Yoshikawa T, Nakamura A, Masuda T. Conversion of glycerol

[286] Zhu X, Li K, Neal L, Li F. Perovskites as geo-inspired oxygen storage materials for

into allyl alcohol over potassium-supported zirconia–iron oxide catalyst. Appl
Catal B-Environ 2014;146:267–73.

[259] Payormhorm J, Idem R. Synthesis of C-doped TiO2 by sol-microwave method for

photocatalytic conversion of glycerol to value-added chemicals under visible
light. Appl Catal A-Gen 2020;590:117362.

[260] Silva LSR, L ́opez-Su ́arez FE, Perez-Cadenas M, Santos SF, da Costa LP,

Eguiluz KIB, et al. Synthesis and characterization of highly active Pbx@Pty/C
core-shell nanoparticles toward glycerol electrooxidation. Appl Catal B-Environ
2016;198:38–48.

[261] Zhou CH, Beltramini JN, Fan YX, Lu GQ. Chemoselective catalytic conversion of
glycerol as a biorenewable source to valuable commodity chemicals. Chem Soc
Rev 2008;37:527–49.

[262] Xu C, Du Y, Li C, Yang J, Yang G. Insight into effect of acid/base nature of

supports on selectivity of glycerol oxidation over supported Au-Pt bimetallic
catalysts. Appl Catal B-Environ 2015;164:334–43.

[263] Katryniok B, Kimura H, Skrzy ́nska E, Girardon J-S, Fongarland P, Capron M, et al.

Selective catalytic oxidation of glycerol: perspectives for high value chemicals.
Green Chem 2011;13:1960–79.

[264] Zhang XQ, Zhou D, Wang XJ, Zhou J, Li JF, Zhang MK, et al. Overcoming the
deactivation of Pt/CNT by introducing CeO2  for selective base-free glycerol-to-
glyceric acid oxidation. ACS Catal 2020;10:3832–7.

[265] Yan H, Yao S, Yin B, Liang W, Jin X, Feng X, et al. Synergistic effects of bimetallic
PtRu/MCM-41 nanocatalysts for glycerol oxidation in base-free medium:
Structure and electronic coupling dependent activity. Appl Catal B-Environ 2019;
259:118070.

[266] Dou J, Zhang B, Liu H, Hong J, Yin S, Huang Y, et al. Carbon supported Pt9Sn1
nanoparticles as an efficient nanocatalyst for glycerol oxidation. Appl Catal B-
Environ 2016;180:78–85.

[267] Zhou YF, Shen Y, Luo XL. Optimizing the activity and selectivity of glycerol
oxidation over core-shell electrocatalysts. J Catal 2020;381:130–8.

[268] Kirillova MV, Kuznetsov ML, Reis PM, da Silva JAL, da Silva J, Pombeiro AJL.

Direct and remarkably efficient conversion of methane into acetic acid catalyzed
by amavadine and related vanadium complexes. A synthetic and a theoretical DFT
mechanistic study. J Am Chem Soc 2007;129:10531–45.

[269] Wu JF, Yu SM, Wang WD, Fan YX, Bai S, Zhang CW, et al. Mechanistic insight into

the formation of acetic acid from the direct conversion of methane and carbon
dioxide on zinc-modified H-ZSM-5 zeolite. J Am Chem Soc 2013;135:13567–73.
[270] Rabie AM, Betiha MA, Park S-E. Direct synthesis of acetic acid by simultaneous
co-activation of methane and CO2 over Cu-exchanged ZSM-5 catalysts. Appl Catal
B-Environ 2017;215:50–9.

[271] Narsimhan K, Michaelis VK, Mathies G, Gunther WR, Griffin RG, Roman-

Leshkov Y. Methane to acetic acid over Cu-exchanged zeolites: mechanistic
insights from a site-specific carbonylation reaction. J Am Chem Soc 2015;137:
1825–32.

[272] Li DX, Baslyman WS, Siritanaratkul B, Shinagawa T, Sarathy SM, Takanabe K.

Oxidative-coupling-assisted methane aromatization: a simulation study. Ind Eng
Chem Res 2019;58:22884–92.

[273] Yuan J, Zhao Y, Xu H, Lu C, Yang K, Zhu X, et al. Layered mg-Al spinel supported

Ce-Fe-Zr-O oxygen carriers for chemical looping reforming. Chin J Chem Eng
2020;28(10):2668–76.

[274] Su M, Zhao H, Tian X. The competition between direct gas–solid reduction and

oxygen uncoupling of CuO oxygen carrier in chemical looping with oxygen
uncoupling: A single particle simulation study. Combust Flame 2020;221:219–27.

[275] Shen T, Ge H, Shen L. Characterization of combined Fe-Cu oxides as oxygen

carrier in chemical looping gasification of biomass. Int J Greenh Gas Con 2018;
75:63–73.

[276] Wang K, Yu Q. Long-lasting investigation of the Cu-based oxygen carrier particles

in chemical looping air separation. Powder Technol 2019;343:40–8.

[277] Yan J, Chu X, Jiao H, Kang S, Lei Z, Li Z, et al. Preparation and performance of Cu-

chemical looping and three-way catalysis: A perspective. ACS Catal 2018;8:
8213–36.

[287] Sun Z, Cai T, Russell CK, Johnson JK, Ye R-P, Xiang W, et al. Highly efficient
methane decomposition to H2  and CO2  reduction to CO via redox looping of
Ca2FexAl2-xO5  supported NiyFe3-yO4  nanoparticles. Appl Catal B-Environ 2020;
271:118938.

[288] Zeng DW, Qiu Y, Peng S, Chen C, Zeng JM, Zhang S, et al. Enhanced hydrogen
production performance through controllable redox exsolution within CoFeAlOx
spinel oxygen carrier materials. J Mater Chem A 2018;6:11306–16.
[289] Lei X, Haines K, Huang K, Qin C. Density functional theory study of oxygen

migration in molten carbonate. J Power Sources 2016;305:161–6.

[290] Ma S, Chen S, Zhu M, Zhao Z, Hu J, Wu M, et al. Enhanced sintering resistance of
Fe2O3/CeO2 oxygen carrier for chemical looping hydrogen generation using core-
shell structure. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:6491–504.

[291] Hu J, Galvita VV, Poelman H, Detavernier C, Marin GB. Pressure-induced

deactivation of core-shell nanomaterials for catalyst-assisted chemical looping.
Appl Catal B-Environ 2019;247:86–99.

[292] Xu R, Lu W, Toan S, Zhou Z, Russell CK, Sun Z, et al. Thermocatalytic formic acid
dehydrogenation: recent advances and emerging trends. J Mater Chem A 2021;9:
24241–60.

[293] Li K, Cheng X, Li N, Zhu X, Wei Y, Zhai K, et al. A yolk/shell strategy for designing
hybrid phase change materials for heat management in catalytic reactions.
J Mater Chem A 2017;5:24232–46.

[294] Yin X, Wang S, Sun R, Jiang S, Shen L. A Ce–Fe oxygen carrier with a core–shell
structure for chemical looping steam methane reforming. Ind Eng Chem Res 2020;
59:9775–86.

[295] Hosseini D, Abdala PM, Donat F, Kim SM, Müller CR. Bifunctional core-shell
architecture allows stable H2  production utilizing CH4  and CO2  in a catalytic
chemical looping process. Appl Catal B-Environ 2019;258:117946.

[296] Kousi K, Neagu D, Bekris L, Papaioannou EI, Metcalfe IS. Endogenous

nanoparticles strain perovskite host lattice providing oxygen capacity and driving
oxygen exchange and CH4  conversion to syngas. Angew Chem Int Edit 2020;59:
2510–9.

[297] Zhang L, Xu W, Wu J, Hu Y, Huang C, Zhu Y, et al. Identifying the role of a-site

cations in modulating oxygen capacity of iron-based perovskite for enhanced
chemical looping methane-to-syngas conversion. ACS Catal 2020;10:9420–30.

[298] Strasser P, Koh S, Anniyev T, Greeley J, More K, Yu CF, et al. Lattice-strain control
of the activity in dealloyed core-shell fuel cell catalysts. Nat Chem 2010;2:
454–60.

[299] Zheng M, Gao J, Xia C. H2  oxidation pathways on Ni-ceria surface by electrical

conductivity relaxation method. Solid State Ionics 2018;319:92–7.

[300] Chen Y, Hong T, Wang P, Brinkman K, Tong J, Cheng J. Investigate the proton

uptake process of proton/oxygen ion/hole triple conductor
BaCo0.4Fe0.4Zr0.1Y0.1O3-δ  by electrical conductivity relaxation. J Power Sources
2019;440:227122.

[301] Berger C, Bucher E, Windischbacher A, Boese AD, Sitte W. Strontium-free rare

earth perovskite ferrites with fast oxygen exchange kinetics: Experiment and
theory. J Solid State Chem 2018;259:57–66.

[302] Song Y, Chen Y, Wang W, Zhou C, Zhong Y, Yang G, et al. Self-assembled triple-
conducting nanocomposite as a superior protonic ceramic fuel cell cathode. Joule
2019;3:2842–53.

[303] Endler-Schuck C, Joos J, Niedrig C, Weber A, Ivers-Tiff ́ee E. The chemical oxygen
surface exchange and bulk diffusion coefficient determined by impedance
spectroscopy of porous La0.58Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3(cid:0) δ  (LSCF) cathodes. Solid State
Ionics 2015;269:67–79.

[304] Perry NH, Kim JJ, Tuller HL. Oxygen surface exchange kinetics measurement by
simultaneous optical transmission relaxation and impedance spectroscopy: Sr(Ti,
Fe)O3-x thin film case study. Sci Technol Adv Mat 2018;19:130–41.
[305] Royer S, Duprez D, Kaliaguine S. Role of bulk and grain boundary oxygen

based bimetallic oxygen carriers in chemical looping combustion with gaseous
and solid fuels. Fuel Process Technol 2020;205:106463.

mobility in the catalytic oxidation activity of LaCo1–xFexO3. J Catal 2005;234:
364–75.

[278] Hu J, Poelman H, Marin GB, Detavernier C, Kawi S, Galvita VV. FeO controls the
sintering of iron-based oxygen carriers in chemical looping CO2 conversion. J CO2
Util 2020;40:101216.

[279] Liu W. Controlling lattice oxygen activity of oxygen carrier materials by design: a

review and perspective. React Chem Eng 2021;6:1527–37.

[280] Deng G, Li K, Zhang G, Gu Z, Zhu X, Wei Y, et al. Enhanced performance of red
mud-based oxygen carriers by CuO for chemical looping combustion of methane.
Appl Energy 2019;253:113534.

[281] Li D, Xu R, Gu Z, Zhu X, Qing S, Li K. Chemical-looping conversion of methane: a

review. Energy Technol 2019;8(8):1900925.

[306] Saranya AM, Morata A, Pla D, Mn Burriel, Chiabrera F, Garbayo I, et al. Unveiling
the outstanding oxygen mass transport properties of Mn-rich perovskites in grain
boundary-dominated La0.8Sr0.2(Mn1–xCox)0.85O3±δ  nanostructures. Chem Mater
2018;30:5621–9.

[307] Navickas E, Chen Y, Lu Q, Wallisch W, Huber TM, Bernardi J, et al. Dislocations
accelerate oxygen ion diffusion in La0.8Sr0.2MnO3  epitaxial thin films. ACS Nano
2017;11:11475–87.

[308] Sun Z, Chen SY, Hu J, Chen AM, Rony AH, Russell CK, et al. Ca2Fe2O5: A

promising oxygen carrier for CO/CH4 conversion and almost-pure H2 production
with inherent CO2 capture over a two-step chemical looping hydrogen generation
process. Appl Energy 2018;211:431–42.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104529

Z. Sun et al.

[309] Lau CY, Dunstan MT, Hu W, Grey CP, Scott SA. Large scale in silico screening of
materials for carbon capture through chemical looping. Energy Environ Sci 2017;
10(3):818–31.

[310] Vieten J, Bulfin B, Huck P, Horton M, Guban D, Zhu L, et al. Materials design of

perovskite solid solutions for thermochemical applications. Energy Environ Sci
2019;12(4):1369–84.

[311] Singstock NR, Bartel CJ, Holder AM, Musgrave CB. High-throughput analysis of
materials for chemical looping processes. Adv Energy Mater 2020;10(27):
2000685.

[312] Krzystowczyk E, Wang X, Dou J, Haribal V, Li F. Substituted SrFeO3  as robust
oxygen sorbents for thermochemical air separation: correlating redox
performance with compositional and structural properties. Phys Chem Chem Phys
2020;22(16):8924–32.

[313] Wang X, Krzystowczyk E, Dou J, Li F. Net electronic charge as an effective

electronic descriptor for oxygen release and transport properties of SrFeO3-based
oxygen sorbents. Chem Mater 2021;33(7):2446–56.

[314] Michalsky R, Steinfeld A. Computational screening of perovskite redox materials
for solar thermochemical ammonia synthesis from N2 and H2O. Catal Today 2017;
286:124–30.

[315] Qin L, Chen YY, Guo M, Liu YA, Fan J, Fan LS. Driving towards highly selective
and coking-resistant natural gas reforming through a hybrid oxygen carrier
design. ChemCatChem 2021;13(2):617–26.

[316] Carrillo AJ, Kim KJ, Hood ZD, Bork AH, Rupp JLM. La0.6Sr0.4Cr0.8Co0.2O3

perovskite decorated with exsolved Co nanoparticles for stable CO2 splitting and
syngas production. ACS Appl Energ Mater 2022;3(5):4569–79.

[317] Wang XJ, GaoYF Krzystowczyk E, Iftikhar S, Dou J, Cai RX, Wang HY, Ruan CY,
Ye S, Li FX. High-throughput oxygen chemical potential engineering of perovskite
oxides for chemical looping applications. Energy Environ Sci 2022;15(4):
1512–28.

Zhao Sun studied in thermal energy and power engineering at
Southeast University (SEU). During his PhD studies, he worked
as a visiting student at the University of Wyoming and Tianjin
University,  both  in  chemical  engineering.  He  is  currently
working as an associate professor at Central South University,
China. His research interest is in the field of energy conversion,
focusing on the advanced energy materials synthesis, efficient
utilization  of  renewable  energy,  and  value-added  chemicals
production.

Christopher K. Russell completed his B.S. at the Georgia Insti-
tute  of  Technology  (Chemical  &  Biomolecular  Engineering,
2015) and his M.S. in Environmental Engineering at Stanford
University  (2018).  He  currently  is  pursuing  his  Ph.D.  in
Chemical Engineering at Purdue University where he focuses
on  elucidating  the  reaction  mechanisms  for  heterogeneous
oligomerization  catalysis  on  transition  and  non-transition
metal isolated sites.

Kevin J. Whitty is the Associate Dean for Research in the Col-
lege  of  Engineering  and  a  Professor  in  the  Department  of
Chemical  Engineering  at  the  University  of  Utah.  Professor
Whitty has over 25 years’ experience in conversion of fossil and
renewable  resources  to  chemicals  and  energy  materials  via
environmentally  friendly  processes  including  catalysis.  His
research focuses on development of transformational technol-
ogies that incorporate CO2 capture including chemical looping
combustion,  gasification,  and  high-pressure  oxy-combustion.
Professor  Whitty  served  as  the  Conference  Chair  in  the  5th
International  Conference  on  Chemical  Looping  in  2018  and
received  Professional  Achievement  Award  for  Innovations  in

Green Process Engineering from the AIChE in 2016.

Eric G. Eddings is the Chair and a Professor in the Department
of Chemical Engineering, and the previous Associate Dean for
Research at the University of Utah. Professor Eddings’ research
areas include fossil resource conversion to fuel and chemicals,
biomass  pyrolysis  for  the  production  of  bio-derived  trans-
portation  fuels,  and  reaction  kinetics  and  mechanisms  for
complex  hydrocarbon  mixtures,  such  as  jet  fuel,  diesel  and
gasoline. He is especially interested in bench- and pilot-scale
demonstration  of  innovative  fuel  and  chemical  production
technologies with low carbon footprints. Professor Eddings is a
2005  winner  of  Kirkpatrick  Chemical  Engineering  Honor
Award.

Jinze  Dai  is  a  postdoctoral  research  associate  in  the  Depart-
ment of Chemical Engineering at the University of Utah. His
research  interests  are  thermochemical  and  catalytic  conver-
sions of energy materials to value-added products with green
and  low  energy  consumption  processes,  especially  chemical
looping. He is also interested in reaction kinetic and thermo-
dynamic  modeling.  He  obtained  his  PhD  in  Chemical  Engi-
neering  from  the  University  of  Utah  in  2020  under  the
supervision of Professor Kevin Whitty.

Yulong  Zhang  is  a  professor  with  College  of  Chemistry  and
Chemical  Engineering,  Henan  Polytechnic  University.  Prof.
Zhang  obtained  his  M.S.  and  PhD  from  Chinese  Academy  of
Science. He has more than 20 years of research experience in
heterogeneous catalysis, coal chemical industry, petrochemical
technology,  nanostructured  materials,  as  well  as  reaction  ki-
netics and mechanisms.

Maohong Fan is an endowed SER Professor in Chemical & Pe-
troleum  Engineering  at  University  of  Wyoming,  and  adjunct
professor in School of Civil and Environmental Engineering at
Georgia  Institute  of  Technology.  He  has  led  and  worked  on
many projects in the areas of chemical production, clean en-
ergy  generation  and  environmental  protection,  which  have
been supported by various domestic and international funding
agencies such as NSF, DOE and EPA, USGS and USDA in the US,
NEDO  in  Japan,  UNDP,  and  industrial  companies  such  as
Siemens and Caterpillar. He has helped various companies to
overcome  their  technical  challenges.  He  has  published  over
300  refereed  books,  book  chapters,  and  papers  in  different

chemical and environmental engineering, and energy journals.

Zhiqiang Sun is a professor with School of Energy Science and
Engineering, Central South University, China, and currently he
is the dean of the school. Prof. Sun obtained his B.S. and M.S.
from Central South University, in 2002 and 2004, respectively,
and  he  earned  his  PhD  from  Zhejiang  University  in  2007.
During  2011-2012  he  worked  as  a  visiting  scholar  at  Duke
University, US. His major research area is clean and low-carbon
energy technology, including multiphase flow and heat/mass
transfer,  renewable  energy  and  hydrogen  energy,  and  com-
bustion  pollution  control  and  emission  reduction.  He  is  the
author or co-author of five books and has published more than
140  peer-reviewed  academic  papers.  Prof.  Sun  is  the  project
leader of the National Key  R&D Program  of China,  the leading talent in Scientific and
Technological  Innovation  of  Hunan  Province,  and  the  recipient  of  the  Natural  Science
Foundation of Hunan Province for Distinguished Young Scholars.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10104530
