Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

A review of diaphragmless shock tubes for interdisciplinary applications

S. Janardhanraj a,*, S.K. Karthick b, A. Farooq a
a Clean Combustion Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia
b Currently at the Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Diaphragmless shock tubes
Shock waves
Fast-acting valves
Chemical kinetics
Ludwieg tubes/tunnels

Shock tubes have emerged as an effective tool for applications in various fields of research and technology. The
conventional mode of shock tube operation employs a frangible diaphragm to generate shock waves. The last
half-century has witnessed significant efforts to replace this diaphragm-bursting method with fast-acting valves.
These diaphragmless methods have good repeatability, quick turnaround time between experiments, and pro-
duce a clean flow, free of diaphragm fragments, in contrast to the conventional diaphragm-type operation. The
constantly evolving valve designs target shorter opening times  for improved performance and efficiency. The
present  review  is  a  compilation  of  the  different  diaphragmless  shock  tubes  that  have  been  conceptualized,
developed, and implemented for various research endeavors. The discussions focus on essential factors, including
the  actuation  mechanism,  driver-driven  configurations,  valve  opening  time,  shock  formation  distance,  and
operating pressure range, that ultimately influence the shock wave parameters obtained in  the shock tube. A
generalized mathematical model to study the behavior of these valves is developed. The advantages, limitations,
and challenges in improving the performance of the valves are described. Finally, the present-day applications of
diaphragmless shock tubes have been discussed, and their potential scope in expanding the frontiers of shock
wave research and technology is presented.

1. Introduction

Shock waves are a fascinating physical phenomenon resulting from
rapid compression in matter. They propagate at supersonic velocities,
and their effects are observed in all forms of matter. The formation and
propagation of shock waves in a gaseous medium are of particular in-
terest in this review. A typical shock wave in gas is characterized by a
moving shock front that increases the fluid’s pressure, temperature, and
density in a very short interval of time (referred to as the rise time of the
shock  wave).  These  thermodynamic  properties  remain  constant  for  a
period called the steady time and gradually decrease to the equilibrium
state over the decay time. The rise time is typically on the order of mi-
croseconds.  In  contrast,  the  steady  and  decay  times  can  range  from
microseconds  to  milliseconds  depending  on  the  energy  of  the  source,
method  of  shock  wave  production,  and  propagation  dynamics.  Shock
waves are multi-scale and are observed in length  scales varying from
micro- to macroscopic regimes. This property has led to a plethora of
shock wave-related disciplines being established for over a century now
[1]. The early applications of shock waves were in chemical kinetics and
aerospace  research  to  study  processes  in  high-temperature  gases  and

high-speed  flows  [2,3].  The  emerging  applications  of  shock  waves  in
interdisciplinary fields of science and technology have opened up new
avenues  for  collaborative  research  [4–6].  Shock  waves  have  also
demonstrated the potential to address present-day industry challenges,
such  as  preservative  impregnation  in  bamboo,  sandal  oil  extraction,
removal  of  micron-size  dust  from  silicon  wafers,  cell  transformation,
meat  tenderization,  and  enhancing  material  properties  [7–10].  The
prospect of developing novel disruptive technologies using shock waves
is an added incentive for modern technologists and entrepreneurs.

The sudden release of energy in a confined space results in a super-
sonic displacement of gas and leads to the formation of shock waves.
Chemical, mechanical, nuclear, or electrical energy can be a source of
shock waves. Explosives [11], laser irradiation [12], electric discharge
[13],  pressurized  gases  [1],  and  detonable  gaseous  mixtures  [1]  are
commonly used to produce shock waves in gases for research purposes.
Among these methods, the use of pressurized gas in a device called the
shock tube [14] is a simple, economical, and safe method to generate
shock waves in a controlled manner. A simple shock tube comprises two
sections separated by a diaphragm and is operated by pressurizing one
section until the diaphragm ruptures to form a shock wave in the other
section.  Although  shock  tubes  seem  to  have  a  simple  operational

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: janardhanraj.subburaj@kaust.edu.sa (S. Janardhanraj).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101042
Received 2 December 2021; Received in revised form 18 September 2022; Accepted 25 September 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)101042Availableonline8October20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Nomenclature

P0, p0
P5(cid:0) 1

P41
P51
T5(cid:0) 1

T0
γ

R
M∞
MS
x, y
t
tr
top
tft

)
)

total pressure (Pa)
pressure in the corresponding regions in the shock tube
(bar)
ratio of P4  and P1  ( (cid:0)
ratio of P5  and P1  ( (cid:0)
temperature in the corresponding regions in the shock tube
(K)
total temperature (K)
specific heat ratio ( (cid:0)
specific gas constant (J/kg/K)
freestream Mach number ( (cid:0)
)
shock Mach number ( (cid:0)
axial or radial distance (m)
time (s)
run time (s)
opening time (s)
flow time (s)

)

)

u, v
xf
ΔtR
F
D, φ, d
r
a
dh
A
PR
μ
σ
m
V
ρ

ap
L

x and y component of velocity (m/s)
axial shock formation distance (m)
steady time (s)
force (N)
diameter (m)
radius (m)
speed of sound (m/s)
hydraulic diameter (m)
area (m2)
perimeter (m)
mean of a quantity ( (cid:0)
standard deviation of a quantity ( (cid:0)
mass of a system (kg)
volume of a system (m3
density of a medium/material (kg/m3)
acceleration of the piston (m/s2)
length (m)

)

)

procedure, the use of diaphragms has been found wanting for various
reasons  described
section.  Therefore,  a
diaphragmless-mode of operation for shock tubes has been explored and
implemented.

following

the

in

The main idea behind a diaphragmless shock tube is to eliminate the
diaphragm burst process and replace it with a quick-opening valve while
retaining the performance capabilities of a diaphragm-type shock tube.
Ideally,  a  diaphragmless  shock  tube  has  good  repeatability,  a  high
repetition rate, the ability to automate, and requires less manual inter-
vention  and  physical  effort.  Also,  in  a  diaphragmless  shock  tube,  the
valve opening process does not contaminate the flow downstream, un-
like conventional diaphragm-type shock tubes. The opening time in the
case of a diaphragm rupture generally varies from hundreds of micro-
seconds to a few milliseconds depending on the diameter, pressure dif-
ference,  material  properties,  and  thickness  of  the  diaphragm.
Practically, it is an engineering and manufacturing challenge to design
fast-acting valves with large diameters and opening times on the order of
milliseconds. Moreover, producing a high-enthalpy shock wave using a
diaphragmless valve as required in certain aerodynamic testing facilities
[15,16]  and  materials  research  [17,18]  is  even  more  cumbersome.
Numerous diaphragmless valve concepts have been proposed since the
first  concept  of  a  ‘shock  wave  valve’  was  introduced  by  Condit  [19].
With  advances  in  manufacturing  technology  and  high-performance
actuation  systems,  fast-acting  valves  with  improved  performance  and
efficiency have been realized.

An assessment of diaphragmless shock tubes has been reported pre-
viously [20–22], but the review was limited to only a few design con-
is  a  comprehensive  compilation  of
cepts.  The  present  work
diaphragmless valve concepts reported for over half a century, and it is
the first such review to the best of our knowledge. The basic parameters
and terminology used in diaphragmless shock tubes are initially defined
and elucidated. Subsequently, the different design concepts reported in
the  literature  are  distinguished  based  on  the  mounting  configuration,
operating  principle,  and  actuation  mechanism.  The  advantages  and
shortcomings of specific diaphragmless valve designs have been iden-
tified. A generalized mathematical model and relations for opening time
are  presented  based  on  the  typical  forces  experienced  by  the  moving
element in a diaphragmless valve. A detailed procedure of the various
design  points  that  must  be  considered  while  developing  such  valve
concepts has also been included, which helps analyze the valve perfor-
mance analytically. The modern applications of shock waves that have
unfolded with diaphragmless shock tubes in various fields of research
the  present
and

technology  have  been

reviewed.  Overall,

communication attempts to identify the gaps, challenges, and opportu-
nities  in  developing  diaphragmless  valves  for  interdisciplinary  shock
wave applications.

2. Fast-acting valves in shock tubes

The wave systems in a diaphragm-type and a diaphragmless shock
tube are discussed considering a simple 1-D inviscid adiabatic flow. The
use of diaphragms in a shock tube comes with numerous disadvantages.
The major shortcomings of conventional shock tubes and how these are
addressed using fast-acting valves are also described in this section.

2.1. Wave system in a shock tube

The flow field in a shock tube is complex, unsteady, and dependent
on the initial conditions in the two sections of the shock tube. Generally,
the pressurized gas filled in the high-pressure section of the shock tube is
termed the “driver gas,” while the gas filled in the low-pressure section is
called the “test gas” or “driven gas.” When the barrier between the driver
and driven gas is removed, a shock wave is formed that propagates in the
low-pressure  section.  Simultaneously,  expansion  or  rarefaction  waves
propagate in the opposite direction into the high-pressure chamber. The
expansion fan region gradually reduces the pressure and temperature of
the driver gas and is bound by the rarefaction head and tail. The rare-
faction waves get reflected from the end-wall of the high-pressure sec-
tion  and  then  travel  towards  the  driven  gas  region.  Meanwhile,  the
shock  wave  travels  towards  the  end-wall  of  the  low-pressure  section,
where the incident shock wave compresses the gas behind it. The inci-
dent shock wave reflects off the end wall and travels into the onward
flow, increasing the pressure and temperature a second time. For studies
that utilize the incident shock wave, the steady time of the shock wave at
a given location is the time interval between the arrival of the shock
front and the contact surface (an imaginary surface that separates driven
and driver gases). Most of the studies utilize the stationary shocked gas
behind the reflected shock. In this case, the steady time window is the
time interval between the reflection of the incident shock wave and the
reflected waves from the contact surface.

The entire flow in the shock tube is generally divided into five re-
gions. Region 1 and 4 are the undisturbed gas in the shock tube’s low-
and  high-pressure  sections,  respectively.  Region  2  represents  the  gas
between the incident shock wave and the contact surface, while region 3
is the flow behind the contact surface. The stagnant gas behind the re-
flected shock wave is in region 5. Thermodynamic parameters in these

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010422

S. Janardhanraj et al.

regions are indicated by using the corresponding number of the region as
a subscript. For example, P4  and T4  are the pressure and temperature of
the undisturbed driver gas, while P1  and T1  represent the pressure and
temperature of the undisturbed driven gas, respectively. The ratio be-
tween the parameters in different regions is also generally represented
using a subscript. For example, the ratio of P4 and P1  is indicated as P41,
ratio of T4  and T1  as T41  and so on. The relationship between the initial
conditions and the shock wave parameters can be solved exactly for a
simple  case  assuming a  one-dimensional,  inviscid,  and  adiabatic  flow
[3]. The pressure ratio, P41, is related to the shock Mach number, MS, as,
(

(

))(cid:0)

2γ4
γ4 (cid:0) 1

P41 =

2γ1M2

S (cid:0) (γ1 (cid:0) 1)
γ1 + 1

1 (cid:0)

γ4 (cid:0) 1
γ1 + 1

a1
a4

MS (cid:0)

1
MS

(1)

where γ  is the specific heat ratio and a is the local speed of sound. A
helpful method to represent the wave system in a shock tube is using an
x (cid:0)
t  diagram  or  wave  diagram.  This  diagram  is  constructed  using  a
technique called the method of characteristics that considers flow per-

turbations to travel at the local speed of sound. For a stationary observer,
the perturbations inside the shock tube travel with the sum of the local
speed of sound and the gas velocity. It is also assumed that the shock
wave instantly forms at the diaphragm location after the rupture. The
wave diagram for a diaphragm-type shock tube is commonly used and
can be found in multiple Refs. [2,3].

The flow in a diaphragmless shock tube can also be represented using
an  x (cid:0)
t  diagram,  assuming  one-dimensional,  inviscid,  and  adiabatic
flow.  Here,  since  a  fast-acting  valve  replaces  the  diaphragm  at  the
interface between the driver and the driven gas, the slower opening of
the valve compared to the diaphragm rupture time results in a longer
shock formation distance. Hence, the shock formation in a diaphragm-
less shock tube is an important process that has to be shown in the wave
diagram. To understand the growth of the shock wave as a result of the
finite  opening  time  of  the  valve,  the  accelerating  piston  analogy
described by Becker is useful [24]. Consider a tube inside which a piston
accelerates from rest to a constant velocity, ’v’ (v greater than the speed

Fig. 1. A schematic diagram showing the distance-time (x (cid:0)
t) plot along with pressure contour for a diaphragmless shock tube and the corresponding wave system
at time  instants  t = 0, t = t1, t = t2  and  t = t3. xf  indicates the shock formation distance  and ▵tR  is the  steady time  of  the reflected shock wave.  (Adapted by
permission from The Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers: Bulletin of JSME, Ikui et al. [23], copyright 1979).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010423

S. Janardhanraj et al.

of  sound).  Let  the  piston  reach  velocity  ’v’  through  small  increments
over a finite time. The first increment in piston velocity causes a weak
compression wave to propagate in the tube, compressing the gas uni-
formly and adiabatically behind it. The compression wave generated by
the  second  velocity  increment  travels  in  a  gas  with  a  slightly  higher
sound  speed  due  to  the  preceding  compression  wave’s  propagation.
Subsequently, each compression wave produced by the piston motion
moves  in  a  gas,  pressurized  and  heated  by  the  previous  compression
wave,  and  eventually  catch  up  with  the  preceding  waves.  The  waves
coalesce to form a shock wave that reaches a steady velocity when the
piston’s speed becomes steady. In a shock tube, the motion of the piston
is  analogous  to  the  contact  surface,  which  is  a  constant-pressure
interface.

Fig. 1 shows the wave diagram for a diaphragmless shock tube with a
pressure contour to highlight the typical pressure variations in the tube.
The position of the corresponding waves in the shock tube at different
time instants (t = 0, t = t1, t = t2 and t = t3) are shown below the wave
diagram. The initial state of the shock tube is shown at time t  = 0. At the
time t = t1, the shock wave formation from compression waves is seen.
The fully developed flow in the diaphragmless shock tube is seen at t  =
t2. The reflections of the shock wave and expansion waves from their
corresponding end-walls are seen at time t = t3. The steady time dura-
tion in the reflected shock region is represented by ▵tR. Fig. 1 also shows
the development of the coalesced shock front from the merging of the
characteristics developed due to the accelerating contact surface [25].
The distance from the initial driver-driven gas interface to the location
where the shock wave is formed is termed as the shock formation dis-
tance (xf ). The shock formation distance is also the distance from the
driver-driven  interface  where  the  shock  front  reaches  the  maximum
velocity.  The  shock  formation  process  in  the  shock  tube  is  directly
proportional  to  the  opening  time  of  the  shock  tube.  The  slower  the
opening time of the valve, the longer the shock formation distance [26].
Therefore,  diaphragmless  shock  tubes  need  longer  driven  sections,  in
general, compared to conventional diaphragm-type shock tubes.

2.2. Drawbacks of diaphragm-type shock tubes

The  major  reasons  for  exploring  alternatives  to  conventional

diaphragm-type shock tubes are listed below:

• Run-to-run variation - The ability to replicate the burst process of
the  diaphragm  determines  the  reproducibility  of  the  shock  wave
conditions in the shock tube. The diaphragm opening can be very
irregular,  and,  on  many  occasions,  a  part  of  the  diaphragm  can
obstruct  the  flow  of  gas  due  to  an  incomplete  opening  [27,28].
Therefore, every experiment performed in a diaphragm-type shock
tube has a unique flow condition as the burst process differs for every
run. The inability to obtain repeatable test conditions is a significant
drawback of diaphragm-type shock tubes.

• Long  turnaround  times  -  Diaphragm  replacement  is  time-
consuming  in  many  shock  tube  facilities.  In  most  cases,  it  might
take a few minutes or even an hour in some large facilities. For in-
vestigations requiring shock waves to be produced at a high repeti-
tion  rate  (on  the  order  of  seconds  or  lower),  the  conventional
diaphragm-type shock tube is unsuitable.

• Manual  effort  -  Large-scale  shock  tubes  typically  have  lengths  of
about 10–15 m and internal diameters in the range of 50–200 mm.
There  is a  requirement for sufficient  human resources or, in some
cases, expensive hydraulic systems to disassemble bulky flanges at
the  diaphragm  stations.  In the  case of  miniature  shock  tubes, dia-
phragm changing becomes very cumbersome because of small-size
fasteners. Also, manual effort is required to employ the best quality
control methods in diaphragm manufacturing. Eliminating manual
intervention  is  necessary  to  automate  the  shock  tube  facility.

Automation  can  help  shift  the  focus  from  spending  time/energy
operating the shock tube to the primary research/project goals.
• Debris  from  diaphragm  rupture  -  The  diaphragm  rupture  is  a
source of tiny fragments carried by the flow to the end of the shock
tube.  This  debris  produced  by  diaphragm  rupture  is  particularly
menacing  for  test  samples,  sensors,  observation  windows,  and  di-
agnostics in the shock tube. The fragments accumulate in the shock
tube after several experiments and must be removed to avoid further
damage to components in pneumatic lines. In some specific chemical
kinetic studies, it has been observed that the debris can cause inho-
mogeneous  ignition  of  fuels  and  hence  lead  to  undesirable  effects
[29]. The process of removal of debris and cleaning the shock tube is
cumbersome and time-consuming.

• Unique  opening  time  in  every  experiment  -  Although  instanta-
neous removal of the diaphragm is quintessential in an ideal shock
tube, in reality, the diaphragm rupture process takes a finite time.
The  complex  flow  phenomena  generated  close  to  the  diaphragm
location depend on the diaphragm’s opening time, which in turn is
strongly related to the diaphragm’s material properties of the dia-
phragm  [30,31].  Different  materials
steel,
aluminum,  Mylar,  Lexan,  etc.)  of  varying  thicknesses  are  used  as
diaphragms  to  vary  the  shock  wave  conditions.  Therefore,  the
opening time of the diaphragm is unique for a particular combination
of  the  diaphragm  material,  thickness,  and  shock  tube  dimensions
[32].

(polycarbonate,

• Resistance  behavior  of  thicker  diaphragms  -  In  high-pressure
shock tubes, thicker diaphragms have to be used to produce strong
shock waves. It has been reported that thicker diaphragms exhibit
significant resistance to opening due to the stresses at the hinge line
of  the  diaphragm  [33].  Therefore,  the  flow  produced
in
high-pressure shock tubes depends on thicker diaphragms’ resistance
behavior.

• Extremely thin diaphragms for small shock tubes - Engineering a
small-scale  shock  tube  poses  many  challenges  as  the  diaphragm
thickness would be on the order of micrometers or nanometers [34].
A very minute change in the thickness of the diaphragm is required to
vary the burst pressure in small steps. In practice, it would be chal-
lenging and expensive to fabricate such diaphragms. Therefore, an
alternative  to  using  diaphragms  is  necessary  for  miniature  shock
tubes.  For  low-pressure  applications,  the  flow  behind  the  incident
shock wave can be used instead of the conditions behind the reflected
shock  wave,  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  experimental  study.
Nevertheless, the diaphragm choice for small increments in the burst
pressure remains.

• Consumable  and  waste  footprint  -  Diaphragm-type  shock  tubes
require the replacement of the frangible diaphragm after every single
run. There is significant wastage of material during the fabrication of
diaphragms and after the completion of experiments.

• Impurities in ambient air - In diaphragm-type shock tubes, an inert
gas  is  filled  in  the  tube  when  changing  a  diaphragm  to  avoid  the
release of harmful gases from previous experiments to be released
into the ambient air. There are a few specific applications, such as in
Gas  Dynamic  Lasers  (GDL),  for  which  it  is  essential  to  avoid  the
exposure of the inside of the shock tube to ambient air after every test
[35].  Certain  species  in  the  ambient  air  can  act  as  impurities  and
excite/de-excite the upper/lower laser levels. In such applications, a
diaphragmless shock tube is a safer option.

Several methods have been reported to minimize shot-to-shot vari-
ation in diaphragm rupture. Generally, a V-groove notch is machined
along two diameters at right angles to form a cross-shape ( × ) on the
exposed portion of the diaphragm facing the low-pressure section [3].
The  high-pressure  fractures  the  diaphragm  along  the  preferential
cross-shape and opens into the low-pressure section with the formation
of four petals. Using electrical discharge to initiate diaphragm breaking
gives short opening times and precise timing of the rupture [36,37]. A

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010424

S. Janardhanraj et al.

diaphragm-cutter  can  also  obtain  controlled  diaphragm  bursts,  as
demonstrated in a 432 mm diameter shock tube, to get an opening time
of about one millisecond [38]. The diaphragm bulges after pressurizing
the high-pressure section, and the cutter is optimally placed so that the
diaphragm  is  cut  into  four  sections  that  open  out  like  petals.  A
gas-operated  clamp  with  a  needle  has  also  been  reported  to  obtain
repeatable diaphragm bursts and quick changing of the diaphragm (≤ 1
min)  [39].  Another  novel  method  is  using  a  double-diaphragm  tech-
nique  which  is  commonplace in  high-pressure shock  tubes, especially
while avoiding the use of thicker diaphragms [40]. By quickly evacu-
ating a small buffer volume between the two diaphragms, the rupture of
the  two  diaphragms  is  attained  at  the  required  pressure.  These  tech-
niques work reasonably well in addressing run-to-run variations, but the
other drawbacks of using diaphragms need to be tackled.

3. Overview of fast-acting valve concepts

Numerous diaphragmless valves with different configurations have
been designed and implemented for research and technological appli-
cations. Each design has unique features in terms of operating principle,
actuation  techniques,  mounting  configuration,  operating  pressure
range, overall size, and shock tube dimensions, making these suitable for
the  specific  studies  they  facilitated.  Diaphragmless  valve  designs  are
analyzed based on these features in the following sections.

3.1. Early concepts (prior to 1980)

Condit [19] presented the idea of a shock wave valve that consisted
of a piston held in position by pressurizing gas in an actuating chamber
behind it (described in Muirhead et al. [41]). The design incorporated an
annular  driver  section  and  a  cam-actuated  poppet,  which  quickly
released the gas in the actuating chamber, allowing rapid retraction of
the  piston  that  initially  sealed  the  driver  gas.  Condit’s  design  was
implemented in shock tubes with driven section diameters of 1 in. and
17 in. for maximum driver pressures of 600 and 200 psi, respectively.
Muirhead et al. [41] modified Condit’s design by replacing the poppet
with an auxiliary piston that releases only a portion of the gas behind the
main piston (see Fig 2). The remaining gas was used to bring the main
piston back to the original position to control the positive duration of the
shock wave. They also suggested a concept for higher driver pressures
(up to 2000 psi) in which the piston had a smaller exposed area, and the
driver section was placed in line with the driven section. Oguchi et al.
[42]  replaced  the  cam-release  mechanism  with  a  solenoid  valve  for
quick  action.  Their  design  primarily  consisted  of  a  smaller  auxiliary
piston to control a larger main piston’s motion. The solenoid valve re-
leases a small volume of high-pressure gas behind the auxiliary piston to
produce quicker retraction of the main piston. In this design, the size of

the main piston was comparable to that of the driven section (smaller
piston size compared to Condit’s and Muirhead et al.’s designs). Shock
Mach numbers of about 4.1 were obtained using this design, and many
researchers  widely  used  the  solenoid-actuated  double-sliding  piston
arrangement for future studies. Distefano et al. [43] suggested an elec-
tromagnetically  operated  diaphragmless  valve  that  utilizes  two  coils,
one  fixed  and  the  other  sliding,  fixed  to  plates.  When  current  flows
through the coils,  the seal plate slides into place and seals the driver
section. When there is a sudden pressure increase due to combustion in
the driver section or a short current interruption, the seal plate retracts
and produces a shock wave.

Garen et al. [47] used a rubber membrane to seal the driven section
from  the  driver  section.  The  rubber  membrane  was  inflated,  by  pres-
surizing  a  volume  behind  it,  to  block  the  entry  into  the  low-pressure
chamber. The bursting of a secondary diaphragm released the pressure
behind the membrane. The retraction of the membrane led to the for-
mation of shock waves in the driven section. This mechanism was used
in  a  shock  tube  with  an  18  mm  square  driven  section  and  a  36  mm
circular  driven  section.  The  replacement  of  the  secondary  diaphragm
after every run and restriction to low driver pressures were significant
drawbacks of this design. Matsuo et al. [48] suggested that the vertical
movement of the piston was ideal for replacing the diaphragm in shock
tubes. The low operating range of driver pressure (≤ 1 bar) was a sig-
nificant shortfall of these designs. Oguchi et al. [44], and Ikui et al. [45]
presented a novel and sophisticated design for fast-acting pistons, which
could be mounted inline with the driver and driven sections of a 100 mm
by 180 mm diaphragmless shock tube (described in details in other re-
ports [46,49,50]). Therefore, there was no major redirection of gas flow
from the driver to the driven section, as seen in Fig. 3. The piston was
accelerated  into  a  teardrop-shaped  coaxial  section  by  venting  the
chamber  behind  it  due  to  an  auxiliary  diaphragm  rupture.  A  spring
mechanism assisted this motion. A spring and gas damper was utilized to
prevent piston damage due to impact and also helped bring the piston
back to its original position. The valve produced shock Mach numbers in
the range of 1.2–5, and the shock formation length was about 50 tube
diameters. A clearance distance was incorporated to obtain an imme-
diate opening of the valve in the piston-based valves in Ikui et al.’s de-
signs [25]. The piston accelerated and traversed the clearance distance
before it breached the seal between the driver and the driven section.
They  designed  a  valve  that  opens  along  the  shock  tube  axis,  a
double-piston  sliding  arrangement,  and  electromagnets  for  actuation.
Since the piston moves horizontally, they called it a type-H valve. They
also described a valve that opens perpendicular to the shock tube axis
(called  a  type-V  valve  because  of  the  vertical  motion  of  the  piston),
which required the piston to move a more considerable distance than the
type-H valve. In both cases, the valve’s performance depended on the
pressures in the actuating and driver chambers. The opening time and

Fig.  2. Schematic  diagrams  showing  the  valve  design  proposed  by  Muirhead  et  al.  [41]  (Adapted  by  permission  from  AIP  Publishing:  Review  of  Scientific  In-
struments, Muirhead and Jones [41], copyright 1964). A double piston arrangement was used in a coaxial driver-driven configuration actuated using a cam. (a) Valve
in the closed position with the high-pressure driver gas filled in the driver section. (b) The valve opens when the cam is actuated, retracting the main and auxiliary
piston. Cam was replaced by a solenoid valve by Oguchi et al. [42].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010425

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 3. Schematic diagrams of the valve designed by Oguchi et al. [44] and Ikui et al. [45]. Driver and driven sections are mounted inline and piston accelerates into
a teardrop-shaped coaxial section. (a) When the valve is closed, the piston is held in place by high-pressure in an auxiliary chamber by means of diaphragms. (b) The
valve opens when the diaphragms are ruptured and the high-pressure auxiliary chamber is evacuated, retracting the piston. (Adapted by permission from Springer
Nature: Experimental Methods of Shock Wave Research by Igra and Seiler [46], copyright 2016).

shock  formation  distance  of  the  type-H  valve  were  investigated  at
different pressures in the chambers [23].

3.2. Variants of Oguchi et al.’s double-piston design

Oguchi et al.’s design principle was used in a shock tube for exper-
iments in low-temperature gases [51] (as low as 150 K) and gas dynamic
laser  applications  [52,53].  The  low  temperatures  were  obtained  by
cooling  the  driven  section  with  liquid  nitrogen  [51].  The  snap-action
shock  tube  had  a  main  and  auxiliary  piston  made of  nylon  and  actu-
ated using electromagnetic valves. The maximum driver pressure was 5
bar, and the driven section had an inner diameter of 19.4 mm. Maeno
and Oguchi [54] performed studies using the synchronized operation of
two diaphragmless shock tubes (with internal diameters of 20  and 50
mm)  that  implemented  the  double-piston  arrangement  actuated  by
electromagnetic valves. Solenoid valves helped time the actuation pre-
cisely to obtain the required delay in shock wave generation. A modified
piston-driven  shock  tube  actuated  by  solenoid  valves  and  having  a
similar  arrangement  to  Oguchi  et  al.’s  design  was  also  reported  by
Yamauchi and coworkers [55]. This design implemented the main pis-
ton made of aluminum and a nylon auxiliary piston. Driver pressures of
up  to 20 bar  were used in the  shock tube  with a 30 mm driven tube
diameter. Hurst et al. [56] adopted Yamauchi et al.’s design to develop
an  enlarged  version  of  the  double-piston  arrangement.  They  signifi-
cantly shortened the turn-around time between runs by automating the
facility and showed good repeatability. The principle of Oguchi et al.’s
design, with minor modifications in the supply of pressure, was used by
Matsui et al. [57] to obtain good reproducibility in shock wave condi-
tions at low operating pressures with a temperature scatter behind the
reflected  shock  as  low  as  ±20  K.  Takano  et  al.  [58]  demonstrated  a
lightweight piston arrangement that was operated by magnetic valves
and the system required little time for the initial setup to run the shock
tube. The maximum driver pressure was 9 bar, and the design employed
an annular driver-driven configuration. They also incorporated a lip in
the piston to accelerate before breaching the seal between the driver and
driven sections.

A  vertical  shock  tube  system  implementing  the  double-piston
arrangement  actuated  by  magnetic  valves  was  reported  by  Teshima
[59].  In  this  design,  an  annular  driver  section  was  used,  and  the

generated  shock  wave traveled  vertically  down  in  the  driven  section.
shock  waves  with  Mach  numbers  up  to  2  were  generated  with  a
high-repetition-rate in a 16 mm diameter driven tube. The double-piston
actuated design was further developed and implemented by Rego et al.
in  their  large  diameter  diaphragmless  shock  tube  [35,60].  Improve-
ments  were  suggested  in  the  choice  of  piston  material,  seals,  piston
shape,  and  damping  element  to  achieve  good  cycle  life  of  operation.
Onodera [61] improved the double-sliding piston design of Oguchi et al.
by combining the functions of the auxiliary and main piston into a more
complex single composite piston. The composite piston had a large front
end  that  sealed  entry  to  the  driven  section  and  a  smaller  back  end
connected through a stem. The high-pressure gas in the small volume
behind the piston, which initially keeps the piston in place, was rapidly
exhausted by a solenoid valve. The gas surrounding the piston stem was
evacuated to ensure minimum resistance to the piston movement. The
complex geometry of the piston, the intricate sealing requirements, and
the considerable weight of the piston were some disadvantages of this
design. The small exhaust volume in the design helped achieve quick
retraction  to  produce  shock  waves  with  a  Mach  number  of  1.2.
Mejia-Alvarez  et  al.  [21]  developed  a  sophisticated  design  for  a
double-sliding  piston  vertical  shock  tube  based  on  a  one-dimensional
compressible  flow  model.  This  design  had  an  annular  driver  section
with many unique features that helped it outperform previous similar
configurations. They analyzed all the variants of Oguchi et al.’s design
before  optimizing  their  structure.  Fig.  4  shows  the  different  possible
moving elements used in Oguchi et al.’s concept. They also highlighted
the crucial role of the discharge orifice in providing the quick retraction
motion  of  the  piston.  A  diaphragmless  driver  using  a  double-sliding
piston arrangement was also reported for studies in a 19.4 mm diam-
eter driven tube [62].

3.3. Improvised designs for specific applications

Kosing et al. [20] used an annular driver section with a single large
piston while introducing a new actuation mechanism that did not utilize
an  auxiliary  pressure  chamber.  The  chamber  behind  the  piston  was
evacuated  to  prevent  the  retraction  movement,  and  the  driver  gas
pressure aided the piston’s acceleration. A steel brake pad mechanism
on the piston side was installed to provide enough frictional force to hold

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010426

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 4. Variants of Oguchi et al.’s design as suggested by Mejia-Alvarez et al. [21] (a) Piston, (b) Piston with lip, (c) Piston with plug, and (d) Sleeve-type. (Adapted
by permission from Springer Nature: Shock Waves, Mejia-Alvarez et al. [21], copyright 2015).

the piston in place, which helps seal the driven section. The brake pad
was  operated  using  a  hydraulic  actuator  with  a  small  pressurized
reservoir to provide sufficient force to hold the brake pad in place. Since
the hydraulic fluid is incompressible, the pressure drop in the reservoir
was very rapid, and the frictional force holding the piston dropped to
zero. Different piston materials were experimented with, and the system
produced a good performance for shock Mach numbers up to 2. A ver-
tical  co-axial  shock  tube  with  the  double-piston  arrangement  was
developed  to  generate  toroidal  shock  waves  traveling  upwards  in  the
driven section [63]. The pistons were ring-shaped and relatively heavy,
resulting  in  slower opening times  and  a  more considerable  formation
distance. A vertical diaphragmless shock tube with a 60 mm by 150 mm
low-pressure  channel  was  also  developed.  This  facility  was  used  to
quantitatively  visualize  shock  waves  in  a  holographic  interferometric
system  [5,6,64].  Miyachi  et  al.  [65]  proposed  two  piston-driven  dia-
phragmless shock tubes; the first design used five neodymium magnets
for actuation, while the second valve was actuated electropneumatically
to release the gas from a pressurized chamber behind the piston. Both
designs incorporated a clearance distance in the piston movement for
quicker opening. These designs were demonstrated in a 10 mm diameter
shock tube for up to 8 bar driver pressures.

A  rapid  opening  valve  assisted  by  magnetic  force  was  used  in  a
diaphragmless shock tube with a 10 mm internal diameter [66]. The axis
of the driver and the driven sections were perpendicular to each other,
and  the  maximum  driver  pressure  used  was  9  bar.  Abe  et  al.  [67]
developed  a  high-speed  valve  to  replace  the  use  of  diaphragms  in  a
free-piston shock tube. Conventionally, the diaphragm in a free-piston
shock  tube  ruptures  when  a  piston  moves  towards  it,  accelerated  by
high-pressure gas from a reservoir and compresses the gas ahead. Abe
et  al.  designed  a  valve  with  two-piston  cylinders  that  moved  perpen-
dicular  to  the  axis  of  the  shock  tube.  An  electromagnetic  valve  that
released the high-pressure gas to drive the free piston actuated the entire
facility.  The  fast-acting  valve  operates  automatically  when  the  free
piston compresses the gas. Bredin and Skews [68] used a three-piston
configuration  valve  in  a  50-meter  long  diaphragmless  shock  tube  in
which  the  opening  times  of  the  valve  could  be  varied  to  obtain
compression waves with rise times in the range of 5 to 20 ms. The main
piston was actuated using a secondary piston, and a tertiary piston was
used  to  provide  forward  motion  for  the  secondary  piston.  The  use  of
multiple pistons made the operation of the shock tube very complicated.
Another  study  compared  a  diaphragmless  shock  tube  operated  by  a
double-acting  pneumatic  cylinder  and  using  a  membrane-based  fas-
t-acting
the
pneumatic-cylinder-based valve varied from 0.325 to 1.15 m/s, while it
was  around  8.3  m/s  for  the  membrane-based  valve.  Shock  Mach

[69].  The

opening

speed

valve

valve

of

numbers of up to 2.125 were obtained with good repeatability using the
double-acting pneumatic cylinder-based valve. A valve similar to that
reported by Oguchi et al. [44] and Ikui et al. [45] consisting of a piston,
spring  dumper,  and  piston  driver  was  operated  using  either  a  small
diaphragm or a solenoid valve [70,71]. Itahashi et al. [72] optimized the
opening of the driver gas to the driven section, thus resulting in a more
efficient driver than most previous designs.

the  valve

the  performance  of

Garen et al.’s design [47] was implemented in a 1 mm driven tube
made of glass to study shock wave phenomena in miniature scales [75,
76]. The propagation velocities of the shock waves were measured with
a  specially  designed  laser  interferometer,  and  experiments  were  per-
formed  up  to  driver  pressures  of  2  bar.  The  investigations  were  also
extended using the same diaphragmless driver in a 3 mm driven tube,
and  the  motion  analysis  of  the  rubber  membrane  was  performed  to
evaluate
[77,78].  Another
membrane-based  design  with  repeatability  of  99  %  for  shock  Mach
numbers in the range of 1.02–1.55 was proposed [73]. Support blocks
and grids were provided to limit the displacement of the rubber sheet
and eliminate the expansion waves due to the rapid movement of the
rubber  sheet  (see  Fig.  5).  The  piston-based  design  [63]  to  generate
toroidal shock waves was improved by using a re-usable rubber mem-
brane in a vertical shock tube [79]. Perforated ring-shaped steel plates
were  used  to  limit  the  rubber  membrane’s  motion  and  to  ensure  the
deformation  was  within  the  elastic limits.  Consistent  operation  and  a
high  degree  of  repeatability  were  ensured  utilizing  this  technique,
although the maximum shock Mach number was limited to 1.8 [80]. A
bellow-actuated  diaphragmless  valve  was  used  to  obtain  reasonable
control over the opening and closing of the valve [81]. Bellows were
pressurized to provide a forward motion to seal the driven section from
the  annular  driver  section.  The  sudden  release  of  the  gas  inside  the
bellows rapidly opened the pathway between the driver and the driven
chamber.  An  alternative  design  based  on  Kim’s  design  [81]  was  pre-
sented [74], as shown in Fig. 6. The problem of vibrations and alignment
during  the  operation  was  minimized  in  the  71  mm  internal  diameter
shock tube using linear bearings to support the bellow-piston arrange-
ment. The design showed good shot-to-shot reproducibility over a range
of operating conditions. An improved driver design was later suggested
[82] where the bellow is placed in a manner such that it is compressed
rather  than  extended  when  the  driver  gas  is  filled.  With  the  growing
interest in miniature shock wave applications, significant efforts were
made  to  build  small-scale  high-repetition-rate  automated  shock  tube
systems.  Shiozaki  et  al.  [83]  built  a  2  mm  internal  diameter  dia-
phragmless shock tube that generated shock waves with Mach numbers
of up to 2.8 and a temperature behind the reflected shock of about 1200
K.  The  solenoid-operated  poppet  valve  produced  high-repetition-rate

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010427

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 5. Fast-acting valve utilizing a rubber membrane proposed by Yang et al. [73] (a) Valve is closed: The rubber membrane bulges and blocks the path between the
driver and driven section when an auxiliary chamber is pressurized. (b) Valve is open: When a diaphragm holding the pressurized gas in the auxiliary chamber is
ruptured, the membrane retracts and opens the driver volume to the driven section. (Adapted with permission from The Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers:
Transactions of the Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers Series B, Yang et al. [73], copyright 1994).

Fig. 6. Fast-acting valve design used by Tranter et al. [74] that incorporated bellows for quick retraction of the piston. Different variations of this arrangement have
been later designed by researchers. (a) A long shaft attached to the bellow moves forward to block the driver section from the driven section. (b) The piston retracts
due to the bellow action to open the path between the driver and driven section. (Adapted with permission from AIP Publishing: Review of Scientific Instruments,
Tranter et al. [74], copyright 2008).

shock waves at 5 Hz.

3.4. Recent designs of fast acting valves (post 2010)

In  contrast  to  previous  designs,  Heufer  et  al.  [84]  suggested  a
sleeve-type  fast-acting  valve  in  which  the  driver  and  driven  sections
have  the  same  cross-section  area  and  are  mounted  in  line  with  each
other (see Fig. 7). Shock Mach numbers of up to 3.4 were obtained for
driver pressures of 30 bar. Downey et al. [85] introduced a fast-opening
valve that uses a sleeve to block the driver gas from entering the driven
section initially. They incorporated multiple new features that improved
the operating pressure range of the valve (up to 200 bar) while achieving
short opening times. The sleeve also had a lip similar to Takano et al.’s
design [58] for faster opening times. The sleeve was made of aluminum
alloy,  and  the  annular  driver  section  had  a  streamlined  flow  path  to
minimize losses. The double-piston arrangement was adopted for studies
in a miniature shock tube [86] as well with the development of a valve
called the Maeno–Oguchi valve (described in Udagawa et al. [87]). This

valve  was  used  for  studies  in  a  miniature  2  mm  and  3  mm  internal
diameter  shock  tube  with  driver  pressures  up  to  9  bar.  An  improved
version called the Udagawa–Maeno–Oguchi valve was also reported that
used  a  clearance  distance  for  piston  movement  that  helped  in  faster
retraction speeds and smaller opening times [87]. Based on the Tranter
et al.’s bellow valve design [74], a new diaphragmless shock tube, called
the  Brown  Shock  Tube  (BST),  with  software  control  and  actuation  of
valving was presented [88]. The operating pressures were increased up
to  100  bar  in  the  diaphragmless  shock  tube  with  a  driven  section
diameter of 100 mm. McGivern et al. [22] used a piston that was con-
nected directly to the movable end of fixed stainless steel bellows for
low-pressure application. This design incorporated a plug instead of a
flat piston so that the piston accelerates before breaching the seal.

A 6.35 mm bore diaphragmless shock tube called the high repetition
rate shock tube (HRRST) was designed for operational pressures up to
100 bar and observation times of about 100 μs [90]. This diaphragmless
driver was actuated using a solenoid valve, had a cycle rate of up to 4 Hz,
and was designed for good reproducibility over thousands of shots. An

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010428

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 7. Sleeve-type fast-acting valve that is operated with actuating solenoid valves. The design proposed by Heufer et al. [84] is shown in (a) when the valve is
closed  and  (b)  when  the  valve  is  open  (Adapted  with  permission  from  Springer  Nature:  Heufer  et  al.  [84],  copyright  2012).  Unlike  the  inline  driver-driven
arrangement, Downey et al. [85] used the sleeve in a coaxial driver-driven configuration. Schematic diagrams of Downey et al.’s valve design in the (c) closed
state and in the (d) open state (Adapted with permission from Springer Nature: Shock Waves, Downey et al. [85], copyright 2011).

improvement of the solenoid driver used in HRRST was suggested for a
12.7  mm  bore  shock  tube  [91].  Improved  performance  and  cycle  life
were  obtained  using  a  new  face  o-ring  sealing  design,  increasing  the
internal volume and providing inserts near the solenoid core. A more
recent  development  of  the  solenoid  actuated  valve  improved  the
longevity and simplified the maintenance and manufacture of the sole-
noid valve [92]. A pneumatic gas-driven diaphragmless shock tube with
an operating mechanism similar to air gun technology was developed to
produce  weak  shock  waves  [93].  The  table-top  arrangement  had  a
dumbbell-shaped piston whose movement was controlled using a trigger
and  reservoir  chamber.  The  actuator  could  be  quickly  reset,  thus
decreasing  the  experimental  turnaround  time.  Fast-acting  valves  pro-
cured commercially have been used in diaphragmless shock tubes [89,
94–97]  (see  Fig  8).  Amer  and  co-workers  [97]  compared  the  perfor-
mance  of  fast-acting  valves  with  conventional  single  and  double  dia-
phragm  techniques.  The  shock-wave  formation,  repeatability,  valve
efficiency, and ease of operation were evaluated in their study. These
valves were connected between the driver and driven section, replacing
the diaphragm. The valves are available for different internal diameters

temperature  was

and can operate at high driver pressures of up to 100 bar. Recently, a
commercial valve was used in a diaphragmless shock tube for chemical
kinetics  studies  which  showed  that  the  repeatability  of  the  reflected
that  obtained  using  a
shock
double-diaphragm technique [89]. A rapid opening shutter valve was
developed  and  demonstrated  in  a  60  mm  internal  diameter  dia-
phragmless shock tube [98]. The innovative shutter valve was actuated
electropneumatically and incorporated a feature that opened the valve
from the center of the tube.

similar

to

4. Design features of fast-acting valves

The  main  design  features  of  a  fast-acting  valve  include  a  closure
element, an actuation mechanism, and the orientation of the driver and
driven sections. These design features of various diaphragmless shock
tube designs reported in the literature are consolidated in Table 1. The
design aspects of the valves are discussed in the following sections.

Fig. 8. A commercially available high-speed valve design that can be mounted in line with the driver and driven section [89]. (a) In the closed state, a sliding cup
blocks the driver gas from entering the driven section. (b) When the volume of gas behind the sliding cup is exhausted, the cup retracts and shock wave is formed in
the driven section.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010429

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Table 1
A consolidated table of various diaphragmless shock tube designs reported in literature.

Author/year (Ref.)

Configuration

Closure element

Actuation elements

Control element

Driven tube dimensionsa  Max. driver pressureb

Condit [19]
Condit [19]
Muirhead and Jones [41]
Takano and Akamatsu [58]
Kim [81]
Israel da Silveira et al. [35], 60]
Miyachi et al. [65]
Tranter and Lynch [90]
Lynch [91]
Downey et al. [85]
Yang et al. [73]
Hariharan et al. [69]
Teshima [59]
Kosing et al. [20]
Mejia-Alvarez et al. [21]
Watanabe et al. [63]
Hosseini et al. [80]
Svete and Kutin [94]
Sembian and Liverts [96]
Amer et al. [97]
Dist ́efano and Fraidenraich [43]
Oguchi et al. [44], Ikui et al. [45]
Taguchi et al. [70]
Heufer et al. [84]
Muirhead and Jones [41]
Ikui et al. [25]
Maeno and Oguchi [54]
Onodera [61]
Shiozaki et al. [83]
Tranter and Giri [74]
Hariharan et al. [69]
Fuller et al. [88]
Swietek et al. [93]
Zhang et al. [62]
Yamauchi et al. [55]
Hurst and Bauer [56]
Matsui et al. [57]
Udagawa et al. [86]
Udagawa et al. [87]
Garen et al. [47]
Udagawa et al. [75]
Bredin and Skews [68]
Miyachi et al. [65]
McGivern et al. [22]
Abe et al. [66]
Ojima et al. [64]
Ikui et al. [25]
Abe et al. [67]
Samimi et al. [98]

Type-I(a)
Type-I(a)
Type-I(a)
Type-I(a)
Type-I(a)
Type-I(a)
Type-I(a)
Type-I(b)
Type-I(b)
Type-I(c)
Type-I(d)
Type-I(d)
Type-I(e)
Type-I(e)
Type-I(e)
Type-I(f)
Type-I(g)
Type-II(a)
Type-II(a)
Type-II(a)
Type-II(b)
Type-II(b)
Type-II(b)
Type-II(c)
Type-II(d)
Type-II(d)
Type-II(d)
Type-II(d)
Type-II(d)
Type-II(d)
Type-II(d)
Type-II(d)
Type-II(d)
Type-II(d)
Type-III(a)
Type-III(a)
Type-III(a)
Type-III(a)
Type-III(a)
Type-III(b)
Type-III(b)
Type-IV(a)
Type-IV(a)
Type-IV(b)
Type-IV(c)
Type-IV(d)
Type-V(a)
Type-V(b)
Type-V(b)

Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Seal Plate
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Sleeve
Membrane
Membrane
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Membrane
Cap
Cap
Cap
Seal plate
Piston
Piston
Sleeve
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Membrane
Membrane
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Piston
Shutter

Cam
Cam
Cam

Pneumatic valves
Solenoid valve
Solenoid valve
Solenoid
Solenoid
Trigger valve
Vacuum pump
Vacuum pump

Poppet
Poppet
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Auxiliary piston-cylinder  Magnetic valve
Opposed bellows
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Piston-cylinder/Magnets
Vespel Poppet
Vespel Poppet
Piston-cylinder
Diaphragm burst
Diaphragm burst
Auxiliary piston-cylinder  Magnetic valves
Hydraulic cylinder
Brake pad
Solenoid valve
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Release valve
Diaphragm burst
Vacuum pump
Diaphragm burst
Solenoid valve
Piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Piston-cylinder
Current in coil
Electromagnetic coils
Diaphragm burst
Piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Piston-cylinder
Cam
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Electromagnet
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Release valve
Piston-cylinder
Solenoid
Poppet
Ball valve
Bellow
Solenoid valve
Piston-cylinder
Solenoid
Bellow
Solenoid valve
Piston-cylinder
Ball valve
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Auxiliary piston-cylinder  Magnetic valve
Solenoid valve
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Vacuum pump
Diaphragm burst
Diaphragm puncture
Diaphragm burst
Ball valve
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Piston-cylinder
Ball valve
Bellow
Ball valve
Piston-cylinder
Diaphragm burst
Piston-cylinder
Electromagnet
Auxiliary piston-cylinder
Solenoid valve
Piston-cylinder
Pneumatic drive
Linear actuator

φ 25.4 mm
φ 431.8 mm
φ 50.8 mm
φ 40 mm
□ 44.5 by 88.9 mm
φ 100 mm
φ 10 mm
φ 6.35 mm
φ 12.7 mm
φ 50 mm
□ 60 by 150 mm
φ 50 mm
φ 16 mm
φ 56 mm
φ 165 mm
Ann. 210 & 230 mm
Ann. 80 & 100 mm
φ 40 mm
φ 80 mm
φ 80 mm
φ 70 mm
□ 100 by 180 mm
□ 60 by 150 mm
φ 45 mm
φ 50.8 mm
□ 38 mm
φ 50 mm
□ 60 by 150 mm
φ 2 mm
φ 71 mm
φ 50 mm
φ 102 mm
φ 76.2 mm
φ 19.4 mm
φ 30 mm
□ 62 by 44 mm
φ 50 mm
φ 2 mm / φ 3 mm
φ 2 mm / φ 3 mm
□ 18 mm / φ 36 mm
φ 1 mm
φ 135 mm
φ 10 mm
φ 31.8 mm
φ 10 mm
□ 60 by 150 mm
□ 38 mm
φ 82 mm
φ 60 mm

≈ 41 bar
≈ 14 bar
≈ 41 bar
9 bar
3 bar
20 bar
8 bar
102 bar
102 bar
200 bar
NA
25 bar
16 bar
50 bar
6 bar
5 bar
5.4 bar
70 bar
50 bar
20 bar
NAc
NAd
3 bar
20 bar
≈ 138 bar
1 bar
20 bar
NAe
10 bar
≈ 2 bar
25 bar
100 bar
5.5 bar
NA
20 bar
≈ 21 bar
NA
9 bar
9 bar
1 bar
2 bar
NA
8 bar
8 bar
9 bar
9 bar
1 bar
176 bar
20 bar

a φ indicates circular cross-section, □ indicates square/rectangular cross-section, and Ann. indicates annulus between two diameters.
b The max. driver pressure listed is not necessarily the maximum operating pressure of the driver but the max. pressure listed in the cited source.
c Used in combustion drivers to produce MS  in the range of 8–14.
d MS  ranging from 1.2 to 5.0 in air.
e Although the value of the driver pressure is not specified, the ratio P41  used in the experiments was 2.5.

4.1. Closure element

Every  valve  design  has  an  internal  element  that  initially  seals  the
pathway  between  the  driver  and  the  driven  section.  This  element  re-
tracts on actuation and opens the pathway between the two sections of
the shock tube. This movable obstruction is termed as a closure element
[99]. The actuator sets the closure element in position to separate the
driver gas from the driven gas. When the actuator is toggled, the closure
element quickly retracts to create an opening between the driver and the
driven  section.  The  closure  element  is  either  a  piston  (or  seal  plate),
sleeve, cap, or membrane based on the various valve designs. The single
and double piston arrangements have been widely used in diaphragm-
less  shock  tube  designs.  The  piston  is  exposed  to  substantial  forces,
especially  in  the  annular  driver  section,  which  requires  stronger  and

heavy pistons. Kosing et  al. [20]  performed experiments with pistons
made of solid brass (4.4 kg), solid PVC (0.71 kg) and hollow aluminium
(0.38 kg). The aluminum piston was used only for low driver pressures.
The piston designed by Alvarez et al. [21] weighed 6.6 kg and was used
for driver pressures of up to 6 bar. Fig. 4 shows different closure ele-
ments that can be utilized in the Oguchi-type valve. Although the piston
with  lip  and  plug  provides  good  sealing,  the  seals  get  damaged
frequently as they leave the sliding face during the operation. A sleeve
valve  member  has  lesser  weight  as  compared  to  the  pistons  used  in
diaphragmless shock tubes. Heufer et al. [84] designed a sleeve made of
aluminum  which  weighed  about 3.124 kg.  Membranes  are  by far  the
lightest closure element for fast-acting valves. The elastic property of the
membrane helps in achieving fast opening times. Rubber membranes are
also  self-sealing,  unlike  metallic  pistons  in  which  a  groove  has  to  be

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104210

S. Janardhanraj et al.

designed to accommodate a gasket or an o-ring. One of the main dis-
advantages of using a membrane is that the pressure difference across
the membrane cannot be large, which restricts the maximum pressure
used in the driver section. Most of the rubber membrane valves have
been tested for driver pressures less than 25 bar [47,69,75,80]. Mem-
branes  also lose  their elastic  property with  repeated use,  limiting the
valve’s cycle life. Caps are used in compact valve designs, especially in
scenarios where the driver section is in line with the driven section. The
mass of caps is a few hundred grams, and caps have been used in com-
mercial  valves  up  to  pressures  of  100  bar.  The  advances  in  material
science  have  brought  about  numerous  lightweight  metal  alloys  and
composites with high strength and durability. These materials present a
wide range of options for high-performance closure elements.

4.2. Actuation and control elements

The  actuation  and  control  elements  are  responsible  for  the  move-
ment of the closure element. The valve’s actuator translates the input
energy  to  the  motion  of  the  control  element.  The  actuator  should  be
powerful enough to overcome the force to move the closure element at a
very  high  speed  to  match  the  time  scales  of  a  diaphragm  rupture.
Skousen [99] defined that the sizing of the actuator is dependent on the
total force required to open the valve, given by,

Ftotal = Fprocess + Fseat + Ffriction + Fmisc.

(2)

where Fprocess is the force to overcome unbalanced process pressures, Fseat
is the force to provide correct seat load, Ffriction  is the force to overcome
frictional forces, and Fmisc. is the force to overcome certain design fac-
tors, such as the weight of the closure element, etc. The main types of
systems that are used for valve actuation include hydraulic, pneumatic,
electric, and electromagnetic [100]. Table 2 highlights the advantages
and disadvantages of these actuators. Hydraulic systems are suitable for
heavy-duty  purposes  since  compressing  a  fluid,  such  as  oil,  produces
much more motion power than compressing a gas. Pneumatic systems
cannot produce the power that hydraulic systems generate, but they are
stronger than purely electric actuators. Pneumatic systems also tend to
work  faster  than  hydraulic  and  electric  systems  over  the  stroke  of
movement.  Pure  electric  actuators  (motor-driven)  cannot  match  the
power of hydraulic and pneumatic systems, though they are cleaner and
can provide precise control over movement. Electromagnetic actuators
include  solenoid-based  devices  that  are  very  reliable,  quick,  and
commonly  used.  Overall,  pneumatic  and  electromagnetic  systems  are
preferred for diaphragmless shock tubes because they are fast, and their
retraction motion can produce short opening times. The most common
control  element  used  for  operating  the  fast-acting  valves  is  solenoid
valves (as seen in Table 1) that use electromagnetic actuation for quick
action (about 1–5 ms). The use of bellows has yielded good results for
repeated operation as the motion of the closure element is consistent and
reliable [22,74,81,88].

4.3. Driver-driven configurations

The mounting configuration of the fast-acting valve and the driver’s
placement relative to the driven section determines the ease of gas flow
from the high- to the low-pressure chamber. Although it would be ideal

Table 2
Comparison of different systems used for valve actuation.

to have the two sections in line, the movement of the closure element
may sometimes block the pathway. Based on the different designs re-
ported in the literature, the driver-driven configurations can be arranged
into five categories.

4.3.1. Type-I driver-driven configurations

◦
In this configuration, the driver gas is forced to take a 180

turn at
the valve location. The flow redirection could lead to losses that even-
tually  affect  the  strength  of  the  shock  wave  generated  in  the  driven
section. The design proposed by Downey et al. [85] and Mejia-Alvarez
et  al.  [21]  incorporated  a  curvature  to  streamline  the  flow  to  mini-
mize the losses. Fig. 9 shows schematic diagrams of variants under the
Type-I configuration. In Type-I(a) configuration (see Fig. 9(a)), a large
piston with diameter same as the inner diameter of the driver section
seals the gases in the respective sections [19,35,41,58,65,81]. The large
piston  size  implies  a  larger  force  is  required  to  move  the  piston  to
compensate  for  the  mass.  Takano  et  al.  [58]  suggested  using  a  light-
weight  hollow  piston  made  of  aluminum  for  faster  retraction  speeds.
Also, additional seals must be used on the sliding face of the piston to
prevent driver gas leaks. An important advantage of type-Ia is that the
piston experiences a large force due to the driver gas in the direction of
piston  retraction.  The  piston  size  is  smaller  and  comparable  to  the
diameter of the driven section in Type-I(b) configuration (see Fig. 9(b)).
Face seals are sufficient to seal the driven section, and the low mass of
the piston can help obtain faster retraction speeds. This configuration
has been demonstrated in miniature shock tubes for driver pressures of
up to 102 bar [90,91]. The closure element in Type-I(c), as shown in
Fig. 9(c), is a sliding sleeve on which the opposing forces for the sleeve
movement are minimum due to the smaller exposed area. Downey et al.
[85] employed this configuration to operate at high operating pressures
of about 200 bar. Fig. 9(d) shows a configuration with a rubber mem-
brane. Yang et al. [73], and Hariharan et al. [69] used this configuration
and  obtained  short  opening  times  due  to  the  quick  retraction  of  the
membrane. The cycle life and the limited pressure range of operation
were some drawbacks of using the rubber membrane. Fig. 9(e) and (f)
show configurations of a piston-based valve for vertical shock tubes. In
Type-I(e)  configuration,  the  piston  retraction  is  against  gravity.  The
shock wave travels vertically downwards while the direction of piston
movement  and  shock  wave  propagation  is  vice-versa  in  Type-I(f)
configuration.  The  retraction  force  has  to  overcome  the  piston’s
weight in Type-I(e) configuration [20,21,59]. This configuration is ideal
for  vertical  systems  in  studying  shock  wave  interaction  with  liquids.
Type-I(f) and I(g) configurations are used for the generation of annular
shock waves using a piston [63] and membrane [80], respectively.

4.3.2. Type-II driver-driven configurations

The driver section is in line with the driven section in Type-II driver-
driven  configurations.  Unlike  the  conventional  diaphragm-type  shock
tube,  the  cross-section  of  the  driver  section  is  larger  than  the  driven
section.  There  is  no  major  flow  redirection  compared  to  the  type-I
configurations. Therefore, there are fewer losses due to flow turning at
the valve location. Generally, a streamlined path is provided in the valve
to minimize resistance to flow. The variants of Type-II configuration are
shown  in  Fig.  10.  Type-II(a)  is  a  cap-type  configuration,  as  shown  in
Fig. 10(a), which is adopted by many commercial valve manufacturers

Hydraulic

Pneumatic

Electric

Electromagnetic

Advantages

Disadvantages

Powerful
Safe
Self-contained
Fast over short strokes
High maintenance
Risk of leaks

Fast over long strokes
Economical
Simple design
Limited power
Short cycle life
Gas requirement

Quick and fast response
Precise control
Clean operation and no leaks
Low power
Complicated design
Expensive

Reliable and robust
Miniature and remote operation
Cost-effective
Electromagnetic interference
Sensitive to voltage
Limited force

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104211

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 9. Schematic diagrams illustrating various Type-I configurations. The orange arrow  indicates the movement of the element blocking the driver and driven
section while the green arrows show the direction of flow after the movement of the element. (a) Piston-type configuration where piston is the size of driver section,
(b)  Piston-type  configuration  where  the  piston  is  the  size  of  the  driven  section,  (c)  Sleeve-type  configuration,  (d)  Membrane-type  configuration,  (e)  Vertical
configuration where piston moves against gravity, (f) Vertical configuration where piston moves in the direction of gravity, and (g) Vertical configuration where
membrane  retracts  in  the  direction  of  gravity.  (For  interpretation  of  the  references  to  color  in  this  figure  legend,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  web  version  of
this article.).

[94,96]. This design allows the valve to be directly mounted in shock
tubes that had previously utilized a diaphragm by simply replacing the
diaphragm  section.  The  front  face  of  the  cap  has  a  conical  shape  for
streamlining  the flow.  The manufacturing  tolerances and  material  se-
lection in this design are critical to the operation of the valve. Type II(b)
configuration is similar to Type II(a), but the driven section has a vari-
able  cross-section  (see  Fig.  10(b)).  The  sleeve-type  design  (shown  in
Fig. 10(c)) was reported by Heufer et al. [84]. Compared to the cap-type
and piston-type designs, one of the main disadvantages of this design is
that the overall stroke length required to open the valve is much larger.
Therefore, the valve is much longer, and a larger volume of gas has to be
released from the actuating chamber during the operation. Fig. 10(d)
shows a piston-type configuration in which the piston retracts into an
actuating chamber behind it. Numerous researchers have adopted this
design  because  of  its  simplicity  [25,41,54,61,62,69,83].  The  designs
used by Tranter et al. [74] and Fuller et al. [88] are similar to those given
in Fig. 10(d) expect that the closure element does not retract into the
actuating chamber but remains in the driver chamber. The schematics
given  in  the  figure  mainly  portray  the  driver-driven  configurations.
Fig. 6 shows the actual depiction of Tranter et al.’s design [74].

4.3.3. Type-III driver-driven configurations

In Type-III configuration, a part of the driver section is annular to the
driven section, and the rest of the driver section is in line with the driven
section. Therefore, the flow of the driver gas is a combination of both
scenarios seen in Type-I and Type-II configurations. Fig. 11 shows the
schematic  diagrams  of  Type-III  configurations.  The  piston-type  (see
Fig. 11(a)) is more popularly used as compared to the membrane-type
configuration (see Fig. 11(b)). The flow field in  both cases is similar,
except that the faster retraction of the membrane can lead to expansion
waves in the region where the membrane is initially inflated. Supporting
grids were used to limit the membrane’s movement and eliminate these
expansion  waves  due  to  the  rapid  movement  of  the  membrane.  A
number of double-sliding piston design concepts use Type-II(a) config-
uration [55–57,86,87] while the membrane-based design is reported by
Garen et al. [47] and Udagawa et al. [75].

4.3.4. Type-IV driver-driven configurations

In this configuration, the driver gas undergoes a 90

flow turn as the
driver and driven sections are perpendicular to each other. Fig. 12 shows
the schematic diagrams of Type-IV configurations. A long driver section

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104212

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 10. Schematic diagrams illustrating various Type-II configuration. The orange arrow indicates the movement of the element blocking the driver and driven
section while the green arrows show the direction of flow after the movement of the element. (a) Cap-type configuration with variable cross-section driver section, (b)
Cap-type configuration with variable cross-section driven section, (c) Sleeve-type configuration, and (d) Piston-type configuration. (For interpretation of the ref-
erences to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).

Fig. 11. Schematic diagrams illustrating various Type-III configuration. The orange arrow indicates the movement of the element blocking the driver and driven
section while the green arrows show the direction of flow after the movement of the element. (a) Piston-type configuration and (b) Membrane-type configuration.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).

is typically necessary to delay the rarefaction wave’s interaction with
the reflected shock wave. The 90∘  bend at the valve location may cause
the rarefaction wave to interact with the contact surface too early and
yield a decelerating shock. Hence, the alignment of the driver tube at a
right angle is a disadvantage, as opposed to the straight-through flow
path in configurations with in-line mounting. In Type IV(a) and IV(b),
the piston movement is horizontal, while the movement is vertical in
Type-IV(c) and IV(d). The driven section is vertical in Type IV(a) and IV
(d),  while  the  driver  section  is  vertical  in  Type  IV(b)  and  IV(c).  The
diaphragmless shock tubes proposed by Bredin et al. [68] and Miyachi
et  al.  [65]  utilized  Type  IV(a)  configuration.  McGivern  et  al.’s
bellow-actuated shock tube [22] has a vertical driver section attached to
a 31.8 mm diameter driven section. Abe et al. [66] and Ojima et al. [64]
employed Type IV(c) and IV(d) configurations, respectively.

4.3.5. Type-V driver-driven configurations

The best way to minimize resistance to the gas flow in the shock tube
is by having the driver and the driven section of the same cross-section
and in line with each other. Such a configuration ensures minimal losses
in  shock  formation  and  propagation.  In  Type-V  configuration  (see
Fig.  13),  the  driver-driven  chambers  are  in  line,  and  the  driver  and
driven sections’ cross-sections are the same. Type V(a) configuration, as
shown  in  Fig.  13(a),  has  a  single  closure  element  that  moves  in  the
transverse  direction.  In  Type-V(a)  configuration,  the  valve  opening is
asymmetrical about the shock tube axis. This design aspect of Type-V(a)

configuration  makes  it  distinct  from  all  the  other  configurations.  The
closure element is composed of multiple individual components in Type
V(b) (see Fig. 13(b)). Abe et al. [67] used two opposing pistons in their
design.  The  design  proposed  by  Samimi  et  al.  [98]  used  a  shutter
configuration  composed  of  either  three  or  six  blades.  A  substantial
advantage of Type-V(b) configuration is that the fast-acting valve opens
from the center of the tube similar to the diaphragm-type shock tube
operation. The transverse motion of the closure elements increases the
loads  on  the  seals  due  to  the  differential  pressure.  Ensuring  proper
sealing  between  multiple  closure  elements  in  Type  V(b)  is  also
challenging.

5. Performance of fast-acting valves

The  performance  of  diaphragmless  shock  tubes  in  terms  of  the
opening  time,  shock  formation  distance,  operating  range,  and  shock
wave conditions are discussed in the following sections.

5.1. Opening time of valve

The opening time of a fast-acting valve is an important parameter
that determines the performance of the diaphragmless shock tube. It is
the time taken by the closure element to move a distance that creates an
opening  with  an  area  equal  to  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the  driven
section of the shock tube. Ideally, the opening time should be short so

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104213

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 12. Schematic diagrams illustrating various Type-IV configuration. The
orange arrow indicates the movement of the element blocking the driver and
driven section while the green arrow shows the direction of flow after the
movement  of  the  element.  Horizontal  piston  movement  with  (a)  vertical
driven section and (b) horizontal driven section. Vertical piston movement
with  (c)  horizontal  driven  section  and  (d)  vertical  driven  section.  (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.).

Fig. 13. Schematic diagrams illustrating various Type-V configuration. The orange arrow indicates the movement of the element blocking the driver and driven
section while the green arrows show the direction of flow after the movement of the element. (a) Movement of single element and (b) Movement of multiple el-
ements. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).

that  a  supersonic  flow  is  initiated  in  the  shock  tube.  The  inability  of
commercial  valves  to  produce  such  a  condition  through  quick  action
makes  them  unsuitable  for  use  in  shock  tubes.  Therefore,  customized
fast-acting valves have to be designed for diaphragmless shock tubes.
Determining the opening time of a fast-acting valve requires a dedicated
optical measurement system. Since the closure element is enclosed in the
driver or driven section, obtaining the opening time during the system’s
operation becomes challenging. Instead, in many cases, the movement
of the closure element is monitored without mounting the driven sec-
tion.  Although  this  method  does  not  give  the  valve’s  actual  opening
time,  a  rough  idea  can  be  obtained.  In  one  of  the  early  reports,  the
opening time was estimated using two laser beams and phototransistors
as  light  detectors  to  track  the  retraction  of  the  membrane  [47].  The
opening time was estimated to be 460 μs. Hariharan et al. [69] measured
retraction speeds of about 8 m/s using high-speed photography for their
membrane-based  fast-acting  valve.  For  a  miniature  1  mm  and  3  mm
shock tube, the opening time of the rubber membrane valve was 46.6 μs
and 117.2 μs, respectively [77].

Piston-based  diaphragmless  valve  concepts  have  slower  speeds
compared  to  rubber-membrane  systems.  Ikui  et  al.  [25]  performed  a
detailed investigation of the opening time as a function of pressures used
in  different  chambers.  They  reported  opening  times  of  less  than  ten
milliseconds for a 38 mm square shock tube. Ikui and co-workers [23]
also  compared  the  variation  of  the  shock  Mach  number  along  a

diaphragm-type and diaphragmless shock tube at different P41 and valve
opening times (see Fig. 14). It is clear from the plots that the longer the
opening time, the slower the shock propagation velocity. Also, at higher
values of P41, the deviation of the valve performance compared to the
diaphragm-mode of operation is significant. Short opening times (< 2
ms) are relatively simple to achieve in smaller diameter tubes (< 10 mm)
as the moving parts are lighter. The solenoid-based HRRST facility [90]
has opening times of less than 1 ms for a 6.35 mm shock tube. The di-
rection of movement of the closure element also has a vital role in the
valve’s opening time. Axial opening of the valve is preferred to gate-type
opening because for the same distance traveled by the closure element,
the  flow  area  is  more  in  the  case  of  axial  opening  than  transverse
opening  (gate-type  opening).  An  example  is  the  sleeve-based  systems
where the closure element has to travel a longer distance to completely
open the valve (Sleeve moves about 100 mm stroke in the design re-
ported by Heufer et al. [84]). Abe et al. [67] reported an opening time of
1.79 ms for a diaphragmless shock tube system that used an opposing
piston. The short opening time results from the piston traversing only
half the diameter of the shock tube and the high pressures to control the
valve (greater than 150 bar).

5.2. Shock formation distance

Since  measuring  the  opening  time  of  the  valve  is  challenging,  an

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104214

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 14. Variation of the normalized shock Mach number along the diaphragm-type and diaphragmless shock tube (MS  represents the experimental shock Mach
S  represents the theoretical shock Mach number obtained from 1D shock tube relations). (a) P41 = 10 (b) P41 = 34 (c) P41 = 100. (Reprinted with
number and Mth
permission from The Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers: Bulletin of JSME, Ikui et al. [23], copyright 1979).

alternative method to evaluate the valve’s performance is by measuring
the shock formation distance. The shock formation distance is directly
dependent  on  the  opening  time  of  the  diaphragm  in  a  conventional
diaphragm-type shock tube [26, 31, 101]. Although fast-acting valves do
not open from the center of the tube (unlike the diaphragm rupture), a
linear dependence between the opening time of the valve and the shock
formation distance can be expected in a diaphragmless shock tube as
well. This assumption holds good because the piston analogy for shock
wave formation holds good for diaphragmless shock tubes. Ikui et al.
[23] showed that the dependence of opening time and shock formation
distance  for  diaphragm-type  and  diaphragmless  shock  tubes  is  linear
(see Fig. 15). The term MSmax refers to the maximum shock Mach number
obtained during the measurements. The shock formation distance (xf )
also depends on several other parameters indicated by the empirical and
functional relationships reported in various studies [102], [103].

xf = top.a1.f (P41)

xf = K1.s.top

(3)

(4)

where top  is the opening time, a1  is the speed of sound of the gas in the
driven section, s is the shock speed, P41  is the ratio of initial pressure in
driver  and  driven  sections,  and  K1  is  a  constant  of  proportionality.
Verifying a fully developed shock wave is relatively simple compared to
measuring the valve’s opening time. It is generally done by mounting
several pressure transducers along the driven section of the shock tube.
The  amplitude  of  the  pressure  trace  and  the  calculation  of  the  shock

Fig. 15. Dependence of shock formation distance (xf ) on the opening time (top)
for diaphragm-type and diaphragmless shock tubes. (Reprinted with permission
from The Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers: Bulletin of JSME, Ikui et al.
[23], copyright 1979).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104215

S. Janardhanraj et al.

speed by the time-of-flight method can confirm the shock formation in
the shock tube. The non-dimensional shock formation length is repre-
sented  by  the  ratio  of  the  shock  formation  length  and  the  hydraulic
diameter of the shock tube. The hydraulic diameter (dh) of a shock tube
is defined as,

dh =

4A
PR

(5)

where A is the area and PR is the perimeter of the cross-section. Typi-
cally,  the  shock  formation  distance  in  a  diaphragm-type  shock  tube
varies  between  15  and  20  hydraulic  diameters  [104].  Longer  shock
formation distances are expected in diaphragmless shock tubes because
of the slower opening times. Onodera reported a non-dimensional shock
formation  length  of  65  for  a  composite  piston-based  diaphragmless
shock tube [61]. The annular driver arrangement for a diaphragmless
shock tube described by Alvarez and co-workers had a consistent shock
formation  at  41  diameters  from  the  driver  in  the  165  mm  diameter
driven tube [21]. The diaphragmless shock tube based on a hydraulic
brake  pad  mechanism  had  a non-dimensional  shock  formation length
between 20 and 40 [20] for different piston materials. A comparative
study  between  a  piston-based  and  membrane-based  diaphragmless
shock tube showed that the latter had a shorter shock formation distance
[69].

Lynch et al. [91] compared the shock pressure profiles obtained in a
miniature shock tube using diaphragms and a fast-acting valve (shown
in Fig. 16(a)). The pressure profile obtained in non-reactive conditions
using the diaphragmless driver (shown in blue in Fig. 16(a)) is similar to
the one obtained in the reactive conditions (shown in red in Fig. 16(a)).
However, a small hump is noticed after about 350 μs compared to the
shock profile obtained in the diaphragm-mode of operation (shown in
magenta in Fig. 16(a)). The valve opening characteristics are a possible
reason for this observation. Non-ideal effects are more pronounced in
the 6.35 mm diaphragmless shock tube that has a shorter driven section
length (shock profile shown in green in Fig. 16(a)). An essential aspect
concerning the shock profile and duration is the intended application of
the shock tube. If the primary information is extracted before distortions
appear in the pressure profile, then the shape of the rest of the signal is of
little consequence. Amer et al. [97] showed an improved shock profile
with increased driven tube length. The difference in the shock profiles
between the double-diaphragm and diaphragmless-mode operations in a

5 m long shock tube (driver length of 2 m and driven length of 3 m) is
quite prominent. When the overall length of the shock tube is changed to
10 m (driver length of 3 m and driven length of 7 m), the shock profile
resembles the one obtained in the diaphragm-mode of operation. The
reflected shock pressure is relatively flat compared to that obtained in
the double-diaphragm experiments.

5.3. Operating range, repetition rate and reliability

The operating range of diaphragmless shock tubes depends on the
design  features  (driver-driven  configuration,  closure,  actuation,  and
control  elements)  used  in  the  fast-acting  valve.  Table  1  shows  the
maximum  driver  pressure  used  in  the  various  diaphragmless  shock
tubes. It is essential to mention here that the value of maximum driver
pressure listed in the table is simply the highest value of pressure used
for the experiments. This value does not necessarily indicate the upper
operating  limit of the  valve. Table 1  shows that diaphragmless shock
tubes can operate at pressures as low as 1 bar to pressures of up to 200
bar. A helpful way to estimate the efficiency of the diaphragmless shock
tubes  is  by  determining  the  shock  Mach  number  as  a  function  of  the
initial conditions in the shock tube. It is generally seen that the efficiency
of diaphragmless drivers is lower than diaphragm-type shock tubes [22].
Fig. 17 compares the efficiency for different diaphragmless shock tubes.
The experimental data are plotted against the one-dimensional inviscid
relation  shown  in  Eq.  (1)  (represented  as  a  solid  line  in  the  figure).
Experimental data from only a few reports have been used in the plot as
the  working  gas  differs  for  different  studies.  Fig.  17  shows  that  the
performance  of  the  diaphragmless  shock  tubes  significantly  deviates
from the predictions beyond P41 = 50. Therefore, the performance of
diaphragmless  shock  tubes  at  higher  initial  pressures  needs  to  be
improved.

The turnaround time between experiments is significantly reduced
by using diaphragmless drivers. Incorporating a mechanism to bring the
closure element back to its original position improves the turnaround
time further. Using a secondary diaphragm to run a diaphragmless shock
tube is a significant disadvantage in terms of the repetition rate [44,45,
75].  Amer  and  co-workers  compared  the  turnaround  times  in  shock
tubes operated in single-diaphragm mode, double-diaphragm mode, and
diaphragmless mode [97]. They found that the operating time for their
diaphragmless shock tube was about 6 min compared to about 32 min

Fig. 16. Comparison of shock profiles obtained using the diaphragmless and diaphragm-type shock tubes. (a) Experimental plots reported by Lynch et al. [91]. (i)
12.7 mm bore, modified solenoid driver [91], 100% Ar (ii) 12.7 mm bore, modified solenoid driver [91], 0.003 C2H3F3/Ar (iii) 12.7 mm bore, diaphragm driver,
100% Ar (iv) 6.35 mm bore, solenoid driver [90], 100% Ar, driven tube length shorter than that in the 12.7 mm shock tube. (Reprinted with permission from AIP
Publishing: Review of Scientific Instruments, Lynch [91], copyright 2016) (b) Experimental plots reported by Amer et al. [97]. (Adapted with permission from Amer
et al. [97]).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104216

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 17. Driver efficiency for diaphragmless designs reported in literature for air as working gas. (Adapted with permissions from Springer Nature: Shock Waves
Mejia-Alvarez et al. [21] copyright 2015, from Springer Nature: Shock Waves Kosing et al. [20] copyright 1999, from Springer Nature: Shock Waves Downey et al.
[85] copyright 2011, and from Springer Nature: Shock Waves Hariharan et al. [69] copyright 2010).

shock

and  48  min  for  the  single-diaphragm  and  double-diaphragm  modes,
tubes  having  a
respectively.  Miniature  diaphragmless
high-repetition-rate  of  4–5  Hz  have  also  been  demonstrated  [83,90].
Fig. 18 shows the repeatability obtained in a high-repetition-rate dia-
phragmless shock tube operated at 0.25 Hz. The cost and lifetime of the
fast-acting valves are a couple of key points to consider while designing
diaphragmless shock tubes. Since most fast-acting valves are customized
designs, developed in laboratories and used solely for research purposes,
their cost is not reported in the literature. The cost of commercial valves
can be about a few thousand US dollars depending on the diameter of the
valve. The high-repetition rate solenoid actuated driver valve has been
tested  for  several  thousand  experiments  [92].  The  commercial
fast-acting valve manufacturer claims the valve’s lifetime to be at least 5
million shots. The scalability of the diaphragmless shock tube to large
diameters  is  essential  in  some  applications.  Commercial  valves  are
currently available up to a maximum diameter of 80 mm.

5.4. Performance in reflected shock mode

While  shock  tubes  have  several  different  applications,  one  of  the
primary uses is the study of chemical kinetics by the combustion com-
munity, which is often done in the reflected shock mode (utilizing the T5
and P5  conditions). In such experiments, key performance characteris-
tics are the attenuation rate of the incident shock wave, the temporal
dependence of the reflected shock pressure (dP5/dt), and the duration of
test-time.  The  attenuation  of  the  incident  shockwave  is  particularly
important in determining the reflected shock temperature that is vital
for  chemical  kinetics  studies  [105].  In  general,  keeping  the  incident
shock attenuation rate as low as possible is desirable to avoid a large
axial  temperature  gradient.  Similarly,  dP5/dt  should  be  minimal  to
perform kinetic studies at conditions fairly close to the reflected shock
(T5, P5). Other performance aspects of diaphragmless shock tubes per-
taining to chemical kinetics studies include the range of Mach numbers
that  can  be  obtained  and  the  potential  for  tailoring  to  extend  the
reflected-shock test times. The range of Mach numbers obtained in the
shock  tube  is  directly  related  to  the  operating  pressure  range,  as  dis-
cussed  in  the  previous  section.  A  recent  study  investigated  these
reflected-shock  characteristics  by  employing  a  newly  developed  dia-
phragmless shock tube to study combustion chemistry [89]. The average
dP5/dt in the reflected shock region was about 2.5%/ms. The velocity
error was about ±0.224%, and the attenuation rate was about 0.41%/m.

These values  are comparable to those obtained using diaphragm-type
shock tubes [106]. In this work, the driver gas was tailored using ni-
trogen gas (18% by volume), as described in detail by Campbell et al.
[107], to obtain longer test times for some of the fuel mixtures.

5.5. Improving valve performance

While  diaphragmless  shock  tubes  present  several  advantages  over
conventional shock tubes, there is still significant scope for performance
improvement.  The  limitations  discussed  below  are  specific  to  certain
design  concepts.  A  valve  design  that  addresses  all  such  limitations
without compromising performance and efficiency would be the most
desirable.

• Shortening opening times - One of the main limitations of a dia-
phragmless shock tube, compared to a conventional shock tube, is
that  the  time  scales  of  the  diaphragm  rupture  process  cannot  be
matched. The opening time of fast-acting valves has to be improved
to reduce the shock formation distance in the shock tube.

• Avoid flow turning - The configurations of the driver and the driven
sections in a diaphragmless shock tube are not necessarily similar to
the  conventional  shock  tube  (except  for  very  few  design  concepts
employing Type-V driver-driven configuration). The flow turning at
the location of the fast-acting valve can lead to losses that will affect
the strength of the shock wave produced and hence lowers the effi-
ciency of the diaphragmless driver.

• Minimal flow obstruction - The components of the fast-acting valve
(closure, actuation, and control elements) obstruct the gas flow in the
shock tube. Complex flow interactions lead to undesirable effects in
the observation window of the diaphragmless shock tube.

• Higher  operational  pressures  -  The  operation  range  of  dia-
phragmless  shock  tubes  is  limited  because  larger  forces  must  be
overcome at higher pressures to move the closure element. The ac-
tuators  controlling  the  movement  of  the  closure  element  become
more bulky and expensive.

• Reduce shock wave attenuation - The presence of obstacles at the
driver-driven  interface  or  the  perpendicular  orientation  of  driver-
driven  sections  can  result  in  the  reflected  expansion  waves
catching up with the moving shock front earlier than expected. This
scenario can lead to faster attenuation of the shock wave.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104217

S. Janardhanraj et al.

• Avoid damage to seals - The amount of wear and tear of a seal is
dependent  on  the  valve  design.  In  most  designs,  the  seals  on  the
closure  element  are  breached  during  the  operation  of  the  dia-
phragmless  shock  tube.  Repeated  operation  of  the  diaphragmless
shock  tube can wear and  tear these seals and other moving parts.
Therefore, there is a need for constant maintenance of the parts while
using diaphragmless shock tubes.

• Reduce noise during operation - Pneumatically-driven fast-acting
valves operate by the sudden exhaust of pressurized gases due to the
actuating  mechanism.  This  process  can  be  extremely  noisy,  and
sufficient measures must be taken to exhaust these gases.

6. Mathematical model for fast-acting valves

Mathematical  models  for  several  diaphragmless  driver  configura-
tions  have  been  developed  and  verified  previously.  Rego  et  al.  [108]
developed a numerical model based on the motion equation to describe
the  piston  sliding  time  against  pressure  ratio  for  a  double-piston
arrangement  similar  to  Oguchi  et  al.’s  design.  Alvarez  et  al.  [21]
developed a model to describe the variants of the Oguchi et al. designs.
Portaro  et  al.  [109]  analyzed  the  performance  characteristics  of  the
sleeve-based diaphragmless shock tube driver proposed by Downey et al.
[85]  using  computational  fluid  dynamics  (CFD)  simulations.  A  CFD
study was also performed to evaluate the performance of Heufer et al.’s
design [84] to give insights into the complex interaction of the sliding
piston  with  the  transient  flow.  Udagawa  and  co-workers  developed  a
numerical model using the Runge–Kutta–Gill method to understand the
motion  of  the  rubber  membrane-based  valve  [77].  In  another  work,
Udagawa et al. suggested a simplified model for a double-sliding piston
diaphragmless  driver.  This  section  presents  a  generalized  model  to
describe fast-acting valves and applies to two popular driver configu-
rations as test cases.

A typical fast-acting valve consists of a moving piston to block the
driver and the driven section, a mechanism to pull the piston as quickly
as possible, and a provision to engage the piston to barricade the sec-
tions between runs. In every fast-acting valve, the mechanism by which
the piston is released is different. However, the pneumatically or elec-
tropneumatically operated piston is preferred in most cases. Following
are the key requirements for a fast-acting valve used in a shock tube:

1.  Short opening time (on the order of a few milliseconds)
2.  Lightweight and high-strength piston
3.  Simple and cost-effective auxiliary systems
4.  Ability of components to withstand extreme environments like high

operating pressure, temperature, and corrosive gases.

Mathematically, one can design a fast-acting valve based on a simple
approach to derive the vital geometrical parameters per the operational
requirements, considering the abovementioned criteria.

Fig. 18. (a) Repeatability of signals obtained by Lynch et al. [91] in a minia-
ture  diaphragmless  shock  tube  operated  at  0.25  Hz.  Solid  lines  represent  μ
(mean  value)  while  dashed  lines  represent  ±σ  (standard  deviation)  from  μ.
(Reprinted  with  permission  from  AIP  Publishing:  Review  of  Scientific  In-
struments, Lynch [91], copyright 2016) (b) Reflected shock conditions from 17,
000 experiments as reported by Tranter and co-workers [92]. The insets show
the mean and standard deviation of the reflected shock temperature for 1000
and 100 runs acquired at 1 Hz repetition rate. (Reprinted with permission from
AIP  Publishing:  Review  of  Scientific  Instruments,  Tranter  et  al.  [92],  copy-
right 2020).

• Firstly,  the  minimum  distance  (x)  moved  by  the  piston  has  to  be
estimated  (see  Fig.  20).  The  effective  diameter  (d)  of  the  driven
section determines the value of x. Consider a piston with a circular
cross-section that seals the driven section passage. The retraction of
the piston to open the valve thus traces a cylindrical pathway whose
circumference offers the entry of fluid flow into the driven section.
The circumference of the cylindrical pathway and the effective flow
diameter  required  can  be  thus  equated  to  extract  the  piston
displacement as,
π
4
= d/4.

xπd =

d2,

x

(6)

The distance moved by the piston is determined by matching the flow
area open to the driven section using this approach.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104218

S. Janardhanraj et al.

• Secondly,  the  acceleration  (ap)  required  to  move  the  piston  of  a
certain mass (mp) is expressed in terms of the distance moved (x) and
the  total  time  taken  for  this  motion(this  is  essentially  the  valve
opening time top). From Newtonian mechanics, the motion equation
can be derived for ap.

• Thirdly, a free-body diagram of the piston helps determine the forces
acting on the different faces. The force contributions due to friction,
self-weight,  seat  loading  and  other  design-specific  loads  (as
explained  in  Section  4.2)  must  be  included.  The  force  required  to
move the piston can be related to the acceleration as,

F ≥ mpap.

(7)

The piston’s mass (mp) can be reduced by having a high strength-to-
weight ratio material  or material with low density (ρp). There are
various  choices,  including  Teflon,  polyurethanes,  hard-plastics,
aluminum,  and  carbon-fiber-reinforced  thin-metal  shells  for  the
lightweight piston material.

• Finally,  the  mechanism  to  generate  F  is  decided  and  engineered.
Popular  choices  are  electromagnetic  force,  spring  assistance,  and
pneumatic  drives.  Here,  a  pneumatically  operated  piston  is
considered.

6.1. Case I: annular driver configuration

The schematics of the model developed by Alvarez et al. are shown in
Fig. 19. A piston with a lip configuration is shown in the figure, although
the model was extended to cases where a piston with a plug and sleeve
was  used  as  a  closure  element.  Relevant  geometric  parameters  are
shown in Fig. 19(a). The position, speed and acceleration of the piston
are easily related as,

breached. The pressure evolution in the control volumes CV4  and CV5
are  determined  by  two  ordinary  differential  equations  as  the  gas  is
released through the back pressure valve. The acceleration of the closure
element for the case of piston with a lip is obtained as,

dup
dt

=

1
mp

[
(A4a + A4b).P4 + (At + Aw).P3 (cid:0) A5a.P5 (cid:0) wp

]

For a piston with a plug, the acceleration is,

dup
dt

=

1
mp

[
(A4a + A4b + Aw).P4 + At.P3 (cid:0) A5a.P5 (cid:0) wp

]

For a sleeve, the acceleration is,

dup
dt

=

1
mp

[
A4b.P4 (cid:0) A5a.P5 (cid:0) wp

]

(9)

(10)

(11)

where wp  is the weight of the piston. The equations for acceleration and
pressure  evolution  are  solved  numerically  to  obtain  the  velocity  and
opening time of the diaphragmless valve.

6.2. Case II: inline driver configuration

An internally held pneumatically operated annular fast-acting valve
during the closing and opening is shown in Fig. 20. The piston is initially
at rest, so the initial velocity is u = 0. The piston should not throttle the
flow to enter the driven section as it reduces tt  significantly. Hence, a
part of the piston is extended so that it runs x times deep into the driven
section instead of exactly closing in front of the driven section. In this
manner, the tip of the piston, upon retracting from the driven section
entrance,  already  possesses  sufficient  velocity  and  quickly  allows  the
driver gas to enter the driven section. The desired ap  is then calculated
as,

ap =

dup
dt

=

d2x
dt2

(8)

2x = utv +

1
apt2
v ,
2

The free-body diagram of the pressures acting on the different faces
of the piston before and after breaching the seals is shown in Fig. 19(b).
Fig.  19(c)  and  (d)  show  the  conditions  before  and  after  the  seals  are

ap =

.

4x
t2
v

(12)

Fig.  19. Schematic  diagrams  of  the  model  developed  by  Mejia-Alvarez  et  al.  [21]  (a)  Relevant  geometric  parameters.  (b)  free  body  diagram  of  the  piston;  P1
contributes before valve opening; P3  replaces P1  after valve opening. (c) Conditions before seals are breached. (d) Conditions after seals are breached. (Adapted by
permission from Springer Nature: Shock Waves, Mejia-Alvarez et al. [21], copyright 2015).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104219

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 20. Schematics showing the vital geometrical and physical parameters involved in the (a) closing and (b) opening operation of a typical fast-acting valve (Type-
IIa, however, the parameters mostly remain the same).

For  the  present  configuration,  after  considering  the  hemispherical

dome-end and perforation, mp  is calculated as,

[

d2(2x + 2δ) (cid:0) ...

]
1
1

πρp
4

mp ≲

[

(

...(d (cid:0) 2δ)2

2x (cid:0)

)

(cid:0)

d (cid:0) 2δ
2

]

.

(d (cid:0) 2δ)3
3

(13)

The mass per unit density of the piston is calculated by subtracting the
volume of the outer cylinder from the sum of the inner cylinder and the
inner hemispherical dome-end. Additionally, the piston mass variation
due to the peripheral perforation is considered negligible. Considering
the calculated ap  and mp  in the previous steps, the net force is given by

F≳

4xmp
t2
v

.

(14)

The  piston  enclosed  in  the  valve  chamber  retracts  quickly  upon
exhausting the gas pressure in the chamber, as the surrounding driver
gas and the suction pressure produce the necessary force to move the
piston. The time scale of gas exhaustion should be smaller than the valve
opening time scale. The valve’s performance can be further improved by
exhausting the gas into a pre-evacuated chamber (typically ≤ 0.1 Torr).
Smaller the valve chamber volume (V), the quicker the exhaustion and,
thus, the piston’s movement. The total time (t0) required to empty V is
calculated  from  the  mass  conservation  law  or  continuity  equation  in
fluid dynamics as,

t0 =

2
k(γ (cid:0) 1)

∫ r

(cid:0)

r∗

)(2(cid:0) γ)/(γ(cid:0) 1)

r2 + 1

dr + tc,

where,

(15)

√

√

r∗ =

r =

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
γ (cid:0) 1
,
2

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(
)γ(cid:0) 1

γ

,
(cid:0) 1

p0
pa

k =

(

(cid:0) γAe
Vc

2γRT0
γ (cid:0) 1
(

(

)1

2

)γ(cid:0) 1

2γ

,

p0
pa
)(

tc =

Ae

Vc
√
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
γRT0

2
γ (cid:0) 1

) γ+1
2(γ(cid:0) 1)

)γ(cid:0) 1

2γ

]

(cid:0) 1

.

[(

p0
pc

γ + 1
2

/4), γ is
Here, Ae  represents the exhaust piping cross-sectional area (πd2
e
the specific heat ratio, R (J/kg/K) is the specific gas constant, and pc  is
the critical total pressure required to choke the flow in the exhaust duct.
Value of Vc  in the considered case is calculated as,

Vc =

π
4

d2(2x + 2δ).

(16)

For  the  current  case,  other  geometrical  parameters  like  the  valve-
holding  chamber  dimension  are  calculated  based  on  d  and  dc,  where
dc is the outer diameter of the valve chamber. It has to be noted that dc is
larger than d. The effective diameter and the annular diameter of the
valve-holding chamber can be equated to avoid local choking. Assuming
dc ∼ d, dh  is given as,
)
π
4
d2
h

c ∼ 2d2,

h (cid:0) d2
d2

(17)

d2,

π
4

=

(cid:0)

c

= d2 + d2
√
̅̅̅
2

d.

≳

dh

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104220

S. Janardhanraj et al.

The piston is held in the valve chamber as a concentric slider with a
0.05–0.1  mm  tolerance.  The  sliding  piston  offers  negligible  frictional
force and allows light gas leakage for the considered short-time opera-
tion. During the valve-closed operation, the gas fills the valve holding
chamber  and  valve  chamber  with  the  same  driver  pressure  (p0).  The
body of the piston is perforated or made of small holes such that the
driver gas fills it. Upon releasing the 3-way valve, a fast-acting pneu-
matic valve with an opening time of 3–30 ms (e.g., Festo® fast-switching
valves-MH series), the valve chamber gas exhausts into the atmosphere
rapidly.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  valve  performance  can  be  further
improved by exhausting the gas into a pre-evacuated chamber. The net
force acting on the piston ends is the same due to how they are shaped.
The end that faces the valve chamber is hemispherical, thus the net force
Fv  is

[

(

Fv = (p0 (cid:0) pa)

2π

]

)2

.

d (cid:0) 2δ
2

(18)

Similarly, the end that faces the driven section is flat, and thus the net
force Fd  is

Fd = (p0 (cid:0) pv)

(d (cid:0) 2δ)2

]

[π
4

(19)

For p0 > pa  and pv ∼ 0, the net resulting force acting on the sides of the
piston is the same (Fv = Fd). Given that Fv > F, the piston moves back
into the valve chamber upon the actuation of the 3-way valve resulting
in the opening of the fast-acting valve. In summary, as long as the time
scales of valve chamber depressurization and of opening the 3-way valve
are  less  than  the  desired  valve-opening  time,  the  fast-acting  valve
operates fine.

Let us consider a simple case to understand the design and sizing of
parameters for a typical fast-acting valve for an inline driver configu-
ration type which is the most commonly used arrangement in aero/gas-
dynamic testing facilitates. Fig. 20 shows the vital design parameters.
The desired input parameters are given in Table 3.

From  Eqs.  (6),  (7),  and  (12)–(19),  the  key  design  parameters  are

computed and tabulated in Table 4.

The valve design will be effective if a suitable material for the casings
and the piston is chosen. The number of fill holes in the piston rod can be
as many as the surface of the piston-rod supports. A notable advantage is
that  the  gas  fills  the  piston-rod  interior  rapidly,  making  the  piston
lightweight, e.g., mp  = 14.7 g in the present case.

Overall, the mathematical model described will come in handy while
developing customized fast-acting valves based on the desired applica-
tion and is a useful guide to follow prior to the fabrication of the valve.
An important point to note is that the opening times calculated by the
above procedure provide a first-order approximation of how quickly the
valve  might  open.  Several  additional  factors  that  influence  the  valve
opening time are difficult to estimate accurately. Some useful recom-
mendations based on the mathematical model are to have a lightweight
closure element, minimize the surfaces on the closure element that lead
to unwanted forces opposing the net retraction force, reduce the friction
due  to  seals  and  incorporate  a  small  clearance  distance  so  that  the
the  seal.  Other
closure  element  accelerates  before  breaching

Table 3
Input parameters for the fast-acting valve design.

Parameters

Effective tube diameter (d)
Working gas (γ, R)
Driver pressure (p0) & temperature (T0)
Driven pressure (pv) & temperature (Tv)
Ambient pressure (pa) & temperature (Ta)
Desired uniform piston wall-thickness (δ)
Piston material density - Teflon® (ρp)
Desired valve opening time (tv)

Values

25 mm
air (1.4, 287 J/kg/K)
2 bar, 300 K
∼0 bar, 300 K
1 bar, 300 K
3 mm
2200 kg/m2
3 ms

Table 4
Output parameters for the fast-acting valve design.

Parameters

Equivalent displacement (x)
Piston acceleration required (ap)

Mass of the piston (mp)
Force needed to move the piston (F)
Holding chamber diameter (d)
Holding chamber volume (Vc)
Pressure and vacuum side force (Fd = Fv)

Values

6.35 mm
2822.22 m/s2
14.7 g
41.46 N
35.9 mm
9.48  × 10
59.9 N

(cid:0) 6m3

recommendations  to  improve  the  valve’s  aerodynamics  include
streamlining the flow and driver-driven configurations to ensure mini-
mal flow turning. Material selection is also important in valve design.
For  example,  high-enthalpy  aerodynamic  testing  facilities  generally
operate at temperatures above ambient. Commercial fast-acting valves
have limitations while continuously operating above 400–500 K. Suit-
able thermal resistant materials can be employed in these cases, and the
fast-acting valve design can be tailored appropriately to suit the appli-
cation needs.

7. Shock wave applications using diaphragmless shock tubes:
current trends

The advantages of diaphragmless shock tube drivers made them a
desirable candidate to replace the diaphragm-type mode of operation.
Additionally, they have opened a range of new applications which were
not previously possible with conventional shock tubes. The new possi-
bilities that have emerged due to the high reproducibility, fast repeti-
tion, cleaner flow characteristics, and precise control are described in
the subsequent sections.

7.1. Reliable studies in shock wave chemistry and physics

In

these  studies,

the  shot-to-shot  fluctuation  of

Shock tubes can produce conditions that cover a wide temperature
and pressure range and provide time scales suitable for studying various
chemical reactions. Some shock tube investigations include temperature
dependence of the reaction rate constants, emission/absorption spectra
of  various  reaction  intermediates,  ignition  delay  times  of  pure  sub-
stances  and  distillate  fuels,  and  mechanisms  of  many  elementary  re-
actions.
the
thermodynamic properties behind the reflected shock in a conventional
diaphragm-type shock tube can affect the quality of the acquired kinetic
data.  Since several  gas  properties  are  monitored  at  a fixed  condition,
comparing data at the same condition becomes a problem if the exper-
iments cannot be precisely replicated. Therefore, using diaphragmless
shock tubes in chemical kinetics studies is advantageous, and the unique
diaphragmless  shock  tube  design  concepts  described  in  this  review
facilitate  these  investigations.  Yamauchi  et  al.’s  diaphragmless  shock
tube was used for emission spectra studies in reproducible shock heated
conditions [55]. This facility was also used to improve the kinetic data at
higher  temperatures  up  to  3197  K  [110,111].  Matsui  and  co-workers
[57]  used  a  combination  of  a  diaphragmless  piston-actuated  shock
tube,  excimer  laser  photolysis,  and  Atomic  Resonance  Absorption
Spectrometry  (ARAS)  to  study  individual  elementary  reactions.  The
bellow-based  diaphragmless  shock  tube  developed  by  Tranter  and
co-workers [74] demonstrated the ability of a diaphragmless shock tube
to obtain kinetic data in the low-pressure limit. A comparison between
the
the  diaphragmless  and
diaphragm-modes  is  shown  in  Fig.  21.  Janardhanraj  et  al.  [89]  also
demonstrated  using  a  diaphragmless  shock  tube  to  measure  ignition
delay times in methane and n-hexane oxidation. The level of control on
the  operating  conditions  allowed  the  post-shock  pressure  to  be  con-
strained to a much narrower range for a wide range of temperatures than
a  conventional  diaphragm-type  shock  tube.  The  diaphragmless  shock

rate  coefficients  obtained  using

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104221

S. Janardhanraj et al.

7.2. Exploring shock waves in miniature scales

The interest in exploring shock wave phenomena in millimeter re-
gimes  springs  from  numerous  interdisciplinary  applications  of  shock
waves in biology and medicine. Unlike large-scale shock tubes, the flow
in miniature shock tubes is dominated by wall effects, and the attenu-
ation  of  shock  waves  at  these  length  scales  has  been  investigated  in
recent years. Most of the studies utilize channels mounted at the end of a
large diameter shock tube to study the propagation of shock waves in
small-scales [34,123,124]. It would be more pertinent to produce the
shock waves in a miniature shock tube as it would not be practical to use
a  large-scale  shock  tube  for  miniature  shock  wave  applications.  As
highlighted earlier (in Section 1), the smaller exposed area in miniature
shock tubes poses a problem for the choice of diaphragm material and
thickness. Therefore, a fast-acting valve is the best method to produce
shock  waves  in  miniature  shock  tubes.  The  studies  performed  in  the
6.35 mm shock tube [90,117], 12.7 mm shock tube [91,118,119,125],
and 8 mm shock tube [120] are great examples of the use of fast-acting
valves in miniature shock tubes. Udagawa and co-workers [75] used a
rubber  membrane-based  diaphragmless  shock  tube  with  an  internal
diameter  of  1  mm  to  study  the  formation  and  propagation  of  shock
waves in small-scales tubes. They observed weak dispersed shock waves
using  laser  differential  interferometry  to  detect  the  shock  wave  den-
sities.  They  extended  their  work  to  observe  shock  waves  and  contact
surfaces in a 3 mm internal diameter small-scale shock tube over a range
of  pressure  conditions  using  the  interferometric  signal  measurement
with the collimated and polarized laser beams [78]. The precise control
of  the  operating  pressure  conditions  in  the  diaphragmless  shock  tube
allowed measurements over a range of pressures. This study confirmed
that  the  shock  waves  do  not  propagate  at  constant  velocity  in  this
mini-shock tube. The attenuation of the shock waves in a 1 mm shock
tube  was  also  studied  by  a  completely  transparent  driven  section,
generating  the  shock  wave  using  a  diaphragmless  driver  [76].  The
propagation characteristics of the shock wave in small diameter shock
tubes were studied using a double-piston diaphragmless driver based on
Oguchi’s design [86].

7.3. Automating aerodynamic ground test facilities

Many  ground  testing  impulse  facilities  incorporate  a  diaphragm
burst to initiate the flow for aerodynamic studies. Shock tunnels, free-
piston shock tunnels, and Ludwieg tunnels have started replacing the
diaphragm  with  fast-acting  valves  to  automate  the  facility  and  avoid
damage to test models by the impact of diaphragm fragments. A Lud-
wieg  tube/tunnel  is  a  short-duration  aerodynamic  test  facility  that
produces high-speed flows between 100 and 1000 m/s for a 10–1000 ms
test duration. The total flow temperature can be maintained between
105 K and 1800 K. An automated Ludwieg tunnel (see Fig. 22) consists of
five essential components: 1. Driver or Ludwieg tube where the test gas
is stored at high pressure, 2. Fast-acting valve whose response time is on
the order of a few milliseconds (3–10 ms), 3. A converging-diverging
(CD)  nozzle  accelerates  the  test  gas  to  hypersonic  velocity,  4.  A  test-
section chamber to house the model under investigation, and 5. A vac-
uum or dump tank is kept at low pressure (on the order of millibars).
Sometimes the test section and the vacuum tank are constructed as a
single piece. The high pressure in the driver tube and the low pressure in
the vacuum chamber facilitate an under-expanded hypersonic jet that
emerges from  the CD  nozzle  for a  short duration  once  the fast-acting
valve  opens  (see  Fig.  23).  The  expansion  wave  propagates  in  the
driver tube to establish a constant total pressure and temperature (p0,
T0)  in  the  tube.  The  reflected  expansion  waves  reach  the  fast-acting
valve to complete the test duration given by,

tr =

2L
,
a

(20)

Fig.  21. Rate  coefficients  for  the  dissociation  of  fluoroethane  reported  by
Tranter  et  al.  [74].  Solid  squares  are  data  points  obtained
from
diaphragm-mode of operation [112], solid stars represent data obtained from
diaphragmless  driver  section  and  solid  line  represents  k∞  [112].  (Reprinted
with permission from AIP Publishing: Review of Scientific Instruments, Tranter
et al. [74], copyright 2008).

tube was also coupled to a TOF-MS (Time-of-flight Mass Spectrometer),
which allowed signal averaging over multiple experiments [112]. This
application was, again, not possible with a conventional shock tube. The
work by Shaik et al. [113] studied fluid dynamic effects in miniature
tubes using synchrotron-based X-ray absorption, which is not possible
with  a  conventional  shock  tube.  Some  other  important  studies  that
demonstrate the use of diaphragmless shock tubes in chemical kinetics
include investigations of the decomposition of styrene [114], reactions
of propyl radicals [115] and butyl radical isomers [116].

The HRRST (high repetition rate shock tube) facilitated high tem-
perature,  high  pressure,  gas-phase  experiments  at  facilities  such  as
synchrotron light sources where space is limited, and many experiments
need  to  be  averaged  to  obtain  adequate  signal  levels  [90].  The  dia-
phragmless shock tube facility was designed to generate reaction con-
ditions of T > 600 K, P < 100 bar at a cycle rate of up to 4 Hz. The
benefits  of  shock  tube/TOF-MS  research  were  extended  to  include
synchrotron-sourced PI-TOF-MS (Photo Ionization Time-of-flight Mass
Spectrometer) as well [117]. The HRRST facility has also been widely
used for other studies, which include chemical thermometry using 1,1,
1-trifluoroethane  dissociation  [91],  ignition  delay  measurements
[118], kinetic modeling of ignition [119], and pyrolysis studies using
double  imaging  photoelectron/photoion  coincidence  spectroscopy
[120].  High-repetition  shock  waves  produced  by  an  automated  dia-
phragmless shock tube have also facilitated molecular beam scattering
experiments  [83].  Diaphragmless  shock  tubes  have  been  successfully
used  in  gas  dynamic  laser  (GDL)  experiments  [35,54,60,121]  as,  in
addition to the high reproducibility of signals, they also limit the im-
purities inside the shock tube. The diaphragmless shock tube compresses
and pre-heats a mixture instantaneously to elevated pressure and tem-
perature  in  these  experiments.  The  mixture  is  delivered  to  a  nozzle
where the rapid cooling of the hot gas creates a population inversion and
produces  a  laser  medium.  The  precise  control  over  the  shock  wave
generation process in the diaphragmless shock tubes also allows for the
synchronized operation of two shock tubes, as demonstrated by Maeno
and Oguchi [54]. In conventional shock tube operation, the water vapor
from ambient air enters the shock tube during diaphragm replacement
and  freezes  on  the  shock  tube  walls.  The use  of  diaphragmless  shock
tubes can avoid water vapor contamination and is ideal for studies of
low-temperature gases [122].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104222

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 22. Typical schematics of Ludwieg tunnel to realize hypersonic flow in the test-section in two different configurations with the fast-acting valve placed (a)
upstream and (b) downstream. Some of the vital components that constitute to the construction of the hypersonic Ludwieg tunnel are also shown in the schematics.

Fig. 23. Typical trajectory of shock wave, interface, and expansion fans across the different segments of a hypersonic Ludwieg tunnel at two different operational
mode: (a) upstream and (b) downstream placement of the fast-acting valve. The x (cid:0)
t diagram indicates the attainment of useful run-time obtained during a test,
typically on the order of milliseconds (ms).

where tr  is the run-time, L is the driver tube length, and a is the sound
velocity at that temperature.

A fast-acting valve at high-enthalpy conditions is preferred in mod-
ern  hypersonic  testing  facilities  like  the  Ludwieg  or  shock  tunnels.
However, the high stagnation temperature encountered at the end of the
tube poses limitations on the material wear and tear of the fast-acting
valve.  Recently,  researchers  at  the  University  of  Maryland  [138,155]
opted to develop a high-enthalpy hypersonic short-duration tunnel by

coupling the free-piston and Ludwieg tube with a fast-acting valve. The
facility can reach Mach numbers between 5 and 7 with a temperature of
1600–1800 K. Many of the existing free-piston or Ludwieg facilities that
[156–169]  using
study
rupture-diaphragms  can  be  upgraded  to  fast-acting  valves  for  better
automation, high repeatability, and clean flow conditions.

at  high-enthalpy

scramjet

engines

Several fast-acting valve concepts have been reported for Ludwieg
tunnels consolidated in Table 5. The fast-acting valve’s location in the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104223

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Table 5
Some of the Ludwieg tube/tunnel type aerodynamic testing facilities that use fast-acting/diaphragmless valves and some vital design parametersa.

Locationb

dm  (mm)

Valve Configurationc

top  (ms)

tft  (ms)

T0  (K)

p0  (bar)

M

TUB, Germany [15,46,126–130]
UB, Germany [131]
ZARM-UB, Germany [132]
DLR, Germany [133–135]
UTA, USA [136]
AFRL, USA [137]
UM, USA [138]
USAFA, USA [139,140]
USQ, Australia [141–145]
DUT, The Netherlands [146]
DUT, The Netherlands [147]
KAU, Saudi Arabia [148,149]
KU, Japan [150]
IISc, India [151,152]
Technion-IIT, Israel [153,154]

200
–

336
800
353
247.65
–

247.65
247.65
40
49.25–59
394.4
60
50
25

Type-II(a):U
Type-II(a):U
Type-II(a):U
Type-II(c):D
Type-II(c):D
Type-II(a):U
Type-II(a):U
Type-II(a):U
Type-II(a):U
Type-II(a):U
Type-II(a):U
Type-II(c):D
RO gate-valve:D
Type-II(a):U
Type-II(a):U

23
–
–
–

65
20
∼5
≤15
≤15
2.1–9
10
10–17
10–17
10
≤1

80
80–130
120
100–1000
120
80
100
100
100
–

100
95
30
35
12.5

500
900
1000
105
300
500
1600–1800
300–673
300–673
573
579
300
300
300
300–500

3–30
100
50
12.5
45
7–27
60
10–40
10–40
1–8.5
2.2–88
2–20
3
10–40
2–10

3–6
11
<1
0.3–0.95
0.5–1.2
6
6
6
6
–
6.4–10.5
1.9
2–4
8
6

a Values are gathered from the published literature, and official websites of the testing facilities. Some values are not available directly in the literature and they are
left unfilled. Nomenclature: dm-mounting tube diameter, top-valve opening time, tft-flow test time, T0-stagnation temperature, p0-stagnation pressure, M∞-freestream
Mach number.

b TUB-Technical University of Braunschweig, UB-University of Bremen, ZARM-Center of Applied Space Technology and Microgravity (in English), DLR-German
Aerospace  Center  (in  English),  UTA-University  of  Texas  at  Arlington,  AFRL-Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  UM-University  of  Maryland  (under  construction),
USAFA-United States Air Force Academy, DUT-Delft University of Technology, KAU-King Abdulaziz University, KU-Kyushu University, IISc-Indian Institute of Science,
IIT-Israel Institute of Technology.

c U-upstream and D-downstream of the test-section, RO-rapid opening.

facility plays a significant role in altering the run time (see Figs. 22 and
23). Mounting the valve downstream of the test section ensures a clean
and  quiet  flow  upstream.  Such  a  flow  field  is  necessary  for  studying
hypersonic  transition-related  research.  However,  the  test  section  is
pressurized,  and  mounting  sensors  pose  difficulties.  Ludwieg  tunnel
with a fast-acting valve is helpful for a variety of reasons. Following are
some of the significant advantages: 1. simpler construction, 2. easy to
automate  operations  and  instrumentation,  4.  ensuring  remote  opera-
tions  and  enhanced  safety  protocol,  5.  lower  downtime  between  suc-
cessive  runs,  6.  ability  to  produce  moderate  to  high  enthalpy,  7.
economically  cheaper  compared  to  other  aerodynamic  facilities,  8.
repeatability  of  flow  conditions  for  statistical  consistency,  9.  reduced
turbulence intensity levels, and 10. quiet upstream conditions.

The report of Eugene and Combs [170] easily highlights the effect of
cost requirements in Ludwieg type of facilities, either with diaphragm or
fast-acting  valves.  A  typical  cost  analysis  graph  for  the  present-day
Ludwieg  facility  from  their  work  is  shown  in  Fig.  24.  A  typical  Lud-
wieg tunnel construction for M∞ = 6 costs only about 97,000 to 122,000
USD (excluding vacuum pump, tank and instrumentation) which runs
for about 75 ms. On the other hand, from the archives of NASA history

Fig. 24. Cost analysis proposed by  Eugene and Combs [170] for their newly
commissioned  Ludwieg  tube  of  a  particular  test-section  configuration  and
exhaust conditions (Reprinted with permission from Eugene and Combs [170]).

[171], a typical construction of a moderate hypersonic blow-down wind
tunnel of a similar Mach number with considerable run time was esti-
mated  to  be  around  30  million  USD  in  1949  itself.  After  excluding
instrumentation costs, while using the commercially available Russian
fast-acting valve ISTA® KB-20-10, the complete construction of a typical
hypersonic  Ludwieg  tunnel  (75  mm  diameter  open  jet  test-section,
M∞ = 6, and tr = 12.5 ms) is estimated to cost about 30,000 USD.

Regarding automation of the Ludwieg tunnel, the ease of assembly
and operation is vividly shown in Fig. 11 of Eugene et al[172]. The low
volume of high-pressure tubes and the relatively low run time reduce the
operational  risk  in  Ludwieg  tunnels.  Besides,  advanced  optical  di-
agnostics  use  laser-based  systems  in  addition  to  the  existing  high
acquisition  rate  pressure  sensors,  which  require  proper  timing  to
repeatedly sample the data during the desired part of the run time. Given
the  fast-acting  valve  replacing  the  diaphragm,  almost  continuous
repeatable  bursts  are  ensured  from  a  remote  operating  location  after
proper automation.

The  initial  performance  studies  of  the  AFRL  Ludwieg  tunnel  by
Kimmel et al[137] highlight the ability of the tunnel to produce fairly
consistent flow conditions as shown in Fig. 25. Diaphragms often pro-
duce transient flows as they are shredded into pieces during the rupture.
The short times are sometimes 10–20% of the whole run time itself and
compensate for efficient data acquisition. On the other hand, fast-acting
valves reduce the transient times by order and offer consistency during
repeated  runs.  In  short-duration  facilities  like  the  Ludwieg  tunnels,
repeatability is important as the tunnels run times are small enough for
advanced optical diagnostics to collect turbulent flow statistics.

The  usefulness  of  the  flow  quality  during  the  test-time  can  be
appreciated while comparing the usage of a paper diaphragm and a fast-
acting valve in a Ludwieg tunnel. For simple pitot measurements on a
flat-disc, the standing shock should be stationary for an unsteady flow. If
the  flow  has  free  disturbances  from  the  non-uniform  breaking  of  the
diaphragm or its chunks, then the standing shock is no longer stationary
but  oscillates.  In  the  Schlieren  image  shown  in  Fig.  26(a),  the  paper
diaphragm enters the test-section during the test-time and contaminates
the flow to a greater extent. The shock is completely unsteady, and the
oscillations can be seen in the x (cid:0)
t diagram shown in Fig. 26(b). On the
other hand, while using the fast-acting valve, the flow is steady (Fig. 26
(c)).  The  x (cid:0)
t  diagram  shows  the  achieved  useful  steady  test-time,
marked by the presence of the detached shock as a solid vertical line.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104224

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Fig. 25. A typical run time captured signal captured by monitoring the driver
tube pressure while using the diaphragm and fast-acting valve as reported in the
work  of  Kimmel  et  al  [137]  (Reprinted  with  permission  from  AIAA:  Kimmel
et al. [137], copyright 2017). The x-axis represents the time in seconds, and the
is  the  initial
y-axis  represents  the  dimensionless  pressure,  where  p0
driver pressure.

7.4. Precise calibration of sensors

Dynamic  calibration  of  pressure  sensors  using  shock  tubes  is  a
notable  method  due  to  their  inherent  capability  to  generate  pressure
pulses of desired amplitude and fast rise time [173,174]. The amplitude
of  step  jump  in  pressure  can  be  analytically  calculated  using  the
well-known  shock  tube  relations.  The  pressure  jump,  P51,  behind  the
reflected shock wave in a shock tube is given by,
]
][
S (cid:0) 2(γ1 (cid:0) 1)
S + 2

S (cid:0) (γ1 (cid:0) 1)
γ1 + 1

(3γ1 (cid:0) 1)M2

[
2γ1M2

(γ1 (cid:0) 1)M2

P51 =

(21)

where γ is the specific heat ratio, MS is the incident shock Mach Number.
Svete et al.’s method characterizes the dynamic performance of pressure
transducers with a relative expanded uncertainty of less than 0.025 [94,
95]. Their diaphragmless shock tube has the potential to be a primary
time-varying  pressure  calibration  standard  to  generate  pressure  steps
with  the  desired  magnitude.  Experiments  in  the  diaphragmless  shock
tube with a commercial fast-acting valve were performed for pressure
steps with magnitudes ranging from approximately 0.83  to 1.32 MPa.
Sembian et al.’s novel technique using converging shock waves pushed
the upper limit of the calibration to medium-high pressure range as there
is an increasing need for a traceable dynamic calibration standard across
wider  pressure  ranges  [96].  Using  the  converging  shock  waves  tech-
nique, pressure pulses with peak amplitudes in the range of 30–40 MPa,
with  < 3.4%  uncertainty  based  on  numerical  reference  profile,  were
realized.

Fig. 26. Instantaneous schlieren imaging showing (a) the influence of the paper
diaphragm in the flow field and (c) a clean flow with a steady detached shock
(flow  is  from  right  to  left  at  a  freestream  Mach  number  of  M∞ = 6).  The
respective x (cid:0)
t diagrams constructed by piling up the intensity variation along
the dotted yellow line at each time instants along the center for (a) and (c) is
shown in (b) and (d). The y-axis represents the dimensionless time, where tr  is a
reference time of 1 ms, and the x-axis represents the dimensionless spatial units,
where D is the diameter of the disc. The dotted yellow line particularly in (c)
and (d) mark the respective time instant in which the instantaneous images (a)
and (c) are taken.  (For interpretation of  the references to color in this figure
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).

Hariharan  et  al.  was  designed  for  a  variety  of  industrial  applications
[69].  The  most  notable  application  was  the  sandal  oil  extraction
enhancement  using  the  diaphragmless  shock  tube  [7].  The  rate  and
quantity  of  oil  extracted  from  the  sandalwood  specimen  exposed  to
shock waves were higher than conventional methods [175]. The amount
of  oil  extracted  in  different  sandalwood  samples  after  shock  wave
loading  showed  an  increase  of  4.56–58.51%  compared  to  the  oil
extracted  from  samples  not  exposed  to  shock  waves.  The  rate  of  oil
extraction  in  the  samples  exposed  to  shock  waves  was  substantially
enhanced during the initial 30 min of the extraction process compared to
nondestructive oil extraction techniques.

7.6. Miscellaneous applications

7.5. Novel industrial applications

Diaphragmless  shock  tubes  have  been  used  for  a  variety  of  novel
industrial  applications.  Miyachi  et  al.’s  diaphragmless  driver  was  an
attempt  to  address  the  environmental  destruction  of  the  marine
ecosystem  caused by micro-organisms  in ship ballast water [65].  The
basic idea was to kill marine bacteria in a large amount of ballast water
by treating it with strong pressure pulses and free radicals created from
the collapse of microbubbles. The work on ballast water treatment was
extended to the rapid-opening valve developed by Abe et al. [66]. The
pneumatic-cylinder-based  diaphragmless  shock  tube  proposed  by

Diaphragmless shock tubes have been used to study shock-induced
deformation  of  metals  like  aluminum,  copper,  and  brass  [176–178].
Precise control over the driver pressure and repeatable shock conditions
are  specific  advantages  of  using  diaphragmless  shock  tubes  in  these
studies. Fast-acting valves have been used for other combustion appli-
cations apart from shock tubes. As an example, a fast-acting pneumatic
valve  was  developed  for  injecting  hydrogen  into  the  combustion
chamber  of  a  scramjet  (supersonic  combustion  ramjet)  engine  model
[179]. This valve had an adjustable opening time with a minimum value
of  10  ms.  Although  a  commercial  solenoid  valve  could  achieve  these
opening times easily, customized fast-acting valve was designed to meet

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104225

S. Janardhanraj et al.

the space restrictions. This valve has been used for injection applications
in a number of studies in transient shock tunnels [162,180,181]. Shock
waves  have  been  extended  to  biological  and  biomedical  engineering
research  in  recent  years  [182].  Shock  tubes  have  been  used  as  blast
simulators  to  study  blast-induced  neurotrauma  in  laboratory  scales.
Precise control over the repeatability of pressure pulses is essential while
working  with  biological  samples.  Diaphragm  fragments  propagating
with the flow can contaminate and sometimes even be detrimental to
biological samples placed at the end of the shock tube. These drawbacks
are  overcome  by  using  diaphragmless  shock  tubes  to  produce
low-intensity  shock  waves.  The  table-top  diaphragmless  shock  tube
developed by Swietek et al. for traumatic brain injury (TBI) studies is an
economical and safe alternative to using conventional shock tubes [93].
Teshima’s vertical diaphragmless shock tube was used to study biome-
chanical and biological effects of high-pressure pulses on microorgan-
isms  and  DNA  [59].  The  facility  could  produce  shock  waves  with  an
amplitude of 10 MPa, and a pulse width of about 25 μs at high repetition.
Divya Prakash et al., for the first time, performed an in vivo study of
shock wave treatment of biofilms in a murine model using 50 mm dia-
phragmless shock tube [183]. In combination with antibiotic therapy,
the studies showed that shock waves could treat lung and skin infections
caused by bacteria.

8. Concluding remarks and future scope

Using  fast-acting  valves  in  shock  tubes  presents  many  advantages
over  the  conventional  mode  of  operation.  The  various  diaphragmless
driver designs developed over the last half-century have been compiled
and discussed in detail in this review. Critical design features like the
type  of  closure  element,  actuators,  control  parameters,  driver-driven
configurations,  and  valve  opening  time  are  explained.  The  following
conclusions can be drawn from this review:

• The opening time of the fast-acting valve is a vital parameter that
determines  the  shock  wave  parameters  obtained  at the  end  of the
shock tube. The opening time in fast-acting valves reported to date
cannot  match  the  time-scale  of  a  diaphragm  rupture.  At  higher
pressure  ratios  (P41),  the  deviation  of  the  shock  Mach  number  is
significant as compared to the diaphragm-type mode of operation.
• The shock formation distance is directly proportional to the opening
time of the fast-acting valve. Diaphragmless shock tubes have longer
shock formation distances than diaphragm-type shock tubes; there-
fore, longer driven sections are required.

• The  efficiency  of  a  diaphragmless  driver  is  comparable  to  a
diaphragm-type  mode  of  operation  at  lower  pressure  ratios
(P41 ≤ 50).

• Lighter closure elements are preferable in fast-acting valves. A cap
made of high-strength composites is a good choice for faster retrac-
tion and a wide operating range.

• Pneumatic or electro-pneumatic actuators have fast action over long
stroke  movement  of  closure  elements  compared  to  hydraulic  and
purely electrical actuators.

• Inline mounting of the driver and driven sections in diaphragmless
shock tubes is a desirable configuration because of its closeness to
replicating the  wave system  in a  conventional shock  tube  and the
ease of converting existing conventional shock tubes to diaphragm-
less shock tubes.

A mathematical model to describe the motion of the closure element
in the fast-acting valve has been developed and presented. The versa-
tility of diaphragmless shock tubes as a reliable high-temperature wave
reactor,  an  automated  aerodynamic  test  facility,  a  precise  pressure
calibration  standard,  a  tool  for  biological  research,  and  disruptive
technology  for  innovative  industrial  applications  has  been  illustrated
with several examples.

The design improvement of paramount importance in diaphragmless

shock tubes is to shorten the opening time of fast-acting valves without
inducing  undesirable  flow  features  in  the  shock  tube.  Advances  in
actuation  technology  promise  more  robust  and  compact  actuators  to
realize quicker opening times in the future. Nevertheless, diaphragmless
shock tubes in the present development stage provide limitless oppor-
tunities for applications in untapped interdisciplinary fields of science
and  technology.  Novel  applications  of  shock  tubes  are  being  demon-
strated  in  material  synthesis  and  modification,  food  preservation  and
quality enhancement, cell transformation, gene therapy, wound healing,
etc.  With  these  areas  of  shock  wave  applications  being  continuously
explored,  diaphragmless  shock  tubes  have  a  very  important  role  for
many years.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgments

The work of authors from King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology  (KAUST)  was  funded  by  the  baseline  research  funds  at
KAUST.

References

[1] Ben-Dor G, Igra O, Elperin T. Handbook of shock waves, three volume set.

Elsevier; 2000.

[2] Bradley JN. Shock waves in chemistry and physics. Methuen; 1962.
[3] Gaydon AG, Hurle IR. The shock tube in high-temperature chemical physics.

Reinhold Publishing Corporation; 1963.

[4] Takayama K. Shockwave/geophysical and medical applications. Annu Rev Fluid

Mech 2004;36(1):347–79. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
fluid.36.050802.121954.

[5] Takayama K. Summary of forty years continuous shock wave research at

interdisciplinary shock wave research center, Tohoku university. Shock waves.
Springer; 2005. p. 3–10.

[6] Takayama K, Ohtani K. Applications of shock wave research to medicine. WIT

Trans Model Simul 2005;41:653–61.

[7] Jagadeesh G. Industrial applications of shock waves. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part G

2008;222(5):575–83. https://doi.org/10.1243/09544100jaero306.

[8] Jagadeesh G. Application of shock waves in pencil manufacturing industry. Shock

waves. Springer; 2009. p. 847–50.

[9] Bolumar T, Enneking M, Toepfl S, Heinz V. New developments in shockwave
technology intended for meat tenderization: opportunities and challenges. A
review. Meat Sci 2013;95(4):931–9.

[10] Murr LE. Shock waves for industrial applications. Park Ridge, NJ (US): Noyes

Publications; 1988.

[11] Kinney GF, Graham KJ. Explosive shocks in air. Springer Science & Business

Media; 2013.

[12] Director MN, Dabora EK. An experimental investigation of variable energy blast

waves. Acta Astronaut 1977;4(3–4):391–407.

[13] Honma H, Glass I, Wong C, Holst-Jensen O, Xu D. Experimental and numerical

studies of weak blast waves in air. Shock Waves 1991;1(2):111–9.

[14] Bleakney W, Weimer D, Fletcher C. The shock tube: a facility for investigations in

fluid dynamics. Rev Sci Instrum 1949;20(11):807–15.

[15] Wagner A, Schülein E, Petervari R, Hannemann K, Ali SRC, Cerminara A, et al.
Combined free-stream disturbance measurements and receptivity studies in
hypersonic wind tunnels by means of a slender wedge probe and direct numerical
simulation. J Fluid Mech 2018;842:495–531. https://doi.org/10.1017/
jfm.2018.132.

[16] Capra BR, Boyce RR, Kuhn M, Hald H. Combustion enhancement in a scramjet
engine using oxygen enrichment and porous fuel injection. J Fluid Mech 2015;
767:173–98. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2015.43.

[17] Nagaraja SR, Prasad JK, Jagadeesh G. Theoretical–experimental study of shock
wave-assisted metal forming process using a diaphragmless shock tube. Proc Inst
Mech Eng, Part G 2011;226(12):1534–43. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0954410011424808.

[18] Jayaram V, Preetam S, Reddy KPJ. Experimental investigation of nano ceramic
material interaction with high enthalpy argon under shock dynamic loading. Appl
Mech Mater 2011;83:66–72. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/
amm.83.66.

[19] Condit R. The shock-wave valve. December meeting of the American physical

society. American Physical Society; 1954. p. 945.

[20] Kosing OE, Barbosa FJ, Skews BW. A new, friction controlled, piston actuated

diaphragmless shock tube driver. Shock Waves 1999;9(1):69–72. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s001930050140.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104226

S. Janardhanraj et al.

[21] Mejia-Alvarez R, Wilson B, Leftwich MC, Martinez AA, Prestridge KP. Design of a
fast diaphragmless shock tube driver. Shock Waves 2015;25(6):635–50. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00193-015-0579-y.

[22] McGivern WS, Awan IA, Manion JA. Diaphragmless single-pulse shock tube for
high-temperature chemical kinetics studies. Rev Sci Instrum 2019;90(6):064101.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5096174.

[23] Ikui T, Matsuo K, Yamamoto Y. Fast-acting valves for use in shock tubes : part 2,
formation of shock waves. Bull JSME 1979;22(167):693–9. https://doi.org/
10.1299/jsme1958.22.693.

[24] Becker R. Stosswelle und detonation. Z Phys 1922;8(1):321–62.
[25] Ikui T, Matsuo K, Yamamoto Y. Fast-acting valves for use in shock tubes: part 1,
construction and their characteristics. Bull JSME 1977;20(141):337–42.
[26] Janardhanraj S, Abhishek K, Jagadeesh G. Insights into the shockwave

attenuation in miniature shock tubes. J Fluid Mech 2021;910.

[27] Gaetani P, Guardone A, Persico G. Shock tube flows past partially opened

diaphragms. J Fluid Mech 2008;602:267–86.

[28] Nguyen TTN, Wilgeroth JM, Proud WG. Controlling blast wave generation in a

shock tube for biological applications. 18th APS-SCCM and 24th AIRAPT, Pts
1–19. 500; 2014. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/500/14/142025.
[29] Tulgestke A, Johnson S, Davidson D, Hanson R. High-speed imaging of

inhomogeneous ignition in a shock tube. Shock Waves 2018;28(5):1089–95.
[30] White DR. Influence of diaphragm opening time on shock-tube flows. J Fluid

Mech 1958;4(6):585–99.

[31] Rothkopf E, Low W. Diaphragm opening process in shock tubes. Phys Fluids 1974;

17(6):1169–73.

[32] de Souza Vianna J, de Souza Oliveira A, Damion J. Influence of the diaphragm on
the metrological characteristics of a shock tube. Metrologia 1999;36(6):599.

[33] Hickman RS, Farrar LC, Kyser JB. Behavior of burst diaphragms in shock tubes.

Phys Fluids 1975;18(10). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.861010.

[34] Brouillette M. Shock waves at microscales. Shock Waves 2003;13(1):3–12.
[35] Israel da Silveira R, Sato K, Miyoshi Y, Ando T, Goto K, Sakamoto M, Kawasaki S,

T. E. Group. A newly developed large diameter diaphragmless shock tube for
studies on CO2-N2  gas-dynamic laser. Plasma Fusion Res 2007;2:033. https://doi.
org/10.1585/pfr.2.033.

[36] Bradley J, Butlin R, Quinn J. An electrical method for breaking shock tube

diaphragms. J Sci Instrum 1965;42(12):901.

[37] Cole AL, Hunting AC, Upham DL, Laporte O. Electrical breaking of shock-tube

diaphragms: progress report. Tech. Rep. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor;
1958.

[38] Roshko A, Baganoff D. A novel device for bursting shock-tube diaphragms. Phys

Fluids 1961;4(11). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1706238.

[56] Hurst SM, Bauer SH. A piston-actuated shock-tube, with laser-Schlieren

diagnostics. Rev Sci Instrum 1993;64(5):1342–6. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.1144090.

[57] Matsui H, Koshi M, Oya M, Tsuchiya K. Improvement of chemical kinetic data at
high temperatures by piston actuated shock tube, excimer laser photolysis, and
atomic resonance absorption spectrometry. Shock Waves 1994;3(4):287–92.
https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01415826.

[58] Takano Y, Akamatsu T. A diaphragmless shock tube. J Phys E 1984;17(8):644.
[59] Teshima K. High-frequency generation of high-pressure pulses using a

diaphragmless shock tube. Shock waves@ Marseille I. Springer; 1995. p. 221–6.

[60] Israel da Silveira R, Sato KN, Kugimiya S, Aoki T, Miyoshi Y, Ando T, et al.

Development of a large diameter diaphragmless shock tube for gas-dynamic laser
studies. Mater Sci Forum 2007;566:9–14. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.
scientific.net/MSF.566.9.

[61] Onodera H. Double piston shock-wave valve. AIAA J 1992;30(10):2569–71.

https://doi.org/10.2514/3.11268.

[62] Zhang M-Y, Chen X, Liu P, Yang K-D, Zhu H-D. Design of diaphragmless shock
tube and research on its normal temperature characteristics. J Phys 2020;1601
(6):062018. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1601/6/062018.

[63] Watanabe M, Onodera O, Takayama K. Shock wave focusing in a vertical annular

shock tube. Shock waves@ Marseille IV. Springer; 1995. p. 99–104.

[64] Ojima H, Kitagawa K, Kainuma M, Ogawa T, Takahashi K, Sun M, Takayama K.
Characteristics of a 60 mm × 150 mm vertical diaphragmless shock tube. 23rd
international symposium on shock waves, Fort Worth, USA. 2001.

[65] Miyachi A, Sugahara K, Abe A. High speed opening operation of diaphragmless
shock wave generator. 28th international symposium on shock waves. Springer;
2012. p. 711–7.

[66] Abe A, Sugahara K, Yamada Y. Rapid opening valve assisted by magnetic force for
a diaphragmless shock tube. 29th international symposium on shock waves. Book
section chapter 52, vol. 1. Springer, Cham; 2015. p. 337–42. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-16835-7_52.

[67] Abe T, Ogura E, Sato S, Funabiki K. Rupture-disk-less shock-tube with

compression tube driven by free piston. Shock Waves 1997;7(4):205–9. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s001930050076.

[68] Bredin M, Skews B. Drag measurement in unsteady compressible flow—Part 1: an
unsteady flow facility and stress wave drag balance. RD J South Afr Inst Mech Eng
2007;23(1):1–10.

[69] Hariharan MS, Janardhanraj S, Saravanan S, Jagadeesh G. Diaphragmless shock
wave generators for industrial applications of shock waves. Shock Waves 2010;21
(3):301–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00193-010-0296-5.

[70] Taguchi M, Kashitani M, Nishiyama M. Fundamental study on operational

[39] Skews BW, Duggan TO. Gas-perated diaphragm clamp for a shock tube. Rev Sci

Instrum 1968;39(7):1063–4. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1683571.

conditions of diaphragmless shock tube driven by pneumatic piston. Int J Mech
Eng Robot Res 2018;7(6).

[40] Stotz I, Lamanna G, Hettrich H, Weigand B, Steelant J. Design of a double

[71] Nishiyama M, Taguchi M, Kashitani M. Fundamental study on operational

diaphragm shock tube for fluid disintegration studies. Rev Sci Instrum 2008;79
(12):125106.

[41] Muirhead JC, Jones WA. Shock wave valves. Rev Sci Instrum 1964;35(1):119–20.

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1718684.

[42] Oguchi H, Funabiki K, Sato S. An experiment on interaction of shock wave with
multiple-orifice plate by means of snap-action shock tube. Mod Dev Shock Tube
Res 1975:386–91. A76-35505 17-09.

[43] Dist ́efano E, Fraidenraich N. An electromagnetic diaphragm for use in shock

tubes. Rev Sci Instrum 1970;41(6):886–7. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1684678.
[44] Oguchi H, Funabiki K, Sato S. A new type of shock valve and its characteristic

performancevol. 20. University of Tokyo, ISAS RN; 1976.

[45] Ikui T, Matsuo K, Yamamoto Y. Study of a quick opening valve for shock tube
research, part 1 structure and characteristics. Trans JSME B 1976;42:2127–32.

[46] Igra O, Seiler F. Experimental methods of shock wave researchvol. 478. Springer;

2016.

[47] Garen W, Synofzik R, Frohn A. Shock tube for generating weak shock waves.

AIAA J 1974;12(8):1132–4. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.49425.

[48] Matsuo K, Kawagoe S, Ogawara T, Tsubaki H. Modern developments in shock
tube research. Proceedings of 10th int. shock tube symp. 1975. p. 265.

[49] Takayama K. The shock wave and beyond, a tribute to professor glass. Professor II

glass: a tribute and memorial. Springer; 2013. p. 7–109.

[50] Timofeev E, Takayama K, Voinovich P, Timofeev E, Takayama K, Voinovich P.
Numerical and experimental observation of three-dimensional unsteady shock
wave structures. 35th aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit. 1997. p. 70.
[51] Maeno K. Shock wave propagation in low temperature fluids and phase change

phenomena. In: Meier GEA, Thompson PA, editors. Adiabatic waves in liquid-
vapor systems. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 1990. p. 69–78.
ISBN 978-3-642-83587-2

[52] Oguchi H, Funabiki K, Sato T, Maeno K. An experimental study on CO2

gasdynamic laser by means of non-diaphragm shock tubes. Rep Inst Space
Astronaut Sci, Univ Tokyo 1978;14:809–29.

[53] Maeno K, Funabiki K, Oguchi H. Experimental and analytical study of CO2/N2

mixing gasdynamic laser. Tokyo Univ Inst Space Aeronaut Sci Rep 1981;46(593):
175–97.

[54] Maeno K, Oguchi H. Study on N2/CO2  mixing gasdynamic laser by means of

synchronized operation of two shock tubes. J Phys Colloq 1980;41(C9):C9-209–9-
215. https://doi.org/10.1051/jphyscol:1980927.

[55] Yamauchi M, Matsui H, Koshi M, Tanaka K, Tamaki S, Tanaka H. Shock tube

studies on the radical emission spectra by use of an imaging spectrometer.
J Spectrosc Soc Jpn 1987;36(6):388–94. https://doi.org/10.5111/
bunkou.36.388.

parameters of diaphragmless shock tube. MATEC web of conferences. vol. 151.
EDP Sciences; 2018. p. 02004.

[72] Itahashi S, Meguro T, Onodera O, Ojirna H, Ogawa T, Takayama K.

Characteristics of a 100 mm × 180 mm diaphragmless shock tube using a piston
quick opening valve. Proc of syrnp on shock waves, Tokyo, Japan. 1996. p. 211.
[73] Yang J, Onodera O, Takayama K. Design and performance of quick opening shock
tube using rubber membrane for weak shock wave generation. JSME B 1994;60
(570):473–8.

[74] Tranter RS, Giri BR. A diaphragmless shock tube for high temperature kinetic
studies. Rev Sci Instrum 2008;79(9):094103. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.2976671.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19044434

[75] Udagawa S, Garen W, Meyerer B, Maeno K. Interferometric detection of dispersed

shock waves in small scale diaphragm-less shock tube of 1 mm diameter. 16th
Australasian fluid mechanics conference (AFMC). 2007.

[76] Garen W, Meyerer B, Udagawa S, Maeno K. Shock waves in mini-tubes: influence
of the scaling parameter S. Shock waves. Proceedings, vol. 2; 2009. p. 1473-1478.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-85181-3_110.

[77] Udagawa S, Garen W, Meyerer B, Maeno K. Motion analysis of a diaphragmless
driver section for a narrow channel shock tube. Shock Waves 2008;18(5):345–51.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00193-008-0171-9.

[78] Udagawa S, Maeno K, Golubeva I, Garen W. Interferometric signal measurement

of shock waves and contact surfaces in small scale shock tube. Shock waves.
Proceedings, vol. 2; 2009. p. 1419–24. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-
85181-3_101.

[79] Hosseini HR, Onodera O, Takayama K. Stability of converging cylindrical shock

waves in a vertical annular co-axial diaphragmless shock tube. Trans Jpn Soc
Aeronaut Space Sci 1999;42(135):19–26.

[80] Hosseini SHR, Onodera O, Takayama K. Characteristics of an annular vertical

diaphragmless shock tube. Shock Waves 2000;10(3):151–8. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s001930050001.

[81] Kim YW. A new diaphragmless shock tube facility for interface instability and
mach reflection studies. Shock waves@ Marseille I. Springer; 1995. p. 227–32.
[82] Randazzo JB, Tranter RS. Note: an improved driver section for a diaphragmless
shock tube. Rev Sci Instrum 2015;86(1):016117. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.4906758.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25638144

[83] Shiozaki S, Kinefuchi I, Sakiyama Y, Takagi S, Matsumoto Y. Development of high
energy molecular beam source using small shock tube. Rarefied Gas Dyn 2005;
762:875–9. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1941645.

[84] Heufer K, Olivier H, Drumm S, Murrenhoff H. A new fast acting valve for

diaphragmless shock tubes. 28th international symposium on shock waves.
Springer; 2012. p. 535–40.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104227

S. Janardhanraj et al.

[85] Downey MS, Cloete TJ, Yates ADB. A rapid opening sleeve valve for a

diaphragmless shock tube. Shock Waves 2011;21(4):315–9. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00193-011-0310-6.

[86] Udagawa S, Ota M, Maeno K. Propagation characteristics of the shock wave in
small diameter tubes at atmospheric initial driven pressure. 28th international
symposium on shock waves. Springer; 2012. p. 529–34.

[87] Udagawa S, Hirose Y, Garen W, Inage T, Ota M, Maeno K. Improvement of a

diaphragmless driver section for a small diameter shock tube. 29th international
symposium on shock waves. Book section chapter 53, vol. 1. Springer, Cham;
2015. p. 343–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-16835-7_53.ISBN 978-3-
319-16834-0 978-3-319-16835-7

[88] Fuller ME, Skowron M, Tranter RS, Goldsmith CF. A modular, multi-diagnostic,

automated shock tube for gas-phase chemistry. Rev Sci Instrum 2019;90(6):
064104. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5095077.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/31255004

[89] Subburaj J., Kashif T.A., Farooq A.. Methane and n-hexane ignition in a newly
developed diaphragmless shock tube2022; https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.02306.
10.48550/arXiv.2208.02306.

[113] Shaik R, Kastengren A, Tranter R, Lynch P. Temporally and spatially resolved X-
ray densitometry in a shock tube. Combust Flame 2021;224:136–49. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.09.035.A dedication to Professor Ronald K.
Hanson; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010218
020304193

[114] Sikes T, Banyon C, Schwind RA, Lynch PT, Comandini A, Sivaramakrishnan R,

Tranter RS. Initiation reactions in the high temperature decomposition of styrene.
Phys Chem Chem Phys 2021;23:18432–48. https://doi.org/10.1039/
D1CP02437J.

[115] Banyon C, Sikes T, Tranter RS. Reactions of propyl radicals: a shock tube-

VUVphotoionization mass spectrometry study. Combust Flame 2021;224:14–23.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.10.024.A dedication to Professor
Ronald K. Hanson; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010218
020304442

[116] Randazzo JB, Sivaramakrishnan R, Jasper AW, Sikes T, Lynch PT, Tranter RS. An
experimental and theoretical study of the high temperature reactions of the four
butyl radical isomers. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2020;22:18304–19. https://doi.org/
10.1039/D0CP02404J.

[90] Tranter RS, Lynch PT. A miniature high repetition rate shock tube. Rev Sci

[117] Lynch PT, Troy TP, Ahmed M, Tranter RS. Probing combustion chemistry in a

Instrum 2013;84(9):094102. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4820917.https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24089840

miniature shock tube with synchrotron VUV photo ionization mass spectrometry.
Anal Chem 2015;87(4):2345–52. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac5041633.

[91] Lynch PT. Note: an improved solenoid driver valve for miniature shock tubes. Rev
Sci Instrum 2016;87(5):056110. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4953115.https
://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27250485

[92] Tranter RS, Sikes T. Solenoid actuated driver valve for high repetition rate shock
tubes. Rev Sci Instrum 2020;91(5):056101. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0006010.

[93] Swietek B, Skotak M, Chandra N, Pfister BJ. Characterization of a controlled

shock wave delivered by a pneumatic table-top gas driven shock tube. Rev Sci
Instrum 2019;90(7):075116.

[94] Svete A, Kutin J. Characterization of a newly developed diaphragmless shock tube
for the primary dynamic calibration of pressure meters. Metrologia 2020;57(5).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1681-7575/ab8f79.

[95] Svete A, Kutin J. Diaphragmless shock tube for primary dynamic calibration of
pressure meters. ACTA IMEKO 2020;9(5):310. https://doi.org/10.21014/acta_
imeko.v9i5.990.

[118] Tao M, Laich A, Lynch P, Zhao P. On the interpretation and correlation of high-
temperature ignition delays in reactors with varying thermodynamic conditions.
Int J Chem Kinet 2018;50(6):410–24. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.21170.
[119] Tao M, Lynch PT, Zhao P. Kinetic modeling of ignition in miniature shock tube.

Proc Combust Inst 2019;37(1):593–601. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2018.05.048.

[120] Nagaraju S, Tranter RS, Cano Ardila FE, Abid S, Lynch PT, Garcia GA, et al.

Reprint of: pyrolysis of ethanol studied in a new high-repetition-rate shock tube
coupled to synchrotron-based double imaging photoelectron/photoion
coincidence spectroscopy. Combust Flame 2021;224:150–65. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.12.035.

[121] Oguchi H, Funabiki K, Sato S, Maeno K. An experimental study on CO2

gasdynamic laser by means of non-diaphragm shock tubes. Rep Inst Space
Astronaut Sci, Univ Tokyo 1978;14(28):809–29.

[96] Sembian S, Liverts M. On using converging shock waves for pressure

[122] Maeno K. Non-diaphragm shock tube and shock waves in low temperature gases

amplification in shock tubes. Metrologia 2020;57(3). https://doi.org/10.1088/
1681-7575/ab7f99.

[97] Amer E, Wozniak M, J ̈onsson G, Arrh ́en F. Evaluation of shock tube retrofitted
with fast-opening valve for dynamic pressure calibration. Sensors 2021;21(13):
4470.

[98] Samimi MA, Zamani J, Sardarzadeh F. Shock wave pressure and velocity

measuring using a novel optic sensor in a newly designed diaphragm-less shock
tube. Exp Tech 2020;45(1):55–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40799-020-00409-
1.

[99] Skousen P. Valve handbook. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2011.ISBN

9780071743891

[100] Sotoodeh K. Actuator selection and sizing for valves. SN Appl Sci 2019;1(10):1–8.
[101] Pakdaman S, Garcia M, Teh E, Lincoln D, Trivedi M, Alves M, Johansen C.
Diaphragm opening effects on shock wave formation and acceleration in a
rectangular cross section channel. Shock Waves 2016;26(6):799–813.

[102] Ikui T, Matsuo K. Investigations of the aerodynamic characteristics of the shock
tubes:(part 1, the effects of tube diameter on the tube performance). Bull JSME
1969;12(52):774–82.

[103] Simpson C, Chandler T, Bridgman K. Effect on shock trajectory of the opening
time of diaphragms in a shock tube. Phys Fluids 1967;10(9):1894–6.

(first report). Mem Muroran Inst Technol Sci Eng 1985;35:81–93.http://hdl.
handle.net/10258/796

[123] Zhang G, Lee I, Hashimoto T, Setoguchi T, Kim H. Experimental study on gas-
particle two-phase flows in a micro shock tube. J Vis 2017;20(1):17–29.
[124] Zhang G, Lee II, Hashimoto T, Setoguchi T, Kim HD. Experimental studies on

shock wave and particle dynamics in a needle-free drug delivery device. J Drug
Deliv Sci Technol 2017;41:390–400.

[125] Lynch PT, Wang G. Chemical thermometry in miniature HRRST using 1,1,1-tri-
fluoroethane dissociation. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36(1):307–14. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.05.057.

[126] Estorf M, Wolf T, Radespiel R. Experimental and numerical investigations on the
operation of the hypersonic Ludwieg tube Braunschweig. 5th European
symposium on aerothermodynamics for space vehicles. 2004.

[127] Wolf T, Estorf M, Radespiel R. Simulation of the time-dependent flow field in the

hypersonic Ludwieg tube Braunschweig. 4th atmospheric reentry vehicles &
systems. 2005.

[128] Wolf T, Estorf M, Radespiel R. Investigation of the starting process in a

Ludwiegtube. Theor Comput Fluid Dyn 2007;21(2):81–98. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00162-006-0040-z.

[129] Stephan S, Radespiel R, Müller-Eigner R. Propulsive jet simulation in a hypersonic

[104] Rothkopf E, Low W. Shock formation distance in a pressure driven shock tube.

Ludwiegtunnel. Deutscher luft- und raumfahrtkongress, Berlin. 2012.

Phys Fluids 1976;19(12):1885–8.

[105] Campbell MF, Owen KG, Davidson DF, Hanson RK. Dependence of calculated

postshock thermodynamic variables on vibrational equilibrium and input
uncertainty. J Thermophys Heat Transf 2017;31(3):586–608. https://doi.org/
10.2514/1.T4952.

[106] Campbell MF, Tulgestke AM, Davidson DF, Hanson RK. A second-generation

constrained reaction volume shock tube. Rev Sci Instrum 2014;85(5):055108.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4875056.

[107] Campbell MF, Parise T, Tulgestke AM, Spearrin RM, Davidson DF, Hanson RK.
Strategies for obtaining long constant-pressure test times in shock tubes. Shock
Waves 2015;25(6):651–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00193-015-0596-x.
[108] Israel da Silveira R, Ando T, Misumi K, Miyazaki T, Nishiyori S, Sato KN, et al.
A model of piston sliding process for a double piston-actuated shock tube. J Fluids
Eng 2008;130(4). https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2903521.

[109] Portaro R, Nakayama H, Ng HD. Analysis of a quick-acting diaphragmless shock
tube driver. 29th international symposium on shock waves. Book section chapter
66, vol. 1. Springer Cham; 2015. p. 421–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
16835-7_66.ISBN 978-3-319-16834-0 978-3-319-16835-7

[110] Koshi M, Yoshimura M, Fukuda K, Matsui H, Saito K, Watanabe M, Imamura A,
Chen C. Reactions of N(4S) atoms with NO and H2. J Chem Phys 1990;93(12):
8703–8.

[111] Hsiao C-C, Lee Y-P, Wang NS, Wang J-H, Lin M-C. Experimental and theoretical
studies of the rate coefficients of the reaction O(3P)+ HCl at high temperatures.
J Phys Chem A 2002;106(43):10231–7.

[112] Giri BR, Kiefer JH, Xu H, Klippenstein SJ, Tranter RS. An experimental and

theoretical high temperature kinetic study of the thermal unimolecular
dissociation of fluoroethane. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2008;10(41):6266–73.
https://doi.org/10.1039/b808168a.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed
/18936851

[130] Stephan S, Radespiel R, Müller-Eigner R. Jet simulation facility using the Ludwieg
tube principle. Proceedings of the 5th European conference for aerospace sciences
(EUCASS), Munich, Germany. 2013.

[131] Renken H, Oelze HW, Rath HJ. Application of a digital high-speed camera and
image processing system for investigations of short term hypersonic fluids. In:
George J, Williams M, editors. Digital solid state cameras: designs and
applications. SPIE; 1998. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.304578.
[132] Rickmers P, Dittmer Jan-Christian, Eigenbrod Christian. Comparison of

Experimental and Numerical Results of the Autoignition of n-Heptane Sprays
under Machine Conditions. International Journal of Microgravity Science and
Application 2008;25(3):367–70. https://doi.org/10.15011/jasma.25.3.367.https
://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/jasma/25/3/25_367/_article/-char/ja/

[133] Rosemann H, Stanewsky E, Hefer G. The cryogenic Ludwieg-tube of DLR and its
new adaptive wall test section. Fluid dynamics conference. American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics; 1995. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.1995-2198.

[134] Costantini M, Fey U, Henne U, Klein C. Nonadiabatic surface effects on transition
measurements using temperature-sensitive paints. AIAA J 2015;53(5):1172–87.
https://doi.org/10.2514/1.j053155.

[135] Costantini M, Hein S, Henne U, Klein C, Koch S, Schojda L, Ondrus V, Schr ̈oder W.
Pressure gradient and nonadiabatic surface effects on boundary layer transition.
AIAA J 2016;54(11):3465–80. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.j054583.
[136] Balcazar T, Braun E, Lu F, Tran D, Wilson D. Refurbishment and testing

techniques in a transonic Ludwieg tunnel. 49th AIAA aerospace sciences meeting
including the new horizons forum and aerospace exposition. American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics; 2011. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2011-1067.

[137] Kimmel RL, Borg MP, Jewell JS, Lam K-Y, Bowersox RD, Srinivasan R, et al. AFRL
Ludwieg tube initial performance. 55th AIAA aerospace sciences meeting.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics; 2017. https://doi.org/
10.2514/6.2017-0102.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104228

S. Janardhanraj et al.

[138] Chung JD, Houim RW, Laurence SJ. Theoretical and numerical study of a
preheated Ludwieg tube with adiabatic compression. AIAA J 2018;56(10):
3951–62. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.j056236.

[165] Ben-Yakar A, Hanson RK. Characterization of expansion tube flows for

hypervelocity combustion studies. J Propul Power 2002;18(4):943–52. https://
doi.org/10.2514/2.6021.

[139] Cummings R, McLaughlin T. Hypersonic Ludwieg tube design and future usage at

[166] Ridings A.. Investigation of pre-combustion shock trains in a sramjet using a

the US air force academy. 50th AIAA aerospace sciences meeting including the
new horizons forum and aerospace exposition. American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics; 2012. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2012-734.

[140] Decker R, Semper M, Anthony J, Cummings RM. Starting characteristics of the US
air force academy mach 6 Ludwieg tube. 45th AIAA fluid dynamics conference.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics; 2015. https://doi.org/
10.2514/6.2015-3338.

[141] Currao GMD, Choudhury R, Gai SL, Neely AJ, Buttsworth DR. Hypersonic

transitional shock-wave–boundary-layer interaction on a flat plate. AIAA J 2020;
58(2):814–29. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.j058718.

[142] Currao GMD, McQuellin LP, Neely AJ, Gai SL, O’Byrne S, Zander F,

Buttsworth DR, McNamara JJ, Jahn I. Hypersonic oscillating shock-wave/
boundary-layer interaction on a flat plate. AIAA J 2021;59(3):940–59. https://
doi.org/10.2514/1.j059590.

[143] Birch B, Buttsworth D, Choudhury R, Stern N. Characterization of a Ludwieg tube
with free piston compression heating in mach 6 configuration. 22nd AIAA
international space planes and hypersonics systems and technologies conference.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics; 2018. https://doi.org/
10.2514/6.2018-5266.

shock tunnel at mach 8 flight conditions. Ph.D. thesis; 10.14264/uql.2015.345.

[167] Nagamatsu HT, Martin ED. Combustion investigation in the hypersonic shock

tunnel driver section. J Appl Phys 1959;30(7):1018–21. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.1776974.

[168] Stalker R, Morgan R, Paull A. A shock tunnel investigation of scramjet

performance with partially premixed combustion. Space plane and hypersonic
systems and technology conference. American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics; 1996. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.1996-4534.

[169] Osgerby IT, Smithson HK, Wagner DA. Supersonic combustion tests with a

double- oblique-shock SCRAMjet in a shock tunnel. AIAA J 1970;8(9):1703–5.
https://doi.org/10.2514/3.5970.

[170] Hoffman EN, Combs CS. Design considerations and analysis of the

UTSAhypersonic Ludwieg tube facility. AIAA region IV student conference 2019,
Austin Texas, USA. 2019.https://engineering.utsa.edu/ccombs/wp-content/up
loads/sites/80/2019/04/EH-2019-AIAA-Region-IV-Student-Conference-Pape
r-CC-Final-Rev.pdf

[171] Wind tunnels of nasa: Chapter 5 - the era of high-speed flight, coordination and
cooperation: The national unitary plan. https://history.nasa.gov/SP-440/ch5-12.
htm; Accessed: 2021-10-15.

[144] Buttsworth D, Smart M. Development of a Ludwieg tube with free piston

[172] Hoffman EN, Bashor I, Combs CS. Construction of a mach 7 Ludwieg tube at

compression heating for scramjet inlet starting experiments. 48th AIAA aerospace
sciences meeting including the new horizons forum and aerospace exposition.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics; 2010. https://doi.org/
10.2514/6.2010-588.

[145] Buttsworth D. Ludwieg tunnel facility with free piston compression heating for

supersonic and hypersonic testing. 2010.

[146] Mathijssen T, Gallo M, Casati E, Nannan NR, Zamfirescu C, Guardone A, et al. The
flexible asymmetric shock tube (FAST): a Ludwieg tube facility for wave
propagation measurements in high-temperature vapours of organic fluids. Exp
Fluids 2015;56(10). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00348-015-2060-1.

[147] Schrijer FFJ, Bannink WJ. Description and flow assessment of the delft hypersonic
Ludwieg tube. J Spacecr Rockets 2010;47(1):125–33. https://doi.org/10.2514/
1.40773.

[148] Juhany K, Aldakhil H. AT0 Ludwieg tube wind tunnel at KAU. 44th AIAA

aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit. American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics; 2006. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2006-1316.

[149] Juhany KA, Darji A. Force measurement in a Ludwieg tube tunnel. J Spacecr

Rockets 2007;44(1):88–93. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.21014.

[150] Matsuo K, Kawagoe S, Ogawara T. Starting process of a supersonic Ludwieg tube

with a downstream valve. Bull JSME 1978;21(161):1610–7. https://doi.org/
10.1299/jsme1958.21.1610.

[151] Rao SMV, NH N, Nagashetty K, Saravanan S. Study of the sonic jet from a novel

mixing enhancement nozzle in supersonic cross-flow. Proceedings of the 32nd
international symposium on shock waves (ISSW32 2019). Research Publishing
Services; 2019. https://doi.org/10.3850/978-981-11-2730-40403-cd.

[152] Sugarno MI, Sriram R, Karthick SK, Jagadeesh G. Unsteady pulsating flowfield

over spiked axisymmetric forebody at hypersonic flows. Phys Fluids 2022;34(1):
016104. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0075583.

[153] Experiments in a hypersonic miniature Ludwieg tunnel at different Reynolds

numbers on a flat-face spiked-body at a freestream mach number of 6. In:
Karthick SK, Nanda SR, Cohen J, editors. The 61st Israel annual conference on
aerospace sciences (IACAS); 2021.

[154] Karthick S.K., Nanda S.R., Cohen J.. Unsteadiness in hypersonic leading-edge

separation2022;.

[155] Chung JD. Quasi-one-dimensional modeling of an adiabatic-compression

preheated Ludwieg tube. University of Maryland, College Park; 2015. Master’s
thesis.

[156] Jachimowski CJ. An analysis of combustion studies in shock expansion tunnels

and reflected shock tunnels. Tech. Rep. NASA: NASA Technical Paper; 1992.

[157] Copper JA. Effects of interface combustion and mixing on shock-tunnel

conditions. AIAA J 1964;2(9):1669–71. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.2649.
[158] Aso S, Hakim AN, Miyamoto S, Inoue K, Tani Y. Fundamental study of supersonic

combustion in pure air flow with use of shock tunnel. Acta Astronaut 2005;57
(2–8):384–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2005.03.055.

[159] Paull A, Stalker RJ, Mee DJ. Experiments on supersonic combustion ramjet

propulsion in a shock tunnel. J Fluid Mech 1995;296:159–83. https://doi.org/
10.1017/s0022112095002096.

[160] Stalker R, Paull A, Mee D, Morgan R, Jacobs P. Scramjets and shock tunnels—the

queensland experience. Prog Aerosp Sci 2005;41(6):471–513. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.paerosci.2005.08.002.

[161] Srinivasan K, Maurya PK, Abhishek K, Desikan SLN, Murugan B. Supersonic

combustion of a scramjet engine using hydrogen fuel in shock tunnel. AIAA J
2018;56(9):3600–9. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.j056761.

[162] Wendt MN, Stalker RJ. Transverse and parallel injection of hydrogen with

supersonic combustion in a shock tunnel. Shock Waves 1996;6(1):53–9. https://
doi.org/10.1007/bf02511404.

[163] Boyce RR, Paull A, Stalker RJ, Wendt M, Chinzei N, Miyajima H. Comparison of
supersonic combustion between impulse and vitiation-heated facilities. J Propul
Power 2000;16(4):709–17. https://doi.org/10.2514/2.5631.

[164] Hongru Y. Oxyhydrogen combustion and detonation driven shock tube. Acta
Mech Sin 1999;15(2):97–107. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf02485874.

UTSA. American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics; 2020. https://doi.org/
10.2514/6.2020-2998.

[173] Downes S, Knott A, Robinson I. Towards a shock tube method for the dynamic

calibration of pressure sensors. Philos Trans A, Math Phys Eng Sci 2014;372
(2023):20130299. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2013.0299.

[174] Li Q, Wang Z, Wang Z, Yan H. Novel method for estimating the dynamic

characteristics of pressure sensor in shock tube calibration test. Rev Sci Instrum
2015;86(6):065002. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4921853.

[175] Arunkumar A, Srinivasa Y, Ravikumar G, Shankaranarayana K, Rao K,

Jagadeesh G. A new shock wave assisted sandalwood oil extraction technique.
Shock waves. Springer; 2005. p. 1235–9.

[176] Nagaraja SR, Prasad JK, Jagadeesh G. Theoretical-experimental study of shock

wave-assisted metal forming process using a diaphragmless shock tube. Proc Inst
Mech Eng, Part G 2012;226(12):1534–43. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0954410011424808.

[177] Obed Samuelraj I, Jagadeesh G. Shock tubes: a tool to create explosions without

using explosives. In: Gopalakrishnan S, Rajapakse Y, editors. Blast mitigation
strategies in marine composite and sandwich structures. Singapore: Springer
Singapore; 2018. p. 337–56. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-7170-6_18.
ISBN 978-981-10-7170-6

[178] Kubsad SS, Siddeswarappa B, Sridhar B. Effect of shock waves on wear behavior

of few metallic materials. Int J Eng Sci Technol 2012;4:2425–31.

[179] Morgan RG, Stalker RJ. Fast acting hydrogen valve. J Phys E 1983;16(3):205–7.

https://doi.org/10.1088/0022-3735/16/3/009.

[180] O’yrne S, Doolan M, Olsen SR, Houwing AFP. Analysis of transient thermal
choking processes in a model scramjet engine. J Propul Power 2000;16(5):
808–14. https://doi.org/10.2514/2.5645.

[181] Gardner AD, Paull A, McIntyre TJ. Upstream porthole injection in a 2-D scramjet

model. Shock Waves 2002;11(5):369–75. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s001930200120.

[182] Loske A.M.. Medical and biomedical applications of shock waves2017; 10.1007/

978-3-319-47570-7.

[183] Gnanadhas DP, Elango M, Janardhanraj S, Srinandan C, Datey A, Strugnell RA,
et al. Successful treatment of biofilm infections using shock waves combined with
antibiotic therapy. Sci Rep 2015;5(1):1–12.

Dr.  Janardhanraj  S. is presently a  Research Scientist  in the
Clean Combustion Research Center at King Abdullah Univer-
sity  of Science  and  Technology. He  did his  Bachelors  in Me-
chanical Engineering from the National Institute of Technology
Karnataka,  India  (2004–2008).  His  research  work  on  shock-
wave phenomena and their applications began during a sum-
mer  internship  at  the  Indian  Institute  of  Science  (IISc),
Bangalore in 2006. He worked as a Project Assistant for a year
after completing his undergraduate degree at the Laboratory
for Hypersonic and Shockwave Research at IISc. Subsequently,
he completed his dual degree (M.Sc. - Engineering and Ph.D.)
in  Aerospace  Engineering  from  IISc  (2009–2016).  After
completion of his doctorate, he worked as a Project Manager
and later as a Head of Technology in an IISc-incubated startup company and handled large-
scale research projects on shockwave-based applications like needleless vaccine delivery,
bacterial transformation, material modification/synthesis, and shockwave assisted frack-
ing. His main research interests include supersonic flows in miniature scales, shockwave
formation and attenuation, diaphragmless shock tubes, fluid-structure interactions, novel
test rig development, and shockwave applications.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104229

S. Janardhanraj et al.

Dr.  S.K.  Karthick  is  presently  continuing  as  a  post-doctoral
fellow  at  Technion  in  the  faculty  of  Aerospace  Engineering.
He did his Bachelors in Aeronautical Engineering from Raja-
lakshmi  Engineering  College  (2006–2010).  He  finished  his
Master’s in Space Engineering and Rocketry from Birla Insti-
tute  of  Technology,  Mesra  (2010–2012).  He  obtained  his
Doctorate in Aerospace Engineering from the Indian Institute
of Science, Bengaluru (2012–2017). He worked as a Research
Associate in the Laboratory for Hypersonics and Shock-wave
Research for the next nine months. Later, he joined as a post-
doctoral fellow in Technion (2018-Present). He is a scientific
researcher in the field of fluid dynamics. He is researching a
wide  range  of  flow  problems,  including  the  flow  physics
involved in the hypersonic/supersonic leading-edge separation, mixing process inside an
annular  subsonic  combustor,  hypersonic  inlet  buzz,  supersonic  jets/ejectors,  confined
supersonic flows, transonic-cavity flow-noise control, and shock-laden flow control.

Prof. A. Farooq received his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering
from  Stanford  University  in  2010,  and  then  joined  King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST). He is
the principal investigator of the Chemical Kinetics and Laser
Sensors Laboratory in the Clean Combustion Research Center
(CCRC)  at  KAUST.  His  research  interests  are  in  the  areas  of
energy, chemical kinetics, spectroscopy, and laser-based sen-
sors. He has authored over 150 refereed journal articles and has
given invited talks at a number of international conferences. At
KAUST,  he  won the Distinguished  Teaching  Award, given  to
the  best  instructor  over  a  period  of  two  years.  In  2019,  Dr.
Farooq was awarded the prestigious Hiroshi Tsuji Early Career
Research Award by Elsevier and the Combustion Institute. In

2020, he received Research Excellence award by the Combustion Institute.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10104230
