Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Advanced modeling approaches for CFD simulations of coal combustion
and gasification

Christian Hasse a,*, Paulo Debiagi a, Xu Wen a, Klaus Hildebrandt b, Michele Vascellari b,
Tiziano Faravelli c
a Simulation of Reactive Thermo-Fluid Systems, TU Darmstadt, Otto-Berndt-Str. 2, 64287, Darmstadt, Germany
b previously Numerical Thermo-Fluid Dynamics, TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Reiche Zeche, Fuchsmühlenweg 9, 09599, Freiberg, Germany
c CMIC Department, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo Da Vinci 32, 20133, Milano, Italy

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Coal
CFD
Kinetics
Combustion
Gasification
Modeling

Coal is the most abundant fossil fuel and is widely used as an energy source for combustion and gasification. Both
experimental methods and computational tools are required for the development of new advanced, innovative
clean  coal  technologies  and  systems.  In  particular,  3D  computational  fluid  dynamics  (CFD)  simulations  can
provide detailed local and global information on the interaction of fluid dynamics, mixing, and heterogeneous
and homogeneous chemical reactions even for complex systems such as combustors, gasifiers, or chemical re-
actors. The predictive capabilities of CFD simulations depend directly on appropriate models and their mutual
interactions. The current state of modeling is reviewed in this paper and the need for further improvements of
both  individual  models  and  their  respective  coupling  is  addressed.  In  addition,  to  evaluate  and  validate  the
models  and  their  interactions,  systems  with  increasing  complexity  and  well-defined  boundary  and  operating
conditions are required that can provide suitable experimental data. A number of reference burners and com-
bustors, developed especially at universities and research institutions, are also presented and recent simulation
data for these systems is reviewed.

1. Introduction

The industrial revolution which started in the 18th century sharply
increased the demand for fuels, both in transportation and due to the
mechanization of industrial activities. As a substitute for wood, coal was
established as the main energy resource, primarily burned for the pro-
duction  of  heat  (and  later  electricity),  but  also  essential  for  other  in-
dustrial purposes, such as steel production.

In 2019, coal was still one of the largest sources of primary energy,
making up about 22 % of the total primary energy consumption, right
behind  oil  (30  %)  and  natural  gas  (25  %)  [1].  In  2020,  the  global
pandemic  and  the  consequent  economic  crisis  resulted  in  significant
decrease in energy demand, which is expected to rise again as the world
economy  recovers.  In  particular,  coal  demand  in  2020  is  expected  to
have fallen 25% in the USA, 20% in Europe, 8 % worldwide and 5 % in
China  [2].  Nevertheless,  coal  remains  the  main  source  for  producing
electricity, generating about 36 % of the total TWh produced in 2019
[3],  reaching  29–35  %  by  2025  [4].  It  was  also  one  of  the  largest

anthropogenic energy-related sources of carbon dioxide releases in the
world, responsible for about 42–44 % [5,6]. The extraction of coal, its
use in energy conversion and its byproducts are all associated with ef-
fects  on  health  and  the  environment,  including  climate  change  [7].
Various scenarios [8] forecast that, despite the continuous increase in
renewable  energy  sources,  coal  will  remain  one  of  the  main  primary
sources of energy in the near future (2030), making up about 20–24 % of
the world usage, and its use will only decrease notably (to 5–17%) in the
more remote future (2050–2070) [5,9].

Consequently, a great deal of effort has been made to develop new
technologies for converting coal in a cleaner way, and further efforts will
be required in the future to accompany the long transition to the new
energy  scenarios.  The  design  and  development  of  so-called  clean  coal
technologies requires advanced, comprehensive tools which are able to
accurately predict the performances and emissions of such systems [10,
11].  These  tools  can  provide  insights  into  the  reaction  and  transport
processes in the solid and gaseous phases.

Numerical  simulations  and  especially  3D-Computational  Fluid

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: hasse@stfs.tu-darmstadt.de (C. Hasse).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100938
Received 19 September 2020; Received in revised form 17 April 2021; Accepted 14 June 2021

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)100938Availableonline6July20210360-1285/©2021TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

C. Hasse et al.

Dynamics (CFD) can significantly contribute to this. In combination with
experiments,  it  is  possible  to  gain  a  profound  understanding  of  coal
combustion and gasification on many scales, i.e. starting from processes
on the single-particle scale and moving on to particle groups, then re-
actors  on  the  pilot  and  industrial  scale.  Another  advantage  is  that
different  experimental  and  numerical  methods  can  be  systematically
combined,  e.g.  measurements  of  solid  kinetics  can  be  transferred  via
suitable models into CFD simulations of large reactors.

The  simulations’  reliability  depends  largely  on  the  quality  of  the
submodels used and their coupling. Especially for turbulent combustion
and  gasification  three  particularly  relevant  modeling  aspects  can  be
identified:

1  Solid phase kinetics and their integration in CFD,
2  The turbulent flow and mixing field,
3  Turbulence – gas-phase chemistry interaction,

all of which are strongly coupled in coal combustion and gasification
processes. However, many studies in the literature deal in detail with the
development  and  validation  of  particular  submodels.  Only  compara-
tively few studies have investigated the coupling. Other modeling as-
pects, such as radiation, that are not covered in detail in this review are
briefly addressed below in Section 1.1.

The  first  modeling  aspect  is  concerned  with  the  thermochemical
conversion  of  coal,  and  pyrolysis  and  char  oxidation/gasification  in
particular.  These  are  complex  and  strongly  interlinked  processes  that
depend not only on the molecular structure of the parent coal, but also
on the gas atmosphere. To this end, a number of detailed phenomeno-
logical  and empirical models have been developed. These  models are
mostly based on extensive experimental data.

The conditions under which this thermochemical conversion takes
place  are  directly  determined  by  the  surrounding  gas  phase.  While
laminar  flows  with  well-defined  conditions  are  often  investigated  in
laboratory  setups,  the  flow  in  technologically  relevant  combustion
chambers  and  reactors  is  turbulent.  Turbulence  amplifies  the  mass,
momentum  and  heat  exchange  between  the  gas  and  the  solid  phase.
Predicting such particle-laden reactive flows is a particular challenge,
which corresponds to the second modeling aspect mentioned above.

During  pyrolysis  and  char  conversion  a  large  number  of  gaseous
molecules (volatiles and char off-gases) are released. These react further
in the gas phase and there is a strong coupling of turbulence and gas-
phase  chemistry,  usually  referred  to  as  turbulence  chemistry  interac-
tion  (TCI).  TCI determines  the  gaseous  combustion/gasification  prod-
ucts  including  the  pollutants;  this  corresponds  to  the  third  modeling
aspect mentioned above.

This article reviews the current situation and recent trends for the
three aspects mentioned above and especially their coupling. The solid
fuel kinetics of thermochemical coal conversion is discussed in Sections
2–4. Most kinetic models have been developed separately for pyrolysis
and char conversion, therefore these two processes will first be consid-
ered separately in Section 2 (pyrolysis) and Section 3 (char conversion).
First  the  physical  and  chemical  processes  are  described,  then  the  nu-
merical  models  are  discussed.  In  Section  4,  another  conceptually
different model developed in recent years is presented. Here, pyrolysis
and char conversion are treated as fully coupled. Finally, for use in 3D-
CFD,  the  detailed  models  must  be  coupled  to  the  CFD;  approaches
developed to achieve this are reviewed in Section 5.

The second aspect is the description of the turbulent (multiphase)
flow and mixing field and the coupling to the gas-phase chemistry. While
Reynolds-averaged  Navier–Stokes  (RANS)  is  still  the  most  common
turbulence modeling approach especially for medium to large-scale re-
actors,  in  recent  years  scale-resolving  methods  such  as  large  eddy
simulation (LES), and in some cases even direct numerical simulation
(DNS), have increasingly been used. In principle, these methods allow a
better resolution of the physical processes in the gas phase, but their use
for coal combustion and gasification is a particular challenge due to the

large  number  of  interacting  processes.  Recent  applications  of  scale-
resolving  simulations  are  reviewed  in  Section  6.  The  third  aspect  of
crucial  importance  is  turbulence–chemistry  interaction.  Similarly  to
turbulence modeling, there is a significant trend towards using advanced
modeling approaches such as flamelet or transported probability density
function  (PDF)  methods.  These  models  were  originally  developed  for
turbulent gas-phase combustion, and must be adapted for coal, which is
a  very  active  research  topic  in  the  current  literature.  Recent  work  is
reviewed in Section 6.

In addition to the development of the individual models for the solid
and the gas phase, their consistent coupling is of crucial importance for
reliable  3D-CFD  simulations.  For  this  purpose,  the  models  and  their
coupling must be investigated under controlled and well-characterized
conditions and for different scales, i.e. from the single particle scale to
laboratory flames and reactors on pilot and industrial scale. The avail-
ability  of  reference  data  for  model  validation  is  crucial  here.  Experi-
mental reference configurations and reactors have been developed for
this  purpose  and  are  reviewed  in  Section  7.  Finally,  conclusions  are
given and directions for future research are outlined.

1.1. Brief discussion on additional aspects

As mentioned earlier, this article focuses on solid phase kinetics and
its integration into CFD, the turbulent flow and mixing field, interaction
between  turbulence  and  gas-phase  chemistry,  and  reference  cases  to
investigate the interactions between the models. There are several other
aspects, including radiation, slagging, fouling and fragmentation, that
are  also  relevant  to  CFD  modeling  of  pulverized  coal  combustion.
Although a detailed discussion on these topics is beyond the scope of this
paper, we briefly refer to some work in this area in this subsection.

In  confined  pulverized  coal  combustion  systems,  the  accurate
modeling of radiative heat transfer between the gas phase and the par-
ticle  phase  is  important.  Some  previous  studies  [12–15]  used  the
moment method developed by Cheng (i.e., the well-known P-1 model
[16]).  In  some  other  studies  [17–22],  the  discrete  ordinates  method
(DOM) [23] is employed, in which the absorption coefficient is obtained
from  the  weighted  sum  of  gray  gases  (WSGG)  [24].  Wu  et  al.  [25]
recently  developed  a  multiphase  Monte  Carlo  ray tracing  (MCRT)  ra-
diation  solver  to  simulate  the  laboratory-scale  pulverized  coal  flame,
taking into account the radiative interactions between the coal particle
phase and the three major species of CO2, H2O and CO. They found that
the flame structure and the lift-off height can be significantly affected by
the radiative heat transfer.

The presence of alkali metals such as sodium (Na) and potassium (K)
in  coal  can  result  in  serious  issues  of  slagging,  fouling  and  corrosion
during the long-term operation of pulverized coal combustion boilers.
Many experimental studies [26–31] have been conducted on slagging
and fouling characteristics and the performance of supplementary ad-
ditives and co-firing with Si/Al. Wan et al. [32] conducted DNS for a
pulverized coal flame with alkali metal emissions stabilized in a turbu-
lent mixing layer, and the suitability of the flamelet tabulation method
for predicting the dynamics of sodium species was evaluated through
quantitative  comparisons  with  the  DNS  dataset.  Compared  to  other
fields, there are only a small number of detailed 3D-CFD studies focusing
on slagging and fouling.

During pulverized coal combustion, fragmentation shifts the particle
size distribution towards small sizes, which affects both the conversion
and  heat  release  rates.  For  char  conversion,  it  is  reported  that  char
fragmentation happens in the chemically controlled combustion regime
(Regime I) [33], transition regime (Regime II) and diffusion-controlled
combustion  regime  (Regime  III)  [34,35],  for  the  discussion  on  the
different regimes please refer to section 3.1. Besides, for high-volatile
coals, fragmentation is observed in the devolatilization stage [36].

Senneca et al. [37] developed a mathematical model to predict coal
fragmentation during combustion, taking into account the volatiles and
char combustion within particle pores. This model can also predict the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)1009382

C. Hasse et al.

temperature, porosity and concentration of the main chemical species
within the coal particle. The simulation results indicate that the prob-
ability of fragmentation is increased when the heating rate is high, while
combustion only plays a negligible role in particle fragmentation phe-
nomena  at  lower  and  moderate  heating  rates.  Senneca  et  al.  [38]
recently adopted the same fragmentation model to predict the fate of
Colombian coal particles and the distribution of the particle size under
the experimental condition in a drop-tube reactor. It was found that the
fragmentation generates a 36 % population of particles with sizes close
to 30 μm.

Kreutzkam et al. [39] investigated ash formation and deposition with
CFD using a novel char fragmentation model. A deposition model was
integrated to investigate the effect of the particle fragmentation on the
slagging behavior of fly ash. It was found that the prediction of depo-
sition can be improved with the char fragmentation model.

2. Pyrolysis

Fuel  pyrolysis  or  devolatilization  is  a  key  sub-step  in  the  overall
conversion process [40–42]. The pyrolysis process is very sensitive to
the specific coal sample showing strong variations with coal rank and
even for samples of the same rank. Accurate modeling should be able to
predict:

1  Pyrolysis rate of the volatiles to determine the pyrolysis duration;
2  Yield and composition of the pyrolysis products;
3  The  evolution  of  the  coal  morphology  toward  the  initial  char

morphology.

In  the  following  section,  the  focus  lies  on  the  description  of  coal
pyrolysis modeling, although the same methodology can also be used for
the pyrolysis of other organic materials, such as wood or a multitude of
waste materials [40,43]. A variety of coal pyrolysis models have been
developed.  These  models  differ  considerably  in  their  complexity  and
thus in their ability to predict the named objectives. In general, it can be
seen that as complexity increases, the accurate prediction of the listed
objectives  becomes  possible  in  the  above  order.  Different  models  are
summarized  in  several  reviews  [42–48].  A  classification  of  pyrolysis
models  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  model  proposed  by  the  group  from
Politecnico di Milano, as discussed in Section 4, is not included here.

After  a  brief  discussion  on  the  physical  and  chemical  processes
during  pyrolysis  in  Section  2.1,  empirical  (Section  2.2)  and  network
pyrolysis (Section 2.3) models are presented in detail. Wherever appli-
cable, a discussion on the specific model’s capabilities to predict sulfur
and nitrogen release is included.

Fig. 1. Classification of pyrolysis models. The abbreviations DAE, CPD and FG-
DVC refer to Distributed Activation Energy, Coal Percolation Devolatilization,
and  Functional  Group  Depolymerization  Vaporization  and  Crosslinking,
respectively.

2.1. Physical and chemical processes during pyrolysis

During  the  heating  process,  the  moisture  evaporates  and  many
chemical  bonds  are  cleaved,  generating  light  gases  and  heavier  frag-
ments of finite molecular weight. Fragments with low molecular weights
tend to vaporize and escape from the coal particle as tars. Volatiles with
a heavy molecular weight tend to remain longer in the coal, possibly
reconnecting  to  the  solid  matrix.  This  process  involves  overlapping
physical and chemical steps, turning coal into a solid/metaplastic sub-
stance. In parallel, a fraction of the original coal is converted to char and
the  process  takes  place  by  which  these  nascent  volatile  species  are
transported from the coal particle to the gas phase [44]. Therefore, coal
pyrolysis  is  a  complex  multi-step  problem  involving  chemistry  and
transport phenomena that must be accounted for in a general, accurate
description [49].

2.1.1.

Initial coal structure and metaplast formation

The  physical  and  chemical  processes  during  pyrolysis  are  highly
influenced by the initial coal structure [50]. Therefore, describing the
physical processes which take place during coal pyrolysis first requires
the initial structure of the coal to be known. A generally representative
coal structure is reported in Fig. 2, showing that coal can be considered a
macromolecular  network  structure  comprising  monomers  of  different
sizes and composition, connected with each other through a variety of
chemical bridges (bonds).

During the heating process, these bonds can break and new ones can
be formed [44]. Because of the different nature of the monomers and the
bridges connecting the parent fuel structure, the rate and the yield of
species released in the pyrolysis step differs significantly from one coal
to
another.  This  first  depolymerization  process  produces
high-molecular-weight species, which are not instantly released to the
gas phase [52]. They stay trapped in the coal structure, forming what is
also called the metaplastic phase. This can be experimentally confirmed
through  extraction  with  pyridine,  which  is  able  to  dissolve  these
high-molecular-weight compounds and “wash” the partially pyrolyzed
coal.  As  the  devolatilization  reaches  completion,  the  number  of
extractable compounds drops, showing that these compounds are heavy
enough to stay trapped in the solid, but are not chemically bonded to the
char. The observance of this phase is more evident in low heating rate
processes, as the species in the metaplastic phase tend to devolatilize
only  after  a  certain  temperature  is  reached.  These  species  can  also
reconnect  chemically  to  the  solid  matrix  by  repolymerization,  cross-
linking  and  reticulation  reactions,  which  explains  the  higher  yield  of
solids  in  processes  with  low  heating  rates.  The  solid  structure  that  is
formed after pyrolysis is richer in carbon and corresponds to the ther-
mally resistant char structure. The devolatilization step leads to an in-
crease in porosity, which depends not only on the initial fuel properties,
but also  on the  operating  conditions  (heating rate,  final  temperature,
residence time, surrounding atmosphere).

2.1.2. Primary pyrolysis

Many devolatilization models assume that the labile bonds may be
broken  in  the  pyrolysis  process  to  yield  smaller  molecular  fragments
constituting  the  light  gas  and  tar  fractions  [53].  Meanwhile,  the  for-
mation  of  stable,  non-labile  bonds  during  coal  devolatilization  corre-
sponds to the formation of char. The length, composition and structure
of  these  bonds  define  their  behavior  during  the  thermochemical  con-
version.  The relative  yields of  gas,  tar,  and  char  are  governed  by  the
reaction  rates  identified  with  these  labile  bond-breaking  and  stable
bond-forming  processes.  After  forming,  these  smaller  fragments  can
remain trapped and in contact with the solid, in the metaplastic phase.
The release of these fragments to the gas phase depends on the evapo-
ration process and their transport through the porous structure of the
coal. While they are trapped in the solid, repolymerization, condensa-
tion and crosslinking reactions can take place which promotes the for-
mation of secondary char. The characteristics of the monomers after the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)1009383

C. Hasse et al.

Fig. 2. General coal structure. Adapted from Davidson (1982) [51].

bonds  are  broken  or  formed  define  whether  they  will  be  released  as
volatiles or stay bonded to the char matrix.

During  primary  pyrolysis,  elements  such  as  sulfur  and  nitrogen
linked to the coal structure will also be released due to the process of
bond-breaking. Similar to the hydrocarbon fraction of coal, there will
also be formation and release of tars and gases containing nitrogen and
sulfur. Part of these atoms will also stay linked to the char structure. The
release of such species is directly related to the emission of pollutants:
SOx, NOx, and their precursors.

2.1.3. Secondary pyrolysis

The term “secondary pyrolysis” describes the gas-phase decomposi-
tion of the products released during the devolatilization step (primary
pyrolysis).  A  large  variety  of  volatile  species  are  formed  during  coal
devolatilization.  Secondary  pyrolysis  reactions  take  place  when  these
volatiles face high-temperature conditions in the gas phase. The nature
of these reactions and the resulting products are strongly dependent on
the temperature, residence time and the surrounding atmosphere.

In inert conditions, weaker bonds that hold large molecules together
tend to break, in so-called tar-cracking reactions. From these reactions,
lighter  species  are  expected  to  form  from  larger  tars.  In  this  context,
these  decomposition  products  are  subject  to  conditions  that  allow
further  condensation  or  polymerization  reactions,  leading  to  the  for-
mation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) [54]. Growth in the
size of PAH clusters leads to the formation of soot. An extensive review
on soot formation in coal combustion systems was published by Fletcher
et al. [54].

In  oxidizing  atmospheres,  e.g.  in  combustion  processes,  the  PAH-
growth/soot-formation mechanism can be suppressed by the oxidation
reactions. However, in fuel-rich regions soot (particulates) can form, e.g.
caused by insufficient local mixing [55].

Also, reactions in the secondary pyrolysis involve SOx, NOx, and their
precursors. The cracking of tars containing sulfur and nitrogen lead to
formation of additional low molecular weight pollutants such as H2S and
HCN. In oxidative conditions, the volatiles containing sulfur and nitro-
gen primarily convert to species such as SO2, SO3, NO, NO2, N2O.

2.1.4. Char annealing

After  the  main  devolatilization  step  (primary  pyrolysis),  the

remaining  metaplastic  species  are  released,  resulting  in  further  solid
mass loss and an increase in carbon content, forming the nascent char.
The remaining char can undergo further physico-chemical changes
that are only possible when certain conditions are met. This process is
called char thermal annealing, or char deactivation, and it is driven by
very  high  temperatures  and  residence  times  [56].  Due  to  its  tight
coupling to the pyrolysis process, it is briefly discussed here; more de-
tails can be found in Section 3.2.4.

In the early stage, this process includes the release of residual minor
elements present in the char, such as hydrogen and oxygen [57]. The
late  stage  of  this  process  is  also  called  graphitization  because  the
amorphous carbonaceous structure of char is reordered into larger or-
dered,  stacked  clusters,  slowly  forming  more  graphite-like  structures,
which are less reactive to oxidation and gasification.

The structural variations can be better observed in inert (pyrolysis)
thermal  treatments,  supported  by  methods  such  as  high-resolution
transmission  electron  microscopy  (HRTEM),  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)
and Raman spectroscopy. Oberlin and coworkers [56,58,59] extensively
studied  this  process  and  identified  four  stages  during  annealing  until
2900

C [59]:

◦

◦
• Stage  1  (<700

C):  The individual scattering  domains  [basic struc-
tural units (BSUs)] are less than 1 nm in diameter and are isometric.
They  are  also  about  1  nm  thick  with  1  to  3  layers.  The  BSUs  are
randomly azimuthally distributed in the fragments. This corresponds
to  the  release  of  the  aromatic  CH  groups,  reducing  the  hydrogen
content.

◦
• Stage 2 (700–1500

C): Begins at the end of heteroatom release. The
BSUs coalesce  face to face into distorted columns; the  lateral coa-
lescence  is  inhibited  by  misoriented  single  BSUs.  This  stage  ends
when the misoriented BSUs disappear. The number of layers reaches
8–10.

◦
• Stage 3 (1500–2000

C): This corresponds to the release of in-plane
defects. The disappearance of the misoriented single BSUs permits
first a considerable increase in thickness, and then the coalescence of
adjacent columns. The distortions of the layers progressively anneal.
During this stage, the layers inside the columns connect edge to edge.
C, all distortions are annealed. The
layers are stiff and perfect. The heteroatoms and both the interlayer

C): Above 2000

• Stage 4 (>2000

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)1009384

C. Hasse et al.

and in-plane defects have successively disappeared. Crystal growth
begins.

(

k(TP) = AT b

Pexp

(cid:0)

)

EA
RGTP

(3)

The different stages of reorganization during thermal annealing are
shown in Fig. 3. The global loss of reactivity during the reorganization is
caused by a continuous reduction in the specific surface area and the
destruction of active sites on the char surface, where the heterogeneous
surface  reactions  take  place.  Holland  et  al.  [60]  reviewed  published
annealing  rates  developed  an  annealing  model  based  on  temperature
and heating rate.

2.2. Empirical pyrolysis models

Empirical  pyrolysis models use a  small number of  simple reaction
rates  to  simulate  the  pyrolysis  process  mathematically.  As  shown  in
Fig.  1,  another  distinction  can  be  made  between  empirical  pyrolysis
models  using  a  global  kinetic  approach and  those using  a  distributed
activation energy (DAE) approach [48].

2.2.1. Global kinetic approach

This type of pyrolysis model is divided into Single-Step models and
Multi-Step models based on the number of reaction equations used. In
general, a simple reaction mechanism based on global kinetics is used.
The  reaction  rate  constants  are  either  constant  or  temperature-
dependent. The temperature dependency is described using the Arrhe-
nius approach.

2.2.1.1. Single-Step  models. The  simplest  mathematical  description  of
the  pyrolysis  process  is  given  by  a  Single-Step  model.  In  this  type  of
model, as proposed by many authors [62–66], coal, as a feedstock, reacts
with the pyrolysis products in one reaction step. This simple reaction
mechanism is shown in Eq. (1)

k
Coal →

Char + Tar + Gas

(1)

The simplest approach is to use a Single-Step model for coal pyrol-
ysis, the so-called Single First Order Reaction Model (SFOM) [40] using
a Single First Order Reaction (SFOR). SFOM calculates the global py-
rolysis rate using Eq. (2) and Eq. (3)

R = k(TP)mCoal,0(Y0 (cid:0) Y)

(2)

with mCoal,0 as the initial raw coal mass, Y and Y0 as the current and final
yield of volatiles and t as the time, A as the pre-exponential factor, also
called  the  frequency  factor,  TP  as  the  particle  temperature,  b  as  the
temperature exponent, EA  as the activation energy and RG  as the uni-
versal gas constant.

Although the pyrolysis rate expressions of Single-Step models take
into  account  some  temperature  dependency  of  pyrolysis  using  the
Arrhenius approach, they are not capable of accurately reproducing the
complex  reaction  mechanism  in  the  coal  particle,  e.g.  SFOM  always
gives  the  same  final  yield  Y0.  The  pyrolysis  behavior  modeled  with
Single-Step  models  disagrees  considerably  with  observed  pyrolysis
behavior in experiments, see Yu et al. [67] and the references included.
This shortcoming is caused by:

• Competing reactions activated at different temperature ranges;
• The  independence  of  final  volatile  yields  from  distinct  boundary

conditions during pyrolysis such as:

• Heating rate;
• Maximum pyrolysis temperature;
• Holding time at the maximum pyrolysis temperature;
• System pressure.

2.2.1.2. Multi-step  models. By using multiple reactions to describe py-
rolysis,  it  is  possible  to  overcome  some  shortcomings  of  Single-Step
models. Multi-Step models describe the pyrolysis process using a reac-
tion mechanism consisting of multiple reaction steps, some coupled as
parallel or consecutive reactions. There are a number of possible ways to
establish arbitrarily complex reaction mechanisms. Several Multi-Step
models are summed up by Anthony and Howard [40].

A  commonly  used  Multi-Step  model  consisting  of  two  competing
reactions is the so-called Competing Two Step Model (C2SM) [65], also
known  as  the  Kobayashi  model.  The  reaction  mechanism  is  shown  in
Fig. 4.

The  two  reactions  compete  with  each  other  on  the  different  tem-
perature levels at which the authors describe the conversion of coal as
feedstock into volatile species and char as a solid byproduct. The reac-
tion mechanism can be described by the following two reaction equa-
tions

Coal →

k1 (1 (cid:0) α1)Char + α1Volatiles

Coal →

k2 (1 (cid:0) α2)Char + α2Volatiles

(4)

(5)

with k1 and k2 as reaction rate constants and α1 and α2 as mass specific
stoichiometric coefficients describing the distribution of coal in volatiles
and char. The reaction rate constants are determined using Eq. (3). The
current yield of volatiles Y(t) is calculated by

∫t

Y(t) =

(α1k1 + α2k2)exp

0

⎞

(k1 + k2)dt

⎠dt

⎛

⎝ (cid:0)

∫t

0

(6)

The  formulation  of  C2SM  in  Eqs.  (4)  uses  different  activation  en-
ergies and pre-exponential factors for the two steps. The stoichiometric
coefficient α1  corresponds to the final yield of volatiles at low temper-
atures and is commonly set to a value comparable to the result of the

Fig. 3. Reorganization of the char structure due to thermal annealing. Adapted
from [19,29].

Fig. 4. Multi-Step pyrolysis models. Adapted from Kobayashi et al. [65].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)1009385

C. Hasse et al.

volatile matter content determined by proximate analysis. In contrast,
the stoichiometric coefficient α2 corresponds to the upper border of the
final yield for volatiles at high temperatures. In general, its value is close
to unity [65].

2.2.2. Distributed activation energy (DAE) models

The DAE approach describes pyrolysis as a number of independent,
parallel first-order reactions. Pitt [68] was one of the first to propose this
type  of  model.  He  assumed that  the  coal  structure consists  of several
decomposable  components.  Their  respective  decomposition  reactions
occur in parallel with a broad distribution of activation energies. Later,
the  basic  concept  of  Pitt’s  approach  was  adapted  by  Anthony  and
Howard [40]. They determined from examination that the coal structure
does not consist of different decomposable components, but is based on
different  decomposable  chemical  bonds.  These  chemical  bonds  also
exhibit a broad distribution of activation energies for their decomposi-
tion reactions. Furthermore, Anthony and Howard [40] showed that the
activation  energy  can  be  described  by  a  Gaussian  distribution.  The
advantage  of  this  finding  is  the  possibility  of  a  full  mathematical
description of the activation energy distribution by its mean value and
its  standard  deviation.  The  DAE  model  developed  by  Anthony  and
Howard [40] is given by Eq. (7)
⎛

⎞

1 (cid:0)

Y
Y0

=

∫∞

∫t

(

exp

⎝ (cid:0) A0

exp

(cid:0)

0

0

)

EA
RGTP

dt

⎠f (EA)dEA

(7)

with Y and Y0 as the current and final number of formed volatiles, A0 as
the pre-exponential factor and f(EA) as the activation energy distribu-
tion. The DAE model by Anthony and Howard [40] assumes, in addition
to the idea that there are independent, parallel reactions, that:

• Every reaction has a defined activation energy with continuous dis-

tribution [69];

• The pre-exponential factor A0 is a constant and equal for all reactions

[70,71].

The  latter  assumption  is  a  simplification  used  for  mathematical
modeling  and  is  difficult  to  justify  generally  based  on  physical  or
chemical reasons.

A large number of pyrolysis experiments are necessary to determine
all  the  required  kinetic  parameters  for  the  DAE  model  developed  by
Anthony and Howard [40]. Therefore, Miura [70] developed a mecha-
nism to reduce the required pyrolysis experiments to a minimum. The
improved version of this mechanism required only three pyrolysis ex-
periments,  reported  in  Miura  and  Maki  [71],  which  enables  certain
required kinetic parameters to be determined: the pre-exponential factor
A0,  and  the  mean  value  and  the  standard  deviation  of  the  activation
energy distribution. The experiments can be carried out in one experi-
mental setup, with the heating rate changed for the three experiments.
The DAE model is also widely applied to model biomass pyrolysis, as
reported by Cai and Liu [72] and Cai et al. [73,74]. Despite the efforts
made to estimate the parameters associated with the DAE model, little
attention has been focused on the integration step, commonly performed
with standard integration algorithms that can produce relatively large
integration  errors  [75].  Therefore,  the  Gauss-Hermite  Quadrature
method [76] was used to optimize the DAE modeling [75]. The authors
report  gains  in  computing  time, the  explicit  estimation  of  integration
errors and substantially improved results due to the optimization.

A  series  form  of  the  DAE  model  was  developed  which  avoids  the
complexity of the parallel formulation in Eq. (7), which assumes that the
reactions with the lowest activation energy occur first, followed by re-
actions with higher activation energies. The series form of the DAE was
first used in a network devolatilization model [44], but later applied to
1-step, 2-step, and DAE-only models [48].

2.2.3. Summary for empirical pyrolysis models

Empirical pyrolysis models are characterized by their simple reaction
mechanisms.  Within  that  field,  models  with  different  degrees  of
complexity have been developed. Often, only a few reaction equations
are applied when describing the conversion of coal into volatiles and
char.  Hence, empirical models  are restricted  to  the  calculation of  the
formation rate for volatiles as well as a strongly simplified description of
the  composition  and  yield  of  the  pyrolysis  products.  Another  disad-
vantage  of  empirical  pyrolysis  models  is  the  need  to  determine  the
required kinetic parameters  for the  Arrhenius reaction  rates (the pre-
exponential factor and activation energy) by carrying out pyrolysis ex-
periments. The experimentally determined rates and product composi-
tions are used to adapt the kinetic parameters or to derive correlations.
Furthermore, based on the ultimate analysis and the elemental compo-
sition of the char, the composition of the volatiles is usually estimated to
close  the  elemental  mass  balances.  Based  on  the  composition  of  the
volatile gases, a corresponding heating value is determined. Combined
with the heating value of the parent coal and the char, the heat of py-
rolysis should be introduced to close the energy balance.

Therefore, it is difficult to make a generalization regarding the pa-
rameters or the correlations for a wide range of operating conditions and
coal ranks, or to use them predictively for simulations [11]. One obvious
advantage of the empirical pyrolysis models is that reasonable predic-
tion  accuracy  can  be  achieved  without  a  significant  increase  in
computational  cost.  Further,  they  can  be  can  be  easily  coupled  to
existing CFD codes thanks to their simplicity. A number of studies dis-
cussed in Section 6 have employed modeling approaches of this kind.

2.3. Network pyrolysis models

To  overcome  the  limitations  associated  with  the  use  of  empirical
pyrolysis models, a number of phenomenological approaches, so-called
network pyrolysis models, have been developed for the description of
coal pyrolysis.  These  approaches are capable of accurately describing
the pyrolysis rate, as well as the yield and composition of the pyrolysis
products, for a wide range of operating conditions and coal ranks.

Compared to empirical pyrolysis models, these models exhibit better
flexibility, reliability and general applicability [11]. However, the uti-
lization of network structures to describe the coal structure in a more
realistic manner results in an increased computational effort because of
increased  complexity  [40].  Therefore,  detailed  network  pyrolysis
models  are  less  suitable  for  direct  use  in  CFD  calculations.  The  most
commonly used network pyrolysis models are:

• The Chemical Percolation Devolatilization (CPD) model [44];
• The Flash-Distillation Chain-Statistics (FLASHCHAIN®) model [77];
• The  Functional  Group-Depolymerization,  Vaporization  and  Cross-

linking (FG-DVC) model [78];

These  models  share  a  number  of  common  features  for  pyrolysis

modeling including:

• Mechanisms for network modeling;
• Characterization of the coal structure;
• Depolymerization reactions;
• Crosslinking and reticulation reactions;
• Formation reactions for non-condensable gas species, tar and char

[11];

• Treatment of the vapor pressure of tar precursors in the metaplast;
• Comparable  simplifications  to  reduce  the  real  coal  structure  to
representative  structures,  including  aromatic  nuclei  and  clusters,
stable, labile and charred bridges, and peripheral functional groups
[11].

A  schematic  coal  structure  including  the  named  representative
structures  is  shown  in  Fig.  5.  In  general,  the  input  values  for  coal

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)1009386

C. Hasse et al.

describing the evolution of light gas species from corresponding func-
tional groups during pyrolysis with individual rate equations for each
gas species examined, e.g. CO, CO2, H2O, HCN, aliphatic hydrocarbons
etc.  The  approach,  also  used  in  the  FG-DVC  model  [78],  requires  a
modification of the standard CPD reaction mechanism [85]. In addition,
a 2D interpolation method, also taken from the FG-DVC model [78], is
implemented  in  the  advanced  CPD  model  to  provide  the  initial  func-
tional group composition of the parent coal as an input for the improved
reaction  mechanism  [85].  Another  improvement  to  CPD  has  been  re-
ported by Umemoto et al. [86]. Their extended version of CPD is capable
of predicting the yield not only of individual gas species but also of in-
dividual  tar  species.  In  addition,  they  couple  a  detailed  gas  phase
chemistry mechanism to CPD to account for secondary pyrolysis, as well
as polymerization reactions in the gas phase. Furthermore, elementary
step reaction models or their simplified versions are added to predict
hydrocarbon polymerization. The overall goal of Umemoto et al. [86] is
to  correctly  predict  the  yield  of  polycyclic  aromatic  hydrocarbons
(PAHs) formed during primary and secondary pyrolysis, because PAHs
are soot precursors. Since soot formation decreases the carbon conver-
sion in coal gasification [87], it is important to account for the first steps
of the formation mechanism in primary pyrolysis [88].

Although the CPD model was originally developed for coal pyrolysis,
in the last two decades it has been extended and applied to other feed-
stocks such as black liquor, biomass and polyurethane foam, as well as
shale oil pyrolysis, which is discussed in a recent review article [47]. In
the following, the underlying theory of CPD is presented.

1. Pyrolysis process in CPD

The description of the pyrolysis process in the CPD model follows
Eaton  et  al.  [11].  CPD  reduces  the  manifold  physical  and  chemical
processes  occurring  during  coal  pyrolysis  to  a  simplified  model
conception. The basic assumption is that the labile bridges between the
aromatic clusters decompose. Regardless of whether the bridges are of a
linking, movable or breakable type, the conversion of bridges results in
the  formation  of  two  classes  of  fragments.  This  fragmentation  of  the
macromolecular coal structure, also called depolymerization, is mostly
thermal in cause.

The first class of fragments consists of tar precursors characterized by
a  relatively  high  molecular  weight  and  a  correspondingly  low  vapor
pressure.  Aromatic  clusters  unlinked  from  the  coal  lattice  are  in  this
class, in particular. The tar precursors tend to remain longer in the coal
lattice under typical pyrolysis conditions. By contrast, the other class of
fragments is characterized by a low molecular weight and an accord-
ingly  high  vapor  pressure.  These  fragments  leave  the  coal  particle
immediately as light non-condensable gases.

During the pyrolysis process the coal lattice and the high molecular
fragments form a viscoelastic fluid together, the so-called metaplast. The
fragments of both classes are transported through the metaplast to the
outer  surface.  Thereby,  new  connections  between  fragments  and  the
coal lattice are possible. The softening behavior of the coal particle is
defined by the amount and properties of the metaplast formed during
pyrolysis. The fraction of the original coal lattice structure remaining
after pyrolysis forms the new char lattice consisting of carbon and ash.

2. Coal lattice

The complex coal lattice is reduced to aromatic clusters linked by
chemical  bridges  utilizing  a  simple  lattice  network  [11].  This  simple
lattice network is described by lattice statistics. The importance of lat-
tice statistics for modeling coal pyrolysis and the concurrent decompo-
sition  of  labile  bonds,  as  well  as  the  forming  of  char  bridges,  were
originally discovered by Niksa and Kerstein [89–92] using lattice sta-
tistics and by Solomon et al. [78] using Monte-Carlo simulations. Their
work on coal pyrolysis has shown that many mechanistic features of the
time-dependent conversion  of  the coal  macromolecule into  molecular
fragments are based on lattice statistics. Percolation theory provides a
mathematical  expression  for  the  statistics  of  bridge  decomposition

Fig. 5. Representative coal structure for network pyrolysis. Adapted from [50].

composition and structure in the models, such as the:

• Molecular weight of monomers and aromatic clusters, or the
• number of bridges and initial crosslinkings per cluster,

are  determined  by  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  (NMR)  spectroscopy,
ultimate analysis, experimental detected tar yields and the experimen-
tally detected coal swelling behavior during pyrolysis [11].

Although the models share some similarities, their approaches and
details  differ  concerning  their  application  and  how  they  model  the
physical  and  chemical  phenomena  occurring  during  pyrolysis.  Espe-
cially  in  terms  of  the  network  models  employed  to  interpret  the  in-
terrelationships in the macromolecular lattice statistics of coal, tar and
char, considerable differences are found between the individual network
pyrolysis models [11].

The network models are generally able to describe devolatilization
rates and yields as a function of coal type, temperature, heating rates,
and pressure. In the following subsections, the network pyrolysis models
are discussed in detail.

2.3.1. Chemical percolation devolatilization (CPD) model

The CPD model was originally proposed by Grant et al. [44]. Later, it
was extended and enhanced by Fletcher et al. [50,52,79]. Of the three
network pyrolysis models presented here, CPD is the only one distrib-
uted as open source code [80]. Percolation theory is used as a statistical
method to describe the coal lattice [50,79]. The coal lattice is approxi-
mated using a three-dimensional Bethe lattice. Bethe lattices are defined
by two parameters:

• The coordination number;
• The fraction of intact bridges [41].

In addition, an extrapolation method taken from Solum et al. [81] is
necessary to describe the coal lattice. The standard version of CPD is
capable of predicting the formation rates and the yields of char, tar and
gaseous  species.  However,  it  does  not  provide  information  about  the
compositions  of  tar  and  gas  species,  which  are  of  high  relevance  for
heterogeneous and homogeneous reactions during secondary pyrolysis.
Genetti  et  al.  [82]  improved  CPD  by  adding  empirical  correlations
derived from data collected by Solomon et al. [83] and Chen and Niksa
[84] to estimate the composition of light gases. Further improvements to
the prediction of the light gas composition with CPD have been made by
Jupudi  et  al.  [85].  They  use  a  more  reliable  and  accurate  method

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)1009387

C. Hasse et al.

during pyrolysis. The use of percolation theory is less time consuming
compared to Monte-Carlo methods. However, many significant statisti-
cal properties of the lattice can be reproduced [50].

still  in  the  confidence  region  for  using  a  pseudo-lattice  instead  of  a
standard lattice with the same coordination number.

3. Percolation theory

This paragraph summarizes the discussion on percolation theory by
Niksa and Kerstein [91,92] and Fletcher et al. [50]. Percolation theory
analytically  describes  the  size  distribution  of  finite  clusters  of  sites
connected by intact bridges but separated from all remaining sites by
broken bridges. Moreover, a critical bridge population is defined by the
theory, depending only on the site coordination number above which
infinite arrays will coexist with fragments of finite size. The adaptation
of  structural  features  of  percolation  theory  to  coals,  as  well  as  the
product char-tar pairs obtained during pyrolysis, is a relatively simple
matter. The infinite arrays of percolation theory represent macroscopic
lattices  of  unreacted  coal  and/or  char,  while  the  finite  fragments  of
percolation  theory  characterize  relatively  small  tar  molecules.  The
non-linear relationship between the distribution of finite fragments and
the fraction of broken bridges is a significant feature of lattice statistics.
This leads to interesting implications in coal pyrolysis. An ongoing dis-
cussion about the importance of lattice statistics and the utilization of
percolation theory for coal pyrolysis is found in Fletcher et al. [50].

4. Bethe lattices

Bethe  lattices  are  briefly  summarized  here  based  on  the  compre-
hensive discussion by Fletcher et al. [50]. In general, the statistics of real
two-  and  three-dimensional  arrays  cannot  be  described  analytically
because sites and bridges are looped within the lattice. However, a class
of  pseudo-lattices,  so-called  Bethe  lattices,  can  be  solved  analytically
based on percolation theory. These Bethe lattices are similar to standard
lattices with respect to the possible characterization by a coordination
number  and  a  bridge  population  parameter.  However,  in  contrast  to
standard lattices, any two sites in a Bethe lattice are only connected by a
single path of bridges and sites. The abstraction of a real honeycomb
lattice using a trigonal Bethe lattice is shown in Fig. 6. The presence of
loops in standard lattices results in the possible connection of two sites
by more than one bridge and so prevents the description of lattice sta-
tistics  in  a  closed  form.  Due  to  these  features,  more  computationally
extensive Monte-Carlo methods are normally required. Nevertheless, the
mathematical constructs of percolation theory, as applied to this class of
pseudo-lattices, have repeatedly proven a successfully means of repre-
senting the properties of real lattices under certain conditions. The Bethe
lattices  and  real  lattices  have  many  properties  that  are  similar  for
problems where only the smaller finite clusters and the infinite arrays
are important. With increasing coordination numbers, the differences in
the statistics between real and pseudo-lattices increase. However, when
a coal lattice is approximated using Bethe lattices this issue is less sig-
nificant. Carbon atoms in a coal matrix representing the sites in lattices
can only form four bridges to other atoms (sites). Therefore, the coor-
dination number for a lattice abstracting the coal matrix is four. This is

5. Reaction mechanism

Here, the standard reaction mechanism of CPD is briefly explained;
more  details  are  given  in  Fletcher  et  al.  [50].  The  improved  reaction
mechanism of the advanced CPD version is explained in Jupudi et al.
[85].  The  standard  mechanism,  see  Fig.  7,  has  four  reaction  steps
describing  the  fragmentation  of  the  coal  matrix  into  two  classes  of
fragments due to the decomposition of labile bridges and the formation
of light non-condensable gases, tar precursors and char [50]:

1  Relatively slow formation of a reactive intermediate species ξ* by the

breaking of a chemical bond in a labile bridge;

2  Release of light non-condensable gas species g2  with simultaneous
recombination of two corresponding sites in the lattice, forming a
charred bridge c (first parallel reaction of intermediate species ξ*);
3  Formation of a side chain δ  due to the stabilization of the reactive

intermediate species ξ* (second parallel reaction);

4  Possible  reactive  conversion  of  a  stabilized  side  chain  δ  into  light
non-condensable gas species g1 with a subsequent slower reaction.

The  mathematical  equations  to  describe  the  CPD  reaction  mecha-
nism  are  published  in  several  papers  [11,44,50].  The  formation  and
consumption rates for the individual species in the reaction mechanism
are summed up in Eqs. (8) - (16). The relatively slow conversion of a
labile bridge ξ into a reactive intermediate species ξ* is described by Eq.
(8)

dξ
dt

= (cid:0) kbξ

(8)

The change in the reactive intermediate species ξ* is the sum of the
formation and consumption reactions for this species, as shown in Eq.
(9)

dξ*
dt

= kbξ (cid:0) (kδ + kc)ξ*

(9)

Assuming  that  all  the  reactive  intermediate  species  ξ*  which  are
formed  continue  reacting  immediately,  the  required  equations  for
describing the formation of all pyrolysis products can be derived. This
assumption describes a steady state between the production and con-
sumption of the reactive intermediate species ξ*, shown in the following
equation

dξ*
dt

= 0

(10)

It is thus possible to derive a formulation for the availability of the

reactive intermediate species ξ*, as shown in Eq. (11)

ξ* =

kbξ
(kδ + kc)

(11)

The  production  rate  for  charred  bridges  c  is  calculated  using  the

expression for the reactive intermediate species ξ* from Eq. (12)

dc
dt

= kcξ* =

kckbξ
(kδ + kc)

=

kbξ
(ρ + 1)

(12)

Additionally, the ratio ρ between the reaction rate constants kδ and kc

Fig.  6. Abstraction  of  real  lattice  using  a  pseudo-lattice  (the  black  circles
represent sites linked with each other by bridges marked as red lines). Adapted
from [50].

Fig. 7. Reaction mechanism of the CPD model. Adapted from [50].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)1009388

C. Hasse et al.

Table 1
Coal-dependent input parameters for coal composition and coal structure in CPD [50].

Parameter

Description

p0
MCl
Mδ
σ + 1
f

′
a

AC/Cl
c0
C

fraction of intact bridges
average molecular weight of aromatic cluster
average molecular weight of side chains
coordination number of lattices
13C aromaticity

aromatic carbon per cluster
Initial number of char bridges
fraction of carbon

Determination

13C-NMR spectroscopy
13C-NMR spectroscopy
13C-NMR spectroscopy
13C-NMR spectroscopy
13C-NMR spectroscopy
13C-NMR spectroscopy
empirical or fitting parameter
ultimate analysis

is introduced in Eq. (13)

ρ =

kδ
kc

(13)

The change in the side chains δ is the sum of the formation rate for
side  chains  and  the  consumption  rate  with  the  formation  of  non-
condensable gas species g1 as shown in Eq. (14)

[

]

dδ
dt

= 2kδξ* (cid:0) kgδ =

2kδkbξ
(kδ + kc)

(cid:0) kgδ =

[

]

2ρkbξ
(ρ + 1)

(cid:0) kgδ

(14)

Eq.  (15)  and  Eq.  (16)  show  the  formation  rates  for  the  non-
condensable  gas  species  g1  and  g2  formed  during  the  conversion  of
side chain δ  or the formation of charred bridges c out of the reactive
intermediate species ξ*

dg1
dt

dg2
dt

= kgδ

= 2

dc
dt

(15)

(16)

All the reaction rate constants ki (i = b, δ, g, c) in Equations. (8) - (16)

are described by the Arrhenius approach, shown in Eq. (3).

6.

Input parameters of CPD
Two types of input parameters are necessary to use the CPD model:

1  coal-dependent structural and composition parameters [79];
2  coal-independent kinetic parameters [50].

To  determine  the  coal-dependent  structural  parameters  in  CPD,
solid-state  13C-NMR  spectroscopy  measurements  are  necessary  [41].
These input parameters are summed up in Table 1.

To  avoid  the  experimental  determination  of  coal-dependent  struc-
tural parameters using 13C-NMR spectroscopy for CPD, Genetti [93] and
Genetti et al. [82] developed a set of correlations for calculation based
on ultimate analysis and the ASTM volatile matter content.

Table 2 sums up the coal-independent parameters for the pyrolysis
kinetic in CPD. The series form of the DAE model (rather than the par-
allel form) is used for bridge-breaking and light gas release.

A nitrogen release submodel was developed and implemented into
the CPD framework in [94–96]. Nitrogen is characterized based on the
chemical structure of coal as measured by 13C NMR spectroscopy, which
allow model predictions to be compared not only with nitrogen release
data, but also with structural characteristics derived from available 13C
NMR measurements of char structure. The CPD nitrogen submodel ac-
counts for the release of coal nitrogen in two different ways: (1) The
weaker-bonded  nitrogen  is  released  as  nitrogen-containing  tar,  which
was modeled by modifying the CPD model to calculate this quantity at
each calculation time step. (2) The fraction of stable nitrogen in coal,
which  progressively  increases  with  coal  rank,  is  released  as  HCN,
described by a first order rate expression with a DAE model.

2.3.2. FLASHCHAIN®

FLASHCHAIN® has been developed by Niksa and Kerstein since the
early 1980s, see chapter 5 in [42]. They have published the different
development  steps  for  the  model  in  a  series  of  papers  [77,97,106,
98–105].  A  summary  of  publications  concerning  the  development  of
FLASHCHAIN®  is  also  given  in  chapters  5,  7,  9  in  [42].  Basically,
FLASHCHAIN® combines three predecessor models:

1  the FLASHTWO model, also called the FLASH2 model [107];
2  the DISCHAIN model [89,90];
3  the DISARAY model [91,92].

The FLASHTWO model is used to describe the formation of char, tar,
and light non-condensable gas species taking into account the pressure
influence [77]. The DISCHAIN model is employed for the conversion of
labile bonds using bridge scission and the formation of peripheral groups
by  applying  kinetic  mechanisms  and  chain  statistics  [77].  In  FLASH-
CHAIN®, the crosslinked three-dimensional char molecule is reduced to
linear  chain  statistics  and  pseudo-components.  An  estimation  of  the
qualitative influence of the macromolecular network is not performed
[11]. Basically, the DISARAY model provides the same functions as the
DISCHAIN model, the difference being that Bethe lattices are employed
instead of linear chain statistics [11].

1. Reaction mechanism

The  kinetic  mechanism  of  FLASHCHAIN®  describes  the  pyrolysis

process in four steps [108]:

• Decomposition  of  the  coal  macromolecule  into  primary  fragments

with a broad particle size distribution;

• Reaching  the  phase  equilibrium  for  tar  in  the  metaplast  and  gas
phase additionally to the removal of tar from the gas phase by con-
vection, neglecting mass transfer resistance;

• Reactions in the condensed phase:
• Conversion of labile bridges into charred bridges and simultaneous

prevention of further polymerization reactions;

• Formation  of  non-condensable  gases  causing  convection  and  pro-

moting the formation of intermediate tar products;

• Recombination reactions in the condensed phase and formation of

non-volatile char species.

A  graphical  display  of  the  FLASHCHAIN®  reaction  mechanism  is

Table 2
Coal-independent kinetic parameters in CPD [50].

Parameter

Description

Eb
Ab
σb
Eg
Ag
σg
ρ

activation energy for bridge scission
pre-exponential factor for bridge scission
standard deviation for Eb
activation energy for light gas release
pre-exponential factor for light gas release
standard deviation for Eg
ratio between reaction rate constants

Value

55.4 kcal/mol
(cid:0) 1
2.6 × 1015 s
1.8 kcal/mol
69 kcal/mol
(cid:0) 1
3 × 1015 s
8.1 kcal/mol
0.9

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)1009389

C. Hasse et al.

Fig. 8. Reaction mechanism of the FLASHCHAIN® model. Adapted from [77].

Table 3
Input parameters for coal composition and structure in FLASHCHAIN® [77].

Parameter

C
H
O
N
S
f

′
a

AC/Cl
Hf

′
a

CT

CA

CB

CC

MWA

MWB

MWC
MWG
p(0)
Fb
0

Description

fraction of carbon
fraction of hydrogen
fraction of oxygen
fraction of nitrogen
fraction of sulfur
13C aromaticity

aromatic carbon per cluster
1H aromaticity

carbon atoms in monomer

carbon atoms in nucleus

carbon atoms in labile bridges

carbon atoms in charred bridges

molar mass of nucleus

molar mass of labile bridges

molar mass of charred bridges
molar mass of non-condensable gases
probability of intact bridges
fraction of labile but intact bridges

Determination

ultimate analysis
ultimate analysis
ultimate analysis
ultimate analysis
ultimate analysis
13C-NMR spectroscopy
13C-NMR spectroscopy
1H-NMR spectroscopy

′

f

′

′

′

′

′

′

′

′

f

f

f

f

a, AC/Cl

a, AC/Cl

a, AC/Cl

a, AC/Cl
a, Hf
a, Hf
a, Hf
a, Hf
a, Hf
constant fraction of MWB
regression (see [77])
pyridine extract yields
C or fitting parameter

a, AC/Cl

a, AC/Cl

f

′

′

Table 4
Input parameters for the pyrolysis kinetics in FLASHCHAIN® [77].

Parameter

Description

vB
AB
EB
σ
AR
ER
AG
EG
vC
vE
Pc
A
z

selectivity for bridge scission
pre-exponential factor for bridge scission
activation energy for bridge scission
standard deviation of EB
pre-exponential factor for recombination
activation energy for recombination
pre-exponential factor for elimination of peripheral groups
activation energy for elimination of peripheral groups
stoichiometric coefficient
stoichiometric coefficient
pre-exponential factor for Psat
parameter for Psat
parameter for Psat

Determination

correlation
correlation
correlation
correlation
correlation
correlation
fitting parameter
fitting parameter
MWG
MWG
Same for all coals
Same for all coals
Same for all coals

Remark

x

x
x

x
x
x

Remark

x
x

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093810

C. Hasse et al.

given in Fig. 8.

asphaltene.

2.

Input parameters of FLASHCHAIN®
Two types of input parameters are necessary to operate the FLASH-

2.3.3. Functional group-devolatilization, vaporization and crosslinking
(FG-DVC) model

CHAIN® model [77]:

• Structural and composition parameters for the coal and
• Kinetic parameters for coal pyrolysis.

Coal-dependent  and  coal-independent  values  exist  for  the  kinetic
parameters, while the coal structural parameters are all coal-dependent.
The input parameters for coal composition and structure as well as py-
rolysis  kinetics  are  evaluated  from  only  the  proximate  and  ultimate
analyses  and  internal  databases  of  analytical  data,  such  as  13C  NMR
parameters and extract yields in pyridine. The parameters are summed
up in Table 3 and Table 4, respectively.

All the coal structural parameters marked with an “x” in Table 3 can
be determined using a submodel in FLASHCHAIN®, with the results of
the coal’s ultimate analysis as an input [98]. The results of the submodel
are used to calculate additional structural parameters from Table 3.

The  kinetic  parameters  marked  with  an  “x”  in  Table  4  are  coal-
dependent.  Using  the  submodels  implemented  in  FLASHCHAIN®  to
determine  the  required input  parameters, the  model does  not require
measurements obtained by NMR spectroscopy [98] for every coal sam-
ple. Correlations for all the parameters in Table 4 have been reported
[99].  In  addition,  FLASHCHAIN®  is  integrated  into  the  commercial
software package PC Coal Lab® distributed by Niksa Energy Associates
LLC (NEA) [108], and is continuously updated as new devolatilization
datasets are reported.

A  submodel  for  the  release  of  nitrogen  was  proposed  and  imple-
mented in FLASHCHAIN® in [101]. Nitrogen content, being primarily
present in coal in cyclic structures such as pyrrolic and pyridinic, was
attributed  to  the  aromatic  clusters.  Quaternary  nitrogen  is  present  in
appreciable amounts only in low-rank coal, where it would be consid-
ered part of the labile bonds. Two mechanisms describe the release of
nitrogen. The first mechanism accounts for formation and evaporation
of tar containing nitrogen from the weaker bonded clusters. Tar release
rate and yields are aligned to the release of other tars, which is corre-
lated to the coal rank. The second mechanism accounts for the direct
release of HCN from stable clusters at high temperature, in a process
analogous to char graphitization that releases H2. The FLASHCHAIN®
also  accounts  for  successive  cracking  of  N-containing  tars  in  the
gas-phase, forming additional HCN.

More recently, the release of sulfur was proposed and implemented
in FLASHCHAIN® in [103], where sulfur content was characterized in
different forms: organic (SORG), pyritic (SPYR) and sulphatic (SSO4). In
case such details of the sulfur distribution are not available, correlations
are proposed to characterize sulfur into these three forms. Organic sulfur
fraction is estimated as a function of the coal proximate analysis, which
is  distributed  into  three  organic  functionalities:  SAL  (aliphatic),  SAR
(aromatic) and STH  (thiophenic), and their amounts are obtained as a
function of the coal rank. Pyritic sulfur is estimated using the correlation
of Strugala [109]. For sulphatic sulfur, they attribute a fixed value of 7%
of the coal sulfur. They highlight that the release of sulfur can only be
accurately interpreted if the distribution of the sulfur functional groups
is correctly specified. The organic sulfur functionalities SAL and SAR were
correlated to labile bridges and peripheral group, with release kinetics
associated to the coal sample-specific parameters. The release of sulfur
from decomposition of STH  is described by a single distributed-energy
reaction.

The FLASHCHAIN® approach was recently extended to tar decom-
position during secondary pyrolysis [104] to describe tar decomposition
into additional non-condensables, oils, and PAH at moderate tempera-
tures, and the subsequent nucleation and condensation of oils and PAH
into soot [104] at higher temperatures. Versions are also available for
any  biomass  form  [110],  pet  coke,  black  liquor,  and  petroleum

FG-DVC has been developed by Solomon et al. [78] since the early
1980s using the theory of functional groups. The theory of functional
groups was developed by Gavalas et al. [111,112]. The FG-DVC model is
an extensive pyrolysis model aiming at the prediction of many general
trends during coal pyrolysis [78], such as:

• The formation rate of individual species is independent of the parent

coal rank;

• Product yields are dependent on the coal rank and correlate with the
parent coal’s composition with regard to the functional groups;
• Similarity between the primary tar composition and the parent coal’s
composition for bituminous and rapidly heated low rank coals;
• Dependence of  the tar yield on the  amount of released H2  and its

chemical conversion;

• Correlation between the crosslinking and the formation of CO2 and

CH4.

Similarly  to  FLASHCHAIN®,  FG-DVC  consists  of  two  predecessor

models:

1  The FG model, describing the decomposition of coal and char under
the formation of gas species and other volatile components, and
2  The  DVC  model,  describing  the  formation  of  tar  species  based  on

statistical methods.

Monte-Carlo methods are employed in the DVC model [78]. They are
used  for  the  mathematical  description  of  coal  lattices  and  their  con-
is  abstracted  by  a
version  during  pyrolysis.  The  real
two-parameter Bethe lattice [11]. Both predecessor models are exten-
sively described by Solomon et al. [78] and the references therein.

lattice

Both predecessor models are characterized by a number of assump-
tions used to describe their sub-process of pyrolysis. The assumptions of
the FG model are [78]:

• Formation  of  light  gas  species  by  decomposition  of  specific  func-
tional groups using first-order reaction rates based on the Arrhenius
approach  with  distributed
(Gaussian
distribution);

activation

energies

• Thermal scission of bridge structures in the coal under formation of
light  gas  species  and  simultaneous  release  of  molecular  fragments
serving  as  an  image  of  the  functional  groups  and  operating  as  tar
precursors during transport to the particle surface;

• Execution of pyrolysis of functional groups in tar and char with the
same reaction rates under specific operating conditions defined by
high temperatures for the pyrolysis products as in an entrained-flow
reactor.

For  the  DVC  model,  the  following  assumptions  are  of  importance

[78]:

• Input parameters are defined which are appropriate to the experi-

mentally determined results for calibration;

Fig. 9. Reaction mechanism of the FG-DVC model. Adapted from Yu et al. [67].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093811

C. Hasse et al.

• Distribution of molar masses in the model is set to correspond to the
real molar mass distribution of the coal determined by a pyrolysis
experiment;

• Random scission of bridges during pyrolysis is based on an Arrhenius
approach with Gaussian distribution under formation of two radicals
reacting with labile and available hydrogen to form methyl and ar-
omatic CH groups;

• Available  hydrogen  only  appears  in  labile  bridges  and  these  are
converted into stable bridges (double bond) through the consump-
tion of available hydrogen;

• Tar  is  formed  after  the  complete  consumption  of  all  available

hydrogen;

• Formation rate for additional stable crosslinkings is determined by

the formation rates of CO2 and CH4;

Crosslinkings  are  randomly  distributed  with  a  probability  for
attachment to an arbitrary monomer proportional to the molar mass of
the monomer;

• Use of vapor pressure correlation proposed by Suuberg et al. [113]

for the tar molecules;

• Empirical equation is used to describe the internal transport of tar by
bubble transport or convective transport through pores in softening,
plastic coals as well as in non-softening coals, respectively;

• Surface evaporation model proposed by Unger and Suuberg [114] is

used to describe the external transport;

• Sole existence of molecules extracted with the help of pyridine with a
molar mass lower than 3000 g/mole (adjustment of arbitrary limit
according to the solvent and extraction conditions);

• Molar mass of the crosslinkings is calculated as the ratio between the
total  molar  mass  of  the  model  molecules  and  the  total  number  of
crosslinkings.

1. Reaction mechanism

The different processes taking place during coal pyrolysis in the FG-

DVC are summed up in three steps [78]:

I  Simultaneous  formation  of  tar  and  gas  species  and  concurrent
release  of  labile  bridges  in  the  tar,  conversion  into  peripheral
groups or adding as stable bridge to aromatic clusters;

II  End of tar formation after complete conversion of labile bridges;
III  End  of  pyrolysis  after  complete  conversion  and  release  of  all

volatile functional groups from the formed char.

Table 5
Input parameters for coal structure and composition in the FG-DVC model [78].

Parameter

Description

The reaction mechanism is represented graphically in Fig. 9.

2.

Input parameters of the FG-DVC model
Compared to the other network models, FG-DVC requires the most
input parameters, corresponding to its complexity. Similar to the other
network models, it is possible to classify the input parameters into two
groups:

1  Parameters describing the coal structure and composition;
2  Kinetic parameters describing the kinetic rates.

Fourteen different parameters are used to describe the coal structure,
while  the  elementary  mass  fractions  are  used  to  determine  the  coal
composition, as shown in Table 5.

Several experiments are required to determine the named structural

and composition parameters in Table 5, e.g.:

• determination  of  yields  for  tar,  CO2  and  CH4  using  pyrolysis

experiments,

• extraction experiments with pyridine as solvent and
• field ionization mass spectroscopy (FIMS) or NMR spectroscopy.

Therefore, determining structural parameters for FG-DVC involves a
considerable amount of work and can only be carried out in a specialized
laboratory.

The  kinetics  of  the  reaction  mechanism  use  twenty  reactions.  The
reaction rate constants ki  are described  with the Arrhenius approach,
shown in Eq. (3), modified by the use of a distribution for the activation
energy. The activation energy distribution is described  by a  Gaussian
distribution  [78].  Therefore,  the  twenty  reactions  examined  in  the
mechanism require not only parameters for the pre-exponential factor
but  also  the  mean  value  and  the  standard  deviation  of  the  activation
energy distribution. In a later publication, Solomon et al. [115] present
an extensive summary of coal structure parameters and kinetic param-
eters for FG-DVC.

In the framework of the FG-DVC, sulfur release was introduced in
[116]. The content of sulfur was divided into a number of the so-called
precursor pools that evolve during pyrolysis with different kinetics. The
evolution of each pool is modeled using a distributed activation energy
approach to represent the diversity of the chemical structure of coals.
The pool accounting for sulfur released as tar was introduced and the
rate of release was modeled with the FG-DVC tar evolution algorithm.
The organic fraction of sulfur in the coal is described as aliphatic sulfur

WB
WN
WP
H(al)
l
Mct
m0
mCO2
mCH4

ML
Mav(σ)
MNL
MPS
ΔP
C
H
O
N
S

mass fraction of labile bridges
mass fraction of nuclei
mass fraction of peripheral groups
mass fraction of available hydrogen
oligomer length
molar mass of crosslinkings
number of crosslinkings per monomer
number of potential CO2 crosslinkings

number of potential CH4 crosslinkings

molar mass of labile bridges
molar mass of monomers with a standard deviation σ
molar mass of stable bridges
molar mass limit for pyridine extraction
inner pressure
fraction of carbon
fraction of hydrogen
fraction of oxygen
fraction of nitrogen
fraction of sulfur

Determination

tar yield of pyrolysis experiment
parameter taken from FG model
1 - WB - WN
(2/28) WB
yield of extract, experimental
literature or experimental
Mav/Mct
parameter taken from FG model

parameter taken from FG model
constant value (ML = 28 g/mole)
experimental, FIMS or NMR spectroscopy
constant value (MNL = 26 g/mole)
adjustable value (MPS = 3000 g/mole)
fitting parameter
ultimate analysis
ultimate analysis
ultimate analysis
ultimate analysis
ultimate analysis

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093812

C. Hasse et al.

(loose),  aromatic  sulfur  (tight),  and  char  sulfur.  While  aliphatic  and
volatile aromatic sulfur are released during pyrolysis as H2S, char sulfur
remains in the char. Inorganic sulfur is considered only as pyritic sulfur
(FeS2),  while  sulphatic  sulfur  content  is  neglected.  Half  of  the  sulfur
content in pyritic sulfur is released as H2S, while the other half remains
in the solid phase as FeS. The experiments used in the model develop-
ment detected only traces of OCS and SO2 released during pyrolysis, and
these gases were, therefore, neglected.

Nitrogen release was also introduced to the FG-DVC in [116]. The
content of nitrogen is also divided into precursor pools, which evolve
with different kinetics during pyrolysis. They describe the direct release
of nitrogen from coal as nitrogen-containing tar using their tar evolution
algorithm. Nitrogen is also released directly from coal as HCN accounted
for with first order kinetics and DAE model. The model describes only a
very  limited  amount  of  NH3  formed  and  released  directly  from  coal
pyrolysis. Higher amounts of NH3 formation are modeled as the result of
a  successive  reaction  mechanism,  which  marks  the  novelty  of  the
FG-DVC modeling approach for nitrogen release. The mechanism con-
sists in the formation of NH3 from heterogeneous reaction of HCN with
the hydrogen present in coal. This mechanism explains why NH3  for-
mation is only observed at low heating rates, since residence times of
HCN within the pore structure are longer in such conditions. Since this
mechanism is strongly dependent on the residence time of HCN within
the pores, it requires a proper description of the char, the presence of
hydrogen in the char and the mass transfer of the gas species.

2.3.4. Summary of network pyrolysis models

In  general,  network  pyrolysis  models  are  characterized  by  a  very
complex description of the coal structure and the reaction mechanism.
The real coal lattice is approximated by lattice statistics. In CPD and FG-
DVC, Bethe lattices are used as pseudo-lattices, while in FLASHCHAIN®
chain  statistics  and  pseudo-components  are  employed  [11].  Such  ap-
proaches enable a more comprehensive examination of the coal struc-
ture consisting of:

• Aromatic clusters;
• Stable and labile bridges between the clusters;
• Functional groups in a peripheral position [11].

The  more  comprehensive  examination  of  the  coal  structure  has  a
direct influence on the reaction mechanism. The reactive conversion of
specific structural groups is described by smaller subordinated mecha-
nisms. As several reactants (structural groups) are taken into account in
the  reactions,  the  spectrum  of  included  pyrolysis  products  is  wider.
Because  of  its  higher  complexity  compared  to  empirical  pyrolysis
models, as well as offering accurate information on the pyrolysis rate,
the network pyrolysis models are capable of providing detailed infor-
mation  about  the  yield  and  composition  of  the  pyrolysis  products.
Additionally,  the  mechanistic  approach  used  for  the  evolution  of  the
coal structure during pyrolysis makes it possible to derive specific in-
formation about the developed char structure. However, the increased
amount of detailed information about coal pyrolysis is accompanied by a
considerably  increased  computational  effort.  Another  drawback  asso-
ciated with the increased complexity of the reaction mechanisms and the
description  of  the  coal  structure  is  the  considerably  higher  effort
required to adapt the kinetic and structural parameters to the feedstock.
A variety of laboratory experiments are needed, especially to determine
the  structural  parameters  for the  coal lattice.  To  ensure  that network
pyrolysis models can be used rapidly and in an automated manner, an
extensive database needs to be created with kinetic and structural pa-
rameters for many feedstocks, such as coals or biomass. Due to these two
disadvantages, the use of network pyrolysis models is limited for CFD
applications.  Several  approaches  to  overcome  these  issues  have  been
developed and they are presented in Section 5.

Fig. 10. Rate controlling regimes in Arrhenius diagram. Adapted from [45].

3. Char conversion

Char conversion mainly takes place after the main devolatilization
phase, but can also occur simultaneously with the final pyrolysis phase,
when  residual  volatile  matter  is  still  present.  The  char  particle  is  the
remaining solid structure after pyrolysis, composed of the parent coal’s
matrix, consisting of mainly carbon and mineral matter (the latter is also
called “ash”). The correct description of the conversion processes taking
place during char conversion is of particular relevance for the entire coal
conversion process. This relevance is due to the fact that char conversion
is  usually  much  slower  than  pyrolysis  and  therefore  defines  the  time
required for coal conversion. When modeling char conversion processes,
two aspects are particularly important:

• Adequate prediction of the carbon conversion level;
• Correct estimation of the gas composition formed by heterogeneous

reactions.

The economical use of coal as a source of carbon for energy or ma-
terial use is only possible if a carbon conversion level of XC > 99.5 % can
be achieved [117]. While the use of coal for electricity production by
combustion is still the dominant conversion process, in recent years it
has  increasingly  been  used  to  produce  synthesis  gas  by  gasification.
Therefore, acquiring the knowledge of how the gasification agents and
operation conditions influence reaction kinetics is essential to produce
the optimized synthesis gas for downstream utilization.

The following  section presents the physical processes  taking place
during  char  conversion.  The  processes  will  be  first  described  from  a
phenomenological  point  of  view  in  Sections  3.1-3.4.  Afterwards,  the
abstraction  into  model  formulations  will  be  outlined  and  advanced
models are discussed in Section 3.5. Wherever applicable, a discussion
on the specific model’s capabilities to predict sulfur and nitrogen release
is included.

3.1. Physical and chemical processes during char conversion

The process of char conversion is fundamentally different to pyrol-
ysis. However, the pyrolysis conditions have a particular influence on
char conversion processes. The char structure is formed during pyrolysis
and  therefore  depends  strongly  on  the  conditions  of  the  preceding
conversion step [57,118]. In particular, during pyrolysis the porosity of
the particles largely increases, leading to highly porous char structures
[119–122]. Therefore, char particles are characterized by an intrinsic
(inner) surface area and it is reasonable to assume that heterogeneous
reactions  occur  over  the  entire  surface. Under these  assumptions,  the
whole char conversion process is governed by the combined effect of the
transport of the reactants outside of the particle (film) and inside the
particle’s porous structure with the heterogeneous reactions occurring
on the intrinsic surface. Additionally, the temperature histories during

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093813

C. Hasse et al.

devolatilization may influence the char molecular structure, by means of
the  so-called  thermal  annealing  process  (described  in  Section  3.2.4),
influencing the kinetics of the heterogeneous reactions.

The numerous physical processes taking place during char conver-
sion are strongly affected by the char particle’s structure. They can be
divided into three groups:

1  Heterogeneous surface reactions;
2  Intra-particle phenomena, especially pore diffusion;
3  Film diffusion.

Investigations carried out by Walker Jr. et al. [123] and Gray et al.
[124]  concerning  the  temperature dependency  of  film  diffusion,  pore
diffusion  and  heterogeneous  surface  reactions  have  shown  that,  in
certain temperature ranges, one process or a combination of two pro-
cesses controls the overall rate. They postulated three reaction regimes.
This  model was  later  confirmed by  other  researchers,  e.g.  Smoot  and
Smith  [125],  and,  in  the  char  conversion  literature,  is  today  widely
accepted  as  the  classical “three-zone”  theory  for  the  interpretation  of
experimental data. A common illustration of the “three-zone” theory is
given by the Arrhenius diagram in Fig. 10.

At low temperatures (Zone I, note the abscissa in Fig. 10 is 1/T), the
overall rate is limited by oxidation and/or gasification kinetics alone.
Therefore,  Zone  I  is  also  known  as  the  kinetically  controlled  regime.
Transport  processes  are  significantly  faster  than  reaction  kinetics,
resulting in a uniform concentration profile in which gas phase species
concentrations are equal in the bulk phase and on the outer and inner
particle surface.

In  Zone  II,  at  intermediate  temperatures,  the  reaction  kinetics  are
much faster than in Zone I. Pore diffusion effects become more impor-
tant, limiting the overall rate. Thus, Zone II is also known as the pore-
diffusion-controlled  regime.  With  increasing  temperature,  the  reaction
kinetics become faster than the diffusion inside the porous structure of
the particle, resulting in the formation of radial concentration gradients
for the reactive species. Concentrations of gas phase species in the pores
are lower than on the outer particle surface, while concentrations be-
tween  the  outer  particle  surface  and  the  bulk  phase  remain  similar.
These  conditions  are  of  high  practical  relevance  because  combustion
and gasification processes mostly take place in this regime [126–128].
Finally, at very high temperatures in Zone III, film diffusion becomes
the rate-limiting step. Reaction kinetics are much faster than transport
processes from the bulk phase to the outer particle surface, so Zone III is
also known as the film-diffusion-controlled regime. Concentration gradi-
ents of reactive gas species are mostly observed in the boundary layer.
Heterogeneous surface kinetics on the outer particle surface are so fast
that  they  convert  all  reactants  immediately.  The  concentrations  of
reactive  species  in  the  pores  are  nearly  zero.  Zone  III,  especially,  is
strongly influenced by particle-gas interactions since the flow conditions
determine  the  boundary  layer  thickness  and  transport  processes  be-
tween the phases.

Further, homogeneous gas phase reactions in the boundary layer can
have  an  impact  on  the  particle  conversion.  Shaddix  and  colleagues
[129–131]  studied  char  conversion  for  different  atmospheres.  During
the combustion of particles larger than 60 μm, mainly at high temper-
atures,  gas-phase  oxidation of  CO to  form CO2  in the  boundary  layer
must be taken into account for reliable predictions. CO released from the
conversion of larger particles consumes O2  in the boundary layer and
reduces the partial pressure of O2 on the particle surface. This gas-phase
conversion is exothermic and increases the boundary layer temperature,
subsequently transferring this heat to the particle. However, this also
leads to an increase in the importance of CO2 gasification reactions. Both
these  factors  lead  to  a  decrease  in  the  particle  temperature,  firstly
because the exothermic reaction of char with O2  is hindered and sec-
ondly because the endothermic reaction of char with CO2 is promoted.
These effects depend, among other things, on the particle size.

The  classical  three-zone  theory  is  an  idealization;  separation  by

sharp boundaries, as shown in Fig. 10, is not realistic. Two more or less
distinct transition zones exist between the main zones. In these transi-
tion  areas,  overall  rates  are  determined  by  a  combination  of  the
respective  rate-limiting  processes.  However,  it  is  impossible  to  deter-
mine the exact impact of the respective rate-limiting processes in the
transition  zones.  As  a  result,  the  transition  zones  are  commonly
neglected, and boundaries are assumed to be sharp [123]. Moreover, not
only the temperature, but also the particle size is a determining factor
for the reaction regime.

The theory of three zones highlights the dominant process in specific
situations.  The  process  is  dominated  either  by  the  chemistry  or  the
transport phenomena. Modeling the char conversion requires the defi-
nition  of  the  conversion  rate,  which  usually  falls  into  one  of  two
categories:

1  Global, apparent or observed reaction rates;
2  Intrinsic reaction rates.

As the name implies, the apparent reaction rates (global, apparent)
are  those  which  can  be  observed  and  measured  under  any  process
conditions.  The  chemical  reaction  rate  constants  are  influenced  and
determined by all three  processes, and their effects  are all lumped in
under the conversion rate. They are highly empirical, basing the con-
version rate on the particle’s external surface area and on the oxidizer
concentration at the external surface. Consequently, these models are
only able to provide reliable predictions within small variations of the
feedstock and operating conditions.

On the other hand, intrinsic models separate the chemistry, the in-
ternal  and  the  external  transport,  using  dedicated  models  for  each  of
them.  The  char  surface  consists of  an  inner and  outer part,  the  inner
surface  area  being  much  higher  than  the  outer  one  [132].  For  this
reason,  intrinsic  models  account  for  the  intrinsic  surface  area  (inner
surface) where the heterogeneous reactions take place, and can take into
account the fact that the oxidizer within the particle has a non-uniform
concentration profile.

Determining the intrinsic surface area theoretically is a very difficult
task. In most cases, this value is obtained experimentally with analytical
methods such as the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) approach. Further,
the char conversion process itself causes changes in the characteristics of
the intrinsic surface area. The decoupling of these physical aspects from
the conversion rate allows intrinsic kinetic parameters to be defined for
the  heterogeneous  reactions,  referring  to  the  chemical  process  only.
Additional models are then required to describe the decoupled aspects:

• Film  diffusion:  external  transport  of  the  oxidizer  from  the  bulk,

through the boundary layer, onto the particle surface;

• Pore diffusion: internal transport of the oxidizer within the particle

porous structure;

• Evolution of the intrinsic surface area along the conversion process.

Intrinsic  reaction  rates  can  only  be  measured  directly  when  the
conversion process is in the kinetically controlled regime (Zone I), when
transport phenomena are not limiting. The observed kinetic rate in these
cases can be described by intrinsic values for the kinetic parameters:

• Pre-exponential factor;
• Activation energy.

With rising temperatures, the difference between the observed and
intrinsic reaction rates increases, indicating a transition from Zone I to
Zone  II.  If  extrapolated  to  higher  temperatures,  the  intrinsic  reaction
rate exceeds the observed reaction rate due to the intra-particle deple-
tion of the oxidizer. Thus, in Zone II, intrinsic kinetic rates can only be
applied if the transport limitation is also accounted for. The transport
limitation  can  be  explicitly  modeled  or  expressed  as  an  effectiveness
factor that counterbalances the overestimation of the reaction rate. The

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093814

C. Hasse et al.

effectiveness factor η can be defined as:

η =

Actuall overall reaction rate of all reactant species
Maximum possible reaction rate of all reactant species

(17)

More details will be discussed in Section 3.3.
Similarly, the observed rates in Zone III are clearly lower than those
estimated using intrinsic reaction rates at the particle temperature, since
the overall rates are limited by external transport processes, which will
be discussed in detail in Section 3.4.

Before discussing the transport limitations, the reaction kinetics and

the methods used to model this process are presented.

Heterogeneous surface reactions can be described in several ways in
a  chemical  mechanism.  In  general,  they  differ  in  their  complexity
(number of steps) and in the detail with which the individual steps of
surface reactions are addressed.

The conversion of the elements that remain retained in the char, such
as nitrogen and sulfur, are also released to the gas phase during oxida-
tion  and  gasification  process  [136,137].  These  reactions  can  also  be
divided  into  combustion  and  gasification  reactions.  Because  of  the
complex structures in which these heteroatoms can be chemically linked
to the char, different reaction paths take place.

A few examples of possible reacting mechanisms regarding the for-

3.2. Heterogeneous surface reactions

Heterogeneous surface reactions take place on the inner and outer
char particle surface. The char particle itself consists mostly of carbon
and  ash,  with  minor  amounts  of  other  elements.  It  is  a  common
simplification to assume that only carbon remains as a reactive species
in  the  char  structure  after  pyrolysis.  Nevertheless,  some  models  also
account for the content of other elements (especially H), also supporting
the description of different char types of varying reactivity [57].

In char conversion processes, carbon atoms are consumed by various
reactions.  These  consumption  reactions  can  be  globally  divided  into
combustion and gasification reactions [126,133]:

Combustion:

C(s) + O2→CO2
ΔH = (cid:0) 394 MJ/kmol Oxidation reaction

C(s) + 0.5O2→CO
ΔH = (cid:0) 111 MJ/kmol Oxidation reaction

Gasification:

C(s) + H2O→CO + H2
ΔH = +131 MJ/kmol Water gas shift reaction

C(s) + CO2→2CO
ΔH = +172 MJ/kmol Boudouard reaction

C(s) + 2H2→CH4
ΔH = (cid:0) 75 MJ/kmol Heterogeneous methanation

mation of SOx and NOx are exemplified:

Combustion:

Char-S + O2  →C(s) + SO2  [138]

Char-S + 0.5 O2  →OCS [138]

Char-N + O2  →CO(s) + NO [139]

(25)

(26)

(27)

Char-HCN + O2→O(s) + CO + HCN [139]

(28)

Gasification:

Char-S + CO2→CO + OCS [138]

Char-N + CO2→C(s) + CO + NO

Char-S + H2O→CO + H2S [138]

Char-N + H2O → C(s) + NO + H2

Char-N+ H+ →C(s) + NH →→NH3  [140]

NOx Reduction:

C(s) + NO→N(s) + CO [139]

N(s) + NO→O(s) + N2  [139]

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

N(s) + NO →N2O [141]

C(s) + N2O → N2  + CO(s) [141]

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

C(s)  represents  solid  carbon.  Compared  with  the  gasification  re-
actions,  oxidation  reactions  are  several  orders  of  magnitude  faster.
Methanation is several orders of magnitude slower than the other gasi-
fication reactions. Therefore, when modeling char conversion in gasifi-
cation processes, heterogeneous methanation is often neglected if H2 is
competing as a reactant with H2O or CO2. Combustion and gasification
can also be compared with regard to the reaction enthalpy. Combustion
reactions  are  exothermic,  whereas  gasification  reactions  are  endo-
thermic except for heterogeneous methanation. The two oxidation re-
actions are commonly represented as a unique reaction:

C(s) +

ψ + 1
2

O2→ψCO2 + (1 (cid:0) ψ)CO

(23)

There  is  no general  consensus  as  to  whether CO2  is  produced  pri-
marily from the heterogeneous reactions or from the homogeneous re-
actions occurring in the particle boundary layer. However, it is accepted
that both CO and CO2  are formed as the main products of the hetero-
geneous reactions. Experimental evidences showed that CO2 is produced
mostly at low temperatures, while CO formation becomes predominant
at  high  temperatures.  For  this  reason,  the  ratio  between  the  CO/CO2
produced  is  usually  modeled  by  empirical  correlations  based  on  the
Arrhenius equation [134,135]:

CO
CO2

=

1 (cid:0) ψ
ψ

(

= Aexp

(cid:0)

)

E
RT

(24)

Conversion of Char-S was investigated experimentally and numeri-
cally  in  [138,142,143],  suggesting  that  sulfur  is  mostly  released  in
combustion as SO2 (Eq.(25)), with minor amounts of OCS (Eq.(26)). The
release as OCS is promoted in gasification with CO2 (Eq.(29)). In steam
gasification the main released product is H2S (Eq.(31)).

Conversion of Char-N is complex and several aspects influence the
products  of  this  process.  Molina  et  al.  [139,141]  investigated  experi-
mentally and numerically the behavior of Char-N during char conver-
sion  and  revealed  the  main  reacting  paths  that  lead  to  the  release  of
nitrogen. Molina et al. [141] produced char from pyrolysis of coal in a
fluidized bed  reactor, and  later investigated the conversion  of char-N
injecting the produced chars in the same reactor using oxidizing atmo-
spheres. The results were further validated by Molina et al. [139], when
HBr  was  used  as  a  radical-scavenging  agent  in  pulverized  coal  com-
bustion in a turbulent flow multi-fuel combustor. Without HBr addition,
they observed that high concentration of NO in the gas phase hinders
Char-N  conversion  into  NO,  while  low  concentrations  promotes  this
process. They suggest that Char-N, instead of being released directly as
NO (Eq.(27)), must be released also as HCN (Eq.(28)), which then reacts
in the gas-phase in a process strongly influenced by operating temper-
atures and reactants concentrations. At 1170 K, the HCN released would
react with O2 forming intermediate NCO, which is able react and destroy
NO molecules, dropping overall NO concentrations. In the presence of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093815

C. Hasse et al.

HBr, oxidation of HCN to NCO is quenched, resulting in increased NO
concentrations at 1170 K. At 1370 and 1570 K, HCN rapidly converts
into NO. In the presence of HBr, this oxidation is quenched, dropping NO
concentrations. In the same work, they also describe NO reduction in the
char  surface:  NO  reacts  with  an  active  carbon  site,  releasing  CO  and
forming  an  active  nitrogen  site  (Eq.(34)).  The  later  reacts  with  NO,
forming and releasing N2 (Eq.(35)). In a parallel mechanism, NO reacts
with  nitrogen  active  site  releasing  N2O  (Eq.(36)),  which  reacts  with
active carbon site and is reduced into N2 (Eq.(37)).

Tian et al. [140] also describes the reduction of the nitrogen atoms
radicals  (typical  in  steam
linked  to  the  char  in  the  presence  of  H
gasification), releasing unstable NH species (imidogen), which further
reacts until formation of stable NH3 (Eq. (33)). Recently, Guo et al. [144]
further  validated  the  heterogeneous  reduction  of  NOx  on  the  char
surface.

+

3.2.1. Global reaction mechanism

An empirical n-th order reaction equation is often used to describe
the kinetics of the char heterogeneous reaction described by Eq. (38)
[145–147]:

q = ks(T)Pn
s

(38)

where  q  is  the  combustion  rate,  normalized  by  the  external  particle
surface, and ks  is the rate constant, which is a function of the particle
surface temperature T. Ps is the partial pressure of oxygen at the particle
surface, and n is the global reaction order. The assumption is made in
many works that the heterogeneous reactions occur only on the external
surface of the particle; for this reason, reaction rates are expressed as per
unit  of  external  surface.  This  hypothesis  can  be  acceptable  for  char
oxidation in  many practical conditions,  where heterogeneous  kinetics
can be faster than diffusion (Zone III) at the high temperatures existing
in pulverized coal boilers. In fact, pore diffusion effects are implicitly
included in the external surface kinetic constant. This approach gener-
ally fails for conditions between Zones I and II, when diffusion inside the
pores is comparable to the heterogeneous rates. For example, because
gasification  reactions  are  much  slower  than  oxidation  reactions,
assuming that the external surface model applies is also not acceptable
for practical calculations in the gasification process.

The n-th order equation can also be used for empirically modeling

intrinsic heterogeneous reactions, which are given by:

R = kp(T)Cn

s = kc(T)Cn

s

(39)

where Cs is the reactant concentration on the particle surface and n is the
reaction  order. The reaction constants  kp  and  kc  are  expressed by the
Arrhenius equation:

(

kp(T) = ApT αexp

(cid:0)

)

E
RT

=

kc(T)
(RT)n

(40)

The rate constants kc and kp in Eq. (40) are proportional to the ratio
between the external and intrinsic surface area of the particle. However,
the fact must be taken into account that the two surfaces evolve differ-
ently during char conversion. In addition, only a fraction of the intrinsic
surface area might contribute to the heterogeneous reactions, and that
active part of the intrinsic surface area changes along with the operating
conditions and particle properties.

The empirical n-th order equation is often used to describe the ki-
netics of char conversion in terms of global reactions [132]. The global
reaction lumps together several elementary reaction steps, including

• Adsorption of gas phase reactants to active surface sites;
• Heterogeneous surface reactions;
• Desorption of products into the gas phase.

only be attained when the kinetic parameters in the model are previ-
ously calibrated to a similar fuel and comparable operating conditions.

3.2.2. Langmuir-Hinshelwood (LH) reaction mechanism

Fundamental studies of char conversion processes have shown that
the heterogeneous reactions of carbon with gas phase reactants include
additional phenomena [119]. In particular, they include:

• Adsorption of reactants at active sites on the surface with formation

of an intermediate species;

• Heterogeneous surface reaction of intermediate species and forma-

tion of adsorbed product;

• Desorption of product from the surface and regeneration of the active

sites.

The n-th order model can only describe the global behavior of the
phenomena  mentioned  above,  and  generally  it  fails  to  reflect  the
adsorption/desorption  nature  of  the  reaction.  In  particular,  Hurt  and
Calo [148] pointed out that the simple n-th order reaction approach is
not able to account for the different apparent orders observed during
char  oxidation.  Notably,  reviewing  the  data  in  the  literature,  they
observed  that  the  order  of  the  char  oxidation  reaction  is  typically
dependent on the temperature. A more mechanistic description of the
char  reactions  can  be  given  by  active  site  theory.  Active  sites  can  be
identified as carbon edges or dislocations, oxygen and hydrogen func-
tional groups and inorganic impurities.

The  simplest  mathematical  model,  which  describes  gas-solid  re-
actions, was proposed by Langmuir [149], and later extended by Hin-
shelwood to include a dual site mechanism, for heterogeneous catalytic
reactions. Next, formulations are discussed separately for oxidation and
gasification.

3.2.2.1. Char oxidation. The classic Langmuir-Hinshelwood model can
be  slightly  adjusted  for  char  oxidation,  dividing  adsorption  into  two
steps, as reported by Laurendeau (1978) [119] and references therein:

Cf + O2→C(O) + O k1
Cf + O→C(O)
k2
C(O)→CO
k3

(41)

The first step describes the breaking of the molecular oxygen into
two atoms and the adsorption of one of them by a free carbon site Cf. The
second step describes the adsorption of the atomic oxygen produced in
the previous step. Finally, the third step describes the desorption of CO
into the gas phase. Typical values for the activation energies are in the
range of 10–125 kJ/mol and 160–400 kJ/mol for the adsorption and
desorption  steps  [150–153].  The  global  char  conversion  rate  can  be
obtained from the mechanism in Eq. (41). First assuming that the only
surface species formed is C(O) and that the surface coverage is constant
(steady-state assumption):

0 = k1PO2 (1 (cid:0) θ) + k2PO(1 (cid:0) θ) (cid:0) k3θ

(42)

θ being the fraction of occupied sites. Also, assuming that the con-

centration of atomic oxygen O is low, it can be rearranged as:

θ =

k1PO2
k1PO2 + k3

(43)

The reaction rate can be then derived from the rate of desorption of

surface species C(O):

R = k3θ

Substituting θ by applying Eq. (43):

(

R = k3

)

k1PO2
k1PO2 + k3

(44)

(45)

Although the limitations of n-th order models are well known, this
approach is widely used for practical simulations. Accurate results can

Rearranging, dividing all terms by k3 leads to:

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093816

C. Hasse et al.

R =

k1k3PO2
k1PO2 + k3

=

k1PO2

1 + k1
k3

PO2

(46)

[CO]
[CO2]

=

k3
k2PO2

(50)

At  low  temperatures,  the  mechanism  is  limited  by  the  desorption
step,  resulting  in  a  zero-order  reaction.  At  high  temperatures,  by
contrast,  the  limiting  step  is  the  adsorption,  leading  to  a  first-order
reaction.

Hurt and Calo [148] showed that the mechanism in Eq. (41) cannot
reproduce the experimental behavior of the char oxidation reactions. In
fact, at low temperatures (< 900 K), experiments show a higher reaction
order  with  respect  to  the  oxygen  concentration,  between  0.6  and  1.0
[154]. In these temperature ranges, char conversion is generally studied
employing Thermogravimetrical Analysis (TGA). At moderate temper-
atures (900 K < T < 1400 K), large uncertainties have been reported,
especially depending on the assumptions related to the heat and trans-
port models necessary to extract the intrinsic parameters. In fact, the
reaction order measured is only apparent, and the actual order can be
reconstructed by the Thiele expression napp = (n+1)/2. Despite the lack
of  extensive  datasets  and  the  difficulties  of  evaluation,  experimental
studies suggest that char conversion is characterized by a low intrinsic
order at moderate temperatures.

From this analysis, it is evident that the previous two-step reaction
mechanism  cannot  properly  describe  the  different  reaction  regimes
observed  during  the  oxidation  of  char.  Additionally,  the  two-step
oxidation mechanism predicts only the formation of CO. However, at
low temperatures CO2 is also produced.

A more detailed mechanism which is able to predict the experimental
trends  was  proposed  by  Hurt  and  Calo  [148],  based  on  different
experimental studies [146,151,161–169,152,154–160]:

Cf + O2→2C(O)
C(O) + O2→CO2 + C(O)
C(O)→CO

k1
k2
k3

(47)

The proposed reactions do not define the precise stoichiometry with
respect to the free surface sites (Cf), and instead adopt the simplest form
of  the  corresponding  rate  laws.  In  particular,  both  reactions  1  and  2
contain implicitly Cf on the left-hand side to correctly balance the carbon
contents. Analogously following the procedure described in Eqs. (42)-
(46), the overall reaction rate is therefore expressed as follows:

R =

+ k1k3PO2

k1k2P2
O2
k1PO2 + k3

2

(48)

According to the results obtained by Haynes and Newbury [153], the
activation energies of the three reactions are E3 > E2 > E1, which lead to
different rate-determining steps depending on the temperature. At low
temperatures, k3  is small and the system is under O2-complex reaction
control. For moderate temperatures, the system is under desorption re-
action control. For high temperatures, k3 is large and the system is under
adsorption reaction control. The global rate of reaction can be simplified
when the reaction temperature is known [148]:

R = k2PO2
R = k3
R = 2k1PO2 High Temperatures

Low Temperatures
Moderate Temperatures

(49)

Therefore,  the  resulting  model  dependency  on  the  oxygen  partial
pressure predicts that the reaction order with respect to oxygen shifts
from  one  (O2-complex  control,  low  temperature)  to  zero  (desorption
control,  moderate  temperature)  and  back  to  one  again  (adsorption
control,  high  temperature).  A  detailed  discussion  including  low-
moderate  and  high-moderate  temperatures  is  available  in  Hurt  and
Calo [148]. The three-step mechanism therefore exhibits good consis-
tency with the experimental evidences for the whole range of temper-
atures in practical systems. Additionally, the primary CO/CO2  ratio is
given by:

which is consistent with the empirical approach previously discussed in
Section 3.2.1. The more mechanistic description of the char conversion
process enables the Langmuir-Hinshelwood-based reaction mechanisms
to  predict  char  conversion  rates  correctly  over  wide temperature  and
pressure ranges.

3.2.2.2. Char gasification. The Boudouard gasification reaction of char
with  CO2  can  be modeled  by  a  two-step  Langmuir-Hinshelwood  (LH)
mechanism [170–172]:

Cf + CO2⇌C(O) + CO k4, k5
C(O)→CO

k8

which leads to the following reaction rate [123,173]:

Rc,CO2 =

k8k4PCO2
k8 + k4PCO2 + k5PCO

=

k4PCO2
PCO2 + k5
k8

PCO

1 + k4
k8

(51)

(52)

This reaction rate shows that the presence of CO in the gas phase may
lead to a reduction in the overall reactivity, due to the inhibitive effect of
CO. In fact, the CO can react with the oxygen in an activated carbon site
C(O) producing CO2, reducing the overall reactivity.

A similar mechanism can be written for the water gasification reac-

tion [123]:

Cf + H2O⇌C(O) + H2
C(O)→CO

k6, k7
k8

with the corresponding reaction rate [123,173]:

Rc,H2O =

k8k6PH2O
k8 + k6PH2O + k7PH2

=

k6PH2O
PH2O + k7
k8

PH2

1 + k6
k8

(53)

(54)

Similarly, the presence of H2 may limit the reactivity inhibiting the

steam gasification rate.

In practical applications, the gasification atmosphere contains both
the gasification agents CO2 and H2O and the products CO and H2. This
means that the gas phase reactants (e.g. CO2 and H2O) compete for the
active sites on the char surface. Therefore, active sites on the surface can
be  blocked  by  the  other  reactants,  so  the  reaction  rate  for  the  single
reactant is reduced [114,125]. Additionally, LH mechanisms also allow
inhibition by adsorbed reaction products on the surface to be taken into
account [126,127].

The overall reaction rate including both H2O and CO2  gasification

can be written as [173,174]:

Rc =

1 + k4
k8

k4PCO2 + k6PH2O
PCO + k6
k8

PCO2 + k5
k8

PH2O + k7
k8

PH2

(55)

The active sites should be the same for the CO2 and H2O reactions.
However, some active sites may be present in pores which are smaller
than the larger reactant (in this case, CO2), meaning that they are active
only for the smaller reactant (in this case, H2O) [175]. In addition, CO2 is
adsorbed molecularly, while H2O can be dissociatively chemisorbed to
form OH species [176].

3.2.3. Comparison of reaction mechanisms

Several  differences  can  be  found  when  comparing  global  and  LH

Table 6
Pore classification based on pore diameters [178].

Pore class

Micropores
Mesopores
Macropores

Pore diameter

< 2 nm
2–50 nm
> 50 nm

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093817

C. Hasse et al.

reaction  mechanisms.  In  general,  global  mechanisms  are  simple  and
they  have  an  empirical  character.  LH  mechanisms  are  more  complex
since they describe char conversion processes in a mechanistic manner,
taking  into  account  more  phenomena  during  conversion.  Therefore,
char conversion rates can be predicted correctly over a wider tempera-
ture  and  pressure  range  with  a  LH  mechanism  compared  to  a  global
mechanism.  Concerning  the  behavior  of  the  reaction  rate  with
increasing  level  of  reactant  concentration,  global  mechanisms  corre-
spond to the behavior of a Freundlich adsorption isotherm. In contrast,
the reaction rate behavior of LH mechanisms correlates with Langmuir
adsorption isotherms. The adsorption behavior described by a Langmuir
isotherm  is  distinguished  by  a  maximum  level  of  adsorbate  on  the
adsorbent  surface  for  high  concentrations  of  adsorbed  species  in  the
surrounding fluid phase. This means that the capacity of the adsorbent is
limited, which is similar to the limited number of active sites on the char
surface. Therefore, LH reaction mechanisms have better preconditions
concerning the adsorption behavior at high reactant concentrations for
the description of kinetics for char conversion processes.

3.2.4. Thermal annealing

Niksa [42] describe the evolution of char composition in two major
steps. The first is the char formation during coal devolatilization, when
coal continues to release volatiles until the process is completed at about
1300 K, if the temperature is held for enough time. At this point, the
element fractions of nitrogen and sulfur are comparable to the fractional
char mass, while hydrogen and oxygen fractions in char are much lower
than the fractional char mass. This is caused by the preferential release
of volatiles containing high oxygen and hydrogen contents. The second
step is the thermal annealing, which not only leads to higher ordering of
the carbonaceous matrix, but also changes the composition of char by
releasing additional HCN, H2S, H2, CO, and CH4. These transformations
increase carbon content in char and nearly eliminates all hydrogen and
oxygen. Nitrogen retention depends on coal rank, and sulfur retention is
significant even at 2300 K in inorganic FeS crystals (triolites) that are
formed  from  pyrite  decomposition.  This  residual  sulfur  is  extremely
difficult to eliminate in inert conditions.

The thermal annealing hinders the reactivity of char during oxida-
tion and gasification because of the collapse of pores, which diminishes
the surface area available for the heterogeneous reactions. Further, the
elimination of the elements H, O, N, and S during annealing eliminates
active sites that are available for the initiation process of char conver-
sion. These two transformations explain the reduced reactivity observed
for chars depending of their degree of graphitization. Natural graphite
oxidation, for instance, takes place at much higher temperatures (onset
900  K)  [177]  and  is  a  very  slow  process  when  compared  to  char
oxidation.

Niksa [42] explains that, for mathematical modeling purposes, het-
eroatoms  can  be  included  in  the  char  composition  and  have  them

Table 7
Char classification system according to [179,182].

released at the overall rate of char conversion, omitting the annealing
stage from process simulations. This remains an acceptable simplifica-
tion unless the process includes extended reacting time under reducing
conditions at elevated temperatures.

3.3. Intra-particle phenomena

Char conversion processes are strongly influenced by intra-particle
phenomena.  Typical  intra-particle  phenomena  include  pore  diffusion
and the evolution of the pore structure, as well as the evolution of the
char particle in general during conversion. The porous structure is very
complex and initially results in the release of volatile matter and mois-
ture from the parent coal’s lattice during drying and pyrolysis. It consists
of  different  pore  types  which  can  be  classified  by  their  diameter,  see
Table 6.

When  the  heterogeneous  reactions  rates  are  calculated,  both  the
global and LH reaction mechanisms require the concentrations of gas
phase reactants in the vicinity of the outer and inner char particle sur-
face. While the concentration of gas phase reactants on the outer particle
surface  is  determined  by  film  diffusion  processes,  pore  diffusion  pro-
cesses determine the concentration inside the particle pores. Since most
of the active sites are inside the pores on the inner surface, pore diffusion
has a significant influence on the total conversion rate of char. The pore
structure can be characterized by various parameters including:

• Pore length;
• Pore diameter;
• Tortuosity;
• Porosity  and  the  fraction  of  macro-,  meso-  and  micropores  [127,

132].

Gas phase species transport inside the pores can be classified into two

categories:

1  Molecular diffusion, mainly observed in macro- and mesopores;
2  Knudsen diffusion, mainly observed in micropores.

Effective pore diffusion is determined either by one mechanism or by
a mixture of both. Which mechanism dominates depends on the pore
diameter or, more specifically, the Knudsen number Kn. For Kn << 1
classical  continuum  assumptions  are  justified  (molecular  diffusion),
while  for  Kn  >> 1  the  laws  of  kinetic  theory  of  gases  for  strongly
diluted/rarefied media (Knudsen diffusion) need to be applied. For both
limits of the Knudsen number, respective diffusion coefficients can be
formulated [132]. These diffusion coefficients have to be adjusted to the
real  pore  geometry,  since  both  coefficients  are  defined  based  on  the
simplifying assumption that the pore is a long, straight channel.

Next to the influence of pore diffusion on char conversion rates, the

Char groups

Group I

Group II

Group III

Two-dimensional schematic representation

Porosity (%)
Average wall thickness (μm)
Shape
Typical swelling ratio
Typical residual mass ratio

> 70
< 5
Spherical-subspherical
> 1.3
0.1–0.5

variable, 40–70
> 5
Subspherical
< 1.0
0.1–0.5

< 40
> 5
Angular
< 0.9
1.0

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093818

C. Hasse et al.

evolution  of  the  pore  and  char  structure  has  to  be  borne  in  mind.
Depending on the reaction regime, the chemical reaction, and therefore
the consumption of carbon in the char particle, mainly takes place on the
outer char surface or inside the char particle pores on the inner surface.
If the char conversion process takes place in Zone III, the chemical re-
actions  consume  carbon  on  the  outer  surface.  The  active  sites  in  the
pores  are  not  involved.  Therefore,  very  little  evolution  of  the  pore
structure is observed. The char particle is consumed from the outside to
the  core. In the process,  the particle diameter  decreases continuously
while  the  particle  density  and  porosity  remain  almost  constant.  This
conversion behavior is also called shrinking-core behavior.

The opposite behavior can be observed if the char conversion takes
place in Zone I, the kinetic-controlled regime. There, the chemical re-
actions occur on all active sites on the outer and inner particle surface.
Since the inner surface in the porous structure is much higher, a major
portion of the carbon is consumed in the pores. Significant pore evolu-
tion can be observed, which leads to a change in the inner surface. Since
most of the char consumption takes place on the inner (intrinsic) surface,
the pore evolution causing this change needs to be taken into account.
The  effect  of  pore  evolution  on  reaction  kinetics  has  an  opposing
character:

• Increase  in  particle  porosity  through  an  increase  in  pore  volume

accompanied by an enhancement of the pore diffusion;

• Decrease in intrinsic particle surface area due to merging of pores,

by Thiele [183]. He studied the transport process in particle pores using
catalyst pellets. Since catalyst pellets and char particles are both porous
structures  whose  surface  is  covered  with  active  sites,  the  findings  by
Thiele  [183]  have  been  abstracted  to  describe  the  influence  of
intra-particle diffusion on heterogeneous reaction kinetics of solid fuels.
The connection between reaction kinetics and the Thiele modulus was
achieved  by  introducing  an  effectiveness  factor  η.  The  effectiveness
factor allows the observed reaction rates robs to be calculated using the
intrinsic reaction rates rin, which are only valid when the char conver-
sion process is taking place in the kinetically controlled regime.

η =

robs(Cs)
rin(Cs)

(56)

A detailed discussion, including the derivation of Eq. (56) based on
the contemplation of the percentages of the char conversion taking place
on the outer and inner particle surface, can be found in Hong [132]. As
noted  above,  it  is  not  the  entire  intrinsic  particle  surface  area  which
contributes to the conversion in Zone II and Zone III due to transport
limitations.  Thus,  the  effectiveness  factor  can  be  interpreted  as  the
fraction of the inner particle surface where heterogeneous surface re-
actions take place.

An  approximate  estimation  of  the  effectiveness  factor  using  the
Thiele modulus φ is given by the Thiele modulus approach [183,185].
The relation depends on the geometry of the particle as shown in the
following equations:

accompanied by a loss of active sites.

In Cartesian coordinates:

The conversion process in Zone I results in the excavation of the char
particle. Since most of the carbon is consumed in the pores, the particle’s
porosity  increases  while  the  density  decreases.  The  diameter  of  the
particle remains almost constant.

As mentioned above, the initial char structure strongly depends on
the conditions of the preceding conversion steps: drying and pyrolysis.
Benfell  et  al.  [179]  developed  a  classification  system  for  the  initial
condition of char based on the work of Bailey et al. [180] and Lightman
and  Street  [181].  Char  is  classified  by  structural  parameters  such  as
porosity  or  average  wall  thickness.  The  classification  system  is  sum-
marized in Table 7.

As shown in Table 7, char in Group I is characterized by a high void
volume,  resulting  in  a  high  particle  porosity.  The  walls  of  the  char
particle are thin and form a hull around the void. The swelling ratio and
the residual mass ratio show that the particle increases in volume and
loses  significant  amounts  of  mass  during  pyrolysis.  This  leads  to  a
considerably decreased density of the initial char particle compared to
the parent coal particle. In general, the particles are of spherical shape.
The opposite behavior is exhibited by Group III char. The particles are
characterized by a low porosity and void volume in the pore channels
and a high wall thickness. The char particles tend to shrink and release
only a small amount of mass during pyrolysis. Therefore, the density of
Group III char is high in comparison with the other groups. The char
particle is mainly angular. Group II char is a combination of the other
groups. Areas with a high void volume and very dense parts can be found
in the same particle. Therefore, the particle properties fall between the
values of the other groups. The examination of different char particle
groups is important to take into account the influence of the different
particle geometries on the reaction kinetics.

3.3.1. Modeling pore diffusion

According to Hong [132], two general groups of approaches can be

identified when pore diffusion pore processes are modeled:

1  Use of the analytical Thiele modulus approach [183];
2  Use  of  numerical  solutions  in  radial  direction  through  the  porous

char structure [184].

The first models describing pore diffusion processes were developed

η =

tanh(φ)
φ

In spherical coordinates:

η =

1
φ

[

1
tanh(3φ)

]

1
3φ

(cid:0)

(57)

(58)

In a more general formulation, the Thiele modulus can be calculated

using the formulation given by Bischoff [185]:

⎡

φ = L

vrin(Cs)
̅̅̅
√
22

⎣

∫Cs

0

⎤

(cid:0) 1
2

⎦

Deff (C)vrin(C)dC

(59)

where L is the characteristic length, ν  is the stoichiometric coefficient
and  Deff  is  the  effective  pore  diffusion  coefficient.  For  spherical  char
particles, the ratio of the sphere volume to the outer sphere surface is
used as the characteristic length [186]. The stoichiometric coefficient is
determined by the heterogeneous surface reaction with the gas phase
reactants. It describes the amount of consumed gas-phase reactant per
consumed  amount  of  carbon  on  a  molar  basis.  Several  models  are
available to define the effective pore diffusion coefficient, e.g. the Par-
allel Path Pore Model (see below).

Examining the effects of pore diffusion on heterogeneous reactions
kinetics using the analytical Thiele modulus is a feasible method which
does require a limited amount of information about the porous structure
of  the  particle.  In  general,  structural  parameters  defining  the  pore’s
geometry require specific experiments. These can usually only be per-
formed ex situ. Thus, particle extraction for various conversion levels
during the combustion/gasification would be required, which is often
not feasible. Nevertheless, the Thiele modulus approach allows only an
approximate  estimation  of  the  effectiveness  factor.  It  is  important  to
note that the relations defined by Eq. (57) and Eq. (58) are the only exact
solution for reactions with a global reaction order of unity.

Hong [132] and Hong et al. [161] developed a correction factor for
the relations between the Thiele modulus and the effectiveness factor,
decreasing the error for reaction kinetics with a reaction order deviant
from one.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093819

C. Hasse et al.

3.3.2. Evolution of intrinsic surface

The structural evolution of porous particles undergoing gasification
or combustion is important for predicting burnout behavior [187–190].
Porous solids such as coal and biomass chars are known to have complex
pore  structures  [191,192].  As  already  mentioned,  the  heterogeneous
reactions take place on the intrinsic surface of the char, which evolves
during  the  conversion  process.  The  rate  of  char  conversion  is  strictly
connected to the availability and the characteristics of this surface. The
complexity  of  the  evolution  of  these  surfaces  requires  an  adequate
description  for  improved  prediction  of  the  process.  Many  models  of
surface structure evolution have been developed, with the grain and the
pore  models  being  widely  employed,  partially  due  to  their  relative
simplicity and success in reproducing experimental data obtained under
kinetically controlled conditions.

3.3.2.1. Grain  and  pore  model. Before  the  more  dedicated  models
describing the pore structure were proposed, the effects described above
were  incorporated  into  empirical  reaction  rate  constants,  neglecting
several important changes in the solid structure. As an alternative, grain
and pore models were proposed. In these models, physical properties of
the materials are accounted for, such as the pore sizes and total porosity,
and evolve along the conversion process. From these assumptions, the
changes  in  the  intrinsic  surface  area  can  be  estimated,  serving  as  an
input to calculate the reaction rate. In this way, the structural parame-
ters can be decoupled from the overall rate of reaction.

The essential difference in these approaches is the aspect on which
they focus. Chars can be described as volumes divided into a solid matter
and a void fraction. The grain models focus on the consumption of the
solid matter fraction, described by grains that are consumed and reduce
in volume. The pore models focus on the increase in void fraction, which
is characterized as a distribution of pores that grow along the conver-
sion, increasing the void volume.

Such models can introduce several simplifications, e.g. assuming that
the grains/pores are the same shape and size. However, chars are not
homogeneous in terms of the pore dimensions, distribution and shape,
and this has led to many other attempts to improve pore models. The
pore models can be classified into a few categories [193]. The list below
briefly describes the main categories, with examples of their use:

• Average pore size model [159,194–196]. All pores are assumed to

have the same length and diameter and not to intersect.

• Grain model [197–199]. The char is described by many non-porous
sub-particles (grains), each one reacting as a shrinking sphere. The
grains may have different distribution of sizes.

• Random  pore  model  [191,192,200–207].  One  of  the  most  wide-
spread  models  with  several  variations  proposed.  Pores  of  random
sizes  and  orientation  describe  the  porous  structure.  They  may  be
adjusted for intersections.

• Dendritical pore distribution model [208,209]. The pores are sized
according to the distribution and the smaller pores are branches from
the larger pores (pore tree approach). The model assumes that vol-
atiles generated in the interior of particles create fine pores which
combine closer to the surface to form larger pores.

• Spherical vesicle pore model [210]. A number of spherical bubbles
(vesicles) of equivalent or different sizes are linked by smaller tubes
(micropores), which account for the majority of the particle surface
area.

• Discrete pore model [211,212]. Similar approach to the grain model.
The char is divided into numerous small blocks. A certain fraction is
randomly defined as void to account for the total porosity;

• Stochastic  pore  network  model  [213–216].  Similar  to  the  average
pore size model and the random pore model, but it allows random
variation in the diameter of pores between the pore intersections.

• Semi-empirical models [217–224].

3.3.2.2. Random pore model (RPM). As mentioned earlier, during char
conversion  the  porous  structures  due  to  carbon  consumption  and,
therefore,  the  intrinsic  surface  of  the  char  particle  changes  corre-
spondingly.  This  influences  the  fraction  of  carbon  consumed  in  the
pores. Since combustion kinetics are several orders of magnitude faster
than gasification kinetics, the consumption predominantly takes place
on  the  outer  surface  and  in  the  openings  of  the  porous  char  particle
structure, the macropores. On most of the pore surface, including meso-
and micropores, no heterogeneous surface reactions take place. There-
fore, the char particle is consumed from the outside to the inside and no
considerable change in the intrinsic surface is observed.

On the contrary, the slower reaction kinetics of the gasification re-
actions utilize the entire inner particle surface for heterogeneous surface
reactions.  The  higher  use  of  available  surface  for  chemical  reactions
leads the main conversion site to shift from the outer particle surface,
moving inside the pore structure. Since the main carbon consumption
site is within the pore structure, the char conversion leads to the exca-
vation  of  the  particle  inducing  two  opposed  effects  important  for  the
char reactivity:

1  increase in the particle porosity caused by an increase in the pore
volume, accompanied by the enhancement of the pore diffusion and
2  decrease in the inner particle surface caused by the coalition of pores,

accompanied by a loss of reactive sites.

The loss of active sites due to a decrease in the inner particle surface
is important for predicting char gasification kinetics correctly. The well-
known Random-Pore Model (RPM) proposed by Bhatia and Perlmutter
[225,226] can be used to describe the evolution of the intrinsic surface
during  char  conversion.  As  input  parameters,  this  model  requires  the
actual  carbon  conversion  and  an  empirical  structural  parameter,  the
so-called ψ-parameter, depending on the parent coal. The examination
of  the  actual  carbon  conversion  incorporates  the  current  conversion
progress. With the input parameters, the RPM calculates a factor which
can be interpreted as the ratio between the current and the initial inner
particle surface.

3.3.3. Parallel path pore model (PPPM)

As mentioned in the introduction part of Section 3.3, two different
diffusion  mechanisms,  namely  molecular  and  Knudsen  diffusion,  are
responsible for  transporting gas  phase  species  from the outer  particle
surface into the particle pores.

Each mechanism dominates the overall diffusion rate for a certain
range of pore sizes. However, when the diffusion coefficients are defined
according  to  the  respective  formulation,  diffusion  is  assumed  to  take
place in long, straight channels [132]. This assumption is not consistent
with the real pore geometry. Therefore, an adaptation of the standard
diffusion coefficient is necessary to account for the porous structure of
char  particles.  The  modified  diffusion  coefficients  are  often  called
effective diffusion coefficients Deff.

One  possibility  to  adapt  standard  diffusion  coefficients  to  the  real
pore  geometry  is  the  Parallel  Path  Pore  Model  (PPPM)  proposed  by
Wheeler  [196]  and  Carberry  [227].  The  model  takes  pore  structure
parameters such as porosity ε into account. However, the model makes
several assumptions to limit the complexity involved in determining the
effective  pore  diffusivity.  The  influence  of  Knudsen  diffusion  and  the
effects  of  microporosity  on  the  overall  diffusion  are  neglected  since
calculating Knudsen diffusion coefficients requires detailed knowledge
of  several  pore  structural  parameters  such  as  the  tortuosity  and  pore
diameter. These parameters are only accessible by experiments with the
char. Therefore, only the molecular diffusion is examined, and modified
by two parameters, the particle porosity ε and an empirical parameter
f/τ. The empirical parameter represents the ratio between the percent-
age of porous volume in macropores f and the tortuosity τ. It is used for
adaptation and to lump the influences of all neglected effects into one
parameter.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093820

C. Hasse et al.

Deff ,ij = ε

Dijf
τ

(60)

The advantage of this type of approach is that it reduces the complex
porous  structure  to  one  factor  with  no  need  to  determine  any  other
porous structure parameter. The benefit of this sort of approach is dis-
cussed  by  Sun and  Hurt [127]. Their  main  argument is  that effective
pore diffusion coefficients can be predicted with a reasonable value for
the lumped, empirical parameter over a wide range of fuels and oper-
ating  conditions,  without  any  modifications  to  the  coal  rank  or
temperature.

3.3.4. Char particle evolution

During char consumption by combustion and/or gasification, parti-
cles evolve because of the consumption of carbon from the char matrix.
While the approaches used to describe the evolution of the pore struc-
ture are described in Section 3.3, the change in overall particle prop-
erties, especially density and diameter, is described here. This is directly
related  to  the  way  carbon  is  consumed  in  the  different  regimes,  see
Fig. 10.

3.3.4.1. Mode-of-burning  model. An  empirical  model,  the  so-called
Mode-of-Burning  model  [228],  can  be  used  to  determine  the  carbon
consumption  profile  during  char  conversion  processes,  and  therefore
how  the  char  particle  properties  alter.  The  empirical  parameter  α  is
introduced to determine the conversion process. This parameter varies
between zero and one, determining two limiting cases:

1  α = 0 → ρp = const. → shrinking core behavior of the char particle;
2  α = 1 → dp = const. → development of excavated char particle.

The  empirical  parameter  α  is  used  to  set  the  carbon  density  and
carbon  mass  into  relation.  The  relation  is  shown  in  the  following
equation

ρc
ρc,0

=

)α

(

mc
mc,0

(61)

with ρc and ρc,0 as the current and initial carbon density, and mc and mc,0
as the current and initial carbon mass. Knowing the change in carbon
density and the apparent ash density ρa  (assumed to be constant), the
current apparent char particle density ρp can be calculated using

(

)

1
ρp

=

Xa
ρa

+

1 (cid:0) Xa
ρc

(62)

Fig. 11. Schematic representation of the external transport phenomena during
char conversion.

entire process. It cannot be adapted to varying consumption processes
whose  reaction  kinetics  differ  considerably  from  each  other.  For
example, in an industrial entrained-flow gasifier, the char particles react
in oxidizing atmospheres (combustion) near the burner while they react
in reducing atmospheres (gasification) in the post-flame zone.

3.3.4.2. Model by Haugen and Mitchell. Haugen et al. [230] proposed a
detailed  approach  in  order  to  overcome  the  drawbacks  of  the
Mode-of-Burning model. Instead of assuming that α is constant for the
whole conversion, this parameter varies with conversion and in effect,
describes how the radius and apparent density of a char particle change
with conversion. In this case, the assumptions made are high thermal
conductivities  (no  intra-particle  temperature  gradient)  and  Thiele’s
approach to concentration gradients and uniform ash distribution.

Further, they assume that conversion occurs in two different stages:

• First  stage  of  char  conversion,  in  which  particle  radius  (and  thus

volume) are constant;

• Second stage, in which particle size and density change.

The length of the first stage is defined by τ, which is the time required
for the mass of the outermost layer to be completely consumed. In CFD
simulations,  this  value  can  be  obtained  explicitly  during  the  calcula-
tions. When the combustion conditions are in Zone I, the value of τ  is
equal  to  the  total  particle  conversion  time,  and  the  radius  remains
constant. In combustion Zone III, τ  is negligible compared to the total
conversion time, as the conversion takes place from the outside due to
limitation in the oxidizer. In Zone II, τ is a fraction of the particle con-
version time, and the changes in particle size and apparent density are
governed by the effectiveness factor η. Thus, during the course of con-
version, the variable mode of conversion of a porous particle is given by:

with Xa as the current ash mass fraction of the char particle. Afterwards,
the current, apparent char particle density is used to calculate the cur-
rent particle diameter dp using

For t ⩽ τ

drp
dt

= 0

dp
dp,0

=

[(

mp
mp,0

)(

ρp,0
ρp

)]1

3

(63)

dρp
dt

=

dmp
dt

1
Vp

with dp,0 as the initial char particle diameter, mp and mp,0 as the current
and initial char particle mass and ρp,0 as the initial char particle density.
When using the Mode-of-Burning model, the challenge is to find a
good  value  for  α  which  is  consistent  with  the  simulated  conversion
process. Mitchell et al. [229] studied ten US coals concerning the value
for the empirical parameter α. Their results for simulation and experi-
mental  data  showed  that  the  value  for  α  differs  only  slightly  for  the
investigated  coals,  although  the  rank  of  the  investigated  coals  covers
lignite  to bituminous  coals. The best-fit value for  the investigated  US
coals is α = 0.2. However, Mitchell et al. [229] only investigated char
consumption by combustion. For consumption by gasification, Liu and
Niksa recommend a value near unity (α = 0.95).

It  should  be  noted  that  the  Mode-of-Burning  model  has  a  major
drawback. The parameter α  is usually assumed to be constant for the

and for t > τ

drp
dt

=

dmp
dt

1 (cid:0) η
pρp
4πr2

dρp
dt

=

dmp
dt

η
Vp

where rp is the radius of the char particle. Therefore, the model provides
the time when the particle radius starts to decrease and, after this time,
the rates at which the radius and apparent density decrease.

This  model  was  applied  by  Haugen  et  al.  [231],  with  particles
assumed to be spherical and uniform in composition and morphology,
using a kinetic mechanism for the char oxidation reactions based on the
Haynes model [232], allowing the simulation of char oxidation with a

(64)

(65)

(66)

(67)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093821

C. Hasse et al.

detailed  heterogeneous  reaction  mechanism,  tracking  species  concen-
trations at the particle’s outer surface, and taking into account the fact
that the apparent density and diameter of the particle vary depending on
the mass loss (typical of combustion Zone II)

3.4. External transport processes

Char conversion can only happen in the presence of gaseous oxidizer
agents  O2,  CO2  or  H2O  in  the  carbonaceous  matrix.  Therefore,  the
oxidizer must be present in the vicinity of the reacting char surface. Film
diffusion accounts for the transport of gas phase species from the bulk
phase to the outer particle surface. The particle surface and bulk phase
are  separated  from  each  other  by  a  boundary  layer  whose  thickness
depends  on  particle-gas  interactions  and  flow  conditions.  Gas  phase
species are transported through the boundary layer, which can be tur-
bulent or laminar, by means of molecular diffusion and convection. For
char conversion based on heterogeneous surface reactions, the influence
of  the  Stefan  flow  on  the  mass  transfer  has  to  be  taken  into  account
[229].  Schematically  shown  in  Fig.  11,  the  resulting  process  can  be
described by three parallel events:

1  Transport of reactants and products from/to the bulk into and across

the boundary layer;

2  Diffusion into the char porous structure;
3  Consumption by heterogeneous and gas-phase reactions.

Another aspect which needs to be taken into account is the formation
of an ash layer on the outer surface of the char particle, typical in Zone
III combustion, where the reaction kinetics are faster than the internal
pore diffusion. This results in a particle with carbon-rich core protected
by an isolating ash layer, as discussed in Section 3.4.2 below.

3.4.1. Modeling transport processes

In order to account for the transport processes in the boundary layer,
a  suitable  description  of  film  diffusion  is  required.  Three  models  are
widely employed, all of which are briefly summarized below:

1  Single-Film model
2  Two-Film model
3  Continuous-Film model.

3.4.1.1. Single-film model. The Single-Film model, also called the One-
Film model, is the simplest approach to describe the mass transfer of
reactive species from the bulk phase into and across the boundary layer
until the particle surface. Many assumptions are invoked [233]:

• The burning process is quasi-steady.
• The spherical carbon particle burns in a quiescent, infinite ambient

medium (bulk phase).

• There  are  no  interactions  with  other  particles  and  no  convection

effects.

• At the particle surface, carbon reacts with the oxygen, producing CO
or  CO2.  In  general,  global  reaction  formulations  or  simple  LH
mechanisms  are  used  to  describe  the  consumption  of  carbon  by
heterogeneous surface reactions.

• The gas  phase  consists of the  reactants, the reaction  products and
inert gas species. The reactants diffuse inward; on the outer particle
surface, they react with the carbon, forming the respective products,
which  then  diffuse outward.  The inert gas forms  a  stagnant layer,
causing a Stefan flow. Secondary homogeneous reactions of products
do not affect the heterogeneous surface reactions, assuming they are
taking place far away from the reacting surface in the bulk phase.

• The gas phase thermal conductivity (λ), specific heat capacity (cp)
and  the  product  of  the  density  and  mass  diffusivity  (ρD)  are  all
constant. In addition, the Lewis number (Le) is assumed to be unity:

Le =

(cid:0)

λ
ρcpD

) = 1

(68)

• Intra-particle diffusion is neglected.
• The particle has no temperature gradient and radiates as a gray body
to  the  surroundings  without  the  participation  of  the  intervening
medium.

Taking into account x0 as the char surface and x∝ as the conditions at

the outer region, the single-film model results in:

• CO/CO2  concentration  is  maximum  at  x0  and  is  equal  to  the  bulk

value at x∝;

• Temperature is maximum at x0 and is equal to the bulk temperature

at x∝;

• O2 is equal to the bulk value at x∝ and reaches a minimum at x0;

By coupling this transport model with a kinetic model, the concen-
tration of oxygen in the particle surface can be calculated, resulting in
the solution of energy and mass flows in the process. This model, how-
ever,  has  many  simplifying  assumptions.  An  improved  description  is
proposed in the Two-Film and Continuous-Film models.

3.4.1.2. Double-film  and  continuous  film  model. In  the  Double-Film
model,  also  called  the  Two-Film  model,  the  main  product  of  char
oxidation is carbon monoxide (CO), which is released and further reacts
with oxygen to form CO2 in the boundary layer [233]. Thus, two reac-
tion mechanisms are accounted for:

• Heterogeneous reaction between oxidizer and carbon on the surface

of the char;

• Homogeneous reactions in the boundary layer.

Homogeneous reactions are assumed to be infinitely fast, forming an
infinitely thin flame sheet, forming two separated and not overlapping
layers:

• Pre-flame zone, between the char surface and the flame sheet.
• Post-flame  zone,  between  the  flame  sheet  and  the  end  of  the

boundary layer.

More  complex  temperature  and  concentration  profiles  along  the
boundary  layer  are  observed  compared  to  the  single-film  model.  All
gases in the boundary layer are considered to be unreactive, except in
the flame sheet, where the peak temperature is attained [234]. All the
remaining assumptions of the One-Film model remain unchanged.

Fig. 12. Composition of char particle during char conversion process. Adapted
from [117].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093822

C. Hasse et al.

The  Continuous-Film  model  assumes  that  the  flame  is  distributed
within  the  boundary  layer,  instead  of  occurring  in  a  single  sheet.  No
inert zone is taken into consideration, and the boundary layer must be
discretized, see e.g. [235]. This approach results in a more complicated,
but more realistic profile of the species concentrations and temperature
along the boundary layer.

3.4.1.3. Comparison  of  different  models. The  Single-,  Double-  and
Continuous-Film  models  are  characterized  by  increasing  levels  of
description  of  the  physical  and  chemical  processes  occurring  in  the
boundary  layer  during  char  conversion.  However,  an  improved
description  also  increases  the  required  computational  resources  for
simulations. Trying to find a good compromise, Hecht et al. [130] per-
formed CFD simulations of the same case, applying the three different
models.  The  Two-Film  model  exhibited  larger  deviations  than  the
Single-Film model. Both are compared to the Continuous-Film model,
which is considered to be the reference. In this specific case, Single-Film
model deviations were always below 16 % when the particle size was
between 60–135 μm and the bulk oxygen concentration was no higher
than 60 %. These results were obtained after improving the Single-Film
model  by  taking  into  account  a  calibrated  mechanism  for  char  con-
sumption including reactions with O2, CO2 and H2O.

Matalon [236] analyzed the dependence of the particle burning rate
in terms of the surface and gas phase Damk ̈ohler number and found that
there is a minimum value for the gas phase Damk ̈ohler number below
which the gas phase is necessarily frozen (that is, characteristic diffusion
time across the boundary layer is much shorter than characteristic ho-
mogeneous reaction time, yielding no reaction in the boundary layer).
Since the Damk ̈ohler number is proportional to the square of the particle
diameter,  this  implies  that  there  is  a  diameter  below  which  the
single-film model is applicable.

Results of theoretical investigations [237,238] have indicated that
the  single-film  model  with  CO  formation  at  the  particle  surface  is  an
acceptable model for particle sizes from 50 μm up to about 100 μm.

3.4.2.

Influence of ash on transport processes

In  general,  the  influence  of  ash  on  the  coal  conversion  becomes
important during char conversion. Additionally, the level of influence
depends  on  the  char  conversion  process.  In  experiments,  a  strong
decrease  in  the  reaction  rates  is  observed  in  the  late  stages  of  char
consumption [117].  The decrease in the conversion rate results in an
increase in the char particle residence time in the reactor required to
achieve the desired carbon conversion level of XC = 99 % for industrial
applications [127].

During char conversion, carbon is consumed by heterogeneous sur-
face reactions and transported into the gas phase, while inert ash grains
remain in the char particle or agglomerate on the outer particle surface,
forming an  ash layer. In this  process, the  particle  is divided  into two
parts, as shown in Fig. 12:

1  a  reactive  carbon-rich  core  where  the  reactions  on  the  inner  and

outer surface take place and

2  an ash layer forming around the core whose density and thickness

increase continuously with increasing carbon conversion.

The  division  of  the  char  particle  has  several  effects  on  transport

processes:

• “dilution” effect due to the reduction of the carbon mass and carbon
surface available per unit particle volume, resulting in a reduction in
the mass transport rate, and

• formation of an additional resistance for the mass and heat transfer
from the gas phase, surrounding the particle, to the carbon-rich core
through the ash layer.

These ash effects have to be taken into consideration using a char
conversion model. The “dilution” effect can be integrated using the size
of the carbon-rich core in the heat and mass transfer equations, as well as
in  the  heterogeneous  reaction  kinetics.  During  char  conversion,  the
diameter of the carbon-rich core decreases continuously while the char
particle diameter, defined as the sum of the carbon-rich core diameter
and  thickness  of  the  ash  film,  approaches  a  constant  value
asymptotically.

The second effect is taken into account in the ash inhibition model by
incorporating the ash film as additional resistance in the heat and mass
transfer equations. This resistance increases as the difference increases
between the diameter of the carbon-rich core and the particle diameter.
As mentioned earlier, the influence of ash inhibition effects depends
on the char conversion process. During combustion, the shrinking core
behavior is dominant, resulting in a considerable loss of char particle
diameter due to carbon consumption on the outer surface of the carbon-
rich core, while at the same time the particle density remains constant.
In this process, ash grains are released from the char matrix, agglom-
erating around the particle and forming an ash layer. By contrast, during
gasification, the main consumption of carbon takes place in the porous
char particle structure, resulting in the excavation of the particle. The
number  of  ash  grains  reaching  the  outer  surface  is  strongly  limited.
Therefore,  ash  inhibition  influences  char  combustion  much  more
strongly than char gasification due to the characteristics of the conver-
sion progress for combustion and gasification.

3.5. An overview of advanced char conversion models

The discussion above highlights the complexity of char conversion
and the multitude of physical and chemical processes involved in com-
bustion and gasification applications. Consequently, a significant num-
ber of advanced char conversion models have been developed and are in
fact still being developed.

In the following, a selection of different advanced char conversion
models are presented briefly, mostly referring to the specific literature
for  further  information.  The  specific  submodels  integrated  into  each
model are finally summarized at the end in a table.

As  computational  power  grows  and  makes  it  possible,  future  de-
velopments will definitely invest in quantum chemistry investigations.
Nowadays,  most  of  the  investigations  in  this  direction  are  based  on
graphene-like  structures  (i.e.  an  extended  two-dimensional  carbon
network). Frankcombe et al. [239] performed ab initio calculations on
basal  plane  oxidation  of  graphene  layers  for  the  release  of  carbon
monoxide.  Another  example  refers  to  the  analysis  of  different  active
groups to study low-temperature spontaneous combustion [240]. Some
investigations consider the graphene as a small PAH [241,242], while
periodic graphene structures were considered to account for the influ-
ence of the solid structure at the reaction sites [243]. Although quantum
chemistry-based kinetic models are not currently available for practical
applications, it reveals a promising potential for future developments.

3.5.1. Carbon Burnout Kinetics/Extended (CBK/E) & Carbon Burnout
Kinetics/Gasification (CBK/G)

CBK/E and CBK/G are the latest two versions of the Carbon Burnout
Kinetics (CBK) model series. CBK/Extended (CBK/E) is one of the most
recently developed models for coal combustion [133]. CBK/Gasification
(CBK/G) is the successor model of CBK/E, adding gasification kinetics to
the heterogeneous surface reactions [126]. Both models are widely used
to interpret research data and model industrial applications [117]. The
development of the models series and the submodels implemented are
described  in  the  following  papers  [117,126,127,133,148,229,244]  as
well as in the PhD theses by Hong [132], Benfell [245] and Shurtz [246].
Extension  of  CBK  model  to  account  for  the  conversion  of  char-S  was
done  simply  by  releasing  SO2  together  with  the  char  burnout  rate.
Similarly,  char-N  is  converted  using  a  splitting  function  fNO,  which
determines the conversion ratio of char-N between NO and N2.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093823

C. Hasse et al.

A particular feature of the CBK/E and CBK/G is the correlation be-
tween the coal rank and char reactivity during heterogeneous conver-
sion, so that predictions can be made knowing only the proximate and
ultimate analyses of the parent coal. Niksa et al. [133] applied a rank
dependency  parameter  to  the  frequency  factor  of  the  desorption  of
surface  oxides  during  oxidation  with  O2,  but  indicated  that  low  rank
coals can also have the reactivity of their chars strongly influenced by
catalytic  effects  of  minerals.  Liu  and  Niksa  [126]  investigated  and
extended the same concept to gasification by CO2 and H2O, where rank
dependency parameters were applied to the frequency factors of rates of
production of surface oxides. Rank dependency for rate parameters of
oxide desorption during gasification with H2O was introduced for both
frequency  factors  and  activation  energies.  The  authors  stated  that
high-volatile  bituminous  coals  or  higher  ranks  exhibit  gasification
reactivity that diminishes with the fuel rank. For lower rank coals, the
catalytic effects of minerals become more significant than the generic
rank dependency correlations. These statements indicate that for lower
rank coals having high content of catalytic minerals, additional experi-
mental  data  could  be  necessary  for  reliable  predictions.  In  these  two
works, the authors extended the CBK/E and CBK/G models to account
for high pressure char conversion.

3.5.2. Char Conversion Kinetics (CCK) and n-th order Char Conversion
Kinetics (CCKN)

CCK and CCKN  are two offsprings of the latest two versions of the
CBK  model  series.  They  were  proposed  in  the  Ph.D.  thesis  by  Shurtz
[246]. CCK stands for Char Conversion Kinetics. Differently to the CBK
model  series,  correlations  for  kinetic  parameters  are  used  which  are
based  on  coal  structural  parameters  instead  of  the  coal  rank.  These
correlations  are  detailed  in  [246]  and  [247].  CCK  uses  a  semi-global
Langmuir-Hinshelwood  kinetic  mechanism  while  CCKN  uses  power
law expressions (nth-order kinetic mechanism) for the surface reactions.
The  sensitivity  of  the  submodels  in  CCK  was  evaluated  in  [248],
identifying that the annealing, the oxidation reaction order, the swelling
model, and the mode of burning parameter are the most influential in
the model performance, followed by extension of the CCK to oxy-fuel
conditions in the Ph.D. thesis by Holland [249] and in [250], in which
several submodels in the code were further modified to more realistic
physics (e.g. particle diameter) . The annealing submodel was improved
[251] accounting for the model sensitivity to char graphitization level.

3.5.3. Model for char particle conversion – Tremel & Spliethoff

Tremel  et  al.  [252–257]  at  Munich  Technical  University  (TUM),
Germany, conducted a series of works on developing a model for char
particle  conversion. A comprehensive description  of the  experimental
setup and the obtained results, as well as the model development based
on these experiments, can be found in [213-218].

3.5.5. Model for char particle conversion – Mitchell

The  last  advanced  char  conversion  model  presented  here  was
developed  at Stanford University  in the Mitchell group. The model is
presented in several papers [147,260] and it accounts for char conver-
sion  in  all  three  regimes  (I,  II and  III),  where  the  particle  conversion
changes  between  conversion  (mode  of  burning)  at  constant  volume
(regime  I),  to  constant  density  (regime  III),  with  a  transitions  zone
(regime II) where both volume and density changes along conversion.
Additionally,  the  Ph.D.  theses  by  Campbell  [261]  and  Ma  [262]  give
more  details.  Their  results  are  further  published  in  Ma  and  Mitchell
[263] and Campbell and Mitchell [264], where attention was paid into
extending the model to char conversion at high pressures. Haugen et al.
[230]  updated  the  model  to  predict  the  shift  between  the  modes  of
burning  as  a  function  of  the  particle’s  mass  conversion,  not  only  the
operating conditions. Haugen et al. [231] further extended the model by
introducing  adsorption-desorption  kinetics  for  the  heterogeneous  re-
actions with CO2  and detailed kinetics for the homogeneous gas-phase
reactions.  Tilghman  et  al.  extended  the  model  to  conversion  of  chars
from biomass in gasification and combustion environments in [265] and
proposes  reactant-specific  effectiveness  factor(cid:0) Thiele  modulus  re-
lations, together with introduction of CO and H2 inhibition reactions in
[266].

3.5.6. Atomistic model of char oxidation – Penn State University

An atomistic model for the simulation of char oxidation was devel-
oped and presented in the Ph.D. thesis by Louw [267], at Pennsylvania
State  University,  USA.  The  model  was  supported  by  a  deep  composi-
tional  and  structural  analysis  of  coals,  published  in  several  papers
[268–270].  The  model  allows  coal  conversion  to  be  simulated  using
molecular dynamics techniques such as ReaxFF, employing their novel
Perl script called Vol3D together with a pre-existing script, Fringe3D, to
populate  a  3D  volume  by  stacking  aromatic  carbon  clusters.  Mineral
matter and pores can be incorporated into the structure. This modeling
approach  accounts  for  the  effect  of  competing  structural  factors  that
influence char reactivity. They also employed their molecular dynamics
techniques  to  investigate  the  conversion  of  sulfur  from  coke  in  com-
bustion  [271,272].  The  studies  unraveled  some  complex  mechanisms
that lead to conversion of tightly bonded sulfur into the formation of
C2S, OCS, CNS in oxygen-poor atmospheres, which in the presence of
hydrogen lead to formation of H2S. In oxygen-rich conditions, tightly
bonded  nitrogen  rapidly  oxidized  into  CON  and  NO,  while  sulfur
oxidized  into  OCS  and  successively  converted  into  CO2S,  CO3S  and
CO4S, which probably leads to decomposition into more stable species
such as CO2 and SO2. Despite the fact that such advanced models cannot
be easily employed into CFD simulations of particle and reactor scales,
they are very  useful to  understand the intermediate  steps of the phe-
nomena and not only the yields and rate of formation of target species.

3.5.4. Model for char particle conversion – CSIRO

3.5.7. Summary

The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
(CSIRO) model was developed at CSIRO Energy Technology, Kenmore,
Qld, Australia [258]. The three dissertations prepared by Beath [193],
Benfell  [245]  and  Hodge  [259]  describe  specific  parts  of  the  model
development.

The submodels used by the various models for simulating chemical
and physical phenomena taking place during char conversion are sum-
med up in Table 8.

Table 8
Summary of submodels implemented in advanced char conversion models, NthOR stands for nth order kinetic mechanism (power law expression).

Hetero. surf. reaction

Film
diffusion

Thermal
annealing

Ash
inhibition

Pore surf.
evolution

Pore diffusion

Oxidation and
gasification

CO/H2 Inhibition
gasification

CBK/E & CBK/G
CCK & CCKN
Tremel & Spliethoff
CSIRO
Mitchell

LH mechanism
LH mech./ NthOR
NthOR
NthOR
LH mechanism

SFM
SFM
SFM
SFM
SFM

✓
✓
✓
⨯
(✓)

✓
✓
⨯
⨯
⨯

RPM
RPM
RPM
RPM
RPM

Thiele, PPPM
Thiele, PPPM
Thiele
Thiele
Thiele

✓
✓

Only gasification
✓
✓

✓
✓ ⨯
⨯
✓
✓

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093824

C. Hasse et al.

Fig. 13. Schematic chemical structure of the reference coals in the CRECK-S-C model [274].

discussed  in  Section  4.2.  The  kinetic  model  for  heterogeneous  char
conversion  by  oxidation  and  gasification  was  first  made  available  in
[278],  and  will  be  discussed  in  Section  4.3.  Thus,  in  contrast  to  the
models discussed before, pyrolysis and char conversion are described in
a seamless approach. Further, the model can be directly coupled with
gas-phase kinetic mechanisms and uses the same CHEMKIN-like format.
Finally, the release of pollutants or precursors (sulfur and nitrogen) will
be  discussed  below,  in  Section  4.4.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the
approach is not limited to coal as a solid fuel but has also been adapted
to  the  thermochemical  conversion  of  plastics  [279],  lignocellulosic
biomass [57,280–283] and algae biomass [284].

4.1. Reference coals and characterization method

While the network models discussed above require detailed data on
the  coal  structure  and  molecular  composition,  the  CRECK-S-C  model
brings  together  all  this  structural  information  and  channels  into  four
reference monomeric structures (i.e. commonly found clusters) that are
bonded repeatedly in the polymeric macrostructure of coal:

1  COAL-1 – (C12H11) – Represents hydrogen-rich anthracites. It is a 50
%  molar  mixture  of  COAL-1(A)  and  COAL-1(B),  and  contains  no
oxygen;

2  COAL-2 –  (C14H10O) –  Represents bituminous coals, which have a

similar composition and structure to many mid-rank coals;

3  COAL-3  –  (C12H12O5)  –  Represents  lignites,  which  have  a  similar
structure and composition to low-rank coals. It has a high content of
both oxygen and hydrogen;

4  CHAR-C,  pure  carbon,  representing  larger  aromatic  clusters  in

graphitized structures.

Not only a molecular composition, but also a molecular structure is
assigned for each of these reference components, as shown in Fig. 13,
which represents the boundary characteristics of coals.

From the structures, it can be observed that COAL-1 (A) and (B) have
branches containing methyl (R-CH3) and larger (R-CH2-CH2-R) groups,
resulting  in  an  increased  hydrogen  content  compared  to  unbranched

Table 9
Example of characterization of different coals in the CRECK-S-C model.

Elem. composition
(dry wt.%)

Rhenish
Lignite (RL)
[285]

Colombian
Bituminous (CB)
[286]

German
Anthracite (GA)
[287]

65.83
5.05
25.25
0.68
0.29
2.9

C
H
O
N
S
Ash
Characterization (dry and ash-free wt.%)
COAL-1
COAL-2
COAL-3
CHAR-C

7.66
19.65
72.69
-

71.85
4.77
18.87
1.76
0.54
2.2

-
51.97
45.65
2.38

85.23
3.03
3.31
1.23
1.80
5.40

14.79
43.83
-
41.38

Fig.  14. Van  Krevelen  diagram  containing  the  reference  structures  of  the
CRECK-S-C  model.  Triangular  symbols  refer  to  coal  samples:  Rhenish  lignite
(RL) [285], Colombian bituminous (CB) [286], German anthracite (GA) [287].
Round symbols refer to the reference coals.

4. Seamless model of coal conversion and pollutant formation –
CRECK-S-C model

Another model that describes the thermochemical conversion of coal
was developed in the CRECK modeling research group at Politecnico di
Milano, Italy. They attribute a systematic nomenclature for their models:
CRECK-p-yymm-t, in which p stands for the phase (solid, liquid or gas),
yymm refers to the release date, and t stands for the fuel type (e.g. C for
coal,  P  for  plastics,  B  for  biomass).  The  general  theory  behind  the
development of pyrolysis kinetic models for solid fuels was firstly pub-
lished in [273]. The consolidated approach for coal pyrolysis was first
discussed  in  [274],  which  brings  the  name  CRECK-S-1002-C.  Further
developments were also extensively reported in a Ph.D. thesis [49]. The
formation and release of sulfur and nitrogen species from coal was first
proposed  as  standalone models in  [275] and  [276],  respectively. The
sulfur and nitrogen models were reformulated to integrate seamlessly
with the main model in [277]. The CRECK-S-C models approach differs
from the models discussed in the previous Sections in several aspects. In
terms of its complexity and level of detail, the CRECK-S-C conversion
model resides halfway between the very complex description adopted by
the network models and the roughly simplified one-step, two-step, and
DAE  models.  It  was  developed  to  offer  a  global  description  of  coal
conversion,  despite  the  differences  in  the  fuel  structure,  rank  and
composition,  relying  on  the  definition  of  reference  coals  and  a  coal
characterization method, which is discussed in Section 4.1. Consisting in
a  multi-step  kinetic  model,  it  encompasses  coal  devolatilization,  the
formation and release of chemi-adsorbed species (metaplastic species),
the  formation  of  char  and  its  annealing  process,  all  of  which  are

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093825

C. Hasse et al.

Table 10
Kinetic mechanism of COAL-1 pyrolysis and char annealing [274].

Reactants

Products

Reaction description

COAL-1 pyrolysis
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
R7
R8
Char annealing
R9
R10

COAL-1 →
COAL-1 →
COAL-1 →
COAL-1 →
G{TAR-1} →
G{C2-5} →
G{TAR-1} + CHAR-H →
G{TAR-1} + CHAR-C →

CHAR-H →
CHAR-C →

5 CHAR-H + 0.1 CHAR-C + 0.2 H2 + 0.9 CH4 + G{C2-5}
G{TAR-1}
5 CHAR-H + 0.25 CHAR-C + 0.5 H2 + 0.75 CH4 + C2-5
TAR-1
TAR-1
C2-5
5.3 CHAR-H + 3 CHAR-C + 2.55 H2 + 0.4 CH4
4.3 CHAR-H + 4 CHAR-C + 2.55 H2 + 0.4 CH4

2 CHAR-C + 0.5 H2
CHAR-G

Low temperature pyrolysis

High temperature pyrolysis

Release of metaplasts

Crosslinking

Annealing

aromatic clusters. COAL-3 has several oxygenated groups such as ether
(R-O-R),  methoxy  (R-O-CH3),  carbonyl  (R-C=O),  and  carboxyl  (R-C
(=O)-OH), which are typically found in lignites. The presence of these
groups provides the compositional characteristics of these species and
reflects  the  reactivity  and  the  products  released  during  the  thermo-
chemical conversion of coals.

These reference coals can be represented in a Van Krevelen diagram,
providing a graphical description of their composition, as reported in
Fig. 14. The reference species COAL-1, COAL-3 and CHAR-C are then
employed to define a triangular area, which is called the characteriza-
tion range. Every coal sample whose composition falls within this area
can  be  characterized  by  a  linear  combination  of  the  three  limiting
reference coals, taking into account the atomic mass balances. As bitu-
minous coals are commonly used to generate energy, reference COAL-2
is  included  in  the  characterization,  dividing  this  area  into  three  sub-
triangles.  Thus,  any  coal  to  be  studied  is  characterized  by  the  linear
combination of the reference coals defining the sub-triangle in which the
fuel composition is located.

This characterization method requires elemental (or ultimate) anal-
ysis in terms of the carbon, hydrogen and oxygen contents, as the criteria
for characterizing any fuel is to take into account the atomic mass bal-
ances. This approach strongly simplifies the amount of required exper-
imental data on the fuel. The proximate analysis complements the fuel
characterization by providing the moisture and ash contents. In Fig. 14,

Table 12
Species used by Sommariva et al. [274] in the de-lumping procedure.

Lumped tar

Composition

De-lumping species

Composition

TAR-1
TAR-2
TAR-3

C10H8
C14H10O1
C11H10O2

BTX

C13H14

Ox-C

C1H3O1

Naphthalene
Phenanthrol
p-coumaryl alcohol
Sinapyl aldehyde
Phenanthrol
Benzene
Toluene
Xylene
Methanol
Formaldehyde

C10H8
C14H10O1
C9H10O2
C11H12O4
C14H10O1
C6H6
C7H8
C8H10
C1H4O1
C1H2O1

three coal samples are also reported as an example: Rhenish lignite (RL),
Colombian bituminous (CB), and German anthracite (GA). As they fall
within the feasible characterization area, they can be represented as a
linear combination of the reference coals.

The characterization procedure can be simply represented through

the linear system of equations (69)–(71):

α⋅ωRC1

C + β⋅ωRC2

C + γ⋅ωRC3

C = ωCoal Sample

C

α⋅ωRC1

H + β⋅ωRC2

H + γ⋅ωRC3

H = ωCoal Sample

H

(69)

(70)

Table 11
Species produced from pyrolysis of reference coals of the CRECK-S-C model [274].

Category

Name

Description

Molecular formula

Metaplastic (chemi-adsorbed) species

Char species

Gas species

Tar species

G{COAL-2}
G{TAR-1}
G{TAR-2}
G{TAR-3}
G{CO2}
G{COH2}
G{H2O}
G{BTX}
G{CH4}
G{C2-5}

CHAR-H
CHAR-C
CHAR-G

H2
CH4
C2-5
CO
CO2

TAR-1
TAR-2
TAR-3
BTX
H2O
Ox-C

Intermediate solid from COAL-2 pyrolysis
Trapped lumped TAR-1
Trapped lumped TAR-2
Trapped lumped TAR-3
Trapped CO2
Trapped CO plus H2
Trapped H2O
Trapped Benzene-Toluene-Xylene (6:3:1 molar)
Trapped CH4
Trapped C2-C5 hydrocarbons

High hydrogen content char
Low hydrogen content char
Graphitized char

Hydrogen gas
Methane
C2-C5 hydrocarbons
Carbon monoxide
Carbon dioxide

C12H12O5
C12H11
C14H10O1
C11H10O2
C1O2
C1H2O1
H2O1
C13H14
C1H4
C1H2

C2H1
C1
C1

H2
C1H4
C1H2
C1O1
C1O2

Lumped tar from COAL-1
Lumped tar from COAL-2
Lumped tar from COAL-3
Lumped aromatic species Benzene-Toluene-Xylene (6:3:1 molar)
Water vapor
Methanol-Formaldehyde (1:1 molar)

C12H11
C14H10O1
C11H10O2
C13H14
H2O
C1H3O1

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093826

C. Hasse et al.

α⋅ωRC1

O + β⋅ωRC2

O + γ⋅ωRC3

O = ωCoal Sample

O

(71)

where α, β, and γ are the unknowns corresponding to the mass fraction
of the reference coals that characterize the sample, ωj
i  is the mass frac-
tion of the corresponding atom i in the solid j, RC 1–3 are the reference
coals and the specific choice depends on the sub-triangle.

In order to better explain the characterization method, Table 9 shows
the  composition  of  these  three  coal  samples,  which  have  significant
differences in their elemental compositions, and the resulting distribu-
tion of reference coals that are able to characterize them.

The resulting values in Table 9 show that different distributions of
reference  coals  are  necessary  to  characterize  these  samples.  Also,
different sub-triangles encompass the different samples, resulting in the
absence of CHAR-C, COAL-1 and COAL-3 in the characterization of RL,
CB  and  GA,  respectively.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  since  Rhenish
lignite is in the upper triangle, CHAR-C is set to zero.

This characterization method allows a wide range of coal composi-
tions to be represented in a single coal conversion model. However, it
does not take into consideration the maceral composition of coals, which
can significantly affect the combustion behavior of the fuel. The char-
acterization can be extended to account for sulfur and nitrogen in coal,
which is described independently of the hydrocarbon fraction, see Sec-
tion 4.4.

4.2. Pyrolysis of hydrocarbon compounds and char formation

Each of the reference coals described in Section 4.1 follows its in-
dependent pyrolysis path, and the overall coal behavior is obtained by
the linear combination of the behavior of the individual reference coals.
The pyrolysis of each reference species forms a corresponding distribu-
tion of solid and volatile products that take into consideration the initial
atomic mass balance. To facilitate discussion on the coal pyrolysis re-
actions,  the  kinetic  mechanism  of  COAL-1  pyrolysis,  including  char
annealing reactions, is reported in Table 10. The entire mechanism, and
especially the reactions for the other reference structures, can be found
in [274].

The  model  proposes  two  parallel  reacting  pathways  for  pyrolysis.
The first is dominant at low temperatures (R1 and R2) and the second at
high temperatures (R3 and R4). Two reacting paths compete in the low
temperature  mechanism:  one  is  the  decomposition  reaction  (R1),
describing the formation of char and chemi-adsorbed species (trapped
metaplastic  species)  with  low  molecular  weight,  and  the  other  is  the
depolymerization reaction, describing the formation of trapped tar (R2).
Similar  competing  reactions  are  present  in  the  high  temperature
mechanism, accounting for decomposition (R3) and depolymerization
(R4), describing the direct release of volatiles to the gas phase. Trapped
species are also released to the gas phase when their evaporation energy
barriers  are  surpassed  (R5  and  R6).  The  presence  of  trapped  species
promotes  crosslinking,  reticulation  and  repolymerization  reactions,

Table 13
Kinetic mechanism of char species conversion in the CRECK-S-C model [278].

Reactants

Products

Reactions with O2
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
Reactions with H2O
R6
R7
R8
Reactions with CO2
R9
R10
R11

CHAR-H + 0.75 O2 →
CHAR-C + O2 →
CHAR-C + 0.5 O2 →
CHAR-G + O2 →
CHAR-G + 0.5 O2 →

CHAR-H + 0.5 H2O →
CHAR-C + H2O →
CHAR-G + H2O →

CHAR-H + 0.5 CO2 →
CHAR-C + CO2 →
CHAR-G + CO2 →

0.5 H2O + CO + CHAR-C
CO2
CO
CO2
CO

H2 + 0.5 CO + 2 CHAR-C
H2 + CO
H2 + CO

0.5 H2O + 0.5 CO + 2 CHAR-C
2 CO
2 CO

which  lead  to  secondary  char  formation  (R7  and  R8),  explaining  the
reduced volatile yields found in low-temperature processes, compared to
high-temperature  processes.  Reactions  R9  and  R10  are  thermal
annealing reactions, part of the pyrolysis mechanism, and will be dis-
cussed later.

Different versions of the model have been proposed in various pub-
lications,  with  some  variations  in  the  species,  stoichiometries  and  ki-
netic parameters. Nevertheless, the same categorization can be applied
for  the  species  formed  from  pyrolysis  of  the  reference  coals  in  every
version of the mechanism. Table 11 lists all the species produced from
coal pyrolysis in the complete kinetic mechanism, as reported in Som-
mariva et al. [274].

While  intermediate  solids,  metaplastic  and  char  species  are  in  the
solid  phase,  tars  and  gases  are  volatiles.  By  considering  these  two
separate phases, the coal mass loss can be accounted for. All the species
named “G{}”  undergo further release reactions until char and volatile
species  are  formed.  Three  different  lumped  tar  species  are  used  to
describe typical tars released from each reference coal, namely TAR-1,
TAR-2  and  TAR-3,  referring  to  heavy-molecular-weight  volatile  spe-
cies. The tar species Ox-C is a lumped representation of low-molecular-
weight  oxygenated  compounds  such  as  methanol  and  formaldehyde.
Tar  species  BTX  is  a lumped  representation of  light  aromatic species,
such as benzene, toluene and xylene.

The  characterization  of  the  tars  via  the  de-lumping  procedure  is
necessary for coupling gas-phase kinetic mechanisms. The de-lumping
enables the description of secondary gas-phase reactions that are very
significant  at  high  temperatures,  increasing  tar  cracking  reactions.
Sommariva  et  al.  [274]  characterized  the  lumped  tars  using  real
chemical species, as reported in Table 12.

The devolatilization process leads to the formation of residual char.
In the CRECK-S-C model [274,276,278], char is made up of so-called
metaplastic  species  and  char  species  (see  Table  11),  which  allow
different char compositions to be described. The model predicts not only
the overall yield of char, but also the elemental composition. These as-
pects  were  extensively  validated  by  comparison  with  low-  and
high-heating-rate experiments [274]. As pyrolysis progresses, interme-
diate  solids  and  metaplastic  species  complete  their  devolatilization,
leading to a residual solid composed of char species only. The release of
metaplastic species (see Table 11) G{CH4}, G{C2-5}, G{CO}, G{CO2}, G
{H2O},  and  G{COH2}  at  high  temperatures  describes  the  progressive
drop  in  hydrogen  and  oxygen  content,  and  the  increase  in  the  char
carbon content.

As  reported  in  Table  11,  three  char  species  are  present:  CHAR-H,
CHAR-C  and  CHAR-G.  Their  presence  is  useful  to  describe  the  evolu-
tion of char characteristics such as the composition and the reactivity
due to  the annealing process  (R9 and  R10 in  Table 10).  Char species
CHAR-H is formed in higher amounts during early coal pyrolysis. As the
pyrolysis  progresses  to  higher  temperatures,  young  CHAR-H  progres-
sively  transforms  into  amorphous  CHAR-C  species  (R9),  with  a
decreasing  hydrogen  content,  accounting  for  the  first  step  of  char
annealing. The second step of annealing (R10), also called graphitiza-
tion,  transforms  amorphous  CHAR-C  into  graphitized  CHAR-G,  ac-
counting for the progressive reordering of the structure and the increase
in cluster size.

The reaction rate constants are calculated using the kinetic param-

eters in Arrhenius format, as reported in Equation (72)
)

(

k(TP) = A TP

βexp

(cid:0)

EA
RGTP

(72)

in which A is the frequency factor, Tp is the particle temperature, β is the
exponential coefficient of temperature (modified Arrhenius format), EA
is the energy barrier (activation energy) and RG is the constant of gases.
The general rate of reactions is described in Equations (73) and (74), for
mono- and bimolecular reactions, respectively

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093827

C. Hasse et al.

Fig. 15. Typical organic sulfur structures in coal.

r = k[A]

r = k[A][B]

(73)

(74)

The mass balance of the coal particle is calculated as the sum of the
mass of the solid species in the mixture, which is obtained as a function
of their net formation/decomposition rates, see Equation (75)

dmS
i
dt

= VSρSRi

(75)

where mS
i  is the mass of the i-th solid species in the particle, VS  is the
solid particle’s volume, ρS  is the particle density, and Ri  is the net for-
mation rate of the i-th solid species resulting from the multi-step kinetic
mechanism.

Because the reactants in the pyrolysis mechanism are all solid spe-
cies, the concentrations are calculated using the relative density of the
species with respect to the solid density (partial density). The CRECK-S-
C  model  of  coal  pyrolysis  was  also  presented  in  a  reduced  one-step
version, in order to ease the implementation into CFD simulations [276].

4.3. Char conversion

Char  species  formed  during  pyrolysis  of  the  reference  coals  react
with oxidizing gases in heterogeneous reactions. Depending on the py-
rolysis conditions, coal produces chars with different reactivities. As laid
out  in  Table  13,  the  progressive  decrease  in  char  reactivity  during
oxidation and gasification is explained by attributing different apparent
kinetic parameters to the heterogeneous reactions of CHAR-H, CHAR-C
and CHAR-G [278]. With a total of 11 reactions, the heterogeneous ki-
netic  mechanism  describes  the  conversion  of  the  three  char  species
formed during pyrolysis, accounting for oxidation and gasification.

CHAR-G is a representation of the aged graphitic structure of char
and thus exhibits low reactivity. CHAR-C is the young char with amor-
phous  carbon  organization,  while  CHAR-H  is  also  a  young  char,  but
containing a relatively large amount of hydrogen and thus with more
active sites and higher reactivity. The relative reactivity of the three char
species  CHAR-H, CHAR-C  and CHAR-G is  assumed to be ~40:20:1  at
1173 K [278], in order to fit the macroscopic observations about char
formation  and  its  subsequent  conversion  in  the  different  operating
conditions.

In  the  first  set  of  reactions  (R1–R5),  char  species  react  with  O2,

releasing oxidized species and consuming the char. The more reactive
CHAR-H  undergoes  partial  oxidation,  forming  CHAR-C,  H2O  and  CO
(R1).  The  chemical  rationalization  is  related  to  the  high  content  of
hydrogen in CHAR-H species, which is considered to first be extracted by
O2,  forming H2O. After extraction, the remaining fraction of carbon is
attributed to form directly CO and CHAR-C. The latter continues along
its own oxidation reaction path without increasing the number of species
and, consequently, the number of reactions in the model. Then, CHAR-C
(R2 and R3) and CHAR-G (R4 and R5) react, forming either CO or CO2.
In order to consider the selectivity for the formation of CO and CO2, two
competing  oxidation  reactions  are  taken  into  consideration  for  both
CHAR-C  and  CHAR-G.  The  kinetic  parameters  of  the  char  conversion
reactions were calibrated to agree with the kinetic parameters reported
in the literature [133,148,288] as well as in terms of the CO/CO2 ratio
[134,264,289,290] .

Another  set  of  reactions  describe  char  gasification  reactions  with
H2O (R6–R8) and CO2 (R9–R11). Similar to the reaction with O2, CHAR-
H  is  partially  oxidized,  forming  CHAR-C.  CHAR-C  reacts  with  H2O
releasing  H2  and  CO,  and  with  CO2  releasing  CO.  In  the  same  way,
CHAR-G reacts with H2O and CO2, but the rate of reactions are slower
when compared to the reactions with CHAR-C. The relative reactivity of
the three char species is similar to the reactions with O2. Gasification
reactions with H2O are about 103 times slower than the corresponding
oxidation reactions, while gasification reactions with CO2 are 4–5 times
slower than those with H2O, at 1200 K.

In  the  CRECK-S-C  model,  the  heterogeneous  reactions  are  simply
described on a volumetric basis, consolidating the surface features in the
pre-exponential factors of the kinetic parameters. Thus, for chars with
significantly different reacting surface areas, the pre-exponential factors
must be adjusted. The heterogeneous reactions are defined as first-order
with respect to the solid species. In relation to the gases, the reactions
are defined as first-order, except for the partial oxidation reactions with
O2  (R1,  R3  and  R5),  for  which  the  reaction  order  was  calibrated
empirically, resulting in 0.78 for O2.

The same formulation used for the pyrolysis reactions is used for the
char  conversion  reactions.  Because  there  are  gas  and  solid  species  as
reactants  in  the  heterogeneous  mechanism,  their  concentrations  are
calculated according to the phase they belong to. For gas species, the
concentration is calculated using an equation of state, while for solid
species  the  concentration  is  calculated  as  the  partial  density  of  the
species in the particle.

4.4. Sulfur and nitrogen release from coal

The  formation  and  release  of  SOx,  NOx,  and  their  precursors  are
directly related to the forms in which sulfur and nitrogen are present in
the coal structure. These species are among the most important pollut-
ants  formed  in  coal  combustion.  In  order  to  address  these  important
aspects  of  coal  conversion,  the  model  was  extended  to  include  the

Table 14
Species produced from sulfur pyrolysis in the CRECK-S-C model [275].

Category

Intermediate solids
Metaplastic species

Char species

Gas species

Tar species

Species

FeS
G{H2S}
G{SGAS}
G{SO3}
G{STAR}
SCHAR
SCHAR-ING
Fe
H2S
SGAS
SO3
STAR

Description

Intermediate inorganic species formed from SPYR pyrolysis
Trapped H2S
Trapped SGAS
Trapped SO3
Trapped STAR
Sulfur chemically bonded to char
Inorganic sulfur bonded to char
Iron atom in the residual ashes
Hydrogen sulfide
Lumped mercaptans
Sulfur trioxide / sulfuric anhydride
Lumped tar containing sulfur

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093828

C. Hasse et al.

Fig. 16. Workflow for using the sulfur pyrolysis model combined with the main coal pyrolysis model.

release  of  sulfur  and  nitrogen  during  the  process  of  coal  pyrolysis  in
[275] and [276], respectively. These models share many similarities to
the pyrolysis kinetic model of the hydrocarbon fraction of coal [274],
but because of the particularities of these heteroatoms, some important
differences were taken into consideration.

These two models describe the multiple forms in which these het-
eroatoms  are  present  in  coal,  using  a  limited  number  of  reference
structures. The release of sulfur and nitrogen is described using several
different chemical species, including light gases and condensable tars.
The models also account for the retention of sulfur and nitrogen in the
char, but kinetic models for the heterogeneous conversion of such spe-
cies during char burnout were not developed concurrently.

Because  of  some  differences  in  the  formulation  of  these  models,
seamless  integration  with  the  hydrocarbon  model  was  not  possible.
Using these models in combination required additional efforts, which
hindered  their  widespread  implementation  in  CFD  simulations.  Only
recently the formulation of these models was unified in [277] to achieve
the  seamless  integration  of  all  the  C/H/O/N/S  fractions  of  coal  in  a
single combustion model. The inclusion of SOx and NOx formation from
char-retained sulfur and nitrogen during char conversion was presented
in  [291]  and  [292],  respectively.  A  more  detailed  description  of  the
sulfur and nitrogen models will be presented in Sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2,
respectively.

4.4.1. Kinetic model of sulfur release during coal pyrolysis

Similarly  to  the  hydrocarbon  pyrolysis  model,  the  sulfur  model
proposes  a  characterization  of  the  fuel  in  terms  of  reference  species,
accounting for both organic and inorganic sulfur compounds.

The inorganic sulfur is accounted for as two reference species:

• SPYR  –  Pyritic  sulfur  –  complex  mineral  structure  containing  iron
sulfide together with other inorganic compounds. Most commonly
containing sulfur in the oxidation state S

(cid:0) 2.

• SS – Sulfate sulfur – salts and other complex inorganic compounds in
(cid:0) 2 and SO4
• The organic sulfur is accounted for in three chemical functionalities,

which sulfur is present as SO3

(cid:0) 2.

attributed to three different reference species:

• SAL – aliphatic sulfur – sulfur bonded to aliphatic carbons.
• SARO – aromatic sulfur – sulfur bonded to aromatic carbons.

Table 15
Species produced from nitrogen pyrolysis in the CRECK-S-C model [275].

Category

Species

Description

Metaplastic species

Char species
Gas species

Tar species

G{NH3}
G{HCN}
G{NTAR}
CHAR-N
NH3
HCN
NTAR

Trapped NH3
Trapped HCN
Trapped NTAR
Nitrogen chemically bonded to char
Ammonia
Hydrogen cyanide
Lumped tar containing nitrogen

• STHIO – thiophenic sulfur – sulfur present in heterocyclic compounds,

bonded to two adjacent carbons in the ring.

The general chemical structure of these organic sulfur functionalities
is illustrated in Fig. 15, each image showing sulfur bonded in different
ways to carbon atoms.

The sulfur in each of these reference species has different reacting
paths during pyrolysis, releasing gases (H2S, SO3, SGAS) and tars (STAR)
and forming char structures in different proportions. Table 14 shows the
list of species present in this model, containing a brief description and
the  corresponding  phase  they  belong  to.  The  species  SGAS  represents
lumped mercaptans, and STAR represents lumped tar containing sulfur.
The  mechanism  is  made  up  of  a  total  of  17  species  (5  reference
species and 12 product species), involved in 15 reactions [49,275]. The
model describes the pyrolysis of the organic components assuming that
there are two competing reacting mechanisms (low and high tempera-
tures). The low temperature mechanism describes the decomposition of
the reference species forming intermediate metaplastic species (chem-
i-adsorbed species) that are further released to the gas phase at higher
temperatures. While in the metaplast phase, the trapped tars can react
with the char species SCHAR  in crosslinking and reticulation reactions,
releasing light gases and retaining additional sulfur in the char. At high
temperatures or high heating rates, the organic sulfur reference species
directly  decompose  into  sulfur  gas  (SGAS)  and  tar  (STAR)  components,
without the intermediate formation of the metaplastic phase.

The decomposition of inorganic components is described in a two-
step release for pyritic sulfur (SPYR) and a one-step release for sulfate
sulfur  (SS).  In  the  first  step,  SPYR  releases  hydrogen  sulfide  (H2S),
forming an intermediate solid (FeS) and permanent inorganic sulfur in
char (SCHAR-ING). In the second step, the decomposition of FeS releases
additional hydrogen sulfide, leaving iron in the remaining ashes. Sulfate
sulfur  decomposition  forms  sulfuric  anhydride  (SO3)  and  permanent
inorganic sulfur in char (SCHAR-ING).

When  a  detailed  compositional  analysis  of  sulfur  in  the  coal  is
available, the data can easily be correlated to these reference species to
characterize  the  sulfur  content.  For  when  such  data  is  not  available,
Maffei  et  al.  [275]  proposed  correlations  for  the  attribution  of  the
reference species. The total sulfur content is first split into organic and
inorganic assuming standard values: 54% is attributed to the inorganic
fraction,  49%  being  pyritic  sulfur  and  5%  sulfate  sulfur.  The  charac-
terization  of  the  organic  fraction,  on  the  other  hand,  changes  as  a
function  of  the  carbon  content  (i.e.  coal  rank),  following  Equations
(76)-(78):

SAL = [0.276 (cid:0) 0.69 × (ωC (cid:0) 0.6)] × STOT

SARO = [0.184 (cid:0) 0.345 × (ωC (cid:0) 0.6)] × STOT

STHIO = [1.035 × (ωC (cid:0) 0.6)] × STOT

(76)

(77)

(78)

In this first publication [275], sulfur release from coal pyrolysis was

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093829

C. Hasse et al.

Fig. 17. Schematic representation of the C/H/O/N/S characterization procedure and obtention of product distribution from coal conversion processes in the in-
tegrated CRECK-S-C model.

presented as a standalone model which was not completely compatible
with the main coal pyrolysis model. Fig. 16 shows the steps required to
correctly  obtain  the  sulfur  and  hydrocarbon  pyrolysis  products  from
coal.

Because the stoichiometry of the sulfur model accounted only for the
atoms  of  sulfur,  calculating  the  corresponding  composition  of  the
products  required  a  sequence  of  steps:  characterization  of  the  sulfur
fraction of coal; calculation of yield and composition of sulfur pyrolysis
products;  recalculation  of  coal  composition  taking  into  account  the
corresponding  composition  of  volatiles  released  (C/H/O)*;  character-
ization of the recalculated hydrocarbon fraction of coal; calculation of
yield and composition of hydrocarbon pyrolysis products.

A fully integrated model was presented in [277], where the necessary
contents  of  carbon,  hydrogen  and  oxygen  are  attributed  to  the  sulfur
reference  species,  and  the  corresponding  formation  of  products  con-
taining these atoms is directly included in the sulfur kinetic mechanism.
This  proposed  formulation  dismisses  any  need  to  treat  sulfur  content
separately from the remaining content of coal.

Using the integrated model and additional experimental data [293],
Debiagi et al. [138,291] extended the model to include the heteroge-
neous conversion of sulfur in char. These latest efforts enabled the sulfur
content  to  be  fully  integrated  into  the  seamless  framework  of  the
CRECK-S-C model.

4.4.2. Kinetic model of nitrogen release during coal pyrolysis

The model describing the release of nitrogen during the pyrolysis of
coal was proposed by Maffei et al. [276]. Similarly to the hydrocarbon
pyrolysis  model,  fuel-nitrogen  is  characterized  by  reference  species.
Nitrogen is commonly found in coal as pyrrolic, pyridinic and quater-
nary  chemical  functionalities  accounting  for  50–80%,  20–40%  and
0–20%  of  total  nitrogen,  respectively  [294].  However,  unlike  sulfur,
nitrogen  content  is  not  closely  related  to  the  coal  rank,  showing
non-linear trends [49]. Maffei et al. [276] mention that more precise
correlation can be obtained with respect to the coal maceral composi-
tion. This information is, however, not usually available and therefore
currently not taken into consideration. Inorganic nitrogen can also be
identified in ions such as nitrite, nitrates and ammonium, but only in
small amounts.

Because  of  the  complex  distribution  of  nitrogen  and  uncertainties
reported in the literature, Maffei et al. [276] propose a model that is
supported  by  the  analogue  behavior  between  the  released  fraction  of
nitrogen and total fraction of released volatile matter, as reported by
Chen and Niksa [84] and Perry and Fletcher [96]. On this basis and to
maintain a consistency in the model, they adopted the same criterion for
the nitrogen matrix already used to characterize the effect of the solid
phase composition on the formation of hydrocarbon species [49,274].
Thus,  four  solid  nitrogen  reference  species  are  taken:  COAL-1-N,
COAL-2-N, COAL-3-N and CHAR-N, closely tied to the reference coals
COAL-1,  COAL-2,  COAL-3  and  CHAR.  Depending  on  the  elemental
composition (C/H/O) of the coal, the nitrogen content of each coal is
characterized using the same distribution of the reference coals of the
hydrocarbon fraction characterization (see Fig. 14).

The nitrogen in each of these reference species has different reacting
paths during pyrolysis, releasing gases (NH3 and HCN) and tars (NTAR)
and forming char structures in different proportions. Table 15 shows the
list  of  species  in  this  model,  with  a  brief  description  and  their  corre-
sponding category. The species NTAR is lumped and represents a variety
of species containing nitrogen, such as the typically found pyridine and
pyrrole and their substituted compounds. Future extensions could also
consider the direct release of N2, which was observed during pyrolysis of
low-rank coals and lignite [295–297].

The mechanism consists of a total of 11 species (4 reference species
and 7 products), involved in 17 reactions [49,276]. The release of ni-
trogen components is assumed to occur along with coal pyrolysis. Thus,
in accordance with the main model of coal pyrolysis, it was assumed that
two different mechanisms, low and high temperature, compete during
the  release  of  the  nitrogen  components.  Again,  the  low  temperature
mechanism accounts for the formation of metaplastic species, which are
then released to the gas phase at higher temperatures. The metaplastic
tar  species  G{NTAR}  reacts  with  CHAR-N  through  crosslinking  and
reticulation reactions, releasing additional NH3 and HCN, decreasing the
overall release of NTAR, increasing the retention of nitrogen in the char.
This process is hindered at high temperatures by the direct release of
volatiles to the gas phase.

Similarly to the sulfur model, the first nitrogen model proposed was
able to predict the distribution of nitrogen in the products based on the
characteristics of coal and  the operating conditions. Moreover,  in the
first  formulation  [276],  nitrogen  release from  coal  pyrolysis  was  pre-
sented  as  a  standalone  model,  which  was  not  completely  compatible
with the main coal pyrolysis model. The steps necessary to use the ni-
trogen model with the main coal model are analogous to those reported
in Fig. 16 for sulfur.

A fully integrated model was presented in [277], where the necessary
contents of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen were attributed to the nitrogen
reference  species,  and  the  corresponding  formation  of  products  con-
taining  these  atoms  were  directly  included  in  the  nitrogen  kinetic
mechanism, there was no need to treat nitrogen content separately from
the  remaining  content  of  coal.  Using  the  integrated  model  and  the
structure of the heterogeneous reactions reported in Table 13, the ni-
trogen model was extended to account for the heterogeneous conversion
of nitrogen in char, and implemented in a carrier-phase DNS simulation
of coal combustion in [292]. These latest efforts enabled the nitrogen
content  to  be  fully  integrated  into  the  seamless  framework  of  the
CRECK-S-C model.

4.5. Summary

The CRECK-S-C model provides a  general, seamless  kinetic frame-
work for the coal conversion process. It provides a level of detail and
accuracy that can be considered intermediate compared to the highly
detailed network models (CPD, FG-DVC, FLASHCHAIN®) and the sim-
ple  SFOMs  (Single  First-Order  Reaction  Models),  C2SMs  (Competing
Two-Step Models) and DAEMs (Distributed Activation Energy Models)
for  pyrolysis,  the  same  argument  also  applies  for  the  detailed  char

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093830

C. Hasse et al.

models. It offers an end-to-end approach, integrating the fuel handling
and characterization, pyrolysis, char formation and annealing [274], the
formation and release of SOx [275] and NOx [276] and their precursors,
and char burn-out [278] in a seamless model. In particular, there is no
conceptual gap between the pyrolysis and the char model. The model
requires the elemental composition from ultimate analysis as input data.
Coal  is  assumed  to  be  a  combination  of  a  number  of  reference  coals
which can be used to describe the conversion of many typical coals. The
model is only able to describe coals that fall within the characterization
range.

The sulfur and nitrogen devolatilization processes, first made avail-
able as standalone submodels [275,276], were reformulated in [277] to
allow  their  seamless  integration  into  the  main  coal  model.  The  inte-
grated model was implemented and further validated for oxy-fuel con-
ditions  [298]  and  for  the  behavior  of  sulfur  [138,291]  and  nitrogen
[292] during coal conversion. A schematic summary of the necessary
steps  for  using  the  integrated  C/H/O/N/S  model  is  represented  in
Fig.  17:  (1)  all  sulfur  content  is  characterized  into  the  corresponding
sulfur reference species, (2) then all nitrogen content is characterized
and,  to  finish  the  characterization,  (3)  the  hydrocarbon  fraction  is
characterized. Having the complete characterization of the coal, (4) the
integrated kinetic model is used to predict the distribution of products.
This will enable a a comprehensive treatment of most thermo-chemical
conversion steps in a single model that can be directly coupled to CFD.
It is important to note that char conversion is assumed to take place
as a volumetric process, rather than a surface process. It is well known
that the surface characteristics strongly influence the reactivity of the
chars.  However,  the  surface  aspects  are  simplified,  assuming  average
values, and lumped in the kinetic parameters. Moreover, pore diffusion
is not explicitly treated. Therefore, for chars that have a significantly
different porous structure and for different atmospheres (such as oxy-
fuel  combustion), the  kinetic parameters  must be adjusted to provide
proper results.

5. Coupling detailed models for solid fuel kinetics to 3D-CFD
applications

Despite  the  availability  of  advanced  phenomenological  and  semi-
empirical  models  for  the  thermo-chemical  conversion  of  coal,  as
described in the previous sections, most CFD simulations reported even
in the recent literature still use simplified approaches for modeling the
solid phase  kinetics. This can be attributed to the computational cost
associated  with  the  use  of  advanced  models  and  to  the  challenges  in
prescribing accurate kinetics data for the feedstock employed. Consid-
ering that CFD simulations of pulverized coal combustion and gasifica-
tion  require  substantially  more  computational  resources  compared  to
pure gas phase systems, a balance must be found between computational
cost and prediction quality. Especially recently, substantial efforts have
been reported in the literature to incorporate advanced solid fuel kinetic
models into CFD simulations; these are reviewed in this section with a
special focus on so-called indirect approaches, see below.

Similarly, it is interesting to note that a number of studies have been
published recently dealing with improved numerical approaches for the
description  of  gas  phase  processes  in  coal  combustion/gasification,
specifically turbulence modeling and turbulence-chemistry interaction,
respectively. These are reviewed in Section 6.

Advanced approaches such as network pyrolysis models (Section 2),
char conversion models (Section 3) or the CRECK approach (Section 4)
provide information about the conversion rate of coal and yield of char,
the composition of products and the evolution of the coal/char matrix.
Different strategies have been developed for the coupling to CFD and
they can be divided into two main categories:

1  Direct  coupling  by  invoking  the  phenomenological  model  on  a
particle-by-particle basis for each time step of the CFD calculation
and

Fig. 18. Workflow of the Pyrolysis kinetic preprocessor (PKP). Adapted from
Vascellari et al. [41].

2  Indirect  coupling  by  successively  invoking  the  solid  fuel  kinetic
model and the CFD calculation (or information thereof) in an itera-
tive routine.

Both  approaches  can  predict  the  thermo-chemical  conversion  but
have specific advantages and disadvantages. Direct coupling is favorable
as  it  requires  no  a  priori  estimates  (e.g.  for  the  particle  temperature
history): this information is directly available for each particle during
the simulation and the kinetic model can be directly applied. Depending
on  the  model’s  complexity,  this  can  lead  to  a  substantial  increase  in
computational  resources.  To  the  authors’  best  knowledge,  only  the
following models have been used in direct coupling so far:

• CPD, e.g. see [11,18,307,308,299–306],
• FG-DVC, e.g. see [301],
• CRECK-S-C approach, e.g. see [309].

The source code of CPD is freely available, which in principle permits
integration  into  CFD  solvers,  and  was  also  implemented  in  the  com-
mercial code ANSYS Fluent. FG-DVC was implemented in the CFD solver
PCGC [310]. The CRECK-S-C approach has no such restrictions since it
uses  a  standard  CHEMKIN  format  for  the  reaction  mechanism.  Other
models are closed-source and can only be run within specific standalone
programs or do not offer an open interface for CFD coupling.

By contrast, the indirect approach relies on a simplified representa-
tion  of  the  detailed  kinetic  models.  The  parameters  of  the  simplified
approaches, e.g. single or multi-step models, are determined using the
detailed models. Thus, these simplified models using global rates can be
considered  as  a  regression  function  with  a  certain  number  of  kinetic
parameters that must be adjusted. This usually requires the definition of
relevant conditions, i.e. the particle heating rate, the temperature his-
tory,  the  atmosphere  and  so  on.  In  the  context  of  this  paper,  these
conditions are usually extracted from corresponding CFD calculations.
It should be noted that these parameters can also be determined from
experiments, which can be considered the traditional approach. How-
ever, this restricts the use to conditions that are close to the experimental
conditions. These might not be close to what is relevant to the targeted
application. More discussion can be found in the literature, e.g. in [42,
311] and references therein.

Widely used indirect approaches for pyrolysis and char conversion
are discussed in Sections 5.1- 5.3 and selected references reporting their
use are given. In addition, the commercial software PC Coal Lab® [108]
provides  automatic  parameter  determination  for  SFOM,  C2SM  and
DAEM  based  on  FLASHCHAIN®  for  pyrolysis.  Further,  a  similar
approach  is  provided  for  char  conversion  using  CBK/E  and  CBK/G,
which is also discussed below in Sections 5.4-5.5.

Finally, machine learning has become a very promising alternative

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093831

C. Hasse et al.

Taking  into  account  one  or  more  temperature  histories  for  a  coal
particle Tp,i,j = fi(tj), for each heating rate i and a discrete number of time
steps tj  the single network pyrolysis models can calculate the yield of
volatiles Ynet
i,j  and a pyrolysis rate using the following equation

rnet
i,j =

dY net
i,j
dt

(79)

Fig. 19. Workflow of advanced chemistry surrogate model in C3M toolbox.

for data-driven modeling in various scientific disciplines. Initial studies
have been published for modeling solid fuel kinetics; for these applica-
tions the data is usually generated by running the detailed kinetic model,
but in the future, it might be interesting to make use of the enormous
amount of available experimental data. This is discussed in Section 5.6.
It is particularly important that the models correctly predict the ul-
timate volatile yields. Especially for high heating rates, only very few
time steps are actually available in CFD to resolve devolatilization dy-
namics. Volatile yields are crucial because they partition the parent coal
into fuels that burn in the order of milliseconds vs. char which burns in
the order of seconds.

5.1. Pyrolysis Kinetic Preprocessor (PKP)

The  Pyrolysis  Kinetic  Preprocessor  (PKP)  [41]  was  initially  devel-
oped at Technical University Bergakademie Freiberg. Work continued at
the Technical University Darmstadt and the University of Stuttgart. PKP
is  used  to  calibrate  simple  empirical  pyrolysis  models  such  as  SFOM,
C2SM  or  DAE  models  using  results  either  from  experiments  or  from
advanced  phenomenological models such as CPD, FG-DVC or  FLASH-
CHAIN®. The code is implemented in object-oriented Python language.
The PKP method has been successfully used in several studies for cali-
brating the SFOM using the advanced phenomenological models CPD,
FG-DVC and FLASHCHAIN® [312–315], and for calibrating the C2SM
using the CPD, FG-DVC and FLASHCHAIN® models [128,316] to ach-
ieve  favorable  agreement  with  the  experimentally  observed  volatile
yield.

The results of proximate and ultimate analyses of the feed coal are
generally used to adapt the kinetic parameters of the phenomenological
models.  In  a  similar  way  to  Eq.  (79),  the  yield  of  volatiles  and  the
pyrolysis  rate  can  be  determined  for  each  heating  rate  i  with  an
empirical  model  considering  a  general  set  of  model  parameters  xk.
Taking into consideration Nhr particle temperature history and a discrete
number of time steps Nt,i for each heating rate i, the objective function
OF is calculated as shown in the following equation

{

OF(xk) =

1
Nhr

∑Nhr

i=1

Nt,i

[

(

∑Ni,j
j=1

[
maxj

Y net
i,j

]2

(cid:0) Y emp
)

i,j (xk)
(

Y net
i,j

(cid:0) minj

Y net
i,j

}

)]2

(80)

The objective function can possess several local minima taking into
account multiple particle heating rates. Therefore, the objective func-
tion is minimized with the use of a genetic algorithm [317]. This type of
algorithm is capable of finding global minima. By contrast, local opti-
mization tools such as gradient-based methods are less suitable to solve
the problem on hand.

When this calibration method has been used previously, only single
heating  rates  have  been  used  for  adaptation.  However,  the  results  of
several  studies  [133,318]  show  that  the  operating  conditions  during
pyrolysis have a strong influence on the calibration procedure. There-
fore, PKP has been implemented with a calibration method using the
data  of  many  particle  heating  rates  to  account  for  local  or
particle-size-based differences in the reactor. Since the adaption of an
empirical model in PKP requires knowledge about the conditions in the
reactor, in general an iterative approach is chosen. Based on this pro-
cedure a representative particle heating rate from the CFD calculation is
chosen. Finally, reliable pyrolysis parameters are derived.
The workflow of the PKP code is illustrated in Fig. 18.
The four sub-steps of the mechanism are:

1  Determination  of  the  kinetic  parameters  of  the  network  pyrolysis
models  based  on  the  results  of  proximate  and  ultimate  analyses,
using the individual methods developed for single models;

Fig. 20. Procedures for CFD simulation using conventional devolatilization models, i.e. the SFOM model (left), and the TDP model (right). Adapted from [321].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093832

C. Hasse et al.

2  Estimation of yields and pyrolysis rates by the network models using
the  heating  rates  and,  optionally  for  CPD  only,  results  of  the  coal
structure measurements by 13C-NMR spectroscopy;

3 Calibration of the empirical models, minimizing the objective func-

tion, defined in Eq. (80);

4  Execution of the CFD simulation using the kinetic parameters from

the calibration procedure [41].

Finally,  to  achieve  accurate  heating  rates  for  the  CFD  simulation,
steps  2–4  are  carried  out  iteratively  until  a  converged  solution  is
reached. It is particularly important to consider different particle sizes
representative  for  the  particle  size  distribution  (PSD),  since  the  final
ultimate yield will strongly depend on this.

5.2. Carbonaceous Chemistry for Computational Modeling (C3M)

The  Carbonaceous  Chemistry  for  Computational  Modeling,  C3M,
model was developed by the United States Department of Energy Na-
tional Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) [319]. C3M software in-
terfaces  with  the  kinetic  packages  PC  Coal  Lab®  (Niksa  Energy
Associate),  CPD  (University  of  Utah)  and  FG-DVC  (Advanced  Fuel
Research) and CFD softwares MFiX (NETL), ANSYS FLUENT (ANSYS)
and Barracuda (CPFD). The C3M software provides the pyrolysis reac-
tion rate, composition and yield for volatile gases and tar for use in CFD
simulations.  The  MFiX  Validation  module  in  C3M  allows  users  to
perform virtual TGA experiments to evaluate the effect which operating
conditions – such as the pressure, temperature and heating rates and fuel
type – can have on pyrolysis reaction rates and yield, before CFD sim-
ulations are performed. The Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) module in
C3M generates advanced chemistry surrogate models for pyrolysis rates
and  yields  for  use  in  CFD  simulations  [319,320].  A  surrogate  model
constructed from data measured at different operating temperatures and
heating rates, which accounts for local changes in the temperature and
heating  rate,  can  be  more  accurate  than  a  single  response  model
developed  for  a  fixed  heating  rate  and  temperature.  Therefore,  C3M
provides both direct and indirect coupling with the aforementioned ki-
netic software package.

The workflow for constructing surrogate models for pyrolysis in C3M
is documented by Van Essendelft et al. [319] and is shown in Fig. 19. The
first step required by the UQ module in C3M is to define the operating
envelope of the reactor. Nominal operating values have to be defined,
along  with  their  operating  range  for  input  parameters  such  as  the
pressure,  temperature,  heating  rate,  particle  size,  among  others.  The
input parameters can either be uniform, characterized by minimum and
maximum  values  (epistemic),  or  expressed  by  a  normal  distribution,
characterized by a mean and standard deviation (aleatoric). In the sec-
ond step, the UQ software toolkit PSUADE, from the Lawrence Liver-
more National Laboratory, is used to generate a sampling space where
each sample is a unique operating condition that the reactor encounters.
In  the  third  step,  the  chosen  phenomenological  pyrolysis  model  is
launched by C3M for each of the sampling points. The fourth step in-
volves  constructing  a  response  surface  for  the  quantities  of  interest
(QoIs), based on user-specified inputs. The QoIs can be the species yield
and reaction rates as functions of input parameters such as temperature
or heating rates. Finally, in the last step the application-oriented sur-
rogate model is coupled to the CFD calculation. Since the dependencies
of the pyrolysis rate and product yields on the heating rate and particle
temperature are collected and stored in the easily and quickly accessible
surrogate model, the CFD solver is capable of invoking the model for
each particle individually time step by time step. As seen in Fig. 19, there
may be a need to repeat Steps 1 through 5 if the original design of the
experiment did not cover all possible operating conditions seen in the
reactor.  The  surrogate  model  routine  in  C3M  allows  the  toolbox  to
indirectly couple network pyrolysis models to CFD applications without
needing to execute numerous iterations to achieve the desired accuracy.

5.3. Tabulated Devolatilization Process (TDP)

The  TDP  model  was  developed  by  Hashimoto  et  al.  [321]  at  the
Central  Research  Institute  of  the  Electric  Power  Industry  (CRIEPI)  in
Japan. TDP stands for Tabulated Devolatilization Process. It is used for
coupling network pyrolysis models to CFD calculations to increase the
level  of  detail  and  the  accuracy  of  devolatilization  description.  In  a
similar way to the C3M model [319], Hashimoto et al. [321] pursue the
same  idea  of  combining  the  advantages  of  directly  and  indirectly
coupling network pyrolysis models to CFD calculations. The routine they
developed for the TDP model tries to avoid multiple iterations of the
successive  execution  of  the  devolatilization  database  generation  with
TDP model and CFD calculations.

The development of TDP is presented in detail by Hashimoto et al.
[321]. The TDP model for coupling phenomenological devolatilization
models to CFD is schematically shown in Fig. 20 and is described in the
following.

Initially, prior to the CFD calculation, data has to be collected for
generating the devolatilization database. This includes typical devola-
tilization  parameters  such  as  the  activation  energy,  pre-exponential
factor and mass fraction of volatile matter in particle, for several par-
ticle temperature histories (particle temperature and heating rate). Both
experimental and numerical data, e.g. obtained with network pyrolysis
models such as CPD, FG-DVC and FLASHCHAIN®, can be used as inputs.
The TDP model generates the devolatilization database in the form of a
table  connecting  the  various  temperature  histories  and  respective
devolatilization parameters with each other.

The  second  step  is  to  couple  the  generated  table,  including  the
devolatilization database, to the CFD calculation. In addition, an initial
setting of devolatilization parameters is chosen for the first iteration of
the CFD solver (i.e. steps (2-4) in Fig. 20.

The third step is the CFD simulation itself. After each iteration of the
CFD  solver,  the  TDP  model  analyzes  the  results  for  the  particle  tem-
perature and heating rate from the last iteration and checks for the best
fitting  particle  temperature  history  in  the  tabulated  devolatilization
database. The respective devolatilization parameters are applied in the
next step of the CFD solver. Thus, the devolatilization parameters are
updated  for  each  particle  by  the  TDP  model.  This  is  continued  until
convergence is achieved.

The TDP model allows phenomenological devolatilization models to
be coupled to a CFD application using a modified indirect approach. The
model’s implementation tries to avoid using more than one iteration of
the successive execution of the TDP model and CFD calculation. Simi-
larly to C3M [319], the accuracy of predicted results after one run of the
routine depends strongly on the generation of a representative devola-
tilization database.

Additionally, the validity of the proposed model is examined by the
numerical  simulation  of  an  industrial-scale  low-NOx  burner.  In  this
simulation, the results of experiments are compared with CFD calcula-
tions employing the TDP model, the SFOM model proposed by Badzioch
and  Hawksley,  and  the  C2SM  model  proposed  by  Kobayashi  et  al..
Further evaluation of the TDP model was conducted by Hashimoto et al.
[318] on a laboratory-scale pulverized coal jet flame, and the simulation
results were again compared to the experimental data and the results
obtained  from  the  conventional  devolatilization  models  SFOM  and

Table 16
Comparison between CBK/G and SNOI model.

Submodel

CBK/G

SNOI model

Heterogeneous surface reactions
Thermal annealing
Pore evolution
Film diffusion
Ash inhibition
Pore diffusion

LH mechanism
✓

RPM
SFM
✓

PPPM

NthOR
⨯

RPM
SFM
⨯

PPPM

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093833

C. Hasse et al.

C2SM. Through cross-comparisons,  Hashimoto et  al. [318,321]  found
that the TDP model can give better results compared to the other con-
ventional models in predicting the particle velocities. They also reported
that,  compared  to  the  turbulence  model,  the  gas-phase  combustion
model  and  the  radiation  model,  the  devolatilization  model  has  an
important influence on particle velocity prediction. Recently, Takahashi
et  al.  [322] applied  the TDP  model to predict  soot  formation charac-
teristics in a pulverized coal jet flame using LES. In all the above sim-
ulations with TDP, the database for devolatilization was generated using
the FLASHCHAIN® model.

5.4. Single n-th order reaction (SNOR) model for char conversion

Advanced  char  conversion  models  are  capable  of  predicting  char
consumption by oxidation and gasification. The following section pre-
sents two approaches used to integrate such advanced char conversion
kinetics into CFD, namely SNOR and SNOI [108,128].

SNOR  stands for  “single  n-th  order  reaction”.  It  builds  directly  on
CBK/E  [133]  and  CBK/G  [126].  SNOR  is  incorporated  into  the  com-
mercial  software  package  PC  Coal  Lab®  distributed  by  Niksa  Energy
Associates LLC (NEA) [108]. Due to the complexity of the advanced CBK
versions and the lack of a direct interface, they are not suitable for direct
CFD applications. Instead, SNOR uses empirical global kinetics for the
more mechanistic LH mechanisms, which are fitted using the results of
CBK/E or CBK/G model. The derived global kinetics are valid for the
defined operation conditions, e.g. temperature, pressure, etc., and the
parent coal.

SNOR considers O2 for oxidation reactions and CO2, H2O and H2 for
gasification reactions as reactants. For O2 and H2, the reaction rates are
defined as

(

Ri = θRi

∘ = θAiexp

(cid:0)

)

Pni
i,s

Ei
RGT

(81)

○

with θ as an empirical fitting parameter, Ri
as the surface-based reaction
rate without the influences of char aging or char structure changes, Ri as
the reaction rate based on the outer particle surface, Ai, Ei and ni as the
pre-exponential factor, activation energy and reaction order of the n-th
order global kinetic approach and Pi,s as the reactant partial pressure at
the char particle surface. For the reaction rates of CO2  and H2O, inhi-
bition  by  the  product  species  CO  and  H2  is  taken  into  account  using
additional terms

RCO2 = θR∘

CO2

= θ

and

RH2O = θR∘

H2O = θ

(

)

ACO2 exp

(cid:0) ECO2
RGT

P

nCO2
CO2,s

1 + KCOPCO,s

(

)

AH2Oexp

(cid:0) EH2 O
RGT

P

nH2 O
H2O,s

1 + KH2 PH2,s

Fig. 22. Total volatile yield predicted by network models for Utah bituminous
coal considering different heating rates. Reprinted with permission from [41].
Copyright 2013 Elsevier Ltd.

with KCO and KH2  as pre-exponential factors of the inhibition term. The
empirical fitting parameter θ describes the influence of the main inhi-
bition  mechanisms  which  decelerate  the  char  conversion  rate  as  the
carbon conversion level XC increases. The inhibition mechanisms taken
into  consideration  are  the  aging  of  char  (thermal  annealing  and  ash
inhibition)  and  the  changes  to  the  char  structure,  e.g.  density  and
porosity. The empirical parameter θ is defined using a fifth-order poly-
nomial expression depending on the carbon conversion level XC

θ(XC) = α0 + α1XC + α2X2

C + α3X3

C + α4X4

C + α5X5

C

(84)

with αj (j = 0 – 5) as regression coefficients.

(82)

(83)

5.5. Single n-th order intrinsic (SNOI) model for char conversion

In  addition  to  the  SNOR  versions  of  CBK/E  and  CBK/G,  a  second
approach  was  developed  to  couple  phenomenological  models  to  CFD
applications. A reduced version of the CBK models is applied: the so-
called single n-th order intrinsic (SNOI) model [128]. SNOI uses only
certain submodels of CBK/G, summarized in Table 16.

Fig. 21. Left: Calculated volatile mass fraction from CPD and an optimized two-step model for four heating rates. Right: Calculated ultimate volatile yield vs. heating
rate using CPD and the two-step model. Reprinted with permission from [48]. Copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093834

C. Hasse et al.

levels  for  a  short  time  only,  which  defines  the  reduction  in  particle
reactivity.

5.6. Machine learning approaches for solid fuel kinetics

Similarly to the aforementioned PKP model for devolatilization and
the SNOR and SNOI models for char reactions, machine learning is an
another option and a strongly emerging scientific field aimed at fitting
detailed solid fuel kinetics to a reduced-order model based on a database
generated from the  network models such as  FG-DVC, CPD  or FLASH-
CHAIN®  for  devolatilization  and  CBK/E  and  CBK/G  model  for  char
surface  reactions.  Some  initial  applications  of  machine  learning  ap-
proaches for solid fuel kinetics are reviewed next.

In machine learning approaches, the relevant information, such as
the heating rate or the ultimate and proximate analyses are the inputs
for  the  specific  machine  learning  algorithms  (i.e.,  unsupervised  and
supervised  machine  learning  methods),  while  the  outputs  can  be  the
rates of kinetic parameters. Abbas et al. [323] were the first to use a
machine learning method employing neutral networks (NNs) to predict
the kinetics of devolatilization. The input parameter was the tempera-
ture for charactering the heating condition, while the output was the
weight loss, which is related to the kinetics of devolatilization. The NN
approach  was  implemented  in  the  CFD  simulations,  and  comparable
results were obtained with those obtained using the detailed devolati-
lization method FLASHCHAIN®. Xing et al. [324] further extended the
work of Abbas et al. [323] by considering the different heating rates and
coal types (determined by the ultimate and proximate analyses) as input
parameters for the machine learning employing Artificial Neural Net-
works (ANNs). The output is the kinetics parameters for the devolatili-
zation  method  of  C2SM,  which  can  be  directly  used  in  the  CFD
simulation.  Compared  to  the  CPD  model,  the  ANN  model  shows  a
competitive  prediction  capability  for  the  total  volatile  release  and
release  rates.  The  results  showed  that  the  heating  rate  has  the  most
significant  effect  on  the  pre-exponential  factor,  while  the  coal  type
directly  influences  the  activation  energy  and  the  total  volatile  yield.
Recently,  Debiagi  et  al.  [325]  developed  a  reduced  order  model  for
devolatilization and char conversion processes based on the supervised
machine learning method employing HDMR (high-dimensional model
representations by Rabitz et al. [326]). The database for the machine
learning  is  generated  based  on  single  coal  particle  combustion  for
various  operating  conditions  extracted  from  the  LES  results  of  a  pul-
verized  coal  combustion  chamber,  taking  all  the  pyrolysis  and  char
conversion processes into account. A detailed solid fuel kinetic model
(CRECK-S-C model) (Section 4) was employed to generate the database
for training and testing. The input parameters include the temperature,
heating  rate,  O2  mass  fraction  and  residence  time,  while  the  outputs
include the mass loss, gas/tar pyrolysis rates and char oxidation rate.
The results showed that the HDMR-based supervised machine learning
approach  is  suitable  for  generating  reliable,  computationally  efficient
models to describe the solid fuel kinetics.

Overall, the recent results have shown that the approaches based on
machine  learning  are  promising  for  implementing  detailed  solid  fuel
kinetics  in  CFD  simulations  of  the  pulverized  coal  combustion  and
gasification applications.

5.7. Selected comparisons of solid fuel kinetics and their application in
CFD

In the following, selected examples from the literature are presented
where different models for the solid fuel kinetics are compared with a
particular focus on their use in a CFD simulation.

Richards and Fletcher [48] investigated six different empirical py-
rolysis  models  and  compared  the  results  to  CPD.  Specifically,  they
looked at the extent to which the models were able to reproduce the
following  two  trends:  increasing  devolatilization  temperature  with
increasing  heating  rate,  and  increasing  ultimate  volatiles  yield  with

Fig. 23. Utah bituminous coal: CO, CO2, H2 and H2O molar fraction along the
axis.  Results  of  C2SM  calibrated  with  CPD,  FG-DVC  and  FLASHCHAIN
compared to experiments [327]. Experimental values for H2O are reported with
hollow  symbols  because  they  are  not  directly  measured.  Reprinted  with
permission from [41]. Copyright 2013 Elsevier Ltd.

SNOI uses a global kinetic approach instead of the more mechanistic
LH  reaction  mechanism.  The  calibration  of  the  kinetic  constants  de-
mands less effort compared to a LH reaction mechanism.

Another simplification is that H2 is neglected as a reactant since the
gasification kinetics of H2 are several orders of magnitude smaller than
the  oxidation  kinetics  or  even  gasification  kinetics  of  CO2  and  H2O.
Therefore, the number of equations in the global kinetic mechanisms is
reduced  to  three  reactions.  The  formulation  of  the  reaction  rates  is
identical to the equations used in the SNOR versions.

Neglecting  ash  inhibition  and  thermal  annealing  by  removing  the
respective  submodels  considerably  reduces  the  computational  effort.
Because  SNOI  was  mainly  developed  to  model  char  gasification,  the
negligence of ash inhibition can be justified as explained in Section 3.
Thermal annealing occurs when particles are exposed to high tempera-
ture levels. With respect to CFD simulations of gasifiers, the coal/char
particles  are  much  closer  to  the  burner  flame  during  pyrolysis  than
during char conversion. This results in an exposure to high temperature

Fig.  24. Instantaneous  stochastic  fuel  particle  pyrolysis  rate.  Results  are  for
Cases M1 and M2 as indicated. The images are clipped at z/D = 20 to focus on
the upstream region dominated by pyrolysis. Reprinted with permission from
[330]. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093835

C. Hasse et al.

increasing temperature. They showed that a modified two-step model
with 18 adjustable parameters (referred to as RF in the paper) provides a
good approximation for a wide range of temperatures and heating rates.
This is illustrated in Fig. 21. They also showed that single-step models
(SFOM) cannot adequately match CPD results for the range of conditions
considered.

A  direct  comparison  of  CPD,  FG-DVC  and  FLASHCHAIN  for  four
different  coals  was  conducted  in  Vascellari  et  al.  [41]  under
entrained-flow gasification conditions. Realistic heating rates were ob-
tained from a CFD simulation and used to predict the volatile yields. An
example result for Utah bituminous coal is shown in Fig. 22. While the
general trend is similar for the models, the final yield can differ signif-
icantly. All three network models were then used to adjust the param-
eters  of  C2SM  for  all  four  coals  individually.  CFD  simulations  were
carried out and compared to experiments, see Fig. 23, which shows re-
sults for the Utah bituminous coal. The relevance of the pyrolysis model
can be seen directly, and differences in the predictions of the rate and
yield also lead to differences in the local distributions of CO, CO2, H2 and
H2O.

Interestingly,  good  agreement  was  obtained  between  the  experi-
mental  data and  the  CFD  simulations for three  of  the  four coals.  Sig-
nificant  deviations  were  only  found  for  North  Dakota  lignite.  This
discrepancy is partly due to the fact that the kinetic data for the network
models had to be extrapolated for the specific O:C and H:C ratio of this
coal. This emphasizes the importance of kinetic data for solid kinetics for
CFD simulation.

Specifically  with  respect  to  entrained  flow  gasification,  a  recent
article  by  Mularski  et  al.  [328]  reviewed  the  importance  of  different
models in CFD. In agreement with the above results, they concluded that
the proper modeling of devolatilization is critical for an accurate esti-
mation of flame stabilization, structure, and lift-off. The modeling must
take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  devolatilization  kinetics  and  yield
strongly  depend  on  the  heating  rate.  While  the  advanced  standalone
network pyrolysis models provide accurate results for a wide range of
operating  conditions,  the  kinetic  parameters  of  the  empirical  models
must be properly calibrated to obtain consistent results. With respect to
char conversion, detailed models are required, as presented in Section 3,
one  distinctive  feature  of  gasification  is  that  it  occurs  essentially  in
Regime II (pore-diffusion controlled). For char conversion, the authors
also concluded that the direct application of the detailed models in CFD
is very challenging. As with pyrolysis, appropriate calibration proced-
ures can be used for the simpler models.

Further work, especially using the fully coupled models in multidi-
mensional CFD simulations, has shown the benefits of using the detailed
models to fit the parameters of empirical pyrolysis models. Shamooni
et al. [329] fitted C2SM with the CRECK-S-C model and obtained good
results. Rieth et al. [18] confirmed that the direct use of a network model
in CFD (here CPD) can be advantageous, but they also concluded that
suitably adjusted empirical models can also provide good results.

Zhao et al. [330] used CPD-fitted single and two step models in an
LES of a pulverized coal jet flame. Using the single step model, pyrolysis
occurs too rapidly, which directly influences the flame structure. This is
illustrated in Fig. 24, where the single-step approach (left, M1) and the
two-step approach (right, M2) are compared.

6. Gas phase modeling of pulverized coal combustion and
gasification in CFD

While  the  previous  Section  discussed  the  integration  of  advanced
models for solid phase kinetics in CFD, this Section is concerned with the
treatment of the gas phase. This includes two elements: (1) the modeling
of the turbulent flow and mixing and (2) the coupling of turbulence and
gas  phase  chemistry,  which  is  usually  referred  to  as  turbulence-
chemistry interaction (TCI). TCI is discussed both in terms of combus-
tion and pollutant formation.

It  is  important  to  note  that  many  studies  using  either  advanced

approaches for the flow field (Sections 6.1 and 6.2) or for TCIs (Sections
6.3 and 6.4) do not necessarily use advanced models for the solid phase.
In fact, coupling and employing advanced models for both the gas and
solid phase really constitutes the next step in the CFD modeling of pul-
verized  coal  combustion  or  of  solid  fuel  combustion  in  general.  The
relevance of high-fidelity simulations of PCC was also highlighted in a
recent article by Cai et al. [331], which emphasized the value of LES and
DNS despite the high computational cost.

6.1. Modeling of the turbulent gas phase

CFD simulations of turbulent combustion and gasification processes
can be performed at three different hierarchy levels: Direct Numerical
Simulations  (DNS),  Large  Eddy  Simulations  (LES),  and  Reynolds-
Averaged  Navier–Stokes  (RANS),  respectively.  These  levels  differ  in
the treatment and resolution of the turbulent fluid motion and mixing. In
DNS, all the instantaneous heat and mass balance equations are fully
resolved. In this way, all the turbulence scales are accounted for and the
effects  on  the  reacting  flows  are  captured.  However,  this  approach  is
computationally very costly, which currently restricts its application to
simplified geometries with reduced Reynolds numbers. The continuous
evolution of computational power and software is progressively raising
the possibilities of applying such simulations to more realistic settings.
In LES, the turbulence is separated into two scales, which are defined by
the filter size. The turbulent motion taking place on scales larger than
the  cut-off  length  of  the  filter  size  is  explicitly  calculated,  while  the
smaller  scale  is  described  using  a  sub-grid  scale  (SGS)  for  sub-filter
models. When the cut-off length in a LES tends to zero, the simulation
approaches  a  DNS.  Besides  the  simplifications,  this  approach  allows
complex features to be captured, such as unsteadiness, ignition spots,
quenching and combustion instabilities. RANS simulations, on the third
level,  describe  the  turbulent  motion  by  averaging  the  instantaneous
balance  equations.  Turbulence  models  must  account  for  all  turbulent
motions, further drastically reducing the required CPU power compared
to LES.

6.2. RANS, LES and DNS of pulverized coal combustion and gasification

RANS has been the most widely used approach in the CFD of pul-
verized coal combustion for many decades, with an enormous breadth of
works  reported  in  the  archival  literature.  Many  studies  using  the
advanced models for solid fuel kinetics discussed in the previous sec-
tions  are  in  fact  RANS-based  [12,41,45,318,321,332–334].  In  the
following, we concentrate on newer studies with LES and DNS.

6.2.1. Large Eddy Simulation - LES

Compared to RANS, LES offers many advantages as it resolves large-
scale unsteady motions, which are important for flame propagation and
stabilization.  Because  of  this,  more  and  more  investigations  are  now
reported using LES for pulverized coal combustion. There are also a few
DNS studies on simplified configurations. DNSs are usually not intended
to simulate entire burners or even furnaces; rather, they provide highly
resolved reference data especially for TCI, as discussed in Sections 6.3
and 6.4.

Kurose and Makino [335] conducted the first LES to model pulver-
ized  coal  combustion,  investigating  interactions  between  dispersion,
evaporation, and coal combustion. SGS turbulence and combustion were
described  with  the  Smagorinsky  model  and  the  conserved  scalar
approach,  respectively.  Watanabe  et  al.  [336]  conducted  a  LES  of  a
swirl-stabilized  pulverized  coal  combustion  furnace  with  a  complex
burner. The simulation results obtained with LES were compared to the
available  experimental  data  and  the  RANS  simulation  results.  The
comparisons showed that compared to the RANS results, the LES results
are closer to the experimental data, especially in the recirculation zone.
The review paper by Kurose et al. [337] discussed the progress of pul-
verized coal combustion CFD in terms of RANS and LES, concluding that

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093836

C. Hasse et al.

LES  is  far superior  to  RANS  simulations and  is  expected  to  become a
useful tool for developing and designing new combustion chambers in
the near future. Yamamoto et al. [338] conducted a LES of a pulverized
coal flame ignited by a preheated gas flow. The simulation results were
compared  to  the  experimental  data  and  the  RANS  simulations  at
different inlet stoichiometric ratios. They found that the lift-off heights
predicted using LES show better agreement with the experimental data
when compared to the RANS results. To improve the prediction capa-
bility of the single reaction rate devolatilization model, Yamamoto et al.
[338]  introduced  a  factor  modifying  the  frequency  factor,  which  is  a
function of the fraction devolatilized. Franchetti et al. [339] conducted a
LES of a laboratory-scale pulverized coal flame using the Eddy-Break-Up
(EBU) model [340] and the simplified coal combustion submodels. The
simulation results, including the particle velocities, particle temperature
and  species  concentrations, were  compared  to  the  experimental data.
They found that the particle velocities and particle temperature can be
well  predicted  by  the  coal  combustion  submodels  they  employed.
However, large discrepancies can be observed for the species concen-
trations, which was attributed to the EBU model employed, as infinitely
fast chemistry is assumed. Wen et al. [341] conducted a LES for the same
burner as in [339] using the EBU model and the simplified coal com-
bustion submodels. To consider the SGS effects of turbulence velocity
and  the  scalar  fluctuation  of  the  gas  flow  on  the  coal  particles,  the
so-called velocity-scalar joint filtered density function (VSJFDF) model
[342]  was  employed.  The  simulation  results  were  compared  to  the
experimental  data  and  the  results  reported  in  [339].  Comparisons
showed that the VSJFDF model can predict not only the influence of the
SGS turbulence and scalar fluctuation on the particles, but also the effect
of  the  subsequent  coupling  interactions  between  the  large-scale  flow
field,  SGS  turbulence  and  the  particles  on  the  flame  configuration.
Further,  it  was  found  that  the  species  concentrations  still  cannot  be
correctly  predicted  using  the  EBU  model,  and  finite-rate  chemistry
models were recommended. Stein et al. [343] compared the LES results
from three different research groups, including Freiberg University (FG),
Imperial  College  (IC)  and  Stuttgart  University  (ST),  for  the  same
laboratory-scale burner. The coal combustion submodels and parame-
ters  used  by  different  groups  were  unified  for  comparison,  and  the
groups differed in terms of the code base and the treatment of the coal
particles (Eulerian in IC, and Lagrangian in FG and ST). The comparisons
showed that the velocity statistics can be well predicted by all simula-
tions,  while  the  particle  temperature  and  species  concentrations
exhibited  large  discrepancies  due  to  the  EBU  model  employed.  The
common finding of the aforementioned works is that the infinitely fast
chemistry model cannot produce good predictions of the species con-
centrations,  and  finite-rate  chemistry  models  are  required.  In  recent
years, various advanced TCI models that were initially developed for gas
and  spray  combustion  have  been  extended  to  study  pulverized  coal
combustion in the frameworks of RANS and LES, see Sections 6.3 and
6.4. For gasification, Abani and Ghoniem [344] conducted both RANS
and  LES
the  Brigham  Young  University  gasifier.  The
Lagrangian-Eulerian method was used to describe the particle trajectory
in the flow field, the devolatilization rate was described with the single
kinetic rate model, while the char surface reaction rate was character-
ized with the model proposed by Zhang et al. [345], in which the char
surface reaction was described with the moving flame front suitable for
CFD simulations. The main finding of this work is that the LES performs
much better than the RANS in terms of the penetration of the volatile
gaseous jet and the radial distribution of species. Kumar and Ghoniem
[307] conducted both RANS and LES for entrained flow gasification in a
sudden expansion geometry using multi-physcis models. The devolati-
lization rate was described with the CPD model embedded in the Fluent
software, and the char surface reaction rate was characterized with the
model proposed by Smith et al. [346].

for

6.2.2. Direct Numerical Simulation - DNS

Full DNS is the paradigm for resolving all turbulence scales (from

integral  to  Kolmogorov)  and  all  near-  and  intra-particle  processes,
something  that  is  still  impossible  for  pulverized  coal  combustion  at
present. Specifically for particle combustion, DNS of the carrier phase
(CP-DNS; the particles are not fully resolved on the grid and are usually
modeled as point particles) is a promising method since the computa-
tional cost is affordable, and the obtained DNS dataset can be used to
analyze the pulverized coal combustion characteristics and to develop
new  coal  combustion submodels.  Luo et  al.  [347]  conducted  the first
CP-DNS of pulverized coal combustion in a hot vitiated co-flow. It was
found that in the upstream region, the reaction zone is scattered and an
individual  particle  combustion  mode  is  formed,  while  in  the  down-
stream  region,  the  reaction  zone  is  more  continuous  and  the  group
combustion mode is observed. Hara et al. [19] conducted a CP-DNS for a
laboratory-scale pulverized coal  jet  flame employing a  global volatile
matter  reaction  scheme.  Comparisons  with  the  experimental  data
showed that the particle velocities and the particle preferential motions
agree with the experimental data. Muto et al. [348] studied the effect of
particle  swelling  on  pulverized  coal  combustion  based  on  the  DNS
dataset generated by Hara et al. [19]. They found that the swelling due
to devolatilization and char surface reactions does not have a significant
effect on the distribution of the coal particle temperature. In the above
two DNS datasets, the global chemical reaction mechanisms were used
to save computational cost. Recently, Rieth et al. [349] conducted a DNS
of  a  turbulent  pulverized  coal  flame  stabilized  in  a  turbulent  mixing
layer with a detailed chemical reaction mechanism containing 52 spe-
cies and 452 elementary reactions [350,351]. The DNS results showed
that  heat  is  initially  released  in  lean  conditions,  both  premixed  and
non-premixed  combustion  modes  exist  in  the  combustion  field,  and
transient  states  such  as  local  extinction  and  re-ignition  prevail  in  the
pulverized  coal flame  studied.  Based on the  DNS  dataset, Rieth  et  al.
[352] evaluated the performance of the steady flamelet/progress vari-
able (FPV) approach [353] through both a priori and a posteriori ana-
lyses.  The  a  priori  analysis  showed  that  the  flamelet  library  and
trajectory  variables  employed  are  suitable  for  modeling  complex  pul-
verized coal flames, while the a posteriori analysis produced similar re-
sults, although with a larger deviation compared to the a priori analysis.
Wen et al. [354,355] further conducted comprehensive analyses of the
DNS generated by Rieth et al. [349] using flamelet tabulation methods,
focusing on multi-mode combustion, transient effects, strong heat losses
and  reoccurring  issues  in  flamelet  modeling  for  pulverized  coal  com-
bustion. The suitability of the premixed-flame-based flamelet model and
non-premixed-flame-based  flamelet  model  was  evaluated  in  [354]  by
means of a priori analysis, and the relevance of the transient states in the
pulverized  coal  flame  was  studied  using  budget  analysis.  The  results
showed  that  both  flamelet  models  make  good  predictions  in  the
respective  combustion  zones,  while  the  non-premixed-flame-based
flamelet model performs better overall than the premixed-flame-based
flamelet model. The unsteady states can be represented to some extent
by the steady flamelet models since the unsteady terms of the trajectory
variables are available in the flow field. Extended flamelet models that
can  consider  strong  heat  losses  and  multi-combustion  modes  were
developed in [355]. The results showed that the extensions can account
for high heat losses in the pulverized coal flame studied, and the per-
formance  of  the  multi-mode  flamelet  model  strongly  depends  on  the
definition of the combustion mode index. Wan et al. [32] conducted DNS
to investigate the alkali metal emissions in early-stage pulverized coal
combustion. The suitability of the premixed-flame-based flamelet model
for predicting pulverized coal combustion was also evaluated. Recently,
Shamooni  et  al.  [292]  conducted  a  CP-DNS  of  early-stage  pulverized
coal combustion with fuel-bound nitrogen, focusing on the detailed NOx
formation.  The  computational  setup  is  a  turbulent  mixing  layer,  the
same as that in [349]. Both volatile-N and char-N were considered in the
DNS, with the NH3, HCN and C5H5N representing the light and lumped
nitrogenated tar in volatile matter. The results showed that NO is formed
as soon as the small groups of particles are entrained into the lower hot
burnt gases, then the volatile ignition begins. The results also showed

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093837

C. Hasse et al.

that the contribution of NO2  to total NOx  is limited, and NO is mainly
formed from the fuel-NO, with a limited thermal Zeldovich mechanism
and the prompt mechanism. In fact, the Zeldovich mechanism does not
contribute  to  the  formation  of  NO  but  to  its  consumption  in  the
fuel-bound nitrogen pulverized coal flames.

Tufano et al. [314,315] conducted DNS for single coal particles and
particle arrays in laminar and turbulent flows considering heating-up,
devolatilization,  ignition  and  volatile  combustion.  The  DNS  fully  re-
solves the particle boundary layers, the flame structure and the smallest
flow  scales.  The  first  part  [315]  investigated  how  the  inter-particle
distance  (Lx)  influenced  the  flame  interaction.  The  analysis  showed
that depending on the inter-particle distance, different combustion re-
gimes  can  be  observed,  ranging  from  isolated  burning  for  large  Lx  to
group combustion for small Lx. The second part [314] investigated the
effects of the particle Reynolds number and turbulence, showing that
increased  turbulence  intensity  delays  the  ignition  of  single  particles.
Further,  they  found  that  the  steady  flamelet  model  works  well  in
reproducing  the  DNS  data  for  lower  turbulence  intensities,  while  for
high  Reynolds  numbers,  significant  discrepancies  exist  due  to  the
multi-dimensional effects (e.g., curvature etc.). Due to the different ex-
tents of interaction of the different coal particle flames, the turbulence
slightly promotes the mass release for the particle set furthest upstream,
but considerably delays the mass release for the downstream particles.

6.3. Turbulence-chemistry interaction (TCI) for coal combustion and
gasification

As mentioned above, the second challenge is to model turbulence-
chemistry  interaction,  something  that  has  been  a  topic  of  active
research for turbulent gas phase combustion for many decades, as evi-
denced e.g. by the TNF International Workshop on Measurement and
Computational Turbulent  Flames  [356]. Many advanced models have
been developed and applied. In the last decade, an increasing number of
studies  have  worked  on  transferring  these  findings  to  solid  fuel  com-
bustion, which is discussed in this section.

In  previous  studies  [322,339,341,343,357–359],  simple  gas  com-
bustion  models  based  on  the  assumption  of  infinitely  fast  chemistry,
such as the EBU model [340], the eddy dissipation concept (EDC) model
[360],  the  partially  stirred  reactor  (PaSR)  model  [361],  or  the  scale
similarity filtered reaction rate model (SSFRRM) [362], were generally
used for turbulent pulverized coal combustion. It is only in recent years
that advanced gas combustion models such as the transport probability
density function (PDF) model [363], the flamelet model [364], and the
conditional moment closure (CMC) model [365] – all initially developed
for gas combustion – have been extended to simulate turbulent pulver-
ized coal combustion. In the following, progress on the development of
gas combustion models for pulverized coal combustion is reviewed.

6.3.1. Eddy Break-Up model (EBU)

The EBU model was initially proposed by Magnussen [340] in the
context  of  RANS.  Zhou  et  al.  [366]  and  Hu  et  al.  [367]  proposed  a
straightforward extension for LES by introducing the filtered strain rate
as a means of computing the flow timescale. The EBU model assumes
that the chemical timescale is infinitely small, and the chemical reaction
rate  purely  depends  on  the  mixing  rate.  In  previous  works  on  the
simulation of pulverized coal combustion, the common finding is that
the  EBU  model  over-predicts  the  consumption  rate  of  reactants,  and
generally over-predicts the products’ concentration.

6.3.2. Transport Probability Density Function model (PDF)

To overcome the limitations of the EBU model, some gas combustion
models based on finite-rate chemistry have been developed for modeling
pulverized  coal  combustion.  St ̈ollinger  et  al.  [21]  first  extended  the
transported PDF model for pulverized coal combustion in the context of
RANS. To treat the devolatilization and char surface reaction separately,
two mixture fractions were introduced to describe the mixing process.

The  gas  phase  and  particle  phase  are  treated  with  two  separate  PDF
transport equations by means of stochastic Lagrangian methods. For the
solid  phase,  they  adopted  the  Distributed  Activation  Energy  Model
(DAEM) [115] to characterize the devolatilization rate, and the intrinsic
model proposed by Smith [145] to characterize the char surface reaction
rate. In the DAEM model, the different species compositions in volatile
matter  follow  the  first-order  decomposition  reactions  with  the  same
pre-exponential factor and activation energy, distributed according to a
Gaussian distribution. The transported PDF model which was developed
coupled the simplified solid phase models and was applied in simula-
tions  of  a  semi-industrial-scale  furnace.  The  simulation  results  were
compared  to  the  available  experimental  data.  Overall  agreement  was
achieved between the measurements and simulation results for both the
gas phase and the coal particles. The results also showed that the per-
formance  of  the  proposed  transported  PDF  model  is  sensitive  to  the
models for the coupling source terms in the governing equation. One
possible limitation of the method developed by St ̈ollinger et al. [21] is
that the assumption of local equilibrium chemistry it made might not be
sufficient for predicting slow reacting species such as CO. To overcome
this  limitation,  Zhao  and  Haworth  [12]  reformulated  the  transported
PDF model by adopting a consistent hybrid Lagrangian particle/Eulerian
mesh algorithm to solve the PDF transport equation based on finite-rate
chemistry. In their work, they tested both the single-rate devolatilization
model and the devolatilization model with two competing rates, using
the  original parameters  proposed by  Kobayashi et  al. [65]  . The con-
ventional diffusion-kinetic-controlled surface reaction model proposed
by Baum and Street [368] was adopted with the assumption that char is
directly converted to the final product, CO2. The newly developed model
was evaluated by simulating two independent laboratory-scale pulver-
ized coal jet flames. For both flames studied, the baseline model offered
good predictions of the measured mean and RMS particle axial velocity,
while the predicted particle temperature and species concentrations still
showed large discrepancies, which were attributed to the uncertainties
in experimental data. Recently, Zhao et al. [330] developed a two-phase
multiple  mapping  conditioning/large  eddy  simulation  (MMC-LES)
model for turbulent pulverized coal combustion. The MMC-LES model
includes  an  Eulerian  LES  for  the  flow  field,  a  stochastic  Lagrangian
particle scheme for the turbulent composition and an inertial Lagrangian
scheme for the fuel particles. As in the work by Zhao and Haworth [12],
both single and two-order reaction rates for devolatilization were eval-
uated, with the volatile matter assumed to be either a combination of
light gases or pure methane. The char surface reaction was neglected for
the  specific  pulverized  coal  flame  studied.  The  performance  of  the
MMC-LES model was applied to a laboratory-scale turbulent pulverized
coal  flame  studied  by  Zhao  and  Haworth  [12].  The  predictions  were
found to be in good overall agreement with the experimental data and
comparable to previously reported LES results for the same target flame
with CP-DNS results [19].

6.3.3. Flamelet models

Like the transported PDF model, the flamelet model [364] is another
promising  TCI  approach.  Several  groups  have  contributed  in  the  last
decade  in  that  respect.  One  particular  advantage  of  the  flamelet
approach  is  that  it  can  consider  detailed  gas  phase  chemistry  with  a
reasonable computational cost. Flores and Fletcher [369] were the first
to introduce a flamelet-based model for describing turbulence-chemistry
interactions  in  turbulent  pulverized  coal  flames.  This  flamelet-based
model  was  developed  based  on  two  mixture  fractions,  which  were
used to describe the mixing of volatile matter and char off-gases with the
oxidizer  separately.  The  model  based  on  two  mixture  fractions  was
found  to  perform  better  than  the  single-mixture-fraction  method  in
predicting the NO concentration. Vascellari et al. [370] introduced the
unsteady flamelet concept to model the ignition delay time of a single
coal  particle  in  a  laminar  configuration,  and  the  flamelet  predictions
were compared to the available experimental data. Further, Vascellari
et al. [371] reformulated the unsteady flamelet model based on a new

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093838

C. Hasse et al.

analytical expression of the scalar dissipation rate in the context of the
flamelet/progress variable (FPV) approach [353]. The suitability of the
unsteady  FPV  approach  was  evaluated  by  comparing  it  against  the
detailed  chemistry  solutions  and  the  experimental  data  using  both  a
priori and a posteriori analyses. The comparisons showed that the FPV
method  is  able  to  correctly  reproduce  the  flame  structure  before  and
during the ignition process. Messig et al. [313] evaluated the suitability
of  the  premixed-flame-based  flamelet  model  and  the  non-premixed
flamelet  model  for  a  counterflow  pulverized  coal  flame,  which  was
experimentally studied by Xia et al. [372]. Further, the importance of
interphase heat transfer in the flamelet model was identified, and the
necessity  was  recognized  of  introducing  the  total  enthalpy  in  the
flamelet model. The results showed that the non-premixed-flame-based
flamelet model performs better overall than the premixed-flame-based
flamelet  model,  especially  for  fuel-rich  conditions.  In  refs.  [313,370,
371], only the devolatilization process was considered, and accordingly,
the flamelet model was formulated based on a single mixture fraction.
Recently, Vascellari et al. [373] extended the flamelet model to include
the  context  of  two  mixture  fractions  in  order  to  consider  both  the
devolatilization  and  char  surface  reactions.  The  performance  of  the
multi-stream  flamelet  model  was  evaluated  in  a  pulverized-coal  stag-
nation flame by comparing it with the detailed chemistry solutions and
the  experimental  data.  The  comparisons  showed  that  the  proposed
multi-stream FPV model can accurately predict the main features of coal
combustion, with only minor issues related to the manifold used to build
the look-up table.

Watanabe and Yamamoto [374] independently extended the flame-
let concept to model turbulent pulverized coal combustion in the context
of DNS, where both the devolatilization and char surface reactions were
considered with two mixture fractions as in [369]. The flamelet model
was developed based on the FPV approach [353], and the performance
of the extended FPV approach was evaluated by comparing it against the
detailed chemistry solutions in terms of the instantaneous distributions
of CO2 and OH mass fractions, and particle temperature. Watanabe et al.
[375] further extended their FPV model to the context of LES to predict
ignition and extinction phenomena in a laboratory-scale coal jet flame
and  a  large-scale  test  furnace.  To  consider  moisture  evaporation,  the
extended  FPV  model  was  based  on  three  mixture  fractions,  used  to
describe  mixing  among  the  coal  moisture,  volatile  matter  and  char
off-gases, respectively. It was found that for the laboratory-scale coal jet
flame, the profile of the ratio of coal burnt on the central axis of the jet
flame  predicted  by  the  flamelet  model  agrees  with  the  measurement,
while for the large-scale test furnace, the unstable flame state occurring
at  a  lower  coal  feeding  rate  can  be  reproduced  by  the  extended  FPV
model.

A  series  of  DNS  and  LES  works  on  flamelet  modeling  have  been
published by Wen et al. [13,354,355,376–382]. At first, Wen et al. [383]
reformulated  the  flamelet  model  developed  by  Watanabe  and  Yama-
moto [374] in terms of the definition of the trajectory variables and the
flamelet table generation, based on the detailed analysis of pulverized
coal combustion characteristics in a laminar counterflow flow [13]. The
reformulated flamelet model was also extended in the context of LES to
simulate  the  laboratory-scale  pulverized  coal  jet  flame  [377]  and  the
semi-industrial-scale  furnace  [376].  For  the  sake  of  describing  the
complex  configurations  in  the  industrial  burners,  the  flamelet  model
initially  developed  for  a  two-fuel-stream  configuration  was  further
extended  to  include  the  context  of  multi-stream,  while  the  extended
multi-stream  flamelet  model  was  evaluated  in  the  laboratory-scale
piloted  pulverized  coal  jet  flame  [380]  and  the  semi-industrial-scale
furnace  [376].  In  the  pulverized  coal  combustion  system,  both  pre-
mixed and non-premixed combustion modes can be observed [19,349].
To adapt to the multi-combustion modes in the pulverized coal flame,
Wen et al. [355,378] coupled the premixed-flame-based flamelet model
with the non-premixed-flame-based flamelet model by making use of the
combustion  mode  index.  In  the  premixed  flame  reaction  zone,  the
thermo-chemical  quantities  are  extracted  from  the  premixed  flamelet

library,  while
in  the  non-premixed  flame  reaction  zone,  the
non-premixed flamelet library is accessed. Recently, the flamelet model
has been extended to describe the pollutant formation in a pulverized
coal flame [381,382]. In [381], the performance of the flamelet model
extended to predict NOx  was evaluated in laminar counterflow flames
for different coal types, while in [382], the extended flamelet model for
predicting SOx  was also evaluated in laminar counterflow flames. The
details of these two works will be described in Section 6.4 . Recently,
Wen et al. [384] further extended the multi-stream flamelet model to
cover pulverized coal combustion in an oxy-fuel atmosphere. Both NOx
and  SOx  emissions  were  considered  in  the  extended  flamelet  model,
which was applied to a laboratory-scale swirl-stabilized pulverized coal
burner [385] specifically designed for oxy-fuel atmospheres.

Rieth  et  al.  [18,352]  independently  transferred  a  non-premixed
flamelet model to pulverized coal combustion. They first used the sca-
lar dissipation rate [17,18], and later the progress variable in the FPV
framework [352]. The performance of the flamelet model they devel-
oped was first evaluated in a semi-industrial pulverized coal furnace for
which comprehensive experimental data is available [17]. The predicted
averaged values for the velocities, species concentrations and tempera-
ture  were  found  to  agree  with  the  experimental  data,  validating  the
suitability  of  the  flamelet  model  developed.  Rieth  et  al.  [18]  further
extended the flamelet model to couple it with the CPD devolatilization
model [50] for predicting the devolatilization rate. The performance of
the  extended  flamelet model was  evaluated in  a laboratory-scale  pul-
verized coal jet flame, and the simulation results were compared to the
experimental data and  the results  predicted with the  fitted simplified
devolatilization models based on the single first-order reaction (SFOR)
[63] and two competing rates (CRM) [65]. The results showed that the
direct CPD model has a direct effect on the individual particle level, but
a well-fitted SFOR model can yield similar predictions. Due to the other
effects compensating for the under-predicted devolatilization rate by the
CRM model (error compensation), the simulation results predicted by
the  CRM  model  showed  improved  agreement  with  the  experimental
data. Recently, Rieth et al. [352] extended the flamelet model to include
the context of the FPV approach, and the extended flamelet model was
evaluated  in  a  turbulent  pulverized  coal  flame  stabilized  in  a  mixing
layer  by  means  of  both  a  priori  and  a  posteriori  analyses.  The  results
showed that the flamelet model performs well in the lower flame (of the
DNS studied), where the non-premixed combustion mode is dominant,
while there are significant discrepancies in the upper flame, where the
premixing  and  highly  unsteady  extinction  and  re-ignition  effects  are
important.  These  are  expected  to  be  difficult  to  predict  using  the
non-premixed flamelet model.

Luo et al. [386] evaluated the performance of the FPV approach in
predicting  NO  formation  in  a  pulverized  coal  flame  based  on  a  2D
laminar counterflow flame. In the first step, only the thermal NOx  was
considered,  while  the  fuel  nitrogen  was  neglected,  and  the  chemistry
was  described  using  GRI-Mech  3.0  for  the  assumed light  gases in  the
volatile matter. Recently, the researchers further extended the flamelet
model in the context of LES to simulate a laboratory-scale pulverized
coal jet flame, in which the fuel NOx, prompt NOx and thermal NOx were
considered [387]. In this work, the NOx formation mechanisms were not
directly  taken  from  the  flamelet  library  described  with  the  detailed
chemistry mechanism, but were described with a separate mechanism
specifically for different formation paths. Akaotsu et al. [388] evaluated
the  performance  of
the
the  FPV  approach
thermo-chemical quantities in the pulverized coal flame stabilized in a
laminar counterflow configuration. The computational setup is the same
as that adopted by Wen et al. [383]. The suitability of the flamelet model
was evaluated by comparing it with the detailed chemistry solutions.

reproducing

in

While  the  works  above  used  non-premixed  flamelet  approaches,
Knappstein et al. [389–392] extended a premixed flamelet model based
on flamelet-generated manifolds (FGMs) [393] for coal combustion. The
thermo-chemical quantities in the FGM table were parameterized as a
function  of the  mixture  fraction, a  reaction  progress  variable and  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093839

C. Hasse et al.

total enthalpy. The validity of the proposed FGM model was first eval-
uated in an electrically heated inert pyrolysis reactor and a premixed flat
flame configuration, focusing on the ignition process of the single coal
particle. Overall, good agreement was obtained between the numerical
results  and  experimental  findings  [389].  The  same  FGM  model  was
further evaluated in [390] by simulating a single coal particle, exposed
to hot product gases. The assumptions of the premixed combustion mode
and the species compositions in volatile matter were evaluated. In order
to  describe  both  the  devolatilization  and  char  surface  reactions,
Knappstein et al. [392] further extended the FGM model to include a
four-dimensional manifold controlled by two mixture fractions for vol-
atiles and char off-gases, the enthalpy and a reaction progress variable.
The suitability of the extended FGM model was evaluated by comparing
it  against  the  detailed  chemistry  solutions,  and  good  agreement  was
obtained with respect to the major species and gas temperature, while
the intermediate species of OH and CO have deviations in certain re-
gions. Similarly to the work of Knappstein et al. [390], Wan et al. [32]
developed a premixed-flame-based flamelet model for predicting alkali
metal emissions from a pulverized coal flame stabilized in a turbulent
mixing layer. They evaluated the developed flamelet model’s suitability
for  predicting  sodium  emissions  by  comparing  it  with  the  DNS  data.
Recently, Nicolai et al. [394] conducted the LES of a laboratory-scale
gas-assisted pulverized coal combustion chamber in an oxy-fuel atmo-
sphere  using  the  FGM  model,  coupled  with  the  artificially  thickened
flame (ATF) model to resolve the premixed flame structure in the LES
mesh.  The  simulation  results  were  compared  to  the  available  experi-
mental  data,  including  the  velocity  fields  and  the  flame  positions.
Further, the ignition and coal particle group combustion were studied by
Nicolai et al. [395] in a laminar flow reaction using the flamelet tabu-
lation  method.  Two  mixture  fractions  are  introduced  to  describe  the
mixing among the fuel gases from the volatile matter, the methane for
coal  flame  stabilization,  and  the  oxidizer  stream.  The  influences  of
particle  groups  on  the  ignition  and  combustion  characteristics  were
investigated by successively increasing the densities of particle streams.
The  predicted  ignition  delay  was  compared  to  the  available  experi-
mental data, and overall good agreement was achieved.

6.4. Turbulence-chemistry interaction for pollutant formation

The  modeling  of  turbulence-chemistry  interaction  is  expected  to
have a significant effect on the prediction of pollutant formation since
the chemical timescales of pollutants can range from very small (on the
order of the main chemical reactions) to large (slow processes such as for
thermal NO). In recent years, a number of CFD simulations have been
conducted  to  predict  pollutant  formation  in  pulverized  coal  flames.
Unlike pure gas combustion, the fuel-bound nitrogen and sulfur in vol-
atile matter and char should be considered in the numerical models. This
subsection  reviews  CFD  simulations  focusing  on  the  prediction  of
pollutant formation in pulverized coal flames, first with the simple TCI
models followed by the advanced TCI models discussed above.

6.4.1. NOx  formation

Kurose  et  al.  [396]  conducted  a  3D  numerical  simulation  of  an
advanced  low-NOx  burner  based  on  the  simplified  coal  combustion
models  in  the  framework  of  RANS.  The  NOx  formation  model  was
employed for post-processing, i.e., the NOx  concentrations were calcu-
lated  based  on  the  distributions  of  the  gas  temperature  and  the  con-
centrations  of  the  major  chemical  species.  Thermal  NO  was  obtained
with the extended Zeldovich mechanism based on the quasi-steady-state
approximation for nitrogen species. Prompt and fuel NO were predicted
using  the  models  developed  by  De  Soete  [397].  Particularly,  the
reduction in NO due to char burning was considered in their simulations
using Levy et al.’s [398] model, while the formation of char NO was also
calculated using De Soete’s model [397]. Based on the same NOx  for-
mation mechanisms as in the work of Kurose et al. [396], Muto et al.
[399]  went  on  to  conduct  a  large-eddy  simulation  (LES)  of  a

laboratory-scale pulverized coal burner to investigate the effect of ox-
ygen  concentration  on  NOx  formation  in  the  oxy-fuel  atmosphere.
Hashimoto  et  al.  [400]  investigated  the  effects  of  fuel-NO  formation
models  on  the  prediction  of  NO  concentrations  in  a  coal  combustion
model. A 760 kW test furnace was simulated with the RANS technique,
coupled with the modified TDP model [401] for devolatilization and the
Field model [402] for char combustion. While the mechanisms leading
to the formation of the thermal, prompt and fuel NO originating from
char  are  the  same  as  those  in  refs.  [396]  and  [399],  three  different
fuel-NO models, i.e., De Soete [397], Chen et al. [403] and Mitchell et al.
[166],  were  evaluated  for  NO  originating  from  the  volatile  matter.
Hashimoto et al. [400] found that the model proposed by Mitchell et al.
could reproduce the tendency of the measurement results better than the
models proposed by De Soete and Chen et al. Recently, Muto et al. [404]
conducted a LES of pulverized coal combustion in a multi-burner system
with  three  advanced  low-NOx  burners  to  investigate  the  effect  of
in-furnace blending method on NO emission. The NOx formation models
and coal combustion submodels adopted, including the devolatilization
model, the char surface reaction model, and the gas combustion model,
are the same as those in their previous works [399,400]. Note that in all
the above works [396,400,404,405], the NO prediction was conducted
in post-processing, i.e., the NO production rate was calculated based on
the  major  species  mass  fractions,  which  were  obtained  with  the  gas
combustion models. The gas combustion model named SSFRRM (Scale
Similarity Filtered Reaction Rate Model [362]) was adopted, with global
or  two-step  reaction  mechanisms.  This  cannot,  however,  consider
finite-rate chemistry, which is important for NO formation.

In  recent  years,  researchers  have  extended  the  advanced  TCI  gas
phase combustion models to simulate NOx formation in pulverized coal
flames. Luo et al. [386] first evaluated the flamelet model’s ability to
predict NO formation in a fuel-nitrogen-free pulverized coal flame by
means  of  a  priori  analysis.  To  take  into  account  the  slow  chemistry
process of thermal NO, the trajectory variable of the reaction progress
variable  was  redefined by  including the NO  mass fraction. The sensi-
tivity of the reaction progress variable definition was studied by varying
the amount of NO in the reaction progress variable. The results showed
that  the  NO  mass  fraction  in  the  fuel-nitrogen-free  flame  can  be  pre-
dicted  well  by  the  flamelet  model  with  a  redefined  reaction  progress
variable.  This  finding  applies  to  pulverized  coal  flames  operated  in
different  conditions,  including  different  strain  rates  and  initial  gas
temperatures. Recently, Zhao et al. [387] further extended the work by
Luo et al. [386] to include LES, taking into account all three NO for-
mation mechanisms. Unlike the work by Wen et al. [381], the NO mass
fraction  was  not  determined  from  the  flamelet  library,  but  from  the
corresponding sub-mechanisms for NO emission by assuming that NO
did not have any significant effect on the reactions of the other major
species. The model parameters for the kinetics of the NO formation were
determined from the semi-empirical relations. This model was evaluated
by  simulating  a  laboratory-scale  pulverized  coal  jet  flame,  and  the

Fig. 25. CO2 fraction comparison along the centreline. The simulation data for
the  flamelet  approach  (coarse  and  fine)  and  the  EBU  model  refer  to  the  gas
phase, and the measurements relied on a gas sampling method. Reprinted with
permission from [377]. Copyright 2017 Taylor & Francis Group.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093840

C. Hasse et al.

Fig. 26. Comparison of mean temperature (left) and species molar fraction (right): (a and b) along central axis, (c and d) x = (cid:0) 10 cm. The flamelet results are from
[376], the EBU data is taken from [15]. Reprinted with permission from [376]. Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd.

Fig. 27. Axial distributions of the measured [407] and calculated volume fractions of O2 and CO2. For validation, the numerical solutions in previous studies [18,19,
339,378] are also shown. Reprinted with permission from [409]. Copyright 2020 Elsevier B.V

flamelet  predictions  were  compared  to  the  experimental  data.  It  was
found that including fuel nitrogen can improve the prediction accuracy,
indicating the importance of fuel nitrogen in NO formation. Wen et al.
[381] evaluated different flamelet tabulation methods for predicting NO
formation in fuel-nitrogen pulverized coal flames, in which all fuel NO,
prompt NO and thermal NO were considered. The NO mass fraction was
obtained  either  by  taking  it  directly  from  the  flamelet  library  or  by
solving the corresponding transport equation with the reaction source
terms extracted from the flamelet library. The flamelet predictions were
compared to the detailed chemistry solutions. The results showed that
the  NO  mass  fraction  extracted  from  the  flamelet  library  agrees  well
with  the  reference  result  of  the  detailed  chemistry  solution,  and  is
comparable to the solution obtained from the transport equation. This
finding is different from that obtained from the fuel-nitrogen-free pul-
verized coal flame. The reason for this is considered to be that fuel NO,
with a fast chemistry, is dominant in the fuel-nitrogen pulverized coal
flame in contrast to thermal NO, which has a slow chemistry. Recently,
Wen et al. [406] investigated the NOx  formation mechanism in a tur-
bulent  pulverized  coal  flame  with  fuel-bound  nitrogen  stabilized  in  a
mixing  layer  by  carrying  out  detailed  analyses  of  a  DNS  dataset,
including the reaction path analysis, chemical timescale analysis, a priori

analysis and budget analysis. The reaction path analyses revealed that
the principal thermal-NO reaction contributes to the net consumption of
NO  in  fuel-nitrogen  pulverized  coal  flames.  The  chemical  timescale
analysis  showed  that the production  rate of  NO species  is  faster than
those  of  major  species,  which  confirms  the  suitability  of  the  flamelet
tables  generated  based  on  the  steady  flamelet  equations.  The  a  priori
analysis  indicates  that  the  gas  temperature  and  major/intermediate
species  can  be  predicted  well  by  the  flamelet  model,  while  the  NOx
species  show  significant  discrepancies  in  certain  regions.  The  budget
analyses of the generalized flamelet equations offered evidence that the
discrepancies  for  NOx  species  are  due  to  multi-dimensional  diffusion
being neglected in the 1D flamelet model employed.

6.4.2. SOx  formation

Unlike studies on NO formation in pulverized coal flames, studies on
SOx formation using the advanced TCI model are rare. Wen et al. [382]
first  extended  the  flamelet  model  to  predict  SOx  formation  in  a
fuel-sulfur pulverized coal flame stabilized in a 2D counterflow config-
uration. As was the case for NO prediction in [381], the SOx species were
either  extracted  from  the  flamelet  library  or  by  solving  the  corre-
sponding transport equations with the reaction source terms taken from

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093841

C. Hasse et al.

Fig. 28. Schematic of laboratory-scale pulverized coal flames. (a) Sandia single coal particle injection flame by Molina and Shaddix [411,412]; (b) CRIEPI piloted
pulverized coal jet flame by Hwang et al. [407]; (c) CRIEPI piloted pulverized coal jet flame by Zhang et al. [413] and Ahn et al. [414]; and (d) Cambridge piloted
swirl-stabilized  pulverized  coal  flame by  Balusamy  et  al. [415,416]. Reprinted  with  permission  from  Elsevier,  American  Chemical  Society  and  Springer  Nature,
Copyright (2007, 2005, 2019 and 2015).

the flamelet library. The different methods’ performance in predicting
SOx species was evaluated by comparing them against the corresponding
values of the detailed chemistry solutions. The results showed that the
SOx  species can be accurately predicted in most regions of the compu-
tational domain, while non-negligible discrepancies can be obtained in
certain regions where the premixed combustion mode is dominant. The
chemical timescale analysis indicates that in the fuel-bound sulfur flame
studied,  the  production  rates  of  the  SOx  species  can  be  faster  than/-
comparable to those of the major species, which supports the suitability
of the flamelet model based on the steady flamelet equations. This also
explains why the SOx  species extracted from the flamelet library agree
with  those  obtained  from  the  transport  equations  with  the  reaction
source  terms  extracted  from  the  flamelet  library,  and  the  detailed
chemistry solutions.

Based on the previous works on NO and SOx  formations in laminar
counterflow  flames,  Wen  et  al.  [384]  recently  conducted  LES  for
laboratory-scale  swirl-stabilized  multi-stream  pulverized  coal  flames
using  the  flamelet  model,  in  which  both  NO  and  SOx  emissions  were
considered.  They  further  investigated  how  the  oxidizer  atmosphere,
including air and oxy-fuel, affected pollutant formation. This work is the
state-of-the-art in flamelet modeling of pollutant formation in pulver-
ized coal flames. The flamelet predictions were compared to the avail-
able experimental data, including the flame structure and the particle
temperature. In the simulation, volatile N, char N and volatile S were
considered, and the chemistry was described with a newly developed
oxy-fuel  mechanism  containing  129  species  and  911  elementary  re-
actions.  The  results  showed  that  in  the  oxy-fuel  atmosphere,  NO  is
mainly formed in the upstream region, while in the air atmosphere, a
large amount of NO is formed in the far-downstream region, which is
taken into account due to the existence of thermal NO. For both air and
oxy-fuel atmospheres, the distributions of SO, SO2  and SO3  are similar
overall, with SO and SO2 mainly in the upstream region and SO3 in the
downstream  region, although the amounts of SOx  formed in different

atmospheres are quantitatively different.

6.5. Selected comparisons of TCI models and their application in CFD

In the following, selected examples from the literature are presented
where the applications of the different TCI models in CFD are compared.
Wen et al. [377] compared the performance of the flamelet model
with the EBU model on a piloted pulverized coal jet flame [407]. Their
focus was on investigating whether the thermo-chemical quantities in a
pulverized coal flame can be predicted better with a finite-rate chem-
istry model (flamelet) compared to the infinitely fast chemistry model
(EBU)  [341].  They  found  that  the  prediction  accuracy  of  the  species
mass  fractions  can  be  significantly  improved  when  using  a  flamelet
model, as illustrated in Fig. 25. In a latter paper from the same group
[376],  they  confirmed  this  trend  by  simulating  the  large-scale  IFRF
(International Flame Research Foundation) furnace No. 1 [408] using a
so-called  three-stream  flamelet  model.  The  comparisons  between  the
flamelet  model  and  the  EBU  model  are  shown  in  Fig.  26.  It  can  be
observed that for both the temperature and the species, the proposed
flamelet model performs better than the EBU model [15].

Recently, Akaotsu et al. [409] compared the simulation results for
the CRIEPI jet flame [407] from different groups using different com-
bustion models, including different flamelet models, EBU and reference
DNS data. As shown in Fig. 27, it was found that, with the exception of
the infinitely fast chemistry EBU model, which has larger discrepancies,
all  flamelet  models  perform  well  and  are  comparable  to  the  DNS  in
predicting species volume fractions, although different numerical setups
are used in the different groups. Despite the good agreement, we note
that  the  results  from  different  flamelet  models  might  not  be  directly
comparable,  since  all  groups  use  different  platforms  for  their  simula-
tions.  Smaller  differences  in  the  prediction  accuracy  should  not  be
attributed purely to the formulation of the flamelet model.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093842

C. Hasse et al.

7. Reference burners for pulverized coal combustion and
gasification

A crucial point for the development and validation of high-fidelity
models is the availability of experimental reference data. This section
reviews experimental reference burners for combustion and gasification.
The  systems  range  from  single-particle  laboratory-scale  combustors
(Section  7.1)  to  medium-/large-scale  combustors  (Section  7.2)  and
industrial-scale  furnaces  (Section  7.3).  Gasification  reactors  are  then
discussed in Section 7.4. The systems discussed were selected as they
have been used extensively for model validation; most of them are so-
called  target  systems  in  the  CBC  (Coal  and  Biomass  Combustion)
workshop [410]. In general, only the most recent studies are discussed,
since they usually provide the latest data, which is particularly inter-
esting  for  model  validation.  References  to  earlier  experimental  in-
vestigations can be found in the bibliographies of the cited studies.

7.1. Laboratory-scale burners for combustion

To  date,  several  laboratory-scale  burners  have  been  studied  both
experimentally and  numerically. A series  of experimental works have
been conducted by Molina and Shaddix [411,412] to study single coal
particle  ignition  in  both  air  and  oxy-fuel  atmospheres  under  various
operating conditions. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 28(a). The
experiments  were  conducted  in  the  laminar,  optical  entrained-flow
reactor operated at 1 atm and used a non-premixed-flamelet Hencken
burner to provide combustion product gases. Coal particles were injec-
ted  at  the  furnace  centerline  at  different  feeding  rates  to  initiate  the
ignition  of  single  particles  or  particle  clusters.  The  single-particle  ex-
periments  have  been  investigated  by  four  research  groups:  TU  Frei-
berg/TU Darmstadt [41,371], University of Stuttgart [309,351], Sydney
University [417] and the University of Utah [300]. Vascellari et al. [41,
371]  studied  the  ignition  of  the  single  coal  particle  by  conducting  a
resolved particle simulation, in which the transient boundary conditions
were directly taken from an Eulerian-Lagrangian simulation a priori. The
results  obtained  with  the  resolved  particle  simulation  were  used  to
evaluate the performance of the unsteady flamelet model. Tufano et al.
[309,351]  particularly  focused  on  implementing  the  Robin  boundary
condition on the particle surface, which accounts for both convective
and diffusive phenomena during devolatilization. The influences of ki-
netic  mechanisms,  transport  properties  and  particle  boundary  condi-
tions  on  the  particle  ignition  process  were  investigated.  In  the  above
studies, the single first-order reaction devolatilization model was used to
describe  the  devolatilization  rate.  Cleary  et  al.  [417]  adopted  a  new
approach to describe the processes of evaporation, devolatilization and
char conversion. This approach is based on the conservation equations
for passive scalar variables, and is derived from the analytical solution of
the mixture fraction and standard enthalpy transport equations in the
particle  boundary  layer.  Goshayeshi  and  Sutherland  [300]  adopted
advanced submodels to describe the devolatilization process based on
one-dimensional balance equations in the direction transversal to the jet
flow.  The  evaluated  devolatilization  model  includes  the  two-step
competing model [65] and the network-based CPD model [50], while
the  evaluated  gas  combustion  model  includes  the  detailed  chemistry
based  on  GRI-Mech  3.0  [418]  and  the  infinitely  fast  chemistry
flame-sheet approach. With a similar experimental setup as in ref. [411,
412], Schiemann et al. [419] conducted experiments using coal particles
with size fractions relevant for pulverized coal combustion. The influ-
ence of atmospheres on particle ignition, char burning and alkali release
were investigated for different coal types. For single particle and group
coal  particle combustion,  TU Darmstadt conducted  a series  of experi-
mental  works  based  on  a  fully  premixed  flat  flame  burner  with
well-defined boundary conditions. Well-documented experimental data
has been achieved for this burner, which is valuable for the purpose of
model evaluation, and it will be the target flame in the CBC workshop.
K ̈oser  et  al.  [420,421]  employed  non-intrusive
simultaneous

multi-parameter techniques to study the volatile combustion of single
coal  particles.  High-speed  luminescence  imaging  combined  with
high-resolution  high-speed  OH-PLIF  was  employed  to  visualize  the
flame. A stereoscopic high-resolution backlight-illumination system was
set  up to  measure  the particle  size. Knappstein et  al. [389]  applied a
flamelet  model  coupled  with  a  one-step  devolatilization  model  to
simulate the flame. They found that this modeling approach can offer
reasonable  predictions  of  the  ignition  height  and  the  overall  flame
shape.  For  particle  group  combustion,  Liu  et  al.  [422]  conducted  ex-
periments to study the effect of particle number density (PND) on the
ignition  delay  time.  They  found  that  it  decreases  as  the  coal  particle
feeding rate increases, until a minimum value is reached, corresponding
(cid:0) 3. At an even higher
to a particle number density of around 4 × 109 m
coal feeding rate, the ignition delay increases again. Nicolai et al. [395]
numerically  investigated  pulverized  coal  particle  group  combustion
with a flamelet model. They obtained similar findings as in the experi-
ment  [423],  namely  that  the  ignition  delay  time  is  increased  signifi-
cantly at higher particle densities. Further, it was found that the shape of
the volatile flame is strongly influenced by the particle number density.
A transition from spherical flames around single particles to a conical
flame around the particle cloud was found in both the numerical sim-
ulations and experiments. It is important to note that the above works
focus  mainly  on  homogeneous  ignition  in  the  gas  phase.  There  are
comparatively few studies on heterogeneous ignition and the potential
competition  between  the  two  ignition  modes  (i.e.  heterogeneous  and
homogeneous).  Heterogeneous  ignition  in  particular  is  discussed  in
[424–426].

Hwang et al. [407] at the Central Research Institute of Electric Power
Industry  (CRIEPI)  experimentally  studied  a  laboratory-scale  piloted
pulverized coal jet flame. The measured data included the particle ve-
locities, particle temperature, species concentrations of O2, N2, CO2, CO
and NO, and 2D and radial distributions of Mie scattering and OH-LIF.
Due  to the well-documented experimental data, a substantial number
of groups have simulated this configuration using different numerical
models; some of the results are summarized below. Stein et al. [343]
compared the simulation results from three different research groups:
TU  Freiberg/TU  Darmstadt,  University  of  Stuttgart  and  University  of
Duisburg-Essen/Imperial College London. In these different simulations,
the devolatilization was described by one- or two-step kinetics, while
turbulence-chemistry  interaction  was  modeled  by  EBU  fast  chemistry
approaches.  Franchetti  et  al.  [339]  at  Imperial  College  London  con-
ducted  an  additional  LES  of  the  CRIEPI  burner  using  the  same  coal
submodels, but with a  Lagrangian method  to track the coal  particles,
which is different from the approach taken in [343]. Wen et al. [341,
377,378,380]  independently  performed  several  simulations  for  the
CRIEPI flame using different gas combustion models in the context of
LES  and  DNS.  The  devolatilization  and  char  surface  reaction  are  the
same  in  these  simulations,  and  correspond  to  the  Badzioch  and
Hawksley model [63], Baum and Street model [368] and P1 model [16],
respectively.  At  first,  to  simulate  the  CRIEPI  flame,  Wen  et  al.  [341]
adopted a simplified EBU model in which the sub-grid scale fluctuations
on the particles were considered. To overcome the disadvantage of the
infinitely  fast  chemistry  EBU  model,  a  finite-rate  chemistry  flamelet
model was developed to simulate the CRIEPI burner in [377]. Wen et al.
[380] developed a three-mixture-fraction (pilot CH4, volatiles and char
off-gases)  flamelet  model  to  adapt  to  the  multi-fuel  streams  in  the
CRIEPI flame. Rieth et al. [18] conducted a LES using the CPD model,
while Zhao and Haworth [12] performed RANS simulations adopting a
transported  PDF  technique  with  standard  simplified  coal  combustion
submodels. Cai et al. [358] conducted a LES using an Eulerian–Eulerian
multi-fluid method, in which the EDC model was used to describe the
reaction  rate;  the  two-competing-reaction-rate  model  was  used  for
devolatilization, and char surface reactions were modeled in line with
Hamor et al. [156]. Hashimoto et al. [318] conducted a RANS for the
CRIEPI flame using different devolatilization models. The performance
of  the  newly  proposed  tabulated-devolatilization-process  model  (TDP

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093843

C. Hasse et al.

Fig.  29. Schematics  of  medium-  to  large-scale
pulverized  coal  flames.  (a)  Darmstadt  swirl-
stabilized  burner  at  20  kW  by  Becker  et  al.
[385]; (b) Aachen swirl-stabilized burner at 40
kW  by  Toporov  et  al.  [302];  (c)  IFRF  No.  1
furnace  at  2.5  MW  by  Vascellari  et  al.  [431],
Michel et al. [432] and Weber et al. [408]; and
(d) BYU swirl-stabilized furnace at 200 kW by
Pickett et al. [433]; (e) University of Utah’s 1.5
MW pilot-scale pulverized coal furnace (L1500)
[434]. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier,
Springer  Nature  and  Taylor  &  Francis  Ltd.,
Copyright (2017, 2008, 2013, 1999 and 2011).

model, see Section 5.3) was compared to the widely used conventional
devolatilization models including the Badzioch and Hawksley [63] and
the Kobayashi models [65]. The char burning rate was calculated using
the Field model [402]. Ahn et al. [357] conducted a LES for the CRIEPI
flame using a simple gas combustion model based on two-step global
kinetic  mechanism.  Again,  the  Badzioch  and  Hawksley  [63]  and  the
Kobayashi  [65]  models  were  used.  Zhao  et  al.  [330]  adopted  a
two-phase MMC-LES model to simulate the target flame following both
the Badzioch and Hawksley [63] and the Kobayashi models [65]. Wan
et al. [359] conducted a LES of the CRIEPI burner using CPD, the PaSR
model to describe the chemical reaction rate, and the kinetic/diffusion
surface  reaction  model  to  characterize  the  char  surface  reaction  rate.
Recently, Hara et al. [19] conducted a DNS using a global volatile matter
reaction scheme to describe the devolatilization rate, which is calculated
based on the detailed reaction mechanism. Zhao et al. [387] conducted a
LES using a flamelet model for gas combustion and the conventional coal

submodels for the devolatilization and char surface reactions. The focus
of  that  work  was  on  investigating  the  NO  formation  characteristics
taking into account the three NO formation mechanisms.

For  the  same  CRIEPI  burner,  additional  experimental  data  was
gathered  for  the  same  operating  conditions.  Hayashi  et  al.  [427]
measured the spatial distributions of the soot volume fraction and pul-
verized coal particles using laser-induced incandescence (LII) and Mie
scattering  imaging,  respectively.  The  radial  distributions  of  the  soot
volume  fraction  were  compared  with  the  OH  radical  planar  laser
induced  fluorescence  (OH-PLIF)  signal  intensity  obtained  from  the
experiment by Hwang et al. [407]. Xu et al. [428] and Takahashi et al.
[322] conducted numerical simulations to predict soot formation in the
CRIEPI  burner  and  compared  their  findings  against  the  experimental
data. The simulation conducted by Xu et al. [428] was based on RANS
coupled  with  the  EDC  model,  while  Takahashi  et  al.  [322]  used  LES
coupled with the SSFRRM model [362]. In both simulations, advanced

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093844

C. Hasse et al.

devolatilization models were used, i.e., the CPD model was used in [428]
while the TDP model was employed in [322]. In both simulations, the
coal-derived  soot  formation  model  proposed  by  Brown  and  Fletcher
[429] was employed to calculate the soot number density.

Recently,  Zhang  et  al.  [413]  and  Ahn  et  al.  [414]  conducted  new
experiments for the CRIEPI burner, focusing on the non-reacting flow
and  reaction  flow,  respectively.  In  contrast  with  the  operating  condi-
tions studied by Hwang et al. [407] and Hayashi et al. [427], where the
pilot fuel is CH4, in the new experiments the pilot fuel is H2, while the
other operating conditions are the same, as shown in Fig. 28(c). The gas
temperature was measured using a sheathed thermocouple, while the
gas  composition  was  examined  using  a  gas  analyzer  with  a  sampling
probe.  The  particle  dispersion  characteristics  and  velocity  were
measured by Mie scattering and PIV techniques, using an optical mea-
surement  system.  Zhang  et  al.  [413]  conducted  a  LES  to  analyze  the
particle dispersion. To investigate the effect of particle shape, spherical
and  spheroidal  motion  models  were  incorporated  to  characterize  the
particle’s movement. Ahn et al. [414] conducted a LES for the piloted
pulverized coal flame using the simplified coal combustion submodels.
Particularly, the predicted gas temperature and major species concen-
trations were compared to the experimental data, while NOx formation
in the pulverized coal flame was analyzed in detail.

The  laboratory-scale  Cambridge  flame  was  studied  experimentally
by Balusamy et al. [415,416], as shown in Fig. 28(d). Two experiments
have been studied, with and without a central stabilizing bluff body. The
available experimental data for this flame include the particle velocity
and the simultaneous Mie scatter and OH-PLIF [415,416]. Muto et al.
[399] conducted a LES for the Cambridge flame without the central bluff
body, studying the effect of the oxygen concentration on NOx formation
in the oxy-fuel atmosphere. The simplified coal combustion submodel
was employed, coupled with the SSFRRM gas combustion model, while
all  three  NOx  formation  mechanisms,  including  thermal  NOx,  prompt
NOx  and fuel NOx, were considered in the simulations. Recently, Chen
et  al.  [430]  conducted  a  LES  using  an  extended  FPV  approach  in  an
Euler-Lagrange framework. A single-kinetic-rate model was applied for
devolatilization, and char surface reactions were neglected since they
only had a negligible effect in the near-burner zone. Reasonable agree-
ment  was  achieved  between  the  flamelet  predictions  and  the  experi-
mental data. Further analysis reveals that different combustion modes
exist in the Cambridge flame, with a typical premixed flame in the re-
gion  furthest  upstream,  a  double  flame  in  the  middle  stream  and  a
typical non-premixed flame in the downstream region.

7.2. Medium- to large-scale combustors

In  this  section,  medium-  to  large-scale  pulverized  coal  flames  are
reviewed. Their combustion characteristics are expected to be closer to
the industrial applications.

Fig. 29 (a) and (b) depict schematics of the Darmstadt and Aachen
swirl-stabilized  pulverized  coal  burners  which  were  experimentally
studied  by  Toporov  et  al.  [302]  and  Becker  et  al.  [385].  Both  target
flames are generated by similar swirl burners mounted in combustion
chambers  with  similar  characteristics,  and  can  be  stabilized  under  a
wide range of operating conditions. These burners are designed partic-
ularly  for pulverized  coal  combustion  in  oxy-fuel  atmospheres.  While
the Aachen burner enables the aerodynamic stabilization of a pulverized
coal flame, the Darmstadt flame is gas-assisted. The Darmstadt burner is
derived from the Aachen burner, and is generated by a burner optimized
for simulations and experiments in well-controlled boundary conditions.
The Aachen burner is composed of two annular concentric nozzles, with
the central annular nozzle providing a mixture of solid fuel and oxidizer,
and  the  adjacent  annular  orifice  providing  a  swirled  oxidizer  stream.
Three different operating conditions have been studied experimentally:
one  reference  case  with  conventional  air  firing  and  two  cases  using
oxy-fuel, respectively. A comprehensive experimental data set has been
generated, including gas velocities, species concentrations of CO2, CO,

H2O and light hydrocarbons as well as the internal wall temperature.
The  Darmstadt  burner  provides  excellent  optical  access  to  the  flame.
Since  the  internal  chamber  walls  and  the  burner  quarl  are  made  of
quartz  glass,  optical  flame  diagnostic  techniques  can  be  applied.  At
present, three operating conditions have been investigated, including a
reference air case and two oxy-fuel cases. The initially available exper-
imental data included the OH-PLIF and particle velocities. Becker et al.
[435]  recently  investigated  the  particle  dynamics  in  the  Darmstadt
burner using advanced laser diagnostics. The small and large coal par-
ticle  velocities  were  measured  using  two-phase  particle  image  veloc-
imetry and particle tracking velocimetry (PIV/PTV), respectively, and
the  spatial  distributions  of  pyrolysis  products  were  recorded  via
laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). The results showed that the coal type
has only a minor effect on the gas phase velocities, and the profiles of the
mean  axial  velocity  of  the  large  particles  have  flatter  gradients  than
those of the gas phase velocity. Sadiki et al. [436] conducted both LES
and RANS simulations for the Aachen burner to analyze the effects of
turbulence  and  multiphase  treatments  on  the  oxy-coal  combustion
process using simplified coal combustion submodels coupled with the
EDC gas combustion model. For the Darmstadt burner, Doost et al. [437]
conducted a LES for the Darmstadt burner to study the fluid residence
times  in  the  non-reacting  case,  and  the  predicted  gas  velocities  were
compared to the experimental data. Knappstein et al. [391] conducted a
LES  for  the  Darmstadt  burner  for  the  reacting  cases  using  a
flamelet-based model coupled with the simplified devolatilization and
char surface reaction models. In the first step, only the air cases were
studied, and the predicted results, including the gas velocities and the
OH-PLIF, were compared to the experimental data. Nicolai et al. [394]
conducted a LES of the Darmstadt burner operated under an oxy-fuel
atmosphere, using the premixed flamelet model coupled with an artifi-
cially thickened model (ATF). The simulation results were compared to
the  experimental  data,  including  axial  and  tangential  velocities,  and
very good agreements were achieved. Recently, Wen et al. [384] con-
ducted a LES of the Darmstadt burner operated in different conditions
using a multi-stream flamelet model. That work focuses on investigating
the influence of the atmosphere on pollutant formation. The simulation
results were compared to the available experimental data, including the
globally  observed  flame  structure  and  the  particle  temperature,  and
reasonable agreement was obtained. It is important to mention that all of
the  above  described  simulations  for  the  Darmstadt  burner  focused
particularly on the turbulent gas phase combustion part and TCI. Thus,
they  employed  conventional  models  for  the  solid  phase,  i.e.,
single-kinetic
a
devolatilization
diffusion-kinetic-controlled model for char oxidation.

rates

and

for

For  the  Aachen  burner,  Massmeyer  et  al.  [438]  carried  out  an
experimental study examining how the fuel type and oxidizer compo-
sition  influence  the  flame  structure  and  combustion  behavior.  Four
pulverized  coal  flames  with  different  coal  types  and  different  atmo-
spheres were studied with a constant thermal output and stoichiometry.
A  combination  of  flame-intrusive  and  non-intrusive  measurement
techniques was employed to provide detailed in-flame measurements,
including  the  flow  field,  major  product  species  and  radiative  heat
transfer. The main findings of the experiment are that the flame length is
predominately controlled by the effective swirl intensity, and the loca-
tion of the peak combustion intensity is determined by the flow inlet
conditions at the burner. Nicolai et al. [22,385] employed a LES coupled
with the premixed flamelet model for the air and oxy-fuel atmospheres
using  the  same coal  combustion  submodels  as  in  their previous  work
[394]  to  simulate  the  Darmstadt  burner.  The  simulation  results  were
compared to the available experimental data for both air and oxy-fuel
atmospheres,  including  the  velocities,  the  particle  temperature  and
major  species  mass  fractions  in  the  near-burner  region.  Reasonable
agreement was achieved between numerical and experimental data for
both atmospheres. Further, the influence of the different atmospheres on
the interaction of coal particles and the gas phase was investigated.

Another important reference configuration is the IFRF (International

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093845

C. Hasse et al.

Fig. 30. LES of the Alstom industrial-scale furnaces operated at 15 MW (top) [451] and 342 MW (bottom) [452]. Bottom figure: reprinted with permission from
Elsevier, Copyright (2018).

Fig.  31. Schematic  of  the  gasifiers  on  different  scales.  (a)  CRIEPI  2  tons/day  (T/D)  research-scale  coal  gasifier  [455];  (b)  Brigham  Young  University  (BYU)
experimental-scale entrained-flow gasifier [327,332]; (c) Siemens 5 MW pilot-scale gasifier [457,458]. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier and Taylor & Francis
Ltd., Copyright (2006, 2014 and 2008).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093846

C. Hasse et al.

the

long  flame  configuration  [432]  and

Flame Research Foundation) No. 1 furnace, sketched in Fig. 29 (c). This
includes  both
the
swirl-stabilized configuration [408]. The furnace has a 2 × 2 m2  rect-
angular cross section and is about 6 m long. It can generate 2–3 MW of
thermal power and has similar combustion characteristics to industrial
furnaces where the radiative heat transfer is dominant compared to the
convective heat transfer. For both configurations, the available experi-
mental  data  include  the  radial  and  axial  profiles  of  the  mean  gas  ve-
locity,  mean  temperature  and  mean  species  concentrations  in  the
near-quarl  region.  For  the  long  flame  configuration,  St ̈ollinger  et  al.
[21] conducted a RANS simulation using an extended transported PDF
model,  coupled  with  simplified  coal  combustion  submodels.  For  the
swirl-stabilized  configuration,  Weber  et  al.  [439]  conducted  a  RANS
simulation  using  simplified  coal  combustion  submodels  coupled  with
the EBU model. One limitation of the RANS approach is that the vortex
breakdown in the recirculation zone cannot be predicted. Thus, Olenik
et al. [15] conducted an initial LES of the IFRF No. 1 furnace using the
EBU  model  coupled  with  simplified  coal  combustion  submodels.  To
overcome the limitations of the EBU model, Wen et al. [376] extended a
three-stream FPV model for LES to simulate the furnace with standard
conventional  coal  combustion  submodels.  The  simulation  results  ob-
tained by Wen et al. [376] were compared to those obtained by Olenik
et al. [15]. The flamelet model was found to outperform the EBU model
in predicting the gas temperature and species concentrations. Rieth et al.
[17,440] also conducted two LESs for the IFRF No. 1 furnace using a
two-mixture-fraction  flamelet  model  coupled  with  simplified  coal
combustion  submodels.  In  contrast  to  previous  works  [15,376],  a
significantly  finer  mesh  was  used.  Overall,  these  LES  studies  offered
satisfactory agreement with the experimental results and demonstrated
that LES could be used to compute large-scale pulverized coal flames.
Pickett et al. [433] conducted experiments at Brigham Young Uni-
versity (BYU) with a practical pulverized coal reactor, shown schemat-
ically  in  Fig.  29  (d),  to  investigate  the  effects  of  swirl  level,  velocity
profile and mass flow rates on NO formation. The available experimental
data  includes  the  axial  and  tangential  gas  velocities,  gas  temperature
and  NOx  species  concentrations.  Xu  et  al.  [441]  conducted  a  RANS
simulation of the BYU swirl-stabilized flame to predict NO destruction
due to advanced reburning. A four-step, eight-species reduced mecha-
nism was integrated into their comprehensive CFD code PCGC-3 [442].
The  integrated  model  for  advanced  reburning  was  evaluated  by
comparing  the  findings  against experimental  data  on  the  NO  concen-
trations and gas temperature. It was found that most of the NO reduction
is  caused  by  chemical  reactions,  while  only  a  small  part  of  the  NO
reduction is due to the dilution of the strong swirling flow. The PCGC
code developed at BYU used basic approaches for modeling gas phase
combustion,  such  as  the  fast-chemistry  or  chemical  equilibrium
assumption, combined with a mixture fraction-based and presumed PDF
approach  [443].  Solid  fuel  kinetics  were  initially  modeled  using
simplified empirical approaches, such as the two-step pyrolysis model
[65] and the single-film char model. The CPD and the FG-DVC models
were later coupled in more recent versions of the PCGC code [11,327].
The PCGC code was also used to investigate coal gasification [327].

The 1.5 MW pilot-scale combustor (L1500) at the University of Utah
[434]  is  a  horizontally  fired  test  furnace  that  is  designed  to  simulate
pulverized coal combustion with low NOx emissions. The test rig has a 1
m2  cross-section and a total length of 12 m, which is divided into 10
sections with various sampling and injection ports. As shown in Fig. 29
(e), the L1500 combustor is equipped with stainless steel flue gas recycle
lines, in-line fans and an associated control system to allow the recycling
of the flue gas, which facilitates oxy-fuel combustion experiments. The
test  rig  has  four  oxidizer  streams.  The  primary  stream  entrains  the
pulverized  coal  into  the  variable-swirl  burner  through  a  gravimetric
feeder. The secondary and tertiary oxidizer streams are pre-heated to
temperatures up to 600 K, while the over-fire oxidizer stream is located
down the furnace and can be plumbed into the furnace at any section.
Eddings et al. [444] conducted experiments on the 1.5 MW pilot-scale

combustor (L1500) to evaluate the performance of co-firing pulverized
coal with either raw wood, torrefied wood or bio-char. They found that
the  pollutant  emissions  (NOx,  CO  and  SO2)  are  similar  between  the
baseline  coal  firing  and  biomass  co-firing  for  any  of  the  forms  of  the
biomass.  Fry  et  al.  [445]  conducted  experiments  in  the  1.5  MW
combustor  to  investigate  the  differences  between  air-  and  oxy-fired
flame  behaviors,  including  video  images  of  the  flames  and  the  radia-
tion  intensity  along  the  flame  length.  The  experimental  data  confirm
that an air-like flame can be established by burning pulverized coal with
a mixture of oxygen and flue-gas recirculation (FGR). The ignition delay,
flame  shape  and  intensity  in  oxy-coal  flames  can  be  modified  by
adjusting the mixing of O2 and FGR.

7.3. Industrial-scale combustion furnaces

As  computational  power  has  become  widely  available,  in  recent
years simulations of industrial-scale furnaces have been conducted. As a
substantial body of work employing RANS with low mesh resolutions
has been conducted for industrial-scale furnaces over long periods [337,
446–450], in this section we only focus on recent progress on LES for
large-scale furnaces.

The  Carbon-Capture  Multidisciplinary  Simulation  Center  (CCMSC)
at  the  University  of  Utah  conducted  LESs  of  Alstom  industrial-scale
furnaces  operated  at  15  MW  [451]  and  342  MW  [452],  as  shown  in
Fig. 30. The simulations were conducted on the platform of the Uintah
software  [453,454]  using  the  Arches  module.  Uintah  is  a  massively
parallel code that solves conserved quantities spatially and temporally in
a turbulent flow field. The particle phase is represented in an Eulerian
framework using the direct quadrature method of moments (DQMOM),
in  which  the  physical  coal-particle  processes  include  devolatilization,
char  oxidation,  swelling,  shrinkage  and  body  forces.  The  DQMOM
method  can  predict  the  particle  size  distribution  (see  the  top  row  of
Fig.  30),  particle  velocities  and  other  particle  properties.  Recently,
Adamczyk et al. [452] conducted LESs to study the air-staging process
(ROFA)  of  an  industrial-scale,  pulverized-coal  boiler  (OP-430,  100%
load: 342 MW). Two configurations have been studied, the original one
consisting  in  the  standard  configuration  of  OFA  nozzles  (one  level  of
OFA ports) and the modified one involving air staging by distributing air
over the upper part of the combustion chamber (four levels of the ROFA
ports). The obtained instantaneous distribution of the O2  volume frac-
tion are shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 30. The simulation results for
the original configuration were compared to the experimental data, and
the  differences  between  the  simulation  results  for  the  original  and
modified configurations were analyzed. It was found that the difference
between the  simulation results and experimental data varies between
2% and 20% depending on the value of interest (O2, NOx, temperature).

7.4. Reference coal gasification systems

Compared to pulverized coal combustion, only a few studies have
investigated  entrained-flow  gasification.  In  this  section,  we  focus  on
three  different scales  of representative coal  gasifiers to illustrate how
advances in coal gasification submodel development have been intro-
duced in CFD simulations.

The  first  is  the  research-scale  coal  gasifier  developed  at  CRIEPI,
operated  at  2  metric  tons/day  (T/D)  [455],  shown  schematically  in
Fig.  31  (a).  The  gasifier  has  a  combustor  and  a  reductor.  In  the
combustor, coal and char are burnt with secondary air, while the burnt
products such as ash are discharged as molten slag. The flue gas intro-
duced from the combustor is introduced to the reductor and mixed with
the pulverized coal from the reductor, whereupon the devolatilization
and  the  gasification  reaction  occur.  Unburnt  char  at  the  gasifier  is
collected by a cyclone and is reintroduced to the combustor. Watanabe
and Otaka [455] conducted a RANS simulation for the CRIEPI gasifier
taking into account pyrolysis, char gasification and gas phase reactions.
The devolatilization rate was calculated with a primary reaction model,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093847

C. Hasse et al.

while  the  gasification  rate  of  char  particles  was  calculated  using  the
model parameters obtained by Kajitani et al. [456], who employed the
random pore model [225]. For the gas phase reactions, a simple five-step
global  reaction  scheme  was  used.  The  gas  temperature  and  species
concentrations predicted by the adopted numerical model were found to
agree with the experimental data under different operating conditions
(air ratio).

Another widely used reference configuration is the laboratory-scale
entrained-flow  gasifier  at  Brigham  Young  University  (BYU)  [327]
shown in Fig. 31 (b). The diameter of the reactor is 20 cm and its total
vertical length 2 m. The pulverized coal is entrained into the gasifier by
the primary gas stream composed of Ar, O2 and H2O. A secondary stream
of steam is introduced into the chamber through a concentric annular
duct. Brown et al. [327] conducted the first simulation of this gasifier
using  their  CFD  code  PCGC-2  (pulverized  coal  gasification  and  com-
bustion, two-dimensional) [334] employing RANS turbulence modeling
and a two-mixture fraction-based approach for TCI. Particularly, heat
losses due to radiation and convection were considered in the energy
equation by introducing a heat loss factor. Kumar and Ghoniem [306]
conducted  a  RANS  simulation  of  this  gasifier  using  the  EBU  model
coupled with the simplified char surface reaction model. The devolati-
lization rate was characterized with the advanced CPD model. Abani and
Ghoniem [344] then conducted a LES for the same gasifier in order to
capture  some  of  the  unsteady  structures  that  affect  mixing,
turbulent-chemistry interactions, turbulence dispersion of particles, etc.
The  devolatilization  rate  was  calculated  using  the  Badzioch  and
Hawksley model [63], the char surface reaction rate was characterized
using the Field model [402] and the effect of turbulence on homoge-
neous combustion was described employing a partially stirred reactor
(PaSR) approach [459]. The simulation results obtained with the LES
were  compared  to  those  from  RANS  with  the  same  coal  combustion
submodels and the experimental data. It was found that, compared to
the  RANS  simulations,  LES  can  offer  better  predictions  since  the  un-
steady flow structures can be captured. To overcome the limitation of
the conventional devolatilization approaches, Vascellari et al. adopted
an advanced coal devolatilization model [41] and later advanced char
models  [332].  Single  particle  trajectories  were  extracted  to  study  the
reactive  boundary  layer  around  the  particles  under  oxidizing  and
reducing  atmospheres  [316].  The  turbulence-chemistry  interactions
were characterized with the EDC model, while the char surface reaction
rate was calculated with the Field model. The devolatilization and char
conversion model was developed by calibrating simple empirical models
using results either from experiments or advanced models. This has been
described in detail in the previous sections.

The  Siemens  5  MW  pilot-scale  gasifier,  shown  schematically  in
Fig. 31 (c), is equipped with water-cooled membrane walls and a partial
water quench. Pulverized coal and oxidizer are fed to the burner at the
top  of  the  gasifier,  while  products  and  slag  leave  the  gasifier  at  the
bottom. Vascellari et al. [41] adopted the same numerical models as for
the  BYU  coal  gasifier  to  simulate  the  Siemens  gasifier.  The  kinetic
models were adjusted based on available experimental data and simu-
lations  using  detailed  pyrolysis  and  char  conversion  models.  It  was
found  that  the  simulations  adequately  predict  the  measured  syngas
species  concentrations  and  the  carbon  conversion  at  the  exit  of  the
reactor. Halama and Spliethoff [457] conducted a RANS simulation for
this gasifier using the EDC model to describe the chemical reaction rate.
The two-competing-rates model was used to describe the devolatiliza-
tion rate, while an advanced char surface reaction model was adopted to
describe  the  gasification  rate  from  the  char  particles.  An  n-th  order
effectiveness  factor  approach  with  intrinsic  reaction  kinetics  was
adopted  to  take  into  account  the  pore  diffusion  and  boundary  layer
diffusion, and the influence of thermal deactivation on the reactivity of
the char surface was also included in the char surface reaction model.
Overall,  very  good  results  were  obtained  given  the  experimental  un-
certainties that are unavoidable for systems on that scale.

8. Summary and future challenges

The present article reviewed advanced models for the simulation of
coal  combustion  and  gasification.  Three  particularly  important  and
relevant areas were identified:

• Solid phase kinetics and their integration in CFD,
• The turbulent flow and mixing field,
• Turbulence – gas-phase chemistry interaction (TCI),

all of which are strongly coupled in combustion chambers and gasifi-
cation reactors.

The main results in these three areas are briefly summarized below,
and the need for further research and the associated challenges are also
presented. Finally, an outlook is given and suggestions made as to how
the results in the three areas should be combined in the next generation
of  CFD  simulations  of  coal  combustion  and  gasification  and  how  the
coupling  can  be  systematically  validated  on  the  basis  of  reference
configurations.

8.1. Solid phase kinetics and their integration in CFD

Detailed  network-based  models  for  pyrolysis  are  very  advanced.
Even  without  experimental  data,  volatile  release  can  be  reliably
described for a wide range of coals. For some models there is still po-
tential, especially in the release of pollutant precursors.

For the description of char conversion, there are a number of models
which  differ  greatly  in  terms  of  their  complexity  and  the  number  of
subprocesses considered. Compared to the pyrolysis models, there is an
overall greater need for experimental data to determine the heteroge-
neous  kinetics.  A  major  reason  for  this,  besides  the  influence  of  the
parent coal, is the strong dependence of the char structure (and thus the
reactivity) on the preceding pyrolysis. For higher temperatures, not only
the heterogeneous surface kinetics, but also pore or film diffusion in the
particle  boundary  layer  become  rate-determining.  Since  oxidation  re-
actions are much faster than gasification reactions, transport limitations
occur much earlier in oxidizing than in reducing atmospheres. There-
fore, the determination of the heterogeneous kinetics for gasification is
particularly  important  in  order  to  predict  overall  char  conversion  for
such conditions. This is also relevant for oxyfuel atmospheres, where the
contribution of gasification reactions increases significantly compared
to combustion in air.

Pyrolysis  and  char  conversion  models  have  been  developed  sepa-
rately.  When  the  entire  thermo-chemical  conversion  process  is  simu-
lated, they must be coupled in a suitable way; whereby the processes are
often assumed to be purely consecutive for the sake of simplification.
This problem is avoided in the semi-empirical framework developed by
the  CRECK  group.  All  individual  steps  are  represented  in  one  kinetic
model.  This  builds  on  four  reference  monomeric  structures  that  are
bonded repeatedly in the polymeric macrostructure of coal. All fuels are
represented  as  mixtures  of  these  reference  structures.  The  kinetic  pa-
rameters are calibrated on the basis of measurements. Each of the four
reference structures has its own mechanism.

Integrating these detailed models into the CFD is a particular chal-
lenge. The detailed models, especially, have only been used compara-
tively  rarely  in  3D-CFD,  either  because  of  the  computational  time
required  or  because  an  interface  was  lacking.  Instead,  a  number  of
methods  have  been  developed  to  calibrate  simplified  kinetic  models,
such as one- or two-step models for pyrolysis, with the detailed models
for  a  wide  range  of  operating  conditions.  Recently  published  work
suggests that methods based on machine learning are also promising to
reduce the models.

There  are  two  main  challenges  and  corresponding  research
needs  for  the  future.  Firstly,  kinetic  models  must  be  continuously
developed further. Important aspects here include char reactivity, the
release  of  pollutant  precursors  and  catalytic  effects  of  minerals.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093848

C. Hasse et al.

Secondly,  the  detailed  kinetic  information  must  be  more  intensively
used  than  today  in  3D-CFD.  Many  current  studies  still  use  highly
simplified and not sufficiently calibrated models. For this, the coupling
strategies in particular have to be improved, including their numerical
efficiency with respect to scale-resolving methods.

8.2. Turbulent flow and mixing field

While the vast majority of CFD simulations of coal combustion and
gasification are RANS-based, scale-resolving methods such as LESs, and
in some cases even DNSs, are used, particularly in more recent studies.
These approaches allow complex features to be captured, such as un-
steadiness,  ignition  and  combustion  instabilities.  A  similar  transition
from RANS to LES was observed some time ago for turbulent gas phase
combustion. In academia, especially for laboratory configurations, LES
has almost completely replaced standard RANS approaches. Especially
for complex systems such as gas turbines or engines, both approaches are
used equally today, both in university and industrial environments.

Furthermore,  some  DNS  studies  of  simplified  configurations  have
been  published.  These  data  are  particularly  suitable  for  a  detailed
analysis of certain physical effects such as ignition in turbulent flows or
TCI in general or the release of precursors and the subsequent formation
of pollutants. Based on this data, models can be developed and validated
using the DNS data.

Future research should focus on the further establishment of LESs.
Operating conditions should be analyzed where effects such as stability
are relevant; this can only be investigated to a limited extent with RANS
methods. An essential point here is that advanced models for solid fuel
kinetics and TCI are also used fully coupled in LES. This is also discussed
in the outlook below.

So far, only a few turbulent DNS studies are available, but these are
very valuable for developing models and thus for improving a compre-
hensive,  LES-based  simulation  methodology.  Future  DNSs  should  in
particular  integrate  detailed  models  for  solid-  and  gas-phase  kinetics.
The two mechanisms must be compatible and, for example, make the
same assumptions for tar species. The interesting scientific topics which
then  emerge  include  ignition,  stability  and  pollutant  formation,  in
particular. The local conditions for the DNS should be extracted from
LES studies of combustion chambers or gasification reactors.

8.3. Turbulence – gas phase chemistry interaction (TCI)

Turbulent  combustion  is  characterized  by  a  strong  interaction  of
turbulent mixing and chemical reactions. TCI has been a very active field
of research for many years. For gas-phase combustion in particular, a
number  of  models  for  premixed  and  non-premixed  combustion  have
been  developed  and  successfully  applied  in  LES.  Here,  too,  one  key
factor  was  close  cooperation  with  the  experiments,  leading  to  corre-
sponding  reference  burners  being  developed  and  extensive  data  sets
provided for the validation.

Turbulent coal flames pose two particular challenges compared to
single-phase gaseous combustion. First, a complex mixture of light gases
and  tars  is  released  from  the  solid  fuel.  The  reactions  of  this  large
number of species have to be described by a suitable chemical mecha-
nism that has to cover not only oxidizing but also reducing conditions.
Due  to  the  very  different  molecular  sizes  of  the  released  species,  the
possibility  cannot be excluded  of  the species’  different molecular  dif-
fusivities  influencing  the  structure  of  the  reaction  zone.  Secondly,  a
number of studies have shown that the release of the gases from the coal
or char particle leads to very complex flame structures. Non-premixed
and premixed reaction zones can occur in close proximity and interact
with each other. These complex structures are highly dependent on local
conditions and may differ from case to case. TCI models for coal com-
bustion should therefore be applicable for different combustion regimes
and should be able to adapt locally to the regime.

In  recent  years,  a  number  of  studies  have  been  published  on  the

development  of  advanced  TCI  models  for  coal  combustion.  Without
exception, these have built on the experience gained for turbulent gas-
phase  combustion  and  have  systematically  further  developed  the
models for coal, e.g. to consider multiple fuel streams/mixture fractions.
A number of configurations such as particle-laden counterflow or stag-
nation point flames, jet flames or mixing layers have been investigated.
For  some  configurations  turbulent DNS  data were  also  available.  The
majority of the studies are based on the flamelet concept. One advantage
is that flamelet manifolds can be generated and tabulated in advance,
which permits the efficient use of large chemical reaction mechanisms.
Research has not yet determined the multi-regime data characteristics or
the probability/filtered density functions (PDFs/FDFs), as investigated,
for example, in transported PDF approaches.

In  these studies,  a  number of  differences  to  gas-phase  combustion
have been identified, which have to be considered in the models. One
example  is  the  formation  of  NOx  in  the  near-burner  region.  While
thermal NO formation in gas flames, in particular, is characterized by
slow time scales, in coal flames it is shown that the NOx  formation is
similarly  fast  to  the  combustion  reactions,  due  to  the  release  of  pre-
cursors and their subsequent reactions.

The development of advanced TCI models for coal combustion and
gasification is still at a quite early stage and there are many open sci-
entific questions. Future research should focus, among other things, on
the  consistent  coupling  of  gas-  and  solid-phase  chemistry. Due  to  the
large  number  of  gases  released,  the  reaction  mechanisms  must  be
compatible. This also includes the precursors and the formation of pol-
lutants, e.g.  the  release of  tars  from coal;  and  their further  reactions,
either decomposition into smaller species or further growth into soot,
should be represented by both the chemistry and the TCI model. Another
focus  should  be  the  multi-regime  character  of  coal  flames.  For  this
purpose, the models have to be systematically evaluated, developed and
validated. This should take into account extremely unsteady processes
such as ignition or flames at the stability limit. It is crucial to further
couple these TCI models for use in LESs.

8.4. Outlook on future comprehensive 3D-CFD simulations of coal
combustion and gasification

The  relevant  physical  and  chemical  processes  as  well  as  their  nu-
merical modeling were discussed on the basis of the three areas above.
Significant progress has been made in all three areas in recent years. A
number of LES studies from the  last years have shown that the rapid
increase  in  computer  resources  is  offering  detailed  insights  into  local
processes which determine the global behavior (stability, carbon con-
sumption,  etc.)
in  combustion  chambers;  this  was  previously
unthinkable.

A goal for the future should therefore be to integrate the respective
advances into CFD simulations and to investigate the interactions. Initial
published work describes the coupling of two of the three areas, e.g. LES-
flamelet  or  LES  with  detailed  multi-step/multi-species  solid  fuel  ki-
netics.  However,  to  the  best  of  the  authors’  knowledge  there  are  no
comprehensive CFD studies to date that have coupled the most advanced
approaches  from  all  three  areas  and  systematically  investigated  their
interaction  and  relevance  for  combustion  chambers  of  different  sizes
(from laboratory to pilot scale) and their complexity. Suitable reference
configurations for this purpose have been presented in a separate section
of this article. Extensive numerical studies of this kind, always in com-
parison  with  experimental  data,  are  absolutely  necessary  to  quantita-
tively evaluate the predictive power of current approaches and to define
the need for future research on further developing models in the three
areas, and on coupling them.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093849

C. Hasse et al.

the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  acknowledge  the  financial  support  by  the  Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft  (DFG,  German  Research  Foundation)  –  Pro-
jektnummer 215035359 – TRR 129 and Projektnummer 238057103. We
further acknowledge previous support by the Federal Ministry of Edu-
cation and Research of Germany in the framework of Virtuhcon (project
number 03Z2FN11). Xu Wen acknowledges the financial support pro-
vided by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, Bonn, Germany.

The  authors  are  grateful  to  Stephen  Niksa,  Thomas  H.  Fletcher,
Mehrdad Shahnam, for fruitful discussions and review of the manuscript
prior to submission.

References

[1] British Petroleum BP. Economics BP energy. BP Energy Outlook; 2020. 2020.
[2] IEA IEA. Global Energy Review 2020. Paris: 2020.
[3] British Petroleum BP. Economics BP energy. Stat Rev World Energy 2020. 2020.
[4] Council WE. World Energy Scenarios 2019 - Exploring innovation pathways to

2040. n.d.

[5] EIA USEIA. International Energy Outlook 2019. IEO 2019; 2019.
[6] IEA IEA. Key World Energy Statistics 2020. Paris: 2020.
[7] You CF, Xu XC. Coal combustion and its pollution control in China. Energy 2010;

35:4467–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2009.04.019.

[8] Council WE. World Energy Scenarios 2016 - The Grand Transition. World Energy

Council; 2016.

[9] British Petroleum BP. economics BP energy. BP Energy Outlook. 2018th ed. BP

energy economics; 2019. 2019.

[10] Chen L, Yong SZ, Ghoniem AF. Oxy-fuel combustion of pulverized coal:

Characterization, fundamentals, stabilization and CFD modeling. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2012;38:156–214.

[11] Eaton AM, Smoot LD, Hill SC, Eatough CN. Components, formulations, solutions,
evaluation, and application of comprehensive combustion models. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 1999;25:387–436. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-1285(99)00008-
8.

[12] Zhao X-Y, Haworth DC. Transported PDF modeling of pulverized coal jet flames.

Combust Flame 2014;161:1866–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2013.12.024.

[13] Wen X, Luo K, Wang H, Luo Y, Fan J. Analysis of pulverized coal flame stabilized
in a 3D laminar counterflow. Combust Flame 2018;189:106–25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.10.021.

[14] Wen X, Fan J. Flamelet modeling of laminar pulverized coal combustion with

different particle sizes. Adv Powder Technol 2019;30:2964–79. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apt.2019.09.004.

[15] Olenik G, Stein OT, Kronenburg A. LES of swirl-stabilised pulverised coal

combustion in IFRF furnace No. 1. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:2819–28. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.06.149.

[16] Cheng P. Two-Dimensional Radiating Gas Flow by a Moment Method. AIAA J

1964;2:1662–4. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.2645.

[17] Rieth M, Proch F, Rabaçal M, Franchetti BM, Cavallo Marincola F, Kempf AM.

Flamelet LES of a semi-industrial pulverized coal furnace. Combust Flame 2016;
173:39–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.07.013.

[18] Rieth M, Clements AG, Rabaçal M, Proch F, Stein OT, Kempf AM. Flamelet LES
modeling of coal combustion with detailed devolatilization by directly coupled
CPD. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:2181–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2016.06.077.

[19] Hara T, Muto M, Kitano T, Kurose R, Komori S. Direct numerical simulation of a

pulverized coal jet flame employing a global volatile matter reaction scheme
based on detailed reaction mechanism. Combust Flame 2015;162:4391–407.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.07.027.

[20] St ̈ollinger M, Naud B, Roekaerts D, Beishuizen N, Heinz S. PDF modeling and
simulations of pulverized coal combustion – Part 1: Theory and modeling.
Combust Flame 2013;160:384–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2012.10.010.

[21] St ̈ollinger M, Naud B, Roekaerts D, Beishuizen N, Heinz S. PDF modeling and

simulations of pulverized coal combustion – Part 2: Application. Combust Flame
2013;160:396–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2012.10.011.
[22] Nicolai H, Wen X, Miranda FCFC, Zabrodiec D, Massmeyer A, Mare F di, et al.

Numerical investigation of swirl-stabilized pulverized coal flames in air and oxy-
fuel atmospheres by means of Large Eddy simulation coupled with tabulated
chemistry. Fuel 2020:119429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119429.

[23] Truelove JS. Discrete-Ordinate Solutions of the Radiation Transport Equation.
J Heat Transfer 1987;109:1048–51. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3248182.
[24] Smith TF, Shen ZF, Friedman JN. Evaluation of Coefficients for the Weighted Sum
of Gray Gases Model. J Heat Transfer 1982;104:602–8. https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.3245174.

[25] Wu B, Roy SP, Zhao X, Modest MF. Effect of multiphase radiation on coal

combustion in a pulverized coal jet flame. J Quant Spectrosc Radiat Transf 2017;
197:154–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jqsrt.2017.03.017.

[26] Zhu C, Tu H, Bai Y, Ma D, Zhao Y. Evaluation of slagging and fouling

characteristics during Zhundong coal co-firing with a Si/Al dominated low rank
coal. Fuel 2019;254:115730. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.115730.

[27] Zhao Y, Huang Q, Yao Q, Li S. Prediction and validation of ash sticking
probability under fouling conditions in pulverized coal combustion. Proc
Combust Inst 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.053. Accepted.
[28] Niu Y, Tan H, Hui S. Ash-related issues during biomass combustion: Alkali-

induced slagging, silicate melt-induced slagging (ash fusion), agglomeration,
corrosion, ash utilization, and related countermeasures. Prog Energy Combust Sci
2016;52:1–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2015.09.003.

[29] Chen L, Yong SZ, Ghoniem AF. Oxy-fuel combustion of pulverized coal:

Characterization, fundamentals, stabilization and CFD modeling. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2012;38:156–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2011.09.003.

[30] Fan Y, Lyu Q, Zhu Z, Zhang H. The impact of additives upon the slagging and

fouling during Zhundong coal gasification. J Energy Inst 2020;93:1651–65.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joei.2020.02.003.

[31] Li S, Xu Y, Gao Q. Measurements and modelling of oxy-fuel coal combustion. Proc

Combust Inst 2019;37:2643–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.08.054.

[32] Wan K, Vervisch L, Xia J, Domingo P, Wang Z, Liu Y, et al. Alkali metal emissions
in an early-stage pulverized-coal flame: DNS analysis of reacting layers and
chemistry tabulation. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:2791–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.119.

[33] Kerstein AR, Niksa S. Fragmentation during carbon conversion: Predictions and
measurements. Symp Combust 1985;20:941–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-
0784(85)80583-X.

[34] Kerstein AR, Edwards BF. Percolation model for simulation of char oxidation and
fragmentation time-histories. Chem Eng Sci 1987;42:1629–34. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0009-2509(87)80167-7.

[35] Salatino P, Miccio F, Massimilla L. Combustion and percolative fragmentation of

carbons. Combust Flame 1993;95:342–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180
(93)90002-K.

[36] Gao Q, Li S, Zhao Y, Yao Q. Mechanism on the contribution of coal/char

fragmentation to fly ash formation during pulverized coal combustion. Proc
Combust Inst 2019;37:2831–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.092.

[37] Senneca O, Bareschino P, Urciuolo M, Chirone R. Prediction of structure

evolution and fragmentation phenomena during combustion of coal: Effects of
heating rate. Fuel Process Technol 2017;166:228–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuproc.2017.06.010.

[38] Senneca O, Heuer S, Bareschino P, Urciuolo M, Pepe F, Schiemann M, et al.

Fragmentation of pulverized coal in a laminar drop tube reactor: Experiments and
model. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:2849–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2018.08.057.

[39] Kreutzkam B, Wieland C, Spliethoff H. Improved numerical prediction of ash
formation and deposition using a novel developed char fragmentation model.
Fuel 2012;98:103–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2012.02.056.

[40] Anthony DB, Howard JB. Coal devolatilization and hydrogastification. AIChE J

1976;22:625–56. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690220403.

[41] Vascellari M, Arora R, Pollack M, Hasse C. Simulation of entrained flow

gasification with advanced coal conversion submodels. Part 1: Pyrolysis. Fuel
2013;113:654–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.06.014.

[42] Niksa S. Process Chemistry of Coal Utilization: Impacts of coal quality and

operating conditions. London: Woodhead Publishing, Elsevier; 2019. https://doi.
org/10.1016/C2018-0-04246-2.

[43] Gavalas GR. Coal pyrolysis, 4. New York: Elsevier; 1982.
[44] Grant DM, Pugmire RJ, Fletcher TH, Kerstein AR. Chemical Model of Coal

Devolatilization Using Percolation Lattice Statistics. Energy Fuels 1989;3:175–86.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef00014a011.

[45] Smith KL, Smoot LD, Fletcher TH, Pugmire RJ. The structure and reaction
processes of coal. Springer Science & Business Media. 1st ed. 1994.
[46] Solomon PR. Chemistry of coal conversion. New York: Plenum Press; 1985.
[47] Fletcher TH. Review of 30 Years of Research Using the Chemical Percolation
Devolatilization Model. Energy Fuels 2019;33:12123–53. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b02826.

[48] Richards AP, Fletcher TH. A comparison of simple global kinetic models for coal

devolatilization with the CPD model. Fuel 2016;185:171–80. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2016.07.095.

[49] Maffei T. Kinetic Model of Coal Combustion. Technical University Milan; 2013.
[50] Fletcher TH, Kerstein AR, Pugmire RJ, Solum MS, Grant DM. A chemical

percolation model for devolatilization: Summary. Combustion Research Facility.
Sandia National Laboratories; 1992.

[51] Davidson RM. Molecular Structure of Coal. Coal Sci. 1982:83–160. https://doi.

org/10.1016/B978-0-12-150701-5.50009-7.

[52] Fletcher TH, Kerstein AR, Pugmire RJ, Grant DM. Chemical percolation model for
devolatilization. 2. Temperature and heating rate effects on product yields.
Energy Fuels 1990;4:54–60. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef00019a010.
[53] Solomon PR. Relation Between Coal Structure and Thermal Decomposition

Products. Coal Struct., vol. 192. AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY; 1981.
p. 95–112. https://doi.org/10.1021/ba-1981-0192.ch00710.1021/ba-1981-
0192.ch007.

[54] Fletcher TH, Ma J, Rigby JR, Brown AL, Webb BW. Soot in coal combustion

systems. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1997;23:283–301.

[55] Josephson AJ, Linn RR, Lignell DO. Modeling soot formation from solid complex

fuels. Combust Flame 2018;196:265–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2018.06.020.

[56] Oberlin A, Oberlin M. Graphitizability of carbonaceous materials as studied by

TEM and X-ray diffraction. J Microsc 1983;132:353–63.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093850

C. Hasse et al.

[57] Debiagi P, Gentile G, Cuoci A, Frassoldati A, Ranzi E, Faravelli T. A predictive

model of biochar formation and characterization. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2018;134:
326–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaap.2018.06.022.

[58] Oberlin A. Carbonization and graphitization. Carbon N Y 1984;22:521–41.

[88] Yu LE, Hildemann LM, Niksa S. Trends in Aromatic Ring Number Distributions of
Coal Tars during Secondary Pyrolysis. Energy Fuels 1998;12:450–6. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ef9700590.

[89] Niksa S. The distributed-energy chain model for rapid coal devolatilization

https://doi.org/10.1016/0008-6223(84)90086-1.

[59] Rouzaud JN, Oberlin A. Structure, microtexture, and optical properties of

anthracene and saccharose-based carbons. Carbon N Y 1989;27:517–29.
[60] Holland T, Fletcher TH, Senneca O. Review of Carbonaceous Annealing Effects on

O2  and CO2  Coal Reactivity. Energy Fuels 2019;33:10415–34. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b02698.

[62] Gürüz GA, Üçtepe Ü, Durusoy T. Mathematical modeling of thermal

decomposition of coal. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2004;71:537–51. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jaap.2003.08.007.

[63] Badzioch S, Hawksley PGW. Kinetics of Thermal Decomposition of Pulverized
Coal Particles. Ind Eng Chem Process Des Dev 1970;9:521–30. https://doi.org/
10.1021/i260036a005.

kinetics. Part II: Transient weight loss correlations. Combust Flame 1986;66:
111–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(86)90083-0.

[90] Niksa S, Kerstein AR. The distributed-energy chain model for rapid coal

devolatilization kinetics. Part I: Formulation. Combust Flame 1986;66:95–109.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(86)90082-9.

[91] Niksa S, Kerstein AR. On the role of macromolecular configuration in rapid coal
devolatilization. Fuel 1987;66:1389–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-2361(87)
90186-4.

[92] Kerstein AR, Niksa S. Polymer Scission with Irreversible Reattachment: A Kinetic
Model of Pyrolysis with Char Formation. Macromolecules 1987;20:1811–8.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ma00174a019.

[93] Genetti DB. An Advanced Model of Coal Devolatilization Based on Chemical

[64] Anthony DB, Howard JB, Hottel HC, Meissner HP. Rapid devolatilization of

Structure. Brigham Young University; 1999.

pulverized coal. Symp. Combust. 1975;15:1303–17.

[65] Kobayashi H, Howard JB, Sarofim AF. Coal devolatilization at high temperatures.
Symp Combust 1977;16:411–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(77)
80341-X.

[66] Solomon PR, Colket MB. Coal devolatilization. Symp. Combust. 1979;17:131–43.
[67] Yu J, Lucas JA, Wall TF. Formation of the structure of chars during

devolatilization of pulverized coal and its thermoproperties: A review. Prog
Energy Combust Sci 2007;33:135–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2006.07.003.

[68] Pitt GJ. The kinetics of the evolution of volatile products from coal. Fuel 1962;41:

267–74.

[69] Sun Q, Li W, Chen H, Li B, Sun Q. Devolatilization Characteristics of Shenmu Coal

Macerals and Kinetic Analysis. Energy Sources Part A Recover Util Environ Eff
2006;28:865–74. https://doi.org/10.1080/009083190910361.

[70] Miura K. A New and Simple Method to Estimate f(E) and k0(E) in the Distributed

Activation Energy Model from Three Sets of Experimental Data. Energy Fuels
1995;9:302–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef00050a014.

[71] Miura K, Maki T. A Simple Method for Estimating f(E) and k0(E) in the Distributed
Activation Energy Model. Energy Fuels 1998;12:864–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef970212q.

[72] Cai J, Liu R. New distributed activation energy model: Numerical solution and

application to pyrolysis kinetics of some types of biomass. Bioresour Technol
2008;99:2795–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2007.06.033.

[73] Cai J, Jin C, Yang S, Chen Y. Logistic distributed activation energy model – Part 1:
Derivation and numerical parametric study. Bioresour Technol 2011;102:
1556–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2010.08.079.

[74] Cai J, Yang S, Li T. Logistic distributed activation energy model – Part 2:

Application to cellulose pyrolysis. Bioresour Technol 2011;102:3642–4. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2010.11.073.

[75] Donskoi E, McElwain DLS. Optimization of coal pyrolysis modeling. Combust

Flame 2000;122:359–67.

[76] Abramowitz M, Stegun IA. Handbook of mathematical functions: with formulas,

graphs, and mathematical tables, 55. Courier Corporation; 1965.

[94] Genetti D, Fletcher TH. Modeling Nitrogen Release during Devolatilization on the
Basis of Chemical Structure of Coal. Energy Fuels 1999;13:1082–91. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ef990056i.

[95] Perry ST, Fletcher TH, Solum MS, Pugmire RJ. Modeling nitrogen evolution

during coal pyrolysis based on a global free-radical mechanism. Energy Fuels
2000;14:1094–102. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef000061i.

[96] Perry ST, Fletcher TH. A global free-radical mechanism for nitrogen release

during coal devolatilization based on chemical structure. Brigham Young
University; 1999.

[97] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN theory for rapid coal devolatilization kinetics. 2. Impact of
operating conditions. Energy Fuels 1991;5:665–73. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef00029a007.

[98] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN theory for rapid coal devolatilization kinetics. 3. Modeling
the behavior of various coals. Energy Fuels 1991;5:673–83. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef00029a008.

[99] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN Theory for Rapid Coal Devolatilization Kinetics. 4.

Predicting Ultimate Yields from Ultimate Analyses Alone. Energy Fuels 1994;8:
659–70. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef00045a022.

[100] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN Theory for Rapid Coal Devolatilization Kinetics. 5.

Interpreting Rates of Devolatilization for Various Coal Types and Operating
Conditions. Energy Fuels 1994;8:671–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef00045a023.

[101] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN Theory for Rapid Coal Devolatilization Kinetics. 6.

Predicting the Evolution of Fuel Nitrogen from Various Coals. Energy Fuels 1995;
9:467–78. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef00051a011.

[102] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN Theory for Rapid Coal Devolatilization Kinetics. 7.

Predicting the Release of Oxygen Species from Various Coals. Energy Fuels 1996;
10:173–87. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef950067l.

[103] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN Theory for Rapid Coal Devolatilization Kinetics. 8.

Modeling the Release of Sulfur Species from Various Coals. Energy Fuels 2017;31:
4925–38. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b00278.

[104] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN Theory for Rapid Coal Devolatilization Kinetics. 9.

Decomposition Mechanism for Tars from Various Coals Energy Fuels 2017;31:
9080–93. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b01349.

[77] Niksa S, Kerstein AR. FLASHCHAIN theory for rapid coal devolatilization kinetics.

[105] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN Theory for Rapid Coal Devolatilization Kinetics. 10.

1. Formulation. Energy Fuels 1991;5:647–65. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef00029a006.

[78] Solomon PR, Hamblen DG, Carangelo RM, Serio MA, Deshpande G V. General
model of coal devolatilization. Energy Fuels 1988;2:405–22. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef00010a006.

[79] Fletcher TH, Kerstein AR, Pugmire RJ, Solum MS, Grant DM. Chemical

percolation model for devolatilization. 3. Direct use of 13C NMR data to predict
effects of coal type. Energy Fuels 1992;6:414–31. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef00034a011.

[80] Fletcher TH, Pugmire RJ. Chemical Percolation Model for Coal Devolatilization

2011;2015. http://www.et.byu.edu/~tom/cpd/cpdcodes.html.

[81] Solum MS, Pugmire RJ, Grant DM. 13C Solid-State NMR of Argonne Premium

Coals. Energy Fuels 1989;3:187–93. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef00014a012.

[82] Genetti D, Fletcher TH, Pugmire RJ. Development and Application of a

Correlation of 13C NMR Chemical Structural Analyses of Coal Based on Elemental
Composition and Volatile Matter Content. Energy Fuels 1999;13:60–8. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ef980074k.

[83] Solomon PR, Serio MA, Carangelo RM, Bassilakis R, Gravel D, Baillargeon M,

Extents of Conversion for Hydropyrolysis and Hydrogasification of Any Coal.
Energy Fuels 2018;32:384–95. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.7b03064.

[106] Niksa S. FLASHCHAIN Theory for Rapid Coal Devolatilization Kinetics. 11. Tar
Hydroconversion during Hydrogasification of Any Coal. Energy Fuels 2018;32:
7569–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.8b01614.

[107] Niksa S. Rapid Coal Devolatilization As an Equilibrium Flash Distillation. AIChE J

1988;34:790–802. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690340509.

[108] Niksa S. PC Coal Lab version 5.1: User guide and tutorial 2020.
[109] Strugała A. Empirical formulae for calculation of real density and total pore

volume of hard coals. Fuel 1994;73:1781–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-2361
(94)90168-6.

[110] Niksa S. Predicting the rapid devolatilization of diverse forms of biomass with
bio-flashchain. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:2727–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0082-0784(00)80693-1.

[111] Gavalas GR, Cheong PH-K, Jain R. Model of coal pyrolysis. 1. Qualitative

development. Ind Eng Chem Fundam 1981;20:113–22. https://doi.org/10.1021/
i100002a001.

et al. Analysis of the Argonne premium coal samples by thermogravimetric
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Energy Fuels 1990;4:319–33. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ef00021a017.

[112] Gavalas GR, Jain R, Cheong PH-K. Model of coal pyrolysis. 2. Quantitative

formulation and results. Ind Eng Chem Fundam 1981;20:122–32. https://doi.org/
10.1021/i100002a002.

[84] Chen JC, Niksa S. Coal devolatilization during rapid transient heating. 1. Primary
devolatilization. Energy Fuels 1992;6:254–64. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef00033a004.

[85] Jupudi RS, Zamansky V, Fletcher TH. Prediction of Light Gas Composition in Coal
Devolatilization. Energy Fuels 2009;23:3063–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef9001346.

[86] Umemoto S, Kajitani S, Miura K, Watanabe H, Kawase M. Extension of the
chemical percolation devolatilization model for predicting formation of tar
compounds as soot precursor in coal gasification. Fuel Process Technol 2017;159:
256–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2017.01.037.

[87] Umemoto S, Kajitani S, Hara S, Kawase M. Proposal of a new soot quantification

method and investigation of soot formation behavior in coal gasification. Fuel
2016;167:280–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.11.074.

[113] Suuberg EM, Unger PE, Lilly WD. Experimental study on mass transfer from

pyrolysing coal particles. Fuel 1985;64:956–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-
2361(85)90151-6.

[114] Unger PE, Suuberg EM. Modeling the devolatilization behavior of a softening
bituminous coal. Symp Combust 1981;18:1203–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0082-0784(81)80124-5.

[115] Solomon PR, Serio MA, Suuberg EM. Coal pyrolysis: Experiments, kinetic rates
and mechanisms. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1992;18:133–220. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0360-1285(92)90021-R.

[116] Bassilakis R, Zhao Y, Solomon PR, Serio MA. Sulfur and nitrogen evolution in the
Argonne coals. Experiment and modeling. Energy Fuels 1993;7:710–20. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ef00042a004.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093851

C. Hasse et al.

[117] Hurt RH, Sun J-K, Lunden MM. A Kinetic Model of Carbon Burnout in Pulverized

[145] Smith IW. The combustion rates of coal chars: A review. Symp Combust 1982;19:

Coal Combustion. Combust Flame 1998;113:181–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/
s0010-2180(97)00240-x.

[118] Su S, Song Y, Wang Y, Li T, Hu S, Xiang J, et al. Effects of CO2 and heating rate on
the characteristics of chars prepared in CO2 and N2 atmospheres. Fuel 2015;142:
243–9.

[119] Laurendeau NM. Heterogeneous kinetics of coal char gasification and

combustion. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1978;4:221–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0360-1285(78)90008-4.

[120] Hou J, Ma Y, Li S, Shang W. A comparative study on characteristics of sulfur and
nitrogen transformation and gaseous emission for combustion of bituminous coal
and char. Carbon Resour Convers 2018.

[121] Annamalai K, Ryan W. Interactive processes in gasification and combustion—II.
Isolated carbon, coal and porous char particles. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1993;
19:383–446.

[122] Coetzee GH, Sakurovs R, Neomagus HWJP, Everson RC, Mathews JP, Bunt JR.

Particle size influence on the pore development of nanopores in coal gasification
chars: From micron to millimeter particles. Carbon N Y 2017;112:37–46.
[123] Walker PL, Rusinko F, Austin LG, Eley DD, Selwood PW, Weisz PB. Gas Reactions
of Carbon. Adv. Catal. 1959;11:133–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-0564
(08)60418-6.

[124] Gray D, Cogoli JG, Essenhigh RH. Problems in Pulverized Coal and Char

Combustion. In: Massey LG, editor. Coal Gasif., vol. 131. editor. American
Chemical Society; 1974. p. 72–91. https://doi.org/10.1021/ba-1974-0131.
ch006.

[125] Smoot LD, Smith PJ. Coal combustion and gasification. 1st ed. New York: Plenum

Press; 1985.

[126] Liu G-S, Niksa S. Coal conversion submodels for design applications at elevated
pressures. Part II. Char gasification. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2004;30:679–717.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2004.08.001.

1045–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(82)80281-6.

[146] Monson CR, Germane GJ, Blackham AU, Smoot LD. Char oxidation at elevated

pressures. Combust Flame 1995;100:669–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-
2180(94)00178-U.

[147] Hurt RH, Mitchell RE. Unified high-temperature char combustion kinetics for a
suite of coals of various rank. Symp Combust 1992;24:1243–50. https://doi.org/
10.1016/s0082-0784(06)80146-3.

[148] Hurt RH, Calo JM. Semi-Global Intrinsic Kinetics for Char Combustion Modeling.

Combust Flame 2001;125:1138–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-2180(01)
00234-6.

[149] Langmuir I, Part II. Heterogeneous reactions”. Chemical reactions on surfaces.

Trans Faraday Soc 1922;17:607–20.

[150] Brown TC, Lear AE, Haynes BS. Oxygen chemisorption on carbon. Symp.

Combust. 1992;24:1199–206.

[151] Du Z, Sarofim AF, Longwell JP. Activation energy distribution in temperature-
programmed desorption: modeling and application to the soot oxygen system.
Energy Fuels 1990;4:296–302.

[152] Elliott MA. Chemistry of coal utilization. Second supplementary volume 1981.
[153] Haynes BS, Newbury TG. Oxyreactivity of carbon surface oxides. Proc Combust

Inst 2000;28:2197–203.

[154] Ranish JM, Walker Jr PL. High pressure studies of the carbon-oxygen reaction.
Carbon N Y 1993;31:135–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/0008-6223(93)90166-8.
[155] Field MA. Measurements of the effect of rank on combustion rates of pulverized

coal. Combust Flame 1970;14:237–48.

[156] Hamor RJ, Smith IW, Tyler RJ. Kinetics of combustion of a pulverized brown coal
K. Combust Flame 1973;21:153–62. https://doi.org/

◦

char between 630 and 2200
10.1016/S0010-2180(73)80020-3.

[157] Lin S-Y, Suzuki Y, Hatano H, Tsuchiya K. Pressure effect on char combustion in
different rate-control zones:: initial rate expression. Chem Eng Sci 2000;55:43–50.

[127] Sun J-K, Hurt RH. Mechanisms of extinction and near-extinction in pulverized

[158] Smith IW. Kinetics of combustion of size-graded pulverized fuels in the

solid fuel combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:2205–13. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0082-0784(00)80630-X.

[128] Vascellari M, Roberts DG, Hla SS, Harris DJ, Hasse C. From laboratory-scale
experiments to industrial-scale CFD simulations of entrained flow coal
gasification. Fuel 2015;152:58–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.01.038.
[129] Geier M, Shaddix CR, Davis KA, Shim H-S. On the use of single-film models to

temperature range 1200–2270 K. Combust Flame 1971;17:303–14.

[159] Smith IW, Tyler RJ. The reactivity of a porous brown coal char to oxygen between

630 and 1812 K. Combust Sci Technol 1974;9:87–94.

[160] Sørensen LH, Gjernes E, Jessen T, Fjellerup J. Determination of reactivity
parameters of model carbons, cokes and flame-chars. Fuel 1996;75:31–8.
[161] Hong J, Hecker WC, Fletcher TH. Modeling high-pressure char oxidation using

describe the oxy-fuel combustion of pulverized coal char. Appl Energy 2012;93:
675–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.12.097.

langmuir kinetics with an effectiveness factor. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:
2215–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(00)80631-1.

[130] Hecht ES, Shaddix CR, Molina A, Haynes BS. Effect of CO2 gasification reaction on
oxy-combustion of pulverized coal char. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:1699–706.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.07.087.

[131] Hecht ES, Shaddix CR, Geier M, Molina A, Haynes BS. Effect of CO2  and steam
gasification reactions on the oxy-combustion of pulverized coal char. Combust
Flame 2012;159:3437–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2012.06.009.

[132] Hong J. Modeling char oxidation as a function of pressure using an intrinsic

Langmuir rate equation. Brigham Young University; 2000.

[133] Niksa S, Liu G, Hurt RH. Coal conversion submodels for design applications at

elevated pressures. Part I. devolatilization and char oxidation. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2003;29:425–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-1285(03)00033-9.

[162] Hecker WC, McDonald KM, Reade W, Swensen MR, Cope RF. Effects of burnout
on char oxidation kinetics. Symp. Combust., vol. 24. Elsevier; 1992. p. 1225–31.

[163] Essenhigh RH, Mescher AM. Influence of pressure on the combustion rate of

carbon. Symp. Combust., vol. 26. Elsevier; 1996. p. 3085–94.

[164] Suuberg EM, W ́ojtowicz M, Calo JM. Reaction order for low temperature
oxidation of carbons. Symp. Combust., vol. 22. Elsevier; 1989. p. 79–87.
[165] Croiset E, Mallet C, Rouan J-P, Richard J-R. The influence of pressure on char

combustion kinetics. Symp. Combust., vol. 26. Elsevier; 1996. p. 3095–102.
[166] Mitchell RE, McLean WJ. On the temperature and reaction rate of burning

pulverized fuels. Symp Combust 1982;19:1113–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0082-0784(82)80287-7.

[167] Kurylko L, Essenhigh RH. Steady and unsteady combustion of carbon. Symp.

[134] Arthur JR. Reactions between carbon and oxygen. Trans Faraday Soc 1951;47:

Combust., vol. 14. Elsevier; 1973. p. 1375–86.

164–78.

[135] Yi L, Feng J, Qin Y-H, Li W-Y. Prediction of elemental composition of coal using

proximate analysis. Fuel 2017;193:315–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2016.12.044.

[136] Kilpinen P, Kallio S, Konttinen J, Bariˇsi ́c V. Char-nitrogen oxidation under
fluidised bed combustion conditions: single particle studies. Fuel 2002;81:
2349–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-2361(02)00176-X.

[137] Nikolopoulos A, Malgarinos I, Nikolopoulos N, Grammelis P, Karrelas S,

Kakaras E. A decoupled approach for NOx–N2O 3-D CFD modeling in CFB plants.
Fuel 2014;115:401–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.06.036.

[138] Debiagi P, Yildiz C, Str ̈ohle J, Epple B, Faravelli T, Hasse C. Systematic evaluation
and kinetic modeling of low heating rate sulfur release in various atmospheres.
Fuel 2021;289:119739. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119739.

[139] Molina A, Murphy JJ, Winter F, Haynes BS, Blevins LG, Shaddix CR. Pathways for

conversion of char nitrogen to nitric oxide during pulverized coal combustion.
Combust Flame 2009;156:574–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2008.11.012.

[140] Tian F-J, Yu J, McKenzie LJ, Hayashi J, Li C-Z. Conversion of Fuel-N into HCN and
NH3 During the Pyrolysis and Gasification in Steam: A Comparative Study of Coal
and Biomass †. Energy Fuels 2007;21:517–21. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef060415r.

[141] Molina A, Sarofim AF, Ren W, Lu J, Yue G, Be ́er JM, et al. Effect of boundary layer

reactions on the conversion of CHAR-N to NO, N2O, and HCN at fluidized-bed
combustion conditions. Combust Sci Technol 2002;174:43–71. https://doi.org/
10.1080/713712945.

[142] Bl ̈asing M, Müller M. Influence of pressure on the release of inorganic species

during high temperature gasification of coal. Fuel 2011;90:2326–33. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2011.02.013.

[143] Wang X, Guo H, Liu F, Hu R, Wang M. Effects of CO2  on sulfur removal and its

release behavior during coal pyrolysis. Fuel 2016;165:484–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2015.10.047.

[144] Guo F, Wu R, Baxter LL, Hecker WC. Models To Predict Kinetics of NOx Reduction
by Chars as a Function of Coal Rank. Energy Fuels 2019;33:5498–504. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.8b03655.

[168] Young BC, Smith IW. The kinetics of combustion of petroleum coke particles at

1000 to 1800 K: The reaction order. Symp. Combust., vol. 18. Elsevier; 1981.
p. 1249–55.

[169] Harris DJ, Smith IW. Intrinsic reactivity of petroleum coke and brown coal char to

carbon dioxide, steam and oxygen. Symp. Combust., vol. 23. Elsevier; 1991.
p. 1185–90.

[170] Gadsby J, Long FJ, Sleightholm P, Sykes KW. The mechanism of the carbon
dioxide-carbon reaction. Proc R Soc London Ser A Math Phys Sci 1948;193:
357–76.

[171] Roberts DG, Harris DJ. Char gasification in mixtures of CO2 and H2O: Competition

and inhibition. Fuel 2007;86:2672–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2007.03.019.

[172] Roberts DG, Harris DJ. High-Pressure Char Gasification Kinetics: CO Inhibition of

the C–CO 2 Reaction. Energy Fuels 2012;26:176–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef201174k.

[173] Huang Z, Zhang J, Zhao Y, Zhang H, Yue G, Suda T, et al. Kinetic studies of char
gasification by steam and CO2 in the presence of H2 and CO. Fuel Process Technol
2010;91:843–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2009.12.020.

[174] Everson RC, Neomagus HWJP, Kasaini H, Njapha D. Reaction kinetics of

pulverized coal-chars derived from inertinite-rich coal discards: Characterisation
and combustion. Fuel 2006;85:1067–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2005.10.025.

[175] Umemoto S, Kajitani S, Hara S. Modeling of coal char gasification in coexistence
of CO2  and H2O considering sharing of active sites. Fuel 2013;103:14–21.
[176] Montoya A, Mondrag ́on F, Truong TN. Formation of CO precursors during char
gasification with O2, CO2  and H2O. Fuel Process Technol 2002;77:125–30.
[177] Jiang W, Nadeau G, Zaghib K, Kinoshita K. Thermal analysis of the oxidation of

natural graphite - Effect of particle size. Thermochim Acta 2000;351:85–93.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-6031(00)00416-0.

[178] Rouquerol J, Avnir D, Fairbridge CW, Everett DH, Haynes JM, Pernicone N, et al.

Recommendations for the characterization of porous solids (Technical Report).
Pure Appl Chem 1994;66:1739–58. https://doi.org/10.1351/pac199466081739.
[179] Benfell KE, Liu G-S, Roberts DG, Harris DJ, Lucas JA, Bailey JG, et al. Modeling
char combustion: The influence of parent coal petrography and pyrolysis pressure

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093852

C. Hasse et al.

on the structure and intrinsic reactivity of its char. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:
2233–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(00)80633-5.

[180] Bailey JG, Tate A, Diessel CFK, Wall TF. A char morphology system with

applications to coal combustion. Fuel 1990;69:225–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0016-2361(90)90179-T.

[181] Lightman P, Street PJ. Microscopical examination of heat treated pulverised coal

particles. Fuel 1968;47:7–28.

[182] Wu H, Bryant G, Benfell K, Wall T. An Experimental Study on the Effect of System
Pressure on Char Structure of an Australian Bituminous Coal. Energy Fuels 2000;
14:282–90. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef990066j.

[216] Shah N, Ottino JM. Transport and reaction in evolving, disordered composites-I.

Gasification of porous solids. Chem Eng Sci 1987;42:63–72.

[217] Adanez J, Miranda JL. Gasificaci ́on del carb ́on: reactividad de carbones. Ing

Química 1986:129–34.

[218] Raghunathan K, Yang RYK. Unification of coal gasification data and its

applications. Ind Eng Chem Res 1989;28:518–23.

[219] Liliedahl T, Sj ̈ostr ̈om K. Modelling of char-gas reaction kinetics. Fuel 1997;76:

29–37.

[220] Adschiri T, Shiraha T, Kojima T, Furusawa T. Prediction of CO2 gasification rate of

char in fluidized bed gasifier. Fuel 1986;65:1688–93.

[183] Thiele EW. Relation between Catalytic Activity and Size of Particle. Ind Eng Chem

[221] Goyal A, Zabransky RF, Rehmat A. Gasification kinetics of Western Kentucky

1939;31:916–20. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie50355a027.

bituminous coal char. Ind Eng Chem Res 1989;28:1767–78.

[184] Reade WC. An Improved Method for Predicting High-Temperature Char

[222] Yang Y, Watkinson AP. Gasification reactivity of some Western Canadian coals.

Oxidation Rates. Brigham Young University; 1996.

Fuel 1994;73:1786–91.

[185] Bischoff KB. Effectiveness Factors for General Reaction Rate Forms. AIChE J 1965;

[223] Lee WJ, Kim SD. Catalytic activity of alkali and transition metal salt mixtures for

11:351–5. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690110229.

steam-char gasification. Fuel 1995;74:1387–93.

[186] Aris R. The mathematical theory of diffusion and reaction in permeable catalysts:

The theory of the steady state. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1975.
[187] Roberts DG, Harris DJ. Char Gasification with O2, CO2, and H2O:  Effects of

Pressure on Intrinsic Reaction Kinetics. Energy Fuels 2000;14:483–9. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ef9901894.

[188] Campbell PA, Mitchell RE, Ma L. Characterization of coal char and biomass char
reactivities to oxygen. Proc Combust Inst 2002;29:519–26. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S1540-7489(02)80067-0.

[189] Hurt RH, Sarofim AF, Longwell JP. Role of microporous surface area in

uncatalyzed carbon gasification. Energy Fuels 1991;5:290–9.

[190] Hurt RH, Sarofim AF, Longwell JP. The role of microporous surface area in the
gasification of chars from a sub-bituminous coal. Fuel 1991;70:1079–82.
[191] Su J, Perlmutter DD. Effect of pore structure on char oxidation kinetics. AIChE J

1985;31:973–81.

[224] Dutta S, Wen CY, Belt RJ. Reactivity of Coal and Char. 1. In Carbon Dioxide
Atmosphere. Ind Eng Chem Process Des Dev 1977;16:20–30. https://doi.org/
10.1021/i260061a004.

[225] Bhatia SK, Perlmutter DD. A Random Pore Model for Fluid-Solid Reactions: I.

Isothermal, Kinetic Control. AIChE J 1980;26:379–86. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aic.690260308.

[226] Bhatia SK, Perlmutter DD. A Random Pore Model for Fluid-Solid Reactions: II.

Diffusion and Transport Effects. AIChE J 1981;27:247–54. https://doi.org/
10.1002/aic.690270211.

[227] Carberry JJ. The Micro-Macro Effectiveness Factor for the Reversible Catalytic

Reaction. AIChE J 1962;8:557–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690080428.
[228] Hurt RH. Structure, properties, and reactivity of solid fuels. Symp Combust 1998;

27:2887–904. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0082-0784(98)80148-3.

[229] Mitchell R, Hurt R, Baxter L, Hardesty D. Compilation of Sandia coal char

[192] Ballal G, Zygourakis K. Evolution of pore surface area during noncatalytic gas-

solid reactions. 1. Model development. Ind Eng Chem Res 1987;26:911–21.
[193] Beath AC. Mathematical Modelling of Entrained Flow Coal Gasification. Australia:

combustion data and kinetic analyses. Albuquerque, NM, and Livermore, CA
(United States): Sandia National Laboratories; 1992. https://doi.org/10.2172/
7045508.

University of Newcastle; 1996.

[194] Balci S, Dogu G, Dogu T. Structural variations and a deactivation model for

gasification of coal. Ind Eng Chem Res 1987;26:1454–8.

[230] Haugen NEL, Tilghman MB, Mitchell RE. The conversion mode of a porous carbon
particle during oxidation and gasification. Combust Flame 2014;161:612–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.09.012.

[195] Smith IW, Tyler RJ. Internal burning of pulverized semi-anthracite: the relation

[231] Haugen NEL, Mitchell RE, Tilghman MB. A comprehensive model for char particle

between particle structure and reactivity. Fuel 1972;51:312–21.

[196] Wheeler A. Reaction rates and selectivity in catalyst pores. In: Frankenburg WG,
Komarewsky VI, Rideal EK, Emmett PH, Taylor HS, editors. Adv. Catal., vol. 3.
editors. Elsevier; 1951. p. 249–327. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-0564(08)
60109-1.

[197] Georgakis C, Chang CW, Szekely J. A changing grain size model for gas—solid

reactions. Chem Eng Sci 1979;34:1072–5.

[198] Szekely J, Evans JW. A structural model for gas-solid reactions with a moving

boundary-II: The effect of grain size, porosity and temperature on the reaction of
porous pellets. Chem Eng Sci 1971;26:1901–13.

[199] Szekely J, Propster M. A structural model for gas solid reactions with a moving
boundary—VI: The effect of grain size distribution on the conversion of porous
solids. Chem Eng Sci 1975;30:1049–55.

conversion in environments containing O2  and CO2. Combust Flame 2015;162:
1455–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2014.11.015.

[232] Haynes BS. A turnover model for carbon reactivity I. development. Combust

Flame 2001;126:1421–32.

[233] Turns SR. An Introduction to Combustion: Concepts and Applications. 3rd ed.

New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012.

[234] Hecht ES, Shaddix CR, Lighty JS. Analysis of the errors associated with typical

pulverized coal char combustion modeling assumptions for oxy-fuel combustion.
Combust Flame 2013;160:1499–509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2013.02.015.

[235] Ashman P, Haynes B, Nelson PF, Nancarrow PC, Bus J, Nicholls PM, et al.

Improved techniqued for the prediction of NOx formation from char nitrogen.
Australia: North Ryde NSW; 1999.

[200] Gavalas GR. A random capillary model with application to char gasification at

[236] Matalon M. Complete Burning and Extinction of a Carbon Particle in an Pxidizing

chemically controlled rates. AIChE J 1980;26:577–85.

Atmosphere. Combust Sci Technol 1980;24:115–27.

[201] Chin G, Kimura S, Tone S, Otake T. Gasification of coal char with steam. Part 1.

Analysis of reaction rate. Int Chem Eng;(United States) 1983:23.

[202] Chin G, Kimura S, Tone S, Otake T. Gasification of coal char with steam. Part 2.

[237] Field MA, Gill DW, Morgan BB, Hawksley PGW. British Coal Utilisation Research
A, Essenhigh RH. Combustion of pulverized coal. Leatherhead (Sy.): B.C.U.R.A.;
1967.

Pore structure and reactivity. Int Chem Eng;(United States) 1983:23.

[238] Caram HS, Amundson NR. Diffusion and reaction in a stagnant boundary layer

[203] Su J, Perlmutter DD. Evolution of pore volume distribution during gasification.

about a carbon particle. Ind Eng Chem Fundam 1977;16:171–81.

AIChE J 1984;30:967–73.

[204] Bliek A, Lont JC, van Swaaij WPM. Gasification of coal-derived chars in synthesis
gas mixtures under intraparticle mass-transfer-controlled conditions. Chem Eng
Sci 1986;41:1895–909.

[205] Chi W, Perlmutter DD. The effect of pore structure on the char-steam reaction.

AIChE J 1989;35:1791–802.

[239] Frankcombe TJ, Bhatia SK, Smith SC. Ab initio modelling of basal plane oxidation
of graphenes and implications for modelling char combustion. Carbon N Y 2002;
40:2341–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0008-6223(02)00147-1.

[240] Shi T, Wang X, Deng J, Wen Z. The mechanism at the initial stage of the room-

temperature oxidation of coal. Combust Flame 2005;140:332–45. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2004.10.012.

[206] Ballal G, Zygourakis K. Evolution of pore surface area during noncatalytic gas-

[241] Singh RI, Mebel AM, Frenklach M. Oxidation of Graphene-Edge Six- and Five-

solid reactions. 2. Experimental results and model validation. Ind Eng Chem Res
1987;26:1787–96.

Member Rings by Molecular Oxygen. J Phys Chem A 2015;119:7528–47. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.5b00868.

[207] Charpenay S, Serio MA, Solomon PR. The prediction of coal char reactivity under

[242] Semenikhin AS, Savchenkova AS, Chechet IV, Matveev SG, Liu Z, Frenklach M,

combustion conditions. Symp. Combust. 1992;24:1189–97.

[208] Simons GA, ML FINSON. The structure of coal char: Part I—pore branching.

Combust Sci Technol 1979;19:217–25.

[209] Simons GA. The Structure of Coal Char: Part II.—Pore Combination. Combust Sci

Technol 1979;19:227–35.

[210] Foster MD, Jensen KF. Small angle X-ray scattering investigations of pore

structure changes during coal gasification. Fuel 1990;69:88–96.

[211] Miccio F, Monte-Carlo Salatino P. Simulation of combustion-induced percolative
fragmentation of carbons. Symp. Combust., 24. Elsevier; 1992. p. 1145–51.

et al. Rate constants for H abstraction from benzo(a)pyrene and chrysene: a
theoretical study. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2017;19:25401–13. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C7CP05560A.

[243] Pykal M, Jureˇcka P, Karlický F, Otyepka M. Modelling of graphene

functionalization. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2016;18:6351–72. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C5CP03599F.

[244] Hurt RH, Lunden MM, Brehob EG, Maloney DJ. Statistical kinetics for pulverized

coal combustion. Symp Combust 1996;26:3169–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/
s0082-0784(96)80162-7.

[212] Sandmann Jr CW, Zygourakis K. Evolution of pore structure during gas-solid

[245] Benfell KE. Assessment of char morphology in high pressure pyrolysis and

reactions: discrete models. Chem Eng Sci 1986;41:733–9.

[213] Reyes S, Jensen KF. Percolation concepts in modelling of gas-solid reactions—I.

Application to char gasification in the kinetic regime. Chem Eng Sci 1986;41:
333–43.

[214] Reyes S, Jensen KF. Percolation concepts in modelling of gas-solid reactions—II.
Application to char gasification in the diffusion regime. Chem Eng Sci 1986;41:
345–54.

[215] Mann R, Almeida JJ, Mugerwa MN. A random pattern extension to the stochastic

network pore model. Chem Eng Sci 1986;41:2663–71.

combustion. Australia: University of Newcastle; 2001.

[246] Shurtz RC. Effects of Pressure on the Properties of Coal Char Under Gasification
Conditions at High Initial Heating Rates. Brigham Young University; 2011.
[247] Shurtz RC, Fletcher TH. Coal Char-CO2 Gasification Measurements and Modeling
in a Pressurized Flat-Flame Burner. Energy Fuels 2013;27:3022–38. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ef400253c.

[248] Holland T, Fletcher TH. Global Sensitivity Analysis for a Comprehensive Char

Conversion Model in Oxy-fuel Conditions. Energy Fuels 2016;30:9339–50.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b02190.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093853

C. Hasse et al.

[249] Holland TM. A Comprehensive Coal Conversion Model Extended to Oxy-Coal

Conditionse. Brigham Young University; 2017.

[250] Holland T, Fletcher TH. Comprehensive Model of Single Particle Pulverized Coal

Combustion Extended to Oxy-Coal Conditions. Energy Fuels 2017;31:2722–39.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b03387.

[251] Holland T, Bhat S, Marcy P, Gattiker J, Kress JD, Fletcher TH. Modeling Effects of
Annealing on Coal Char Reactivity to O2  and CO2, Based on Preparation
Conditions. Energy Fuels 2017;31:10727–44. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.7b01888.

[252] Tremel A, Haselsteiner T, Kunze C, Spliethoff H. Experimental investigation of

high temperature and high pressure coal gasification. Appl Energy 2012;92:
279–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.11.009.

[253] Tremel A, Haselsteiner T, Nakonz M, Spliethoff H. Coal and char properties in
high temperature entrained flow gasification. Energy 2012;45:176–82. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2012.02.028.

[254] Tremel A. Reaction Kinetics of Solid Fuels during Entrained Flow Gasification.

Technische Universit ̈at München; 2012.

[255] Tremel A, Spliethoff H. Gasification kinetics during entrained flow gasification –
Part I: Devolatilisation and char deactivation. Fuel 2013;103:663–71. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2012.09.014.

[256] Tremel A, Spliethoff H. Gasification kinetics during entrained flow gasification –
Part II: Intrinsic char reaction rate and surface area development. Fuel 2013;107:
653–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2012.10.053.

[257] Tremel A, Spliethoff H. Gasification kinetics during entrained flow gasification –
Part III: Modelling and optimisation of entrained flow gasifiers. Fuel 2013;107:
170–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.01.062.

[258] Harris DJ, Roberts DG, Henderson DG. Gasification behaviour of Australian coals
at high temperature and pressure. Fuel 2006;85:134–42. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2005.07.022.

Australia: University of New South Wales; 2009.

[260] Hurt RH, Mitchell RE. On the combustion kinetics of heterogeneous char particle

populations. Symp. Combust. 1992;24:1233–41.

[261] Campbell PA. Investigation into the Roles of Surface Oxide Complexes and their
Distributions in the Carbon-Oxygen Heterogeneous Reaction Mechanism.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University; 2005.

[262] Ma L. Combustion and Gasification of Chars in Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide at

Elevated Pressures. Stanford, CA: Stanford University; 2006.

[263] Ma L, Mitchell RE. Modeling char oxidation behavior under Zone II burning

conditions at elevated pressures. Combust Flame 2009;156:37–50. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.06.015.

[264] Campbell PA, Mitchell RE. The impact of the distributions of surface oxides and
their migration on characterization of the heterogeneous carbon–oxygen reaction.
Combust Flame 2008;154:47–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2007.11.002.

[265] Tilghman MB, Mitchell RE. Coal and biomass char reactivities in gasification and
combustion environments. Combust Flame 2015;162:3220–35. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.05.009.

[266] Tilghman MB, Haugen NEL, Mitchell RE. Comprehensive Char Particle

Gasification Model Adequate for Entrained-Flow and Fluidized-Bed Gasifiers.
Energy Fuels 2017;31:2164–74. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.6b02148.

[267] Louw E. Structure and combustion reactivity of inertinite-rich and vitrinite rich
South African coal chars: quantification of the structural factors contributing to
reactivity differences 2012.

[268] Wang C, Watson JK, Louw E, Mathews JP. Construction Strategy for Atomistic
Models of Coal Chars Capturing Stacking Diversity and Pore Size Distribution.
Energy Fuels 2015;29:4814–26. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.5b00816.

[277] Debiagi P, Ranzi E, Faravelli T, Hasse C. Coal Combustion: Integrating Nitrogen
and Sulfur Fraction in a Single Kinetic Mechanism. 1st Int. In: Conf. smart energy
carriers; 2019.

[278] Maffei T, Khatami R, Pierucci S, Faravelli T, Ranzi E, Levendis YA. Experimental
and modeling study of single coal particle combustion in O2/N2 and Oxy-fuel (O2/
CO2) atmospheres. Combust Flame 2013;160:2559–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.combustflame.2013.06.002.

[279] Ranzi E, Faravelli T, Manenti F. Chapter One - Pyrolysis, Gasification, and

Combustion of Solid Fuels. In: Geem KM Van, editor. Thermochem. Process Eng.,
vol. 49, Academic Press; 2016, p. 1–94. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/
bs.ache.2016.09.001.

[280] Debiagi PEA, Pecchi C, Gentile G, Frassoldati A, Cuoci A, Faravelli T, et al.
Extractives Extend the Applicability of Multistep Kinetic Scheme of Biomass
Pyrolysis. Energy Fuels 2015;29:6544–55. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.5b01753.

[281] Ranzi E, Debiagi PEA, Frassoldati A. Mathematical Modeling of Fast Biomass

Pyrolysis and Bio-Oil Formation. Note I: Kinetic Mechanism of Biomass Pyrolysis.
ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2017;5:2867–81. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.6b03096.

[282] Ranzi E, Debiagi PEA, Frassoldati A. Mathematical Modeling of Fast Biomass

Pyrolysis and Bio-Oil Formation. Note II: Secondary Gas-Phase Reactions and Bio-
Oil Formation. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2017;5:2882–96. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.6b03098.

[283] Debiagi PEA, Gentile G, Cuoci A, Frassoldati A, Ranzi E, Faravelli T. Yield,

composition and active surface area of char from biomass pyrolysis. Chem Eng
Trans 2018;65:97–102. https://doi.org/10.3303/CET1865017.

[284] Debiagi PEA, Trinchera M, Frassoldati A, Faravelli T, Vinu R, Ranzi E. Algae

characterization and multistep pyrolysis mechanism. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2017;
128:423–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaap.2017.08.007.
 ̈
Ozer B, Debiagi PEA, Hasse C, Faravelli T, Kazanç F. An experimental and
numerical study on the combustion of lignites from different geographic origins.
Fuel 2020;278:118320. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118320.

[286] Heuer S, Schiemann M, Scherer V. Determination of devolatilization kinetics in
inert and CO2-enriched atmospheres in a plug flow reactor. In: 32nd Annu. Int.
Pittsburgh Coal Conf. Coal - Energy, Environ. Sustain. Dev. IPCC; 2015. p. 2015.
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.1603.2726.

[287] Lopez-Peinado AJ, Tromp PJJ, Moulijn JA. Quantitative heat effects associated
with pyrolysis of coals, ranging from anthracite to lignite. Fuel 1989;68:
999–1004. https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-2361(89)90065-3.

[288] Senneca O, Cortese L. Kinetics of coal oxy-combustion by means of different

experimental techniques. Fuel 2012;102:751–9.

[289] Tognotti L, Longwell JP, Sarofim AF. The products of the high temperature

oxidation of a single char particle in an electrodynamic balance. Symp. Combust.
1991;23:1207–13.

[290] Skokova KA. Selectivity in the carbon-oxygen reaction. The Pennsylvania State

University; 1997.

[291] Debiagi P, Yildiz C, Richter M, Str ̈ohle J, Epple B, Faravelli T, et al. Experimental
and modeling assessment of sulfur release from coal under low and high heating
rates. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:4053–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2020.06.121.

[292] Shamooni A, Debiagi P, Wang B, Luu TD, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, et al. Carrier-
phase DNS of detailed NOx formation in early-stage pulverized coal combustion
with fuel-bound nitrogen. Fuel 2021;291:119998. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.119998.

[293] Frigge L, Elserafi G, Str ̈ohle J, Epple B. Sulfur and Chlorine Gas Species Formation
during Coal Pyrolysis in Nitrogen and Carbon Dioxide Atmosphere. Energy Fuels
2016;30:7713–20. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b01080.

[294] Glarborg P, Jensen AD, Johnsson JE. Fuel nitrogen conversion in solid fuel fired

systems. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2003;29:89–113.

[259] Hodge EM. The Coal Char-CO2 Reaction at high Temperature and high Pressure.

[285]

[269] Xin H, Wang C, Louw E, Wang D, Mathews JP. Atomistic simulation of coal char

[295] Glarborg P. Fuel nitrogen conversion in solid fuel fired systems. Prog Energy

isothermal oxy-fuel combustion: Char reactivity and behavior. Fuel 2016;182:
935–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.05.103.

Combust Sci 2003;29:89–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-1285(02)00031-
X.

[270] Louw EB, Mitchell GD, Wang J, Winans RE, Mathews JP. Constitution of Drop-

[296] Wu Z, Ohtsuka Y. Key Factors for Formation of N2  from Low-Rank Coals during

Tube-Generated Coal Chars from Vitrinite- and Inertinite-Rich South African
Coals. Energy Fuels 2016;30:112–20. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.5b01517.

[271] Zhong Q, Mao Q, Xiao J, van Duin ACT, Mathews JP. ReaxFF simulations of
petroleum coke sulfur removal mechanisms during pyrolysis and combustion.
Combust Flame 2018;198:146–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2018.09.005.

[272] Zhong Q, Zhang Y, Shabnam S, Xiao J, Van Duin ACT, Mathews JP. Reductive
Gaseous (H2/NH3) Desulfurization and Gasification of High-Sulfur Petroleum
Coke via Reactive Force Field Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Energy Fuels
2019;33:8065–75. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b01425.

[273] Migliavacca G, Parodi E, Bonfanti L, Faravelli T, Pierucci S, Ranzi E. A general
mathematical model of solid fuels pyrolysis. Energy 2005;30:1453–68. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2004.02.011.

[274] Sommariva S, Maffei T, Migliavacca G, Faravelli T, Ranzi E. A predictive multi-
step kinetic model of coal devolatilization. Fuel 2010;89:318–28. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2009.07.023.

[275] Maffei T, Sommariva S, Ranzi E, Faravelli T. A predictive kinetic model of sulfur

release from coal. Fuel 2012;91:213–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2011.08.017.

Fixed Bed Pyrolysis: Pyrolysis Conditions and Inherent Minerals. Energy Fuels
1997;11:902–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef9700238.

[297] Wu Z, Sugimoto Y, Kawashima H. Formation of N2  from Pyrrolic and Pyridinic

Nitrogen during Pyrolysis of Nitrogen-Containing Model Coals. Energy Fuels
2003;17:694–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef020184y.

[298] Debiagi P, Ontyd C, Pielsticker S, Schiemann M, Faravelli T, Kneer R, et al.

Calibration and validation of a comprehensive kinetic model of coal conversion in
inert, air and oxy-fuel conditions using data from multiple test rigs. Fuel 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119682. Under revi:119682.

[299] Wan K, Xia J, Wang Z, Wrobel LC, Cen K. Online-CPD-Coupled Large-Eddy

Simulation of Pulverized-Coal Pyrolysis in a Hot Turbulent Nitrogen Jet. Combust
Sci Technol 2017;189:103–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00102202.2016.1193498.

[300] Goshayeshi B, Sutherland JC. A comparison of various models in predicting
ignition delay in single-particle coal combustion. Combust Flame 2014;161:
1900–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2014.01.010.

[301] Jovanovic R, Milewska A, Swiatkowski B, Goanta A, Spliethoff H. Sensitivity

analysis of different devolatilisation models on predicting ignition point position
during pulverized coal combustion in O2/N2 and O2/CO2 atmospheres. Fuel 2012;
101:23–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2011.02.024.

[276] Maffei T, Frassoldati A, Cuoci A, Ranzi E, Faravelli T. Predictive one step kinetic
model of coal pyrolysis for CFD applications. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:
2401–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.08.006.

[302] Toporov D, Bocian P, Heil P, Kellermann A, Stadler H, Tschunko S, et al. Detailed

investigation of a pulverized fuel swirl flame in CO2/O2  atmosphere. Combust
Flame 2008;155:605–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.05.008.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093854

C. Hasse et al.

[303] Farazi S, Hinrichs J, Davidovic M, Falkenstein T, Bode M, Kang S, et al. Numerical
investigation of coal particle stream ignition in oxy-atmosphere. Fuel 2019;241:
477–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.11.108.

[304] Farazi S, Attili A, Kang S, Pitsch H. Numerical study of coal particle ignition in air
and oxy-atmosphere. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:2867–74. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2018.07.002.

[305] Wan K, Wang Z, Xia J, Vervisch L, Domingo P, Lv Y, et al. Numerical study of HCl
and SO2  impact on sodium emissions in pulverized-coal flames. Fuel 2019;250:
315–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.04.019.

[306] Kumar M, Ghoniem AF. Multiphysics Simulations of Entrained Flow Gasification.

Part II: Constructing and Validating the Overall Model. Energy Fuels 2012;26:
464–79. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef2008858.

[307] Kumar M, Ghoniem AF. Multiphysics Simulations of Entrained Flow Gasification.
Part I: Validating the Nonreacting Flow Solver and the Particle Turbulent
Dispersion Model. Energy Fuels 2012;26:451–63. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef200884j.

[308] Zhang C. Numerical Modeling of Coal Gasification in an Entrained-Flow Gasifier.
Vol. 6 Energy, Parts A B. American Society of Mechanical Engineers; 2012.
p. 1193–203. https://doi.org/10.1115/IMECE2012-88481.

[309] Tufano GL, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, Gentile G, Stagni A, Frassoldati A, et al.

Fully-resolved simulations of coal particle combustion using a detailed multi-step
approach for heterogeneous kinetics. Fuel 2019;240:75–83. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2018.11.139.

[310] Smith PJ, Smoot LD, Hill SC, Eaton AM. Detailed model for practical pulverized

coal furnaces and gasifiers. Volume II. United States: 1991.

[311] Niksa S, Lau C. Global rates of devolatilization for various coal types. Combust

Flame 1993;94:293–307. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(93)90075-E.
[312] Rabaçal M, Franchetti BM, Marincola FC, Proch F, Costa M, Hasse C, et al. Large

[329] Shamooni A, Debiagi P, Wang B, Luu TD, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, et al. Carrier-
phase DNS of detailed NOx formation in early-stage pulverized coal combustion
with fuel-bound nitrogen. Fuel 2021;291:119998. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.119998.

[330] Zhao L, Cleary MJ, Stein OT, Kronenburg A. A two-phase MMC-LES model for

pyrolysing solid particles in a turbulent flame. Combust Flame 2019;209:322–36.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.08.005.

[331] Cai R, Luo K, Watanabe H, Kurose R, Fan J. Recent advances in high-fidelity

simulations of pulverized coal combustion. Adv Powder Technol 2020;31:
3062–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apt.2020.05.001.

[332] Vascellari M, Arora R, Hasse C. Simulation of entrained flow gasification with
advanced coal conversion submodels. Part 2: Char conversion. Fuel 2014;118:
369–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.11.004.

[333] Vascellari M, Xu H, Hartl S, Hunger F, Hasse C. Flamelet/progress variable
modeling of partial oxidation systems: From laboratory flames to pilot-scale
reactors. Chem Eng Sci 2015;134:694–707. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2015.05.042.

[334] Smith PJ, Fletcher TH, Smoot LD. Model for pulverized coal-fired reactors. Symp

Combust 1981;18:1285–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(81)80132-4.
[335] Kurose R, Makino H. Large eddy simulation of a solid-fuel jet flame. Combust
Flame 2003;135:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(03)00141-X.
[336] Watanabe H, Kurose R, Komori S. Large-Eddy Simulation of Swirling Flows in a
Pulverized Coal Combustion Furnace with a Complex Burner. J Environ Eng 2009;
4:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1299/jee.4.1.

[337] Kurose R, Watanabe H, Makino H. Numerical Simulations of Pulverized Coal

Combustion. KONA Powder Part J 2009;27:144–56. https://doi.org/10.14356/
kona.2009014.

[338] Yamamoto K, Murota T, Okazaki T, Taniguchi M. Large eddy simulation of a

Eddy Simulation of coal combustion in a large-scale laboratory furnace. Proc
Combust Inst 2015;35:3609–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.06.023.

pulverized coal jet flame ignited by a preheated gas flow. Proc Combust Inst 2011;
33:1771–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.05.113.

[313] Messig D, Vascellari M, Hasse C. Flame structure analysis and flamelet progress

[339] Franchetti BM, Cavallo Marincola F, Navarro-Martinez S, Kempf AM. Large Eddy

variable modelling of strained coal flames. Combust Theory Model 2017;21:
700–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830.2017.1290279.

[314] Tufano GL, Stein OT, Wang B, Kronenburg A, Rieth M, Kempf AM. Coal particle

volatile combustion and flame interaction. Part II: Effects of particle Reynolds
number and turbulence. Fuel 2018;234:723–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2018.07.054.

[315] Tufano GL, Stein OT, Wang B, Kronenburg A, Rieth M, Kempf AM. Coal particle

volatile combustion and flame interaction. Part I: Characterization of transient
and group effects. Fuel 2018;229:262–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2018.02.105.

[316] Richter A, Vascellari M, Nikrityuk PA, Hasse C. Detailed analysis of reacting

particles in an entrained-flow gasifier. Fuel Process Technol 2016;144:95–108.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2015.12.014.

[317] Perone CS. Pyevolve: a Python Open-source Framework for Genetic Algorithms.
SIGEVOlution 2009;4:12–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/1656395.1656397.

simulation of a pulverised coal jet flame. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:2419–26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.07.056.

[340] Magnussen BF, Hjertager BH. On mathematical modeling of turbulent combustion
with special emphasis on soot formation and combustion. Symp Combust 1977;
16:719–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(77)80366-4.

[341] Wen X, Jin H, Stein OT, Fan J, Luo K. Large Eddy Simulation of piloted pulverized

coal combustion using the velocity-scalar joint filtered density function model.
Fuel 2015;158:494–502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.05.045.

[342] Wen X, Jin H, Sun K, Fan J. Numerical investigation of droplet evaporation and
transport in a turbulent spray with LES/VSJFDF model. Chem Eng Sci 2014;119:
251–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2014.08.038.

[343] Stein OT, Olenik G, Kronenburg A, Cavallo Marincola F, Franchetti BM,

Kempf AM, et al. Towards Comprehensive Coal Combustion Modelling for LES.
Flow. Turbul Combust 2013;90:859–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10494-012-
9423-y.

[318] Hashimoto N, Kurose R, Shirai H. Numerical simulation of pulverized coal jet

[344] Abani N, Ghoniem AF. Large eddy simulations of coal gasification in an entrained

flame employing the TDP model. Fuel 2012;97:277–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.fuel.2012.03.005.

flow gasifier. Fuel 2013;104:664–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2012.06.006.

[319] Van Essendelft D, Li T, Nicoletti P, Jordan T. Advanced Chemistry Surrogate

Model Development within C3M for CFD Modeling, Part 1: Methodology
Development for Coal Pyrolysis. Ind Eng Chem Res 2014;53:7780–96. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ie402678f.

[345] Zhang M, Yu J, Xu X. A new flame sheet model to reflect the influence of the
oxidation of CO on the combustion of a carbon particle. Combust Flame 2005;
143:150–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.05.010.

[346] Smith IW. The intrinsic reactivity of carbons to oxygen. Fuel 1978;57:409–14.

[320] Li T, Chaudhari K, Vanessendelft D, Turton R, Nicoletti P, Shahnam M, et al.

https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-2361(78)90055-8.

Computational fluid dynamic simulations of a pilot-scale transport coal gasifier:
Evaluation of reaction kinetics. Energy Fuels 2013;27:7896–904. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef401887r.

[347] Luo K, Wang H, Fan J, Yi F. Direct Numerical Simulation of Pulverized Coal

Combustion in a Hot Vitiated Co-flow. Energy Fuels 2012;26:6128–36. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ef301253y.

[321] Hashimoto N, Kurose R, Hwang S-M, Tsuji H, Shirai H. A numerical simulation of
pulverized coal combustion employing a tabulated-devolatilization-process model
(TDP model). Combust Flame 2012;159:353–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2011.05.024.

[322] Takahashi H, Hashimoto N, Watanabe H, Kurose R, Fujita O. Prediction of soot

formation characteristics in a pulverized-coal combustion field by large eddy
simulations with the TDP model. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:2883–91. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.08.019.

[323] Abbas T, Awais MM, Lockwood FC. An artificial intelligence treatment of

devolatilization for pulverized coal and biomass in co-fired flames. Combust
Flame 2003;132:305–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02)00482-0.

[324] Xing J, Luo K, Pitsch H, Wang H, Bai Y, Zhao C, et al. Predicting kinetic

parameters for coal devolatilization by means of Artificial Neural Networks. Proc
Combust Inst 2019;37:2943–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.148.

[325] Debiagi P, Nicolai H, Han W, Janicka J, Hasse C. Machine learning for predictive

coal combustion CFD simulations—From detailed kinetics to HDMR Reduced-
Order models. Fuel 2020;274:117720. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.117720.

 ̈
OF, Shorter J, Shim K. Efficient input-output model representations.

[326] Rabitz H, Alis ̧

Comput Phys Commun 1999;117:11–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-4655
(98)00152-0.

[327] Brown BW, Smoot LD, Smith PJ, Hedman PO. Measurement and Prediction of

Entrained-Flow Gasification Processes. AIChE J 1988;34:435–46. https://doi.org/
10.1002/aic.690340311.

[328] Mularski J, Pawlak-Kruczek H, Modlinski N. A review of recent studies of the CFD

modelling of coal gasification in entrained flow gasifiers, covering
devolatilization, gas-phase reactions, surface reactions, models and kinetics. Fuel
2020;271:117620. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117620.

[348] Muto M, Tanno K, Kurose R. A DNS study on effect of coal particle swelling due to
devolatilization on pulverized coal jet flame. Fuel 2016;184:749–52. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.07.070.

[349] Rieth M, Kempf AM, Kronenburg A, Stein OT. Carrier-phase DNS of pulverized

coal particle ignition and volatile burning in a turbulent mixing layer. Fuel 2018;
212:364–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.09.096.

[350] Ranzi E, Frassoldati A, Granata S, Faravelli T. Wide-Range Kinetic Modeling Study
of the Pyrolysis, Partial Oxidation, and Combustion of Heavy n-Alkanes. Ind Eng
Chem Res 2005;44:5170–83. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie049318g.

[351] Tufano GL, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, Frassoldati A, Faravelli T, Deng L, et al.

Resolved flow simulation of pulverized coal particle devolatilization and ignition
in air- and O2/CO2-atmospheres. Fuel 2016;186:285–92. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2016.08.073.

[352] Rieth M, Kempf AM, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, Hasse C, Vascellari M. Evaluation of
a flamelet/progress variable approach for pulverized coal combustion in a
turbulent mixing layer. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:2927–34. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.150.

[353] Pierce CD, Moin P. Progress-variable approach for large-eddy simulation of non-
premixed turbulent combustion. J Fluid Mech 2004;504:73–97. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S0022112004008213.

[354] Wen X, Rieth M, Scholtissek A, Stein OT, Wang H, Luo K, et al. A comprehensive
study of flamelet tabulation methods for pulverized coal combustion in a
turbulent mixing layer — Part I: A priori and budget analyses. Combust Flame
2020;216:439–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.05.046.
[355] Wen X, Rieth M, Scholtissek A, Stein OT, Wang H, Luo K, et al. A comprehensive
study of flamelet tabulation methods for pulverized coal combustion in a
turbulent mixing layer—Part II: Strong heat losses and multi-mode combustion.
Combust Flame 2020;216:453–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2019.12.028.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093855

C. Hasse et al.

[356] Turbulent Non-premixed Flames (TNF) Workshop, International Workshop on

Measurement and Computation of Turbulent Flames 2020. https://tnfworkshop.
org (accessed April 9, 2021).

[357] Ahn S, Tanno K, Watanabe H. Numerical analysis of particle dispersion and

combustion characteristics on a piloted coaxial pulverized coal jet flame. Appl
Therm Eng 2017;124:1194–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2017.06.103.

[358] Cai J, Handa M, Modest MF. Eulerian–Eulerian multi-fluid methods for pulverized
coal flames with nongray radiation. Combust Flame 2015;162:1550–65. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2014.11.023.

[359] Wan K, Xia J, Wang Z, Pourkashanian M, Cen K. Large-eddy Simulation of Pilot-

assisted Pulverized-coal Combustion in a Weakly Turbulent Jet. Flow. Turbul
Combust 2017;99:531–50. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10494-017-9817-y.
[360] Magnussen BF. The Eddy Dissipation Concept—A Bridge Between Science and
Technology. ECCOMAS Themat. Conf. Comput. Combust. 2005;21:24.

[361] Berglund M, Fedina E, Fureby C, Tegn ́er J, Sabel’nikov V. Finite Rate Chemistry
Large-Eddy Simulation of Self-Ignition in Supersonic Combustion Ramjet. AIAA J
2010;48:540–50. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.43746.

[362] DesJardin PE, Frankel SH. Large eddy simulation of a nonpremixed reacting jet:

Application and assessment of subgrid-scale combustion models. Phys Fluids
1998;10:2298–314. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.869749.

[363] Pope SB. PDF methods for turbulent reactive flows. Prog Energy Combust Sci

1985;11:119–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(85)90002-4.
[364] Peters N. Laminar diffusion flamelet models in non-premixed turbulent
combustion. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1984;10:319–39. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0360-1285(84)90114-X.

[365] Klimenko AY, Bilger RW. Conditional moment closure for turbulent combustion.

Prog Energy Combust Sci 1999;25:595–687. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-
1285(99)00006-4.

[366] Zhou L, Hu L, Wang F. Large-eddy simulation of turbulent combustion using

different combustion models. Fuel 2008;87:3123–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2008.04.025.

[367] Hu LY, Zhou LX, Zhang J. Large-Eddy Simulation of a Swirling Diffusion Flame
Using a SOM SGS Combustion Model. Numer Heat Transf Part B Fundam 2006;50:
41–58. https://doi.org/10.1080/10407790500459395.

[368] Baum MM, Street PJ. Predicting the combustion behaviour of coal particles.

Combust Sci Technol 1971;3:231–43. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00102207108952290.

[369] Fores DV, Fletcher TH. The Use of Two Mixture Fractions to Treat Coal

Combustion Products in Turbulent Pulverized-Coal Flames. Combust Sci Technol
2000;150:1–26. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200008952115.

[370] Vascellari M, Xu H, Hasse C. Flamelet modeling of coal particle ignition. Proc
Combust Inst 2013;34:2445–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.06.152.

[371] Vascellari M, Tufano GL, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, Kempf AM, Scholtissek A, et al.

A flamelet/progress variable approach for modeling coal particle ignition. Fuel
2017;201:29–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.09.005.

[372] Xia M, Zabrodiec D, Scouflaire P, Fiorina B, Darabiha N. Experimental and

numerical studies of pulverized coal devolatilization and oxidation in strained
methane/air flames. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:2123–30. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.080.

[373] Vascellari M, Messig D, Scholtissek A, Hasse C, Xia M, Fiorina B, et al.

Experimental and numerical investigation of a stagnation pulverised coal flame.
Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:2857–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2018.05.141.

[374] Watanabe J, Yamamoto K. Flamelet model for pulverized coal combustion. Proc

Combust Inst 2015;35:2315–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.07.065.

[375] Watanabe J, Okazaki T, Yamamoto K, Kuramashi K, Baba A. Large-eddy

simulation of pulverized coal combustion using flamelet model. Proc Combust
Inst 2017;36:2155–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.06.031.

[376] Wen X, Luo K, Luo Y, Kassem HI, Jin H, Fan J. Large eddy simulation of a semi-
industrial scale coal furnace using non-adiabatic three-stream flamelet/progress
variable model. Appl Energy 2016;183:1086–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2016.09.034.

[377] Wen X, Luo K, Jin H, Fan J. Large eddy simulation of piloted pulverised coal

combustion using extended flamelet/progress variable model. Combust Theory
Model 2017;21:925–53. https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830.2017.1314552.

[378] Wen X, Luo Y, Luo K, Jin H, Fan J. LES of pulverized coal combustion with a

multi-regime flamelet model. Fuel 2017;188:661–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2016.10.070.

[379] Wen X, Luo K, Luo Y, Wang H, Fan J. Large-eddy simulation of multiphase

combustion jet in cross-flow using flamelet model. Int J Multiph Flow 2018;108:
211–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2018.06.017.

[380] Wen X, Luo Y, Wang H, Luo K, Jin H, Fan J. A three mixture fraction flamelet
model for multi-stream laminar pulverized coal combustion. Proc Combust Inst
2019;37:2901–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.147.

[381] Wen X, Debiagi P, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, Kempf AM, Hasse C. Flamelet

tabulation methods for solid fuel combustion with fuel-bound nitrogen. Combust
Flame 2019;209:155–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.07.039.

atmospheres with pollutant formation. Proc Combust Institute 2020;38. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.05.061.

[385] Becker LG, Kosaka H, B ̈ohm B, Doost S, Knappstein R, Habermehl M, et al.

Experimental investigation of flame stabilization inside the quarl of an oxyfuel
swirl burner. Fuel 2017;201:124–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2016.09.002.

[386] Luo K, Zhao C, Wen X, Gao Z, Bai Y, Xing J, et al. A priori study of an extended

flamelet/progress variable model for NO prediction in pulverized coal flames.
Energy 2019;175:768–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.03.110.
[387] Zhao C, Luo K, Cai R, Xing J, Gao Z, Fan J. Large eddy simulations and analysis of
NO emission characteristics in a laboratory pulverized coal flame. Fuel 2020;279:
118316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118316.

[388] Akaotsu S, Matsushita Y, Aoki H, Malalasekera W. Analysis of flame structure

using detailed chemistry and applicability of flamelet/progress variable model in
the laminar counter-flow diffusion flames of pulverized coals. Adv Powder
Technol 2020;31:1302–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apt.2019.12.019.
[389] Knappstein R, Kuenne G, Ketelheun A, K ̈oser J, Becker L, Heuer S, et al.

Devolatilization and volatiles reaction of individual coal particles in the context of
FGM tabulated chemistry. Combust Flame 2016;169:72–84. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.04.014.

[390] Knappstein R, Kuenne G, Meier T, Sadiki A, Janicka J. Evaluation of coal particle
volatiles reaction by using detailed kinetics and FGM tabulated chemistry. Fuel
2017;201:39–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.10.033.

[391] Knappstein R, Kuenne G, Becker LG, di Mare F, Sadiki A, Dreizler A, et al. Large
Eddy Simulation of a Novel Gas-Assisted Coal Combustion Chamber. Flow, Turbul
Combust 2018;101:895–926. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10494-018-9910-x.
[392] Knappstein R, Kuenne G, Nicolai H, di Mare F, Sadiki A, Janicka J. Description of
the char conversion process in coal combustion based on premixed FGM
chemistry. Fuel 2019;236:124–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.08.158.
[393] van Oijen JA, Donini A, Bastiaans RJM, ten Thije Boonkkamp JHM, de Goey LPH.
State-of-the-art in premixed combustion modeling using flamelet generated
manifolds. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2016;57:30–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2016.07.001.

[394] Nicolai H, Kuenne G, Knappstein R, Schneider H, Becker LGG, Hasse C, et al.
Large Eddy Simulation of a laboratory-scale gas-assisted pulverized coal
combustion chamber under oxy-fuel atmospheres using tabulated chemistry. Fuel
2020;272:117683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117683.

[395] Nicolai H, Li T, Geschwindner C, di Mare F, Hasse C, Boehm B, et al. Numerical
investigation of pulverized coal particle group combustion using tabulated
chemistry. Proc Combust Inst 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2020.06.081.

[396] Kurose R, Makino H, Suzuki A. Numerical analysis of pulverized coal combustion
characteristics using advanced low-NOx burner. Fuel 2004;83:693–703. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2003.07.003.

[397] De Soete GG. Overall reaction rates of NO and N2  formation from fuel nitrogen.

Symp Combust 1975;15:1093–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(75)
80374-2.

[398] Levy JM, Chan LK, Sarofim AF, Be ́er JM. NO/char reactions at pulverized coal

flame conditions. Symp Combust 1981;18:111–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0082-0784(81)80016-1.

[399] Muto M, Watanabe H, Kurose R, Komori S, Balusamy S, Hochgreb S. Large-eddy
simulation of pulverized coal jet flame – Effect of oxygen concentration on NOx
formation. Fuel 2015;142:152–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.10.069.
[400] Hashimoto N, Watanabe H, Kurose R, Shirai H. Effect of different fuel NO models
on the prediction of NO formation/reduction characteristics in a pulverized coal
combustion field. Energy 2017;118:47–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2016.12.003.

[401] Hashimoto N, Shirai H. Numerical simulation of sub-bituminous coal and

bituminous coal mixed combustion employing tabulated-devolatilization-process
model. Energy 2014;71:399–413. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2014.04.091.

[402] Field MA. Rate of combustion of size-graded fractions of char from a low-rank

K. Combust Flame 1969;13:237–52. https://doi.

coal between 1 200
org/10.1016/0010-2180(69)90002-9.

K and 2 000

◦

◦

[403] Chen W, Smoot LD, Fletcher TH, Boardman RD. A Computational Method for
Determining Global Fuel-NO Rate Expressions. Part 1. Energy Fuels 1996;10:
1036–45. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef950169b.

[404] Muto M, Watanabe H, Kurose R. Large eddy simulation of pulverized coal

combustion in multi-burner system–effect of in-furnace blending method on NO
emission. Adv Powder Technol 2019;30:3153–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apt.2019.09.024.

[405] Muto M, Yuasa K, Kurose R. Numerical simulation of ignition in pulverized coal
combustion with detailed chemical reaction mechanism. Fuel 2017;190:136–44.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.11.029.

[406] Wen X, Shamooni A, Stein OT, Cai L, Kronenburg A, Pitsch H, et al. Detailed
analysis of early-stage NO formation in turbulent pulverized coal combustion
with fuel-bound nitrogen. Proc Combust Inst 2020;38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2020.06.317.

[382] Wen X, Debiagi P, Hasse C. Flamelet tabulation methods for SOx formation in

[407] min Hwang S, R Kurose, Akamatsu F, Tsuji H, Makino H, Katsuki M. Application

pulverized solid fuel combustion. Combust Flame 2020;218:150–67. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.04.025.

of Optical Diagnostics Techniques to a Laboratory-Scale Turbulent Pulverized
Coal Flame. Energy Fuels 2005;19:382–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef049867z.

[383] Wen X, Wang H, Luo Y, Luo K, Fan J. Evaluation of flamelet/progress variable

[408] Weber R, Dugue J, Sayre A, Peters AAF, Visser BM. Measurements and

model for laminar pulverized coal combustion. Phys Fluids 2017;29:083607.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4999335.

computations of quarl zone flow field and chemistry in a swirling pulverized coal
flame. IFRF Doc F 1992;36.

[384] Wen X, Nicolai H, Schneider H, Cai L, Janicka J, Pitsch H, et al. Flamelet LES of a
swirl-stabilized multi-stream pulverized coal burner in air and oxy-fuel

[409] Akaotsu S, Matsushita Y, Aoki H, Malalasekera W. Application of flamelet/

progress-variable approach to the large eddy simulation of a turbulent jet flame of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093856

C. Hasse et al.

pulverized coals. Adv Powder Technol 2020;31:4253–74. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apt.2020.09.005.

[410] Coal and Biomass Conversion (CBC) Workshop 2020. http://www.cbc.uni-due.

de/?file=workshop.

[411] Molina A, Shaddix CR. Ignition and devolatilization of pulverized bituminous coal

particles during oxygen/carbon dioxide coal combustion. Proc Combust Inst
2007;31:1905–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.08.102.

[412] Shaddix CR, Molina A. Particle imaging of ignition and devolatilization of

pulverized coal during oxy-fuel combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32:2091–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2008.06.157.

[413] Zhang W, Tainaka K, Ahn S, Watanabe H, Kitagawa T. Experimental and

numerical investigation of effects of particle shape and size distribution on
particles’ dispersion in a coaxial jet flow. Adv Powder Technol 2018;29:2322–30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apt.2018.06.008.

[414] Ahn S, Tainaka K, Watanabe H, Kitagawa T. Experimental and numerical analysis
of turbulent pulverized coal flame in a coaxial burner. Energy 2019;179:727–35.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.04.190.

[415] Balusamy S, Schmidt A, Hochgreb S. Flow field measurements of pulverized coal
combustion using optical diagnostic techniques. Exp Fluids 2013;54:1534.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00348-013-1534-2.

[416] Balusamy S, Kamal MM, Lowe SM, Tian B, Gao Y, Hochgreb S. Laser diagnostics of
pulverized coal combustion in O2/N2 and O2/CO2 conditions: velocity and scalar
field measurements. Exp Fluids 2015;56:108. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00348-
015-1965-z.

[417] Cleary M, Stein O, Kronenburg A, Bilger B. Modeling of Sandia single particle
case. 1st Work. Coal Biomass Convers 2015:58–62. Avignon, France.
[418] Smith GP, Golden DM, Frenklach M, Moriarty NW, Eiteneer B, Goldenberg M,

et al. GRI-Mech 3.0 n.d. http://combustion.berkeley.edu/gri-mech/version30/te
xt30.html (accessed August 13, 2020).

[419] Schiemann M, Wirtz S, Scherer V. Optical measurement of pulverized coal

combustion in a laminar flow reactor: ignition, particle temperature, and alkali
release. In: Proc. 10th ICCEU - Int. Conf. Combust. Energy Util.; 2010. p. 23–30.
[420] K ̈oser J, Becker LG, Goßmann AK, B ̈ohm B, Dreizler A. Investigation of ignition
and volatile combustion of single coal particles within oxygen-enriched
atmospheres using high-speed OH-PLIF. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:2103–11.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.083.

[421] K ̈oser J, Li T, Vorobiev N, Dreizler A, Schiemann M, B ̈ohm B. Multi-parameter

diagnostics for high-resolution in-situ measurements of single coal particle
combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:2893–900. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2018.05.116.

[422] Liu Y, Geier M, Molina A, Shaddix CR. Pulverized coal stream ignition delay

under conventional and oxy-fuel combustion conditions. Int J Greenh Gas Control
2011;5:S36–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2011.05.028.

[423] Li T, Geschwindner C, K ̈oser J, Schiemann M, Dreizler A, B ̈ohm B. Investigation of

the transition from single to group coal particle combustion using high-speed
scanning OH-LIF and diffuse backlight-illumination. Proc Combust Inst 2020;38:
4101–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.314.

[424] Essenhigh RH, Misra MK, Shaw DW. Ignition of coal particles: A review. Combust
Flame 1989;77:3–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(89)90101-6.

[425] Xu Y, Li S, Gao Q, Yao Q, Liu J. Characterization on Ignition and Volatile

Combustion of Dispersed Coal Particle Streams: In Situ Diagnostics and Transient
Modeling. Energy Fuels 2018;32:9850–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.8b01322.

[426] Yuan Y, Li S, Li G, Wu N, Yao Q. The transition of heterogeneous–homogeneous
ignitions of dispersed coal particle streams. Combust Flame 2014;161:2458–68.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2014.03.008.

[434] Ahn J, Okerlund R, Fry A, Eddings EG. Sulfur trioxide formation during oxy-coal
combustion. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2011;5:S127–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijggc.2011.05.009.

[435] Becker LG, Pielsticker S, B ̈ohm B, Kneer R, Dreizler A. Particle dynamics in a gas
assisted coal combustion chamber using advanced laser diagnostics. Fuel 2020;
269:117188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117188.

[436] Sadiki A, Agrebi S, Chrigui M, Doost AS, Knappstein R, Di Mare F, et al. Analyzing

the effects of turbulence and multiphase treatments on oxy-coal combustion
process predictions using LES and RANS. Chem Eng Sci 2017;166:283–302.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2017.03.015.

[437] Doost AS, Ries F, Becker LG, Bürkle S, Wagner S, Ebert V, et al. Residence time
calculations for complex swirling flow in a combustion chamber using large-eddy
simulations. Chem Eng Sci 2016;156:97–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2016.09.001.

[438] Maßmeyer A, Zabrodiec D, Hees J, Kreitzberg T, Hatzfeld O, Kneer R. Flame
pattern analysis for 60kWth flames under conventional air-fired and oxy-fuel
conditions for two different types of coal. Fuel 2020;271:117457. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117457.

[439] Weber R, Dugu ́e J, Sayre A, Visser BM. Quarl zone flow field and chemistry of

swirling pulverized coal flames: Measurements and computation. Symp Combust
1992;24:1373–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80160-8.

[440] Rieth M, Proch F, Clements AG, Rabaçal M, Kempf AM. Highly resolved flamelet
LES of a semi-industrial scale coal furnace. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:3371–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.08.089.

[441] Xu H, Smoot LD, Tree DR, Hill SC. Prediction of Nitric Oxide Destruction by

Advanced Reburning. Energy Fuels 2001;15:541–51. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef000120s.

[442] Hill SC, Smoot LD. A comprehensive three-dimensional model for simulation of
combustion systems. PCGC-3. Energy & Fuels 1993;7:874–83. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef00042a025.

[443] Kent JH, Bilger RW. The prediction of turbulent diffusion flame fields and nitric

oxide formation. Symp Combust 1977;16:1643–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0082-0784(77)80443-8.

[444] Eddings EG, McAvoy D, Coates RL. Co-firing of pulverized coal with Pinion Pine/
Juniper wood in raw, torrefied and pyrolyzed forms. Fuel Process Technol 2017;
161:273–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2015.11.020.

[445] Fry A, Adams B, Paschedag A, Kazalski P, Carney C, Oryshchyn D, et al. Principles
for retrofitting coal burners for oxy-combustion. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2011;5:
S151–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2011.05.004.

[446] Fan JR, Zha XD, Sun P, Cen KF. Simulation of ash deposit in a pulverized coal-

fired boiler. Fuel 2001;80:645–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-2361(00)
00134-4.

[447] Fan JR, Zha XD, Cen KF. Study on coal combustion characteristics in a W-shaped
boiler furnace. Fuel 2001;80:373–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-2361(00)
00098-3.

[448] Fan J, Qian L, Ma Y, Sun P, Cen K. Computational modeling of pulverized coal
combustion processes in tangentially fired furnaces. Chem Eng J 2001;81:261–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1385-8947(00)00212-6.

[449] Asotani T, Yamashita T, Tominaga H, Uesugi Y, Itaya Y, Mori S. Prediction of
ignition behavior in a tangentially fired pulverized coal boiler using CFD. Fuel
2008;87:482–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2007.04.018.

[450] Hashimoto N, Watanabe H. Numerical analysis on effect of furnace scale on heat

transfer mechanism of coal particles in pulverized coal combustion field. Fuel
Process Technol 2016;145:20–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuproc.2016.01.024.

[451] The Carbon-Capture Multidisciplinary Simulation Center (CCMSC) at University

[427] Hayashi J, Hashimoto N, Nakatsuka N, Tsuji H, Watanabe H, Makino H, et al. Soot

of Utah 2019.

formation characteristics in a lab-scale turbulent pulverized coal flame with
simultaneous planar measurements of laser induced incandescence of soot and
Mie scattering of pulverized coal. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:2435–43. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.10.002.

[452] Adamczyk WP, Isaac B, Parra-Alvarez J, Smith ST, Harris D, Thornock JN, et al.

Application of LES-CFD for predicting pulverized-coal working conditions after
installation of NOx control system. Energy 2018;160:693–709. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2018.07.031.

[428] Xu K, Wu Y, Shen H, Zhang Q, Zhang H. Predictions of soot formation and its

[453] Davison de St, Germain J, McCorquodale J, Parker SG, Johnson CR. Uintah: a

effect on the flame temperature of a pulverized coal-air turbulent jet. Fuel 2017;
194:297–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.01.032.

[429] Brown AL, Fletcher TH. Modeling Soot Derived from Pulverized Coal. Energy

Fuels 1998;12:745–57. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef9702207.

[430] Chen Y, Stein OT, Kronenburg A, Xing J, Luo K, Luo KH, et al. Analysis of Gas-
Assisted Pulverized Coal Combustion in Cambridge Coal Burner CCB1 Using FPV-
LES. Energy Fuels 2020;34:7477–89. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.0c00317.

[431] Vascellari M, Schulze S, Nikrityuk PA, Safronov D, Hasse C. Numerical Simulation

of Pulverized Coal MILD Combustion Using a New Heterogeneous Combustion
Submodel. Flow. Turbul Combust 2014;92:319–45. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10494-013-9467-7.

[432] Michel J-B, Payne R. Detailed measurement of long pulverized coal flames for the

characterization of pollutant formation. International Flame Research
Foundation; 1980.

[433] Pickett LM, Jackson RE, Tree DR. LDA Measurements in a Pulverized Coal Flame

at Three Swirl Ratios. Combust Sci Technol 1999;143:79–107. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00102209908924194.

massively parallel problem solving environment. In: Proc. Ninth Int. Symp. High-
Performance Distrib. Comput., IEEE Comput. Soc; 2000. p. 33–41. https://doi.
org/10.1109/HPDC.2000.868632.
[454] The Uintah software (2009) 2019.
[455] Watanabe H, Otaka M. Numerical simulation of coal gasification in entrained flow

coal gasifier. Fuel 2006;85:1935–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2006.02.002.

[456] Kajitani S, Hara S, Matsuda H. Gasification rate analysis of coal char with a

pressurized drop tube furnace. Fuel 2002;81:539–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0016-2361(01)00149-1.

[457] Halama S, Spliethoff H. Reaction Kinetics of Pressurized Entrained Flow Coal

Gasification: Computational Fluid Dynamics Simulation of a 5 MW Siemens Test
Gasifier. J Energy Resour Technol 2016;138:42204–11. https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.4032620.

[458] Higman C. Gasification. Combust. Eng. Issues Solid Fuel Syst.. Elsevier; 2008.

p. 423–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-373611-6.00011-2.

[459] Williams FA. Combustion theory. CRC Press; 2018.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience86(2021)10093857
