Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Biofuels, electrofuels, electric or hydrogen?: A review of current and
emerging sustainable aviation systems

Pimchanok Su-ungkavatin *, Ligia Tiruta-Barna, Lorie Hamelin

Toulouse Biotechnology Institute (TBI), INSA, INRAE UMR792, and CNRS UMR5504, Federal University of Toulouse, 135 Avenue de Rangueil, F-31077, Toulouse,
France

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Batteries
Environmental performance
Kerosene
Regulatory frameworks
Sustainable aviation fuels (SAF)
Fuel cells

Climate neutrality is becoming a core long-term competitiveness asset within the aviation industry, as demon-
strated by the several innovations and targets set within that sector, prior to and especially after the COVID-19
crisis. Ambitious timelines are set, involving important investment decisions to be taken in a 5-years horizon
time. Here, we provide an in-depth review of alternative technologies for sustainable aviation revealed to date,
which we classified into four main categories, namely i) biofuels, ii) electrofuels, iii) electric (battery-based), and
iv)  hydrogen  aviation.  Nine  biofuel  and  nine  electrofuel  pathways  were  reviewed,  for  which  we  supply  the
detailed process flow picturing all input, output, and co-products generated. The market uptake and use of these
co-products was also investigated, along with the overall international regulations and targets for future aviation.
As most of the inventoried pathways require hydrogen, we further reviewed six existing and emerging carbon-
free  hydrogen  production  technologies.  Our  review  also  details  the  five  key  battery  technologies  available
(lithium-ion,  advanced  lithium-ion,  solid-state  battery,  lithium-sulfur,  lithium-air)  for  aviation.  A  semi-
quantitative  ranking  covering  environmental-,  economic-,  and  technological  performance  indicators  has  been
established to guide the selection of promising routes. The possible configuration schemes for electric propulsion
systems are documented and classified as: i) battery-based, ii) fuel cell-based and iii) turboelectric configura-
tions. Our review studied these four categories of sustainable aviation systems as modular technologies, yet these
still have to be used in a hybridized fashion with conventional fossil-based kerosene. This is among others due to
an  aromatics  content  below  the  standardized  requirements  for  biofuels  and  electrofuels,  to  a  too  low  energy
storage capacity in the case of batteries, or a sub-optimal gas turbine engine in the case of cryogenic hydrogen.
Yet,  we  found  that  the  latter was  the  only  available  option,  based  on the  current  and  emerging  technologies
reviewed,  for  long-range  aviation  completely  decoupled  of  fossil-based  hydrocarbon  fuels.  The  various  chal-
lenges and opportunities associated with all these technologies are summarized in this study.

1. Introduction

With ca. 920 Mt carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions per year (year 2019;
[1]),  the  global  aviation  industry  (commercial,  private  and  military)
represented  approximately  2.5%  of  all-human  induced  CO2  emission
(37  Gt  in  2019;  [2])  and  accounts  for  ca.  12%  of  emissions  from  all
transport sources [3]. Despite  growing public  concerns on the  contri-
bution of the flying industry to climate change [4–7], the aviation traffic
was,  prior  to  the  COVID-19  outbreak,  forecasted  to  grow  4.3%  per
annum  and  the  number  of  passengers  to  increase  by  as  much  as  20
trillion  revenue  passenger  kilometers  (RPK)  by  2038  [8,9],  compen-
sating  most  gains  obtained  from  years  of  fuel  consumption  efficiency

improvements (the global amount of fuel burned per passenger dropped
by 23% between 2005 and 2017, from 4.4 L per 100 km to 3.4 L per 100
km; [10]). The aviation sector itself acknowledges the need of finding
sustainable  alternatives  to  fossil  fuels.  For  instance,  the  International
Civil  Aviation  Organization  (ICAO)  launched  the  CORSIA  initiative
(Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation) in
2016, with the vision to achieve CO2  emission mitigation for the avia-
tion sector  corresponding to a carbon (C) neutral growth by  the year
2020 (CNG2020 target). It thereby became the first economic sector to
adopt a global, universal, and binding system to control its GHG emis-
sions.  In  addition,  the  International  Air  Transport  Association  (IATA)
and  the  Air  Transport  Action  Group  (ATAG)  have  set  CO2  emission

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: su-ungka@insa-toulouse.fr (P. Su-ungkavatin).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101073
Received 29 June 2021; Received in revised form 1 November 2022; Accepted 3 January 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)101073Availableonline11February20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

reduction goals of 50% for 2050 (relative to 2005 levels).

The  mitigation  of  the  climate  impact  of  aviation  is  thus  the  main
driver  of  the  present  work.  Here,  we  focus  on  commercial  aviation
(passengers and cargo), as this represents 88% of the CO2 emissions from
global  aviation  ([11];  military,  private,  and  other  flights,  e.g.,  emer-
gency,  represent  the  remaining  12%).  Commercial  aviation  relies
essentially on airplanes covered by the European Certification Specifi-
cation 25 (CS-25) [12] and excludes air taxis [13]. From here onwards,
the term “aviation” will thus specifically refer to commercial aviation.
Reducing CO2 (and overall GHG) from aviation may be achieved either
by a decreased demand (itself spurred by e.g., shifts in transportation
habits),  or  by  technological  means  (e.g.,  enhancing  fuel  consumption
efficiency,  developing  alternative  energy  sourcing).This  study  focuses
on the latter strategy, i.e., the potential of alternative energy sources to
enhance the environmental performance of aviation in comparison to
flying on fossil-based kerosene. Four large families of emerging alter-
native  energy  sources  for  fueling  future  aviation  can  be  highlighted:
biofuels,  electrofuels  (liquid  hydrocarbons  produced  through  an  elec-
tricity  input),  electricity  (battery-based),  and  hydrogen.  These  all
involve several variants and are here referred to as “sustainable avia-
tion” (SA) systems, though the term sustainability remains to be assessed
as  later  detailed.  One  commonly  used  denomination  is  “sustainable
aviation fuels”  (SAF), but we refrained from using it for two reasons.
First,  this  term  is  typically  used  to  represent  biofuels  (e.g.,  Refs.
[14–17]),  although  the  recent  ReFuelEU  aviation  initiative  and  its
regulation  proposal  have  explicitly  expanded  it  to  electrofuels  (also
designated as synthetic fuels) [18–20]. Second, some of the emerging
technologies (e.g., batteries) do not fit within the concept of fuel. Here
the  more  inclusive  “sustainable  aviation”  terminology  is  instead  pro-
posed and used.

◦
C (233K), Jet A-1 47

In the literature, several terminologies are used to designate aviation
fuels, such as jet fuels or kerosene. In industry, it is referred to as Jet A or
Jet A-1 (among all differences between these, the most notable one re-
◦
lates to their freezing point; Jet A (cid:0) 40
C (226K);
[21,22]). Through this study, the term kerosene (C8–C16 hydrocarbons)
is  used  to  refer  to  liquid  aviation  fuels  in  general,  whether  these  are
fossil-based  or  not.  Fossil-free  aviation  fuels  deriving  from  bio-based
feedstock (denoted as bio-kerosene or biofuels; the latter term is used
herein) are drawing great interest in achieving GHG emission reduction
targets for the aviation industry [23]. Today, biofuels generated from
different technology pathways must be certified by the American Society
for Testing and Materials International (ASTM) (ASTM D7566 –  Stan-
dard  Specification  for  Aviation  Turbine  Fuel  Containing  Synthesized
Hydrocarbons) or equivalent standards (e.g., Standard 90–091 of United
Kingdom’s  Ministry  of  Defense;  [24])  before  it  can  be  used  in  com-
mercial aircraft. So far, there are only six certified pathways for biofuels,
namely  the  Fischer–Tropsch  (FT)  process,  hydroprocessed  esters  and
fatty acids (HEFA), direct sugar to hydrocarbon (DSHC), alcohol-to-jet
(ATJ;  with  isobutanol  or  ethanol  intermediates),  and  catalytic  hydro-
thermolysis jet (CHJ). Some of these pathways involve variants (e.g. FT
with added aromatics). Here, sugar and syngas fermentation (followed
by upgrading of the produced alcohol) are considered separately instead
of being aggregated under the umbrella term “ATJ”, as often found in
the literature (e.g., Refs. [16,25,26]). This is done to reflect the drasti-
cally different technologies and overall process flow involved in both
cases, among others.

Besides biofuels, additional alternative kerosene for fossil-free avia-
tion include electrofuels (sometimes known as synthetic fuels or pow-
erfuels  or  power-to-liquid).  Aviation  electrofuels  require  a  source  of
carbon and hydrogen (H2) to generate hydrocarbon liquid fuels having
properties similar to those of fossil-based kerosene. Hydrogen may be
produced via water-splitting technologies including approaches such as
water electrolysis [27], thermochemistry [28], or bio-photolysis [29].
Carbon may stem from biomass-free options such as direct capture of
carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere (typically termed Direct Air
Capture, DAC) [30,31]. The carbon source may also arise from biogenic

carbon through the use of syngas stemming from biomass gasification.
The syngas may also stem from high-temperature co-electrolysis (using
water and CO2  as input, the latter being biomass-derived or not) [32].
Carbon may also stem from CO2 captured from a point source (industrial
process) [33–35]. Liquid fuels are then produced through the FT process
[32] or methanol (CH3OH) synthesis [36,37], although only the former
has been certified by ASTM [36,37]. At present, both electrofuels and
biofuels  can  be  used  as  drop-in  fuels,  i.e.,  they  are,  up  to  a  certain
blending limit, interchangeable with conventional kerosene, and do not
require adaptation of the fuel distribution network or the engine.

So far, there are four main categories of alternative kerosene. They
include  i)  Synthetic  paraffinic  kerosene  (SPK)  largely  composed  of
normal-  and  iso-paraffins  (e.g.,  obtained  with  the  FT,  HEFA,  SuF,  SF
pathways), ii) Synthetic aromatic kerosene (SAK), primarily consisting
of aromatics designed as blend components (e.g., produced in the APR
pathway), iii) Synthetic iso-paraffin (SIP) consisting essentially of far-
nesane  (C15H32),  and  iv)  Synthetic  kerosene  (SK)  consisting  of  a
composition similar to fossil-based kerosene (e.g., produced in the CHJ
pathway;  a  new  SK  fuel  from  this  pathway  (CHJ-SK)  has  just  been
certified  in  2020)  [16,38]).  SPK  is  however  the  predominant  type  of
alternative  kerosene  generated  from  the  currently  certified  pathways
[26].

These  four  types  of  alternative  kerosene  are  reported  to  provide
cleaner combustion, with reductions of soot; [39,40], particulate matter
(PM);  [41],  and  sulfur  emissions  [42],  among  others  because  of  the
lower aromatic content in the fuel (when not zero). On the other hand, a
low aromatic content has the disadvantage to cause shrinkage of some
elastomers in the engine seal [43,44]. Reflecting this risk, ASTM D7566
requires a minimum aromatics content of 8% by volume, and as a result
alternative fuels have been used as blends with conventional kerosene,
up to a certain blending limit varying between 10% (DSHC) and 50% (all
other  certified  processes)  of  the  total  fuel  volume  [17,26,43].  For
longer-term solutions, state-of-the-art engines (with novel sealing ma-
terials) are being developed to be compatible with unblended aviation
biofuels and electrofuels, as tested and announced by aircraft and engine
original equipment manufacturers (OEM), namely Airbus [45], Boeing
[46], Rolls-Royce [47], Deutsche Aircraft [48].

Through this review, electric aviation refers to the use of batteries as
energy  sourcing to  power aircrafts  (whether  for  propulsion,  on-board
operating systems, or both in a hybridized mode). One challenge this
poses is the development of energy-dense batteries as light and compact
as possible, which is challenging with today’s lithium-ion (Li-ion) bat-
(cid:0) 1; [49]), relative to Jet A-1
tery technology (around 300–400 Wh  kg
(cid:0) 1;  [21]).  Lithium-based  batteries  (with  the
(approx.  12,000  Wh  kg
introduction  of  novel  electrodes/electrolytes  such  as  advanced
lithium-ion  batteries  (Adv.  Li-ion),  solid-state  lithium-ion  (SSB),  or
lithium-sulfur (Li–S)), are foreseen as the most promising approaches for
mass sensitive applications like aviation, owing to their higher specific
energy density [50,51]. However, these advanced Li-based batteries are
still  in  the  early  stages  of  research,  and  many  challenges  need  to  be
tackled  before  their  mass  production.  Current  Li-ion  batteries  have
nevertheless  been  applied  as  a  sole  energy  source  for  small  aircraft
capable  of  carrying  less  than  20  passengers  per  flight  missions  (e.g.,
Eviation’s  Alice  aircraft;  [52],  Bye  Aerospace’s  eFlyers  aircraft;  [53],
Pipistrel’s Velis Electro; [54], Heart Aerospace’s ES-19; [55]). For larger
aircraft, electric aviation requires to be combined with another energy
source  such  as  conventional  (or  alternative)  kerosene,  an  approach
commonly known as hybridization [56].

Additionally, hydrogen (both gaseous and cryogenic forms) [57,58]
is currently researched as an alternative option for use in commercial
flights.  In  the  perspective  this  hydrogen  is  produced  through
water-splitting  approaches,  most  of  the  associated  environmental  im-
pacts are reported to be related to the type of electricity used [59–61].
Because of the low volumetric energy density of H2, the heavy on-board
system infrastructure required to accommodate H2 weakens its benefits,
as  in  the  case  of  batteries  [62,63].  Moreover,  additional  external

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010732

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

infrastructures are required in both cases, including a charging station
for  the  case  of  batteries,  a  H2  refueling  station  for  hydrogen,  while
redesigned  airframes  making  the  plane  lighter  or  improving  its  aero-
dynamic performances are optional. Unlike electric aviation, H2 systems
require a refueling time comparable to conventional (and alternative)
kerosene [64].

These  two  approaches  (electric  and  hydrogen)  are  not  associated
with  CO2  emissions  during  the  flight.  Although  the  principle  of  zero
tailpipe emissions applies to 100% electric (battery-based) aviation, the
pollution  occurring  during  batteries  manufacturing  (and  recycling)  is
not  zero  and  needs,  as  for  all  upstream  activities  of  all  other  SA  ap-
proaches, to be addressed as well [65]. Similarly, the emissions gener-
ated  during  the  production  of  H2  may  be  important,  especially  if
stemming from conventional steam reforming of natural gas instead of
water  electrolysis  or  other  carbon-free  approaches  [61].  Water  vapor
and nitrogen oxides (NOx) are tailpipe pollutants from H2 aviation and
are  considered  as  predominant  climate  forcers  [57,66,67].  They  are
potential precursors, along with soot (emitted with liquid kerosene), for
contrail and cirrus cloud formations, depending upon the ambient at-
mospheric conditions, which in turns affects the amount of heat trapped
within  the  technosphere  [63,65,68,69].  The  formation  of  NOx  (also
responsible  for  tropospheric  ozone  formation)  from  H2  combustion  is
reported  to  be  lower  compared  to  the  NOx  emissions  from  kerosene
combustion [57,63].

There  is,  thus,  a  variety  of  technical  possibilities  towards  a  more
sustainable  aviation  sector,  and  each  involve  a  variety  of  options  in
terms of feedstock. While some options can act as drop-in fuels, others
require additional infrastructure, and all options affect the environment
(not  only  climate)  in  different  ways.  It  thus  remains  unclear,  in  the
perspective  of  long-term  investment  decisions  towards  tomorrow’s
aviation, which option leads to the highest overall environmental per-
formance, and even whether some of the options are truly sustainable
and  environmentally  superior  to  fossil-based  kerosene.  Clear  re-
quirements defining sustainability for aviation do exist, among others
through the sustainability criteria elaborated in CORSIA by ICAO [70]
and to some extent in the Recast Renewable Energy Directive (RED II
[71])  for  biofuels,  electrofuels  as  well  as  (renewable)  hydrogen  feed-
stock, although these are not aligned with one another [25]. It should be
noted that the former criteria go well beyond the sole GHG reductions,
also including criteria on enhancing water quality and availability, or
soil health, for example.

Nevertheless, to quantify sustainability, Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)
is acknowledged as a central tool for environmental management and
decision support, in the European Union in particular [72]. Because it
can  address  impacts  in  a  full  system  perspective,  LCA  has  grown  to
become one of the key tools for assisting the direction of the so-called
“green  transition”. Yet,  to perform  such  analysis, vital  and  timely  for
the case of aviation, the very first step is to have the full overview of the
process flow of the alternatives under assessment, including the over-
view of the types of co-products being generated. It is our claim that such
overview is not yet in place for all alternative SA options simultaneously,
being one possible reason why no LCA comparing all four-alternative
exist  at  the moment.  Although reviews  have  been  published to  docu-
ment  the  production  process,  and,  to  some  extent,  the  sustainability
aspects of alternatives to fossil kerosene, these reviews focused mainly
on only one of the SA categories distinguished herein. Aviation biofuels
have been the most widely reviewed. Notable reviews are the ones of
[73,74], where the conversion processes are extensively described, with
key  technological  advances  and  challenges.  In  addition  to  that,  eco-
nomic and environmental aspects of biofuel pathways are comprehen-
sively  discussed  by  Refs.  [44,75].  Similarly,  an  overview  of  the
state-of-the-art  implementation  of  biofuels  within  the  aviation  sector
was presented by Ref. [76]. Although not as extensively reviewed, the
main synthesis pathways for a variety of electrofuels were qualitatively
discussed  in  Ref.  [77],  with  regards  to  the  required  physical  and
chemical properties of these fuels when used in airplanes. The studies of

[78] as well as [79], albeit not focusing on the aviation sector per se,
carried  out  an  economic  analysis  for  a  variety  of  electrofuels  doc-
umenting several technologies and variations in plant size. However, the
electrofuels investigated in these studies can be considered only as in-
termediates for aviation fuel production. The recent work of [80], on the
other hand, represents a notable advance where a general overview of
both carbon-free and biofuels options is described. Albeit valuable, the
study of Bauen [80] remains largely qualitative and does not detail the
technical conversion pathways and processes involved, and completely
excludes  electrofuels.  Moreover,  all  of  the  above-mentioned  studies,
except  [44,75],  completely  overlook  the  co-products  generated  along
the production process. Yet, these do generate market interactions that
in turn are part of the overall economic and environmental performance
of these new alternatives, and accordingly must be understood.

In the perspective of bridging these gaps, and in the vision of sup-
plying  a  harmonized  comparative  background  to  assess  the  environ-
mental  consequences  of  current and  emerging  options  for  fueling  the
aviation  sector,  the  present  study  presents  a  comprehensive  review
intending to supply a holistic understanding in the field of sustainable
aviation.  Concretely,  this  review  intends  to  gather  and  discuss  infor-
mation and data relevant and necessary for comparative environmental
assessments (in particular LCA) of emerging candidate options for sus-
tainable aviation.

The  review  is  organized  into  thirteen  sections.  The  underlying
methodological approach used for the review is first described (section
2).  The  review  starts with  detailing  the  biofuels,  electrofuels,  electric
(battery-based) and hydrogen families and options within each (sections
3, 4, 6, and 7, respectively) as well as the co-products obtained in the
liquid fuel pathways (biofuel and electrofuel families) and their poten-
tial  uses  as  alternatives  to  fossil-based  products  (section  5).  A  semi-
quantitative ranking  is  proposed  (section  8), covering  environmental,
economic, and technological performance indicators, in order to provide
a  preliminary  screening  of  the  environmental  performance  potential
associated with each approach in the near- (2030) and long-term (2050)
timescales. In addition to the four dominant SA approaches that are the
object of this study, other marginal alternative energy sourcing are re-
ported in section 9. The electric propulsion systems (i.e., those involving
electric motors; either battery- or fuel-based) are discussed in section 10.
Section  11  discusses  the  development  of  regulatory  frameworks  and
legislations related to clean aviation. Finally, sections 12 and 13 address
the challenges and prospects for the deployment ofSA, with emphasis on
the availability and sustainability of raw materials and the scientific and
technological advances needed.

2. Methodological approach

Overall, approximately  600 records,  including scientific literature,
patents,  (company)  reports,  conference  proceedings,  and  company
websites, were extensively screened and reviewed. Efforts were made to
ensure  that  the  most  recent  data  from  announcements  and  literature
were used. However, in the very process of writing this article, some of
these announcements have changed (e.g., the cancellation of the Airbus
E-Fan X project in April 2020), and although we strived to keep all the
information presented herein up-to-date, it can happen that some will no
longer apply following the publication of this article.

The  scientific  literature  search  was  performed  through  two  key
search engines, namely Google Scholar and Web of Sciences, while the
Google Search engine was used for screening the grey literature. A va-
riety of generic keywords such as “aviation decarbonization,” “alterna-
tive  aviation  fuels,”  “sustainable  aviation  regulation”  have  first  been
used, while snowballing strategies [81] were applied to capture addi-
tional content. A few variations of the abovementioned keywords have
also  been  used  to  capture  additional  records.  This  procedure  was
repeated for each specific topic addressed in this review.

Moreover,  although  we  strive  to  explain  all  key  terminology  used
within  the  manuscript  (e.g.,  what  the  notion  of  electrofuels  exactly

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010733

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

encompasses), a glossary is provided (SM2) to clarify all terms and ac-
ronyms used. Throughout the manuscript, we report the units as sup-
plied in the original references but provide the conversion in units of the
International System of Units (SI).

3. Aviation biofuels

Because of their maturity and compatibility with the existing fueling

infrastructure, biofuels is the most dominant SA family.

Three large biofuel categories are here distinguished according to the
feedstock  used:  carbohydrate-rich,
lignocellulosic  and  oil-based
biomass.  These  will  be  used  within  this  section  to  organize  the
description of each biofuel.

Fig. 1 presents, in relation with these three categories, an overview of
nine different biofuels pathways for which known investments in terms
of capacity have been made.

Among the nine pathways covered in Fig. 1, six are already certified
by the ASTM D7566. The remaining three are either under the process of
certification (APR, IH2; integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion)
or  under  development  (HDCJ  pathway).  Some  pathways  are  well
developed, documented,  and applied in large-scale  production (pilot/
demonstration plants), while some, such as the CHJ and IH2 pathways,
are less extensively documented. These are briefly described herein, and
additional insights on, e.g., the biofuels properties, blending ratios, or
the leading industrial producers to date are available in supplementary
material 1 (SM1) (Tables S1-S2).

Low  readiness  level  emerging  pathways  are  disregarded  from  this
section  because  they  are  scarcely  documented,  including  the  one
described  by  e.g.,  Ref.  [82],  where  volatile  fatty  acids  (VFAs)  from
anaerobic  digestion  of  residual  biomass  are  processed  for  catalytic
upgrading  to  kerosene-ranged  paraffins  [82].  It  also  includes  the

emerging methanol-based pathway to produce kerosene described in e.
g., Ref. [83].

3.1. Biofuel pathways involving carbohydrate-rich feedstock

This category comprises three pathways (Fig. 1). They greatly rely
upon  carbohydrate-rich  feedstock  such  as  sugarcane,  sorghum,  maize
dextrose, maize, etc., but can also be used with less dense carbohydrate
sources such as molasses. Simple mechanical pretreatment for particle
size reduction (milling, chopping, grinding, etc.) may be performed for
sugar-rich  feedstock  (e.g.,  sugarcane,  maize,  fodder  beet).  For
lignocellulosic-rich  feedstock  (e.g.,  straw,  woody  crops,  and/or  resi-
dues),  mechanical  pretreatment  is  followed  by  delignification.  In  this
step, the lignin fraction is typically separated from cellulose and hemi-
cellulose by alkaline deacetylation, followed by vacuum filtration [75,
84]. The remaining lignin may be utilized in various applications, such
as  the  generation  of  heat  and  electricity  or  the  production  of  syngas
(through gasification) for liquid fuel production [85,86]. The cellulose
and hemicellulose fractions are further processed with enzymatic or acid
hydrolysis  approaches to recover C5  and C6  sugars.  As a  result,  a hy-
drolysate  is  produced  and  further  used  as  input  for  the  pathways
described in this section, namely the aqueous phase reforming (APR),
DSHC, and SuF pathways.

3.1.1. Aqueous phase reforming (APR)

In this pathway, the generated hydrolysate (Fig. 2) first undergoes a
purification  and  concentration  process.  In  this  step,  numerous  tech-
niques may  be applied, for instance, alkaline solvents for ash and  re-
sidual lignin removal and filtration for insoluble solid residues removal
[74,85].  Depending  on  the  initial  feedstock  characteristics,  the
sugar-rich hydrolysate produced in the concentration step undergoes an

Fig. 1. Main conversion pathways in the production of aviation biofuels. (*) Indicates that the pathway is certified by ASTM. ** It is considered that the pretreatment
methods are varying depending upon the characteristics of feedstock applied.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010734

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Fig. 2. Process flow diagram for the aqueous phase reforming (APR) pathway.

hydrotreating process to convert sugars and organic acids through hy-
drogenation  (forming  polyhydric  alcohols)  and/or  hydrogenolysis
(forming  shorter-chain compounds)  [86,87].  Oxygen  is  then removed
from  the  obtained  molecules  through  two  successive  steps:  the  APR
followed by a condensation process.

In the APR process, the aqueous phase is reacted in the presence of a
catalyst  under  a  large  variety  of  operating  conditions.  A  temperature
◦
range of 175–300
C (448–573 K) and pressure range of 10–90 bar (1–9
MPa) are necessary [86] when catalysts such as Cu, Re, Ni, Fe, Co, Ru,
Pd, Rh, or Pt are used [85]. Examples of specific operating conditions
reported  in  the  literature  are  summarized  in  SM1.  The  reactions
happening  within  this  process  strongly  depend  upon  the  specific
configuration  and  typically  include  dehydrogenation  of  alcohols,  hy-
drogenation  of carbonyls, deoxygenation, hydrogenolysis and  cycliza-
tion. As a result of this step, the water-soluble oxygenated compounds
are  converted into  a liquid mixture (APR liquid), which  is a complex
mixture of hydrocarbons and undesired oxygenated hydrocarbons (e.g.,
alcohols, aldehydes, ketones). These may be separated at this stage or
fed directly to the subsequent condensation step [87] as illustrated in
Fig. 2. A gas phase rich in H2, CO2, CO and light alkanes is also produced
(Fig. 2), which can be directly used for heat and power production [84],
among  other  uses.  Alternatively,  the  H2  produced  in  the  gas  stream
could  be  separated  and  recirculated  to  the  process  [84,88],  prior  to
burning  the  light  alkanes  (C1–C4)  for  heat  and  electricity  [84,85,88].
The  exact  mixture  of  both  gas  and  liquid  output  is  rather  difficult  to
predict  given  the  complex  mixture  of  hydrocarbons  and  oxygenated
hydrocarbons involved [89].

Through  condensation  reactions,  the  liquid  mixture  from  the  APR
process  is  upgraded  to  longer-chain  hydrocarbons.  For  example,  base
condensation is applied for the production of gasoline and kerosene. The
liquid condensate may, prior to distillation, undergo hydrotreating ac-
cording to the desired hydrocarbon fuels output. The resulting products
are polyhydric alcohols or shorter-chain compounds depending on the
hydrotreating  approaches  used.  Dehydration  of  alcohols  into  alkanes
and oligomerization (using solid phosphoric acid or zeolite as catalyst) is
used for kerosene production [86]. Hydrogenation and/or isomerization
might  also be required to ensure conformity with the specific market
requirements (e.g., the mandatory ASTM D1655 for aviation fuel blends

to be used in commercial aviation) [85]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, these
processes can be combined in different configurations and with different
operating conditions to fit with the desired final product. Finally, the
generated products are subsequently condensed and distillated to pro-
duce the desired aviation fuels, here as hydrodeoxygenation synthetic
aromatic kerosene (HDO-SAK) or hydrodeoxygenation synthetic kero-
sene  (cycloparaffin-rich  fuel)  (HDO-SK),  along  with  hydrocarbons
co-products  including  naphtha,  and  diesel  [84,86].  Currently,  both
HDO-SK and HDO-SAK are under consideration for ASTM certification
[90].

3.1.2. Direct sugar to hydrocarbon (DSHC)

sugars

and  C6

The DSHC pathway allows to produce aviation biofuels without an
alcohol  intermediate  (Fig.  3).  The  sugars  derived  from  the  biomass
feedstock input are converted to C15H24  (denoted as isoprenoid farne-
sene)  through  fermentation,  subsequently  hydrogenated  to  farnesane
(C15H32), which can be used as aviation fuel [91,92]. The joint venture
between  Amyris  and  Total  is  the  main  global  developer  of  the  DSHC
pathway  with  carbohydrate-rich  feedstock  such  as  maize,  sugar  beet,
sugarcane [93]. These companies engineered microorganisms capable of
fermenting  both  C5
[94,95].  Accordingly,
lignocellulosic-rich  substrates  can  also  be  used  as  a  feedstock  in  this
pathway. Additional examples of industrial partnerships developed to
produce aviation biofuels via the DSHC pathway are described in SM1.
The fermentation process with the engineered yeasts takes place at
operating temperatures of 30–34
C (303–307 K) [94]. A liquid/solid
centrifugation process separates the yeast cells and fermentation broth.
The  supernatant,  consisting  of  farnesene  oil,  farnesene  emulsion  and
fermentation broth, is collected for further purification. Within the pu-
rification  process,  the  collected  supernatant
in  the
de-emulsification unit (65–70
C; 338–343 K) with the addition of sur-
factant  and  is  transferred  to  liquid/liquid  centrifugation  in  order  to
separate the oil and aqueous phases [94]. The distillation stage separates
the contaminants into a heavy fraction containing triglyceride, mono-
glyceride  and  salts,  and  a  light  fraction  of  the  distilled  farnesene.
Distilled  farnesene  then  undergoes  hydrogenation  in  the  presence  of
catalysts such as Ni, Pd, Ru, Pt, Mo, Zn, etc. [96]. The purification step
may be combined with hydroprocessing in downstream operations for

is  heated

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010735

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Fig. 3. Process flow diagram for direct sugar to hydrocarbon (DSHC) pathway.

achieving high recovery efficiency (97% reported) [94] (not shown in
Fig. 3). The farnesane produced can be used as diesel fuel for terrestrial
transport  or  as  aviation  kerosene,  although  the  former  tends  to  be
preferred  due  to  the  low  blending  ratio  allowed  for  the  kerosene  ob-
tained from this pathway (10% by volume; Table S1). Alternatively, the
farnesene can be chemically converted to produce a variety of products
including fragrances, flavors, cosmetics, lubricants, etc. The co-products
derived from the separation and purification step (Fig. 3) are reported to
be used in anaerobic digestion for biogas production [95], where the
biogas is subsequently led to a steam methane reforming (SMR) process
in order to produce part of the hydrogen needed for the hydrogenation
step.

3.1.3. Sugar fermentation with alcohol upgrading (SuF)

This  pathway  is  based  upon  the  fermentation  of  the  hydrolysate
derived  from  carbohydrate-rich  biomass  (e.g.,  molasses,  sugarcane,
sweet  sorghum,  sugar  beets,  food  waste,  inedible  fodder  maize)  or
lignocellulosic-based biomass (e.g., cereal or rice straw) to produce al-
cohols [97–99]. The generated alcohol, typically ethanol or isobutanol
[100,101], is then further upgraded to aviation biofuel through a series
of four key processes (Fig. 4) described below (fermentation generating
an  ethanol  or  isobutanol  intermediate,  dehydration,  oligomerization,
hydrogenation). Both alcohol intermediates are certified by ASTM [16].
The solid residue (often referred to as distiller grains) not converted to
alcohol is generally dried and sold as a protein-rich ingredient for animal
feed [102–104]. This pathway is often aggregated with the SF pathway
(3.2.1.1) under the umbrella of “alcohol-to-jet (ATJ)”, and the biofuels
production with those pathways are referred to as ATJ-SPK.

In the fermentation step of SuF, bacteria, in particular Clostridia and
a modified strain of E. coli, are commonly used for isobutanol production
through the acetone-butanol-ethanol (ABE) fermentation process [105],
albeit other microorganisms are also possible in the presence of yeast
S.  cerevisiae  [106]  or  engineered  yeast  (details  in  SM1).  For  ethanol,

◦

◦

C (293 K) to 95

S. cerevisiae yeasts are typically used [107]. Fermentation temperatures
from 20
C (368 K) are reported, depending upon the
microorganisms  used  [102,106,108,109].  After  the  fermentation,  the
broth  containing  the  desired  alcohols,  microorganisms  and  other
organic compounds is separated into an alcoholic fraction and distiller
grains  (by  e.g.,  membrane  separations,  distillation,  solid/liquid  sepa-
ration,  etc.)  [102]. The  alcohol obtained  from the  fermentation  stage
will typically not be pure but consists of  a mixture of C2–C6  alcohols
including ethanol, propanol, butanol, isobutanol and pentanol [102].

◦

In  the  case  of  the  isobutanol  intermediate  pathway,  the  produced
isobutanol  is  typically  converted  into  isobutenes  in  the  presence  of
dehydration catalysts such as inorganic strong acids, metal oxides, ze-
olites, acidic resins, etc. at operating temperatures ranging from 250 to
C  (523–623  K)  [98,110]  (dehydration  stage;  Fig.  4).  Isobutene
350
monomers  are  oligomerized  in  the  presence  of  acid-  or  metal-based
catalysts,  which  results  in  a  liquid  mixture  of  longer  chains  alkenes
(C10–C16)  and  shorter  chains  (C4–C8)  ones  (oligomerization  stage;
Fig. 4). Shorter chains alkenes are separated and recycled to the oligo-
merization unit [98]. The heavier olefin fractions (C10–C16) are then fed
to the hydrogenation process (Fig. 4) [111]. The hydrogenated hydro-
carbons are distilled into distinct fractions, namely the ATJ-SPK along
with an isooctane co-product [44]. A variation has been proposed where
the  heavier  olefin  fractions  are,  prior  to  hydrogenation  and  fraction-
ation, enriched in aromatics (C8–C16; content of ca. 20 vol.% [38]) in
order to get a fuel without blending limits, leading to the production of
so-called synthetic kerosene with aromatics [26]. This is promoted by
among others Byogy and Swedish Biofuels and is under ASTM certifi-
cation  process  [90,112].  However,  at  the  light  of  the  available  infor-
mation [113,114], it remains unclear whether the upstream part of this
process involve direct biomass fermentation as described herein, or the
fermentation  of  gasified  biomass  (i.e.,  syngas),  which  is  further
described in section 3.2.1.1. Additional details on the SuF process are
presented in SM1. The process with the ethanol intermediate is similar;

Fig. 4. Process flow diagram for the (conventional) sugar fermentation with alcohol upgrading (SuF) from different types of feedstocks (a, b and c).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010736

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

oxygen  is  removed  via  a  catalytic  dehydration  process,  producing
ethylene,  then  turned  into  linear  or  non-linear  (branched)  α-olefins
through  a  catalytic  oligomerization  process,  in  turn  hydrogenated  to
produce paraffins (C9–C16 alkanes) [115].

3.2. Pathways handling residual and lignocellulosic biomass feedstock

Some pathways can be considered as specifically targeting residual
(often lignocellulosic) biomasses such as primary forestry residues, crop
residues,  municipal  solid  waste  (MSW),  etc.,  although  these  can  also
technically  be  used  in  the  previously  described  biofuels  pathways  if
subjected  to  pre-treatments.  These  low-value  residues  have  attracted
tremendous  attention  due  to  their  potential  to  avoid  the  competition
with food production [116], and their potential important bio-physical
availability  [117–119].  The  pathways  described  herein  use  thermo-
chemical conversion processes to convert lignocellulosic biomasses into
kerosene. The vision is whether to first convert residual biomasses to
gas, and then convert this gas into liquid fuels through so-called Gas--
to-Liquid (GtL) processes, or to convert the biomass into a bio-oil to be
further processed to kerosene.

3.2.1. Biomass-to-gas via gasification: a prerequisite to several biofuels and
electrofuels pathways

Gasification and anaerobic digestion are the two most known tech-
nologies  to  convert  biomasses  into  gas.  While  the  former  targets  bio-
masses with dry matter content of at least 65%, the latter is typically
considered for wet biomasses (dry matter content below 30%) [120].
The exact amount of carbon from the biomass that will convert to gas, as
well as the gas composition itself, will heavily depend upon the tech-
nology, process conditions and biomass composition. Anaerobic diges-
tion  can  be  expected  to  convert  ca.  60%  of  the  biomass  carbon  into
biogas [121] while gasification is expected to convert at least 75% of the
carbon  into  syngas  [122].  The  present  review  will,  based  on  the
reviewed  pathways,  only  focus  on  gasification,  as  none  consider
anaerobic digestion (for kerosene production).

Prior to gasification, biomass must be pretreated into fine particles
(80–100 mm) by mechanical techniques (including chopping, grinding)
in order to enhance the efficiency of moisture removal, which in turns
facilitates  the  biomass  conversion  to  syngas  [123–125].  Gasification
typically occurs at temperatures of 600–1000
C (873-1,273K) or even
higher  with  controlled  amount  of  oxidizing  agent  such  as  air,  steam,
oxygen, their mixture or supercritical water [123–125]. Supplying the
appropriate  amount  of  oxidizer  is  an  important  parameter  for  a  high
syngas production and for limiting the amount of by-products genera-
tion  (e.g.,  char)  [124].  During  the  gasification  process,  carbonaceous
materials are transformed through several reactions including drying,
pyrolysis (PL), combustion and reduction of feedstock to produce syn-
gas, water vapor, tar, and a solid co-product denoted as char [126].

◦

Syngas, based on the experimental data compiled by Ref. [122] for
fixed bed gasifiers, is a gaseous mixture of H2 (10–20%), CO (15–23%),

CO2  (8–18%),  CH4  (1–4%)  and  N2  (42–60%).  Syngas  impurities  are
composed of tar particles, nitrogenous compounds (NH3, HCN), sulfur
compounds  (H2S,  COS,  CS2),  hydrogen  halides  (HCl,  HF),  and  trace
metals (Na, K) [127]. Hence, syngas needs to be further conditioned to
reform tar contaminants, and remove PM and acid gases prior to utili-
zation in downstream gas-to-liquid processes (Figs. 5 and 6). Depending
on the gas-to-liquid process to be used, additional steps to adjust for the
H2/CO ratio of the cleaned syngas may be required. While it could be
avoided entirely for the SF pathway, the FT typically requires adjusting
the H2/CO ratio to ~2.0 to avoid methane formation. In addition, syngas
must be strictly purified from acid gas and ash to avoid catalyst deac-
tivation  during  the  FT  step  as  well  as  downstream  corrosion  [124].
Details on gasification and syngas conditioning and cleanup processes
are presented in SM1.

3.2.1.1. Gas-to-liquid:  syngas  fermentation  and  alcohol  upgrading  (SF).
The syngas deriving from waste gases from industrial processes and/or
gasified biomass can be converted into various intermediate products (e.
g., alcohols, organic acids) through fermentation process (Fig. 5) after
cleanup/conditioning as above described. Different microorganisms can
be used to obtain a panel of co-products [128]. Typically, the objective is
to  convert  syngas  into  ethanol,  which  is  subsequently  upgraded  into
kerosene.

Microorganisms such as acetogenic Clostridium spp. convert syngas
into several intermediates including ethanol, 2,3-butanediol (2,3-BDO),
and  acetic  acid  [109,129,130].  Optimum  fermentation  conditions
intensively  depend  upon  the  microorganisms  used  [131],  however,
pressures higher than ambient pressure are preferred for enhancing the
syngas transfer between the gas and the liquid phase [132]. After the
fermentation, the broth including co-products and microbial biomass is
fractionated  through  several  processes  depending  on  the  co-products
formed. For example, distillation is typically used for ethanol recovery
[130], while simulated moving bed chromatography may be used for 2,
3-BDO recovery [133].

The fermentation residue, comprising microbial biomass and other
organic fractions (also known as distillation grains), is filtered [134].
The filtered liquid stream, consisting of soluble nutrient mixtures, can be
further  recycled  back  to  the  fermentation  reactor  while  the  filtrated
insoluble sludge is typically sent to anaerobic digestion. The resulting
biogas can be used for internal steam and power generation [130,133].
Ethanol may be upgraded to kerosene through a variety of processes.
First, ethanol is converted to ethylene in the presence of catalysts such as
γ-alumina  (Al2O3),  transition  metal  oxides,  or  zeolites  at  operating
temperatures of 320–500
C (593–773 K) [135]. Oligomerization then
converts the produced ethylene to linear long-chain olefins at operating
temperatures of 100–300
C (373–573 K), also in the presence of cata-
lysts  [136].  Nickel  complexes  are  commonly  used  as  catalysts  for  in-
dustrial ethylene oligomerization (e.g., used in the Shell Higher Olefin
catalysts
Process;

Aluminum-based

[136,137].

SHOP)

◦

◦

Fig. 5. Process flow diagram for biomass gasification, followed bysyngas fermentation and alcohol upgrading (SF) pathway.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010737

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Fig. 6. Process flow diagram for biomass gasification and Fischer–Tropsch (FT) pathway.

(tri-ethyl-aluminum)  generate,  through  the  Gulf  and  Ethyl  process,
linear α-olefins and by-products (alkanes and branched α-olefins) [137].
The longer-chain olefins generated are afterwards hydrogenated into
alkanes.  Copper,  zinc  chromite  or  sulfide  are  utilized  as  catalysts  for
◦
high-pressure hydrogenation with temperature ranges of 150 and 200
C
(423  and  473  K)  and  under  a  pressure  of  200–350  bar  (20–35  MPa)
[137]. Hydrogenated hydrocarbons are further distilled to recover the
C8–C16 fraction known as ATJ-SPK. In addition, naphtha and diesel can
be obtained as co-products [133].

The SF pathway, when deriving from lignocellulosic biomass, has an
overall reported energy efficiency of 57%, while the FT pathway has an
overall reported energy efficiency of 45% [138].

The  fermentation  pathway  provides  numerous  advantages  such  as
operating conditions near the ambient temperature and pressure [139].
However, the main challenge with the SF pathway is the low solubility
of syngas in the fermentation medium, which limits the mass transfer to
the liquid phase, in turns resulting in the generation of untargeted (or
less desired) products [140,141].

3.2.1.2. Gas-to-liquid: Fischer–Tropsch (FT) process. The FT technology
has been extensively used for the production of synthetic liquid fuels and
chemicals  (e.g.,  diesel  [21];  kerosene  [142,143];  naphtha;  [144]).  FT
consists of a series of catalytic processes (Fig. 6) which convert purified
syngas (mostly composed of H2 and CO) into liquid fuels. During the FT
synthesis, the purified syngas is passed over catalysts in specific process
conditions  to  form  a  variety  of  hydrocarbons  (ranging  from  gases  to
waxes) following three main reactions [145]:

2H2  + CO → (CH2) + H2O

(2n+1)H2  + nCO → CnH2n+2  + nH2O

(2n) H2  + nCO → CnH2n  + nH2O

(1)

(2)

(3)

The hydrocarbon product composition is strongly influenced by the
operating temperature, pressure, syngas composition, and used catalyst
[44,147–150]. The FT process can be categorized into high temperature
(HTFT) and low temperature (LTFT). Gasoline, solvent oil and olefins as
shorter-hydrocarbon compounds can be generated through HTFT pro-
◦
cess with operating temperatures of 310–340
C (583–613 K). LTFT will
◦
C (483–533 K) and
typically involve operating temperature of 210–260
generate an hydrocarbon mixture consisting of ca. 50% solid wax, the
remaining consisting of a liquid phase containing aromatics and cyclo-
paraffins  [143].The  wax  can  later  be  processed  to  produce  naphtha,
kerosene and diesel, among others [124,150]. It should be noted that the
wax is sometimes defined as C20 [151], C21 [152], C22 [153] or C23 [143]
and heavier fractions. Common catalysts used are transition metals like

Fe, Co, Ni and Ru. Fe and Co are widely used catalysts, with distinct
selectivity.  For  example,  Fe-based  LTFT  generates  higher  olefins  con-
centration as Co-based LTFT, but with lower hydrocarbon conversion
and more CO2  production. Cobalt-based catalyst is often preferred for
GtL FT due to its high activity  and selectivity to linear paraffins [44,
154–156].

There  are  three  fractions  generated  from  the  FT  process:  gaseous,
liquid and wax phases. The gaseous phase represents unconverted syn-
gas and contains CO, H2, CO2, and potentially N2. It can either be frac-
tionated for H2 recovery or be recycled back to the FT unit in order to
maximize kerosene yield [154], while a fraction (ca. 10% of the syngas)
will end as off-gas (Fig. 6). The liquid hydrocarbons from FT undergo an
hydrotreating  process  including  deoxygenation,  decarboxylation  and
decarbonylation in the presence of supported base metal- or supported
noble metal-catalysts [142]. Additional hydrogenation may be applied
for transforming olefins and residual oxygenated molecules into satu-
rated hydrocarbons. Wax (C20-23+) produced in the FT unit are trans-
formed
followed  by
isomerization into branched hydrocarbons. Obtained hydrocarbons with
different lengths are distilled to produce naphtha, kerosene, diesel and
lubricants [108,143,157].

to  smaller  molecules  by  hydrocracking

This technology allows the use of lignin deriving from lignocellulosic
biomass as primary feedstock for bio-based kerosene production (SPK).
The SPK derived from the FT process, denoted as FT-SPK, consists of a
high  proportion  of  n-  and  iso-paraffins  with  a  maximum  of  15%  by
weight of cycloparaffins resulting in a high cetane number, high specific
energy,  and  high  thermal  stability.  FT-SPK  provides  a  high  quality
kerosene in the absence of sulfur, nitrogen, and other impurities [43,
87].  FT-SPK  with  the  addition  of  aromatics  (denoted  as  SPK/A)  is
another FT-SPK variation, certified in 2015  [26]. This variant  is here
considered within the overall umbrella of FT-SPK.

3.2.2. Hydrotreated depolymerized cellulosic jet (HDCJ)

Residual biomass can be converted into liquid fuels via a pyrolysis
(PL)  process,  denoted  as  HDCJ-PL,  or  via  hydrothermal  liquefaction
(HTL)  for  wet  substrates,  denoted  as  HDCJ-HTL  (Figs.  1  and  7).  Oily
feedstock (e.g., waste cooking oil) can also be used directly (i.e., straight
to the separation/upgrading process of Fig. 7).

The PL process converts dry biomass into bio-oil, gases, and biochar,
the  proportion  and  composition  depending  on  the  process  conditions
and the nature of the feedstock [158]. Biomass feedstock, finely ground
(<5 mm), is dried to achieve less than 10% moisture content by weight,
often seen as mandatory for the PL process, especially in the perspective
of  quality  bio-oil  production  intended  for  use  as  a  transport  fuel
[159–161].  Fast  PL  is  conducted  at  relatively  high  temperatures

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010738

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Fig. 7. Process flow diagram for hydrotreated depolymerized cellulosic jet (HDCJ) pathway.

◦

C;  723–823  K)  and  ambient  pressure  with  short  residence
(450–550
time of the gas phase (typically less than 2s) [162]. Fast PL is proposed
for  maximizing  the  production  of  liquid  hydrocarbons  (bio-oil)  while
lower temperatures PL mainly produce a solid product known as biochar
[163]. In the HTL process, residual biomass reacts with water at tem-
◦
perature ranging from 200 to 450
C (473 to 723 K) and pressures of
50–280 bar (5–28 MPa) [164] with or without a catalyst. This process is
suitable  for  the  conversion  of  relatively  wet  biomasses  (5–35%  dry
matter  content)  into  bio-crude  oil;  drying  pretreatment  processes  are
therefore not necessary [162,164–167]. During the HTL process, bio-oil
is produced through multiple reactions such as hydrolysis, dehydration,
decarboxylation,  condensation,  cyclisation  or,  polymerization.  The
produced bio-oil contains lower oxygen (in oxygenated compounds) and
moisture  content  with  higher  heating  value  in  comparison  to  the  PL
bio-oil  [92,168,169].  Moreover,  PL  bio-oil  has  higher  acidity  and
weaker thermal stability relative to the HTL bio-oil [169]; therefore it
requires  more  extensive  upgrading  processes.  More  details  about  the
HDCJ  processes  and  examples  of  industrial  developments  can  be
retrieved in SM1. During the upgrading process of the bio-oil to kerosene
(Fig. 7), distillation, centrifugation and extraction are preliminary pro-
cesses for the fractionation of the bio-oil into a gaseous phase, a liquid
bio-crude oil phase (the main output), an aqueous phase and solid res-
idue (e.g., tar). Subsequently, other upgrading processes are performed,
for example, emulsification, catalytic cracking and/or, steam reforming
[170]. The liquid bio-crude oil phase is further refined by hydrotreating
to
of
heteroatom-containing molecules and by hydrogenation of unsaturated
molecules.  Hydrotreated  hydrocarbons  are  distilled  into  liquid  fuels
including naphtha, kerosene and diesel.

composition,

reduction

increase

alkane

by

its

3.2.3.

Integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion (IH2)

The integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion (IH2) pathway is
characterized  by  a  series  of  thermochemical  processes,  enabling  the

conversion  of  lignocellulosic  biomass  into  hydrocarbon  fuels,  namely
gasoline,  kerosene,  and  diesel  ranged  hydrocarbons  [171].  Four  key
processes are involved: pretreatment, hydropyrolysis, hydroconversion,
and  steam  reforming  (also  known  as  hydrogen  manufacturing  unit)
[171] (Fig. 8).

◦

Lignocellulosic  biomass  is  first  passed  to  the  pretreatment  unit
(including size reduction and drying). Pretreated biomass is sent to the
catalytic  hydropyrolysis,  operated  at  temperatures  of  350–450
C
(623–723 K), where it is reacted with hydrogen at an incoming pressure
of 20–35 bar (2–3.5 MPa) in the presence of a catalyst. As a result, it is
converted to deoxygenated vapors along with light gases vapors (C1–C3
hydrocarbons, and CO), and char [172,173]. This process minimizes the
undesirable properties of standard pyrolysis bio-oil, namely a high acid
number, low heating value, high oxygen content, low liquid fuels yields,
etc.,  by  adding  hydrogen  to  the  pyrolysis  process  [172].  Char  is
continuously removed by cyclones, followed by a hot filter [172]. Light
gases are further converted to hydrogen (to be reused in the process)
through a steam reformer [26,174]. Char, on the other hand, is passed to
the  hydroconversion  reactor.  It  operates  at  temperatures  340–400
C
(613–673 K), at essentially the same pressure as the hydropyrolysis, with
a catalyst that induces hydrodeoxygenation and hydrogenation to take
place [174,175]. Within this unit, deoxygenated vapors are converted to
hydrocarbon  vapors  (of  gasoline,  diesel,  kerosene)  through  a  hydro-
treating processes (e.g., hydrodeoxygenation, hydrogenation). They are
subsequently  recovered  through  condensation  (e.g.,  via  a  distillation
column) to liquid hydrocarbon fuels [172,175].

◦

Currently,  this  pathway  is  going  through  the  ASTM  certification
process [26,90]. IH2  could be a blending component owing to its high
aromatic content (up to 92 vol.% when from woody biomass; [174]),
which  is  above  the  maximum  limit  for  aviation  kerosene  (25  vol.%)
[38]. They can be additionally added to SPK (low/lacking aromatics)
[174].

Fig. 8. Process flow diagram for integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion (IH2) pathway.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)1010739

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

3.3. Pathways involving oil feedstock

Oil feedstock may be derived from many sources, for example, non-
edible  oil  crops  (e.g.,  camelina,  jatropha,  carinata,  pongamia,  penny-
cress)  or  oleochemical  wastes  (e.g.,  waste  cooking  oils;  WCO,  waste
animal  fats, greases stemming from municipal waste facilities).  Crops
are  converted  to  oil  through  several  processes  such  as,  mechanical
processes (e.g., chopping, pressing, chipping), chemical extraction with
solvent and/or enzymatic methods [176].

3.3.1. Hydroprocessed esters and fatty acids (HEFA)

Triglycerides  containing  saturated  and/or  unsaturated  fatty  acids
can be converted to liquid hydrocarbons (naphtha, kerosene, diesel) by
hydroprocessing under various conditions [161,177,178], as illustrated
in Fig. 9. In the literature, this is typically referred to as hydroprocessed
esters and fatty acids (HEFA) when related to terrestrial biofuels pro-
duction,  and  as  hydroprocessed  renewable  jet  (HRJ)  when  related  to
aviation fuels. In term of process pathway, these terminologies are here
considered as equivalent.

Waste fats and oils with different degrees of unsaturation are firstly
hydrogenated to saturate the double bonds leading to the production of
propane along with free fatty acids. The hydrogenated fatty acids are
subsequently  converted  into  straight  chain  hydrocarbons  through
hydrotreating processes including deoxygenation, decarboxylation and
decarbonylation with the formation of H2O, CO2  and CO, respectively
[73,75,179]. Subsequently, the hydrocarbons produced are transformed
by  isomerization  and  hydrocracking  reactions. Isomerization converts
straight chain hydrocarbons into highly branched alkanes exhibiting a
low freezing point, a desired property as a blending component. Long
chain  hydrocarbons  are  broken  through  an  hydrocracking  process  to
desirable  carbon  length  compounds  (e.g.,  in  the  range  of  C8  to  C16
aviation kerosene) [180]. The product is distilled into naphtha, kerosene
and diesel [181,182].

Several parameters have an impact on product generation during the
HEFA  process,  for  instance,  the  type  of  catalyst  used,  the  fatty  acids
profile  of  the  feedstock  used  and  the  operating  conditions  [181,183,
184]. A variety of research and industrial experiments resulting in the
production of aviation biofuels with the HEFA pathway under various
conditions are summarized in SM1.

The HEFA pathway is considered as a relatively mature technology at
commercial  scale.  However,  the  availability  and  the  cost  of  the  sus-
tainable oleochemical feedstock, in particular if waste-based (as in e.g.,
Refs.  [185,186])  or  relying  on  limited  marginal  lands  (e.g.,  Refs.
[187–190]) to grow the feedstock, may become a limiting factor in the
perspective  of  increased  biofuels  demand  in  the  future.  The  HEFA
pathway with the variant of using third-generation feedstock (e.g., oils
stemming from microalgae Botryococcus braunii, denoted as Bb oil) has
been  recently  certified  (ASTM  approved  for  10%  maximum  blend  in
2020) [191]. This pathway produces biofuels known as hydroprocessed
hydrocarbons HEFA-SPK (HH HEFA-SPK).

High freeze point HEFA-SK (HFP HEFA-SK, also known as HEFA+) is
another  variation  of  already  certified  HEFA,  nearing  final  ASTM
approval  [90,112].  The  production  cost  is  expected  to  be  reduced  as
involving lower requirements for the upgrading process (e.g., isomeri-
zation)  relative  to  HEFA-SPK  [26].  This  is  among  others  due  to  the

longer length of the molecule chain, varying from C15  to C18  [26,192,
193]

3.3.2. Catalytic hydrothermolysis jet (CHJ)

The  CHJ  pathway,  similarly  to  the  HTL  process,  is  based  on  high
temperature water chemistry (hydrothermal processes), converting oil-
based feedstock into a mixture of straight, branched and cyclic hydro-
carbons  as  shown  in  Fig.  10.  The  process  is  composed  of  four  steps
including  hydrothermal  pre-conditioning,  catalytic  hydrothermolysis
(CH), upgrading through hydrotreatment and products fractionation.

◦

◦

During the pre-conditioning stage, the oil-based material is cracked
resulting in the production of free fatty acids with the removal of het-
eroatoms (S, N, metals, etc.) in the presence of steam and catalyst under
operating  temperatures  of  150–300
C  (423–573  K)  and  pressures  of
5–50 bar (0.5–5 MPa) [194]. These generated fatty acids are converted
in  a  CH  unit  at  elevated  temperature  (240–450
C;  513–723  K)  and
pressure  (15–250  bar;  1.5–25  MPa)  [194].  Within  the  CH  unit,
numerous  reactions  take  place  including  cracking,  hydrolysis,  decar-
boxylation,  isomerization,  and  cyclization  to  produce  a  mixture  of
paraffin and cyclic hydrocarbons. In a nutshell, the outputs of the CH
unit  consist  of  an  organic  phase  and  an  aqueous  phase.  The  aqueous
phase  is  composed  mostly  of  low  molecular  weight  carboxylic  acids
(C2–C5), glycerol, and some of small polar molecules [194]. They are
transformed  through  decarboxylation  and  dehydration  into  alkene
products.  These  intermediates  could be  upgraded  to  aviation  biofuels
through  alcohol  recovery  stage  (oligomerization,  hydrogenation  and
distillation) as described above. The organic phase, referred to as CHJ
bio-crude, is further decarboxylated, hydrogenated, and finally distilled
into several product fractions including naphtha, kerosene (denoted as
catalytic hydrothermolysis jet-synthesized kerosene; CHJ-SK) and diesel
[195].

Aviation  biofuels  obtained  with  this  process  contain  high  density
aromatics, iso-paraffins and cycloparaffins [194,196]. Additional details
on the CHJ pathway and its industrial developments are presented in
SM1.

4. Aviation liquid electrofuels

Electrofuels  (power-to-liquid)  allow,  pushed  to  its  extreme,  to
decouple  the  production  of  kerosene  from  the  demand  of  biomass,
relying on water-based hydrogen (H2), and atmospheric CO2 [19,197].
Through  hydrogen  produced  from  water  electrolysis,  electrofuels
involve  the  storage  of  electrical  energy  within  chemical  bonds  in  the
form  of  liquid  fuels,  these  providing  more  energy  density  and  lower
aircraft  mass,  compared  to  emerging  electric  (battery)  aviation  and
hydrogen aviation.

Clear  climate  benefits  have  been  documented  when  renewable
sources of energy (whether electricity or heat) are employed to produce
the required H2 [186–188; SM2].

4.1. Hydrogen supply

There are several pathways to produce hydrogen with different re-
sources, e.g., from fossil fuel resources through steam reforming and/or
partial oxidation, from non-fossil resources through biomass gasification

Fig. 9. Process flow diagram for hydroprocessed esters and fatty acids (HEFA) pathway.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107310

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Fig. 10. Process flow diagram for catalytic hydrothermolysis jet (CHJ) pathway.

Fig. 11. Electrofuels production process by water electrolysis (a), co-electrolysis (b), and solar thermochemical process (c). The FT and methanol synthesis com-
parisons can be found in Table S3 (SM1).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107311

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

or  fermentation,  and  from  water-splitting  technologies  [201–205].
Today,  around  one-third  of  global  hydrogen  supply  is  obtained  as  a
by-product  from  industrial  processes,  (e.g.,  chlorine  production  from
electrolysis of brine; [206–208]). Here, the focus is on hydrogen pro-
duction  decoupled  from  a  carbon  source,  and  as  the  main  product
driving the production process.

Water  is  a  promising  resource  generating  growing  interest  for
hydrogen  production.  Several  pathways  are  possible,  such  as  electro-
chemistry  (including  water  electrolysis  and  photo  electrolysis)  [209,
210],  thermochemistry  [211],  or  biological  water-splitting  such  as
bio-photolysis [29,204] as summarized in Fig. 12. The latter, along with
photo-electrolysis,  have  however  not  been  considered  any  further
herein, being still in early development stages.

Water electrolysis, in particular if powered with fluctuating power in
excess  of  demand,  has  attracted  growing  attention  as  a  process  to
generate so-called green hydrogen [203,212]. There are different water
electrolysis  technologies  available  such  as  alkaline  electrolysis  [213],
proton/polymer exchange membrane (PEM) electrolysis [214], or solid
oxide  electrolysis  (SOE)  [215,216]  (details  on  these  technologies  are
presented  in  SM1).  However,  these  technologies  remain  relatively
expensive,  and  their  profitability  is  bound  to  low  renewable  energy
prices [58,62]. Alkaline electrolysis, for example, provides two to four
times the production cost of the conventional steam reforming of natural
gas [62,217,218], as further detailed in SM1.

4.2. Carbon sourcing

Carbon  sources  include  (i)  biomass  (undergoing  gasification),  (ii)
fossil or biogenic carbon stemming from industrial activities captured at
a  point  source  (e.g.,  biofuel/bioethanol  production,  waste  gases  from
steel production and cement industry, from biogas upgrading process,
mine gases, etc.; here denoted as point source CO2) and (iii) atmospheric
carbon  captured  by  DAC  (Fig.  11)  [130,197].  As  DAC,  point  source
carbon also requires a capture process, as further described in SM1. It
should be noted that biomass here also acts as source of H2.

There are two major technical approaches for DAC. One is based on
the absorption of CO2 using low-toxicity solvents such as water (through
a scrubbing process) and alkaline aqueous solutions (such as NaOH, Ca
(OH)2, KOH) with a CO2 strong affinity. In addition to water and alkaline
solutions, amino acid salts, ammonia, polyglycol ether and ionic liquids
can also be used as solvent for CO2 extraction [219]. The solvent-based
technology is mature and is already applied in large-scale plant, how-
ever, the solvent regeneration is a high energy-consuming process. The
second approach utilizes an alkaline carbonate bonded to a mesoporous

solid support in which the sorbents can be easily regenerated. The most
promising technology is the use of supported amine materials; this solid
sorbent-based  approach  revealed  higher  sorption  performance  with
higher  capacities  and  selectivity,  and  lower  heating  requirement
compared to the liquid sorbent-based method [31,220]. However, the
tradeoff  is  the  high  operational  expenditure  resulting  from  sorbent
degradation [220].

On  the  other  hand,  capturing  technologies  for  industrial  point
sources are already well addressed and deployed (details in SM1). CO2
concentrations vary greatly according to the origin of the point source,
ranging from 15 to 30 vol.% for the cement industry, to up to 90–100
vol.% for natural gas processing [221,222]. The capture cost is around
ten times less than the DAC technology cost, and is mainly associated to
the cost of energy needed [30,78,221,223].

4.3. Liquid hydrocarbon synthesis

In this step, hydrogen is combined with CO2 to produce syngas. This
happens with a reverse water gas shift reaction (i.e., reaction (6) below,
from right to left) in the direct electrolysis pathway (Fig. 11a) or through
a co-electrolysis process where water thermal splitting and reverse water
gas shift reactions jointly occur, thereby converting steam and CO2 into
syngas  [224]  (Fig.  11b).  This  is  in  particular  possible  with  high tem-
perature  electrolysis  using  SOE  (600-1000
C;  873-1273  K)  [224].
Co-electrolysis provides high conversion and energy efficiencies utiliz-
ing  the  industrial  waste  heat  derived  from  other  industrial  processes
such as the FT synthesis [75,216]. The reverse water gas shift reaction
◦
implies operating conditions of varying from ca. 300–800
C (573-1073
K)  depending  on  the  use  of  a  catalyst  (typically  copper-based;
[225–228]) as well as the operating conditions (e.g., syngas composi-
tions; [228]).

◦

As  shown  in  (Fig.  11c),  a  third  option  is  to  thermochemically
combine  H2  (from  H2O)  and  CO2  for  syngas  production  through  the
direct use of concentrated solar radiation as energy source. Nuclear and
geothermal resources are also possible [229]. Here, the H2O and CO2
conversion into syngas is carried out by multi-step thermochemical cy-
cles  such  as  cerium-chlorine,  copper-chlorine,  sulfur-iodine,  iron--
chlorine, etc. [202,229–231]. This was demonstrated in the SOLARJET
project [202], with a 4 kW solar reactor prototype. The upscaling of this
solar  thermochemical  reactor  (50  kW)  is  being  performed  within  the
SUN-to-LIQUID project [205,232], where syngas is to be produced from
concentrated solar energy.

To produce liquid fuels, the syngas is further used in either the FT or
methanol synthesis process, as depicted in Fig. 11a–c (and Table S3). For

Fig. 12. Water splitting hydrogen production technologies. AED: Average Energy Demand, calculated from a compilation of several references (see Table S4 in SM1).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107312

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

the FT route, the syngas-to-kerosene conversion is exactly as descried for
biofuels (Fig. 6).

In  the  methanol  route,  syngas  is  converted  at  temperatures  of
◦
150–300
C (423–573 K) and under pressures in the range of 10–100 bar
(1–10  MPa)  in  the  presence  of  copper-based  catalysts  (e.g.,  Cu/ZnO)
[233]. The hydrogenation of CO/CO2 can be described by the following
reactions [234]:
CO + 2H2  → CH3OH ΔH298K  = (cid:0) 91 kJ mol(cid:0) 1

(4)

CO2  + 3H2  → CH3OH + H2O ΔH298K  = (cid:0) 50 kJ mol(cid:0) 1

(5)

The water gas shift reaction occurs simultaneously according to the

following reaction [234]:
CO + H2O ↔ CO2  + H2  ΔH298K  = (cid:0) 41 kJ mol(cid:0) 1

(6)

Subsequently, the methanol is condensed and separated by distilla-
tion. It can then be processed to the desired chemicals and fuels [233,
234]. This conversion and upgrading of methanol to desired fuels and
chemicals comprises several processes depending on the preferred target
product.  For  instance,  methanol  may  be  used  for  olefin  synthesis  (an
alkene  intermediate  to  produce  kerosene)  via  di-methyl  ether,  oligo-
merization  and  hydrotreating  [37,233,235].  The  methanol  generated
from syngas could also serve for the production of gasoline (denoted as
methanol-to-gasoline),  as  currently  done  in  commercial  plants,  for
example ExxonMobil [236]. However, no aviation electrofuels have yet
been  produced  via  the  methanol  pathway  [37].  On  the  other  hand,
FT-SPK  has  already  been  tested,  and  approved  by  ASTM  D7566  as  a
blending constituent. To the best of our knowledge, the first electrofuel
industrial plant (Power-to-Liquid for the production of e-kerosene) was
officially opened at the beginning of October 2021 in Werlte (Emsland,
Germany)  [237].  The  Lufthansa  Group  announced,  in  October  2021,
purchases of at least 25,000 L (25 m3) annually over the next five years
[238].

5. Co-products generation in liquid fuels production pathways
(biofuels and electrofuels)

The technologies previously described (sections 3 and 4, Figs. 2–11)
generate,  besides  the  desired  fuels,  multiple  co-products,  no  matter
which route is used. As such, biofuel/electrofuel production pathways
are  to  be  seen  as  refineries  rather  than  mere  kerosene  suppliers
(Table S2). Their co-products include liquid fuels (other than kerosene),
chemicals, animal feed, etc. and their generation depends on the specific
technologies and operating conditions being used within a given con-
version route as illustrated in Table 1. In some cases, it may also depend
upon  market  conditions,  where  the  production  chain  can  flexibly  be
adjusted  towards  enhanced  production  of  the  most  valuable  product.
These co-products represent an additional market or value generation
opportunity  for  the  production  plant.  These  co-products  are  here
grouped  in  three  major  categories:  chemicals,  liquid  fuels,  and  other
products.

5.1. Chemicals

Various  chemical  compounds  are  generated  as  co-products  during
production  processes.  Those  that  have  been  reported  by  biofuel  pro-
ducers are detailed here.

5.1.1. Propane

Propane  (C3H8)  is  formed  as  a  co-product  in  the  FT  and  HEFA
pathway (Figs. 6 and 9, respectively). Propane is used in a variety of
applications,  for  instance  as  a  fuel  for  commercial  boilers,  camping
stoves,  heating  animal  houses  (e.g.,  piglet  nursery)  in  livestock  pro-
duction,  etc.  It  can  also  be  used  as  refrigerant  [239,240].  Propane  is
generally pressurized and stored  as liquid in storage  vessels or tanks.

Due to its high energy density and high quality combustion character-
istics, propane is also used as alternative vehicle fuel for internal com-
bustion  engine  [241,242].  Propane  is  categorized  as  one  of  the  bulk
components of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) in combination with other
gases  such  as  butane,  isobutene,  isopentane.  Currently,  propane  is
typically  generated  as  a  co-product  of  natural  gas  processing  and  pe-
troleum refinery [137]. The cost of propane thus corresponds with fossil
fuels resources. The global propane market has been estimated to reach
$84 billion (with 200 million tonnes in its production) by 2030 [243].

5.1.2. Naphtha

Naphtha  is  a  mixture  of  liquid  hydrocarbons  comprising  carbon
compounds ranging from C5–C9 [244]. Naphtha is the main combustible
component of both gasoline and kerosene. It has a great potential for
diverse industrial purposes including plastic production or its use as a
cleaning extraction or dilution agent [245,246]. Naphtha is traditionally
generated as a co-product in fractional distillation processes from the
petrochemical  industry,  including  the  production  of  (fossil-based)
kerosene for aviation fuel. The market price of naphtha is thus closely
tight to the price of crude oil [247].

Biofuel pathways involve the production of naphtha as a co-product
(including FT, HDCJ, and HEFA; Figs. 6, 7 and 9, respectively). It can be
recirculated within the process, for instance in the FT pathway it can be
fed into the partial oxidation unit and reformed as syngas feedstock to
produce a greater amount of aviation fuel [248]. Additional examples of
such bio-based naphtha use are described in SM1.

5.1.3. 2,3-Butanediol (optional)

2,3-BDO  (C4H10O2)  is  a  bulk  commodity  chemical.  It  is  seen  as  a
promising fuel additive or gasoline blendstock for enhancing the octane
number  [249].  2,3-BDO  is  readily  convertible  to  butadiene,  butane,
methyl-ethyl ketone (MEK) which could be used as intermediates in a
variety of product manufactures. In particular, MEK is used in several
applications such as solvents in surface coating, printing inks, dewaxing
agent,  liquid  fuel  additive,  indirect  food  additive  for  adhesives  and
polymers [250]. According to Refs. [249,251,252], 2,3-BDO will reach a
global market around $220 million by the year 2027.

2,3-BDO is usually produced on the industrial scale by conventional
chemical (or synthetic) methods [253,254]. In the production of avia-
tion biofuel, 2,3-BDO is involved in the SF pathway (Fig. 5). It is not
directly generated (hence the optional label above), but can be recov-
ered  providing  adjustments  to  the  product  separation  step  prior  to
ethanol production, if  favorable market conditions  makes it  desirable
[249]. For recovery, the fermentation broth including liquid mixture or
a  mixed alcohol  stream containing 2,3-BDO  would be processed with
separation techniques such as fractional distillation, evaporation, per-
vaporation, adsorption [249]. For instance, LanzaTech has patented the
production  of 2,3-BDO from CO-rich  industrial  waste gases (from  the
steel industry) by fermentation (Table S2). Their commercial ethanol/2,
3-BDO  production  plant  has  a  production  capacity  of  30–50  million
gallons  (ca.  0.11–0.19  million  m3)  and  costed  $75–125  million.  In
partnership  with  Orochem  Technologies  (USA),  LanzaTech  seeks  to
economically convert its 2,3-BDO into MEK or 1,3-butadiene through
thermocatalytic processes [249].

5.1.4.

Isobutene (optional)

Isobutene (C4H8) may be optionally recovered in the SuF pathway. It
is produced after dehydration of alcohols, just prior the oligomerization
process (Fig. 4). If the market conditions are favorable to isobutene, a
choice could be made to stop the process after the dehydration process
for  a  certain  proportion  of  the  stream,  and  not  continue  further  to
kerosene production. Isobutene production thus implies less bio-based
kerosene production; hence its “optional” label.

Isobutene is used as a building block in the manufacturing of several
industrial products namely fuel additive, butyl rubber, plastic and lu-
bricants, domestic gas, chemicals and cosmetics, etc. Isobutene can be

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107313

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Table 1
Summary of the co-products generated in the various liquid biofuels production pathways for aviation.

Production status

Market uptake and Displacement

Co-product ratioa (kg MJ

(cid:0) 1 kerosene) (% mass)b

Co-product

Conversion
pathways

Chemicals
Propane

FT, HEFA

Generated from triglyceride
hydrogenation

Naphtha

FT, HDCJ, HEFA

Generated along with aviation biofuel
(final production step)

2,3-butanediol
(2,3-BDO)

SF

Isobutene

SuF

Generated along with ethanol, may be
recovered through a separation process
before the ethanol production (optional)

Derived from isobutanol, which can be
further processed the dehydration
(optional)

Liquid fuels
Isooctane

SuF

Gasoline

APR, FT, IHd,
CHJ

Diesel

APR, SF, HDCJ,
HEFA, IHd, CHJ

• Generated along with aviation biofuel

(final production step)

• Derived from isobutanol in the SuF

process, which can be further
upgraded to isooctane (optional)
• Generated along with aviation fuel

(final production step)

• Generated along with aviation fuel
from APR, FT and HEFA processes
• Derived from isobutanol in the SuF

process, which can be further
upgraded to diesel (optional)

Others
Waxes

FT

• Generate along with aviation biofuel

(final production step)

High-protein
animal feed

SuF

• Derived from fermentation residues
and may require further processing
such as evaporation/drying

0.0003c,n (1.1%)
0.004d,e (9.7%)

0.0004c,n(1.3%)
0.019f (27.0%)
0.005d,e (12.5%)

0.013g (if they are recovered from the fermentation
process) (33.0%)

Unclear, because isobutene is an intermediate that
can either be processed (fully or partly) to kerosene
or not depending on the market context (flexible
production)

0.002h,i (7.5%)

0.003j (8.0%)
0.004a,c,n (14.7%)
0.086k (72.2%)
0.016l (28.1%)

0.012j (32.0%)
0.003g (8.7%)
0.028f (40.1%)
0.009d,e (21.1%)
0.010k (8.3%)
0.018l (31.0%)

0.001c,n (2.9%)

0.037m (59.4%)

• One of the main LPG constituents
• Used as fuel in numerous applications
(e.g., commercial boiler, burner, etc.)

• Displaces fossil-based propane from
petrochemical sources (natural gas
processing, crude oil refinery)
• Gasoline blending component
• Precursors for plastics manufacturing
• Can be recycled in the FT unit to
produce additional aviation fuel
• Displaces fossil-based naphtha from

petrochemical sources

• Conversion to various precursors
namely MEK, 1,3-butadiene, etc.
• Displaces 2,3-BDO from chemical en-
gineering (or synthetic) methods

• Precursor for numerous products such
as butyl rubber, plastics, isooctane, etc.

• One of the main LPG constituents
• Dimerization for isooctane production
• Polymerization in butyl rubber

production

• Displaces isobutene from
petrochemical sources

• (Premium-grade) gasoline production
• Displaces fossil-based isooctane from

petrochemical sources

• Transportation fuel
• Displaces fossil-based gasoline derived

from petrochemical source

• Transportation fuel
• Displaces fossil-based diesel derived

from petrochemical sources

• Raw materials for various products
such as petroleum jellies, adhesive,
etc.

• Displaces petrochemical-based waxes
• High protein and nutrient

concentrations derived from dried
distiller grains

• Displaces marginal carbohydrate,
protein and lipid sources (maize,
soybean meals and palm oil) in animal
feed

References.

a Co-product ratios presented are extracted from the available literature in which the operating conditions intend to maximize kerosene production. This could not

be done for the advanced IH2 process, which is currently essentially used for gasoline production as demonstrated in the study of [174].

b The mass (%) of the co-products are provided in parenthesis.This includes the % (mass) out of all products (including kerosene): therefore the total is lower than

100%. The calculation procedure can be retrieved in SM2. The considered lower heating value (LHV) of kerosene is 43.0 MJ kg

c [143].
d [268].
e [269].
f [270].
g [133].
h [271].
i [272].
j [273].
k [174].
l [274].
m [266].
n [275].

(cid:0) 1.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107314

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

reacted with methanol leading to methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) or with
ethanol  leading  to  the  production  of  the  gasoline  additive  ethyl  tert-
butyl ether (ETBE), used as an anti-knocking agent for the automotive
industry  [255].  The  isobutene  polymerization  generates  butyl  rubber
that can be used as precursor in several products such as window seals,
bottle stoppers, protective gloves, etc. Isobutene is also one of the main
constituents of LPG. Moreover, isooctane (a gasoline blendstock) could
be generated by dimerization of isobutene [255].

Currently, isobutene as a key chemical building block, is massively
obtained from petrochemical sources. Being a major precursor in various
industrial applications with continuous demand, its market is worth $25
billion with 15 million tonnes produced annually and used as cosmetic
ingredients and specialty fuels [256].

5.2. Liquid fuels

5.2.1.

Isooctane

Isooctane  is  a  co-product  produced  in  the  SuF  pathway  (Fig.  4),
during the oligomerization/hydrogenation steps. Isooctane represents a
large share of gasoline composition and has properties (e.g., high energy
content,  high  antiknock  quality)  that  make  it  suitable  as  a  blending
component for the production of premium-grade fuels [257]. Isooctane
is  typically  produced  through  the  dimerization  of  isobutene  and  iso-
pentene generated as by-products from steam cracking of naphtha and
light gas oil in refineries, dimer separation and hydrogenation in con-
ventional  industrial  processes  [257].  Isooctane  is  further  used  as  a
feedstock  to  produce  gasoline,  in  a  process  where  it  is  blended  with
naphtha [258].

The  major  market  for  the  isooctane  co-product  generated  in  the
production of aviation biofuels appears to be its use as drop-in blending
component for the automotive industry, with a global market reaching
$99  billion  in  2019  [259].  Yet,  new  markets  are  also  emerging.  For
instance,  high  purity  solvents  or  specialty  fuels  used  for  racing  and
classic cars [260].

5.2.2. Gasoline

Gasoline is a refined product of petroleum consisting of hydrocarbon
mixtures,  additives  and  blending  agents.  The  gasoline  composition
strongly depends on various parameters such as the crude oil sources,
the refinery process available and product specification defined by oc-
tane rating [261]. Gasoline may be generated in particular in the SuF
(Fig. 4) and FT (Figs. 6 and 11) pathways. In the latter, gasoline is not
directly  produced  as  a  co-product,  but  can  be  produced  from  the
isooctane  generated  as  explained  above.  Similarly,  gasoline  (C5–C12
hydrocarbon ranged; [262]) can also be produced from the APR, FT, and
CHJ pathways (Figs. 2, 6 and 10, respectively); it is not directly visible in
the  figures,  but  is  captured  within  the  naphtha  fraction.  The  fraction
generated  strongly  depends  upon  the  operating  conditions,  which  in
turn can, to some extent, be adjusted according to the market value of
bio-based kerosene, diesel and gasoline. For instance, in the production
of  aviation  biofuel  through  LTFT  process,  the  proportions  of  gasoline
observed correspond to approximately 10–15% of product distillation
output  [263].  Additional  information  about  renewable  gasoline  is
described in SM1.

5.2.3. Diesel

Diesel  is  a  key  fuel  powering  compression  ignition  engine.  As  for
gasoline, it is derived from petroleum refining, and its exact composition
is influenced by market demands and prices.

Diesel  with  carbon  distribution  ranging  C10–C20  is  produced  in
aviation biofuel pathways such as SF, FT (Figs. 2, 5, and 7–10) and in
considerable  volumes.  It  is  optionally  produced  in  the  SF  pathway,
derived from ethanol upgrading processes. Furthermore, diesel is also
generated  as  the  co-product  from  the  FT  process  where  the  volume
produced  is  also  depended  upon  the  operating  conditions  [263].  The
main market for the diesel co-product appears to be as a renewable fuel

for terrestrial transport as reflected by several recent examples of pur-
chasing agreements and collaboration deals detailed in SM1.

5.3. Others

5.3.1. Waxes

Waxes are generated as a co-product in the FT pathway (Figs. 6 and
11). They consist primarily of straight chain alkanes (C20-23+) which are
typically not used in fuel refinery due to their physical properties with, i.
e.,  high  melting  point,  low  viscosity  and  hardness.  During  the  LTFT
route, the heavy fraction of the FT syncrude accounts for 20–30% weight
of total hydrocarbons. The molecular mass of the wax fraction generated
is higher relative to the wax produced in the HTFT process [263]. These
wax fractions can be cracked into lower molecular weight compounds
appropriate for use as liquid fuels or may be sold as precursor of a variety
of  products.  These  heavy  alkanes  have  a  high  potential  commercial
value due to their competitive prices and versatility in both industrial
and  medical  applications  including  petroleum  jellies,  lithium  grease,
engine oil, industrial gear oil, industrial cleaners, adhesives, etc. [264].
Examples of wax purchase agreements are listed in SM1.

5.3.2. High-protein animal feed

An animal feed co-product is generated in the SuF pathway (Fig. 4),
where  the  protein-rich  solid  residues  derived  from  the  fermentation
broth can be further processed. Upon drying, these are often referred to
as distiller dried grains, and typically have a high concentration of crude
protein with an amino acid profile suitable for animal feed [265]. Ten
pounds (around 4.5 kg) of animal feed can be produced from one gallon
(ca. 0.0038 m3) of aviation biofuel [266]. As in the case of the distiller
dried  grains  co-generated  with  bio-based  alcohol  (e.g.,  ethanol)  pro-
duction, the access to the feed market is real and already in place [267].

6. Electric (battery-based) aviation

Batteries can serve as the energy sourcing for either propulsion (as
further  explained  in  section  10.1)  or  non-propulsion  systems  (overall
electricity within the aircraft). The latter is often referred to as the “more
electric” architecture, and is applied in aircraft to power services such as
the flight control system and cabin environmental control system, or the
auxiliary power unit (APU) [49,276,277]. “More electric” architectures
were implemented in the Airbus A350 and Boeing 787 [51,276].

Albeit  battery  is  one  of  the  most  promising  energy  sourcing  (for
propulsion) in terms of climate impacts (further discussed in section 8),
there  are  several  limitations  to  overcome  for  a  widespread  imple-
mentation within aviation. First, they cover essentially short-haul flights
due to the limited energy storage capacity. Table 2 details the emerging
lithium-based battery technologies for aviation applications [277]. The
present lithium-ion batteries (Li-ion) have a maximum specific energy of
(cid:0) 1) [49,278], which is relatively low in com-
400 Wh kg
parison with conventional kerosene, having a specific energy density of
(cid:0) 1).  This  introduces  a  crucial  mass
ca.  12,000  Wh  kg
penalty factor to consider [277,279,280], and affects the final supplied
service (e.g., reduction of the number of seats and thus passengers car-
ried, a lower distance travelled; [56,279]).

(cid:0) 1  (43.2  MJ  kg

(cid:0) 1 (1.44 MJ kg

To overcome this challenge, different innovations are in place. The
main focus has been on the use of different materials for the cathode/
anode, and on the use of different electrolytes (Table 2). This has led to
the  development  of  high  performance  batteries  including  advanced
lithium  metal/silicon  anode  (Adv.  Li-ion)  [49],  solid-state  electrolyte
battery (SSB) [278,281], lithium-sulfur (Li–S) [282,283] and lithium-air
(Li-air)  batteries  [284,285].  Moreover,  nickel-rich  NCM  (Nickel-
–Cobalt–Manganese)-811 cathodes [49,286], alternative anode material
to graphite (e.g., silicon, lithium metal) [287], approximate solid-state
electrolytes  in  SSB  [49],  prevention  of  polysulfide  shuttle  effects  in
Li–S  batteries  [288,289]  and  improvement  of  moisture  sensitivity  in
Li-air batteries [285,290] are additional avenues being investigated.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107315

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Table 2
Battery technology outlook for aviation.

Other advances for batteries have been introduced, for instance with
systems based on sodium, magnesium, zinc, and aluminum [291], albeit,
still in the early stage of research and development. These can be po-
tential  candidates  to  substitute  the  lithium,  cobalt,  natural  graphite,
silicon metals used as the major materials for the electrodes (defined as
EU critical raw materials; CRM [292]) [293].

Another  concern  applying  to  battery  electric  aviation  relates  to
safety, among other associated with overheating of the battery, which
can cause failure of thermal runaway, known to be a key cause of un-
desired incidents [294,295]. For example, the fire incident of the Boeing
787  Dreamliner  in  2013  was  reported  to  be  due  to  the  failure  of  the
Li-ion  batteries,  powering  the  aircraft  APU  [296].  Therefore,  the
development  of  high-performance,  long-lived  batteries  with  thermal
stability is one of the numerous technological challenges to be solved
before broad deployment [286].

One other important issue relates to the charging time of batteries
and the possibility to recycle them after their limited lifetime (>1000
cycles for current Li-ion batteries; [49]). The battery swapping station
model, where batteries are not charged but replaced by charged batte-
ries  during the turnaround phase  of the plane, is  one option that has
been considered to overcome the charging time issue [297,298], how-
ever,  this  option  implies  high  investment  costs  because  of  the  great
number of batteries involved.

Although  battery  recycling  has  advantages  over  the  use  of  virgin
metals  (e.g.,  need  for  less  energy  for  extraction  operations,  avoid
emissions from batteries disposal) [299], several challenges remain to be
alleviated, related to a variety of factors. The efficiencies of the collec-
tion and dismantling methods (e.g., difficulties in the dissociating used
graphite from others) and the appropriate recycling technologies (e.g.,
for  the  developing  sustainable  methods,  for  high  purity  requirements
such as 99.9% carbon purity for the graphite; [300]) are some examples
[299,301,302].

7. Hydrogen aviation

The energy density of hydrogen, in terms of energy-to-weight ratio
(cid:0) 1)  is  three-fold  that  of  conventional  kerosene,  rendering  it
(MJ  kg
suitable for longer flights in large planes supporting high payload ca-
pacity. Despite being lighter, hydrogen, in its cryogenic liquid form, has
(cid:0) 1) four-fold lower than fossil kerosene,
an energy-to-volume ratio (MJ L
which implies obvious storage challenges [313]. The different pathways
for hydrogen production through water-splitting technologies are pre-
sented in Fig. 12.

Cryogenic  hydrogen  (referred  as  liquid  hydrogen;  LH2)  requires
◦
cryogenic storage ((cid:0) 253
C; 20K) to maintain hydrogen in a liquid form
[314]. This is due to hydrogen’s high specific volume at standard at-
mospheric pressure and temperature.

Hydrogen  propulsion  system  have  been  demonstrated  whether  in
combustion  mode  or  fuel  cell  mode  (the  latter  is  detailed  in  section
10.2.1). The Russian manufacturer Tupolev manufactured, in 1989, the
first hydrogen aircraft using both gaseous H2  (from an LH2  tank), and
liquefied natural gas (LNG) fuel in a gas turbine engine to propel the
Tupolev 155 (Tu-155) [315]. The direct use of H2  in gas turbines and
piston engines generally involve that LH2 is pumped from the tank to a
heat  exchanger,  where  LH2  is  heated  to  gaseous  form  prior  to  being
injected into the combustion chamber of the engine [316]. The A380
MSN1 is an additional undertaking demonstrator to be powered by the
H2  combustion  mode,  which  is  expected  to  fly  by  2026  [317]. Those
require,  besides  the  gas  turbine  with  modified  components  (such  as
combustion  chamber,  fuel  injector),  a  cryogenic  tank  with  insulation
system, additional on-board infrastructure such as high-pressure pumps,
and a heat exchanger suitable to H2 combustion characteristics (e.g., a
tendency  to  flashback,  a  high  flame  temperature)  [62,313,316,318],
although  scarcely  detailed.  Hydrogen  turbine  engines  with  low-NOx
emissions are already expected as the next improvement of this tech-
nology  [58,62,63].  Boeing  Phantom  Eye  is  another  example  of  an

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107316

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

unmanned drone powered by  hydrogen combustion in piston engines
[319]. Other hydrogen aircraft, and projects can be retrieved in SM1.

Cryogenic LH2 has a propensity to leak due to hydrogen’s high boil-
off rate and small size molecule. Because of this, the use of H2  raises
important concerns about safety, and involves stringent procedures and
requirements with regards to safety regulation certification, at airports,
production and storage sites, transportation, distribution as well as for
the  aircraft  operation,  to  avoid  and  control  these  leakages  in  case  of
occurrence [58,313,320]. It is even suggested to build airports where
only H2 would be used for all airport vehicles used for ground operations
[321]. Despite this, H2  has some advantages safety-wise, over conven-
tional kerosene, such as lower flammability (more H2 leak than kerosene
leak  is  required  prior  to  fire  hazards,  among  others  due  H2  rapid
◦
dispersion in air), and a higher auto-ignition temperature (550
C; 823K
for  H2  versus  300
C;  573K  for  conventional  kerosene),  leading  to  a
lower risk of spontaneous ignition of the fuel [320–322].

◦

The key challenge of hydrogen as aviation fuel relates to the mass
penalty  induced  by  the  onboard  storage  system.  The  mass  penalty
derived  from the  H2  storage  system  is,  at  current technological  state,
reported to be twice as much as  the conventional aviation fuel-based
APU, when the compressed H2 system is applied [58,63].

A light cryogenic storage tank with cooling system advancement is
necessary for tackling this challenge [62]. On top of this, the fuselage
may need a further redesign to accommodate the cryogenic hydrogen
tank.  The  Airbus  ZEROe  project  for  instance  announced  the  use  of  a
blended wing body (BWB), as one type of aircraft allowing to efficiently
accommodate hydrogen [323].

8. Semi-quantitative comparison and prioritization in the
perspective of environmental mitigation

The  strengths,  challenges  and  prospects  of  the  four  SA  families
studied  herein  are  summarized  in  Fig.  13.  At  the  light  of  Fig.  13,  it
however remains unclear which pathways are the most promising from a
technical, economic and environmental point of view.

To  this  end,  a  semi-quantitative  multi-criteria  decision  matrix  has
been established to enable a relative prioritization of the various types of
SA  approaches  elaborated  to  this  point  (Table  3),  inspired  by  the
approach used in Ref. [324]. It is meant as a tool to pre-screen the global
performance,  and  is  by  no  means  intended  to  replace  state-of-the  art
quantitative assessment. It proposes three performance criteria (Table 3)
seen as key forsustainable aviation: technology status, market prospects,
and environmental performance, reflecting that short- and longer-term
environmental mitigation are deeply intertwined with broader market
considerations.  For  each  of  these  critical  criteria,  sub-criteria  were
elaborated,  to  which  a  score  (from  0  to  3)  is  given,  on  the  basis  of
quantitative  or  qualitative  descriptions  (Table  3).  The  tool  is  distinc-
tively  applied  on  two  timescales:  near-term  future  (~2030)  and
long-term (~2050). These 10–20 years’ time scopes are used as judged
representative to reflect the time elapsed between two generations of
technologies [325]. Several supporting references, including literature,
scientific papers, patents, industrial/research organization reports, an-
nouncements,  were  accessed  to  assign  scores  for  all  criteria,  and  all
pathways. This is thoroughly documented in SM2.

Fig.  14  summarizes,  for  all  pathways  considered  herein,  the  score
obtained  for  some  of  the  key  quantitative  performance  indicators  of
Table  3,  namely  fossil  fuel  reduction,  GHG  reduction  and  technology
readiness  level  (TRL),  distinguished  according  to  the  time  scope.

Fig. 13. Strengths and challenges/prospects of four emerging aviation approaches for low fossil carbon aviation.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107317

(cid:0) 1 is considered

Based on known standards
for aviation (e.g., ASTM
D7566, etc.)
The general principles
used for TRL assessment
can be retrieved in SM2.
Current production
capacity
43 MJ kg
as a default value for
conventional kerosene
[143]. The ranges
proposed herein are based
on this.
The average jet fuel price
in 2020 was around 0.60 €
(cid:0) 1 [329]. We also
kg
consider that aviation
kerosene has a fuel density
of 0.785 kg L
Electric battery aviation is
evaluated based on [56,
325]. Hydrogen aircraft
are evaluated based on
[63].
Electric battery aviation is
evaluated based on [56,
330]. Hydrogen aircraft
are evaluated based on
[63].
Conventional jet fuel price
1.30 €cent MJ

(cid:0) 1 [143].

(cid:0) 1 [329].

The Well-to-Wake GHG
emission of conventional
jet fuel is considered to be
(cid:0) 1 [331].
87.5 gCO2-e MJ

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Table 3
Semi-quantitative criteria for prioritizing sustainable aviation approaches.a.

Overall criteria

Weight (0–1)b

Sub-criteria

2030

2050

Score

0

1

2

3

Comments

Technology

0.19

0.25

current status

Requirement of fossil
fuels

100% fossil fuel
required

>50% fossil fuel
required

≤50% fossil fuel
required

Not required or
Required for
takeoff only
8–9

0.12

n/c

Technology readiness
level (TRL)

0.12

n/c

0.01

0.02

Existing capacity ( ×
(cid:0) 1)
109 MJ y
Energy density (MJ
kg

(cid:0) 1)

0–2

<1

<20

3–4

5–7

1.00–4.99

5.00–9.99

20–30

31–40

>10

>40

Market

prospects

0.03

0.04

Commodity co-
products (with
offsetting production
costs) (€ kg

(cid:0) 1)

<0.10

0.10–0.49

0.50–1.0

>1.0

0.08

0.06

Passenger carrying
capacity (seat)

Not for carrying
passenger

1–50

51–100

>100

0.08

0.06

Flight range (km)

<500

500-2,000

2,001–5,000

>5,000

0.04

0.03

Environmental
performance

0.12

0.17

0.02

0.08

0.12

0.17

Cost competitiveness
in low-fossil carbons
(cid:0) 1)
future (€cent MJ
GHG emission
reduction in
comparison to fossil
kerosene, as reported
by studies
Energy demand to
produce the fuel (MJ
(cid:0) 1 fuel produced
MJ
or battery)
Land requirement

0.05

0.12

Sustainable
availability of
feedstock

0.02

0.01  Water demand (L
(cid:0) 1 fuel
H2O MJ
produced or battery)

1.00

1.00

>5.00

<40%

3.01–5.00

1.31–3.00

40–60%

60–80%

<1.30

>80%

>10.0

5.01–10.0

2.0–5.0

<1.99

Growing crops
with a high
impact on the
food/feed
competition
Highly limited
availability
Feedstock
otherwise used
for food and
feed

>100

High share of
residual biomass
(wastes), but
crops may be
involved
Limited
availability:
Feedstock
otherwise not
used for food/feed
(Non-edible
crops)
50.01–99.99

Biomass share overall
low, and from residual
resources only

No biomass
needed

Relates to feedstock
sourcing only

Limited availability
but independent from
land (e.g., residual,
waste) included in the
EC critical raw
materials (CRMs) list
2020 [292]
10.01–50

Abundant
availability (e.
g., solar energy,
CO2 from the
air)

<10

Considering the overall
water requirement during
theirproduction stage.

a n/c: not considered. The reference data and rationale used for the scores attributed herein are further detailed in SM2.
b The weight of each sub-criteria has been calculated through the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) as described in [326].

Accordingly,  11  groups  of  pathways  can  be  distinguished  (Fig.  14).
Pathways of group (1) are, according to the criteria selected in Fig. 14,
the  most  promising,  implying  zero  fossil  fuels  requirement  and  high
(>60%) GHG reductions expected in comparison to foss.il kerosene. It
involves hydrogen (produced with alkaline or PEM electrolysis) as well
as  one  biofuel  and  electrofuel  pathway.  The  former  is  highlighted  as
particularly interesting due to its higher TRL. On the other hand, path-
ways of group (11), involving Li-ion and Advanced Li-on batteries used
in  hybridized  mode  (i.e.,  used  for  propulsion)  are  shown  as  the  least
interesting,  involving  a  high  fossil  fuels  share  and  less  than  40%

expected GHG reductions.

Despite useful, Fig. 14 does not allow to reflect all criteria, especially
the qualitative ones, of Table 3. In a second stage, the Analytical Hier-
archy Process (AHP) protocol proposed by Ref. [326] has therefore been
used to assign weights to the different sub-criteria through the appli-
cation  of  weighting  factors  between  0  and  1  to  each  sub-criteria,  the
total being 1 (Table 3). This is of course subjective, but the vision, for the
screening  exercise  to  be  useful,  is  to  supply  a  weight  choice  that  is
transparently  argued  (SM2).  For  instance,  here,  the  sub-criteria
“requirement  of  fossil  fuels”  is  the  one  with  the  highest  weight  for

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107318

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

(cid:0) 1  fuel combusted for fossil kerosene [331].

(cid:0) 1); ii) the degree of energy hybridization (battery) as reported on the study of [56].

Fig. 14. General overview of the reviewed energy sourcing pathways for aviation
1 the requirement of fossil fuel has been estimated based upon: i) maximum blending quota of the certified fuels (whether biofuels or electrofuels) along with their
gravimetric energy density (MJ kg
2  GHG emissions mitigation have been calculated from existing LCA studies relative to the fossil kerosene (including the combustion phase), considering 87.50 g
CO2eq. MJ
For battery and renewable hydrogen, only the GHG associated to the production phase were considered, due to the lack of data on their use phases.
3  The TRLs of the displayed approaches are assessed based on the general principles as detailed in SM2.
TRL (circle) are depicted only for the near-term time scope.
Water electrolysis covers alkaline, PEM and SOE technologies.
All data including references can be retrieved in SM2.
* For the electrofuel production, the Fischer–Tropsch (FT) conversion is considered, as it is certified.

both the short- and long-term, keeping a maximum of fossil carbon in the
ground being seen as a key driver for the development of SA at the first
place. Final weighted scores are calculated by multiplying the weighting
factors  by  the  sub-criteria  assigned  scores,  as  detailed  in  SM2.  The
resulting final weighted scores are presented in Figs. 15 and 16, for near-
and long-term, respectively, with a breakdown per sub-criteria.

As a result (Figs. 15 and 16), the most promising biofuels technolo-
gies  uncovered  for  the  near-term  (Fig.  15)  are  HEFA  (oleochemical
wastes)  and  FT-LB  (biomass  gasification  and  the  FT  process,  with  re-
sidual lignocellulosic biomass), significantly standing out from the other
biofuel technologies. This result for (waste-derived) HEFA is explained
by two key advantages of this pathway in comparison to the other op-
tions addressed: it benefits from existing capacity and it is not directly
requiring  additional  arable  land  demand.  For  FT-LB,  this  decoupling
from additional land demand is also important, along with its expected
lower well-to-wake GHG emissions ([327,328]; SM2). Based on avail-
able literature, a well-to-wake reduction of GHG emissions of 91% was
considered  for  FT-LB  (in  comparison  to  fossil  fuels),  which  is  much

higher  than  for  all  other  biofuels  (SM2).  Yet,  this  result  is  to  be
considered  with  caution,  as  essentially  reflecting  methodological
choices attributing GHG credits to energy-dense co-products. For elec-
trofuels,  only  one  technology  stands  out,  namely  FT  using  H2  from
alkaline  water  electrolysis  and  carbon  from  DAC  (irrespective  of  the
exact  DAC  technology),  due  to  its  expected  lower  well-to-wake  GHG
emissions. For electric (battery-based) systems, current technology for
lithium-ion battery is highlighted with a higher weighted score, essen-
tially benefiting from its greater maturity. For H2 systems, alkaline water
electrolysis significantly stands out from the other H2 production tech-
nologies assessed, benefiting from its greater existing capacity (and the
weight assigned to this criterion in the near-term).

For the long-term (Fig. 16), the results are similar for electrofuels,
and biofuels, except that here, the FT-LB clearly stands out from all other
biofuels,  essentially  because  of  its  expected  lower  well-to-wake  GHG
advantage, weighted higher for the long-term (SM2). This explanation
also applies for the electrofuels result. The alkaline water electrolysis is
again shown as the most interesting technology for H2 production, but

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107319

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Fig. 15. Semi-quantitative ranking for the emerging aviation technology assessments to prioritize, near-term scenario (2030)
Acronyms: ADV. LI-ION: Advanced lithium-ion battery; AG: Algae; Al: Alkaline water electrolysis; APR: Aqueous phase reforming; ATJ: Alcohol-to-Jet; CHJ: Cat-
alytic hydrothermolytic jet; DAC: Direct air capture; DSHC: Direct sugar to hydrocarbon; EC: Edible crops; FT: the Fischer–Tropsch process; FT-LB: Biomass gasi-
fication and Fischer-Tropsch based on lignocellulosic biomass; HDCJ: Hydrotreated depolymerized cellulosic jet; HEFA: Hydroprocessed esters and fatty acids; IH2-
Integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion; LI-AIR: Lithium-air battery; LB: Lignocellulosic biomass; LI-ION: Lithium-ion battery; LI-S: Lithium-sulfur battery; LI-
SSB: Solid-state battery; LUC: Land use change; MeOH: Methanol synthesis process; NEC: Non-edible crops; OW: Oleochemical waste; PEM: Proton/Polymer exchange
membrane water electrolysis; PS: Point source carbon-capturing; SF: Syngas fermentation and alcohol upgrading; SOE: Solid oxide electrolysis (water electrolysis or
co-electrolysis); SuF: (conventional) Sugar fermentation and alcohol upgrading; THC; Thermochemical water splitting.

the  difference  with  other  technologies  is  less  pronounced  than  in  the
short-term.  For  electric  (battery),  however,  the  lithium-air  battery  is
highlighted  as  the  most  interesting  technology  due  to  its  anticipated
higher  energy  density  (see  Table  2)  and  hence  ability  to  carry  more
passengers with a longer distance traveled [56] or to the use less fossil
kerosene supplement in a hybrid mode. Higher weights are put on these
sub-criteria,  namely  the  requirement  of  fossil  fuel,  GHG  emissions
reduction, in comparison to the short-term.

9. Other emerging energy sourcing for aviation not considered
herein

9.1. Liquefied natural gas (LNG) based aviation

The use of LNG (i.e., liquefied methane) as a fuel is highly researched
and discussed for the maritime sector ([332,333]), and to some extent
the aviation sector (e.g., Savion aerospace; [334]), though it is still very
marginal. One driver for the development of this technology is the price
of fuels; low natural gas price relative to fossil kerosene may favor the
LNG. It is further suggested that LNG aviation fuels could reduce CO2
tailpipe  emissions  of  approximately  20–25%  relative  to  conventional
kerosene,  for  the  same  energy  content  [313,335].  Although  LNG  is
presently  derived  from  natural  gas,  it  could  stem  from  biomethane
generated  through  anaerobic  digestion  [121],  biomass  gasification
[336],  or  power-to-methane  routes  decoupled  from  biomass  [337].  It
also has a gravimetric energy density slightly higher than conventional

kerosene (around 48–54 MJ kg

(cid:0) 1) [335,336].
LNG  for  aviation,  however,  still  involve  a  number  of  challenges.
◦
First, it implies, as for LH2, cryogenic form ((cid:0) 162
C; 111K), and thus a
certain mass penalty [313,338,339]. It also implies infrastructure  not
already in place (e.g., refueling system, LNG storage tanks, liquefaction
facilities) [335,338]. Importantly, eventual leakages of LNG is another
factor  to  be  considered,  as  methane  has  a  global  warming  potential
(GWP100) around 28 times the one of CO2 [340].

As LH2, LNG is compatible with whether combustion mode or fuel
cell mode [341]. The former has been show-cased in gas turbines (e.g.,
TU-155 aircraft [315]) as well as within the Advanced Hybrid Engines
for Aircraft Development (AHEAD) project [342]. The combustion mode
implies  that  modification  and/or  change  in  propulsion  systems  are
required, including engines, injectors and heat exchangers, able to use
this fuel [343,344]. The fuel cell mode has been showcased in a solid
oxide fuel cell (SOFC) within the Subsonic Ultra Green Aircraft Research
(SUGAR) project [341]. To make it viable on long-range aircraft, addi-
tional research on advanced materials for fuel cells is however needed
[341].

9.2. Ammonia based aviation

The use of liquefied ammonia (NH3) for aviation has been discussed
and considered within some research and industrial communities [345,
346].  For  instance,  ammonia-powered  aircraft  are  being  developed
within  the  Zero-carbon  Ammonia-Powered  Turboelectric  propulsion

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107320

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Fig. 16. Semi-quantitative ranking for the emerging aviation technology assessments to prioritize, long-term scenario (2050)
Acronyms: ADV. LI-ION: Advanced lithium-ion battery; AG: Algae; Al: Alkaline water electrolysis; APR: Aqueous phase reforming; ATJ: Alcohol-to-Jet; CHJ: Cat-
alytic hydrothermolytic jet; DAC: Direct air capture; DSHC: Direct sugar to hydrocarbon; EC: Edible crops; FT: the Fischer–Tropsch process; FT-LB: Biomass gasi-
fication and Fischer-Tropsch based on lignocellulosic biomass; HDCJ: Hydrotreated depolymerized cellulosic jet; HEFA: Hydroprocessed esters and fatty acids; IH2-
Integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion; LI-AIR: Lithium-air battery; LB: Lignocellulosic biomass; LI-ION: Lithium-ion battery; LI-S: Lithium-sulfur battery; LI-
SSB: Solid-state battery; LUC: Land use change; MeOH: Methanol synthesis process; NEC: Non-edible crops; OW: Oleochemical waste; PEM: Proton/Polymer exchange
membrane water electrolysis; PS: Point source carbon-capturing; SF: Syngas fermentation and alcohol upgrading; SOE: Solid oxide electrolysis (water electrolysis or
co-electrolysis); SuF: (conventional) Sugar fermentation and alcohol upgrading; THC; Thermochemical water splitting.

project (ZAPturbo) [347]. In comparison to LH2, it involves lower mass
(cid:0) 3;
penalties owing to the superior density of liquid ammonia (730 kg m
[343]). Ammonia requires refrigeration to (cid:0) 33
C (240K) under atmo-
spheric pressure, this implies prior refrigeration when on ground, and is
maintained  by  the  outside  temperature  during  cruise  altitude  (at  ca.
8–12 km; [348,349]) through heat exchanger systems [346]. Refriger-
ated ammonia can be stored in the wings like in the case of conventional
kerosene [350].

◦

However,  most  ammonia  is  currently  produced  from  hydrogen
through  steam  reforming  of  natural  gas,  and  N2  is  derived  from  air
separation  through  the  energy-intensive  Haber-Bosch  process  [343,
351]. Alternatives using renewable H2 (derived from water electrolysis
rather  than  natural  gas;  also  referred  to  as  the  2nd  generation  path)
[352,353], or electrochemical ammonia synthesis as an alternative to
the Haber-Bosch process (electrochemical N2  reduction reaction; NRR,
known as the 3rd generation path) [351,353,354] are being developed.
However,  at  present,  the  production  cost  of  renewable  ammonia  is
roughly twice the price of conventional ammonia. Its production cost is
essentially shaped by the price of renewable electricity [355]. In addi-
(cid:0) 1;
tion,  ammonia  has  a  low  gravimetric  energy  density  (18.6  MJ  kg
[343,347]),  this  means  that  ammonia-powered  aircraft  would  have  a
shorter flight range relative to (conventional) kerosene and hydrogen
[356], considering a similar payload mass. Moreover, an enhanced use
of  atmospheric  N2  to  produce  (additional)  ammonia  implies  an
enhanced risk for contributing to excess reactive nitrogen in the envi-
ronment,  known  to  cause  a  range  of  negative  environmental,
socio-economic, and health consequences [353,357], besides being one

of the exceeded planetary boundaries [358].

Ammonia per se has a high ignition temperature, and low flow ve-
locity [357,359]. Therefore, a mixture with other reactive molecules (e.
g., H2), has been proposed as one option to improve combustion prop-
erties ([353]). In this endeavor, it is proposed to add a cracking unit to
the aircraft, where part of the ammonia dissociates into nitrogen and
hydrogen, resulting in a mixture of NH3–H2–N2 [347,357]. This feature
closely makes it compatible with the current (hydrocarbon-based) gas
turbine  engines  [347,353,357],  and  is  being  developed  by  e.g.,  Ray-
theon  Technologies Research Center  [347] and Reaction Engines  Ltd.
[345]. Ammonia can also be employed in the fuel cell mode [360], but
no showcasing of this has been found. Water vapor, nitrogen, and ni-
trogen  oxides  (NOx)  are  considered  as  the  only  tailpipe  emissions  of
ammonia [356]. To minimize the effects derived from NOx  formation,
mitigation technologies such as a low-NOx  combustors have been pro-
posed [347]. Additionally, new materials for storage tanks (in particular
for on-board NH3) are required to safely deal with the corrosive prop-
erties of NH3 [353]. Ammonia’s toxicity (inhalation hazards) is another
issue to be tackled and would imply mandatory specific training before
handling [353,357].

9.3. Solar aviation

its  unlimited  availability  and

Solar energy generates growing attention for aviation [361,362], due
to
sustainability.
Solar-powered  aircraft for  passenger-carrying  purposes  however  faces
many  challenges.  First,  solar  panels  are  limited  in  their  capturing

envisioned

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107321

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

efficiency  (around  20%;  [363,364]).  Even  if  an  increase  in  efficiency
(reaching 100%) has been achieved ([362]), the generated power might
not be sufficient to deal with the payload a passenger aircraft implies. In
addition,  because  of  low  efficiency  power  devices  of  solar-powered
aircraft  (e.g.,  photovoltaic  cells,  rechargeable  batteries;  [364]),  the
(cid:0) 1)
maximum speed would not reach beyond 50 miles h
(cid:0) 1)
(commercial  aircraft  traveling  at  about  600  miles  h
[362]. The high variability of photon capturing angles is also reported to
result  in  lower  power  generated  (relative  to  the  expected  maximum
power) [362,364]. Other issues are reported, for instance, the vulnera-
bility of solar panel materials to adverse weather conditions, or the need
for  large  wingspans. Nevertheless,  solar  power  is  successfully  applied
and  deployed  for  unmanned  aircraft  system/unmanned  aerial  vehicle
(UAS/UAV) as a satellite service (additional detail in SM1).

(cid:0) 1  (160 km h
(cid:0) 1;  965  km  h

The deployment of solar aviation for carrying passengers therefore
appears as an unlikely option till the first half of the century, but it may
be  considered  in  hybridization  with  the  other  SA  systems  discussed
within the present study.

9.4. Others

Finally,  additional  initiatives,  albeit  marginal  such  as  methanol
[365,366], and ethanol [367,368] direct use, do exist and have not been
covered  within  this  review  due  to  a  lack  of  available  documentation
about these.

10. Electric propulsion systems for aviation

Electric  propulsion (to  be  distinguished from  battery-electric) rep-
resents  configuration  schemes  involving  an  electric  motor  to  supply
mechanical power to the aircraft propulsors (which could be propellers
or fans) (Fig. 17). These configuration schemes differ with regards to
whether they imply or not (i) energy storage from batteries; (ii) a (H2)
gas turbine fueled by H2 or liquid hydrocarbons and (iii) fuel cells fueled
by  H2  or  liquid  hydrocarbons  and  supplying  electricity  to  electric
motors.

Advancing the propulsion efficiency is, after the energy sourcing it-
self,  one  key  lever  considered  to  improve  the  overall  environmental
performance (including noise reduction) of future aviation. Throughout
this  section  (and  in  Fig.  17),  the  term  propulsor  represents  devices
generating thrust either by a propeller in the turboprop or by fans in the
turbofans. It also encompasses the generation of shaft power in the case
of turboshaft engines. The term “(H2) gas turbine” collectively refers to
the turboshaft, turboprop, and turbofan engines. Converter refers to the
devices converting the voltage of the electrical power source, sometimes
denoted  as  power  electronic  [276],  and  considers  that  one  type  of
converter  is  an  inverter,  which  converts  direct  current  (DC)  to  alter-
nating current (AC).

To  represent  the  proportion  of  electric  power  in  total  power,  two
parameters are used [51,56], respectively degree of energy hybridiza-
tion (HE) and degree of power hybridization (HP). HE and HP vary from
0 to 1 depending on the conceptual designs [51,369]. HE  is zero when
there are no energy storage devices involved (no batteries), and 1 when
the  power  is  solely  supplied  via  batteries.  HP  is  1  when  only  electric
motors are supplying the required mechanical power, and 0 if no electric
motors are involved in supplying the required power.

10.1. Battery-dependent electric propulsion configurations

Electric aircraft relying on batteries have gained substantial interest
in recent years. Batteries can serve as the energy sourcing for propulsion
either as standalone (“all electric” concept; Fig. 17a) or in combination
with other fuels (“hybrid electric” concept; Fig. 17b and c).

The all electric concept is also denoted as “full electric” (e.g., in Refs.
[370–372]). An all electric configuration (Fig. 17a) involves that (HP =
1) because the propulsor is powered by an electric motor only but also

involves that (HE = 1) because it relies solely on batteries without any
hydrocarbon-based fuels or H2 [51].

The concept of “hybrid electric” (Fig. 17b and c) implies, on top of
the  electric  motor,  the  use  of  a  (H2)  gas  turbine  fueled  by  liquid  hy-
drocarbons or H2 to generate additional mechanical power. As AC power
is required for most of the electric motors that can be used in aviation,
converters  are  required  [373].  The  parallel  and  series  hybrid  electric
concepts are the two main configurations that have been tested (Fig. 17b
and c), however, a series-parallel hybrid scheme has also been demon-
strated (not depicted in Fig. 17) [373,374]. The parallel hybrid electric
configuration (Fig. 17b) involves (H2) gas turbines and electric motors to
generate  mechanical  power  from  fuels  combustion  and  batteries,
respectively,  [375].  Hence  a  mechanical  transmission  (typically
gearbox)  is  required  to  integrate  and  control  these  two  mechanical
power sources prior to the propulsor [373,376,377]. In the series hybrid
electric configuration, the generator powered by the (H2) gas turbine
produces  electricity  for  both  the  electric  motor(s)  (which  is  directly
linked to the propulsor; HP = 1), and to charge the battery onboard (0 <
HE < 1) [51,371,378] (Fig. 17c).

Several projects have been launched to demonstrate the feasibility of
these  battery  dependent  configurations)  (Fig.  18).  For  example,  the
startup  Eviation  (Israel)  launched  Alice,  a  nine-passenger  all  electric
aircraft with an autonomy range of 650 miles (1046 km), expected to be
in service by 2024 [379]. The aircraft relies on a battery that can be fully
charged within 70 min and is expected to be FAA-certified (FAA: USA
Federal Aviation Administration) by 2024 [379]. However, a fire inci-
dent has occurred during the Alice ground test in January 2020 caused
by  a  fault  with  a  ground-based  battery  system  [380].  The  company
magniX  (Canada)  designed  and  demonstrated  a  high-power  density
electric propulsion system with the world’s first fully electric commer-
cial seaplane, tested on a flight in December 2019 (6-passenger aircraft;
flight range of 1000 km) [381,382]. In May 2020, magniX together with
Harbour Air successfully tested an all electric powered system carrying
up to 9 passengers for a reported flight range of ca. 160 km (e-Caravan;
retrofitted  from  Ceravan  208)  [383,384].  It  is  announced  to  be  the
largest all electric aircraft with a successful test flight (in the middle of
2020). In Europe, EasyJet and Wright Electric are developing since 2017
an  all  electric  aircraft  (186  seats)  and  announced  it  will  start  using
electric  aircraft  to  cover  short-haul  routes  by  2030  [385,386].  Addi-
tional details on these emerging developments along with specifications
on these technologies are presented in SM1.

10.2. Electric propulsion independent from batteries

Electric propulsion configurations independent from the presence of

batteries include: Fuel cell electric and Turboelectric systems.

10.2.1. Fuel cell electric propulsion (may involve batteries as backup)

A fuel cell propulsion system could be employed in the mode of all
electric  (in  Fig.  17d),  or  hybrid  electric  (electric  motor  and  (H2)  gas
turbine; Fig. 17e and f) [373,387], where hydrocarbon-based fuels or H2
are  converted  to  electricity  that  in  turns  powers  an  electric  motor
involving a modification of the propulsion system [62].

Fuel cells serve as energy converters, not as energy storage as in the
case of batteries. Fuel cells can continuously produce electricity as long
as fuels (whether hydrocarbon-based fuels or H2) are fed to the fuel cell.
The existing fuel cell technologies, for the automobile sector and sta-
tionary  power  applications,  include  the  proton/polymer  exchange
membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) and SOFC, depending on the electrolyte
employed, operating conditions, and fuels compatibility [387,388]. Fuel
cells can be considered for the propulsion system in aviation, providing
(cid:0) 1)  has  been
an  increase  in  their  specific  power  (targeting  2  kW  kg
achieved  [57,63,388].  The  electricity  produced  in  excess  of  what  is
needed for propelling the aircraft can additionally be stored in batteries
as a backup energy source, not directly involved in the propulsion sys-
tem [62] (Fig. 17d–f). Fuel cell propulsion also provide the advantage of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107322

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Fig. 17. Basic configuration schemes for aviation propulsion systems. DC stands for direct current, AC for alternative current. *(H2) gas turbine here denotes whether
turboshaft, turboprop and turbofan engines. Fuel defined herein represents hydrocarbon-based fuels (conventional fossil kerosene, biofuels, or electrofuels), and
hydrogen-based fuels (herein focused on hydrogen (H2)).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107323

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Fig. 18. Examples of inventoried electric, hydrogen and solar-based project announced to date (by the end of the year 2021).

short refueling time relative to batteries with fewer risks of reducing the
lifetime [58].

Hydrogen  fuel  cell  designs  for  aircraft  are  being  developed,  for
instance  by  Airbus  in  ZEROe  concepts  (hybrid  hydrogen  propulsion
system).  These  aircraft  are  expected  to  enter  service (with  a  carrying
capacity of 100–200 passengers) by 2035 [323]. Furthermore, the first
commercial  H2  fuel  cell  aircraft  (with  a  carrying  capacity  of  10–20
passengers,  and  maximal  distance  traveled  up  to  555  km),  was
announced by ZeroAvia to be ready by the year 2024.

Unlike the H2 combustion in gas engines and piston engines (Fig. 17i)
where air is involved in the combustion process (thus involving nitrogen
outputs such as nitrogen oxides; NOx); the only two by-products from H2
fuel  cell  systems  are  water  vapor  and  a  small  amount  of  heat.  This,
however, involves non-negligible cooling requirements [58,63]. Addi-
tionally,  fuel  cell  propulsion  is  unlikely  to  be  competitive  for  heavy
payload and long distances, with four times the mass of current aircraft
engines to generate the same power output [58,63].

Various  projects  have  been  intensively  studied  in  developing  and
improving hydrogen fuel cell technologies (Fig. 17), as detailed in SM1.
Hybridization with fuel cell and battery propulsion is another alterna-
tive configuration (not depicted herein) [389].

10.2.2. Turboelectric propulsion (no batteries)

Turboelectric propulsion (Fig. 17g and h) is another configuration
for electric powertrain systems, and fully relies on hydrocarbon fuel or
H2  as  its  energy  source.  Here,  no  energy  storage  (e.g.,  batteries)  is
involved  [369,370,378].  A (H2)  gas  turbine  drives  the  generator  that
powers electric motors for thrust or shaft power generation. In the full
turboelectric  system  (hence, HE  = 0,  HP  = 1;  Fig. 17g)  [51,390], the
generic (H2) gas turbine term denotes a turboshaft engine [391]. In the

partial  turboelectric  concept  (Fig.  17h),  the  generated  mechanical
power from the (H2) gas turbine is partially delivered to the generator
ultimately  feeding  the  electric  motor(s),  and  the  remaining  power  is
delivered  directly  to  the  other  propulsors  [51,279,370].  In  this  case
(Fig.  17g),  HE  would  be  zero  as  there  are  no  energy  storage  devices
involved, while HP would be between 0 and 1 because both a (H2) gas
turbine and an electric motor are used to supply energy to the propulsor.
In  this  particular  case,  however,  a  clear  standard  for  attributing  the
appropriate  non-zero  and  non-one  hybridization  value  is  still  missing
[51,369].

Albeit the propulsive efficiency of electrically-driven propulsors can
improve, the integration of the electric system introduces mass penalties
(although lighter than the all electric configuration as it does not involve
batteries) [279,391–394]. To enhance the overall performance in terms
of fuel burnt and mass, this configuration concept has been integrated
with  optimized  aircraft  design,  for  instance  in  NASA’s  STARC-ABL
aircraft design (Single-aisle Turboelectric AiRCraft with an Aft Bound-
ary  -  Layer  propulsors)  [394].  This  allowed  a  12%  reduction  of  fuel
burnt  compared  to  the  conventional  aircraft  concept  (conventional
kerosene  configuration  (Fig.  17j)  and  airframe  design)  [394].  The
Wright  ECO-150R  aircraft  capable  of  carrying  up  to  150  seats  (flight
range of ~3000 km) initially demonstrated ca. 44% fuel burn reduction
in  comparison  to  the  conventional  configuration [378].  NASA’s  N3-X
aircraft is another turboelectric concept with a blended wing body in
which electric motors are used to drive several distributed electric fans,
where the effective bypass ratio (BPR) is increased while reducing the
fan pressure ratio [393]. It demonstrated to provide ca. 63% energy and
90% NOx reductions [395]. This architecture has been proposed as the
upcoming  technology  to  meet  environmental  goals  [370,396],  where
hydrocarbon-based  fuels  (biofuels/electrofuels)  or  H2  can  be  used

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107324

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

instead of fossil kerosene.

Other  projects  on  electric  propulsion  systems  are  demonstrated  in

Fig. 18 and can be further retrieved in SM1.

11. Regulatory frameworks/sustainability policies

Policy and regulatory frameworks are often pinpointed as essential to
encourage the deployment of SA, and to ensure this deployment is sus-
tainable [397–399]. Alternative fuels for aviation have been considered
in numerous launched/ongoing regulatory framework and sustainable
policy initiatives. These essentially apply to liquid biofuels and to some
extent electrofuels, owing to their technological maturity. As of today,
the use of biofuels nevertheless remains minimal, with less than 1% of
total aviation fuel demand [25,400,401] (electrofuels are not yet widely
available for commercial use).

A handful of frameworks/policies have also been paying attention to
other  emerging  alternatives to  power  aircraft,  including  electric  (bat-
tery)  aviation  and  hydrogen  (H2)  systems.  The  regulatory  context  on
alternatives implemented at the point of writing is summarized herein,
with a greater focus on schemes affecting the EU countries.

11.1. European Union’s sustainable & smart mobility strategy

The EU’s sustainable & smart mobility strategy (part of the EU Green
Deal) has been adopted by the European Commission on December 9th,
2020. Being a strategy, it is not binding, but it aims to ensure that the
EU’s transport systems are able to achieve the climate targets for 2030,
and the 2050 climate neutrality [25], and describes the Commission’s
current  vision  to  reach  these  goals.  A  package  of  milestones  for  all
transport modes are proposed, covering also the aviation sector [402].
For instance, the production and deployment of biofuels and electrofuels
(labelled as SAF in the strategy) are highly encouraged at Union airports
to reduce aircraft’s emissions in line with the ReFuelEU Aviation pro-
posal  (section  11.5).  Alternative  propulsion  technologies  powered  by
electricity  or  hydrogen  are  also  required  to  achieve  zero  (carbon-)
emissions.  Other measures,  such as  improving  the  air traffic  manage-
ment  (ATM)  efficiency,  developing  an  environmental  label  program,
and revising the EU Emission Trading Scheme (EU ETS) with respect to
aviation (section 11.4) are also mentioned [403].

11.2.

‘Fit for 55’ package

The European Commission has proposed, as announced in the Eu-
ropean  Green  Deal  communication  [403],  to  increase  the  2030  GHG
emission reduction target (at overall EU level) from 40% to 55%, rela-
tive  to  1990  levels.  To  this  end,  the  European  climate-,  energy-  and
transport-related legislation is being revised under the so-called Fit for
55 package [404], being a set of proposals to align the EU legislation
with the new target. The most relevant points of this package for avia-
tion  include:  i)  the  amendment  to  the  Renewable  Energy  Directive  II
(RED II) (section 11.3); ii) the revision of the EU ETS (section 11.4), ii)
the ReFuel EU Aviation proposal (section 11.5), and iii) the revision of
the Energy Taxation Directive (section 11.6).

11.3. EU Renewable Energy Directive (RED)

The EU Renewable Energy Directive (RED) adopted in 2009 estab-
lished an overall policy framework for the production and promotion of
energy from renewable sources. It is a binding regulation for EU Member
States. The RED requires all EU countries to ensure a share of at least
10% of final energy consumed in transportation stems from renewable
sources by 2020 [405]. The RED (or RED I) target, however, does not
fully include the aviation sector, by limiting, in the calculation of the
gross final energy consumed by a Member State, the aviation share to
maximum of 6.18% (4.12% in the specific case of Malta and Cyprus).

The  RED  was  further  amended  with  the  Directive  2015/1513  to,

among  others,  recognize  the  opportunity  offered  by  biofuels/electro-
fuels  to  enhance  the  consumption  of  fuels  not  derived  from  fossil  re-
sources  within  the  aviation  sector.  This  translated  in  the  so-called
‘voluntary opt-in’ [406]. The Member States could implement this opt-in
differently: in form of a certificate system for fuel suppliers, or as a tax
exemption  for  reaching  the  10%  of  final  energy  consumption  from
renewable sources by 2020 [407].

The revised RED for the period 2021–2030, denoted as RED II, re-
quires a minimum share of 14% of final energy consumption in transport
sector to be derived from renewable energy by 2030, and is set as an
obligation for fuel suppliers [71]. It also sets additional sustainability
criteria, namely requirements associated to specific GHG emission sav-
ings,  specific shares of advanced fuels  to incorporate  (in 2022, 2025,
2030),  criteria  for  feedstock  sourced  form  forest  biomass  (e.g.,  har-
vesting  with  legal  permits,  maintaining  soil  quality  and  biodiversity
during the harvesting process), and the consideration of indirect land
use changes (ILUC) to limit the use of high ILUC-risk feedstock from land
with high carbon stocks [71,408,409], among others. The new directive
further  introduces  a  slight  incentive  for  using  non-food  biomass  for
aviation and maritime fuels production through a multiplication factor
of 1.2 (of their energy content) in the calculation of renewable energy
not stemming from feedstock intended for food and feed consumption.
As the original RED, RED II has no specific target for the aviation sector.
Key provisions affecting the aviation sector have been suggested in
an  amendment  to  RED  II  proposed  by  the  Commission  in  July  2021
[410]. This includes a reduction of the minimum share of advanced fuels
for  2025  and  2030,  and  the  introduction  of  a  new  sub-category  of
renewable  fuel,  namely  renewable  fuels  of  non-biological  origin
(RFNBOs; including electrofuels, renewable hydrogen, renewable elec-
tricity). Besides the minimal share of advanced fuels to be supplied to
the overall transport sector, the amendment proposes to also ensure a
minimal share of 2.6% of RFNBO by 2030.

11.4. EU emission trading system (EU ETS)

The EU ETS is one of the EU’s policy instrument to mitigate climate
change  [411],  used  to  implement  the  current  40%  GHG  emission
reduction target for 2030. It is a mandatory cap-and-trade system and
covers approximately 40% of total EU GHG emissions from industrial
activities, including the aviation and maritime sectors. The EU ETS aims
at achieving economy-wide emission reduction targets through tradable
allowances putting a price on carbon emissions.

Currently, for the aviation sector, the EU ETS covers only CO2  tail-
pipe emissions. The flights operated within the European Economic Area
(EEA) as intra-EEA flights (arriving at and departing from EU airports)
are presently accounted in the EU ETS, while flights to and from non-
EEA  countries  are exempted  until  the end  of 2023  [18,412].  Overall,
emissions allowances to airline operators covered by the EU ETS, from
2013  to  2020,  are  distributed  as  follows:  82%  are  granted  as  free  al-
lowances  allocated  on  the  basis  of  airlines’  efficiency  in  transporting
passengers and cargo while 15% are auctioned, for a price reaching ca.
€25 for one tonne of CO2  at the end of 2019 [413] up to about €85 in
May 2021 [414]. The remaining 3% are reserved for new entrants (those
starting activities after 2010) and fast-growing airlines (>18% average
tonne km annual growth between 2010 and 2014) [415]. The cap for
free  allowances  is  annually  limited  to  97%  of  the  average  aviation
emissions  for  the  years  2004–2006  (approx.  210–220  million  tonnes
CO2) [416,417]. It was further reduced to 95% for 2013–2020. From
2021 onwards, the cap is to be decreased by an annual linear reduction
factor (LRF) of 2.2% [418,419]. For CO2  emissions exceeding the cap,
the  aircraft  operators  have  to  purchase  EU  emission  unit  allowances
(EUAs) at auction, or from other sectors, leading to additional costs for
the airlines. CO2 emissions are significantly dependent upon the carried
weight, namely the revenue tonne kilometer (RTK) for cargo flight, the
RPK for passenger-carrying flight. The EU allowances are used to fund
emission-saving  projects  in  lower-income  countries,  such  as  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107325

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

development of innovative renewable energy technologies or, modern-
ization in power sector and energy system [398,420].

The revision proposed for the EU ETS in the framework of the Fit for
55 package includes the following points relevant for aviation: (i) Free
allowance distribution will be phased out progressively from 2024 (by:
25%,  50%,  and  75%,  in  2024,  2025  and  2026,  respectively),  for  a
complete  phase-out  from  2027  onwards  [18];  (ii)  Starting  2025,  the
application of a LRF of 4.2% (instead of 2.2%) is proposed to meet the
more stringent 2030 emission target (revision proposed by the Fit for 55
package) [237,401,415]; (iii) The allowances will be capped at current
level (instead of an average historical amount); (iv) Flights between the
EU’s  outermost  regions  and  flight  to  Switzerland  and  the  United
Kingdom (UK) will be included in the EU ETS; (v) International flights
(involving  CORSIA  participating  states;  11.10)  departing  from  or
arriving at an airport inside the EEA (extra-EEA flight) will be also be
integrated [421,422].

Currently, the uptake of SAF can be an incentive for airline operators
as this system counts biofuels/electrofuels (to the extent it complies with
the sustainability criteria defined in the RED) as having zero emissions
(no  allowances  required  to  be  surrendered)  [25].  However,  this
approach is not economically incentivized to encourage the use of SAF
as their prices has remained higher than the CO2’s price (the price of at
least €160 per tonne of CO2  emissions is required). This is required to
report, of the EU ETS, based on SAF purchasing records [25].

11.5. The ReFuelEU aviation proposal

The  ReFuelEU  Aviation  proposal  is  a  proposal  for  a  regulation  to
boost the supply and demand for SAF in the EU, by 2050. This proposal
has been launched as a part of the ‘Fit for 55’ package, and was released
in July 2021 after several consultation rounds and an impact assessment
of the sector [25]. In the context of ReFuelEU, the term SAF specifically
covers RED-compliant (section 11.3) biofuels including advanced bio-
fuels (e.g., agricultural and forestry biomass; listed in Annex IX Part A of
RED II), biofuels produced from feedstock listed in RED II Annex IX, Part
B (waste oils and fats), and electrofuels (equivalent to the term synthetic
fuels) [71].

The key highlight of the current proposal version is an obligation for
fuel  suppliers  to  ensure  that  the  aviation  fuel  made  available  at  EU
airports contains a minimum share of SAF (from 2 vol.% in 2023 to 63
vol.% in 2050), including a minimum share of electrofuels (0.7 vol.% of
overall SAF in 2030 to 28 vol.% in 2050) [25]. The European Parliament
has recently endorsed the ReFuel EU proposal, and proposed to raise the
SAF share from 63% to 85% by 2050 with the inclusion of electricity and
hydrogen in the overall (sustainable) aviation fuel mix [423].

However, until 2035, fuel suppliers will be allowed to supply this
minimum share of SAF to airportsthrough the trading of SAF certificates
obtained by overachievers (suppliers with an excess of SAF) [424]. To
mitigate the effects of tankering (the use, prior to enter the EU, of more
fuel than required for the flight in order to reduce the amount of SAF to
be used, and thus save on fuel costs), ReFuelEU proposes a requirement
that EU and non-EU airlines, for all flights departing from the EU, tank at
least the whole required amount for their subsequent flight. The pro-
posal also includes an obligation for EU airports to provide the infra-
structure required, including hydrogen refueling, electric recharging, to
reach  the  above-mentioned  SAF  supply  targets.  Additionally,  a  Sus-
tainable Aviation Fund is proposed by the Parliament in order to facil-
itate  the  establishment  of  cleaner  aviation,  including  an  investment
support in sustainable fuels, and in research on innovative propulsion
systems [423].

Non-compliance  penalties  according  to  the  Commission’s  criteria
will  be  proposed  by  the  Member  State  authorities  and  are  to  be
communicated to the Commission by the end of 2023 [424].

11.6. The Energy Taxation Directive (ETD)

The Energy Taxation  Directive  is  a European  directive in order  to
support  the  EU’s  climate  and  energy  policy  frameworks  through  a
taxation system of energy products used as motor fuels, heating fuels,
and electricity [425,426].

A tax exemption for (conventional) aviation fuels granted by the ETD
for intra-EEA flights to be abolished in the revision of ETD, as part of the
‘Fit for 55’ package. The revised ETD will raise the minimum tax rate for
fossil kerosene for intra-EEA flights: starting at zero from 2023 onwards
and  to  be  increased  gradually  (annual  rate  of  10%)  over  a  transition
(cid:0) 1 is reached [425,426].
period of ten years, until the rate of €10.75 GJ
The revised taxation for aviation fuels proposes to consider energy
efficiency and environmental impacts [25]. Therefore, the reduction of
tax  rates  or  exemption  for  SAF  as  well  as  renewable  hydrogen  (i.e.,
minimum  tax  rate  of  zero)  contribute  to  make  these  fuels  more
economically interesting to airlines, relative to fossil jet fuels, and foster
their  uptake  [25,427].  This  strategy  would  work  coherently  with  the
ReFuelEU Aviation proposal to encourage the necessary investment in
SAF production and their deployments. These minimum tax rates would
not be applicable for pleasure flights and business flights [427].

11.7. EU climate law

In the framework of the European Green Deal, the EU launched its
first proposal for a Climate Law [428]. This law makes it legally binding
for the EU to achieve a balance between GHG emissions and emissions
removals  (so-called  neutrality)  by  2050.  The  current  proposal  of  the
Climate  Law  covers  all  GHGs.  As  it  stands  now,  there  are  no  clear
measures specifically applying to the aviation sector. The updated GHG
reduction  target  (details  in  section  11.2)  along  with  the  climate
neutrality target by 2050 is currently in the process of being enshrined
into the EU Climate Law [415,428]. For aviation, one consequence of
the EU Climate Law could be the quicker deployment of DAC technol-
ogies  for  electrofuels  and  carbon-free  technologies  (e.g.,  batteries,
hydrogen), on the premise that decarbonized renewable energy can be
used.

11.8. The European advanced biofuels Flightpath initiative (EABFI)

The EABFI was launched in 2011 as a partnership between the Eu-
ropean Commission and major European stakeholders including airlines
and biofuel producers. The objective is to promote the commercializa-
tion of biofuels in terms of production, storage and distribution in an
endeavor to support the European Commission’s ambition to reach en-
ergy  security  [429].  Concretely,  this  translates  in  the  objective  of
reaching 2 million tonnes of biofuel consumption per annum by 2020
through  the  construction  of  advanced  biofuels  production  plants  in
Europe. The EABFI is a shared and voluntary commitment to promote
the  biofuel  deployment  through  appropriate  financial  mechanisms
[429]. However, its 2020 goal has not been met. The EABFI is working
on an updated roadmap towards 2030 [429,430].

11.9. The French sustainable aviation targets as an example of national
initiative

France  was  one  of  the  first  country  to  announce  the  ambition  of

making its aviation industry “the cleanest in the world”.

At  the  end  of  2017,  France  planned  to  facilitate  the  production,
distribution and deployment  for aviation biofuels, corresponding to a
“Commitment  to  Green  Growth”  with  five  industrial  partnerships
including Air France, Airbus, Safran, Total and Suez Environment [431].
The intention, as stated in the French “National Low Carbon Strategy” of
March 2019 is the deployment of 2% and 5% biofuels of the expected
gross demand of the aviation fuel in 2025 and 2030, respectively [432].
Accordingly, aviation biofuels should be produced from resources listed

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107326

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

in Annex IX of the EU RED II [71]. The HEFA from WCO, being a mature
technology, is the pathway that received the most focus. By 2050, it is
intended  that  alternative  liquid  fuels  from  other  advanced  pathways
(both aviation biofuels and electrofuels) substitute 50% of conventional
kerosene [432].

In addition, in early 2020, French government officials announced a
15 billion euro recovery plan for the aeronautical industry, including 1.5
billion  euro  aid  to  support  research  and  development  into  cleaner
aviation  technologies,  for  instance,  the  improvement  of  engine  effi-
ciency with a 30% reduction in fuel consumption for the early 2030s,
relative to the current engine, or the development of carbon-emission
free  aircraft  whether  electric  or  hydrogen  powered  by  2035
[433–435]. Investments to transit towards electric and hydrogen avia-
tion have been announced, along with investments in the advancement
of  biofuel/electrofuel  production  pathways  in  order  to  reduce  GHG
emissions [433].

11.10. Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for international
aviation (CORSIA)

The  Carbon  Offsetting  and  Reduction  Scheme  for  International
Aviation (CORSIA) was launched in 2016 by ICAO in the endeavor of
meeting international goals in terms of GHG mitigation. The aviation
industry organizations including IATA and ATAG have set goals of CO2
emission reductions by 50% in 2050 (relative to 2005 level). It covers all
states that are ICAO members. CORSIA aims to offset the emission from
international aviation  that is not covered  under the  Paris Agreement.
The aircraft operators with emissions greater than 10,000 tonnes CO2
from the use of aircraft with a maximum certified take-off mass greater
than 5700 kg need to prepare emission monitoring plans and emission
reports  for  all  their  international  flights  on  an  annual  basis,  from  1
January 2019.

The total CO2 emissions of each operator are required to calculate in
order to demonstrate the offsetting requirements [436,437]. The aircraft
operators will then be required to purchase emission units labelled as
“carbon offsets” from the Aviation Carbon Exchange (ACE), in order to
offset  the  CO2  emissions  exceeding  the  defined  baseline  [438].  These
carbon  offsets  are  credits  in  certified  projects  that  reduce  carbon
emissions.

Aircraft  technology  development,  operational  improvement  and
deployment of biofuels can be used to achieve their CO2  offsetting re-
quirements. The sustainability criteria for alternative aviation fuels has
been  developed  under  CORSIA  Eligible  Fuels,  which  will  support  the
maximum use of biofuels and long-term investment in their productions
[439].

ICAO’s CORSIA is being implemented since 2019. The compensation
phase thus begins in 2021. This market-based measure encouraged the
airlines and other aircraft operators to use SAF. CORSIA SAF are defined
in CORSIA Eligible Fuels [70] (SAF in CORSIA corresponds to biofuels in
this review). The objective of CORSIA is to reach carbon neutral growth
onwards in the aviation sector, in an endeavor to stabilize the net CO2
emissions  from  international  aviation  [70].  CORSIA  is  composed  of
three implementation phases: the pilot phase (2021–2023), a first phase
(2024–2026) and a second phase (2027–2035). Year 2019 is considered
as the baseline emissions for the pilot phase instead of the first proposed
baseline  of  average  2019–2020  due  to  the  pandemic’s  impact  on  the
international aviation emissions. The baseline for the first-phase is still
under discussion [421,440]. During the pilot and first phases, the off-
setting  requirements  will  be  applicable  for  ICAO  member  states  that
have  volunteered  to  participate  in  scheme.  A  total  of  81  states  have
officially  participated  in  the  pilot  phase,  representing  approximately
76%  of  international  aviation  activities  in  terms  of  RTK  [398].  The
second  phase  is  legally  binding  for  all  ICAO  member  states,  with  the
exception of least developed countries and, states with small share of
international traffic (less than 0.5% of air traffic), unless they volunteer
to participate.

ICAO  has  launched  a  detailed  requirement  for  the  monitoring,
reporting and verification (MRV) of emissions for the CORSIA scheme
[439]. It proposes default life cycle assessment (LCA) emission values for
five (biomass-based) certified production pathways, these being backed
up by a detailed methodological study [439]. However, the calculated
default  life  cycle  emission  for  what  CORSIA  defines  as  lower  carbon
aviation fuels (here referred as electrofuels) and the latest certified CHJ
pathway have not been announced at the time of writing.

12. Challenges for sustainable aviation (SA) systems

Some  challenges  for  the  use of  the  SA  approaches detailed  in this
review, in the future low GHG emissions, are summarized in Fig. 13 and
discussed below.

12.1. Availability of sustainable biomass feedstock

In the perspective of a sustainable transition towards GHG neutral
economies,  the  procurement  of  sustainable  feedstock  not  inducing
additional arable land demand is a key concern when it comes to bio-
fuels [441], including for aviation biofuels [330,398]. In this context,
residual  biomasses  generated  increased  attention  as  they  can  be
decoupled from the need for additional arable land (e.g., Refs. [119,442,
443]). Residual biomasses have the potential to feed the future low fossil
carbon aviation, and several examples have been documented and even
show-cased  (Table  4).  Numerous  aviation  biofuel  producers  such  as
LanzaTech or Neste have adapted their technologies to flexibly incor-
porate residual biomasses (Table S2).

(cid:0) 1  FT-SPK and 15 GJ t

(cid:0) 1 (ca. 390 Mt kerosene y

A  key  question  remains  whether  the  residual  biomass  potential  is
large enough to supply the demand. We estimated, on the basis of the
ICAO  projections  [451],  for  2045,  a  global  aviation  fuel  demand  of
(cid:0) 1). In comparison, it was 7.62 EJ
16.73 EJ y
(cid:0) 1  in 2019 (details in SM2). In the hypothetical case that this future
y
demand should be fully supplied by a biofuel pathway (i.e., disregarding
the ASTM D7566 standard on aromatics), we evaluated, considering the
FT-SPK pathway as a technology capable to process most residual bio-
(cid:0) 1  of  biomass  feedstock  is  required
masses,  that  at  least  46  EJ  y
(cid:0) 1
(assuming 0.183 kg biomass (dry matter) MJ
biomass; details in SM2). This alone represents ca. 23% of the global
(cid:0) 1 based on
residual biomass potential (being at maximum ca. 200 EJ y
the  meta-study  of  [117]).  Yet,  the  transition  towards  GHG  neutral
economies  implies  other  demands  for  this  limited  potential.  One
example is the plastic sector; based on a forecasted demand of 1124 Mt
plastics for 2050 from Ref. [452], and considering a biomass:bioplastic
(cid:0) 1  can be
ratio of 1.26 [453], a rough biomass demand of ca. 20 EJ y
derived if future plastics are to be bio-based (details in SM1). Similarly,
supplying 100% bio-based maritime fuels would, considering the 2050
(cid:0) 1 [332,333], also require at least 20 EJ
projected demand of 9.50 EJ y
(cid:0) 1  with  100%
biomass  y
bio-based  LNG,  itself  deriving  from  the  anaerobic  digestion  of  straw
biomass; details in SM1). This rough yet illustrative back of the envelope
estimation  of  the  productions  illustrates  the  eventual  pressure  on  the
residual biomass potential, where only 3 demands already mobilizes ca.
half of the potential.

(cid:0) 1  (estimation  based  on  supplying  9.50  EJ  y

Further, while some biofuel pathways (e.g., the FT and IH2) can use
most types of residual biomasses, other pathways are less flexible, such
as the HEFA pathway requiring oil feedstock. At present, aviation bio-
fuels are mainly obtained from the HEFA pathway [248]. This pathway
has  the  advantage  of  having  a  greater  energy  yield  in  comparison  to
other  biofuels  pathways  (an  overall  energy  efficiency  of  ca.  75%  for
HEFA  in  comparison  to  40%  for  FT-SPK;  [44,454]).  The  current  pro-
(cid:0) 1 (0.1 Mt
duction capacity of HEFA is reaching ca. 100,000 tonnes SPK y
(cid:0) 1) (in 2019; reported by Neste) derives from dedicated oilseed
SPK y
crops and a variety of oil/fat residues [248]. One question is to which
extent  this  new  capacity  will  be  based  upon  waste  feedstock  versus
dedicated  oilseed  crops.  Moreover,  basing  new  investment  strategies

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107327

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Table 4
Documented examples of residual biomasses used in the production of aviation
fuels.

Feedstock

Residues/
wastes

Conversion
pathway

Comments

References

Carbohydrate

Molasses

SuF

• Co-product from

[97]

Food waste

SuF

MSWa

FT, IH2

HDCJ

Anaerobic
sludge
(digestate)

Algae
biomass

HDCJ

Swine
manure

HDCJ

Lignocellulose

Forestry
waste

SuF, IH2, FT

Wheat/rice
straw

SuF, DSHC

Maize
stover

SF, FT,
DSHC, APR

Woody
chips

SF, FT,
DSHC, APR

Bagasse

SF, DSHC

sugar
production,
albeit already
sold as an
ingredient for the
feed industry
• Organic waste
from food
processing
industries,
restaurants, and
household

• Organic portion
of household
waste

• Digestate from
anaerobic
digesters

• The digestate is
used as an input
for bio-crude oil
production by
HTLa, subse-
quently upgra-
ded to kerosene

• Grown in

wastewater
• For bio-crude oil
production by
HTL, subse-
quently upgra-
ded to kerosene
• For bio-crude oil
production by
fast pyrolysis,
subsequently
upgraded to
kerosene
• Pretreatment
requirement
• Gasification and

syngas
conditioning
requirements
• Pretreatment
requirement
• Pretreatment

and hydrolysis
requirements
• Gasification and

syngas
conditioning
requirements
• Pretreatment

and hydrolysis
requirements
• Pretreatment

and hydrolysis
requirement
• Gasification and

syngas
conditioning
requirements
• Pretreatment

and hydrolysis
requirement
• Pretreatment

and hydrolysis
requirement
• Gasification and

syngas

[99,266]

[156,174]

[165]

[444]

[159]

[98,157,
174,266]

[266,445]

[91,132,
446]

[95,132,
447]

[95,130]

Table 4 (continued )

Feedstock

Residues/
wastes

Conversion
pathway

Comments

References

conditioning
requirements
• Pretreatment

and hydrolysis
requirements
• Gasification and

syngas
conditioning
requirements
• For bio-crude oil
production by
HTL, subse-
quently upgra-
ded to kerosene

• Pretreatment
requirement
• For bio-crude oil
production by
HTL, subse-
quently upgra-
ded to kerosene
• For bio-crude oil
production by
fast pyrolysis,
subsequently
upgraded to
kerosene

• Collected from

restaurants, food
processing
industries
• Extracted from
sunflower
residual wastes
• Residue from the
distillation of tall
oil

• Slaughterhouse

waste

• Co-product of

palm oil
production
• Derived from

grease trap waste

[147]

[168]

[166]

[448]

[196,449,
450]

[184]

[248]

[248]

[248]

[196]

Eucalyptus
tips

FT

Wood
sawdust

HDCJ

Maize stalk

HDCJ

Straw stalk

HDCJ

Waste
cooking oil
(WCO)

Non-edible
sunflower
oil
Tall oil
pitch

HEFA, CHJ

HEFA

HEFA

Animal fats

HEFA

Palm fatty
acid
distillate
Brown
grease

HEFA

CHJ

Oil/Fat

Note.

a MSW: Municipal Solid Waste; HTL: Hydrothermal liquefaction.

upon food waste poses the risk of rebound effects encouraging whether
the generation of waste, or inducing unforeseen additional demand for
the  most  competitive  oil  feedstock  (often  identified  as  palm  oil,  e.g.,
Ref. [443]) if no waste oil can be supplied. Globally, the potential of
(cid:0) 1 [455]. The
waste fats, oils, and greases has been estimated to ca. 1 EJ y
(cid:0) 1  capacity mobilizes ca. 0.02 EJ
current 100,000 tonnes HEFA-SPK y
waste oil and fat. For illustration purposes, supplying the 2045 aviation
(cid:0) 1  by 100% HEFA-SPK would require 77.41 EJ
demand of 16.73 EJ y
waste oil and fats (details in SM1). Despite being an unrealistic scenario,
it illustrates that the current potential could only supply 1% of the future
demand.  On  the  other  hand,  competing  bioeconomy  sectors  (e.g.,
bio-based  polypropylene;  [456])  also  aspire  to  use  these  fat  waste
resources.

12.2. Uncertain deployment of DAC

Liquid fuel pathways (biofuels, electrofuels) have the advantage of
not requiring heavy infrastructure changes in comparison to the other
options  discussed  in  this  review.  These  imply  two  sources  of  carbon:
biomass and captured-C, either from the atmosphere through DAC or
from  industrial  point  sources.  While  the  former  and  the  latter  are
limited, the potential of DAC is theoretically very large, to the extent the
technology is deployed.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107328

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

There are currently 15 DAC plants operating worldwide, capturing
(cid:0) 1) [30,223]. To produce
(cid:0) 1  (0.009 Mt CO2  y
more than 9000 t CO2  y
16.73 EJ (2045 demand) of electrofuels (FT pathway), approximately
1200  Mt  CO2  captured  would  be  needed,  based  on  the  stoichiometry
described in the FT reaction (details in SM2). Keith et al. [30] provide
the design and engineering costs for a plausible advanced DAC plant to
(cid:0) 1  when
be  implemented  at  industrial  scale,  capturing  1  Mt  CO2  y
operated at full capacity. Taking the plant of Keith et al. as a basis, it
implies that ca. 1200 DAC plants would need to operate to supply the
carbon needed for future aviation demand by biomass-free FT electro-
fuels. Yet, the costs of DAC [457] are often pinpointed as a barrier for
massive deployment [458,459], along with uncertainties on the markets
for CO2  to ensure a revenue offsetting the costs of capture. Keith et al.
(cid:0) 1 industrial plant they describe, current
[30] report, for the 1 Mt CO2 y
(cid:0) 1  CO2  (range  reflecting
levelized  costs  ranging  from  US$  94–232  t
different technology choices), while other studies report that levelized
(cid:0) 1 CO2 are achievable by mid-century [460,461]. For
costs below €50 t
comparison, the first commercial-scale DAC plant built in 2017 (with
(cid:0) 1  CO2,  foreseen  to
storage  of  the  captured  carbon)  costed  US$  600  t
(cid:0) 1  CO2  as additional plants are built [462]. It is
decrease to US$ 200 t
further  argued  that  DAC  costs  are  minor  when  reported  to  a  country
gross domestic product (GDP) [463], or to global GDP (an emergency
massive  DAC  deployment  would  imply  an  investment  of  1.2–1.9%
global annual GDP; [464]).

Nevertheless,  DAC  technologies  are  improving  and  maturing,
◦
reflecting among others their vital role in stabilizing warming at 1.5
C
above pre-industrial levels [465–467]. On-going reported improvements
include new contactors and tower designs [457,468], optimized oper-
ating conditions (e.g., kinetics stability, process stability; [468]), new
materials  development  (e.g.,  composites  of  potassium  carbonate  and
γ-Al2O3;  [457],  amine-oxide  hybrid  materials;  [469]),  or  alternative
regeneration processes (e.g., electrochemistry; [470]).

Assuming a favorable techno-economic environment, the potential
(cid:0) 1
of  DAC  is  theoretically  unlimited.  Potentials  up  to  40  Gt  CO2  y
(cid:0) 1) by the end of the century have been reported [471]
(40,000 Mt CO2 y
for global warming mitigation, albeit the meta-study of Fuss et al. [462]
(cid:0) 1).
suggests a potential limited to 0.5–5 Gt CO2 y
For comparison, the global annual CO2  fossil emissions were ca. 36 Gt
CO2 (36,000 Mt CO2) in 2019 [472].

(cid:0) 1 (500–5000 Mt CO2 y

However,  it  must  be  highlighted  that  the  driver  for  DAC  is  the
perspective  of  inducing  so-called  negative  emissions,  i.e.,  a  net  long-
term  sequestration  (or  removal)  of  atmospheric  CO2.  The  use  of  the
captured CO2 for fuels, as proposed for aviation electrofuels, is therefore
deriving the technology from its original purpose.

12.3. Need for sustainable hydrogen

All pathways described herein involve hydrogen, with the exception
of  electric  (battery-based)  SA,  unless  part  of  a  hybridized  system
involving  a  share  of  hydrogen  fuel  or  liquid  biofuels  or  electrofuels.
Hydrogen  is  used  whether  for  hydrogenation  of  aviation  biofuels
(Figs. 2–10), electrofuels (Fig. 11), as well as for fossil-based kerosene
production, although more H2  is used for biofuels than fossil kerosene
(3–75-fold  more, depending  on the  pathway; [473]).  Yet,  some alter-
natives will require significantly more H2, namely electrofuels and LH2
pathways.

Electrofuels, in particular, require H2 for the reverse water gas shift
reaction,  where  12  moles  of  CO2  are  reacted  with  12  moles  of  H2  to
produce 12 moles of CO (Eq. (6) and its adjustment in SM1). This CO is
then reacted with another 25 moles of H2 in order to generate for 1 mole
of C12H26 fuel via the FT process. This involves that approximately 169
Mt H2 is required to produce 16.73 EJ (2045 demand) with this pathway
(details in SM2), involving 1,520 Mt of water (equivalent to 1.52 billion
m3). This clearly exceeds the current capacity of H2 produced by water
electrolysis (around 2% global H2 production), which amounts to 1.4 Mt
(cid:0) 1 [473]. Furthermore, the amount of water needed is not negligible
H2 y

either, representing ca. 10% of Australia’s freshwater withdrawals (ca.
15.95  billion  m3  in  the  year  2017;  [474]).  This  also  applies  for  elec-
tricity, as detailed in 12.4.

Albeit  not  discussed  in  this  study,  hydrogen  can  also  stem  from
biomass-based hydrocarbons through a gasification process, a process
that  can  also  be  applied  to  fossil  resources  (e.g.,  coal)  [475].  This,
however,  implies an  additional  demand  for  limited  biomass and  land
resources  as  discussed  in  12.1.  Renewable  H2  can  also  be  produced
through biogas/biomethane reformation (instead of natural gas) [63],
which  again  implies  increasing  the  pressure  on  biomass  residues  to
produce the biogas.

Hydrogen fuels (LH2), on the other hand, are not dependent upon a
carbon intermediate, and therefore require slightly less hydrogen when
reported by MJ of fuel (details in SM2).

12.4. Need for sustainable electricity

(cid:0) 1 CO2 captured (0.83 and 1.33 MJ kg

Several of the emerging pathways presented in this review involve
important electricity requirements, in particular for electrofuels. Elec-
tricity  consumption  for  DAC  alone  may  need  between  0.23  and  0.37
(cid:0) 1 CO2 captured) [30,31,
kWh kg
(cid:0) 1 H2
476]. Water electrolysis, on the other hand, requires 30–80 kWh kg
(cid:0) 1  H2) (Table S4), depending on the technolo-
(around 110–290 MJ kg
gies. To produce the 16.73 EJ demand in 2045 with current technologies
for electrofuels, an estimated range of 5,900–10,000 TWh electricity (ca.
(cid:0) 1  electrofuel
21–36 EJ) is needed (i.e., 0.55–0.74 kWh electricity MJ
(cid:0) 1 electrofuel produced), depending on the
produced; 1.81–2.66 MJ MJ
DAC  and  electrolysis  technology  considered  (detailed  calculations  in
SM2). This illustrates, for electricity alone, that 25%–140% more energy
is required compared to what is obtained from the produced electrofuel,
which  only  makes  sense  in  the  perspective  of  harnessing  the  full  po-
tential of fluctuating decarbonized energy sources. Independently of the
electrolysis-DAC technological combination selected, water electrolysis
always  represents  ca.  90%  of  the  consumption;  the  electricity  con-
sumption for DAC thus appears negligible in comparison.

The 0.55–0.74 kWh MJ

(cid:0) 1 electrofuel derived herein lies in the wide
(cid:0) 1  elec-
range of estimates found in the literature (0.59–1.00 kWh MJ
(cid:0) 1 electrofuel, details in SM2). It should also be
trofuel; 2.12–3.60 MJ MJ
(cid:0) 1 (21–36 EJ electricity
highlighted that 5,900–10,000 TWh electricity y
(cid:0) 1), i.e., the electricity requirement to produce 16.73 EJ electrofuels, is
y
not a negligible quantity. To put it into perspective, the global electricity
consumption  in  2019  was  about  23,000  TWh  (ca.  82.8  EJ)  [477].  In
other  words,  the  equivalent  of  25%–43%  of  today’s  global  electricity
consumption would be required to supply the electricity needed just for
producing the H2 necessary for a demand of 16.73 EJ of electrofuels per
year. Similarly, supplying 16.73 EJ of fuels with LH2 would require only
ca.  5500–9000  TWh  electricity  (20–32  EJ  electricity),  including  the
liquefaction requirements for ground storage (details in SM1 and SM2).
It should be highlighted that in both cases, the lower end of interval is
due  to  the  use  of  SOE  technology,  based  on  high-temperature  water
splitting rather than electricity. This technology requires, per unit of H2
produced,  ca.  40%  less  electricity  than  alkaline  electrolysis,  but  40%
more heat (SM2).

12.5. Limits of current quantification methods for environmental impacts

To  compare  the  different  emerging  technologies  covered  in  this
study, it must be ensured that the same service is supplied (the amounts
of passengers and freight transported over a given distance and time).
These  may  require  different  number  of  aircraft  (e.g.,  smaller  electric
planes), type of aircraft (e.g., to accommodate onboard hydrogen stor-
age systems [57]); infrastructure (e.g., charging), blending with fossil
kerosene, etc. Current comparative studies assessing the environmental
impacts of alternative fuels often only compare impacts per MJ fuel (e.g.,
Refs. [478–480]), which cannot be applied for SA that are not purely
based  upon  liquid  fuels.  Further,  the  requirements  for  blending  with

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107329

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

fossil  kerosene are typically  completely ignored (e.g.,  Refs. [478,479,
481]).

Another key issue is the evaluation of the global warming potential
related to the non-CO2  emissions generated during propulsion. Pollut-
ants such as NOx and PM (including black carbon) serve as precursors for
contrail  formation,  an  important  climate  forcer  [68,348].  These  are
generally  ignored  in  current  life  cycle  assessment  studies  (e.g.,  Refs.
[115,327,482]). Yet, Lee et al. [348] illustrated that the greatest share of
cumulative  radiative  forcing  from  global  aviation  between  2000  and
2018 is due to these non-CO2 effects, and in particular on the radiative
forcing effect of NOx, and to a smaller extent to the aviation induced
cloudiness (including cirrus induced by condensation contrails). In the
perspective of life cycle assessments, this implies two issues. First, there
is a need to quantify these emissions, and second to translate these into
warming  effect  (and  eventual  other  environmental  impacts),  often
through characterization factors.

To date, the most robust method available for the former is to use
emission factors relating to the amount of fuel use (e.g., in g of pollutant
per  g of fuel burnt),  which can be found in the literature for all sub-
stances including contrails [348,483–485]. Yet, non-CO2 emissions are
not necessarily due to the fuel itself, and are also highly dependent upon
the location where they are emitted. Emissions of NOx, for instance, can
be considered as independent from the fuel chemical composition [486],
stemming  from  the  nitrogen  in  the  air.  Similarly,  aviation  induced
cloudiness is highly influenced by the water vapor saturation of the air
where the emission takes place, and by the aerosols (e.g., sulfate, soot)
emitted during combustion.

Moreover, there is no consensus on the characterization factors to
use to translate NOx, induced cloudiness, water vapor, black carbon and
sulfate to a warming effect. Although recent studies tend to refer to the
factors proposed by Lee et al. [348], the differences in proposed factors
are really large. For aircraft NOx for example, the effect will depend not
only on the emission altitude but also on the latitude as discussed by
Fuglestvedt et al. [483]. A GWP100 between (cid:0) 2.1 and 71 can be obtained
following  the  modeling  approach.  Kӧhler  et  al.  [487]  proposed  a
GWP100 of 75 at the global scale with important variations according to
the  region  of  emission.  Other  methods  have  also  been  proposed  to
translate these non-CO2  substances into a warming effect, such as the
global temperature change potential (GTP), a measure of the tempera-
ture change (rather than heat absorbed) over a given time period due to
the emission of a gas, in comparison to CO2 [483,488,489]. Step-change
emission approaches (e.g., GWP*, Combined GTP; CGTP) [340] which
are applied to a change in emission rate rather than a change in emission
amount  (as  for  GWP  and  GTP)  [490],  should  also  be  highlighted  as
existing alternative approaches.

Accounting for non-CO2  climate forcers will impact the hydrogen-
based  SA  approaches.  The  hydrogen  used  in  H2  internal  combustion
engines or fuel cells, can generate approximately 2.6 times more water
emissions relative to conventional kerosene [58,491]. Lee et al. [348]
proposed  a  GWP100  of 0.06  for water  vapor.  Despite  useful, this may
however not entirely reflect the exact effect that massively deploying
hydrogen  aviation  would  have  on  the  radiative  equilibrium  of  water
vapor in the low stratosphere [492].

Finally, reductions of soot and PM have been reported for alternative
liquid  fuels,  in  particular  biofuels  (e.g.,  HEFA-SPK,  FT-SPK)  [39,40,
486]. This reduction could be explained by the low levels of aromatic
content in biofuels [40,486,493]. Some studies, however, consider these
differences as negligible (e.g., Ref. [327]), while others shed light on the
high level of uncertainty still existing regarding these measurements in
test rig [486,494]. It thus remains unclear whether biofuels (and elec-
trofuels)  really  induce  a  reduction  in  PM,  and  the  magnitude  such
reduction could have.

12.6. Other impacts

Noise  is  another  impact  of  aviation  especially  for  residential

developments  around  airports.  Novel  propulsion  systems  including
battery-electric  and  hydrogen  aviation  are  foreseen  to  mitigate  and
minimize  noise  impact  [58,495,496],  facilitating  their  use  in  densely
populated  areas  [330,496].  The  electric  propulsion  system,  magniX
eBeaver aircraft, for instance, has been reported to reduce the average
noise level by about 22% (~66 dBA) relative to standard Beaver with
piston engines (~85 dBA) [497].

Electric (battery) and H2 aviation will induce the need for additional
infrastructure, among other to charge batteries or store hydrogen. The
recharging time, which is mainly dependent upon the charging point (e.
g., power outlet capacity) and the battery capacity, is one key challenge
of electric aviation to meet desired flight turnaround times.

Similarly,  hydrogen  refueling  stations  should  be  developed  with
important flow rates to maintain flight turnaround times and prevent
hydrogen  boil-off  issues  [58,63].  According  to  Ref.  [387],  onsite
hydrogen production (through water electrolysis) may be possible in a
foreseeable future to produce the needed hydrogen on-demand. Cryo-
genic storage (whether on ground or onboard), which implies the stor-
age  of  liquefied  hydrogen  below  (cid:0) 253
C  (20K)  in  a  double-walled
vessel with vacuum insulation [57], implies the need for reliable com-
ponents including valves, and pumps allowing to ensure these cryogenic
conditions as well as safety requirements [498].

◦

13. Prospects for sustainable aviation (SA) systems

Despite  the  potential  of  the  four  large  SA  approaches  described
herein,  there  are  a  number  of  issues  to  be  addressed  prior  to  broad
adoption. This section provides the prospects of their applications for
sustainable aviation  in  the upcoming  future. Other sustainable routes
are also discussed.

13.1. Future aspects for unblended biofuels/electrofuels

All pathways documented in this study require blending with fossil
carbon with exception of hydrogen aviation and 100% electric concepts
(either 100% battery as shown in Fig. 17a, or hybrid LH2 or fuel cell with
battery, as in Fig. 17b to d). The prospects for alternative hydrocarbon-
based fuels (biofuels/electrofuels) is summarized herein.

One of the key limiting factors of liquid fuels free of fossil carbon is
their low fuel density (below ASTM’s minimum specific requirement of
(cid:0) 3  [499]) and their low (<8%) aromatics content [44,500],
775 kg m
which shrinks engine seals. The latter effect is notably observed with the
commonly used nitrile rubber material [499,501]. To overcome this, a
certain  research  focus  has  been  placed  on  the  development  of  new
sealing materials preventing leakages [499,502].

The use of 100% alternative liquid fuels is also being investigated
through the possibility of combining SAK with HEFA-SPK [503]. SAK is
produced through the APR pathway (Fig. 2) by converting oxygenated
compounds to aromatics in the presence of heterogeneous catalysts such
as the aluminosilicate zeolite ZSM-5 [504], a pathway currently under
the ASTM approval process [26].

Besides aromatics, cycloparaffins (e.g., cyclohexane, cyclooctane), at
a  concentration  above  30  vol.%,  have  been  shown  to  supply  suitable
volume  swelling  properties  [505,506].  They  provide  increased  fuel
density,  similar  to  the  function  of  aromatics.  Furthermore,  they  have
high  gravimetric  heat  of  combustion  with  the  respect  to  aromatics,
resulting in reduction of PM emissions from fuels containing aromatics
[21,506].  These  compounds,  that  could  be  blended  in  the  fuel,  have
been produced through multiple pathways and from numerous renew-
able feedstock, for instance through hydrodeoxygenation of lignocellu-
losic biomass [507,508]. This approach can be introduced as near-term
solution  for  current  aircraft,  before  new  engines  capable  of  handling
unblended SPK are widely available.

Another  investigated  solution  is,  as  earlier  reported,  the  develop-
ment of alternative fuels identical to conventional kerosene (synthetic
kerosene;  SK)  that  could  be  used  without  blending.  This  includes  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107330

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

+

recently certified CHJ-SK (in February 2020; Fig. 10), as well as some
biofuels  currently  under  certification  (e.g.,  ATJ-SK  from  the  SuF
) [26,38]. It is important to note that there is currently
pathway, HEFA
no guideline for blending more than one alternative fuel with conven-
tional  kerosene  (or  several  alternative  fuels  without  conventional
kerosene) within the same hydrant system [509].

Finally, new engine generations capable of using low aromatic fuels
may be another solution. For example, the D328neo aircraft manufac-
tured by Deutsche Aircraft Inc. has been publicized in September 2021,
to  be  compatible  with  unblended  alternative  fuels  by  the  use  of  new
sealants, surface protection measures, and materials. It is a sub 50 seater
regional commuter expected to start its test flight in 2024 and to enter
into service by the end of 2025 [48,510].

13.2. Electric propulsion development

Motors and generators are key elements for parallel hybrid electric
and  turboelectric configurations [388] (Fig.  17), with  additional con-
verters in the case of electric configurations, whether from battery or
fuel cell. Further research for the high power-to-weight ratio of electric
components  is  essential  to  be able  to  fit  with  the  aircraft  weight and
volume constraints [390]. A thermal management system, in particular
the removal of the generated waste heat, is another key challenge for
further  research  [388].  Alongside,  certification  standards  must  be
developed to assure the safety and use of batteries (or fuel cells).

High  power  density  fuel  cells  need  to  be  developed  to  attain  the
power requested in propulsion system, and to improve the weight and
volume constraints in commercial aircraft. Current power density of fuel
(cid:0) 1  would  be  required  for
(cid:0) 1,  whereas  2  kW  kg
cells  is  ca.  0.75  kW  kg
commercial aircraft [57,63,387].

Another key development is the optimization of the aircraft config-
uration, in order to optimally integrate the electrical propulsion system
and batteries into the aircraft [277], which in turn is dependent on the
electric propulsion configuration (Fig. 17). This is also studied in com-
bination  with  alternative  design  approaches  to  improve  the  overall
propulsion  efficiency  (e.g.,  boundary  layer  ingestion,  wingtip  pro-
pulsors, BWB aircraft) [511].

13.3. Further improvement of hydrogen aviation

Albeit hydrogen can be used as standalone fuel, the integration of
either fuel cells or hydrogen combustion engines (whether gas turbines
or  piston  engines)  in  airplanes  remains  an  engineering  challenge.
Among others, novel airframes such as the BWB design may present the
advantage of having extra volume to accommodate onboard LH2 storage
systems [58,63,313]. In addition to engine developments, airframe de-
signs  are  required  for  accommodating  cryogenic  hydrogen  storage,
which is beyond the current aircraft capacities. Hydrogen tanks can be
placed either inside or outside the fuselage (referred to as integral or
non-integral, respectively) [58,512]. Drag penalty can be reduced with
the integral method [58] (hydrogen storage inside the fuselage), which
may have an impact on overhead luggage storage for short-to-medium
ranged  airplanes
the
[498].  Placed  outside
passenger-carrying capacity remains unchanged, however, the drag is
likely to be increased.

fuselage,

the

Development  in  new  materials  (e.g.,  polymer  matrix  composites;
[513]) for hydrogen tanks is needed in order to make these as light as
possible. With the newly developed materials, the gravimetric energy
(cid:0) 1) of
density is expected to reach 10–21 kWh kg
empty storage system [62,63]. If these values are achieved, the system
becomes highly competitive with conventional storage systems (ca. 8.9
(cid:0) 1)  [514].  Additionally,  de-
kWh  kg
velopments to improve the insulation system for cryogenic LH2 allowing
to minimize boil-off losses (e.g., vaporization) has been demonstrated
[512].

(cid:0) 1;  equivalent  to  ca.  32  MJ  kg

(cid:0) 1 (around 36–76 MJ kg

As  for  electric  (battery)  aviation,  developments  are  needed  to

optimize  the  integration  of  propulsion  system  and  hydrogen  storage
system,  as  well  as  for  certifications  and  regulations  ensuring  safety
through the overall supply chain.

The  optimal  hybridization  between  fuel  cells  and  hydrogen  com-
bustion  engines  at  the  different  phases  of  the  flight  (i.e.,  takeoff  and
climb  phase  powered  by  hydrogen  turbines;  cruise  powered  by  fuel
cells) is also being investigated in order to reduce fuel consumption and
NOx emissions [63].

Similarly, improvements are being performed on hydrogen internal
combustion system to reduce NOx emission. For instance, technological
and environmental improvements have been obtained with a micro-mix
combustor [63,396] or lean direct injection [515].

13.4. Other innovations towards sustainable aviation

One  notable  innovation  is  the  recent  AHEAD  project,  proposing  a
Multi-Fuel Blended Wing Body (MFBWB) aircraft with hybrid turbofan
engines, capable of using both a cryogenic fuel (LH2  and LNG are spe-
cifically mentioned), and a liquid fuel such as biofuel or conventional
kerosene.  While  the  BWB  is  expected  to  overcome  the  mass  issues
related to the cryogenic system, the multi-fuels approach is proposed in
order to significantly reduce the overall emissions from engines [342]. A
reduction of 50% CO2  emission (in LNG/conventional kerosene mode)
was shown compared to a traditional Boeing 777-200 LR model using
fossil  kerosene  [313,342].  Emissions  of  NOx,  soot,  and  CO  were  also
mitigated  by  ca.  80%  relative  to  the  baseline  B777-200  ER  aircraft
[342].

The  Taxibot  is  another  example  of  innovation  to  reduce  the  envi-
ronmental impacts of the aviation sector. It is a pilot-controlled towing
vehicle applied for assisting taxiing-aircraft between the terminals and
the runway and vice versa while the aircraft’s engines are switched off
[516,517].  It  is  an  emerging  pushback  approach  to  minimize  aircraft
fuel consumption (by 50–85% reduction) and noise (by 60% reduction)
while taxiing [58,516]. Approximately 20 million tonnes of CO2  emis-
sion of the world’s airliners are estimated to be reduced during the taxi
phase of flights if the TaxiBot is adopted [516]. The Taxibot is in oper-
ation at Schiphol [518], Delhi and Bangalore airports [519], and serves
Lufthansa [517]. Currently, it is powered whether by electric or diesel
engines [518], but the vision is to power them with 100% batteries or
hydrogen in the future [21,520].

Author contributions

Pimchanok  Su-ungkavatin:  Conceptualization,  Visualization,  Data
curation,  Formal  analysis,  Investigation,  Methodology,  Original  draft
preparation, Review & editing. Ligia Tiruta-Barna: Supervision, Writing
–  review &  editing. Lorie Hamelin: Conceptualization, Funding acqui-
sition,  Investigation,  Resources,  Supervision,  Writing  –  Review  &
editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

The data used in the manuscript can be all found in the attach files.

Acknowledgments

This  work  was  carried  out  within  the  framework  of  the  research
project Cambioscop (https://cambioscop.cnrs.fr), partly financed by the
French National Research Agency, Programme Investisement d’Avenir
(ANR-17-MGPA-0006)  and  Region  Occitanie  (18015981).  Pimchanok

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107331

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Su-ungkavatin  was  additionally  funded  by  the  French  Ministry  for
Europe and Foreign Affairs (Doctoral grant).

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://do

i.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101073.

References

[1] Graver B, Rutherford D, Zheng S. CO2 emissions from commercial aviation 2013.

2018. and 2019 2020, https://theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications
/CO2-commercial-aviation-oct2020.pdf.

[2] Friedlingstein P, O’Sullivan M, Jones MW, Andrew RM, Hauck J, Olsen A, et al.
Global carbon budget 2020. Earth Syst Sci Data 2020;12:3269–340. https://doi.
org/10.5194/essd-12-3269-2020.

[3] Air Transport Action Group (ATAG). Beginner’s guide to sustainable aviation
fuel. 2017. https://aviationbenefits.org/media/166152/beginners-guide-to-sa
f_web.pdf.

[4] Lane J. Aviation biofuels: which airlines are doing what, with whom? : biofuels
Digest. Biofuel Digest. 2012. https://www.biofuelsdigest.com/bdigest/2012/06/
05/aviation-biofuels-which-airlines-are-doing-what-with-whom/. [Accessed 22
November 2021].

[5] Loh C. Which US airlines are using sustainable aviation fuel? - simple flying.
Simple flying. 2020. https://simpleflying.com/us-airlines-sustainable-aviation
-fuel/. [Accessed 10 November 2021].

[6] Grewe V, Gangoli Rao A, Gr ̈onstedt T, Xisto C, Linke F, Melkert J, et al.

Evaluating the climate impact of aviation emission scenarios towards the Paris
agreement including COVID-19 effects. Nat Commun 2021;3841:12. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-021-24091-y.

[7] Kl ̈ower M, Allen MR, Lee DS, Proud SR, Gallagher L, Skowron A. Quantifying
aviation’s contribution to global warming. Environ Res Lett 2021;104027:16.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac286e.

[8] ATAG. Fact sheet #4: aviation 2050 goal and the Paris agreement. ATAG 2019.
https://aviationbenefits.org/media/166838/fact-sheet_4_aviation-2050-and-pari
s-agreement.pdf.

[9] Airbus. Global market forecast: cities, airports and aircraft 2019-2038. 2019. htt

ps://www.airbus.com/sites/g/files/jlcbta136/files/2021-07/GMF-2019-2
038-Airbus-Commercial-Aircraft-book.pdf.

[10] Eurocontrol. The aviation network - decarbonisation issues. Eurocontrol

Supporting European Aviation. 2019. https://www.eurocontrol.int/publication/
aviation-network-decarbonisation-issues. [Accessed 20 September 2022].
[11] G ̈ossling S, Humpe A. The global scale, distribution and growth of aviation:

implications for climate change. Global Environ Change 2020;65. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102194.

[23] IRENA. Biofuels for aviation: Technology brief. IRENA 2017. https://www.irena.
org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2017/IRENA_Biofuels_for_Avi
ation_2017.pdf.

[24] Ministry of Defence. Defence standard 91–091 turbine fuel, kerosene type, jet A- 1
; NATO code : F-35 ; joint service designation : AVTUR. Ministry of defence. 2019.
http://inaca.or.id/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Def-Stan-91-091-Issue-11-Oct-
2019-Turbine-Fuel-Kerosene-Type-Jet-A-1-NATO-CodeF-35-Joint-Service-Desi
gnation-AVTUR.pdf.

[25] European Commission. Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council on ensuring a level playing field for sustainable air transport. 2021.
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0561.

[26] Humphris-Bach A, Groves L, Sikova I, Sharp J. Targeted aviation advanced

biofuels demonstration competition - feasibility study: final report. 2020. https
://www.e4tech.com/uploads/files/final-report-aviation-abdc-feasibility-s
tudy-issue-v1-0.pdf.

[27] Buttler A, Spliethoff H. Current status of water electrolysis for energy storage,

grid balancing and sector coupling via power-to-gas and power-to-liquids: a
review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;82:2440–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2017.09.003.

[28] Furler P, Marxer D, Scheffe J, Reinalda D, Geerlings H, Falter C, et al. Solar

kerosene from H2O and CO2. AIP Conf Proc 2017;1850. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.4984463.

[29] Ghiasian M. Biophotolysis-based hydrogen production by cyanobacteria. Springer

international publishing. 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-14463-0_5.

[30] Keith DW, Holmes G, St Angelo D, Heidel K. A process for capturing CO2 from the
atmosphere. Joule 2018:1–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2018.05.006.

[31] Realmonte G, Drouet L, Gambhir A, Glynn J, Hawkes A, K ̈oberle AC, et al. An
inter-model assessment of the role of direct air capture in deep mitigation
pathways. Nat Commun 2019;10:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-
10842-5.

[32] Sunfire. Breakthrough for power-to-x: sunfire puts first co-electrolysis into

operation and starts scaling. Sunfire GmbH Press Release 2019. https://www.sun
fire.de/de/unternehmen/news/detail/durchbruch-fuer-power-to-x-sunfire-ni
mmt-erste-co-elektrolyse-in-betrieb-und-startet-die-skalierung.

[33] Padurean A, Cormos CC, Agachi PS. Pre-combustion carbon dioxide capture by
gas-liquid absorption for Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle power plants.
Int J Greenh Gas Control 2012;7:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijggc.2011.12.007.

[34] Hornberger M, Sp ̈orl R, Scheffknecht G. Calcium looping for CO2 capture in

cement plants - pilot scale test. Energy Proc 2017;114:6171–4. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.egypro.2017.03.1754.

[35] Stec M, Tatarczuk A, Więcław-Solny L, Kr ́otki A. ͆ciązko M, Tokarski S. Pilot plant
results for advanced CO2 capture process using amine scrubbing at the Jaworzno
II Power Plant in Poland. Fuel 2015;151:50–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2015.01.014.

[36] Andika R, Nandiyanto ABD, Putra ZA, Bilad MR, Kim Y, Yun CM, et al. Co-

electrolysis for power-to-methanol applications. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;
95:227–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.07.030.

[12] EASA. Decision no. 2003/2/RM of the executive director of the agency of 17

[37] Schmidt P, Weindorf W. Power-to-Liquids: potentials and perspectives for the

October 2003 on certification specifications, including airworthiness codes and
acceptable means of compliance, for large aeroplanes (CS-25). European Aviation
Safety Agency (EASA). 2003. https://www.easa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/d
fu/decision_ED_2003_02_RM.pdf.

[13] Susan H. ICAO glossary. ICAO. 2013. https://www.icao.int/dataplus_archive/Doc

uments/20130807/GLOSSARY%20v1%202.pdf.

[14] Chiaramonti D. Sustainable aviation fuels: the challenge of decarbonization.

Energy Proc 2019;158:1202–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2019.01.308.

[15] ICAO. The challenges for the development and deployment of sustainable

alternative fuels in aviation: outcomes of ICAO’s sustaf experts group. https
://www.icao.int/environmental-protection/GFAAF/Documents/ICAO%20
SUSTAF%20experts%20group%20outcomes_release%20May2013.pdf; 2013.
[16] IATA. Fact sheet 2-sustainable aviation fuel: technical certification. IATA. 2020.

https://www.iata.org/contentassets/d13875e9ed784f75bac90f000760e998/saf
-technical-certifications.pdf.

[17] IATA. IATA guidance material for sustainable aviation fuel management. IATA.

2015. https://www.iata.org/contentassets/d13875e9ed784f75bac90f
000760e998/iata20guidance20material20for20saf.pdf.

[18] Eurocontrol. Supporting European Aviation. The EU’s “Fit for 55” Package: what

does it mean for aviation?. 2021. https://www.eurocontrol.int/article/eus-fit
-55-package-what-does-it-mean-aviation. [Accessed 6 January 2022].
[19] Drünert S, Neuling U, Zitscher T, Kaltschmitt M. Power-to-Liquid fuels for

aviation – processes, resources and supply potential under German conditions.
Appl Energy 2020;277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115578.
[20] Terwel R, Kerkhoven J. Carbon neutral aviation with current engine technology:
the take-off of synthetic kerosene production in The Netherlands: the story and
the report. 2018. https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/static.quintel.com/publi
cations/Carbon_Neutral_Aviation.pdf.

[21] Chevron Product Company. Aviation fuels technical review | chevron products

company. 2007. https://www.chevron.com/-/media/chevron/operations/docum
ents/aviation-tech-review.pdf. [Accessed 20 September 2022].

[22] American Petroleum Institute. Robust summary of information: substance group
kerosene/jet fuel. 2010. https://www.petroleumhpv.org/-/media/Petrole
umHPV/Documents/2010_sept21_Kerosene_Jet%20fuel%20robust%20s
ummaries%20final.pdf?la=en&hash=43AF43DE15BF9C62C4C436FEB1
095B7D49A94356.

future supply of renewable aviation fuel. 2016. https://www.umweltbundesamt.
de/sites/default/files/medien/377/publikationen/161005_uba_hintergrund_pt
l_barrierrefrei.pdf.

[38] Zschocke A, Scheuermann S. High biofuel blends in aviation (HBBA) ENER/C2/

2012/420-1 interim report. https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/doc
uments/final_report_for_publication.pdf; 2012.

[39] Chan TW, Chishty W, Davison C, Buote D. Characterization of the ultrafine and

black carbon emissions from different aviation alternative fuels. SAE
International Journal of Fuels and Lubricants 2015;8:515–26. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2015-01-2562.

[40] Lobo P, Rye L, Williams PI, Christie S, Uryga-Bugajska I, Wilson CW, et al. Impact
of alternative fuels on emissions characteristics of a gas turbine engine – Part 1:
gaseous and particulate matter emissions. Environ Sci Technol 2012;46:
10805–11. https://doi.org/10.1021/es301898u.

[41] Chan TW, Chishty WA, Canteenwalla P, Buote D, Davison CR. Characterization of

emissions from the use of alternative aviation fuels. J Eng Gas Turbines Power
2016;138:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4031226.

[42] Khandelwal B, Roy S, Lord C, Blakey S. Comparison of vibrations and emissions of
conventional jet fuel with stressed 100% SPK and Fully Formulated Synthetic Jet
Fuel. Aerospace 2014;1:52–66. https://doi.org/10.3390/aerospace1020052.
[43] Baena-Zambrana S, Repetto SL, Lawson CP, Lam JK-W. Behaviour of water in jet
fuel - a literature review. Prog Aero Sci 2013;60:35–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.paerosci.2012.12.001.

[44] Wei H, Liu W, Chen X, Yang Q, Li J, Chen H. Renewable bio-jet fuel production

for aviation: a review. Fuel 2019;254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2019.06.007.

[45] Airbus. This A319neo is the latest to test 100% SAF. 2021. https://www.airbus.

com/en/newsroom/stories/2021-10-this-a319neo-is-the-latest-to-test-100-saf.
[Accessed 6 January 2022].

[46] Boeing. Boeing commits to deliver commercial airplanes ready to fly on 100%

sustainable fuels. Boeing - media room. 2021. https://boeing.mediaroom.com/20
21-01-22-Boeing-Commits-to-Deliver-Commercial-Airplanes-Ready-to-Fly-on-
100-Sustainable-Fuels. [Accessed 19 September 2022].

[47] Rolls-Royce. Rolls-Royce to test 100% Sustainable Aviation Fuel in next

generation engine demonstrator. Rolls-Royce. 2020. https://www.rolls-royce.
com/media/press-releases/2020/12-11-2020-rr-to-test-100-percent-sustainabl

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107332

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

e-aviation-fuel-in-next-generation-engine-demonstrator.aspx. [Accessed 20
September 2022].

[48] Deutsche Aircraft. Deutsche aircraft. Deutsche aircraft. 2022. https://deutsche

aircraft.com/. [Accessed 20 September 2022].

[73] Chen RX, Wang WC. The production of renewable aviation fuel from waste

cooking oil. Part I: bio-alkane conversion through hydro-processing of oil.
Renewable Energy 2019;135:819–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2018.12.048.

[49] The Faraday Institute. Faraday report: high-energy battery technologies. The

[74] Xing R, Subrahmanyam AV, Olcay H, Qi W, Van Walsum GP, Pendse H, et al.

Faraday Institute 2020. https://faraday.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Hig
h-Energy-battery-technologies-FINAL.pdf.

[50] Cerdas F, Titscher P, Bognar N, Schmuch R, Winter M, Kwade A, et al. Exploring
the effect of increased energy density on the environmental impacts of traction
batteries: a comparison of energy optimized lithium-ion and lithium-sulfur
batteries for mobility applications. Energies 2018;11:1–20. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en11010150.

[51] Rossi N. Conceptual design of hybrid-electric aircraft. Polytechnic university of
milan (politecnico di Milano). 2017. https://www.politesi.polimi.it/bitstream/
10589/139491/3/2018_04_Rossi.pdf.

[52] Eviation. Aircraft – eviation. Eviation - Alice. 2022. https://www.eviation.co/

aircraft/. [Accessed 20 September 2022].

[53] ByeAerospace. eFlyer - Bye aerospace. ByeAerospace. 2019. https://byeaerospace

.com/eflyer/. [Accessed 20 September 2022].

[54] Pipistrel Aircraft. Velis Electro EASA TC – Pipistrel Aircraft: the first and still the
only type-certified electric aircraft in the world n.d. https://www.pipistrel-aircra
ft.com/aircraft/electric-flight/velis-electro-easa-tc/. [Accessed 14 February
2022].

[55] FutureFlight. Heart aerospace ES-19 specification. FutureFlight. 2021.
https://www.futureflight.aero/aircraft-program/heart-electric-airliner.
[Accessed 27 May 2022].

[56] Ribeiro J, Afonso F, Ribeiro I, Ferreira B, Policarpo H, Peças P, et al.

Environmental assessment of hybrid-electric propulsion in conceptual aircraft
design. J Clean Prod 2020;247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119477.
[57] Baroutaji A, Wilberforce T, Ramadan M, Olabi AG. Comprehensive investigation
on hydrogen and fuel cell technology in the aviation and aerospace sectors.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;106:31–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2019.02.022.

[58] Bruce S, Temminghoff M, Hayward J, Palfreyman D, Munnings C, Burke N.

Opportunities for hydrogen in commercial aviation. CSIRO; 2020. https://www.
csiro.au/-/media/Do-Business/Files/Futures/Boeing-Opportunities-for-hydrog
en-in-commercial-aviation.pdf.

Production of jet and diesel fuel range alkanes from waste hemicellulose-derived
aqueous solutions. Green Chemistry 2010;12:1933–46. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c0gc00263a.

[75] Wang WC, Tao L. Bio-jet fuel conversion technologies. Renewable and

Sustainable Energy Reviews 2016;53:801–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2015.09.016.

[76] Hari TK, Yaakob Z, Binitha NN. Aviation biofuel from renewable resouces routes
opportunities and challenges. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2015;
42:1234–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.10.095.

[77] Goldmann A, Sauter W, Oettinger M, Kluge T, Schr ̈oder U, Seume JR, et al.
A study on electrofuels in aviation. Energies 2018;11:1–23. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en11020392.

[78] Brynolf S, Taljegard M, Grahn M, Hansson J. Electrofuels for the transport sector:
a review of production costs. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2018;
81:1887–905. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.288.

[79] Hansson J, Hackl R, Taljegard M, Brynolf S, Grahn M. The potential for

electrofuels production in Sweden utilizing fossil and biogenic CO 2 point
sources. Frontiers in Energy Research 2017;5:1–12. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fenrg.2017.00004.

[80] Bauen A, Bitossi N, German L, Harris A, Leow K. Sustainable aviation fuels.

Johnson matthey technology review. 2020. p. 263–78. https://doi.org/10.1595/
205651320x15816756012040.

[81] Wohlin C. Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a

replication in software engineering. Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering - EASE ’14.
London, England, United Kingdom: ACM Press; 2014. p. 1–10. https://doi.org/
10.1145/2601248.2601268.

[82] Huq NA, Hafenstine GR, Huo X, Nguyen H, Tifft SM, Conklin DR, et al. Toward

net-zero sustainable aviation fuel with wet waste–derived volatile fatty acids.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2021;118:e2023008118. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2023008118.

[83] Bradin D. Process for producing renewable jet fuel compositions. WO 2014/

[59] Ozbilen A, Dincer I, Rosen MA. A comparative life cycle analysis of hydrogen

008337 A1. 2014.

production via thermochemical water splitting using a Cu-Cl cycle. International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2011;36:11321–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2010.12.035.

[60] Mehmeti A, Angelis-Dimakis A, Arampatzis G, McPhail S. Ulgiati S. Life cycle
assessment and water footprint of hydrogen production methods: from
conventional to emerging technologies. Environments 2018;24:5. https://doi.
org/10.3390/environments5020024.

[61] Bareiß K, de la Rua C, M ̈ockl M, Hamacher T. Life cycle assessment of hydrogen

from proton exchange membrane water electrolysis in future energy systems.
Applied Energy 2019;237:862–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2019.01.001.

[62] Thomson R. A future fuel for aviation?. 2020. https://www.rolandberger.com/e
n/Insights/Publications/Hydrogen-A-future-fuel-for-aviation.html. [Accessed 20
September 2022].

[63] Fuel Cells and Hydrogen 2 Joint Undertaking. Hydrogen-powered aviation: a fact-

based study of hydrogen technology, economics, and climate impact by 2050.
Publications Office; 2020. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2843/471510.

[64] Pohl HW, Malychev VV. Hydrogen in future civil aviation. International Journal
of Hydrogen Energy 1997;22:1061–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0360-3199(95)
00140-9.

[65] ICAO. Assembly — 40Th Session: envisioning a “zero climate impact”

[84] Davis R, Tao L, Scarlata C, Tan ECD, Ross J, Lukas J, et al. Process design and

economics for the conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to hydrocarbons: dilute-
acid and enzymatic deconstruction of biomass to sugars and catalytic conversion
of sugars to hydrocarbons. 2015. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/60223.
pdf.

[85] Chheda JN, Powell JB. Direct aqueous phase reforming of bio-based feedstocks.

US 9,303,226 B2. 2016.

[86] Blommel PG, Cortright RD. Production of conventional liquid fuels from sugars.

Madison, USA: Virent Energy System Inc.; 2008.

[87] Wang T, Tan J, Qiu S, Zhang Q, Long J, Chen L, et al. Liquid fuel production by
aqueous phase catalytic transformation of biomass for aviation. Energy Procedia
2014;61:432–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.11.1142.

[88] Qiao M, Woods E, Myren P, Cortright R. Solvolysis of biomass and stabilization of

biomass hydrolysate. US 2013/0019859 A1. 2013.

[89] Coronado I, Stekrova M, Reinikainen M, Simell P, Lefferts L, Lehtonen J. A review
of catalytic aqueous-phase reforming of oxygenated hydrocarbons derived from
biorefinery water fractions. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2016;41:
11003–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.05.032.

[90] Pavlenko N. The cost of supporting alternative jet fuels in the European Union.

ICCT 2021. https://theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/Alternative_jet
_fuels_cost_EU_20190320.pdf.

international aviation pathway toward 2050: how governments and the aviation
industry can step-up amids the climate emergency for a sustainable aviation
future. ICAO. 2019. https://www.icao.int/Meetings/a40/Documents/WP/wp_5
61_en.pdf.

[91] Davis R, Biddy M, Tan E, Tao L, Jones S. Biological conversion of sugars to
hydrocarbons technology pathway. National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
2013. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy13osti/58054.pdf.

[92] Mawhood R, Gazis E, de Jong S, Hoefnagels R, Slade R. Production pathways for

[66] Yip HL, Srna A, Yuen ACY, Kook S, Taylor RA, Yeoh GH, et al. A review of

hydrogen direct injection for internal combustion engines: towards carbon-free
combustion. Applied Sciences 2019;4842:9. https://doi.org/10.3390/
app9224842.

[67] Sefain MJ. Hydrogen aircraft concepts & Group support. Cranfield University.

2005. https://dspace.lib.cranfield.ac.uk/handle/1826/2998.

[68] Boucher O, Office M, Centre H. Aviation science and research needs. 2009. https

://theicct.org/sites/default/files/Boucher_2009-1.pdf.

[69] Fichter C, Marquart S, Sausen R, Lee DS. The impact of cruise altitude on contrails
and related radiative forcing. Meteorologische Zeitschrift 2005;14:563–72.
https://doi.org/10.1127/0941-2948/2005/0048.

[70] ICAO. ICAO document CORSIA methodology for calculating actual life cycle

emissions values. 2022. https://www.icao.int/environmental-protection/CORSIA
/Documents/CORSIA_Eligible_Fuels/ICAO%20document%2007%20-%20Met
hodology%20for%20Actual%20Life%20Cycle%20Emissions%20-%20June%
202022.pdf. [Accessed 5 July 2022].

[71] European Commission. Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament

and of the Council on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources.
European Commission 2018. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2018/2001/oj.

[72] Sala S, Amadei AM, Beylot A, Ardente F. The evolution of life cycle assessment in
European policies over three decades. Int J Life Cycle Assess 2021;26:2295–314.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-021-01893-2.

renewable jet fuel: a review of commercialization status and future prospects.
Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining 2016;10:462–84. https://doi.org/10.1002/
bbb.1644.

[93] Amyris Lane J. Total to commercialize renewable, low-carbon jet fuel technology;
Total takes 75% stake in JV. Biofuels Digest. 2015. https://www.biofuelsdigest.
com/bdigest/2015/06/30/amyris-total-to-commercialize-renewable-low-carbo
n-jet-fuel-technology/. [Accessed 22 December 2021].

[94] Renninger NSM Derek J, McPhee DJ. Fuel compositions comprising farnesane and
farnesane derivatives and method of making and using same. US 7,399,323 B2.
2008.

[95] Gray D, Sato S, Garcia F, Eppler R, Cherry J. Amyris, Inc. Integrated biorefinery
project summary - public version. United states. 2014. https://doi.org/10.2172/
1122942.

[96] Ohler Nicholas L, Vazquez R. Stabilization and hydrogenation methods for

microbial-derived olefins. US 9,611,189 B2. 2017.

[97] Qureshi N, Lolas A, Blaschek HP. Soy molasses as fermentation substrate for

production of butanol using Clostridium beijerinckii BA101. Journal of Industrial
Microbiology and Biotechnology 2001;26:290–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.
jim.7000131.

[98] Peters MW, Taylor JD. Renewable jet fuel blendstock from isobutanol.

US8,975,461 B2. 2015.

[99] Ma K, Ruan Z, Shui Z, Wang Y, Hu G, He M. Open fermentative production of fuel
ethanol from food waste by an acid-tolerant mutant strain of Zymomonas mobilis.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107333

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Bioresource Technology 2016;203:295–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2015.12.054.

[100] Yao G, Staples MD, Malina R, Tyner WE. Stochastic techno-economic analysis of

alcohol-to-jet fuel production. Biotechnol Biofuels 2017;18:10. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s13068-017-0702-7.

[101] Geleynse S, Brandt K, Garcia-Perez M, Wolcott M, Zhang X. The alcohol-to-jet
conversion pathway for drop-in biofuels: techno-economic evaluation.
ChemSusChem 2018;11:3728–41. https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.201801690.

[102] Evanko WA, Eyal AM, Glassner DA, Miao F, Aristidou AA, Evans K, et al. Recovery
of higher alcohols from dilute aqueous solutions. US 8,101,808 B2. 2012.
[103] David PR, Alto P. Compositions and methods for producing fermentation products

and residuals. US 7,309,602 B2. 2007.

[104] Gevo. Gevo’s biofuels. Gevo, Inc. 2019. https://gevo.com/biofuels-reduce-greenh

ouse-gas-emissions/. [Accessed 15 May 2022].

[105] Jang YS, Malaviya A, Lee J, Im JA, Lee SY, Lee J, et al. Metabolic engineering of
Clostridium acetobutylicum for the enhanced production of isopropanol-butanol-
ethanol fuel mixture. Biotechnology Progress 2013;29:1083–8. https://doi.org/
10.1002/btpr.1733.

[106] Buijs NA, Siewers V, Nielsen J. Advanced biofuel production by the yeast

saccharomyces cerevisiae. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2013;17:480–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2013.03.036.

[107] Costa OYA, Souto BM, Tupinamb ́a DD, Bergmann JC, Kyaw CM, Kruger RH, et al.
Microbial diversity in sugarcane ethanol production in a Brazilian distillery using
a culture-independent method. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 2015;42:73–84.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-014-1533-1.

[108] Wang T, Li K, Liu Q, Zhang Q, Qiu S, Long J, et al. Aviation fuel synthesis by
catalytic conversion of biomass hydrolysate in aqueous phase. Applied Energy
2014;136:775–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.06.035.
[109] Liu K, Atiyeh HK, Stevenson BS, Tanner RS, Wilkins MR, Huhnke RL. Mixed
culture syngas fermentation and conversion of carboxylic acids into alcohols.
Bioresource Technology 2014;152:337–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2013.11.015.

[126] Klinghoffer NB, Castaldi MJ, Nzihou A. Influence of char composition and

inorganics on catalytic activity of char from biomass gasification. Fuel 2015;157:
37–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.04.036.

[127] Abdoulmoumine N, Adhikari S, Kulkarni A, Chattanathan S. A review on biomass
gasification syngas cleanup. Applied Energy 2015;155:294–307. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.05.095.

[128] Sun X, Atiyeh HK, Huhnke RL, Tanner RS. Syngas fermentation process

development for production of biofuels and chemicals: a review. Bioresource
Technology Reports 2019;100279:7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biteb.2019.100279.

[129] Mohammadi M, Younesi H, Najafpour G, Mohamed AR. Sustainable ethanol

fermentation from synthesis gas by Clostridium ljungdahlii in a continuous stirred
tank bioreactor. Journal of Chemical Technology and Biotechnology 2012;87:
837–43. https://doi.org/10.1002/jctb.3712.

[130] Handler RM, Shonnard DR, Griffing EM, Lai A, Palou-Rivera I. Life cycle

assessments of ethanol production via gas fermentation: anticipated greenhouse
gas emissions for cellulosic and waste gas feedstocks. Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry Research 2016;55:3253–61. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
iecr.5b03215.

[131] Kundiyana DK, Huhnke RL, Wilkins MR. Syngas fermentation in a 100-L pilot
scale fermentor: design and process considerations. Journal of Bioscience and
Bioengineering 2010;109:492–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiosc.2009.10.022.

[132] Schultz M, Obern J. Methods and systems for the production of hydrocarbon

products. WO 2010/058508 A2. 2012. https://doi.org/10.7868/
s0002337x14020092.

[133] Harmon L, Hallen R, Lilga M, Heijstra B, Palou-Rivera I, Handler R. A hybrid

catalytic route to fuels from biomas syngas. United States 2017. https://doi.org/
10.2172/1423741.

[134] LanzaTech. LanzaTech: capturing carbon, fueling growth. LanzaTech. 2019.

https://www.lanzatech.com/. [Accessed 24 January 2022].

[135] Morschbacker A. Bio-ethanol based ethylene. Polymer Reviews 2009;49:79–84.

https://doi.org/10.1080/15583720902834791.

[110] Taylor JD, Jenni MM, Peters MW. Dehydration of fermented isobutanol for the

[136] Finiels A, Fajula F, Hulea V. Nickel-based solid catalysts for ethylene

production of renewable chemicals and fuels. Topics in Catalysis 2010;53:
1224–30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11244-010-9567-8.

[111] Choo HP, Liew KY, Liu HF, Seng CE. Hydrogenation of palm olein catalyzed by
polymer stabilized Pt colloids. Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical 2001;
165:127–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1381-1169(00)00367-8.

[112] Dahal K, Brynolf S, Xisto C, Hansson J, Grahn M, Gr ̈onstedt T, et al. Techno-
economic review of alternative fuels and propulsion systems for the aviation
sector. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2021;151:111564. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111564.

[113] Byogy Inc. Renewable fuels for all modes of transport. 2016. https://www.energy

.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/09/f33/weiss_alternative_aviation_fuels_workshop.
pdf.

[114] Hull A. Jet fuel from ethanol and syngas Transition to a more sustainable society.

Swedish BioFuel AB. 2019. https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/9_a
ngelica_hull.pdf. [Accessed 10 May 2022].

[115] Han J, Tao L, Wang M. Well-to-wake analysis of ethanol-to-jet and sugar-to-jet
pathways. Biotechnology for Biofuels 2017;10:1–15. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13068-017-0698-z.

[116] Karan SK, Hamelin L. Crop residues may be a key feedstock to bioeconomy but

how reliable are current estimation methods? Resources, Conservation and
Recycling 2021;164:105211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.105211.
[117] Slade R, Bauen A, Gross R. Global bioenergy resources. Nature Climate Change

2014;4:99–105. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2097.

[118] Karan SK, Hamelin L. Towards local bioeconomy: a stepwise framework for high-
resolution spatial quantification of forestry residues. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 2020;134:110350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110350.
[119] Hamelin L, Borzęcka M, Kozak M, Pudełko R. A spatial approach to bioeconomy:
quantifying the residual biomass potential in the EU-27. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 2019;100:127–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2018.10.017.

[120] Lodato C, Hamelin L, Tonini D, Astrup TF. Towards sustainable methane supply

from local bioresources: anaerobic digestion, gasification, and gas upgrading.
Applied Energy 2022;119568:323. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2022.119568.

[121] Hamelin L, Naroznova I, Wenzel H. Environmental consequences of different

carbon alternatives for increased manure-based biogas. Applied Energy 2014;114:
774–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.09.033.

oligomerization-a review. Catalysis Science and Technology 2014;4:2412–26.
https://doi.org/10.1039/c4cy00305e.

[137] Pechstein J, Kaltschmitt M. Liquid hydrocarbon fuels derived from alcohols.
Energy from organic materials (biomass). 2019. p. 1023–46. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-1-4939-7813-7_1039.

[138] Griffin DW, Schultz MA. Fuel and chemical products from biomass syngas: a
comparison of gas fermentation to thermochemical conversion routes.
Environmental Progress and Sustainable Energy 2012;31:219–24. https://doi.
org/10.1002/ep.11613.

[139] Liu K, Atiyeh HK, Tanner RS, Wilkins MR, Huhnke RL. Fermentative production of
ethanol from syngas using novel moderately alkaliphilic strains of Alkalibaculum
bacchi. Bioresource Technology 2012;104:336–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2011.10.054.

[140] Devarapalli M, Atiyeh HK, Phillips JR, Lewis RS, Huhnke RL. Ethanol production
during semi-continuous syngas fermentation in a trickle bed reactor using
Clostridium ragsdalei. Bioresource Technology 2016;209:56–65. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2016.02.086.

[141] Shen N, Dai K, Xia XY, Zeng RJ, Zhang F. Conversion of syngas (CO and H2) to

biochemicals by mixed culture fermentation in mesophilic and thermophilic
hollow-fiber membrane biofilm reactors. Journal of Cleaner Production 2018;
202:536–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.08.162.

[142] de Klerk A. Fischer-Tropsch jet fuel process. US 2010/0108568 A1. 2010.
[143] de Klerk A. Fischer-Tropsch fuels refinery design. Energy and Environmental

Science 2011;4:1177–205. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0ee00692k.
[144] Boerrigter H. Economy of biomass-to-liquids (BTL) plants. An engineering
assessment. Netherlands. US department of energy, office of scientific and
technical information. 2006. https://www.osti.gov/etdeweb/biblio/20767385.
[145] Gruber H, Groß P, Rauch R, Reichhold A, Zweiler R, Aichernig C, et al. Fischer-
Tropsch products from biomsass-derived syngas and renewable hydrogen.
Biomass Conversion and Biorefinery 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13399-019-
00459-5.

[147] Hanaoka T, Miyazawa T, Shimura K, Hirata S. Jet fuel synthesis from Fischer-

Tropsch product under mild hydrocracking conditions using Pt-loaded catalysts.
Chemical Engineering Journal 2015;263:178–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2014.11.042.

[148] Bradin D. Process for producing renewable jet fuel composition. US 9,422,494 B2.

2016.

[122] Amaro J, Rosado DJM, Mendiburu AZ, dos Santos LR, de Carvalho Jr JA.

[149] Dayton David C, Turk B, Gupta R. Syngas cleanup, conditioning, and utilization.

Modeling of syngas composition obtained from fixed bed gasifiers using
Kuhn–Tucker multipliers. Fuel 2021;287:119068. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.119068.

[123] Hu J, Yu F, Lu Y. Application of fischer-tropsch synthesis in biomass to liquid
conversion. Catalysts 2012;2:303–26. https://doi.org/10.3390/catal2020303.

[124] Chiodini A, Bua L, Carnelli L, Zwart R, Vreugdenhil B, Vocciante M.

Enhancements in Biomass-to-Liquid processes: gasification aiming at high
hydrogen/carbon monoxide ratios for direct Fischer-Tropsch synthesis
applications. Biomass and Bioenergy 2017;106:104–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biombioe.2017.08.022.

[125] Susastriawan AAP, Saptoadi H. Purnomo. Small-scale downdraft gasifiers for

biomass gasification: a review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2017;
76:989–1003. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.03.112.

In: Brown RC, editor. Thermochemical processing of biomass: conversion into
fuels, chemicals, and power. Wiley and Sons Ltd; 2019. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781119417637.ch5.

[150] Rahardjo BS. The assessment of syngas utilization by fischer tropsch synthesis in

the slurry-bed reactor using Co/SiO2 catalyst. International journal of
engineering and applied Sciences. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/down
load;jsessionid=116BEA5B99F8E944EBE52470846E92B1?doi=10.1.1.685.6055
&rep=rep1&type=pdf; 2012.

[151] Marchese M, Giglio E, Santarelli M, Lanzini A. Energy performance of Power-to-

Liquid applications integrating biogas upgrading, reverse water gas shift, solid
oxide electrolysis and Fischer-Tropsch technologies. Energy Conversion and
Management 2020;X(6):100041. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2020.100041.
[152] Mena Subiranas A. Combining fischer-tropsch synthesis (FTS) and hydrocarbon
reactions in one reactor. Karlsruhe Institute of technology (KIT). 2009. htt
ps://publikationen.bibliothek.kit.edu/1000010077.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107334

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

[153] Bouchy C, Hastoy G, Guillon E, Martens JA. Fischer-Tropsch waxes upgrading via
hydrocracking and selective hydroisomerization. Oil and Gas Science and
Technology 2009;64:91–112. https://doi.org/10.2516/ogst/2008047.
[154] Srinivas S, Malik RK, Mahajani SM. Fischer-Tropsch synthesis using bio-syngas
and CO2. Energy for Sustainable Development 2007;11:66–71. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0973-0826(08)60411-1.

[155] van Steen E, Claeys M. Fischer-Tropsch catalysts for the biomass-to-liquid process.
Chemical Engineering and Technology 2008;31:655–66. https://doi.org/
10.1002/ceat.200800067.

[156] Fulcrum bioenergy. Fulcrum BioEnergy. 2020. 2015. http://fulcrum-bioenergy.

com/. [Accessed 5 March 2022].

[157] Red rock biofuels. Red rock biofuels. 2018. https://www.redrockbio.com/.

[Accessed 22 February 2022].

[158] Brassard P, Godbout S, Hamelin L. Framework for consequential life cycle

assessment of pyrolysis biorefineries: a case study for the conversion of primary
forestry residues. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2021;138:110549.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110549.

[159] Jeong YW, Choi SK, Choi YS, Kim SJ. Production of biocrude-oil from swine

manure by fast pyrolysis and analysis of its characteristics. Renewable Energy
2015;79:14–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.08.041.

[160] Wang T, Qiu S, Weng Y, Chen L, Liu Q, Long J, et al. Liquid fuel production by
aqueous phase catalytic transformation of biomass for aviation. Applied Energy
2015;160:329–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.08.116.

[161] Baldino AC, Berg R, Pavlenko N, Searle S. Advanced alternative fuel pathways:

technology overview and status. ICCT 2019. https://theicct.org/publication
/advanced-alternative-fuel-pathways-technology-overview-and-status/.

[162] Mohan D, Pittman CU, Steele PH. Pyrolysis of wood/biomass for bio-oil: a critical
review. Energy and Fuels 2006;20:848–89. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef0502397.
[163] Bridgwater AV, Czernik S, Piskorz J. An overview of fast pyrolysis. Progress in

thermochemical biomass conversion. 2008. p. 977–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9780470694954.ch80.

[164] Ramirez JA, Brown RJ, Rainey TJ. A review of hydrothermal liquefaction bio-
crude properties and prospects for upgrading to transportation fuels. Energies
2015;8:6765–94. https://doi.org/10.3390/en8076765.

[165] Vardon DR, Sharma BK, Scott J, Yu G, Wang Z, Schideman L, et al. Chemical

properties of biocrude oil from the hydrothermal liquefaction of Spirulina algae,
swine manure, and digested anaerobic sludge. Bioresource Technology 2011;102:
8295–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2011.06.041.

[166] Shi W, Gao Y, Song S, Zhao Y. One-pot conversion of bio-oil to diesel- and jet-fuel-

range hydrocarbons in supercritical cyclohexane. Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry Research 2014;53:11557–65. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie501682r.

[167] Watson J, Wang T, Si B, Chen WT, Aierzhati A, Zhang Y. Valorization of
hydrothermal liquefaction aqueous phase: pathways towards commercial
viability. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2020;77. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2019.100819.

[168] Nazari L, Yuan Z, Souzanchi S, Ray MB, Xu C. Hydrothermal liquefaction of

woody biomass in hot-compressed water: catalyst screening and comprehensive
characterization of bio-crude oils. Fuel 2015;162:74–83. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2015.08.055.

[169] Dimitriadis A, Bezergianni S. Hydrothermal liquefaction of various biomass and

waste feedstocks for biocrude production: a state of the art review. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2017;68:113–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2016.09.120.

[170] Zhang Q, Chang J, Wang T, Xu Y. Review of biomass pyrolysis oil properties and
upgrading research. Energy Conversion and Management 2007;48:87–92.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2006.05.010.

[171] Shell inc. Integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion. 2020. https://www.
shell.com/business-customers/catalysts-technologies/licensed-technologies/be
nefits-of-biofuels/ih2-technology/hydropyrolysis.html. [Accessed 6 January
2022].

[172] Marker TL, Felix LG, Linck MB, Roberts MJ, Ortiz-Toral P, Wangerow J.

Integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion for the direct production of
gasoline and diesel fuels or blending components from biomass, Part 2:
continuous testing. Environ Prog Sustainable Energy 2014;33:762–8. https://doi.
org/10.1002/ep.11906.

[173] Marker T, Felix LG, Linck MB. Integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion

process for production of gasoline and diesel fuel from biomass. SEMANTIC
SCHOLAR. 2009. https://www.semanticscholar.
org/paper/Integrated-Hydropyrolysis-and-Hydroconversion-for-Marker-Feli
x/fad15a9b4909aaecd9cad92c7ed229b1619df702#citing-papers. [Accessed 24
January 2022].

[174] Marker T, Roberts M, Linck M, Felix L, Ortiz-Toral P, Wangerow J, et al. Long

term processing using integrated hydropyrolysis plus hydroconversion (IH2) for
the production of gasoline and diesel from biomass. 2013. https://doi.org/
10.2172/1082786.

[178] Buffi M, Valera-Medina A, Marsh R, Pugh D, Giles A, Runyon J, et al. Emissions

characterization tests for HRJ fuel from used cooking oil and its blends.pdf.
Applied Energy 2017;201:84–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2017.05.104.

[179] Li T, Cheng J, Huang R, Zhou J, Cen K. Conversion of waste cooking oil to jet

biofuel with nickel-based mesoporous zeolite Y catalyst. Bioresource Technology
2015;197:289–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.08.115.

[180] Yang J, Xin Z, He Q. (Sophia), Corscadden K, Niu H. An overview on performance
characteristics of bio-jet fuels. Fuel 2019;237:916–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2018.10.079.

[181] Verma D, Rana BS, Kumar R, Sibi MG, Sinha AK. Diesel and aviation kerosene

with desired aromatics from hydroprocessing of jatropha oil over hydrogenation
catalysts supported on hierarchical mesoporous SAPO-11. Applied Catalysis A:
General 2015;490:108–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2014.11.007.
[182] Ameen M, Azizan MT, Yusup S, Ramli A, Yasir M. Catalytic hydrodeoxygenation

of triglycerides: an approach to clean diesel fuel production. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 2017;80:1072–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2017.05.268.

[183] Rabaev M, Landau MV, Vidruk-Nehemya R, Koukouliev V, Zarchin R,

Herskowitz M. Conversion of vegetable oils on Pt/Al2O3/SAPO-11 to diesel and
jet fuels containing aromatics. Fuel 2015;161:287–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2015.08.063.

[184] Zhao X, Wei L, Julson J, Qiao Q, Dubey A, Anderson G. Catalytic cracking of non-
edible sunflower oil over ZSM-5 for hydrocarbon bio-jet fuel. New Biotechnology
2015;32:300–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbt.2015.01.004.

[185] Kristiana T, Baldino C, Searle S. An estimate of current collection and potential
collection of used cooking oil from major Asian exporting countries. ICCT 2022.
https://theicct.org/publication/asia-fuels-waste-oil-estimates-feb22/.

[186] van Grinsven A, van den Toorn E, van der Veen R, Kampman B. Used cooking oil

(UCO) as biofuel feedstock in the EU. https://www.transportenvironment.org/
wp-content/uploads/2021/07/CE_Delft__200247_UCO_as_biofuel_feedstock_in_
EU_FINAL%20-%20v5_0.pdf; 2020.

[187] Jiang C, Guan K, Khanna M, Chen L, Peng J. Assessing marginal land availability
based on land use change information in the contiguous United States. Environ
Sci Technol 2021;55:10794–804. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c02236.
[188] Mehmood MA, Ibrahim M, Rashid U, Nawaz M, Ali S, Hussain A, et al. Biomass

production for bioenergy using marginal lands. Sustainable Production and
Consumption 2017;9:3–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2016.08.003.
[189] Cai X, Zhang X, Wang D. Land availability for biofuel production. Environ Sci

Technol 2011;45:334–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/es103338e.

[190] Naylor RL, Liska AJ, Burke MB, Falcon WP, Gaskell JC, Rozelle SD, et al. The

ripple effect: biofuels, food security, and the environment. Environment: Science
and Policy for Sustainable Development 2007;49:30–43. https://doi.org/
10.3200/ENVT.49.9.30-43.

[191] Hirano K, Hara T, Ardianor Nugroho RA, Segah H, Takayama N, et al. Detection of
the oil-producing microalga Botryococcus braunii in natural freshwater
environments by targeting the hydrocarbon biosynthesis gene SSL-3. Sci Rep
2019:9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53619-y. 16974.

[192] Pavlenko N, Kharina A. Policy and environmental implications of using HEFA+

for aviation. ICCT. 2018. https://theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/
Green-Diesel-Aviation_ICCT-Working-Paper_20180321_vF.pdf.

[193] Douvartzides SL, Charisiou ND, Papageridis KN, Goula MA. Green diesel: biomass
feedstocks, production technologies, catalytic research, fuel properties and
performance in compression ignition internal combustion engines. Energies 2019;
809:12. https://doi.org/10.3390/en12050809.

[194] Li L, Coppola E, Rine J, Miller JL, Walker D. Catalytic hydrothermal conversion of
triglycerides to non-ester biofuels. Energy and Fuels 2010;24:1305–15. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ef901163a.

[195] Li L. Method of converting triglycerides to biofuels. US 7,691,159 B2. 2010.
[196] McGarvey E, Tyner WE. A stochastic techno-economic analysis of the catalytic
hydrothermolysis aviation biofuel technology. Biofuels,. Bioproducts and
Biorefining 2018;12:474–84. https://doi.org/10.1002/bbb.1863.

[197] Malins C. What role is there for electrofuel technologies in European transport’s
low carbon future? Cerulogy. 2017. https://www.transportenvironment.
org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/2017_11_Cerulogy_study_What_role_electro
fuels_final_0.pdf.

[201] Guo XM, Trably E, Latrille E, Carrre H, Steyer JP. Hydrogen production from

agricultural waste by dark fermentation: a review. International Journal of
Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:10660–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2010.03.008.

[202] Marxer D, Furler P, Scheffe J, Geerlings H, Falter C, Batteiger V, et al.

Demonstration of the entire production chain to renewable kerosene via solar
thermochemical splitting of H2O and CO2. Energy and Fuels 2015;29:3241–50.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.5b00351.

[203] Nabgan W, Tuan Abdullah TA, Mat R, Nabgan B, Gambo Y, Ibrahim M, et al.

[175] Zupko R. Life cycle assessment of the production of gasoline and diesel from forest

residues using integrated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion. Int J Life Cycle
Assess 2019;24:1793–804. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-019-01616-8.

Renewable hydrogen production from bio-oil derivative via catalytic steam
reforming: an overview. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2017;79:
347–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.069.

[176] Karaj S, Müller J. Optimizing mechanical oil extraction of Jatropha curcas L.

[204] Nikolaidis P, Poullikkas A. A comparative overview of hydrogen production

seeds with respect to press capacity, oil recovery and energy efficiency. Industrial
Crops and Products 2011;34:1010–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indcrop.2011.03.009.

processes. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2017;67:597–611. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.044.

[205] Hoes M, Ackermann S, Theiler D, Furler P, Steinfeld A. Additive-manufactured

[177] Ben Amara A, Kaoubi S, Starck L. Toward an optimal formulation of alternative

jet fuels: enhanced oxidation and thermal stability by the addition of cyclic
molecules. Fuel 2016;173:98–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.01.040.

ordered porous structures made of ceria for concentrating solar applications.
Energy Technology 2019;7. https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.201900484.

[206] Campanari S, Guandalini G, Coolegem J, Ten Have J, Hayes P, Pichel AH.

Modeling, development, and testing of a 2 MW polymeric electrolyte membrane

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107335

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

fuel cell plant fueled with hydrogen from a chlor-alkali industry. Journal of
Electrochemical Energy Conversion and Storage 2019;16:1–9. https://doi.org/
10.1115/1.4042923.

[207] Haneda T, Akisawa A. Technological assessment of PEFC power generation

system using by-product hydrogen produced from a caustic soda plant.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:3240–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.10.142.

[208] IEA. The future of hydrogen Seizing today’s opportunities. International Energy
Agency (IEA). 2019. https://www.oecd.org/fr/publications/the-future-of-hydro
gen-1e0514c4-en.htm.

[209] Park JH, Kim S, Bard AJ. Novel carbon-doped TiO 2 nanotube arrays with high
aspect ratios for efficient solar water splitting. Nano Letters 2006;6:24–8. https://
doi.org/10.1021/nl051807y.

[210] Joy J, Mathew J, George SC. Nanomaterials for photoelectrochemical water

splitting – review. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:4804–17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.01.099.

[211] Safari F, Dincer I. A review and comparative evaluation of thermochemical water

splitting cycles for hydrogen production. Energy Conversion and Management
2020;205:112182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2019.112182.

[212] Acar C, Dincer I. Review and evaluation of hydrogen production options for better
environment. Journal of Cleaner Production 2019;218:835–49. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.02.046.

[213] Ursúa A, Gandía LM, Sanchis P. Hydrogen production from water electrolysis:

current status and future trends. Proceedings of the IEEE 2012;100:410–26.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2011.2156750.

[214] Carmo M, Fritz DL, Mergel J, Stolten D. A comprehensive review on PEM water
electrolysis. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2013;38:4901–34. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.01.151.

[215] Choi IH, Hwang KR, Han JS, Lee KH, Yun JS, Lee JS. The direct production of jet-
fuel from non-edible oil in a single-step process. Fuel 2015;158:98–104. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.05.020.

[216] Song Y, Zhang X, Xie K, Wang G, Bao X. High-temperature CO2 electrolysis in

solid oxide electrolysis cells: developments, challenges, and prospects. Advanced
Materials 2019:1–18. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201902033. 1902033.
[217] Zapantis A. Blue hydrogen. Global CCS Institute. 2021. https://www.globalccsins
titute.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/Circular-Carbon-Economy-series-Blue-
Hydrogen.pdf.

[234] Andika R, Nandiyanto ABD, Putra ZA, Bilad MR, Kim Y, Yun CM, et al. Co-
electrolysis for power-to-methanol applications. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 2018;95:227–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.07.030.
[235] Yurchak S. Developmbnt of mobil’s H-IXBD-HKD methanol-to-gasoline (MTG)

process, vol. 36; 1988. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2991(09)60521-8.
[236] ExxonMobil. Synthetic fuels (methanol to gasoline). 2019. https://www.exxonmo

bilchemical.com/en/catalysts-and-technology-licensing/synthetic-fuels.
[Accessed 3 October 2022].

[237] Eurocontrol. Aviation sustainability briefing: news and views on how we can

make aviation sustainable together Issue #6. EUROCONTROL. 2022. https
://www.eurocontrol.int/sites/default/files/2022-05/eurocontrol-aviation-sustai
nability-briefing-edition-6_0.pdf.

[238] Lufthansa Group. From test tube to barrel - Lufthansa invests in first industrially
produced carbon-neutral, electricity-based kerosene made in Germany. Lufthansa
Group; 2021. https://www.lufthansagroup.com/en/newsroom/releases/from-tes
t-tube-to-barrel-lufthansa-invests-in-first-industrially-produced-carbon-neutral-e
lectricity-based-kerosene-made-in-germany.html. [Accessed 22 February 2022].
[239] Lemmon EW, McLinden MO, Wagner W. Thermodynamic properties of propane.
III. A reference equation of state for temperatures from the melting line to 650 K
and pressures up to 1000 MPa. J Chem Eng Data 2009;54:3141–80. https://doi.
org/10.1021/je900217v.

[240] Ramesha DK. An overview of propane based domestic refrigeration systems.

Materials Today 2018;5:1599–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matpr.2017.11.252.

[241] Ashok B, Denis Ashok S, Ramesh Kumar C. LPG diesel dual fuel engine - a critical
review. Alexandria Engineering Journal 2015;54:105–26. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.aej.2015.03.002.

[242] Neste. Neste delivers first batch of 100% renewable propane to European market.

Green Car Congress; 2018. https://www.neste.com/releases-and-news/renew
able-solutions/neste-delivers-first-batch-100-renewable-propane-european-
market. [Accessed 3 October 2022].

[243] Hart W. Global LPG: opportunities and challenges in an evolving market. 2019.
https://www.lpgc.or.jp/corporate/information/images/Ph.D.,P.E.Hart.pdf.
[Accessed 25 March 2022].

[244] Pyl SP, Schietekat CM, Reyniers MF, Abhari R, Marin GB, Van Geem KM. Biomass
to olefins: cracking of renewable naphtha. Chemical Engineering Journal 2011;
176–177:178–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2011.04.062.

[218] IRENA. Hydrogen from renewable power: technology outlook for the energy

[245] Piehl JA, Zyada A, Bravo L, Samimi-Abianeh O. Review of oxidation of gasoline

transition. IRENA. 2018. https://www.irena.org/-/media/files/irena/agenc
y/publication/2018/sep/irena_hydrogen_from_renewable_power_2018.pdf.

[219] Li B, Duan Y, Luebke D, Morreale B. Advances in CO2 capture technology: a
patent review. Applied Energy 2013;102:1439–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2012.09.009.

[220] Keith DW. Why capture CO2 from the atmosphere? Science 2009;325:1654–5.

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1175680.

surrogates and its components. Journal of Combustion 2018;2018. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2018/8406754.

[246] Tamm DC, Devenish GN, Finelt DR, Kalt AL. Analysis of gasoline octane costs

prepared for. 2018.

[247] Neste. Neste MY renewable isoalkane TM. Neste. 2019. https://www.neste.
com/companies/products/renewable-products/neste-renewable-naphtha-0.
[Accessed 3 October 2022].

[221] IEA. Putting CO2 to use creating value from emissions. International Energy
Agency (IEA). 2019. https://www.iea.org/reports/putting-co2-to-use.

[222] Last GV, Schmick MT. Identification and selection of major carbon dioxide stream
compositions. United states. 2011, 1019211. https://doi.org/10.2172/1019211.
PNNL-20493.

[248] Neste. Accelerating the wide-scale adoption of sustainable aviation fuel. Neste.
2019. https://www.neste.com/products/all-products/saf. [Accessed 3 October
2022].

[249] Simpson SD, Tran PL, Mihalcea CD, Fung JMY, Liew F. Production of butanediol

by anaerobic microbial fermentation. CA-2727549-C. 2014.

[223] IEA. Direct air capture. International energy agency (IEA). 2022. https://www.

[250] United State Food and Drug Administration. Code of federal regulations (CFR)

iea.org/reports/direct-air-capture. [Accessed 27 September 2022].
[224] Zheng Y, Wang J, Yu B, Zhang W, Chen J, Qiao J, et al. A review of high

temperature co-electrolysis of H2O and CO2 to produce sustainable fuels using
solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs): advanced materials and technology.
Chemical Society Reviews 2017;46:1427–63. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c6cs00403b.

[225] Bahmanpour AM, H ́eroguel F, Kılıç M, Baranowski CJ, Artiglia L, R ̈othlisberger U,
et al. Cu–Al spinel as a highly active and stable catalyst for the reverse water gas
shift reaction. ACS Catal 2019;9:6243–51. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acscatal.9b01822.

[226] Liu H-X, Li S-Q, Wang W-W, Yu W-Z, Zhang W-J, Ma C, et al. Partially sintered
copper‒ceria as excellent catalyst for the high-temperature reverse water gas shift
reaction. Nat Commun 2022;867:13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-
28476-5.

[227] Zhang X, Zhu X, Lin L, Yao S, Zhang M, Liu X, et al. Highly dispersed copper over
β-Mo 2 C as an efficient and stable catalyst for the reverse water gas shift (RWGS)
reaction. ACS Catal 2017;7:912–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.6b02991.

[228] Gonz ́alez-Casta ̃no M, Dorneanu B, Arellano-García H. The reverse water gas shift

reaction: a process systems engineering perspective. React Chem Eng 2021;6:
954–76. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0RE00478B.

[229] Bhandari R, Trudewind CA, Zapp P. Life cycle assessment of hydrogen production
via electrolysis - a review. Journal of Cleaner Production 2014;85:151–63.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.07.048.

title 21. 2021. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CF
RSearch.cfm?fr=173.220.

[251] Białkowska AM. Strategies for efficient and economical 2,3-butanediol

production: new trends in this field. World Journal of Microbiology and
Biotechnology 2016;32. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11274-016-2161-x.
[252] Transparency Market Research. Market research report. Transparency market

research. 2019. https://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/.

[253] Pinkos R, Erich Lorenz R, Alexander Beste Y. Process for preparing 1,4-butane-

diol. US 7,759,531 B2. 2010.

[254] Białkowska AM. Strategies for efficient and economical 2,3-butanediol

production: new trends in this field. World Journal of Microbiology and
Biotechnology 2016;32. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11274-016-2161-x.

[255] Van Leeuwen BNM, Van Der Wulp AM, Duijnstee I, Van Maris AJA, Straathof AJJ.
Fermentative production of isobutene. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology
2012;93:1377–87. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-011-3853-7.

[256] GlobalBioenergies. First batch of isobutene from renewable resources delivered to
Arkema. Global Bioenergies; 2015. https://www.global-bioenergies.com/first-ba
tch-of-isobutene-from-renewable-resources-delivered-to-arkema/?lang=en.
[Accessed 29 January 2020].

[257] Goortani BM, Gaurav A, Deshpande A, Ng FTT, Rempel GL. Production of

isooctane from isobutene: energy integration and carbon dioxide abatement via
catalytic distillation. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2015;54:
3570–81. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie5032056.

[230] Parhad PS, Nirukhe AB. Hydrogen production method by multi-step copper-

[258] Gevo. Bio-based gasoline for high-performance engines. Gevo Inc; 2019. https://

chlorine thermochemical cycle. WO/2013/054340. 2013.

gevo.com/products/renewable-gasoline/. [Accessed 29 January 2020].

[231] Furler P, Scheffe JR, Steinfeld A. Syngas production by simultaneous splitting of H
2O and CO 2via ceria redox reactions in a high-temperature solar reactor. Energy
and Environmental Science 2012;5:6098–103. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c1ee02620h.

[232] SUN to LIQUID project - SUN to LIQUID project n.d. http://www.sun-to-liquid.

eu/. [Accessed 27 February 2020].

[233] Hankin A, Shah N. Process exploration and assessment for the production of

methanol and dimethyl ether from carbon dioxide and water. Sustainable Energy
& Fuels 2017;1:1541–56. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7se00206h.

[259] Bhoot K. Isooctane market to increase considerably. Communal News; 2019. https
://communalnews.com/isooctane-market-to-increase-considerably/. [Accessed 4
March 2020].

[260] HCS Group. HCS Group signs purchase agreement with Gevo on renewable

isooctane. HCS Group; 2019. https://www.h-c-s-group.com/hcs-group-signs-pur
chase-agreement-with-gevo-on-renewable-isooctane/. [Accessed 27 November
2019].

[261] Samimi A, Kavousi K, Zarinabadi S, Bozorgian A. Optimization of the gasoline

production plant in order to increase feed. Progress in Chemical and Biochemical
Research 2020;3:7–19. https://doi.org/10.33945/sami/pcbr.2020.1.2.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107336

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

[262] Abrams MA, Dahdah NF, Francu E. Development of methods to collect and

[289] Wang C, Zhu K, Chi Z, Ke F, Yang Y, Wang A, et al. How far away are lithium-

analyze gasoline range (C5–C12) hydrocarbons from seabed sediments as
indicators of subsurface hydrocarbon generation and entrapment. Applied
Geochemistry 2009;24:1951–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apgeochem.2009.07.009.

[263] de Klerk A. Aviation turbine fuels through the fischer–tropsch process. Elsevier

sulfur batteries from commercialization? Frontiers in Energy Research 2019.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2019.00123.

[290] Li OL, Ishizaki T. Development, challenges, and prospects of carbon-based

electrode for lithium-air batteries. Elsevier Inc.; 2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-813794-9.00004-1.

Inc.; 2016. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-804568-8.00010-x.

[291] Biemolt J, Jungbacker P, van Teijlingen T, Yan N, Rothenberg G. Beyond lithium-

[264] Durkin T, Kersey K, Paolini J. Synthesis of green hydrocarbons using the AIR TO
FUELS TM  technology. University of Pennsylvania. Penn Libraries: University of
Pennsylvania; 2019. https://repository.upenn.edu/cbe_sdr/114/.

[265] David PR, Alto P. Compositions and methods for producing fermentation products

and residuals. US 7,309,602 B2. 2007.

[266] Gevo. Gevo’s biofuels. 2019. https://gevo.com/biofuels-reduce-greenhouse-gas-e

missions/. [Accessed 17 November 2019].

[267] BusinessWire. Gevo and land O’lakes purina feed sign off-take and marketing

agreement | business wire. Business Wire; 2012. https://www.businesswire.
com/news/home/20120110005824/en/Gevo-Land-O’Lakes-Purina-Feed-Sign-
Off-Take, . [Accessed 12 December 2019].

[268] Chu PL, Vanderghem C, MacLean HL, Saville BA. Process modeling of

hydrodeoxygenation to produce renewable jet fuel and other hydrocarbon fuels.
Fuel 2017;196:298–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.01.097.
[269] Pearlson M, Wollersheim C, Hileman J. A techno-economic review of

hydroprocessed renewable esters and fatty acids for jet fuel production. Biofuels,.
Bioprod Bioref 2013;7:89–96. https://doi.org/10.1002/bbb.1378.

[270] van Dyk S, Su J, Ebadian M, O’Connor D, Lakeman M, Saddler J. (John). Potential

yields and emission reductions of biojet fuels produced via hydrotreatment of
biocrudes produced through direct thermochemical liquefaction. Biotechnol
Biofuels 2019;281:12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13068-019-1625-2.

[271] Balzer G. Conversion of douglas fir biomass into isobutanol and biojet. Gevo, Inc.
2014. https://nararenewables.org/documents/2016/11/balzernwbcc2014.pdf/.
[Accessed 3 October 2022].

[272] Johnston G. Alcohol to jet - isobutanol. 2017. https://www.icao.int/Meetings/altf
uels17/Documents/Glenn%20Johnston%20-%20Gevo.pdf. [Accessed 12
December 2021].

[273] Inc Virent. BioForm ® SAK jet fuel. Virent, Inc. 2015. https://www.virent.

com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/BioForm-SAK-Data-Sheet-Jan-
2015.pdf. [Accessed 22 January 2022].

[274] Eswaran S, Subramaniam S, Geleynse S, Brandt K, Wolcott M, Zhang X. Techno-
economic analysis of catalytic hydrothermolysis pathway for jet fuel production.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2021;151:111516. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rser.2021.111516.

[275] CARE-O-SENE project. CARE-O-SENE catalyst research for sustainable kerosene.
CARE-O-SENE research project. 2022. https://care-o-sene.com/en/. [Accessed 19
September 2022].

based batteries. Materials 2020;425:13. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma13020425.

[292] European Commission. Study on the EU’s list of critical raw materials - final

report. 2020. p. 2020.

[293] Porzio J, Scown CD. Life-cycle assessment considerations for batteries and battery
materials. Advanced Energy Materials 2021;2100771:11. https://doi.org/
10.1002/aenm.202100771.

[294] Sripad S, Bills A, Viswanathan V. A review of safety considerations for batteries in
aircraft with electric propulsion. MRS Bulletin 2021;46:435–42. https://doi.org/
10.1557/s43577-021-00097-1.

[295] Chin JC, Look K, McNichols EO, Hall DL, Gray JS, Schnulo SL. Battery cell-to-pack
scaling trends for electric aircraft. AIAA propulsion and energy 2021 forum, vol.
15; 2021. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2021-3316.

[296] Kolly JM, Panagiotou J. The investigation of a lithium-ion battery fire onboard a
boeing 787 by the US national transportation safety board. International society
of air safety investigators. 2013. https://www.isasi.org/Documents/library/tech
nical-papers/2013/ISASI%20NTSB%20Kolly.pdf.

[297] Li W, Li Y, Deng H, Bao L. Planning of electric public transport system under

battery swap mode. Sustainability 2018;2528:10. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su10072528.

[298] Sarker MR, Pandzic H, Ortega-Vazquez MA. Optimal operation and services

scheduling for an electric vehicle battery swapping station. IEEE Trans Power Syst
2015;30:901–10. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2014.2331560.

[299] United Nations. Commodities at a glance: special issue on strategic battery raw
materials No. 13. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD). 2020. https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/ditcc
om2019d5_en.pdf.

[300] Jara AD, Betemariam A, Woldetinsae G, Kim JY. Purification, application and

current market trend of natural graphite: a review. International Journal of
Mining Science and Technology 2019;29:671–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijmst.2019.04.003.

[301] Chordia M, Nordel ̈of A, Ellingsen LA-W. Environmental life cycle implications of
upscaling lithium-ion battery production. Int J Life Cycle Assess 2021;26:
2024–39. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-021-01976-0.

[302] Golmohammadzadeh R, Faraji F, Jong B, Pozo-Gonzalo C, Banerjee PC. Current
challenges and future opportunities toward recycling of spent lithium-ion
batteries. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2022;159:112202. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112202.

[276] Domone J. The challenges and benefits of the electrification of aircraft. SNC-

[313] Rao AG, Yin F, Werij HGC. Energy transition in aviation: the role of cryogenic

Lavalin’s Atkins Business 2018. https://www.snclavalin.com/~/media/Files/S/
SNC-Lavalin/download-centre/en/whitepaper/electrification%20white%20pape
r%20-%20digital.pdf. [Accessed 15 March 2022].

[277] Thomson R, Sachdeva N, Nazukin M, Martinez N. Aircraft electrical propulsion –
the next chapter of aviation?. 2017. https://www.rolandberger.com/publication
s/publication_pdf/roland_berger_aircraft_electrical_propulsion.pdf. [Accessed 10
October 2022].

[278] European Commission. Batteries: European Battery cell R&I workshop. 2018. htt
ps://www.2zeroemission.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/report_batteries-wor
kshop_january-11-12_final.pdf.

[279] Duffy KP, Jansen RH. Partially turboelectric and hybrid electric aircraft drive key
performance parameters. 2018 AIAA/IEEE electric aircraft technologies
symposium, EATS 2018. 2018. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2018-5023.

[280] Janovec M,

ˇ
Cerˇnan J,

ˇ
Skult ́ety F, Nov ́ak A. Design of batteries for a hybrid

fuels. Aerospace 2020;181:7. https://doi.org/10.3390/aerospace7120181.
[314] Zohuri B. Hydrogen energy: challenges and solutions for a cleaner future.

Hydrogen Energy: Challenges and Solutions for a Cleaner Future 2018:1–283.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-93461-7.

[315] Browne M. Clean hydrogen beckons aviation engineers. The New York times.
1988. https://www.nytimes.com/1988/05/24/science/clean-hydrogen-beckon
s-aviation-engineers.html. [Accessed 27 September 2022].

[316] Klug HG, Faass R. CRYOPLANE: hydrogen fuelled aircraft — status and

challenges. Air & Space Europe 2001;3:252–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1290-
0958(01)90110-8.

[317] Airbus. The ZEROe demonstrator has arrived | Airbus. Airbus. 2022. https://
www.airbus.com/en/newsroom/stories/2022-02-the-zeroe-demonstrator-has
-arrived. [Accessed 20 September 2022].

[318] Schuurman R. Airbus confirms the A380 as ZEROe hydrogen demonstrator.

propulsion system of a training aircraft. Energies 2021;49:15. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en15010049.

AirInsight. 2022. https://airinsight.com/airbus-confirms-the-a380-as-zeroe-hyd
rogen-demonstrator/. [Accessed 20 September 2022].

[281] Ulvestad A. A brief review of current lithium ion battery technology and potential
solid state battery technologies. 2018. http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.04317.
[282] Deng Y, Li J, Li T, Gao X, Yuan C. Life cycle assessment of lithium sulfur battery
for electric vehicles. Journal of Power Sources 2017;343:284–95. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.01.036.

[283] Perathoner S, Centi G. Advanced nanocarbon materials for future energy

applications. Emerging Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage 2018:
305–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813794-9.00009-0.

[284] Hansson N, Bradley M, Campbell M, Cherry DAJ, Cox K, Angelo DD, et al. Boeing

technical journal environmental impacts of aerospace batteries. 2018. https
://www.boeing.com/resources/boeingdotcom/features/innovation-quarterly/
aug2018/BTJ_Batteries_AUG2018_FULL.pdf.

[285] Imanishi N, Yamamoto O. Perspectives and challenges of rechargeable lithium–air
batteries. Materials Today Advances 2019;4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mtadv.2019.100031.

[286] Schmuch R, Wagner R, H ̈orpel G, Placke T, Winter M. Performance and cost of

materials for lithium-based rechargeable automotive batteries. Nature Energy
2018;3:267–78. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-018-0107-2.

[287] Foss CEL, Müssig S, Svensson AM, Vie PJS, Ulvestad A, Mæhlen JP, et al. Anodes
for Li-ion batteries prepared from microcrystalline silicon and enabled by binder’s
chemistry and pseudo-self-healing. Scientific Reports 2020;10:1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-020-70001-5.

[288] Sund ́en B. Hydrogen, batteries and fuel cells. United kingdom. Elsevier Science;

2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816950-6.00004-X.

[319] Boeing. Boeing: phantom Eye. 2013. https://www.boeing.com/defense/phant

om-eye. [Accessed 6 January 2022].

[320] Hoelzen J, Silberhorn D, Zill T, Bensmann B, Hanke-Rauschenbach R. Hydrogen-
powered aviation and its reliance on green hydrogen infrastructure – review and
research gaps. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2022;47:3108–30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.10.239.

[321] IATA. Fact sheet 7: liquid hydrogen as a potential low-carbon fuel for aviation.
IATA. 2020. https://www.iata.org/contentassets/d13875e9ed784f75bac90f0007
60e998/fact_sheet7-hydrogen-fact-sheet_072020.pdf.

[322] Javed I, Baek SW, Waheed K. Autoignition and combustion characteristics of

kerosene droplets with dilute concentrations of aluminum nanoparticles at
elevated temperatures. Combustion and Flame 2015;162:774–87. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2014.08.018.

[323] Airbus. ZEROe project: towards the world’s first zero-emission commercial

aircraft. 2020. https://www.airbus.com/en/innovation/zero-emission/hydro
gen/zeroe. [Accessed 6 January 2022].

[324] European Commission. Directorate-general for research and innovation.

Environmental impact assessments of innovative bio-based product. Task 1 of
“study on support to R&I policy in the area of bio-based products and services “.
Publications Office; 2019. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/251887.
[Accessed 7 January 2022].

[325] IATA. Aircraft technology roadmap to 2050. IATA. 2017. https://www.iata.

org/contentassets/8d19e716636a47c184e7221c77563c93/Technology-roadmap
-2050.pdf.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107337

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

[326] Saaty TL. Decision making with the analytic hierarchy process. International

[353] Valera-Medina A, Amer-Hatem F, Azad AK, Dedoussi IC, de Joannon M,

Journal of Services Sciences 2008;1:83–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-0483
(87)90016-8.

[327] de Jong S, Antonissen K, Hoefnagels R, Lonza L, Wang M, Faaij A, et al. Life-cycle
analysis of greenhouse gas emissions from renewable jet fuel production.
Biotechnology for Biofuels 2017;10:1–18. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13068-017-
0739-7.

Fernandes RX, et al. Review on ammonia as a potential fuel: from synthesis to
economics. Energy Fuels 2021;35:6964–7029. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.0c03685.

[354] Kyriakou V, Garagounis I, Vasileiou E, Vourros A, Stoukides M. Progress in the
electrochemical synthesis of ammonia. Catalysis Today 2017;286:2–13. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2016.06.014.

[328] ICAO. CORSIA supporting document: CORSIA eligible fuels - life cycle assessment

[355] Brown T. Industry report sees multi-billion ton market for green ammonia.

methodology. ICAO. 2021. https://www.icao.int/environmental-protection/C
ORSIA/Documents/CORSIA%20Supporting%20Document_CORSIA%20Eligible%
20Fuels_LCA%20Methodology.pdf.

[329] IATA. Jet fuel price monitor. IATA. 2021. https://www.iata.org/en/publications/

economics/fuel-monitor/. [Accessed 7 January 2022].

[330] IATA. IATA Sustainable aviation fuel roadmap 1st Edition. 2015. https://www.ia

ta.org/contentassets/d13875e9ed784f75bac90f000760e998/safr-1-2015.pdf.

[331] Stratton RW, Wong HM, Hileman JI. Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions from
alternative jet fuels. 2010. http://web.mit.edu/aeroastro/partner/reports/proj2
8/partner-proj28-2010-001.pdf.

[332] IRENA. A pathway to decarbonise the shipping sector by 2050. International

Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). 2021. https://www.irena.org/-/media/File
s/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2021/Oct/IRENA_Decarbonising_Shipping_2021.
pdf.

[333] DNV GL. Maritime forecast to 2050 energy transition outlook 2019. 2019. https
://sustainableworldports.org/wp-content/uploads/DNV-GL_2019_Maritime-fore
cast-to-2050-Energy-transition-Outlook-2019-report.pdf.

[334] SAVION Inc. SAVION aerospace. FlySavion. 2020. https://www.flysavion.com

/about-us. [Accessed 24 March 2022].

[335] Burston M, Conroy T, Spiteri L, Spiteri M, Bil C, Dorrington GE. Conceptual design

of sustainable liquid methane fuelled passenger aircraft. In: 20th ISPE
international conference on concurrent engineering; 2013. p. 391–400. https://
doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-302-5-391.

[336] Garcia Jarque S, Birgen C. Liquefied synthesis natural gas from woody biomass -
investigation of cryogenic technique for gas upgrading. Universitat polit`ecnica de
Catalunya. 2013. http://hdl.handle.net/2099.1/20309.

[337] Ghaib K, Ben-Fares F-Z. Power-to-Methane: a state-of-the-art review. Renewable

and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2018;81:433–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2017.08.004.

[338] Rompokos P, Kissoon S, Roumeliotis I, Nalianda D, Nikolaidis T, Rolt A. Liquefied
natural gas for civil aviation. Energies 2020;13. https://doi.org/10.3390/
en13225925.

[339] Withers MR, Malina R, Gilmore CK, Gibbs JM, Trigg C, Wolfe PJ, et al. Economic
and environmental assessment of liquefied natural gas as a supplemental aircraft
fuel. Progress in Aerospace Sciences 2014;66:17–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
paerosci.2013.12.002.

[340] Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pirani A, Connors SL, Pean C, Berger S, et al. IPCC
2021: summary for policymakers. In: Climate change 2021: the physical science
basis. Contribution of working group I to the sixth assessment report of the
intergovermental panel on climate change. Cambridge University Press; 2021.
[341] Bradley MK, Droney CK. Subsonic Ultra green aircraft research phase II: N+4

advanced concept development. NTRS - NASA technical reports server. 2012. http
s://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20120009038.

[342] Rao AG, Yin F. The AHEAD project: advanced hybrid engines for aircraft

development. CORDIS EU Research Results 2013. https://cordis.europa.eu/proje
ct/id/284636/reporting.

[343] Bicer Y, Dincer I. Life cycle evaluation of hydrogen and other potential fuels for
aircrafts. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:10722–38. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.12.119.

[344] Terpitz J. LNG for aircraft. 2019. https://www.gti.energy/wp-content/uploads/

2019/10/151-LNG19-03April2019-Terpitz-Julian-paper.pdf.

Ammonia Energy Association. 2020. https://www.ammoniaenergy.org/articles
/industry-report-sees-multi-billion-ton-market-for-green-ammonia/. [Accessed 15
April 2022].

[356] Wetering L. Zero-emissions aeroplanes that use ammonia as jet fuel rather than
kerosene could take to the skies within years. Dauurzame Luchtvaart. 2020. http
s://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-8611587/Zero-emission-ammonia
-fuelled-aeroplanes-skies-years.html. [Accessed 10 December 2021].

[357] Imhoff TB, Gkantonas S, Mastorakos E. Analysing the performance of ammonia
powertrains in the marine environment. Energies 2021;7447:14. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en14217447.

[358] Steffen W, Richardson K, Rockstr ̈om J, Cornell SE, Fetzer I, Bennett EM, et al.

Planetary boundaries: guiding human development on a changing planet. Science
2015;347:1259855. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259855.

[359] Erdemir D, Dincer I. A perspective on the use of ammonia as a clean fuel:

challenges and solutions. Int J Energy Res 2021;45:4827–34. https://doi.org/
10.1002/er.6232.

[360] Zhao Y, Setzler BP, Wang J, Nash J, Wang T, Xu B, et al. An efficient direct

ammonia fuel cell for affordable carbon-neutral transportation. Joule 2019;3:
2472–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2019.07.005.

[361] Kanchwala H. What is A solar-powered airplane? Can it replace the conventional
jet-fueled airplanes? Science ABC. 2018. https://www.scienceabc.com/innovati
on/solar-powered-plane-future-aviation-industry.html. [Accessed 25 March
2022].

[362] Blais C. MIT school of engineering | » is it possible to make solar-powered

airplanes? MIT school of engineering. 2016. https://engineering.mit.edu/engage
/ask-an-engineer/is-it-possible-to-make-solar-powered-airplanes/. [Accessed 7
January 2022].

[363] Svarc J. Most efficient solar panels 2021. Clean Energy Reviews. 2021.
https://www.cleanenergyreviews.info/blog/most-efficient-solar-panels.
[Accessed 7 January 2022].

[364] Safyanu BD, Abdullah MN, Omar Z. Review of power device for solar-powered

aircraft applications. JAerosp Technol Manag 2019:e4119. https://doi.org/
10.5028/jatm.v11.1077.

[365] Methanology. MY-methanol for aviation | METHANOLOGY. 2021. https://www.

methanology.com/methaviation. [Accessed 23 December 2021].

[366] Green Car Congress. Element 1 and NEXA Capital partner on methanol-based

hydrogen generation for electric vertical aircraft. Green Car Congress. 2021. https
://www.greencarcongress.com/2021/11/20211130-e1.html. [Accessed 23
December 2021].

[367] Helder D, Behnken J, Aulich T. Design of ethanol based fuels for aviation. Section
1: Journal of Aerospace 2000;2000(109):243–56. https://doi.org/10.4271/2000-
01-1712.

[368] Shauck ME, Zanin MG. Certification of an aircraft engine on ethanol fuel. 1990.
https://afdc.energy.gov/files/pdfs/2896.pdf. [Accessed 20 January 2022].

[369] Christoph Vratny P. Conceptual design methods of electric power architectures
for hybrid energy aircraft. Technische Universit ̈at München 2018. https://d-nb.
info/1183259239/34.

[370] Misra A. Energy conversion and storage requirements for hybrid electric aircraft.
In: 40th international conference and expo on advanced ceramics and composites;
2016. https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20160010280/downloads/20160010
280.pdf. [Accessed 3 March 2022].

[345] Reaction Engines. Reaction Engines, STFC engaged in ground-breaking study on

[371] Hoelzen J, Liu Y, Bensmann B, Winnefeld C, Elham A, Friedrichs J, et al.

ammonia fuel for a sustainable aviation propulsion system. Reaction Engines.
2020. https://www.reactionengines.co.uk/news/news/reaction-engines-stfc-en
gaged-ground-breaking-study-ammonia-fuel-sustainable-aviation-propulsion-sys
tem. [Accessed 28 September 2022].

[346] Raytheon Technologies. Ammonia could fuel the future of sustainable flight.

Raytheon Technologies. 2021. https://www.rtx.com/News/2020/12/09/ammo
nia-could-fuel-the-future-of-sustainable-flight. [Accessed 7 October 2022].

[347] Smith L. Zero-carbon ammonia-powered turboelectric propulsion system

(ZAPturbo). 2021. https://arpa-e.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2021-02/0
4_Smith_ZAPTurboKickoffJan2021_vIII.pdf.

Conceptual design of operation strategies for hybrid electric aircraft. Energies
2018;11:1–26. https://doi.org/10.3390/en11010217.

[372] Baumeister S, Leung A, Ryley T. The emission reduction potentials of first

generation electric aircraft (FGEA) in Finland. Journal of Transport Geography
2020;85:102730. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2020.102730. 102730.
[373] MAHEPA project. D1.1 : concept of modular architecture for hybrid electric
propulsion of aircraft. Modular approach to hybrid electric propulsion
architecture (MAHEPA). 2017. https://mahepa.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/1
2/D1.1-Concept-of-Modular-Architecture-fro-Hybrid-Electric-Propulsion-of-Aircr
aft.pdf.

[348] Lee DS, Fahey DW, Skowron A, Allen MR, Burkhardt U, Chen Q, et al. The

[374] Xie Y, Savvarisal Antonios T, Dan Z, Jason G. Review of hybrid electric powered

contribution of global aviation to anthropogenic climate forcing for 2000 to 2018.
Atmospheric Environment 2021;29:244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
atmosenv.2020.117834.

[349] Mulder TJ, Ruijgrok GJJ. On the reduction of NOx-emission levels by performing

low NOx flights. In: 26th international congress of the aeronautical Sciences;
2008. http://www.icas.org/ICAS_ARCHIVE/ICAS2008/PAPERS/532.PDF.

[350] Snelgrove G. Oxford university looks to power aircraft with ammonia. 2020.

https://simpleflying.com/ammonia-powered-aircraft/. [Accessed 25 March
2022].

[351] Ghavam S, Vahdati M, Wilson IAG, Styring P. Sustainable ammonia production
processes. Front Energy Res 2021;580808:9. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fenrg.2021.580808.

[352] Chatterjee S, Parsapur RK, Huang K-W. Limitations of ammonia as a hydrogen

energy carrier for the transportation sector. ACS Energy Lett 2021;6:4390–4.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.1c02189.

aircraft, its conceptual design and energy management methodologies. Chinese
Journal of Aeronautics 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cja.2020.07.017.

[375] Gil AA, Silva HL. Hybrid-electric aircraft: conceptual design, structural and
aeroelastic analyses. Universidade federal de Uberlˆandia, vol. 123; 2017. htt
ps://repositorio.ufu.br/bitstream/123456789/20599/3/HybridElectricAircraft.
pdf.

[376] Boggero L, Corpino S, De Martin A, Evangelista G, Fioriti M, Sorli M. A virtual test
bench of a parallel hybrid propulsion system for UAVs. Aerospace 2019;6.
https://doi.org/10.3390/AEROSPACE6070077.

[377] Chen PT, Pai PH, Yang CJ, Huang KD. Development of transmission systems for
parallel hybrid electric vehicles. Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 2019;9. https://
doi.org/10.3390/app9081538.

[378] Brelje BJ, Martins JRRA. Electric, hybrid, and turboelectric fixed-wing aircraft: a
review of concepts, models, and design approaches. Progress in Aerospace
Sciences 2019;104:1–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2018.06.004.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107338

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

[379] Eviation. Eviation. Media - eviation. 2022. https://www.eviation.co/media/.

[Accessed 19 September 2022].

eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52020DC0789.
[Accessed 15 December 2022].

[380] Alcock C. Eviation’s Alice electric aircraft catches fire during ground tests. AIN

[404] European Commission. 2030 climate target plan 2021. https://ec.europa.

online. 2020. https://www.ainonline.com/aviation-news/business-aviation/
2020-01-24/eviations-electric-alice-aircraft-catches-fire-during-ground-tests.
[Accessed 13 November 2021].

[381] magniX. magniX. MagniX. 2019. https://www.magnix.aero/. [Accessed 30

August 2022].

[382] Pallini T. The world’s largest electric plane just took its first flight in the latest

milestone for battery-powered passenger flights. Business Insider. 2020. https
://www.businessinsider.com/magnix-all-electric-cessna-grand-caravan-takes-firs
t-flight-2020-6. [Accessed 20 December 2021].

[383] Grad P. Groundbreaking all-electric plane paving way to greener aviation.

TechxploreCom. 2020. https://techxplore.com/news/2020-05-groundbreaking-
all-electric-plane-paving-greener.html. [Accessed 25 October 2021].

[384] Campbell M. World’s largest all-electric plane generates zero carbon emissions.
EuronewsGreen. 2020. https://www.euronews.com/living/2020/06/01/world-s-
largest-all-electric-plane-generates-zero-carbon-emissions. [Accessed 1 November
2021].

[385] easyJet. easyJet’s partner Wright Electric begins engine development program for
186 seat electric aircraft. MediacentreEasyjetCom. 2020. https://mediacentre.eas
yjet.com/story/13660/easyjet-s-partner-wright-electric-begins-engine-d
evelopment-program-for-186-seat-electric-aircraft. [Accessed 20 November
2021].

[386] Skies Sustainable. Wright electric reveals big plans | sustainable skies n.d. https
://sustainableskies.org/wright-electric-reveals-big-plans/. [Accessed 20
December 2021].

[387] Barnes P. General aviation aircraft: fuel cell hybrids for electric propulsion.
AerosocietyCom. 2019. https://www.aerosociety.com/media/12868/raes-f
uel-cell-presentation-v31.pdf. [Accessed 29 September 2022].

[388] National Academies of Science. Engineering, Medicine. Commercial aircraft
propulsion and energy systems research: reducing global carbon emissions.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2016. https://doi.org/10.17226/
23490.

[389] Bassam AM, Phillips AB, Turnock SR, Wilson PA. An improved energy

management strategy for a hybrid fuel cell/battery passenger vessel. International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2016;41:22453–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2016.08.049.

[390] Sahoo S, Zhao X, Kyprianidis K. A review of concepts, benefits, and challenges for

future electrical propulsion-based aircraft. Aerospace 2020;7. https://doi.org/
10.3390/aerospace7040044.

[391] Alrashed M, Nikolaidis T, Pilidis P, Jafari S. Utilisation of turboelectric

distribution propulsion in commercial aviation: a review on NASA’s TeDP
concept. Chinese Journal of Aeronautics 2021;34:48–65. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cja.2021.03.014.

[392] Rodrigo C. Basic comparison of three aircraft concepts: classic jet propulsion,

turbo-electric propulsion and turbo-hydraulic propulsion. Master thesis. Hamburg
: aircraft design and systems group (AERO), department of automotive and
aeronautical engineering, hamburg university of applied Sciences. 2019. https://
nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:gbv:18302-aero2019-09-22.014.
[393] Rend ́on MA, S ́anchez RCD, Gallo MJ, Anzai AH. Aircraft hybrid-electric

propulsion: development trends, challenges and opportunities. J Control Autom
Electr Syst 2021;32:1244–68. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40313-021-00740-x.

eu/clima/eu-action/european-green-deal/2030-climate-target-plan_en. [Accessed
7 January 2022].

[405] European Commission. Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from
renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001/
77/EC and 2003/30/EC. European Commission. 2009. https://eur-lex.europa.eu
/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A32009L0028.

[406] The European Parliament and of the Council. Directive (EU) 2015/1513 of the

European Parliament and of the Council of 9 September 2015 amending Directive
98/70/EC relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels and amending Directive
2009/28/EC on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable. 2015. https
://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32015L1513.
[407] Meijerink O, Valk M, Junginger M. The voluntary RED opt-in for aviation

biofuels. 2016. https://fdocuments.net/document/the-voluntary-red-opt-in-for-
aviation-biofuels-in-could-be-implemented-into-the.html?page=1. [Accessed 27
June 2022].

[408] Mai-Moulin T, Hoefnagels R, Grundmann P, Junginger M. Effective sustainability

criteria for bioenergy: towards the implementation of the european renewable
directive II. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2021;138:110645.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110645.

[409] European Commission. Commission delegated regulation (EU) of 13.3.2019

supplementing Directive (EU) 2018/2001 as regards the determination of high
direct land-use change-risk feedstock for which a significant expansion of the
production area into land with high carbon stock is observed and the certification
of low indirect land-use change-risk biofuels, bioliquids, and biomass fuels.
European Commission 2019. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
PDF/?uri=CELEX:32019R0807.

[410] European Commission. Proposal for a directive of the European parliament and of
the council: amending directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European parliament and
of the council, regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European parliament and of the
council and directive 98/70/EC of the European parliament and of the council as
regards the promotion of energy from renewable sources, and repealing council
directive (EU) 2015/652. 2021. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/T
XT/?uri=CELEX%3A52021PC0557.

[411] European Parliament and of the Council. Directive 2008/101/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 amending Directive 2003 87
EC so as to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission
allowance trading within the Community. 2008. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/lega
l-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32008L0101.

[412] European Parliament and of the Council. Regulation (EU) 2017/2392 of the

European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2017 amending
Directive 2003/87/EC to continue current limitations of scope for aviation
activities and to prepare to implement a global market-based measure from 2021.
2017. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2017
.350.01.0007.01.ENG.

[413] Ministry of Ecological and Solidarity Transition. French strategy for energy and
climate: multi annual energy plan 2019-2023 and 2024-2028. Ministry of
Ecological and Solidarity Transition. 2019. https://www.ecologie.gouv.fr/sites
/default/files/0-PPE%20English%20Version%20With%20Annex_0.pdf.
[Accessed 3 December 2021].

[394] Welstead JR, Felder JL. Conceptual design of a single-aisle turboelectric

[414] EMBER. Carbon pricing: the latest data on EU ETS. Ember. 2022. https://ember

commercial transport with fuselage boundary layer ingestion. In: 54th AIAA
aerospace Sciences meeting; 2016. p. 1–17. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2016-
1027. 0.

[395] Del Rosario RA. Future with hybrid electric propulsion systems: a NASA

perspective. Nasa. 2015. https://ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?R=20150000748.
[396] Nalianda D, Singh R. Turbo-Electric distributed propulsion - opportunities,

benefits and challenges. Aircraft Engineering and Aerospace Technology 2014;86:
543–9. https://doi.org/10.1108/AEAT-03-2014-0035.

-climate.org/data/data-tools/carbon-price-viewer/. [Accessed 3 June 2022].

[415] ICAP. EU emission trading system (EU ETS) ETS detailed information.

International carbon action partnership (ICAP). 2021. https://icapcarbonaction.
com/en/ets/eu-emissions-trading-system-eu-ets. [Accessed 15 May 2022].

[416] Preston H, Lee DS, Hooper PD. The inclusion of the aviation sector within the

European Union’s Emissions Trading Scheme: what are the prospects for a more
sustainable aviation industry? Environmental Development 2012;2:48–56.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envdev.2012.03.008.

[397] Baldino C, Searle S. Changes to the renewable energy directive revision and

[417] Leggett JA, Elias B, Shedd DT. Aviation and the European union’s emission

ReFuel EU proposals: greenhouse gas savings and costs in 2030. ICCT. 2021. https
://theicct.org/publication/changes-to-the-renewable-energy-directive-revision
-and-refuel-eu-proposals-greenhouse-gas-savings-and-costs-in-2030/.

[398] EASA. European aviation environmental report 2019. European union aviation

safety agency (EASA). 2019. www.easa.europa.eu/eaer.

[399] Searle S. Alternative transport fuels elements of the European Union’s “Fit for 55”

package. ICCT. 2021. https://theicct.org/publication/alternative-transport-fuel
s-elements-of-the-european-unions-fit-for-55-package/.

[400] IATA. Fact sheet climate and CORSIA. IATA. 2018. https://www.iata.org/content

trading scheme. 2012. https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/R42392.pdf.

[418] European Commission. Allocation to aviation. An official website of the European

union. 2022. https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/eu-emissions-trading-syste
m-eu-ets/free-allocation/allocation-aviation_en. [Accessed 3 June 2022].
[419] European Commission. Notice on the union-wide quantity of allowances for 2021
and the market stability reserve under the EU emissions trading system (text with
EEA relevance) 2020/C 428 I/01. 2020. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv%3AOJ.CI.2020.428.01.0001.01.ENG. [Accessed 22
February 2022].

assets/713a82c7fbf84947ad536df18d08ed86/fact-sheet-climate-change.pdf.

[420] De Clercq G, Psaledakis D. EU nations aim high with plan to tax air travel.

[401] ICCT. International Council on Clean Transportation consultation response on

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending
Directive 2003/87/EC as regards aviation’s contribution to the Union’s economy-
wide emission reduction target and appropriately implementing a global market-
based measure. 2021. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/A-6-
2007-0402_EN.html.

[402] European Commission. Mobility strategy. European commission. 2020. https://tr

ansport.ec.europa.eu/transport-themes/mobility-strategy_en. [Accessed 3 June
2022].

[403] European Commission. Communication from the commission to the European
parliament, the council, the European economic and social committee and the
committee of the regions: sustainable and smart mobility strategy - putting
European transport on track for the future. European commission. 2020. https://

ReuterCom. 2019. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-climate-change-eu-air
lines-idUSKCN1TL1I7. [Accessed 6 June 2022].

[421] Jensen L. Aviation’s contribution to European Union climate action: revision of

EU ETS as regards aviation. 2022. https://www.europarl.europa.
eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2022/698882/EPRS_BRI(2022)698882_EN.pdf.

[422] European Commission. Aviation and the EU ETS. An official website of the

European union. 2022. https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/european-green-
deal/delivering-european-green-deal/aviation-and-eu-ets_en. [Accessed 3 June
2022].

[423] Duch Guillot J. Fit for 55: parliament pushes for greener aviation fuels. News

European Parliament. 2022. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-roo
m/20220701IPR34357/fit-for-55-parliament-pushes-for-greener-aviation-fuels.
[Accessed 21 June 2022].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107339

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

[424] SkyNRG. A summary of the proposed Sustainable Aviation Fuel mandate.

SkyNRG. 2021. https://skynrg.com/a-summary-of-the-proposed-sustainable-avia
tion-fuel-mandate/. [Accessed 7 December 2021].

[425] European Commission. Revision of the energy taxation directive (ETD): questions

and answers. European commission. 2021. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/api/files/document/print/en/qanda_21_3662/QANDA_21_3662_EN.
pdf.

[426] KPMG. Energy taxation directive. KPMG. 2021. https://home.kpmg/xx/en/h

ome/insights/2021/08/energy-taxation-directive.html. [Accessed 7 July 2022].
[427] Euractiv. LEAK: EU to propose aviation fuel tax in green policy push. 2021. https

://www.euractiv.com/section/alternative-renewable-fuels/news/leak-eu-to-pr
opose-aviation-fuel-tax-in-green-policy-push/. [Accessed 7 January 2022].
[428] European Commission. Proposal for a regulation of the European parliament and

of the council establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and
amending regulation (EU) 2018/1999 (European climate law). European
commission. 2020. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?
uri=CELEX%3A52020PC0080. [Accessed 10 July 2022].

[429] European Commission. Launch of the European advanced biofuels flightpath.

European commission. 2011. https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/2
0110622_biofuels_flight_path_launch.pdf. [Accessed 27 June 2022].

[430] Grand-Perret S, Maniatis K, Pylkkanen O, Roger P, Cobror S, Zschocke A, et al. 2
million tons per year: a performing biofuels supply chain for EU aviation: revision
of the version initially published June 2011. 2013. https://ec.europa.eu/energy/s
ites/ener/files/20130911_a_performing_biofuels_supply_chain.pdf. [Accessed 1
February 2022].

[431] Ministry of Ecological and Solidarity Transition. Ministry of Economy and
Finance. Engagements pour la croissance verte. EcologieGouvFr. 2017. htt
ps://www.ecologie.gouv.fr/loi-transition-energetique-croissance-verte.
[Accessed 22 May 2022].

[432] Ministry for the Ecological and Inclusive Transition. Feuille de route française

pour le d ́eploiement des biocarburants a ́eronautiques durables. EcologieGouvFr.
2020. https://www.ecologie.gouv.fr/sites/default/files/Feuille%20de%20route
%20fran%C3%A7aise%20pour%20le%20d%C3%A9ploiement%20des%20biocar
burants%20a%C3%A9ronautiques%20durables.pdf. [Accessed 15 June 2022].

[433] Ministry of Economy and Finance. Presentation of the aeronautical support plan.
2020. https://www.economie.gouv.fr/plan-soutien-aeronautique#. [Accessed 22
January 2022].

[434] Carroll SG. First clean jets will be ready for commercial flight by 2035, industry

says. 2022. https://www.euractiv.com/section/aviation/news/first-clean-jets-
will-be-ready-for-commercial-flight-by-2035-industry-says/. [Accessed 2 June
2022].

[435] Derber A. France boosts clean aircraft technologies. Aviation week network.

2020. https://m.aviationweek.com/mro/france-boosts-clean-aircraft-technologi
es. [Accessed 2 June 2022].

[436] IATA. An airline handbook on CORSIA. 2019. https://www.iata.org/contentasset

s/fb745460050c48089597a3ef1b9fe7a8/corsia-handbook.pdf. [Accessed 10
March 2022].

[437] ICAO. Secretariat. Session 5: CORSIA calculation of offsetting requirements. 2018.
https://www.icao.int/Meetings/RS2018/Documents/5_1_Offsetting_Requirement
s_Presentation.pdf. [Accessed 30 March 2022].

[438] Air Transport Action Group (ATAG). Sustainable aviation fuel (SAF). 2019. htt
ps://www.atag.org/our-activities/sustainable-aviation-fuels.html. [Accessed 22
January 2022].

[439] ICAO. ICAO document CORSIA sustainability criteria for CORSIA eligible fuels.

2021. https://www.icao.int/environmental-protection/CORSIA/Documents/
ICAO%20document%2005%20-%20Sustainability%20Criteria%20-%20Novem
ber%202021.pdf. [Accessed 22 June 2022].

[440] European Commission. Proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of
the Council amending Directive 2003/87/EC as regards the notification of
offsetting in respect of a global market-based measure for aircraft operators based
in the Union. 2021. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/TXT/?
uri=CELEX%3A52021PC0567.

[441] Stafford W, Lotter A, Brent A. Maltitz G von. Biofuels technology: a look forward,

WIDER Working Paper, No. 2017/87. The United Nations University World
Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU-WIDER). 2017. htt
ps://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/163049/1/884531538.pdf.

[442] Teigiserova DA, Hamelin L, Thomsen M. Review of high-value food waste and
food residues biorefineries with focus on unavoidable wastes from processing.
Resources, Conservation and Recycling 2019;149:413–26. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.05.003.

[443] Tonini D, Hamelin L, Astrup TF. Environmental implications of the use of agro-

industrial residues for biorefineries: application of a deterministic model for
indirect land-use changes. GCB Bioenergy 2016;8:690–706. https://doi.org/
10.1111/gcbb.12290.

aqueous solutions. Green Chemistry 2010;12:1933–46. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c0gc00263a.

[448] Weng Y, Qiu S, Ma L, Liu Q, Ding M, Zhang Q, et al. Jet-Fuel range hydrocarbons
from biomass-derived sorbitol over Ni-HZSM-5/SBA-15 catalyst. Catalysts 2015;
5:2147–60. https://doi.org/10.3390/catal5042147.

[449] Li T, Cheng J, Huang R, Zhou J, Cen K. Conversion of waste cooking oil to jet

biofuel with nickel-based mesoporous zeolite Y catalyst. Bioresource Technology
2015;197:289–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.08.115.

[450] Xu J, Long F, Jiang J, Li F, Zhai Q, Wang F, et al. Integratd catalytic conversion of
waste triglycerides to liquid hydrocarbons for aviation biofuels. Journal of
Cleaner Production 2019;222:784–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2019.03.094.

[451] ICAO. ICAO long-term traffic forecasts: passenger and cargo. 2018. April,

https://www.icao.int/sustainability/documents/ltf_charts-results_2018edition.pd
f.

[452] Ellen Mac Arthur Foundation. The new plastics economy: rethinking the future of

plastics & catalysing action. Ellen Mac Arthur Foundation. 2017. https://ellen
macarthurfoundation.org/the-new-plastics-economy-rethinking-the-future-of-pl
astics-and-catalysing. [Accessed 23 February 2022].

[453] Dahl Svenja. How much biomass do bio-based plastics need? Renewable Carbon

News. 2020. https://renewable-carbon.eu/news/how-much-biomass-do-bio-bas
ed-plastics-need/. [Accessed 22 June 2022].

[454] O’Connell A, Kousoulidou M, Lonza L, Weindorf W. Considerations on GHG
emissions and energy balances of promising aviation biofuel pathways.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2019;101:504–15. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rser.2018.11.033.

[455] Staples MD, Malina R, Barrett SRH. The limits of bioenergy for mitigating global
life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuels. Nature Energy 2017;2:1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2016.202.

[456] Moretti C, Junginger M, Shen L. Environmental life cycle assessment of

polypropylene made from used cooking oil. Resources, Conservation and
Recycling 2020;104750:157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104750.

[457] Sanz-P ́erez ES, Murdock CR, Didas SA, Jones CW. Direct capture of CO2 from
ambient air. Chemical Reviews 2016;116:11840–76. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.chemrev.6b00173.

[458] Supekar SD, Lim T-H, Skerlos SJ. Costs to achieve target net emissions reductions

in the US electric sector using direct air capture. Environ Res Lett 2019;14:
084013. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab30aa.

[459] Pritchard C, Yang A, Holmes P, Wilkinson M. Thermodynamics, economics and
systems thinking: what role for air capture of CO2? Process Safety and
Environmental Protection 2015;94:188–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
psep.2014.06.011.

[460] Fasihi M, Efimova O, Breyer C. Techno-economic assessment of CO2 direct air

capture plants. Journal of Cleaner Production 2019;224:957–80. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.03.086.

[461] Breyer C, Fasihi M, Aghahosseini A. Carbon dioxide direct air capture for effective
climate change mitigation based on renewable electricity: a new type of energy
system sector coupling. Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change 2020;25:43–65. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11027-019-9847-y.

[462] Fuss S, Lamb WF, Callaghan MW, Hilaire J, Creutzig F, Amann T, et al. Negative

emissions—Part 2: costs, potentials and side effects. Environ Res Lett 2018;13:
063002. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aabf9f.

[463] Mortensen AW, Mathiesen BV, Hansen AB, Pedersen SL, Grandal RD, Wenzel H.
The role of electrification and hydrogen in breaking the biomass bottleneck of the
renewable energy system – a study on the Danish energy system. Applied Energy
2020;275:115331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115331.

[464] Hanna R, Abdulla A, Xu Y, Victor DG. Emergency deployment of direct air capture
as a response to the climate crisis. Nature Communications 2021;368:12. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-20437-0.

[465] Rogelj J, Luderer G, Pietzcker RC, Kriegler E, Schaeffer M, Krey V, et al. Energy
system transformations for limiting end-of-century warming to below 1.5
Nature Climate Change 2015;5:519–27. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2572.
[466] Millar RJ, Fuglestvedt JS, Friedlingstein P, Rogelj J, Grubb MJ, Matthews HD,
◦
et al. Emission budgets and pathways consistent with limiting warming to 1.5
Nature Geoscience 2017;10:741–7. https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo3031.
[467] Rogelj J, Popp A, Calvin KV, Luderer G, Emmerling J, Gernaat D, et al. Scenarios
C. Nature Climate

◦
towards limiting global mean temperature increase below 1.5
Change 2018;8:325–32. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0091-3.
[468] Jones CW. CO2 capture from dilute gases as a component of modern global

C.

C.

◦

carbon management. Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
2011;2:31–52. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-061010-114252.
[469] Didas SA, Choi S, Chaikittisilp W, Jones CW. Amine-oxide hybrid materials for

CO2 capture from ambient air. Accounts of Chemical Research 2015;48:2680–7.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00284.

[444] Chen WT, Zhang Y, Zhang J, Yu G, Schideman LC, Zhang P, et al. Hydrothermal

[470] Stern MC, Simeon F, Herzog H, Hatton TA. Post-combustion carbon dioxide

liquefaction of mixed-culture algal biomass from wastewater treatment system
into bio-crude oil. Bioresource Technology 2014;152:130–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2013.10.111.

[445] Lew L, Biddle T. Evaluation of Amyris direct sugar to hydrocarbon (DSHC) fuel,

DOT/FAA/AEE/2014-07. US department of transportation. Federal Aviation
Admistration 2014. https://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offic
es/apl/research/aircraft_technology/cleen/reports/media/PW_Amyris_Final.pdf.
[446] Inc Virent. Virent technology. Virent, Inc. 2019. https://www.virent.com/tech

nology/. [Accessed 27 September 2022].

[447] Xing R, Subrahmanyam AV, Olcay H, Qi W, Van Walsum GP, Pendse H, et al.

Production of jet and diesel fuel range alkanes from waste hemicellulose-derived

capture using electrochemically mediated amine regeneration. Energy and
Environmental Science 2013;6:2505–17. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ee41165f.
[471] Chen C, Tavoni M. Direct air capture of CO2 and climate stabilization: a model
based assessment. Climatic Change 2013;118:59–72. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-013-0714-7.

[472] Friedlingstein P, O’Sullivan M, Jones MW, Andrew RM, Hauck J, Olsen A, et al.
Global carbon budget 2020. Earth System Science Data 2020;12:3269–340.
https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-12-3269-2020.

[473] U.S. Department of Energy. Hydrogen strategy: enabling A low-carbon economy,
office of fossil energy, Washington, DC 20585. 2020. https://www.energy.gov/sit
es/prod/files/2020/07/f76/USDOE_FE_Hydrogen_Strategy_July2020.pdf.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107340

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

[474] Ritchie H, Roser M. Water use and stress. Our world in data. 2017. https://ourwor

[499] Moses CA. Comparative evaluation of semi-synthetic jet fuels: final Report, CRC

ldindata.org/water-use-stress. [Accessed 10 October 2022].

[475] Baharudin L, Watson MJ. Hydrogen applications and research activities in its
production routes through catalytic hydrocarbon conversion. Reviews in
Chemical Engineering 2017;34:43–72. https://doi.org/10.1515/revce-2016-
0040.

[476] Ishimoto Y, Sugiyama M, Kato E, Moriyama R, Tsuzuki K, Kurosawa A. Putting
costs of direct air capture in context. SSRN Journal 2017. https://doi.org/
10.2139/ssrn.2982422.

[477] IEA. Electricity consumption – electricity information: overview – analysis.

International energy agency (IEA). 2020. https://www.iea.org/reports/electrici
ty-information-overview/electricity-consumption. [Accessed 15 October 2022].

[478] Michailos S. Process design, economic evaluation and life cycle assessment of jet
fuel production from sugar cane residue. Environmental Progress and Sustainable
Energy 2018;37:1227–35. https://doi.org/10.1002/ep.12840.

[479] Ganguly I, Pierobon F, Charles Bowers T, Huisenga M, Johnston G, Eastin IL.

‘Woods-to-Wake’ Life Cycle Assessment of residual woody biomass based jet-fuel
using mild bisulfite pretreatment. Biomass and Bioenergy 2018;108:207–16.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2017.10.041.

[480] de Jong S. Green horizons: on the production costs, climate impact and future
supply of renewable jet fuels. Copernicus Institute of Sustainable Development,
Utrecht University. 2018. https://dspace.library.uu.nl/handle/1874/364514.

[481] de Jong S, Hoefnagels R, Wetterlund E, Pettersson K, Faaij A, Junginger M. Cost

optimization of biofuel production – the impact of scale, integration, transport
and supply chain configurations. Applied Energy 2017;195:1055–70. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.03.109.

[482] Pierobon F, Eastin IL, Ganguly I. Life cycle assessment of residual lignocellulosic
biomass-based jet fuel with activated carbon and lignosulfonate as co-products.
Biotechnology for Biofuels 2018;11:1–18. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13068-018-
1141-9.

[483] Fuglestvedt JS, Shine KP, Berntsen T, Cook J, Lee DS, Stenke A, et al. Transport
impacts on atmosphere and climate: Metrics. Atmospheric Environment 2010;44:
4648–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.04.044.

[484] Lund MT, Aamaas B, Berntsen T, Bock L, Burkhardt U, Fuglestvedt JS, et al.
Emission metrics for quantifying regional climate impacts of aviation. Earth
System Dynamics 2017;8:547–63. https://doi.org/10.5194/esd-8-547-2017.
[485] Lee DS, Pitari G, Grewe V, Gierens K, Penner JE, Petzold A, et al. Transport

impacts on atmosphere and climate: Aviation. Atmospheric Environment 2010;
44:4678–734. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.06.005.

[486] Braun-Unkhoff M, Riedel U, Wahl C. About the emissions of alternative jet fuels.
CEAS Aeronaut J 2017;8:167–80. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13272-016-0230-3.
[487] K ̈ohler MO, R ̈adel G, Shine KP, Rogers HL, Pyle JA. Latitudinal variation of the
effect of aviation NOx emissions on atmospheric ozone and methane and related
climate metrics. Atmospheric Environment 2013;64:1–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2012.09.013.

[488] KeithP Shine, Berntsen TK, Fuglestvedt JS, Skeie RB. Stuber. Comparing the

climate effect of emissions of short- and long-lived climate agents. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical. Physical and Engineering
Sciences 2007;365. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2007.2050.

[489] Forster PMDF, Shine KP, Stuber N. It is premature to include non-CO2 effects of
aviation in emission trading schemes. Atmospheric Environment 2006;40:
1117–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2005.11.005.

[490] Collins L. Offshore wind to power giant green-hydrogen carbon-neutral aviation-

fuel plant. 2019. https://www.rechargenews.com/transition/offshore-wind-to
-power-giant-green-hydrogen-carbon-neutral-aviation-fuel-plant/2-1-696907.
[Accessed 30 August 2022].

[491] Gauss M, Isaken ISA, Wong S, Wang WC. Impact of H2O emissions from

cryoplanes and kerosene aircraft on the atmosphere. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres 2003;108:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1029/2002jd002623.
[492] Grassl H, Brockhagen D. Climate forcing of aviation emissions in high altitudes
and comparison of metrics. An update according to the Fourth Assessment Report,
IPCC. IPCC 2007; 2007. https://earthjustice.org/sites/default/files/black-carbo
n/grassl_brockhagen-2007-aviation-forcing.pdf.

[493] Chan T, Chishty WA, Canteenwalla P, Davison CR, Chalmers J. Benchmarking

data from the experience gained in engine performance and emissions testing on
alternative fuels for aviation. Journal of the Global Power and Propulsion Society
2017;1:195–210. https://journal.gpps.global/a/S5WGLD.

Project No. AV-2–04a. 2008. http://www.ncfap.org/documents/biofuels_aviat
ion/Comparison%20of%20SSJF%20-%20CRC%20Final.pdf.

[500] Kosir S, Heyne J, Graham J. A machine learning framework for drop-in volume
swell characteristics of sustainable aviation fuel. Fuel 2020;274:117832. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117832.

[501] Graham JL, Rahmes TF, Kay MC, Belieres J-P, Kinder JD, Millett SA, et al. Impact
of alternative jet fuel and fuel blends on non-metallic materials used in
commercial aircraft fuel systems, DTFAWA-10-C-0030. 2011. https://www.faa.
gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/apl/research/aircraft_technology/c
leen/reports/media/Impact_of_Alternative_Jet_Fuel_and_Fuel_Blends.pdf.
[502] Miller B, Johnson D, Thompson T, Rosenberg FL, Driver J, Biscardi GP, et al. R&D
control study: plan for future jet fuel distribution quality control and description
of fuel properties catalog, DOT/FAA/AEE/2014-11, VNTSC-FAA-14-11. 2014. htt
ps://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/apl/research/alternat
ive_fuels/media/Metron_Fuel_Quality_Final.pdf.

[503] Canteenwalla P, Davison CR, Chishty WA, Ginestra C, Dally B. Testing of

synthesized aromatic kerosene (SAK) aviation fuel blends at simulated altitudes.
Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo 2016;3. https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2016-
57570.

[504] Cortright R, Rozmiarek B, Van Straten M. Catalytic upgrading of thermochemical
intermediates to hydrocarbons: conversion of lignocellulosic feedstocks to
aromatic fuels and high value chemicals. United States 2017. https://doi.org/
10.2172/1410413.

[505] Kosir ST, Behnke L, Heyne JS, Stachler RD, Flora G, Zabarnick S, et al.

Improvement in jet aircraft operation with the use of high-performance drop-in
fuels. AIAA Scitech 2019 Forum. 2019. p. 1–27. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2019-
0993.

[506] Muldoon JA, Harvey BG. Bio-based cycloalkanes: the missing link to high-

performance sustainable jet fuels. ChemSusChem 2020;13:5777–807. https://doi.
org/10.1002/cssc.202001641.

[507] Cheng F, Brewer CE. Producing jet fuel from biomass lignin: potential pathways to

alkyl-benzenes and cycloalkanes. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
2017;72:673–722. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.01.030.

[508] Zhang X, Lei H, Zhu L, Wu J, Chen S. From lignocellulosic biomass to renewable

cycloalkanes for jet fuels. Green Chemistry 2015;17:4736–47. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c5gc01583a.

[509] van Dyk S, Saddler J. Progress in commercialization of biojet/sustainable aviation

fuels (SAF): technologies, potential and challenges. IEA Bioenergy 2021. https
://www.ieabioenergy.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/IEA-Bioenergy-Tas
k-39-Progress-in-the-commercialisation-of-biojet-fuels-May-2021-1.pdf.
[510] Suas News - The business of drones. Deutsche aircraft selects HEGGEMANN AG
for D328ecoTM wing industrialization and production. SUAS News - The Business
of Drones 2021. https://www.suasnews.com/2021/09/deutsche-aircraft-selects
-heggemann-ag-for-d328ecotm-wing-industrialization-and-production/.
[Accessed 17 December 2021].

[511] Madavan N, Heidmann J, Bowman C, Kascak P, Jankovsky A, Jansen R. A NASA
Perspective on electric propulsion technologies for commercial aviation. National
Aeronauticals and Space Administration (NASA). 2016. https://dokumen.tips/
documents/a-nasa-perspective-on-electric-propulsion-a-hybrid-electric-propulsi
on-system.html?page=1.

[512] Khandelwal B, Karakurt A, Sekaran PR, Sethi V, Singh R. Progress in Aerospace

Sciences Hydrogen powered aircraft : the future of air transport. Progress in
Aerospace Sciences 2013;60:45–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
paerosci.2012.12.002.

[513] Mital SK, Gyekenyesi JZ, Arnold SM, Sullivan RM, Manderscheid JM,

Murthy PLN. Review of current state of the art and key design issues with
potential solutions for liquid hydrogen cryogenic storage tank structures for
aircraft applications october 2006, NASA/TM-2006–214346. National
aeronauticals and space administration (NASA). 2006. https://ntrs.nasa.gov/ap
i/citations/20060056194/downloads/20060056194.pdf.

[514] Winnefeld C, Kadyk T, Hanke-rauschenbach R. Modelling and designing

cryogenic hydrogen tanks for future aircraft applications. Energies 2018:1–23.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en11010105.

[515] Marek CJ, Smith TD, Kundu K. Low emission hydrogen combustors for gas

turbines using lean direct injection. NTRS - NASA technical reports server. 2005.
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20080002274.

[494] Rypdal K. Background papers: IPCC Expert meetings on good practice guidance

[516] TLD displays TaxiBot at dubai airport show. 2013. https://www.aviationpros.co

and uncertainty management in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 2000.
https://doi.org/10.1021/es60082a602.

m/gse/news/10940291/taxiing-equipment-saves-fuel-for-aircraft. [Accessed 2
May 2022].

[495] Guynn MD, Freh JE, Olson ED. Evaluation of a hydrogen fuel cell powered

blended-wing-body aircraft concept for reduced noise and emissions. 2004. http
s://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20040033924/downloads/20040033924.pdf.

[496] ICAO. Electric, hybrid, and hydrogen aircraft-state of play. International Civil

aviation organization (ICAO). 2016. https://www.icao.int/environmental-prote
ction/Documents/EnvironmentalReports/2019/ENVReport2019_pg124-130.pdf.
[Accessed 15 September 2022].

[497] CISION PR Newswire. magniX continued flight testing reveals electric aircraft

significantly reduce noise pollution. 2021. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-r
eleases/magnix-continued-flight-testing-reveals-electric-aircraft-significantly-r
educe-noise-pollution-301264765.html. [Accessed 18 December 2021].

[498] Rondinelli S, Sabatini R, Gardi A. Challenges and benefits offered by liquid

hydrogen fuels in commercial aviation aviation. 2014. https://doi.org/10.13140/
2.1.2658.9764.

[517] Taxiing without engines running. Lufthansa Group. 2013. https://www.lufthansa
-leos.com/documents/438370/444077/2013_10_TaxiBot.pdf. [Accessed 23
January 2022].

[518] TLD Group. TaxiBot semi-robotic towing tractor to trial at Schiphol airport. 2020.
https://www.tld-group.com/technologies/taxibot/. [Accessed 18 December
2021].

[519] The Times of India. Air India becomes first airline to use “TaxiBot” on A320

aircraft with passengers onboard. The Times of India. 2019. https://timesofindia.
indiatimes.com/business/india-business/air-india-becomes-first-airline-to-use-t
axibot-on-a320-aircraft-with-passengers-onboard/articleshow/71592913.cms.
[Accessed 23 January 2022].

[520] Gokulakrishnan P, Gaines G, Klassen M, Roby R. Autoignition of aviation fuels:
experimental and modeling study. 43rd AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE joint propulsion
conference & exhibit. Cincinnati, OH: American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics; 2007. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2007-5701.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107341

P. Su-ungkavatin et al.

Pimchanok Su-ungkavatin  is a second-year  PhD candidate at
the National Institute of Applied Sciences  of Toulouse (INSA
Toulouse; France) in the department of Process and Environ-
mental Engineering. She received her B.S. and M.S. degree in
Biotechnology,  from  King  Mongkut’s Institute  of Technology
(Bangkok,  Thailand).  Her  current  research  field  is  the  envi-
ronmental  assessment  of  alternative  energy  sources  for  sup-
plying  the  future  aviation  demand,  in  the  perspective  of
establishing sustainable national bioeconomy strategies.

Ligia  Tiruta-Barna  is  professor  at  the  Federal  University  of
Toulouse. She obtained her Ph.D. and her habilitation in the
field of Chemical Engineering and Environment from Univer-
sity  of  Lyon.  Her  current  professional  interest  and  research
activities  within  chemical  engineering  relates  with  environ-
mental goals, eco-design of bio-chemical processes, impact &
risk  assessment  and  pollutant  emission  modelling.  She  de-
velops integrated modelling platforms for process modelling &
simulation and Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) along with meth-
odological developments for dynamic LCA. She has scientific
expertise on environmental assessment of wastes and polluted
soils and experience in applying thermodynamics, geochemical
and mass transfer modelling to assess the long-term environ-

mental behaviour of materials under various environmental conditions.

Dr.  Hamelin,  currently  senior  researcher  at  the  Federal  Uni-
versity of Toulouse (France), is a laureate of the French presi-
dential  climate  call  “Make  our  planet  great  again”  (Project
Cambioscop). In this context, she heads a research team of 8
researchers.  Her  research  focuses  on  the  national/regional
development  and  scaling  up  of  environmentally-  &  cost-
efficient  strategies  to  transit  towards  a  low  fossil  carbon
economy.  She  also  has  activities  within  the  field  of negative
emission technologies. Dr. Hamelin received her PhD in 2013
from the University of Southern Denmark in the field of Envi-
ronmental  Technologies,  where  she  developed  methods  for
including Land Use Changes and soil organic carbon modelling
within Life Cycle Assessment, among others. She received her

M.Sc. and B.Sc. in Agricultural Engineering from Laval University (Canada).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience96(2023)10107342
