Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Premixed flame ignition: Theoretical development

Dehai Yu a, b, Zheng Chen a, *
a SKLTCS, HEDPS, CAPT, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
b State Key Laboratory of High Temperature Gas Dynamics, Institute of Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
Ignition
Premixed flame
Minimum ignition energy
Flame propagation

Premixed  flame  ignition  is  a  fundamental  issue  in  combustion.  A  basic  understanding  of  this  phenomenon  is
crucial for fire safety control and for the development of advanced combustion engines. Significant efforts have
been devoted to understanding the mechanisms of ignition and determining critical ignition conditions, such as
critical flame radius, minimum ignition energy, and minimum ignition power, which have remained challenging
research topics for centuries. This review provides  an in-depth investigation of the forced-ignition of laminar
premixed  flames  in  a  quiescent  flammable  mixture,  with  emphasis  on  theoretical  developments,  particularly
those  based  on  activation  energy  analysis.  First,  the  fundamental  concepts  are  overviewed,  including  spark
ignition,  characteristic  time  scales,  and  critical  ignition  conditions.  Then,  the  chronological  development  of
premixed flame ignition theories is discussed, including homogeneous explosion, thermal ignition theory, flame
ball  theory,  quasi-steady  ignition  theory,  and,  more  importantly,  transient  ignition  theory.  Premixed  flame
ignition  consists  of  three  stages:  flame  kernel  formation,  flame  kernel  expansion,  and  transition  to  a  self-
sustaining  flame.  These  stages  are  profoundly  affected  by  the  coupling  of  positive  stretch  with  preferential
diffusion, characterized by the Lewis number. Specifically, positive stretch makes the expanding ignition kernel
weaker  at  larger  Lewis  numbers,  consequently  increasing  the  critical  ignition  radius  and  MIE.  The  premixed
flame  ignition process is dominated by flame propagation dynamics.  Both quasi-steady  and transient  ignition
theories demonstrate that the critical flame radius for premixed ignition differs from either flame thickness (by
thermal ignition theory) or flame ball radius (by flame ball theory). Particularly, the transient ignition theory
appropriately acknowledges the “memory effect” of external heating, offering the most accurate description of
the evolution of the ignition kernel and the most sensible evaluation of minimum ignition energy. In addition, the
effects of transport and chain-branching reactions of radicals, finite droplet vaporization, and repetitive heating
pulses on premixed flame ignition are discussed. Finally, a summary of major advances is provided, along with
comments on the applications of premixed flame ignition theory in ignition enhancement. Suggested directions
for future research are presented.

1. Introduction

1.1. Background

Ignition is one of the most fundamental and important problems in
combustion  [1–3].  Understanding  ignition  is  important  not  only  for
fundamental combustion research but also for fire safety control and the
development  of  advanced  combustion  engines.  The  fundamental
mechanisms of ignition and the determination of critical ignition con-
ditions, such as the critical flame radius and minimum ignition energy
(MIE),  have  been  the  most  challenging  research  topics  over  the  last
hundred years.  Therefore, tremendous  efforts, including experimental

investigations (e.g., Refs. [4–6]), theoretical studies (e.g., Refs. [7–9])
and numerical simulations (e.g., Refs. [10–13]) have been devoted to
ignition.

Ignition in combustion science refers to the progress by which a fuel-
air  mixture  is  brought  to  conditions  that  allow  for  spontaneous  com-
bustion  without  continuous  external  energy  input  [14].  This  critical
phase  transition  is  characterized  by  the  fuel’s  reaction  rate  with  an
oxidizer,  which,  upon  reaching  a  certain  energy  threshold,  leads  to
self-sustaining combustion. In favorable conditions with high tempera-
ture  and  pressure,  ignition  may  occur  spontaneously,  known  as  auto-
ignition.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to  precisely  control  combustion  in
engines,  the  ignition  in  practical  combustion  facilities  is  in  general
induced by energy deposition from external sources, which is termed as

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: cz@pku.edu.cn (Z. Chen).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2024.101174
Received 5 July 2023; Received in revised form 25 June 2024; Accepted 26 June 2024

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)101174Availableonline6July20240360-1285/©2024ElsevierLtd.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.

D. Yu and Z. Chen

Nomenclature

discharge

Ignition energy of laminar premixed flame
Energy deposition from ignition source
Minimum ignition energy by transient ignition theory

Collision frequency factor of global reaction
Heat capacity of combustible mixture at constant pressure
Mass diffusivity
Thickness of laminar premixed flame
Thickness of adiabatic planar premixed flame
Induction length of normal detonation
Gap distance between two electrodes
Internal energy within ignition kernel

Alphabetic symbols
aacoustic  Acoustic speed
B
cp
D
dL
d0
L
dD
dspark
Eburnt
Edetonation detonation initiation energy
Eflame
Eignition
Emin
Eʹ
min
Erelease
Eunburnt
h
kB
kR
L
→
n
np
pe
pN
pkernel
qc
Qca(cid:0) diss  Cathode-anode fall dissipation of discharge energy
Qconduction Conductive dissipation of discharge energy due to

Minimum ignition energy by quasi-steady ignition theory
Energy release from ignition source
Internal energy outside ignition kernel
Heat transfer coefficient
Rate coefficient of chain-branching reaction
Rate coefficient of recombination reaction
Normalized heat loss of flame ball
Normal direction to the flame front
Pulse number for multi-stage central heating
Uniform pressure in hot pocket due to energy deposition
Pressure behind shock wave
Ignition kernel pressure
Chemical heat release per unit mass of reactant

thermal boundary layer

Critical heating power for reaction front formation

Heating power of external source
Critical heating power
Minimum heating power for premixed flame ignition

Qchemical  Minimum power for chemical runaway
Qcr,runaway Critical heating power for thermal runaway
Qcr,front
Qcr,kernel  Critical heating power for flame kernel formation
Qm
Qm,cr
Qmin
Qradiation  Radiation loss of discharge energy
r
re
rN
rs
rv
R

Radial coordinate
Edge of the hot pocket due to energy deposition
Radial distance of shock wave
Radial coordinate relative to the ignition kernel front
Vaporization front
Dimensional radial distance of the ignition kernel/
detonation front from the origin
Domain of external heating during flame kernel formation
Critical radius of ignition kernel
Ignition kernel radius
Radius of Zel’dovich flame ball
Perturbation of flame ball radius
Propagation speed of adiabatic planar premixed flame
Dimensional time
Time of external heating during flame kernel formation
Characteristic time for arc stage during spark discharge

R0
Rcr
Rkernel
RZ
RZ,p
S0
L
t
t0
tarc
tblastwave  Characteristic time for blast wave induced by spark

discharge

Instant of ignition kernel arriving at the critical state

tbreakdown Formative time lag for breakdown
tcr
tchemical  Characteristic time scale for chemical reaction
tconduction Characteristic time scale for conduction
tconsumption Delay time for reactant consumption at heating center
tconvection  Characteristic time for convective transport during spark

tdeformation Characteristic time for flame kernel deformation during

tdiffusion

spark discharge
Characteristic time for mass diffusion during spark
discharge

tevolution  Characteristic time during flame kernel evolution
texplosion  Delay time for thermal runaway
tfront
Delay time for establishing reaction front at heating center
Characteristic time for glow stage during spark discharge
tglow
tignition
Delay time for autoignition
tignition,0  Delay time for adiabatic autoignition
Delay time for formation of ignition kernel
tkernel
tpropagation Delay time for reaction front propagation towards the

edge of heating domain

Scaled time for transient evolution of ignition kernel
Duration of spark discharge
Activation temperature of global
Activation temperature for chain-branching reaction
Adiabatic temperature of laminar premixed flame
Initial temperature of the ignition kernel
Temperature at the heating center

tradiation  Characteristic time scale for radiation
ts
tspark
Ta
Ta,B
Tad
T0
b
Tcenter
Tcrossover  Crossover temperature for chain-branching reaction
Tf
TFK
TH
Tkernel
Tp
Tu
Tv
uN
U
Ucr

Temperature at flame front
Temperature at the edge of Frank-Kamenetskii region
Critical ignition temperature of homogeneous explosion
Ignition kernel temperature
Temperature perturbation of flame ball
Temperature of unburnt mixture
Reference temperature for vaporization
Propagation speed of shock wave
Propagation speed of ignition kernel front
Propagation speed of ignition kernel front at the critical
state
Moving speed of fluid behind shock wave
Mass fraction of the deficient reactant in combustible
mixture

vN
YF

YF,center  Mass fraction of the deficient reactant at the heating center
Yo
F
YZ
YFV
YFD

Initial mass fraction of the deficient reactant
Mass fraction of radical species
Mass fraction of fuel vapor
Mass fraction of droplet

Greek letters
α
δD
φ
λtm
ρ0
ρN
σ
σs

θ
ω
ωv
π
Ω
χ
ξuT

ξuc

ξbT

Thermal conductivity of combustion mixture
Initial droplet load
Global equivalence ratio
Intermittent factor of adjacent heating pulse
Density of the unburnt mixture
Fluid density behind shock wave
Expansion ratio
Scaled radial coordinate for transient evolution of ignition
kernel
Temperature perturbation
Rate of chemical reaction
Rate of vaporization
Burning rate of droplet
Complex frequency of flame ball radius perturbation
Stretched coordinate representing flame structure
Transformed coordinate for temperature in the unburnt
region
Transformed coordinate for concentration in the unburnt
region
Transformed coordinate for temperature in the burnt

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)1011742

D. Yu and Z. Chen

region

Nondimensional parameters
Ar
ArB
Da
Kn
Le
LeF
LeZ
Ze
ZeB
Δ

Arrhenius number
Arrhenius number for chain-branching reaction
Damk ̈ohler number
Kndusen number
Lewis number of combustible mixture
Lewis number of fuel
Lewis number of radical
Zel’dovich number
Zel’dovich number for chain-branching reaction
modified Damk ̈ohler number

Acronyms and abbreviations
DDT
ICE

Deflagration to detonation transition
Internal combustion engine

Cycle-to-cycle variation
Pre-chamber ignition

CCV
PCI
SWACER Shock wave amplification by coherent energy release
DE
FK

Discharge energy
Frank-Kamenetskii region

Subscripts
0
u
+
(cid:0)

Initial state of combustible mixture
Unburnt state
Unburnt region separated by the ignition kernel
Burnt region separated by the ignition kernel

Overheads
∼
∧
∨

Nondimensional quantities for ignition kernel propagation
Nondimensional quantities for flame kernel formation
Nondimensional quantities for thermal wave propagation

forced-ignition. Differentiating between various ignition mechanisms is
essential  for  implementing  combustion  processes  in  various  applica-
tions, ranging from internal combustion engines to industrial furnaces.
In  practical  combustion  devices,  ignition  is  initiated  by  spark
discharge. Spark ignition is widely applied in internal combustion en-
gines  (ICEs).  Dale  et  al.  [15]  reviewed  the  progress  on  high-energy
ignition  systems  with  emphasis  on  the  process  of  high-energy  break-
down,  the  physicochemical  properties  of  igniters,  and  the  effects  of
exhaust  gas  recirculation  in  assisting  ignition.  Energy  and  environ-
mental concerns impose increasingly stringent regulations on efficiency
improvement and emission control. To increase thermal efficiency and
reduce  NOx  formation,  advanced  ICEs  tend  to  operate  at  ultra-lean
conditions  [16–19].  Due  to  lower  combustion  temperatures than  that
at the stoichiometric condition, the heat transfer loss at ultra-lean con-
ditions is greatly alleviated [6,20] and thereby the thermal efficiency
increases. Besides, the combustion chamber of the engine can operate at
higher  compression  ratios  under  fuel-lean  conditions,  which  further
improves the thermal efficiency [21,22]. However, as approaching the
fuel-lean  operation  limit,  misfire  and  partial  burning  might  cause
cycle-to-cycle  variation  (CCV),  which  affects  the  engine  performance
adversely  [16,23].  Suitable  forced-ignition  systems  must  be  imple-
mented  to  ensure  reliable  ignition  in  such  limiting  situations.  For
example, the Pre-Chamber Ignition (PCI) strategy has been developed
[6,20,24–26].  The  combustible  mixture  in  the  pre-chamber  is  first
ignited  by  spark  discharge,  issuing  hot  turbulent  jets  into  the  main
chamber through the small holes and inducing ignition at multiple lo-
cations in the homogeneous fuel-lean mixture. The turbulent jets from
the pre-chamber also enhance the turbulence and, thereby, the burning
rate in the main chamber. Therefore, the PCI strategy exhibits superior
performance for forced-ignition in extremely fuel-lean situations.

Ignition also plays a crucial role in air-breathing aviation propulsion
systems. The relight of an aircraft gas-turbine at high altitudes is a sig-
nificant issue. Modern civilian aircrafts cruise at high altitude (~9 km),
where the combustion chambers receive inflow at relative low temper-
ature (~200 K) and pressure (~0.4 atm) [27,28]. Under such conditions,
a  sufficient  amount  of  ignition  energy  must  be  provided  in  order  to
achieve reliable initiation of an ignition kernel. Otherwise, relight may
fail due to the decrease in fuel vapor pressure and flow rate [3,29]. For
hypersonic  flight,  the  aircraft  is  usually  driven  by  the  air-breathing
scramjet,  whose  operation  requires  stable  and  reliable  combustion  at
high-speed flow conditions [30–34]. An oblique shock wave forms at the
leading edge of the inlet, which increases the volumetric internal energy
of the inflow into the combustion chamber. The resident time of both
injected fuel and mainstream airflow is exceedingly short. Moreover, the
high speed inflow conditions in the combustion chamber cause severe
heat  loss,  jeopardizing  the  survival  of  the  ignition  kernel  [35].

Consequently, it is challenging to achieve successful ignition in scramjet
engines [36]. In addition, the intensive flow stretch effect causes strong
deformation of the ignition kernel, which brings great difficulty in its
transition
to  a  self-sustained  flame  [8,37].  Therefore,  robust
forced-ignition systems must be equipped in order to achieve successful
ignition  and  stable  combustion,  which  provide  reliable  thrust  over  a
broad range of flight conditions [33,34].

Fire  accidents  are  one  of  the  primary  threats  to  human  lives  and
social  properties  [38,39].  Recently,  fire  safety  issues  occurring  in  in-
dustry (e.g., coal mine explosion [40] and ignition by mechanical spark
[41]), transportation (e.g., traffic accident [42] and battery fires [43,
44])  and  the  environment  (e.g.,  urban  and  forest  fires  [45,46])  have
drawn increasing attention. Fires in urban and wild spaces are usually
initiated by unexpected ignition [47]. For example, spot ignition of a
combustible mixture or material by hot particles is one of the important
routes leading to urban and wild  spot fires [47]. Besides, unexpected
ignition is one of the prime concerns for spacecraft fire safety issues and
for  inhabited  space  exploration  [48].  Understanding  ignition  mecha-
nisms and critical ignition conditions is of pivotal importance for fire
control and safety management [49,50].

Fundamentally,  ignition  is  characterized  by  the  onset  of  thermal
runaway, followed by three sequential stages [2,3,51]: (1) creation of
the ignition kernel, (2) expansion of reaction fronts, and (3) generation
of a self-sustained premixed flame or stabilized non-premixed flame. It is
well known that chemical reactions take place only when the fuel and
oxidizer are mixed at the molecular level [14]. In practical combustion
devices, stages (1) and (2) can proceed only at regions where fuel and
oxidizer  are  mixed,  which  highlights  the  significance  of  ignition  in
premixed combustible mixtures. Non-premixed flame ignition refers to
the emergence of a non-premixed flame, initiated from and stabilized by
a  local  premixed  region,  where  a  triple  flame  structure  forms  [2,3].
ignition  characterizes  the  birth  of
Therefore,  premixed  flame
non-premixed  flames.  In  this  paper,  we  shall  present  a  review  on
elementary understandings of premixed flame ignition with emphasis on
the  advancement  of  fundamental  ignition  theory.  The  ignition  of
non-premixed flame is not covered in this review.

1.2. Classification of ignition

The ignition phenomenon can be understood from different aspects,

which are categorized as follows:

Thermal  runaway.  A  premixed  flame  is  initiated  by  the  onset  of
thermal runaway. It can be comprehensively understood by analyzing
the relationship between the heat release rate and temperature, or by an
equivalent controlling parameter determining the rate of chemical re-
action, i.e., the Damk ̈ohler number Da [14]. Plotting temperature (or

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)1011743

D. Yu and Z. Chen

burning rate) versus Da results in either a regular, S-shaped folded curve
or a stretched S-shaped unfolded curve, as first studied by Fendell [52]
and  Lin ́an  [53].  In  general,  the  folded  S-curve,  consisting  of  three
branches, corresponds to the situation of thermal runaway during pre-
mixed  flame  ignition.  By  increasing  Da  along  the  lower  branch,  the
combustible  mixture  exhibits  weakly  reactive,  nearly  frozen  states,
which in physics, represents the accumulation of both heat and radicals.
Beyond a critical Damk ̈ohler number DaI, the lower branch transitions to
the  middle  branch  through  a  turning  point,  which  represents  the
extrema, delineate regions of stable and unstable characteristics of the
ignition  process.  At  the  critical  value  DaI,  the  change  in  the  reaction
intensity, Tf , with respect to the change in the system’s reactivity, Da,
becomes infinite. The system consequently “jumps” to the upper branch
for higher Damk ̈ohler numbers and faster reaction rates, and therefore
represents all the intensely burning states the system can have. It is then
reasonable  to  identify  point  I  as  the  state  of  ignition  and  DaI  as  the
ignition Damk ̈ohler number. Physically, the existence of turning points
implies  that  there  exist  states  for  which  the  chemical  reaction  rate
cannot balance the heat transport rate in a steady state. Thus, for the
lower branch, beyond DaI, the chemical heat is generated so fast in the
reaction zone that it cannot be transported away in a steady manner, i.e.,
thermal runaway occurs accordingly. The S-curve curve provides crucial
insights  into  the  stability  and  multiplicity  of  steady-state  solutions  in
combustion systems.

Autoignition and forced-ignition. Depending on the presence of an
external igniter, ignition can be classified into two types: autoignition
and forced-ignition [14,54]. Autoignition, also known as self-ignition or
spontaneous ignition, is caused by chain branching or thermal feedback
in a homogeneous mixture without the input of either an external source
of thermal energy or active radicals into the system. For homogeneous
premixed  reactants,  autoignition  occurs  throughout  the  whole  spatial
domain  after  an  induction  time,  known  as  the  ignition  delay  time,
tignition. The ignition delay time is one of the most prominent parameters
in the autoignition process. It can be measured in a shock tube [55] or a
rapid  compression  machine  [56,57].  The  ignition  delay  time  is  very
sensitive  to  the  temperature  and  pressure.  At  room  temperature  and
atmospheric pressure, the ignition delay time for typical hydrocarbon
fuels  is  exceedingly  long,  and  thereby  forced-ignition  is  required  to
achieve  successful  ignition.  Unlike  autoignition,  forced-ignition  is  a
result  of  electrical  discharge  (spark),  heated  surface,  shock  wave,  or
pilot flame, with the locally initiated flame front subsequently reaching
a  self-propagating  state  so  that  the  ignition  source  can  be  removed
without  extinguishing  the  combustion  process.  In  forced-ignition,  the
deposition of energy/radicals from the external igniter rapidly acceler-
ates the reaction rate among the reactant mixture in the vicinity of the
igniter, providing suitable conditions for autoignition to proceed. The
external igniter creates local inhomogeneity in temperature or radical
concentration in the reactant mixture, which induces loss of heat and
active radicals via heat conduction and mass diffusion respectively. The
result  of  the  forced-ignition  depends  on  the  competition  between  the
loss and production rates of both heat and radicals through the chemical
process. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that there is no defi-
nite  boundary  between  autoignition  and  forced-ignition.  This  review
aims  to  provide  a  conceptual  framework  that  aids  in  understanding
these complex  processes rather than to assert rigid classification. The
broad spectrum of ignition phenomena highlights the separate roles of
spontaneous heat and radical generation due to chemical reactions and
the deposition of heat and radicals from an external source in the igni-
tion  process.  This  review  focuses  on  the  forced-ignition  of  premixed
flames,  and
to
following
forced-ignition unless otherwise indicated.

is  equivalent

thereby,

ignition

the

Spark ignition and laser ignition. The primary effect of an external
igniter  is  to  accelerate  autoignition  nearby  [58,59].  There  are  many
types of external igniters. In spark ignition, thermal energy deposition
from electric breakdown increases the local temperature of the reactant

low

in  relatively

and  induces  local  autoignition  [60–68].  Sher  et  al.  [66]  presented  a
theoretical model that underlines the breakdown mechanisms and pro-
vides a parametric description of the breakdown phase. Unfortunately, a
large  amount  of  energy  in  spark  ignition  is  utilized  to  heat  the  elec-
trodes,  resulting
ignition  efficiency  [69,70].
Plasma-assisted ignition, in particular the non-equilibrium plasma, helps
to improve the ignition efficiency by forming a large number of active
radicals due to collisions between high energy electrons and the reactant
molecules [71,72]. The accumulation of active radicals accelerates the
chain-branching reactions and thereby facilitates the chemical runaway
process  during  autoignition  [73,74].  Both  spark  and  plasma  ignition
require the presence of an igniter, which is intrusive to the reactive flow
field. Besides, the installation of the igniter is restricted by the geometric
design  of  the  combustor  and  cannot  be  freely  placed  to  optimize  the
ignition  performance.  Because  of  non-intrusive  nature,  laser-induced
ignition  exhibits  great  potential  in  advanced  propulsion  systems
[75–77].  Ronney  [78]  reviewed
fundamental  process  of
laser-induced ignition and made a critical comparison between laser and
conventional ignition. According to Phuoc [79,80], laser ignition can be
divided  into  four  categories, i.e.,  laser  thermal ignition,  non-resonant
breakdown, resonant breakdown and photochemical ignition, depend-
ing on the wavelength and intensity of the laser source. Compared with
conventional  ignition,  laser  ignition  has  advantages  in  the  ability  to
choose the ignition location(s) in the combustion chamber and the ac-
curate timing control of ignition events [75,79,81]. In addition, it was
found that laser ignition could expand the fuel-lean ignition limit and
significantly shorten ignition time [82,83].

the

Ignition of premixed and non-premixed flames. There are mainly
two  types  of  flames:  premixed  and  non-premixed  flames.  Premixed
combustion occurs when the fuel and oxidizer are mixed on molecular
scales before they enter the reaction zone, e.g., Bunsen flames [84]. By
consuming  reactants,  the  premixed  flame  behaves  as  a  wave  propa-
gating into the unburned mixture. Stabilization of a premixed flame is
mainly determined by the balance between the local flow speed and the
laminar flame speed. Non-premixed combustion takes place when the
fuel and oxidizer are separately transported to the reaction zone from
different directions. In contrast to the premixed flame, the non-premixed
flame has the advantage in flame stabilization since its location is mainly
determined by the local mixture fraction rather than the flow speed. In
general, the edge of a non-premixed flame is enveloped by a branch of a
partially premixed flame, which helps anchor the non-premixed flame in
a flowing environment [85]. Despite the difference in the outcome of
premixed  and  non-premixed  ignition  (i.e.,  the  appearance  of  the
self-sustained propagating premixed flame and the growth and stabili-
zation of the non-premixed flame, respectively), their ignition processes
share some common features [2,3]. For example, local mixing of fuel
and oxidizer is the prerequisite for the creation and subsequent devel-
opment of the ignition kernel, which are necessary stages in both pre-
mixed and non-premixed ignition.

Ignition  of  premixed  flame  and  detonation.  Depending  on  the
propagation  speed,  the  premixed  combustion  wave  exhibits  in  two
forms, i.e., flame and detonation. The laminar flame speeds of various
fuels are much smaller than the sound speed, and thereby the premixed
flame is usually assumed to propagate under isobaric conditions [14].
The  premixed  flame  structure  consists  of  a  preheat  zone  and  a  much
thinner reaction zone. The preheat zone is a bridge that, by means of
convection and diffusion, supplies the fresh mixture to the reaction zone,
and in the meanwhile, transports heat from the reaction zone to warm
up the fresh mixture. In the reaction zone, reactant consumption and
heat generation  are  respectively  balanced by  mass diffusion  and  heat
conduction, which implies that the rate of molecular transport plays the
decisive role in premixed flame. Particularly, the diffusion of radicals
back into the unburnt gas can significantly influence the flame propa-
gation  speed  and  stability,  exhibiting  more  profound  impacts  than
thermal back diffusion [86].

In contrast to premixed flame, detonation is a supersonic wave [87],

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)1011744

D. Yu and Z. Chen

which consists of a leading shock wave followed by a reaction front [88].
For detonation initiation, there are two possible ways: direct detonation
initiation [89,90] and deflagration-to-detonation transition (DDT) [91,
92]. In direct detonation initiation, the leading shock results from the
blast wave created by the rapid release of energy. In the region swept by
the leading shock, the reaction front propagates at the rate determined
by  the  gradient  of  autoignition  delay  time  [93,94].  According  to  the
reactivity gradient theory of Zel’dovich [93,94] and the SWACER (shock
wave amplification by coherent energy release) mechanism of Lee et al.
[95], the coherent coupling between the propagating reaction front and
pressure wave leads to the development of the detonation structure. In
detonation, the distance between the leading shock and the subsequent
reaction front is defined as the induction length, dD, which is in general
considerably longer than the thickness of a premixed flame, dL, i.e., dD≫
dL  [96]. Dimensional analysis suggests that the minimum energies for
premixed  flame  ignition,  EF,min  and  detonation  initiation  ED,min  are
respectively  proportional  to  the  cubic  of  their  characteristic  length
scales  [12,97],  i.e.,  EL,min ∼ d3
D.  Therefore,  we  have
ED,min≫EF,min,  which  interprets  the  fact  that  detonation  initiation  is
much  more  difficult  than  premixed  flame  ignition.  The  underlying
mechanism  responsible  for  DDT  is  more  involved  [92,98].  Phenome-
nologically,  DDT can  be understood  as  detonation initiation  resulting
from the acceleration of premixed flames, which is driven by various
flame  instabilities  and  turbulence.  However,  the  essential  mechanism
responsible for DDT is still unclear, and many fundamental questions
remain to be answered [91,99,100].

L  and  ED,min ∼ d3

The essential stage for both premixed flame ignition and detonation
initiation  is  the  establishment  of  their  inner  structures.  In  premixed
flame  ignition,  it  is  the  evolution  of  explosive  autoignition  to  the
expanding  ignition  kernels  that  yields  the  transport-controlled  flame
structure  [51,101].  While  the  structure  of  detonation  is  much  more
complex  than  that  of  a  premixed  flame.  The  Zel’dovich-von  Neu-
mann-D ̈oring (ZND) theory presents a simplified detonation structure,
consisting of a leading shock followed by reaction fronts [88]. The ZND
theory  suggests  that  the  overall  thickness  of  the  detonation  process,
including the shock and subsequent reaction zones, can be much larger
than that of a premixed flame under normal conditions [88]. However,
the inherent instability of the ZND detonation structure implies that the
actual  detonation  wave  is  multi-dimensional.  The  size  of  the  cellular
structure of detonation is influenced by the thermochemical character-
istics  of  the  premixed  combustible.  The  boundary  of  the  individual
cellular  structure  comprises  the  shock  and  subsequent  reaction  front,
and  thus  the  span  of  the  cellular  structure  is  much  larger  than  the
thickness of the premixed flame.

laminar minimum ignition energy over wide ranges of turbulence fluc-
tuation velocities has been thoroughly analyzed. It was found that at a
sufficiently  large  Lewis  number  and  small  spark  gap,  turbulence  can
promote ignition, yielding a lower minimum ignition energy than that in
laminar situation, which is then interpreted as a non-monotonic mini-
mum  ignition  energy  transition.  The  underlying  mechanism  of
turbulence-facilitated ignition was attributed to the coupling effects of
differential diffusion, heat losses to electrodes, and turbulence on the
spark  kernel.  Babrauskas  [103]  conducted  a  systematic  review  of  the
literature  on  ignition  over  the  past  century  as  well  as  an  insightful
interpretation  of  the  current  status,  covering  ignition  properties  of
ignitable materials, characteristics of ignition sources, and behaviors of
self-heating  in  ignition.  Ronney  [78]  gave  a  critical  review  on  the
initiation of the combustion process, with emphasis on comparison be-
tween the conventional electric spark and laser igniting sources, whose
main advantages could be attributed to the precise timing control and
freedom  of  placement  in  the  ignition  system.  Morsy  [83]  reviewed
innovative  techniques  of  laser-induced  ignition  and  discussed  the
feasibility  of  adopting  such  technique  in  practical  applications,  espe-
cially the ICE. It was concluded that most incident laser energy could be
utilized in laser-indued cavity ignition, leading to significant enhance-
ments to the combustion process. Patane and Nandgaonkar [104] pre-
sented  a  thorough  review  on  a  variety  of  techniques  utilized  for
multi-point laser ignition,  underlying  its effect on  combustion perfor-
mance in a constant volume chamber. For ICE, it was demonstrated that
laser-induced ignition contributes substantial improvements in engine
efficiency and operation stability without flame quenching. Starikovskiy
and Aleksandrov [105] and Ju and Sun [106] gave comprehensive re-
views on the plasma-assisted ignition and combustion and discussed the
possibility for generation of the chemically active discharge plasma with
desirable  parameters  as  well  as  the  effect  of  nonequilibrium  plasma
upon ignition and combustion processes in various practical conditions.
Li et al. [107] provided a wide review on the recent developments in
plasma-assisted ignition and combustion in the fields of aerospace en-
gines with emphasis on experimental investigations covering ignition,
emission, lean blow-out, combustion efficiency and stability. Practically,
Toulson et al. [26] presented a review on the pre-chamber initiated jet
ignition  combustion system, highlighting  its  high efficiencies with  jet
ignition and simplicity of mechanical system, which suggests promising
potential to be adopted in advanced ICE operating at ultra-lean condi-
tions. Yu and Zheng [108] gave a review on recent progress of ignition
improvement with emphasis on fundamental understandings in ignition
improvements and working principles of primary categories of advanced
ignition  systems,  including  high-energy  spark  ignition,  pulsed  nano-
second  discharge
ignition,
laser-induced plasma ignition, and pre-chamber ignition.

radio-frequency  plasma

ignition,

1.3. Scope of the present review

Ignition  is  one  of  the  most  complicated  problems  in  combustion
research. It is a formidable task to present a comprehensive review on all
aspects of the ignition phenomenon. In the literature, several reviews
have  been  conducted  for  special  aspects  of  ignition.  Fundamentally,
Mastorakos [2] gave an in-depth review on the autoignition and spark
ignition  of  turbulent  non-premixed  combustion  of  gaseous  fuels.
Emphasis was placed on the essential understandings of the associated
turbulent-chemistry  interactions,  which  helps  to  reveal  the  stochastic
nature of the flame kernel onset and the subsequent flame establishment
following  spark  ignition.  For  spray  combustion,  Mastorakos  [3]
consolidated  the  existing  knowledge  on  the  spark-induced  ignition
kernel  and  subsequent  flame  development  in  the  presence  of  both
spatially distributed droplets and turbulent flow. A variety of primary
parameters that distinguish spray ignition from gaseous flame ignition,
e.g., fuel voidability, droplet size, overall fuel-to-air ratio, and the de-
gree of pre-evaporation were highlighted. Shy [102] proposed a solid
review of the dynamic process of premixed turbulent spark ignition, in
which the variation of turbulent minimum ignition energies against the

Unlike  previous  reviews,  this  review  focuses  on  forced-ignition  of
laminar premixed flames with the emphasis on the recent progress in
fundamental  theories  of  ignition.  The  present  review  will  not  cover
homogeneous autoignition [57,78], non-premixed flame ignition, spray
flame ignition, or detonation initiation [87,92]. Besides, the emphasis of
the  present  review  is  on  the  chronological  development  of  theory  on
premixed flame ignition in a quiescent flammable mixture. The progress
in the numerical simulation and experiments on premixed flame ignition
will not be included in the present review.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 the fun-
damentals of premixed flame ignition are reviewed, including the pro-
cess of spark ignition, the various time scales involved in the creation of
premixed flame by spark and critical ignition conditions, such as critical
radius of ignition kernel and the minimum ignition energy. In section 3,
the progressive development of ignition theory is presented, in which
the key mechanisms leading to premixed flame ignition in a quiescent
combustible mixture, i.e., exothermic chemical reaction, diffusive and
conductive transport of reactant and heat respectively, the flame front
expansion of the ignition kernel, and the transient effects involved in
ignition  energy  deposition  and  flame  propagation  are  sequentially

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)1011745

D. Yu and Z. Chen

incorporated  as  the  ignition  theory  advances.  In  section  4,  the
concluding remarks are presented in association with suggested future
research directions.

2. Basics of premixed flame ignition

Forced-ignition in a combustible mixture is a very complex process,
consisting of three stages: flame kernel formation, flame kernel expan-
sion,  and  transition  to  a  self-sustained  flame  [51,109].  The  spark
discharge process plays an essential role in generating the flame kernel
and  has wide-spread  applications, particularly in  internal combustion
engines  [63,65,110,111],  motivating  us  to  place  deserves  special
attention. A brief review on the spark discharge process is presented in
section 2.1. The forced-ignition involves various physical mechanisms,
characterized by different time scales [51,112,113]. Those time scales
are discussed in depth in section 2.2. The key parameters dominating the
transition from an expanding flame kernel to a self-sustained flame are
the  critical  ignition  radius,  minimum  ignition  energy,  and  minimum
ignition power, which are introduced in section 2.3.

2.1. The spark ignition process

Spark ignition represents a critical mechanism by which a controlled
ignition process can be achieved. This section is focused on spark igni-
tion by thoroughly examining the pre-breakdown, breakdown, arc, and
glow discharge phases, which provides essential insights into the initi-
ation and sustaining of the flame kernel in premixed combustible.

According to previous studies [110,114], there are four phases dur-
ing  spark discharge,  i.e., the  pre-breakdown, the breakdown,  the arc,
and  the  glow  discharge.  The  durations  and  voltages  on  the  corre-
sponding electrodes in the process of spark discharge are given in Fig. 1.
It  shows  that  the  characteristic  times  for  each  stage  are  apparently
separated, implying different mechanisms dominating individual stages.
The pre-breakdown phase refers to the transition from insulated gas
between  the  electrodes  to  an  active  plasma  channel  connecting  the
anode and cathode [116,117]. When the voltage applied to the anode,
ranging from 50 to 100 kV/cm, is much higher than the threshold value
of around 30 kV/cm, the formative time lag for the breakdown tbreakdown,
tends to be exceedingly short, i.e., tbreakdown ∼ 1 ns [66,68]. The estab-
lishment of plasma channel is achieved by means of electron avalanches.
The electrons are accelerated to high speed by the strong electric field,
and they collide with atoms nearby, producing ions and new electrons.

Fig. 1. The temporal evolution of voltage and current in a typical spark ignition
process.  Typical  values  of  energy  deposition  for  each  phase  are  given  in  pa-
rentheses.  Four  phases  are  shown:  I,  the  pre-breakdown  phase;  II,  the  break-
down phase; III, the arc phase; and IV, the glow discharge phase. There are two
transition  regions  (in  grey)  between  II  and  III  and  between  III  and  IV.
Figure reprinted from Ref. [115] with permission from Elsevier.

Consequently, the number of freely moving electrons grows exponen-
tially [66].

The  breakdown  phase  starts  at  the  onset  of  the  plasma  channel,
which connects the electrodes by current [98]. A schematic of break-
down phase is shown in Fig. 2 from Ref. [111]. Strong current through
the plasma channel is characterized by substantial motion of electrons.
Because  of  the  drastic  mass  difference,  the  electrons  acquire  much
higher kinetic energy than the other heavy particles, such as atoms, ions,
and  molecules,  during  the  pre-breakdown  phase,  indicating  that  the
plasma  channel  is  in  a  thermal  non-equilibrium  state  [118–120].  In
general,  the  process  of  achieving  thermal  equilibrium  between  the
electrons and the gas, i.e., the conversion of potential energy to thermal
energy  via  collisions  and  recombination  reactions,  lasts  for  tens  of
nanoseconds, which is thereby defined as the lapse of the breakdown
stage. The end state of breakdown provides a suitable initial condition
based on which the spark ignition analysis is conducted.

The arc  phase  proceeds in  the  plasma channel after thermal  equi-
librium  is  established  [66].  Willems  and  Sierens  [121]  developed  a
model  to  interpret  the  growth  of  the  initial  plasma  channel  in  spark
ignition engines. The model takes into account the detailed properties of
the  ignition  system  (e.g.,  the  electrical  power,  geometry  of  the  spark
plug, and the cylinder wall), the flammable mixture (e.g., the pressure,
temperature, and equivalence ratio), and the flow (e.g., turbulence in-
tensity,  stretch,  and  characteristic  time/length  scales).  Thermal  equi-
librium is characterized by a substantially lower concentration of freely
moving  electrons  and  ions  than  in  the  breakdown  phase  and,  thus,  a
higher impedance in the plasma channel [98]. At the end of the break-
down phase, the plasma temperature reaches around thousands of kel-
vins  [110].  Such  a  high  temperature  is  considerably  higher  than  the
melting  point  of  the  material  comprising  the  electrodes,  resulting  in
electron emission from the spot on the electrode surface. Such an effect
is  known  as  thermionic  emission,  which  is  the  dominant  mechanism
responsible  for  the  discharge  in  the  arc  phase  [110,122].  Moreover,
dissociation of gas molecules profoundly affects the thermal dynamics of
an  arc,  particularly  lowering  the  arc  temperature  [123].  This  process
significantly  influences  the  energy  balance  of  the  arc  and  affects  its
characteristics and behavior. By absorbing thermal energy, the dissoci-
ation of gas molecules cools the arc, impacting the birth of the ignition
kernel and the subsequent ignition process.

The glow is the final phase of spark discharge. The temperature in the
plasma  channel  falls  due  to  the  conductive  heat  transfer  to  the  sur-
roundings, which leads to a decrease in current in the gap provided by
thermionic emission [124]. The transition from the arc to the glow phase
takes place when the current is below a threshold, at which the melting
on the electrode surface no longer sustains and thereby the thermionic
emission is switched off [63,125]. Accordingly, the current in the gap
can  only  be  sustained  by  the  positive  ion  bombardment  mechanism,
according to which freely moving electrons are produced during colli-
sions among heavy positive ions on the cathode surface.

The loss of plasma energy during spark ignition can be understood as
heat  transfer  to  the  surroundings.  The  energy  distribution  during
different phases of spark discharge is shown in Fig. 1, and the proportion
of plasma energy and energy loss to electrodes in each stage is given in
Table 1. The breakdown phase is associated with a shock wave origi-
nating from the plasma channel [18]. Propagation of the shock wave
leads  to  the  convective  transfer  of  ignition  energy  from  the  plasma
channel.  The  intensity  of  the  shock  wave  depends  on  the  amount  of
ignition energy deposited during the breakdown phase [111]. For con-
ventional spark ignition, this convective loss of plasma energy appears
to  be  negligible.  Because  of  the  short  duration  and  relatively  small
voltage fall on the cathode, it was estimated that the energy loss asso-
ciated  with  the  breakdown  stage  is  less  than  5  %  [15].  As  shown  in
Fig. 1, the arc phase is much longer than the breakdown phase and it
usually  lasts  for  tens  of  microseconds  [115].  Compared  to  the  break-
down phase, the arc phase has a relative longer duration and a higher
temperature of the plasma channel, implying that the heat loss through

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)1011746

D. Yu and Z. Chen

Fig.  2. Schematics  of  the  spark  breakdown  process:  (a)  a  circuit  is  connected  to  two  conductors  at  a  distance  with  increasing  voltage  across  the  gap;  (b)  the
breakdown voltage is reached, causing the gap to ionize through the “electron avalanche”; (c) a high-temperature, high-pressure, electrically conductive plasma
channel forms across the gap. Reprinted from Ref. [111] with permission from Dr. Sally Bane.

Table 1
Energy distribution for breakdown, arc, and glow phases [15].

Radiation loss
Heat loss to electrodes
Total loss
Plasma energy

Breakdown

<1 %
5 %
6 %
94 %

Arc

5 %
45 %
50 %
50 %

Glow, %

<1 %
70 %
70 %
30 %

heat transfer should be more pronounced. During the glow phase, the
loss of plasma energy can be attributed to the voltage fall on the cathode
and thermal conduction to the electrodes [110]. In general, the loss of
plasma energy in the glow phase is much more significant than that in
the arc phase. Maly and Vogel [115] demonstrated that the effectiveness
of breakdown discharge in ignition is higher than that of arc discharge,
which is in turn more efficient than glow discharge.

The  formation  of  flame  kernel  is  a  very  complex  process,  which
profoundly affects the performance of engines [126–130]. Eisazadel-Far
et al. [129] conducted experimental and theoretical work on the spark
discharge-induced flame kernel formation and propagation in premixed
gas,  and  examined  the  effects  of  various  parameters,  including  dis-
charged energy, radiation loss, and the initial condition of the plasma
kernel. Song and Sunwoo [128] proposed a one-dimensional simulation
model for the flame kernel growth induced by a spark in a gasoline-air
mixture, in which the heat transfer to both the cylinder wall and elec-
trodes,  the  environmental  turbulent  flow  of  the  combustible  mixture,
and the effect of residual gas were taken into account.

Spark  discharge  creates  a  plasma  channel,  which  involves  an
expanding  flame  kernel  and  subsequently  leads  to  a  premixed  flame.
There  are  three  major  steps  of  ignition  kernel  formation  induced  by
spark ignition: (1) plasma channel formation; (2) transition from plasma
channel to flame kernel; and (3) flame kernel development into propa-
gating flame [98]. During the first step, the plasma channel is charac-
terized by an exceedingly high electron temperature, and accordingly,
the  expansion  of  the  plasma  kernel  is  dominated  by  strong  thermal
conduction  and  an  expanding  shock  wave  induced  by  breakdown.
Therefore, the chemical reaction can hardly be initiated during a period
of nanoseconds [125,131]. Entering the arc and glow phases, the tem-
perature of the plasma channel decreases over longer time scales, during
which  the  chemical  reactions  make  an  increasing  contribution  to  the
plasma  kernel  expansion.  By  the  end  of  the  breakdown  phase,  the
created plasma channel consists of a large amount of high-temperature
ions  [124].  As  the  spark  discharge  proceeds,  the  high-temperature
plasma channel expands and finally transitions into a flame kernel at
the end of the second step. In the third step, the flame kernel develops
into a propagating flame, which is dominated by chemical reactions and
the  transport of  heat and species.  The chemical reaction  at the flame
front must be sufficiently intensive in order to balance various effects

leading to heat loss without supplementary energy supply, and mean-
while, the flame kernel should be of comparable size so that the flame
stretch can be sustained without local quenching.

Fig. 3 further shows the sequential process of flame kernel formation.
The shock wave, flow entrainment, and vortex development are clearly
depicted in Fig. 3. The shock wave originating from the spark plays a
crucial role during flame kernel formation. Arpaci et al. [132] examined
the development of ignition kernels in propane-air mixtures and found
that  the  early  radius  of  the  kernel  exhibits  similarity  behavior,  i.e.,
R ∼ t1/5.  Subsequent  analysis  showed  that  the  shock  wave  from  the
spark  kernel  induces  a  strong  detonation  and  that  the  temperature
variation within the kernel can be obtained based on the 1/5-power law
[133]. At initial states, the 1/5-scaling relation implies that such a flow
structure  accelerates  more  rapidly  than  the  Sedov-Taylor  blast  wave,
which  satisfies  R ∼ t2/5  [134].  This  strong  blast  wave  refers  to  the
high-energy wave front emanating from the spark channel and is char-
acterized  by  rapid  expansion  and  high  pressure.  Bradley  et  al.  [135]

Fig. 3. Schematics of the flame formation process. (a) A blast wave is emitted
due to the high temperature, high pressure spark channel; (b) the hot gas kernel
expands  rapidly  following  the  blast  wave  and  fluid  is  entrained  along  the
electrodes;  (c)  chemical  reactions  produce  heat  inside  the  gas  kernel  and
diffusion of heat and species occurs at the boundary; (d) if the proper conditions
exist, a self-sustaining flame forms after approximately 10–100 μs. Reproduced
from Ref. [111] with permission from Dr. Sally Bane.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)1011747

D. Yu and Z. Chen

conducted an experimental and theoretical study on the characteristics
and  underlying  mechanisms  of  high-energy  laser  ignition.  They
demonstrated that the strong shock wave has a complex impact on the
ignition process. On one hand, the shock wave takes away a substantial
amount of thermal energy, which increases the MIE for laser ignition. On
the other hand, the rarefaction wave associated with the strong shock
wave creates a favorable condition that enhances the flame spread and
thus facilitates the ignition process [135].

The flame front indicated in Fig. 3(d) refers specifically to the for-
mation of the flame front at the initial phase of ignition. This phase is
characterized  by  rapid  chemical  kinetics,  especially  in  environments
with  high-energy  initiation  methods  or  highly  reactive  fuel  mixtures,
allowing for the very fast establishment of an autoignition-dominated
reaction  zone  after  an  approximate  duration  of  10–100  μs.  This  time
scale differs from that of transport, which affects the subsequent prop-
agation  of  the  flame  front  through  the  combustible  mixture  and  is
typically  on  the  order  of  milliseconds.  This  transport  time  scale  is
determined by the rates of heat and mass transfer that sustain the flame
front as it moves through the unburnt mixture. The distinction between
these  two  phases—rapid  ignition  and  subsequent  steady-state  prop-
agation—resolves the apparent discrepancy. The microsecond time scale
refers to the very initial establishment of a chemically active zone, while
the  millisecond  time  scale  reflects  the  broader  process  of  flame  front
propagation and stabilization in the combustible mixture. These differ-
ences between the phases of flame kernel development are crucial for
understanding flame dynamics.

The  ignitability  of  spark  discharge  can  be  evaluated  based  on  an
energy budget analysis. According to Eisazadel-Far et al. [129], radia-
tion  is  an  important  source  of  energy  loss  in  plasma,  particularly  in
situations with high temperatures. This is demonstrated by Fig. 4, which
shows  the  temporal  evolution  of  the  energy  deposition  rate  from  the
spark and the rates of energy loss due to various mechanisms. However,
when  a  self-sustained  flame  establishes  itself,  radiation  is  not  an
important source of energy loss. In addition, Song and Sunwoo [128]
found  that  increasing  breakdown  energy  enlarges  the  plasma  kernel
radius  and  thereby  yields  faster  development  of  the  ignition  kernel.
Therefore, efficient spark ignition should avoid significant energy loss
during the arc and glow phases.

Despite widespread practical applications, spark ignition has some
limitations, such as electrode erosion over time and low reliability in
limiting  situations.  Particularly  for  the  ignition  of  a  lean  mixture  or

Fig.  4. Rate  of  variation  of  discharge  energy  (DE),  cathode-anode  fall  dissi-
pation Qca(cid:0) diss, radiation loss Qradiation, and conduction dissipation by thermal
boundary  layer  Qconduction  for  air.  The  ignition  radius  is  ri = 0.5  mm  and  the
distance between electrodes is de = 0.38 mm. Reprinted from Ref. [129] with
permission from Elsevier.

ignition at high pressure conditions, the ignition energy deposited by the
spark might be insufficient. To overcome these limitations and enhance
ignition efficiency, alternative advanced ignition techniques have been
developed,  including  laser  ignition  and  plasma  jet  ignition.  Available
techniques  to  develop  advanced  ignition  approaches  include  laser
[135–137]  and  plasma  jet  [138,139].  In  spite  of  the  similarities  in
dominant  mechanism  and  evolution  process  shared  between  conven-
tional  spark  ignition  and  laser-induced  ignition,  the  latter  exhibits
several advantages, such as an extremely high rate of energy transfer
from the beam and freedom in selecting a location for breakdown. In
laser ignition, unless tuned for resonant excitations of particular species
[140],  the  absorption  of  laser  energy  causes  electrical  breakdown
through multiphoton ionization and electro-ion bremsstrahlung [79]. It
leads to  a substantial increase in  both temperature and  pressure and,
thereby, the emission of a strong shock wave. Subject to a sufficiently
strong igniter, the initial shock wave can be treated as a blast wave that
rapidly  decays  to  an  acoustic  wave  followed  by  a  growing  diffusion
boundary layer [141,142]. The laser-induced ignition offers high pre-
cision and control over the spark ignition process and is able to target
specific locations within the combustible mixture. However, its draw-
backs include the high cost of laser equipment, the complexity of inte-
grating  laser  systems  into  combustion,  and  potential  safety  concerns
with  laser  operation.  In  addition,  the  effectiveness  of  laser-induced
ignition  can  be  influenced  by  the  optical  properties  of  the  fuel
mixture, which might limit its applicability across different combustion
scenarios.

The plasma jet igniter includes two spark energy delivery systems,
whose operation process can be interpreted as follows: A high voltage,
low current discharge is initially imposed to break down or ionize the
gap, which is followed by a low voltage, high current discharge that adds
the  dominant  part  of  the  spark  energy.  The  second  spark  discharge
rapidly  heats  the  flammable  mixture  to  a  high  temperature  and  high
pressure,  which  subsequently  produces  a  high-speed  jet  of  high  tem-
perature  ions  and  free  electrons  [107,143].  Plasma  jet  ignition  offers
advantages in igniting lean mixtures and can improve combustion effi-
ciency and stability. The challenges associated with this method include
the  complexity  of  the  ignition  system,  higher  energy  requirements
compared to conventional spark ignition, and the need for specialized
equipment  to  generate  and  deliver  the  plasma  jet  to  the  combustion
zone. Additionally, long-term durability and deploying plasma jet sys-
tems  into  existing  engine  designs  pose  significant  engineering
challenges.

2.2. Different characteristic times in premixed flame ignition

As indicated by Fig. 1, various time scales are involved in different
phases  during  premixed  flame  ignition.  For  sufficiently  high  over-
(cid:0) 9  s), during which
voltage, the breakdown time is in nanoseconds (10
electron avalanches open the plasma channel connecting the electrodes
[63]. Subsequent to the breakdown phase, a thermal equilibrium plasma
(cid:0) 5  s),
channel forms. The arc phase lasts for tens of microseconds (10
within  which  a  shock  wave  is  created  by  the  rapid  thermal  energy
addition  since  strong  current  flows  through  the  plasma  channel  by
means of thermionic emission [66]. The plasma region spreads due to
both shock wave propagation and thermal expansion, which cools the
plasma  kernel  over  time.  At  a  period  comparable  to  the  mixture’s
autoignition delay time, the chemical reaction becomes pronounced and
tends  to  dominate  the  expansion  of  the  plasma  kernel  at  a  relatively
large distance, which creates the flame kernel. The glow phase is much
(cid:0) 3  s) [124]. Despite huge losses to
longer, typically in milliseconds (10
the electrodes, the ignition energy deposited in the glow phase supports
the expansion of the flame kernel. The expansion of the flame kernel is
due  to  the  outward  propagation  of  the  flame  front  at  the  edge.  The
motion of the flame front is driven by chemical reactions and is mean-
while subject to heat transfer caused by various effects, such as radia-
tion,  conduction,  and  expansion  waves  [8,144].  Specifically,  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)1011748

D. Yu and Z. Chen

radiation time scale can be evaluated based on temperature and size of
the spark channel. At high temperatures, the radiation time scale may be
exceedingly short and efficiency of radiation in transferring energy in
such  scenarios  is  significantly  enhanced  due  to  the  T4-dependence  of
radiative emission according to Stefan-Boltzmann law [145]. The flame
(cid:0) 2
kernel development time is usually in the range of 1–10 ms (10
s) and the subsequent flame propagation takes much longer time in the
(cid:0) 2~1 s). These time-scaling analyses suggest
range of 10–1000 ms (10
that radiative energy transfer is an important mechanism, in association
with conduction and convection, in the brief duration of the spark to
initiate combustion.

(cid:0) 3~10

Numerical and experimental efforts have been devoted to unveiling
the  range  of  timescales  involved  in  each  process  of  premixed  flame
ignition [81,136,146,147]. The schematics of the primary characteris-
tics  and  associated  time  scales  of  different  phases  of  laser  induced
ignition are shown in Fig. 5.

kernel

The inverse of reaction rate defines the characteristic time scale for
chemical reactions tchemical, which is very sensitive to temperature and is
affected by the ambient pressure and equivalence ratio of the mixture
[14]. Each heat loss mechanism is characterized by a time scale as well.
In general, radiation time scale tradiation is much larger than tchemical. This
indicates  that  radiative  heat  loss  cannot  balance  the  heat  generation
from reaction and thereby has marginal influence during flame kernel
expansion  [148,149].  The  heat  conduction  time  is  evaluated  as
tconduction ∼ R2
/α, in which Rkernel is the flame kernel radius and α the
thermal conductivity of the mixture. The expansion wave propagates at
the speed of sound, aacoustic. Accordingly, the time scale for the cooling
induced by expansion wave is tacoustic ∼ Rkernel/aacoustic. The time ratio
tacoustic/tconduction ∼ α /(aacousticRkernel) is of the same order as the Knud-
sen number Kn, which is the ratio of mean-free-path to the flame kernel
size  and  is  in  general  considerably  small,  i.e.,  tacoustic/tconduction ∼ Kn.
According to physics kinetics [150], the Knudsen number separates the
continuum regime and the kinetics-dominated regime of free molecular
flow. Regarding the specific flame kernel size in practical combustion
problems, we noticed that the Knudsen number is significantly less than
unity, i.e., Kn≪1. It implies that the smallest flame kernel size, deter-
mined by the spark plug gap of the order of 1 mm, is substantially larger
than the mean free path in typical conditions. It solidifies that the gas
behavior in the vicinity of the flame kernel can be appropriately inter-
preted within the continuum regime.

In general, spark discharge time scales in ignition systems range from
a few nanoseconds to several hundred microseconds, depending on the
energy  level,  spark  gap,  and  electrical  characteristics  of  the  ignition
system.  For  instance,  a  typical  automotive  spark  ignition  system

Fig.  5. Range  of  timescales  for  various  processes  involved  in  laser-induced
ignition:  the  lengths  of  the  box  indicate  the  durations  of  the  indicated  pro-
cess. Reprinted from Ref. [146] with permission from SAE International.

operates with discharge times on the order of tens to hundreds of mi-
croseconds,  with  the  initial  high-energy  discharge  phase  lasting
approximately 1–2 μs, followed by a long, lower-energy tail. These time
scales  are  crucial  for  ensuring  sufficient  energy  transfer  to  initiate
combustion. Thus, it is difficult to specify a unique time scale charac-
terizing the spark discharge process because of its multi-stage nature.
Table 2 provides a summary of the primary characteristic time scales
involved in the forced-ignition of premixed flames. This table also pre-
sents the dimensional relationships of these time scales as well as their
dependence on state variables.

In

respond.

the  other

can  hardly

Depending  on  the  flame  front  propagation  speed,  the  primary
mechanism  of  heat  loss  differs.  V ́azquez-Espí  and  Li ̃n ́an  [151,152]
defined  two  ignition  regimes  by  comparing  characteristic  times
describing the dominant mechanism and chemical reaction respectively.
In  the  regime  satisfying  tchemical ∼ tacoustic≪tconduction,  i.e.,  the  reaction
time being comparable with the acoustic time, the reaction heat release
is balanced by heat loss due to thermal expansion, and thereby ignition
exhibits to be a fast, non-diffusive process, during which the heat con-
duction
regime  with
tacoustic≪tconduction ∼ tchemical,  the  heat  conduction  turns  out  to  be  the
primary  cooling  mechanism  that controls  the  ignition  process.  Before
ignition takes place, the expansion wave would have propagated to far
distance and thereby cannot be perceived by the flame kernel. Since the
expansion of the flame kernel is determined by the reaction rate, the
propagation speed of the flame front shall be correlated to tconduction. In
the non-diffusive ignition regime, the flame kernel grows at the speed
comparable  with  local  sound  speed,  which  may  induce  detonation
initiation according to gradient theory of Zel’dovich [93]. In real-world
scenarios, the flame kernel growth in the non-diffusive ignition regime
involves complex hydrodynamic and chemical processes. Particularly,
the growth speed of the flame kernel in non-diffusive regime is signifi-
cantly influenced by the propagation of acoustic waves induced by the
flame kernel expansion. These acoustic waves can collapse into a shock
wave, holding the potential to transition to detonation and playing more
crucial role in the dynamics of the flame kernel development [153]. A
thorough review of denotation and deflagration-to-detonation transition
(DDT) can be found in Refs. [91,112,154] and it is beyond the scope of
this  review.  In  the  thermal-diffusive  ignition  regime,  the  equilibrium

Table 2
List of primary characteristic time scales involved in forced-ignition of premixed
flame

Spark discharge

Breakdown

tbreakdown ∼ ns

Arc (electric discharge)

tarc ∼ μs

Ignition kernel
formation

Ignition kernel
propagation

Key parameters

Glow (electric
discharge)

Acoustic
Blast wave

Chemical reaction

Thermal conduction

Kernel deformation
Chemical reaction

Thermal conduction

Radiation

Mass diffusion

Convection
Ignition kernel
temperature
Ignition kernel
pressure
Ignition kernel radius
Speed of kernel front
Thermal diffusivity
Mass diffusivity

tglow ∼ ms

kernel

/α

tacoustic ∼ tacoustic(Tkernel)
tblastwave ∼ tblastwave(Tkernel,
Pkernel)
tchemical ∼ tchemical(Tkernel,
Pkernel)
tconduction ∼ R2
tdeformation ∼ Rkernel/Ufront
tchemical ∼ tchemical(Tkernel,
Pkernel)
tconduction ∼ R2
tradiation ∼ tradiation(Tkernel,
Rkernel)
tdiffusion ∼ R2
tconvection ∼ Rkernel/Ufront
Tkernel

/D

/α

kernel

kernel

Pkernel

Rkernel
Ufront
α
D

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)1011749

D. Yu and Z. Chen

between chemical reaction and heat conduction indicates the definite
flame structure at the edge of flame kernel [155,156] and suggests that
the flame kernel shall evolve into a self-sustained spherical flame [144,
157].  This  process  introduces  one  more  essential  time  scale,  whose
interpretation  involves  critical  ignition  radius  Rcr  and  flame  front
propagation speed U.

Nevertheless, it shall be noted that the physicochemical process of
flame  kernel  development  in  real-world  situations  would  be  more
complex [130,158]. For instance, as the flame kernel temperature in-
creases,  it significantly influences the rates of  chemical reactions and
sound speeds in highly dynamic environments of the gas mixture. This
interplay  suggests  that  a  simple  balance  between  these  time  scales  is
unlikely to be stable, and additionally, their interplay is subject to the
evolving conditions within the flame kernel. The early development of
the flame kernel involves complex and highly transient physio-chemical
processes, characterized by rapid changes in temperature, pressure, and
species concentrations [159].

In  the  next  subsection,  we  shall  briefly  look  into  the  definition  of
critical ignition radius. The dynamic behavior of flame kernel develop-
ment will be thoroughly reviewed in section 3.

2.3. Critical ignition radius and minimum ignition energy

Successful  ignition  is characterized  by the  setup of  a  flame kernel
that is able to propagate outwardly in a self-sustained manner. Studies
on the evolution of the ignition kernel showed that there is a critical
radius Rcr, corresponding to the marginal state that separates the growth
(i.e., transition to an ever-expanding spherical flame) and collapse (i.e.,
shrink  of  the  flame  kernel  leading  to  extinction)  of  the  flame  kernel
[160,161]. Utilizing a high-speed laser schlieren system, Ko et al. [142],
recorded the temporal growth of the ignition kernel from a spark near
the MIE in a propane/air mixture and showed the existence of a critical
ignition radius, beyond which the flame front can propagate outwardly
in a self-sustained manner.

The flame kernel initiated by the spark discharge is very small and
thereby subject to a very large positive stretch, which is inversely pro-
portional to the flame radius. Consequently, flame stretch substantially
affects the developing procedure of the flame kernel and thus plays a
decisive role in determining the outcome of the ignition process [8,144].
According to the coupling of positive stretch with preferential diffusion
between heat and mass (i.e., the Lewis number, Le, which is the ratio
between  heat  diffusivity  of  the  mixture  and  mass  diffusivity  of  the
deficient reactant), the temperature and propagation speed of the flame
kernel  are  increased  (decreased)  in  mixtures  with  Lewis  number  less
(greater) than unity, which accordingly promotes (inhibits) the ignition
process [157,162,163]. This is consistent with the fact that successful
ignition can always be achieved once the flame kernel is created in a
combustible mixture with Le < 1 [12,164].

Nevertheless, it is difficult to ignite a mixture with Le > 1 because of
the inhibiting effect induced by the positive stretch [12,17]. For a flame
kernel  expanding in  a  quiescent  mixture, the  flame  stretch  is  propor-
tional to the flame curvature. Correspondingly, the threshold intensity
of stretch is interpreted in terms of the critical ignition radius, and it
implies that Rcr  increases with Lewis number [12,157]. When the flame
curvature is greater than 2/Rcr, the flame front propagation needs to be
supported by external energy supply, i.e., the ignition energy. Consid-
ering  flame  kernel  growth  as  a  two-step  process  consisting  of  an
instantaneous  blast  followed  by  a  diffusion  penetration  into  the  sur-
rounding area, Ko et al. [141] developed a theoretical model to interpret
the temporal evolution of the flame kernel and to evaluate the critical
ignition radius. However, the structure and the dynamic propagation of
the flame kernel were not appropriately considered in the formulation of
Ko et  al. [141].  Such issues were addressed by  later ignition theories
[109,144], on which a detailed review is presented in the next section.
In  practical  combustion,  there  exists  turbulence  in  the  combustible
mixture, which alters the transport rate of both heat and radicals. While,

except  for  extremely strong  turbulence, the  turbulent eddies  may  not
significantly  damage  the  fundamental  structure  of  the  flame  kernel
[165], which is exceedingly small at the ignition stage. Despite a tur-
bulent Lewis number close to unity, the dynamic behavior of the ignition
kernel is profoundly affected by local stretch and differential diffusion
defined by the molecular Lewis number in turbulent flows.

In  experiments,  ignition  energy  is  provided  by  a  capacitive  spark
with variable power levels and discharge durations [114]. For a mixture
at given initial temperature and pressure, there exists a transition band
of the spark energy level between ignition and non-ignition [166–168],
which can be attributed to the perturbation in various aspects, such as
the breakdown energy, the subsequent discharge, and the location of the
spark  channel.  In  practice,  ignition  is  usually  considered  a  statistical
rather than a threshold phenomenon. Accordingly, the concept of igni-
tion probability is widely adopted [167,169,170]. The ignition proba-
bility grows monotonically as the spark energy level increases from the
lower to the upper bound within this transition band. In general, the
middle point within this transition band corresponding to 50 % ignition
probability defines the MIE [166–168]. It is noted that a slight variation
in fuel concentration may significantly change the ignition probability
and thereby the MIE [111].

The MIE changes non-monotonically with the gap distance between
two  electrodes,  dspark.  It  reaches  the  smallest  value  at  some  optimal
distance dspark,optimal, which is in the same order as the quenching dis-
tance  [171–173].  Ono  et  al.  [174,175]  measured  the  MIE  of  hydro-
gen/air  mixtures,  for  which  the  quenching  distance  increases  with
hydrogen concentration. Similarly, the MIE changes non-monotonically
with  the discharge  duration tspark,  and  there exists an  optimum spark
duration tspark,optimal  that leads to the smallest value of MIE at a given
electrode gap distance [69,176]. Combining the effects of electrode gap
distance and spark duration, the absolute (least) MIE can be determined
by satisfying the conditions dspark = dspark,optimal  and tspark = tspark,optimal.
In flow environments, experimental studies [5,116,177] found that the
severe stretch imposed on the ignition kernel renders the ignition pro-
cess more difficult, and accordingly, the MIE becomes higher. In addi-
tion  to  the  increase  in  MIE,  the  optimal  spark  duration  for  a  flowing
mixture  tends  to  be  smaller  than  that  for  the  corresponding  stagnant
mixture [178]. This indicates that a stronger ignitor must be adopted to
initiate flame in a flowing mixture. Moreover, Sloane and Ronney [179]
found  that  the  MIE  predicted  based  on  a  one-step  chemical  model  is
substantially  lower  than  those  calculated  using  detailed  chemical
mechanisms. This suggests that the detailed chemistry needs to be taken
into account for a qualitative evaluation of the MIE.

The dynamic evolution of the flame kernel changes drastically for
ignition  near  the  MIE  [5,69,180].  Initially,  the  spark-induced  flame
kernel  expands  exceedingly  rapidly.  As  depicted  in  Fig.  6,  the  propa-
gation speed of the flame front falls in the course of time as it approaches
the critical radius. The origin of Fig. 6 does not start at r = 0, which

Fig. 6. Schematic for the change of ignition kernel propagation speed with its
radius for successful and failed ignition.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117410

D. Yu and Z. Chen

helps  focus on  the  propagation speed  of  the  flame  kernel  beyond the
critical  ignition  radius.  The  ignition  kernel  onset  is  associated  with
complex interaction between fluid dynamics and physiochemical pro-
cesses,  leading  to  intricate  variation  of  flame  kernel  speed  in  a  very
restricted domain close to r = 0. While success or failure of ignition can
be judged by the flame propagation speed at radial coordinates near the
critical radius. For successful ignition, the flame kernel can pass through
the critical radius, and the propagation speed of the flame kernel turns to
increase  and  eventually  approaches  the  planar  adiabatic  flame  speed
[164,181].  For  failed  ignition,  the  growth  of  the  flame  kernel  ceases
before arriving at the critical radius, and eventually flame extinguish-
ment occurs.

In addition to ignition energy, there is another key parameter char-
acterizing  the  ignition  criterion—ignition  power.  The  ignition  power
can be understood as the rate at which this energy is delivered to the
combustible  mixture.  In  analogy  to  minimum  ignition  energy,  there
exists a minimum ignition power below the ignition kernel can never
pass through the critical size, no matter how long the ignition source
lasts, or equivalently, how much the ignition energy is deposited into the
combustible  mixture  [109,144,182].  Both  the  ignition  energy  and
ignition power are intrinsic parameters that can influence the ignition
outcome.

The critical ignition radius and MIE are essential concepts of spark
ignition and provide fundamental knowledge for evaluating the ignit-
ability of a combustible mixture. In the following section, a thorough
review will be presented with emphasis on the theoretical development
concerning the key issues of forced-ignition of premixed flames.

3. Premixed flame ignition theory

The prerequisite for chemical reaction is the mixing of reactants at
the  molecular  level.  Therefore,  ignition  in  premixed  reactants  is  the
onset process for a variety of fundamental combustible modes, including
premixed and non-premixed flames, spray combustion, and detonation.
In a quiescent mixture, ignition involves the generation of a flame kernel
and its subsequent evolution. The flame kernel can either develop into a
self-sustained  propagating  flame  or  quench,  which  are  referred  to  as
successful and failed ignition, respectively. In this section, the progress
in  the  theory  for  premixed  flame  ignition  in  a  quiescent  mixture  is
reviewed. Fig. 7 shows various controlling physical and chemical pro-
cesses considered in different ignition theories. In Fig. 7, the governing
equations for temperature and mass fraction of the deficient reactant are
in the coordinate moving with the propagation front, whose propagation
speed is U [144]. Therefore, the convection term (the second term on the
left hand side of the governing equations) represents the consideration

Fig.  7. Different  ignition  theories  considering  various  controlling  physical/
chemical processes. The non-dimensional governing equations for temperature
and mass fraction of the deficient reactant are shown (the tilde is omitted).

of  flame  propagation  [144].  As  shown  in  Fig.  7,  the  thermal  ignition
theory  considers  the  balance  between  heat  loss  due  to  thermal  con-
duction  and  heat  generation  due  to  chemical  reactions.  Since  the
chemical  reaction  occurring  in  flames  is  associated  with  both  heat
release  and  reactant  consumption,  the  flame  ball  theory  further  con-
siders the transport of both heat and reactant. Based on the stability of
the  flame  ball,  the  critical  radius  for  premixed  ignition  can  be  deter-
mined. The quasi-steady ignition theory describes the transition from an
ignition kernel to a self-sustained, propagating spherical flame. There-
fore,  the  convection  term  corresponding  to  flame  propagation  is
considered in the quasi-steady ignition theory, as shown in Fig. 7. The
quasi-steady  ignition  theory  neglects  the  unsteady  transition  of  the
ignition  kernel.  The  transition  ignition  theory  further  considers  the
unsteady term in the governing equations, as shown in Fig. 7.

The large activation energy asymptotic (AEA) analysis has histori-
cally  played  a  significant  role  in  the  theoretical  development  of  pre-
mixed flame ignition. In early decades, limited kinetic and numerical
tools  made AEA  a  reasonable approach to gaining a  fundamental  un-
derstanding of complex combustion systems. As advanced chemical ki-
netics and computational fluid dynamics develop, the limitations of AEA
have  become  more  evident.  The  primary  issue  with  AEA  is  the
assumption  of  large  activation  energy,  which  forms  the  basis  for  the
entire AEA framework in analyzing flame ignition, extinction, and flame
propagation speed. Specifically, the explosion of hydrogen, influenced
by the presence of radicals, typically does not exhibit large activation
energies  [183].  For  autoignition,  the  real-world  activation  energy  is
controlled by chain branching reactions, such as H + O2→OH + O [14].
Despite these limitations, AEA has contributed valuable insights into the
qualitative understanding of ignition phenomena [184,185]. The AEA
has the ability to highlight key parameters and dominant processes in
flame ignition, which guide focused efforts on critical aspects of com-
bustion phenomena. Moreover, AEA remains a powerful tool for heu-
ristic interpretation of premixed flame ignition. The analytical nature of
AEA makes it an excellent framework for conceptual understanding of
critical  combustion  processes.  Even  as  the  computational  methods
advance, the foundational knowledge provided by AEA continues to be
relevant, helping to train new generations of combustion researchers.
The following sections give a chronological review on ignition the-
ories,  which  are  essentially  based  on  the  AEA  theoretical  framework.
The theory on the onset of chemical reactions, which is characterized by
thermal runaway or explosion, is reviewed in section 3.1; the thermal
ignition  theory  is  presented  in  section  3.2;  the  flame  ball  theory  is
reviewed  in  section  3.3;  the  formation  of  ignition  kernel  subject  to
external  heating  is  discussed  in  section  3.4;  the  quasi-steady  ignition
theory  is  described  in  section  3.5;  and  the  transient  ignition  theory,
which  provides  a  more  comprehensive  description  to  the  process  of
premixed flame ignition, is discussed in section 3.6.

3.1. Thermal runaway in a homogeneous system

The overall exothermicity from chemical reactions can induce ther-
mal  runaway/explosion  in  a  combustible  mixture.  Thermal  runaway,
also  known  as  autoignition,  represents  the  onset  of  premixed  flame
ignition.  In classical thermal ignition theory,  the chemical reaction is
simplified  by  a  one-step  Arrhenius  type  model,  and  the  combustible
mixture is assumed to be adiabatic prior to autoignition [14]. Accord-
ingly, the temperature of the homogeneous mixture satisfies

cp

dT
dt

= (cid:0) qc

dYF
dt

= qcYFBe

(cid:0) Ta /T

(1)

where cp  is the heat capacity, and YF  is the mass fraction of the deficient
reactant,  respectively.  The  parameters  for  chemical  reaction  are  the
activation temperature Ta, the collision frequency factor B and the heat
release per unit mass of reactant qc.

In  general,  the  consumption  of  reactant  before  thermal  runaway

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117411

D. Yu and Z. Chen

)

ρ0cp

F  where Yo

onset tends to be insubstantial, i.e., YF ≈ Yo
F  is the initial mass
fraction  of  the  deficient  reactant  [186,187].  Consequently,  the  auto-
ignition  process  is  primarily  characterized  by  temperature  variation.
Usually the activation temperature Ta is much higher than the adiabatic
(cid:0)
flame temperature Tad, i.e., Ta≫Tad, where Tad = T0 + qc /
derived
from  energy  conservation.  The  relation  Ta≫Tad  implies  that  a  slight
increment in temperature substantially facilitates the chemical reaction
[7,161]. In general, the temperature can be expanded in an asymptotic
series, and the thermal ignition process can be described by the temporal
variation of temperature perturbation. Accordingly, the AEA provides a
convenient approach to investigating the dynamic behavior of premixed
flames  [14,185].  The  large  activation  energy  asymptotic  analysis  re-
quires the specification of a small parameter. In general, this parameter
can be specified as 1/Ze, where the Zel’dovich number, defined as Ze =
Ta(Tad (cid:0) T0)/T2
ad,  is  considerably  greater  than  unity  for  typical  com-
bustion systems, i.e., Ze≫1.

For simplicity and clarity, the mathematical formulation of asymp-
totic analysis should be conducted in nondimensional form. The tem-
perature can be non-dimensionalized as ̃T = ρ0cpT/Qc  with ρ0  being the
density of the unburned mixture and qc  the specific heat release due to
chemical  reaction.  The  non-dimensional  temperature  is  introduced  in
the  form  of  an  asymptotic  series  by  regarding  1/Ze  as  the  expansion
parameter, i.e.,

̃T = ̃T0 +

̃θ
Ze

+ O

)

(

1
Ze2

(2)

̃θ describes the
where ̃T0 is the mixture’s temperature at initial state and
nondimensional temperature perturbation. Substituting Eq. (2) into Eq.
(1) and retaining the first order terms of 1/Ze, one obtains [14]

̃θ
d
d̃t

 ̃θ
= e

(3)

where the non-dimensional time is defined as ̃t = tBYF,0e
ject to the initial condition of
is
̃θ = (cid:0) ln(1 (cid:0) ̃t)

(cid:0) Ta/T0 Ze. Sub-
̃θ(0) = 0, the analytical solution for Eq. (3)

(4)

As ̃t→1, |̃θ| approaches infinity as the linearized model break down,
indicating the occurrence of thermal runaway. Accordingly, the ignition
delay time for the adiabatic thermal runaway in dimensional form can
be written as

tignition,0 =

1
ZeBYF,0e(cid:0) Ta/T0

(5)

Considering  volumetric  heat  loss  in  a  homogeneous  system,  the

temperature satisfies [14].

cp

dT
dt

= qcBYFe

(cid:0) Ta /T (cid:0) h(T (cid:0) T0)

(6)

where h is the heat transfer coefficient. Substituting Eq. (2) into Eq. (6)
and retaining first order terms of 1/Ze yield the following equation for
the temperature perturbation:

̃θ
d
d̃t

= e

 ̃θ (cid:0) ̃
̃θ
h

(7)

(cid:0)

̃
h = h /

)
(cid:0) Ta/T0 Ze

ρcvBYF,0e

where
is  the  non-dimensional  heat  transfer
coefficient. The presence of heat loss retards the accumulation of ther-
mal  energy  and  thereby  extends  the  delay  time  for  thermal  runaway
tignition. Integrating Eq. (7) yields

The integral in Eq. (8) approaches infinity for

̃
h ≥ e, implying that
thermal  runaway  can  never  occur  for  sufficiently  severe  heat  loss.

Consequently, the critical condition for thermal runaway is

̃
h = e.

In  general,  ignition  is  associated  with  convective  and  conductive
transport processes, which can be considered as effective heat loss for
inhomogeneous combustion system. The energy conservation equation,

in terms of non-dimensional temperature

̃
T, has the following form [14]

∂̃
T
∂t

+ ∇⋅( v

→̃T (cid:0) α∇̃T) = BcFe

(cid:0)  ̃Ta / ̃T

(9)

)

ρcp

(cid:0)
where α = λ /
is the thermal diffusivity of the mixture. The inclu-
sion of convective and conductive transport in equation (9) suggests that
the flow system exhibits inhomogeneities from a macroscopic perspec-
tive,  due  to  the  presence  of  temperature,  mass  fraction,  and  velocity
gradients. However, when these gradients are not particularly strong,
the local flow states within the reactive fluid element can be approxi-
mately regarded as homogeneous, and the gradients of temperature and
mass fraction play a role in loss mechanisms. The chemical heat release
within  the  reactive  fluid  element  is  balanced  by  convective  and
conductive heat loss in the chemically frozen fluid element nearby [14,
185]. Usually, the lateral diffusion tangent to the reaction zone tends to
be  negligible.  Consequently,  the  reaction  zone  can  be  treated  as
quasi-planar, and the conductive heat transfer is primarily in the normal
→
direction, denoted by  n
[14]. In addition, as approaching the critical
state for thermal runaway, the ignition delay time tends to be substan-
tially longer than that for heat conduction and mass diffusion within the
reaction  zone.  The  separation  of  spatial  and  temporal  scales  suggests
that the evolution of temperature in the reaction zone is determined by
the  competition  between  chemical  heat  release  and  heat  conduction.
The temperature variation in the reaction zone must be investigated in a
zoom-in perspective by means of stretched coordinate, which is defined
as ̃χ = nZe|∂̃
T/∂n|
0  represents the magnitude of the
temperature gradient outside the reaction zone, which is affected by the
convective heat transfer. Applying the asymptotic analysis to Eq. (9), the
temperature perturbation satisfies
d2̃θ
d̃χ2

0. The factor |∂̃

T/∂n|

Δ
 ̃θ
e

= (cid:0)

2

(10)

(

)

α|∂̃

(cid:0) Ta/T0 /

where Δ = 2BcF,0YO,0e

T/∂n|2
number [186]. Integrating Eq. (10) subject to the boundary conditions at
̃χ = 0 and ̃χ→∞, which are determined by matching with the tempera-
ture profile outside the reaction zone, one obtains [186]
})

is the modified Damk ̈ohler

0Ze

{

(

]

[(cid:0)

̃θ = ln

1
Δ

1 (cid:0)

(cid:0)

√

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 (cid:0) Δ
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 (cid:0) Δ

)/(cid:0)

)/(cid:0)

1 (cid:0)
1 (cid:0)

1 +
1 +

√

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 (cid:0) Δ
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 (cid:0) Δ

)

)

∓ ̃χ

(cid:0) e
+ e∓ ̃χ

2

(11)

There is no solution for

̃θ  when Δ ≥ 1, implying the occurrence of
thermal  runaway.  Therefore,  the  critical  ignition  condition  is  Δ = 1,
which can be alternatively expressed in terms of temperature gradient
[186]

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

⃒
∂̃
⃒
T
⃒
⃒
∂n

0

=

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(cid:0) Ta/T0

2BcF,0e
αZe

(12)

Here  |∂̃

T/∂n|

0  represents  the  temperature  inhomogeneity  experi-
enced by the reaction zone. It can be determined by solving the tem-
perature  equation  describing  the  heat  transfer  process  in  the  outer
region, which is controlled by both heat conduction and convection and
is meanwhile affected by boundary conditions. Therefore, the value of
|∂̃

0  changes among various flow conditions.

T/∂n|

tignition
tignition,0

=

∫∞

0

̃θ
d
 ̃θ (cid:0) ̃
̃θ
e
h

(8)

The  reaction  rate  strongly  depends  on  the  local  temperature  and
pressure and so does the ignition delay time. When the temperature or
pressure  changes  due  to  compression/expansion  or  heat  transfer,  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117412

D. Yu and Z. Chen

time for thermal runaway also changes. In order to predict the occur-
rence  of  autoignition  in  a  mixture  whose  temperature  or  pressure
changes with time, Livengood and Wu [188] proposed an integration
method.  In  the  so-called  Livengood-Wu  (L-W)  integral,  the  inverse  of
ignition  delay  time  represents  the  reactivity  and  thermal  runaway  or
autoignition  occurs  when the  value  of the  L-W  integral reaches  unity
[188]:

∫tignition

1 =

0

1
tch

dtʹ

(13)

where  tch  refers  to  the  delay  time  of  autoignition  in  a  homogeneous
system with an initial temperature identical to the central temperature
of the hot spot at the current instant. The Livengood-Wu (L-W) integral
records  the  progress  of  the  transition  from  a  chemically  frozen  state
(corresponding to a large tignition) to the onset of vigorous chemical re-
actions (corresponding to small tignition), during which the accumulation
of reactivity due to either temperature growth or radical production is
appropriately taken into account [189,190]. The L-W integral has been
popularly used to predict autoignition in ICEs with varying thermody-
namic  conditions  [191].  Initially,  the  L-W  integral  was  proposed  for
fuels with single-stage autoignition. Recently, the L-W integral has been
extended  for  fuels  with  two-stage  autoignition  induced  by  low-  and
high-temperature  chemistry  [192,193].  Zhao  et  al.  [194,195]  have
developed the staged L-W integral which is able to evaluate and predict
the two-stage autoignition behavior for different fuels.

The L-W integral was initially proposed to predict the occurrence of
homogeneous autoignition without heat and mass transport. However,
during forced ignition, the mixture is not homogeneous, and the heat
transport may greatly affect the local temperature of the ignition kernel/
hot spot. Recently, Chen et al. [58] have proposed a method using the
L-W  integral  to  predict  the  critical  ignition  temperature  of  hot
spot-induced ignition in a flammable mixture. In this method, first the
transient temperature at the hot spot center is obtained by solving the
1D unsteady heat conduction equation. Then the ignition delay time at
different  central  temperatures  is  obtained  from  a  0D  calculation
considering detailed chemistry. Finally, the critical ignition temperature
is determined based on whether the L-W integral can reach unity. This
method can significantly reduce the computational cost by two to three
orders compared to transient simulation, taking into account detailed
chemistry  and  transport  [58].  The  proposed  method  was  tested  for
different mixtures, including methane/air, hydrogen/air, n-heptane/air,
and dimethyl ether/air. Fig. 8 compares the critical ignition temperature

predicted based on the L-W integral, TH,min,L(cid:0) W, and that from detailed
simulations,  TH,min,detailed,  for  these  mixtures.  It  is  seen  that  good
agreement is achieved for critical ignition temperatures below 2000 K.
Though the method based on the L-W integral slightly over-predicts the
critical  ignition  temperature,  it  is  able  to  quickly  give  a  conservative
prediction of the critical ignition temperature, which is important for
safety considerations.

It is noted that successful ignition refers to the generation of a self-
sustained  propagating  flame,  which  is  not  assured  by  the  occurrence
of thermal runaway in real combustion problems. Therefore, additional
ignition energy must be supplied to support the creation of a flame front
subsequent to thermal runaway and to drive the flame front to a certain
distance,  i.e., the critical ignition radius  Rcr,  beyond which  the flame
propagation can be self-sustained [51,144]. This shall be discussed in
the following sub-sections.

3.2. Thermal ignition theory

The homogeneity of the system consisting of a combustible mixture
no longer remains as the appearance of flame, which can be regarded as
an interface separating the unburned reactant and the burned product.
Based on comprehensive experiments on spark ignition of various hy-
drocarbon fuels, Lewis and von Elbe [114] proposed the classical ther-
mal ignition theory, which deals with the thermal balance between heat
addition from chemical reactions and heat loss by conduction within the
flame  structure.  Specifically,  the  minimum  size  of  the  spark  kernel  is
determined by the requirement that the heat generation from chemical
reactions  within  the  kernel  are  in  balance  with  the  conductive  heat
transfer from the kernel surface. Accordingly, this minimum size of the
spark kernel is regarded as the critical ignition radius, below which the
conductive heat loss exceeds the chemical heat release and thereby the
ignition kernel quenches.

As shown in Fig. 7, the thermal ignition theory considers the balance
between conductive heat transfer and chemical heat release. The non-
dimensional governing equation is

)

(
̃
̃r2d
T
d̃r

1
̃r2

d
d̃r

+ ̃ω = 0

(14)

̃
T and ̃ω represent the nondimensional radial coordinate, tem-

where ̃r,
perature, and reaction rate.

Unless otherwise specified, the time, length, velocity, temperature,

and mass fraction are non-dimensionalized as follows:

,̃r = r
d0
L

U = U
, ̃
S0
L

, ̃
T =

T
Tad (cid:0) Tu

YF = YF
, ̃
YF,u

,

̃t = t
d0
L
S0
L

(15)

= α/S0

L  is the thickness of adiabatic planar premixed flame, and it is
L, with α  being the  thermal diffusivity  of the  un-
L  the  laminar  flame  speed.  The  adiabatic  flame
with qc being the heat release due to
L, the nondimensional reaction
[14].  Integrating  Eq.  (14)  over  the

where d0
defined  as  d0
L
burned  mixture  and  S0
(cid:0)
temperature is Tad= Tu (cid:0) qc /
chemical reactions. In terms of α and S0
(cid:0)
rate  in  Eq.  (14)  is  ̃ω = αω/
spherical domain of the ignition kernel whose radius is

ρucp

)2

S0
L

)

̃
Rcr  yields

(16)

π̃R

3

cr

4
3

̃
̃ω ∼ (cid:0) 4π̃r2d
T
d̃r

| ̃r= ̃Rcr

Fig. 8. Comparison of critical ignition temperature from prediction based on
the L-W integral, TH,min,L(cid:0) W , with those from detailed simulations, TH,min,detailed.
The  dashed  lines  denote  the  border  of  10  %  deviation  of  TH,min,L(cid:0) W  from
TH,min,detailed. Reprinted from Ref. [58] with permission from Elsevier.

The  volume  integration  on  the  left-hand  side  is  a  simplification
meant to provide an overall rate of energy release. Rigorously, the re-
action  rate  within  an  ignition  kernel  is  indeed  not  constant,  varying
spatially and temporally as the ignition proceeds. This approximation
assumes an equivalent uniform distribution of average reaction intensity
across the flame kernel. Despite the fact that such an approach may not
capture local variations in reaction rate, it allows for the derivation of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117413

D. Yu and Z. Chen

useful insights into ignition kernel growth and evolution and facilitates a
macroscopic view of the ignition process.

the flame thickness, through which the thermo-chemical properties of
the reactant mixture were suitably taken into account.

Equation (16) represents the requirement that the heat release rate
from chemical reactions within the ignition kernel is equal to the rate of
heat conduction loss from the kernel to  the surrounding mixture. We
assume there is no chemical reaction outside the ignition kernel, i.e., ̃r >
̃Rcr. Therefore, the temperature in the domain ̃r > ̃Rcr  satisfies

)

(

̃r2d̃T
d̃r

1
̃r2

d
d̃r

= 0

The boundary conditions are

T(̃r = ̃
̃

Rcr) = ̃

Tad, ̃

T(̃r→∞) = ̃
Tu

(17)

(18)

̃
Tu  is  the  temperature  of  the  unburned  mixture,  and

̃
where
Tad  is  the
temperature of the ignition kernel, which is usually approximated by the
adiabatic flame temperature [14,114]. Solving Eq. (17) with boundary
conditions (18) yields

T(̃r) = ̃
̃

Tu + (̃

Tad (cid:0) ̃

Tu)

̃Rcr
̃r

(19)

Substituting  the  temperature  profile  (19)  into  equation  (16),  one

obtains

π ̃ω̃R

3

cr

4
3

= 4π̃Rcr(̃Tad (cid:0) ̃Tu)

(20)

The nondimensional reaction rate and the difference in nondimen-

Tad (cid:0) ̃

sional temperature are correlated by  ̃ω ∼ ̃
Tu  [14]. The rationale
for this correlation can be understood as follows: A stronger reaction and
higher  rate  of  heat  release  are  directly  related  to  a  greater  potential
temperature  increment,  reflecting  the  system’s  capacity  to  convert
chemical energy into thermal energy. The nondimensional reaction rate,
denoted by  ̃ω, is defined in terms of the thermal diffusivity of the un-
L, i.e., ̃ω =
burnt mixture α and the square of the laminar flame speed S0
(cid:0)
αω/
. This nondimensionalization process is designed to normalize
the reaction rate by relevant physical quantities, facilitating a general-
ized analysis independent of specific units or scales. The nondimensional
reaction  rate  ̃ω  allows  effective  comparison  of  reaction  rates  across
different systems and conditions.

S0
L

)2

Therefore,  Eq.  (20)  suggests  that

̃
Rcr ∼ 1,  i.e.,  the  critical  ignition
radius is comparable with the thickness of the standard premixed flame.
In dimensional form, it has

Rcr ∼ d0
L

=

α
S0
L

(21)

This is consistent with Zel’dovich’s proposition [196] that the min-
imum  radius  of  the  ignition  kernel  leading  to  successful  initiation  of
spherical flame is related to the thickness of laminar premixed flame.
Equation  (21)  interprets  the  scaling  relation  of  the  critical  ignition
radius with the premixed flame thickness since only thermal transport is
considered  in  thermal  ignition  theory.  Regarding  mass  diffusion,  the
differential diffusion effect plays a decisive role in determining the ratio
factor between Rcr  and d0
L, which is a function of Lewis number [144].
The MIE was proposed to be the energy required to heat a sphere in
the critical ignition radius to the adiabatic flame temperature [114,196]:

Emin ∼ 4
3

πR3

crρcp(Tad (cid:0) Tu)

(22)

In experiments, it is difficult to determine the critical ignition radius.
According  to  Lewis  and  Elbe  [114],  the  critical  ignition  radius  is
correlated  with  the  quenching  distance  dspark,optimal,  which  for  spark
ignition refers to the optimal electrode separation corresponding to the
MIE. It is consistent with the experimental observations that the MIE is
proportional to the cube of quenching distance, i.e., Emin ∼ d3
spark,optimal.
Williams [197] suggested that the quenching distance is proportional to

The critical ignition radius and MIE given by the thermal ignition
theory, i.e., Eq. (21) and (22) above, well explain the effects of mixture
composition  (equivalence  ratio,  dilution)  and  thermal  states  (initial
temperature and pressure) on ignition [114]. For example, the thermal
ignition theory explains why it is difficult to achieve successful ignition
at low pressure, which is related to high-altitude relight in jet engines. At
lower pressure, the flame thickness becomes larger, as does the critical
ignition  radius.  Consequently,  according  to  Eq.  (21),  a  larger  MIE  is
required at lower pressure [114,198]. In addition, there are alternative
factors beyond increased flame thickness. The lower ambient tempera-
tures at high altitudes, along with reduced oxygen levels, can make it
tremendously difficult to initiate combustion.

The thermal ignition theory also explains why it is difficult to achieve
successful ignition in ultra-lean mixtures used in advanced SIEs [16–19].
The flame thickness of an ultra-lean mixture is much larger than that of a
stoichiometric mixture, and so is the critical ignition radius. Therefore,
Eq. (21) indicates that a much higher MIE is required for an ultra-lean
mixture than for a stoichiometric mixture.

However, the thermal ignition theory only phenomenologically in-
terprets premixed flame ignition since the processes involving reactant
consumption by chemical reaction and reactant supply by mass diffusion
were  not considered.  As  shown in  Fig.  7,  the  thermal  ignition  theory
considers  only  the  governing  equation  for  temperature,  without
including the equations for the mass fraction of the deficient reactant.
More accurate theory on premixed flame ignition must incorporate the
description for the variation of reactant and thus reveal the effects of
differential diffusion of heat and mass, characterized by Lewis number,
during the ignition process [161,199]. Moreover, the ignition kernel has
a large curvature and stretch rate, which greatly affect the propagation
speed  of  the  ignition  kernel  when  the  Lewis  number  is  apparently
different  from  unity.  Therefore,  the  thermal  ignition  theory  has  been
extended to consider both heat and mass diffusion (i.e., flame ball the-
ory)  and  flame  kernel  propagation  (quasi-steady  ignition  theory  and
transient  ignition  theory),  which  shall  be  discussed  in  the  following
sub-sections.

3.3. Ignition theory considering both heat and mass diffusion (flame ball
theory)

Zel’dovich [200] derived a solution for stationary spherical flames or
flame  balls  in  the  unbounded  domain  of  static  combustible  mixtures.
The flame front has zero moving speed relative to the unburned mixture,
and there is no convective transport of heat and mass. The flame ball is
sustained by mass diffusion and heat conduction, and thereby the Lewis
number is a key parameter that determines the flame temperature and
radius of the flame ball. A schematic diagram of a flame ball is shown in
Fig. 9. Inside the flame ball, the burned products have a uniform flame
temperature  of  Tf  when  radiative  heat  loss  is  neglected.  Outside  the

Fig. 9. Schematic diagram of a flame ball.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117414

D. Yu and Z. Chen

flame ball, there is no chemical reaction, and the temperature and fuel
mass fraction are both proportional to the inverse of the radial coordi-
nate  [200].  Zel’dovich  [200]  showed  that  the  normalized  flame  tem-
Tf (cid:0)
perature  is  equal  to  the  inverse  of  the  Lewis  number,  i.e.,
/(Tad (cid:0) Tu) = 1/Le.  Moreover,  the  flame  ball  radius,  RZ,  mono-
Tu
tonically increases with the Lewis number.

)

(cid:0)

The  flame  ball  theory  by  Zel’dovich  [200]  is  based  on  the  AEA
framework and the thin-flame assumption, which provide valuable in-
sights into flame dynamics with acceptable mathematical tractability.
More importantly, it has interpreted the unique conditions of flame balls
and  the  dependence  of  flame  ball  radius  on  the  thermodynamic  and
physicochemical  properties  of  the  combustible  mixture.  However,  it
should be acknowledged that the simplifications inherent in AEA and
thin-flame models may overlook essential physiochemical mechanisms
that  are  vital  for  accurately  describing  flame  ball  characteristics.  For
instance, the AEA theoretical approach may not be able to reveal the role
of radicals in lowering activation energy and influencing flame stability
at low temperatures [11].

3.3.1. Structure of flame ball

When the instabilities on the flame front are not taken into account,
the  flame ball is treated as  one-dimensional due to its  spherical sym-
metry, i.e., the geometric characteristic is interpreted by the radius from
the origin, and the polar and azimuthal angles become degenerate. A
theoretical interpretation of the flame ball can be obtained based on the
thermal-diffusive  model  [109,151,201],  in  which  the  thermodynamic
and transport properties of the reactant, i.e., density ρ, heat capacity at
constant pressure cp, thermal conductivity λ and mass diffusivity D are
assumed to be constants. The reference length for the flame ball can be
selected as the flame thickness, d0
L, of the adiabatic planar flame, which
propagates at the standard laminar flame speed S0
L. The propagation of
standard laminar speed is determined by the competition between mo-
lecular  transport  (mass  diffusion  and  thermal  conduction)  and  the
chemical reaction. The value of S0
L  can be obtained in terms of transport
properties  and  key  parameters  describing  the  rate  for  a  first-order
one-step Arrhenius type chemical reaction [14], i.e.,

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(cid:0)  ̃Ta / ̃Tad
2αLeBe

=

S0
L

2

̃
T
ad
̃
Ta

(23)

According to the definition of non-dimensional quantities defined in
Eq. (15), the non-dimensional governing equations for energy and mass
fraction of the deficient reactant F are
(̃
Tad
̃T

+ Ze2̃cF
2Le

̃r2∂̃
T
∂̃r

= 1
̃r2

∂̃
T
∂̃t

(cid:0) Ar

∂
∂̃r

(cid:0) 1

exp

)]

)

(

[

(24)

∂̃YF
∂̃t

= 1
Le

1
̃r2

∂
∂̃r

)

(

̃r2∂̃YF
∂̃r

(cid:0) Ze2YF
2Le

[

exp

(cid:0) Ar

)]

(cid:0) 1

(̃Tad
̃
T

(25)

L  and ̃r = r/d0

where the non-dimensional time and radial coordinate are defined as ̃t =
t/t0
L. The activation temperature is incorporated into the
Zel’dovich number Ze and Arrhenius number Ar, which are defined as
Ze = Ta(Tad (cid:0) Tu)/T2
ad  and Ar = Ta/Tad, respectively. For a steady-state
flame  ball,  the  time-dependent  terms  in  Eqs.  (24)  and  (25)  can  be
removed, and the resulting ordinary differential equations are subjected
to the following boundary conditions:
̃r = 0 : d̃T/d̃r = 0, d̃cF/d̃r = 0

(26)

r→∞ : ̃T = ̃Tu, ̃cF = 1

(27)

In  the  limit  of  large  activation  energy,  the  inverse  of  Zel’dovich
number can be identified as the small parameter, i.e., ε = 1/ Ze≪  1,
based on which the flame structure can be solved by asymptotic analysis.
The  vigorous  reaction  is  concentrated  in  a  restricted  region  that  is

substantially  thinner  than  the  flame  thickness.  Therefore,  in  leading
order approximation, the reaction zone can be considered an interface of
zero thickness, and accordingly, the jump conditions across the reaction
zone are determined as

(

̃
d
T
d̃r

(

̃
d
T
d̃r

+ 1
Le

d̃cF
d̃r

) ̃r= ̃RZ+

 ̃r= ̃RZ(cid:0)

= 0

)

 ̃r= ̃RZ(cid:0)

(

̃
d
T
d̃r

(cid:0)

)

=

 ̃r= ̃RZ+

(̃
Tad
̃
Tf

(cid:0) Ar
2

)]

(cid:0) 1

(28)

(29)

2

[

exp

̃T
̃
T

f
2

ad

where

̃
Tf = Tf /(Tad (cid:0) Tu) is  the  non-dimensional  temperature  of  the
̃
RZ = RZ/d0
adiabatic flame ball, and
L  is the flame ball radius (see Fig. 9).
The subscripts “ + ”  and “(cid:0)
“  respectively, refer to the unburned and
burned regions separated by the flame front. Removing the unsteady and
chemical reactions in Eqs. (24) and (25), the steady profiles of temper-
ature and reactant mass fraction in the unburned and burned regimes
can be obtained as follows:

⎧
⎪⎨

⎪⎩

̃T(̃r) =

̃
Tf for ̃r < ̃
RZ

̃Tf +

(cid:0)

̃
RZ
̃r

)

̃Tf (cid:0) ̃Tu

for ̃r > ̃RZ

̃YF(̃r) =

⎧
⎪⎨

⎪⎩

1 (cid:0)

0 for ̃r < ̃
RZ
̃RZ
̃r

for ̃r > ̃
RZ

(30)

(31)

Substituting the above expressions into the matching conditions (28)
and (29), one obtains the following expressions for the flame tempera-
ture and flame ball radius, which can be determined as

̃Tf = ̃Tu + 1
Le

̃
T

̃RZ =

2

[

exp

ad
̃
T

2

f

Le

(̃
Tad
̃Tf

Ar
2

)]

(cid:0) 1

(32)

(33)

Note  that  the  adiabatic  flame  temperature  of  a  planar  premixed
flame is ̃Tad = 1 + ̃Tu, which is independent of Lewis number. However,
Eq.  (32)  indicates  that  the  flame  ball  temperature  depends  on  Lewis
number of the deficient reactant. For Le < 1, we have ̃Tf > ̃Tad, and the
flame  ball  temperature  is  much  higher  than  the  adiabatic  flame  tem-
perature  when  the  Lewis  number  is  much  less  unity.  This  makes  the
existence  of  flame  ball  in  mixtures  far  below  their  lean  flammability
limits.

The expansion ratio is defined as σ = Tu/Tad, which can be consid-
ered  the  density  ratio  across  an  adiabatic  planar  premixed  flame.
Substituting Eq. (32) into Eq. (33) yields a nonlinear equation for flame
ball radius

̃
RZ =

[
Le
(Leσ + 1 (cid:0) σ)2 exp

]
Ar(Le (cid:0) 1)(1 (cid:0) σ)
2(σLe + 1 (cid:0) σ)

(34)

Fig. 10 plots the change of normalized flame ball temperature and
flame ball radius with Lewis number as predicted by Eq. (32) and (34). It
is observed that the flame ball radius increases exponentially with Lewis
number, and it is equal to the thickness of an adiabatic planar premixed
flame for Le = 1. For Le < 1, the flame ball radius is smaller than the
flame thickness, i.e., RZ < do
L, and the flame ball temperature is higher
than the adiabatic flame temperature of a planar flame, i.e., Tf > Tad.
This  indicates  that  mixtures  with  low  Lewis  numbers,  e.g.,  fuel-lean
hydrogen/air,  can  be  ignited  relatively  more  easily  [162,202]  and
flame  balls  can  observed  outside  the  flammability  limit  (see.  In  the
opposite situation with Le > 1, we have RZ > do
L, and Tf < Tad). Conse-
quently, it is relatively more difficult to ignite mixtures with large Lewis

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117415

D. Yu and Z. Chen

√

̃cFp = (cid:0) 1
(cid:0) ( ̃r(cid:0)  ̃RZ)
e
̃r

̅̅̅̅̅̅
 ̃Ω
Le

(39)

The perturbed temperature and reactant molar fraction must satisfy
the  matching  conditions  (28)  and  (29).  Accordingly,  the  dispersion
relation in terms of the complex frequency can be obtained
√
)( ̅̅̅̅
(
̃Ω
1(cid:0) e

√ ( ̅̅̅̅
̃Ω

)
̃
RZ (cid:0) 1

(
1+e

̅̅̅
√
 ̃Ω
 ̃RZ

̃
RZ (cid:0) 1

FLe +

̅̅̅̅̅
Le

= 0

)[

)]

√

̅̅̅
 ̃Ω

√

+

 ̃RZ

(cid:0) 2

(cid:0) 2

in which the factor FLe  is defined as

[

FLe =

√

̅̅̅̅̅
Le
Le

(cid:0) 1

ZeLe2
(σLe + 1 (cid:0) σ)2

+ 4Le + 4
̃
Tad

]

(40)

(41)

√

̅̅̅̅
̃Ω

It can be verified that the real positive solution of

always exists
̅̅̅̅
̃Ω
̃
for Eq. (40). The left-hand side of Eq. (40) is equal to (cid:0) 2 at
RZ = 0
̅̅̅̅
̃Ω
̃RZ  becomes  large.  This  implies  that  the
̃Ω, i.e., the real part of the

dispersion relation must have a positive root

and  grows  unbounded  as

√

√

frequency

̃Ω is definitely positive and the flame ball is unstable.
The analysis of Deshaies and Joulin [199] showed that an adiabatic
flame ball is unstable, explaining why the flame ball predicted by Zel’-
dovich’s theory in 1940s has not been observed in experiments for about
half  a  century.  However,  Ronney  et  al.  [205]  discovered  accidently
stable  flame  balls  in  micro-gravity  drop-tower  experiments  in  lean
hydrogen/air mixtures Le ≈ 0.3. Stable flame balls were also observed
later in aircraft microgravity experiments for other mixtures with low
Lewis  numbers  by  Ronney  et  al.  [206].  To  explain  the  contradiction
between the theoretical analysis of Deshaies and Joulin [199] and the
experimental  observations  of  Ronney  et  al.  [4],  Buckmaster  et  al.  [7,
203] took into the volumetric radiative heat loss in their analysis of the
flame  ball.  They  derived  the  following  relationship  between  the

normalized flame ball radius

̃
RZ  and the normalized heat loss

̃
L:

(cid:0) 2
L = ̃
̃
R
Z

ln (̃

RZ)

(42)

Fig. 11 shows the results predicted by the above relationship. It is
observed that there are two flame ball radii when the heat loss intensity
is below some critical value. The ‘large’ flame ball (solid black line in
Fig. 11) is stabilized by volumetric heat loss. When the flame ball radius
increases/decreases due to perturbation, the ratio of total radiative heat
loss to total heat release increases/decreases, and thereby the flame ball
becomes weaker/stronger and shrinks/expands. The radiative role plays
a profound impact upon the energy balance within the flame ball, while

Fig.  10. Change  of  normalized  flame  ball  temperature  and  flame  ball  radius
with Lewis number for σ = 0.2 and  = 12.5.

number, e.g., fuel-lean n-heptane/air [12,157].

3.3.2. Stability of flame ball

In  actual  situations, flame  ball  is  subject  to  various perturbations.
Accordingly, the stability of the flame front plays an essential role in
affecting  the  eventual  evolution  of  the  flame  ball  [7,203].  Adopting
large activation energy asymptotic analysis, Deshaies and Joulin [199]
and Buckmaster and Weeratunga [204] analyzed the structure of flame
ball and found that adiabatic flame balls without radiative heat loss are
inherently unstable: a small perturbation causes the flame to propagate
either inwardly and eventually collapses and extinguishes, or outwardly
and possibly develops into a propagating flame.

In linear stability analysis, the amplitude of perturbation is assumed
to be infinitesimal and can be decomposed into Fourier normal modes.
Accordingly, the perturbed temperature, mass fraction of the deficient
reactant, and flame radius can be written in the following form
⎡

⎤

⎤

⎡

⎢
⎢
⎣

̃
T(̃r,̃t)
̃
YF(̃r,̃t)
̃
RZ(̃t)

⎥
⎥
⎦ =

⎢
⎢
⎣

̃Tm(̃r)
̃YF,m(̃r)
̃RZ,m

⎥
 ̃Ω ̃t
⎦ + ̃RZ,pe
⎥

⎢
⎣

⎡

⎤

̃
Tp(̃r)
̃
YF,p(̃r)

1

⎥
⎦

(35)

where the subscript “m” refers to the unperturbed state of the flame ball,
and “p” indicates the perturbation imposed on the relevant quantities.
The perturbations in temperature and reactant mass fraction result from

̃
RZ,p/̃

RZ≪1. The frequency

the perturbation of flame ball radius,

̃
RZ,p, which is thus regarded as a
̃Ω could be a complex
small parameter, i.e.,
quantity. The imaginary part of ω describes the periodic variation of the
perturbed component, and the real part interprets the temporal varia-
tion of the magnitude of the perturbed quantity, i.e., the stability of the
perturbed quantities over time. The perturbed temperature and reactant
molar fraction grow (decay) exponentially providing that Re(̃Ω) > 0 (0.
̃
Tp  and  ̃cFp  should  be  obtained  by
substituting Eq. (35) into Eq. (24) and (25) without the chemical reac-
tion  terms  and  using  the  boundary  conditions  (26)  and  (27)  and  the
continuity condition across the reaction zone, i.e.,

The  perturbed  components

For 0 < ̃r < ̃RZ:

̃
Tp =

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0)

√ )
̅̅̅̅̅
Le
2̃rLe

[
(cid:0) ( ̃RZ + ̃r)
e

√
̅̅̅
 ̃Ω

(cid:0) ( ̃RZ (cid:0)  ̃r)

(cid:0) e

√ ]
̅̅̅
 ̃Ω

̃cFp = 0

For
(cid:0)

̃
RZ < ̃r < ∞:
̅̅̅
√
√ )
̅̅̅̅̅
 ̃RZ + 1 +
 ̃Ω
(cid:0) 2
e
Le
2̃rLe

1 (cid:0)

̃
Tp =

√

̅̅̅̅̅
Le

e

√
̅̅̅
 ̃Ω

(cid:0) ( ̃r(cid:0)  ̃RZ )

(36)

(37)

(38)

Fig. 11. Change of normalized flame ball radius with the normalized heat loss.
The  regimes  of  stability  are  shown.  Figure  refurbished  from  Ref.  [7]  with
permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117416

D. Yu and Z. Chen

it should not be regarded as the single mechanism stabilizing the flame
ball. In theoretical analysis, the stabilization of flame balls can be ach-
ieved without explicitly modeling radiative heat loss. There exist alter-
native  stabilization  mechanisms,  relevant  to  higher  order  diffusive
processes,  detailed  chemical  kinetics,  and  the  interplay  between  heat
generation and convective cooling within the flow field [101,207]. The
analysis by Lee and Buckmaster [208] showed that stable flame balls can
only exist in mixtures with Lewis numbers below a critical value, which
is  consistent  with  the  micro-gravity  experiments  on  flame  balls  by
Ronney and coworkers [4,209].

The stability analysis of the flame ball provides a fundamental un-
derstanding of the critical conditions for premixed flame ignition. Ac-
cording to the above analysis, the critical ignition radius represents the
threshold intensity of stretch at which the heat release from reaction and
overall heat loss are almost in balance, rendering the propagation speed
of  the  flame  front  exceedingly  slow  [156,210].  Comparing  with  the
planar laminar flame thickness d0
L, a more suitable choice of the critical
radius for premixed flame ignition should be the flame ball radius. The
dispersion relation (40) tells the spontaneous behavior of the spherical
flame close to the flame ball radius, i.e., shrinking and finally quenching
for R < RZ and developing to ever-expanding spherical flame otherwise.
In addition, the presence of an ignition source may quantitatively alter
the characteristics of the flame ball, which then exhibits its impacts on
the  outcome  of  premixed  flame  ignition.  The  general  feature
forced-ignition process shall be reviewed in the next subsection.

3.3.3. Critical ignition radius based on flame ball with central heating

The instability of adiabatic flame ball demonstrates that the flame
front subject to positive disturbance can propagate unboundedly. The
unstable equilibrium flame ball radius was therefore considered to be a
critical size in controlling flame initiation, and the MIE was proposed to
be proportional to the cube of the flame ball radius instead of the flame
thickness [161,196,211]. Since the flame ball radius strongly depends
on the Lewis number [196], the MIE for mixtures with different Lewis
numbers is totally different. This was confirmed by numerical simula-
tion using a one-step chemistry [163].

In forced-ignition of premixed flame, the addition of thermal energy
to  the  mixture  is  achieved  through  external  heating,  which,  for
simplicity,  is  usually  considered  a  point  source  of  constant  power,
denoted  by  Qm  [161,211,212].  The  presence  of  external  heating  in-
troduces excess enthalpy to the reaction zone due to thermal conduc-
tion, which reduces the flame ball radius [12,144]. However, according
to the theoretical formulation presented by Joulin and coworkers [161,
199], the existence and stability of flame balls are significantly affected
by the external central heating. In addition to the conventional flame
ball solution, there is another flame ball solution caused by the heating
source.

The  heating  power  of  an  external  source  could  be  made  non-

dimensional, denoted by

̃
Qm, i.e.,

Qm = Qm
̃
4παδ0

LQc

(43)

In general, the origin of external heating is placed at the center of flame
ball, and accordingly, the boundary conditions for temperature profile at
̃r = 0 would be revised to [161,211,212]

̃
̃r = 0,̃r2d
T
d̃r

= (cid:0) ̃
Qm

(44)

Because  of  large  activation  energy,  the  chemical  reaction  rate  is
exceedingly  sensitive  to  temperature.  It  is  expected  that  an  order  of
O(1 /Ze) intensity  of  external  heating  could  lead  to  a  considerable
̃
QmZe/̃RZ ∼ O(1),  the
reduction  in  flame  ball  radius.  Providing  that
matching conditions (28) and (29) remain valid. The flame temperature
is revised to

̃Tf = ̃Tu + 1
Le

+

̃
Qm
̃RZ

(45)

Substituting ̃Tf  given by Eq. (45) into Eq. (33), the flame ball radius

can be determined,

(

eAr/2

Leσ+1(cid:0) σ+Le

̃
Qm

̃
RZ
Le

)

2

1(cid:0) σ
̃RZ

[
=exp

ArLe
̃
Qm(1(cid:0) σ)/̃
2(Leσ+1(cid:0) σ+Le

]

RZ)
(46)

which becomes identical to Eq. (34) for

̃
Qm = 0.

As shown in Fig. 12, at relatively low heating power Eq. (46) yields a
pair of solutions for flame ball radius. According to Deshaies and Joulin
[199] the smaller flame ball solution is stable. This indicates that for
sufficiently low heating power, a flame ball can be stabilized by constant
supply of ignition energy. This demonstrates that, in addition to ignition
energy, the heating power of the ignition source also plays a decisive
role in determining the ignition outcome. Consequently, the concept of
minimum (critical) heating power must be introduced [12,109]. Fig. 12
shows  that  the  pair  of  solutions  merge  at  the  critical  heating  power,

̃
Qm,cr,  beyond  which  no  stationary  flame  ball  exists.  For

Qm,cr, the flame front originated from external heating exhibits a

denoted  by
̃
Qm > ̃
̃
continually propagating spherical flame. Consequently,
Qm,cr  is defined
as the critical heating power for forced ignition, and the corresponding
flame  ball  radius  can  thus  be  defined  as  the  critical  ignition  radius,

denoted by

̃
RZ,cr  [161].

The  formation  and  propagation  of  the  highly-stretched  ignition
kernel are important for premixed flame ignition. However, they are not
considered in the flame ball theory. Consequently, the critical ignition
conditions might be over-predicted by analysis based on the flame ball
[12]. In the following subsections, ignition kernel formation and prop-
agation will be discussed.

3.4. Ignition kernel formation in quiescent mixture by external heating

The  formation  of  the  ignition  kernel  plays  a  crucial  role  in  deter-
mining the ignition process and thereby, has been widely examined in
previous studies. Herweg and Maly [213] proposed a one-dimensional,
time-dependent numerical model describing the flame kernel develop-
ment in spark ignition engines based on a strained flamelet model. This
model  can  predict  the  effects  of  various  operation  conditions  on  the
phenomena of misfire or flame quenching. Hern ́andez-P ́erez et al. [214]
conducted  simulations  on  the  creation  of  steady,  stable  and  close
reacting  fronts  in  ultra-lean  hydrogen-methane-air  mixtures.  Their

Fig.  12. Change  of  normalized  flame  ball  radius  with  normalized  heating
power  predicted  by  Eq.  (46)  for  Le = 1.5,  Ar = 12.5  and  σ = 0.2.  Reprinted
from Ref. [161] with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117417

D. Yu and Z. Chen

simulation results showed that, under normal gravity, the heat loss of
ball-like flame by thermal radiation tends to be negligible in comparison
with those due to thermal conduction and convection. Premixed flame
ignition in a quiescent mixture consists of two phases: ignition kernel
formation and subsequent transition to self-sustained expanding spher-
ical flame. In this subsection, we shall briefly introduce the theoretical
understandings on the ignition kernel formation. The second phase of
ignition  kernel  propagation  will  be  thoroughly  reviewed  in  the  next
subsection.

Yu et al. [51] conducted a theoretical analysis on the evolution of
ignition kernel induced by external heating within a finite domain and
for  a  finite  duration.  The  ignition  kernel  formation  consists  of  three
stages: (1) onset of thermal runaway during pure heating of a combus-
tible mixture, (2) generation of reaction front due to depletion of reac-
tant at the heating center, and (3) propagation of the reaction front to
the edge of the heating domain. A schematic for the characteristic time
scales involved in the ignition kernel formation is shown in Fig. 13.

For  combustible  premixtures  subject  to  igniting  sources,  the  local
temperature  increases  over  time.  This  eventually  leads  to  thermal
runaway,  which  is  characterized  by  a  certain  delay  time,  denoted  by
texplosion, as illustrated in Fig. 13. Following thermal runaway, the reac-
tant continues to be consumed locally, and in specific, the mass fraction
of reactant becomes vanishing at time tconsumption. It implies the forma-
tion  of  reaction  front,  which  propagates  outward.  Since  thermal
runaway and establishment of reaction front are sequential processes,
the  characteristic  time  for  reaction  formation  is  tfront = texplosion +
tconsumption. The formation of ignition kernel can be understood as the
passage of the reaction front beyond the ignition source domain. In the
presence  of  continuous  supply  of  ignition  energy,  the  reactant  pre-
mixture is of high temperature within this domain, and therefore, the
propagation of reaction is assisted by autoignition. The time needed for
the reaction front to reach the edge of the ignition domain is denoted by
tpropagation. Consequently, the total time for the formation of the ignition
kernel,  represented  by  tkernel  can  be  calculated  as  tkernel = texplosion+
tconsumption + tpropagation  [51].

For each stage involved in the ignition kernel formation, there is a
critical  heating  power  as  depicted  in  Fig.  14  [51].  The  first  critical
heating power density Qcr,runaway  defines the lowest rate of ignition en-
ergy input below which the thermal runaway can never be observed in
the combustible in spite of everlasting external source. In situations with
Qm < Qcr,runaway, the ignition energy deposition is completely balanced
with  conductive  heat  loss,  resulting  in  zero  accumulation  of  thermal
energy. The second and third critical heating power densities Qcr,front and
Qcr,kernel  respectively characterize the occurrence of reaction front and
the subsequent propagation to the edge of heating domain. Those two
critical heating power densities are defined subject to the condition that
external heating source is removed at the instant of thermal runaway. In
situations  with  Qcr,runaway < Qm < Qcr,front,  the
initiated  chemical

Fig. 13. The schematic for the characteristic time scales involved in the igni-
tion kernel formation. The red solid line represents the propagation of reaction
front from the center to the edge of ignition kernel. Reprinted from Ref. [51]
with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 14. The schematic for different critical heating power densities. The cen-
tral  heating  is  removed  at  the  onset  of  thermal  runaway,  i.e.,  t0 = texplosion.
Reprinted from Ref. [51] with permission from Elsevier.

reaction  by  thermal  runaway  would  be  rapidly  terminated  before
establishing  the  reaction  front,  which  can  be  understood  that  the
chemical  heat  release  is  slower  than  conductive  heat  loss.  At  further
higher  heating  power  densities  satisfying  Qcr,front < Qm < Qcr,kernel,  the
propagation speed of the reaction front is so slow that the considerable
temperature  drop  in  the  absence  of  external  heating  leads  to  flame
quench and thus forbids the ignition kernel formation. For sufficiently
high heating power density, i.e.,  Qm > Qcr,kernel, the intensive ignition
energy deposition can effectively increase the temperature within the
heating domain and thereby ensures the successful ignition kernel for-
mation. The schematic of three critical heating power densities corre-
sponding to individual degree of ignition kernel formation is shown in
Fig. 14.

/S0

L  and  the  characteristic  time  scale  d0
L

The detailed analysis of each stage (including its characteristic time
scale and critical heating power density) during ignition kernel forma-
tion can be found in Ref. [51]. Only the main results are presented here.
Considering  the  process  of  ignition  kernel  formation  due  to  external
heating of finite domain and duration, it is not convenient to use the
nondimensional time and radius previously defined in terms of standard
flame  thickness  d0
L  based  on
laminar  flame  speed.  For  instance,  the  finite  domain  of  the  ignition
source provides a suitable candidate for the characteristic length scale
during  ignition  kernel  formation.  This  necessitates  a  redefinition  of
nondimensionalization to accurately reflect the specific conditions and
scales relevant to the external heating of a finite domain and the sub-
sequent flame kernel evolution. However, to avoid extra mathematical
complexity,  we  shall  transform  the  mathematical  formulation  into  a
partially non-dimensional form. Specifically, the temperature and mass
into  their
fraction  of  the  deficient  reactant  F  are  converted
non-dimensional expression given by Eq. (15), while the radial coordi-
nate and time remain in their dimensional form. The governing equa-
tions  describing  the  ignition  kernel  formation  are  presented  in  the
following form

∂̃
T
∂t

= 1
r2

∂
∂r

(

r2α

)

∂̃
T
∂r

+

Φ(r, t)
QccF0

+ ω

∂̃
YF
∂t

= 1
r2

∂
∂r

(

r2D

)

∂̃
YF
∂r

(cid:0) ω

(47)

(48)

where  Φ  represents  the  rate  of  thermal  energy  deposition  by  spark
discharge within a spherical domain of radius R0  and lasting for a finite
duration t0  at constant power density Qm. The energy deposition can be
expressed in terms of the Heaviside function H(x), i.e.,

Φ(r, t) = Qm[H(r) (cid:0) H(r (cid:0) R0)][H(t) (cid:0) H(t (cid:0)

t0)]

(49)

The reaction rate for one-step chemistry in Arrhenius form is:

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117418

D. Yu and Z. Chen

ω = B

(cid:0)  ̃Ta/ ̃T

̃
YFe

The initial and boundary conditions are:

(50)

d

̃
Tcenter
dt

= (cid:0) α 15(̃

Tcenter (cid:0) ̃
r2
FK

TFK)

+ 5
2

Qm
QcYF,0

+ 5
2

(cid:0)  ̃Ta/ ̃Tcenter F

Be

(cid:0)

Tcenter, ̃
̃

YF,center

)

⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

r = 0 : ∂̃

t = 0 : ̃

Tu, ̃cF = 1

T = ̃
T/∂r = 0, ∂̃
T = ̃
Tu, ̃

r→∞ : ̃

YF/∂r = 0
YF = 1

(51)

d

̃
YF,center
dt

= (cid:0) 5Be

(cid:0)  ̃Ta/ ̃Tcenter F

(cid:0)

̃Tcenter, ̃YF,center

)

(56)

(57)

Before autoignition onset, heat release from chemical reactions tends
to  be  insignificant.  Accordingly,  the  chemical  reaction  terms  on  the
right-hand side of Eq. (47) and (48) can be neglected. The solution for ̃cF
subject to the initial and boundary conditions is trivial, i.e., ̃cF = 1 in the
whole space. With help of Green’s function, the transient evolution of
temperature distribution can be determined analytically [51]. This in-
dicates  that  the  highest  temperature  can  be  found  at  the  center  of
heating  domain.  Consequently,  autoignition  first  takes  place  at  the
heating center. Analytical solutions indicate that the central tempera-

̃
Tcenter  grows  almost linearly  with  time,  the  slop of  which  is  pro-
ture
portional  to  the  heating  power  density.  At  the  end  of  the  heating
duration,  the  central  temperature  appears  to  be  saturated,  whose
magnitude depends upon both the power density and duration of the
external  heating  source.  Due  to  the  presence  of  an  external  heating
source, the central temperature continuously increases. Therefore, the
historical effect must be taken into account when evaluating the delay
time  of  thermal  runaway,  which  can  be  determined  by  the
Livengood-Wu integral [189,190], i.e.,

∫texplosion

1 =

0

1
tch

dt

(52)

where  tch  represents  the  characteristic  time  for  the  chemical  reaction
and is the ignition delay time for a homogeneous system with an initial
temperature equal to the given central temperature. According to Eq.
(5), tch  is given in the following form:
tch = eTa/Tcenter

(53)

ZeBYF,0

The second stage of ignition kernel formation is characterized by the
appearance of reaction front at the center of the heating domain. Ac-
cording  to  V ́azquez-Espí  and  Li ̃n ́an  [151,152],  chemical  reactions
mainly occur in the Frank-Kamenetskii region (abbreviated for FK re-
gion hereinafter) of radius rFK, within which the temperature drop is of
order  O(1 /Ze). Subsequent  to  thermal  runaway,  the  heat  release  and
reactant consumption by chemical reaction must be taken into account,
which makes the analytical solutions for Eq. (47) and (48) become un-

̃
Tcenter and the edge of the
available. In terms of temperature at the center
FK region ̃TFK, an approximate temperature profile within the FK region
could be constituted as [51]
TFK) r2
r2
FK

Tcenter (cid:0) (̃

Tcenter (cid:0) ̃

T = ̃
̃

(54)

which  is  the  simplest  mathematical  form  of  temperature  profile  that
satisfies the symmetry condition at the center, i.e., (d
= 0, and
T = ̃
̃
TFK  at the edge of the FK region. A similar reactant mass fraction
profile could also be introduced as

̃
T/dr)

r=0

̃
YF = ̃

YF,center + 3

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) ̃

YF,center

(cid:0)
(cid:0) 2

) r2
r2
FK

1 (cid:0) ̃

YF,center

) r3
r3
FK

(55)

With the help of constituted profiles (54) and (55), the integration of Eq.
(47) and (48) over the heating domain gives a pair of ordinary differ-
ential equations describing the transient variation of temperature and
reactant concentration at the heating center, i.e.,

where the function F
[51]

(cid:0)

̃Tcenter, ̃YF,center

)

is defined in the following form

F(̃

T, ̃

YF) = (cid:0) 3

̃
T2e
̃
Ta(̃
2

(cid:0)  ̃Ta ( ̃T(cid:0)  ̃TFK)/ ̃T
T (cid:0) ̃

TFK)

2

+

(cid:0)  ̃Ta( ̃T(cid:0)  ̃TFK)/ ̃T

2

(cid:0) 3(1 (cid:0) ̃YF)̃T4e
2(̃
̃
Ta
4
(cid:0) 6(1 (cid:0) ̃
YF)T6
3(̃
̃
T (cid:0) ̃
TFK)3
Ta

T (cid:0) ̃
TFK)2
[

(cid:0)  ̃Ta( ̃T(cid:0)  ̃TFK)/ ̃T

1 (cid:0) e

√ ̃
̅̅̅
̃
T3
π
YF
3
3/2(̃
T (cid:0) ̃
TFK)3/2
√
̅̅̅
π
5/2(̃
2 ]

(1 (cid:0) ̃YF)̃T5
T (cid:0) ̃
TFK)5/2

̃
Ta

4

+ 27
̃
Ta
8

]

]

√
[ ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
̃Ta(̃T (cid:0) ̃TFK)
̃
T
[ ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
̃
T (cid:0) ̃
Ta(̃
TFK)
̃
T

erf

erf

(58)

The occurrence of reactant front is characterized by the depletion of
reactant  concentration  at  the  heating  center,  which  is  infinitely  long

̃
because  of  the  long  tail  exponential  decay  of
YF,center.  For  practical
consideration, we set a threshold value of ̃YF,center = 0.1 to represent the
end of reactant consumption. Consequently, the characteristic time for
the reactant consumption can be extrapolated with the help of numerical
solutions of Eq. (56) and (57) according to the relation

(cid:0)

̃
YF,center

tconsumption

)

= 0.1

(59)

The total time lapse for the reaction front formation tfront  is therefore

defined as

tfront = texplosion + tconsumption.

(60)

The established reaction front propagates outwardly. Due to external
heating,  the  temperature  of  the  reactant  mixture  inside  the  heating
domain is close to that of autoignition, which substantially facilitates the
propagation of the reaction front. According to the gradient theory by
Zel’dovich [93], the propagation of the reaction can be regarded as the
spatial  onset  of  reaction  fronts  at  a  suitable  temporal  sequence,  and
therefore the moving speed of the reaction front ufront  is correlated to the
gradient of the ignition delay time, which exhibits the following form

ufront =

)(cid:0) 1

(

∂tfront
∂r

(61)

The formation of the ignition kernel is characterized by the arrival of
the reaction front at the edge of the heating domain. The characteristic
time scale for this propagation process tpropagation  can be evaluated in the
form of

tpropagation =

∫R0

0

1
ufront

dr

(62)

So far, the characteristic time scales for individual stages have been
obtained, the total time lapse of ignition kernel formation, denoted by
tkernel, is the summation, i.e.,

tkernel = texplosion + tconsumption + tpropagation

(63)

The  time  scales  characterizing  individual  stages  of  ignition  kernel
formation depend upon the properties of the igniting source, e.g., the
heating power, the size of the heating domain, and the duration of the
ignition  energy  supply.  To  present  those  relations  compactly  and
concisely,  we  shall  introduce  the  non-dimensional  time  and  non-
dimensional heating power in the following form

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117419

D. Yu and Z. Chen

̂t = tα

/
R2
0

, ̂
Q = QR2
0

/
λTu

(64)

where λ is the thermal conductivity of the mixture and Tu  the ambient
temperature.

The variation of characteristic time scales with the power density of
an external heating source is shown in Figs. 15 and 16. The numerical
results,  denoted  by  the  hollow  symbols,  are  obtained  using  in-house
code A-SURF [37], which examines the transient ignition process in a
methane-air mixture subject to a uniform heating within a finite dura-
tion of t0 = 0.2 ms and a finite spherical domain in the radius of R0 = 0.2
mm.

In summary, this section highlights the significance of ignition kernel
formation  as  a  critical  and  frequently  underexplored  aspect  of  flame
ignition. Three stages of ignition kernel formation induced by external
heating within a finite domain and duration are analyzed. The charac-
teristic time scales of these stages are evaluated, which provides an in-
depth  understanding  of  the  ignition  kernel  formation  process.  The
theoretical analysis identifies the critical thresholds of external heating
power  density, interprets the underlying mechanism of  reaction front
establishment  at  the  external  heating  center,  and  assesses  the  central
role  of  thermal  runaway,  which  makes  a  primary  contribution  to  the
total time lapse of ignition kernel formation.

Subsequent  to  ignition  kernel  formation,  the  outcome  of  forced
ignition depends on the dynamic evolution of the flame kernel driven by
the ignition energy deposition from an external source. To interpret the
radius as well as the expanding speed of the spherical ignition kernel, the
mass and energy balance at the flame front must be considered simul-
taneously.  In  the  following  sub-section,  we  shall  first  consider  a
simplified quasi-steady ignition theory, in which the unsteady variation
of both temperature and reactant mass fraction is not taken into account.
A more general  transient ignition theory  considering unsteady  effects
will be reviewed in section 3.6.

The existing works on the theoretical models of ignition, including
those summarized in this review, often simplify the combustion process
by excluding convection terms to focus on the dominant chemical and
thermal mechanisms in ignition and flame propagation. Such simplifi-
cation  helps  isolate  key  processes  and  reduce  the  mathematical
complexity  of  the  of  the  underlying  ignition  process.  Combustion
invariably  leads  to  thermal  expansion  and  the  generation  of  non-
uniform velocity fields due to the conversion of reactants to products.
Ignoring  convection  can  indeed  result  in  qualitatively  different  out-
comes in theoretical models compared to observations from the real-life
ignition process. Specifically, convection plays a crucial role in distrib-
uting heat and species within the flame kernel, affecting its shape and
development  [167].  While  a  thorough  discussion  on  the  effects  of

Fig.  15. Change  of  different  characteristic  time  scales  with  heating  power
density. The solids φ = 1.0 and dashed φ = 0.6 lines represent results predicted
by  theory  and  the  symbols  correspond  to  results  from  simulation.  Reprinted
from Ref. [51] with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 16. Change of time scale ratios with heating power density. The theoret-
ically  predicted ̂t front/̂t explosion  and ̂t kernel/̂t explosion  are  represented  by  red  and
blue lines (solid lines for φ = 1.0 and dashed lines for φ = 0.6), respectively.
The corresponding ratios obtained via numerical simulation are represented by
hollow  symbols  of  diamond  and  square  shapes,  respectively.  Reprinted  from
Ref. [51] with permission from Elsevier.

combustion induced convection is beyond the scope of this review.

3.5. Ignition theory considering flame kernel propagation (quasi-steady
ignition theory)

Premixed  flame  ignition  involves the  onset  of a  chemical reaction
due to autoignition, the creation of ignition kernel resulting from the
consumption  of  reactant,  and  the  expansion  of  the  ignition  kernel  to
critical  size  beyond  which  the  spherical  flame  propagates  in  self-
sustained manner [51,144]. In the previous four subsections, the prop-
agation  of  the  ignition  kernel  was  not  considered.  Since  the  ignition
kernel  is  highly  stretched/curved,  its  propagation  speed  is  strongly
affected  by  the  flame  stretch  when  the  effective  Lewis  number  is
apparently different from unity. In fact, the formation of ignition kernel
is  the  necessary  rather  than  sufficient  condition  for  successful  flame
initiation. Therefore, ignition kernel propagation plays a crucial role in
the overall process of premixed flame initiation. The relevant problems
are reviewed in this subsection.

Based  on  large  activation  energy  asymptotic  analysis,  Joulin  and
coworkers [211,212,215,216] made analytical attempts to interpret the
dynamic  evolution  of  the  ignition  kernel  subject  to  a  time-dependent
point  source  of  energy.  The  temperature  and  mass  fraction  were
asymptotically  constituted  in  separate  domains  that  are  close  to  the
flame  ball  front  and  at  remote  distances,  respectively.  Utilizing  the
matching  conditions  across  the  reaction  front,  an  integro-differential
equation  was  derived,  describing  the  trajectory  of  the  flame  kernel
radius driven by central heating. Nevertheless, for combustible mixture
with Le > 1, the critical ignition radius is substantially smaller than the
radius of flame ball [12] due to the dynamic propagation of the ignition
kernel front, which was not appropriately considered in the theoretical
model of Joulin and coworkers [212,216]. He and Law [8,217] proposed
a theoretical formulation that interprets the dynamics of flame kernel
propagation subject to external heat addition. They demonstrated that
the onset of the flame kernel cannot guarantee premixed flame ignition,
which is controlled by the critical ignition radius that strongly depends
on the Lewis number. Accordingly, the external ignition source should
drive the flame kernel to a radius beyond the critical ignition radius to
successfully initiate a self-sustained flame. Through a series of theoret-
ical  and  numerical  investigations,  Chen  et  al.  [12,144]  proposed  a
revised criterion to determine the critical ignition radius, with emphasis
on the effects of differential diffusion and heat loss. A critical Lewis was
introduced, beyond which the critical ignition radius is smaller than the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117420

D. Yu and Z. Chen

rs = r (cid:0) Rf (t), ts = t

(65)

[

Γ

̃YF(̃rs) = 1 (cid:0)

flame ball radius but greater than the flame thickness. In addition, the
cubic scaling law between the MIE and the critical ignition radius was
verified. Rich results could be obtained based on quasi-steady ignition
theory.  In  the  following  sub-sections,  recent  work  on  quasi-steady
ignition theory is reviewed.

3.5.1. Quasi-steady ignition theory considering one-step chemistry

The  ignition  kernel  propagation  induced  by  central  heating  in  a
quiescent mixture was analyzed by He [8] and Chen and Ju [144] using
the thermal-diffusion model, in which the density was assumed to be
constant and thereby the thermal expansion was neglected. As shown in
Fig. 17, the flame front, Rf = Rf (t), is characterized by the flame tem-
perature of Tf  and the propagation speed of U = dRf /dt. The apparent
sudden rise in temperature as r→0 is due to concentrated ignition energy
deposition in a restricted area.

To describe the dynamic evolution of the ignition kernel, we fix the
observing coordinate at the flame front, which proceeds in the course of
time, i.e., Rf = Rf (t). Accordingly, a new coordinate with the subscript s
is defined as [144]

r=Rf(cid:0)

r=Rf+

= YF|

The  flame  front  separates  the  burned  and  unburned  regions,  and  the
propagation of the ignition kernel leads to a moving boundary in solving
the temperature and reactant molar fraction distributions on both sides
of the flame front. In leading order approximation of large activation
asymptotical analysis, the flame front can be modeled as an interface of
zero  thickness,  across  which  the  deficient  reactant  is  completely
= 0. Consequently, the chemical re-
depleted, i.e., YF|
action tends to be negligible in both burned and unburned regions. The
quasi-steady theory assumes that the characteristic time of flame kernel
evolution, tevolution = Rf /U is sufficiently longer than the unsteady evo-
lution of temperature and reactant molar fraction during the propaga-
tion of the flame front, according to which, Eq. (24) and (25) can be
further  simplified  by  removing  the  time-dependent  term.  This  quasi-
steady  assumption  has  been  widely  adopted  in  the  development  of
premixed flame ignition theories and validated by transient simulations
[144,157,218,219].  Consequently,  in  terms  of  the  nondimensional
quantities,  defined  in  Eq.  (15),  the  temperature  and  reactant  molar
fraction in the burned and unburned regions satisfy the following or-
dinary differential equations in the coordinated attached to the propa-
gating flame front [144], which exhibit the following form

̃rs = (cid:0) ̃

Rf :

(
̃rs + ̃
Rf

)

̃
2 d
T
d̃rs

= (cid:0) ̃

̃
YF
Qm, d
d̃rs

= 0

̃rs = 0 : ̃

T = ̃

Tf , ̃

YF = 0

̃rs→∞ : ̃

T = ̃

Tu, ̃

YF = 1

(68)

(69)

(70)

The analytical solutions subject to boundary conditions can be ob-
tained in the burned and unburned regions [144]. In the burned region
with ̃rs ≤ 0, we have:
[
Tf (cid:0) ̃
̃
T(̃rs) = ̃
(cid:0) 1, ̃
Qm

̃
Rf + ̃rs

[
(cid:0) Γ

)
̃
U

[
̃
U

(cid:0) 1,

Rf U

])]

(71)

Γ

]

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

̃
YF(̃rs) = 0

In the unburned region with ̃rs ≥ 0, we have:

̃
T(̃rs) = ̃

Tu +

(cid:0)

Tf (cid:0) ̃
̃
Tu

[
) Γ

]

)
̃
U

(cid:0) 1,
(cid:0)
Γ

(cid:0)

̃
Rf + ̃rs
)
(cid:0) 1, ̃
̃
U
Rf
]
)
̃
U

(cid:0)

(cid:0) 1, Le
(cid:0)
Γ

̃
Rf + ̃rs
)
(cid:0) 1, LẽRf
̃U

(72)

(73)

(74)

where Γ is the incomplete gamma function defined in the general form

∫∞

Γ(a, x) ≡

ta(cid:0) 1e

(cid:0) tdt

x

(75)

̃
U = 0, the temperature and reactant molar
In the particular situation of
fractions are identically reduced to the solutions of the flame ball, which
̃
are discussed in section 3.3. Substituting the preceding solutions for
T
and  ̃YF  into  the  matching  conditions  (28)  and  (29),  we  obtain  the
following algebraic equations [144]:
[
(1 (cid:0) Le)̃Rf
̃U + exp
(cid:0)
(cid:0) 1, LẽRf
Le2Γ

̃Tf = ̃Tu + Γ

(cid:0) 1, ̃Rf

{
)

̃U
̃U

̃
Qm

̃U

}

)

]

(cid:0)

(76)

(cid:0)
exp

(cid:0) ̃Rf

̃U

){

̃Tf (cid:0) ̃Tu (cid:0) ̃
Qm
(cid:0)
2
̃
(cid:0) 1, ̃
Rf
R
f

̃
UΓ

̃UΓ
)
̃
U

(cid:0)

)}

(cid:0) 1, ̃Rf

̃U

=

2

[

exp

̃T
̃
T

f
2

ad

(̃
Tad
̃
Tf

(cid:0) Ar
2

)]

(cid:0) 1

(77)

(cid:0) ̃
U

̃
d
T
d̃rs

=

(cid:0)

1
̃rs + ̃
Rf

)2

d
d̃rs

[
(cid:0)

̃rs + ̃
Rf

]

)

̃
2d
T
d̃rs

(cid:0) ̃
U

̃
YF
d
d̃rs

= 1
Le

(cid:0)

1
̃rs + ̃
Rf

)2

d
d̃rs

[

(cid:0)

̃rs + ̃
Rf

]

̃
)
YF
2d
d̃rs

The boundary conditions are:

(66)

(67)

Fig. 17. Schematic of the model of ignition kernel propagation.

The  above  algebraic  equations  implicitly  describe  the  change  in

̃
Tf  and flame propagation speed

flame temperature
̃
Rf . Therefore, with the help of these two equations, the dynamic evo-
lution of the ignition kernel subject to central heating from an external
source can be interpreted by investigating the trajectory in the phase

̃
U with flame radius

space constituted by

̃
U and

̃
Rf .

In the presence of heat loss due to various mechanisms, such as ra-
diation and immersed particles, an additional term related to the non-
dimensional temperature should appear on the right side of the energy
equation (66). Such analysis was conducted by Chen and Ju [144] who
interpreted the dynamic propagation of flame kernels subject to volu-
metric radiative heat loss and various effects of heat loss enriching the
ignition  characteristics.  Because  of  the  heat  transfer  properties  that
control the energy balance across the flame front, the analytical solution
for  ̃T  is  in  much  more  complicated  mathematical  form,  which  is  not
presented in this review. The readers are referred to Ref. [144] for de-
tails on how radiation affects the ignition and propagation of a premixed
spherical flame. Note that outwardly propagating spherical flames are
popularly used to measure the laminar flame speed, which is one of the
most important parameters of a flammable mixture [157,220–223].

In  quasi-steady  ignition  theory,  the  key  assumption  of  constant
density simplifies the analysis by eliminating the need to account for the
complexities introduced by thermal expansion and the variable density

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117421

D. Yu and Z. Chen

effect. This assumption allows for a more tractable analytical or semi-
analytical treatment of ignition phenomena, with focus on the chemi-
cal kinetics and heat transfer mechanisms central to ignition. Relaxing
the constant density assumption can significantly complicate the anal-
ysis because it introduces nonlinearities associated with both fluid flow
and  changes  in  material  properties  [224].  The  adoption  of  constant
density  assumption  conceals  significant  physical  processes  that  can
affect  the  dynamics  and  stability  of  the  flame  kernel,  such  as
buoyancy-driven  flow  and  variation  of  flow  velocity  due  to  density
changes  [225].  However,  this  realism  comes  at  the  cost  of  increased
mathematical complexity and the loss of concise and beautiful formulas
interpreting  the  fundamental  mechanisms  dominating  the  ignition
process.

Fig.  18  plots  the  normalized  flame  propagation  speed  with  flame
radius for different Lewis numbers. There is no central ignition power
and  no  radiative  heat  loss.  For  each  Lewis  number,  the  intersection
between the solution curve and the horizontal axis with  ̃U = 0 corre-
sponds  to  radius  of  adiabatic  flame  ball.  For  very  large  flame  radius,
unity normalized flame propagation speed is approached and thereby
the solution for an adiabatic, planar, premixed flame is recovered. The
solution curve connecting the flame ball solution and planar flame so-
lution depicts the expanding spherical flame between them. Therefore,
the present theory can describe the flame transition from the flame ball
to  an  outwardly  propagating  spherical  flame  and  thereby  be  used  to
study flame kernel propagation. Fig. 18 shows that each mixture with a

̃
certain Lewis number has a critical flame radius,
Rcr, above which the
spherical flame can propagate outwardly along the solution curve in a
self-sustained manner [12]. There is no quasi-steady solution below the
critical  flame  radius.  Therefore,  to  achieve  successful  ignition,  the
ignition  source  must  be strong  enough  to  drive  the  flame  kernel  to  a

̃
radius beyond
Rcr. It is seen that the critical radius increases significantly
with the Lewis number. This is because the positive stretch rate of the
outwardly propagating spherical flame kernel makes the flame weaker
at larger Lewis number.

As discussed in Section 3.3, the flame ball radius (

̃
RZ, corresponding
to ̃U = 0 in Fig. 18) has been popularly considered to be a critical length
̃
Rcr only
scale for ignition. However, Fig. 18 shows that
for Le = 0.5, 0.7 and 1.0 (more exactly we have ̃RZ = ̃Rcr  for Le < 1.36).
For large Lewis numbers, the propagation spherical flame can exist even
when  its  radius  is  less  than  ̃RZ,  and  thereby  the  critical  flame  radius
controlling  spherical  flame  initiation  is  not  the  stationary  flame  ball
radius.

̃
RZ is the same as

For non-vanishing external heating, Fig. 19 shows that there are two

Fig. 19. Change of the normalized flame propagation speed with flame radius
for  different  central  ignition  powers  but  fixed  Lewis  number  of  Le = 2.
Reprinted from Ref. [12] with permission from Elsevier.

U (cid:0) ̃
̃

+

Rf  phase  diagram.  For  sufficiently  low  heating
branches  in  the
powers, these two branches are separated from each other, yielding a
̃
pair of intersecting points on the
Rf  axis corresponding to zero propa-
gation  speed,  which  are  identified  as  the  inner  and  outer  flame  ball

(cid:0)
̃
̃
R
R
Z  and

(cid:0)
+
̃
radius,
Z  and
R
Z  respectively. In general, the distance between
̃R
Z  on the ̃Rf  axis differs from the minimum distance between those two
branches  in  the  ̃U (cid:0) ̃Rf  phase  diagram.  The  maximum  possible  flame
radius on the inner branch of  ̃U (cid:0) ̃Rf  phase diagram is defined as the
(cid:0)
lower critical flame radius, denoted by ̃R
cr, and similarly the minimum
possible  flame  radius  on  the  upper  branch  is  regarded  as  the  upper
(cid:0)
̃
critical flame radius, denoted by
R
cr. As the external heating power in-
creases, the inner branch of ̃U (cid:0) ̃Rf  diagram swells outwardly, while the
outer  branch  retreats  inwardly.  Consequently,  there  exists  a  critical
ignition power, beyond which both branches of phase diagrams merge
with each other at an intermediate phase point. Fig. 19 shows that the
critical ignition power is between 0.96 and 0.97 for Le = 2.

The  above  results  indicate  that  the  critical  ignition  condition  is
determined  by  the  critical  flame  radius.  Fig.  20  shows  the  change  of
upper and lower critical flame radii and flame ball radii with the ignition
power. The vertical dashed lines denote the minimum/critical ignition

Fig. 18. Change of normalized flame propagation speed with flame radius for
different Lewis numbers. The central ignition power is zero. The critical flame
radius for each case is denoted by a circle at the corresponding minimum flame
radius. Reprinted from Ref. [12] with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 20. Change of the upper and lower critical flame radii (in blue color) and
flame ball radii (in red  color) with the central  ignition power for Le = 2 and
Le = 2.5. Reprinted from Ref. [12] with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117422

D. Yu and Z. Chen

+

+

cr

cr

̃
R

(cid:0)
power for successful ignition under the requirement of ̃R
cr. It is
also observed that the minimum ignition power based on the flame ball

= ̃R

= ̃
R

(cid:0)
̃
R
radius, i.e.,
Z , is higher than that based on critical flame radius, i.
Z
(cid:0)
+
= ̃
e.,
cr.  Therefore,  for  mixtures  with  large  Lewis  numbers,  the
R
minimum  ignition  power  is  overpredicted  based  on  the  flame  ball

+
radius. Moreover, Fig. 20 indicates that
cr  remains almost constant as
the ignition power increases. Therefore, the critical flame radius at zero
ignition power can be considered to be the critical length of premixed
flame ignition.

̃
R

(cid:0)

z

∗

∗

+

+

+

̃
R

The critical ignition radius and MIE strongly depend on the Lewis
number of the reactant mixture. In the theoretical and numerical study
by Chen et al. [12], it was demonstrated that there exists a critical Lewis
number  slightly  beyond  unity,  Le
,  below  which  the  inner  and  outer
flame ball radii are identical with the inner and outer critical flame radii,

̃
R
c

̃
R
z

= ̃
R

(cid:0)
= ̃
c  and
R

+
c ,  and  the  propagation  speed  of  the  flame
i.e.,
+
kernel monotonically grows as its radius departs from ̃R
z  (see the lines
for Le ≤ 1 in Fig. 18). However, for reactant mixtures with Le > Le
, it
was  found that the  outer branch tends  to be C-shaped,  i.e., the  outer
critical flame radius tends to be smaller than the outer flame ball radius,
< ̃
z  (see the lines for Le ≥ 1.5 in Fig. 18). Fig. 21 compares the
i.e.,
R
critical flame radius and the flame ball radius (both normalized by the
flame  thickness) for  a  broad  range of  Lewis  numbers.  Three  different
regimes in terms of the Lewis number were identified [12]. In regimes I
∗ = 1.36),  the  critical  flame  radius  is
(Le < 1)  and  II  (1 < Le < Le
respectively smaller and larger than the flame thickness. Nevertheless,
in regimes I and II, the critical flame radius is the same as the flame ball
radius,  indicating  that  the  flame  ball  can  be  used  to  determine  the
critical  ignition  condition.  However,  in  regime  III  with  Le > Le
,  the
critical flame radius is smaller than the flame ball radius but larger than
the  flame  thickness.  Consequently,  the  MIE  is  substantially  over-  or
under-predicted based on the flame ball radius and flame thickness for
mixtures  with  large  Lewis  number.  This  suggests  that  the  flame  ball
radius or flame thickness cannot be a suitable candidate to define the
critical ignition length scale for mixtures with a large Lewis number.

∗

In addition to MIE, the minimum ignition power

̃
Qmin, referring to
the  lower  threshold  of  ignition  energy  deposition  rate  necessary  to
generate a self-sustaining spherical flame, also plays a decisive role in
affecting  the  outcome  of  forced  ignition.  Specifically,  if  the  ignition
energy input rate is lower than the minimum ignition power, the igni-
tion kernel cannot expand to the critical ignition radius, no matter how
much ignition energy is deposited. Thus, the magnitude of the critical
ignition radius gives a quantitative interpretation of the difficulty of the
ignition  process.  Ignition  theory  based  on  quasi-steady  state  assump-
tions  demonstrates  that  the  minimum  ignition  power  of  the  igniting
source tends to be proportional to the cube of the critical ignition radius,

3
̃
Qmin ∼ ̃
cr, as shown in Fig. 22. Similar results were also obtained
R
i.e.,
by numerical simulation [12], which verifies the scaling relation. It was
demonstrated that for mixtures with large Lewis numbers (i.e., thermal
diffusivity  being  substantially  higher  than  mass  diffusivity,  e.g.,  lean
hydrogen/air or rich n-heptane/air mixture), a stronger igniting source
must be adopted to ensure the creation of self-sustained flame kernel and
subsequently the successful initiation of premixed flame.

In  the  quasi-steady  ignition  theory,  a  series  of  assumptions  were
adopted  for  simplicity  in  theoretical  formulation  and  mathematical
convenience in obtaining analytical solutions, e.g., one-step irreversible
reaction  model,  absence  of  Soret  diffusion  and  reactant  mixture  in  a
single phase. Remedying those simplifications helps improve the theo-
retical  predictions. Adopting  large activation  energy asymptotic  anal-
ysis, Li et al. [219] conducted a theoretical investigation, examining the
impact of reaction reversibility on the characteristics of spherical flame
propagation.  The  reversibility  is  characterized  by  the  ratio  of
pre-exponential factors of the backward and forward reactions, denoted
by Γ. It was found that reaction reversibility plays a similar role as heat
loss. The reaction reversibility reduces the spherical flame propagation
speed while increasing the absolute value of the Markstein length. For
the ignition process, the reaction reversibility increases both the mini-
mum ignition power and the critical ignition radius [219]. Fig. 23 plots
the  variation  of minimum  ignition  power and  critical ignition  radius,
which  are  normalized  by  the  corresponding  values  evaluated  in  the
absence  of  reaction  reversibility,  i.e.,  Γ = 0.  It  is  seen  that  both  the
minimum  ignition  power  and  the  critical  ignition  radius  grow  mono-
tonically  with  the  reversibility  parameter  Γ,  i.e.,  ignition  becomes
increasingly  difficult  as  reversible  reactions  occur.  This  is  consistent
with  the  recognition  that  reversibility  can  be  regarded  as  a  heat  loss
mechanism during the ignition process. Moreover, Fig. 23 indicates that
the influence of reaction reversibility becomes weaker at a larger Lewis
number.

Han and Chen [218] conducted a theoretical analysis to assess the
influence of Soret diffusion on the ignition of a spherical flame. They
derived a general correlation between the flame propagation speed and
flame  radius,  considering  Soret  diffusion  and  external  energy  deposi-
tion. Based on this correlation, the effects of Soret diffusion on spherical
flame propagation speed, Markstein length, and critical ignition condi-
tions were assessed. The absolute value of Markstein length was found to
increase linearly with the magnitude of Soret diffusion coefficient. This
indicates that the highly stretched flame kernel becomes more sensitive
to  stretch  rate  after  including  Soret  diffusion.  For  light/heavy  fuels,
Soret  diffusion  increases/decreases  the  flame  propagation  speed  by
modifying the local equivalence ratio. Consequently, the Soret diffusion

Fig. 21. Change of the critical flame radius (solid black line) and the flame ball
radius (dashed red line) with the Lewis number. Reprinted from Ref. [12] with
permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 22. Change of the minimum ignition power with the cube of the critical
flame  radius  for  different  Lewis  numbers  and  Zel’dovich  numbers.  Reprinted
from Ref. [12] with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117423

D. Yu and Z. Chen

measured  from  the  propagating  spherical  flame  method  strongly  de-
pends  on  the  extrapolation  model  and  different  models  were  recom-
mended  for  mixtures  with  different  Lewis  numbers  [220,223,227].
Different extrapolation models may account for various physical phe-
nomena differently, such as heat loss, flame curvature, or preferential
diffusion effects, which are especially relevant in mixtures with varying
Lewis numbers. At different Lewis numbers, the dynamic behaviors of
the  ignition  kernel  show  considerable  influence  on  spherical  flame
propagation and thus exhibit impacts on the measurement of premixed
flame speed.

3.5.2. Quasi-steady ignition theory considering radical and chain-
branching reaction

In theoretical studies on ignition and flame dynamics, the one-step
global reaction model is widely adopted for its inherent simplicity. It
has been recognized that qualitatively correct results can be obtained
using a one-step reaction. Nevertheless, the direct conversion of fuel into
products and heat via a one-step global reaction neglects the pivotal role
of intermediate species and radicals that participate in the ignition and
combustion processes of practical hydrocarbon fuels in engines [234].
Therefore, ignition and flame propagation are affected not only by the
properties of fuel, but also by those of the radicals involved in the chain
reactions.  To  acquire  in-depth  understandings  of  flame  initiation  and
propagation,  the  multi-step  reaction  model  involving  the  generation,
transformation, and termination of various radicals should be taken into
account. A simple generalization of the one-step reaction model is the
Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an model [184,196], which consists of a chain branching
reaction, F + Z→2Z, and a chain-breaking/recombination reaction, Z +
Z→2P, where F, Z, and P represent fuel, radical, and product, respec-
tively.  The  Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an  model  was  simplified  by  Dold  and  co-
workers [235,236] so that the analytical solutions for flame balls and
premixed  flames  could  be  obtained.  The  simplified  version  of  the
Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an model is

(cid:0)
F + Z→2Z, kB = AB exp

(cid:0) ̃Ta,B

)

/
̃T

Z + M→P + M, kR = AR

(78)

(79)

where  M  denotes  any  type  of  molecule  in  the  system.  The  chain
branching reaction is thermally sensitive, and the reaction rate coeffi-
cient is of the Arrhenius type characterized by the normalized activation

̃
Ta,B.  The  chain-breaking/recombination  reaction  is  sup-
temperature
posed to be chemically activated, whose rate coefficient is independent
of temperature. For simplicity, it can be understood that the occurrence
of the chemically activated reaction is associated with molecular colli-
sion, and therefore, its rate coefficient can be considered equal to the
frequency factor, i.e., kR = AR. The rate of the recombination reaction in
the simplified version of the Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an model depends linearly on
the radical concentration, while nonlinear dependence happens in the
original Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an model. Nevertheless, this two-step model does
not capture the complete kinetic behavior of the complex combustion
reactions. It serves to bridge the gap between simplistic one-step models
and  the  detailed  chemical  kinetics  mechanisms.  The  assumption  of  a
quasi-steady state of radical Z introduces additional simplification to the
two-step reaction model and thus leads to its degeneration to a one-step
reaction model under specific mathematical arrangements.

When the simplified Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an model given in Eq. (78) and
(79) is considered in theoretical analysis [237], the ignition caused by
radical deposition and the effects of radical transport on ignition and
flame propagation can be examined. Fig. 24 shows the schematic of the
model  of  ignition  kernel  propagation  determined  by  chain-branching
and  recombination  reaction  considered  by  Zhang  and  Chen  [237]. In
the  ignition  theory  considering  one-step  chemistry  (see  the  model  in
Fig.  17),  ignition  can  be  caused  only  by  heat  deposition.  In  practical
ignition processes, both heat and radicals are generated by the spark,
and the radicals can support flame kernel propagation. Recent studies on

Fig.  23. Change  of  the  minimum  ignition  power  and  critical  ignition  radius
with  reaction  reversibility.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  [219]  with  permission
from Springer.

affects the minimum ignition power and makes flame initiation easier
(more  difficult)  for  light  (heavy)  fuel.  Numerical  simulations  consid-
ering detailed chemistry and transport properties by Liang et al. [226]
demonstrated that the Soret diffusion tends to vary the concentration of
light  species  and  radicals,  e.g.,  H2  and  H,  and  thus  alters  the  local
reactivity  of  the  combustible  mixture.  Depending  on  the  molecular
weight of the fuels, the Soret diffusion asymmetrically affects the igni-
tion process. The influence of Soret diffusion on ignition predicted by
simulation  in  Ref.  [226]  is  consistent  with  theoretical  prediction  in
Ref. [218].

As mentioned before, the propagating spherical flame method  has
been popularly used to measure the laminar flame speed S0
L  [157,221].
In this method, the flame evolution of the flame radius, Rf = Rf (t), is
recorded by a high-speed schlieren or shadow photograph. For relatively
small flame radii, the burned gas inside the expanding flame is nearly
static, and thereby the flame speed relative to the burned gas is Sb =
dRf /dt.  Since  the  propagating  spherical  flame  is  positively  stretched,
extrapolation to zero stretch rate needs to be conducted to obtain the
unstretched flame speed with respect to burned gas, S0
b  and the Marks-
tein length, Lb. Different linear or nonlinear models based on stretch,
K = 2Sb/Rf ,  or  curvature,  κ = 2/Rf ,  can  be  derived  from  the
quasi-steady  ignition  theory  described  above  [223].  Several  typical
models are listed in Table 3. It was shown that the laminar flame speed

Table 3
Different models used in the extrapolation of unstretched flame speed S0

b  [223].

Model

Expression

Notes

LS

LC

NQ

N3P

NQH

NE

FTE

Sb = S0
b

(cid:0) LbK

Sb = S0
b

(1 (cid:0) Lbκ)

(

)

2

(

)

2

ln

Sb
S0
b

Sb
S0
b
= 1 (cid:0) Lbκ + C
R2
f
)
)
(
2

2

Sb
S0
b
(

= (cid:0) 2LbK
S0
b

Sb
S0
b
[

ln

= (cid:0) 2LbK
S0
b

Sb
S0
b
1 + Lbκ + (Lbκ)2 + 2
(Lbκ)3
3

+ C
R2
f
]

=

Linear model based on
Stretch
Linear model based on
Curvature
Nonlinear Quasi-steady
model

Nonlinear model with 3
Parameters

NQ model with a High-
order term

Nonlinear model in
Expansion form

Ref.

[228]

[229]

[230]

[231]

[223]

[232]

)

(

)

ln

Sb
S0
b

+ d0
L κ

= (cid:0)

Finite flame Thickness
Expression

[233]

Sb
S0
b
1
(

Sb
S0
b

+ d0
L κ
)

(
Lb (cid:0) d0
L

κ

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117424

D. Yu and Z. Chen

boundary conditions shall be supplemented in the following form:

At the center of ignition kernel with ̃rs = (cid:0) ̃

Rf ,

̃
d
YF
d̃rs

(cid:0)

= 0,

̃rs + ̃
Rf

̃
)
2d
YZ
d̃rs

= (cid:0) LeZ

̃
Qc,

(cid:0)

̃rs + ̃
Rf

̃
)
2d
T
d̃rs

= (cid:0) ̃
Qm

At the far field from the ignition kernel with ̃rs→∞:

̃YF = 1, ̃YZ = 0, ̃T = ̃Tu

(83)

(84)

Fig.  24. Schematic  of  the  model  of  ignition  kernel  propagation  considering
radical and chain-branching reaction.

plasma-assisted combustion [105,106] showed that the chemical effect
of radicals generated by non-equilibrium plasma can be stronger than
the  thermal  effect  on  ignition  and  flame  stabilization.  In  the  ignition
theory, considering the simplified Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an model, the process
of chemical ignition due to the accumulation of radicals can be inter-
preted in addition to thermal ignition [238].

The thermal sensitivity of the chain branching reaction in Eq. (78)
implies  that  a  slight  increment  in  temperature  results  in  substantial
enhancements in radical production. The ignition process involving the
simplified Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an mechanism can also be solved analytically
by means of large activation energy asymptotics, in which the Zel’do-
vich number and Arrhenius number are defined in terms of the activa-
tion temperature of the chain branching reaction and satisfy ZeB = ̃
Ta,B/
ad≫1 and ArB = ̃
̃
Tad≫1. Moreover, there exists an infinitesimal
T
region similar to the concept of reaction zone in which the rate of the
chain-branching reaction, denoted by ωB, significantly exceeds that of
the recombination reaction, denoted by ωR, i.e., ωB ∼ Ze2
BωR  based on
asymptotic analysis [235,236].

Ta,B/̃

2

In  the  leading-order  approximation,  the  chain-branching  reaction
tends  to  be  frozen  on  both  sides  of  the  radical  generation  zone.
Accordingly,  the  governing  equations  in  quasi-steady  theory  can  be
written in the following form

(cid:0) ̃U

̃
d
YF
d̃rs

(cid:0) ̃U

̃
d
YZ
d̃rs

= 1
LeF

(cid:0)

1
̃rs + ̃
Rf

)

2

d
d̃rs

= 1
LeZ

(cid:0)

1
̃rs + ̃
Rf

)
2

d
d̃rs

[

(cid:0)

[
(cid:0)

̃rs + ̃Rf

̃rs + ̃Rf

]

]

)2d

̃
YF
d̃rs

)2d

̃
YZ
d̃rs

(cid:0) ̃YZ

(cid:0) ̃U

̃
d
T
d̃rs

=

(cid:0)

1
̃rs + ̃
Rf

)
2

d
d̃rs

[
(cid:0)

̃rs + ̃Rf

]

̃
)2d
T
d̃rs

+ ̃YZ

(80)

(81)

(82)

where  LeF  and  LeZ  are  the  Lewis  numbers  of  the  fuel  and  radical,
respectively.  The  above  equations  are  similar  to  the  governing  equa-
tions, (66) and (67) for one-step chemistry. The main difference is that
the transport and reaction of radicals are included. Besides, the defini-
tions of reference length and time scales involve the propagation speed
of an adiabatic planar flame, S0
L, which, according to Eq. (23), depends
on the chemical reaction rate. For the two-step reaction model given by
Eq. (78) and (79), the laminar flame speed is derived based on the rate of
recombination reaction (through which heat is released). Accordingly,
the relevant quantities are non-dimensionalized in a revised manner, for
which the details can be found in Ref. [237].

As mentioned before, the ignition processes caused by both heat and
radical deposition can be studied when the simplified Zel’dovich-Linan
mechanism is considered. The addition of radicals (e.g., due to plasma)
can be introduced in analogy to thermal energy deposition at the center
of  the  ignition  kernel,  which  can  be  characterized  by  the  non-

dimensional  chemical  ignition  power

̃
Qc  [238].  Accordingly,  the

As show in Fig. 24,  ̃Rf  refers to the flame front position where the
radical  is  generated  by  the  chain-branching  reaction.  The  following
conditions should hold across or at the flame front [237]
(

(

)

)

̃
d
T
d̃rs

(cid:0)

 ̃rs=0+

̃
d
T
d̃rs

= 0

 ̃rs=0(cid:0)

(

1
LeF

̃
d
YF
d̃rs

+ 1
LeZ

̃
d
YZ
d̃rs

)

(

(cid:0)

 ̃rs=0+

1
LeF

̃
d
YF
d̃rs

+ 1
LeZ

̃
d
YZ
d̃rs

)

= 0

 ̃rs=0(cid:0)

̃
T(̃rs = 0+) = ̃

T(̃rs = 0(cid:0) ) = ̃

Tcrossover

̃
YF(̃rs = 0+) = ̃

YF(̃rs = 0(cid:0) ) = 0

̃
YZ(̃rs = 0+) = ̃

YZ(̃rs = 0(cid:0) )

(85)

(86)

(87)

(88)

(89)

The

[235,236].

̃
Tcrossover  is  the  crossover  temperature  beyond  which  the  chain
where
branching reaction is fully initiated so that the condition ωB ∼ Ze2
BωR  is
satisfied
involving
Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an mechanism include additional conservation for radi-
cals, which must be associated with one more matching condition at the
reaction zone. It is noted that the temperature gradient is continuous at
̃r = ̃Rf ,  which  can be attributed  to the  fact  that  the heat  release rate
tends to be insubstantial compared with the radical production within
the radial generation zone with crossover temperature.

governing

equations

Subject to the boundary conditions at the origin and the far field,

̃
YF  and

̃
̃
equations (80) – (82) yield partial solutions of
T,
YZ on each side
of the radical generation zone. Then the flame radius ̃Rf , flame propa-
gation speed ̃U, and radical concentration ̃YZ,f  at the flame front can be
determined  via  the  matching  conditions  (85)  –  (89).  Consequently,  a
correlation depicting the change in flame propagation speed with flame
radius can be obtained, which was shown in Refs. [237,238]. The cor-
relation  was  shown  to  be  able  to  describe  flame  balls,  propagating
spherical  flames,  and  planar  flames  with  thermally  sensitive interme-
diate kinetics given in Eq. (78) and (79) [237]. Therefore, it was used to
study the flame kernel growth and the transition among different flame
regimes at different Lewis numbers, LeF  and LeZ, and different ignitio-

̃
n/or ignition powers
Qm  and
U (cid:0) ̃
̃

Fig. 25 shows the

̃
Qc  [237,238].

Rf  phase diagram for different ignition powers.
When  there  is  only  thermal  heating  at  zero  chemical  ignition  power,
Fig. 25(a) shows similar results as those shown in Fig. 19 obtained from
ignition theory considering a one-step chemistry model. However, the
U (cid:0) ̃
̃
Rf  curves have different shapes when only chemical ignition power
is considered. At relatively low ignition powers, both Fig. 25(a) and (b)
Rf  curves exhibit to be C-shaped, which indicates that
show that the
there  is  no  flame  ball  solution.  As  ignition  power  increases,  an  inner

U (cid:0) ̃
̃

U (cid:0) ̃
̃

branch  of  the  bell-shaped

Rf  curve  appears  in  Fig.  25(b),  which
̃
Qc = 1.0, the bell-
expands with the magnitude of ignition power. For
shaped  inner  branch  approaches  towards  the  origin  corresponding  to
̃
̃
U = 0 and
Rf = 0. Nevertheless, a spherical flame cannot be established
at this ignition power, because the flame undergoes extinction with a
finite propagation speed around ̃Rf ≈ 2.7 along the bell-shaped  ̃U (cid:0) ̃Rf
curve in Fig. 25(b). This phenomenon can be understood as follows: Less
radical (because of large flame radius) and less fuel (due to relatively

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117425

D. Yu and Z. Chen

Fig. 25. Flame propagation speed as a function of flame radius for LeF = 2.5 and eZ = 1: (a) different thermal ignition powers but zero chemical ignition power; (b)
different chemical ignition powers but zero thermal ignition power. Reproduced from Refs. [237,238] with permission from Elsevier.

large fuel Lewis number) can be provided to the reaction zone from the
center and thereby the flame front can hardly propagate outwardly in a
self-sustained manner. Further increasing the ignition power to Qc =
1.06,  the  C-shaped  outer  branch  merges  with  the  bell-shaped  inner
branch, resulting in an upper branch of
Rf  curve, through which a
spherical  flame  can  propagate  outwards  and  thereby  the  successful
initiation of a premixed flame is thus achieved.

U (cid:0) ̃
̃

The minimum thermal ignition power and the minimum chemical
U (cid:0) ̃
̃
ignition power can both be evaluated based on the bifurcation of
Rf
curves, as shown in Fig. 25. The minimum thermal ignition power and
minimum chemical ignition power were found to increase with the fuel
Lewis number and to decrease with the radical Lewis number [237,238].
The increase in the minimum ignition power with fuel Lewis number is
mainly  due to  the  coupling  between  the  positive  stretch  rate and  the
preferential diffusion between heat and fuel. A similar trend is predicted
by ignition theory considering one-step chemistry, as shown in Fig. 22.
The decrease in minimum ignition power with a radical Lewis number is
mainly due to the fact that radicals with a large Lewis number are less
inclined to diffuse away from the ignition kernel, and consequently, the
radical accumulation induces an explosive chain branching reaction and
thereby facilitates the ignition process. It is noted that fuel and radicals
diffuse  in  opposite  directions.  Therefore,  LeF  and  LeZ  have  different
impacts on ignition kernel propagation and critical ignition conditions.
Both heat deposition and radical addition can lead to ignition. The

comparison  between
̃
Qc = 0) and pure thermal chemical (i.e.,

̃
Qc,min  for  pure  thermal  ignition  (i.e.,
̃
Qm = 0), respectively, is shown

̃
Qm,min  and

in  Fig.  26.  For  most  situations,  the  critical  ignition  powers  satisfy
Qc,min > ̃
̃
Qm,min,  i.e.,  thermal  ignition  due  to  heat  deposition  is  more
efficient  than  chemical  ignition  resulting  from  radical  addition.  In  a
particular situation with a large fuel Lewis number and a small radical
Lewis number (see the shadow region in Fig. 26), i.e., the transport of
fuel molecules to the flame front is less effective than the diffusion of
radicals from the external source, chemical ignition occurs more readily

̃
Qc,min < ̃

than  thermal  ignition  and  thereby
Qm,min.  Therefore,  under
certain conditions, the radicals produced by plasma help promote pre-
mixed flame ignition. This was demonstrated in simulations considering
detailed chemistry and transport by Wang et al. [239].

In the simplified Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an model given in Eqs. (78) and (79),
the  chain-branching  reaction  was  usually  assumed  to  be  thermally
neutral,  and  thereby  the  combination  reaction  releasesd  all  the  heat.
However, in the practical combustion process, the chain-branching re-
action  is  usually  endothermic  [236]  and  the  endothermicity  of  the
chain-branching  reaction  might  affect  premixed  flame  ignition  and
propagation. Li et al. [240] conducted theoretical analysis on spherical
flame
initiation  and  propagation,  considering  an  endothermic
chain-branching  reaction  and  an  exothermic  recombination  reaction.
Following the similar analysis procedure in Ref. [237], Li et al. [240]
derived an implicit correlation depicting the change of the flame prop-
agation  speed  with  flame  radius,  based  on  which  the  effects  of  the
endothermicity  of  the  chain-branching  reaction  on  ignition  kernel
propagation and critical ignition conditions were assessed. It was found
that the endothermicity of the chain-branching reaction can inhibit the
radical accumulation at the flame front and thereby suppresses the flame
intensity.  The  Markstein  length  increases  monotonically  with  endo-
thermicity, indicating that the effects of endothermicity tend to become
stronger on the propagation of stretched flames with large fuel Lewis
numbers. In addition, the endothermicity of the chain-branching reac-
tion also affects the transition among various flame regimes, including
ignition  kernel,  flame  ball,  propagating  spherical  flame,  and  planar
flame.  The  critical  ignition  radius  was  found  to  increase  with  endo-
thermicity.  Therefore,  endothermicity  inhibits  the  ignition  process,
though it does not change the adiabatic flame temperature [240].

Fig. 26. The comparison between the minimum chemical and thermal ignition
powers. Reproduced from Ref. [238] with permission from Elsevier.

3.5.3. Quasi-steady ignition theory considering droplet or solid particle

In  practical  combustion  devices,  such  as  internal  combustion  en-
gines, gas turbines, and rocket engines, usually liquid fuels are supplied.
The  operation  process  requires  that  liquid  fuels  are  vaporized  before
taking part in the ignition and subsequent combustion processes [241,
242]. Therefore, the initiation of premixed flame in multi-phase systems
plays a crucial role in affecting the overall performance of different types
of engines.

For  liquid  fuels  injected  into  a  gaseous  oxidizer,  the  fuel  spray  is

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117426

D. Yu and Z. Chen

generated by atomization, which produces a large number of droplets of
exceedingly small size. A schematic of a premixed spherical spray flame
consisting of droplet evaporation is shown in Fig. 27. The flame struc-
ture is shown to consist of four zones: the outer pre-vaporization zone
with negligible droplet evaporation, the pre-flame zone, where finite-
rate  vaporization  occurs,  the  thin  reaction  zone  which  is  assumed  to
be  infinitely  thin at  large-activation  energy, and  the  post-flame zone.
The front of the onset of vaporization is located at the radius of Rv  and
the flame front is at Rf . The droplet vaporization provides gaseous fuel,
and  meanwhile,  absorbs  thermal  energy  from  the  surroundings.  Such
two-fold impacts result in additional complexity in the ignition process.
Based  on large activation energy asymptotics, Han and Chen  [29]
proposed  a  simplified  theoretical  model  interpreting  the  ignition  and
propagation  of  premixed  spherical  spray  flames.  This  model  in-
corporates  various  key  parameters,  e.g.,  initial  droplet  load,  finite
vaporization  rate,  Lewis  number,  and  ignition  power,  into  analytical
correlations  describing  the  change  of  flame  propagation  speed  with
flame radius. A theoretical interpretation of the dynamic characteristics
of  spray  flame  initiation  was  obtained  in  the  limit  of  infinitesimal
droplets,  i.e.,  the  droplets  are  embedded  in  the  gaseous  environment
with zero dimension and thus can instantaneously adjust to the velocity
of  the  surrounding  gas  [29].  In  such  situations,  the  spray  system  is
considered  a  continuum  composed  of  fuel  droplets,  fuel  vapor,  and
gaseous  oxidizer.  The  simplified  spray  models  in  the  AEA  theoretical
framework  aim  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  spray  combustion  to  a
manageable analytical form. However, it should be understood that the
vaporization rate is inherently transient, and moreover, the accumula-
tion rate of fuel vapor depends upon the droplet size [243]. The tran-
siency of droplet vaporization induces an induction period in addition to
the  quasi-steady  vaporization  period  predicted  by  the  d2-law  [244].
Droplet  vaporization  can  lower  the  temperature  of  the  combustible
mixture, affect reaction rates, and thus exhibit substantial impacts on
chemical kinetics. Those effects, due to mathematical complexity, were
not taken into account in theoretical models based on AEA.

The  initiation  of  spray  combustion  also  involves  the  creation  and
expansion of the ignition kernel. The high temperature at the flame front
substantially facilitates the vaporization of droplets nearby, which re-
sults  in  a  pre-flame  zone  enveloping  the  ignition  kernel,  as  shown  in
Fig. 28. The fuel-rich and fuel-lean cases are determined by the global
equivalence ratio based on the total fuel concentration, including both
fuel  vapor  and  droplets.  However,  the  reaction  rate  is  mainly

Fig.  27. Configuration  for  premixed  spherical  spray  flame  with  finite-rate
droplet evaporation. Reprinted from Ref. [29] with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 28. Schematic of different zones and temperature and mass fraction dis-
tributions in a premixed spherical spray flame for fuel-rich α = 0 and fuel-lean
α = 1 cases. Reprinted from Ref. [29] with permission from Elsevier.

determined by the effective equivalence ratio, which is based on only the
fuel  vapor  concentration.  For  a  fuel-rich  case  with  a  local  effective
equivalence ratio at the flame front above unity, oxygen is completely
consumed in the pre-flame zone. Therefore, the fuel droplets may tra-
verse through the flame front and continue vaporization inside the post-
flame zone. For the fuel-lean case, the absence of fuel within the post-
flame  zone  implies  that,  in  addition  to  vaporization  in  the  pre-flame
zone,  the  remaining  fuel  droplets  are  completed  by  burning  as  they
cross the flame front.

The presence of the vaporization-dominant pre-flame zone does not
affect  the  characteristics  of  the  chemical  reaction.  Accordingly,  the
flame front can also be solved by means of large activation energy as-
ymptotics. In quasi-steady theory, the temperature and molar fraction of
fuel vapor on either side of the flame front satisfy the following equa-
tions in nondimensional form [29]:

(cid:0) ̃U

̃
d
T
d̃rs

=

(cid:0)

1
̃rs + ̃
Rf

)
2

d
d̃rs

[
(cid:0)

̃rs + ̃Rf

]

̃
)
2 d
T
d̃rs

(cid:0) ̃qv ̃ωv + H(1 (cid:0) φ)π

(90)

̃
d
YF,V
(cid:0) ̃U
d̃rs

= 1
LeF

(cid:0)

1
̃rs + ̃
Rf

)
2

d
d̃rs

[
(cid:0)

̃rs + ̃Rf

]

)
2d

̃
YF,V
d̃rs

+ ̃ωv + H(1 (cid:0) φ)π

̃
d
YF,D
(cid:0) ̃U
d̃rs

= (cid:0) ̃ωv

(91)

(92)

̃
YFV  and

̃
where
YFD  are molar fractions of fuel vapor and fuel droplet,
respectively,  and  φ  the  global  equivalence  ratio,  ̃ωv ∼ DãYFH(̃T (cid:0) ̃Tv)
the non-dimensional vaporization rate, Da the vaporization Damk ̈ohler
number (defined as the ratio between the characteristic time of flame

̃
Tv  the non-dimensional reference temperature
and that of evaporation),
close to the boiling point of fuel droplet, ̃qv = qv/qc the non-dimensional
latent  heat  of  vaporization  of  fuel  droplet,  π = ̃ωvH((cid:0) ̃rs) the  non-
dimensional  burning  rate  of  droplet,  and  H  the  Heaviside  step  func-
tion. The closure of the present mathematical formulation requires the
determination  of  those  quantities,  which  becomes  available  with
knowledge of the theoretical model for droplet vaporization.

The  boundary  conditions  at  the  far  field,  i.e.,  ̃rs→∞,  should  be
̃
YF,V = 1 (cid:0) δD  and ̃cF,D = δD,  where  δD  refers  to  the  initial
revised  to
droplet  load.  The  presence  of  a  pre-flame  zone  further  introduces
detailed structure in  the unburned  domain since  droplet vaporization
tends  to  be  negligible  outside  the  pre-flame  zone.  According  to  the
definition of finite vaporization rate ̃ωv, the vaporization front, denoted
by ̃rv,  could  be  determined  as  the  radial  coordinate  where  the  local
temperature is equal to the reference vaporization temperature

̃
Tv,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117427

D. Yu and Z. Chen

T(̃r = ̃
̃

Rv) = ̃
Tv

(93)

and moreover, the molar fractions of both fuel vapor and fuel droplets
remain smooth across the vaporization front, i.e.,

̃
YF,V| ̃Rv+

= ̃

YF,V| ̃Rv(cid:0)

, ̃
YF,D| ̃Rv+

= ̃

YF,D| ̃Rv(cid:0)

̃
YF,V
d
d̃rs

| ̃Rv+

= d

̃
YF,V
d̃rs

| ̃Rv(cid:0)

, d

̃
YF,D
d̃rs

| ̃Rv+

= d

̃
YF,D
d̃rs

| ̃Rv(cid:0)

(94)

(95)

The  temperature  and  fuel  vapor  and  droplet  distributions  in  the
unburned  region  could  be  solved  separately  on  either  side  of  the
vaporization front, which are then joined by the matching conditions
(93) – (95). Droplet vaporization may affect the solutions in the burned
region, depending on the equivalence ratio.

In the leading-order approximation, the droplet vaporization has no
impact on the reaction zone structure, so the matching conditions (28)
and (29) remain valid. Following a similar approach, substituting the
solutions of temperature and fuel vapor on the burned and unburned
sides into those matching conditions, one can determine the propagation
speed ̃U and flame temperature ̃Tf  for given flame radius ̃Rf  according to
the following algebraic system [29]:
For the fuel-rich case (α = 0):

speed

In the limit of zero droplet load, i.e., δD = 0, Eq. (97) can be reduced to
Eq. (76) and (77) describing ignition and flame propagation in purely
gaseous mixtures as described in Section 3.5.1. By numerically solving
Eq. (96) or (97), we can we can obtain the change in flame propagation
̃
̃
U with flame radius
Rf  at any specified values for central ignition
̃
Qm, initial droplet load δD, vaporization Damk ̈ohler number Da,
power
and Lewis number for fuel LeF  or oxidizer LeO. Consequently, the effects
of  initial  droplet  load  and  vaporization  Damk ̈ohler  number  (which  is
proportional to the evaporation rate) on the ignition of a spherical spray
flame can be examined [29].

U (cid:0) ̃
̃

Fig. 29 shows the change of spherical flame propagation speed with
flame  radius  at  different  ignition  powers  for  the  fuel-lean  case.  For  a
purely gaseous mixture with δD = 0, the results are the same as those in
Section 3.5.1. At relatively low ignition powers, there exist two separate
branches of the
Rf  phase diagram, which collapse into a single curve
when the ignition power grows beyond the minimum ignition power, i.
Qmin. Comparison between the results without δD = 0 and with
e.,
droplet evaporation δD = 0.2 indicates that the separation of the inner
Rf  phase diagram becomes wider in sit-
and outer branches of the
uations  with  δD = 0.2.  This  demonstrates  that  droplet  evaporation
shows  inhibiting  effects  upon  the  ignition  process,  and  the  critical
ignition  power  grows  with  δD  concomitantly.  For  larger  fuel  Lewis

̃
Qm > ̃

U (cid:0) ̃
̃

(cid:0)  ̃U ̃Rf

(cid:0) 2
̃R
̃Tf
f e
I1(0, U)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat absorbed by gaseous fuel

(cid:0)

̃
R

(cid:0) 2
(cid:0)  ̃U ̃Rf
̃
Q
f e
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat provided by ignition energy

[

(cid:0)

̃
R

+ ̃qvDaδD

(cid:0)  ̃U ̃Rf

(cid:0) 2
f e

I2(0, ̃U)
U, (cid:0) ̃
̃
I1(0, ̃
U)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat absorbed for droplet evaporation

Rf , ηv

E

)

(cid:0)

]

=

(cid:0)  ̃U ̃Rf

(cid:0) 2
̃R
(cid:0) 1
f e
Le
O
I1(0, ̃
ULeO)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat supplied by oxygen

=

(cid:0)

[

]

[

σ + (1 (cid:0) σ)̃
exp
Tf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat produced by reaction

)
̃
Tf (cid:0) 1
2σ + 2(1 (cid:0) σ)̃
Tf

Ze

]

2

(96)

numbers, e.g., LeO = 2.0, the outer branch of the
Rf  phase diagram
exhibits to be C-shaped, which is consistent with the results obtained in
pure gaseous combustible mixture. Therefore, droplet evaporation does

U (cid:0) ̃
̃

For the fuel-lean case (α = 1):

(cid:0)  ̃U ̃Rf

(cid:0) 2
̃R
̃Tf
f e
I1(0, U)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat absorbed by gaseous fuel

(cid:0)

̃
R

(cid:0) 2
(cid:0)  ̃U ̃Rf
̃
f e
Q
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat provided by ignition energy

+ ̃qvDaδD

)
(cid:0)  ̃U ̃Rf E
Rf , 0
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat supplied by droplet burning

U, (cid:0) ̃
̃

(cid:0) 2
f e

̃
R

(cid:0)

[

+ qvDaδD

̃
R

(cid:0)  ̃ULeF

(cid:0) 2
f e

I2(0, ̃U)
I1(0, ̃
U)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat absorbed for droplet evaporation

U, (cid:0) ̃

Rf , ηv

(cid:0)
E

 ̃Rf

)

(cid:0)

]

(cid:0)  ̃ULeF

 ̃Rf

=

(1 (cid:0) δ)Le

(cid:0) 2
̃
(cid:0) 1
R
f e
F
I1(0, ̃
ULeF)

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat supplied by initial fuel vapor

+ Daδ̃
R

(cid:0)  ̃ULeF

(cid:0) 2
f e

[
E(̃

]
ULeF)
ULeF, 0, ηv
ULeF)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat supplied by fuel vapor from droplet evaporation

I2(0, ̃
I1(0, ̃

) (cid:0)

 ̃Rf

= =

[

]2

[
σ + (1 (cid:0) σ)̃
exp
Tf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
heat produced by reaction

)
̃
Tf (cid:0) 1
2σ + 2(1 (cid:0) σ)̃
Tf

(cid:0)
Ze

]

(97)

where

E(x, κ1, κ2) =

∫κ2

{(cid:0)

κ1

ξ + ̃Rf

)

2

[
exp

(cid:0)
x

ξ + ̃Rf

)

(cid:0)

+ Da

ξ (cid:0) ̃Rv + ̃Rf

) /

̃U

]}

dξ

I1(x, κ) = e

(cid:0) κ ̃Rf

)(cid:0) 2

ξ + ̃
Rf

(cid:0) κξ
e

dξ

∫∞

(cid:0)

x

I2(x, κ) = e

(cid:0) κ ̃Rf

∫ ̃Rv(cid:0)  ̃Rf

(cid:0)

x

ξ + ̃Rf

)(cid:0) 2

(cid:0)
(cid:0) κξ ⋅ E
e

κ, ξ, ̃Rv (cid:0) ̃Rf

)
dξ

not  qualitatively  affect  the  characteristics  of  flame  kernel  evolution
during the forced ignition process.

The minimum ignition power depends upon the Lewis numbers of
fuel (oxidizer) for fuel rich (lean) combustible mixtures. It was found
that droplet evaporation has a much stronger effect on ignition in fuel-
lean cases than in fuel-rich cases [29]. Fig. 30 shows that the minimum
ignition  power  grows  monotonically  with  Lewis  number  for  both
gaseous (δD = 0) and spray (δD > 0) flames. In a fuel-rich environment,
the  minimum  ignition  power  hardly  changes  with  the  droplet  load
because  the  ignition  kernel  has  a  high  flame  temperature  and  wide
vaporization zone, which ensures complete vaporization of the droplet
in the pre-flame zone. However, for fuel-lean cases, the minimum igni-
tion power increases significantly with droplet load, especially at large
Lewis numbers. Note that the droplet vaporization in the fuel-lean case
changes the local effective equivalence ratio in addition to absorbing the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117428

D. Yu and Z. Chen

Fig. 29. Change of the normalized flame propagation speed with flame radius for different central ignition powers at (a) LeF = 1 and (b) LeF = 2 for fuel-lean case.
Reprinted from Ref. [29] with permission from Elsevier.

Fig.  30. Change  of  the  minimum  ignition  power  with  the  Lewis  number  for  fuel-rich  (a)  and  fuel-lean  (b)  cases.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  [29]  with  permission
from Elsevier.

latent  heat  of  vaporization  in  the  pre-flame  and  post-flame  zones.
Therefore, the spray flame of lean hydrocarbon fuels with a large Lewis
number  is  much  more  difficult  to  ignite  compared  to  an  equivalent
purely gaseous flame.

The theory of Han and Chen [29] was extended by Li et al. [245] by
considering  the  unsteady  evolution  of  droplet  distribution  caused  by
droplet evaporation. They studied two types of flames, heterogeneous
and  homogeneous  flames,  determined  by  the  relative  position  of  the
flame front and droplet evaporation completion front. The evaporative
heat  loss was found  to have  a different impact  on the  ignition of  ho-
mogeneous and heterogeneous spray flames.

For  a  combustible  mixture  in  a  humid  environment,  Zhuang  and
Zhang [246] conducted a theoretical analysis and found that the pres-
ence of water droplets exhibits substantial impacts on the ignition and
extinction characteristics of the premixed spherical flame. At relatively
large heat exchange coefficients, the total evaporation heat loss from the
pre-flame  and  post-flame  zones  is  sufficiently  intensive  to  induce  a
self-extinguishing flame. In addition, the combined effects of differential

diffusion and stretch rate compete with the evaporation heat loss, which
substantially  changes  the  flammability  of  the  mixture.  Zhuang  and
Zhang [247] further extended their analysis by considering the contin-
uously  evolving  (fully  or  partially  dispersed)  distributions  of  evapo-
rating droplets. They demonstrated that the Lewis number has a great
impact  on  the  ignition  and  propagation  of  droplet-laden  spherical
flames.

Gaseous combustible  mixtures laden with dispersed  solid particles
are  widely  encountered  in  engineering  applications  (e.g.,  pulverized
coal combustion and sooty flames in gas turbine engines) as well as dust
explosions. The existence of particles can result in new phenomena in
the ignition and combustion processes through inter-phase interactions
with the gaseous environment in terms of mass, momentum, and energy
exchange [248]. Based on quasi-steady assumptions and large activation
energy asymptotics, Li et al. [249] conducted a theoretical investigation
on spherical flame initiation and propagation in a static mixture laden
with  chemically  inert  solid  particles.  They  derived  the  correlation
describing  spherical  flame  propagation  speed  as  a  function  of  flame

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117429

D. Yu and Z. Chen

radius and assessed the effects of particle properties on the ignition and
propagation of spherical flames. For particle-laden flames, the MIE also
increases  monotonically  with  the  Lewis  number.  At  a  larger  Lewis
number, the presence of particles has a stronger influence on the MIE.
Since the particle  thermal response time determines the heat transfer
between gas and particle phases, it has a great impact on the propaga-
tion speed of the ignition kernel and, thereby, on the critical ignition
conditions for particle-laden flames [249].

3.6. Transient ignition theory

In  the  quasi-steady  theory  of  premixed  flame  initiation,  external
heating is applied as an ever-lasting deposition of thermal energy from a
concentrated  point.  Due  to  the  absence  of  time  scales,  the  essential
concept of MIE is unavailable in existing ignition theories based on the
quasi-steady state assumption [12,29,144,219]. In addition, the initia-
tion  and development of the ignition kernel during its transition to a
self-sustained spherical  flame is  a highly transient process [109,250].
Therefore,  it requires transient ignition theory  that can provide more
accurate description of the dynamic evolution of the ignition kernel and
a sensible evaluation of MIE.

3.6.1. Theory of thermal wave propagation

Sanchez et al. [251] conducted an analytical study on the ignition
process with emphasis on the transient, one-dimensional flow induced
by  the  localized  energy  source.  It  demonstrated  that  the  convection
resulting from thermal expansion helps the transport of heat away from
the  source and  thus  supports  the  propagation  of  thermal  waves.  Kur-
dyumov  and  coworkers  [9,176]  investigated  the  formation  of  planar,
cylindrical, and spherical flame fronts due to energy sources. The hy-
drodynamic  and  thermodynamic  behaviors  of  heat  propagation  were
comprehensively  analyzed  by  separating  dominant  mechanisms  into
distinct spatial regions. Based on time scale analysis, the dynamic evo-
lution of the temperature profile was obtained, according to which the
ignition  characteristics  were  interpreted,  and  the  MIE  was  evaluated.
Fernandez-Tarrazo et al. [252] proposed a method to calculate the MIE
for gaseous fuel/air mixtures considering detailed kinetic models. This
method  was  tested  for  methanol-air  mixtures  considering  detailed
chemistry with 38 elementary reactions and reduced chemistry with 8
elementary  reactions.  Good  agreement  between  the  numerically  pre-
dicted  MIE  and  the  available  experimental  results  was  achieved  (see
Fig. 1 in Ref. [252]), which supports the robustness of the computational
method.

For a concentrated energy source with a finite deposition time, the
ignition  outcome  can  be  predicted  by  integrating  the  unsteady  heat
propagation  process,  and  the  MIE  can  be  evaluated.  Existing  studies
have shown that the heat propagation process is characterized by a two-
regime-structure,  when  the  heating  duration  is  comparable  with  the
acoustic time scale [9,152,176]. A brief description is presented as fol-
lows:  The  time  lapse  of  the  external  heating  is  denoted  by  t0,  during
which a total amount of thermal energy E0  is released, suggesting an
average heating power of q = E0/t0. The energy deposition induces a hot
pocket with the length scale of r0, in which the temperature is exceed-
ingly high due to external heating. Under the uniform pressure condi-
tion, the high temperature environment creates remarkably low density.
The front of this low-density regime exhibits to be a contact surface that
acts as a piston pushing the fluid outwards. The motion of the piston
creates a pressure wave that propagates at the local sound speed. The
acoustic time scale could be evaluated in terms of the pressure p0 and ρ0
of the unperturbed gas, i.e., tacoustic ∼ r0/

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
p0/ρ0

√

.

To simplify the governing equations describing aerothermodynamic
behavior of the unburnt gas subject to finite domain external heating,
the following nondimensional quantities are introduced:

ˇr = r
r0

,ˇt = t

tacoustic

, ˇp = p
p0

T = T
, ˇ
T0

, ˇp =

ρ
ρ0

(98)

The overhead symbol is selected to be “∨” in order to avoid misun-
derstanding with the nondimensional quantities defined based on the
properties of laminar flame, which are denoted by the overhead symbol
“~”.

Pressure waves are incessantly produced by external heating. They
collapse ahead of the hot pocket to form shock waves when the heating
duration  is  comparable  with  the  acoustic  time,  i.e.,  t0 ∼ tacoustic  or  in
nondimensional form ˇt0 ∼ 1. The non-dimensional radial distance of the
shock wave is denoted by ˇrN, whose time derivative gives the propaga-
tion speed, i.e., ˇuN = dˇrN/dˇt. Behind the shock wave, the fluid element
moves at the speed of ˇvN  with density ˇρN  and pressure ˇpN, which are
determined by the following matching conditions:

dˇrN
d̂t

dˇrN
d̂t

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
γ (cid:0) 1 + (γ + 1)ˇpN
2

=

(cid:0) ˇvN =

γ + 1 + (γ (cid:0) 1)ˇpN
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
[
]

√

2

γ (cid:0) 1 + (γ + 1)ˇpN

ˇρN =

γ (cid:0) 1 + (γ + 1)ˇpN
γ + 1 + (γ (cid:0) 1)ˇpN

(99)

(100)

(101)

As indicated by V ́azquez-Espí and Li ̃n ́an [152], the ratio between the
acoustic  time  scale  and  thermal  conduction  time  scale  is  a  small
parameter, i.e., ε = tacoustic/tconduction≪1. In terms of the small parameter
ε, asymptotic analysis can be conducted. Close to the heating source, the
temperature within the hot pocket is extraordinarily high, and thus it is
convenient  to  define  a  rescaled  temperature  θ = ε̂
which satisfies the following thermal energy equation

T  of  order  unity,

⎛

∂
∂ˇt

⎝

ˇpe
θ

⎞
⎠ + 1
ˇr2

⎡
⎣1
θ

∂
∂ˇr

⎛

ˇq
⎝
ˇtd

(cid:0)

ˇr3
γ

dˇpe
dˇt

⎞

⎤

+ ˇr2∂θ
∂ˇr

⎠

⎦ = 0

(102)

where ˇq = q/q is the non-dimensional heating power and γ = cp/cv  the
heat capacity ratio. The quantity ˇpe  refers to the uniform pressure in the
hot pocket and is equal to that at the edge of the thermal wave. The
initial and boundary conditions for Eq. (102) are
ˇt = 0, θ = 0

(103)

/

ˇt > 0, ˇr→0, ˇr2∂θ

∂ˇr = (cid:0) ˇq

/
ˇt0

ˇt > 0, ˇr = ̂re, ∂θ

/

∂ˇr = 0

(104)

(105)

where ˇre  represents the edge of the hot pocket, i.e., the thermal wave
front, beyond which the magnitude of θ is of order O(ε) and thus tends to
be negligible in the first approximation. The thermal wave behaves as a
contact  surface,  indicating  that  the  propagation  speed  of  the  thermal
front is identical to the moving velocity of the fluid, i.e.,
dˇre
dˇt

= ˇve

(106)

In addition, the heat flux vanishes there, providing the energy balance
relationship

ˇr3
e
γ

dˇpe
dˇt

+ ˇpeˇve =

ˇq
ˇt0

(107)

which  states that the  thermal energy delivered by  external heating is
used to increase the internal energy of the hot pocket region and, in the
meantime, to displace the outer cold fluid outward.

In the regime between the hot pocket and the resulting shock wave,
the Reynolds number is of order ε(cid:0) 1≫1 and thus the fluid flow can be
described  by  Euler  equations.  Integrating  the  Euler  equations  with

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117430

D. Yu and Z. Chen

boundary conditions (106) and (107) at ˇr = ˇre  and boundary conditions
(99)  –  (101)  at  ˇr = ˇrN  determines  the  instantaneous  locations  of  the
thermal front and the leading shock along with the hot pocket pressure
as functions of time, i.e., ˇre = ˇre(t), ˇrN = ˇrN(̂t), and ˇpe = ˇpe(̂t). With
knowledge of those informations, the structure of the thermal wave, i.e.,
the temperature profile in the hot pocket region, can be determined by
integrating Eq. (102) subject to initial and boundary conditions (103) –
(105), through which the dynamic evolution of the thermal wave can be
fully determined at a given heating power ˇq and duration ˇt0. In the post-
heating stage, the rate of hot pocket expansion diminishes, leading to a
rapid decrease of pressure ˇpe and a reduction in the propagation speed of
the thermal wave front. Therefore, the final state of the thermal wave is
determined by the characteristics of external heating.

In limit situations of ˇt0≪1, the thermal energy is deposited instan-
taneously. It generates a blast wave, whose intensity decays as it prop-
agates outward. The pressure settles to the ambient value in the stage
1≪ˇt≪ε(cid:0) 1, which yields the asymptotic distribution of temperature and
thus determines the thermal wave structure.

In the opposite limit of ˇt0≫1 the propagation of the thermal wave
proceeds  under  nearly  isobaric  conditions,  and  the  thermal  wave
structure is dominated by pure conduction.

Corresponding  to  each  physicochemical  state  of  a  combustible
mixture, there exists a critical ignition radius that depends on various
fuel  parameters,  such  as  molecular  structure,  equivalence  ratio,  and
Lewis  number,  and  must  be  known  before  evaluating  the  ignition
outcome.  Successful  ignition  is  characterized  by  the  passage  of  the
thermal wave through the critical ignition radius so that a self-sustained
spherical flame appears. The MIE can be determined by the requirement
of equality between the final radius of the thermal front and the critical
ignition radius.

3.6.2. General theory on transient ignition and spherical flame propagation
Evaluation  of  MIE  based  on thermal  wave  theory  implies  that the
duration of external heating is much shorter than the conduction time
scale, i.e., t0≪tconduction. In the meanwhile, the reaction time scale under
the critical ignition condition is comparable with the conduction time
scale. This implies that the chemical reaction tends to be frozen during
the thermal energy deposition from external heating, according to which
the development of thermal waves is not affected by heat release from
the chemical reaction. A more accurate interpretation of premixed flame
ignition involves the transient development of the ignition kernel, dur-
ing which a self-sustained spherical flame is supported by both external
heating and heat release from chemical reactions.

Yu  and  Chen  [109,253]  conducted  theoretical  studies  on  the
forced-ignition of a premixed expanding spherical flame in a quiescent
mixture with emphasis on the transient evolution of the flame kernel
subject to finite duration external heating. Their results indicated that
the  unsteady  effect  leads  to  a  longer  critical  ignition  radius  and  high
critical ignition power, i.e., the ignition process becomes more difficult
when the unsteady effect is considered. In addition, the transient igni-
tion theory can appropriately describe the sustaining propagation of the
flame  kernel  subsequent  to  switching  off  the  external  heating,  and  is
thereby  able  to  deal  with  external  heating  with  a  finite  duration,
enabling  the  prediction  of  MIE.  The  transient  ignition  theory  [109]
generalizes
the
time-dependent  terms  in  the  governing  equations,  through  which  the
transient evolution of the temperature and reactant mass fraction are
taken into account.

the  quasi-steady

formulation  by

incorporating

The  general  theory  for  transient  ignition  and  flame  propagation
developed by Yu and Chen [109,253] was established based on the AEA
framework,  adopting  constant  density  assumption  and  simplified
one-step  reaction  model.  In  real-life  ignition  problem,  the  variable
density effect, detailed reaction kinetics model, and accurate equation of
state offer a more detailed and potentially accurate representation of the
ignition  process.  However,  this  high  accuracy  comes  at  the  cost  of  a

significant increase in mathematical complexity and thus the impossi-
bility  of  obtaining  analytical  solutions  for  ignition  problem.  The
simplified theoretical model based on AEA yields an analytical, albeit
implicit, expression describing the flame kernel propagation, which is
instrumental  in  elucidating  the  core  dynamics  of  ignition  and  flame
kernel development under transient conditions. Analytical expressions
provide a direct means to examine the influence of key parameters on
ignition outcome.

In the AEA framework of transient premixed ignition, the dynamic
characteristics during the expansion of the ignition kernel consist of two
parts,  i.e.,  the  unsteady  motion  of  the  flame  front  and  the  transient
evolution of the temperature and reactant molar fraction profiles across
the flame front. It should be noted that the sphericity of the flame front
suggests that a suitable time scale describing the transient variation of
temperature and reactant molar fraction profiles due to conduction and
diffusion, which are related to the derivatives ∂̃
YF/∂̃r, should
2
be proportional to the surface area of the flame front, i.e., ̃tevolution ∼ ̃
f .
R
A  suitable  coordinate  transform  shall  be  defined  by  normalizing  the
spatial coordinate with the flame ball radius that varies in the course of
time and scaling the time by the surface area of the flame ball, i.e. [109],

T/∂̃r and ∂̃

σs =

̃r
̃
Rf (t)

, ts =

∫ ̃t

0

dtʹ
(tʹ)

2
̃
R
f

(108)

Applying  the  coordinate  transform  (108)  to  governing  Eqs.  (24)  and
(25), one obtains

∂̃
T
∂ts

(cid:0) ̃

Rf σs

̃
U

̃
d
T
dσs

= 1
σ2
s

d
dσs

)

(

̃
d
T
dσs

σ2
s

+ Ze2 ̃
YF
2Le

[

exp

(cid:0) Ar

(̃
Tad
̃
T

∂̃
YF
∂ts

(cid:0) ̃Rf σs

̃U

̃
YF
d
dσs

= 1
Le

1
σ2
s

d
dσs

)

(

σ2
s

̃
YF
d
d̃r

(cid:0) Ze2 ̃
YF
2Le

[

exp

(cid:0) Ar

)]

(cid:0) 1

(̃
Tad
̃T

(109)

)]

(cid:0) 1

The initial and boundary conditions are:

ts = 0 : ̃

T = ̃

Tuand

̃
YF = 1 for σs > 1

T = ̃
̃

Tb and

̃
YF = 0 for σs < 1

σs = 0 :

∂̃
T
∂σs

= ̃

Q and

̃
YF = 0

σs → ∞ : ̃

T = ̃

Tu and

̃
YF = 1

(110)

(111)

(112)

(113)

The choice of initial conditions can influence the evaluation of key
ignition  parameters,  such  as  minimum  ignition  energy  and  critical
ignition radius. In the transient theoretical model, the initial conditions
are  simplified  to  be  a  point-less  energy  source  that  provides  ignition
energy into the combustible mixture within the given period. Such an
approach  helps  focus  on  the  primary  influence  of  ignition  deposition
rate and amount upon the subsequent flame kernel propagation process
and facilitates the derivation of analytical insights into transient ignition
processes.

Adopting large activation energy asymptotic analysis, the reaction
terms disappear on the sides of the ignition kernel front in the leading-
order approximation. The first order derivative corresponding to flame
front propagation causes mathematical difficulty in obtaining analytical
solutions  for temperature and  reactant molar fractions. Such  an issue
can be fixed by introducing additional coordinate transformation sepa-
rately on each side of the flame front [109].

On the unburned side, the coordinate transform is defined as

ξuT

=

⎛

⎝

∫∞

(cid:0)  ̃Rf
e

0

 ̃U(σ2

s

(cid:0) 1)/2

σ2
s

⎞

(cid:0) 1

⎠

dσs

⎛

⎝

∫σs

(cid:0)  ̃Rf
e

0

⎞

⎠

σʹ
s

 ̃U(σ2

s

(cid:0) 1)/2

σ2
s

(114)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117431

D. Yu and Z. Chen

ξuc =

∫∞

⎛

⎝

0

(cid:0) Le ̃Rf
e

 ̃U(σ2

s

(cid:0) 1)/2

σ2
s

⎞

(cid:0) 1

⎠

dσs

∫σs

⎛

⎝

0

(cid:0) Le ̃Rf
e

 ̃U(σ2

s

(cid:0) 1)/2

σ2
s

⎞

⎠

dσʹ

s

(115)

)

(
∂̃T
∂̃r

 ̃Rf +

= (cid:0)

{

̂F uT
̃
Rf

̃
Tf + T0
b

[

(

θ3

π2t

(cid:0) F 2
uT
e

/
 ̃R

2
f

)

]}

(cid:0) 1

In terms of ξuT  and ξuc, the governing equations are simplified to
∂̃
T
∂ts

= F 2
uT

∂2̃
T
∂ξ2
uT

∂̃cF
∂ts

=

F 2
uc
Le

∂2̃cF
∂ξ2
uc

where the factors F uT  and F uc  are functions of σs, i.e.,

F uT = e

(cid:0)  ̃Rf

 ̃U(σ2

s

(cid:0) 1)/2

σ2
s

⎛

⎝

∫∞

(cid:0)  ̃Rf
e

(cid:0) 1

⎞

⎠

dσs

 ̃U(σ2

s

(cid:0) 1)/2

σ2
s

(cid:0) Le ̃Rf

F uc = e

 ̃U(σ2

s

(cid:0) 1)/2

σ2
s

0

⎛

⎝

∫∞

(cid:0) Le ̃Rf
e

 ̃U(σ2

s

(cid:0) 1)/2

σ2
s

0

⎞

(cid:0) 1

⎠

dσs

(116)

(117)

(118)

(119)

(123)

(124)

(125)

(

∂̃cF
∂̃r

)

 ̃Rf+

=

(

̂F uY
̃
Rf

θ3

(cid:0) π2 ˆF 2
e

uY t

/
 ̃R

)

2
f Le

)

(

∂̃
T
∂̃r

 ̃Rf (cid:0)

=

(cid:0)

̂F bT
̃Rf

)

̃
Tf (cid:0) T0
b

(cid:0) Qm
2
̃
R
f

(cid:0)
̂F bTS

t, U, ̃
Rf

)

̂F uT = F uT(σs = 1),

̂F uY = F uY(σs = 1), and

̂F bT = F bT(σs =
where
1). The Jacobi theta function θ3  and θ4  respectively denote the sums
θ3(x) = 1 + 2
. The function S
is defined as

and θ4(x) = 1 + 2

((cid:0) 1)nxn2

n=1xn2

∑∞

∑∞

n=1

(cid:0)
S

t, U, ̃Rf

)

=

⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

(
e

θ4

θ4
/
 ̃R

(cid:0) ˆF 2

bT π2 ̃t

(

/
2
 ̃R
f

bT π2 ̃t

(cid:0) ˆF 2
e

)

2
f

(
e

(cid:0) θ4

(cid:0) ˆF 2

)
,̃t < ̃th
/
2
 ̃R
f

bT π2( ̃t(cid:0)  ̃th )

(126)

)

,̃t > ̃th

The initial and boundary conditions are specified as.
(i) at ts = 0 : ̃
T = ̃
Tu  and ̃cF = 1:
(b1) at ξuT = 0 : ̃
T = ̃
at ξuc = 0 : ̃

YF = 0:

Tf :

where  ̃th  represents  the  duration  of  external  heating.  Substituting
equations (123) – (125) into the matching conditions (28) and (29), one
obtains the following expression for flame temperature, i.e.,

̂F uYθ3

(
(cid:0) π2 ˆF 2
uY
e

/
2
 ̃R
 ̃t
f Le

̃
Tf = ̃
T

0

b

+

)/

Le + Qm

)/

(cid:0)
̂F bTS

̃t, ̃

U, ̃
Rf
̂F bT + ̂F uT (cid:0) 1

Rf (cid:0) ̂F uT
̃

T = ̃

(b2) at ξuT = 1 : ̃
at ξuc = 1 : ̃
On the burned side, the coordinate transform is

YF = 1:

Tu:

ξbT =

(cid:0)

erf

erf

√

σs
√
(cid:0)

)

/

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
̃
̃
2
U
Rf
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
/
̃
̃
2
U
Rf

In terms of ξbT, the thermal energy equation can be written as

∂̃
T
∂ts

= F 2
bT

∂2̃
T
∂ξ2
bT

where the factor F bT  is defined as

F bT =

2
√

√

 ̃U/2

/

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
 ̃Rf
̃
̃
(cid:0) σ2
Rf
2
e
U
s
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
(cid:0)
̅̅̅
̃Rf
̃U
π
2

erf

/

)

(121)

(122)

Tb:

T = ̃

T = ̃
Rf

The initial and boundary conditions are specified as.
(i’) at ts = 0 : ̃
(b1’) at ξbT = 0 : ̃T = Q(t):
(b2’) at ξbT = 1 : ̃
̃
Tf :
The temperature and reactant molar fraction distributions on both
burned and unburned sides of the ignition kernel could be obtained by
analytically  solving  Eqs.  (116),  (117)  and  (121)  subject  to  preceding
initial  and  boundary  conditions  [109].  For  one-step  global  reaction
model, the matching conditions (28) and (29) are still valid, which in-
volves the derivatives of ̃T and ̃cF  with respect to ̃r. With knowledge of
analytical  solutions,  those  quantities  can  be  written  in  the  following
explicit forms:

/
2
 ̃R
f

(cid:0) ˆF 2

uT π2 ̃t

(
e

̃
T

0

b θ3

)

(127)

and  the  expression  interpreting  the  consumption  of  reactant  mixture
across the flame front, i.e.,

/
2
 ̃R
 ̃t
f Le

)

(cid:0) π2 ˆF 2
uY

=

(
e

θ3

̂F uY
̃
Rf
Le

(120)

2

̃
T
f
2
̃
T

ad

[

exp

(̃Tad
̃
Tf

(cid:0) Ar
2

)]

(cid:0) 1

(128)

̃
Tf , radius coordinate

The  solutions  in  Eqs.  (127)  and  (128)  yield  the  time-dependent
̃
temperature
U
of the ignition kernel [109]. The phase diagrams interpreting the dy-
namic propagation of flame kernels in combustible mixtures subject to
different heating powers are presented in Fig. 31. The geometric char-
acteristic of the phase diagram changes drastically as the magnitude of

̃
Rf , and flame propagation speed

̃
central  heating  power  increases.  For  relatively  low  values  of
Qm,  the
phase diagram consists of separate branches, the inner of which bounds
the expansion of the ignition kernel originating from central heating, i.
e.,  an ever-expanding spherical  flame  cannot be  established. In  situa-
tions with relatively high heating powers, the separate diagrams merge
into a single curve, which suggests that the ignition kernel induced by
central heating could successfully evolve into a self-sustaining spherical
flame, i.e., a successful flame initiation process is achieved.

U (cid:0) ̃
̃

Based  on  the

Rf  diagram  given  by  solutions  in  Eq.  (127)  and
(128),  the  premixed  flame  initiation  process  consists  of  four  stages,
namely,  the  fast  establishment  of  the  ignition  kernel,  the  ignition-
energy-supported flame kernel propagation, the unsteady transition of
the flame  kernel,  and quasi-steady spherical flame  propagation. Time
scale analysis demonstrates that the transient ignition theory is consis-
tent  with  the  quasi-steady  theory  at  the  particular  situation  of  a  sta-
tionary flame ball (̃
U = 0) and the limit of a planar adiabatic premixed
̃
Rf →∞ [109]. However, at intermediate radius with comparably
flame
̃
U ∼ O(1),  the  transient  evolution  for

low  propagation  speed,  i.e.,

̃
Rf

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117432

D. Yu and Z. Chen

Fig. 31. Change of flame propagation speed with flame radius for different central heating powers. The solid lines are solutions from the transient formulation, while
̃
Qm =
̃
Qm = 2.5. RZ  and ̃RC  respectively denote the flame ball radius and critical radius

the dashed lines are results from quasi-steady theory. The heating powers are indicated by colors of the solid/dashed lines. (a) black for
0.06, and blue for
for flame initiation. Reproduced from Ref. [109] with permission from Cambridge University Press.

̃
Qm = 1.0, red for Qm = 2.0, and blue for

̃
Qm = 0.07; (b) black for

̃
Qm = 0.05, red for

Fig.  32. Change  of  flame  propagation  speed  with  flame  radius  for  different
initial flame kernel radius of  ̃R0 = 0.01, 0.1 and 1.0. The solid lines are solu-
tions  from  the  transient  formulation,  while  the  dashed  lines  are  results  from
quasi-steady theory. The Lewis number is 2.0 and the central heating power is
̃
Qm = 2.5. Reproduced from Ref. [109] with permission from Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Fig.  34. Change  of  the  minimum  ignition  power  with  the  cube  of  critical
ignition  radius.  The  symbols  represent  results  from  quasi-steady  theory  or
transient  formulation,  and  the  lines  represent  the  scaling  relationship  of
̃
Qcr ∼ R3
cr. Reproduced from Ref. [109] with permission from Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. s

Fig. 33. Change of critical heating power and critical ignition radius with the
Lewis  number.  The  solid  lines  are  solutions  from  the  transient  formulation,
while the dashed lines are results from quasi-steady theory. Reproduced from
Ref. [109] with permission from Cambridge University Press.

Fig. 35. The improvements of heating scheme in transient ignition theory in
comparison with that in quasi-steady ignition theory.

temperature/reactant  molar  fraction  tends  to  reduce  the  propagation
speed of the expanding ignition kernel.

According to the transient formulation, the evolution of the ignition
kernel requires knowledge of its initial size, denoted by  ̃Rf0, which is

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117433

D. Yu and Z. Chen

ʹ
̃
min given by
E
Fig. 36 shows that at relatively low heating powers, the
the quasi-steady ignition theory, agrees well with ̃Emin obtained from the
ʹ
transient  ignition  theory.  Both  ̃E
min  and  ̃Emin  rise  abruptly  as  central
̃
heating power
Qm approaches the critical value. The difference between
ʹ
̃E
min  and ̃Emin  becomes apparent as the heating power increases. When
heating power becomes sufficiently high, the heating duration t0  can be
made arbitrarily short in the transient formulation, and consequently,
the  external  heating  could  be  modeled  by  a  delta  function,  whose
magnitude  is  the  total  energy  deposition.  Therefore,  in  the  limit  of
̃
̃
Qm→∞,  both
Qm  and  t0  do  not  appear  explicitly  in  the  formulation,
which implies the independence of MIE on Qm, i.e., the existence of an

ʹ
̃
asymptotic value  of MIE  in that limit.  However,
E
min  without consid-
ering  memory  effect  changes  with  the  heating  power  following  an
0.7
ʹ
∼ ̃
̃
approximate scaling law, i.e.,
E
m  as indicated by the slope of the
Q
min
dashed lines in Fig. 36, which does not satisfy the physical plausibility.

ʹ
̃
The  growing  discrepancy  between  the
min  manifests  the
E
increasing importance of the memory effect in determining the MIE. It is
noted that Fig. 5 in Ref. [8] also shows that the quasi-steady theory tends
to overestimate the value of MIE, which is consistent with the results in
Fig.  36  shown  above.  Nevertheless,  the  range  of  the  heating  power

̃
Emin  and

̃
considered in Ref. [8] was restricted to the neighborhood of
Qcr, which is
much narrower than that concerned in the present transient formula-
tion. Therefore, the substantial impact of the memory effect on the MIE
was not observed in Ref. [8].

The above transient ignition theory helps to assess the unsteady ef-
fects on ignition kernel propagation and to determine the MIE. It was
found that the memory effect of external heating helps to sustain flame
front  propagation  even  after  the  removal  of  the  heating  source  and
thereby  reduces  the  MIE.  The  memory  effect  becomes  stronger  with
higher ignition power. Note that the transient ignition theory is based on
the assumption of one-step global chemistry. In future works, it would
be interesting to take into account radical and chain-branching reactions
[238] in the transient ignition theory.

3.6.3. Transient ignition by repetitive heating pulse

Forced-ignition  by  nanosecond-repetitive-pulsed-discharge  (NRPD)
has received great attention since it can greatly promote ignition [169,
170,239,254]. Lefkowtiz and coworkers [168,255] conducted a series of
experimental studies investigating forced-ignition by NRPD in flowing
mixtures.  They  identified  three  distinct  regimes,  i.e.,  fully  coupled,
partially  coupled,  and  decoupled  between  sequential  pulses.  Castela
et  al.  [256]  showed  that  appropriate  vortical  fluid  motion  could  be
produced by nanosecond discharges, which can bring fresh gas into the
gap  between  the  electrodes.  In  turbulent  environments,  Shy  and  co-
workers [169] observed the synergistic effect between the frequency of
NRPD and the recirculation frequency of turbulence, which can effec-
tively transport the ignition energy to the ignition kernel front and thus
promote ignition probability.

Modifying the transient formulation by incorporating multiple pul-
ses, Yu and Chen [253] provided a theoretical analysis on the ignition of
a quiescent flammable mixture by multiple discharges and assessed the
influence  of  repetitive  pulse  on  the  ignition  process.  For  repetitive

Fig. 37. Schematic of repetitive heating pulses.

Fig. 36. Change of the MIE with heating power for different Lewis numbers.
The  solid  lines  represent  ̃Emin  determined  by  the  transient  formulation  with
ʹ
memory  effect,  while  the  dashed  lines  stand  for  ̃E
min  predicted  by  the  quasi-
steady
from
Ref. [109] with permission from Cambridge University Press.

theory  without  considering  memory  effect.  Reproduced

̃
Rf0 = 0.01 in the preceding results. Fig. 32 compares the
selected to be
phase  diagram  for  successful  ignition  processes  with  different  initial
radii of the ignition kernel. It suggests that initially larger ignition ker-
nels  require  a  shorter  distance subject  to  the  driving  effect  of  central
heating  on  the  critical  ignition  radius,  which  facilitates  the  ignition
process. Beyond the critical ignition radius, Fig. 32 shows that various

̃
Rf 0  collapse, which implies
curves corresponding to different values of
that the propagation of a self-sustaining spherical flame does not inherit
the history of ignition kernel evolution subject to central heating.

Besides,  as  shown  in  Fig.  33,  the  minimum  ignition  powers  and
critical ignition radii predicted by transient ignition theory appear to be
uniformly greater than those evaluated in quasi-steady ignition theory.
This is due to the fact that the local temperature gradient ahead of the
flame front predicted by the transient ignition theory is larger than that
predicted by the quasi-steady theory, implying stronger heat loss in the
transient formulation at the same flame radius. Consequently, the crit-
ical radius determined by the transient ignition theory is larger than that
determined  by  the  quasi-stead  theory.  Therefore,  the  unsteadiness  of
flame kernel propagation exhibits inhibiting effects during the premixed
flame ignition process.

Fig. 34 shows the change of the minimum ignition power with the
cube of the critical flame radius. For the quasi-steady ignition theory, the
minimum  ignition  power  is  shown  to  be  linearly  proportional  to  the
3
̃
Qmin ∼ ̃
cube of the critical radius, i.e.,
cr  [12]. However, the minimum
R
ignition  power  predicted by  the  transient  ignition theory  formulation
changes more rapidly than the cube of the critical radius, and the scaling
3+δ
̃
Qmin ∼ ̃
cr  with  δ > 0
R

law  should  be  phenomenologically  revised  to
[109].

More  importantly,  the  flexible  external  heating  can  be  defined  as
arbitrary functions of time in the transient ignition theory, as shown in
Fig. 35. Therefore, the memory effect of external heating, i.e., the flame
front  could  sustain  propagation  for  a  while  after  the  removal  of  the
heating  source,  can  also  be  interpreted  appropriately  based  on  the
transient ignition theory, and it is found that the memory effect becomes
stronger as the external heating power increases [109,253]. Since the
heat  release  from  the  flame  front  during  the  transient  of  the  ignition
kernel to the ever-expanding spherical flame is taken into account, the
transient ignition theory yields the lower bound for MIE, which provides
helpful guidelines for fire safety issues.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117434

D. Yu and Z. Chen

Fig.  38. Evolution  of  flame  propagation  speed  (black  lines)  and  flame  tem-
perature (red line) during the ignition kernel development into a self-sustained
expanding flame. The solid and dashed lines are for double and single pulse,
respectively. Each heating scheme is characterized by equal ignition energy of
̃
̃Eignition = 380 and heating power of
Qm = 100. The instants corresponding to
the  switching-on  and  -off  of  individual  pulse  are  indicated  by  the  squares
adjacent to the abscissa for two pulse cases. Reproduced from Ref. [253] with
permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 39. Evolution of temperature profiles at selected instants (or equivalently
the  flame  front  locations)  characterizing  the  flame  kernel  evolution  corre-
sponding  to  conditions  of  λtm = 0  (dashed  lines)  and  λtm = 0.93  (solid  lines).
Reprinted from Ref. [253] with permission from Elsevier.

heating pulses, the heating scheme shall be expressed as the summation
of Heaviside functions in the following form [253].

Q(t) = ̃
̃
Qm

∑2np

k=1

((cid:0) 1)k+1H(̃t (cid:0) ̃tk)

(129)

where

̃
Qm  is the heating power of an individual pulse, and np  the total

Fig.  40. The  impact  of  two-pulse  heating  on  ignitability,  in  which  the  same
̃
amount of ignition energy ̃Eig = 350 is released at constant heating power
Qm =
100  with  various  intermittent  durations.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  [253]  with
permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 41. Change of the minimum ignition energy with heating pulse number.
Reproduced from Ref. [253] with permission from Elsevier.

number of pulses, in which the kth pulse is initiated at ̃t = ̃t2k(cid:0) 1 and ends
at ̃t = ̃t2k+1, k = 1, 2, ..., np. Fig. 37 shows the schematic of a repetitive
heating pulse, in which ̃th  is the duration of the individual pulse and ̃tm
the intermittent period.

The transient variation of flame temperature exhibits the same form
̃t, ̃U,

given by Eq. (127), in which the central heating related function S
̃
Rf

should be revised into the following form:

)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

Sk

̃t, ̃

U, ̃
Rf

)

=

∑k

m=1

((cid:0) 1)m+1θ4

[

(cid:0) π2 ˆF 2
bT
e

/
 ̃R

( ̃t(cid:0)  ̃tm)

]

2
f

(130)

which includes the key information of multistage heating parameters, e.
g., pulse number, duration of individual pulse, and intermittent period
between neighboring pulses.

Fig.  38  shows  that  the  repetitive  pulses  can  improve  the  ignition
capability due to the flame revitalization effect, which is attributed to
the memory effect of flame front propagation [253]. It can be under-
stood  as  follows:  Introducing  the  subsequent  heating  pule  provides
additional ignition energy, which is subsequently supplied to the flame
front  by  convective/conductive  transport,  depending  on  presence  of
fluid motion in the ignition kernel. Since the flame front distance is still
shorter than the critical ignition radius, the flame front propagation is
sustained  by  the  memory  effect.  The  mechanism  of  the  revitalization
effect  is  shown  in  Fig.  39.  When  the  ignition  energy  reinforcement
provided  by  the  subsequent  heating  pulse  arrives  at  the  flame  front
before quenching, it lowers the rate of heat loss and thus facilitates the
propagation of the flame front.

Theoretical analysis indicates that replacing a single heating pulse
with two pulses and arranging them with an appropriate intermittent
duration can reduce the ignition energy [253]. This is demonstrated by
̃
Rf =
Fig. 40. It is seen that the flame kernel extinction happens around
17 for a single heating pulse (i.e., λtm = 0). When the intermittent factor
is increased to λtm = 0.93 (i.e., two heating pulses), Fig. 40 shows that
the flame front can successfully propagate across the critical radius and
achieve successful ignition.

For a heating scheme with multiple pulses, it was found that the MIE,
in general, reduces as the pulse number increases [253]. Fig. 41 shows
that the MIE decreases monotonically with the pulse number. This in-
dicates  that  the  revitalization  effect  results  in  ignition  energy  rein-
forcement  between  sequential  pulses,  and  accordingly  enhances  the
ignition process. Moreover, Fig. 41 shows that the MIE gradually decays
with heating pulse numbers and tends to approach an asymptotic value
as np→∞.

The fall of minimum ignition with heating pulse number np as well as

̃
Emin  to the heating pulse
the insensitivity of minimum ignition energy
number as np→∞ can be interpreted as follows: The total energy of the
flame kernel at the ignition instant, i.e., ̃R = ̃Rcr, consists of three parts,
i.e.,

The thermal energy inside the flame kernel, ̃Eburnt,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117435

D. Yu and Z. Chen

∫ ̃Rcr

̃
Eburnt∝

4π̃

Tb̃r2d̃r

0

The thermal energy in the unburnt region,

̃
Eunburnt,

∫∞

̃Eunburnt∝

4π̃Tũr2dr

 ̃Rcr

(131)

R = ̃
̃

Ucr  at t = tc  subse-
arrive at the critical ignition state
quent to the deposition of the last heating pulse, i.e., we can assume the
relation  t ∼ tc≫τnp  when  evaluating  the  series  (137).  Expanding  the
series Gk(t; τk) in terms of τk/t and retaining the leading order term, we
have

Rcr  and

U = ̃
̃

(132)

Gk(t; τk) ≈ 2F 2
bT

∑∞

n=1

((cid:0) 1)nn2π2e

(cid:0) ˆF 2

bT n2π2t

/
 ̃R

2

f = G(t)

(138)

The  heat  released  by  consuming  fresh  mixtures  inside  the  flame

kernel of critical radius

Erelease∝4
̃
3

3
π̃
R

cr

̃
Qm

(133)

Driven by the MIE, the last term becomes identical for every np. Since
the temperature in the unburnt region is significantly lower than that in

the burnt side, we may assume that the difference in

̃
Eunburnt  would be

immaterial  in  determining  the  MIE.  Therefore,  the  decreasing  of

with np  might be attributed to the similar behavior of

̃
Eburnt.

̃
Emin

As the number of heating pulses increases, the central heating power
corresponding  to  individual  pulses  increases  dramatically.  In  the
limiting situation of np→∞, the heating pulse of finite duration can be
regarded as instantaneous deposition of a finite amount of energy, i.e.,
̃
Q(t) in the boundary condition for equation (121) shall be

the function
replaced by

̃
Q(t) =

∑np

k=1

̃
Eignition
np

δ(t (cid:0) τk)

(134)

where τk refers to the instant when the ignition energy is introduced. The
solution of equation (121) subject to the reduced boundary condition
(134) could be written in the form

nπ sin(nπξb)e

(cid:0) F 2

bT n2π2(t(cid:0) τk )

/
2
 ̃R
f + ξb

(cid:0)

̃
Tf

̃
Tb(ξb, t) = 2

̃
EignitionF 2
bT
̃R

np

2

f

∑np

∑∞

k=1

n=1

)

2
f

/
 ̃R

)(

(cid:0) ̃T

0

b

1 (cid:0) e

(cid:0) F 2
bT

π2t

which does not include the transient information for individual heating
pulses explicitly. Replacing Gk(t; τk) by G(t) in equation (136), it reduces
to
(

)

dTb
dr

=

R(cid:0)

̃Eignition
2
̃
R
f

G(t) + 1
̃
Rf

)(

(cid:0)

̃
Tf (cid:0) ̃
T

0

b

1 (cid:0) e

(cid:0) F 2
bT

π2 t

/
 ̃R

2
f

)

(cid:0)

̃Tf
̃
Rf

(139)

In analogy, the resulting  ̃U (cid:0) ̃Rf  relation derived by substituting equa-
tion  (139)  into  the  matching  conditions  does  not  include  the  heating
pulse  number  np  explicitly.  Consequently,  it  demonstrates  that  the
minimum ignition energy tends to vary indiscernibly as np  increases.

The  preceding  formulation  revises  the  transient  ignition  theory
reviewed in the previous section by taking into account the effects of
multiple heating pulses on the evolution process of the ignition kernel.
Interestingly,  it  was  observed  that  the  minimum  ignition  energy  de-
creases as the heating pulse number increases and is asymptotic towards
a lower bound value in the limit of np→∞. However, this revised tran-
sient ignition theory still focuses on the ignition process induced in a
quiescent  mixture.  In  practical  situations,  the  mixture  might  not  be
static.  Shy  and  coworkers  [169,170]  experimentally  observed  that
coherence between the frequency of the heating pulse and the recircu-
lation frequency of the turbulent flow of reactant leads to a synergistic
effect  on  the  ignition  kernel  development,  which  promotes  ignition.
Therefore, it would be of practical interest to conduct theoretical anal-
ysis on the forced ignition of a flowing mixture by a repetitive heating
pulse in future works.

4. Summary and future research

(135)

4.1. Summary of major advances

The temperature gradient at the flame front inside the flame kernel

can be determined accordingly
(

)

̃
d
Tb
d̃r

=

(cid:0)
 ̃r= ̃R
f

̃
Eignition
2
̃R

np

f

∑np

k=1

Gk(t; τk) + 1
̃
Rf

(cid:0)

̃
Tf (cid:0) ̃
T

0

b

)(

(cid:0) F 2
bT

1 (cid:0) e

where Gk(t; τk) represents the series

Gk(t; τk) = 2F 2
bT

∑∞

n=1

((cid:0) 1)nn2π2e

(cid:0) ˆF 2

bT n2π2(t(cid:0) τk )

/
 ̃R

2
f

/
 ̃R

2
f

)

π2 t

(cid:0)

̃
Tf
̃
Rf

(136)

(137)

which is convergent in the range t > τk, i.e., the release of k th heating
̃
Tu/d̃r)
pulse.  The  remaining  gradients  (d
are  not

and  (d̃cF/d̃r)

+

+

 ̃r= ̃
R
f

 ̃r= ̃
R
f

affected  by  central  heating,  according  to  equations  (123)  and  (124).
Substituting equation (136) into the matching conditions for reactant
mass fraction and temperature, an implicit ordinary differential equa-
tion for flame radius can be obtained, in which the heating power does
not appear explicitly. Thus, we may expect that the Emin-Qm  curve will
become flat at sufficiently high heating power.

To  ensure  flame  revitalization  by  subsequent  heating  pulses,  the
intermittent duration Δτ = τi (cid:0)
τi(cid:0) 1, i = 2, ⋯, np, should not be arbi-
trarily  long.  As  np  increases,  the  energy  added  by  each  pulse  decays
following 1/np, and the heating duration Δτ must drop accordingly. We
assume that it takes a comparably long period for the flame kernel to

A  detailed  review  on  the  development  of  premixed  flame  ignition
theory is presented in this article, with increasing intricacies of mathe-
matical formulation. The major advances are summarized below.

4.1.1. Homogeneous explosion theory

The  homogeneous  explosion  of  a  combustible  mixture  can  be
considered  the  most  fundamental  phenomenon  of  combustion.  The
fundamental mechanism can be attributed to the net accumulation of
heat  and  radicals  by  consuming  the  reactant,  leading  to  the  self-
acceleration of chemical reactions. The homogeneous explosion theory
answers the question of whether chemical reactions can be initiated in a
combustible  mixture.  However,  the  absence  of  characteristic  length
scale implies the nonequivalence between homogeneous explosion and
premixed flame ignition.

4.1.2. Thermal ignition theory

The thermal ignition theory introduces the characteristic length scale
for  premixed  flame  ignition.  The  critical  size  of  the  spark  kernel  is
determined by the thermal balance between heat release from chemical
reactions and heat loss by conduction, characterized by the local tem-
perature  gradient.  The  minimum  size  of  the  spark  kernel  can  be
considered the critical ignition radius, beyond which the chemical heat
release  exceeds  the  conductive  heat  loss  and  leads  to  the  successful
ignition of a premixed flame. According to thermal ignition theory, the
critical  ignition  radius  is  comparable  to  the  flame  thickness  or

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117436

D. Yu and Z. Chen

quenching distance. The MIE is the energy required to heat a sphere in
the  radius  of  flame  thickness  to  the  adiabatic  flame  temperature.
Nevertheless,  the  thermal  ignition  theory  does  not  take  into  account
mass diffusion and fuel consumption, which, in association with thermal
balance, also play a decisive role in premixed flame ignition.

4.1.3. Flame ball theory

A more accurate description of premixed flame ignition, including
the effect of preferential diffusion of heat and mass (the Lewis number
effect), is given by the flame ball theory. The flame ball theory indicates
that  there  exists  a  stationary  spherical  flame  in  a  static  combustible
mixture. The reactant consumed at the reaction front is supplied by pure
diffusion.  Stability analysis  indicates  that a  small  perturbation  causes
the flame ball to propagate either inwardly (flame extinguishment, i.e.,
ignition  failure)  or  outwardly  (self-sustained  expanding  flame,  i.e.,
successful ignition). Therefore, the flame ball radius is considered to be
the critical length controlling premixed flame ignition. The MIE is pro-
portional  to  the  cube  of  the  flame  ball  radius  instead  of  the  flame
thickness.  Since  the  flame  ball  radius  strongly  depends  on  the  Lewis
number, the change of MIE with the Lewis number is quantified by the
flame ball theory.

4.1.4. Quasi-steady ignition theory

Both  the  thermal  ignition  theory  and  flame  ball  theory  do  not
consider  flame  kernel  propagation,  which  profoundly  affects  the  dy-
namic  process  of  premixed  flame  ignition.  The  quasi-steady  ignition
takes into account the impact of flame stretch on flame propagation by
including convective terms (see Fig. 7) and thus interprets the dynamic
evolution of the ignition kernel. The quasi-steady ignition theory deals
with both thermal and mass balance across the flame front of the igni-
tion  kernel,  which  is  supported  by  energy  supply  from  the  external
ignition  source  and  tends  to  propagate  outwards.  It  can  describe  the
transition between the initial flame kernel, the flame ball, the outwardly
propagating spherical flame, and the propagating planar flame. There-
fore,  compared  to  thermal  ignition  theory  and  flame  ball  theory,  the
quasi-steady ignition theory more rigorously interprets premixed flame
ignition  and  critical  ignition  radius.  According  to  the  quasi-steady
ignition  theory,  the  critical  flame  radius  depends  strongly  on  the
Lewis number; and for large Lewis numbers, the MIE can be substan-
tially over-predicted based on the flame ball radius and under-predicted
based on the flame thickness. The quasi-steady ignition theory has been
extended to consider the effects of Soret diffusion, reaction reversibility,
transport  and  chain  branching  reactions  of  radicals,  finite  droplet
vaporization,  and  dispersed  solid  particles,  which  may  have  a  great
impact on premixed flame ignition.

4.1.5. General theory on transient ignition and spherical flame propagation
The  temporal  dependence  is  absent  in  the  quasi-steady  ignition
theory.  In  practice,  the  ignition  source  exists  for  a  finite  duration.
Consequently, a more accurate interpretation of premixed flame ignition
must consider the transient evolution of the ignition kernel. The general
theory on transient ignition and spherical flame propagation has been
developed by further incorporating the unsteady terms in the governing
equations (see Fig. 7). The general theory reveals the memory effect of
flame kernel evolution, which can be interpreted that the flame kernel
can sustain propagation at some distance subsequent to the removal of
an external ignition source. Comparing with quasi-steady ignition the-
ory,  the  transient  framework  can  deal  with  finite  ignition  energy
deposition through a single or multiple heating pulses. It has been found
that  repetitive  heating  pulses  can  improve  ignition  due  to  the  flame
revitalization  effect,  i.e.,  ignition  energy  reinforcement  to  the  flame
kernel via heat conduction induced by subsequent heating pulses. The
MIE can be reduced by increasing the number of heating pulses, which is
consistent with experimental observation. Besides, the general theory on
transient ignition and spherical flame propagation provides an in-depth
description  of  the  birth  of  the  ignition  kernel  subject  to  an  external

heating  source  of  finite  domain  and  duration.  Time  scale  analysis  in-
dicates  that  the  ignition  kernel  formation  process  consists  of  three
stages: onset of thermal runaway at the heating center, occurrence of
reaction fronts due to depletion of reactant concentration, and arrival of
the reaction front at the edge of the heating domain. Corresponding to
each stage, there exists a critical heating power of the ignition source
below  which  the  ignition  kernel  cannot  be  established,  and  thereby
premixed flame ignition can hardly take place.

4.1.6. Applications of premixed flame ignition theory in ignition
enhancement

The  above advances  in  premixed  ignition  theory  not only  provide
insights  on  the  fundamental  mechanisms  of  ignition  but  also  help
develop ignition enhancement techniques. It is well known that reliable
relight at high altitude with relatively low pressure and temperature of
inlet  air  is  crucial  in  jet-engine  design.  According  to  the  premixed
ignition theory mentioned above, at lower pressure, the critical ignition
radius is larger, and thereby larger ignition kernel should be generated
to achieve successful ignition. Multi-channel nanosecond discharge has
been proposed and demonstrated to be able to induce a large ignition
kernel  so  that  successful  ignition  can  be  achieved  even  at  very  low
pressures [257]. Similarly, the three-channel spark ignition technique
has been developed by Zhao et al. [17] to increase the ignition kernel
size while maintaining the same total ignition energy. As mentioned in
the Introduction section, advanced ICEs tend to operate in ultra-lean or
highly  diluted  conditions  so  that  high  thermal  efficiency  can  be  ach-
ieved. However, the critical ignition radius is very large in ultra-lean or
highly  diluted  conditions,  according  to  the  premixed  ignition  theory
above. An innovative three-pole igniter [22,258] has been developed to
enlarge the volume of the ignition kernel and thereby improve ignition
in gasoline engines with high charge dilution. Besides, multi-point mi-
crowave discharge igniters have also been developed to extend the lean
ignition limit in ICEs [259]. The basic idea for these ignition enhance-
ment  techniques  is  to  generate  a  large  ignition  kernel  whose  size  is
comparable to or even above the critical ignition radius.

According to the premixed ignition theory, the MIE increases greatly
with the Lewis number. Therefore, another way to facilitate ignition is to
reduce the Lewis number. For large hydrocarbon fuel burning at fuel-
lean conditions, the Lewis number is greater than unity. The simplest
way to reduce the Lewis number is to blend hydrogen, which has a large
mass diffusivity and thereby a sub-unity Lewis number [260,261]. Since
the Lewis number increases with the equivalence ratio, fuel stratification
also helps to reduce the Lewis number at the ignition kernel. The rela-
tively high equivalence ratio at the ignition kernel compared to that in
the  surroundings  has  been  shown  to  greatly  enhance  ignition  kernel
propagation and thereby promote ignition [262]. Besides, active cooling
with endothermic hydrocarbon fuel is popularly used in thermal pro-
tection. The decomposed small fragments from pyrolysis have a much
larger mass diffusivity compared to the original hydrocarbon fuel, so the
Lewis number can be greatly reduced. Therefore, fuel decomposition has
been  shown  to  greatly  promote  ignition  [263].  Moreover,  the  combi-
nation of fuel decomposition and fuel stratification can further promote
premixed flame ignition [263]. The underlined principle for the ignition
promotion methods mentioned above is to decrease the Lewis number,
which reduces the MIE according to the premixed flame ignition theory.

4.2. Future research directions

Though extensive advances in premixed flame ignition theory have
been  achieved  over  the  last  hundred  years,  there  are  still  some  addi-
tional research challenges, as listed below.

4.2.1. Multi-step chemistry

Most  of  the  premixed  flame  ignition  theories  consider  a  one-step
global  reaction,  which  can  interpret  fuel  consumption  and  total  heat
release. However, practical combustion of hydrocarbon fuels involves

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117437

D. Yu and Z. Chen

numerous  elementary  reactions  among  fuel,  oxygen,  and  reactive  in-
termediate species. Therefore, the premixed flame ignition theory needs
to  be extended  to consider  multi-step chemistry  so  that the effects  of
transport and reaction of intermediate species and key radicals can be
quantified. Usually, it is difficult to consider complicated chemistry in
theoretical analysis. Besides the modified Zel’dovich-Li ̃n ́an model pro-
posed  by  Dold  and  coworkers  [235,236]  (see  Section  3.5.2),  the
simplified  chemistry  developed  by  Williams  and  coworkers  (see
Ref. [264] and references therein) may be considered in ignition theory.
Despite  the  fact  that  the  integration  of  multi-step  chemistry  into  the
theoretical  model  results  in  further  complexities  in  mathematical
formulation, the potential further understanding of ignition still merits
continued efforts in this direction. Note that for a hydrogen/air mixture,
eigenvalue analysis considering detailed chemistry can be conducted to
determine the critical ignition conditions [73,265].

aspects,  taking  into  account  the  future  research  directions  mentioned
above, and as a consequence, it can provide promising insights into a
variety of phenomena critical to the development of combustion science
technology. Besides, numerical simulation is another powerful tool to
understand premixed flame ignition, which is beyond the scope of the
current review. The advances in the numerical simulation of premixed
flame ignition need to be discussed in future works.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Dehai Yu: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing –
original draft, Writing –  review &  editing. Zheng Chen: Conceptuali-
zation,  Formal  analysis,  Funding  acquisition,  Investigation,  Project
administration, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing.

4.2.2. Cool flame ignition

Recently,  cool  flame  combustion  has  attracted  increasing  interest
[266,267].  The  fundamental  knowledge  of  the  ignition  and  dynamic
propagation of cool flames is helpful for the development of combustion
science  and  advanced  technology  in  clean  combustion  [266,267].
However,  there  are  only  a  few  numerical  or  experimental  studies
[268–272] on cool flame ignition. To the authors’ knowledge, there is no
theoretical analysis of the ignition of premixed cool flames. Since a cool
flame  is  induced  by  low-temperature  chemistry,  in  future  works,  it
would  be
low-  and
to
high-temperature chemistry in transient ignition theory.

into  account  both

interesting

take

4.2.3. Flowing mixture

counterintuitive

The theories reviewed here are for premixed flame ignition in a static
mixture.  However,  in  practice  premixed  flame  ignition  usually  takes
place in a flowing mixture. The presence of laminar or turbulent flow
enhances the heat transfer from the ignition kernel to the surrounding
mixture  and  thereby  prohibits  premixed  flame  ignition  [1,273–275].
Nevertheless,
and
turbulence-facilitated ignition (TFI) have been observed in recent sim-
ulations [276] and experiments [102,277–279], respectively. Therefore,
ignition theory, considering uniform flow or even turbulent transport,
would be of great interest. Recently, the authors have conducted theo-
retical  analysis  on  premixed  flame  ignition  by  a  moving  hot  particle
[41], which may be extended to ignition in a mixture with uniform flow.
Besides, premixed flame ignition in a counterflow configuration [280,
281] may be considered in future works since it is a relatively simple
flow field.

flow-facilitated

ignition

4.2.4. Autoigniting mixture

The  ignition  theories  have  been  developed  for  premixed  flame
propagation in a mixture at or close to normal temperature and pressure
(NTP). At NTP, the ignition delay time is very large, and the unburned
mixture  can  be  considered  frozen.  However,  under  engine-relevant
conditions  with  high  temperature  and  pressure,  the  ignition  delay
time of the fuel/air mixture may be comparable to the flame residence
time.  The  competition  between  flame  propagation  and  end-gas  auto-
ignition determines whether strong pressure oscillation occurs in spark
ignition  engines  [282].  Therefore,  it  is  of  interest  to  understand  pre-
mixed  flame  ignition  and  propagation  in  such  kinds  of  autoigniting
mixtures, which are closely related to engine knock [282]. Moreover,
flame  propagation  and  acceleration  in  auto-igniting  mixtures  may
induce the deflagration-to-detonation transition (DDT). It is of consid-
erable  interest  to  deepen  the  fundamental  understanding  of  the  DDT
phenomenon,  especially  in  studies  of  explosions  and  high-speed  pro-
pulsion  systems.  Currently,  there  are  only  a  few  theoretical  studies
[283–286] on premixed flame propagation speed in autoigniting mix-
tures. In future work, premixed flame ignition theory for autoigniting
mixtures needs to be developed.

The  ignition  theory should  be  generalized  and  revised in  multiple

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgements

Z.C. wishes to acknowledge Prof. Yiguang Ju and Chung K. Law at
Princeton  University  for  their  encouragement  on  this  work.  Z.C.  also
thanks his former graduate students,  in particular Dr. Wang Han, Dr.
Yuan Wang, Dr. Weikuo Zhang, Dr. Yiqing Wang, Dr. Xinyi Chen, and
Mr. Shumeng Xie for their work on ignition. Financial support on this
work  has  been  provided  by  National  Natural  Science  Foundation  of
China (Nos. 52176096, 52006001, 51861135309, and 51322602).

References

[1] Pouech P, Duchaine F, Poinsot T. Premixed flame ignition in high-speed flows

over a backward facing step. Combust Flame 2021;229:111398.

[2] Mastorakos E. Ignition of turbulent non-premixed flames. Prog Energy Combust

Sci 2009;35:57–97.

[3] Mastorakos E. Forced ignition of turbulent spray flames. Proc Combust Inst 2017;

36:2367–83.

[4] Ronney PD, Wu M-S, Pearlman HG, Weiland KJ. Experimental study of flame
balls in space: Preliminary results from STS-83. AIAA J 1998;36:1361–8.
[5] Beduneau J-L, Kim B, Zimmer L, Ikeda Y. Measurements of minimum ignition

energy in premixed laminar methane/air flow by using laser induced spark.
Combust Flame 2003;132:653–65.

[6] Li F, Zhao Z, Wang B, Wang Z. Experimental study of pre-chamber jet ignition in a
rapid compression machine and single-cylinder natural gas engine. Int J Engine
Res 2021;22:1342–56.

[7] Buckmaster J, Joulin G, Ronney P. The structure and stability of nonadiabatic

flame balls. Combust Flame 1990;79:381–92.

[8] He L. Critical conditions for spherical flame initiation in mixtures with high Lewis

numbers. Combust Theor Model 2000;4:159.

[9] Kurdyumov V, S ́anchez A, Linan A. Heat propagation from a concentrated

external energy source in a gas. J Fluid Mech 2003;491:379–410.

[10] Kravchik T, Sher E. Numerical modeling of spark ignition and flame initiation in a

quiescent methane-air mixture. Combust Flame 1994;99:635–43.
[11] Wu M-S, Ronney PD, Colantonio RO, VanZandt DM. Detailed numerical

simulation of flame ball structure and dynamics. Combust Flame 1999;116:
387–97.

[12] Chen Z, Burke MP, Ju Y. On the critical flame radius and minimum ignition

energy for spherical flame initiation. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:1219–26.
[13] Lacaze G, Richardson E, Poinsot T. Large eddy simulation of spark ignition in a

turbulent methane jet. Combust Flame 2009;156:1993–2009.
[14] Law CK. Combustion physics. Cambridge University Press; 2010.
[15] Dale JD, Checkel M, Smy P. Application of high energy ignition systems to

engines. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1997;23:379–98.

[16] Tsuboi S, Miyokawa S, Matsuda M, Yokomori T, Iida N. Influence of spark
discharge characteristics on ignition and combustion process and the lean
operation limit in a spark ignition engine. Appl Energy 2019;250:617–32.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117438

D. Yu and Z. Chen

[17] Zhao H, Zhao N, Zhang T, Wu S, Ma G, Yan C, Ju Y. Studies of multi-channel
spark ignition of lean n-pentane/air mixtures in a spherical chamber. Combust
Flame 2020;212:337–44.

[18] Zhang A, Scarcelli R, Lee S-Y, Wallner T, Naber J. Numerical investigation of
spark ignition events in lean and dilute methane/air mixtures using a detailed
energy deposition model. Argonne, IL (United States): Argonne National Lab.
(ANL); 2016.

[19] Xu G, Hanauer C, Wright YM, Boulouchos K. CFD-simulation of ignition and

combustion in lean burn gas engines. 2016. Report No. 0148-7191, SAE Technical
Paper.

[20] Li F, Zhao Z, Wang Z, Wang B. Experimental and numerical study of a methane-
fueled pre-chamber system in rapid compression machine. Combust Sci Technol
2021;193:1463–94.

[21] Zhou Z, Shoshin Y, Hern ́andez-P ́erez FE, van Oijen JA, de Goey LP. Effect of

pressure on the lean limit flames of H2-CH4-air mixture in tubes. Combust Flame
2017;183:113–25.

[22] Han X, Yu S, Tjong J, Zheng M. Study of an innovative three-pole igniter to

improve efficiency and stability of gasoline combustion under charge dilution
conditions. Appl Energy 2020;257:113999.

[23] Shen H, Hinze PC, Heywood JB. A model for flame initiation and early

development in SI engine and its application to cycle-to-cycle variations. SAE
Trans 1994:1808–19.

[24] Biswas S, Tanvir S, Wang H, Qiao L. On ignition mechanisms of premixed CH4/air
and H2/air using a hot turbulent jet generated by pre-chamber combustion. Appl
Therm Eng 2016;106:925–37.

[51] Yu D, Chen X, Chen Z. Analysis on ignition kernel formation in a quiescent

mixture: different characteristic time scales and critical heating powers. Combust
Flame 2022;245:112336.

[52] Fendell FE. Ignition and extinction in combustion of initially unmixed reactants.

J Fluid Mech 1965;21:281–303.

[53] Linan A. The asymptotic structure of counterflow diffusion flames for large

activation energies. Acta Astronaut 1974;1:1007–39.

[54] Glassman I, Yetter RA, Glumac NG. Combustion. Academic Press; 2014.
[55] Hanson RK, Davidson DF. Recent advances in laser absorption and shock tube

methods for studies of combustion chemistry. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2014;44:
103–14.

[56] Sung C-J, Curran HJ. Using rapid compression machines for chemical kinetics

studies. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2014;44:1–18.

[57] Goldsborough SS, Hochgreb S, Vanhove G, Wooldridge MS, Curran HJ, Sung C-J.
Advances in rapid compression machine studies of low-and intermediate-
temperature autoignition phenomena. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;63:1–78.
[58] Chen X, Zhao P, Dai P, Chen Z. On the prediction of hot spot induced ignition by

the Livengood-Wu integral. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:4709–16.

[59] Gu X, Emerson D, Bradley D. Modes of reaction front propagation from hot spots.

Combust Flame 2003;133:63–74.

[60] Opacich KC, Ombrello TM, Heyne JS, Lefkowitz JK, Leiweke RJ, Busby K.

Analyzing the ignition differences between conventional spark discharges and
nanosecond-pulsed high-frequency discharges. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:
6615–22.

[61] Jo S, Gore JP. Laser induced spark ignition for laminar premixed hydrogen air

[25] Qin F, Shah A, Huang Z-w, Peng L-n, Tunestal P, Bai X-S. Detailed numerical

jets. AIAA Scitech 2021 Forum; 2021. p. 681.

simulation of transient mixing and combustion of premixed methane/air mixtures
in a pre-chamber/main-chamber system relevant to internal combustion engines.
Combust Flame 2018;188:357–66.

[26] Toulson E, Schock HJ, Attard WP. A review of pre-chamber initiated jet ignition

combustion systems. SAE International; 2010.

[62] Wawrzak A, Tyliszczak A. A spark ignition scenario in a temporally evolving

mixing layer. Combust Flame 2019;209:353–6.

[63] Kawahara N, Hashimoto S, Tomita E. Spark discharge ignition process in a spark-
ignition engine using a time series of spectra measurements. Proc Combust Inst
2017;36:3451–8.

[27] Read RW. Experimental investigations into high-altitude relight of a gas turbine.

[64] Ono R, Oda T. Spark ignition of hydrogen-air mixture. In: J Phys Conf ser. IOP

University of Cambridge; 2008.

Publishing; 2008, 012003.

[28] Read R, Rogerson J, Hochgreb S. Flame imaging of gas-turbine relight. AIAA J

[65] Kravchik T, Sher E, Heywood J. From spark ignition to flame initiation. Combust

2010;48:1916–27.

Sci Technol 1995;108:1–30.

[29] Han W, Chen Z. Effects of finite-rate droplet evaporation on the ignition and

[66] Sher E, Ben-Ya’ish J, Kravchik T. On the birth of spark channels. Combust Flame

propagation of premixed spherical spray flame. Combust Flame 2015;162:
2128–39.

1992;89:186–94.

[67] Bradley D, Lung F-K. Spark ignition and the early stages of turbulent flame

[30] Segal C. The scramjet engine: processes and characteristics. Cambridge University

propagation. Combust Flame 1987;69:71–93.

Press; 2009.

[68] Sher E, Keck JC. Spark ignition of combustible gas mixtures. Combust Flame

[31] Curran E, Heiser W, Pratt D. Fluid phenomena in scramjet combustion systems.

1986;66:17–25.

Annu Rev Fluid Mech 1996;28:323–60.

[32] Seleznev R, Surzhikov S, Shang J. A review of the scramjet experimental data

base. Prog Aero Sci 2019;106:43–70.

[69] Ballal D, Lefebvre A. The influence of spark discharge characteristics on minimum

ignition energy in flowing gases. Combust Flame 1975;24:99–108.

[70] Maly R. Ignition model for spark discharges and the early phase of flame front

[33] Hammack SD, Ombrello TM. Spatio-temporal evolution of cavity ignition in

growth. Proc Combust Inst 1981;18:1747–54.

supersonic flow. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:3845–52.

[34] An B, Yang L, Wang Z, Li X, Sun M, Zhu J, Yan W. Characteristics of laser ignition

and spark discharge ignition in a cavity-based supersonic combustor. Combust
Flame 2020;212:177–88.

[35] Ochs BA, Ranjan R, Ranjan D, Menon S. Topology and flame speeds of turbulent

premixed flame kernels in supersonic flows. Combust Flame 2019;210:83–99.

[71] Hwang J, Kim W, Bae C. Influence of plasma-assisted ignition on flame

propagation and performance in a spark-ignition engine. Applications in Energy
and Combustion Science 2021;6:100029.

[72] Collin-Bastiani F, Vermorel O, Lacour C, Lecordier B, Cuenot B. DNS of spark
ignition using Analytically Reduced Chemistry including plasma kinetics. Proc
Combust Inst 2019;37:5057–64.

[36] Urzay J. Supersonic combustion in air-breathing propulsion systems for

[73] Wang Y, Li S, Wang Y, Yu D, Zhang H, Chen Z. Analysis of the ignition of

hypersonic flight. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 2018;50:593–627.

[37] Chen Z. Studies on the initiation, propagation, and extinction of premixed flames.

Princeton University; 2009.

[38] Kobes M, Helsloot I, De Vries B, Post JG. Building safety and human behaviour in

fire: a literature review. Fire Saf J 2010;45:1–11.

[39] Lennon T, Moore D. The natural fire safety concept—full-scale tests at

Cardington. Fire Saf J 2003;38:623–43.

[40] Davis SG, Engel D, van Wingerden K. Complex explosion development in mines:
case study—2010 upper big branch mine explosion, Process. Saf. Prog 2015;34:
286–303.

[41] Yu D, Chen Z. Theoretical analysis on the ignition of a combustible mixture by a

hot particle. J Fluid Mech 2022;936:A22.

hydrogen/air mixtures induced by a hot particle. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2022;24:
21188–97.

[74] Liang W, Law CK. An analysis of the explosion limits of hydrogen/oxygen

mixtures with nonlinear chain reactions. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2018;20:742–51.
[75] Endo T, Kuwamoto K, Kim W, Johzaki T, Shimokuri D, Namba S-i. Comparative
study of laser ignition and spark-plug ignition in high-speed flows. Combust
Flame 2018;191:408–16.

[76] Kobayashi Y, Nakaya S, Tsue M. Laser-induced spark ignition for DME–air

mixtures with low velocity. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:4127–35.

[77] Endo T, Takenaka Y, Sako Y, Johzaki T, Namba S-i, Shimokuri D. An experimental

study on the ignition ability of a laser-induced gaseous breakdown. Combust
Flame 2017;178:1–6.

[42] Hemmatian B, Planas E, Casal J. Fire as a primary event of accident domino

[78] Ronney PD. Laser versus conventional ignition of flames. Opt Eng 1994;33:

sequences: the case of BLEVE. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2015;139:141–8.

510–21.

[43] Sun P, Bisschop R, Niu H, Huang X. A review of battery fires in electric vehicles.

[79] Phuoc TX. Laser-induced spark ignition fundamental and applications. Opt Laser

Fire Technol 2020;56:1361–410.

Eng 2006;44:351–97.

[44] Wang Q, Mao B, Stoliarov SI, Sun J. A review of lithium ion battery failure

[80] Phuoc TX. An experimental and numerical study of laser-induced spark in air. Opt

mechanisms and fire prevention strategies. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2019;73:
95–131.

[45] Suzuki S, Manzello SL. Characteristics of firebrands collected from actual urban

fires. Fire Technol 2018;54:1533–46.

[46] Flannigan MD, Stocks BJ, Wotton BM. Climate change and forest fires. Sci Total

Environ 2000;262:221–9.

[47] Liu N, Lei J, Gao W, Chen H, Xie X. Combustion dynamics of large-scale wildfires.

Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:157–98.

[48] Guibaud A, Legros G, Consalvi J-L, Torero J. Fire safety in spacecraft: past

incidents and Deep Space challenges. Acta Astronaut 2022.

[49] Nakamura Y, Aoki A. Irradiated ignition of solid materials in reduced pressure

atmosphere with various oxygen concentrations–for fire safety in space habitats.
Adv Space Res 2008;41:777–82.

[50] Troitzsch JH. Fires, statistics, ignition sources, and passive fire protection

measures. J Fire Sci 2016;34:171–98.

Laser Eng 2005;43:113–29.

[81] Srivastava DK, Weinrotter M, Iskra K, Agarwal AK, Wintner E. Characterisation of

laser ignition in hydrogen–air mixtures in a combustion bomb. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2009;34:2475–82.

[82] Alger T, Mehta D, Chadwell C, Roberts C. Laser ignition in a pre-mixed engine:
the effect of focal volume and energy density on stability and the lean operating
limit. 2005. Report No. 0148-7191, SAE Technical Paper.

[83] Morsy MH. Review and recent developments of laser ignition for internal

combustion engines applications. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2012;16:4849–75.
[84] Law C, Ishizuka S, Cho P. On the opening of premixed Bunsen flame tips. Combust

Sci Technol 1982;28:89–96.

[85] Buckmaster J. Edge-flames. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2002;28:435–75.
[86] Matalon M. Flame dynamics. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32:57–82.
[87] Shepherd JE. Detonation in gases. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32:83–98.
[88] Lee JH. The detonation phenomenon. Cambridge University Press; 2008.
[89] Clarke JF, Kassoy DR, Riley N. On the direct initiation of a plane detonation wave.

Proc. Math. Phys. 1986;408:129–48.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117439

D. Yu and Z. Chen

[90] Lee J, Higgins A. Comments on criteria for direct initiation of detonation. Philos.

[128] Song J, Sunwoo M. Flame kernel formation and propagation modelling in spark

Trans. Royal Soc. A . 1999;357:3503–21.

[91] Oran ES, Gamezo VN. Origins of the deflagration-to-detonation transition in gas-

phase combustion. Combust Flame 2007;148:4–47.

[92] Liberman M, Ivanov M, Kiverin A, Kuznetsov M, Chukalovsky A, Rakhimova T.

Deflagration-to-detonation transition in highly reactive combustible mixtures.
Acta Astronaut 2010;67:688–701.

ignition engines. P I MECH ENG D-J AUT 2001;215:105–14.

[129] Eisazadeh-Far K, Parsinejad F, Metghalchi H, Keck JC. On flame kernel formation
and propagation in premixed gases. Combust Flame 2010;157:2211–21.
[130] Reddy H, Abraham J. Ignition kernel development studies relevant to lean-burn

natural-gas engines. Fuel 2010;89:3262–71.

[131] Liu J, Wang F, Li G, Kuthi A, Gutmark EJ, Ronney PD, Gundersen MA. Transient

[93] Zeldovich YB. Regime classification of an exothermic reaction with nonuniform

plasma ignition. IEEE Trans Plasma Sci 2005;33:326–7.

initial conditions. Combust Flame 1980;39:211–4.

[132] Arpacı VS, Ko Y, Lim MT, Lee HS. Spark kernel development in constant volume

[94] Bartenev A, Gelfand B. Spontaneous initiation of detonations. Prog Energy

combustion. Combust Flame 2003;135:315–22.

Combust Sci 2000;26:29–55.

[133] Arpacı VS, Lee HS, Zeng P. On inductive ignition. Combust Flame 2005;141:

[95] Lee J, Knystautas R, Yoshikawa N. Photochemical initiation of gaseous

180–5.

detonations. Acta Astronaut 1978;5:971–82.

[96] Clavin P, Searby G. Combustion waves and fronts in flows: flames, shocks,

detonations, ablation fronts and explosion of stars. Cambridge University Press;
2016.

[97] Clavin P. Quasi-isobaric ignition near the flammability limits. Flame balls and

self-extinguishing flames. Combust Flame 2017;175:80–90.

[134] Lee JH. The gas dynamics of explosions. Cambridge University Press; 2016.
[135] Bradley D, Sheppard C, Suardjaja I, Woolley R. Fundamentals of high-energy

spark ignition with lasers. Combust Flame 2004;138:55–77.

[136] MacArt JF, Wang JM, Popov PP, Freund JB. Detailed simulation of laser-induced
ignition, spherical-flame acceleration, and the origins of hydrodynamic
instability. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:2341–9.

[98] Zhang A. Combustion initiation by electrical-discharge-induced plasma in lean

[137] Ghosh S, Mahesh K. Numerical simulation of the fluid dynamic effects of laser

and dilute methane-air mixture: experimental and modeling investigation. 2014.

energy deposition in air. J Fluid Mech 2008;605:329–54.

[99] Lee J, Moen I. The mechanism of transition from deflagration to detonation in

[138] Takita K, Shishido K, Kurumada K. Ignition in a supersonic flow by a plasma jet of

vapor cloud explosions. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1980;6:359–89.

mixed feedstock including CH4. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:2383–9.

[100] Ciccarelli G, Dorofeev S. Flame acceleration and transition to detonation in ducts.

Prog Energy Combust Sci 2008;34:499–550.

[101] Tse S, He L, Law CK. A computational study of the transition from localized

ignition to flame ball in lean hydrogen/air mixtures. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:
1917–24.

[102] Shy SS. Spark ignition transitions in premixed turbulent combustion. Prog Energy

Combust Sci 2023;98:101099.

[103] Babrauskas V. Ignition: a century of research and an assessment of our current

status. J Fire Protect Eng 2007;17:165–83.

[104] Patane P, Nandgaonkar M. Multipoint laser ignition system and its applications to

[139] Lin B, Wu Y, Zhang Z, Bian D, Jin D. Ignition enhancement of lean propane/air
mixture by multi-channel discharge plasma under low pressure. Appl Therm Eng
2019;148:1171–82.

[140] Kobtsev VD, Kostritsa SA, Pelevkin AV, Smirnov VV, Starik AM, Titova NS,

Torokhov SA, Vereshchagin KA, Volkov SY. Ignition and early stage combustion
of H2–O2 mixture upon the photodissociation of O2 molecules by UV laser
radiation: experimental and numerical study. Combust Flame 2019;200:32–43.
[141] Ko Y, Arpaci VS, Anderson R. Spark ignition of propane-air mixtures near the

minimum ignition energy: Part II. A model development. Combust Flame 1991;
83:88–105.

IC engines. Opt Laser Technol 2020;130:106305.

[142] Ko Y, Anderson R, Arpaci VS. Spark ignition of propane-air mixtures near the

[105] Starikovskiy A, Aleksandrov N. Plasma-assisted ignition and combustion. Prog

Energy Combust Sci 2013;39:61–110.

[106] Ju Y, Sun W. Plasma assisted combustion: dynamics and chemistry. Prog Energy

Combust Sci 2015;48:21–83.

[107] Li M, Wang Z, Xu R, Zhang X, Chen Z, Wang Q. Advances in plasma-assisted

ignition and combustion for combustors of aerospace engines. Aero Sci Technol
2021;117:106952.

[108] Yu S, Zheng M. Future gasoline engine ignition: a review on advanced concepts.

Int J Engine Res 2021;22:1743–75.

[109] Yu D, Chen Z. Theoretical analysis on the transient ignition of a premixed

expanding flame in a quiescent mixture. J Fluid Mech 2021;924:A22.

[110] Seers P. Spark ignition: an experimental and numerical investigation. The

University of Texas at Austin; 2003.

[111] Bane SPM. Spark ignition: experimental and numerical investigation with

application to aviation safety. California Institute of Technology; 2010.
[112] Kassoy D. Non-diffusive ignition of a gaseous reactive mixture following time-

resolved, spatially distributed energy deposition. Combust Theor Model 2014;18:
101–16.

[113] Lian H, Martz J, Maldonado B, Stefanopoulou A, Zaseck K, Wilkie J, Nitulescu O,
Ehara M. Prediction of flame burning velocity at early flame development time
with high exhaust gas recirculation and spark advance. J Eng Gas Turbines Power
2017;139.

minimum ignition energy: Part I. An experimental study. Combust Flame 1991;
83:75–87.

[143] Wang F, Liu J, Sinibaldi J, Brophy C, Kuthi A, Jiang C, Ronney P, Gundersen MA.
Transient plasma ignition of quiescent and flowing air/fuel mixtures. IEEE Trans
Plasma Sci 2005;33:844–9.

[144] Chen Z, Ju Y. Theoretical analysis of the evolution from ignition kernel to flame

ball and planar flame. Combust Theor Model 2007;11:427–53.

[145] Bergman TL. Fundamentals of heat and mass transfer. John Wiley & Sons; 2011.
[146] Weinrotter M, Ast G, Kopecek H, Wintner E. An extensive comparison of laser-

induced plasma ignition and conventional spark plug ignition of lean methane-air
mixtures under engine-like conditions. Report No. 0148-7191, SAE Technical
Paper 2005.

[147] Tanoff MA, Smooke MD, Teets RE, Sell JA. Computational and experimental

studies of laser-induced thermal ignition in premixed ethylene-oxidizer mixtures.
Combust Flame 1995;103:253–80.

[148] Wu M-S, Ronney P, Ju Y. Numerical simulation of flame balls with radiative
reabsorption effects. 38th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit 2000:851.

[149] Ju Y, Masuya G, Ronney PD. Effects of radiative emission and absorption on the
propagation and extinction of premixed gas flames. Proc Combust Inst 1998;27:
2619–26.

[150] Pitaevskii LP, Lifshitz E. Physical kinetics, vol. 10. Butterworth-Heinemann; 2012.
[151] Vazquez-Espi C, Linan A. Thermal-diffusive ignition and flame initiation by a

[114] Lewis B, Von Elbe G. Combustion, flames and explosions of gases. Elsevier; 2012.
[115] Maly R, Vogel M. Initiation and propagation of flame fronts in lean CH4-air

local energy source. Combust Theor Model 2002;6:297.

[152] V ́azquez-Espí C, Li ̃n ́an A. Fast, non-diffusive ignition of a gaseous reacting

mixtures by the three modes of the ignition spark. Proc Combust Inst 1979;17:
821–31.

mixture subject to a point energy source. Combust Theor Model 2001;5:485.

[153] Poludnenko AY, Gardiner TA, Oran ES. Spontaneous transition of turbulent

[116] Kono M, Hatori K, Iinuma K. Investigation on ignition ability of composite sparks

flames to detonations in unconfined media. Phys Rev Lett 2011;107:054501.

in flowing mixtures. Proc Combust Inst 1985;20:133–40.

[154] Oran ES. Understanding explosions–From catastrophic accidents to creation of the

[117] Bane SP, Ziegler JL, Shepherd JE. Investigation of the effect of electrode geometry

universe. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:1–35.

on spark ignition. Combust Flame 2015;162:462–9.

[155] Zhou Z. Flame balls at earth gravity. Technische Universiteit Eindhoven; 2017.

[118] Tropina AA, Uddi M, Ju Y. On the effect of nonequilibrium plasma on the

Ph. D. diss.

minimum ignition energy—Part 1: discharge model. IEEE Trans Plasma Sci 2010;
39:615–23.

[156] Daou J, Daou R. Flame balls in mixing layers. Combust Flame 2014;161:2015–24.
[157] Chen Z, Burke MP, Ju Y. Effects of Lewis number and ignition energy on the

[119] Tropina AA, Uddi M, Ju Y. On the effect of nonequilibrium plasma on the
minimum ignition energy: Part 2. IEEE Trans Plasma Sci 2011;39:3283–7.
[120] Han J, Yamashita H. Numerical study of the effects of non-equilibrium plasma on
the ignition delay of a methane–air mixture using detailed ion chemical kinetics.
Combust Flame 2014;161:2064–72.

determination of laminar flame speed using propagating spherical flames. Proc
Combust Inst 2009;32:1253–60.

[158] Nakaya S, Hatori K, Tsue M, Kono M, Segawa D, Kadota T. Numerical analysis on

flame kernel in spark ignition methane/air mixtures. J Propul Power 2011;27:
363–70.

[121] Willems H, Sierens R. Modeling the initial growth of the plasma and flame kernel

[159] Kassoy D. The response of a compressible gas to extremely rapid transient,

in SI engines. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2003;125:479–84.

[122] Kolacinski Z. Modelling of short arc re-ignition. J Phys D 1993;26:1941.
[123] Pashley N, Stone R, Roberts G. Ignition system measurement techniques and

correlations for breakdown and arc voltages and currents. 2000. Report No. 0148-
7191, SAE Technical Paper.

[124] Korolev YD, Frants OB, Landl NV, Geyman VG, Matveev IB. Glow-to-spark

transitions in a plasma system for ignition and combustion control. IEEE Trans
Plasma Sci 2007;35:1651–7.

[125] Crispim LW, Hallak PH, Benilov MS, Ballester MY. Modelling spark-plug

discharge in dry air. Combust Flame 2018;198:81–8.

[126] Kono M, Niu K, Tsukamoto T, Ujiie Y. Mechanism of flame kernel formation
produced by short duration sparks. Proc Combust Inst 1989;22:1643–9.

[127] Liou D, Santavicca DA. A model for flame kernel growth at aircraft relight

conditions. Proc Combust Inst 1994;25:261–8.

spatially resolved energy addition: an asymptotic formulation. J Eng Math 2010;
68:249–62.

[160] Akindele O, Bradley D, Mak P, McMahon M. Spark ignition of turbulent gases.

Combust Flame 1982;47:129–55.

[161] Champion M, Deshaies B, Joulin G, Kinoshita K. Spherical flame initiation: theory
versus experiments for lean propane-air mixtures. Combust Flame 1986;65:
319–37.

[162] Zhou Z, Shoshin Y, Hern ́andez-P ́erez FE, van Oijen JA, de Goey LP. Effect of Lewis
number on ball-like lean limit flames. Combust Flame 2018;188:77–89.
[163] Tromans P, Furzeland R. An analysis of Lewis number and flow effects on the

ignition of premixed gases. Proc Combust Inst 1988;21:1891–7.

[164] Kelley AP, Jomaas G, Law CK. Critical radius for sustained propagation of spark-

ignited spherical flames. Combust Flame 2009;156:1006–13.

[165] Peters N. Turbulent combustion. Meas Sci Technol 2001;12:2022. 2022.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117440

D. Yu and Z. Chen

[166] Katta VR, Bonebrake JM, Blunck DL, Ombrello TM. Propagation of ignition kernel

in CO2-diluted, CH4/air mixtures. Combust Flame 2021;229:111380.

[167] Bonebrake JM, Blunck DL, Lefkowitz JK, Ombrello TM. The effect of nanosecond
pulsed high frequency discharges on the temperature evolution of ignition
kernels. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:5561–8.

[168] Lefkowitz JK, Ombrello T. An exploration of inter-pulse coupling in nanosecond

pulsed high frequency discharge ignition. Combust Flame 2017;180:136–47.

[169] Shy SS, Chen YR, Lin B-L, Maznoy A. Ignition enhancement and deterioration by
nanosecond repetitively pulsed discharges in a randomly-stirred lean n-butane/
air mixture at various inter-electrode gaps. Combust Flame 2021;231:111506.

[170] Nguyen M, Shy S, Chen Y, Lin B, Huang S, Liu C. Conventional spark versus
nanosecond repetitively pulsed discharge for a turbulence facilitated ignition
phenomenon. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:2801–8.

[203] Buckmaster J, Joulin G, Ronney P. The structure and stability of nonadiabatic
flame balls: II. Effects of far-field losses. Combust Flame 1991;84:411–22.
[204] Buckmaster J, Weeratunga S. The stability and structure of flame-bubbles.

Combust Sci Technol 1983;35:287–96.

[205] Ronney PD. Near-limit flame structures at low Lewis number. Combust Flame

1990;82:1–14.

[206] Ronney P, Whaling K, Abbud-Madrid A, Gatto J, Pisowicz V. Stationary premixed
flames in spherical and cylindrical geometries. AIAA J 1994;32:569–77.
[207] Shah A, Thatcher R, Dold J. Stability of a spherical flame ball in a porous medium.

Combust Theor Model 2000;4:511.

[208] Lee C, Buckmaster J. The structure and stability of flame balls: a near-

equidiffusional flame analysis. SIAM J Appl Math 1991;51:1315–26.

[209] Ronney PD. Effect of chemistry and transport properties on near-limit flames at

[171] Kondo S, Takahashi A, Tokuhashi K. Calculation of minimum ignition energy of

microgravity. Combust Sci Technol 1988;59:123–41.

premixed gases. J Hazard Mater 2003;103:11–23.

[210] Daou J, Al-Malki F, Ronney P. Generalized flame balls. Combust Theor Model

[172] Frendi A, Sibulkin M. Dependence of minimum ignition energy on ignition

2009;13:269–94.

parameters. Combust Sci Technol 1990;73:395–413.

[173] Kumamoto A, Iseki H, Ono R, Oda T. Measurement of minimum ignition energy in
hydrogen-oxygen-nitrogen premixed gas by spark discharge. In: J Phys Conf ser.
IOP Publishing; 2011, 012039.

[174] Ono R, Oda T. Measurement of OH density and gas temperature in incipient
spark-ignited hydrogen–air flame. Combust Flame 2008;152:69–79.

[175] Ono R, Nifuku M, Fujiwara S, Horiguchi S, Oda T. Minimum ignition energy of
hydrogen–air mixture: effects of humidity and spark duration. J Electrost 2007;
65:87–93.

[176] Kurdyumov V, Blasco J, S ́anchez P ́erez AL, Li ̃n ́an Martínez A. On the calculation

of the minimum ignition energy. Combust Flame 2004;136:394–7.

[211] Joulin G. Point-source initiation of lean spherical flames of light reactants: an

asymptotic theory. Combust Sci Technol 1985;43:99–113.

[212] Champion M, Deshaies B, Joulin G. Relative influences of convective and diffusive

transports during spherical flame initiation. Combust Flame 1988;74:161–70.

[213] Herweg R, Maly R. A fundamental model for flame kernel formation in SI engines.

SAE Trans 1992:1947–76.

[214] Hern ́andez-P ́erez FE, Oostenrijk B, Shoshin Y, van Oijen JA, de Goey LP.

Formation, prediction and analysis of stationary and stable ball-like flames at
ultra-lean and normal-gravity conditions. Combust Flame 2015;162:932–43.

[215] Joulin G. Preferential diffusion and the initiation of lean flames of light fuels.

SIAM J Appl Math 1987;47:998–1016.

[177] De Soete G. Effects of geometrical and aerodynamic induced flame stretch on the

[216] Buckmaster J, Joulin G. Radial propagation of premixed flames and t behavior.

propagation of spark fired premixed flames in early stages. Proc Combust Inst
1985;20:161–8.

[178] Adelman HG. A time dependent theory of spark ignition. Proc Combust Inst 1981;

18:1333–42.

[179] Sloane TM, Ronney PD. A comparison of ignition phenomena modelled with
detailed and simplified kinetics. Combust Sci Technol 1993;88:1–13.
[180] Essmann S, Markus D, Maas U. Investigation of the spark channel of electrical

discharges near the minimum ignition energy. Plasma Sci Technol 2016;3:
116–21.

[181] Kim HH, Won SH, Santner J, Chen Z, Ju Y. Measurements of the critical initiation
radius and unsteady propagation of n-decane/air premixed flames. Proc Combust
Inst 2013;34:929–36.

[182] Yu D, Chen Z. Theoretical analysis on the forced ignition of a quiescent mixture by

repetitive heating pulse. Proc Combust Inst 2023;39:1881–91.

Combust Flame 1989;78:275–86.

[217] He L, Law C. On the dynamics of transition from propagating flame to stationary

flame ball. 37th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit 1999:325.
[218] Han W, Chen Z. Effects of Soret diffusion on spherical flame initiation and

propagation. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2015;82:309–15.

[219] Li C, Wu Y, Chen Z. Effects of reaction reversibility on ignition and flame

propagation. J Math Chem 2015;53:386–401.

[220] Chen Z. On the accuracy of laminar flame speeds measured from outwardly

propagating spherical flames: methane/air at normal temperature and pressure.
Combust Flame 2015;162:2442–53.

[221] Egolfopoulos FN, Hansen N, Ju Y, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K, Law CK, Qi F. Advances

and challenges in laminar flame experiments and implications for combustion
chemistry. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2014;43:36–67.

[222] Faghih M, Chen Z. The constant-volume propagating spherical flame method for

[183] Ng HD, Lee JH. Comments on explosion problems for hydrogen safety. J Loss Prev

laminar flame speed measurement. Sci Bull 2016;61:1296–310.

Process Ind 2008;21:136–46.

[184] Li ̃n ́an A, Williams FA. Fundamental aspects of combustion. Oxford University

Press; 1993.

[185] Williams FA. Combustion theory. CRC Press; 2018.
[186] Law C. Transient ignition of a combustible by stationary isothermal bodies.

Combust Sci Technol 1979;19:237–42.

[187] Law CK. Heat and mass transfer in combustion: fundamental concepts and
analytical techniques. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1984;10:295–318.
[188] Livengood JC, Wu PC. Correlation of autoignition phenomena in internal

[223] Han W, Dai P, Gou X, Chen Z. A review of laminar flame speeds of hydrogen and
syngas measured from propagating spherical flames. Applications in Energy and
Combustion Science 2020;1:100008.

[224] Lai CC, Charonko JJ, Prestridge K. A K ́arm ́an–Howarth–Monin equation for

variable-density turbulence. J Fluid Mech 2018;843:382–418.

[225] Yu D, Zhang P. Circulation-controlled firewhirls with differential diffusion.

Combust Flame 2018;189:288–99.

[226] Liang W, Law CK, Chen Z. Ignition of hydrogen/air mixtures by a heated kernel:

role of Soret diffusion. Combust Flame 2018;197:416–22.

combustion engines and rapid compression machines. Proc Combust Inst 1955;5:
347–56.

[227] Chen Z. On the extraction of laminar flame speed and Markstein length from
outwardly propagating spherical flames. Combust Flame 2011;158:291–300.

[189] Khaled F, Badra J, Farooq A. Ignition delay time correlation of fuel blends based

[228] Clavin P. Dynamic behavior of premixed flame fronts in laminar and turbulent

on Livengood-Wu description. Fuel 2017;209:776–86.

flows. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1985;11:1–59.

[190] Miyoshi A. Kinetics of autoignition: a simple intuitive interpretation and its

relation to the Livengood–Wu integral. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2018;20:10762–9.
[191] Heywood JB. Internal combustion engine fundamentals. McGraw-Hill Education;

2018.

[192] Yates A, Bell A, Swarts A. Insights relating to the autoignition characteristics of

alcohol fuels. Fuel 2010;89:83–93.

[193] Hern ́andez JJ, Lapuerta M, Sanz-Argent J. Autoignition prediction capability of

the Livengood–Wu correlation applied to fuels of commercial interest. Int J
Engine Res 2014;15:817–29.

[194] Pan J, Zhao P, Law CK, Wei H. A predictive Livengood–Wu correlation for two-

stage ignition. Int J Engine Res 2016;17:825–35.

[195] Tao M, Han D, Zhao P. An alternative approach to accommodate detailed ignition

chemistry in combustion simulation. Combust Flame 2017;176:400–8.
[196] Zeldovich I, Barenblatt GI, Librovich V, Makhviladze G. Mathematical theory of

combustion and explosions. 1985.

[229] Markstein GH. Experimental and theoretical studies of flame-front stability.

Dynamics of curved fronts. Elsevier; 1988. p. 413–23.

[230] Kelley AP, Law CK. Nonlinear effects in the extraction of laminar flame speeds
from expanding spherical flames. Combust Flame 2009;156:1844–51.
[231] Wu F, Liang W, Chen Z, Ju Y, Law CK. Uncertainty in stretch extrapolation of

laminar flame speed from expanding spherical flames. Proc Combust Inst 2015;
35:663–70.

[232] Kelley AP, Bechtold JK, Law CK. Premixed flame propagation in a confining vessel

with weak pressure rise. J Fluid Mech 2012;691:26–51.

[233] Liang W, Wu F, Law CK. Extrapolation of laminar flame speeds from stretched

flames: role of finite flame thickness. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:1137–43.
[234] Westbrook CK. Chemical kinetics of hydrocarbon ignition in practical combustion

systems. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:1563–77.

[235] Dold J, Thatcher R, Omon-Arancibia A, Redman J. From one-step to chain-

branching premixed flame asymptotics. Proc Combust Inst 2002;29:1519–26.

[197] Williams F. Theory of combustion in laminar flows. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 1971;3:

[236] Dold J. Premixed flames modelled with thermally sensitive intermediate

171–88.

[198] Zhang W, Gou X, Chen Z. Effects of water vapor dilution on the minimum ignition
energy of methane, n-butane and n-decane at normal and reduced pressures. Fuel
2017;187:111–6.

[199] Deshaies B, Joulin G. On the initiation of a spherical flame kernel. Combust Sci

Technol 1984;37:99–116.

[200] Zeldovich YB. The theory of combustion and detonation. Academy of Sciences;

1944.

[201] Kurdyumov VN, Jim ́enez C, S ́anchez-Sanz M. Flame initiation near a cold

isothermal wall: ignition by an instantaneous thermal dipole. Combust Flame
2021;234:111643.

[202] Fern ́andez-Tarrazo E, S ́anchez AL, Li ̃n ́an A, Williams F. The structure of lean

hydrogen-air flame balls. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:1203–10.

branching kinetics. Combust Theor Model 2007;11:909–48.

[237] Zhang H, Chen Z. Spherical flame initiation and propagation with thermally
sensitive intermediate kinetics. Combust Flame 2011;158:1520–31.

[238] Zhang H, Guo P, Chen Z. Critical condition for the ignition of reactant mixture by

radical deposition. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:3267–75.

[239] Wang Y, Guo P, Chen H, Chen Z. Numerical modeling of ignition enhancement by

repetitive nanosecond discharge in a hydrogen/air mixture II: forced ignition.
J Phys D 2020;54:065502.

[240] Li H, Zhang H, Chen Z. Effects of endothermic chain-branching reaction on
spherical flame initiation and propagation. Combust Theor Model 2019;23:
496–514.

[241] Aggarwal SK. Single droplet ignition: theoretical analyses and experimental

findings. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2014;45:79–107.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117441

D. Yu and Z. Chen

[242] Aggarwal SK. A review of spray ignition phenomena: present status and future

research. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1998;24:565–600.

[243] Sirignano WA. Fluid dynamics and transport of droplets and sprays. Cambridge

university press; 2010.

[244] Yu D, Chen Z. Theoretical analysis on droplet vaporization at elevated

temperatures and pressures. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2021;164:120542.

[271] Zhang T, Susa AJ, Hanson RK, Ju Y. Two-dimensional simulation of cool and
double flame formation induced by the laser ignition under shock-tube
conditions. Proc Combust Inst 2023;39:2017–25.

[272] Wang Y, Han W, Zirwes T, Zhang F, Bockhorn H, Chen Z. Effects of low-

temperature chemical reactions on ignition kernel development and flame
propagation in a DME-air mixing layer. Proc Combust Inst 2022.

[245] Li Q, Shu C, Zhang H. On the evolution of fuel droplet evaporation zone and its

[273] Ballal DR, Lefebvre AH. The influence of flow parameters on minimum ignition

interaction with flame front in ignition of spray flames. Combust Theor Model
2022;26:1131–58.

energy and quenching distance. Proc Combust Inst 1975;15:1473–81.
[274] Jo S, Gore JP. Laser ignition energy for turbulent premixed hydrogen air jets.

[246] Zhuang Y, Zhang H. Effects of water droplet evaporation on initiation,

Combust Flame 2022;236:111767.

propagation and extinction of premixed spherical flames. Int J Multiphas Flow
2019;117:114–29.

[247] Zhuang Y, Zhang H. On flame bifurcation and multiplicity in consistently

propagating spherical flame and droplet evaporation fronts. Int J Multiphas Flow
2020;125:103220.

[275] Baum M, Poinsot T. Effects of mean flow on premixed flame ignition. Combust Sci

Technol 1995;106:19–39.

[276] Chen X, Xie S, B ̈ottler H, Scholtissek A, Han W, Yu D, Hasse C, Chen Z. Effects of
electrodes and imposed flow on forced ignition in laminar premixed hydrogen/air
mixtures with large Lewis number. Proc Combust Inst 2022.

[248] Crowe C, Sommerfeld M, Tsuji Y. Multiphase flows with droplets and particles.

[277] Wu F, Saha A, Chaudhuri S, Law CK. Facilitated ignition in turbulence through

second ed. CRC Press; 2011.

differential diffusion. Phys Rev Lett 2014;113:024503.

[249] Li Q, Liu C, Zhang H, Wang M, Chen Z. Initiation and propagation of spherical

[278] Shy SS, Nguyen MT, Huang S-Y, Liu C-C. Is turbulent facilitated ignition through

premixed flames with inert solid particles. Combust Theor Model 2020;24:
606–31.

[250] Singh G, Clarke JF. Transient phenomena in the initiation of a mechanically

driven plane detonation. Proc. Math. Phys. 1992;438:23–46.

[251] Linan A, S ́anchez AL, Jimenez-Alvarez JL. The coupling of motion and conductive
heating of a gas by localized energy sources. SIAM J Appl Math 2003;63:937–61.

[252] Fernandez-Tarrazo E, Sanchez-Sanz M, S ́anchez AL, Williams FA. Minimum
ignition energy of methanol–air mixtures. Combust Flame 2016;171:234–6.
[253] Yu D, Chen Z. Theoretical analysis on the forced ignition of a quiescent mixture by

differential diffusion independent of spark gap? Combust Flame 2017;185:1–3.
[279] Saha A, Yang S, Law CK. On the competing roles of turbulence and differential

diffusion in facilitated ignition. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:2383–90.

[280] Yu C, Markus D, Schießl R, Maas U. Numerical study on spark ignition of laminar

lean premixed methane-air flames in counterflow configuration. Combust Sci
Technol 2021:1–25.

[281] Xie S, Chen X, B ̈ottler H, Scholtissek A, Hasse C, Chen Z. Forced ignition of a rich

hydrogen/air mixture in a laminar counterflow: a computational study. Flow,
Turbul Combust 2023;110:441–56.

repetitive heating pulse. Proc Combust Inst 2022.

[282] Wang Z, Liu H, Reitz RD. Knocking combustion in spark-ignition engines. Prog

[254] Xu D, Shneider M, Lacoste D, Laux C. Thermal and hydrodynamic effects of

nanosecond discharges in atmospheric pressure air. J Phys D 2014;47:235202.
[255] Lefkowitz JK, Hammack SD, Carter CD, Ombrello TM. Elevated OH production

from NPHFD and its effect on ignition. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:6671–8.

[256] Castela M, Stepanyan S, Fiorina B, Coussement A, Gicquel O, Darabiha N,

Laux CO. A 3-D DNS and experimental study of the effect of the recirculating flow
pattern inside a reactive kernel produced by nanosecond plasma discharges in a
methane-air mixture. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:4095–103.

[257] Lin B-x, Wu Y, Zhang Z-b, Chen Z. Multi-channel nanosecond discharge plasma
ignition of premixed propane/air under normal and sub-atmospheric pressures.
Combust Flame 2017;182:102–13.

[258] Zheng M, Yu S, Xie K. Multi-coil spark ignition system. Patent 9 2016;441:604.

USA.

[259] Nishiyama A, Ikeda Y, Serizawa T. Lean Limit Expansion up to Lambda 2 by

Multi-Point Microwave Discharge Igniter, Ignition Systems for Gasoline Engines:
Internationale Tagung Zündsysteme für Ottomotoren. 2018. p. 247.

[260] Li Z, Han W, Liu D, Chen Z. Laminar flame propagation and ignition properties of
premixed iso-octane/air with hydrogen addition. Fuel 2015;158:443–50.

[261] Iafrate N, Matrat M, Zaccardi J-M. Numerical investigations on hydrogen-

enhanced combustion in ultra-lean gasoline spark-ignition engines. Int J Engine
Res 2021;22:375–89.

[262] Wang Y, Han W, Chen Z. Effects of fuel stratification on ignition kernel

development and minimum ignition energy of n-decane/air mixtures. Proc
Combust Inst 2019;37:1623–30.

[263] Chen X, Peng W, Gillard P, Courty L, Sankhe ML, Bernard S, Wu Y, Wang Y,

Chen Z. Effects of fuel decomposition and stratification on the forced ignition of a
static flammable mixture. Combust Theor Model 2021;25:813–31.

[264] S ́anchez AL, Williams FA. Recent advances in understanding of flammability
characteristics of hydrogen. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2014;41:1–55.
[265] Li S, Liang W, Yao Q, Law CK. An analysis of the ignition limits of premixed

hydrogen/oxygen by heated nitrogen in counterflow. Combust Flame 2018;198:
230–9.

[266] Ju Y, Reuter CB, Yehia OR, Farouk TI, Won SH. Dynamics of cool flames. Prog

Energy Combust Sci 2019;75:100787.

[267] Ju Y. Understanding cool flames and warm flames. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:

83–119.

[268] Zhang W, Faqih M, Gou X, Chen Z. Numerical study on the transient evolution of

a premixed cool flame. Combust Flame 2018;187:129–36.

[269] Yang Q, Zhao P. Minimum ignition energy and propagation dynamics of laminar

premixed cool flames. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:2315–22.

[270] Wang Y, Zhang H, Zirwes T, Zhang F, Bockhorn H, Chen Z. Ignition of dimethyl
ether/air mixtures by hot particles: impact of low temperature chemical
reactions. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:2459–66.

Energy Combust Sci 2017;61:78–112.

[283] Clarke JF. On changes in the structure of steady plane flames as their speed

increases. Combust Flame 1983;50:125–38.

[284] Kagan L, Sivashinsky G. Hydrodynamic aspects of end-gas autoignition. Proc

Combust Inst 2013;34:857–63.

[285] Zhang T, Ju Y. Structures and propagation speeds of autoignition-assisted

premixed n-heptane/air cool and warm flames at elevated temperatures and
pressures. Combust Flame 2020;211:8–17.

[286] Yang L, Wang Y, Chen Z. Comparison of combustion duration and end-gas

autoignition in inwardly and outwardly propagating flames induced by different
ignition configurations. Combust Theor Model 2022:1–15.

Dehai Yu is an associate professor at Institute of Mechanics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his bachelor’s de-
gree  from  Harbin  Institute  of  Technology,  and  Ph.D.  degree
from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. After that, he was
a  postdoc  fellow  and  an  associate  researcher  at  Peking  Uni-
versity.  Dr.  Yu’s  research  focuses  on  theoretical  studies  of
fundamental combustion processes, including premixed flame
ignition, dynamics of premixed and non-premixed flames, and
droplet vaporization  and combustion. His  work on premixed
flame  ignition  theory  has  been  published  on  Journal  of  Fluid
Mechanics, Combustion and Flame, and Proceedings of the Com-
bustion Institute.

Zheng Chen is a professor at Peking University. He obtained
his bachelor’s and master’s degrees from Tsinghua University,
and  completed  his  Ph.D.  at  Princeton  University.  Dr.  Chen’s
research focuses on the flame dynamics of fundamental com-
bustion  processes.  He  was  awarded  the  Bernard  Lewis
Fellowship and Hiroshi Tsuju Early Career Researcher Award
from  the  Combustion  Institute. Additionally,  he  received  the
Distinguished Paper Award of the 39th International Sympo-
sium on Combustion. He is a fellow of the Combustion Insti-
tute, and currently serves on the Board of Directors of both the
Combustion Institute and the Institute for Dynamics of Explo-
sions  and  Reactive  Systems.  He  also  serves  as  the  associate
editor for Combustion and Flame.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience104(2024)10117442
