Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Selective ring-opening of polycyclic to monocyclic aromatics: A data- and
technology-oriented critical review

Gontzal Lezcano a, Idoia Hita a, Yerraya Attada a, Anissa Bendjeriou-Sedjerari a, Ali H. Jawad b,
Alberto Lozano-Ballesteros c, Miao Sun b,**, Noor Al-Mana b, Mohammed AlAmer b,
Eman Z. Albaher b, Pedro Casta ̃no a, d,*
a Multiscale Reaction Engineering, KAUST Catalysis Center (KCC), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
b Research and Development Center, Technology Oversight & Coordination, Saudi Arabian Oil Company (Saudi Aramco), Dhahran, 31311, Saudi Arabia
c Technology Strategy & Planning Department, Technology Oversight & Coordination, Saudi Arabian Oil Company (Saudi Aramco), Dhahran, 31311, Saudi Arabia
d Chemical Engineering Program, Physical Science and Engineering (PSE) Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi
Arabia

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Christof Schultz

Keywords:
Polyarenes and polyaromatics (PAH)
Hydrocracking
Dearomatization
Aromatic ring-opening
BTX

Polyaromatic  hydrocarbons,  polycyclic  aromatics  or  polyarenes  are  a  major  (by-)product  fraction  of  multiple
classical, waste, and bio-refinery operations. They have an extremely negative environmental impact, a minimal
market,  and  a  lowering  demand.  Parallelly,  lowly  alkylated  single  ring  arenes  or  monoaromatics  (benzene,
toluene, and xylenes, the so-called BTX fraction) are highly demanded due to their applications as chemicals or
fuels. Herein, we review the status of applied polyaromatic selective ring-opening (SRO) by hydrocracking into
monoaromatics.  This  review  addresses  the  involved mechanisms,  applicable  catalysts, and  reported  modeling
approaches  for  SRO.  Applying  the  multivariate  analysis  to  the  results  reported  in  the  literature  using  model
molecules,  we  showcase  the  limitations  for  extrapolating  the  obtained  knowledge  to  realistic  polyaromatic
stream processing. We also provide a statistical evaluation of the suitability of several polyaromatic streams for
their SRO processing and assess the markets, usage, and production routes for monocyclic aromatics. Finally, the
technologies  of  these  processes  are  also  evaluated  and  compared,  while  the  most  promising  one  is  discussed
further based on process simulations and a techno-economic assessment.

1. Introduction

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) originate from biological
processes, as products of the incomplete combustion of natural materials
(e.g.,  forest  fires)  or  artificial  combustion  sources  (e.g.,  automobile
emissions,  cigarette  smoke  and  incinerators)  [1].  The  most  common
origin of polyaromatics is  the petrogenic (derived from crude  oil and
coal  maturation),  particularly  in  urban  and  developed  areas.  This  is
because petrogenic polyaromatics are emitted through the combustion
and  storage  of  crude  oil-derived  feeds.  The  concentrations  of  these
species in the heaviest crudes can be up to 7 wt%, and, in general, their
content increases with the specific gravity of the crude [2]. However,
their proportion is significantly higher in refined streams and products
of pyrolysis (from biomass, tires or plastics) [3,4].

Polyaromatics  are  non-polar  species  having  only  carbon  and
hydrogen. Their chemical structure comprises two or more fused aro-
matic  rings  bonded  in  different  arrangements  with  a  pair  of  carbon
atoms shared among their rings. Several hundred polyaromatics have
been  identified;  Fig.  1  shows  the  molecular  structures of  some  of  the
most  abundant  polyaromatics.  As  environmental  pollutants,  poly-
aromatics are concerning because of their mutagenic and carcinogenic
properties, which can potentially harm humans upon exposure [5,6].

Polyaromatics are  present in  many streams  involved  in the  down-
stream  segments  at  traditional  refineries.  Aromatic-rich  streams  are
generally  formed  as  heavy  (often  residual)  byproducts  in  the  most
important  refinery  units:  distillation,  fluid  catalytic  cracking  (FCC),
delayed coking, visbreaking or steam cracking units. These higly aro-
matic  streams  have  a  relatively  low  commercial  value,  but  their

* Corresponding author. Multiscale Reaction Engineering, KAUST Catalysis Center (KCC), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, 23955-

6900, Saudi Arabia.
** Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: miao.sun@aramco.com (M. Sun), pedro.castano@kaust.edu.sa (P. Casta ̃no).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101110
Received 16 January 2023; Received in revised form 18 May 2023; Accepted 17 July 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)101110Availableonline30July20230360-1285/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

G. Lezcano et al.

composition  imparts  potential  for  upgrading  to  lighter  chemicals,
including  (alkylated)  monoaromatics  such  as  benzene,  toluene,  and
xylenes  (BTX).  These  have  potential  as  fuel  blending  and,  simulta-
neously, are valuable building blocks in the petrochemical industry. As
gasoline  blending,  monoaromatics  are  regarded  as  octane  boosters.
However, as they create harmful polyaromatics after their combustion
and given the carcinogenic nature of some of them (particularly ben-
zene) [7–10], their compositions are limited by legislations worldwide.
As  chemicals,  monoaromatics  are  pivotal  platform  chemicals  for  pro-
ducing multiple derivatives. The imbalance in the demand of the three
(benzene, toluene, and xylenes) is corrected through acid-catalyzed re-
actions such as (trans)alkylation, isomerization, and disproportionation
[11,12]. A market analysis indicates a remarkable increase of demand of
BTX worldwide in parallel of that of their downstream products [13].
Recently, considerable progress has been made in developing cata-
lytic strategies to convert heavily aromatic feedstock, either produced as
refinery byproducts or as waste from consumer society. These strategies
seek a more integrated and efficient refinery concept [14,15]. However,
the proposed approaches struggle with handling such heavy feedstock
and its limited reactivity, which can be further hindered by the presence
of  other  heteroatomic  species  [16].  Hydroprocessing  is  a  traditional
catalytic  route  for  upgrading  heavy  aromatic  feedstock.  Using
moderate-to-high temperatures and high partial pressures of hydrogen,
this route has been demonstrated to be efficient for removing pollutants
and heteroatoms, converting saturated compounds, and increasing the
value of a given feedstock overall for better profitability while meeting
increasingly stringent environmental regulations [17,18]. As shown in
Fig. 2, hydroprocessing refers to all processes involving these conditions,
particularly  high  pressure  of  hydrogen,  typically  categorized  from
hydrotreating  (or  hydrotreatment,  HDT)  to  hydrocracking  (HC),

depending on the severity of the process. The type of catalyst, temper-
ature, pressure, partial pressure of hydrogen, and space velocity, among
others,  control  this  severity.  An  intermediate  process  with  high  tech-
nological relevance is the mild hydrocracking (MHC) [19]. By properly
balancing  hydrogen  partial  pressure  and  temperatures  with  catalysts
capable of promoting hydrogenation and cracking reactions, mild hy-
drocracking  can  render  highly  selective  rates  of  ring-opening  of  light
cycle oil with yields of BTX up to 31 wt% as opposed to hydrogenation
conditions (as low as 10 wt%) [20,21].

As indicated in Fig. 2, hydroprocessing involves four different reac-
tion routes: (i) hydrogenation, C=C to C–C; (ii) hydrogenolysis, C–X to C
+ X (X = metals, S, N or O); (iii) isomerization, and (iv) cracking, C–C to
C  + C.  The  mechanistic  aspects  of  C–C  bond  cleavage  reactions  of
cyclopropane compounds within selective ring opening conversion have
been  covered  in  detail  by  Vicente  [22].  Hydrogenation  and  hydro-
genolysis reactions occur on the metallic sites of the catalyst, whereas
isomerization  and  cracking  reactions  are  carbocation-mediated  and
occur on the acidic sites [23]. A broad classification is needed, but a
certain degree of C–C hydrogenolysis on the metallic sites [24,25] and
other  reactions,  such  as  coking,  also  occur.  Hydrogenation  involves
alkene-olefin  hydrogenation,  one  of  the  fastest  reactions  in  hydro-
processing, and aromatics hydrogenation in a later stage as the energy
barrier to break the aromatic resonance is greater than for the olefins.
The latter step is sometimes called hydrodearomatization (HDA) when
targeting the removal of polyaromatics [26]. Hydrogenolysis involves
the removal of heteroatoms from the organic molecules, giving rise to
specific  hydrodemetallization  (HDM),  hydrodesulfurization  (HDS),
hydrodenitrification (HDN) and hydrodeoxygenation (HDO). Cracking
reactions involve dealkylation, ring-opening, and, finally, overcracking,
which are reactions that promote the production of dry gases and some

Fig. 1. Structures of some of the most common polyaromatics.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011102

G. Lezcano et al.

Fig.  2. Scheme  of  processes  and  reactions  involved  in  hydroprocessing,  with  special  focus  on  the  selective  ring-opening  (SRO)  of  polyaromatics  to  (alkylated)
monoaromatics.

liquified petroleum gases (LPG). We use the terminology of the selective
ring-opening (SRO) for the process aiming (alkylated) monoaromatics,
which  should  be  differentiated  from  the  ARINO  process  (aromatic
ring-opening)  referred  to  as  the  cracking  of  monoaromatics  to  an
optimal feedstock for the steam cracking (ethane and propane) [27,28].
SRO is  a particularly interesting process,  as we will elaborate on this
work, given the potential applications of BTX as  fuels and  chemicals.
SRO belongs to the process commonly known as hydrocracking or mild
hydrocracking  and  requires  a  bifunctional  catalyst  with  balanced
metallic-acidic functions. A recent work by Jampaiah et al. [29] presents
a broad coverage of all the catalyst possibilities and addresses in great
detail  the  reaction  mechanisms  involved  in  the  conversion  of  model
polycyclic  molecules.  For  a  more  dedicated  review  of  the  design  of
heterogeneous catalytic systems, the reader is also referred to the work
of Galadima et al. [30]. This review addresses aspects related to catalyst
design and reaction mechanisms and primarily focuses on bridging the
gap of this fundamental research to the applied world. We analyze the
potential  streams  and  link  technologies  through  statistical  analysis,
market evaluations, and process simulations.

This  review  assesses  the  technological  challenges  in  valorizing
polyaromatic-rich  streams  into  monoaromatics  (fuels  or  chemicals),
namely benzene, toluene, and xylenes. First, we provide an overview on
the most relevant aspects concerning the reaction mechanisms involved
in SRO, the keys for a balanced SRO catalyst design and the approaches
reported for the kinetic modeling of this process. We analyze virtually all
the  polyaromatic-rich  streams  in  a  classical  refinery  scheme,  their
market, stability, and suitability for SRO conversion, which to the best of
our knowledge, have yet to be evaluated in any previous review on SRO
conversion.  The  demand  for  alkylated  monoaromatic  products,  their
applications and sources are also analyzed. We perform a critical review
(correlating and cross-correlating the results reported in the literature
on  model  compounds)  from  the  viewpoints  of  the  reaction  networks,
catalysts, and reactors while using multivariate analysis to find the most
important catalyst parameters affecting process performance. The state-
of-the-art  process  technologies  for  SRO  have  also  been  evaluated  in
detail to propose a simulation of the process using one representative
feedstock (pyrolysis fuel oil from a steam cracker). We use these simu-
lations to analyze the limitations and challenges of the process. Finally,
we  present  a  geo-techno-economic  assessment  for  the  technological
deployment and address further challenges.

2. The science of the ring-opening

When  looking  at  the  fundamental  aspects  of  the  ring-opening  of
polyaromatics, it is convenient to look at the research undertaken with

monoaromatics  to  produce  a  potential  feedstock  for  steam  cracking.
These works focused on the hydrogenation of toluene [31], the cracking
of methylcyclohexane [32–38], the hydrocracking of toluene (one-step)
as model components [39,40], and the use of realistic pyrolysis gasoline
[28,41],  which  culminated  in  the  commercial  process  called  ARINO
[27]. These works paved the way for a fundamental understanding of
the  hydrogenation  of  the  aromatic  ring,  followed  by  the  cracking  of
cycloalkenes and the reaction mechanisms present in hydrocracking due
to the presence of hydrogen.

2.1. Reaction mechanism

The reactions taking place during SRO of complex feedstock do not
occur isolated but within complex reaction networks with multiple re-
action  routes  occurring  in  parallel  and  generating  many  synergetic,
neutral, and detrimental interrelationships [14]. Indeed, because of the
complexity of tracking SRO reactivity among significant other parallel
reaction routes, decalin, tetralin, and naphthalene are generally used as
model compounds to assess and compare the performance of different
catalytic materials for SRO [42–45]. Fig. 3a shows the reaction mech-
anism from naphthalene with alternative reaction routes depending on
the production aim: the selective production of BTX chemicals (upper-
most course) or high cetane number chemicals to be blended in auto-
motive  fuel  pools  (lowermost  route).  Although  most  studies  focus
primarily  on  diaromatic  compounds,  triaromatic  compounds  are
essential representatives of anthracene and phenanthrene in industrial
streams. Plausible reaction pathways for forming mono and diaromatic
hydrocarbons  from  the  hydroprocessing  of  anthracene  and  phenan-
threne include (i) central ring hydrogenation (favorable for anthracene)
and (ii) terminal ring hydrogenation (favorable for phenanthrene).

Hydroprocessing  (hydrotreating  and  hydrocracking)  over  bifunc-
tional heterogeneous catalysts is an important industrial technology for
SRO  reactions  involving  streams/compounds  with  high  aromaticity.
Hydrotreating  primarily  comprises  hydrogenation  and  hydrogenolysis
reactions.  Hydrogenation  involves  the  saturation  of  an  olefin  and  an
aromatic by breaking a π-linkage in a carbon-carbon bond. While the
hydrogenation of an olefin is a rapid reaction, the hydrogenation of an
aromatic compound requires considerably higher hydrogen pressures to
efficiently  achieve  saturation  due  to  the  resonance  stabilization  of
π-electrons [46,47]. Furthermore, hydrogenolysis reactions require the
breakage of a σ-linkage in a carbon-X bond, with X (mainly) being either
a  carbon,  sulfur,  nitrogen,  or  oxygen  atom  [48,49].  Finally,  hydro-
cracking  comprises  both  the  hydrotreating  reaction  routes  and  the
cracking  (scission  of  a  carbon-carbon  bond)  of  hydrocarbons  [50],
involving carbenium- or carbonium-ion intermediates that have specific

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011103

G. Lezcano et al.

and  a  shorter  carbenium-ion  in  what  is  known  as  the  classical  bimo-
lecular  cracking  mechanism  or  suffer  hydrogen  transfer  reactions.
Carbonium-ions are more unstable  than their carbenium counterparts
and suffer different scissions in what is known as protolytic cracking,
including α, yielding other species comprising C1 and C2 (which are not
possible through the classical bimolecular cracking mechanism).

Olefins  easily  hydrogenate  into  paraffins  in  hydrocracking  condi-
tions  (Fig.  2),  leading  to  a  reaction  media  that  is  deficient  in  olefins
(which react much faster than paraffins on the acid sites) as compared to
standard  cracking  conditions  (without  hydrogen  and  a  bifunctional
catalyst). As a result, the ratio of carbonium:carbenium-ion is greater in
hydrocracking than in cracking reactions, i.e., the protolytic (or Haag-
Dessau)  cracking  mechanism  is  more  relevant  in  hydrocracking  than
in cracking reactions [33,50,60]. Despite all, the classical bimolecular
cracking  mechanism  is  the  dominant  reaction  pathway  in  both  re-
actions, given the relatively longer stability of its intermediates.

The olefin either cracks or oligomerizes in an acidic site or hydro-
genates over a metallic site. Furthermore, the transient carbenium ion
can be deprotonated on a cutting site to form an olefin that can migrate
into a metallic site to hydrogenate, forming a new paraffin. Other par-
allel  side  reactions  occurring  during  hydroprocessing  and  parallel  to
SRO include product recombination (e.g., olefins reacting with H2S to
form  mercaptans),  catalytic  poisoning  (e.g.,  NH3  or  H2S),  and  coke
formation. The latter has a considerable influence on the efficiency of
SRO due to the formation and deposition of heavy hydrocarbon species
over the active sites of the catalyst and blocking pore access [61,62].
Suitable SRO catalysts require limited acidity to prevent overcracking
and isomerization reactions (Fig. 2); this can limit coke formation re-
actions in favor of a more durable and stable performance [62].

2.2. Catalyst design and configuration

Commonly used metallic functions can be classified into two primary
categories: (i) reduced noble metals (i.e., Pt, Pd, Rh, Ru, and Ir) and (ii)
non-noble transition metals (i.e., Fe, Ni, Mo, Co, and W) which can be
used either in their reduced, sulfide, or phosphide forms depending on
the hydrotreating objective. Porous carriers used as support should have
balanced  acidic  features  (higher  and  stronger  acidity  unlike  hydro-
treating support if the catalyst is intended for hydrocracking purposes)
and high porosity to enhance proper metallic dispersion. Certain most
commonly  used  hydrotreating  supports  include  γ-Al2O3,  amorphous
SiO2-Al2O3 and crystalline zeolites such as HZSM-5 (with straight 0.53
× 0.56 nm channels and sinusoidal ones of 0.51 × 0.55 nm), HY (with
three-directional channels 0.74 nm wide which intersect forming cages
of 1.24 nm diameter), or Hβ (with 0.56 × 0.56 nm and 0.76 × 0.64 nm
channels forming openings of 0.56 × 0.65 nm) for hydrocracking cata-
lysts [59]. In the zeolite arena, the influence of pore topology is critical,
as microporous materials are known to pose severe diffusional limita-
tions for bulky hydrocarbons and present a higher tendency for trapping
coke  precursors  [54].  An  example  of  commonly  used  hydrotreating
catalysts  is  the  Pt/γ-Al2O3  catalyst  used  by  Oh  et  al.  [63]  on  the  hy-
drogenation of PAHs present in the pyrolysis fuel oil cut (obtained after
distillation of crude pyrolysis fuel oil) using a trickle-bed reactor at 50
◦
bar and 300
C. With an optimal Pt loading of 1%, they report a constant
yield of ca. 55% of saturated products for 10 h of reaction.

Regarding zeolites, and in a study delving into the hydrocracking of
light cycle oil, Gutierrez et al. [64,65] demonstrated that after an initial
deactivation phase due to sulfur poisoning and coke deposition, bime-
tallic Pt-Pd catalysts are more stable than their monometallic counter-
parts. An HY-supported Pt-Pd catalyst could maintain a hydrocracking
conversion  of  >80%  in  the  steady  reaction  state  with  >70%  sulfur
removal.  The  performance  of  this  material  upon  coke  formation  is
remarkable,  considering  the  microporosity  of  the  catalyst  (Vmicro  ca.
63%, dp = 5 nm) and the potential diffusional limitations it could pose.
Furthermore, they also proved that increasing the hydrocracking pres-
sure  up  to  75  bar  and  operating  at  low  weight  hourly  space  velocity

Fig. 3. (a) Proposed mechanism for the ring-opening of naphthalene as a model
compound  and  (b)  scheme  of  the  dual  reaction  mechanism  for  the  hydro-
cracking of paraffins (adapted from Ref. [59]). Acronyms: HYD, hydrogenation;
HC, hydrocracking; CN, cetane number.

chemistries [51,52]. SRO involves hydrogenation and to hydrocracking
mechanisms, and that is why it requires mild-to-severe process condi-
tions, as indicated in Fig. 2. Focusing on the sole BTX production, the
literature  presents  a  vast  range  of  feedstock  conversions  and  BTX
selectivity, as these greatly depend on both reaction conditions and the
catalysts of choice. For instance, while BTX selectivity of 21% has been
reported on the conversion of tetralin over  a β  zeolite [53], from the
conversion  of  a  mixture  of  5  wt%  naphthalene  and  tridecane  it  is
possible to produce BTX with a selectivity of 94% with almost complete
feed conversion using a Ni2P/β catalyst [54].

◦

On the conversion of model molecules like 1-methylnaphthalene or
tetralin,  conversions close  to 100% are  relatively easy to attain oper-
ating at 380(cid:0) 420
C and 4(cid:0) 6 MPa of H2  pressure, as catalyst deacti-
vation is also limited. However, the selective production of BTX is more
complex  to  tackle  and  optimize,  given  the  multiplicity  of  reactions
occurring simultaneously (often competitively) and the different metal/
catalyst support interactions [55]. This becomes an even greater chal-
lenge when dealing with realistic feedstock like light cycle oil, whose
conversion  into  BTX  chemicals  often  requires  a  more  demanding
multi-step strategy [56].

In  bifunctional  catalysts,  hydrocracking  occurs  via  a  dual  mecha-
nism:  the  metallic,  active  sites  are  responsible  for  hydrogenation  re-
actions, while acid sites on the catalyst support provide the driving force
for  cracking reactions, which can also  be further enhanced  by higher
reaction temperatures [57,58]. For the paraffin hydrocracking (example
in  Fig.  3b),  the  molecule  chemisorbs  over  the  metal  particle.  It  de-
hydrogenates, after which the alkene migrates to a Brønsted site pro-
tonating into a carbenium-ion. Alkanes can also abstract a proton and
form  a  carbonium-ion.  Carbenium-ion  isomerizes  towards  additional
stable ions (more branched) or cracks trough β-scission to form an olefin

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011104

G. Lezcano et al.

(WHSV) values was beneficial for boosting the production of naphtha
products with high concentrations of monoaromatics and limited over-
cracking [66,67]. Calemma et al. [68] demonstrated that Ir and Pt-based
catalysts supported on a Na-exchanged Y zeolite are successful for the
conversion of a pre-treated light cycle oil feed into a cut with increased
cetane  index,  boosted  primarily  due  to  the  SRO  of  the  naphthenic
structures present in the feed. Despite their high activity promoted by
their acidic features, overcoming the diffusional limitations for both the
feedstock  and  products  during  the  conversion  of  heavy  hydrocarbons
motivates the development of hierarchical zeolites [69]. Azkaar et al.
[70] proved that an increase from 19% to 41% in the mesoporosity of a
2.5%  Ru/USY  catalyst  could  improve  the  hexadecane  hydrocracking
conversion by 12% and the jet-fuel yields by 8%. Moreover, a promising
research  field  has  opened  with  the  development  of  more  innovative
silica-based support materials such as MCM-41 or SBA-15, which show a
highly ordered hexagonal array of mesopores that can facilitate heavy
feedstock conversion [71,72]. We must also highlight that while noble
metal-based catalysts are highly active toward hydrogenation reactions,
these materials also present a significant dehydrogenation activity due
to  the  reversible nature  of hydrogenation  reactions  depending on the
reaction conditions [73,74].

The targeted product outcome determines the process conditions and
catalyst type selection. If, for instance (and based on the example for
naphthalene  in  Fig.  3a),  the  desired  products  are  unsaturated  com-
pounds, including BTX, the hydrogenation activity of the catalyst must
be limited, whereas SRO and cracking must be promoted. If, however, a
high cetane number of fuel-fraction compounds is sought, a catalyst with
a  higher  hydrogenation  activity  is  required,  in  addition  to  higher
hydrogen partial pressure, because the hydrogen consumption will be
higher  in  contrast  to  the  process  which  aims  at  BTX  products  [66].
Although hydrotreating catalysts are generally the most efficient for the
saturation of double carbon-carbon bonds, more is needed to improve
the  quality  of  the  processed  middle  distillates  due  to  the  low  cetane
number  of  the  formed  individual  cycloalkanes  [23].  Hydrocracking
catalysts also can efficiently cleave carbon-carbon bonds and reduce the
number  of  aromatic  structures  in  a  specific  feedstock.  However,  the
higher  severity  of  the  process  inevitably  promotes  overcracking  re-
actions,  thus  leading  to  increased  lighter  distillates  yields  that  often
contain  high  concentrations  of  paraffins  [75].  This  effect  is  generally
favored by higher hydrogen partial pressures, higher catalyst acidities,
and  increased  metal  dispersion,  as  reported  for  the  ring-opening  of  a
pyrolysis  gasoline  [76]  and  light  cycle  oil  [66]  over  zeolite-based
catalysts.

2.3. Kinetic modeling

Kinetic modeling of heavily polyaromatic feedstock is an indispens-
able tool for predicting the reaction and product distribution behavior at
different reaction conditions required to sustain reactor design, process
optimization,  and  catalyst  selection.  Current  kinetic  models  can  be
classified into two main categories: lump-based and detailed. Because of
the intrinsic compositional complexity of polyaromatic feedstocks and
the products derived from their conversion, lump-based kinetic models
are  popular  in  large-scale  reaction  networks  (e.g.,  hydroprocessing,
thermal/catalytic cracking, thermal/catalytic pyrolysis, and reforming.)
[77–80]. The lumping technique is based on grouping the compounds
into a complex mixture according to certain physicochemical similar-
ities, often according to the chemical nature or boiling point range cri-
terion, depending on the compositional complexity of the feedstock and
its  derived  products.  As  such,  lump-based  models  provide  excellent
experimental data fitting over a relatively wide range of reaction con-
ditions. Nonetheless, they sometimes fail to provide detailed chemical
information  about  individual  reaction  routes,  and  the  obtained  infor-
mation for a given feedstock is often not quickly or directly extrapolated
to others.

Lump-based kinetic models can be categorized into discrete models

(based  on  model  compounds  or  pseudocomponents)  and  continuous
models.  The  main  advantage  of  discrete  lumping  is  its  simplicity,
less  experimental  data  and  computational  resources.
requiring
Furthermore, these models have higher predictive power than contin-
uous approaches. Nonetheless, such prediction accuracy is limited to the
tested feedstock type (especially in the case of model compounds) and
experimental conditions due to the overfitting of the experimental data.
Most discrete kinetic modeling approaches have been performed using
either decalin or tetralin as the feedstock for SRO. An example of the
case of decalin is provided in Fig. 4a. Through this approach proposed by
Kubicka et al. [81], the C10 ring-opening products are lumped in such a
way that the individual ring-opening activity of a specific catalyst can be
assessed in an isolated manner. Additional saturated cyclic compounds
with  fewer  than  ten  carbon  atoms  are  considered  cracking  products.
Through the sensible lumping of individual species, capturing shifting
behaviors  like  the  hydrogenation/dehydrogenation  reactions  with
temperatures can be attained. One of the main objectives of SRO is to
maintain the number of carbon atoms in each molecule.

The potential of discrete lumping for evaluating SRO routes alone
relies  on  a  suitable  identification  and  quantification  of  the  reaction
products. Hence, this methodology is limited when operating with heavy
polyaromatic  feedstocks  due  to  the  intrinsic  analytical  limitations  for
obtaining a comprehensive description of the composition of the reac-
tion medium. To overcome the limitations of discrete lumping for the
kinetic modeling of complex polyaromatic feedstock, continuous lump-
based models were introduced and remain the most widely applied at
the time of writing. These models group the chemical compounds based
on their physicochemical similarities, such as chemical nature (Fig. 4b)
or boiling point range (Fig. 4c); the latter is generally the predominant
criterion.

Fig. 4. Schematic diagram showing (a) a lump-based discrete kinetic model for
the SRO of decalin over a Pt-modified β  zeolite (indices O and OO denote an
olefin  and  diene,  respectively)  and  lump-based  continuous  models  for  the
hydroprocessing  of  (b)  a  heavy  oil  and  (c)  a  vacuum  residue  (VR,  vacuum
residue; HGO, heavy gas oil; LGO, light gas oil) [81–83].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011105

G. Lezcano et al.

More recent modeling approaches have proposed structure-oriented
lumping  (SOL)  and single-event  kinetic  modeling (SEKM) methodolo-
gies,  which  target  reaction  modeling  at  the  molecular  level.  Initially
developed by Quann and Jaffe [80,81], SOL methodologies effectively
apply to heavy polyaromatic oil processing and have been perfected up
to  industrial-level  application  by  ExxonMobil  [84].  These  models
describe  complex  hydrocarbon  mixture  compositions,  chemical  re-
actions, and properties as vectors or matrixes of structural increments (i.
e., in terms of carbon number or aromatic saturation) instead of using
average  molecular  structures  for  describing  whole  fractions.  This
method has already been applied for the description of representative
refinery  reaction networks, including steam  cracking [85], fluid  cata-
lytic  cracking  [86],  and  delayed  coking  [87,88].  Conversely,  SEKM
methodologies operate at the microkinetic level to describe the reaction
pathways  in  elementary  steps  (e.g.,  hydride  transfer,  (de)alkylation,
cyclization,  and  β-scission)  [89,90].  The  number  of  elementary  steps
that can take place within a complex reaction mixture is considerably
limited in contrast to the number of reacting compounds present in that
mixture,  which  greatly  simplifies  the  resulting  reaction  schemes.  Ap-
plications of SEKM include olefin cracking [91], Fischer-Tropsch syn-
thesis [92], naphtha reforming [93], ethylene oligomerization [94], and
hydrocracking [95].

2.4. Overview of knowledge gathered from model compounds

Due to the challenges involved in the realistic feedstock conversion,
in the literature, we find a gap in works that report the transformation of
realistic crude- or waste-derived feedstock, which would provide results
with  greater  industrial  applicability,  despite  providing  limited  infor-
mation  due  to  (mainly)  analytical  constraints  [14].  One  of  the  main
challenges associated with the SRO is translating the knowledge gath-
ered from model compound analysis into complex feedstock processing.
To  provide  a  data-oriented  understanding  of  the  performance  of  the
catalysts reported in the literature specifically for aromatic ring-opening
in specific, we created a database compiling some of the most relevant
information reported in the literature for model compounds (from the
year  2000  onwards).  Since  comparisons  between  results  provided  by
different authors is practically impossible, the scope of catalyst perfor-
mance  analysis  has  been  limited  to  data  from  authors  from  the  same
research  groups.  These  databases  are  available  in  the  Supplementary
Material. Principal component analysis (PCA) was chosen as the tool for
the  statistical  analysis.  PCA  is  a  mathematical  technique  that  aids  in
managing and interpreting high-dimensional datasets and is commonly
used  for  visualization  or  data  compression.  PCA  converts  data  in  the
multidimensional  physical  space  into  an  information  content  space
through dimensionality reduction while maintaining most of the infor-
mation in the original dataset measured in terms of the percentage of
variance  retained  [96].  PCA  results  were  interpreted  based  on  the
loadings  of  each  component,  a  measure  of  the  contribution  of  each
original variable to each component. This way, loading analysis is used
to  understand  how  the  original  variables  describe  the  data  in  the
reduced dimensional space [97]. More detailed information on the PCA
approach followed here is available in Supplementary Material (section
S1).

The first SRO catalyst database we created contains the results re-
ported by Eliche-Quesada et al. [98–101] and Rodriguez-Castellon et al.
[102,103] on the SRO of tetralin and using Zr-modified SiO2  catalyst
supports operating in a fixed bed reactor at 60 bar. Further details on the
variables in this database and the data handling procedures can be found
in  the  Supplementary Material  (section S2). The loading  plots repre-
senting  PC2,  PC3,  and  PC4  versus  PC1  are  presented  in  Fig.  5a–c,
respectively, describing 66.4% of the variance. Fig. 5a reveals that PC1
captures the high variation of conversion while selectivities are mainly
captured in PC2 (Fig. 5b) and PC3 (Fig. 5c). Taking PC1 and PC2 into
consideration,  a  close  trend  between  conversion  and  the  catalyst  fea-
tures  (surface  area,  pore  volume,  and  strength  of  acid  sites)  can  be

Fig. 5. Loading plots for (a) PC2 vs. PC1, (b) PC3 vs. PC1, and (c) PC4 vs. PC1
obtained  from  the  database  containing  the  results  of  Eliche-Quesada  et  al.
[98–101]  and  Rodriguez-Castellon  et  al.  [102,103]  Red-squared,  blue-circled
and  dark-cyan-triangled  symbols  represent  features  related  to  the  catalyst,
operating  conditions  and  performance  (i.e.,  conversion  and  product  selectiv-
ities), respectively.

extracted,  with  higher  modifications  observed  for  Zr-doped  SiO2  sup-
ports with well-developed textural properties. Fig. 5a indicates that the
metals also play a vital role in the outcome of the reaction because metal
loadings  represent  a  large  portion  of  the  eigenvalues  associated  with
PC1  and  PC2,  albeit  with  a  second  degree  of  importance.  Catalysts
containing Ru, Os, or even Pd result in higher conversions than Ni, W, or
P.  Although  Fig.  5a  somehow  reflects  the  effect  of  metal  loading  on
product  selectivity,  such  an  association  is  more  clearly  inferred  from
Fig.  5b  (PC3),  which  retains  a  very  similar  fraction  of  the  variance
compared to PC2. PC3 accurately captures very well the effect of the
metal  content  on  product  distribution,  with  positive  values  of  PC3
(y-axis in Fig. 5b) related to ring saturation reactions.

In  contrast,  negative  values  indicate  both  aromatization  to  naph-
thalene and the ring-opening (cracking products), mainly when using Os
[98]. As a result, it is not surprising to observe that the H2/Feed ratio
and  contact  time  influence  the  hydrogenation  performance  of  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011106

G. Lezcano et al.

catalyst. Likewise, there is an apparent positive trend between temper-
ature  with  the  ring-opening  to  yield  cracking  products  and  cracked
gases. However, decoupling the role of specific metals (e.g., Os) remains
challenging compared to well-known hydrogenation noble metals (e.g.,
Pd). Additionally, naphthalene selectivity is fostered at higher temper-
atures.  A mapping of  the  scores corresponding  to PC2, PC3, and  PC4
concerning PC1 is provided in Figs. S1a–c. These results highlight that
catalysts with a higher metal loading do not necessarily perform better;
the type of metal (and even operating conditions) is more important.
Overall, it can be concluded that a good tetralin SRO performance for a
Zr-modified SiO2-supported catalyst requires primary consideration of
suitable catalyst support features (porosity and acidity) for enhancing
feed conversion. The selection of the active metal(s) plays a secondary
role but is essential for promoting desired product selectivity.

The most widely used model compounds in SRO are decalin, tetralin,
and  to a lesser extent, naphthalene. To  assess the feed impact on the
catalyst performance, we have used another database containing results
reported  by  Ardakani  et  al.  [45,104]  and  Liu  et  al.  [105,106]  using
different bifunctional catalysts supported over HY zeolites and operating
in a continuous fixed bed reactor. As per the loading plot in Fig. 6a, PC1
clearly  distinguishes  between  the  conversion  of  the  feed  (positive  di-
rection of the component) and selectivity towards ring-opening products
(negative direction of the component). Together with PC2, the role of
metals is revealed, with K, Mg, and Mo being more prone to fostering
selectivity.  Liquid  hourly  space  velocity  (LHSV)  and  ring-opening
product selectivity are correlated in the variance retained by the first
two components (~41%). Other parameters (e.g., TOS, sulfur content in
the feed, and temperature) provide relatively little information; surface
area  and  acidity  contribute  similarly  to  conversion  and  ring-opening
selectivity. According to the loadings in the first 2 PCs of ring-opening

Fig. 6. Loading plots for (a) PC2 vs. PC1 and (b) PC3 vs. PC1 as obtained from
the database containing the results from Ardakani et al. [45,104] and Liu et al.
[105,106].  Red-squared,  blue-circled  and  dark-cyan-triangled  symbols  repre-
sent  features  related  to  catalyst,  operating  conditions  and  performance  (i.e.,
conversion and product selectivities), respectively.

product  selectivity  and  Si/Al  ratio,  higher  Si/Al  ratios  are  preferred
for SRO. This observation seems rational as higher Si/Al ratios in HY
zeolites  are  related  to  higher  (and  often  stronger)  acidity,  which  can
promote  cracking  or  polymerization  reactions,  among  others,  to  the
detriment of ring opening.

Provided that the direction of the loading of total acidity points to-
wards  the  intersection  of  the  loadings  of  ring-opening  selectivity  and
conversion,  total  acidity  can  be  correlated  with  ring-opening  product
yield. These observations should be taken carefully because the first two
components  only  account  for  41%  of  the  total  retained  variance.
Although PC3 (Fig. 6b) is also required to represent at least 50% of the
overall information, it does not carry much insightful information, with
apparent  variable  associations  remaining  mainly  unaltered,  again
highlighting the role of the metals in ring-opening product selectivity as
well as the effect of space velocity. Likewise, temperature and sulfur do
not provide much of the 10.85% information in PC3. Loadings in PC3
hint that conversion could be negatively affected by TOS, indicating that
a  high  causality  should  be  attributed  for  the  noticeable  deactivating
effect of TOS. Nonetheless, direct associations should not be assumed
when analyzing loadings, since the Si/Al ratio and total acidity could be
positively correlated in Fig. 6b. This observation is only valid for ~30%
of the data used.

By plotting the scores of the first few PCs sorted by feed, the wide
variety of catalysts tested for each feed (represented by the x-axis, PC1)
is  symbolized  by  the  high  dispersion  of  scores  along  the  y-axes  in
Figs. S2a–b,  representing PC2  and  PC3. As  previously explained,  PC2
and  PC3  mainly  capture  catalyst-related  information  such  as  metal
loading, support properties, and reaction performance criteria, such as
conversion. Likewise, the arrangement in PC1, with the scores of deca-
lin, tetralin, and naphthalene generally having a trend from left to right,
are  indicative  of  either  that  overall  higher  Si/Al  ratios  and  space  ve-
locities were tested for decalin compared to naphthalene in the dataset
or  that  decalin  has  a  higher  ring-opening  activity.  Furthermore,  the
cluster in Fig. S2a gathers the catalysts with Pd, indicating that the latter
feature provides a distinct behavior pattern, probably denoting a better
conversion to ring-opening product selectivity tradeoff. Examples in this
cluster also present higher surface areas and total acidities, indicating
that the starting support material in these samples differed remarkably
from other such features induced by Pd loading. However, the fact that
the cluster vanishes in Fig. S2b indicates that the effect of the acidity and
surface area is more prominent than that of the metal. Another group of
examples for naphthalene (with positive values in PC1), despite occur-
ring in close relation, are not related by any specific feature but their
poorer  ring-opening  selectivity.  These  examples  vary  from  instances
supported  by  different  Si/Al  ratios  to  catalysts  with  up  to  10%  Mo
content. Hence, if the feed is more aromatic, HY-supported catalysts will
require  either  noble  metals  (e.g.,  Pd)  or  high  loadings  of  transition
metals (e.g., Mo).

The  third  database  created  herein  contains  the  data  reported  in
recent studies by D’Ippolito et al. [107–115], Benitez et al. [116],and
Vicerich  et al.  [117–120]. These  authors reported the SRO of decalin
(trans/cis ratio of 1.63) and operated an autoclave reactor with 25 mL of
feed  and  1  g of  catalyst. Loading  plots  corresponding to  PC2  vs.  PC1
(Fig. 7a) indicate that variables related to the operating conditions, such
as time and stirring, display a positive correlation and are anticorrelated
with pressure. Although the roles of the metal and operating conditions
can be significant, Fig. 7a hints that surface area and acidity are critical
for decalin conversion. Combining the observations from Fig. 7a and b,
the  conversion  and  selectivity  of  ring-opening  products  positively
co-vary with the surface area. Total acidity seems to promote the for-
mation  of  cracking  products  mainly.  In  other  words,  a  suitable  SRO
opening catalyst to optimize high alkyl aromatic yields should combine
a good balance of the surface area, particularly acidity, due to the in-
clusion of different types of supports. The role of the metals, which show
very different loadings among themselves, should not be decoupled from
the analysis of the distribution of the scores, which are sorted by support

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011107

G. Lezcano et al.

3. Polyaromatic streams

3.1. Statistical analysis of aromaticity in refinery streams

Streams  rich  in  polyaromatics  and,  therefore,  eligible  for  SRO  are
inherent  to  classical  crude  oil  refineries,  including  thermal/catalytic
cracking  or  distillation  bottom  streams.  Similarly,  products  from
ethylene  steam  crackers  are  highly  aromatic  and  can  be  found  in  re-
fineries integrated with the petrochemical side. To embrace a refinery
concept  that  incorporates  the  valorization  and  recovery  of  wastes
derived from consumer society, such as scrap tires (waste-refinery) or
biomass (bio-refinery), their derived pyrolysis oils must be considered
because  they  can  have  high  polyaromatics  contents  [3,121,122].  We
have compiled another database from the available literature to assess
the  features of  interest  in  the  existing aromatic-rich  (integrated)  con-
ventional  refinery,  waste  refinery,  and  bio-refinery  streams.  This  raw
database, including >800 instances for 17 streams, is available in the
Supporting Information. The studied streams comprise straight run gas
◦
oil (SRGO, 220–365
C),
light coker gas oil (LCGO, 195–360
C), light cycle oil (LCO, 195–350
◦
C), full-range coker gas oil (CGO, >195
C), atmospheric residue (AR,
>350
C),  heavy  fuel  oil  (HFO,
◦
195–720
C), vacuum residue (VR,
◦
◦
>560
C), decanted oil (DO, >350
C),
◦
C), pyrolysis fuel oil (PFO, >190
heavy cycle oil (HCO, 350–500
C),
◦
pyrolysis gasoline (PyGas, 40–190
C), and other waste-derived streams
such  as  scrap  tire  pyrolysis  oil  (STPO,  125–540
C)  and  hydro-
deoxygenated  bio-oil  (HDO–BIO,  35–335
C).  The  fractions  are
expressed in true boiling point (TBP) cuts.

C),  vacuum  gas  oil  (VGO,  350–560
C), visbreaker residue (VBR, >350

◦
C), light visbreaker gas oil (LVBGO, 165–350

◦
C), deasphalted oil (DAO, >560

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

Fig. 7. Loading plots for (a) PC2 vs. PC1 and (b) PC3 vs. PC1 as obtained from
the database containing the results of D’Ippolito et al. [107–115], Benitez et al.
[116],  and  Vicerich  et  al.  [117–120].  Red-squared,  blue-circled  and
dark-cyan-triangled  symbols  represent  features  related  to  catalyst,  operating
conditions  and  performance  (i.e.,  conversion  and  product  selectivities),
respectively.

in Figs. S3a–b.

Including the support material in the PCA analysis, as shown by the
scores in Figs. S3a–b, provides a deeper insight into how the data are
structured  around  the  support  type.  As  expected,  the  support  choice
conditions the outcome, often much more than any other quantifiable
variable. This is represented by the various clusters, which indicate only
the  information  carried  by  their  PCs.  For  instance,  the  group  repre-
senting the highest SRO product yields contains HY and SIRAL70 sup-
ports (SIRAL stands for a SiO2-Al2O3 material, and the digits specify its
Si/Al ratio). Although the cluster gathering including SIRAL5, SIRAL20,
and  SIRAL40  supports  also  denotes  good  overall  selectivity  towards
ring-opening,  especially  opposing  ring-contraction  products,  their
overall  conversion  is  not  as  high  as  in  the  cluster  including  HY  and
SIRAL70. The correlation between total acidity loading and the cluster
containing HY and SIRAL70 is attributed to the HY examples, primarily
because the acidity of SIRAL70 should be conceptually lower than that
of  the  cluster  containing  SIRAL5,  SIRAL20,  and  SIRAL40.  As  noted
above, the loading of different metals also plays a role, indicated by the
fact that most examples in the first cluster contain Pt and Ir. In contrast,
samples  from  the  second  cluster  are  mainly  doped  with  Pd  and  Rh,
which  influences  catalyst  performance.  It  is  clear  that  higher  total
acidity  inevitably  leads  to  higher  cracked  product  selectivity,  charac-
teristic  of  the  examples  with  HY,  represented  by  the  loading  of  total
acidity contributing to the scores of the models, including HY.

Fig.  8  is  a  schematic  representation  of  an  integrated  refinery  and
petrochemical complex. On the right, in the layout of a classical coking
refinery,  first,  the  desalted  crude  oil  is  fractionated  at  atmospheric
pressure  into  separate  fractions,  which  after  being  upgraded,  become
gasoline, kerosene and diesel blending components. The bottoms of the
column are further distilled under vacuum to give a vacuum gasoil and a
residue. In Fig. 8, the refinery uses a coker unit, a visbreaker for mainly
vacuum  residuum  conversion,  and  a  deasphalting  unit  to  remove
asphaltenes and produce deasphalted oil. The gasoil conversion plant is
essentially an FCC unit where the heavy cuts, after being hydrotreated,
are  converted  into  fuel  gas,  light  olefins,  LPG,  and  blending  streams,
namely, FCC gasoline and LCO.

On the left of Fig. 8, the petrochemical site is represented by an ar-
omatics  unit  for  BTX  production  and  a  steam  cracker  for  ethylene,
propylene  and  butenes  production, which  could  be fed  any  feedstock
ranging from LPG to gasoil and even heavier fractions like VGO. Other
potential  petrochemical  complexes  for  integration  include  plants  pro-
ducing  solvents  and  high  polymers  [123].  The  main  products  of  the
steam  cracker  are  hydrogen,  light  olefins,  PyGas  and  PFO.  PyGas  is
typically sent to the aromatics units to produce BTX, while PFO is used
for pitch production.

An integrated refinery like the one shown in Fig. 8 creates a great
synergy, as the feed of the steam cracker (whichever it might be) can be
directly provided by the refinery, and products like PyGas after hydro-
treating  could  be  introduced  into  the  gasoline,  as  blending  of  the  re-
finery  if  aromatics  production  is  not  a  priority.  Or  instead,  heavy
aromatics from PyGas processing in the aromatics unit could be incor-
porated into the refinery as an octane booster. Another stream flowing
from the petrochemical site to the refinery is hydrogen, one of the main
streams bridging between complexes, especially for refineries with high
hydrogen consumption due to deep hydroprocessing requirements. Be-
sides the steam cracker feed, in case of a high BTX demand, the catalytic
reformer could be optimized for producing a reformate more suitable for
BTX extraction [124].

The inclusion in the refinery of the pyrolysis oils from wastes and
scrap tires represents a strategy to tackle the waste disposal problem via
their  valorization  to  fuels  and  valuable  chemicals  [125].  Similarly,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011108

G. Lezcano et al.

Fig.  8. Schematic  of  the  streams  assessed  in  this  review  (including  waste  and  bio-refinery  streams  in  the  dark  cyan  rectangle)  within  the  context  of  an  inte-
grated refinery.

hydrocarbons from renewable sources like biomass or waste feedstocks
represent  a  potential source  of valuable  products  [126]. The types  of
biomass-based products to consider are numerous, and typically, their
viability  is  influenced  by  the  processability  within  the  layout  of  the
classical refinery. The gain of cofeeding increases the earlier the alter-
native oil (refinery coprocessing vs. final pool blending) is incorporated
into the refinery, but so does the complexity of handling it [127]. Hence,
a  hydrodeoxygenated  bio-oil  has  been  considered  in  this  work,  thus
becoming a “drop-in” bio-fuel compatible for (co)processing in an SRO
unit [128,129].

Despite  their  promising  composition  for  producing  bio-based  aro-
matic molecules, several challenges still hinder the higher-value appli-
cations of biomass pyrolysis oil in bio-refinery platforms. Specifically,
the high oxygen and water content of these liquids gives rise to issues
related  to  instability  upon  storage  and  repolymerization  (due  to  the
highly reactive oxygenates), corrosiveness, low calorific value, or high
viscosity, among others. Over the last years, hydrodeoxygenation routes
have  primarily  explored  the  production  of  drop-in  fuels  from  bio-oil,
including  1-step  and  2-step  strategies  over  conventional  hydrotreat-
ment catalysts [130,131]. Nonetheless, the boundaries of heterogeneous
catalysts  still  need  to  be  pushed  for  improved  activity,  selectivity  to-
wards compounds of interest, and, above all, good stability on contin-
uous operation despite the usually severe coke formation [132], known
to  be  caused  by  both  aromatic  condensation  and  repolymerization  of
unstable bio-oil oxygenates. In some cases, catalyst deactivation in HDO
is  reported  to  be  beneficial  for  producing  monoaromatic  bio-based
chemicals,  as  it  preferentially  “kills”  the  stronger  active  sites

responsible for cracking and hydrogen transfer reactions in favor of a
higher HDO activity [133,134]. Adding bio-oil (or bio-oil fractions) to
petroleum fractions for their joint conversion can also be conceived as a
more ready-to-use approach [135,136]. In this regard, co-feeding into
FCC  units  is  also  a  promising  strategy,  which  circumvents  the  re-
quirements for an external hydrogen source, potentially benefiting the
cost of operation.

Despite  the  obvious industrial and  commercial  interest  of SRO  re-
actions for increasing the value of the streams shown in Fig. 8 via the
production of BTX, Fig. 9a shows that the available literature on realistic
feedstock is limited compared to that using model compounds (partic-
ularly in the case of PFO, as opposed to studies carried out with model
diaromatic feeds) [137]. Fig. 9b shows the distribution of the total ar-
omatics of the streams in our database, including the cetane indexes for
gas  oils  and  the  H/C  ratios  for  the  heavy  oils.  The  insights  into  the
mathematical treatment of the database information are provided in the
Supplementary Material (section S3).

Among gas oil-like streams, the SRGO (containing ~20–30 wt% total
aromatics) is the important stream (after hydrotreating) in formulating
diesel products. However, its aromaticity limits its potential for incor-
poration  into  the  diesel  pool.  Aromatic  molecules  provide  a  small
contribution to the cetane number and therefore, highly aromatic gas
oils are considered eligible for SRO provided that their blending in the
diesel  pool  can  compromise  the  minimum  cetane  specifications.  The
cetane  limitation  is  aggravated  because  cetane  improver  addition  is
generally restricted up to 5 points [138]. This is the case of the LCO from
the FCC unit: the refinery stream with the highest aromatic content (up

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011109

G. Lezcano et al.

Fig. 9. Classification of the 17 streams (crude-derived streams and those including STPO and HDO-BIO) identified as potential sources of polyaromatics in terms of
(a) the number of instances considered for the construction of the database and (b) the total aromatic concentration.

to  91  wt%)  exhibits  a  deficient  cetane  number,  far  outside  the  limits
established  by  various  worldwide  road  diesel  fuel  specifications
(Table S1). STPO is a highly aromatic stream (~50 wt%), and despite its
(cid:0) 1),  it  has  limited  utility  as  a  fuel
high  calorific  value  (40–44  MJ  kg
[139].  The  high  variability  of  the  aromatics  content  in  STPO  (see
Fig. 9b) is attributed to both the effect of the type of tire of origin [140]
and the pyrolysis reaction conditions, e.g., residence time, heating rate,
particle size, nitrogen flow, and reactor technology [141]. In compari-
son, gas oils from thermal cracking units, such as LVBGO or LCGO are
less aromatic and compositionally more similar to SRGO. Both LVBGO
and LCGO are suitable diesel pool components after being hydrotreated
to increase their cetane number and reduce their olefin content, typi-
cally to within the range of 10–30 wt% [142].

The aromaticity of heavy oils such as VGO and VR is higher than that
of gas oils because of their residual origin from successive distillation
stages. Aromatics in HFO are highly scattered and similar to those in
heavy oils from crude oil distillation. The higher variability of aromatics
reported for HFO compared to VBR is attributed to uncertainties in the
formulation of the former. DAO is obtained by paraffinic-solvent deas-
phalting of VR to remove the asphaltene-rich pitch fraction and reva-
lorize it by increasing its H/C ratio and aromatic concentration [143].
Heavy oils from catalytic cracking, namely HCO and DO, are even more
aromatic.  The  aromatics  reported  for  HCO  depend  strongly  upon  the
composition of the FCC feed and the operating mode. Previous studies
[138,144,145] have reported heavy LCOs with FBP <370
C as HCO.
Because of their extraordinary aromaticity, heavy FCC oils have higher
densities and lower H/C ratios than analogous distillation oils. For in-
tegrated  refineries,  petrochemical  subproducts,  including  PyGas  and
PFO from the steam crackers, are another important source of aromatics.
Their yields are extremely dependent on the cracker feed and operating
conditions. For instance, PyGas yields can vary from 0.24 to 14.1 wt%
depending  on whether  ethane  or  naphtha  are fed.  PFO  is  primarily a
subproduct  of  heavy  oil  crackers  like  hydrocracking  residues  and
hydrotreated crudes, which reach yields up to 30 wt% [146,147].

◦

Although  the  conversion  of  biomass-derived  feedstocks  presents  a
different  set  of  operational  challenges  because  of  their  compositional
differences from crude-derived streams, bio-oil can also be a rich source
of aromatic compounds. After an initial hydrodeoxygenation stage for
oxygen removal (mainly from functional groups), aromatics in HDO-BIO
originate  from  the  hydrogenolysis  of  phenolic-based  structures  in  the
lignin fraction of biomass, favored at more severe hydrotreating tem-
peratures and pressures [148]. Hence, the significant variability noted in

the aromatic concentration of this stream is also greatly conditioned by
the lignin amount and the characteristics of the parent biomass under-
going pyrolysis [149,150].

It is essential to evaluate the distribution of the aromatics on a ring-
number classification when assessing the suitability of a given stream for
SRO  processing  because the  presence  of  di and  triaromatics  is  funda-
mental for avoiding detrimental overhydrogenation and ring-opening of
monoaromatics in the processed feed. However, the SRO of higher ar-
omatics (with three or more rings) can be difficult to perform because of
the severe conditions required, the less  reactive nature of these poly-
aromatics,  and  the  excessive  hydrogen  consumption.  Based  on  this
premise and to facilitate an insightful evaluation of their SRO suitability,
Fig. 10a shows the mean aromatics distributions of the studied streams.
We observed that monoaromatic-rich streams such as PyGas are more
suitable  for  recovering  BTX  chemicals  via  extraction  and  as  excellent
octane boosters for the gasoline pool [151]. Some of these streams have
limitations for eligibility within the pool due to various legislations, e.g.,
in the EU (EN-228), the maximum olefin and aromatic contents in the
gasoline are 18 and 35 vol%, respectively. Gas oil-like streams, including
SRGO,  LVBGO,  LCGO,  and  STPO,  primarily  present  mono  (A1)  and
diaromatics  (A2)  in  the  decreasing  order  of  concentration,  with  little
concentration of tri and higher aromatics (A3+). LCO is the only stream
in  which  A2  compounds  predominate  among  gas  oils,  as  shown  in
Fig. 10b–d. Diaromatics in LCO are responsible for the low cetane index
because of their poor burning properties and high density in the mixture.
A3+ polyaromatics start to appear in LCO at boiling points of >300
C
when  the  proportion  of  monoaromatic  decreases  [65,152].  Their  low
volatility indicates that A3+ compounds are the most abundant aromatic
fraction in heavy oils such as DO, VBR, and VR. A2 aromatics in DO are
scarce compared to A3+ aromatics, where tetraaromatics are the most
abundant [153]. Polyaromatics are more important in DAO than in VR
because of the concentration effect during deasphalting despite the ar-
omatic nature of the asphaltenes, which are separately evaluated using
SARA analysis. Aromatics in other less heavy oils such as HCO, VGO, and
CGO range mostly have 2–4 rings [154–156]. VGO and CGO also present
noticeable A1 concentrations, unlike HCO in which the presence of tetra
and  even  pentaaromatics  has  been  reported  in  the  literature  [157].
Regarding  the  distribution  of  aromatics,  PFO  differs  from  the  other
streams studied: it is extremely rich in A2  compounds (mean value of
43.5 wt%, Fig. 10a) despite its high boiling point range and the presence
of  heavily  condensed  aromatic  molecules  up  to  C70  [158].  Moreover,
naphthalene can exhibit high concentrations in PFO of up to almost 15

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111010

G. Lezcano et al.

Fig. 10. Distribution of aromatics by the number of rings in the studied streams is represented as (a) the mean and instance dispersion plot for (b) monoaromatics, (c)
diaromatics, and (d) triaromatics+. a  Example from Cheng et al. [161]; b  Example from Hita et al. [3]; c  Calculated as 100% - recovery.

◦

wt%  [159].  As  previously  mentioned,  because  of  its  operating  condi-
tions, the steam cracker feed will intensely influence the PFO compo-
sition, thus resulting in a high variability of the diaromatics present in
PFO (Fig. 10c). Similarly, other factors including the PyGas/PFO frac-
tionation grade can lead to a PFO with an IBP lower than the TBP cut of
190
C, thus resulting in a higher monoaromatics content than desired,
as shown in Fig. 10b. The chemical complexity of multiple streams re-
ported herein requires of highly advanced analytical techniques (e.g.,
GC  × GC-FID  /  TOF-MS,  NMR,  FT-ICR  MS)  to  guarantee  an  accurate
characterization of their heaviest fractions [158,160]. We should stress
that  an incomplete  analytical workflow  inevitably leads  to  an incom-
plete  description  of  the  distribution  of  aromatics  in  these  mixtures,
particularly for streams with a remarkable polyaromatic content, such as
PFO.  The  lack  of  a  standardized  analytical  workflow  (i.e.,  steam
cracking experimentation, sample preparation and analytical methods)
further compromises the homogeneity of the compositional data gath-
ered from the open literature.

Using the HDO of raw bio-oil, it is possible to obtain a highly aro-
matic  organic  phase  (a  mixture  of  gasoline  and  light  diesel  range
distillate), primarily constituted of monoaromatics. However, previous
studies have indicated a tradeoff between the total aromatic content in
the organic phase and the yield [162,163]. For example, Hita et al. [3,
164] (Fig. 10a) reported a predominantly aromatic (61.9 wt%, A1 48.3
+
wt%, A2  12.8 wt%, A3
0.76 wt%) upgraded bio-oil from black poplar
◦
C
sawdust using a Pt-Pd/HZSM-5 catalyst in a trickle bed reactor at 450
and 65 bar; however, this was achieved at the expense of a low organic
phase yield (8 wt%). Nevertheless, Cheng et al. [165] (Fig. 10a) reported
26 wt% organic phase yield with only 15.4 wt% aromatics after the HDO
of a pine sawdust bio-oil in an autoclave at 300
C and 35 bar using a
Fe-Co(II)/SiO2 catalyst. The tradeoff is then illustrated in Fig. S4, where
the  total  aromatic  concentration  is  represented  against  the  organic
phase yield for all the instances gathered in the database along with an
experimental upper limit for aromatics. This is in line with the generally
◦
C, >100 bar) stabilizes the
accepted theory that a mild HDO (175–250
mixture through the conversion of unstable (more reactive) oxygenate
◦
C, >200 bar), the
functional groups, whereas in a deep HDO (350–400
complete conversion of oxygen-containing compounds is sought to yield
alkanes and aromatics [148]. Furthermore, besides the aforementioned
biomass pyrolysis conditions, the role of the catalyst is essential because
it defines the types of reactions (decarboxylation, decarbonylation, hy-
drogenation, hydrocracking, hydrogenolysis, and dehydration) that are
promoted [166].

◦

3.2. Analysis of stability in refinery streams

Despite  the  high  aromaticity  of  the  studied  streams,  asphaltene
contents and colloidal instability can compromise their applicability for
SRO  because  of  undesirable  phenomena  related  to  the  plugging  of
pipelines and process equipment. They also condition the design of the
SRO reactor. To assess the stability of heavy oils, methods including the
colloidal index [167], the stability factor [168] or the Stankiewicz plot
[169] are used. The stability cross plot (SCP) method by Sepulveda et al.
[170] is based on the SARA analysis of the feedstock. It is an effective
method for assessing the stability of crudes [171] and heavy oils [172].
The SCP plot of the rich oils compiled in our database (except for DAO) is
provided in Fig. S5. This methodology considers the ratios between the
saturate  (S),  aromatic  (Ar),  resin  (R),  and  asphaltene  (A)  fractions  of
each  feed  as  a  means  of  evaluating  their  stability.  Evaluating  the  re-
lationships between these ratios for each feed plotted in Fig. S5, allows
us to confirm the percentage of the samples that remain within the stable
zone of each graph, as listed in Table 1.

VGO  is  completely  stable  compared  to  AR  and  VR  because  of  its
lower asphaltene content (mean 0.2 wt% compared to 9.2 and 11.7 wt%,
respectively), which prevents the aggregation and precipitation of these
molecules. The presence of resins and aromatics that provide dispersing
and  solvent  functions,  respectively,  plays  an  important  role  when
assessing  the  colloidal  stability  of  heavy  oils  [173].  The  higher  H/C
ratios of VGO indicate a lower concentration and better dispersion of
asphaltenes due to the presence of resins [174]. The stability of VGO is
fundamental because asphaltenes result in steric, poisoning, and coking
hindrances in downstream catalytic systems [175]. The stability of AR
and VR must be assessed on a case-by-case basis; as such, a generalized

Table 1
Stability assessment of certain heavy oils included in the database based on the
stability cross plot (SCP) analysis.

Stream

SCP1 (%)

SCP2 (%)

SCP3 (%)

SCP4 (%)

Overall

CGO
AR
VGO
HFO
VBR
VR
DO
HCO
PFO

100
76
98
100
42
79
95
100
–

100
42
98
86
16
39
86
100
–

100
59
98
86
87
77
96
100
–

100
56
98
86
32
52
91
100
–

Stable
Case sensitive
Stable
Stable
Unstable
Case sensitive
Stable
Stable
Unstable

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111011

G. Lezcano et al.

statement  about  the  stability  of  these  streams  cannot  be  made.  For
instance, the cut point for VGO will inevitably condition the aromatic
and resin content in both VGO and VR and, hence, influence the stability
of the latter fraction [176,177]. Oil cuts with virtually no asphaltenes
such  as  DAO  have  no  instability  issues.  Heavy  FCC  oils  are  stable
because of little to no asphaltene content, which are very well-dissolved
in the abundant aromatics [178]. Most of the gathered examples of HFO
are stable due to the dissolving function of the highly aromatic cutter
stocks [145]. Because of a high asphaltene content derived from steam
cracking, PFOs suffer from severe instability issues, causing fouling in
equipment downstream of the steam cracking unit [158] or the hydro-
treating and hydroconversion units [179]. Therefore, when PFO is to be
fed  to  the  coker,  asphaltene  removal  is  required  [180].  The  typical
values of asphaltenes in PFO are 15–40 wt% [179] and can even surpass
60  wt%  for  PFOs  produced  from  hydrotreated  crude  feeds  [158].
Because  of  the  aforementioned  chemical  characterization  complexity
and the lack of standardized analytical workflows, the SCP methodology
does  not  apply  to  PFO  and  is  considered  unstable.  VBR  is  another
intrinsically  unstable  stream  that  is  difficult  to  process  due  to  its
asphaltene content [181]. The instability of the VBR is the primary re-
striction  of the unit because it can limit the conversion [182], and is
influenced by the crude source and the VGO content in the feed. Higher
VGO  cut  points  are  reported  to  positively  influence  the  VBR  stability
without hindering the conversion [177].

3.3. SRO eligibility of refinery streams

To  summarize,  not  all  the  streams  collected  in  our  database  are
suitable for SRO purposes either due to their important role in the cur-
rent  production  layout  of  the  refinery  or  because  of  their  intrinsic

Table 2
Summary of the potential streams for SRO.

Yieldsb on
crude (wt%)

Comment

Suitable for
SRO?

Stream

SRGO
LVBGO
LCGO
STPO

16–21
0.3–1.2
2–6
0.2

LCO

5–6

CGO

VGO
HFO

VBR

AR
VR
DAO
HCO +
DO

2–8

27–33
2–8

2–8

42–59
9–32
0.2–0.7
4–5

PFO

0.1–0.2

PyGas

0.2

HDO–BIO

0.2

Key streams for diesel pool due to high
or upgradable cetane and little
aromatics concentration
Limited applicability as fuel, rich in
mono and diaromatics with
heteroatoms like S, N, O, F, Cl
Very rich in diaromatics and little
added value as diesel pool component
while produced in big flow rates
Moderate aromatics and high sulfur
and basic nitrogen content
Main FCC feedstock
Similar to VBR but stable due to cutter
stock incorporation
Most of the cases unstable due to
asphaltenes, high sulfur and heavy
polyaromatics
Very heavy oils with high sulfur
content and metals that require very
deep hydrocracking
Very rich in refractory aromatics (3–4
rings) and stable, can be recirculated
back to FCC
Residual stream, very rich in
diaromatics and little sulfur. High
asphaltene instability
Naphtha-like fraction with high
content of monoaromatics
At specific conditions, mainly
monoaromatic organic phase at the
expense of extremely low yields

No

Yes

Yes

No

No
No

No

No

No

Yes

Noa

No

a Note that the conversion of PyGas is through a more severe ring-opening

stage, known and referred to as ARINO process, indicated in Fig. 2.

b Estimations based on Arabian crude oils in context of a fully integrated re-

finery. Further details available on Section S4.

chemical limitations (e.g., instability and/or low aromatic content). As
summarized in Table 2, the most promising streams for SRO are LCO,
PFO, and STPO.

LCO is a low-value stream for diesel blending and is used as cutter
stock despite its high diaromatic nature. Studies have investigated the
hydrotreating of LCO and LCO/SRGO mixtures [183,184] and the hy-
drocracking  of  heavy  LCO  [185].  Technologies  have  already  been
developed  for  upgrading  LCO  to  fuels  such  as  FD2G  [186]  or  Uni-
cracking  [187]  and  SRO  to  produce  high-quality  chemicals  including
BTX  using  a  two-stage  hydrotreating-hydrocracking  scheme  [21,186,
188–191]  with  lower  H2  requirements  [192].  Similar  processes  have
been applied to the catalytic hydroprocessing of PFOs to produce valu-
able  chemicals  [159,193,194],  stream  typically  intended  for  pitch  or
carbon black production [195] or bunker pool blending. However, SRO
of PFO remains a more complex challenge because of its heaviness and
instability. To enhance the stability of PFO, it may be blended with HCO
and even DO (if sufficiently light) [196–198]. Despite being richer in
alkylbenzenes  than  in  A2  aromatics,  STPO  should  be  considered  as  a
promising  SRO  stream  if  pyrolysis  conditions  and  downstream  frac-
tionation are optimized for such purposes. The application of STPO as
fuel is limited because of its high Conradson Carbon Residue (CCR), high
viscosity, and lower flash point [199], in addition to the requirement of
hydrotreating  for  sulfur  removal  [72].  Hence,  the  production  of
renewable BTX via the SRO of diaromatics in STPO must be considered.

3.4. Applications, sources, and market prospects of polyaromatics

Polyaromatics have little commercial interest because of their spe-
cific industrial applications (e.g., herbicides and fluorescent dyes) and
the intensive operations (e.g., distillation, filtration and crystallization)
required for their high-grade production [200]. Among polyaromatics,
naphthalene is the most profitable, followed by anthracene at consid-
erably smaller volumes. Other polycondensed aromatics, such as phen-
anthrene  and  indene,  are  also  used  for  parent  anthracene  and
indene-cumarone resin production, respectively, although to a consid-
erably lesser extent [201].

The  primary  applications  of  naphthalene  are  the  production  of
naphthalene  sulfonates  (plasticizers  for  concrete)  and  phthalic  anhy-
dride, although the latter can also be produced from o-xylene, depend-
ing on cost. Naphthalene is also an intermediate of many chemicals, such
as  decalin,  tetralin  and  2-naphthol  (dyestuff  intermediate)  [200].  In
1985,  global  naphthalene  production  was  ~950  kT  per  year  [202].
Despite the naphthalene market estimates of 2.1 MT per year for 2025 (i.
e., 3% average annual growth rate), the production of naphthalene may
not follow a demand trend because the availability of coal tar (currently
its  primary  source)  depends  on  metallurgical  industries.  In  many
industrialized countries, the production of naphthalene faces pressure
from environmental regulations, and China accounts for >50% of the
global  production  capacity  [203].  Naphthalene  is  primarily  produced
from coal tar-derived naphthalene oil (with ~70 wt% of naphthalene),
requiring several crystallization and distillation stages; such processes
accounted for >90% of naphthalene sources in 2020 [203]. It can also be
produced from crude oil fractions; however, the naphthalene content is
much lower than the one in naphthalene oil from coal tar. Amongst the
streams  studied,  the  naphthalene  content  in  PFO  is  the  highest,  with
~15 wt%, and alkyl naphthalenes reaching up to ~25 wt% [159,160].
Certain studies concluded that producing naphthalene from PFO would
be profitable but require several unit operations, including atmospheric
and  vacuum  distillations,  extraction  with  azeotropic  rectification,
multistage crystallization and pressing [204]. In crude oil fractions rich
in  methylnaphthalenes,  hydroaromatization  and  subsequent  deal-
kylation are required, but they must be conducted at high temperatures
and H2 pressures, compromising its economic viability [205]. This is the
case  for  LCO,  which  does  not  contain  remarkable  quantities  of  naph-
thalene (typically <1 wt%) but is rich in alkyl naphthalenes (~50 wt%)
[206]. STPO contains moderate diaromatics, with naphthalene and its

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111012

G. Lezcano et al.

derivatives accounting for only ~15 wt% [207].

Anthracene  is  primarily  used  to  produce  anthraquinone.  Anthra-
quinone is mainly used as dyestuff, a redox-catalyst additive in wood
pulping to promote the rate of delignification, and as a hydrogen carrier
in the production of H2O2 in anthraquinone auto-oxidation. This process
requires  significant  energy  input  and  generates  waste  [208,209].  To
date, anthracene has exclusively been produced from coal tar distillate
fractions (i.e., anthracene oils). The latter, containing ~6 wt% anthra-
cene, is crystallized, vacuum distilled and recrystallized to reach 95 wt%
concentrations  [210].  Despite  its  highly  intensive  production  route,
synthetic anthracene has no commercial interest due to its unbalanced
and limited global supply and demand (20 kT in 1987) [202]. Global
production and utilization of anthracene has decreased over the past few
decades, especially in Europe, where it has virtually been neither pro-
duced nor used since 2003 (compared to 8 kT in 1987) [202,210]. If
anthracene  demand  increased  far  beyond  the  current  production  ca-
pacities, the HCO from catalytic cracking could be an alternative source
of this material because its polyaromatics are mainly within the 2–4 ring
range  with  up  to  around  20  wt%  of  anthracene  and  phenanthrenes
combined [206,211].

3.5. BTX applications, sources, and market prospects

Commodities  such  as  BTXs  are  high  added-value  chemicals  with
higher margins than their application as fuel, as shown in Table 3. The
requirement for petrochemicals is predicted to grow annually at a rate of
2–3% until 2030, led by Asian Pacific economies where populations and
living standards are increasing [212]. Benzene toluene and xylene iso-
mers are highly in-demand building blocks because they are essential in
the manufacture of several commodity chemicals (Fig. 11) and account
for 16.9% of the global consumption of the seven most-used chemicals,
namely, ethylene, propylene, ammonia, and methanol, in addition to the
aforementioned BTXs [213]. Fig. 11 is inspired by a previous one [60].
Benzene  is  primarily  used  in  the  production  of  ethylbenzene  (for
styrene  and  polystyrene),  cumene  (for  phenol  and  acetone  synthesis,
precursors  of  phenolic  resins  and  methacrylates,  respectively),  and
cyclohexane (for nylon production) [214]. In 2021, ethylbenzene and
cumene production accounted for 67.3% of benzene consumption [215].
Although toluene can be used for producing polyurethanes through the
synthesis of toluene diisocyanate (5.5%), as a solvent (17.3%) or as a
gasoline  component  to  reduce  vapor  pressure  and  enhance  octane
(24.6%), most of the toluene is converted to benzene and p-xylene (51%)
via  dealkylation  and  disproportionation/transalkylation,  respectively,
because benzene and p-xylene are more widely demanded and utilized
[214,216]. In particular, p-xylene is a pivotal raw material for producing
the  terephthalic  acid  and  dimethyl  terephthalate  required  to  produce
PET polymers. However, o-xylene and m-xylene are primarily used for
phthalic anhydride and isophthalic acid production in PVC plasticizers,
polyesters, and alkyd resins [214].

The  recovery  of  BTXs  from  polyaromatic-rich  streams  involves  an
extraction  unit  and  downstream  fractionation  of  the  BTX-containing
extract.  Depending  on  the  aromatic  content  of  the  source,  extractive
distillation  (65–90%)  or
liquid-liquid  extraction  (20–65%)  are
commonly  used.  The  added  solvent  decreases  the  boiling  point

Table 3
Relative price margins of various refinery and petrochemical products, from Al-
Samhan et al. [15].

Products

Refining

naphtha

Benzene
Toluene
p-xylene
Polymers

Net price margin relative to crude oil ($ per ton, adjusted to
2019)

1.13

1.66–1.73
1.46
1.46–1.86
2.1

Fig.  11. Leading  derivatives  from  BTX  chemicals  in  the  petrochemical  in-
dustry [60].

difference  between  the  aromatics  and  aliphatic  compounds  in  the
former. In the latter, the extracting solvent must be sufficiently polar to
retain  a  two-liquid-phase  system  during  all  stages.  Indeed,  p-xylene
isolation from its isomers typically requires crystallization or adsorption
with  a  selective,  solid  zeolitic  adsorbent  [201,217].  The  principal
streams from which BTX can be extracted are heavy naphtha from the
catalytic reformer (reformate) and PyGas. Comparatively, reformate is
richer  in  benzene and  xylenes,  with  up  to  15  vol%  of  benzene  under
conventional  catalytic  reforming  conditions  [215].  However,  several
process  variations  (e.g.,  RZ  Platforming,  UOP;  Aromizing,  Axens;
XK-130  Performing, ExxonMobil)  have  been developed  to  specifically
convert low-quality naphtha into BTX [218]. Reformate is the primary
source  for  benzene  production  alongside  PyGas  and  toluene,  repre-
senting ~93% of global benzene capacity in 2021. Coal-derived crude
light  oil  containing  between  55  and  75  vol%  benzene  accounted  for
around 10% of the worldwide installed capacity in 2021, predominantly
from  China  [215].  The  largest  share  of  toluene  is  recovered  from
reformate (74%, 2021) and PyGas (21%, 2021), the latter more suitable
for toluene extraction. The remaining 5% is accounted for by styrene
manufacture  from  ethylbenzene  dehydrogenation,  where  toluene  is
obtained as a byproduct [216]. In 2019, 68% of xylene isomers were
derived from reformate, while 29% were derived from toluene conver-
sion, with PyGas as the third source (4%) due to the strong presence of
ethylbenzene  (up  to  50  vol%)  in  heavy  feed  crackers  PyGas  that  can
render xylene extraction to be uneconomical [219].

Global BTX production is expected to increase in the coming decades,
reaching 149 Mt per year in 2030 and 169 Mt per year in 2050, assuming
the  current  technology  scenario.  If  a  cleaner  technology  scenario  is
considered, the estimations of global production shrink to 143 and 154
Mt per year for 2030 and 2050, respectively [213]. As per other sources,
the increased demand for BTX chemicals in the upcoming decade will be
even more abrupt, reaching 141 Mt per year by 2023 [220]. As shown in
Fig.  12a,  global  benzene  capacity  in  2021  was  73.4  Mt  per  year,  ac-
counting  for  10%  of  the  global  primary  petrochemicals  demand  and
36% of BTX, and is expected to increase to 81.5 Mt by 2026, with an
annual average rate of 2.9%. The economic growth and improved living
standards in Asia are capitalizing on new capacity installation to meet
the localized demand growth. Demand in China alone increased at an

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111013

G. Lezcano et al.

predicted to grow at an average annual rate of 4%. Similarly, 57.5% of
the world’s p-xylene capacity (57.6 Mt per year in 2019) is in Northeast
Asia and is expected to remarkably increase during the next five years,
led by mega-refining projects in China, followed by those in the Middle
East. The importance of the Middle East as a p-xylene producing region
is growing due to its cost-competitive industry based on the developed
local feedstock integration [219].

In future scenarios where the average price of fuels is ~$600 per ton,
and  petrochemicals  are  ~$1200  per  ton,  refineries  that  integrate  the
production of the latter will be more profitable than traditional opera-
tions.  Accordingly,  the  implementation  of  “crude-to-chemicals”  tech-
nologies seems to be fundamental [221]. However, in the short-medium
term, less capitally intensive alternatives that do not involve such pro-
found  structural  changes  in  the  layout  of  existing  refineries  or
refinery-petrochemical complexes with a low level of integration seem
to be more plausible. Furthermore, the current industrial implementa-
tion of crude-to-chemicals could be impractical unless significant tech-
nological breakthroughs are made [222]. Hence, the design of refinery
and petrochemical schemes that use the existing units and streams offers
excellent  prospects  for  enhanced  return  on  existing  and  new  assets,
flexibility  in  operations  to  meet  volatile  market  demands,  and  opera-
tional efficiency. The latter includes heat integration/recovery, poten-
tial  reductions  in  intermediate  product  storage  volume  requirements,
pumping services, product cooling for storage and reheating from the
warehouse,  and  optimizing  hydrogen  networks  and  utility  facilities
[124]. By shifting to an integrated approach to producing petrochemi-
cals beyond the current classical refinery standards along with fuels, the
gross margin per barrel of crude oil could be increased to $30 [222]. For
example, aromatics are currently extracted from PyGas, and the raffi-
nate is sent to a gasoline pool or catalytic reformer if the steam cracker is
integrated with the conventional refinery [223]. Providing a refinery is
combined  with  a  petrochemical  complex.  The  heavy  naphtha  from
distillation could be dedicated to producing highly aromatic reformate
that can be used for BTX production, as shown in Fig. 8. At the same
time,  H2  byproducts  can  be  recirculated  in  the  refinery  H2  network
[224]. Accordingly, new potential low-value refinery or petrochemical
streams should be identified to produce BTX to maximize the existing
units, utilities, and streams in conventional or integrated refineries. In a
future  scenario  with  a  declining  gasoline  market,  FCC  units  could  be
operated to maximize petrochemical (olefins and aromatics) levels from
15 to 50% yields by incorporating selective catalysts and tuning feed-
stock and working conditions [124,224].

Although  BTX fraction  has  more  value  as  chemicals than  fuels, as
shown in Table 3, BTX can also be incorporated into the gasoline pool
because they are octane boosters with values close to 100. The problem
with them is that there are pressing environmental concerns about their
limits on gasoline, particularly for benzene. Table 4 shows the regula-
tions present in EU, China and India. As the gasoline demand is highly
volatile, given the geopolitical constraints and the momentum created to
approach a circular carbon economy, the forecasted gasoline demand
will increase and remain steady over the coming years. The demand for
diesel is dropping significantly. The fact that aromatics drop the quality
of  the  diesel  (cetane  number)  has  motivated  works  of  HDA  and  mild
hydrogenation  of  A2+ aromatics.  In  this  context,  the  SRO  of  poly-
aromatics to monoaromatics becomes even more relevant.

4. The technology of the ring-opening

4.1. Available reactor technologies

The  choice  of  reactor  technology  is  as  important  as  the  choice  of
catalyst and its selection is influenced by several characteristics of the
feed,  namely,  molecule  size  and  chemical  complexity,  polyaromatic
content, heteroatom presence and distribution across molecules, carbon
formation proclivity under reacting conditions, metal content in the feed
that can deactivate the catalyst, flow rate of hydrogen and the H2/feed

Fig.  12. Evolution  of  the  global  capacity  (solid  line),  consumption  (dashed
line),  and  their  geographical  distribution  for  (a)  benzene  [215],  (b)  toluene
[216], and (c) p-xylene [219], during the period 2014–2016.

average annual rate of 9.3% in the last decade (compared to a global
4.1%) and, along with Southeast Asia and the Middle East, representing
a  region  with  a  positively  evolving  benzene  market,  particularly
compared  to  the  stagnant  scenario  of  the  American  continent  and
Europe  [215].  Similar  to  benzene,  the  global  toluene  capacity  is  ex-
pected to increase at an average annual rate of 2.1% during the next five
years  (Fig.  12b).  Toluene  capacity,  however,  is  not  backed  by  a  high
operation rate (~60%), because the global demand for this chemical is
comparatively lower than that for other BTXs (29 Mt in 2021). Hence,
the  average annual rate of toluene  capacity growth is  lower than the
expected  demand  growth  of  3.2%,  with  the  demand  for  benzene  and
xylenes  positively  controlling  the  supply  of  toluene.  Therefore,  the
economics of toluene conversion are governed by the relationship be-
tween  the  prices  of  toluene  and  benzene,  which  determine  whether
hydrodealkylation  units  will  operate  [215].  Increasing  refining  and
steam  cracking  projects  in  Northeast  Asia  produce  51%  of  the  global
toluene, accounting for nearly all the additional toluene requirements
globally [216]. Finally, the demand for p-xylene (Fig. 12c) is determined
by the extensive utilization of phthalic anhydride to produce polyesters
in the textile industry, primarily in Northeast Asia, where 73% of global
p-xylene  was  consumed  in  2019.  Global  p-xylene  consumption  is

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111014

G. Lezcano et al.

Table 4
Current road gasoline and diesel fuel specifications in the EU, China and India
regions.

Country/Region

Standard
Year
RON
Olefins (vol%)
Aromatics (vol%)
Benzene (vol%)
Sulfur (ppm)
(cid:0) 1)
Pb (mg L

◦

(cid:0) 3)

Standard
Year
Density, 15
C (g cm
85 vol% ASTM-D86
90 vol% ASTM-D86
95 vol% ASTM-D86
Cetane Index
Cetane Number
PAHs (wt%)
Sulfur (ppm)
CCR on 10% residual oil

EU

Gasoline

EN 228
2013/2017a
95
18.0
35.0
1.0
10.0
5.0

Diesel

EN 590
2013/2017a
820–845
350
–

360
46
51
8.0
10.0
0.3

China

India

VI GB-17930
2016
95/98c
18.0/15.0
35.0
0.8
10.0
5.0

VI GB-19147
2016
–
–

355
365
46d
51d
7.0
10.0
0.3

BS VI
2020
91/95b
21.0/18.0b
35.0
1.0
10.0
5.0

BS VI
2020
820–860
350
–

370
46
51
11.0
10.0
0.3

a Rule established in 2013, Annex I was added in 2017.
b Regular/Premium.
c 98 RON fuels can be offered if a producer has production capability.
d Fuel Grade No. 0

ratio required by the catalyst. The most common hydroprocessing and
heavy  oil  upgrading  reactor  technologies  are,  in  decreasing  order  of
importance  (based  on  operative  units  worldwide  in  2008),  fixed-bed
(1350), ebullated-bed (17) and slurry-phase (3) [225].

Fixed-bed  reactors  are  typically  designed  to  follow  an  in-series
scheme  and  have  simple  operation  characteristics.  These  reactors  do
not require moving parts and are associated with relatively low oper-
ating and investment costs [226], unless we consider innovative reactor
internals  to  improve  wetting  efficiency  such  as  the  Spider  Vortex
developed by ExxonMobil Research &  Engineering Co [227]. A multi-
phase fixed-bed reactor may be operated in three ways: using two fluid
phases (liquid feed and H2  gas) that flow downward in parallel, using
two fluid phases flowing upward in parallel, or using two fluid phases
flowing  countercurrently.  Upflow  and  counterflow  fixed-bed  reactors
are not industrially relevant because the higher pressure drop associated
with the liquid flow rates in the latter is limited by flooding [226,228,
229].  Parallel  downflow  reactors  operating  under  the  dominance  of
gravity are called trickle-bed reactors (TBRs), and are the most widely
used in the industry, wherein they operate at higher fluid flow rates near
the transition or in the pulsing regime. The pulsing flow arises from the
higher liquid holdup zones promoted by the higher liquid flow rates that
extend  across  the  bed  [229].  TBRs  enable  the  liquid  flow  rate  to  be
varied  according  to  catalyst  wetting  and  transport  resistances  and
enable  ready  adjustment  to  fluctuations  in  demand  [226].  Typically,
flow patterns approach plug flow for both fluid phases and feature little
back-mixing [230].

TBR designs are heavily influenced by mass flow rates that enable
good  liquid  distribution  by  efficient  liquid  distributing  systems  that
minimize  preferential  pathways,  inefficient  catalyst  wetting  and  hot-
spots that can trigger coke deposition by poor radial heat transfer [229,
231]. TBRs typically follow a multibed configuration (e.g., 3–4 beds for
maximizing  middle  distillates)  [231]  that  enables  intermediate  H2
quenching via rings with multiple slots, spiders, and slotted tubes [123],
which are key for an effective reaction heat control by reducing the risk
of temperature excursions and enhancing H2 partial pressure [226,229].
Catalyst  particle  size  is  heavily  influenced  by  the  reaction  rate  and
pressure drop trade-off [230]. Therefore, particle size cannot be smaller

than 1 mm due to pressure drop and the risk of a more severe deacti-
vation by fouling [226]. The limited tolerance to metals (i.e., Ni and V)
and deposits in the feed can cause a rapid deactivation of the catalyst
and  high  pressure  drops,  leading  to  unit  shutdown  and  reactor
dismantlement  for  catalyst  substitution  [226,230].  These  metals  can
generally be used for feeds with metal contents below 25 ppm (hereafter
given on a weight basis) for year-long cycles. Heavier feedstocks require
the use of dual catalyst systems with layouts consisting of an inexpensive
hydrodemetallization catalyst guard bed in the front of the reactor. For
feeds with metal contents in the 100–150 ppm range, a triple catalyst
configuration is typically arranged with an HDM catalyst, an HDM/HDS
catalyst,  and  a  hydrocracking  catalyst  [230].  For  high  metal  content
feedstocks,  a  two-swing  fixed-bed  HDM  guard  reactor  (Hyvahl-S  by
IFP/Asvahl)  is  recommended  where  the  beds  operate  in  switchable
mode [232]. More recently, a third guard bed that enhances the lifetime
of  the  HDM  catalyst  has  been  proposed  for  the  swinging-bed  system
[233]. Systems for replacing spent catalysts over shorter periods, such as
Shell’s Quick Catalyst Replacement system, have also been developed
[234]. Other types of reactors are generally recommended for feeds with
metal  content  greater  than  250  ppm  [235].  N  and  S  in  the  feeds  are
usually  removed  during  a  pre-hydrotreating  stage  to  avoid  poisoning
and passivation of the acid sites in hydrocracking catalysts [236,237].
During the pretreatment stage, H2 partial pressures are the lowest at the
reactor  outlet  due  to  the  combined  effects  of  the  pressure  drop,  H2
consumption  and  higher  gaseous  product  yields,  which  hinder  the
removal of the trace of the sulfur compound, e.g., via recombination of
H2S with olefins to yield mercaptans [226]. SynSat Technology is one
strategy used to tackle this phenomenon using a separator downstream
of the hydrotreatingstage to remove H2S [238].

Moving  bed  reactors  (MBRs)  are  a  variation  of  the  TBRs  and  can
efficiently process very heavy oils with high contents of asphaltenes and
metals  (<400  ppm);  nonetheless,  their  efficiency  is  less  than  that  of
ebullated-bed or slurry reactors [235]. In MBRs, the catalyst continu-
ously flows downward from the top of the reactor under gravitational
forces, and the spent catalyst is collected at the bottom of the reactor
[239].  Both  fluid  phases  can  flow  in  parallel  (Shell’s  Hycon)  or  in
countercurrent (Chevron’s Onstream Catalyst Replacement, OCR) con-
cerning  the  catalyst  [240,241].  MBRs  allow  either  continuous  or
discontinuous catalyst replacement without interrupting unit operation
and are industrially applicable when coupled with upstream TBRs. The
main drawback of MBRs is their semi-continuous loading and the high
temperatures  and  pressures  required  for  the  withdrawal  of  fresh  and
deactivated catalysts, respectively. This process, which is usually per-
formed batchwise once or twice a week, can be optimized to ensure that
the withdrawn catalyst is completely spent. Countercurrent operations
are the most economical design because the spent catalyst interacts with
fresh feed while the new catalyst makes contact with lean oil, thereby
requiring less catalyst [239,242]. OCR and Hyvahl-M (by IFP/Asvahl)
are  examples  of  successful  countercurrent  MBR  technologies  for  pro-
cessing heavy fractions with very high contents of metals, maltenes and
asphaltenes  [230,241,242].  In  MBRs,  catalyst  grinding  and  abrasion
lead to the generation of fines that can reach downstream reactors and,
hence,  requires  catalysts  with  higher  mechanical  resistance  and
enhanced shapes [239,243].

Ebullated bed reactors (EBRs) can process feedstocks with very high
metal contents (<600 ppm), as well as asphaltenes and CCR with low
pressure  drops [235,244].  Current  designs  include a  single  reactor or
several EBRs in-series with interstage gas separators [245]. The liquid
hydrocarbon and H2  are fed to the plenum chamber below the grid in
each reactor, flowing upward and keeping the catalyst in suspension.
Gaseous and liquid reactants are well-mixed using a specially designed
gas-liquid  mixer,
i.e.,  a  horseshoe/shroud  distributor  assembly
[245–247]. Oil is separated from the catalyst in the upper part of the
reactor before being recycled to the bottom of the bed, wherein mixing
with the feed occurs using an ebullating pump. Most of the catalyst is
returned to the reactor, while some are replaced with a fresh catalyst

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111015

G. Lezcano et al.

[225].  Once  pumped,  the  extended  catalyst  takes  130–150%  of  the
settled  catalyst  bed,  attaining  a  uniform  fluidization  that  fosters  the
three-phase contact [245,246]. The main hydrocracking EBR units are
H-Oil (by IFP/Axens), T-Star (an extension of H-Oil) and LC-Fining (by
Chevron Lummus Global), which are conceptually similar but differ in
certain mechanical aspects, e.g., in the location of the ebullating pump,
which is placed either externally (H-Oil) or within the reactor (LC-Fin-
ing)  [247,248].  More  novel  EBR  technologies,  such  as  STRONG  by
SINOPEC, do not require the ebullating pump because the microspher-
ical  catalyst  is  fluidized  by  other  fluid  phases,  enhancing  fluidization
and making the process safer [246,249].

In EBRs, the catalyst lifetime is not a limiting factor because fresh
catalysts are continuously added and spent catalysts are withdrawn; as
such, the unit shutdown is not required for catalyst replacement [250].
The average catalyst activity reaches a stable state, resulting in constant
product properties throughout the cycle [245]. Nevertheless, as in the
case of MBRs, the catalyst suffers attrition and erosion, leading to higher
consumption rates and thus requiring enhanced mechanical stability. Its
operation is subject to semi-continuous catalyst withdrawal and addi-
tion under severe reaction conditions from the lower and upper parts of
the  reactor,  respectively  [246,250].  Additionally,  sediment  formation
must  be  strictly  controlled  because  it  can  affect  cycle  lifetime  when
present  at  more  than  0.8–1  wt%  [245].  In  EBRs,  the  catalysts  are
extrudates  smaller  than  0.8–1  mm  that  ease  suspension  by  the  liquid
phase inside the reactor. Smaller catalyst particle sizes and lower cata-
lyst holdups require higher reactor volumes than comparable conditions
in TBRs and MBRs [225,250].

◦

Slurry-phase reactors (SPRs) consist of a three-phase flow wherein
the catalyst bed is fluidized by a liquid that moves in parallel or coun-
tercurrently  with  the  gas  [251].  Most  SPR-based  technologies  are
currently at the pilot stage, with few operational industrial units. Some
commercialized  technologies  include  ENI’s  Slurry  Technology,  KBR’s
Veba Combi Cracking, and UOP’s Uniflex [252–254]. SPRs have several
advantages, including competitive construction and operational costs,
high flexibility, low pressure drops, and simple online catalyst addition
[251,255].  SPRs  can  process  feedstocks  with  very  high  contents  of
metals  (>300  ppm),  CCR,  and  asphaltenes,  and  even  coal  tar  under
extreme operating conditions (>450
C and 14–20.8 MPa) [225,235].
SPR  operation  is  almost  isothermal,  even  for  highly  exothermic  re-
actions, with high throughput and conversion [251,256]. Hence, tem-
perature control is simple, with good external heat transfer and no risk
of  temperature  runaway  or  hotspot  appearance  [242].  SPRs  achieve
good contact between the catalyst and oil phase, with high back-mixing
of  the  slurry  phase  [256].  Typically,  small  amounts  of  finely  divided
powder  catalysts  are  added  to  the  feed;  more  recently,  homogeneous
dispersed  catalysts  (oil  or  water  soluble)  have  also  increased  usage
[257].  Nonetheless,  the  limited  industrial  application  of  SPRs  can  be
attributed  to  the difficulty  of the  scale-up of  operations, the  inconve-
nience  of  separating  the  catalyst  from  the  liquid phase  at  the  reactor
outlet that can lead to downstream plugging, and the agglomeration and
sedimentation of solid phases inside the reactor that severely negatively
impacts unit performance [251]. As such, SPRs are typically associated
with higher catalyst consumption [242].

C, approximately 0.93–0.94 kg m

Among the streams suitable for SRO, their physicochemical proper-
ties  heavily  condition  the  reactor  technology  used.  LCO  or  STPO,
(cid:0) 3),
◦
featuring moderate densities (15
negligible metal contents, sulfur contents around 1–2 wt%, an absence
of asphaltenes, and very low CCR, imply that conventional TBR reactors
can be used for their hydroconversion. This is the case for commercially
available technologies such as FD2G and Unicracking. Problematic as-
pects, such as heteroatoms (O, Cl, F) in STPO, could require additional
guard beds, yet these have limited implications. Despite the low sulfur in
PFO, nitrogen, and metal contents, other reactor technologies that can
tolerate highly dense and viscous liquids prone to precipitating asphal-
tenes and coking are required. This is a challenge faced by EBRs, which
are typically designed for VR feeds to ensure low pressure drops. Other

solutions to reduce the proneness to sedimentation of the PFO include
diluting  the  feedstock  with  highly  aromatic  solvents  and  utilizing  se-
lective catalysts that produce fewer sediments. Several works [196,197,
258]  have  reported  that  the  dilution  of  the  feedstock  with  aromatic
streams,  including LCO,  HCO  and  DO,  is  an  efficient  method  to  keep
sediment formation under control (<0.8 wt%) to ensure the continuous
operation of the heavy oil hydrotreating/hydrocracking unit. Further-
more, the highly diaromatic nature places LCO as the most promising
diluent among the ones reported.

4.2. Process-scale simulation

Developing innovative technologies for product deployment requires
careful  consideration  of  multiple  aspects,  including  technical  and
financial factors. A techno-economic model (TEM) is a useful approach
to quantify the financial attractiveness of a proposed process flow dia-
gram.  Herein,  a  techno-economic  analysis  (TEA)  of  a  unit  producing
alkylated monoaromatics from PFO is presented (hereafter, SRO unit).
PFO was chosen as the candidate offering the most innovative prospects
for producing alkylated monoaromatics, as mentioned above.

The  LC-FINING  process  (developed  by  Chevron  Lummus  Global)
inspires the proposed two-level hydrocracking scheme shown in Fig. 13.
The  first  level  (HDT/HC,  Fig.  13)  is  the  integrated  hydrotreating-
hydrocracking reactor (analogous to an EBR) for heavy oil feedstocks.
It aims to upgrade the PFO feed into a liquid that, after removal of the
heavier end, resembles a VGO. The second level of hydroprocessing (HC-
1 and 2, Fig. 13) utilizes a train of two fixed-bed hydrocracking reactors
[248,259]. Flash drums remove the light ends products, such as H2, H2S,
and NH3, after which a heavy oil stripping column (HOS, Fig. 13) rejects
the  unconverted  heavy  end  of  PFO  as  an  HFO.  The  final  products
recovered  consisted  of  HFO,  paraffinic  naphtha,  and  a  lumped  heavy
aromatics stream. Given the infrastructure already present in the steam
crackers and deploying the SRO technology in these plants, the aromatic
extraction section was omitted from the proposed process configuration.
The obtained process flow diagram generated the process material bal-
ance as an input to the TEM [260,261]. Simulations were carried out
using Aspen HYSYS; further details are available in the Supplementary
Information. A PFO throughput of 6 thousand barrels per day (MBPD, i.
(cid:0) 1) in the simulation represents the approximate yield of PFO
e., 40 m3 h
that can be obtained from a steam cracker processing 100% full range
naphtha  processing  5  million  metric  tons  per  annum  (MMTPA).  To
dilute the PFO feed and control its colloidal instability, typically aro-
matic  solvents  (e.g.,  HCO)  are  used,  but  to  simplify  the  simulation,
toluene was cofed [248].

The  integrated  hydroprocessing  reactor  results  and  operating  con-
ditions  are  shown  in  Tables  5  and  6  were  determined  based  on  the
typical  values  for  the  LC-Fining  residue  EBR  (Table  S3).  Simulated
hydroconversion (45.1%) occurred at the lower range of typical residual
values as when processing PFO, and severe cracking was undesirable to
avoid  the  oversaturation  of  aromatic  rings.  Nonetheless,  high  hydro-
treating conversions were achieved. Mass balances of the simulation are
provided in Table S4. The HOS was configured with a high boil-up ratio
to  recover  as  much  light  oil  as  possible  and  to  feed  the  downstream
hydrocrackers;  however,  maintaining  the  quality  of  the  feed  was
important (Table S5, Figs. S6–7). The hydrocracking reactors aimed to
favor  ring-opening  reactions  for  the  formation  of  alkylated  mono-
aromatics, as shown in Table 6. The total hydrogen consumption was
estimated to be 4.8 wt% of the feed.

4.3. Techno-economic modeling and analysis

The TEM presented in this work is based on the discount cash flow
(DCF) methodology, which considers different cash flows generated by
the deployment of a facility during its whole lifetime from conceptual
inception  to  shutdown.  Profitability  depends  on  the  balance  between
competitive advantages that are created and destroyed, including those

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111016

G. Lezcano et al.

Fig. 13. Simplified process flow diagram showing the proposed configuration to convert PFO into alkylated monoaromatics. Acronyms: HDT/HC, ebullated-bed
hydrotreater/hydrocracker; HC-1 and 2, fixed-bed hydrocracker train; HOS, heavy oil stripper.

Table 5
Simulation results for the feed and product streams.

Parameter

Value

Parameter

Feed

m

C, kg

◦
Density (15
(cid:0) 3)
Sulfur (wt%)
Nitrogen (ppmw)

ASTM D2887
distillation

10/50/90 wt%

Aromatics (wt%)

A1
A2
+
A3

Saturates (wt%)

Diluent (wt/wt)

0.9463

2.47
1572
◦
C)
(

388/539/
680

18
28
52
2

Product Yields
Aromatic Rich Stream (wt%
of feed)

Mass fraction
Benzene
Toluene

Xylenes

Ethylbenzene
C8 aromatics
C9 aromatics
C10 aromatics
Paraffins
HFO (wt% of feed)

Value

70.7

0.0196
0.0004

0.0051

0.0036
0.0283
0.0504
0.8017
0.0909
21.5

PFO/Toluene

48.0

ASTM D 2887 distillation
C)

◦

(

10/50/90 wt%

559/588/
649

Table 6
Characteristics of the reacting zones.

following parameters to be estimated: (i) capital expenditure (CAPEX)
and operating expenses (OPEX), (ii) cost of energy and H2, and (iii) cost
of feedstocks and products.

Location strongly influences the TEA and affects every aspect of the
TEM from CAPEX to energy costs. Hence, a two-by-two matrix analysis
was performed, as shown in Fig. 14, wherein four scenarios based on
CAPEX and the cost of energy/H2  were considered. CAPEX intensity is
allocated to each region based on the capital cost relative to the US Gulf
Coast (USGC) shown in Table S6. The cost of energy/H2 is based on the
assumption  of  using  natural  gas  (LNG)  as  the  marginal  energy  for
refining and petrochemical facilities. The cost of LNG experiences major
changes  from  producing  regions  (e.g.,  the  USA  and  the  Middle  East)
compared to those importing it (e.g., Europe and Asia). Likewise, the
predicted H2  consumption for the SRO unit (4.8 wt% of feed) is high,
especially compared to a conventional VGO hydrocracker. Hence, the
cost of H2, which is assumed to be produced via steam reforming of CH4,
will be strongly linked to the latter; as such, the price/cost of CH4  be-
comes a key input of the potential profitability of the process.

From Fig. 14, the worst-case scenario corresponds to Europe where

Parameter

Feed

Flow rate (m3 h

(cid:0) 1)

Temperature (
Pressure (MPa)

◦

C)

H2 Partial pressure (MPa)

H2/Oil Ratio (STD m3 m
LHSV (h
Conversion (%)

(cid:0) 1)

(cid:0) 3)

HDT/HC

HC-1

HC-2

PFO + Toluene
44.9
410
20.0
17.0
800
0.46–1.18

Light Oil
34.8
410
15.5
13.1
600
0.63

prod. HYC-1
34.5
410
14.9
12.7
600
0.62

Hydrocracking (>525
Hydrodesulfurization
Hydrodenitrification

◦

C)

45.1
99.6
85.4

inherent to the technology and independent of the process (e.g., market
prices). Although the process simulation covers all the inputs related to
the  technology,  forecasting  the  cash  flows  for  revenues  requires  the

Fig.  14. Two-by-two  matrix  with  all  potential  deployment  locations  studied
based on capital cost intensity and the cost of energy/H2.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111017

G. Lezcano et al.

both  CAPEX  and  cost  of  energy/H2  are  high.  Intermediate  scenarios
correspond to the Middle East and the USA, which enjoy low natural gas
cost but have high capital intensities. The opposite case is Asia, where
capital costs are around 65% of those in the USA but cost of energy/H2 is
higher. The best-case scenario corresponding to both low CAPEX and
low cost of energy/H2 is not specific to any location yet could represent a
scenario  with  a  low  interest  rate  loan  facilitated  by  a  country  that  is
looking for foreign investments.

The other key assumption for the TEM is feedstock and product price
estimation. These costs, together with the overall mass balance, govern
the gross margin of the unit, defined as the difference between the worth
of  all  products  sold  and  the  cost  of  all  feedstocks  purchased.  Price
forecasts  are  given  based  on  multiple  factors,  such  as  outlooks  and
strategies and are both confidential and expensive. Hence, in this work,
we  followed  a  stochastic  approach  to  assume  feedstock  and  product
prices  based  on  triangular  distributions  taking  the  average  historical
price set by the 5–95 percentile of the data as the most probable value.
Stochastic simulations are then used to perturb the full set of prices in
the estimated ranges, thereby covering a wide range of potential sce-
narios. The pricing philosophies are summarized in Table 7 and addi-
tional assumptions for the TEM and the financial and market inputs are
provided in Tables S7–8.

The DCF analysis results comprise multiple financial metrics that can
be used to rank different investment options; the most used metrics are
the Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR). In this
TEA, we used IRR as the output metric of our TEM, since it is indepen-
dent of the Discount Rate of Return, which is different for every com-
pany.  The  results  of  the  stochastic  Monte  Carlo  simulations  are
presented in Fig. 15.

Fig. 15a–d shows the results corresponding to a greenfield scenario
of cases from the two-by-two matrix in Fig. 14. As expected, the Euro-
pean case is the least attractive option; indeed, it is unlikely that SRO
technology can be profitably deployed (i.e., IRR >10%) in this region. It
is  interesting  that  the  Middle  East,  the  USA,  and  Asia  show  similar
probabilities  (around  20%)  of  achieving  IRRs  higher  than  10%.  This
means that the low cost of energy/H2  and the low capital advantages
lead  to similar potential profitability. This finding  is somewhat unex-
pected as lower CAPEX is typically considered as a stronger competitive
advantage than low energy/H2  costs due to the fact that refining and
petrochemical processes require high capital investment, and the cash
flows derived therein are incurred early in the life of the facility. In this
case,  the  higher  consumption  of  H2  is  equally  impactful  as  the  lower
capital cost expected in Asia; however, the most likely IRR values in the
three regions evaluated (excluding the best scenario, Fig. 15c) exhibit a
range spanning from 2% to 7%, which represents a low expected return
in the downstream refining and petrochemical business.

Table 7
Pricing philosophies for all the feed and product streams.

Stream

Comment

Pyrolysis fuel oil (PFO)

H2

CH4

Benzene + toluene
C8-C9 alkylated

monoaromatics

C10 alkylated

monoaromatics
Paraffinic naphtha

Heavy fuel oil (HFO)

Priced as heavy sulfur fuel oil (380 cSt) and a premium of
around 6% (the difference between light and heavy
sulfur fuel oils).
Produced via CH4 steam reforming, purchased to a third
party over the fence.
Priced as either subsidized ($2–4 MMBTU
cost in Europe and Asia ($12 MMBTU
Priced as chemical grade aromatics.
Contains mixed xylenes and ethylbenzene equivalent to
the post extraction products of benzene and toluene from
PyGas.
Priced as RON 92 gasoline.

(cid:0) 1)a or average

(cid:0) 1)a.

Priced as petrochemical grade paraffinic naphtha (<180
◦
C).
Priced as heavy fuel oil (380 cSt).

a 1 MMBTU = 1 million British thermal units (BTUs).

Fig.  15. Probability  distribution  of  internal  rate  of  return  (IRR)  from  Monte
Carlo  simulation  results  and  the  probability  of  achieving  an  internal  rate  of
return higher than 10% for greenfield scenarios of (a) low energy/H2  cost and
high CAPEX, (b) high energy/H2 cost and high CAPEX, (c) low energy/H2 cost
and low CAPEX, and (d) high energy/H2  cost and low CAPEX, and brownfield
scenarios for (e) low energy/H2  cost and (f) high energy/H2  cost.

When  benchmarking  potential  opportunities  of  upgrading  PFO  to
alkylated  monoaromatics  against  conventional  projects,  the  relatively
small throughput of PFO affording a small unit is of immediate benefit,
as world scale capacity hydrocrackers are in the range of 50–70 MBPD
(compared to 6 MBPD in this study). Hence, the TEM in this study is
penalized by its economy of scale. Indeed, following the heuristic rule of
CAPEX being a function of capacity to the power of 2/3, a throughput of
6 MBPD implies 2.15 times more CAPEX per barrel of feed than a con-
ventional 60 MBPD unit [262]. Hence, to fully evaluate the impact of
SRO  technology,  instead  of  considering  a  new  unit  deployment  or  a
greenfield  scenario  (Fig.  15a–d),  stochastic  Monte  Carlo  simulations
were performed considering a brownfield scenario with low and high
energy/H2  costs (Fig. 15e and f). The brownfield scenario assumes the
revamping  of  an  existing  hydrocracking  unit  to  accommodate  a  PFO
stream  with  10%  of  the  analogous  greenfield  scenario  CAPEX.  These
simulations  indicate  a  much  more  promising  scenario  in  terms  of  in-
vestment, as well as a significant margin to accommodate higher capital
costs yielding returns in the 15–20% range.

The short-medium term will be full of changes in the refining and
petrochemical industries. Although a radical shift towards the exclusive
production  of  chemicals  is  unlikely,  the  integration of  refineries  with
petrochemical  complexes  will  become  more  competitive  as  they  lean
their product portfolio towards growing chemical building blocks in a
shrinking fuel market. In that regard, the TEA presented herein indicates

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111018

G. Lezcano et al.

that more innovative approaches, like the SRO of PFO, inevitably rely on
efficient  integration  from  a  CAPEX  point  of  view  (greenfield  vs.
brownfield scenarios) and due to limited PFO availability. The present
study  assumed  6  MBPD  of  throughput  for  the  SRO  unit,  representing
approximately 5 wt% yield of a medium-size naphtha cracker. However,
within the refining and petrochemistry ranges, such throughput is small
and limits the feasibility of the analysis. To expand the validity of the
analysis, the effect of the throughput (assuming the same dilution and
product distribution) was studied, and the results are shown in Fig. 16.
Higher flow rates of PFO could be obtained when heavier feedstocks,
such as diesel and VGO, were fed to the same medium-size steam cracker
producing 1.5 MMTPA of ethylene (30 wt% yield), assuming PFO yields
of 12.5 and 25 wt%, respectively. Higher flow rates could even represent
the steam cracking of crude oil or a scenario wherein the SRO unit is run
in alternate campaigns, switching between PFO and more conventional
feedstocks (i.e., VR). Fig. 16a shows that the most probable IRR for the
high CAPEX and low energy/H2 cost scenario is virtually highly driven
by the CAPEX as the throughput influences the IRR in the same form the
decreasing throughput ratio influences the CAPEX per unit barrel ratio
(Fig. 16b), i.e., powered to 1/3. Note that in Fig. 16b the aforementioned
2.15 CAPEX per barrel ratio increase corresponding to a 10-fold capacity
decrease  is  indicated.  Hence,  feedstock  availability  is  a  fundamental
factor  to  consider  when  addressing  the  upgrading  of  PFO  via
hydroconversion.

5. Conclusions

The  conversion  of  polyaromatic-rich  streams  through  hydro-
processing involves complex reaction networks with strong synergistic
interactions  among  them,  which  are  also  conditioned  by  the  catalyst
design  and  operating  conditions.  Process  severity  will  determine
whether we operate in hydrotreating (milder) or hydrocracking (more
severe)  regime,  and  also  drive  the  occurrence  of  hydrogenation  (C-C
bond  saturation),  hydrogenolysis  (heteroatom  scission),  and  cracking
reactions (C-C bond cleavage). The latter include selective ring-opening

Fig. 16. (a) Effect of SRO unit throughput on the most probable internal rate of
return (IRR) values assuming a high CAPEX and low energy/H2 cost greenfield
scenario and (b) effect of decreasing capacity ratio on the CAPEX per unit barrel
ratio according to the 1/3 heuristic rule.

(SRO)  reactions,  which  are  of  crucial  relevance  on  the  conversion  of
polyaromatic  refinery  streams  into  valuable  BTX  products  (benzene,
toluene and xylenes).

In SRO reactions, catalyst design (the selection of the active metallic
phase and support properties) must meet the requirements to provide
the complex reaction network balance that is required for BTX produc-
tion.  On  the  one  hand,  the  mesoporosity  and  mild  acidity  of  γ-Al2O3
have made it the preferential support for transition metals and hydro-
treatment purposes. On the other hand, the conversion of moderate-to-
heavy hydrocarbons requires of additional driving forces, which can be
better provided by zeolite support materials, and/or noble metal-based
metallic phases. Specifically, zeolites with wider pores like Hβ  can be
particularly suitable for avoiding the diffusional limitations commonly
ascribed to polyaromatic stream conversion. The necessity to overcome
these  limitations  and  the  customizable  nature  of  zeolites  have  also
motivated more sophisticated catalyst design, like hierarchical zeolites.
While  the  literature  addresses  the  hydroprocessing  of  a  variety  of
polyaromatic feedstock (from mild pyrolysis gasoline hydrotreating to
severe vacuum residue hydrocracking), there is no uniform framework
that allows to systematically compare the works across research groups
and easily extrapolate the obtained knowledge from the processing of a
given feed type to another. This lack of standardization involves several
aspects of the experimentation procedure, from the choice of operating
conditions  (catalysts  synthesis  method,  reactor  type,  temperature,  H2
partial  pressure)  to  the  applied  analytical  workflow  (instruments  and
methods).  Furthermore,  the  challenges  involved  in  the  conversion  of
realistic  polyaromatic  feedstock  and  the  lack  of  fundamental  under-
standing of the reactivity of each mixture have led to abundant research
using model compounds. On many occasions, these model compounds
have been selected based on a partial analysis of the feed (i.e., through
GC) and can also be restricted by commercial availability, which inev-
itably  limits  the  scientific  relevance  and  further  applicability  of  the
obtained  research  data.  For  instance,  despite  pyrolysis  fuel  oil  being
highly  diaromatic  (c.a.  40  wt%),  naphthalene  cannot  be  taken  as  a
representative  compound  of  the  mixture  for  gathering  industrially
relevant  insights,  as  its  reactivity  will  mainly  be  limited  by  the  most
refractory  and  polyaromatic  compounds  present  in  it.  Nonetheless,
molecules like naphthalene, tetralin and decalin have been efficiently
used to obtain valuable fundamental information on SRO reactivity and
also to for establishing the key considerations to be considered for the
optimization of catalyst and process design. In this regard, the multi-
variate analysis reported in this work has resulted a very powerful tool
to  help  understand  how  the  choice  of  metal  affects  the  final  product
selectivity,  how  the  model  feed  and  reactor  conditions  influence  the
reported conversions, or how the performance is strongly driven by the
support material.

At an industrial scale, only a few of all the polyaromatic streams were
deemed potentially suitable for their SRO conversion. A suitable stream
must be marginal in terms of importance, rich in diaromatics to avoid
excessive H2  consumption, lean on heteroatoms and colloidally stable.
Most  of  the  PAH-rich  streams  present  in  refinery  conversions  are  too
valuable under the current refinery layout (e.g., straight-run gas oil), too
heavy and rich in very refractory aromatics (e.g., heavy cycle oil and
decanted oil from FCC) or simply are not aromatic enough for dedicated
BTX  production  (e.g.,  visbreaker  and  coker  gas  oils  and  hydro-
deoxygenated bio-oils). In that context, light cycle oil from FCC, pyrol-
ysis  fuel  oil  from  the  steam  cracker  and  scrap  tire  pyrolysis  oil  as  a
renewable  source  were  identified  as  promising.  Based  on  the  scarce
literature  available,  more  research  should  be  attracted  to  the  hydro-
cracking of pyrolysis fuel oil for being very rich in aromatics and readily
accessible  in  the  framework  of  an  integrated  refinery,  while  posing
remarkable scientific challenges as it also can contain up to C70  mole-
cules. Light cycle oil from the FCC, on the other hand, has been exten-
sively studied and technologies for its upgrading to BTX have already
been  developed.  Likewise,  the  inclusion  of  scrap  tire  pyrolysis  oil  for
BTX production is conditioned by its downstream fractionation which

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111019

G. Lezcano et al.

must be optimized for such purpose.

The  upgrading  of  polyaromatic  mixtures  to  BTX  is  easily  justified
from a conceptual viewpoint. While the market of polyaromatics con-
tinues to shrink, alkylated monoaromatics are becoming key platform
chemicals. Although it is not declining on a yearly basis, the market for
naphthalene is already saturated with the production of coal tar-derived
naphthalene oil, which leaves almost no niche for the extraction of crude
naphthalene from pyrolysis fuel oil, light cycle oil or other renewable
counterparts.  On  the  contrary,  global  BTX  production  is  expected  to
increase remarkably even if a clear technology scenario is considered,
thus making the upgrading of residual polyaromatics to BTX an inter-
esting  alternative.  In  fact,  despite  the  existence  of  technologies  that
convert low-quality naphtha into BTX, fuel market predictions suggest
that the heavy oil upgrading is still justified. Furthermore, a tight inte-
gration of refinery and petrochemical complexes is to be key wherein the
gross margin per barrel of crude oil could be increased to $30, especially
in the short- and mid-term, while other avant-garde alternatives around
the conversion of crude to chemicals still remain impractical.

The main hydrocracking reactor technology has been the fixed-bed
reactor,  which  serves  efficiently  for  the  upgrading  of  feedstock  of
moderate densities and neglectable metal contents. Heavier feeds with
high  metal  contents  and  prone  to  cause  sedimentation  issues  like  py-
rolysis fuel oil require ebullated-bed reactors. In ebullated-bed reactors
the main component is the ebullating pump that suspends the catalyst
and oil mixture for an effective conversion of the latter. Research in this
area is leaning towards the utilization of a microspherical catalyst that is
fluidized by other fluid phases, thus not requiring the pump.

Despite  showing  a  great  potential,  the  SRO  upgrading  via  hydro-
cracking is also subject to external factors. As shown in our simulations
of pyrolysis fuel oil upgradation, the cost of energy/H2  plays a crucial
role  in  the  economic  viability  of  the  hydrocracking  plant  over  other
factors  like  the  lower  CAPEX,  which  is  typically  considered  to  be  a
stronger competitive advantage than low energy/H2 costs. Furthermore,
the technoeconomic analysis highlights the economy of scale as another
fundamental factor. When greenfield (i.e., installation of a new unit) and
brownfield (i.e., revamping of an existing hydrocracking unit) scenarios
were compared, the probability of obtaining an IRR >10% was signifi-
cantly bigger in the latter, as a result of the assumed feed capacity of 6
MBPD (i.e., a 5 wt% yield of a medium-size naphtha cracker). Note that
world scale capacity hydrocrackers are in the range of 50–70 MBPD, and
hence, installing a brand new 6 MBPD capacity hydrocracker is simply
not feasible. The study was further expanded by considering higher flow
rates (e.g., from diesel/VGO and even futural crude oil steam crackers)
and  revealed  that  feedstock  availability  is  a  vital  factor  for  the
competitive upgrading of PFO via hydroconversion.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge financial support, resources and facilities
provided by the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST) and Saudi Aramco.

Atmospheric residue
British thermal unit
Benzene, toluene and xylenes

Conradson carbon residue
Coker gas oil (full range)
Deasphalted oil
Discount cash flow
Decanted oil
Ebullated-bed reactor
Final boiling point
Fluid catalytic cracking
Hydrocracking
Heavy cycle oil
Hydrodearomatization
Hydrodemetallization
Hydrodeoxygenation

AR
BTU
BTX
CAPEX  Capital expenditure
CCR
CGO
DAO
DCF
DO
EBR
FBP
FCC
HC
HCO
HDA
HDM
HDO
HDO-BIO Hydrodeoxygenated bio-oil
Hydrodesulfurization
HDS
Hydrotreating or hydrotreatment
HDT
Heavy fuel oil
HFO
Heavy oil stripper
HOS
Hydrogenation
HYD
Initial boiling point
IBP
Internal rate of return
IRR
Light coker gas oil
LCGO
Light cycle oil
LCO
Liquid hourly space velocity
LHSV
Liquated natural gas
LNG
LPG
Liquified petroleum gas
LVBGO  Light visbreaker gas oil
MBPD
MBR
MHC
MMBTU  Million metric british thermal unit
MMTPA  Million metric tons per annum
NPV
OPEX
PAH
PCA
PFO
PyGas
R
RON
S
SCP
SEKM
SOL
SPR
SRGO
SRO
STPO
TBP
TBR
TEA
TEM
USGC
VBR
VGO
VR
WHSV  Weight hourly space velocity

Net present value
Operating expenses
Polyaromatic hydrocarbon
Principal component analysis
Pyrolysis fuel oil
Pyrolysis gasoline
Resins
Research octane number
Saturates
Stability cross plot
Single-event kinetic modeling
Structure-oriented lumping
Slurry phase reactor
Straight-run gas oil
Selective ring–opening
Scrap tire pyrolysis oil
True boiling point
Trickle bed reactor
Techno-economic assessment
Techno-economic model
US Gulf coast
Visbreaker residue
Vacuum gas oil
Vacuum residue

Thousands of barrels per day
Moving-bed reactor
Mild hydrocracking

6. Abbreviations

A
Ar

Asphaltenes
Aromatics

PCA Nomenclature
cis-Decalin Selectivity towards cis–decalin,%
Cracked gases Selectivity towards cracked gases,%
Cracking products Selectivity towards cracking products,%

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111020

G. Lezcano et al.

(cid:0) 1

Pore diameter, Å

Iridium content in the catalyst, wt%
Potassium content in the catalyst, wt%
Liquid hourly space velocity, h
Magnesium content in the catalyst, wt%
Molybdenum content in the catalyst, wt%
Sodium content in the catalyst, wt%

DHYD products Selectivity towards dehydrogenated products,%
dp
H2/Feed  Molar ratio of H2 and hydrocarbon feed
Ir
K
LHSV
Mg
Mo
Na
Naphthalene Selectivity towards napthtalene,%
Ni
NS
Os
Other products Selectivity towards other products,%
P (red-squared) Phosphorous content in the catalyst, wt%
P (blue-circled) Reaction pressure, bar
Pd
Pt
Rh
Ring-contraction products Selectivity towards ring–contraction

Palladium content in the catalyst, wt%
Platinum content in the catalyst, wt%
Rhodium content in the catalyst, wt%

Nickel content in the catalyst, wt%
Stirring rate, rpm
Osmium content in the catalyst, wt%

products,%

(cid:0) 1

Ruthenium content in the catalyst, wt%
BET surface area, m2 g
Molar ratio of Si to Al in the support

Ring-opening products Selectivity towards ring–opening products,%
Ru
SBET
Si/Al
Strong acidity Strong acidity relative to total acidity of the catalyst,%
Sulfur
τ
T
t
TOS
Total acidity Total acidity of the catalyst, mmol propylamine g

Sulfur content in the feed, ppmw
Contact time, s
Reaction temperature,
Reaction time, h
Time on stream, h

(cid:0) 1 or

C

◦

mmol pyridine g

(cid:0) 1

Pore volume, cm3 g
Tungsten content in the catalyst, wt%

trans-Decalin Selectivity towards trans-decalin,%
Vp
W
Weak acidity Weak acidity relative to total acidity of the catalyst, %
XFeed

Feed conversion, %

(cid:0) 1

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101110.

References

[1] Abdel-Shafy HI, Mansour MSM. A review on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons:
source, environmental impact, effect on human health and remediation. Egyptian
Journal of Petroleum 2016;25:107–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejpe.2015.03.011.

[2] Peter HA. Petroleum and individual polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. In:

Handbook of ecotoxicology, second edition; 2002.

[3] Hita I, Cordero-Lanzac T, Kek ̈al ̈ainen T, Okafor O, Rodríguez-Mirasol J,

Cordero T, et al. In-Depth analysis of raw bio-oil and its hydrodeoxygenated
products for a comprehensive catalyst performance evaluation. ACS Sustainable
Chem Eng 2020;8:18433–45. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c05533.
[4] Palos R, Kek ̈al ̈ainen T, Duodu F, Guti ́errez A, Arandes JM, J ̈anis J, et al. Detailed
nature of tire pyrolysis oil blended with light cycle oil and its hydroprocessed
products using a NiW/HY catalyst. Waste Manag 2021;128:36–44. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.wasman.2021.04.041.

[5] Zhang X, Wang X, Zhao X, Tang Z, Zhao T, Teng M, et al. Using deterministic and

probabilistic approaches to assess the human health risk assessment of 7
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. J Clean Prod 2022;331:129811. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.129811.

[6] Shukla S, Khan R, Bhattacharya P, Devanesan S, AlSalhi MS. Concentration,

source apportionment and potential carcinogenic risks of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) in roadside soils. Chemosphere 2022;292:133413. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.133413.

[7] Sakizadeh M. Spatiotemporal variations and characterization of the chronic

cancer risk associated with benzene exposure. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 2019;182:
109387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.109387.

[8] Gerner-Smidt P, Friedrich U. The mutagenic effect of benzene, toluene and xylene
studied by the SCE technique. Mutat Res Genet Toxicol 1978;58:313–6. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0165-1218(78)90024-1.

[9] Jephcote C, Mah A. Regional inequalities in benzene exposures across the

European petrochemical industry: a Bayesian multilevel modelling approach.
Environ Int 2019;132:104812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.05.006.

[10] North CM, Rooseboom M, Kocabas NA, Schnatter AR, Faulhammer F,

Williams SD. Modes of action considerations in threshold expectations for health
effects of benzene. Toxicol Lett 2020;334:78–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
toxlet.2020.09.005.

[11] Perego C, Pollesel P. Advances in aromatics processing using Zeolite catalysts. In:
Ernst SBT-A in NM, editor. Advances in nanoporous materials, 1. Elsevier; 2010.
p. 97–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1878-7959(09)00102-9.

[12] Shi Q, Gonçalves JC, Ferreira AFP, Plaza MG, Rodrigues AE. Xylene isomerization

side reactions over Beta zeolite: disproportionation and transalkylation of C8
aromatics and toluene. Appl Catal Gen 2018;562:198–205. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apcata.2018.06.011.

[13] Chen F, Zhang G, Weng XY, Zhang Y, Zhao L, Cao L, et al. High value utilization of
inferior diesel for BTX production: mechanisms, catalysts, conditions and
challenges. Appl Catal Gen 2021;616:118095. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcata.2021.118095.

[14] Hita I, Sarathy SM, Casta ̃no P. Polymeric waste valorization at a crossroads: ten
ways to bridge the research on model and complex/real feedstock. Green Chem
2021;23:4656–64. https://doi.org/10.1039/D1GC00845E.

[15] Al-Samhan M, Al-Fadhli J, Al-Otaibi AM, Al-Attar F, Bouresli R, Rana MS.

Prospects of refinery switching from conventional to integrated: an opportunity
for sustainable investment in the petrochemical industry. Fuel 2022;310:122161.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.122161.

[16] Ito E, van Veen JAR. On novel processes for removing sulphur from refinery

streams. Catal Today 2006;116:446–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cattod.2006.06.040.

[17] Nadeina KA, Potapenko OV, Kazakov MO, Doronin VP, Saiko AV, Sorokina TP,
et al. Influence of hydrotreatment depth on product composition of fluid catalytic
cracking process for light olefins production. Catal Today 2021;378:2–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2021.04.014.

[18] Cui Q, Ma X, Nakano K, Nakabayashi K, Miyawaki J, Al-Mutairi A, et al. Effect of
blending on hydrotreating reactivities of atmospheric residues: synergistic effects.
Fuel 2021;293:120429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120429.

[19] Valavarasu G, Bhaskar M, Balaraman KS. Mild hydrocracking—a review of the
process, catalysts, reactions, kinetics, and advantages. Petrol Sci Technol 2003;
21:1185–205. https://doi.org/10.1081/LFT-120017883.

[20] Laredo GC, P ́erez-Romo P, Vega-Merino PM, Arzate-Barbosa E, García-L ́opez A,
Agueda-Rangel R, et al. Effect of the catalytic system and operating conditions on
BTX formation using tetralin as a model molecule. Appl Petrochem Res 2019;9:
185–98. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13203-019-00237-4.

[21] Laredo GC, P ́erez-Romo P, Agueda-Rangel R, García-L ́opez A. Effect of the

experimental conditions on BTX formation from hydrotreated light cycle oil. Appl
Petrochem Res 2020;10:21–34. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13203-020-00242-y.

[22] Vicente RC-C. Bond cleavages of cyclopropenes: operating for selective ring-

opening reactions. Chem Rev 2021;121:162–226. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
chemrev.0c00151.

[23] Du H, Fairbridge C, Yang H, Ring Z. The chemistry of selective ring-opening
catalysts. Appl Catal Gen 2005;294:1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcata.2005.06.033.

[24] McVicker G. Selective ring opening of naphthenic molecules. J Catal 2002;210:

137–48. https://doi.org/10.1006/jcat.2002.3685.

[25] Garin F. Site requirements in the kinetics of alkane transformations catalysed by
metals. Top Catal 2006;39:11–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11244-006-0033-6.
[26] Lee SU, Lee YJ, Kim JR, Kim ES, Kim TW, Kim HJ, et al. Selective ring opening of
phenanthrene over NiW-supported mesoporous HY zeolite catalyst depending on
their mesoporosity. Mater Res Bull 2017;96:149–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
materresbull.2017.05.002.

[27] Ringelhan C, Burgfels G, Neumayr JG, Seuffert W, Klose J, Kurth V. Conversion of
naphthenes to a high value steamcracker feedstock using H-ZSM-5 based catalysts
in the second step of the ARINO®-process. Catal Today 2004;97:277–82. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2004.07.004.

[28] Gutierrez A, Casta ̃no P, Azkoiti MJ, Bilbao J, Arandes JM. Modelling product

distribution of pyrolysis gasoline hydroprocessing on a Pt-Pd/HZSM-5 catalyst.
Chem Eng J 2011;176–177:302–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2011.04.061.

[29] Jampaiah D, Murzin DY, Lee AF, Schaller D, Bhargava SK, Tabulo B, et al.

Catalytic selective ring opening of polyaromatics for cleaner transportation fuels.
Energy Environ Sci 2022;15:1760–804. https://doi.org/10.1039/D1EE02363B.
[30] Galadima A, Muraza O. Ring opening of hydrocarbons for diesel and aromatics
production: design of heterogeneous catalytic systems. Fuel 2016;181:618–29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.05.024.

[31] Casta ̃no P, Arandes JM, Pawelec B, Fierro JLG, Guti ́errez A, Bilbao J. Kinetic
model discrimination for toluene hydrogenation over noble-metal-supported
catalysts. Ind Eng Chem Res 2007;46:7417–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie070094m.

[32] Raichle A, Traa Y, Weitkamp J. Preparation of a high-quality synthetic

steamcracker feedstock from methylcyclohexane on acidic zeolite H-ZSM-5:
influence of the hydrogen partial pressure. Appl Catal, B 2003;41:193–205.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-3373(02)00211-4.

[33] Casta ̃no P, Arandes JM, Olazar M, Bilbao J, Pawelec B, Sedr ́an U. Effect of

hydrogen on the cracking mechanisms of cycloalkanes over zeolites. Catal Today
2010;150:363–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2009.09.013.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111021

G. Lezcano et al.

[34] Casta ̃no P, Gayubo AG, Pawelec B, Fierro JLG, Arandes JM. Kinetic modelling of
methylcyclohexane ring-opening over a HZSM-5 zeolite catalyst. Chem Eng J
2008;140:287–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2007.09.041.

[35] Berger C, Raichle A, Rakoczy RA, Traa Y, Weitkamp J. Hydroconversion of

methylcyclohexane on TEOS-modified H-ZSM-5 zeolite catalysts: production of a
high-quality synthetic steamcracker feedstock. Microporous Mesoporous Mater
2003;59:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1387-1811(03)00270-1.

[36] Raichle A, Moser S, Traa Y, Hunger M, Weitkamp J. Gallium-containing zeolites –

valuable catalysts for the conversion of cycloalkanes into a premium synthetic
steamcracker feedstock. Catal Commun 2001;2:23–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1566-7367(01)00003-6.

[37] Raichle A, Ramin M, Singer D, Hunger M, Traa Y, Weitkamp J. Influence of the
aluminum content of zeolite H-ZSM-5 on the conversion of methylcyclohexane
into a high-quality synthetic steamcracker feedstock. Catal Commun 2001;2:
69–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1566-7367(01)00012-7.

[38] Raichle A, Rakoczy RA, Traa Y, Weitkamp J. Reactions of methylcyclohexane on
bifunctional zeolite catalysts. 1999. p. 433–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-
2991(99)80243-2.

[39] Casta ̃no P, Arandes JM, Pawelec B, Olazar M, Bilbao J. Kinetic modeling for
assessing the product distribution in toluene hydrocracking on a Pt/HZSM-5
catalyst. Ind Eng Chem Res 2008;47:1043–5. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie071154r.

[40] Casta ̃no P, Pawelec B, Aguayo AT, Gayubo AG, Arandes JM. The role of zeolite
acidity in coupled toluene hydrogenation and ring opening in one and two steps.
Ind Eng Chem Res 2008;47:665–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie070921j.
[41] Casta ̃no P, Guti ́errez A, Pawelec B, Fierro JLG, Aguayo AT, Arandes JM. Effect of
the support on the kinetic and deactivation performance of Pt/support catalysts
during coupled hydrogenation and ring-opening of pyrolysis gasoline. Appl Catal
Gen 2007;333:161–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2007.05.041.

[59] Saab R, Polychronopoulou K, Zheng L, Kumar S, Schiffer A. Synthesis and

performance evaluation of hydrocracking catalysts: a review. J Ind Eng Chem
2020;89:83–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2020.06.022.

[60] Weitkamp J, Raichle A, Traa Y. Novel zeolite catalysis to create value from

surplus aromatics: preparation of C2+-n-alkanes, a high-quality synthetic
steamcracker feedstock. Appl Catal Gen 2001;222:277–97. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0926-860X(01)00841-9.

[61] Guisnet M, Magnoux P. Coking and deactivation of zeolites. Influence of the pore

structure. Appl Catal 1989;54:1–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-9834(00)
82350-7.

[62] Guisnet M, Magnoux P. Organic chemistry of coke formation. Appl Catal Gen

2001;212:83–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-860X(00)00845-0.

[63] Oh SK, Ku H, Han GB, Jeong B, Jeon J-K. Hydrogenation of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons over Pt/γ-Al2O3 catalysts in a trickle bed reactor. Catal Today
2022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2022.06.046.

[64] Guti ́errez A, Arandes JM, Casta ̃no P, Aguayo AT, Bilbao J. Role of acidity in the
deactivation and steady hydroconversion of light cycle oil on noble metal
supported catalysts. Energy Fuel 2011;25:3389–99. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef200523g.

[65] Guti ́errez A, Arandes JM, Casta ̃no P, Olazar M, Bilbao J. Preliminary studies on
fuel production through LCO hydrocracking on noble-metal supported catalysts.
Fuel 2012;94:504–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2011.10.010.

[66] Guti ́errez A, Arandes JM, Casta ̃no P, Olazar M, Bilbao J. Effect of pressure on the
hydrocracking of light cycle oil with a Pt-Pd/HY catalyst. Energy Fuel 2012;26:
5897–904. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef3009597.

[67] Guti ́errez A, Arandes JM, Casta ̃no P, Olazar M, Barona A, Bilbao J. Effect of space
velocity on the hydrocracking of Light Cycle Oil over a Pt-Pd/HY zeolite catalyst.
Fuel Process Technol 2012;95:8–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.20
11.11.003.

[42] Catherin N, Blanco E, Laurenti D, Piccolo L, Simonet F, Lorentz C, et al. Transition
metal sulfides on zeolite catalysts for selective ring opening. Catal Today 2021;
377:187–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2020.10.012.

[43] Kostyniuk A, Bajec D, Likozar B. Catalytic hydrocracking reactions of tetralin as
aromatic biomass tar model compound to benzene/toluene/xylenes (BTX) over
zeolites under ambient pressure conditions. J Ind Eng Chem 2021;96:130–43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2021.01.010.

[44] Cui S, Wang G, Yang Y, Liu B. Influence of Si/Al molar ratio on the

hydrogenation, isomerization and ring opening of naphthalene over silica-
alumina supported Ni2P catalyst. Fuel 2018;225:10–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.fuel.2018.03.130.

[45] Ardakani SJ, Smith KJ. A comparative study of ring opening of naphthalene,

tetralin and decalin over Mo2C/HY and Pd/HY catalysts. Appl Catal Gen 2011;
403:36–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2011.06.013.

[46] Ding S, Jiang S, Wang J, Huang X, Yang Z. Effects of the Ni-Mo ratio on olefin

selective hydrogenation catalyzed on Ni-Mo-S active sites: a theoretical study by
DFT calculation. Fuel 2020;277:118136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.118136.

[47] Toulhoat H. A perspective on the catalytic hydrogenation of aromatics by Co(Ni)

MoS phases. J Catal 2021;403:121–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcat.2021.01.020.

[48] Lin B, Li R, Shu R, Wang C, Cheng Z, Chen Y. Hydrogenolysis and

hydrodeoxygenation of lignin in a two-step process to produce hydrocarbons and
alkylphenols. J Energy Inst 2020;93:784–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
joei.2019.05.004.

[49] Zhou X, Li X, Prins R, Lv J, Wang A, Sheng Q. Hydrodesulfurization of

dibenzothiophene and its hydrogenated intermediates over bulk CoP and Co2P
catalysts with stoichiometric P/Co ratios. J Catal 2021;394:167–80. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jcat.2020.08.030.

[50] Weitkamp J. Catalytic hydrocracking-mechanisms and versatility of the process.
ChemCatChem 2012;4:292–306. https://doi.org/10.1002/cctc.201100315.
[51] Corma A, Orchill ́es AV. Current views on the mechanism of catalytic cracking.
Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2000;35–36:21–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1387-1811(99)00205-X.

[52] Kotrel S, Kn ̈ozinger H, Gates BC. The Haag–Dessau mechanism of protolytic

cracking of alkanes. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2000;35–36:11–20. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S1387-1811(99)00204-8.

[53] Nakajima K, Suganuma S, Tsuji E, Katada N. Mechanism of tetralin conversion on
zeolites for the production of benzene derivatives. React Chem Eng 2020;5:
1272–80. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0re00128g.

[54] Kim YS, Yun GN, Lee YK. Novel Ni2P/zeolite catalysts for naphthalene

hydrocracking to BTX. Catal Commun 2014;45:133–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.catcom.2013.11.010.

[55] Kostyniuk A, Bajec D, Likozar B. Catalytic hydrocracking reactions of tetralin

biomass tar model compound to benzene, toluene and xylenes (BTX) over metal-
modified ZSM-5 in ambient pressure reactor. Renew Energy 2022;188:240–55.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2022.01.090.

[56] Laredo GC, P ́erez-Romo P, Escobar J, Garcia-Gutierrez JL, Vega-Merino PM. Light
cycle oil upgrading to benzene, toluene, and xylenes by hydrocracking: studies
using model mixtures. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:10939–48. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.iecr.7b02827.

[57] Jones DSJ. Atmospheric and vacuum crude distillation units in petroleum

refineries. Handbook of Petroleum Processing 2015;1:125–98. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-14529-7_3.

[58] Corma A, Orchill ́es AV. Current views on the mechanism of catalytic cracking.
Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2000;35–36:21–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1387-1811(99)00205-X.

[68] Calemma V, Ferrari M, Rabl S, Weitkamp J. Selective ring opening of naphthenes:
from mechanistic studies with a model feed to the upgrading of a hydrotreated
light cycle oil. Fuel 2013;111:763–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2013.04.055.

[69] Galadima A, Muraza O. Hydrocracking catalysts based on hierarchical zeolites: a

recent progress. J Ind Eng Chem 2018;61:265–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jiec.2017.12.024.

[70] Azkaar M, Vajglov ́a Z, M ̈aki-Arvela P, Aho A, Kumar N, Palonen H, et al.
Hydrocracking of hexadecane to jet fuel components over hierarchical Ru-
modified faujasite zeolite. Fuel 2020;278:118193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.118193.

[71] Narksri P, Angnanon S, Guntasub J, Wijitrattanatri K, Kingputtapong S,
Phumpradit S, et al. Production of alternative liquid fuels from catalytic
hydrocracking of plastics over Ni/SBA-15 catalyst. Mater Today Proc 2022;57:
1040–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.09.048.

[72] Hita I, Guti ́errez A, Olazar M, Bilbao J, Arandes JM, Casta ̃no P. Upgrading model
compounds and Scrap Tires Pyrolysis Oil (STPO) on hydrotreating NiMo catalysts
with tailored supports. Fuel 2015;145:158–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2014.12.055.

[73] Alcala R, Dean DP, Chavan I, Chang C-W, Burnside B, Pham HN, et al. Strategies

for regeneration of Pt-alloy catalysts supported on silica for propane
dehydrogenation. Appl Catal Gen 2023:119157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcata.2023.119157.

[74] Vincent RS, Lindstedt RP, Malik NA, Reid IAB, Messenger BE. The chemistry of
ethane dehydrogenation over a supported platinum catalyst. J Catal 2008;260:
37–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcat.2008.08.014.

[75] Galadima A, Muraza O. Ring opening of hydrocarbons for diesel and aromatics
production: design of heterogeneous catalytic systems. Fuel 2016;181:618–29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.05.024.

[76] Casta ̃no P, Guti ́errez A, Villanueva I, Pawelec B, Bilbao J, Arandes JM. Effect of
the support acidity on the aromatic ring-opening of pyrolysis gasoline over Pt/
HZSM-5 catalysts. Catal Today 2009;143:115–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cattod.2008.10.029.

[77] Hita I, Aguayo AT, Olazar M, Azkoiti MJ, Bilbao J, Arandes JM, et al. Kinetic

modeling of the hydrotreating and hydrocracking stages for upgrading scrap tires
pyrolysis oil (STPO) toward high-quality fuels. Energy Fuel 2015;29:7542–53.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.5b01502.

[78] Vo TA, Ly HV, Tran QK, Kwon B, Kim SS, Kim J. Lumped-kinetic modeling and
experiments on co-pyrolysis of palm kernel cake with polystyrene using a closed-
tubing reactor to upgrade pyrolysis products. Energy Convers Manag 2021;249:
114879. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2021.114879.

[79] Naik DV, Karthik V, Kumar V, Prasad B, Garg MO. Kinetic modeling for catalytic
cracking of pyrolysis oils with VGO in a FCC unit. Chem Eng Sci 2017;170:790–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2017.01.048.

[80] Gayubo AG, Valle B, Aramburu B, Montero C, Bilbao J. Kinetic model considering
catalyst deactivation for the steam reforming of bio-oil over Ni/La2O3-АAl2O3.
Chem Eng J 2018;332:192–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.09.063.
[81] Kubiˇcka D, Salmi T, Tiitta M, Dyu Murzin. Ring-opening of decalin – kinetic

modelling. Fuel 2009;88:366–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2008.09.004.

[82] F ́elix G, Ancheyta J. Comparison of hydrocracking kinetic models based on SARA
fractions obtained in slurry-phase reactor. Fuel 2019;241:495–505. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.11.153.

[83] Esmaeel SA, Gheni SA, Jarullah AT. 5-Lumps kinetic modeling, simulation and

optimization for hydrotreating of atmospheric crude oil residue. Appl Petrochem
Res 2016;6:117–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13203-015-0142-x.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111022

G. Lezcano et al.

[84] Ye L, Liu J, Xing B, Qin X, Yu W, Xie J, et al. Molecular-level reaction network in
delayed coking process based on structure-oriented lumping. Chem Eng Sci 2021;
246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2021.116981.

[85] Tian L, Wang J, Shen B, Liu J. Building a kinetic model for steam cracking by the
method of structure-oriented lumping. Energy Fuel 2010;24:4380–6. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ef100534e.

[86] Liu J, Chen H, Pi Z, Liu Y, Sun H, Shen B. Molecular-level-process model with

feedback of the heat effects on a complex reaction network in a fluidized catalytic
cracking process. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:3568–77. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.iecr.7b00320.

[87] Xing B, Ye L, Liu J, Qin X, Yu W, Xie J, et al. Reaction network of sulfur

compounds in delayed coking process. Chem Eng J 2021;422:129903. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.129903.

[88] Ye L, Liu J, Xing B, Qin X, Yu W, Xie J, et al. Molecular-level reaction network in
delayed coking process based on structure-oriented lumping. Chem Eng Sci 2021;
246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2021.116981.

[89] Thybaut JW, Marin GB. Single-Event MicroKinetics: catalyst design for complex
reaction networks. J Catal 2013;308:352–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcat.2013.08.013.

[90] Froment GF. Single event kinetic modeling of complex catalytic processes. AIChE

Annual Meeting, Conference Proceedings 2005:9576. https://doi.org/10.1002/
chin.200518293.

[91] Standl S, Tonigold M, Hinrichsen O. Single-event kinetic modeling of olefin

cracking on ZSM-5: proof of feed independence. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:
13096–108. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.7b01344.

[92] Van Belleghem J, Yang J, Janssens P, Poissonnier J, Chen D, Marin GB, et al.

Microkinetic model validation for Fischer-Tropsch synthesis at methanation
conditions based on steady state isotopic transient kinetic analysis. J Ind Eng
Chem 2022;105:191–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2021.09.017.

[93] Ali SA, Alshareef AH, Theravalappil R, Alasiri HS, Hossain MM. Molecular kinetic
modeling of catalytic naphtha reforming: a review of complexities and solutions.
Catal Rev Sci Eng 2022:1–54. https://doi.org/10.1080/
01614940.2021.2008622.

[94] Jin F, Fan Y, Yuan M, Min F, Wu G, Ding Y, et al. Single-event kinetic modeling of

ethene oligomerization on ZSM-5. Catal Today 2018;316:129–41. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cattod.2018.05.020.

[95] Zhang T, Leyva C, Froment GF, Martinis J. Vacuum gas oil hydrocracking on

NiMo/USY zeolite catalysts. Experimental study and kinetic modeling. Ind Eng
Chem Res 2015;54:858–68. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie503567b.

[96] Smith A, Keane A, Dumesic JA, Huber GW, Zavala VM. A machine learning

framework for the analysis and prediction of catalytic activity from experimental
data. Appl Catal, B 2020;263:118257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcatb.2019.118257.

[97] Ras EJ, Rothenberg G. Heterogeneous catalyst discovery using 21st century tools:
a tutorial. RSC Adv 2014;4:5963–74. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ra45852k.
[98] Eliche-Quesada D, M ́erida-Robles JM, Rodríguez-Castell ́on E, Jim ́enez-L ́opez A.
Ru, Os and Ru-Os supported on mesoporous silica doped with zirconium as mild
thio-tolerant catalysts in the hydrogenation and hydrogenolysis/hydrocracking of
tetralin. Appl Catal Gen 2005;279:209–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcata.2004.10.031.

[99] Eliche-Quesada D, M ́erida-Robles JM, Rodríguez-Castell ́on E, Jim ́enez-L ́opez A.
Influence of the incorporation of palladium on Ru/MCM hydrotreating catalysts.
Appl Catal, B 2006;65:118–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2006.01.003.
[100] Eliche-Quesada D, M ́erida-Robles J, Maireles-Torres P, Rodríguez-Castell ́on E,
Jim ́enez-L ́opez A. Superficial characterization and hydroconversion of tetralin
over NiW sulfide catalysts supported on zirconium doped mesoporous silica. Appl
Catal Gen 2004;262:111–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2003.11.015.

[101] Eliche-Quesada D, M ́erida-Robles J, Maireles-Torres P, Rodríguez-Castell ́on E,

Busca G, Finocchio E, et al. Effects of preparation method and sulfur poisoning on
the hydrogenation and ring opening of tetralin on NiW/zirconium-doped
mesoporous silica catalysts. J Catal 2003;220:457–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0021-9517(03)00271-9.

[102] Rodríguez-Castell ́on E, Díaz L, Braos-García P, M ́erida-Robles J, Maireles-

Torres P, Jim ́enez-L ́opez A, et al. Nickel-impregnated zirconium-doped
mesoporous molecular sieves as catalysts for the hydrogenation and ring-opening
of tetralin. Appl Catal Gen 2003;240:83–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-
860X(02)00414-3.

[103] Rodríguez-Castell ́on E, M ́erida-Robles J, Díaz L, Maireles-Torres P, Jones DJ,
Rozi`ere J, et al. Hydrogenation and ring opening of tetralin on noble metal
supported on zirconium doped mesoporous silica catalysts. Appl Catal Gen 2004;
260:9–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2003.09.039.

[104] Ardakani SJ, Liu X, Smith KJ. Hydrogenation and ring opening of naphthalene on
bulk and supported Mo2C catalysts. Appl Catal Gen 2007;324:9–19. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apcata.2007.02.048.

[105] Liu X, Ardakani SJ, Smith KJ. The effect of Mg and K addition to a Mo2C/HY

catalyst for the hydrogenation and ring opening of naphthalene. Catal Commun
2011;12:454–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catcom.2010.10.025.

[106] Liu X, Smith KJ. Acidity and deactivation of Mo2C/HY catalysts used for the

hydrogenation and ring opening of naphthalene. Appl Catal Gen 2008;335:
230–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2007.11.028.

[107] D’Ippolito SA, Gutierrez LB, Pieck CL. Optimal Ir/Pt ratio for the ring opening of

decalin in zeolite supported catalysts. Appl Catal Gen 2012;445–446:195–203.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2012.08.037.

[108] D’Ippolito SA, Ballarini AD, Pieck CL. Influence of support acidity and Ir content
on the selective ring opening of decalin over Ir/SiO2-Al2O3. Energy Fuel 2017;
31:5461–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b00451.

[109] D’Ippolito SA, Especel C, Epron F, Pieck CL. Selective ring opening of

methylcyclohexane and decalin over Rh-Pd supported catalysts: effect of the
preparation method. Fuel Process Technol 2015;140:180–7. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuproc.2015.08.027.

[110] D’Ippolito SA, Ballarini AD, Rosas SM, Pirault-Roy L, Especel C, Epron F, et al.
Influence of the Ir content and the support on the thiotolerance of the Ir/SiO2-
Al2O3 catalysts for selective ring opening of decalin. Can J Chem Eng 2021;99:
1146–57. https://doi.org/10.1002/cjce.23930.

[111] D’Ippolito SA, Pirault-Roy L, Especel C, Epron F, Pieck CL. Selective ring opening
of decalin on Rh-Pd/SiO2-Al2O3 bifunctional systems: catalytic performance and
deactivation. Fuel Process Technol 2018;177:6–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuproc.2018.04.008.

[112] D’Ippolito SA, Especel C, Vivier L, Pronier S, Epron F, Pieck CL. Influence of the
support on the selective ring opening of methylcyclohexane and decalin catalyzed
by Rh-Pd catalysts. J Mol Catal Chem 2015;398:203–14. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.molcata.2014.12.011.

[113] D’Ippolito SA, Pirault-Roy L, Especel C, Epron F, Pieck CL. Influence of rhodium
content on the behavior of Rh/SiO2-Al2O3 catalysts for selective ring opening of
decalin. RSC Adv 2017;7:46803–11. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ra08350e.

[114] D’Ippolito SA, Gutierrez LB, Vera CR, Pieck CL. Pt-Mg-Ir/Al2O3 and Pt-Ir/HY

zeolite catalysts for SRO of decalin. Influence of Ir content and support acidity.
Appl Catal Gen 2013;452:48–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2012.12.002.
[115] D’Ippolito SA, Especel C, Vivier L, Epron F, Pieck CL. Influence of the Brønsted
acidity, SiO2/Al 2O3 ratio and Rh-Pd content on the ring opening: Part I.
Selective ring opening of decalin. Appl Catal Gen 2014;469:532–40. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apcata.2013.06.057.

[116] Benitez VM, de Lima SP, do Carmo Rangel M, Ruiz D, Reyes P, Pieck CL. Influence
of the metallic content on Pt-Ir/Nb2O5 catalysts for decalin selective ring
opening. Catal Today 2017;289:53–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cattod.2016.10.004.

[117] Vicerich MA, Benitez VM, Especel C, Epron F, Pieck CL. Influence of iridium

content on the behavior of Pt-Ir/Al2O 3 and Pt-Ir/TiO2 catalysts for selective ring
opening of naphthenes. Appl Catal Gen 2013;453:167–74. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apcata.2012.12.015.

[118] Vicerich MA, Oportus M, Benitez VM, Reyes P, Pieck CL. Influence of Na content
on the catalytic properties of Pt-Ir/Al 2O3 catalysts for selective ring opening of
decalin. Appl Catal Gen 2014;480:42–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcata.2014.04.036.

[119] Vicerich MA, Benitez VM, S ́anchez MA, Pieck CL. Influence of support material on
the activity and selectivity of Pt-Ir catalysts for ring opening reactions. Catal Lett
2015;145:910–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10562-014-1459-2.

[120] Vicerich MA, S ́anchez MA, Pieck CL, Benitez VM. Pt–Ir/Al2O3 catalysts for the
ring opening of naphthenes. Performance as a function of time. React Kinet Mech
Catal 2019;127:875–86. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11144-019-01605-w.
[121] Hita I, Arabiourrutia M, Olazar M, Bilbao J, Arandes JM, Casta ̃no P. Opportunities

and barriers for producing high quality fuels from the pyrolysis of scrap tires.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;56:745–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2015.11.081.

[122] Kingputtapong S, Chanlek N, Poo-arporn Y, Hinchiranan N. Production of cleaner

waste tire pyrolysis oil by removal of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons via
hydrogenation over Ni-based catalysts. Int J Energy Res 2022;46:16082–101.
https://doi.org/10.1002/er.8290.

[123] Hsu CS, Robinson PR. Springer handbook of petroleum technology. Cham,

Switzerland: Springer International Publishing; 2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-49347-3.

[124] Lucke E, Ronces EA. Technical view. In: Leveraging synergies between refining
and petrochemical processes. 1st ed., first edition. | boca raton, FL : CRC press,
2020. CRC Press; 2020. p. 75–128. https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429022043.

[125] Martínez JD, Lapuerta M, García-Contreras R, Murillo R, García T. Fuel properties

of tire pyrolysis liquid and its blends with diesel fuel. Energy Fuel 2013;27:
3296–305. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef400602e.

[126] Speight JG. Feedstock types and properties. The refinery of the future. second ed.
Laramie, Wyoming, United States: Elsevier; 2020. p. 1–42. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-816994-0.00001-4.

[127] van Dyk S, Su J, Mcmillan JD, Saddler JJ. Potential synergies of drop-in biofuel
production with further co-processing at oil refineries. Biofuels, Bioproducts and
Biorefining 2019;13:760–75. https://doi.org/10.1002/bbb.1974.

[128] Manara P, Bezergianni S, Pfisterer U. Study on phase behavior and properties of
binary blends of bio-oil/fossil-based refinery intermediates: a step toward bio-oil
refinery integration. Energy Convers Manag 2018;165:304–15. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2018.01.023.

[129] Bezergianni S, Dimitriadis A, Kikhtyanin O, Kubiˇcka D. Refinery co-processing of
renewable feeds. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;68:29–64. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2018.04.002.

[130] Wang H, Male J, Wang Y. Recent advances in hydrotreating of pyrolysis bio-oil
and its oxygen-containing model compounds. ACS Catal 2013;3:1047–70.
https://doi.org/10.1021/cs400069z.

[131] Saidi M, Samimi F, Karimipourfard D, Nimmanwudipong T, Gates BC,
Rahimpour MR. Upgrading of lignin-derived bio-oils by catalytic
hydrodeoxygenation. Energy Environ Sci 2014;7:103–29. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c3ee43081b.

[132] Patel M, Kumar A. Production of renewable diesel through the hydroprocessing of

lignocellulosic biomass-derived bio-oil: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2016;58:1293–307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.146.

[133] Hita I, Cordero-Lanzac T, García-Mateos FJ, Azkoiti MJ, Rodríguez-Mirasol J,

Cordero T, et al. Enhanced production of phenolics and aromatics from raw bio-

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111023

G. Lezcano et al.

oil using HZSM-5 zeolite additives for PtPd/C and NiW/C catalysts. Appl Catal, B
2019;259:118112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2019.118112.

[134] Hita I, Cordero-Lanzac T, Bonura G, Cannilla C, Arandes JM, Frusteri F, et al.
Hydrodeoxygenation of raw bio-oil towards platform chemicals over FeMoP/
zeolite catalysts. J Ind Eng Chem 2019;80:392–400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jiec.2019.08.019.

monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. J Ind Eng Chem 2016;35:99–107. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2015.12.020.

[160] Ristic ND, Djokic MR, Delbeke E, Gonzalez-Quiroga A, Stevens Cv, van Geem KM,

et al. Compositional characterization of pyrolysis fuel oil from naphtha and
vacuum gas oil. Energy Fuel 2018;32:1276–86. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.7b03242.

[135] Castello D, Rosendahl L. Coprocessing of pyrolysis oil in refineries. Elsevier Ltd.;

[161] Cheng S, Wei L, Julson J, Muthukumarappan K, Kharel PR, Cao Y, et al.

2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-101029-7.00008-4.

[136] Bezergianni S, Dimitriadis A, Kikhtyanin O, Kubiˇcka D. Refinery co-processing of
renewable feeds. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;68:29–64. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2018.04.002.

[137] Hita I, Sarathy SM, Casta ̃no P. Polymeric waste valorization at a crossroads: ten
ways to bridge the research on model and complex/real feedstock. Green Chem
2021;23:4656–64. https://doi.org/10.1039/D1GC00845E.

[138] Sharafutdinov I, Stratiev D, Shishkova I, Dinkov R, Pavlova A, Petkov P, et al.

Dependence of cetane index on aromatic content in diesel fuels. Oil Gas Eur Mag
2012;38:148–52.

[139] Edwin Raj R, Robert Kennedy Z, Pillai BC. Optimization of process parameters in
flash pyrolysis of waste tyres to liquid and gaseous fuel in a fluidized bed reactor.
Energy Convers Manag 2013;67:145–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2012.11.012.

[140] Kyari M, Cunliffe A, Williams PT. Characterization of oils, gases, and char in

relation to the pyrolysis of different brands of scrap automotive tires. Energy Fuel
2005;19:1165–73. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef049686x.

[141] Williams PT. Pyrolysis of waste tyres: a review. Waste Manag 2013;33:1714–28.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2013.05.003.

[142] Budukva SV, Eletskii PM, Zaikina OO, Sosnin GA, Yakovlev VA. Secondary middle

distillates and their processing. Petrol Chem 2019;59:941–55. https://doi.org/
10.1134/S0965544119090044.

[143] Du PA, Ren MN, Jiang D, Zhao ZH, Ying WY. An experimental study on

optimization utilization of deasphalted oil. Fuel Process Technol 2012;99:64–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2012.01.033.

[144] Stratiev D, Marinov I, Dinkov R, Shishkova I, Velkov I, Sharafutdinov I, et al.

Opportunity to improve diesel-fuel cetane-number prediction from easily
available physical properties and application of the least-squares method and
artificial neural networks. Energy Fuel 2015;29:1520–33. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef502638c.

[145] Stratiev D, Belchev Z, Petkov P, Kirilov K. Investigation on residual fuel oil

stability. Oil Gas Eur Mag 2008;34:199–203.

[146] Nowak S, Keil G, Zimmermann G. Pyrolysis of high boiling-point oil fractions.

Hung J Ind Chem 1978;6:105–14.

[147] Zimmermann H, Walzl R. Ethylene. Ullmann’s encyclopedia of industrial

chemistry. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA; 2009.
https://doi.org/10.1002/14356007.a10_045.pub3.

[148] Oyedun AO, Patel M, Kumar M, Kumar A. The upgrading of bio-oil via

hydrodeoxygenation. Chemical Catalysts for Biomass Upgrading 2020:35–60.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527814794.ch2.

[149] Hita I, Heeres HJ, Deuss PJ. Insight into structure–reactivity relationships for the
iron-catalyzed hydrotreatment of technical lignins. Bioresour Technol 2018;267:
93–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2018.07.028.

[150] Constant S, Wienk HLJ, Frissen AE, Peinder P De, Boelens R, Van Es DS, et al. New

insights into the structure and composition of technical lignins: a comparative
characterisation study. Green Chem 2016;18:2651–65. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c5gc03043a.

[151] Casta ̃no P, Pawelec B, Fierro JLG, Arandes JM, Bilbao J. Aromatics reduction of

pyrolysis gasoline (PyGas) over HY-supported transition metal catalysts. Appl
Catal Gen 2006;315:101–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2006.09.009.

[152] Peng C, Huang X, Duan X, Cheng Z, Zeng R, Guo R, et al. Direct production of high
octane gasoline and ULSD blend stocks by LCO hydrocracking. Catal Today 2016;
271:149–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2015.11.049.

[153] Li H, Zhang Y, Xu C, Zhao S, Chung KH, Shi Q. Quantitative molecular

composition of heavy petroleum fractions: a case study of fluid catalytic cracking.
Decant Oil. Energy & Fuels 2020;34:5307–16. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.9b03425.

Hydrodeoxygenation upgrading of pine sawdust bio-oil using zinc metal with zero
valency. J Taiwan Inst Chem Eng 2017;74:146–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jtice.2017.02.011.

[162] Luo Y, Guda VK, Hassan EB, Steele PH, Mitchell B, Yu F. Hydrodeoxygenation of
oxidized distilled bio-oil for the production of gasoline fuel type. Energy Convers
Manag 2016;112:319–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.12.047.

[163] Mortensen PM, Grunwaldt JD, Jensen PA, Knudsen KG, Jensen AD. A review of

catalytic upgrading of bio-oil to engine fuels. Appl Catal Gen 2011;407:1–19.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2011.08.046.

[164] Hita I, Cordero-Lanzac T, García-Mateos FJ, Azkoiti MJ, Rodríguez-Mirasol J,

Cordero T, et al. Enhanced production of phenolics and aromatics from raw bio-
oil using HZSM-5 zeolite additives for PtPd/C and NiW/C catalysts. Appl Catal, B
2019:118112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2019.118112.

[165] Cheng S, Wei L, Julson J, Rabnawaz M. Upgrading pyrolysis bio-oil through

hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) using non-sulfided Fe-Co/SiO 2 catalyst. 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2017.08.024.

[166] Saidi M, Samimi F, Karimipourfard D, Nimmanwudipong T, Gates BC,
Rahimpour MR. Upgrading of lignin-derived bio-oils by catalytic
hydrodeoxygenation. Energy Environ Sci 2014;7:103–29. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c3ee43081b.

[167] Loeber L, Muller G, Morel J, Sutton O. Bitumen in colloid science: a chemical,

structural and rheological approach. Fuel 1998;77:1443–50. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0016-2361(98)00054-4.

[168] Joshi JB, Pandit AB, Kataria KL, Kulkarni RP, Sawarkar AN, Tandon D, et al.
Petroleum residue upgradation via visbreaking: a review. Ind Eng Chem Res
2008;47:8960–88. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie0710871.

[169] Stankiewicz AB, Flannery MD, Fuex NQ, Broze G, Couch JL, Dubey ST, et al.

Prediction of asphaltene deposition risk in E&P operations. In: Proceeding of 3rd
international symposium on mechanisms and mitigation of fouling in petroleum
and natural gas production. New Orleans, USA: AIChE 2002 Spring National
Meeting; 2002. p. 410–6.

[170] Sepúlveda Gaona JA, Bonilla Manrique JP, Medina Maj ́e Y. Predicci ́on de la
estabilidad de los asfaltenos mediante la utilizaci ́on del an ́alisis SARA para
petr ́oleos puros. Ingeniería y Regi ́on 2010;7:103–10. https://doi.org/10.25054/
22161325.805.

[171] Guzm ́an R, Ancheyta J, Trejo F, Rodríguez S. Methods for determining asphaltene
stability in crude oils. Fuel 2017;188:530–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2016.10.012.

[172] Kohli K, Prajapati R, Singh N, Maity SK. Colloidal stability tests on vacuum

residue hydrocracked products obtained at increasing severity. Int J Oil Gas Coal
Technol 2019;21:76–90. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJOGCT.2019.099521.
[173] Ferreira C, Tayakout-Fayolle M, Guibard I, Lemos F, Toulhoat H, Ramˆoa

Ribeiro F. Hydrodesulfurization and hydrodemetallization of different origin
vacuum residues: characterization and reactivity. Fuel 2012;98:218–28. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2012.03.054.

[174] Gao H, Wang G, Wang H, Chen J, Xu C, Gao J. A conceptual catalytic cracking
process to treat vacuum residue and vacuum gas oil in different reactors. Energy
Fuel 2012;26:1870–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef201815z.

[175] Arandes JM, Torre I, Azkoiti MJ, Ere ̃na J, Bilbao J. Effect of atmospheric residue

incorporation in the fluidized catalytic cracking (FCC) feed on product stream
yields and composition. Energy Fuel 2008;22:2149–56. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef800031x.

[176] Stratiev D, Shishkova I, Dinkov R, Nikolova R, Mitkova M, Stanulov K, et al.

Reactivity and stability of vacuum residual oils in their thermal conversion. Fuel
2014;123:133–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.01.043.

[177] Stratiev D, Kirilov K, Belchev Z, Petkov P. How do feedstocks affect visbreaker

operations? Hydrocarb Process 2008;87:1–5.

[154] Fang D, Wang G, Sheng Q, Ge S, Gao C, Gao J. Preparation of hydrogen donor

[178] Nesumi Y, Oyama T, Todo Y, Azuma A, Mochida I, Korai Y, et al. Properties of

solvent for asphaltenes efficient liquid-phase conversion via heavy cycle oil
selective hydrogenation. Fuel 2019;257:115886. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2019.115886.

[155] Li ZK, J Sen Gao, Wang G, Shi Q, Xu CM. Influence of nonbasic nitrogen

compounds and condensed aromatics on coker gas oil catalytic cracking and their
characterization. Ind Eng Chem Res 2011;50:9415–24. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie2003973.

[156] Dutriez T, Courtiade M, Thi ́ebaut D, Dulot H, Hennion MC. Improved

hydrocarbons analysis of heavy petroleum fractions by high temperature
comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography. Fuel 2010;89:2338–45.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2009.11.041.

[157] Wang G, Li ZK, Huang H, Lan X, Xu CM, J Sen Gao. Synergistic process for coker

gas oil and heavy cycle oil conversion for maximum light production. Ind Eng
Chem Res 2010;49:11260–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie100950c.
[158] Djokic MR, Muller H, Ristic ND, Akhras AR, Symoens SH, Marin GB, et al.

Combined characterization using HT-GC × GC-FID and FT-ICR MS: a pyrolysis
fuel oil case study. Fuel Process Technol 2018;182:15–25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuproc.2018.10.007.

[159] Upare DP, Park S, Kim MS, Kim J, Lee D, Lee J, et al. Cobalt promoted Mo/beta
zeolite for selective hydrocracking of tetralin and pyrolysis fuel oil into

fluid catalytic cracking decant oils of different origins in their single
carbonization and cocarbonization with a petroleum vacuum residue. Ind Eng
Chem Res 1990;29:1793–801. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie00105a009.
[179] Frecon J, le Bars D, Nguyen HD. Process for converting a feedstock containing

pyrolysis oil. US11208602B2; 2021.

[180] Simone AA. Treatment for pyrolysis fuel oil. US. 1980. 4,207,168.
[181] Fainberg V, Podorozhansky M, Hetsroni G, Brauch R, Kalchouck H. Changes in the
composition and properties of the vacuum residues as a result of visbreaking. Fuel
Sci Technol Int 1996;14:839–66. https://doi.org/10.1080/08843759608947615.
[182] Gonz ́alez S.F., Carrillo J., Nú ̃nez M., Hoyos L.J., Giraldo S.A. Modified design for
vacuum residue processing. CTyF - Ciencia, Tecnologia y Futuro 2010;4:57–62,
http://www.scielo.org.co/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0122-
53832010000200006&nrm=iso.

[183] Fuchikami J, Horie T, Takamori Y, Yoshinaga K. Hydrotreatment of light cycle oil

over pt-pd supported catalyst combined with Ni-Mo supported catalyst. J Jpn
Petrol Inst 2009;52:29–34. https://doi.org/10.1627/jpi.52.29.

[184] Laredo GC, Saint-Martin R, Martinez MC, Castillo J, Cano JL. High quality diesel

by hydrotreating of atmospheric gas oil/light cycle oil blends. Fuel 2004;83:
1381–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2004.01.001.

[185] Laredo GC, Figueroa Y, Cano JL, Teresa M, Castillo J. Estudio de la composici ́on
química del aceite cíclico ligero proveniente de crudos mexicanos. Rev Soc Quim

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111024

G. Lezcano et al.

Mex 2002;46:115–9. http://www.scielo.org.mx/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pi
d=S0583-76932002000200007&lng=es&nrm=iso.

[186] Chong P, Xuejing Y, Xiangchen F, Xinlu H, Zhenmin C, Ronghui Z, et al.

Development of light cycle oil (LCO) hydrocracking technology over a
commercial W-Ni based catalyst. China Petroleum Processing & Petrochemical
Technology 2015;17:30–6.

[187] Thakkar VP, Abdo SF, Gembicki VA, McGehee JF, Dziabala B. LCO upgrading a
novel approach for greater added value and improved returns. In: 11th conference
on refinery processing, topical conference at the 2008 AIChE spring national
meeting; 2008. p. 68–82.

[188] Anilkumar M, Loke N, Patil V, Panday R, S G. Hydrocracking of hydrotreated light
cycle oil to mono aromatics over non-noble bi-functional (ni-w supported) zeolite
catalysts. Catal Today 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2019.12.027. 0–1.

[189] Oh Y, Noh H, Park H, Han H, Nguyen TB, Lee JK. Molecular-size selective

hydroconversion of FCC light cycle oil into petrochemical light aromatic
hydrocarbons. Catal Today 2020;352:329–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cattod.2019.08.037.

[190] Peng C, Liu B, Feng X, Du Y, Fang X. Engineering dual bed hydrocracking catalyst
towards enhanced high-octane gasoline generation from light cycle oil. Chem Eng
J 2020;389:123461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.123461.

[191] Oh Y, Shin J, Noh H, Kim C, Kim YS, Lee YK, et al. Selective hydrotreating and
hydrocracking of FCC light cycle oil into high-value light aromatic hydrocarbons.
Appl Catal Gen 2019;577:86–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2019.03.004.
[192] Calemma V, Giardino R, Ferrari M. Upgrading of LCO by partial hydrogenation of

aromatics and ring opening of naphthenes over bi-functional catalysts. Fuel
Process Technol 2010;91:770–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2010.02.012.

[193] Zhou B, Zhou Z, Wu Z. Process for increasing the mono-aromatic content of

polynuclear-aromatic-containing feedstocks. US 8142645B2; 2012.

[194] Kim Y, Cho K, Lee Y. Structure and activity of Ni2P/desilicated zeolite β catalysts
for hydrocracking of pyrolysis fuel oil into benzene, toluene, and xylene. Catalysts
2020;10:47. https://doi.org/10.3390/catal10010047.

[195] Jung MJ, Jung JY, Lee D, Lee YS. A new pitch reforming from pyrolysis fuel oil by
UV irradiation. J Ind Eng Chem 2015;22:70–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jiec.2014.06.026.

[196] Tirado A, Ancheyta J. Batch reactor study of the effect of aromatic diluents to

reduce sediment formation during hydrotreating of heavy oil. Energy Fuel 2018;
32:60–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b02452.

[197] Ortega García F, Mar-Ju ́arez E, Schacht Hern ́andez P. Controlling sediments in the
ebullated bed hydrocracking process. Energy Fuel 2012;26:2948–52. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ef300183u.

[198] Stratiev D, Dinkov R, Shishkova I, Sharafutdinov I, Ivanova N, Mitkova M, et al.
What is behind the high values of hot filtration test of the ebullated bed residue H-
oil hydrocracker residual oils? Energy Fuel 2016;30:7037–54. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b01241.

[214] Sweeney WA, Bryan PF. BTX processing. Kirk-Othmer encyclopedia of chemical

technology. Wiley; 2000. https://doi.org/10.1002/
0471238961.02202419230505.a01.

[215] Jain P, Feng P. Benzene. IHS Markit Chemical Economics Handbook 2021:7–20.
[216] Jain P, Singh N. Toluene. IHS Markit Chemical Economics Handbook 2021:6–21.
[217] Zhu F, Johnson JA, Ablin DW, Ernst GA. Aromatics process unit design. Efficient
petrochemical processes. Wiley; 2019. p. 83–111. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781119487890.ch4.

[218] Aitani A. Licensed reforming processes. In: Antos GJ, Aitani AM, editors. Catalytic
naphtha reforming, revised and expanded. CRC Press; 2004. p. 435–52. https://
doi.org/10.1201/9780203913505.

[219] Singh N, Nayak A, Clark D. para-Xylene. IHS Markit Chemical Economics

Handbook 2020:6–17.

[220] Saito H, Sekine Y. Catalytic conversion of ethane to valuable products through
non-oxidative dehydrogenation and dehydroaromatization. RSC Adv 2020;10:
21427–53. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ra03365k.

[221] Alabdullah MA, Gomez AR, Vittenet J, Bendjeriou-Sedjerari A, Xu W, Abba IA,
et al. A viewpoint on the refinery of the future: catalyst and process challenges.
ACS Catal 2020;10:8131–40. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.0c02209.
[222] Zhu F, Johnson JA, Ablin DW, Ernst GA. Efficient petrochemical processes. first
ed. American Institute of Chemical Engineers and John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119487890.

[223] Al-Qahtani KY, Elkamel A. Petroleum refining and petrochemical industry

overview. Planning and integration of refinery and petrochemical operations.
Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA; 2010. p. 1–16.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527630844.fmatter.

[224] Quintino A, Catal ̃ao-Lopes M, Lourenço JC. Can switching from gasoline to

aromatics mitigate the price risk of refineries? Energy Pol 2019;134:110963.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2019.110963.

[225] Robinson PR. Hydroconversion processes and technology for clean fuel and

chemical production. In: Khan MR, editor. Advances in clean hydrocarbon fuel
processing. Cambdridge, UK: Elsevier; 2011. p. 287–325. https://doi.org/
10.1533/9780857093783.3.287.

[226] Ancheyta J. Modeling and simulation of catalytic reactors for petroleum refining.

Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2011. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9780470933565.

[227] Petro-Canada to upgrade Montreal refinery for ultralow-sulfur diesel production.

Oil Gas J 2004;102:9.

[228] Froment GF, Bischoff KB, De Wilde J. Chemical reactor analysis and design. third

ed. Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2010.

[229] Harriott P. Chemical reactor design. first ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press;

2002. https://doi.org/10.1201/9780203910238.

[230] Speight JG. Handbook of petroleum refining. first ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC

Press; 2016. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315374079.

[199] Rowhani A, Rainey TJ. Scrap tyre management pathways and their use as a fuel -

[231] Bricker M, Thakkar V, Petri J. Hydrocracking in petroleum processing. In:

a review. Energies 2016;9:1–26. https://doi.org/10.3390/en9110888.
[200] Granda M, Blanco C, Alvarez P, Patrick JW, Men ́endez R. Chemicals from coal

coking. Chem Rev 2014;114:1608–36. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr400256y.
[201] Weissermel K, Arpe H-J. Aromatics— production and conversion. Industrial

organic chemistry. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH; 2003.
p. 313–36. https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527619191.ch12.

[202] Franck H-G, Stadelhofer JW. Naphthalene — production and uses. In: Industrial
aromatic chemistry. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 1988.
p. 298–333. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-73432-8_9.

[203] Passararat S, Sesto B, Zhang V. Naphthalene. IHS Markit Chemical Economics

Handbook 2020;1–10.

[204] Bulauka YA, Yakubouski SF. Process to extract high purity naphthalene from the
heavier gas oil fraction from naptha crackers producing ethylene. In: Proceedings
of the 15th International forum-contest of students and young researchers
“Topical issues of rational use of natural resources. Saint Petersbourg; 2019. p. 24.

[205] Munn S, O’Connor S, Berthault F, Bruijn J de, Allanou R, Pakalin S, et al.

European union risk assessment report - naphthalene vol 33, 1st priority list.
Luxembourg. 2009.
[206] Laredo GC, P ́erez-romo P,

 ́
Agueda-rangel R, Escobar J. Detailed characterization
of light cycle oil for BTX production purposes. International Journal of Petroleum
and Petrochemical Engineering 2020;6:1–12. https://doi.org/10.20431/2454-
7980.0603001.

Treese SA, Jones DSJ, Pujado PR, editors. Handbook of petroleum processing.
second ed. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing; 2014. p. 1–35.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05545-9_3-1.

[232] Morel F, Renard P. Process for hydrotreating a heavy fraction of hydrocarbons

with a view to refining it and converting it to light fractions. FR2681871A1; 1991.

[233] Bazer-Bachi F, Digne M, Verstraete J, Marchal N, Plain C. Process for

hydrotreating heavy hydrocarbon feeds with switchable reactors including at
least one step of progressive switching. US9359561B2; 2016.

[234] Sie ST. Consequences of catalyst deactivation for process design and operation.

Appl Catal Gen 2001;212:129–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-860X(00)
00851-6.

[235] Sahu R, Song BJ, Im JS, Jeon Y-P, Lee CW. A review of recent advances in
catalytic hydrocracking of heavy residues. J Ind Eng Chem 2015;27:12–24.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2015.01.011.

[236] Celis-Cornejo CM, P ́erez-Martínez DJ, Orrego-Ruiz JA, Baldovino-Medrano VG.
Identification of refractory weakly basic nitrogen compounds in a deeply
hydrotreated vacuum gas oil and assessment of the effect of some representative
species over the performance of a Ni-MoS2/Y-Zeolite-Alumina catalyst in
phenanthrene hydrocracking. Energy Fuel 2018;32:8715–26. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.8b02045.

[237] Furimsky E. Deactivation of hydroprocessing catalysts. Catal Today 1999;52:

381–495. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0920-5861(99)00096-6.

[207] Li SQ, Yao Q, Chi Y, Yan JH, Cen KF. Pilot-scale pyrolysis of scrap tires in a

[238] Babich IV, Moulijn JA. Science and technology of novel processes for deep

continuous rotary kiln reactor. Ind Eng Chem Res 2004;43:5133–45. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ie030115m.

[208] Campos-Martin JM, Blanco-Brieva G, Fierro JLG. Hydrogen peroxide synthesis: an
outlook beyond the anthraquinone process. Angew Chem Int Ed 2006;45:
6962–84. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200503779.

[209] Hart PW, Rudie AW. Anthraquinone - a review of the rise and fall of a pulping

catalyst. In: PEERS conference 2014, 13; 2014. p. 567–85.

[210] Pakalin S, Munn S, Aschberger K, Cosgrove O, Paya Perez A, Vegro S. European
union risk assessment report - Part II - human health - anthracene. 2007.
Luxembourg.

[211] Fang D, Wang G, Liu M, Nan J, Gao C, Gao J. Combined selective hydrogenation
and catalytic cracking process for efficient conversion of heavy cycle oil to high
octane number gasoline. Ind Eng Chem Res 2019;58:19752. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.iecr.9b03896. –9.

[212] Cetinkaya E, Liu N, Simons TJ, Jeremy W. Petrochemicals 2030: reinventing the

way to win in a changing industry. McKinsey on Chemicals 2018;1–9.
[213] The Future of Petrochemicals. Towards more sustainable plastics and fertilisers.

International Energy Agency; 2018.

desulfurization of oil refinery streams: a review. Fuel 2003;82:607–31. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0016-2361(02)00324-1.

[239] Morel F, Kressmann S, Harl ́e V, Kasztelan S. Processes and catalysts for

hydrocracking of heavy oil and residues. Stud Surf Sci Catal 1997;106:1–16.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0167-2991(97)80003-1.

[240] Scheffer B, Van Koten MA, R ̈obschl ̈ager KW, De Boks FC. The shell residue

hydroconversion process: development and achievements. Catal Today 1998;43:
217–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0920-5861(98)00150-3.

[241] Scheuerman GL, Johnson DR, Reynolds BE, Bachtel RW, Threlkel RS. Advances in
Chevron RDS technology for heavy oil upgrading flexibility. Fuel Process Technol
1993;35:39–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-3820(93)90084-H.

[242] Ancheyta J, Speight JG. Hydroprocessing of heavy oils and residua. first ed. Boca

Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press; 2007. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420007435.
[243] Rana MS, S ́amano V, Ancheyta J, Diaz JAI. A review of recent advances on
process technologies for upgrading of heavy oils and residua. Fuel 2007;86:
1216–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2006.08.004.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111025

G. Lezcano et al.

Dr. Yerrayya Attada graduated from JNTU Kakinada in 2013
with  a  degree  in  Chemical  Engineering,  followed  by  a  post-
graduate  degree  from  NIT  Warangal,  and  then  a  doctorate
course  at  IIT  Madras  with  Prof.  Vinu  and  Prof.  Upendra
Natarajan. He obtained his Ph.D. in 2019 and then he became a
postdoctoral  fellow  at  IIT  Madras.  Since  2020  he  has  been
working  as  postdoctoral  researcher  in  Prof.  Pedro  Casta ̃no
research group (MuRE) in the KAUST Catalysis Center (KCC) in
KAUST.  His  research  interests  include  thermo-catalytic  con-
version (pyrolysis, microwave assisted pyrolysis, hydrothermal
liquefaction, gasification and combustion) of various wastes to value added products, fuel
production using dry reforming of methane, ammonia decomposition, CO2  Valorization,
heterogeneous  catalysis,  process  modeling  and  simulation,  microkinetic  modeling  and
molecular simulation (Density functional theory (DFT)). He received the Ambuja’s Young
Research Award for his master’s thesis in Chemical Engineering.

Dr. Anissa Bendjeriou-Sedjerari is currently R& D Portfolio
Manager at KAUST Catalysis Center (KCC, Saudi Arabia). She
received  a  Ph.D.  in  Materials  Science  from  the  University  of
Science and Technology of Montpellier (France). She occupied
a post-doc position at Ecole Normale Superieure de Lyon (ENS-
Lyon,  France)  and  CALTECH  (Pasadena,  USA)  followed  by
different research scientist positions at CNRS (Centre National
de Recherche Scientifique, France), and then at KCC. In 2018,
she was appointed Center Liaison Officer to ensure successful
and sustainable partnerships with the industry. She has broad
expertise  in  materials  science,  organic  and  organometallic
chemistry,  and  specifically  in  the  designs,  characterizations,
and applications of heterogeneous catalysts in the Oil & Gas industry. Her research port-
folio applied to the industry encompasses a range of projects such as Oil to Chemicals,
Green  &  Blue  Ammonia,  Carbon  Capture  &  Valorization,  Hydrogen  Production  and
Storage, E-fuels, Plastic Recycling, etc.

Ali  Jawad  received  his  BSc  in  Chemical  Engineering  from
Oregon State University in 2015 and is currently pursuing an
MEng in Petrochemical Engineering from King Fahad Univer-
sity  of  Petroleum  &  Minerals.  He  has  worked  as  a  research
engineer for petrochemical process development and piloting
in  Saudi  Aramco  R&DC,  and  as  a  process  engineer  in  Ras
Tanura Refinery. His experience includes heterogeneous cata-
lyst  development  and  bench-scale  experimentation  in  the
application of crude oil conversion to chemicals. His current
work  focuses  on  techno-economic  analysis  and  flowsheet

simulation of conceptual process designs.

Alberto  Lozano  Ballesteros  is  a  Senior  Techno  Economic
Analyst  at  Saudi  Aramco  Technology  Portfolio  Management.
Alberto  has  a  B.Sc.  in  Industrial  Engineering  and  an  MSc  in
Chemical Engineering by the Polytechnic University of Madrid.
Alberto holds as well a Master in Refining by the IPF School and
is  currently  studying  an  EMBA  with  HEC  Paris.  Alberto  has
around  20  years  of  experience  working  in  different  down-
stream roles: Process Engineer with IFP and Axens, Consultant
with  KBC  Process  Technology  and  Research  Engineer  with
Saudi Aramco. His expertise includes Techno-Economic Anal-
ysis  of  new  technologies,  Crude-Oil  to  Chemicals,  Techno-
Economic Studies, Wide Refinery Model and Simulation, Pro-
cess  Engineering  and  Refinery-Petrochemicals  Integration.
Alberto  also  has  significant  experience  in  process  simulation  tools  such  as  Petro  SIM,
Hysys, Spyro, and Coil SIM. As a Saudi Aramco Research Engineer Alberto is a co-author of
two awarded patents and several ongoing IP applications.

[244] Casta ̃neda LC, Mu ̃noz JAD, Ancheyta J. Combined process schemes for upgrading
of heavy petroleum. Fuel 2012;100:110–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2012.02.022.

[245] Martinez J, Sanchez JL, Ancheyta J, Ruiz RS. A review of process aspects and

modeling of ebullated bed reactors for hydrocracking of heavy oils. Catal Rev Sci
Eng 2010;52:60–105. https://doi.org/10.1080/01614940903238858.

[246] Liu J, Fang X, Yang T. Novel ebullated bed residue hydrocracking process. Energy
Fuel 2017;31:6568–79. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b02937.

[247] Kressmann S, Boyer C, Colyar JJ, Schweitzer JM, Vigui ́e JC. Improvements of

ebullated-bed technology for upgrading heavy oils. Oil Gas Sci Technol 2000;55:
397–406. https://doi.org/10.2516/ogst:2000028.

[248] Sundaram KM, Mukherjee U, Baldassari M. Thermodynamic model of sediment
deposition in the LC-FINING process. Energy Fuel 2008;22:3226–36. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ef800264e.

[249] Cheng ZM, Huang Z Bin, Yang T, Liu JK, Ge HL, Jiang LJ, et al. Modeling on scale-
up of an ebullated-bed reactor for the hydroprocessing of vacuum residuum. Catal
Today 2014;220–222:228–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2013.08.021.

[250] Alonso F, Ancheyta J, Centeno G, Marroquín G, Rayo P, Silva-Rodrigo R. Effect of
reactor configuration on the hydrotreating of atmospheric residue. Energy Fuel
2019;33:1649–58. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.8b03208.

[251] Calder ́on CJ, Ancheyta J. Modeling of slurry-phase reactors for hydrocracking of
heavy oils. Energy Fuel 2016;30:2525–43. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.5b02807.

[252] Delbianco A, Meli S, Tagliabue L, Panariti N. Eni slurry technology: a new process

for heavy oil upgrading. In: Energy Institute - 19th world petroleum congress
2008: a world in transition: delivering energy for sustainable growth. 2; 2008.
p. 614–22.

[253] Till A, Rees A, Schleiffer A. Field upgrading of bitumen to produce a synthetic

crude oil with improved properties. Society of Petroleum Engineers - SPE Heavy
Oil Conference Canada 2014 2014;2:968–75. https://doi.org/10.2118/170091-
ms.

[254] Gillis D, VanWees M, Zimmerman P, Houde E. Upgrading residues to maximize

distillate yields with UOP unifex TM  Process. J Jpn Petrol Inst 2010;53:33–41.
https://doi.org/10.1627/jpi.53.33.

[255] Bellussi G, Rispoli G, Landoni A, Millini R, Molinari D, Montanari E, et al.

Hydroconversion of heavy residues in slurry reactors: developments and
perspectives. J Catal 2013;308:189–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcat.2013.07.002.

[256] Calder ́on CJ, Ancheyta J. Dynamic modeling and simulation of a slurry-phase

reactor for hydrotreating of oil fractions. Energy Fuel 2017;31:5691–700. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b00450.

[257] Nguyen MT, Nguyen NT, Cho J, Park C, Park S, Jung J, et al. A review on the oil-
soluble dispersed catalyst for slurry-phase hydrocracking of heavy oil. J Ind Eng
Chem 2016;43:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2016.07.057.

[258] Marafi M, Al-Barood A, Stanislaus A. Effect of diluents in controlling sediment
formation during catalytic hydrocracking of Kuwait vacuum residue. Petrol Sci
Technol 2005;23:899–908. https://doi.org/10.1081/LFT-200034519.

[259] Meyers RA. Handbook of petroleum refining processes. fourth ed. New York, NY:

McGraw Hill Education; 2016.

[260] Burk C. Techno-economic modeling for new technology development. Chem Eng

Prog 2018;43–52.

[261] Haydary J. Chemical process design and simulation: aspen plus and aspen Hysys

applications. John Wiley & Sons; 2019.

[262] Kaiser MJ, Klerk A de, Gary JH, Hwerk GE. Petroleum refining. CRC Press; 2019.

https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429188893.

Gontzal  Lezcano  completed  his  BSc  and  MSc  in  Chemical
Engineering in 2018 and 2019 at the University of the Basque
Country (UPV/EHU, Spain). He did an internship as a process
engineer at Repsol Refinery at the Petronor site, taking part in
several unit revamping projects. In 2020 he started as a PhD
student in the Multiscale Reaction Engineering group, KAUST
Catalysis  Center  (KCC)  of  the  King  Abdullah  University  of
Science and Technology (KAUST, Saudi Arabia). His research
interests  are  kinetic  modeling,  statistical  analysis,  high-
throughput  experimentation,  hydroprocessing  and  oxidative

coupling of methane.

Dr. Idoia Hita completed her BSc and MSc in Chemical Engi-
neering  in  2010  and  2011  at  the  University  of  the  Basque
Country (UPV/EHU, Spain), where she also graduated with an
International Cum Laude PhD degree in 2015. During her PhD
she  was  a  visiting  PhD  researcher  at  the  Schulich  School  of
Engineering at the University of Calgary (Canada) in 2012. In
2016 she became a postdoctoral researcher at the Engineering
and Technology Institute Groningen (ENTEG) of the University
of  Groningen  (The  Netherlands).  She  continued  her  post-
doctoral activities in 2018 back at the UPV/EHU. In 2019, she
was hired as a Research Scientist at the KAUST Catalysis Center
(KCC) of the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST, Saudi Arabia).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111026

G. Lezcano et al.

Dr. Miao Sun obtained her doctoral degree in Chemical Sci-
ence in 2009 from Xiamen University (China). After that, she
worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow for King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology (KAUST, Saudi Arabia) from 2009
to 2012. During her Post-Doctoral Fellow period, Dr. Miao Sun
was assigned to work at Organometallic Catalysis Lab (CNRS)
in  Universit ́e  Claude  Bernard  Lyon  1  (France)  from  2009  to
2010.  Dr.  Miao  Sun  joined  the  Research  and  Development
Center  of  Saudi  Arabian  Oil  Company  (Saudi  Aramco)  since
2012, and she is currently working as a Science Specialist and
project leader in Fuels & Chemicals Division. Dr. Miao Sun has been working on synthe-
sizing  and  utilizing  heteropoly  compounds,  zeolites,  nanoparticles,  and  noble  metal
complexes as catalysts in both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic reactions since
2004. Her major research interest is in the field of chemistry relating to catalytic upgrading
of nature gas, biomass and heavy fuel oils into value-added petrochemicals in an envi-
ronmentally friendly and cost-effective way. Dr. Miao Sun has published & granted in total
11 journal papers and 30 US patents so far.

Dr. Noor Al-Mana is a Senior Scientist at Saudi Aramco com-
pany.  She led a couple  of research projects focusing on  con-
verting  low-value  petroleum  refineries  to  higher  value
petrochemical products that are considered the building blocks
for  the  various  petrochemical  industries  and  chemical
manufacturing  processes.  She  received  her  PhD  in  Chemical
Sciences  from  the  King  Abdullah  University  of  Science  and
Technology  under  the  supervision  of  Jean-Marie  Basset.  Her
research  interest  focuses  on Catalysis  and  Nanomaterial  syn-
thesis  and  characterization,  in  addition,  to  petrochemical
valorization.

Dr. Mohammed AlAmer completed his BEng at McGill Uni-
versity  and  his  PhD  at  Cornell  University  in  Chemical  Engi-
neering.  During  his  PhD,  he  studied  the  synthesis  and
fabrication  of  graphene  in  model  Taylor-Couette  reactor
setups. He is currently the Team Lead of Aromatics and Fuel
Blendstock at the Research and Development Center in Saudi
Aramco. His team is actively developing disruptive technolo-
gies for refining and petrochemical applications.

Eman Albaher received her BSc degree in Chemistry from The
University  of  Manchester  in  2019.  She  works  as  a  research
scientist at Saudi Aramco R&DC. Her research focuses on the
synthesis  and  characterization  of  multifunctional  catalytic
materials for hydrocarbon conversion, including the develop-
ment  and  modification  of  mesoporous  zeolites  and  nano-
particles.  Her  research  interests  include  mid  streams  to
chemicals, plastic recycling and CO2 conversion.

Dr. Pedro Castano is an Associate Professor of Chemical En-
gineering  at  the  King  Abdullah  University  of  Science  and
Technology (KAUST), Physical Science and Engineering (PSE)
division and KAUST Catalysis Center (KCC), where he leads the
Multiscale Reaction Engineering (MuRE) group. He completed
his PhD in Chemical Engineering in 2006 from the University of
the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), where he is an Adjunct Pro-
fessor. His research interests are catalytic reaction engineering
for waste valorization, sustainable production of chemicals and
hydrogen,  catalyst  deactivation,  and  multiscale  modeling.

More information can be found at https://mure.kaust.edu.sa

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10111027
