Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Opportunities and challenges in using particle circulation loops for
concentrated solar power applications

☆

Gilles Flamant a, Benjamin Grange a, John Wheeldon b, Fr ́ed ́eric Siros c, Benoît Valentin c,
Françoise Bataille d, Huili Zhang e, Yimin Deng f,g,*, Jan Baeyens b, f, g, *
a Processes, Materials and Solar Energy laboratory, PROMES-CNRS, 7 rue du Four solaire, 66120 Font Romeu, France
b European Powder and Process Technology, Kettering, United Kingdom
c EDF-R&D Solar Thermal Electric Technologies, D ́epartement M ́ecanique des Fluides, Energies et Environnement, 6, Quai Watier- BP 49. 78401 Chatou cedex France
d Processes, Materials and Solar Energy laboratory, CNRS-UPVD, Perpignan University, Tecnosud, Rambla de la Thermodynamique, 66100 Perpignan, France
e Beijing University of Chemical Technology, College of Life Science and Technology, 100029, Beijing China
f KULeuven, Department of Chemical Engineering, Process and Environmental Technology Lab., J. De Nayerlaan, 2860 Sint-Katelijne-Waver, Belgium
g Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing Advanced Centre for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, 100029, Beijing, China

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Concentrated solar power
Particle-driven solar receiver
Fluidized bed systems
High efficiency thermodynamic cycles
Particle conveying, process economy

Concentrated  Solar  Power  (CSP)  is  an  electricity  generation  technology  that  concentrates  solar  irradiance
through heliostats onto a small area, the receiver, where a heat transfer medium, currently a fluid (HTF), is used
as heat carrier towards the heat storage and power block. It has been under the spotlight for a decade as one of
the potential or promising renewable and sustainable energy technologies.

′
s
Using gas/solid suspensions as heat transfer medium in CSP has been advocated for the first time in the 1980
and this novel concept relies on its possible application throughout the full CSP plant, i.e., in heat harvesting,
conveying, storage and re-use, where it offers major advantages in comparison with the common heat transfer
fluids  such  as  water/steam,  thermal  fluids  or  molten  salt.  Although  the  particle  suspension  has  a  lower  heat
capacity than molten salts, the particle-driven system can operate without temperature limitation (except for the
maximum  allowable  wall  temperature  of  the  receiver  tubes),  and  it  can  also  operate  with  higher  hot-cold
temperature  gradients.  Suspension  temperatures  of  over  800
C  can  be  tolerated  and  achieved,  with  addi-
tional high efficiency thermodynamic systems being applicable. The application of high temperature particulate
heat carriers moreover expands the possible thermodynamic cycles from Rankine steam cycles to Brayton gas
cycles and even to combined electricity generating cycles.

◦

This review paper deals with the development of the particle-driven CSP and assesses both its background
fundamentals and its energy efficiency. Among the cited systems, batch and continuous operations with particle
conveying  loops are discussed. A short summary of  relevant  particle-related properties, and their use as heat
transfer medium is included. Recent pilot plant experiments have demonstrated that a novel bubbling fluidized
bed concept, the upflow bubbling fluidized bed (UBFB), recently adapted to use bubble rupture promoters and
called dense upflow fluidized bed (DUFB), offers a considerable potential for use in a solar power tower plant for
its excellent heat transfer at moderate to high receiver capacities.

For all CSP applications with particle circulation, a major challenge remains the transfer of hot and colder
particles among the different constituents of the CSP system (receiver to storage, power block and return loop to
the  top  of  the  solar  tower).  Potential  conveying  modes  are  discussed  and  compared.  Whereas  in  solar  heat
capture, bubbling fluidized beds, particle falling films, vortex and rotary furnaces, among others, seem appro-
priate,  both  moving  beds  and  bubbling  fluidized  beds  are  recommended  in  the  heat  storage  and  re-use,  and
examined in the review.

Common to all CSP applications are the thermodynamic cycles in the power block, where different secondary
working  fluids can  be  used  to feed the  turbines. These  thermodynamic cycles  are  discussed in  detail  and the
current or future most likely selections are presented.

☆

Flamant G. and Siros F. have equally shared the main scientific tasks, and should be considered as equal primary authors. The overall project coordination was

performed by Baeyens J. and Deng Y., considered equal corresponding authors.

* Corresponding authors.

E-mail addresses: yimin.deng@kuleuven.be (Y. Deng), baeyens.j@mail.buct.edu.cn (J. Baeyens).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101056
Received 25 April 2021; Received in revised form 2 October 2022; Accepted 29 October 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)101056Availableonline11November20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

G. Flamant et al.

Since  the  use  of  a back  up  fuel  is  recommended  for  all CSP  systems,  the  hybrid  operation  with  the  use of

alternative fuel back-up is also included in the review.

The review research is concluded by scale-up data and challenges, and provides a preliminary view into the
prospects and the overall economy of the system. Market prospects for both novel concentrated solar power are
expected to be excellent. Although the research provided lab- and pilot-scale based design methods and equa-
tions for the key unit operations of the novel solar power tower CSP concept, there is ample scope for future
development of several topics, as finally recommended.

Symbols and Acronyms

Cross-sectional area of the containment vessel m2
Archimedes number -
Diameter of a pipe, m
Sieve size of particles μm
Volume equivalent particle diameter μm
Surface-to-volume diameter of the particle μm
Particle mass flow rate and Gas mass flow rate kg/s
Solids circulation flux kg/m2s
Gravitational acceleration m/s2
Height m

A
Ar
D
Dp
dV
Dsv
Fp, Fg
G
G
H
h, hmax  Heat transfer coefficient and maximum heat transfer

coefficient W/m2K
Convective particle heat transfer coefficient W/m2K
Radiation heat transfer coefficient W/m2K
Gas convective heat transfer coefficient W/m2K
Effective length of the fluidized bed, or pipe length m

hpc
hrad
hconv
LT
Numax  Maximum Nusselt number -
P
Re
T
Tp, TW

Pressure Pa
Reynolds number -
Temperature K
Bulk (bed) temperature and wall temperature respectively
K

Tcold, Thot Cold and hot working fluid in heat exchanger K
Tdb, Twb  Dry bulb temperature and wet bulb temperature K
U
Ui
Ums
Umb, Umf Minimum bubbling velocity and minimum fluidization

Superficial air velocity m/s
Interstitial gas velocity m/s
Superficial gas velocity at the onset of slugging m/s

velocity m/s

Uch Usalt  Choking velocity, saltation velocity m/s
Up
Ut
Utf
Utrans
UTR

Particle velocity m/s
Particle terminal velocity m/s
Gas velocity at the transition to turbulent fluidization m/s
Transition velocity m/s
Gas velocity at the transition to circulating fluidization
mode m/s
Wadell’s particle sphericity -
Gas viscosity Pa s

Φ
М

ε
εs, εbed
λg, λp

Bed voidage -
Emissivity of the surface and bed, respectively -
Thermal conductivity of gas and particles, respectively W/
mK

ρg, ρp, ρB Gas, particle and bed bulk density, respectively kg/m3
σB

Stefan-Boltzmann constant, 5.67×10

–8 W/m2K4

Acronyms
APS
BS
CAPEX, OPEX Capital expenditures, operating expenses,

Aiming point strategy
Backup systems

respectively
Circulating fluidized bed
Concentrated solar power
German aerospace center
Direct normal irradiation
Dense upflow fluidized bed
Engineering, management, contingencies, etc.
Heat exchanger
Heat recovery steam generator
Heat transfer fluid
Integrated solar combined cycle plants
Levelized cost of electricity
Linear Fresnel reflectors
Oxide dispersion strengthened
Parabolic dish collectors
Pumped hydro energy storage
Price purchase agreement
Parabolic trough collector
Photovoltaic
Recompression
Recuperated
Recompression with main compression intercooling
Solar power tower
Thermal energy storage

CFB
CSP
DLR
DNI
DUFB
EPC
HEX
HRSG
HTF
ISCC
LCOE
LFR
ODS
PDC
PHES
PPA
PTC
PV
RC
RE
RMCI
SPT
TES
TIT/TIP/ CIT/CIP Turbine/compressor inlet temperature/pressure,

respectively
Upflow bubbling fluidized bed

UBFB
WACC  Weighted average cost of capital

1. Outlook and objectives of the review

1.1. The importance of concentrated solar power in renewable energy

In  2021,  approximately  290  GW  of  new  renewable  electricity  ca-
pacity were installed [1], with PV accounting for more than half of it.
The total global renewable electricity capacity reached 2537 GW by the
end  of  2019  [2]  with  hydropower  and  wind  remaining  the  largest
sources of 1310.2 GW and 622.7 GW, respectively. Concentrated Solar
Power, CSP, represented ~6.5 GW of the total. These statistics indicate
that  the  CSP  production  capacity  is  still  small  with  respect  to  other

renewable production sources. Moreover, PV prices have considerably
been reduced in recent years, and CSP technology can no longer compete
directly with PV on a simple levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) basis
that does  not consider the  capacity of  a given  power plant to  deliver
electricity when most needed. A small capacity nevertheless does not
mean  a  small  service  to  the  grid.  In  favourable  regions  with  direct
normal  irradiation  (DNI)  equal  to  or  exceeding  about  2000  kWh/m2
year  [3],  the  built-in  thermal  storage  capabilities  of  CSP  plants  are  a
decisive  asset  that  distinguishes  these  plants  from  highly  variable
renewable electricity production technologies like PV or wind power.
The secure development of interconnected bulk power systems based on
renewables needs to respect two functions, adequacy and reliability [4].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010562

G. Flamant et al.

Adequacy is the ability of the electricity system to supply the aggregate
electrical demand and energy requirements of the customers at all times.
Reliability  is  the  probability  of  the  system  to  perform  its  function
adequately  for  an  intended  period  and  measures  the  capacity  of  the
considered system to meet all consumer demands. Accounting for these
two constraints, system operators are facing a new challenge with the
increase  of  installed  capacity  of  intermittent  renewable  facilities  for
power generation. In industrialized countries, the power generation by
variable  renewable  energy  together  with  the  base  load  and  flexible
generation at minimum load whenever possible, exceeds the demand in
specific  places  at  many  moments  along  the  year.  This  leads  to  a  re-
striction or even curtailment of the operation of renewable plants and to
an increase of the costs of ancillary services provided by conventional
power plants for balancing the system. In emerging economies, there is
often a need to increase generation capacities in all timeframes at a high
ramp  rate,  especially  for  covering  the  morning-evening  peaks.  There-
fore, the penetration of variable renewable energy in such systems needs
to be backed-up by fossil-fueled plants. Consequently, there is a need to
set up new indicators based on the value –not just on the costs – of the
new  elements  of  the  power  system.  This  will  result  in  specific  re-
quirements in terms of a significant share of dispatchable renewables in
the overall renewable capacity. The dispatchability is the capacity of a
power plant to vary its output at the command of the plant or the system
operator. The impact of CSP plants with thermal storage was already
discussed in a previous report [5].

For renewable energy supplies, electrical dispatchability refers to the
source that can be programmed on demand at the request of the power
grid operators, according to market needs. It can hence be expressed by
the time of dispatch. Non-dispatchable renewable energy sources such
as wind power and photovoltaics cannot be controlled. Several param-
eters determine the dispatch ability of a power plant, including mostly
start-up time, ramp rate, and minimum load capacity. In function of the
start-up time, the hierarchy of conventional state-of-the-art plants rates
the  systems  as  follows:  grid  batteries  (a  few  milliseconds)  < hydro-
electric power plants (seconds to a few minutes) < open-cycle gas tur-
bines (5–10 min) < combined cycle gas turbines (30–40 min). A hard
coal fired power plant will require 80 to 150 min as response time. The
indicated start-up times or the thermal plants correspond to hot start-
ups, i.e., when the plant has been out of operation for less than 8 h. A
particle-driven solar power plant with hot storage is expected to have a
hot start-up time of around1 hour, close to that of the state-of-the-art
molten salt tower system.

In an example case of California,  it was demonstrated that with a
33% share of renewable energy in the power generation mix in the short
term, it was economically equivalent to remunerate 5 US cents/kWh to a
new PV plant and 10 US cents/kWh to a CSP plant with storage. The
value  of  a  new  generation  unit  is  based  on  two  components:  (i)  the
operational  value  that  represents  the  avoided  costs  of  conventional
generation  at  their  respective  dispatching  times  along  with  related
ancillary  service  costs  (savings on  emission  costs  are  also  taken  in  to
account); and (ii) the capacity value that reflects the ability to avoid the
costs of building new conventional power plants in response to growing
energy demands. In this context, concentrated solar power plants with
7–14  h  storage  capacity  offer  the  opportunity  to  install  a  base-load
power generation facility with a capacity factor of approximately 70%
and a cost of heat storage in the range 40–50 €/kWhe (for solar towers),
i.e., much cheaper than battery storage. CSP can also be envisioned as a
peaker  power  facility  operating  only  with  thermal  storage  as  a  com-
plement to PV plants. Such CSP facilities deliver electricity during 5 to 6
h  at  the  end  of  the  afternoon  and  after  sunset  when  PV  production
without storage declines to zero [6]. The two strategies are discussed in
Section  7  of  this  paper.  Consequently,  the  annual  capacity  factor  de-
creases to about 16 to 23% but the electricity cost is only 5% higher than
for similarly sized and operated natural gas plants. The conclusion of
this study is that a CSP peaker (with 230 MWe net power) can provide
most of the capacity and ancillary benefits of a conventional natural gas

peaker plant, however without CO2 and pollutant emissions.

In assessing the dispatchable energy options, a comparison is diffi-
cult since  greatly  depending on  local conditions.  It is  therefore  likely
that these specific conditions will alter the competitivity. Examples, as
given  below  in  the  Australian  context,  should  not  be  extrapolated  to
other regions where local conditions will considerably differ.

A  comparison  of  dispatchable  renewable  electricity  options  was
prepared  by  ARENA  in  the  Australian  context  [7].  The  various  tech-
nologies considered are:

• Utility-scale  PV  and  wind  generation  in  combination  with  large
network  connected  Li-ion  batteries,  pumped  hydro  energy  storage
(PHES) and hydrogen storage (via electrolysers).

• CSP with molten salt energy storage.
• Bio-energy via either anaerobic digestion combined with gas engine
power generation or biomass-fired boilers with a steam turbine.
• Geothermal generation via either hot sedimentary aquifers or engi-

neered geothermal systems.

The ARENA study shows that there is no single winner, and at each
timescale, there are multiple options that fall within a general least-cost
band. PV and wind plus batteries are well-adapted solutions for short
duration (1–2 h) energy storage whereas PV and wind in combination
with  PHES  can  satisfy  a  wide  range  of  storage  hours  but  is  the  most
sensitive to site constraints. Anaerobic digestion systems operating on
zero cost waste and operating at 50% or a higher capacity factor, result
in the cheapest dispatchable renewable generating option considered.
Combustion-based bioenergy generation is also very competitive at 50%
or  more  capacity  factor,  provided  low-cost  biomass  inputs  can  be
sourced. Geothermal sources can be competitive for continuous opera-
tion.  Hydrogen-based  storage  with  PV  and  wind  appears  not  yet
competitive in the time-scale (0–40 h) of the study. Concentrated solar
power is competitive for a storage capacity over 6 h and its cost appears
to be very similar to that of PV and wind with PHES under this condition
(approximately USD 120–130/MWh for 6 h storage and 100MWe, as end
of 2017 cost). In particular, there is a minimum in LCOE in the range of
15 to 20 h of storage, even if CSP generation in peak periods may be
preferred. This latter finding is in complete agreement with the results of
NREL’s report [8] concluding that, in 2025, three hours of PV storage
tends to produce a lower projected LCOE than CSP. For nine hours of
storage, CSP tends to have a lower projected LCOE than PV + batteries.
The  report  demonstrates the  significant  remaining  uncertainty in  this
kind  of  cost  projection  (period  2015–2030).  It  should  moreover  be
considered that the economic analysis for batteries does not consider the
full life-cycle emissions of batteries, which is far from carbon-neutral at
present. From an environmental point of view, the CSP versus PV with
batteries concepts are environmentally far from equivalent, especially
regarding their respective manufacturing processes and Life Cycle con-
siderations. LCA studies on particle-driven CSP applications have not yet
been  published  since  still  at  pilot-scale  development.  Important  facts
and data were however published for photovoltaic power plants [9,10]
and for battery power storage [9–12].

◦

◦
C. Consequently, it is currently used at a 565

Previous considerations illustrate the key role of thermal storage in
the future deployment of solar thermal power generation. State-of-the-
art CSP thermal storage at commercial scale is based on molten salt, a
mixture of sodium and potassium nitrates (60/40 wt%) that solidifies at
221
C  and  can  be  used  without  significant  decomposition  up  to
◦
C bulk
approximately 600
temperature. Sensible thermal heat storage is used in parabolic troughs
and central receiver (solar towers) CSP plants under different operating
conditions. For parabolic troughs (linear concentrating systems) oper-
◦
ating at 390
C with synthetic oil as heat transfer fluid, the temperature
difference  between hot and cold storage tanks is  90 oC  whereas for a
central  receiver  point  focusing  facility  the  temperature  difference  is
about  three  times  this  value.  Consequently,  considering  the  higher
conversion efficiency, the storage of one kWhe needs at least three times

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010563

G. Flamant et al.

less  molten  salt  in  central  receiver  (solar  tower)  CSP.  Implementing
thermal energy storage (TES) in CSP results in an increase of the plant
capacity  factor  with  respect  to  variable  renewable  energy  without
storage. The capacity factor is the ratio between what a generation unit
is  capable  of  generating  at  maximum  output  versus  the  unit’s  actual
generation output over a period of time. The global weighted average
capacity factors for PV, onshore wind and CSP were 18%, 35.6% and
45.2% respectively in 2019 [13]. The same report points out that LCOE
of  CSP  plants  fell  by  47%  between  2010  and  2019  and  that  a  recent
auction and price purchase agreement (PPA) indicates a cost in the range
of USD 70–80/MWh. This case was analysed in [14]. In particular, for
the DEWA IV project in Dubai (700 MWe total, 3×200 MWe parabolic
trough plants with 10 h storage and 1×100 MWe solar tower with 15 h
storage), a key factor is its extraordinarily long PPA duration (35 years),
combined probably with very low financing costs. The weighted average
cost of capital (WACC) is estimated to be equal or less than 3% to reach
this LCOE. Despite this remark, the authors conclude that low costs are
both  feasible  and  sustainable and  may  be generalized  to other  places
pushing concentrating solar power as a commercially viable technology
for dispatchable renewable electricity.

◦

◦

C [16], and at approximately 850

The molten salt working temperature in a central receiver CSP results
in  a  heat-to-electricity  efficiency  of  approximately  42%.  Higher  effi-
◦
ciencies (~48% and more) are attainable at 650–670
C with advanced
supercritical steam cycles [15], with supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2)
cycles at 700–750
C with hot air
turbines operated in externally heated combined cycle gas turbines [17].
Such high operating temperatures result in great challenges on the solar
receiver  and  power  plant  design,  construction  materials  and  heat
transfer  fluids.  In  the  field,  possible  options  are  high-pressure  gasses,
high  temperature  molten  salt,  liquid  metals  and  particle  suspensions
[18,19]. Accounting for the technical problems linked to high-pressure
and  high-temperature  solar  receiver  development,  critical  issues
related  to  corrosion  and  freezing  temperature  of  high  temperature
molten salts, and corrosion and safety issues of processes using liquid
metals foster, the development of the particle option received a wide
interest at the international level.

1.2. CSP technologies and solar towers

Concentrated  Solar  Power  (CSP)  is  an  electricity  generation  tech-
nology that concentrates solar irradiation through concave mirrors onto
a small area, the receiver, where a heat transfer fluid (HTF) is used as
heat carrier to capture and convey the heat to a heat storage and ulti-
mately a power block. It is particularly promising in regions with high
direct  normal  irradiance  (DNI).  CSP  plants  are  gaining  increasing  in-
terest,  mostly  by  using  Parabolic  Trough  Collectors  (PTC)  and  Solar
Power  Tower  (SPT)  systems,  the  latter progressively  occupying  a  sig-
nificant  market  position  due  to  their  advantages  of  higher  efficiency,
lower operating costs and good scale-up potential. The large-scale SPT
technology  was  successfully  demonstrated,  by  e.g.,  Torresol  in  the
Spanish Gemasolar project on a 19.9 MWel-scale [20] and at Ivanpah
(USA) at a scale of 370 MWel (3 towers) [21]. According to IEA [22], CSP
installed capacity can reach between 9 and 13 GW in 2025 and produce
at least 27 TWh.

At present, there are four major CSP technologies: Parabolic Trough
Collectors (PTC), Solar Power Towers (SPT), Linear Fresnel Reflectors
(LFR) and Parabolic Dish Collectors (PDC). Concentrated Solar Thermo-
electrics has also been reported [23], but requires further fundamental
and applied research: the cost of thermo-electric materials hampers their
widespread use in the CSP concept. The current CSP technologies are of
medium  (PDC,  LFR)  to  large-scale  size  (SPT,  PTC),  with  operations
mostly  located  in  Spain,  Morocco,  China,  Australia,  South  Africa,  the
USA and the Middle East. Parabolic trough collector technology is the
most mature CSP design, while the SPT now occupies the second place
however  with  increasing  importance  because  of  its  advantages  and
ongoing improvements. A full description of different CSP technologies

is given in [24]. Whereas PTC and SPT can operate at capacities above
100 MWel, the power of Linear Fresnel Reflector plants are generally in
the range 10–50 MWe except the Dhursar plant (India) that reaches 125
MWe [25]. Parabolic dish collector plants operate generally at 10 to 30
kWe capacity per dish: large scale plants require hundreds to thousands
of parabolic dish collector units.

Solar power towers use a field of heliostats, i.e., sun tracking mirrors
that reflect and concentrate the sunrays onto a central receiver placed at
the top of a fixed tower. In the central receiver, heat is absorbed by a
heat transfer fluid, which then transfers its heat to a secondary fluid that
powers a thermodynamic cycle turbine. A sensible heat storage is also
generally  included.  Commercial  tower  plants  now  in  operation  use
either direct steam generation or mostly molten salts. The concentrating
tower can achieve high temperatures, thereby increasing the efficiency
at  which  heat  is  converted  into  electricity,  and  reducing  the  cost  of
thermal  energy  storage.  As  stated  above,  the  CSP  potential  can  be
enhanced by the incorporation of two concepts in order to improve the
competitiveness  towards  conventional  power  generation  systems, i.e.,
Thermal Energy Storage (TES) and Backup Systems (BS). Both systems
offer the  possibility of  a  successful year-round  operation, providing  a
stable energy supply in response to electricity grid demands.

Thermal  energy  storage  systems  apply  a  simple  principle:  heat
collected in the solar receiver is stored by the heat transfer fluid into a
hot storage tank. When needed, the hot heat transfer medium can be
used and sent to the power block. Storage duration at full power can
reach  15  h  [20].  CSP  plants,  with  or  without  storage,  are  moreover
commonly  equipped  with  a  fuel  backup  system  (BS),  that  helps  to
manage start-up phases, to regulate the production and to guarantee a
nearly  constant  generation  capacity,  especially  in  peak  periods.  CSP
plants equipped with backup systems are called hybrid plants. Fossil fuel
burners or biomass combustion can provide energy to the heat transfer
fluid, to the storage medium, or directly to the power block. The inte-
gration of the BS can moreover reduce investments in extra solar field
and storage capacity. CSP can also be used in a hybrid mode by adding a
small  solar  field  to  a  fossil  fuel  or  biomass  fired  power  plant.  These
systems are called Integrated Solar Combined Cycle plants (ISCC), and
two case studies were examined by Zhang et al. for the integration with
either a coal fired power plant of Southern Croatia [26] or a biomass
fired power plant in Lleida (Spain) [27]. Such hybridization targets the
reduction of fossil fuel use. A positive aspect of solar fuel savers is their
relatively low cost: with the steam cycle and turbine already in place,
only components specific to the CSP require additional investment.

The solar power tower concept is flexible as it allows a choice from a
wide  variety  of  heliostats,  receivers  and  heat  transfer  media.  Some
plants can have several towers (multi-tower concept) to feed a single
power block. The next paragraph examines the potential improvements
of the solar power tower concept.

1.3. Using particles to raise the operating temperatures of the solar power
tower

The  main  reasons  for  the  enhanced  development  of  novel  heat
transfer fluids are related to overcoming the specific and overall draw-
backs  of  molten  salts,  relating  to  their  solidification  temperature
◦
◦
C) and temperature of decomposition of the salts (>600
(~220
C). The
use of gas/solid suspensions, i.e., powders, as heat transfer media has
′
s [28]. Powders have been
been advocated for the first time in the 1980
widely  applied  in  fluidized  bed  reactors  for  pyrolysis,  gasification  or
combustion of, e.g., coal, biomass, and plastic and refuse-derived solid
waste  [29,30].  In  such  reactors,  the  powder  acts  as  mixing  and
isothermal  reaction  medium,  with  in-bed  or  wall-mounted  heat  ex-
changers used to generate steam for further use in either a power gen-
eration or an in-plant steam network. A novel application of powders in
renewable energy relies on their use as heat transfer medium for heat
capture,  conveying  and  storage.  As  explained  in  Section  3,  various
particle solar receiver concepts have been developed as a function of the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010564

G. Flamant et al.

solid size from few micrometres to millimetres.

The use of gas/solid systems, or powder suspensions, as heat carrier
to transfer solar heat from the receiver to the energy conversion process
offers major advantages in comparison with water/steam, thermal fluids
or molten salts. Since the powder has a heat capacity similar to that of
molten salts, without temperature limitation except for the maximum
allowable wall temperature of the receiver, a suspension temperature in
excess of 1000
C can be achieved, especially in refractory-lined solar
receivers as reported by Rafique et al. [31,32]. These high temperatures
offer new opportunities for highly efficient thermodynamic cycles such
as obtained when using supercritical steam or CO2. Moving into higher
temperature heat transfer media, a cascade of effects is noteworthy, as
illustrated in Fig. 1 and assessed by, e.g., Dunham and Iverson [33].

◦

A higher temperature operation will increase the power cycle effi-
ciency as well as the temperature range over which the storage operates,
thus enhancing the thermal energy storage density. The increased effi-
ciency of the power cycle also reduces the thermal power demand from
the receiver, which allows a smaller heliostat field to be used and more
electricity  to  be  generated  per  unit  of  stored  thermal  energy.  The  in-
crease in storage density and capacity will reduce investments, despite
the use of more expensive construction materials. The increasing tech-
nology risk reflects the effects on the other components of the CSP plant,
which  are  more  difficult  to  predict  since  higher  temperatures  might
increase the cost of the receiver and of the power cycle as well. If the new
particle-based high-temperature heat transfer medium is to improve the
economics of the CSP, the cost reduction of the solar field and storage
must outweigh the cost increases of the receiver and power block.

Table 1
Typical power plant operating conditions reported in [37,38] (The cycle effi-
◦
ciencies cited assume an indirect dry-cooled condenser, operating at 60
C with
multistage feed water preheating).

No.

Power cycle

1

2

3
4

5
6

7

8

High-tech. parabolic trough
collector plants
High-tech. molten salt solar power
tower plants
Old subcritical fossil fuel plants
High-tech. Subcritical fossil fuel
plants
Old supercritical fossil fuel plants
High-tech. supercritical fossil fuel
plants
Advanced supercritical fossil fuel
plants
Ultra-supercritical fossil fuel plants

Steam
conditions
◦
(

C)

(bar)

Cycle efficiency
(%)

375

100

~35

535

115

~40

535
565

565
600/
610
600/
620
700/
720

165
165

255
270

~42
~43

~44
~45

285

~46

350

~48

◦

The  higher  operating  temperature  of  the  powder  circulation  loop
allows advanced power cycle configurations to be used, though not yet
exploited in current CSP plants. Typical operating conditions of CSP and
fossil fuel power plants [34,35] are shown in Table 1 and Fig. 2, in terms
of the operating temperatures and steam pressures, along with typical
efficiency values. Parabolic trough collector plants are limited to a steam
temperature  of  365
C  by  their  thermal  oil  heat  transfer  fluid,  and
molten salt solar power tower plants are limited to temperatures below
560
C [36]. Both parabolic trough collector and the molten salt solar
power towers operate at temperatures and pressures far below the cor-
responding  state-of-technology  fossil  fuel  power  plants,  resulting  in
lower  efficiencies.  The  particle  receiver  can  have  a  nominal  outlet
temperature exceeding 850
C, as discussed in this review paper, thus
leading to the potential applications of highly efficient thermodynamic
cycles (as detailed in Section 6).

◦

◦

Supercritical  Rankine  cycles  in  associated  steam  turbines  are
commonly designed for large power outputs (~800 MWel) [34], and will
need to be scaled-down for solar power tower plants by a redesign in
order to cope with the low volumetric flow rates and the resulting small
blade  sizes,  although  solutions  using  radial  turbines  or  operating  the
high pressure turbine at higher speeds have been suggested [39]. State
of  the  art  of  advanced  cycles  is  proposed  in  Section  6.  In  order  to
facilitate the use of SPT plants in arid locations, the power block must

Fig.  2. Evolution  of  Standard Reheat  Rankine-Cycle configurations  (numbers
refer to Table 1) [37].

use dry, indirect cooling for lack of sufficient cooling water.

1.4. Objectives and layout of the review

In addition to the main concept, particle-driven CSP involves specific
components and units that are more commonly used in chemical engi-
neering  than  in  power  engineering.  Consequently,  this  paper  aims  to
review  the  different  unit  operations  where  heat  transfer  to/from  the
particles  is involved both from literature data and from experimental
findings.

Section 2 reviews the particle solar receivers tested at various scale,
with a focus on the systems with continuous particle circulation. Particle
handling issues are detailed in Section 3 since it is a critical point of the
technology.  Section  4  gives  an  insight  in  particle  heat  exchangers,
another originality of the particle-driven CSP concept. A detailed state of
the art of existing and advanced thermodynamic cycles is proposed in
Section  5.  Accounting  for  the  various  building  units,  scaling  up  pro-
cedures, operation in baseload or peaker mode, and hybrid systems are
discussed in Sections 6 and 7 respectively. The hybrid systems (bio-en-
ergy/CSP) are examined in Section 8. An examination of the required
future developments is proposed in Section 9 and the LCOE estimation
for  a  commercial-scale  peaker  plant  is  detailed  in  Section  10  with  a
reference to current molten salt technology. Section 11 concludes the
paper.

Fig. 1. Operational temperature ranges of different sub-systems.

Although  the  scope  of  the  present  review  paper  is  limited  to  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010565

G. Flamant et al.

application of concentrated solar radiation to generate electrical power,
recent developments open broader perspectives where the captured heat
is directly used in physical processes (e.g., in drying of products [40], in
continuous  process  steam  generation  [41]),  in  thermo-chemical  pro-
cesses (e.g., solar biomass pyrolysis or gasification [42]), and even in
high temperature calcination of minerals [43,44]. These direct captured
solar heat applications have a higher thermal efficiency since avoiding
the Carnot losses of the power cycle. These applications are however not
dealt with in the present review, but would merit a separate treatment.

2. The particle-driven solar power tower concepts

2.1. Fundamentals of particle technology applied to CSP application

2.1.1. Properties of solid/gas systems

In dealing subsequently with the different solid/gas systems in the
CSP  concepts,  some  definitions  will  be  frequently  used,  and  are  only
briefly summarized below, since available in numerous handbooks on
powder or particle technology.

Reynolds number: Re = dSVρgU
Additional dimensionless numbers, namely Nusselt and Prandtl, will

μ

be used further in the text and explained as and when required.

2.1.1.4. Packed  beds  of  powders. A  widely  used  characterization  of
packed beds is the pressure drop. An equation developed by Ergun [48,
49] has been proven satisfactory:

ΔP
H

= 150

(1 (cid:0) ε)2
ε2

μU
d2
SV

+ 1.75

(1 (cid:0) ε)2
ε2

ρgU2
d2
SV

(4)

With ΔP, the packed bed pressure drop per unit height (H) for a gas
with  viscosity  μ  and  density  ρ  flowing  at  a  superficial  velocity  of  U
through the bed of voidage ε. Under laminar flow conditions (Re < 1) the
first term on the right hand side dominates, whereas in fully turbulent
flow (Re > 1000), the second term dominates.

2.1.1.5. Gas  velocity. In  powder  technology,  gas  velocities  are
expressed as superficial velocities, i.e., the ratio of the gas flow rate and
the cross-sectional area of the containment vessel.

2.1.1.1. Particle  size  and  shape. Three  diameter  definitions  are
commonly used for packed and fluidized beds:

Fg

U =

)
/
h

(cid:0)

Nm3
A(m2)

(5)

(6)

(7)

dP:  sieve  size, the  width  of the minimum  square  aperture through
which the particle will pass;
dV:  volume  diameter,  the  diameter  of  a  sphere  having  the  same
volume as the particle;
dSV: surface/volume diameter, the diameter of a sphere having an
equal ratio of surface area to volume ratio as the particle

Gp =

Fp(kg/h)
A(m2)

2.1.1.6. Solid flux and particle velocity. The solid flux is also defined as
the  mass  flow  per  unit  time  and  per  unit  cross  sectional  area  of  the
vessel.

The last two diameters are related through Wadell’s sphericity factor

Since Fp = (1(cid:0) ε)ρpAUp, the solids velocity Up is equal to

φ [45], resulting in:

φ =

dSV
dV

Up =

Gp
(1 (cid:0) ε)ρp

(1)

It has been well established that the most appropriate parameter for
correlating the flow of fluids through packed and fluidized beds is the
external surface area of the powder per unit particle volume [46], and
the most relevant diameter is thus dsv. Unfortunately, there is no simple
generally accepted method for measuring the sphericity of small irreg-
ular  particles.  Although  values  have  been  published,  they  should  be
regarded as estimates only and range from 0.64 to 1 for most materials.
Viewing the particles through a microscope will usually enable a real-
istic value of φ to be determined, according to the method described in
Kong et al. [47].

2.1.1.2. Particle density. The density of a specific particle is defined as
[46]:

ρp =

mass of a single particle
volume the particle would displace

(2)

The particle density should not be confused with the bulk density of
the bed, ρB, which takes account of the voids in and between the par-
ticles. For nonporous solids the particle density is equal to the absolute
density of the material, ρABS. For porous solids, ρp<ρABS, and cannot be
measured by the usual means and a mercury porosimeter can be used.
For  bulk  powders,  the  effect  of  the  gas-filled  voids  between  the

particles is accounted for, and ρB = (1(cid:0) ε)ρp with

ε =

total volume of bed (cid:0) volume of particles
total volume of bed

(3)

2.1.1.3. Dimensionless numbers. The previous fundamental characteris-
tics  are  commonly  grouped  within  dimensionless  numbers,  the  most
representative being:

Archimedes number: Ar = d3

SV(ρp(cid:0) ρg)ρgg
μ2

2.1.1.7. Transition  velocities. Since  different  hydrodynamic  regimes
occur in gas/solid systems, regime-transition velocities will be used, for
example,  the  minimum  fluidization  velocity,  Umf;  the  minimum
bubbling velocity, Umb; the particle terminal velocity, Ut; the velocity at
the onset of turbulent fluidization, Utf; or at fast fluidization, UTR. These
velocities will be determined and quantified in Section 2.2.2.

2.1.1.8. The powder classification. Work by Geldart [50] and by Baeyens
and Geldart [51] summarized the experimental and industrial experi-
ence of using different powders. A powder classification was established
based  upon  increasing  cohesiveness  (C-type),  aeratability  (A-type),
bubbling fluidization (B-type) and specific behavior of coarse powders
(D-type). The main properties of the 4 groups are specified by Geldart
[50].

Geldart [50] presented a tentative diagram for classifying the pow-
ders  into  groups  having  broadly  similar  fluidization  characteristics in
ambient air. The group boundaries were further refined and completed
by, e.g., Wu and Baeyens [52], Rabinovich et al. [53] and Kong et al.
[47]. Cohesive C-type particles are not recommended for use in particle
systems.

2.1.2. Solid/Gas systems: from packed bed to pneumatic conveying

2.1.2.1. The gross behavior of solid/gas systems. The processes of heat or
mass  transfer  and  chemical  reaction  in  fluidized  beds  depend  on  the
interaction of gas and solids within the bed. Different contacting regimes
are possible, depending on the solid/gas characteristics, the bed geom-
etry and the operating gas flow rate. The transitions are presented in
Fig. 3.

When a gas passes upwards through a bed of particles, it percolates
through  the  void  spaces,  and  at  low  gas  flow  rates  the  bed  remains

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010566

G. Flamant et al.

beds (CFBs) and pneumatic conveyors, the solids loading in general and
solids circulation rate in the CFB are also important [54,55].

The  different  operation  modes  of  powder  gas  systems  have  been
discussed  by  previous  researchers  [50,56],  and  can  be  distinguished
with operating velocities at the transition of subsequent operation re-
gimes, Utrans, using selected empirical equations listed in Table 2. For
circulating fluidized bed and pneumatic conveying applications, addi-
tional  critical  velocities  are  the  choking  velocity  (Uch)  for  vertical
transport,  and  the  saltation  velocity  (Usalt)  for  horizontal  pneumatic
transport.  Both  circulating  fluidized  bed  and  dilute-phase  pneumatic
conveying (solid/gas mass flow ratio below 10 kg/kg) are not recom-
mended for CSP receiver applications due to the low solid fraction of the
upflowing suspension, and the high volumetric gas flow rate required
(leading to excessive sensible heat losses).

However, for the particle conveying within the CSP loop, the dense-
phase pneumatic conveying, operated at high solid/gas mass flow ratios
of 100 to 250 kg/kg, is deemed applicably and merits further investi-
gation due to its flexibility, non-mechanical nature and expected eco-
nomics. This is dealt with in Section 3.

2.1.2.3. Bubbling and slugging regimes. In a bubbling fluidized bed, small
bubbles are formed at the distributor and grow when rising through the
bed. Their rising velocity is a function of the bubble diameter. In beds of
Geldart-A type particles, a stable maximum bubble size can be reached.
In beds of coarser particles, bubbles keep on growing. The fluidization
regime starts to alter when the bubbles grow larger than approximately
50 % of the bed diameter and when the wall effect influences the bubble
and  solids flow.  The rise  velocity of  the  bubbles, now  called slugs, is
determined  by  the  bed  diameter.  Slugging  beds  are  characterized  by
large pressure fluctuations [56]. According to Yagi et al. [60], slugging
is unlikely for low values of the height/diameter ratio.

2.1.3. Heat transfer in gas-fluidized beds

2.1.3.1. General  considerations. Heat  transfer  is  generally  very  favor-
able in bubbling fluidized beds, representing one of the key advantages
of fluidization. Some extended reviews of heat transfer are presented by
Gutfinger and Abauf [61], Botterill [62], Saxena et al. [63], Grace [64],
Baeyens and Geldart [65], and Xavier et al. [66].

For  most  practical  purposes,  a  gas  fluidized  bed  may  be  macro-
scopically regarded as isothermal [84,85]. In general, thermal equilib-
rium is achieved within about 25 mm of the bottom of a fluidized bed.
For  high  velocity  jets  entering  a  bed  through  a  perforated  plate  or
nozzles, a greater distance may be required.

The heat transfer coefficient for bed to wall heat transfer is normally
very  high,  of  the  order  of  500  -  1000  W/m2K,  roughly  one  order  of
magnitude  higher  than  that  for  steady  state  transfer  to  the  wall  in  a
packed bed, and two orders of magnitude better than gas to wall transfer
in an empty column under comparable flow conditions. The overall heat
transfer  coefficient  between  the  bed  and  a  wall,  h,  is  made  up  three
components [65–67]:

h = hpc + hconv + hrad

(8)

Table 2
Prediction of transition velocities.

Utrans

Equations

Ref.

Umb

Umf
Utf
UTR
Ums

Umb =

2.07dpρ0.06
g
μ0.347

exp(0.716F45)

Abrahamsen and Geldart [57]

mf + 21.27Re2
mf

F45: fine fraction less than 45 μm
Ar = 1823Re1.07
Retf = 0.36Ar0.59,for2 < Ar < 108
ReTR = 3.23 + 0.23Ar
̅̅̅̅̅̅
Ums = Umf + 0.07
gD
D: diameter of the bubbling fluidized bed

√

Wu and Baeyens [52]
Deng et al. [58]
Zhang et al. [59]
Baeyens and Geldart [56]

Fig. 3. Operation modes of solid/gas systems.

packed. The increase in pressure drop is proportional to the gas flow rate
in the laminar flow mode (Eq. 3). When the pressure drop approaches
the weight of the bed per unit cross-sectional area, the particles start to
move slightly without losing mutual contact, but in such a way that the
gas is given a maximum passage. A further increase in gas flow rate will
lead to the state in which the drag force between the particles and the
gas counter-balances the weight of the particles and the bed is consid-
ered to be incipiently fluidized. The superficial gas flow rate at this point
is called the minimum fluidization velocity, Umf.

For most solid/gas systems, an increase in flow rate beyond Umf re-
sults  in  bubbling.  No  increase  in  pressure  drop  is  observed  since  the
excess  gas  by-passes  the  dense  phase  as  bubbles.  For  A-type  powders
however, this increase in gas flow rate results in a progressive expansion
of  the  bed  and  bubbling  only  starts  at  a  higher  velocity,  called  the
minimum bubbling velocity, Umb. In cohesive powders, channeling of
the  gas  is  often  observed.  If  the  superficial  gas  velocity  gradually  in-
creases above Umf  or Umb, bubbles form and rise upwards through the
bed growing in size as they do so. As the velocity increases further, the
average bubble size increases and may reach a size comparable with the
diameter of the bed: the bed is said to be slugging and the superficial gas
velocity at the onset of slugging is called minimum slugging velocity,
Ums. The commencement of slugging is dependent primarily upon the
bed diameter and U(cid:0) Umf, called the excess gas velocity. Slugging should
be avoided.

At sufficiently high gas flow rates, the terminal velocity of the par-
ticles, Ut, is exceeded and solids are carried out of the bed with the gas
stream. For the sake of completeness, a variant of fluidization namely
the  spouted  bed  technique  is  mentioned.  It  is  often  used  for  coarse
materials. Gas is introduced into the bed by a single central nozzle and
the formed jet penetrates through the full depth of the bed. At very high
gas flow rates, pneumatic conveying will occur: Upc is the onset velocity
of pneumatic conveying.

2.1.2.2. Characteristics  and  transition  velocities. The  dominant  param-
eter in fluidization is the superficial gas velocity. In circulating fluidized

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010567

G. Flamant et al.

The particle convection term, hpc, is that arising from unsteady state
conduction through a gas film and particles during the time that parti-
cles are contacting the wall. Some workers [64,65,68,69] call this the
particle  convective  transfer  since  the  time-averaged  value  relies  on
frequent particle replacement, i.e., on convection by the particles to the
bulk  of  the  bed  after  the  transfer  has  taken  place  by  unsteady  state
conduction. The hconv  term is called the “gas convective”  component.
◦
For modest bed temperatures (e.g., less than about 1000
C) the particle
convective component dominates for small particles while the convec-
tive  component  hconv  is  rate-controlling  for  large  particles  where  the
interstitial  gas  velocity  is  significant.  The  radiation  component  hrad
becomes important at high temperature.

It is a common simplification to assume that the three components
can  be  predicted  separately  and  then  simply  added.  This  procedure
should, however, be used with caution when two or more of the com-
ponents are of comparable magnitude.

2.1.3.2. Particle convective component, hpc. The favorable heat transfer
coefficient  between  fixed  surfaces  and  fluidized  beds  of  fine  particles
results from high values of hpc. Favorable time-averaged values of hpc
are associated with frequent exposure of fresh particles from the bulk to
the heat transfer surface.

Gas convective component, hconv.
In addition to heat transferred due to conduction through stagnant
gas,  transfer  also  occurs  due  to  mixing  of  gas  percolating  along  the
surface  in  the  interstitial voids  between the  particles. Baskakov et  al.
[70] correlated this component by means of

be  better  than  ± 30  %  within  their  ranges  of  application.  Large  dis-
crepancies must be expected when the correlations are extrapolated to
other conditions.

2.1.3.4. Maximum  particle  convection  heat  transfer  coefficient,  hmax.
Many  investigators  have  reported  data  in  the  region  of  hmax  for  heat
transfer from an immersed surface to the bed or presented correlations
to  predict  this  maximum  value.  Similar  data  for  heat  transfer  at  the
outside wall have been presented, generally about 30% lower than hmax
for immersed surfaces. Most experimental results have been taken only
in small size units (< 15 cm on I.D.).

Obviously most practical applications of the fluidized system will be
in the region of hmax and a prediction of both the maximum achievable
heat  transfer  coefficient  and  the  corresponding  gas  flow  rate  is  very
valuable for process optimization as it provides a standard of excellence.
A  number  of  correlations  have  been  given  for  the  maximum  heat
transfer coefficient achieved when U is varied over a wide range. The
correlation of Zabrodsky et al. [72] covers a relatively broad range of
data including beds operated at high temperature:

Numax =

hmaxdp
λg

= 0.88Ar0.213

(cid:0)

102 < Ar < 1.4 × 105

)

(12)

This equation may be applied for vertical or horizontal tubes and for

particles smaller than about 1 mm.

A similar approach was adopted by Baeyens and Geldart [65] with

Numax = 0.91Ar0.21

(13)

Nu =

hconvdp
λg

= 0.009Ar0.5Pr0.33

If  by  analogy  with  other  existing  correlations,  gas  properties  are

(9)

included as Pr number (Pr0.33), and Eq. (13) is modified to

Alternatively,  Denloye  and  Botterill  [68]  obtained  values  over  an

experimental range of operating conditions up to 10 bar:

hconv

)0.5

(cid:0)

dp
λg

= 0.86Ar0.39

(cid:0)

103 < Ar < 106

)

(10)

2.1.3.3. Radiation component, hrad. Radiation heat transfer from fluid-
ized beds is simplest for large particles since their temperature does not
vary appreciably during exposure to a hot or cold surface. Therefore,
radiation  can  be  predicted  from  the  net  flux  between  two  isothermal
planes. Since the bubbles can be considered transparent, no allowance
needs to be made for the fraction of time during which bubbles are at the
surface. Representing both wall and particle surface as gray bodies, the
Stefan-Boltzmann equation can be used:

hrad =

(

(cid:0)

σB

1
εs

+ 1
εbed

)

W (cid:0) T 4
T 4
P
)
(cid:0) 1

(TW (cid:0) TP)

(11)

(cid:0) 8 W/m2K4
σB is Stefan-Boltzmann constant and it equals 5.67×10
The effective bed emissivity, εbed exceeds the particle emissivity, εs,

due to multiple reflections.

For small particles, the description of radiation heat transfer is more
complex since it must consider the bed as a semi-transparent medium in
order to account for radiation penetration in the particle packet [71].
Gutfinger and Abauf [61] tabulate no fewer than 34 different cor-
relations, and others have been added since their review was prepared.
The predictions of different correlations commonly disagree widely due
to different fluidized bed dimensions, bed materials, operating condi-
tions  and  hydrodynamic  regimes.  It  is  important  not  to  apply  these
correlations outside the ranges for which they were derived. Separate
correlations  are available  for  transfer  to the  external  wall,  to vertical
tubes and to horizontal tubes. Some correlations seek to give the effect of
superficial  gas  velocity,  whereas  others  are  for  the  maximum  heat
transfer coefficient. The correlations presented do not include the effect
of  radiation.  Where  radiation  is  important,  it  should  be  added  on  as
outlined before. The accuracy of the correlations shall not be assumed to

Numax = 1.02Ar0.21Pr0.33

(14)

2.1.3.16. Finned tubes. Improved heat transfer rates on a bare tube basis
can be obtained with an extended finned heat transfer area. In addition,
the extra confining impact of the fins may locally reduce the velocity of
solid suspension, thus reducing the erosion of the tubes. Various types of
fins have been tried. Hager and Thomson [73] showed that fins have
little effect on hydrodynamics for vertical tubes, but play an important
role  for  horizontal  and  inclined  tubes.  The  de-fluidized  region  above
tubes with radial fins tends to be larger than for bare tubes. The region
between transverse fins tends to be de-fluidized. There is less tendency
for bubbles to adhere to finned than to bare tubes, while bubbles distort
more as they pass finned tubes.

Rates of heat transfer increase as fins are added to bare tubes [74–79]
but  the  increase  levels  off  as  the  fin  height  is  increased.  The  fins  are
much  less  effective  if  particles  are  unable to  circulate  freely  between
them. A deterioration in heat transfer coefficient due to this effect was
noted for dp greater than about 0.1 x fin spacing [76].

While correlations have been proposed for heat transfer from finned
tubes, the range of experimental conditions covered is too narrow for
reliable predictions to be expected under different conditions. The best
procedure, if pilot plant data are unavailable, would appear to be to use
bare tube correlations and to apply correction factors to allow for the
presence  of  fins,  using  the  cited  studies  to  suggest  the  degree  of
augmentation likely for a given configuration and tube material.

In  the  review  by  Baeyens  and  Geldart  [65],  the  emission  packets
renewal model approach with contact resistance represents the bubbling
bed situation very accurately. It is now widely used and was applied by
Zhang et al. [80] for the Upflow Bubbling Fluidized bed receiver.

2.1.4. Novel bubbling regime: vertical upflow systems

Literature  concerning  dense  up-flow  systems,  with  forced  up-flow
and  bubble  induced  mixing  is  scarce.  Initial  research  mostly  covered
moving packed beds [81–83] hence with a gravity down flow of parti-
cles.  Fluidized  bed  up-flow  reactors  were  described  by  several  re-
searchers,  as  reviewed  in  Supplementary  information.  The  dense

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010568

G. Flamant et al.

to  overcome

up-flow column is fed at its bottom by a circulation flow of solids at an
appropriate  pressure
the
upwards-moving bed of solids. The column itself is either aerated from
the windbox [84–89] or by a combined windbox aeration and additional
aeration  at  the  bottom  of  the  riser  column  itself.  Illustration  of  the
experimental rigs used in these earlier works were presented in Zhang et
al [80]. All rigs have an upflow section, and a pressurized feeder.

the  pressure  drop  of

Table 3 compares the essential earlier literature findings. Except for
Tomita et al. [90], all investigations used column diameters D < 0.1 m.
Transport heights, LT, vary from 2.0 to 24.0 m [90], and the upflow is
either  lean  with  a  very  low  solids  fraction  αp  or  a  real  fluidized  bed
operation with solids fraction between 0.25 and 0.4. In circulating flu-
idized bed operations, the solids fraction is close to 0.02 –0.05.

2.2. Survey of the current particle-driven solar receivers

Particle solar receivers can be classified according to the following

characteristics,

• Direct or indirect heating of the particles
• Continuous particle flow or batch process
• Types of solid-gas contacting and mixing modes

In addition, inert or reactive particles may be added to the previous
list since many developments have been achieved in the field of solar
thermo-chemistry for solid-gas reaction processing. Applications in solar
thermo-chemistry address calcination, thermo-chemical energy storage,
gasification and hydrogen production using redox cycles [94–96]. Most
of the thermo-chemical particle reactors apply the direct particle irra-
diation configuration to reach high temperatures [97].

The type of solid-gas contacting and mixing modes refer to particle
reactors in chemical engineering. They are moving beds, falling parti-
cles, vortex and centrifugal particle flows, and fluidized beds. A review
on gas-solid fluidized bed solar receivers was published recently, it in-
cludes  consideration  on  particles  properties,  receiver  developments,
measurement methods and modeling tools [98].

2.2.1. Particle-driven solar receivers without particle circulation

The first development of batch fluidized bed solar receivers-reactors
dated from the eighties [98]. Fluidized particles were heated from the
top of the bed using a beam-down concentrating system, a solar furnace
in the previous study. The concept was then developed particularly in
Italy  and  Japan  using  solar  simulators  and  beam-down  solar  concen-
trators. Tregambi et al. [99] studied a directly-irradiated fluidized bed of
127 μm Sauter diameter silicon carbide particles heated by a short-arc
Xe lamp coupled with an elliptical reflector. They examined in partic-
ular the interaction of bubbles with the radiation beam. The design was
then improved using a compartmented windbox, without physical par-
titioning or internals immersed in the bed [100]. Physically compart-
mented design was also examined for energy storage applications [101].
The integration of the particle receiver in a calcium looping CSP plant
was  further  proposed  [102].  Recently,  the  same  team  designed  an
autothermal  solar  fluidized  bed  integrating  a  double  pipe  heat
exchanger [103] that was proposed to be used for operating a thermo-
chemical battery using the limestone calcination/carbonation reversible
reaction  [103].  Nevertheless,  continuous  particle  flow  and  pilot-scale
receiver  were  never  experimented.  Magaldi  Company  developed  the
fluidized  bed  particle  receiver  heated  by  a  beam  down  solar  concen-
trating system at prototype scale to produce steam under the name Solar
Thermo Electric Magaldi (STEM®) [104]. A 2 MWth plant was installed
in Sicily, Fig. 4. The 2 MWth  Solar Thermo Electric Magaldi (STEM®)
prototype using a fluidized bed solar receiver for steam production.

Previous developments are related to the windowless concept that is
not adapted to syngas production based on solid-gas reaction. Kodoma
et  al.  [105]  developed  a  spouted  bed-type  design  equipped  with  a
window  for  particle  processing.  The  concept  was  experimented  for

driving  a  two-step  water  splitting  reaction  based  on  NiFe2O4  is  bed
heated by 6 kW Xe-arc lamp [106] and coal gasification [107]. Then a 30
kWth  fluidized bed reactor was installed and fabricated at Niigata Uni-
versity, and modeled [108]. Maintaining the batch operation mode, the
system  was  scaled up to  100 kWth  and  heated by  a beam-down  solar
concentrator  [109].  The  core  fluidized  bed  temperature  of  the  sand
particles attained 1100
C during experiments.

◦

Fluidized SiC particles of different size (from 0.5 to 2 mm) was used
in  [110]  to  heat  air  inside  a  34  mm  ID  quartz  tube.  The  highest  air
◦
temperature was measured at 867

C with 0.5 mm particles.

2.2.2. Particle-driven solar receivers with particle circulation

The following analysis considers separately lab-scale and prototype

or demonstration-scale developments.

At lab-scale. Continuous-fed particle solar receiver-reactor concepts
have  been tested  at lab-scale mainly for  solar thermo-chemical appli-
cations. Concerning direct absorption systems, they are the vortex flow
reactor developed for steam gasification of petcoke [111], the cascading
pressure reactor for solar reduction of oxides [112], the spouted bed for
continuous steam gasification of biomass [110], and the rotary kiln for
calcination [113]. Indirect absorption particle solar reactors have also
been  developed,  for  example,  the  particle  flow  reactor  for  biochar
gasification  [114]  and  the  pressurized  adaptation  of  the  vortex  flow
reactor [115]. Lime production at pilot scale was also demonstrated in a
10  kWth  multitube  rotary  kiln  [116]  and  in  a  50  kWth  horizontal
multi-stage fluidized bed [117]. This latter study can be considered as a
prototype-scale demonstration of solar calcination.

The small particle solar receiver concept was proposed in [118] and
modeled in [119]. It consisted in a realizing a suspension of sub-micron
carbon  particles  in  a  gas  thus  creating  a  volumetric  absorption  with
negligible scattering. The gas could be inert or reactive. Receiver effi-
ciency in the range 80–90% was predicted. Experimental validation was
published in [120] with a mass fraction of particles in the range 0.2–0.5
wt%.  Gas  temperature  varied  from  1900  to  2100  K  depending  of  the
carrier gas. The integration of the solar receiver with a gas turbine and
the associated efficiency was then published in [121].

◦

Various  concepts  of  directly  irradiated  moving  bed  particle  solar
receivers  have  been  published.  Xiao  et  al.  proposed  the  spiral  design
[122,123].  300–600 μm  sintered  bauxite  particles  were  tested  with  a
solar  simulator  (5  kW).  Temperature  increases  up  to  350
C  were
measured and the  thermal efficiency reached approximately 60%. In-
clined moving bed was studied in [124]. A fluidizing gas assisted the
particle movement. Experimental result indicated a mean particle tem-
perature of approximately 807 K and a receiver efficiency of 61% for 7.5
g/s  particle  mass  flow  rate.  Moving  bed  in  quartz  tube  concept  was
examined in [125–128]. Helix quartz tube solar receiver was tested in
[125]. For a particle mass flow rate of 8.12 g/s the particle temperature
increased  by  212
C  (0.2  m  irradiated  length)  and  the  measured
maximum thermal efficiency was 61.2%. Study [126] reported cold test
of particle flow in vertical tubes with particle sizes ranging from 149 μm
to  1359  μm  (mean  diameter)  with  and  without  insert  in  single  and
multi-tube systems. Solar simulator test results were examined in [127].
C was measured with 718 μm particles
A temperature increase of 164
for a mean radiative power density of 276 kW/m2 on a 0.26 m irradiated
length. The corresponding thermal efficiency was 50%. Nie et al. [128]
experimented  and  modeled  the  particle  flow  characteristics  in  tubes
equipped without and with an insert delimiting an annular irradiated
section. They recommended using an insert and a layer thickness of 5
mm to obtain a homogeneous axial particle velocity.

◦

◦

At  prototype  scale.  Solar  power  production  based  on  the  particle
technology  involves  critical  constraints  such  as  receiver  scalability  at
multi-MW scale, handling of continuous flows of large amounts of par-
ticles, hot particle storage and particle-to-working fluid heat exchanger
design. The concept of a particle solar receiver and storage integrated
with a combined cycle was published in [129].

Three main solar receiver concepts are presently under development

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010569

G. Flamant et al.

at  prototype  and  demonstration  scales  worldwide,  the  free  falling  or
obstructed particle receiver, the centrifugal receiver and the multi-tube
fluidized bed [130]. Both first types are direct particle heating concepts
and the latter is an indirect heating design.

Sandia National Laboratories (SNL) developed the free falling par-
ticle central receiver concept in the early eighties [131]. The particle
curtain is directly heated by concentrated solar energy in a cavity. In this
configuration, the main operation parameters are the particle size, the
particle  cloud  absorptance  and  optical  thickness,  and  the  mean  resi-
dence time of the solid in the irradiated zone [132]. The concept was
then  analyzed  in  the  perspective  of  large-scale  applications  at  high
temperature [133]. After a period of reduced activity in the field, SNL

Table 3
Literature review of dense particle upflow systems.

Reference

Illustrations

Powder

dp
(μm)

ρp
(kg/m3)

Tomita et al.

[90]

cement

30

2560

◦

started again to develop the technology in the framework of the US-DoE
SunShot  initiative.  Receivers  for  commercial-scale  solar  power  plants
(100 MWe) were designed [134]. Simulations indicated that a 256 MWth
receiver with a 10.63×10.63 m aperture and 50
nod angle can reach a
thermal efficiency in the range 80–86.8% when delivering particles at
◦
C. The receiver was assumed to be located on a 195
approximately 750
m height tower. Mills [135] simulated the thermal efficiency of an in-
termediate scale 135 MWth  peak falling particle solar receiver heating
C. The 700 μm particle curtain length
particles in the range 750–775
was 14 m. The thermal efficiency was found between 83 and 86.8% with
an annualized value of 85.7%. An important issue of the falling particle
solar receiver is the particle flow behavior. This issue was addressed in

◦

D
(m)

0.41
0.668

LT
(m)

24.0

αp
(-)

Fg
(kg/s)

Fp/ Fg
(-)

0.09–0.18
0.08–0.14

0.023–0.06
0.062–0.135

101.5–228.7
99.6–131.5

ΔP/H
(mbar/m)

53.8–115.8

Li and

Kwauk
[83]

Zhu and Zhu

[85]

resin
coal

65
1000

1188
929

0.047
0.047

8.0

0.66
0.62

0.00044–0.00076
0.0012–0.0016

17.1–25.0
7.5–9.2

125–188
170–225

FCC-catalyst

65

1780

0.101

3.6

0.24–0.29

0.016–0.032

25.0–37.5

45–55

Watson et al.

[86]

alumina

2690

3500

0.0464
0.0714

3
4

0.22–0.5
0.33–0.61

0.0104–0.0239
0.0103–0.0444

19.2–732.2
71.8–202.7

78.3–167
148.5–200

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105610

G. Flamant et al.

Table 3 (continued )

Reference

Illustrations

Powder

Turzo [88]

Flamant

et al. [87,
91]

Hirama et al.

[84]
Piti ́e et al.
[92]

Zhang et al.

[93]

alumina

SiC

HA54
FCC-catalyst

sand

sand,
bituminous
coal

dp
(μm)

ρp
(kg/m3)

54

64

2360

3120

D
(m)

0.028
0.056
0.036

LT
(m)

6.0

2.0

αp
(-)

Fg
(kg/s)

Fp/ Fg
(-)

ΔP/H
(mbar/m)

0.31–0.41
0.38
0.26–0.35

0.00005–0.00058
0.00013–0.00057
0.0075–0.025

100.0–741.4
1039–4077
52–1735

80
88
120–160

38
57

75

750
930

2260

0.10
0.10

5.5

0.003–0.25
0.006–0.17

0.011–0.053
0.031–0.041

0.05

2.5

0.01–0.03

0.16–0.79

1.7–4.8
1.4–15.2

34–838

2–180
5–150

3.5–5

74–79

2160–2340

0.05

2.5

0.01–0.03

0.04–0.32

8.5–9.4

2.1–2.3

◦

results  are  reported  in  Siegel  [138]  and  Ho  [139,140].  Siegel  [138]
published experimental results obtained with a 6 m tall cavity receiver
equipped with a 3 m high and 1.5 m width aperture operating in the
power range 1.6–2.5 MWth using the 5 MWth SNL solar tower facility in
Albuquerque. CARBO HSP with 697 μm mean diameter particle were
introduced in a 1.5 m in depth cavity. Runs duration lasted from 3 to 7
min depending on the mass flow rate. The measured particle tempera-
ture increase was ranging from 100 to 250
C as a function of incident
solar  power  at  the  cavity  aperture  and  particle  mass  flow  rate,  in
agreement with simulation data. Maximum receiver thermal efficiency
was 50% with dominant radiation losses with respect to convection. This
result can be explained by the low value of the average solar flux density
on the particle curtain, 400 kW/m2. Excessive heating of the receiver
back wall was noticed due to the decrease of particle volume fraction
from the top to the bottom of the particle  curtain that resulted in an
increase of its transmittance. Ho [139] reported the test result of a 1
MWth  falling particle receiver carried out with the same solar facility.
The receiver consisted of 2m×2m×2m cavity with a ~1mx1m aperture.
CARBO  Accucast  particles  with  280  μm  mean  diameter  were  used.
Free-fall and obstructed-flow particle receiver design have been tested.
The  obstructed  flow  design  consisted  in  using  chevron-shaped  mesh
structures in order to increase the residence time of the particle in the
solar irradiated zone. Consequently, the residence time of the particles
in the irradiated zone was approximately 0.2–0.4 s for the free-falling
receiver  and  1–3  s  for  the  obstructed-flow  receiver.  The  particle  can
be recirculated thanks to an Olds’  elevator. A temperature increase of
approximately 200
C/m drop was measured with the obstructed-flow
receiver  for  a  solar  flux  density  of  400  kW/m2.  The  bulk  outlet  tem-
perature  exceeded  700
C  for  several  tests.  The  temperature  increase
C/m drop for a solar flux density of 600 kW/m2
reduced to 100–150
and  2–3  kg/s.m  (curtain  width)  particle  mass  flow  rate.  The  thermal
efficiency ranged from 50 to 90% and 40–80% for the obstructed-flow
and  free-fall  receivers  respectively.  Technical  issues  were  observed
with variable particle mass flow rate and deterioration of the chevron
structure of the obstructed-flow receiver. Further tests were performed
with  a  closed-loop  feedback  system  aiming  to  maintain  the  particle

◦

◦

◦

Fig. 4. The 2 MWth Solar Thermo Electric Magaldi (STEM®) prototype using a
fluidized bed solar receiver for steam production.

Ho [136] and Kim [137]. Ho [136] characterized the free-falling flow of
CARBO Accucast (75% Al2O3, 11% SiO2, 9% Fe2O3, 3% TiO2) 280 μm
particles experimentally and numerically. Particle mass flow rate in the
range 3–9 kg/s.m (with respect to curtain width) have been tested. The
particle velocity 1 m after the release point was approximately 5 m/s
and the curtain thickness doubled at the same point. The particle volume
fraction decreased from 60% to less than 10% after a 0.5 m trajectory
from the release point that resulted in an increase of the curtain trans-
mittance. The wind effect on the particle flow stability was examined in
Kim [137]. The experimental results obtained with 697 μm CARBO HSP
(83%  alumina)  particles  indicated  that  critical  loss  of  particles  might
result from winds with certain angles of the attack. For a 45
angle of
attack, a less than 0.46 m of the cavity depth, and a 6.5 m/s wind ve-
◦
locity,  up  to  ~10%  particle  loss  occurred.  Contrarily,  wind  with  90
angle of attack resulted in a particle loss less than 2% and the closer to
the back wall the lower the particle curtain loss due to wind. On-sun test

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105611

G. Flamant et al.

The  French  National  Center  for  Scientific  Research  (CNRS)  and
project partners developed the fluidized particle-in-tube solar receiver
since 2010 [145]. The development steps of this indirectly heated par-
ticle solar receiver are summarized in the next paragraph.

The  fluidized  particle-in-tube  concept  was  also  named  “upward
bubbling fluidized bed (UBFB)”. A key point of this concept is the par-
ticle diameter. It addresses type A particles of the Geldart classification
[50], typically 50 μm mean diameter particles. The upward movement
of  the  fluidized  particles  in  the  tubes  is  produced  according  to  the
following  principle.  The  bottom  tip  of  the  tubes  (typical  ID  diameter
40–50  mm) are  immersed  in  a  feeder  tank  in  which  the  particles  are
fluidized. This tank is named “the dispenser”. The upward mass flow rate
of the particle is controlled by tuning the dispenser’s freeboard pressure,
as the particle mass flow rate in the tubes is a function of the differential
pressure  between  the  dispenser  and  the  top  of  the  tube  as  shown  in
Boissi`ere  [89].  A  secondary  air  injection  (identified  as  “aeration”)

outlet  temperature  by  varying  the  mass  flow  rate  [140].  The  experi-
mental system is illustrated in Fig. 5.

◦

During the tests, the particle set point temperature varied from 350
to  650
C.  The  control  system  proved  to  work  well  during  high  tem-
perature  runs.  Nevertheless,  oscillations  have  been  observed  in  rapid
irradiation variation conditions. The receiver thermal efficiency ranged
from 50% to 90%.

◦

◦
) or at 45

The  German  Aerospace  Center  (DLR)  developed  the  centrifugal
particle  receiver  concept  (CentRec).  Proof  of  concept  was  performed
using the DLR 10 kW solar simulator [141]. The CentRec receiver is a
rotary  cylinder  that  can  be  inclined  90
to  the  horizontal.  The  feed
particles form a thin layer at the wall due to the centrifugal acceleration.
The additional action of gravitation results in a slow movement of the
particle in the axial direction from the bottom to the cylinder aperture.
During their trajectories, they are heated by the concentrated radiation
focused at the aperture. Sintered 1 mm diameter bauxite particles were
used during the high temperature tests of the lab-scale receiver oriented
◦
vertically (90
The 137 mm ID aperture received a maximum
flux  density  of  1  MW/m2  and  the  size  of  the  cylinder  was  170  mm
diameter and 260 mm height. The power at the aperture varied from
approximately  2.5  to  7  kW.  Temperatures  up  to  900
C  were  experi-
◦
mentally  obtained  for  the  highest  radiation  power  and  with  a  45
inclination. It was observed that a homogeneous and constant particle
flow was difficult to maintain. More details on experimental results are
given in Wu et al. [142]. The tests were performed with a radiation flux
density in the range 265–670 W/m2  and particle mass flow rate in the
◦
range 3–9.5 g/s. The measured temperature varied from 385 to 885
C.
◦
For an inclination angle of 45
, the maximum particle outlet tempera-
◦
ture of ~900
C was achieved for a particle mass flow rate of 3 g/s and a
flux  density  of  370  kW/m2  at  the  aperture.  The  receiver  efficiency
decreased  with  increasing  outlet  particle  temperature  from  84%  at
) position
approximately 400
and a maximum input flux of 670 W/m2 the receiver efficiency reached
◦
about 75% (±4%) for particle at ~900
C. The receiver was scaled up to
2.5 MWth (but never tested at this power level) and qualified with a 100
kW electric heating system [143]. On-sun tests have been performed at
the DLR’s test facility Jülich Solar Tower [144]. Fig. 6 shows the solar
receiver.

◦
C. For the vertical (90

C to 51% at 900

◦

◦

◦

During  tests,  the  rotation  speed  was  approximately  45  rpm,  the
particle  mass  flow  rate  was  ranging  from  0.07  to  0.15  kg/s  and  the
maximum  solar  flux  density  was  400  kW/m2.  Outlet  temperatures
higher  than  900
C  were  measured  during  short  time  periods.  It  was
observed that particle mass flow rate and film homogeneity were very
sensitive the rotation speed.

◦

Fig. 6. The DLR centrifugal particle receiver (CentRec) [144].

Fig. 5. Sandia’s 1MWth  particle receiver test loop [140].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105612

G. Flamant et al.

located at the bottom of the tubes is necessary to stabilize the particle
flow.  The  typical  pressure  drop  in  the  tube  is  approximately  100
mbar/m. The corresponding mean particle volume fraction ranges from
0.30 to 0.45, it decreases with the aeration flow rate. The local particle
volume fraction decreases also with the temperature increase along the
tubes from the bottom to the top when heated by solar energy [146]. The
structure  and  stability  of  the  particle  flow  as  a  function  of  the  tube
height, aeration flow rate and temperature is still a subject of research.
The  main  issue  is  the  degeneration  of  the  bubbling  regime  into  the
slugging regime thus, the latter resulting in a considerable decrease of
the  wall-to-fluidized  bed  heat  transfer  coefficient.  The  transitions  of
fluidization  regimes  were studied  in [47,58].  For  air velocities  in the
range  0.01–0.30  m/s,  the  freely  bubbling,  wall  slugging  and
axi-symmetric  slugging  regimes  were  identified  [96].  The  transition
between the bubbling and wall slugging regime occurred in the first half
meter of the tube. Above 1 m, wall slug coalescence resulted generally in
the appearance of axi-symmetric slugs. Fortunately, for type A particles,
the increase in temperature results in shifting the slugging transition to a
higher bed height of several meters. For higher gas velocity turbulent
and  fast  fluidization  regimes  were  identified  in  [97].  Recently,  the
problem of slug occurrence was solved by adding Bubble Rupture Pro-
moters (BRP) long the total tube height of 6 m [58].

The  solar  receiver  development  was  performed  in  three  steps  as

summarized in Table 4.

◦

The developments include the proof of concept with a 1m-long single
absorber  bare  tube  that  achieved  750
C  particle  outlet  temperature
[148] and testing of fin tube [153]. Then an experimental campaign of a
particle  loop  at  pilot  scale  involving  a  150  kWth  solar  receiver  and  a
particle  recirculation  equipment[154].  Finally,  the  upscaling  of  the
technology at the MW scale by the implementation of a complete system
including a collection and a conversion loop [151]. The latter facility is
composed of a 3 MWth solar receiver, two storage tanks, a particle heat
exchanger  and  a  1.2  MWe  gas  turbine  operating  in  the  hybrid  mode
(Fig. 7). The tests associated with the three steps were performed using
large-scale solar facilities, the 1 MW CNRS solar furnace in Odeillo-Font
Romeu for the first two steps and the 5 MW Themis power tower.

The three technologies can be examined with respect to the following

◦

C or higher.

criteria assuming that they can deliver particles at 750

• Acceptable solar flux density
• Construction material issues
• Particle attrition
• Particle loss
• Scaling up ability

Direct absorption solar receivers can accept higher flux density that
indirect absorption concept due to the limited value of wall-to-particle
heat  transfer  coefficient  and  of  the  operating  temperature  of  the
absorber tube walls. Typical values are 1 MW/m2 for the former and 0.5
MW/m2 for the latter. Construction material issues are identified for the
three solar receivers, back wall for the falling particles, kiln wall for the
CentRec  and  tube  wall  for  the  UBFB  concept.  The  falling  particle
receiver is the most sensitive to particle attrition due to the high impact

Table 4
Development steps of the UBFB solar receiver.

Steps

Step 1. Proof
of concept

Step 2.
Lab-scale

Step 3. Pilot-
scale

Step 4. Large-
scale prototype

velocity of the particles at the end of their fall. CentRec and UBFB are not
sensitive because of the low particle velocity involved. Particle issues for
the UBFB technology were discussed by Kang et al. [155]. Particle loss is
a  critical  issue  for  open  direct  absorption  particle  receivers  due  to
temperature and wind effect on particle flow stability. Scaling up ability
to large scale, typically some 100 MWth, is examined in Section 7. The
next  section  addresses  the  particle  handling  issues  in  Particle  CSP
application.

3. Particle handling in particle-driven CSP plants

3.1. General considerations

The solids heated in the solar receiver are transferred to the thermal
power  block  and  stored  before  their  use.  In  turn,  the  cooled  solids
leaving the power block are stored before being transferred back to the
solar receiver to be reheated. The number of solar fields in a project will
depend  upon  a  combination  of  economic  factors  and  power  re-
quirements  so  the  discussion  deals  only  with  the  requirements  for  a
single field.

The typical solar tower will be between 100 and 200 m high, and the
power block is at ground level. Consequently, in addition to moving the
solids horizontally, they also have to be moved vertically. The horizontal
distance will be determined by the site arrangement but is likely to be at
several  hundred  meters.  A  design  requirement  is  that  the  transfer
equipment is enclosed to minimize dusting, and insulated to minimize
heat  losses  and  maintain  the  solids  temperature.  The  thickness  and
multi-layer  composition  of  the  refractory  insulation  (low  density
alumina  refractories,  ceramic  fiber  and  rockwool  backing)  should
◦
guarantee an outer wall temperature of around 50
C. The heat losses are
hence limited to the natural convection of the ambient air and the outer
wall. With a heat transfer coefficient of natural convection at curved or
flat surfaces in the order of 3 to 5 W/m2K, heat loses can be limited to
well below 0.1 kW/m2.

To eliminate the need for equipment to move the hot solids down-
ward,  gravity  provides  the  motive  force.  The  solids  leaving  the  solar
tower are directed to the horizontal transfer system and later are dis-
charged into hot storage from above the hoppers. Elevators are required
to raise the cool solids to the level of the solar receiver and, depending
on the design selected, from storage to the horizontal conveyor

Two important considerations for the solids transfer system selected
will be reliability and availability. As the operating window for heating
the  solids  is  limited  to  between  7  and  10  h,  even  a  relatively  short
interruption could reduce the amount of hot solids stored and, thereby,
reduce power plant output. Such an interruption would be exacerbated
if,  for  example,  two  solar  towers  shared  a  transfer  system.  Hence,  to
achieve the required availability, each solar tower should have a dedi-
cated horizontal conveying system, and the equipment selected must be
reliable  with  acceptable  inspection  and  preventative  maintenance  re-
quirements. The effect of flow interruptions can be managed, at some
additional cost, by the provision of surge-capacity hoppers.

This section discusses the selection process for the handling equip-
ment required to move the solids horizontally between the solar towers
and  the  power island,  raise the  solids vertically, and  feed them  short
distances between equipment items.

3.2. Potential solids conveying systems for long distance horizontal solids
transfer

Testing
unit

Single tube
0.5 m long

Single tube
1 m long

10kW

40 kW

16 tubes, 1 m
long in a
cavity
150kW

40 tubes, 3 m
long in a half
cavity
3MW

3.2.1. Systems that do not meet the requirements

Several  options  have  been  investigated,  but  only  those  able  to

operate at elevated temperatures are discussed.

Those eliminated are presented first in detail:

1MW solar
furnace
[147,148]

1MW solar
furnace
[149]

1MW solar
furnace
[150]

5MW Themis
power tower
[151,152]

Drag chain conveyors [156,157]. The maximum operating temper-
◦
ature is limited to 450
C. Also, the maximum conveying capacity of

Thermal
Power
Testing

facility
Reference

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105613

G. Flamant et al.

Fig. 7. The Next-CSP prototype.

◦

C.

60 m3/h and the maximum horizontal conveying distance of 60 m
would require multiple units making the selection uneconomic.
Pipe  Conveyors  [156,158,159].  Although  satisfying  the  conveying
capacity  and  horizontal  distance  criteria,  the  maximum  operating
temperature is limited to 150
Two  additional  technologies,  although  able  to  meet  the  design
criteria  of  operating
temperature,  conveying  capacity,  and
conveying distance were also eliminated for the following reasons.
Dilute-phase  pneumatic  conveyors:  The  conveying  air  cools  the
solids, and although around 75% of the heat transferred to the air can
be recovered, the power plant would be derated by up to 14%.
Railway  wagons  [160]:  Complying  with  regulations  results  in
wagons only carrying 50 tons of solids, requiring multiple wagons to
transfer  the  790  tons  of  solids  per  hour  for  each  solar  tower.  The
resulting  short  feeding  and  discharging  times  for  this  intermittent
operation are difficult to achieve. Additionally, the cost of the system
was greater than that for alternative technologies.
Screw  conveyors  [161–166],  and  vibrating  conveyors:  Both  these
technologies  satisfy  the  temperature  and  conveying  capacity  re-
quirements but only for distances up to 15 m. Although not suitable
for long-distance conveying, they could be used as solids feeders in
the Power Island and delivering hot and cool solids to and from the
long-distance  conveyors.  These  technologies  are  presented  below
and will be discussed further in this section.

3.2.2. Selected horizontal conveying techniques

Two conveying technologies have been identified that have the po-
tential to meet the selection criteria, but both present significant design
challenges. Experience from coal-based power demonstration projects
identifies that introducing novel features or designing outside of oper-
ating  experience  can  result  in  operational  issues  that  cause  extensive
delays  and  cost  overruns.  Careful  analysis  is  required  to  determine
which design is the more reliable. Given the high temperatures involved
and  the  cooling  time  required,  mechanical  failures  will  take  time  to
rectify. This loss of availability and the loss of generating revenue needs
to be factored into any economic assessment.

Apron Conveyors [167–170]:
A conveying system consists of two horizontal pulleys around which
a continuous belt of linked plates rotates. At least one pulley is powered;
the powered one is the drive pulley and, if unpowered, the other one is
the idler pulley. The solids from the solar tower will enter the conveyor
at  the  idler  end  and  discharge  at  the  drive  end  into  the  hot  storage
hopper. As the belt loops beneath the loaded section, it returns to the
feed point empty hence, a separate conveyor is required to deliver the
solids from the cool hopper to the solar tower. However, as the design
also  operates  inclined,  it  can  collect  solids  from  the  cool  hopper
discharge and by raising their elevation reduce the number of vertical
elevators required to feed the solar tower.

Apron conveyors are used to transport hot clinkers from cement kilns
to storage silos. The clinker temperatures are usually in the range 500 to
800
C,  although  they  can  be  higher  under  upset  conditions.  To

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105614

G. Flamant et al.

withstand the high temperatures and heavy-duty requirements, the belt
consists of closely fitting steel plates. Plates across the belt form cells to
“anchor”  the  solids  on  the  belt,  and  overlapping  side  plates  prevent
spillage into the space below the belt. The traction is provided by chains
on either side of the plates or by a steel wire belt on which the plates are
mounted. Although the solids conveyed may be as high as 800
C, the
conveyors are open, allowing natural cooling of the conveying structure
so that the structure and drive mechanism, chain or belt, are at lower,
more acceptable temperatures. To reduce air-related sensible heat los-
ses,  the  design  proposed  for  the  solar  application  is  enclosed  so  the
conveyor  enclosure  and  drive  mechanism  would  be  at  the  same  tem-
perature as the solids.

◦

◦

To provide corrosion resistance, stainless steels will be used that, at
800
C, will have lost a large proportion of their tensile strength. The
elevated temperature will also require certain departures from standard
conveyor design.

-  The  conveying  casing  will  also  have  to  be  reinforced  to  avoid
distortion, adding to the amount of steel required. In addition, slip
joints would be required to accommodate thermal expansion.

-  For increased wear resistance, the drive chain is hardened, a property
that will be lost at elevated temperature in addition to the loss in
tensile strength. For this reason, the chain drive would have to be
mounted  outside the conveyor. This will require a redesign of the
conveying mechanism inside the conveyor.

- The drive belt will remain inside the conveyor, where the tempera-
ture  rise  will  expand  its  length.  A  500  m  conveying  distance  will
require  a  1000  m  long  belt,  which  expands.  Arrangements  to
accommodate this expansion may limit the length of an individual
conveyor and require more than one to traverse the 500 m.

Side-Pulled Conveyor [171,172]:
An  alternative  to  the  apron  conveyor  is  the  side-pulled  conveyor.
This design uses a drive chain located outside the conveyor casing to
which are attached flights that penetrate the casing to contact the solids.
The drive pulley shaft is vertical, and the chain with flights returns to the
idler pulley within a continuation of the casing located to the side. In this
way, unlike the apron conveyor, the returning side can be used to convey
material.  Applied  to the  solar  project,  the side-pulled  conveyor could
deliver hot solids to the power block on one side and return cool solids to
the solar tower on the other. As this double-duty increases flow resis-
tance, both pulleys will likely be driven. This design cannot negotiate
inclines  so  will  require  more  vertical  elevators  than  the  apron-belt
design.  Hence  the  whole  conveyor  length  would  run  approximately
20 m above ground level, the actual elevation determined by the height
of the hot storage hopper solids inlet.

A design issue is the turning moment placed on the single chain by
the force required to move the solids. The flights will be at 800
C and
will  have  to  be  reinforced  to  compensate  for  the  associated  loss  of
strength. The use of two chains with the flights attached to each is not
possible as the outer chain has to travel further when negotiating the
pulleys. Penetrating both side walls would also complicate the design of
the casing, for which the lid would have to be supported separately to
the base to provide a clear gap all around

◦

3.3. Potential vertical transfer systems

Four methods of raising the solids can be considered. A bucket hoist,
which  rises  individual  loads  up  the  tower  is  not  recommended.  Its
operation is discontinuous and requires intermediate storage to ensure
continuity of solids feed to the solar receiver. This places a large mass at
the  top  of  the  tower  requiring  that  the  structure  and  foundations  be
reinforced to carry the additional load. Additionally, to place the hopper
discharge  at  a  similar  level  to  the  receiver  solids  feed  system,  the
elevator hoist has to raise the solids to the top of the hopper requiring a
higher  vertical  lift  than  alternative  elevators.  For  these  reasons,  this

option was eliminated from consideration.

Bucket Elevator [18,173,174]:
A  bucket  elevator  consists  of  a  series  of  buckets  mounted  on  two
continuous chains. Like the horizontal conveyors, the chains are moved
using a drive pulley with sprockets located at the top of the elevator with
an idler pulley at the bottom. To reduce drag, the solids should be fed
directly into the bucket rather than picking them up by passing through
a bed of solids at the foot of the elevator. The filled buckets rise up the
elevator, pass over the drive pulley, and discharge through a chute.

The solids feed system for the solar receiver is approximately 120 m
above ground level. Suppliers indicate that the maximum lift height for a
bucket elevator is 65 m for a solids flow rate of 400 tons per hour. As the
horizontal  conveyor  will  discharge  solids  approximately  20  m  above
ground level, four elevators will be required. Two elevators will each lift
395 tons per hour to around 70 m and discharge into two additional
elevators to lift the solids to around 120 m.

Inclined Apron Conveyor:
The apron conveyors discussed previously are also capable of oper-
◦
, which would require taller cross plates
ating at inclined angles up to 60
to  prevent  the  solids  from  flowing  back.  Illustrations  of  an  inclined
apron  conveyor  are  given  in  standard  conveying  handbooks.  For  a
◦
conservative inclination of 45
, the conveyor would be located 100 m
away from the solar tower, and the horizontal conveyor would discharge
into it. To reach the 120 m level would require an elevator 140 m long,
well within the capabilities of the design. The advantage of using this
approach  is  that  only  one  elevator  will  be  required,  but  a  potential
drawback is the shadow it could cast across the solar field.

[175].

considered

Dense-phase Pneumatic Conveying:
Since
can  be
conveying
Pneumatic
high-temperature filtration can be used to de-dust the conveying air at a
sub-micron particle size level, the hot conveying air can be re-used for
the  conveying  itself,  thus  reducing  sensible  heat  losses  commonly
encountered  in  pneumatic  conveying.  If  a  dense-phase  conveying  is
applied, at solids-to-air ratios of 100 to 250 kg solids/kg air, the air flow
will  be  limited.  Pneumatic  conveying  has  the  advantages  of  cost  and
reliability. Mechanical conveying concepts will imply significant extra
power  needs  due  to  not  only  lifting  the  particles,  but  also  the
heavy-weight chains and buckets. Dense-phase conveying is however a
non-mechanical concept where only the particle lifting and friction and
acceleration losses need to be accounted. The conveying power is hence
predicted to be 60 to 70% only of the power required by a mechanical
particle lifting. The low solid and air velocities applied in a dense-phase
system moreover lead to a conveying of particles without major pipeline
erosion or particle degradation.

3.4. Additional conveying methods

The  solar  project  will  require  solids  feeders  at  various  locations
within the solids transfer system between the solar towers and the Power
Island,  and  within  the  Power  Island.  For  example,  the  Power  Island
feeders will be required to feed hot solids to and remove cool solids from
the fluidized-bed heat exchanger. In the solid’s transfer system, feeders
will be required to transfer hot solids from the solar tower to the hori-
zontal conveyor, and to remove cool solids from storage.

Three possible feeders were identified, and these are discussed.
Screw Feeders
This  conveying  system  consists  of  a  rotating  screw  blade  located
within a sealed U-shaped trough. The screw is driven at one end of the
trough and supported at the other. If more support is required, hangers,
suspended from the top of the trough, can be located on the screw shaft
at points between the screw sections. The screw feeder can handle the
required  volumetric  flow,  but  the  conveying  distance  is  limited  to
around 12 m primarily by the torque required to turn the shaft of the
screw.

High-temperature feeders are offered by suppliers but are not com-
mon plant items, and as such their design may carry a higher element of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105615

G. Flamant et al.

risk. The materials of construction are expensive; for the cool solids, 310
austenitic stainless steel will be acceptable, but for the hot solids higher-
grade steel such as 254 SMO, will be required. The design will need to
accommodate  differential  thermal  expansion  between  the  trough  and
the screw. Because of the high temperatures, the drive and end bearings
will  be  mounted  distant  from  the  trough  where  temperatures  will  be
lower.

The screw flight design is adjusted to suit the properties of the ma-
terial being conveyed. For the fine sand, to ensure that it moves forward
efficiently, a short-pitch, close-tolerance screw may be used, with the
feeder declined slightly towards the discharge opening. To limit product
degradation  and  abrasion,  the  screw  will  turn  at  the  slowest  speed
possible to achieve the required flow rate. To further limit abrasion, the
flights and the trough are plasma coated with hard surfacing materials
such as plasma-sprayed chromium carbide. Even with these measures
incorporated, abrasion and product degradation may be high, in which
case two or more screws in parallel may be required to lower the screw
speed.

Vibrating Tray Feeders
When the tray vibrates, the solids are agitated and move along the
tray in the direction of the vibration. To assist motion the tray can be
declined  and  provided  that  the  declination  is  less  than  the  angle  of
repose,  solids  motion  should  cease  once  the  tray  stops  vibrating.  For
large industrial units, the tray is mounted on springs and the vibration is
generated  using  electromagnetic  or  pneumatic  drives.  For  the  solar
application,  these  would  have  to  be  mounted  outside  the  insulation
layer. Vibrating tubular conveyors are also available but do not feed at
the rate required, 390 m3/h.

The tray must be free to vibrate and cannot be mechanically attached
to the feed or discharge equipment. To prevent dusting, flexible seals are
required  at  these  locations.  At  low-temperature  operation,  elastomer
seals are used. At the higher temperatures, a silica or ceramic fiber seal
would  survive  the  temperature,  but  how  they  would  function  under
constant  medium-amplitude,  low-frequency  vibration  is  unknown.
Metal bellows are used to prevent transmission of low-amplitude, low-
frequency pump vibration to pipework, but again their suitability for use
on the solar project is unknown.

Despite  meeting  the  operating  temperature  and  solids  volumetric
flow criteria, if suitable seals cannot be identified then, for health and
safety reasons, the vibrating feeder will not be selected.

Solids Removal from the Solar Receiver
The  hot  sand  leaving  the  top  of  the  heat  transfer  tubes  will  be
collected and spillover, descending approximately 100 m to the eleva-
tion of the horizontal conveyor. Allowing 800 tons/h of sand to fall 100
m vertically will land at the bottom of the pipe with a significant impact
load sufficient to damage refractory and distort metal. The design needs
to remove this possibility. This could be achieved using a zig-zag pipe
arrangement  to  slow  the  solid’s  rate  of  descent.  The  tubes  should  be
stainless steel to avoid problems with refractory differential expansion,
However,  the  sand  will  likely  wear  the  metal  which  will  need  to  be
protected by surface hardening. If an acceptable design solution for a
gravity discharge system cannot be reached then consideration should
be given to more controlled removal using a conveyor system. By adding
moving equipment, this solution comes at increased capital and main-
tenance costs.

3.5. Conveying and feeding equipment design considerations

Equipment  suppliers  understand  their  equipment,  but  the  solar
project application may pose several challenges with which they do not
have ready answers. Points to be clarified as part of the equipment se-
lection process include the following.

• As the equipment heats up, so the metal will expand. Hence, chains
and belts that were correctly tensioned when cold will need to self-
adjust  when  operating  at  temperature.  The  measures  adopted  at

lower  temperatures  may  not  be  applicable  for  the  enclosed  high-
–temperature designs under consideration.

• To  achieve  the  required  high  reliability,  in  addition  to  selecting
equipment with the potential for high reliability, some preventative
maintenance  and  inspection  schedule  will  be  required.  Ways  of
achieving this need to be clearly established.

• The conveyor carries certain standard monitoring instrumentation to
ensure  reliable  operation  and  help  reduce  component  wear  and
deterioration. Speed switches are used to curtail feed to the conveyor
should it slow down or trip. All such instrumentation should function
reliably at elevated operating temperatures.

• The solids feed rate to the various equipment items, especially the
solar  receiver  and  the  fluidized-bed  heat  exchanger,  need  to  be
accurately measured. How this is to be achieved needs to be estab-
lished. Such measurements will be fed to the control logic to facili-
tate control of the solar process and the protection of equipment from
damage.

As  a  part  of the  solids  transfer  equipment  selection, consideration
should  be  given  to  the  benefits  of  equipment  standardization.  These
include the following.

• Maintenance  and  operational  teams  will  be  more  familiar  with
equipment issues and how best to rectify them. The sharing of this
experience  with  common  equipment  items  shortens  the  start-up
period and leads to a more reliable plant.

• Standardization of maintenance tasks improves productivity result-

ing in shorter maintenance turnaround times.

• Spare  parts  inventory  will  be  lower,  reducing  the  cost  of  stock-

keeping and spare part management.

3.6. Solids storage hoppers

3.6.1. Design principles

The  application  will  require  two  sets  of  hoppers,  one  for  the  hot
solids and one for the cool solids. If there are several solar towers, it is
likely they will share hoppers to limit capital costs. Both types of hoppers
will be carbon steel vessels lined with refractory, an insulating layer next
to the wall covered with a protective abrasion resistant refractory, which
comes  into  contact  with  the  solids.  A  wealth  of  experience  has  been
gained  from  refractories  operating  at  up  to  900
C  in  circulating
fluidized-bed  combustors  that should  be  applied  to  the  benefit  of  the
solar  project.  A  vital  piece  of  information  is  that  to  avoid  premature
failure of the hard-faced refractory it should not be allowed to heat up or
◦
cool down at rates greater than 50
C/h: at higher rates the greater the
likelihood of surface cracking increases.

◦

Cracking can also occur for two additional reasons. During refractory
dry-out of thick layers of low permeability refractory, water vapor can
build  up  sufficient  pressure  to  create  cracks.  Adding  moisture-release
fibres  to  the  refractory  to  provide  paths  to  vent  the  water  vapor  can
minimize  this  problem.  Some  fibres  are  tubular  and  others  shrink  or
burn out as the refractory heats up. The second reason is when insuffi-
cient allowance is made for refractory expansion requiring that expan-
sion joints be carefully designed.

When the refractory is hot, fine solids enter these cracks, and as the
refractory  cools  the  crack  closes.  In  this  way,  the  solids  in  the  crack
create sufficient local stress to cause the refractory to spall away from
the surface. If sufficiently large, the spalled material can interrupt solids
flow, and the space left in the wall will accelerate further damage. In the
worst  case,  the  insulating  refractory  will  be  damaged and  expose  the
vessel wall to high temperatures and possible failure.

The  vessel  will  be  heavily  insulated  internally,  but  suddenly
◦
impacting an internal surface only marginally cooled with 600 or 800
C
◦
material will exceed the 50
C/h temperature limit. Some measures are
available to minimize the effect of any cracks formed, one of which is the
addition of approximately 4% by weight of 310 steel fibers to reinforce

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105616

G. Flamant et al.

the refractory. These fibres are typically 35 mm long with a diameter of
0.4  mm,  and  by  expanding  more  than  the  refractory  they  create  a
network of fine cracks too small for the sand to enter. The presence of the
fine cracks allows the refractory to expand without further cracking, and
so improve the resistance of the refractory to thermal shock. A variety of
refractory materials and methods of application are available and vary
by supplier, the careful selection of which will be essential to the reli-
ability of the refractory-lined vessels.

As spalling can still occur with even the most carefully installed re-
fractory,  early  detection  of  vessel  wall  overheating  is  essential.  Two
approaches  should  be  adopted.  First,  the  carbon  steel  outer  surface
should  be  painted  with  temperature-sensitive  paint  to  alert  operators
that the failure process is in progress. The second is to complete regular
infrared  thermographic  surveys  of  the  vessels.  These  provide  early
detection of areas of increased temperature and allow their progress to
be monitored.

◦

The  insulating  refractory  will  be  sufficiently  thick  to  achieve  an
external  temperature  of  50
C  to  limit  heat  losses.  Hot  solids  will  be
drawn  from  storage  typically  between  19:00  and  midnight  and  filled
again between 09:00 and 17:00. Hence, between midnight and 09:00,
the hoppers will be cooling. One way to limit the cooling is to leave some
hot  solids  in  the  vessel,  although  this  will  increase  the  size  of  vessel
required. If determined to be advantageous, this same approach should
also be used with the cool-solids storage hoppers. Leaving solids in the
hopper will also prevent falling solids directly impacting and damaging
refractory.

As  the  solids  are  free-flowing,  it  may  not  be  necessary  to  use  the
steep-sided, conical hopper walls of mass flow designs. These also make
the hoppers taller and raise the height the conveyor or elevator has to
raise the solids to the inlet port. Instead, it is proposed to use cones with
◦
a 30
incline. To ease movement of the solids to the exit, they will be
fluidized locally, taking care not to erode the refractory, by air intro-
duced  through  metal  lances  distributed  across  the  cone.  A  common
problem in fluidized-bed combustion is solids backflow through the air
distributor nozzles, and the design and arrangement of the lances should
cater for such an eventuality. At least initially, the flow resistance of the
fixed-bed  of  solids  above  the  cone  will  result  in  the  majority  of  the
fluidizing  air  leaving  with  the  discharged  solids,  something  that  the
solids removal equipment must accommodate.

If shared with other solar towers, the roof of the hot solids hopper
will have more than one solids entry port. These should be located to
avoid solids impact with the hopper walls, and each will be provided
with  isolation  valves.  The  number  of  removal  ports  will  need  to  be
determined  by  detailed  design.  Assuming  that  an  extraction  feeder  is
required to feed the conveyor, factors to take into consideration are as
follows.

• A single hopper extraction point has the advantages of simplicity, but
if the feeder/conveyor fails then all the hot solids are isolated from
use.  Additionally,  a  feeder/conveyor  capable  of  handling  the
required flow would be required.

• Although  an  extraction  port  for  each  solar  train  would  allow  for
maximum availability (if one fails, then others are still available),
access for multiple feeder/conveyors both below the hopper and in
the vicinity of the fluidized-bed heat exchanger may prevent this. A
detailed plant layout is required to determine the arrangement and
number of hopper solids extraction and fluidized-bed feeder trains.

The cool solids returning from the Power Island will be elevated to
the top of the hopper using a similar feeder/conveyor arrangement as
used to feed the hot solids. The number of removal ports per hopper is
fixed by the number of horizontal conveyors to be fed, but how to feed
those conveyors will need to be determined by detailed design. Factors
to take into consideration are as follows.

• If the apron feeders are selected, then an extraction feeder can direct
the  solids  directly  to  the  conveyor  at  ground  level  allowing  the
conveyor to rise to the elevation required for the feed arrangement to
the solar tower.

• If  side-pulled  conveyors  are  used,  then  the  solids  also  need  to  be
elevated.  The  extraction  feeder  could  feed  either  a  vertical  or  in-
clined elevator. Depending on the equipment layout, the extraction
feeder may have to travel a distance that eliminates the use of screw
and vibrating feeders.

Solids level detection is an important measurement to avoid over-
filling the hopper and also to avoid draining it if a solids inventory is
to  be maintained.  Sensors  are  available for  reliable  level  detection at
lower temperatures but what would be used at elevated temperatures
needs to be established. One option may be a cooled version of a con-
ventional sensor such as microwave or radar detectors. Wall-mounted
capacitance probes that penetrate into the solids may not be successful.

3.6.2. High-temperature valving

The solids transfer system will require numerous high-temperature
valves to isolate equipment either when not in service or when down-
stream  equipment  fails.  Fortunately,  there  is  a  wealth  of  relevant
experience from fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) units to help guide the
selection  of  the  most  appropriate  valving.  FCC  is  a  high-temperature
process that uses a catalyst (150 μm to 0, with a mean size of 70 μm)
to crack high-molecular-weight hydrocarbons into lighter, more valu-
able  products  such  as  petroleum  and  olefinic  gasses.  The  catalyst  is
progressively  coated  with  carbon  that  is  burnt  off  in  a  regenerator
◦
C and 2.5 bar. The valving required to control
operating at around 800
the flow of the abrasive, high-temperature catalyst can be expected to be
equally suitable for application in the solar project for which the olivine
sand used is of a similar size and abrasivity.

Depending on the supplier, these valves can be either ball valves or
gate valves, and each type is available in sizes up to 900 mm, more than
adequate  for  the  solar  project  application.  An  advantage  of  the  solar
project application over that of the FCC process is that the system is at a
lower  pressure,  which  may  allow  clearances  within  the  valves  to  be
increased,  reducing  the  likelihood  of  the  valve  seizing.  The  isolation
valving usually consists of a pair of valves as follows.

• The main on-off valve is automatically actuated to achieve rapid cut
off in an emergency. It might also be closed to isolate filled solids
storage hoppers from the conveyors.

• Immediately upstream of the main valve is a valve that opens and
closes manually to allow work on the main valve, and as such must
provide a tight seal against solids flow.

Whatever type of valve is used, it must operate reliably, be resistant
to  corrosion  and  erosion,  and  accommodate  the  effects  of  thermal
expansion  and  thermal  shock.  For  the  solar  project  application,  the
exposed  surface  will  be  protected  from  erosion  by  chromium  carbide
applied  by  high-velocity  oxygen  fuel  thermal  spray.  Some  manufac-
turers use ceramic balls for erosion resistance, but these would have to
resist thermal shock upon start-up and restart each day.

3.6.3. Dust control

The release of dust and the associated hot air is to be avoided. In
addition to constituting health, environmental, and safety hazards, the
dust may drift across the solar fields. The potential for dust emissions in
the conveying system occurs at each point solids enter a vessel, as the
entering volume of solids will displace a similar volume of dusty air. If
the only way out for the air is counter to the solids, then solids flow may
be impeded. To vent this displaced hot air safely, it will first have to be
filtered.  As  the  filters  offer  flow  resistance,  an  extractor  fan  will  be
required to assist the airflow through the filters.

◦
Filters are in service operating at temperatures above 800

C, and the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105617

G. Flamant et al.

technology is readily applied to the requirements of the solar plant. In
these other applications, in addition to its temperature, the gas stream
contains  corrosive  species,  in  which  case  the  solar  application  is  less
demanding. Sintered Fecralloy® metal fibres are formed into cylindrical
elements  of  various  designs,  self-supporting  or  internally  supported,
plain-faced, or pleated to increase the surface area per element. To raise
removal efficiency, the dust collects on the outer surface and forms a
filter barrier. Once the pressure drop across the filter reaches a specific
value, the dust cake is blown off with a pulse of high-pressure air. The
efficiency of the filter itself can be increased by using finer fibres, but
this also decreases porosity and raises pressure drop. The final design
selection will depend on the particle size of the dust presented to the
filter and on an acceptable compromise between efficiency and pressure
drop.

The  volume  of  solids  from  a  solar  tower  can  be  up  to  230  m3/h
(without voidage). These will displace a similar volume of gas at the hot
solids surge hopper and the conveyor entry point, and also at the entry
points of the cool solid’s conveyor and the elevators. At the hot and cool
storage hoppers, where multiple streams may enter, the volume of gas
displaced will be correspondingly higher. The hopper filters will have to
be  sized  for  the  fluidizing  air  used  to  assist  solids  removal.  If  high-
temperature  fans  for  such  low  throughputs  are  not  available,  a  stan-
dard fan protected by an upstream gas cooling circuit will be required.

4. Particle-driven heat exchangers

4.1. The particle-to-working fluid heat recovery in the power block

Being  the  equipment  that  usually  withstands  the  highest  pressure
and  temperature  in  the  thermodynamic  cycle,  the  primary  heat
exchanger  (or  set  of  heat  exchangers,  depending  on  the  cycle)  is  of
utmost importance to the plant’s performance and economics.

Due to the difficulty to pressurize high quantities of particulate solids
and to efficiently separate the particles from a fluid, the heat transfer
from particles to the working fluid is not considered feasible via direct
contact, despite the typically high efficiency of such a solution. Particle-
to-working fluid heat exchangers are therefore selected to be an indirect
model,  and  can  be  divided  into  fluidized-bed  heat  exchangers  and
moving bed heat exchangers. While fluidized-bed heat exchangers are
generally  the  preferred  solution  thanks  to  their  higher  heat  transfer
coefficient, moving packed beds can be used for bigger or denser par-
ticles whose fluidization would be heavily penalized in terms of thermal
losses and auxiliary consumptions. A review of heat recovery technology
from high temperature particles is presented in [176].

4.2. Moving bed heat exchangers

Baumann and Zunft first proposed a shell-and-tube, moving bed heat
exchanger  [177]  used to  transfer  heat  from an  air  solar  receiver  to a
storage medium made of coarse particles of diameter ranging from 0.56
to 2.89 mm. The same architecture (moving bed of particles on the shell
side, fluid in the tubes) was then suggested to serve as hot source for a
water/steam Rankine cycle [178]. The study of its flow dynamics and
heat  transfer  [179,180]  showed  that  particle-side  heat  transfer  co-
efficients up to 240 W/m2K could be reached.

Moving packed beds were further investigated by the particle solar
pathway of the US-DoE’s SunShot initiative [18]. In particular, a moving
packed-bed, shell-and-plate configuration was characterized extensively
regarding  heat  transfer  [181,182]  and  transient  behavior  [183],
exhibiting overall heat transfer coefficients of 380 W/m2K for particles
of 200 μm in diameter. That configuration was selected by Sandia for the
construction of a pilot to be integrated with their particle receiver and
sCO2 test loop [184,185], considering its fair performance compared to
fluidized-bed heat exchangers for the considered particle diameters, and
its  superior  potential  for  improvement  as  compared  to  shell-and-tube
moving  bed  heat  exchangers.  Nevertheless,  technical  manufacturing

challenges must be addressed for this design, and then printed circuit
heat exchanger (PCHE) technology is necessary to accommodate high
pressures at the gas side [182].

4.3. Fluidized bed heat exchangers

4.3.1. The particle-to-tube wall heat exchange coefficient

In the absence of receiver-related constraints that make the use of
large particles (diameters> 200 μm) necessary, fluidized bed heat ex-
changers  are  not  heavily  penalized  by  the  parasitic  consumption  and
heat losses caused by a high flowrate of fluidization air. Their better heat
transfer  coefficient  compared  to  moving  packed  bed  heat  exchangers
can then be taken advantage of. The variation of fluidized bed-to-surface
heat transfer coefficient with particle properties and operating param-
eters  was  studied  since  decades  [186–188].  The  effect  of  the  particle
size, shape, density, specific heat, air mass fluidizing velocity, tube size,
tube material, bed depth, heat flux and distributor design [186]. Particle
size  and  operating  temperature  and  pressure  (as  well  as  bed  to  heat
transfer  surface  temperature  difference)  are  the  main  parameters
affecting the heat transfer coefficient. In particular, it is well known that
hw  increases with a decrease in particle diameter [188]. For example,
the following values of hw  are reported, 600 W/m2K for 241 μm glass
bead and a 12.7 mm O.D. tube [186], 500 W/m2K for 370 μm alumina
◦
C and a 35 mm O.D. tube [187], and 800–900 W/m2K
particles at 800
for 160 μm sand particles [188]. Recently, heat transfer coefficients as
high as 1600 W/m2K were measured for 129 μm sand particle and 6 mm
O.D. horizontal tubes [189]. Data for horizontal tube bundle are pre-
sented in [190].

Among recent applied studies regarding CSP or heat storage, Haider
and Schwaiger et al. [191] proposed a thermal storage system based on
fluidized particles, with insight on the design of the heat exchanger. Ma
et al. [192] suggested replacing solar salts with particles in a CSP plant,
using heat exchangers similar to those used in fluidized-bed coal plants.
More  detailed  modeling  works  [193,194]  proposed  a  counter-flow
arrangement  of  heat  exchangers  (multistage  fluidized  bed),  assuming
perfect mixing on particle side in each module [195]. All the modeling
work presented above mainly relies on correlations from the literature.
However, due to the high uncertainty on the particle-side heat transfer
coefficient, experimental validation is necessary.

Li et al. [194] investigated the benefit of heat transfer enhancement
on the bed-to-wall heat transfer coefficient. They observed significant
benefits when using finned tubes: up to 1200 W/m2K for particles of 128
μm average diameter, 1600–3000 W/m2K for smaller particles of 85 μm
average  diameter.  However,  the  latter  already  measured  very  good
bed-to-wall  heat  transfer  coefficients  (around  800  W/m2K)  for  bare
tubes,  to  be  compared  to  a  wall-to-working  fluid  coefficient  of  325
W/m2K. In that particular case, the benefit of fins in terms of overall heat
transfer is probably not sufficient to justify the additional cost of using
finned tubes. The situation is different with other heat transfer fluids as
shown in the next section.

4.3.2. The tube-wall to working fluid heat transfer

Depending on the working fluid used, heat transfer coefficient can be
predicted from literature data. They are represented in Fig. 8 for various
working fluids.

Whereas for LP and HP air, the heat transfer resistance will be mostly
located inside the tube, other working fluids are characterized by a heat
transfer  coefficient  that  approaches  the  bed-to-tube  value.  Both  heat
transfer resistances will hence play a proportional role.

4.3.3. Design considerations for a bubbling fluidized-bed heat exchanger to
be used as hot source

The  choices  leading  to  a  design  of  bubbling  fluidized-bed  heat
exchanger  are  mainly  driven  by  the  following  criteria,  adapted  from
[184,196]:

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105618

G. Flamant et al.

-  Affordability (both CAPEX and OPEX): being the equipment that is
most  heavily  exposed  to  thermo-mechanical  stress,  such  an
exchanger can be expected to use noble materials such as Ni-based
alloys. Exchangers are reported to cost about two times more when
using  austenitic  stainless  steel,  as  compared  to  carbon  steel  heat
exchangers, and the factor increases to 5 if a Ni-based alloy such as
Inconel 625 is use [197].

-  Compatibility with the particles necessary to the receiver: usually,
the type of receiver prevails when selecting the particles. Depending
on the particle type [50], fluidized beds – as opposed to packed beds
– may be a more or less practical and cost-effective option.

- Heat  transfer:  while  high  temperatures  are  detrimental  to  the  re-
ceiver’s efficiency, they tend to improve the cycle’s conversion ef-
ficiency  as  indicated  in  Section  6.  The  heat  exchanger  should
therefore allow a minimal temperature difference between the par-
ticles and the working fluid.

-  Pressure losses for the working fluid: pressure drops are relatively
benign for Rankine cycles where the working fluid is compressed in
liquid phase. However, their potential substitutes presented in Sec-
tion 6 are Brayton cycles that compress gasses with significant power
consumption [198,199]. These cycles will be much more sensitive to
pressure drops, so that a compromise needs to be made on fluid ve-
locities: higher Reynolds numbers will be favorable to heat transfer,
at the expense of higher pressure drops, and vice-versa. Fig. 8 illus-
trated  this  compromise  for  a  fixed  geometry,  typical  for  a
shell-and-tubes heat exchanger, at pressure/temperature conditions
of the working fluid that are representative of the different cycles.
While supercritical CO2 and steam do not seem impacted by pressure
drops, the low density of air in a gas turbine penalizes it heavily, thus
making it difficult to obtain good heat transfer coefficients without
incurring excessive pressure losses. With water or supercritical CO2
as  working  fluid,  the  heat  transfer  coefficient  on  the  particle  side
(between 200 and 800 W/m2K as mentioned above) prevails because
it is much lower than that on the fluid side. Heat transfer intensifi-
cation on particle side has shown significant gains in terms of heat
transfer  [194],  but  the  economic  gain  to  be  expected  from  such
measures  is  still  uncertain.  While  finned  tubes  clearly  lead  to  a
reduction  in  heat  exchange  surface  when  a  high-density  working
fluid is used (steam or supercritical CO2), such designs are not rele-
vant  for  fluidized  beds  exchanging  heat  with  low-density  working
fluids such as air at low pressure, as the heat transfer limitation is
rather on the wall-to-working fluid side.

-  Parasitic and thermal losses: the main parasitic consumption related
to  such equipment arises  from the air compressor  for fluidization.
This consumption is primarily dependent on the pressure ratio and
air flowrate that correspond respectively to bed height and particle
size and density. Thermal losses are directly linked to the flowrate of

Fig.  8. Tube-side  heat  transfer  coefficient  vs.  pressure  drop  for  an  8  m  long
tube with an internal diameter of 9 mm in the turbulent regime (104<Re< 105)
at an average temperature of 600

C.

◦

◦

fluidization air: fluidization air leaves the heat exchanger at particle
temperature  whilst  it  usually  enters  the  compressor  at  ambient
temperature.  Excessive  losses  can  be  mitigated  by  recirculating  a
portion  of  the  air,  but  compression  becomes  impractical  above  a
C [191]. For a better heat re-
compressor inlet temperature of 400
covery, an exchanger is needed between compressor outlet and bed
outlet; due to the poor heat transfer characteristics of air at nearly
atmospheric pressure, such an option may prove uneconomical.
-  Structural reliability: due to the extreme temperatures and pressures
to which the equipment is exposed, its intrinsic ability to withstand
high  pressures  and  temperature  cycling  is  of  utmost  importance.
Thermal expansion should be particularly looked after, as a rod of
◦
SS347 will typically gain 1% in length from ambient to 538
C [200],
that is around 1.5% from ambient to 800

C.

◦

-  Manufacturability: the geometry and material selection should be as
close as possible to standards allowing for easy manufacturability.
Otherwise,  the  economics  or  even  the  mere  feasibility  of  such  an
equipment would be problematic.

-  Scalability: a gain in specific costs is usually expected from process
equipment when their capacity increases. Although the gain is usu-
ally higher when increasing the size of a single equipment (up to a
certain  size),  modularity  can  also  result  in  economic  gains  and
improve overall availability through redundancy.

-  Off-design  and  transient  operation:  although  nominal  efficiency  is
generally the ultimate target of early design, a certain flexibility is
expected from CSP plants that usually start up every day. The ther-
mal inertia, driven by the mass of metal and the inventory of parti-
cles and working fluid, can be an important parameter regarding the
plant’s  overall  quick  response.  Simple  and  quick  temperature  and
flow control on both sides of the exchanger are required for opera-
tional stability as well as fast load change.

-  Maintainability:  the  geometry  and  location  of  the  heat  exchanger

should facilitate its access, inspection and maintenance.

-  Compactness: a moderate size tends to minimize the length of piping
connected to  the  equipment,  thus  limiting  the  thermodynamic  cy-
cle’s  overall  pressure  drop  and  inertia.  Even  more  importantly,
compactness usually results in benefits on all the criteria mentioned
above.

-  Maturity: a design with similarities with other industrial equipment
will (at least partly) benefit from their operating experience, thereby
potentially improving its availability.

Considering the high complexity of the phenomena involved, their
importance in the overall plant’s reliability and economics, and the lack
of  predictive  models  consolidated  with  experiments  and  industrial
experience, particle heat exchangers should be a key R&D subject in the
years to come.

5. High efficiency thermodynamic cycles

As  shown  in  the  detailed  example  of  a  peaker  tower  CSP  plant
(Section 10), the solar island of a CSP plant accounts for approx. one
third of its Capex whose amortization accounts for more than 80% of its
LCOE. For a baseload plant of the same thermal power, the share of the
solar  island  in  the  CAPEX  is  even  higher,  as  the  cycle  and  (more
marginally) the thermal storage are smaller.

Besides, the cleaning of the heliostat mirrors represents a significant
share  of  the  O&M  costs  that  are  the  remaining  part  of  the  LCOE.
Consequently, one of the best drivers to lower the LCOE of a CSP plant is
to downsize the solar island, which means reducing its thermal power.
For a given amount of yearly power generation, it amounts to increasing
the efficiency of the power cycle. That reasoning, as well as the present
section, applies to all types of CSP systems and in particular to those
using particles, insofar as they can reach the typical hot temperature for
each cycle.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105619

G. Flamant et al.

5.1. Constraints affecting the power cycle that are specific to CSP

In an ideal Carnot cycle, the heat input to and the heat release from
the working fluid are isothermal. Supposing that the temperature of the
working fluid during these heat exchanges is Thot and Tcold respectively,
the  cycle  efficiency  is  equal  to  1  –  Tcold/Thot.  However,  in  most  real
thermodynamic cycles, the temperature of the working fluid increases
during  the  heat  input  and/or  decreases  during  the  cooling.  Let  us
consider, as an example, the Brayton cycle of a gas turbine pictured in
Fig. 9.

T and S represent the temperature and the entropy of the working
fluid.  The  isobaric  heat  input  starts  at  2  and  ends  at  3  (1–2  is  the
compression,  3–4  the  expansion  and  4–1  the  isobaric  cooling).  The
temperature  that  matters  regarding  the  cycle  efficiency  (i.e.,  corre-
sponding  to  Thot  in  the  Carnot  formula  above)  is  the  “average”  tem-
perature Thot of the fluid during the heat input. It is defined as follows:

∫3

Heat input =

T dS = Thot (S3 (cid:0) S2)

2

(15)

Similarly,  the  “average”  temperature  Tcold  of  the  fluid  during  its

cooling is defined as follows:

∫1

Heat removed =

T dS = Tcold (S1 (cid:0) S4)

(16)

4

In this case, where the fluid keeps the same phase and supposing its
specific heat is constant, Thot is the mean Log of T2 and T3: Thot = (T3 –
T2)/ln(T3/T2). Tcold can similarly be approximated by Tcold ~ (T1 – T4)/
ln(T1/T4).  The  efficiency  of  the  cycle  is  improved  by  increasing  the
temperature of the working fluid during all the heat input. One way to
achieve that is to design a cycle where the beginning/lowest tempera-
ture of the heat input is increased. In the example of Fig. 10, the heat
input starts at a higher temperature due to a compression at a higher
pressure; at the same time, expanding the air across a wider pressure
ratio leads to a lower temperature T4, therefore to a lower Tcold. Both
effects directly increase the cycle’s efficiency. There are several other
ways to change Tcold and/or Thot without changing the cycle’s minimum
and maximum temperatures: a common way is to reheat the working
fluid  at  the  middle  of  the  expansion.  If  the  exhaust  of  the  turbine  is
hotter than that of the compressor, a regenerative heat exchanger can
also be used.

For all power plants, the highest temperature of the heat input (T3 in
Figs. 9 and 10) is always limited (through a techno-economic optimum)
by material limitations and costs. Similarly, the pressure increase sug-
gested in Fig. 10 is limited by the same material and cost considerations.
Regarding CSP plants, specific issues may put a lower limit:

• The temperature may be limited by the storage medium itself (as it is
the  case  today)  or  by  corrosion  issues  if  novel  high  temperature
molten salts are used;

• Increasing the temperature results in an increase of the external wall
temperature of the solar receiver. Most of the thermal losses of the
receiver being radiant and therefore proportional to T4 (T being the
absolute temperature of the external wall), the thermal losses of the
receiver  may  eventually  offset  the  gain  in  cycle  efficiency.  In
contrast,  the  radiant  energy  emitted  by  the  heat  exchangers  of  a
combustion boiler is not lost.

Once an optimal value of the highest heat input temperature of the
cycle is determined taking the above into account, the cycle efficiency
can still be improved by raising the lowest heat input temperature (T2 in
Figs. 9 and 10). However, this means reducing the temperature range of
the heat input (T3 – T2) by the same amount. The thermal storage of all
commercial  CSP  plant  works  with  sensible  heat,  with  two  tanks  of
storage medium at two different temperatures. Since the temperature of
the hot medium is kept close to T3 to avoid increasing the temperature of
the receiver (see above), the temperature difference of the storage sys-
tem ΔTstorage is closely linked to T3  – T2, and will decrease in a similar
way. Therefore, increasing T2 of the power cycle for a given T3 has two
negative consequences on a CSP plant:

• It increases the required amount of storage medium in inverse pro-
portion with ΔTstorage, with an obvious impact on the Capex (amount
of medium and size of the tanks).

• The losses of stored heat during prolonged periods are increased (e.
g., 3 K lost are 1% if ΔT = 300 K but 2% if ΔT = 150 K). This may be a
minor drawback for big installations (with higher volume/external
area ratios of the tanks) storing their heat for no more than a few
days.

• The mass flow of heat transfer fluid (which is also the storage me-
dium in a molten salt tower or the particle tower concept studied
here) increases in inverse proportion with ΔTstorage. A lower ΔTstorage
means  costlier  pumping  or  handling  systems  and  more  parasitic
consumption. This is significant for a molten salt tower, and a huge
penalty for the particle tower (as shown in Section 11).

The issues related to the cooling temperature of the working fluid
discussed below are not explicitly specific to CSP generation; however,
they  affect  all  power  plants  located  in  arid  areas,  which  include  CSP
plants. Due to their need of high direct solar irradiation, CSP plants must
be built in dry areas that are also hot in most cases. High water con-
sumption  is  impossible  or  strictly  regulated  in  such  regions;  should
water  be  available  nonetheless,  the  reliability  of  its  supply  would  be
doubtful over the plant’s lifespan. This eliminates once-through direct

Fig. 9. Average temperatures of the heat input and cooling in a Brayton cycle.
Solid blue: air Brayton cycle, dashed red: equivalent Carnot cycle.

Fig. 10. Effect of increasing maximum pressure on the T-S diagram of an air
Brayton  cycle.  Dark/light,  solid  blue:  resp.  high-pressure/low  pressure  air
Brayton cycle; dark/light, dashed red: resp. equivalent Carnot cycles.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105620

G. Flamant et al.

water  cooling  (no  sea  or  big  lake  nearby)  or  wet  cooling  based  on
evaporation:  only  dry  cooling  can  be  reasonably  envisioned.  Putting
aside  the direct water cooling  that is  the cheapest and  allows for the
lowest and least variable cooling temperature, let us compare dry and
wet cooling. Below are some brief reminders about the dry bulb and the
wet bulb temperatures of the ambient air:

1)  The dry bulb temperature Tdb  is the “usual”  ambient temperature.
The  wet  bulb  temperature  Twb  is  the  temperature  obtained  when
adiabatically  removing  heat by  evaporating  additional  water  until
saturation.

2)  The difference Tdb  –  Twb  is zero when the air is saturated (relative
humidity = 100%) and increases when the humidity decreases.
3)  For a given specific humidity (mass ratio of vapor contained in the
air), Tdb – Twb increases when Tdb increases, so that Twb moves in the
same direction as but less than Tdb.

Consequently:

• Due to 2) above, Twb is significantly lower than Tdb in dry areas, and

even more so in dry and hot areas because of 3).

• In given area, the specific humidity tends to be independent of the
temperature over time. Therefore, according to 3) above, Twb is less
variable than Tdb.

To summarize, in CSP-friendly areas, the dry bulb, “usual” ambient
temperature  that  is  the  reference  sink  temperature  for  dry  cooling  is
significantly higher and more variable than the wet bulb temperature
that is the reference sink temperature for wet (i.e., evaporative) cooling.
Besides, due to the low density and poor heat transfer properties of air at
ambient pressure, dry cooling means a high final temperature difference
in the cooling heat exchange (typically 15 K) and a significant parasitic
consumption  of  the  cooling  fans.  As  will  be  shown  below,  all  power
cycles  are  significantly  but  not  equally  affected  by  dry  cooling  with
respect to their efficiency.

5.2. Reference power cycle: Rankine steam cycle of a typical molten salt
tower

The Rankine steam cycle of a typical molten salt tower has one reheat
and  typically  5  to  7  feedwater  preheaters  including  the  deaerator.  A
schematic diagram of the power cycle and its T-S diagram are shown in
Fig.  11a  and  b.  In  the  previous  figures  SH  means  superheater,  RH
reheater, and  PH preheater.  The PH 3 is the feedwater  tank with the
deaerator.  Unlike  the  others,  it  is  a  direct  contact  preheater.  The  ex-
pansions  shown  in  Fig.  11b  are  ideal  (isentropic)  whilst  the  real  ex-
pansions are slightly tilted to the right so that the entropy increases.

As can be seen in Fig. 11b, the reheat allows increasing Thot defined
above (see Fig. 19) and limiting the final part of the steam expansion
that takes place below the saturation curve (moisture is detrimental to
expansion efficiency and causes blade erosion). The preheaters increase
the starting temperature of the heat input, thereby increasing Thot. The
steam characteristics vary (e.g., the main steam pressure can be lower)
but are typically as follows:

• Main steam at 120 to 170 bar/550
• Feedwater  temperature  210  to  260

C;
C,  depending  on  the  steam
pressure,  in  order  to  allow  for  a  salt  return  temperature  of  about
300

C, and reheat steam at 550

C.

◦

◦

◦

◦

The  temperatures  of  the  main  and  reheat  steam  are  of  course
◦
determined by the maximum allowable bulk temperature (565
C) of the
salt that is universally used in commercial molten salt towers (NaNO3-
KNO3 eutectic mixture), considering a reasonable 15 K final temperature
difference in the superheater and reheater.

In  conclusion,  for  a  solar  tower  using  the  standard  molten  salt  as

storage medium, the subcritical Rankine cycle described above is quite
optimal.  Only  incremental  upgrades  (mainly  of  the  efficiency  of  the
turbomachinery) and therefore limited improvements are to be expected
from  the  current  “half-net”  cycle  efficiency1:  about  42.5%  with  an
◦
C, as determined below. A significant
ambient temperature of about 35
increase in cycle efficiency can only be expected from the integration of
a novel power cycle. Several options are discussed below.

5.3. Supercritical steam cycles

◦

If the storage medium allows for temperatures higher than 565
C
(which  is  the  case  with  fluidized  particles),  the  steam  characteristics
mentioned above can be improved, thereby increasing Thot  that is the
prime parameter towards higher cycle efficiency, as explained above. As
can  be  seen  in  Fig.  12,  increasing  Thot  is  achieved  by  increasing  the
feedwater temperature, the main steam and reheat steam temperatures
(T3 and T6), and the temperature of the evaporation plateau. The latter
corresponds  to  increasing  the  pressure  (pressure  and  temperature  are
linked  in  two-phase  conditions).  Increasing  the  pressure  shortens  the
evaporation plateau (the latent heat decreases) until it is reduced to one
point, namely the top of the saturation dome. This is the critical point:
221  bar  and  374
C.  At  pressures  above  221  bar,  there  is  no  phase-
change discontinuity; the water is a supercritical fluid whose isobaric
heating path in the T-S diagram is an S-curve located above the satu-
ration dome in the T-S diagram. Rankine Steam cycle with main steam at
pressures above 221 bar are called supercritical cycles. The T-S diagram
of a supercritical steam Rankine cycle is shown in Fig. 12 below. As in
Fig.  11b,  the  expansion  shown  are  isentropic  whereas  real  ones  are
somewhat tilted to the right.

◦

A  second  reheat  in  not  uncommon  on  supercritical  steam  cycles:
◦
typically, on plants with moderate steam temperature (e.g., 540–565
C)
and  low  condenser  pressure  (direct  water  cooling  in  a  cold  area):
without a second reheat, the expansion of the reheat steam would cross
the saturation dome too early in the T-S diagram and its wet part would
be excessive. However, due to their high condenser pressures inherent to
dry  cooling,  future  CSP  plants  with  supercritical  steam  cycles  do  not
strongly  need  a  second  reheat;  besides,  the  added  complexity  seems
difficult  to  justify  with  small-scale  cycles  that  would  suit  CSP
applications.

So far, supercritical steam cycles were developed for pulverized coal
plants.  A  generally  accepted  classification  of  supercritical  coal  plants
distinguishes supercritical (SC), ultra-supercritical (USC) and advanced
ultra-supercritical (A-USC) steam cycles with the following hierarchy in
terms  of  main  and  reheat  steam  temperatures  and  pressures,  thus  in
terms of efficiency and material requirements: SC < USC < A-USC. That
classification  varies  according  to  the  entities  (R&D  centers,  manufac-
turers, etc.); Table 5–1 below gathers ranges or typical values of steam
pressure  and  temperature  given  by  various  sources.  General  Electric
labels  its  “Steam  H”  generation  as  A-USC  despite  its  main  steam  and
◦
reheat temperatures (650
C). For future CSP applications, USC
cycles as defined in Table 5, or the lower end of A-USC cycles as defined
by  General  Electric,  are  probably  the  right  choice:  steam  pressure  25
MPa, superheated/reheated steam temperatures 600
C/620
C, with a
potential objective of 30 MPa/650
C later. Higher steam pres-
sures and temperatures are too far from technological readiness, and the
gain in overall efficiency would not be as straightforward as with coal
plants, because of the thermal losses of the solar receiver that depend
strongly on temperature.

◦
C/670

C/670

◦

◦

◦

◦

The commercial availability of small-scale supercritical steam cycles
is an issue. In 2018, there were 226 USC units in operation in China, 22
in South Korea, 19 in Japan, 13 in Germany, and others in several other

1  The  cycle  half-net  efficiency  is  defined  here  as  ηhalf (cid:0) net

with
Pgross the gross electric power of the cycle, Q the heat consumed by the cycle and
PFWpump. It allows a fair comparison between cycles that use different heat sinks.

Q

= Pgross(cid:0) PFW pump

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105621

G. Flamant et al.

Fig. 11. (a-left): typical subcritical Rankine steam power cycle; (b-right): T-S diagram of the cycle.

In [15], the Electric Power Research Institute studies a 300 MWe (gross)
flexible  Advanced  Ultra-Supercritical  (A-USC)  Coal-Fired  Power  Plant
that is downscaled from a reference advanced Ultra-Supercritical (USC)
cycle currently proposed by General Electric. The authors consider that a
power  output  of  300  MWe  is  a  reasonable  minimum  with  the  steam
characteristics  considered  (last  row  of  Table  6).  The  timescale  of  the
commercial availability of supercritical power cycles (with power out-
puts appropriate for CSP applications) is summarized in Table 6.

5.3.1. Efficiency of a USC steam cycle integrated in a CSP plant compared
to that of a benchmark subcritical cycle

In [209], 14 steam power cycles suitable for a molten salt tower were
studied  and  their  performances  assessed  and  compared,  with  the
following main characteristics:

Fig. 12. Main changes from a subcritical (light blue) to a supercritical (dark
blue) steam cycle on a T-S diagram.

countries. In contrast, there were no AUSC plants (with steam temper-
ature  ≥700
C) in  operation or  even under  construction  in  late  2018
[201].

◦

The power output of USC turbines ranges typically from 600 to 1100
MWe [204,208]; given the complexity of such plants, economies of scale
can  explain  their  size.  Besides,  there  is  a  technological  hurdle  for
small-scale supercritical steam power cycles. Due to steam density, the
volumetric flow rate in the HP turbine of a small supercritical turbine is
low,  which  translates  into  short  blades  with  high  flow  rates  leaking
through  the  clearances,  which  affects  the  turbine’s  efficiency.  An  HP
turbine rotating faster thanks to a gearbox is a possible solution.

That being said, small-scale supercritical steam turbines are gaining
ground. The OECD introduced new financing rules in 2015 that required
coal  plants  between  300  MWe  and  500  MWe  to  be  supercritical  to
benefit  from  attractive  financing  [208].  Today,  Siemens  proposes  su-
percritical steam turbines of 250 MWe. General Electric proposes 300
MWe USC power cycles with steam (main steam pressure/main steam
temperature/reheat steam temperature) at 30 MPa/600
C and
◦
150 MWe USC power cycles with steam at 25 MPa/600
C [207].

◦
C/620

C/620

◦

◦

Table 5
Classification of supercritical coal power plants according to various sources.

• Gross power output 165 MWe;
• Condensing pressure/temperature 15.2 kPa/54.3

◦

◦
to an ambient temperature of 35
cooled condenser);

◦
C (or 40

C, corresponding
C with a very efficient air-

• Steam characteristic ranging from 12.0 MPa/553

C to 26.0
C (same temperature for main steam and reheat

◦

C/580

◦

◦
C/553

◦

MPa/580
steam).

In order to compare power cycle efficiencies, “half-net” efficiencies
are  considered,  i.e.,  calculated  after  deducing  only  the  electric  con-
sumption of the feedwater pumps from the power output. The bench-
◦
mark cycle working with steam at 12.0 MPa/553
C has a gross
efficiency of 43.2% and a half-net efficiency of 42.5%. After reprocess-
ing the data obtained in [209] for the most advanced cycles, one can
determine  the  performances  of  a  cycle  working  with  steam  at  26.0
C:  gross  efficiency  47.0%,  “half-net”  efficiency
MPa/600
45.3%.  Compared  to  the  benchmark  cycle,  this  is  a  6.6%  relative  in-
crease  (+2.8  percentage  points)  in  half-net  efficiency,  the  one  that
matters.  It  allows  reducing  the  thermal  power  of  the  solar  island  by
6.2%.

◦
C/553

C/600

◦

◦

Unit

Sloss
[201]

Wheeldon & Phillips
[202]

SC  MPa

◦

C
SC

24.8
565–600
MPa
≥ 600

26.2
582
24.8
604

-USC  MPa

700–760

27.6–34.5
SH 700
RH 720

◦

C

◦

C

IEA 2013
[203]

22.1–25.0
540–580
27.6
580–620

35.2
700–725

Nomoto [204]  Weiland and Shelton

22.1–25.0
< 566 or 593
22.1–25.0
566 or
593–700
25.0–35.0
> 700

[205]

22.0–27.0
565–600
25.0–30.0
600–640

30.0–35.0
700–760

Nair and Kuman
[206]

GE Steam Power
[207]

22.0–24.0
565–580
24.0–31.0
595–620

24.0–35.0
> 705

25.0
565
25.0–34.0
SH 600
RH 620
> 34.0
◦
SH 600–650
RH 620–670

25.0–30.0

27.5–33.0

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105622

G. Flamant et al.

Table 6
Timescale for commercial availability of small-scale supercritical power cycles.

Power Output

Timeframe  Main Steam P  Main Steam T

Reheat Steam T

150 MWe
300 MWe
300 MWe

Now
Now
Mid-term

25.0 MPa
30.0 MPa
33.0 MPa

600
600
650

◦

◦

◦

C
C
C

620
620
670

◦

◦

◦

C
C
C

5.3.2. Efficiency of an A-USC steam cycle integrated in a CSP plant

The main characteristics of the 300 MWe (gross) power cycle studied

and optimized in [Hack] (see above) are as follows:

• Main steam at 33.0 MPa/650

◦

C, reheat steam at 6.28 MPa/670

◦

C,

• Condensing  pressure  3.9  kPa  (temperature  28.4

◦

C),  feedwater

no second reheat;

temperature of 330

C;

◦

• Gross efficiency 53.38% at full load, and “half-net” efficiency (i.e.,
deducing  only  the  electric  consumption  of  the  feedwater  pumps)
51.20%.

◦

In  order  to  be  compared  with  those  mentioned  above,  the  perfor-
mances of this power cycle must be reprocessed for a condensing tem-
perature of 54.3
C that was considered above for the benchmark and
USC cycles. Assuming that the exhaust area of the low-pressure turbine
is adjusted to keep the same exhaust losses [210], the gross efficiency
decreases  from  53.38%  to  49.9%.  The  consumption  of  feedwater
pumping  remaining  unchanged,  the  half-net  efficiency  is  47.7%.
Compared  to  the  benchmark  cycle,  this  is  a  12.2%  relative  increase
(+5.2 percentage points) in half-net efficiency. It allows reducing the
thermal power of the solar island by 10.9%.

5.3.3. Flexibility of USC and A-USC steam cycles for CSP applications

Since  they  are  the  sole  application  for  supercritical  steam  cycles
today, available data exist for pulverized coal plants only. The transients
(ramp rate, start-up duration, etc.) are limited by both the boiler and the
steam cycle, and it is generally not fully clear which one prevails. Be-
sides, these plants are much bigger than CSP plants, and were generally
built at a time when flexibility was not as crucial as today. Eventually,
the  definition  of  hot,  warm  and  cold  starts  varies  according  to  the
authors.

Generally,  the  steam  generators  currently  used  in  subcritical  CSP
plants feature a drum to separate steam from liquid water. This pressure
vessel with its thick wall is the limiting component regarding transients.
Supercritical steam generators are once-through: breaking them down
into  water  preheater,  evaporator,  and  superheater  interconnected  in
series is no longer needed as the steam generator does not involve any
phase  change.  The  drum  disappears,  even  though  a  steam  separator
system  is still needed for start-up purposes, when the pressure is still
below  22.1  MPa  [209].  Therefore,  a  supercritical  steam  generator  is
likely to allow for faster transients than the subcritical ones currently
used in CSP plants. As a result, the limiting component will be the tur-
bine and possibly the high-pressure steam piping.

Ramp-up  and  load  decrease  rates  (in  %  of  full  load  per  minute)
including  primary  and  secondary  response  capability,  and  minimum
load  operation  (about  20%  [15])  are  relevant  parameters  regarding
flexibility; however, for CSP plants that will be peakers, the hot start-up
time is the most telling criteria. A hot start takes place within 8 h after
shutdown  according  to  [211],  and  12  h  after  shutdown  according  to
[212]. The duration of a hot start (until full load) varies significantly
depending on the power plant and the definition of a hot start, but is
approx. 1 hour to 2.5 h according to [212], and 90 min minimum for a
50 MWe supercritical plant according to [211]. Hack mentions 2 h for a
hot start, but without precisely defining what a hot start is. Bedognirst
[213] defines a hot start with a maximum of 8 h after shutdown, then
gives hot start-up times for three SC/USC pulverized coal plants:

• Belchatow II Unit 1 (Poland), completed in 2011, lignite-fired, 858

MWe, 26.6 MPa/554

C/582

C: 140 min

• Walsum Unit 10 (Germany), completed in 2013, hard coal-fired, 725

◦

◦

◦

◦

MWe, 27.4 MPa/600

C/620

C: 66 min

• Boxberg  Unit  R  (Germany),  completed  in  2012,  lignite-fired,  675

MWe, 28.6 MPa/600

1/620

C: 80 min

◦

◦

All these data are given for pulverized coal power plants with bigger
turbines than those envisioned for CSP applications; besides, their boiler
might be the limiting component regarding transient capabilities. Price
[214] envisions a hot start-up in as little as 25 min for a peaking molten
salt tower that features a 230 MWe (net) subcritical power cycle and a
once-through steam generator whose purpose is precisely to allow for
faster  transients.  Compared  to  the  latter reference,  the  thicker  piping
and turbine casings of a supercritical power cycle are potential hurdles,
but a hot start-up lasting 45 to 60 min until full load seems a realistic
objective. Further studies  are nonetheless required to provide a  more
accurate conclusion.

5.3.4. Materials for a USC/AUSC steam power cycle in a particle CSP plant
For a given steam temperature, the tubes of a particle-driven steam
generator used in a CSP plant do not withstand the same maximum outer
temperatures  as  those  of  a  coal-fired  boiler.  Besides,  unlike  the  com-
bustion gasses in a coal-fired boiler, the particles on the outer side of the
tubes  are  not  corrosive.  Therefore,  regarding  the  material  issues
affecting a particle supercritical CSP plant, it is legitimate to focus more
specifically on the turbine.

Advances on high-grade steels and nickel-based superalloys for the
hottest  parts  dictate  the  current  state-of-the-art  of  USC/AUSC  coal
power plants. The main hurdle to overcome are the deployment of such
materials,  their  affordability,  and  the  mass  production  of  specialized
equipment made of them [201]. The material used so far in power plants
working  at  lower-temperatures  and  pressures  do  not  have  sufficient
creep and corrosion characteristics. Significant advances were made and
continue to be made regarding the materials required in the boiler and
the turbine of supercritical coal plants. In the USA, the second phase of
the ComTest project is currently under progress with completion due by
the  end  of  2021  (deadline  based  upon  January  2019).  It  aims  at
manufacturing  and  testing  full-scale  components  for  steam  at  760
C
[215]. The long-term behavior (over the lifetime of a power plant) of
some materials required in an A-USC plant must yet be validated.

◦

The available material types for steam power plants depending on
the temperature are shown in Table 7, with the materials specifically
needed in USC and A-USC plants listed in the rightmost columns.

The most appropriate materials are component-dependent: casing of
shells/valves/nozzles, bolts, rotors/discs, nozzles/blades, piping. They
also  depend  on  the  temperature  range.  Zhang  [202]  and  Nair  and
Kumanan  [206]  give  lists  of  these  materials  for  the  abovementioned
◦
components with the following temperature thresholds: 565
C,
◦
C. All the high temperature components of an
620
A-USC turbine must be made of Nickel-based alloys. Even for a plant
whose  steam  temperature  approaches  650
C,  a  high-end  Nickel-base
alloy  such  as  Inconel  740H  is  required  for  the  highest  temperature
components [15].

◦
C, and 760

◦
C, 700

◦
C, 593

◦

5.4. Externally heated air combined cycle gas turbines

5.4.1. Main characteristics of fossil-fired combined cycle gas turbines

In  most  power  cycles,  the  bulk  of  the  lost  exergy  is  generally
destroyed in the hot source: the working fluid is heated at a much lower
temperature  than  the  theoretically  available  one  (e.g.,  generally  ≥
◦
◦
C in a furnace, or the sun’s external temperature ~5700
2000
C for a
CSP plant). As an internal combustion engine able to heat its working
fluid  at  up  to  1600
C,  fossil-fired  gas  turbines  minimize  these  early
second-principle losses. On the other hand, they release exhaust heat at
temperatures higher than 400
C (industrial

C (aero turbines) or 600

◦

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105623

G. Flamant et al.

turbines),  which  limits  their  efficiency  to  about  43%.  Conversely,
externally heated Rankine steam cycle (as those described above) have a
quite inefficient hot source but an excellent isothermal (i.e., Carnot-like)
heat sink at nearly ambient temperature. By connecting a gas turbine
(topping cycle) with a Rankine steam cycle (bottoming cycle) that re-
covers its exhaust heat, one benefits from the best of both worlds. The
output of the steam turbine is about 50% of that of the gas turbine. Ef-
ficiencies up to 64% are achieved in ISO conditions by state-of-the-art
combined cycle gas-fired gas turbines [217]. In such installations, the
gas turbine works with the highest possible turbine inlet temperature
◦
(TIT, that is, T3 in Fig. 9 above: up to ~1600
C) and its pressure ratio is
adjusted (generally up to ~25) so that the exhaust temperature (T4  in
◦
Fig. 9 above) is at 620–650
C, which is convenient for heat recovery by
the  steam  cycle.  Due  to  the  water  evaporation  plateau  that  creates  a
pinch  in  the  heat  exchange,  a  heat  recovery  steam  generator  (HRSG)
producing  steam  at  a  decent  pressure  level  (e.g  >12.0  MPa)  would
release  flue  gasses  at  >200
C.  Therefore,  in  order  to  recover  the
◦
low-grade heat and release the flue gasses at 85–125
C, current HRSGs
include three pressure levels (HP, IP, and LP). The Q-T diagram (heat
exchanged vs. temperature from one end of the HRSG’s gas path to the
other) of a typical three pressure-reheat HRSG is shown in Fig. 13 below.
Some  heat  exchangers  shown in  Fig. 13  are  split  to  further  minimize
exergetic  losses,  so  that  3P-RH  HSRGs  featuring  about  15  heat  ex-
changers are not uncommon. For a given pressure level (i.e., color), the
horizontal line corresponds to the evaporator, the line on the right-hand
side is an economizer, the line(s) on the left-hand side are superheaters.

◦

5.4.2. Design specificities of an externally heated combined cycle gas
turbine

With  air  as  working  fluid,  an  externally  heated  gas  turbine  raises
much less corrosion issues than supercritical steam or CO2 power cycles.
Besides, whatever the power cycle, no corrosion affects the particle-side
of the primary heat exchanger(s) whilst combustion gas (in a coal plant)
or molten salt (in a benchmark solar tower) are corrosive. Eventually,
pressures  are  about  10  times  lower.  Therefore,  the  allowable  TIT  is
higher than that of a sCO2 or an A-USC steam turbine. That being said, a
◦
TIT of, e.g., 900
C (a quite aggressive target) is no match with that of a
fossil-fired  gas  turbine,  even  one  with  an  old  design.  However,  with
proper  design  of  the  gas  turbine,  a  combined  efficiency  approaching
50%  is  feasible,  which  makes  the  concept  a  competitive  option
compared with supercritical steam or CO2 cycles.

In  order  to  maximize  the  combined  cycle  efficiency,  both  the

Table 7
Available material types for steam power plants. Sources: [206,216].

≤ 420

◦

C

420–620

◦

C

620–680

◦

C

≥ 680

◦

C

T range

Grades

Examples
Main
contents

Low alloy
ferritic steels

T/P22, T/
P23, T/P24
2% Cr, small
amounts of
other
components

Ferritic creep-
resistant
steels
T/P91, T/
P92, T/P122
9% to 12% of
Cr, and small
amounts of
Mo, V, Nb

Advanced
Austenitic
Stainless steels
304H, 316H,
347H, Sanicro25
18%Cr-8%Ni;
16%Cr-12%NiMo;
18%Cr-10%NiNb;
22%Cr-25%
NiWCuNbN

Merits

Drawbacks

welding,
strength,
oxidation
Creep

Oxidation

creep, corrosion

welding,
production
time

High thermal
expansion,
sensitization to
intergranular
corrosion, stress
corrosion cracking
in wet
environment

Nickel-
based
alloys
Haynes
230,
Inconel
617
Inconel
623
Inconel
740,
etc.

Cost

externally  heated and the  gas-fired gas turbines are coupled  with the
same bottoming cycle, namely a three pressure reheat steam Rankine
cycle  (an  example  of  its  Q-T  diagram  is  shown  in  Fig.  13).  Its  main
◦
C, reheat steam:
characteristics are typically: HP steam: 16.0 MPa, 585
◦
◦
C. The heat
C, LP steam: 0.3 MPa, stack temperature: 85
3.0 MPa, 585
recovery rate of the steam generator is ~89% and the compound (HP +
IP + LP) efficiency of the cycle is about 35%.

The  respective  designs  of  the  gas-fired  and  externally  heated  gas
turbines differ, beyond the fact that the latter lacks combustors and all
the related hardware (piping, valves, etc.).

The schematic and T-S diagram of a double reheat gas turbine are
displayed respectively in Figs. 14 and 15. Let us consider a fictitious no-
reheat gas turbine operating with the same TIT (i.e., value of T3, T5, and
T7 in Fig. 15) and the same exhaust temperature T8 that is a good value
for combined cycle operation. Its cycle (using the dotted isobaric line in
Fig. 15) is 1→1.5→(6)→7→8→1, with a lower pressure ratio (hence the
′′
compression ending at “1.5
). The only components that remain are an
initial  section  of  the  compressor,  the  third  heat  input,  and  the  last
expander.

As it appears clearly in Fig. 15, the “average” temperature (as defined
at  the beginning of  this section) of  the three  reheats (2→3 + 4→5 +
6→7) is higher than that of the single reheat 1.5→7. In conclusion, for
given turbine inlet and exhaust temperatures, the theoretical efficiency
of  a  gas  turbine  increases  with  the  number  of  reheats.  However,  this
must be tempered for real cycles. Due to their high TIT, gas-fired gas
turbines  require  a  substantial  mass  flow  rate  of  cooling  air  to  be
extracted from the compressor, then re-injected in the first stage (the
hottest one) of the expander; this is detrimental to the efficiency. Adding
reheat(s) means extracting more cooling air, which more than offsets the
gain with very high TITs, so that last generation reheated turbines no
longer  exist.  Due  to  their low  TIT,  externally  heated  gas  turbines  are
uncooled,  which  makes  the  aforementioned  downside  of  reheat(s)
irrelevant; however, each heat input is done by a heat exchanger with a
significant  pressure  drop  to  which  Brayton  cycles  are  very  sensitive.
Therefore, one or maximum two reheats is in practice the best trade-off.
With reasonable assumptions regarding pressure losses, the best com-
bined cycle efficiency is obtained with one reheat configuration when
TIT ≥ 900

C, and with two reheats when TIT ≈ 800

C [218].

◦

◦

5.4.3. Current status of the studies of externally heated gas turbines

Externally  heated  gas  turbines  were  already  studied,  with  diverse
configurations (open, recuperated, or combined cycle, with or without
intercooled  compression,  with  or  without  reheat(s)),  and  for  various
potential  applications:  CSP,  nuclear,  external  firing  with  coal  or
biomass, etc. In 2012, Barigozzi et al. [219] presented a method predict
the design and off-design performance of a hybrid open-cycle gas tur-
bine through detailed modeling (“hybrid”  means that the turbine fea-
tures a supplementary combustion). In 2013, Sanchez-Orgaz et al. [220]
performed  the  thermodynamic  optimization  of  a  regenerative,  inter-
cooled and reheated gas turbine with a solar-only heat input, without

Fig. 13. Typical flue gas/steam cycle temperature profile for a three pressure
reheat HRSG.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105624

G. Flamant et al.

Fig. 14. Schematic of a double reheat gas turbine, adapted from [218].

Fig.  15. Temperature-entropy  diagram  of  the  double  reheat  gas  turbine
shown above.

storage. In 2014, Andreades et al. [221,222] proposed to modify com-
mercial  gas  turbines  for  solar  or  nuclear  applications,  the  heat  input
being  performed  by  high  temperature  molten  salt  (thus  allowing  for
thermal  storage)  plus  optional  hybridization.  In  2015,  Al-Attab  et  al.
[223] reviewed the existing externally fired gas turbines with specific
emphasis on the high temperature heat exchangers and had previously
tested (in 2009) a biomass-fueled micro-gas turbine focusing on the heat
exchanger’s efficiency [224]. Siros et al. in 2017 [218], then Valentin
et al. in 2018 [17] described the optimization of a solar-only, low TIT
combined cycle gas turbine with the purpose of its integration in a solar
tower  power plant using particles  as  storage medium. Zaversky et  al.
[225]  analyzed  the  potential  performances  of  solar-driven  combined
cycle  gas  turbines;  the  topping  gas  turbine  is  indirectly  heated  by  an
atmospheric air receiver through a regenerative heat exchange system.
A  techno-economic  study  of  this  concept  was  then  done  in  [226],
concluding that the LCOE of this concept is higher than that of a regular
Rankine steam cycle, despite a higher efficiency. Many of the publica-
tions (including others than those mentioned above) consider direct air
heating through a pressurized solar receiver, which does not realistically
allow  for  significant  thermal  storage:  full  dispatchability  is  generally
allowed by a supplementary combustion that also increases the TIT in
solar  operation  when  installed  downstream  of  the  solar  receiver.  The
pressure losses of the loop that heats the working air are often subject to
optimistic assumptions.

◦

◦

A TIT not exceeding 800

5.4.4. Efficiency of an externally heated gas turbine with a TIT of 780

C
C seems a reasonable hypothesis to miti-
gate the heat losses of the solar receiver and to avoid the need for the
costliest superalloys. According to [17], a net efficiency of 48.6% can be
achieved  under  realistic  (and  even  slightly conservative)  assumptions
with  a TIT of  780
C,  with a
double reheat configuration. To ensure a fair comparison with the su-
percritical steam and CO2  cycle described above, this figure is reproc-
essed as follows. Firstly, adding the power consumption of the air-cooled

C and  a condensing  temperature of 45

◦

◦

◦

consumption (1.4 MWe) to the net power output (161.0 MWe) results in
a half-net efficiency of 49.0%. Then, raising the condensing temperature
◦
C results in a half-net efficiency of 47.7%. This is the
from 45
efficiency  of  the  A-USC  steam  cycle  with  main/reheat  steam  at
650

C under the same conditions (see above).

◦
C to 54.3

C/670

◦
It should be noted that the TIT of 780

C considered above is close to
the  minimum  acceptable;  should  it  decrease  below  this  value,  the
resulting  efficiency  would  drop  very  quickly,  thus  making  the
externally-heated combined cycle pointless.

◦

5.4.5. Flexibility of externally heated combined cycle gas turbines for CSP
applications

A modern gas turbine can, if necessary, reach full load from a cold
start-up in about 20 min. It never limits the flexibility of a combined
cycle whose transient capabilities are therefore those of its steam cycle.
In general, HRSGs (always subcritical so far) feature a drum for each
pressure level to separate steam from liquid water. Due to its thick wall,
the high-pressure drum is the limiting component regarding transients.
However, Benson®  HRSGs with a once-through –  i.e., drum-less –  HP
circuit allow for faster transients: a hot start lasts typically 50 min from
gas turbine start-up to combined cycle full load [227]. Benson® HRSGs
have been commercially available for at least two decades.

5.4.6. Technological readiness of externally heated combined cycle gas
turbines

The advanced dry low NOx  burners of state-of-the-art gas-fired gas
turbines are cutting-edge technology that disappears from an externally
heated gas turbine. The heat exchangers that replace the combustion are
studied in Section 4. A double reheat gas turbine would be a first-of-a-
kind at industrial scale. However, a single reheat gas turbine has been
on the market since 1995: the Ansaldo (ex-Alstom ex-ABB) GT24/GT26
(the former in its 60 Hz version, the latter in its 50 Hz version) that was
very successful [228]. Therefore, the double should not constitute any
major technological risk. The maximum temperature of the turbine’s hot
parts is necessarily lower than that of the particle-air heat exchangers
and a fortiori than the external temperature of the solar receiver’s tubes.
Using a high grade Nickel-based alloy for the turbine’s hot components
(notably  its  blades)  will  suffice:  no  internal  cooling  and  no  thermal
barrier  coating  are  required. To  summarize,  despite  its  double  reheat
layout, the externally heated gas turbine should be easier and cheaper to
design and manufacture than a gas-fired turbine. The bottoming cycle is
exactly the same as that of a gas-fired combined cycle equipped with a
Benson® HRSG.

The combined requirement of relative low pressure drops and small
temperature  differences  results  in  bulky  and  therefore  expensive
particle-air heat exchangers. This is especially true for the low-pressure
heat  exchangers.  In  practice,  several  heat  exchangers  in  parallel  are
necessary for each pressure level, which makes air piping and particle
handling more complex (see Section 11).

In case of a turbine trip (unexpected disconnection from the grid), a
gas-fired gas turbine avoids over speeding by immediately closing the
gas valve; with an externally heated turbine, due to the inertia of the
heat  exchangers,  the  hot  air  must  be  safely  diverted  within  a  split-
second; this must still be validated with a utility-scale turbine.

Considering all the above, designing and manufacturing the exter-
nally  heated  combined  cycle  considered  in  this  study,  including  the
particle-air heat exchangers, should not raise any major challenge. The
main hurdle would rather be to convince a manufacturer to build the gas
turbine.

5.5. Supercritical CO2  (sCO2) Brayton cycles

Gas  turbines  work  in  compliance  with  a  Brayton  cycle  (shown  in
Fig. 19) that uses a quasi-ideal gas as working fluid (namely air). In a
typical  industrial  internal  combustion  gas  turbine,  the  compression
consumes  about  half  of  the  work  released  by  the  expansion.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105625

G. Flamant et al.

Consequently, the net specific work of the cycle (expansion work minus
compression work per unit of mass flow of working fluid) is very sen-
sitive  to  component  efficiencies  (pressure  losses  and  turbomachinery
efficiencies). This in turn penalizes the cycle efficiency and is exacer-
bated by the moderate TITs allowed by external heating (as opposed to
◦
TITs up to 1600
C allowed by internal combustion with proper cooling
of  the  hot  path).  Besides,  due  to  the  low  density  of  atmospheric  air,
recuperative cycles (where the exhaust heat is partly recovered to pre-
heat the working air after compression) are not realistically feasible on
utility-scale units. Combined cycle configurations, where a bottoming
steam cycle uses the exhaust heat, are described in the previous chapter.
Using CO2 as working fluid mitigates these shortcomings: its critical
temperature is 31.0
C, which is generally close to the available heat
sink temperature. The CO2 that enters the compressor, though not in its
liquid phase, is close to its critical point, which means high density and
low  compressibility.  Consequently,  the  compression  work  is  low,
thereby increasing the net specific work of the cycle and lowering its
sensitivity to component efficiencies. Besides, due to its critical pressure
(7.38 MPa), the density of the CO2 remains high throughout the cycle,
thereby allowing for efficient recuperative heat exchangers with little
penalty in terms of relative pressure drops. High recuperation rates –
corresponding to low pressure ratios – mean higher average hot source
temperature Thot as described in Fig. 19 and thus higher efficiencies.

◦

As a result, sCO2  cycles allow for good or very good efficiencies at
moderate  TITs,  even  though  steam  Rankine  cycles  (that  pump  water
with  even  less  work  consumption)  remain  unbeatable  at  low  TITs  (a
tentative comparison is proposed below). Unfortunately, the two char-
acteristics that contribute to this efficiency – namely, compressing the
working fluid near its critical point and being highly recuperative – are
also significant hurdles for CSP applications:

• Even though the conjunction of cold weather and high direct irra-
diation is conceivable in some sites (probably elevated ones), CSP-
friendly  areas  are  generally  hot  and  arid.  Dry  cooling  combined
with high ambient temperature result in compressor inlet tempera-
tures (i.e., the lowest CO2  temperature of the cycle) that are much
higher  than  the  critical  temperature  of  CO2  (31.0
C).  With  such
temperatures, the benefit of low compression work – maximum when
C  –  almost
the  compressor  inlet  temperature  is  just  above  31.0
disappears. Consequently, in terms of efficiency, Brayton sCO2 cycles
suffer  much  more from  poor  cooling  conditions than  steam  cycles
whose efficiency only decreases according to the Carnot principle.
One  must  keep  in  mind  that,  when  comparing  the  respective  effi-
ciencies of Brayton sCO2 cycles and Rankine steam cycles, the tem-
perature of the heat sink is almost as important as that of the heat
source.

◦

◦

The  impact  is  even  worse  on  power  output,  when  the  compressor
◦
inlet temperature increases starting from just above 31.0
C, at first the
compressor rpm increases and/or its inlet guide vanes open to keep the
same CO2  mass flow. But when the temperature further increases and
the rpm and/or the IGV opening have reached their maximum, the mass
flow  decreases,  and  the  power  output  decreases  more  than  the
efficiency.

• Being highly recuperative, sCO2  cycles have a usually narrow tem-
perature  range  of  the  heat  input;  in  a  CSP  plant,  the  temperature
difference (ΔT) of the storage system will be similarly narrow. When
only sensible heat is used, with roughly constant heat capacities, the
inventory  of  storage  medium  and  the  mass  flow  rate  of  the  heat
transfer  fluid  are  inversely  proportional  to  ΔT.  Consequently,  a
narrower ΔT means more Capex and more parasitic consumption for
pumping/handling the heat transfer fluid. Besides, the thermal losses
of  the  solar  receiver  increase  because  its  average  temperature  is
higher for a given maximum temperature.

Specific layouts of sCO2 cycles can mitigate these two drawbacks, but
with some negative impact on the efficiency. This caveat is sometimes
overlooked by some publications studying sCO2 cycles integrated in CSP
plants with a compressor inlet temperature of, e.g., 32.0

C.

◦

5.5.1. Overview of the various sCO2  cycles – best candidate for CSP
applications

The earliest reference on sCO2 cycles acknowledged in the literature
is a Swiss Patent filed by Sulzer in 1948 on a partial condensation CO2
Brayton cycle. Cycles using CO2  as working fluid were then studied in
several countries in the 1960s, the papers released by Angelino in Italy
[229] and Feher in the US [230] being among the most notable. In 2004,
Dostal et al. did an extensive study of the supercritical CO2 cycles [231].
Although it mainly focuses on nuclear power applications, this study is
still a reference regardless of the application envisioned. Several review
papers (mentioned below), as well as a book edited by Brun et al. [198],
were released since then.

Due  to  the  strongly  non-linear  behavior  of  CO2  around  its  critical
point  and  the  overall  low  maturity  of  sCO2  applications,  there  is  less
consensus on the “optimal” designs of sCO2 cycles than on water/steam
cycles that benefit from 250 years of continuous development. Variants
are therefore very numerous, so that dedicated literature reviews proved
necessary to compare their merits. Amongst other studies, Ahn, Crespi
and Yin [232–234] provide an overview of most if not all the layouts
that were devised, the last two publications being focused on CSP ap-
plications.  Most  of  the  cycles  mentioned  in  these  papers  are  Brayton
cycles in which the fluid remains above the saturation dome. In some
cycles,  the  temperature  of  the  working  fluid  goes  below  the  critical
temperature (31.0
C), the main compressor being replaced by a pump
and the cooler by a condenser: these are transcritical Rankine CO2 cycles
(note that the supercritical steam cycles should rather be referred to as
transcritical).  In  [233],  Crespi  classifies  the  cycles  according  to  their
layout regardless of them being trans- or supercritical. However, tran-
scritical cycles can be discarded from this overview that is dedicated to
CSP applications since they need a compressor inlet temperature sub-
stantially  lower  than  the  critical  temperature  to  make  sense  from  an
efficiency  standpoint:  typically  ≤15
C,  which  corresponds  to  an
◦
ambient temperature lower than ~5

C with dry cooling.

◦

◦

The  simple  recuperative  cycle  must  obviously  be  preferred  to  the
simple cycle, but carries a major drawback regarding the recuperative
heat exchange that is pictured in the Q-T diagram shown in Fig. 16. Near
the cold end of the heat exchanger, the cold CO2 path (in blue) is close to
the critical point, hence an increasing specific heat that corresponds to a
lower  slope  of  the  blue  line.  Conversely,  the  hot  path  is  at  a  higher
pressure  that  keeps  it  away  from  the  critical  point,  hence  the  almost
constant specific heat and slope of the red line. This mismatch between
the  two  specific  heats  causes  a  pinch  at  the  cold  end  of  the  heat
exchanger that translates into a high temperature difference along most
of  the  heat  exchange,  even  for  a  (theoretical)  infinite  exchange  area.
This irreversibility has a major impact on the cycle efficiency.

The  remedy  consists in  splitting  the  recuperator  into  a  LTR  and  a
HTR (low and high temperature recuperators) – and diverting part of the
mass flow away from the LTR, so that the lower mass flow going through
it compensates for the higher specific heat. The most prevalent layout
that implements that is the recompression layout. Its schematic and T-S
diagram are shown in Fig. 17.

Based on the studies carried out by Angelino, Dostal et al. compared
in [232] the following cycles based on their efficiency: pre-compression,
recompression,  partial  cooling  cycle,  and  partial  cooling  cycle  with
improved regeneration. One must keep in mind that Angelino studied
transcritical cycles; with a supercritical cycle, the improved regenera-
tion  proposed  for  the  partial  cooling  layout  becomes  irrelevant.  The
authors conclude that:

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105626

G. Flamant et al.

• The recompression cycle (shown in Fig. 17) is the most efficient for
turbine  inlet  pressures  higher  than  approx.  20  MPa  (which  is  the
general situation);

• The efficiency of the partial cooling cycle (shown in Fig. 18) is almost
independent  of  the  turbine  inlet  pressure;  as  a  consequence,  the
partial cooling cycle becomes more efficient than the recompression
one when the turbine inlet pressure goes below approx. 20 MPa.

◦

The cycle layouts deemed most appropriate for CSP vary according to
the publications released since the early 2010s. It is the recompression
cycle  (amongst  12  layouts  without  reheat)  according  to  Ahn  et  al.  in
[232]. LCOE considerations led Crespi et al. to prefer the Allam cycle
and the Partial Cooling cycle, both without reheat. However, the Allam
cycle  considered  is  transcritical  with  a  minimum  CO2  temperature  of
20

C, which greatly limits its potential for CSP.
Neises  and  Turchi  compared  in  [235]  the  relative  merits  of  the
recompression  and  partial  cooling  cycles,  both  with  reheat.  A
◦
C – slightly conservative, even for
compressor inlet temperature of 50
CSP – was considered. When using a heat exchanger effectiveness model
(as was generally the case in previous studies), the efficiencies of both
cycles are similar. However, the authors characterized the recuperators
by their conductance (in W/K) which is a better proxy for their size and
cost, and concluded that the partial cooling cycle is more efficient until
high values of recuperator conductance are considered. Other aspects
favor the partial cooling cycle. The wider temperature range of the heat
input  is  a  significant  plus  for  CSP,  as  explained  above.  The  partial
cooling cycle is almost unaffected by lowering the turbine inlet pressure,
e.g.,  from  25  to  20  MPa,  unlike  the  recompression  cycle.  In  another
study by the same authors [236], the LCOE of molten salt towers using
simple recuperative, recompression, and partial cooling cycles (this time
without reheat) are compared. The turbine and compressor inlet tem-
◦
peratures are 630 and 45
C respectively. The minimum LCOE with the
partial cooling cycle is 6.2% lower than that with the two other cycles. In
the comparison with the recompression cycle, the reason is the wider
temperature  range  of  the  heat  input  compared  to  that  of  the  recom-
pression cycle (hence cheaper storage, less receiver thermal losses, and
lower  parasitic  consumption  to  pump  the  molten  salt,  as  explained
above). As for the simple recuperated cycle, it is penalized by its lower
efficiency. This study confirms the conclusions drawn from the previous
one.

In [237], Binotti et al. compared three non-reheat sCO2 power cycles
◦
integrated in a solar tower system with TITs up to 800
C: recompression
cycle, partial cooling cycle, and recompression with main compression
intercooling (RMCI). The latter is similar to the partial cooling cycle, but
with the bifurcation before the first cooling rather than after the first
compression. The ambient temperature considered is 40
C. The final
comparison  criterion  is  the  solar-to-electric  efficiency  that  factors  in
cycle efficiency, thermal losses of the solar receiver, and auxiliary con-
sumption (including salt pumping and cooling fans). It is 24.5% (with a

◦

Fig. 17. T-S diagram and schematic (top left) of a recompression sCO2  Bray-
ton cycle.

Fig. 18. Partial cooling sCO2  Brayton cycle.

◦

◦

◦

cycle gross efficiency of 48.6%) with the RMCI cycle, obtained with a
C; it is similar (0.4% lower) with the partial cooling cycle
TIT of 750
(obtained with TIT = 780
C) and 3.9% lower with the recompression
cycle  (obtained  with  TIT  = 740
C).  Being  as  efficient  as  the  partial
cooling cycle with a lower TIT, the RMCI cycle wins. Comparing these
two cycles using a conductance model (that should be more represen-
tative than effectiveness) for the heat exchangers would be interesting.
Adding a reheat improves the efficiency by about 1.5% point (i.e.,
~3%), as shown by Mecheri and Le Moullec [238]. However, a reheat
does not seem optimal for CSP. The turbine inlet pressure is limited for
feasibility and cost reasons and the exit pressure must be higher than the
critical pressure (or reasonably lower for partial cooling or intercooling
cycles);  this  limits  the  turbine  overall  expansion  ratio  and  the  corre-
sponding temperature drop. Splitting the expansion with a reheat also
splits this temperature drop, thereby lowering the temperature range ΔT
of the heat input (this is why the reheated cycle is more efficient). As
explained above, a lower ΔT is not welcome for CSP applications.

The  seven  studies  mentioned  above  provide  a  good  insight  of  the
most appropriate power cycles for CSP applications, even though many
other studies cover the subject. The partial cooling cycle seems to be the
best  choice  for  CSP,  but  it  should  be  further  compared  with  the
recompression cycle with main compression intercooling to reach a final
decision.

5.5.2. Existing power sCO2  power cycles or experimental loops today

Table 8 gathers the known projects with a power output of 100 kWe
or above that are being or were already demonstrated and tested (except
the 10 MWe STEP project that is still underway). The three first projects
mentioned are the commercially relevant demonstration systems [239],
the others being primarily R&D loops.

Fig. 16. Q-T diagram and schematic (top right) of a simple recuperated cycle.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105627

G. Flamant et al.

• Net Power is a 50 MWth (~25 MWe) internal oxy-combustion/Allam
cycle  plant  that  was  first  fired  on  30  May  2018  [217].  The  CO2
is
produced  by  the  combustion  is  the  working  fluid  and
pipeline-ready (thanks to its pressure) for CO2 capture. Water – the
other combustion product –  is removed once condensed. However
promising, this concept is not applicable for CSP.

• Echogen is the closest to commercialization. Its target application is
waste heat recovery where cycle efficiency, but also heat recovery
rate  matter.  The  company  favored  layout  simplicity  and  compact-
ness, the main objective being to replace organic Rankine cycles.
• The  STEP  demonstration  plant  aims  at  becoming  the  largest  indi-
rectly gas-fired sCO2 power plant, expected to be tested from January
2021 to September 2022 (pre-Covid schedule). Its design allows for
operation  first  in  simple  recuperated  mode  at  500
C,  then  in
recompression  mode  up  to  715
C  [240].  It  benefits  from  lessons
learned from the Sunshot 1 MWe test loop.

◦

◦

Smaller  experimental  loops  (< 100  kWe,  hence  not  mentioned  in

Table 8) are being or were already tested:

• In Asia, in the Korea Institute of Energy Research and in the Tokyo

Institute of Technology;

• In Europe: in TU Wien in Austria, in the Research Center Rez in Czech
Republic,  and  within  the  following  projects  funded  by  the  EU’s
H2020 program: sCO2-HeRo, IThERM, and sCO2-Flex. In the latter,
critical components are being tested separately.

It is generally acknowledged that an electric power output of at least
~10 MWe is necessary for an experimental loop to be representative of
the future challenges to be met by future utility-scale sCO2 power cycles
[232]. Some challenges encountered with most test loops are specific to
small turbomachinery and therefore not relevant for future utility-scale
power  cycles:  notably,  the  issues  (especially  the  impact  on  perfor-
mances) affecting the thrust and radial gas-foil bearings needed for this
scale of turbomachinery [232]. Conversely, the solutions developed for
the bigger STEP turbomachinery regarding seals and bearing (e.g., hy-
drostatic bearings with hermetic turbomachinery that do not need seals,
hydrostatically-assisted gas foil bearings, etc.) are potentially scalable.
Depending on the experimental loop, the arrangement of compressor(s),
turbine, generator, and electric motor if applicable varies (decoupled or
on the same shaft). The compressors and turbines are generally radial
(including on Echogen); the turbine of Net Power, STEP, and Sunshot is
axial.

5.5.3. Efficiency

Assessing  the  efficiency  of  supercritical  Brayton  CO2  cycles  –  let
alone comparing it with that of steam cycles – is difficult, mainly for the
following reasons,

• Accurately predicting, for a future utility-scale plant, the efficiency
of the turbomachinery (particularly the main compressor that works
close to the critical point) is uncertain.

• Many variants of sCO2  cycles exist, and the best choice for CSP ap-
plications  depends  on  several  criteria  beyond  the  sole  cycle  effi-
ciency at design point.

• As explained above, sCO2 cycles are much more sensitive to the heat
sink temperature than steam cycles; this must be taken into account
to  ensure  a  fair  comparison  whose  conclusion  will  depend  on  the
ambient temperature.

Amongst  the  many  studies  that  included  the  determination  of  the
efficiency of one or more cycle configurations, a representative selection
is proposed in Table 9. A table summarizing the efficiencies obtained
from other studies [241]. It complements Table 9 but does not mention
the compressor inlet temperature.

Table 10 gives an estimate of the influence of the compressor inlet
temperature on the cycle efficiency. Please note that the variations of
efficiency  mentioned  are  in  relative  %:  for  example,  an  efficiency
decrease from 50% to 49% (one percentage point) means 2%.

◦
C or 33

The impact of a CIT increase on the efficiency drawn from [198,238]
are  design  values;  in  other  words,  the  design  of  the  cycle  is
CIT-dependent.  Conversely,  the  impact  determined  in  [253]  is
off-design. Its lower value can be explained by 1/ an active control of the
low-pressure side of the cycle depending on the CIT, 2/ the higher CIP
that  is  beneficial  with  higher  CITs,  even  though  it  penalizes  the  effi-
◦
ciency when the CIT is close to 31.0
C. Besides, the partial cooling cycle
and probably the intercooling cycle (that seem a better fit for CSP than
the  recompression  cycle)  are  known  to  be  less  sensitive  to  the
compressor inlet temperature than the recompression cycle considered
in  Table  10.  In  view  of  these  results,  to  extrapolate  efficiencies  from
◦
values obtained with 32
C to higher CITs, applying a penalty of
0.50% (relative %) per Kelvin seems reasonable. This rule of thumb was
used to recalculate the efficiencies drawn from Table 9 for inlet tem-
◦
perature of 45
C that are typical for CSP. Table 11 gathers the
◦
results obtained; only studies with TITs ≥ 600
C were kept, and the
RMCI cycle in [237] was removed because it somehow duplicates with
the PC cycle. The A-USC cycle studied above was inserted in the Table as
a  comparison  basis;  the  condensing  temperature  replaces  the
compressor inlet temperature, and the “half-net”  efficiency of 51.20%
drawn from [15] was readjusted for condensing temperatures of 45 and
51

C using the same method as above.
According  to  this  tentative  comparison,  the  efficiency of  the  sCO2
cycles  are  generally  not  higher  than  that  of  a  A-USC  steam  cycle  for
similar TITs (resp. 650 and 670
C for the main steam and the reheat
steam). It is only significantly higher in two studies: in [237], but with a
much higher TIT; and in [235], even subtracting ~1.5 percentage point
to account for the reheat that is not convenient for CSP, as explained

◦
C and 51

◦

◦

Table 8
sCO2 experimental loops with a power output ≥ 100 kWe Source: [241,242], Acronyms: RE = simple recuperated, RC = recompression.

Name

Ref.

Power
(kWe)

Cycle

Temp. (
◦
C)

Pressure
(MPa)

Main partners

Location

25,000

Allam

1150

30.0

Net Power, Toshiba

La Porte, TX (USA)

Net

Power
Echogen
STEP

Sunshot

SNL

PTT
IST

[217,
243]
[244]
[240]

[245,
246]
[247]

[248]
[249]

8000
Up to
10,000
1000

125

50–250
100

SCIEL

[250]

300

RE
RE/
RC
RE

RC

RC
RE

RE

485
715

700

◦

C

537

750
299

500

25.0

17.0

42.3

20.0

Echogen Power Systems
Gas Technology Institute, SwRI, GE Global Research, GE-Baker
Hughes
General Electric,
Southwest Research Institute
Sandia National Laboratory,
Barber Nichols
Peregrine Turbine Technology, Carleton University
Bettis Atomic Power Lab.,
Bechtel Marine Propulsion
Korea Adv. Inst. of Science & Technology, Korea Atomic Energy
Research Institute

Akron, OH (USA)
San Antonio, TX
(USA)
San Antonio, TX
(USA)
Albuquerque, NM
(USA)
Ottawa, Canada
West Mifflin, PA
(USA)
Daejeon, Korea

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105628

G. Flamant et al.

Table 9
Efficiencies provided in the literature.
TIT/TIP/ CIT = compressor/turbine inlet temperature/pressure, SR = simple recuperated cycle, RC = recompression cycle, PC = partial cooling cycle, RMCI =
recompression cycle with main compressor intercooling, RH = reheat, and UA = conductance.

Ref.

Reference

TIT

◦

C

[235]

Neises

[232]
[237]

Ahn
Binotti

[233]

Crespi

[251]
[252]
[236]

Luu
Alfani
Neises

650

500
750

550
750

620
630

TIP
MPa

25.0

25.0
25.0

25.0
30.0
25.0
25.0
25.0

CIT
◦
C

PowerMWe

Remarks

51.0

35

32.0
51.0

32.0

32.0
33.0
45.0

25

100
115

UA recuperators = 10 MW/K
(other UAs also considered)
Value drawn from bar-chart

C ≤ TIT ≤ 850
From chart (efficiency vs. TIT) with 500
Results shown for best effic. vs. thermal inertia trade-offs
UA recuperators = 30 MW/K (other UAs also considered)

◦

◦

Layouts

RC with RH 50.39%
PC with RH 51.21%
RC ~43.8%
RC 46.9% | PC 48.7%
RMCI 48.6%
RC 46.5% | PC 46.1%
RC 50.6% | PC 51.1%
C 48.1%; 700
RC 600
RC. 42.4% to 43.9%
RC 47.6% | PC 47.4%

◦

C

◦

C 52.5%

Table 10
Relative variation of efficiency as a function of the CIT.

Ref.

reference

Cycle

TIT

◦

C

TIP MPa

CIP MPa

[198]
[198]
[238]
[253]

Brun
Brun
Mecheri
Dyreby

SR
SR
RC/2RH
RC

700
600
620
700

34.5
34.5
20.0
25.0

7.93
7.93
8.0
9.17

CIT
◦
C

35→40
35→40
35→45
35→55

above. A comparison with the efficiency calculated by the same authors
five  years  later  in  [236]  suggests  that  the  modeling  may  have  been
somewhat optimistic.

To  summarize,  based  on  current  knowledge  and  with  heat  sink
temperatures generally allowed by CSP-friendly sites, the efficiency of
sCO2 cycles is, at best, similar to that of A-USC steam cycles. Given the
deviation shown in Table 11, it is not possible to draw more accurate
conclusions.

These  results  are  rather  consistent  with  conclusions  obtained  in
previous studies: in [231], Dostal et al. state that 1/ the efficiency of
sCO2 cycles increases more with the TIT than that of steam cycles, 2/ the
◦
threshold where sCO2 cycles becomes more efficient is 550
C compared
◦
to supercritical steam cycles, and 470
C compared to subcritical steam
cycles.  However,  this  comparison  was  done  in  2004  with  USC  (not
Advanced USC) steam cycles, and the compressor inlet temperature was
32.0
C. With A-USC cycles and dry cooling with hot ambient temper-
atures, a threshold of about 700

C seems more realistic.

◦

◦

5.5.4. Flexibility

Flexibility is often mentioned as a key potential merit of sCO2 cycles
for  CSP  plants  that  are  intended  for  daily  start-up/shutdown  cycles.
Higher  flexibility  allows  wasting  less  energy  and  better  meeting  the
needs  of  the  grid  during  these  transients. Several  studies  propose dy-
namic analyses of sCO2  cycles integrated in a CSP plant, although it is
not always clear if truly transient or quasi-steady-state simulations are
performed. Marchionni et al. [254] studied a 1-D transient model based
on  the  major  components  of  Brunel  University  London’s  test  facility,

Table 11
Efficiencies of some representative sCO2 cycles plus an A-USC steam cycle.

Efficiency change due to CIT change

Relative efficiency of variation / +1 K @ CIT

44.00%→42.66%
40.74%→39.07%
46.56%→43.81%
51.47% →46.87%

-0.61% / Kelvin
-0.82% / Kelvin
-0.59% / Kelvin
-0.45% / Kelvin

namely, a simple regenerative 50 kWe sCO2 power cycle. Start-up, shut
down  and heat input variations were studied, and the  control system
(including turbine by-pass and CO2  inventory) was optimized. Due to
the application targeted (waste heat recovery from industrial flue gas)
and  the  power  scale,  the  conclusions  of  this  study  seem  difficult  to
extrapolate to CSP applications. Osorio et al. [255] studied the behavior
of a sCO2  cycle driven by a solar tower during days with diverse irra-
diation profiles; two unusual buffer storage units are installed, respec-
tively at the hot and cold sources of the cycle. Singh et al. [256] modeled
the dynamic response of a sCO2 cycle driven by a parabolic trough CSP
plant without storage during typical summer and winter days. Luu et al.
[251]  studied  several  sCO2  Brayton  cycles  driven  by  a  solar  island
featuring an auxiliary boiler but no thermal storage; the main focus was
to  define  optimal  operation  strategies  in  order  to  cope  with  variable
solar irradiation. In [257], the same authors studied thoroughly the cold
start-up of a similar power plant with a non-reheat recompression cycle.
Regarding the heat input, a boiler-only strategy (no solar input) is pro-
posed: since it allows the operator to fully control the heat input, it could
apply to a CSP plant with direct storage. Six hours are required for a cold
start-up,  from  zero  to  full  load  operation;  no  warm  or  hot  start  is
modelled in the study.

With the exception of the latter (to a certain extent), these publica-
tions are focused on the response of sCO2 cycles submitted to unwanted
variations of the heat input. However, this is not the challenge to be met
by future CSP plants whose power cycle is fully isolated from any solar
events by their direct storage. These power plants will have to meet an
increasingly variable power demand from the grid, most probably with

Ref.

First Author

Luu
[251]
Alfani
[252]
Neises
[236]
[235]
Neises
A-USC steam cycle[15]
[251]
[237]
[233]

Luu
Binotti
Crespi

TIT

◦

C

600
620
630
650
650 670
700
750
750

TIP
MPa

25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
33.0
25.0
25.0
30.0

PowerMWe

Layout

Efficiency CIT = 45

◦

C

Efficiency CIT = 51

◦

C

100
115
35
300

25

RC
RC
PC
PC/RH
N.A.
RC
PC
PC

45.0
41.3
47.4
52.8
48.96
49.1
51.7
47.8

43.5
40.0
46.0%
51.2
48.15
47.5
48.7
46.2

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105629

G. Flamant et al.

one  start-up/shut  down  cycle  per  day.  Studying  these  transients,
regardless  of  any  solar  consideration,  is  what  is  really  needed.  Such
studies  are  currently  underway,  notably  in  the  Horizon  2020  project
sCO2-Flex [258]; this project develops and validates the design of a 25
MWe sCO2 cycle that will increase its operational flexibility. The design
is scalable for future fossil-fueled power plants. Cagnac et al. shortlisted
three cycles to be further studied in [259]. The components of the power
cycle, including their transient behavior, will be tested separately. Alfani
et al. [252] describe an insightful study developed within the sCO2 Flex
project. The study aims at finding good trade-offs between thermal ef-
ficiency  and  flexibility  of  a  100  MWe  recompressed  sCO2  cycle  inte-
grated in a coal power plant, its CO2  characteristics being 620
C/25
◦
MPa at turbine inlet and 33
C at main compressor inlet. The study starts
from the assumption that the heat exchangers prevail regarding flexi-
bility, because sCO2  turbo-machinery is very small whilst ~5 MWth  of
recuperators are required per MWe of power output. The impact of the
heat exchange areas, volumes and masses of the various heat exchangers
were analyzed. Various cycle configurations with different combinations
of heat exchanger designs were envisioned. A Pareto front of the best
efficiency vs. thermal inertia trade-offs provides seven relevant config-
urations for next generation sCO2 coal power plants. A sensitivity to the
maximum CO2  pressure and turbo-machinery efficiency was also per-
formed. It is eventually suggested that 1/ such sCO2 power cycles should
allow for a better efficiency/thermal inertia compromise than equiva-
lent subcritical steam cycles (no supercritical steam cycle is mentioned);
2/ a more detailed study of the system and its controls is required to
refine  this  comparison,  according  to  relevant  criteria  that  depend  on
operational strategies and market valuations. Other studies are currently
being performed within sCO2-Flex and will be published later.

◦

To summarize, even though a growing number of theoretical studies
are  published,  results  that  allow  quantifying  the  flexibility  of  a  sCO2
power  cycle  –  with  practical  data  such  as  hot  start-up  times  or  load
variation rates –  are still lacking today. However, there seems to be a
growing interest for this topic in conjunction with the increasing number
of test facilities.

5.5.5. Materials

◦

C;  it  still  holds  with  a  (probably  more  realistic)  ~1000

According to Ho et al. [260], the maximum temperature reached by
the turbo-machinery (governed by the TIT) should not raise major is-
sues,  other  than  a  more  complex  design  of  bearings  and  seals.  This
prediction is based on the fact that the blades of an un-cooled gas turbine
can work – admittedly at much lower pressures – at temperatures up to
1150
C
threshold  for  un-cooled  gas  turbines.  In  view  of  this,  the  authors
consider that the pressure and temperature of the primary heater (the
hottest  heat exchanger)  are the parameters that limit the cycle’s TIT,
depending on the maximum allowable stress vs. temperature of its ma-
terial. It should be noted that the authors reach this conclusion without
taking explicitly corrosion into account.

◦

Corrosion is a major issue and a key criterion for choosing the right
materials:  the  frequent  use  of  CO2  as  inert  gas  for  certain  industrial
applications may be misleading in this regard. Corrosion with CO2  at
high temperature takes place through oxidation (in a similar way as with
steam) and carburization; both phenomena expand with time and tem-
perature following a parabolic law. Since the resistance to oxidation is
highly dependent on Cr content, austenitic steels (preferably with a Cr
content higher than 17% [234]) are much more resistant to oxidation
than ferritic/martensitic steels. The difference is less obvious regarding
carburization  [261].  Nickel-based  alloys  are  highly  resistant  to  CO2
corrosion: the generation of a Cr2O3 layer provides an efficient protec-
tion against further oxidation and carburization is limited by the low
solubility  of  carbon,  the  low  stability  of  chromium  carbide,  and  the
protection  allowed  by  Cr-oxide  against  carbon  penetration.  Oxide
dispersion  strengthened  (ODS)  steels  are  promising:  their  Al2O3  in-
clusions provide far better protection than a Cr-oxide layer, especially
regarding  carbon  penetration.  They  are  being  considered  for  future

◦

nuclear  applications  but  not  for  CSP,  due  to  cost  and  manufacturing
difficulties.

Even though White et al. mention a 650

C threshold for replacing
stainless steels with Nickel- or even Titanium-based alloys [241]. There
seems to be a general consensus for limiting the temperature of 9–12%
◦
Cr ferritic-martensitic steels to 500
C,
◦
and to use Nickel-base alloys for temperatures from 600 to 800
C [198,
234]. Results from long-term studies performed for steels at tempera-
C are available; regarding Nickel-based alloys at tem-
tures up to 600
◦
peratures > 600
C, research is underway and more long-term studies
are necessary.

◦
C, that of austenitic steels to 600

◦

5.6. Overall comparison of the proposed highly efficient power cycles

5.6.1. Efficiency

The efficiencies of the three technologies (supercritical steam cycles,
combined cycles and sCO2 cycles) being similar, so are the thermal duty
of the respective heat sinks (air-cooled condenser or dry sCO2  cooler).
Therefore, the differences in parasitic consumption of their cooling fans
(the main auxiliary consumers of the power cycle) are second-order, so
that it is legitimate to compare gross efficiencies. Please note that the
“half-net” efficiency considered above for steam cycles is the one rele-
vant  for  this  comparison,  since  the  feed  water  pumps  are  part  of  the
cycle, as are the compressors of Brayton cycles. A tentative comparison
of the efficiencies of the technologies assessed in this study is shown in
Table 12. The cold end temperature of the cycle (compressor inlet in
Brayton  cycles,  condensing  temperature  in  steam  Rankine  cycles)
◦
considered is 54.3
C, quite typical (even slightly conservative) for CSP.
◦
It corresponds to an ambient temperature of about 40
C. The efficiency
given for the sCO2 cycles is a 2%-wide range because it cannot be pre-
cisely predicted today for utility-scale units. In all likelihood, sCO2  cy-
cles will be more efficient than USC cycles and, at best, as efficient as A-
USC  cycles  and  externally  heated  combined  cycle  gas  turbines.  The
comparison would be much more favorable to the sCO2 cycle should the
heat sink allow for a compressor inlet temperature of sCO2 cycles close
to 31.0

C.

◦

The combined cycle needs a higher TIT than the steam and CO2 cy-
cles  to  achieve  interesting  efficiencies.  Since  the  corrosion  issues  are
comparatively non-existent and the pressures much lower, this is not an
issue for the gas turbine. However, this higher temperature translates
into higher thermal losses, especially in the solar receiver whose radiant
losses  are  proportional  to  T4.  Consequently,  when  considering  the
overall efficiency of the plant, combined cycle will most certainly be at a
disadvantage compared to the USC, A-USC and sCO2 cycles.

In light of the above, the right choice today to enhance the efficiency
of the current benchmark is the USC steam cycle. The sCO2 cycle may be
an option within a ~2030 time horizon; its merits – simplicity, higher
flexibility  (yet  to  be  proven,  but  likely),  potentially  lower  cost,  and
compactness (not really relevant in CSP, given the size of the solar field)
– remain.

5.6.2. Technological readiness

USC steam power cycles of 250–300 MWe (power outputs that can be
envisioned for a big solar tower with a solar receiver of ~650 MWth and

Table 12
Tentative comparison of the efficiencies of the three technologies.

Sub-
critical
steam

USC
steam

A-USC
steam

sCO2

Ext.
Heated
CCGT

Pres./TIT/RHT
◦
(MPa/
C)

◦
C/

12.0/553/
553

Efficiency,

lowest T =
◦
54.3

C

42.5%

26.0/
600/
600
45.3%

33.0/
650/
670
47.7%

◦
TIT 780

C  ~25.0/

~650

47.7%

46–48%

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105630

G. Flamant et al.

operated as a peaker) begin to be commercially available and are a first
step before the A-USC steam cycle that is not fully technologically ready
yet. The externally heated combined cycle raises probably fewer chal-
lenges than the A-USC steam cycle but fosters less interest in the liter-
ature, so that convincing a manufacturer to build the first-of-a-kind gas
turbine must not be taken for granted. Regarding the supercritical CO2
cycles, it is a long road to go before reaching commercial availability for
power outputs ≥100 MWe with a TIT high enough to allow for a decent
efficiency compared to that of proven technologies.

5.6.3. Operational flexibility

The steam generator of the benchmark/subcritical steam cycle and
the  high-pressure stage of the  bottoming cycle of the combined cycle
should be once-through for higher flexibility. The steam generator of the
supercritical  steam  cycles  are  ipso  facto  once-through.  Therefore,  the
operational flexibilities should not be very different; probably slightly
higher for the combined cycle (thanks to the gas turbine) and slightly
lower  for  the  supercritical  steam  cycles.  The  supercritical  CO2  cycle
should be the most flexible of all, although this remains to be proven.

In the tentative techno-economic assessment presented in Section 11,
specific cycles were selected for a detailed example. Other options (e.g.,
supercritical steam or CO2) could however be assessed similarly.

6. Scale-up procedures in the particle-driven CSP systems

In process engineering scaling up is a critical issue that needs both
experimental and numerical developments. Typical steps can be sum-
marized  as  follows.  First,  small-scale  prototype  development  of  the
technology  components  and  identification  of  bottlenecks  related  to
scaling-up and operational issues, first validation of the process simu-
lation (TRL4). Second, qualification of the technology through testing at
larger scale than previous step with improved hardware, refining of the
process modeling, validation of LCA and economic assessments, iden-
tification of health and safety, environmental, regulation and resources
constraints (TRL5). Third, integration of all the up-scaled components to
construct  an energy system that accounts and solves the issues previ-
ously  found,  design  and  modeling  of  full  commercial-scale  system
including refining of economic and circularity (TRL6). Demonstration
system, first of the kind (FOK) commercial system and full commercial
application  are  the  next  three  steps  of  the  development  procedure
(TRL7, 8 and 9 respectively). For particle-driven CSP systems, the three
most developed technologies (falling film, centrifugal particle receiver
and  fluidized  particle-in-tube)  have  reached  TRL5,  in  particular  con-
cerning the solar receiver that is the most critical component. In addition
to the particle solar receiver, the particle handling system and the par-
ticle heat exchanger are the two other sub-systems for which scaling up
issues must be examined carefully. They are discussed in Section 4 and 5.
Consequently, this section addresses mainly the scaling-up of the solar
receiver  and  the  integration  issues.  Concerning  the  solar  receiver,
typical thermal powers are 10–100 kW for step 1 (TRL4), 100–1000 kW
for step 2 (TRL5&6), 5–10 MW for the demo-unit and approximately 50
MW for the FOK unit.

6.1. Scaling-up the particle-driven solar receivers

Upscaling the three most mature technologies cited above gives rise
to  different  issues  that  are  linked  to  the  specific  characters  of  each
design.  Nevertheless,  they  share  the  same  question:  what  is  the
maximum  length/diameter  of  a  single  receiver?  Considering  that
increasing  the  power  needs  increasing  the  characteristic  length.  As  a
reference,  the  tube  length  of  commercial  molten  salt  receivers  is
approximately 20 m. The identified issues for particle receivers are, for
example, the control of the stability and opacity (decrease of the particle
volume  fraction)  of  the  particle  flow  for  the  falling  film,  the  particle
layer thickness and cylinder diameter for the centrifugal receiver and
the bubbling flow evolution to slugging when increasing the tube length

for the fluidized-particle in tubes. At the FOK level, design efficiency of
the solar field is a common necessary data for the engineering and cost
evaluation of the complete system. In the following, a medium size solar
field is designed and a cavity receiver is assumed because of the high
operation temperature. This assumption allows calculating the spillage
losses that are included in the optical losses.

6.1.1. Solar field at the 50 MWth  scale

The optimization of the solar field layout associated with the cavity
solar receiver is essential to ensure a high collection efficiency (optical
efficiency  x  thermal  efficiency).  In  general,  a  tradeoff  must  be  found
because the receiver thermal efficiency increases with a decrease of the
solar receiver aperture surface area (reduction of the radiation losses)
but the optical efficiency decreases. This trend is due to solar reflected
beam  spillage  at  the  receiver  aperture  that  rises  considerably  with  a
decrease of the aperture size. For large-scale solar power plants (≥ 100
MWe), a single tower would lead to a low collection efficiency and too
many towers would lead to a complex handling and conveying of the
particles. Consequently, a sensitivity analysis is necessary to determine
the optimal power of the solar receiver.

Such  a  study  involves the  integration of  many  simulation tools. It
starts  typically  with  the  optimization  of  the  solar  field  layout  using
SolarPILOT software [262]. Then the position of the heliostats is intro-
duced into the ray-tracing software that computes the flux density on the
cavity receiver elements. Finally, a thermal model provides the power
absorbed by the particles, among other data.

The following presents an example of the solar field design approach
accounting for a given aperture size of the solar receiver. To simplify the
illustration  of  the  approach,  the  results  do  not  focus  on  the  annual
performance but on the performance for nominal operating conditions,
March 21 at noon.

In  SolarPILOT,  the  tower  height  is  set  to  120  m  regardless  of  the
power considered. The solar field design power is increased from 37 to
98 MWth. The field optimization is achieved using representative pro-
files for 4 days during the year and 7 or 8 h per day. Fig. 19a shows a
typical solar field layout optimized in SolarPILOT for an incident power
of 61 MWth.

Given the shape of the receiver presented in Fig. 19b, the maximum
field radius is constrained in order to locate heliostats on the Eastern and
Western part of the field. Consequently, the side zones of the receiver
can be more easily irradiated. Under these constraints, the solar field
efficiency decreases from 69% to 67% for a receiver thermal power of 50
◦
and 61 MW respectively and a particle outlet temperature of 750
C. The
corresponding aperture size for 50 MW solar receiver is 6.5×6.5 m2.
◦
Accounting  for  the  high  operation  temperature  (at  least  750
C),
cavity-type  solar  receiver  was  chosen  for  the  three  most  advanced
concept. The 50 MWth power for a single unit solar receiver is the rec-
ommended  size  for  the  centrifugal  and  the  fluidized  particle-in-tube
technologies.  Numerous  numerical  simulations  have  been  developed
to overcome this limit for the falling particle receiver as discussed in the
next paragraph.

6.1.2. Particle solar receiver

The thermal performance of a 50 MWe  falling particle receiver was
simulated  in  [135].  The  corresponding  peak  thermal  power  of  the
north-facing heliostat field is 135 MWth (2529 heliostats) and the tower
height 145 m. The receiver square aperture size is 8.6×8.6 m2 and the
particle curtain length is 13 m (receiver height). For an average outlet
◦
temperature in the range 750–775
C the receiver thermal efficiency is
ranging from 83 to 86.8% for the various tested cases. Annualized value
is 85.7%. Kim et al. [263] proposed a multi-stage falling particle receiver
in order to maintain a high enough particle volume fraction along the
curtain height (it decreases rapidly) and to increase particle residence
time under concentrated solar irradiation. Thermal capacity up to 100
MWth  was  examined.  A  256  MWth  cavity-type  solar  receiver  with  a
◦
10.63×10.63 m2 aperture and a nod angle of 50
was modeled in [134].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105631

G. Flamant et al.

Fig. 19. (a)Solar field layout optimized in SolarPILOT for an incident power of 61 MWth. Colors from red to blue illustrate the variation of optical efficiency of each
heliostat. (b) Shape of the cavity solar receiver.

The maximum thermal efficiency reached 86.8%. Gobereit et al. [264]
proposed  a  CFD  simulation  of  a  400  MWth  facedown-falling  particle
receiver that exhibited an efficiency of 83% at design point. In addition,
the critical issue of particle emission of the falling particle receiver was
examined in [265] for ~ 350 and < 10 μm particles.

Concerning  the  centrifugal  particle  receiver,  the  association  of  50
MWth receiver and solar field modules (solar tower modules) is proposed
in [266] to design a 125 MWe commercial scale solar power plant with
12 h storage. Fourteen solar tower modules are necessary to achieve the
power plant specifications.

The limit of 8 m in tube length allowing either bubbling or turbulent
fluidization, which are favorable regimes for efficient wall-to-fluidized
bed  heat  transfer,  was  established  in  [58].  On  this  basis,  Gueguen
et al. have modeled the thermal efficient of a 50 MWth cavity fluidized
particle-in-tube solar receiver [267] that corresponds to a realistic single
receiver power designed accounting for this tube length constraint. They
demonstrated that an efficiency of 85% can be reached.

As a conclusion of the previous analysis, one can conclude that two
options  are  open  for  upscaling  the  particle  CSP  technology.  First,  a
medium-scale solar power plant designed based on a ~50 MWth  solar
tower  module.  Second,  a  large-scale  solar  power  plant  based  on  the
multi-tower concept associating  N solar tower modules depending on
the  desired  power  and  capacity  factor.  The  developers  of  the  falling
particle  solar  receiver  are  the  only  ones  that  assumes  a  single  tower
concept at commercial scale. The published works on medium and large-
scale particle CSP are analyzed in the next paragraphs.

6.2. Medium-scale particle CSP plant

Solar  power  plants  performances  based  on  an  approximately  50
MWth  solar  tower  module  integrating  a  combined  (CC)  and  a  sCO2
Brayton  cycle  were  examined  in  [268]  and  [269]  respectively,  both
involving  the  fluidized  particle-in-tube  concept.  Behar  et  al.  [268]
◦
showed that using an off-the-shelf gas turbine and 750
C outlet particle
temperature imposed a hybrid concept. Considering a 44 MWth particle
solar receiver, the corresponding power of the CSP plant at design point
reached 18.37 MWe  with a 46% CC efficiency and 73.7% solar share.
The solar-to-electricity efficiency was 25.8%. The integration of sCO2
conversion  cycle  and  a  10  MWe  power  block  results  in  an  only-solar
concept studied by [269] in the framework of the Next-CSP project. A
solar-to-electricity efficiency of 30.8% and 26.3% at design point and on
an  annual  basis  respectively  was  calculated  for  750
C  particle  tem-
perature.  A  sensitivity  analysis  of  the  model  to  particle  temperature,
heliostat beam quality and main compressor inlet temperature was also
proposed.

◦

Among the thermodynamic cycles discussed in Section 6, only steam
Rankine  cycles  and  supercritical  CO2  Brayton  cycles  are  realistically
applicable at a scale relevant for a ~50 MWth receiver as the technical
and economic performance of combined cycles is too degraded at that
scale. CO2 cycles show very promising performance at small scale (<30
MWe)  but  their  techno-economic  performance  is  to  date  much  more
uncertain  than  that  of  steam  cycles.  The  detailed  example  of  techno-
economic estimation at medium scale given in Section 11 therefore in-
volves a steam Rankine cycle.

6.3. Large-scale particle CSP plant

At utility scale (100 MWe and more) the multi-tower concept with N
solar tower modules (or solar islands) sharing the same particle storage
and power block was examined by the authors. The following paragraph
summarizes  the  design  procedure  of  a  peaker  solar  power  plant.  For
more details on the technical features of such a plant, one should refer to
Section 11 where a tentative cost estimation is proposed.

One of the original characteristics of such a plant is its low capacity
factor,  approximately  20–25%  on  a  typical  good  day,  estimated  to
15–20%  annually.  This  results  in  a  solar  loop  and  a  thermal  energy
storage  of  relatively  moderate  size  compared  to  the  power  block.  At
utility scale however, the solar loop is no longer small enough for only
one solar field: the high temperatures necessary for the use of a high-
efficiency cycle  (>800
C for  an externally  heated  combined cycle in
the  example  of  Section  11)  make  it  impossible  to  achieve  a  decent
receiver efficiency with an open receiver. A cavity receiver is therefore
considered,  limiting  the  individual  capacity  of  a  solar  loop  to  50–70
MWth depending on the working temperature.

◦

As  thermodynamic  cycles  typically  draw  significant  benefits  from
scale effects (both in terms of efficiency and specific Capex), the thermal
energy  storage  and  the  power  block  are  centralized.  Considering  the
high  Capex  and  thermal  losses  expected  from  long  distance,  high-
temperature  conveying  (discussed  in  Section  4),  the  positioning  of
each individual field and of the power block + thermal energy storage
island  has  to  be  optimized  in  order  to  minimize  the  total  length  of
conveyors.

All the auxiliary power of the solar loop is considered to be provided
by a small PV farm with a buffer battery, whose production is typically
synchronized with the working time of the solar loop.

The externally heated combined cycle discussed in Section 6 needs
two  reheats  in  order  to  achieve  an  acceptable  efficiency  (48.6%  at
nominal  conditions),  i.e.,  a  total  of  three  heat  inputs  from  fluidized
particles-to-air heat exchangers. Air at moderate pressures (<20 bar) is a
poor  heat  transfer  fluid  due  its  low  density;  on  the  other  hand,  heat

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105632

G. Flamant et al.

transfer cannot be promoted by very high Reynolds numbers on the air
side,  as  the  combined  cycle  is  very  sensitive  to  pressure  drops  (see
Fig. 19). High heat transfer surfaces have to be deployed, resulting in
several  heat  exchangers  in  parallel.  That  results  in  an  additional
complexity of the particle handling systems around the power block, to
be minimized by  an adequate layout of the different heat exchangers
around the air turbine. Simulation of the annual performance and the
LCOE  of  a  similar  peaker  solar  power  plant  is  proposed  in  [270].  A
detailed example of tentative LCOE calculation is presented in Section
11 of the present article.

Concerning the falling film technology, another viewpoint is envi-
sioned, the solar power plant is assumed to produce electricity as a base
load utility with a capacity factor of 70% [271]. A single tower 100 MWe
solar plant located at Dagget (CA) is modeled with a 14 h storage. The
concentration ratio is 1200 and the outlet particle temperature 800
C.
The hot particles power a sCO2  cycle with a turbine inlet temperature
(TIT) of 715

C.

◦

◦

7. Baseload or peaker plants

7.1. Future CSP plants will be peakers that generate power during
nighttime

Photovoltaic  electricity  is  about  three  times  cheaper  than  CSP,  as
shown in Table 13 below whose results are drawn from [272]. A site
with an excellent irradiation (e.g., Daggett, California) for CSP, and one
with a fair irradiation (Kansas City) for PV. The ratios shown in Table 13
would be higher with similar site conditions for both technologies.

Besides,  it  will  be  increasingly  curtailed  (i.e.,  worthless)  during
midday hours, an obvious consequence is that CSP must not generate
power  during  daytime  (except  on  sunny  summer  days  when  storage
overflow would otherwise require heliostat defocusing). On the other
hand,  in  areas  with  high  DNI,  CSP  is  one  of  the  cheapest  ways  to
generate power during nighttime and should remain so until 2040, as
explained  later  in  this  section.  More  specifically,  CSP  plants  must
generally  be  designed  as  peakers  that  concentrate  their  daily  power
generation on a four to six hour time duration (during the evening plus,
sometimes, early morning). This requirement will be increasingly crit-
ical  as  the  growing  share  of  variable  renewables  translates  into  an
increasing  variability  of  the  net  demand,  as  shown  in  [273]  for  Cali-
fornia. To achieve renewable shares of 60% and beyond in the future,
enhanced grids, proper demand side management and optimized flexi-
bility of existing fossil-fueled power plants will not suffice: flexible re-
newables  and/or  massive  electricity  storage  will  be  mandatory,  as
shown in [274] for Europe. In [214], a request for proposal issued in
mid-2017 by the Arizona Public Service utility was studied and the “best
fit”  molten salt tower CSP plant was determined. The pricing of elec-
tricity is multiplied by a coefficient that depends on the hour of the day
and the month: 0, 1, 3 and 9 during respectively 70.2%, 11.8%, 9.7%,
and 8.3% of the time. The “best fit” plant has a very low capacity factor:
17.4%,  which  means  that  it  is  a  peaker.  For  this  plant,  the  weighted
average of the pricing coefficient is 5.33 whereas it would be 1.84 at best
for a base load, “Gemasolar-like” CSP plant with a 63% capacity factor.
In other words, the value of the electricity generated by this peaker CSP
plant is 2.90 times that of the base load plant. Of course, the peaker plant
is costlier: compared to a base load plant that generate the same yearly
amount of energy, it has a somewhat bigger storage (no heat is spent
during daytime) and a much bigger power cycle (in inverse proportion

Table 13
Comparison of LCOE of utility-scale PV and CSP without storage.

of  the  capacity  factors).  Considering  the  cost  breakdown  of  a  typical
molten salt tower described in [275] and reprocessing it for both the
base and peaker plants, one can determine that the LCOE of the peaker
plant is 1.46 times that of the base load plant. To summarize, the val-
ue/cost ratio of the power generated by the peaker plant is about twice
that  of  the  base  load  plant  (2.90/1.46):  the  choice  of  the  peaker  is
obvious here. The peaker still wins with a much milder (and unrealistic
for future highly renewable networks) price differentiation depending
on  time  of  day;  for  example  with  price  coefficients  (2.0|1.5|1.0|0.5)
instead of (9.0|3.0|1.0|0), the value of the peaker is 1.75 times that of
the  base  load.  To  summarize,  even  though  base-load  CSP  plant  are
regularly mentioned as viable options [276], it will usually be optimal
for  the  electrical  systems  to  use  CSP  plants  as  peakers  (or  perhaps
mid-peakers in some contexts) that typically generate power during four
to six nighttime hours per day. A shown below,

• Utility-scale batteries charged mainly by photovoltaic power is the

only alternative to CSP,

• Today, its LCOE is similar to that of CSP for four hour per day of peak
shifted generation, but is higher for mid-merit (i.e., more hours per
day) generation,

• CSP will remain competitive in 2040 provided it benefits from sub-

stantial improvements.

• It is more expensive today and will still probably remain so in 2040.

7.2. Potential alternatives to CSP as flexible renewable power generation

The flexible renewable technologies for power generation are: hydro,
CSP, biomass and geothermal. In order to limit the cost and energy losses
of the grid, flexible power generation must be properly dispatched on
the territory, including in desert or semi-desert areas that are well-suited
to  CSP.  The  global  resource  for  geothermal  energy  is  limited  to  very
specific  areas  where  CSP  cannot  be  envisioned.  Hydro  and  biomass
power generation are ill-suited to CSP-friendly, dry areas (due to its low
energy density, long-distance transportation of biomass is economically
and environmentally challenging). Besides, biomass is renewable but its
carbon neutrality is questionable [277] and it generally does not fare
better than fossil fuels regarding emission of pollutants such as particles
and NOx. To summarize, in arid areas where flexible power generation is
required, no other renewable and clean power generation technology
can  replace  CSP.  That  being  said,  utility-scale  storage  units  [278]
charged with renewable (including curtailed) electricity can be another
alternative to CSP. Hydrogen may play a significant role in the future for
long-term  storage  aimed  at  correcting  inter-season  imbalances,  but  is
irrelevant  here.  Flywheels  and  supercapacitors  cover  very  short  term
storage  needs  that  do  not  belong  to  the  scope  of  this  study  either.
Pumped hydro storage is discarded for the same reason as hydro power
generation. Compressed Air Energy Storage is an attractive concept but
it needs underground cavities and its deployment remains confidential.
Pumped Heat Energy Storage (i.e., Power-to-heat-to-power storage) may
be  relevant  in  some  contexts  (notably  the  conversion  of  existing  coal
plant into storage units that requires limited capital expenditures) but its
round-trip efficiency is low: about 40%. Replacing the electrical heating
with  a  heat  pump  would  increase  the  efficiency,  but  not  drastically.
Cryogenic  storage  (e.g.,  using  liquid  air)  is  another  option  [279];
combining  heat  and  cryogenic  storages  potentially  allows  for  good
round-trip efficiency [280] but leads to high complexity and low tech-
nological  readiness.  Thermo-chemical  storage  could  replace  thermal

LCOEs US$/MWh

2020
2030

Conservative scenario
Utility PV

CSP

32.7
28.8

82.1
78.2

Ratio

3.20
2.72

Moderate scenario
Utility PV

31.4
18.3

CSP

82.1
58.6

Ratio

2.61
3.20

Advanced scenario
Utility PV

30.7
13.9

CSP

82.1
42.1

Ratio

2.67
3.03

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105633

G. Flamant et al.

storage for both CSP and Pumped Heat Energy Storage but its techno-
logical readiness is low.

7.4. Economic comparison of electrochemical storage and CSP thermal
storage

To  summarize,  in  any area  where  CSP  can be  envisioned,  electro-
chemical  storage  (i.e.,  batteries)  is  the  only  possible  alternative
technology.

7.3. Current and future cost of renewable power shifted with batteries

In such areas, the typical battery unit will be mainly or fully charged
with a dedicated PV farm, curtailed (i.e., worthless) electricity being an
optional and marginal contribution. The Li-ion technology is dominant
for  utility-scale  batteries  and  allows  for  quick  charge  and  discharge,
which can be useful for some networks. Other technologies (e.g., Na-S
batteries,  flow  batteries)  may  prove  cheaper  in  the  future  for  utility-
scale storage, but they have other drawbacks [281] and lack industrial
maturity; therefore, they are not considered here. The Capex of a com-
plete four-hour Li-ion battery system from 2018 to 2050, as determined
in [282], is shown in Fig. 20. The Capex starts in 2018 at US$ 380/kWh,
which  corresponds  to  [283]  and  is  consistent  with  the  2019  Capex
determined in [275]: US$ 347/kWh for a 200 MWh / 50 MWe  storage
system.  Four  hours  of  nighttime  power  generation  per  day  meets  the
typical  need  of  future  networks  for  peak  generation,  a  different
discharge duration would change the relative sizing of the inverters with
some impact on the LCOE, but to an extent that would not affect the
following analysis.

Neglecting the Opex, the LCOS of the battery system corresponds to
the amortization of its Capex. A 15 year lifespan, a discount rate of 5% in
constant  currency,  and  300  cycles  with  a  70%  capacity  per  year  are
considered. The resulting LCOS for 2020, 2030 and 2040 are summa-
rized in Table 14, with the three scenarios. According to [13], the world
weighted average of the 2019 LCOE of PV generation is US$ 68/MWh.
This  value  was reprocessed  as follows:  1/ Reducing the discount  rate
from 7.5% to 5% (with a 25 year lifespan) reduces the LCOE by 20%; 2/
The required PV capacity is divided by the round-trip efficiency of the
batteries (85%). The resulting 2019 LCOE of shifted PV generation is US
$ 64/MWh. Then, a reasonable extrapolation using 2015 to 2019 values
from [13] leads to the following predictive LCOEs of PV in US$/kWh:
59.9 in 2020, 41.7 in 2025, 32.7 in 2030, and 23.5 in 2040. By adding
these values to the aforementioned LCOS, one determines the cost of PV
electricity fully stored, then released to the network during four night-
time  hours.  These  values  are  summarized  in  the  columns  “LCOE”  in
Table 14. Please note that the LCOEs mentioned in Table 14 must not be
confused with the “LCOE of PV + X hours of battery storage” that is often
referred to, where only a fraction of the electricity collected by the PV
farm is shifted in order to extend its generation beyond sunset. Since it is
well understood that daily power generation must be done by PV only,
the  comparison  must  be  made  between  shifted  (i.e.,  nighttime)  CSP
generation and shifted power generation with PV + batteries.

Fig. 20. Cost projections for a 4-hour Li-ion battery system. Source: NREL.

The  medium  scenario/2020  LCOE  shown  in  Table  14  is  to  be
compared  with  that  of  a  peaker  molten  salt  tower  built  in  2020  that
dispatches  its  power  generation  within  four  nighttime  hours  per  day.
The total project cost of such a plant (built in the US in order to avoid
any geographical bias) can be assessed by reprocessing the results given
in [214]: about US$ 675M for a net power output of 230 MWe  with a
capacity factor of 13.2%. With a 5% real discount rate, a 25 year lifetime
and US$ 25/MWh for O&M (US$ 21 + US$ 4 to account for the bigger
power cycle, see Section 11), one obtains a LCOE of US$ 201/MWh for a
plant built in 2020.

Note that the LCOE estimate of Section 11 is made under different
assumptions with the objective of comparing the LCOE of a tower using
fluidized particle beds with that of a molten salt tower, both being built
in 2030. It is not fully relevant here.

All the  above  mentioned LCOEs correspond  to fully shifted power
that is generated during four nighttime hours. They would be lower for
both technology (CSP and PV + batteries) if the power were generated
during more hours (and vice-versa). Here is why:

• The amount of energy generated by a CSP plant sizes the same solar
island and the thermal storage system (able to store one day of solar
collection); However, for a given amount of energy generated, the
sizing of the power cycle (along with the transformer switchgear, the
circuit breaker and the transmission line) is inversely proportional to
the generation time.

• The same reasoning applies to a PV farm equipped with batteries,
replacing the CSP solar island with the PV farm, the thermal storage
with  the  batteries,  and  the  power  cycle  with  the  inverters  plus
transformer switchgear, circuit breaker and transmission line.

Comparing the costs given by [275] for two battery storage systems:
50 MW/200 MWh, total capital cost US$ 69,456k, and 200 MW/ 100
MWh,  total  capital  cost  US$  45,260k,  one  can  determine  the  cost
structure of their total capital cost: US$ 272/kWh + US$ 301/kW. The
US$ 301/kW correspond mainly to the cost of the inverters, plus that of
transformer switchgear, circuit breaker and transmission line. It is much
lower than that of the sole power cycle, about US$1100–1200 [284].
Therefore, the LCOE of a CSP plant will decrease much faster than that of
a PV + batteries farm when extending the generation time from four
hours  (considered  in  this  study)  to  more,  e.g.,  for  a  plant  generating
during the whole night.

7.5. Final considerations

The following conclusions can be drawn from this study:
For a peaker plant that generates shifted power during (typically) four

nighttime hours

The LCOE of a PV + batteries plant that shift all its generation during
four nighttime hours is US$ 208/MWh, vs. US$ 201/MWh for a molten
salt  tower  –  the  current  benchmark  of  CSP  plants  –  with  the  same
dispatch strategy. The difference (3.5%) is well within the uncertainties
of the estimates. This comparison applies in the US whose local costs

Table 14
Four hours Li-ion battery system: estimated LCOS of battery system and LCOE of
PV generation delivered during four nighttime hours. All values are in 2020 US
$/MWh.

Scenario for cost decrease

High
Medium
Low

2020
LCOS

161
148
133

LCOE

221
208
193

2030
LCOS

135
92.7
55.5

LCOE

165
125
88.2

2040
LCOS

126
81.5
44.8

LCOE

150
105
68.3

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105634

G. Flamant et al.

(labor, regulations) are among the highest in a developing country, the
CSP solution would benefit significantly more from cheaper local labor
costs: local construction and O&M costs of a CSP plant proportionally
are much higher than those of a PV + battery power plant. Therefore, the
molten salt tower has probably an edge in developing countries.

The  future  will  be  challenging  for  CSP:  according  to  Table  14,  its
LCOE must decrease at least as follows in 2030 to remain competitive
with that of PV farms equipped with batteries:

• -18% if the cost of PV + batteries farms decrease according to the

“high” scenario;

• -38% with the “medium” scenario;
• -56% with the “low” scenario.

Therefore,  the  future  of  CSP  depends  in  great  part  on  the  cost

decrease of PV + batteries farms:

• CSP  will  most  certainly  remain  competitive  if  the  “high”  scenario

prevails,

• With the “medium” scenario which is also the most likely, CSP will
remain  competitive  provided  significant  improvements  are  per-
formed:  incremental  ones  and,  if  possible,  technological  break-
throughs. In the light of the recent past, it seems perfectly feasible.
• If the “low” scenario prevails, the competitiveness of CSP will be an
uphill battle: significant technological breakthroughs (such as using
particle circulation loops for CSP) are the only option.

Incremental improvements will probably not suffice to achieve that
goal;  technological  breakthroughs,  such  as  using  particle  circulation
loops for CSP, are needed.

For a mid-merit plant that generates shifted power during, e.g., six or more

nighttime hours

As explained above, longer generation times favor CSP over PV +
batteries quite strongly. Precisely quantifying this statement is out of the
scope of this study. However, starting from the conclusions above for
four  hours of  generation, it is  clear that CSP is  and will remain most
certainly  competitive  than  PV  + batteries  for,  e.g.,  generating  eight
nighttime hours per day. One potential hurdle remains: with the incre-
mental  phasing  out  of  fossil-fueled  power  plants,  peaking  renewables
will be needed before mid-merit ones.

8. Hybrid systems: the use of alternative fuel for CSP plants

Actual CSP plants have moderate electricity costs, but in most cases
quite lower capacity factors and transient problems due to high inertia
[285]. Moreover, CSP plants require backup system for non-sun periods.
Biomass or other carbonaceous feedstock and their derived energy car-
riers  (biogas,  syngas,  among  others)  can  be  a  valid  source  in  the  BS
system, despite the necessity to build a large biomass collection struc-
ture for scale of merit, the volatility of the biomass price and the lower
feed-in tariffs [285].

Recently,  hybrid  CSP  technology  with  biomass  has  however  been
rapidly developed. The hybridization [286] of these technologies would
increase  the  power  plant  capacity  factors  (when  compared  to  a  solar
only CSP) and reduces back up fossil fuel consumption still generating a
dispatchable electricity flow with positive economic indicators [287].
The  first  concentrating  solar  power-biomass  hybrid  power  plant
commenced  operation  in  Spain  and  the  combination  of  both  energy
sources is promising to lower plant investment [288].

Considered  hybrid  co-production  plants  are  illustrated  in  Figs.  21
and  22  [287],  where  the  possible  application  of  biomass,  its  derived
syngas  or  biogas  as  back-up  fuel  is  indicated  and  applied  in  various
sub-sections of the overall plant layout.

Biomass is widely available, with a lower heating value ranged from
15 to 23 MJ/kg. When biomass has a high water content, or comes from
animal  or  urban  residues,  the  most  applied  biomass  conversion

technologies  are  based  on  bio-methanation.  These  technologies  are
largely applied in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) and landfills
and  generates  biogas  or  landfill  gas,  which  is  available  as  a  fuel.
Biomass, its pyrolysis/gasification or its bio-methanation derivates can
be readily applied in a hybrid CSP.

Petersheim  et  al.  [288]  conducted  a  case  study  approach  of  17
possible  CSP-biomass  hybrid  configurations  including  only  mature
technologies with references >5 MWe, with the aim of identifying the
best configurations regarding technical, economic, and environmental
performance in  Mildura, Australia.  The CSP technologies  selected are
Parabolic  trough,  Fresnel  and  Solar  tower  with  thermal  oil,  steam  or
molten salt as working fluid, while the biomass systems include grate,
fluidized bed, and gasification with produced gas used in a boiler. The
plant net capacity ranged from 17.3 to 19.5 MWe in all configurations.
As  results,  while  the  efficiency  differences  for  the  17  scenarios  reach
13%, the investment variations are with 31 % significantly larger. Solar
tower-biomass  gasification  hybrids  reach  the  highest  net  cycle  effi-
ciency,  33.2%,  but  Fresnel-biomass  hybrids  have  the  lowest  specific
investment of AU$ 4.5 /MWe. Based on the annual electricity generation
CSP-biomass hybrids have an up to 69% lower investment compared to
standalone concentrating solar power systems. The integration of ther-
mal storage can increase the annual generation of CSP-biomass hybrid
plants up to 17% (7 h TS) but currently requires a capacity value pay-
ment  to  be  competitive  with  a  no  storage  plant.  However,  even  with
extensive thermal storage most of the electricity, 70%, still derives from
the biomass resource.

Coelho et al. [289] have analyzed numerous possibilities of hybrid-
izing  between  a  forest  waste  biomass  direct  burning  boiler  and  CSP
plants.  They  have  used  Ebsilon  Professional  software  to  design  and
optimize the power conversion system, while the solar subsystems, i.e.,
heliostat  field  and  volumetric  receiver  have  been  designed  and  opti-
mized in HFLCAL software. The authors have analyzed 8 cases in terms
of hybrid solution (only solar, biomass or hybrid), scale (4 or 10 MWe)
and  storage  in  the  field  of  the  Portuguese  Algarve  region.  They  have
found that the best technical/economical solution in 4 MWe power plant
scale is the hybrid CSP/biomass plant with storage, which results in a
LCOE  of  0.144  to  0.149  €/kWh,  with  higher  efficiency  and  capacity
factor than a conventional CSP. Larger hybrid plants will exhibit a better
performance: a 10 MWe power plant can have a LCOE of 0.108 €/kWh

Fig. 21. Hybrid co-generation concept based on particle CSP prototype oper-
ated by CNRS at the Themis solar tower.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105635

G. Flamant et al.

Fig. 22. Different options of a hybrid biomass - CSP power plant.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105636

G. Flamant et al.

with  twice  the  annual  efficiency  and  lower  costs  than  the  solar  only
tower  system  of  4  MWe.  The  proposed concept  could  reduce  biomass
consumption by 17% compared with biomass only power plant.

Coelho  et  al.  [290]  analyzed  several  base  case  power  plants  and
hybrid  biomass/CSP  options:  wood  gasification,  refuse-derived  fuel
pellets,  biogas  from  a  wastewater  anaerobic  digester,  biogas  from  a
landfill and natural gas. As results, the LCOE for the CSP base case is 0.23
€/kWh  and  the  best  base  case  LCOE  is  the  WWTP  anaerobic  digester
with 0.08 €/kWh. The hybrid power plant investment with best payback
period is the hybridization with an anaerobic digester, using sludge from
a WWTP. This power plant returns the investment in 13 years (sludge
collection and transport assumed without cost), presenting also the best
net  present  value  (15  million  euro).  However,  for  the  4  MWe  scale,
WWTP or landfill biogas would only be possible close to large cities (few
limited  cases)  with  centralized  plants  capable  of  generating  enough
sludge or municipal solid waste (MSW).

A typical example of a large-scale hybrid CSP plant, is Termosolar
Borges,  a  hybrid  biomass-parabolic  trough  solar  thermal  plant  which
provides electricity to the Spanish grid. The plant is the most northern
CSP plant built in Spain.

The  plant  power  output  is  22.5  MWe.  The  facility  combines  solar
power with biomass-fired power generation in a system that allows for
continuous electrical production of renewable energy 24/7, even when
the sun does not shine. The plant peak capacity of 22.5 MWe is obtained
when there is sufficient solar power. At night, when only the biomass
power is available, the plant power capacity is 12 MWe. The facility is
located on a 70 hectare site. The schematic of the power plant is illus-
trated in Fig. 23.

The  solar  field  consists  of  trough-shaped  mirror  reflectors  to
concentrate  solar  radiation  on  to  receiver  tubes  containing  thermal
transfer  fluid  which  is  heated  to  produce  steam.  The  solar  field  com-
prises 2688 collectors, 5.5 m in diameter and 12 m long each, and has
been realized by Siemens [291], including the mirror and solar receiver.
The heat is transferred with a thermal oil loop.

The thermal block comprises two 22 MWth dual biomass and natural
gas  boiler  (BM-NG),  one  6  MWth  natural  gas  conventional  auxiliary
boiler (auxNG) for assistance, and a steam generator (SG). The biomass
is  inserted  in  series  on  the  solar  field  thermal  oil  loop.  Gas  firing  is
intended for power shaping and back-up.

The electricity generation is composed of a 22.5 MWe steam turbine
generator  train  and  a  power  transformer.  The  turbo  generator  train
comprises one high-pressure turbine followed by a low-pressure turbine.
The electrical block converts the thermal energy in mechanical energy in
the steam turbines followed by the generator which changes that into
electricity. Turbine full load efficiency is 37%. The plant is to produce
electricity on a continuous basis, round-the-clock. Gas firing is available
for  back-up.  The  auxiliary  systems  include  shredding  and  biomass
storage and control systems. Carbon offset is 24,500 t/year.

Although the previous examples illustrate the potential of hybridiz-
ing CSP and alternative fuels, it is obvious that the solution is viable only
in  geographic  regions  with  high  solar  irradiance  when  the  CSP  can
provide a considerable share of the total power, and provided alterna-
tive  fuels  are  available.  If  these  conductions  are  not  wet,  a  hybrid
concept should not be envisaged.

9. Additional issues to be further assessed

9.1. Enhancing the particle-to-tube heat transfer coefficient in the
particle-to-working fluid heat exchanger

The  ideal  heat  exchanger  will  be  executed  as  a  baffled  cross-flow
fluidized bed (Fig. 24), using an in-bed externally finned-tube bundle.
The  heat  transfer  coefficient  from  the  fluidized  bed  to  the  heat
exchanging tube, of different geometries, was measured by Zhang et al.
[194]. The heat transfer coefficient from bed-to-wall was measured for
the 3 tube geometries, and results are shown in Fig. 25. The fluid ve-
locity inside the tubes was kept constant for all geometries.

The heat transfer from the tube wall to the turbulent fluid flow was
separately determined, and was in excellent agreement with predictions
by the Gnielinski equation. Finned tubes considerably increase the heat
transfer coefficient through the larger surface area exposed to the bed.
The twin-bore pipe results confirm the influence of the hydrodynamics
and the absence of a stagnant particle nose and gas film enhanced the
heat  transfer  in  comparison  with  the  round  tubes.  Since  the  heat
exchanger will be of externally finned tube design with a high bed-to-
wall heat transfer coefficient (>> 2 kW/m2K) [292], the overall heat
transfer is determined by the wall-to-in-tube working fluid flow. At air
velocities  of  35  to  40  m/s  at  the  exit  T  of  ~  650–750  °C,  Gnielinski
predicts air-side transfer coefficients of ~ 325 W/m2K.

Clearly, finned tubes enhance the heat transfer coefficient, and the
reasons are reflected by the distinct gas/solid hydrodynamics around the
tubes of different geometry [292].

9.2. Recommended research prior to multi-MW up-scaling

9.2.1. The maximum achievable solid flux

Common fluidized bed operations can be hampered in a specific (U,
G) range where choking occurs, being understood as the phenomenon
where a small change in gas or solids flow rate prompts a significant
change  in  the  pressure  drop  and/or  solids  holdup:  the  stable  upflow
regime  can  no  longer  be  maintained  when  G-values  exceed  a  certain
limit for a low to moderate gas velocity. This choking can occur in dense
upflow  of  particles  when  the  superficial  gas  velocity  and  the  driving
pressure are no longer capable of entraining the particles. In the upflow
bubbling fluidized bed concept, only G-values up to 110 kg/m2s were
tested during hot experiments, where the stability of the operation was

Fig. 23. the Spanish example plant near Lleida Thermo Borges.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105637

G. Flamant et al.

Unlike SiC, cristobalite and olivine have a moderate AI and both attri-
tion and erosion will be limited at the superficial gas velocities applied.

9.2.3. Finned receiver tubes

To overcome the high cost of SiC, 58 μm cristobalite of density 2340
kg/m3  was  additionally  and  subsequently  tested  in  a  vertical  high
temperature electrical furnace using tubes of 46 and 50.09 mm O.D.,
each  0.5  m  long.  Operating  parameters  (temperatures  of  wall,  inlet/
outlet  particles,  arid  solid  flux)  were  continuously  monitored.  The
absorbed  heat  was  calculated  from  the  heat  balance  of  the  particle
suspension flow. The tube geometries, including fins in the 50.09 mm O.
D., were known, thus enabling the calculation of the heat transfer co-
efficient. Since using only 4 temperature measurements of the outside
wall along the height of the tube, and temperature measurements of the
inlet and outlet solids flow, results are less accurate than when using
multiple  thermocouples  as  in  the  PROMES-CNRS  on-sun  set-ups,  but
allow a fair determination of an average overall heat transfer coefficient.
Bare tubes tested were respectively 46 mm O.D. (wall thickness 2 mm)
and 50.09 mm O.D. The 50.09 mm O.D. tube was also manufactured
with internal fins, as illustrated in Fig. 27 for wall temperatures up to
◦
685
C. For comparison and to gather data at higher flux densities at the
wall  on-sun,  single  tube  experiments  (bare  and  finned  tubes)  were
conducted by CNRS using Group A cristobalite and olivine.

Results were previously detailed in Zhang et al. [153], but repeated
in Fig. 28. At higher wall temperatures, radiation heat transfer should be
added and will increase the experimental values by about 50 (low G) to
150 W/m2K (high G), to achieve a maximum of ~1050 W/m2K for the
bare  tubes, and  ~2200  W/m2K  for the  finned tube.  Heat  transfer  co-
efficients for the bare tubes are slightly lower than those obtained by
CNRS in 29 and 26 mm I.D. tubes [80,89,148,150]. The decrease of the
heat transfer coefficient is however largely compensated by the increase
in heat exchanger surface area per meter of tube length, being + 27.7%
for the 46 mm and + 38.9% for the 50 mm tube. The exposed surface
area of the finned tube was 2.84 times the surface area of the bare tube.
Experiments moreover  give evidence of the fact  that solid circulation
fluxes up to (cid:0) 100 kg/m2s are achievable and provide stable operating
conditions of the UBFB.

9.2.4. Particle conveying systems

The conveying of hot and cold particles at high capacity (>100 t/h)
and for long vertical or horizontal distances needs further investigations.
The  solar  project  application  poses  several  challenges.  Points  to  be
studied in detail as part of the equipment selection process include the
following.

As the equipment heats up, the metal will expand. Hence, chains and
belts that were correctly tensioned when cold will need to self-adjust

Fig. 26. Predicted choking limit at different superficial gas velocities and bed
voidages between 0.65 and 0.75.

Fig. 24. Air heat exchanger design (a), with illustration of the twin-bore finned
air pipe (b).

Fig.  25. Fluidized  bed-to-wall  heat
tube geometries.

transfer  coefficient

for  different

confirmed. This is expected since the pressure balance indicates that the
loop will operate in a stable manner provided the external pressure in
the dispenser compensates the upflow bubbling fluidized bed pressure
drop.  At  high  G-values,  acceleration  and  friction  losses,  both  propor-
tional to Gn (n = 1–2) will increase and will finally hamper the system
stability.  To  assess the  impact  of  (U,  G)  combinations, a  non-choking
criterion is established when considering that the particle slip velocity
must remain positive. With equal to 0.65–0.75, as measured in the single
tube experiments, ρp is between 910 and 700 kg/m3. For a specific gas
velocity in the tube, the choking limit is illustrated in Fig. 26.

To operate the upflow bubbling fluidized bed at G-values in excess of
150  kg/m2s,  superficial  air  velocities  should  exceed  0.17  m/s,  as
commonly used in the single and multi-tube set-ups.

9.2.2. Attrition of particles

Since a fluidized bed is the key in operating the solar receiver at a
high  wall-to-bed  heat  transfer  coefficient,  attrition  of  particles  was
examined experimentally in order to select the type of Geldart A-pow-
ders less prone to attrition. This extensive research was fully reported by
Zhang et al. [293] and only essential features are summarized below.
Although  fast  particle  motion  associates  a  high  degree  of  mixing,  it
however  causes  inter-particle  collision  and  bed-to-wall  impacts,  both
leading to particle attrition. Attrition generates fines that can be lost in
the dust collection system, whereas the particle size distribution of the
bed will alter during the operation.

Zhang et al. clarified the influence of particle size and nature, bed
height, fluidization velocity, action of jets and orifice diameter [293].
An  equation  was  developed  and  enables  to  predict  attrition  rates  for
different particles at different operating contribution. The total attrition
rate  combines  the  bubble-induced  and  jet-induced  effects.  It  was
moreover  shown  that  particles  with  a  high  Abrasion  Index  (AI),  as
defined  by  CEMA  [294],  are  less  prone  to  attrition.  The  higher  AI  is
however  an  indication  of  the  expected  wear  of  the  equipment  [295].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105638

G. Flamant et al.

2030 and using the same individual field layout. Their design is based on
the  UBFB  solar  receiver.  The  following  calculations  correspond  to  a
plant  located  in  Ouarzazate,  Morocco:  yearly  DNI  2635  kW/m2year,
◦
latitude  31.06
,  1150  m  above  sea  level.  The  general  design  is  first
outlined  for  each  scale;  then,  Capital  and  Operation  Expenditures
(CAPEX and OPEX) are assessed for both plants in parallel; eventually,
each  Levelized  Cost  of  Electricity  (LCOE)  is  calculated  according  to
given financial hypotheses. The CAPEX, OPEX and LCOE of the plants
studied are compared to the benchmark CSP plant: a 150 MWe  molten
salt tower using the current state-of-the-art technology built in the same
site, also in 2030.

Let us notice that in the case of the two particle-based plants assessed
in  the  present  section,  specific  solutions  were  selected  for  a  detailed
example. Other options (e.g., using different cycles) could however be
assessed similarly.

As  already  explained  in  Section  8,  the  best  use  of  CSP  consists  in
concentrating  its  generation  during  peak  hours:  evening  and  possibly
early morning. Both plants are designed as peakers that generate five
hours of full-load equivalent power during the evening: linear ramp-up
from zero (a little before sunset) to full load in 40 min, then 4 h and 20
min at nominal load, then linear load decrease in 40 min until shutdown.
The  ramp-up  rate  is  a  reasonable  hypothesis  provided  the  plant  is
properly designed to that end [214].

The design of a utility-scale plant (150 MW) is described first. As the
thermal  input  to  a  particle  receiver  is  limited,  that  design  involves
several towers; therefore the assessment of a smaller, single-tower plant
is also presented.

10.1. Design of the large-scale particle-based plant (150 MWe)

The solar island includes the solar receiver(s), the tower(s) and the
heliostat field. Factoring in foreseeable improvements to be performed
by 2030, an average net solar flux impacting the particle solar receiver
tube panel of about 550 kW/m2  was considered; it is similar to that of
current molten salt receivers. Given this moderate flux and the tubes’
◦
external wall temperature (~950 to ~1100
C
in a molten salt receiver), a cavity receiver is mandatory to mitigate heat
losses (most of them radiant and proportional to T4). A maximum irra-
diated height of the receiver tubes of 8 m was considered to ensure stable
hydrodynamic behavior of the fluidized bed within the tubes (no slug-
ging). A width/height ratio of 1.63 allows a well-controlled flux map on
the panel whilst avoiding excessive spillage. Given these three figures (8
m,  1.63,  and  ~550  kW/m2),  the  maximum  thermal  power  of  the
receiver is approx. 57 MWth.

◦
C versus ~525 to ~ 650

Considering the aforementioned dispatch requirement and the cycle
efficiency (48.6% in nominal conditions, less during transients) as well
as 5% thermal losses overall from the receiver output to the power cycle
(those  losses  are  discussed  further  below),  at  least  1.68  GWh  of  heat
must be collected daily by the solar island in order to meet the dispatch
requirement. In Ouarzazate, it is achieved during 60% of the days of a
typical year by six receivers of 56.2 MWth each. In practice, since the
heat  from  good  days  can  be  stored  and  used  several  days  later,  the
dispatch requirements will be fully met during at least 280 days per year.
Except for a very small overlap between generation ramp-up and sunset,
no heat is spent during daytime; therefore, the storage is sized for a full
day of heat collection. As a compromise between oversizing the storage
and having to defocus heliostats during too many good days, the storage
is sized for the 90th best day of the year, i.e., a thermal capacity of 2.0
GWh. Given the temperature difference (200 K) and the specific heat of
olivine (1.22 kJ/kgK), 30,000 t (15,000 m3) of olivine are needed. Four
hoppers  (two  hot,  two  cold)  are  used:  their  outer  diameter  is  31  m
(accounting for wall and thermal insulation thickness: 0.50 m max.) and
their storage height (including the V-shaped bottom) is 16 m.

In order to maximize the optical efficiency, each tower has only one
receiver and a north field. Its optical height (i.e., from heliostat mirror
level to panel mid-height) is 126 m. Each individual solar field is shown

Fig. 27. Top view of the 50.09 mm O.D. finned tube.

when  operating  at  temperature.  The  measures  adopted  at  lower  tem-
peratures may not be applicable for the enclosed high-temperature de-
signs under consideration.

To  achieve  the  required  high  reliability,  in  addition  to  selecting
equipment with such a potential, some preventative maintenance and
inspection schedule will be required. Ways of achieving this need to be
clearly established.

The conveyor carries certain standard monitoring instrumentation to
ensure reliable operation and help reduce component wear and deteri-
oration. All such instrumentation should function  reliably at elevated
operating temperatures.

The solids feed rate to the various equipment items, especially the
solar  receiver and the fluidized-bed heat exchanger, need to be accu-
rately measured. How this is to be achieved needs to be established.

10. Tentative economics and LCOE for potential medium- and
large-scale applications

The objective of this section is to assess the Levelized Cost of Elec-
tricity (LCOE) generated by (i) a ~25 MWe medium-scale plant using a
high-temperature  subcritical  steam  cycle  (ii)  a  150  MWe  utility-scale
plant  using  an  externally  heated  combined  cycle,  to  be  built  around

Fig. 28. Experimental heat transfer coefficient versus solids circulation flux G
for different tube geometries[153].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105639

G. Flamant et al.

in Fig. 11a; each of the 1879 dots represents a high performance Stellio®
heliostats developed by sbp [296]. The cost and thermal losses of the
horizontal conveying network that links the storage system to the six
towers are proportional to its total length that must therefore be mini-
mized. To this end, various arrangements were considered and the total
lengths  of  the six  corresponding conveying networks  were compared.
The lengths with double and triple particle mass flow were multiplied
respectively by 1.8 and 2.8. With a “wide”  solar field such as this one
(see Fig. 29a below: length/width = 640 m / 890 m = 0.73), the layout
shown in Fig. 29b below allows for the lowest total length.

Besides, once this layout is chosen, the length/width ratio of each
individual solar field minimizes the total conveying length. Therefore,
the  arrangement  of  solar  island  can  be  considered  optimal.  The  total
length of the horizontal conveying network is 4.0 km.

The  critical  issues  affecting  hot  particle  conveying  sections  are
described  in  Section  4,  and  the  required  developments  regarding  the
particle circulation loops between the solar towers and the power block
are discussed in Section 10. This paragraph is dedicated to outline the
main characteristics of the particle handling system with sufficient ac-
curacy to then assess its cost.

About 220 kg/s of particles must be conveyed between the storage
system  and  each  receiver:  horizontally  as  described  above,  and  verti-
cally: from ground level to the receivers and to the discharge height of
the particle hoppers. To lift the particles from ground level to the re-
ceivers, skip hoists have their merits [173]; however, bucket elevators
were eventually chosen because they work almost continuously, thereby
reducing  the  buffer  storage  required  at  the  top  of  the  tower.  Due  to
limitations of lift height and mass flow, four elevators are required for
each  tower  (two  in  parallel  x  two  in  series).  As  for  the  horizontal
conveying of the particles between the storage and the towers, railway
wagons and apron conveyors were first considered but continuous-flow
conveyors  were  eventually  chosen.  Some  manufacturers  can  build
equipment  that  withstand  the  particle  temperatures  (resp.  620  and
820
C to and from the receivers). The power consumption of the par-
ticle handling system, about 3.5 MWe, is supplied by a PV farm and a
buffer battery. The thermal losses along the conveyors can be limited to
max. 2.5% through proper engineering practices, but that is still a sig-
nificant penalty.

◦

◦

In  order  to  make  efficient  use  of  the  particle  temperature  (about
800
C), an externally heated combined cycle gas turbine was chosen
(supercritical steam and CO2 Brayton cycles are also good candidates, as
discussed in Section 6). The bottoming steam cycle is standard: three
pressure with reheat and air-cooled condenser. Due to the low Turbine
Inlet Temperature (TIT) compared to that of an internal combustion gas
turbine (780
C), a double reheat configuration is
required to reach an efficiency of 48.6% [17,218]. The general archi-
tecture of the turbine is shown in Fig. 30. The electric output of the gas
and steam turbines are 81 and 74 MWe  respectively. Pressure drops –

C vs. up to ~1600

◦

◦

highly detrimental to the performances of Brayton cycles –  as well as
temperature differences of the particle-air heat exchangers (HEXs) must
be limited. Due to the moderate pressures, air densities are low; there-
fore, these two combined requirements translate into bulky and costly
HEXs. In practice, two HP HEXs, three IP HEXs and five LP HEXs are
arranged  in  parallel;  single  HEXs  would  be  too  wide  relative  to  their
length.  A  tentative  arrangement  of  the  powerhouse  (gas  and  steam
turbines with common generator, HEXs, air piping, and particle paths) is
shown in Fig. 30.

The  heat  recovery  steam  generator,  the  powerhouse  and  the  air-
cooled condenser are aligned (in that order) on the N-S axis of symme-
try of the solar island. Two hoppers (one cold and one hot) are located on
the  west  side  of  the  powerhouse,  the  two  other  hoppers  being  sym-
metrically located on the east side. This layout is shown in Fig. 31.

10.2. Design of the medium-scale particle-based plant (25.3 MWe)

As shown in Section 6, the only cycle that can be considered relevant
for  a  ~25  MWe  scale  while  being  industrially  mature  is  a  small
subcritical steam cycle with no reheat. As particles do not suffer from the
same temperature limitations as molten salts, the main parameters of the
steam cycle can be improved in order to increase the conversion effi-
ciency. The cycle studied here therefore has a main steam temperature
◦
and pressure of 600
C/180 bar. The simulation of such a cycle using the
thermal engineering software SteamPRO 29 gives a gross efficiency of
39.6%  for  a  net  efficiency  of  36.6%.  That  relatively  low  efficiency,
compared to those given in Section 6, is mainly due to the lower turbine
efficiencies that can be expected in smaller power cycles.

◦

The particle temperatures required to heat the steam Rankine cycle
are more moderate than at full-scale: particles cycling between 400 and
700
C  allow  for  a  comfortable  temperature  difference  in  the  steam
generator, while leading to efficiency gains at the receiver. With a field
similar to that of Fig. 29a and  the same receiver geometry as for the
large-scale plant, the receiver’s thermal losses (essentially due to radi-
ative heat transfer) are halved thanks to the substantially lower working
temperatures,  which  leads  to  a  higher  thermal  power  of  66.5  MWth.
Given  the  specific  heat  of  olivine  (1.22  kJ/kgK)  and  the  temperature
range envisioned, that leads to a nominal particle flowrate of 182 kg/s in
the receiver and the conveyors feeding it. Considering the same solar
resource (i.e., that of Ouarzazate, Moroco), the solar loop can accumu-
late  333  MWhth  in  the  thermal  energy  storage  60%  of  the  time  in  a
typical year. Sizing it for the 90th best day leads to a 400 MWhth thermal
energy storage, that is 3900 t (1950 m3) of particles. Two hoppers (one
hot, one cold, height: 16 m, external diameter: 16 m) are enough to store
that volume of particles.

Thanks to the collection of heat by only one tower, the total length of
conveyors  is  drastically  reduced  (estimated  to  around  100  m  of  hori-
zontal conveyors, essentially between the power block and the hoppers).

Fig. 29. (a-left) Individual solar field | (b-right) Layout envisioned for the solar island.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105640

G. Flamant et al.

Fig. 30. Arrangement of the powerhouse including its approximate dimensions.

10.3. Levelized cost of electricity generated by the plant

10.3.1. EPC cost of the solar island

According to [284], the cost of heliostats were expected to decrease
from  US$  143/m2  in  2015  to  US$  103/m2  in  2020.  An  exponential
extrapolation  gives  US$  87.4/m2  in  2030.  As  indicated  in  [297],
up-to-date heliostat costs are difficult to find, so that optimistic trend
cannot  be  verified.  It  has  however  a  limited  impact  on  the  present
comparison as the same assumption is used for both the particle plants
and the benchmark plant. With 1879 heliostats of 48.5 m2 each, the cost
of the medium-scale heliostat field is US$ 8M. With six modules, and
assuming no scale effect, the cost for the large-scale plant is US$ 47.8M.
Due to the architecture of the receiver system, the tower’s top is 6.5
m above the center of the solar panel; moreover, the heliostat mirrors
are  4.5  m  above  ground.  Therefore,  a  126  m  height  difference  from
heliostat mirrors to receiver panel mid-height corresponds to a tower
height  of  126  + 6.5  + 4.5  = 137  m.  The  weight  of  the  receiver  in
operational conditions (i.e., particles included) is about 90 tons. Given
these parameters, one tower costs US$ 3.9M; since building six identical
towers on the same site only allows for a 10% cost saving, the six towers
cost US$ 21.0M.

In  [284],  the  2015  total  costs  for  a  state-of-the-art  molten  salt
receiver is estimated at 125 US$/kWth and potentially at US$ 100/kWth
by 2025. Let us compare the UBFB receiver with a molten salt receiver:
since the average fluxes are similar, so are the size of the tube panels; in
both  receivers,  the  receiver  tubes  are  the  only  components  made  of
Nickel-based  superalloys;  therefore,  they  contain  approximately  the
same mass of superalloy (about  8 to 10 times  costlier than austenitic
stainless steel [298]). The UBFB receiver does not require heat tracing or
emergency  drainage  process  (requiring  pressurized  buffer  tanks),  but
handling  a  fluidized  bed  raises  more  challenges  than  a  circulating  a
liquid. Overall, it is assumed that in 2030 the cost of a UBFB receiver will
be similar to that of the 2025 cost of a molten salt receiver or US$ 100
/kWth, which means US$ 6.7 M for the medium-scale plant’s receiver,
US$ 33.7 M for the six receivers of 56.2 MWth  each in the large-scale
plant. Considering the above, the cost of the solar island is US$ 8.0M
+ 3.9M  + 6.7M  ≈ 18.6M  for  the  medium-scale  plant,  US$  47.8M  +
21.0M + 33.7M ~ US$ 102.5M.

Thoroughly comparing the cost of the large-scale, multi-tower solar
island  with  that  of  a  molten  salt  single  tower  of  equivalent  capacity
would be out of the scope of this study. The multiple tower architecture
allows for higher towers relative to the size of each individual solar field,
thereby increasing optical efficiency and reducing the heliostat area; on

Fig. 31. Layout of the whole power island plus the four particle hoppers.

The thermal losses due to conveying, fluidization in the exchangers are
therefore themselves reduced: a conservative value of 1% is assumed,
which results in 329 MWhth available for the power block if 333 MWhth
are collected. The dispatch strategy assumed for the large-scale plant can
be used with the same reliability (that is 4h20 at full load, on at least 280
days in a typical year) if the cycle’s nominal thermal input is 69.4 MWth.
Given the abovementioned conversion efficiency, the cycle’s net power
output is 25.3 MWe, taking into account the power consumption of the
condenser fan, feedwater pump, condensate pump and all the auxiliary
consumption  linked  to  particle  handling  during  power  production.
Similarly to the large-scale plant, a small photovoltaic farm (320 kW)
including buffer batteries is dedicated to the particle elevators that work
only by day.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105641

G. Flamant et al.

the  other hand,  six towers  should be somewhat costlier than a  single
tower.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  it  is  considered  that  the  these  two
impacts compensate each other; taking into account the downsizing of
the receiver and heliostat field in inverse proportion with the net cycle
efficiencies  (~43%  vs.  48.6%),  the  solar  island  is  about  US$  10.6M
cheaper than that of a molten salt tower of similar power output.

10.3.2. EPC cost of the particle handling system

The four bucket elevators required in the medium-scale plant (each
with a 180 kg/s capacity and a 70 m lift) cost ~US$ 1.2M plus US$ 0.3M
for supporting / access structure and thermal insulation. An additional
elevator towards the cold hopper is necessary, with a capacity of 190 kg/
s and an 18 m lift. Its cost is estimated to UD$ 60k. Adding ~10% for
electric cabinets and cabling, the cost of the vertical handling for the
medium-scale plant is: US$ 1.8M.

Due to their higher capacity (220 kg/s), the large-scale plant’s bucket
elevators are slightly more expensive: ~US$ 1.3M for each tower, plus
US$ 0.3M for supporting/access structure and thermal insulation. With
the same ~10% extra cost for electric cabinets and cabling the cost of the
vertical handling for the 6 towers is US$ 10.6M.

Regarding the horizontal conveying: the conveyors cost US$ 900/m
(one-way)  or  US$  1400/m  (round  trip)  plus  US$  500/m  for  thermal
insulation and underground concrete trench. In the medium-scale plant,
this amounts to US$ 150k, plus US$ 30k for the electric motors and an
additional  10%  for  electrical  equipment  and  instrumentation.  The
overall cost of the conveying system can be rounded to US$ 200k.

Regarding  the  large-scale  plant,  the  total  4  km  of  roundtrip  con-
veyors amount to US$ 7.6M, plus US$ 1.3M for the electric motors, then
10%  for  electrical  and  instrumentation  equipment,  that  is  about  US$
9.8M for the horizontal conveying between the hoppers and the towers.
The  conveying  system  that  links  the  hoppers  to  the  particle-air  heat
exchangers located in the power house has short horizontal distances
but is quite complex, as shown in Fig. 6–2: it costs about US$ 1.0M. The
overall cost of the conveying system is therefore US$ 21.4M.

Besides, the medium-scale system is powered with a 320 kW PV farm
and a 320 kWh/330 kW battery with a rounded overall cost of US$ 300k
(2030 costs: ~US$ 350/kW for PV and ~US$ 120/kWh + ~US$ 380/
kW  for  storage  [282]).  The  overall  cost  of  the  conveying  system  is
therefore US$ 2.3M.

At the larger scale, they become a 3.5 MWe PV farm and a 3.5 MWh/
3.6 MW battery with an overall cost of US$ 3.0M. The cost of the whole
particle handling system is therefore US$ 24.4M.

In comparison, the set of molten salt pumps (including the variable
frequency drives and the piping) of a tower of similar power output is
about US$ 4.0M. The thermal power of the particle CSP plant without
accounting for the thermal losses of the particle handling is 320 MWth;
given  its  net  conversion  efficiency  (~43.0%  instead  of  48.6%),  the
molten salt tower needs 363 MWth. Given the average specific heat of
◦
solar salt (~1.52 kJ/kgK at 430
C) and considering a 270 K temperature
difference,  a  tower  height  of  200  m,  and  80%  for  the  combined  effi-
ciencies of the molten salt pump and motor, one determines the mass
flow of solar salt is (885 kg/s) and the consumption of the molten salt
pumps: ~2.2 MWe. A 2.5 MWh/2.5 MW PV + battery farm is required; it
would cost US$ 2.2 M. The overall cost is therefore US$ 4.0 + 2.2M = US
$ 6.2M. This is US$ 23.6 M cheaper than that of the particle handling
system.

10.3.3. EPC cost of the storage system

According to [284], the 2025 cost of the 2 GWhth storage system of a
typical molten salt tower can be broken down as shown in the second
row in Table 15 (it should not decrease much further by 2030). The cost
of the particle storage is broken down in the last row and was deter-
mined as follows:

• Storage medium: with the amount needed in an industrial context, it
is reasonable to estimate the cost of olivine at about US$ 120/t.

• Hoppers: an external quotation was used for the large-scale hoppers.
Despite  the  need  for  higher  mass  (+75%)  and  volume  (+57%)  of
olivine  for  the  same  storage  capacity,  our  hoppers  being  slightly
cheaper than molten salt tanks should come as no surprise since they
have no corrosion and tightness issues. A conservative exponent 0.5
(applied  to  the  volume  of  particles  stored  in  each  hopper)  was
assumed for the extrapolation to medium scale

• Balance of plant: the costs are considered identical between molten
salt and particle plants at large scale, and extrapolated proportion-
ally to the storage capacity for the medium size.

Eventually, as shown in Table 15 above, the particle storage system

costs US$ 23.2M at large-scale, US$ 5.2M at medium scale.

10.3.4. EPC cost of the steam generator / particle-air heat exchangers

Further to initial market consultations within the European Union at
the common and average costs of AISI 347H (high temperature appli-
cations) and AISI 316 L (cladding, reinforcements, supports), raw ma-
terials  (as  pipes,  sheets,  L-profiles),  current  manufacturing  costs
(including  drilling,  welding,  pressure  testing  among  others)  can  be
estimated at 165 k€ for the medium-scale plant’s economizer (383 tubes,
outer / inner diameters 38.1 mm / 32 mm, length 6 m), 150 k€ for an
evaporator  (175  tubes,  outer  /  inner  diameters  50.8  mm  /  42.4  mm,
length 6 m) and 375k€  for a superheater (564 tubes, outer / inner di-
ameters 50.8 mm / 41.2 mm, length 6 m).

Similarly, the large-scale plant’s costs are 485 k€  for a HP/IP heat
exchanger (3400 tubes, outer / inner diameters 29 mm / 25 mm, length
6 m), and 240 k€  for a LP heat exchanger (2160 tubes, outer / inner
diameters 44 mm / 40 mm, length 3 m).

The  fluidized  beds  themselves,  with  internal  AISI  347H  shell,
ceramic insulation and outer AISI 316 L cladding, and the multi-tubular
multi-orifice distributors represent an added cost of approx. 200,000 €
for the medium-scale steam generators, 1 M€ for the large-scale plant’s
combined cycle.

The total manufactured costs of the medium-scale steam generator
will hence approximate 900 k€, while the large-scale plant’s 5 + 5 heat
exchangers are estimated to 4.6 M€.

According  to  [10]  and  [11],  additional  costs  will  relate  to  the
instrumentation  and  controls,  wiring  of  the  instrumentation  and  con-
trols,  blank  testing,  fluidization  blowers  and  exhaust  gas  filtration  at
respectively 15%, 5%, 5%, 12 and 10 % respectively (or 47% in total).
The total not-installed investment is hence estimated at about 1.3 M€ at
medium  scale,  7.0  M€  at  large  scale.  Considering  a  long-term  power
purchase parity €/US$ exchange rate of 1.30, the cost of the particle-air
heat  exchangers  (complete  with  its  air  fluidization  equipment)  costs
approx. US$ 1.7M for the medium-scale steam cycle, US$ 9.1M for the
large-scale, externally heated combined cycle.

In comparison, the steam generator of a molten salt tower of similar

power output is about US$ 7.0M.

10.3.5. EPC cost of the power cycle

The  cost  of  the  medium-scale  plant’s  steam  cycle  (excluding  the
steam generator estimated above) is estimated with the specialized en-
gineering software Steam PRO developed by Thermoflow Inc, based on a

Table 15
Cost breakdown of 2 GWhth molten salt (MS), 2 GWhth olivine particle and 400
MWhth olivine particle storages.

Storage
medium

18.8

2 GWhth MS storage
system (US$ M)

2 GWhth particle storage

3.6

system (US$ M)
400 MWhth particle

storage system (US$ M)

0.5

Tanks /
Hoppers

Balance of
plant

18.0

16.0

4.0

3.6

3.6

0.7

Total

40.4

23.2

5.2

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105642

G. Flamant et al.

◦

complete list of main and auxiliary equipment. It amounts to US$ 46M.
As for the large-scale plant’s combined cycle, such a cycle does not
exist to date; its estimation is therefore performed by comparing the gas
turbine with a conventional, internal combustion turbine rated at sea
level with an ambient temperature of 15
C (ISO conditions): 1/ com-
bustion – one of the most challenging issues on modern gas turbines –
disappears, hence a ~20% cost reduction; 2/ the double reheat (first-of-
a-kind, but single reheat Ansaldo GT24/26 gas turbines are well-proven)
should  increase  the  cost  by  ~10%;  3/  no  internal  cooling,  thermal
barrier  or  top-grade  superalloys  are  required,  hence  a  ~15%  cost
reduction;  4/  the  ISO  rating  of  the  gas  turbine  (but  not  that  of  the
generator)  must  be  increased  by  about  20%  to  deliver  the  required
power  output  in  Ouarzazate  (barometric  pressure  882  mbar,  average
◦
temperature during operation ~25
C), which increases its cost by about
10%.  Overall,  the  cost  of  the  gas  turbine  is  0.82  times  that  of  a  con-
ventional one with the same power output rated at ISO conditions.

The impact of the dry cooling on the steam cycle is ~5% less power
output and 7% more Capex; therefore, the 70 MWe  steam cycle corre-
sponds to an ISO-rated 73.7 MWe (70.0/0.95) steam cycle whose cost is
multiplied by 1.07. This steam cycle is an ISO-rated 221 MWe  regular
combined  cycle  (2/3 gas  turbine,  1/3  steam  cycle)  minus its  conven-
tional 147 MWe gas turbine.

The  cost  of  the  combined  cycle  can  therefore  be  determined  as

follows:

Cost PowerCycle = 1.07 (Cost 221MW CombCycle – Cost 147MW GasTurbine)+

0.82 Cost 80MW  GasTurbine

Using interpolation curves from [217] for ISO-rated combined cycles
and  simple  cycle  gas turbines  as  a function  of  the  power output,  one
determines  the  cost  of  the  power  cycle:  US$  171M.  This  cost  (US$
1140/kWe) is very similar to that of the steam Rankine cycle of a molten
salt tower with the same power output t [18,284]. The higher cost of the
medium-scale steam Rankine cycle (US$ 1820/kWe) is essentially due to
its smaller size (25 vs. 150 MWe) and lower efficiency .

10.3.6. Capex of the turnkey plant

All  the  costs  determined  above  as  well  as  the  corresponding

Table 16
Breakdown of the plants’ Capex into subsystems’ and other costs (in US$ M).

references (if applicable) are summarized in Table 16 below. The sum of
the  abovementioned  costs  respective  to  the  medium-scale  particle
plant’s subsystems is US$ 72.1M. For the large-scale particle plant it is
US$ 330.2M. Adding 2% for balance of plant and interconnection as well
as instrumentation and control, then 2% again for site preparation, one
obtains  the  direct  Engineering,  Procurement  and  Construction  (EPC)
cost of each plant: US$ 75.0M (medium-scale) US$ 343.4M (large-scale).
In a manner consistent with various sources such as [x], the following
must be added to the EPC cost of the plant: 10% for indirect EPC costs
(Engineering,  management,  contingencies,  etc.)  and  10%  for  owner’s
costs (land, infrastructure, etc.). The Capex of each turnkey plant are
therefore US$ 90M (medium scale) and US$ 412.1M (large scale). That
corresponds to US$ 3560/kWe and US$ 2750/kWe respectively.

Table 16 also summarizes the cost deviations between the large-scale
plant studied and a similar molten salt tower, both being built in 2030
with  the  same  dispatch  strategy  under  similar  site  conditions.  The
turnkey Capex of the plant is US$ 9.3M or 2.2% lower than that of the
molten salt tower (US$ 421.4M).

10.3.7. Levelized cost of energy (LCOE)

A 5% real (i.e., nominal minus inflation) discount rate and a 25-year
lifetime are considered, which corresponds to a discounted lifetime of
14.5 years. Assuming that 1500 full load hours of power generation are
performed per year, the discounted generation during the plant’s dis-
counted lifetime is therefore 550 GWh (medium scale) / 3.26 TWh (large
scale).  The  LCOEs  corresponding  to  the  amortization  of  the  turnkey
Capex of each plant are therefore US$ 90.0×106/0.55×106 MWh = US$
163.6/MWh  (medium  scale)  US$  412.1×106/3.26×106  MWh  = US$
126.4/MWh. It is US$ 129.3/MWh for the comparable molten salt tower
if one considers that the discount rate is the same for both plants. This is
a rather strong assumption: in practice, investors ask for higher interest
rates (on both equity and debt) for less mature technologies, which has a
major impact on the LCOE. However, this assumption was retained in
order to compare the two technologies based on their respective techno-
economic merits, independently of any financial considerations.

According to [301], the O&M costs for molten salt towers range from

Subsystem

Medium-scale particle
plant

Large-scale particle
plant

Benchmark

Difference between large-scale particle and
molten salt plants

References

Solar Island
Heliostat field
Towers
Solar receivers
Particle handling
Vertical hoppers-

towers

Horiz. hoppers-

towers

18.6
8.0
3.9
6.7
2.3
1.8

–

Hoppers-Power

0.2

house

PV farm + battery
Storage system
Particles
Hoppers
Balance of plant
Cycle hot source
Power cycle

0.3
5.2
0.5
4.0
0.7
1.7
46.0

102.5
47.8
21.0
33.7
24.4
10.6

9.8

1.0

3.0
23.2
3.6
16.0
3.6
9.1
171.0

113.1
54.0
21.0
38.1
6.2
Molten salt pumps
4.0

- US$ 10.6M

+ US$ 18.2M

2.4
40.4
MS 18.8
Tanks 18.0
3.6
7.0
171.0

- US$ 17.2M

+ US$ 2.1M
~ 0

Sum of the above

72.1

330.2

337.7

[284]
Engineering company
[284]

Various manufacturers

Various manufacturers

Supplier
Construction company
[284]
[299]
Large scale : [217]
Medium scale : Steam PRO
(Thermoflow)

(1)

BOP/I&C/Site
preparat.

EPC cost
Indirect EPC costs
Owner’s costs
Capex of turnkey

plant

+4%

75.0
+10%
+10%
90.0

343.4

351.2

-2.2%

412.1

421.4

-2.2%

[217,275,300]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105643

G. Flamant et al.

US$ 11/MWh to US$ 27/MWh, with US$ 21/MWh for the US and US$
12/MWh for Morocco. The O&M costs given by various other sources
such as [275,284,300] for a molten salt tower built in the US need some
treatment to be reconciled, but US$ 19–21/MWh and US$ 12/MWh are
good estimates of the O&M costs of a typical molten salt tower built in
2020, respectively in the US and in Morocco. This US$ 12/MWh figure is
adjusted to US$ 12.5/MWh as follows:

• It corresponds to a mid-peaker with a capacity factor of 50–55% vs.
17.1% for the plant studied that is a peaker: its power cycle is about
three times bigger for the same yearly power generation. It adds ~US
$ 4/MWh to the O&M cost. This cost adjustment is about the plant
being a peaker, not about particles vs. molten salt technologies. It
does not affect the comparison between the particle tower and the
molten salt tower.

• It is assumed that future improvements of O&M practices will lower

this figure by 22% between 2020 and 2030 [272].

• The O&M costs of the particle handling system would be about 8% of
its Capex per year if it were operating round the clock throughout the
year:  Systems  dealing  with  particles  are  costlier  to  operate  and
maintain  than  systems  circulating  fluids.  However,  the  particle
handling works when the solar island is in operation, that is, no more
than  12  h  per  day.  The  handling  devices  connected  to  the  power
cycle  works  ~6  h/day,  but  is  a  minor  part  of  the  whole  system.
Therefore, the 8% mentioned above can be reduced to 4%. This is US
$ 92k per year (US$ 2.42/MWh) at medium scale, US$ 0.976M per
year (US$ 4.34/MWh) at large scale. The O&M costs of the molten
salt pumping system that is replaced by the particle handling system
is about 1% of the Capex, which results in an avoided O&M cost of US
$  0.28/MWh.  Eventually,  the  extra  O&M  costs  corresponding  to
replacing the molten salt pumps with the particle handling system is
US$  2.14/MWh  (medium  scale)  to  US$  4.06/MWh  (large  scale).
Once again, the difference between medium and large scale plants
arises from the multi-tower architecture of the large-scale plant, that
makes long-distance horizontal conveying necessary.

The  resulting  O&M  costs  of  the  particle  plants  studied  are  US$
14.64/MWh (medium-scale) and US$ 16.56/MWh (large-scale), vs. US$
12.5/MWh for the benchmark molten salt tower.

By  adding  the  Capex  amortization  and  the  O&M  costs  above,  one
eventually obtains the estimated LCOE of each plant: US$ 178.24/MWh
(medium  scale)  /  US$  143.0/MWh  (large  scale).  In  comparison,  the
LCOE  of  the  benchmark  large-scale  molten  salt  tower  is  US$  141.8/
MWh.

10.4. Final considerations

In the previous estimates, the plants using fluidized particles and the
benchmark  molten  salt  tower  are  peakers  whilst  the  LCOE  of  CSP  is
typically  given  in the  literature  for plants  with much  higher  capacity
factors: generally above 50%, in [272] for example. Since peaker CSP
plants have bigger power cycles for the same yearly power generation,
the fact that the LCOEs assessed in this study are higher should come as
no surprise. Regarding LCOE comparisons, what really matters is:

• Peaker CSP plants vs. non-CSP alternatives fulfilling the same service

to the electrical networks. This is dealt with in Section 8.

• The  CSP  plants  studied  here,  using  fluidized  particles,  vs.  the
benchmark  that  is  a  molten  salt  tower  with  a  subcritical  Rankine
steam power cycle.

The main takeaways are as follows:

• The Capex of the large-scale plant studied is only 2.2% lower than
that  of  the  benchmark:  the  solar  island  is  cheaper  thanks  to  the
improved  conversion  efficiency  of  the  power  cycle,  the  storage  is
much cheaper, but all this is significantly offset by the cost of the
particle handling system. The multi-tower architecture is necessary
with this receiver technology, hence the multi-kilometer horizontal
conveying system. Lifting the particle at receiver level is no easy task
either. The thermal losses are another penalty.

• Despite the considerable limitation of the particle handling issue at
medium  scale,  thanks  to  a  single  tower  architecture,  the  25  MWe
version  of  the  particle  plant  has  both  higher  Capex  and  LCOE,
essentially due to the modest performance and high specific cost of
its small power block.

• The O&M costs of the particle handling system are high, which off-
sets  the  limited  gain  in  Capex  at  utility  scale,  compared  to  the
benchmark.

To summarize, the  individual receiver size limitation prevents the
concept  studied  to  allow  for  a  lower  LCOE  than  the  benchmark:  in  a
medium-scale, single tower architecture, the power block is typically too
small  to  reach  acceptable  technical  and  economic  performances.  At
utility  scale,  the  particle  handling  system  has  to  be  considerably
expanded and becomes penalizing. The latter issue can be mitigated by
replacing  the  externally  heated  combined  cycle  envisioned  here  by  a
high-performance supercritical steam cycle (see Section 4), that would
allow for approx. doubling the temperature range of the particles and
lowering their temperature by about 100–150 K. The mass flow rate and
the  relative  thermal  losses  of  the  particle  handling  system  would  be
divided  by  two  and  its  cost  approx.  by  four.  The  cost  of  the  storage
system would be further reduced. The efficiency of the receiver would be
higher, thereby compensating (and possibly beyond) for the somewhat
lower efficiency of the power cycle. The extra cost of the power cycle
should  be  limited  to  5–7%  maximum  (~US$  10M).  Overall,  such  a
change  is  expected  to  lower  significantly  the  plant’s  LCOE.  Any
improvement aiming at downsizing or removing some particle handling
subsystems should be considered a way to decrease both thermal losses
and investment costs.

11. Conclusions

Section 1 introduced the reader into the field of Concentrated Solar
Power (CSP). In favourable regions with direct normal irradiation (DNI)
equal to or exceeding about 2000 kWh/m2  year. The built-in thermal
storage capabilities of CSP plants are a decisive asset that distinguishes
these  plants  from  highly  variable  renewable  electricity  production
technologies like PV or wind power. In this context, concentrated solar
power  plants  with  7–14  h  storage  capacity  offer  the  opportunity  to
install a base-load power generation facility with a capacity factor of
approximately 70 % and a cost of heat storage in the range of 40–50
€/kWhe (for solar towers), i.e., much cheaper than battery storage. CSP
can also be envisioned as a peaker power facility operating only with
thermal storage as a complement to PV plants. Such CSP facilities deliver
electricity during 5 to 6 h at the end of the afternoon and after sunset
when PV production without storage declines to zero. The two strategies
are discusses in Section 7 of this paper.

Currently, molten salts are widely used as HTF in CSP applications.
The main reasons for the enhanced development of novel heat transfer
media are related to overcoming the specific and overall drawbacks of
molten salts, relating to their solidification temperature (~220
C) and
temperature of decomposition (>600
C). The use of gas/solid suspen-
sions,  i.e.,  powders,  as  heat  transfer  media  has  hence  attracted  an
increasing interest for CSP applications, since moving into higher tem-
peratures has significant effects on the applicable thermal storage and
on the used thermodynamic cycles in the power block.

◦

◦

• The LCOEs of both large-scale power plants can be considered equal:
the difference, less than 1%, is well below the uncertainty margin.

Section  2  provided  a  review  of  the  fundamentals  of  particle  tech-
nology  in view of  its CSP application. Essential gas/solid  parameters,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105644

G. Flamant et al.

including the Geldart powder classification, were summarized and the
gross behavior of particle/gas systems was reviewed. Available litera-
ture on heat transfer was summarized through empirical correlations.
Vertical  upflow  systems  were  evaluated,  with  a  special  attention  to
previous experiments of such upflow system toward solar tower appli-
cations. The survey of the current particle-driven solar receivers classi-
fied them according to the characteristics of direct or indirect heating of
particles; continuous particle flow or batch processes; and types of solid-
gas contacting and mixing modes. In addition, inert or reactive particles
may be added to the previous list since many developments have been
achieved  in  the  field  of  solar  thermo-chemistry  for  solid-gas  reaction
processing. The various developments were illustrated and discussed.

Direct  absorption  solar  receivers  can  accept  a  higher  flux  density
than indirect absorption concept due to the limited value of the wall-to-
particle heat transfer coefficient and of the operating temperature of the
absorber tube walls. Typical values are 1 MW/m2 for the former and 0.5
MW/m2 for the latter. Construction material issues are identified for the
three most-developed solar receivers: back wall for the falling particles,
kiln wall for the CentRec and tube wall for the UBFB concept. The falling
particle receiver is the most sensitive to particle attrition due to the high
impact velocity of the particles at the end of their fall. CentRec and UBFB
are sensitive because of the low particle velocity involved. Particle loss is
a  critical  issue  for  open  direct  absorption  particle  receivers  due  to
temperature  and  wind  effects  on  particle  flow  stability.  Scaling  up
ability to large scale, typically some 100 MWth, is examined in Sections 7
and 10.

Section 3 selected the most appropriate conveying and storage sys-
tems.  The  solids  heated  in  the  solar  receiver  are  transferred  to  the
thermal  power  block  and  stored  before  their  use.  In  turn,  the  cooled
solids leaving the power block are stored before being transferred back
to the solar receiver to be reheated. The typical solar tower will be be-
tween  100  and  200  m  high,  and  the  power  block  is  at  ground  level.
Consequently, in addition to moving the solids horizontally, they also
have  to be moved  vertically. As  a result of the assessment apron and
side-pulled  mass conveyors were proposed  for the  long-distance hori-
zontal  conveying,  whereas  apron  conveyors,  bucket  elevators,  and
dense-phase  pneumatic  conveying  seem  the  most  appropriate  candi-
dates for vertical conveying. Screw conveyers are applicable for short-
length transfer of the powders.

For the storage of the hot and cooled powders the construction re-
quirements were discussed, together with its auxiliaries (valving, and
dust  control).  The  conveying  and  storage  part  of  the  CSP  plant  are
crucial items and the operation at high temperatures and transferring
large quantities of powders around the loop certainly need further me-
chanical, thermal, and particle flow research, that is a recommended as a
priority development topic.

Section 4 examined the particle-to-working fluid heat exchanger as a
key component of the particle CSP concept. Being the equipment that
usually  withstands  the  highest  pressure  and  temperature  in  the  ther-
modynamic  cycle,  the  primary  heat  exchanger  (or  set  of  heat  ex-
changers, depending on the cycle) is of almost importance to the plant’s
performance  and  economics.  Due  to  the  difficulty  to  pressurize  high
quantities of particulate solids and to efficiently separate the particles
from a fluid, the heat transfer from particles to the working fluid is not
considered  feasible  via  direct  contact,  despite  the  typically  high  effi-
ciency of such a solution. Particle-to-working fluid heat exchangers are
therefore  selected  to  be  of  an  indirect  mode  and  can  be  divided  into
fluidized-bed heat exchangers and moving bed heat exchangers. While
fluidized-bed exchangers are generally the preferred solution thanks to
their higher heat transfer coefficient, moving packed beds can be used
for  bigger  or  denser  particles  whose  fluidization  would  be  heavily
penalized in terms of thermal losses and auxiliary consumptions.

Considering the high complexity of the phenomena involved, their
importance in the overall plant’s reliability and economics, and the lack
of  predictive  models  consolidated  with  experiments  and  industrial
experience, particle heat exchangers should remain a key R&D subject in

the years to come.

Section 5 presents a detailed review of the advanced cycle technol-
ogies candidates for integration with particle-CSP, including supercrit-
ical  steam  cycles,  combined  cycles  and  sCO2  cycles.  Thermodynamic
cycle characteristics, efficiency, operational flexibility, material issues
and technology readiness level are discussed. The efficiency of the three
technologies  is  similar,  ~48%.  On  the  one  hand,  the  combined  cycle
needs a higher TIT than the steam and CO2 cycles to achieve interesting
efficiencies and, on the other hand supercritical cycles need very high
pressures.  Ultra-supercritical  steam  cycles  offer  the  opportunity  to  a
better use of the thermal storage by an increase of approximately two-
fold the temperature difference between the hot and the cold storage
with respect to combined and sCO2 cycles.

The steam generator of the benchmark/subcritical steam cycle and
the high-pressure stage of the bottoming cycle of the  combined cycle
should be once-through for higher flexibility. The steam generators of
the supercritical steam cycles are ipso facto once-through. Therefore, the
operational flexibilities should not be very different; probably slightly
higher for the combined cycle and slightly lower for the supercritical
steam cycles. The supercritical CO2 cycle should be the most flexible of
all, although this remains to be proven. In the tentative techno-economic
assessment presented in Section 10, specific cycles were selected for a
detailed example. Other options (e.g., supercritical steam or CO2) could
however be assessed similarly.

Section 6 deals with the scale-up procedures in the particle-driven
CSP  systems,  upscaling  the  three  most  mature  technologies  of  falling
film, centrifugal and UBFB receivers. For particle-driven CSP systems,
the three most developed technologies (falling film, centrifugal particle
receiver and fluidized particle-in-tube) have reached TRL5, in particular
concerning  the  solar  receiver  that  is  the  most  critical  component.  In
addition to the particle solar receiver, the particle handling system and
the  particle  heat  exchanger  are  the  two  other  sub-systems  for  which
scaling  up  issues  must  be  examined  carefully.  They  are  discussed  in
Section 4 and 5. Consequently, this section addresses mainly the scaling-
up of the solar receiver and the integration issues. Concerning the solar
receiver,  typical  thermal  powers  are  10–100  kW  for  step  1  (TRL4),
100–1000  kW  for  step  2  (TRL5&6),  5–10  MW  for  the  demo-unit  and
approximately 50 MW for a FOK unit.

Among the thermodynamic cycles discussed in Section 5, only steam
Rankine  cycles  and  supercritical  CO2  Brayton  cycles  are  realistically
applicable at a scale relevant for a ~50 MWth receiver as the technical
and economic performance of combined cycles is too degraded at that
scale. CO2 cycles show very promising performance at small scale (<30
MWe)  but  their  techno-economic  performance  is  to  date  much  more
uncertain than that of steam cycles. At utility scale (100 MWe and more)
the multi-tower concept with N solar tower modules (or solar islands)
sharing the same particle storage and power block was examined by the
authors.

As  thermodynamic  cycles  typically  draw  significant  benefits  from
scale efforts (both in terms of efficiency and specific Capex), the thermal
energy  storage  and  the  power  block  are  centralized.  Considering  the
high  Capex  and  thermal  losses  expected  from  long  distance  high-
temperature  conveying  (discussed  in  Section  3),  the  positioning  of
each individual field and of the power block + thermal energy storage
island  has  to  be  optimized  in  order  to  minimize  the  total  length  of
conveyors. All the auxiliary power of the solar loop is considered to be
provided by a small PV farm with a buffer battery, whose production is
typically synchronized with the working time of the solar loop.

Section  7  looks  at  the  enhanced  potential  of  CSP  plants  used  as
peaker, rather than as baseload plants. Even though base-load CSP plant
are regularly mentioned as viable options, it will usually be optimal for
the  electrical  systems  to  use  CSP  plants  as  peakers  (or  perhaps  mid-
peakers in some contexts) that typically generate power during four to
six nighttime hours per day. It was shown that, (1) utility-scale batteries
charged mainly by photovoltaic power is the only alternative to CSP; (2)
today, its LCOE is similar to that of CSP for four hour per day of peak

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105645

G. Flamant et al.

shifted generation, but is higher for mid-merit (i.e., more hours per day)
generation; (3) CSP will remain competitive in 2040 provided it benefits
from substantial improvements; (4) It is more expensive today and will
still probably remain so in 2040.

A  cost  analysis  of  renewable  power  shifted  with  batteries  and  the
economic  comparison  of  electrochemical  storage  and  CSP  thermal
storage demonstrate that the future will be challenging for CSP.

The LCOE of a PV + batteries plant that shift all its generation during
four nighttime hours is US$ 208/MWh, vs. US$ 201/MWh for a molten
salt  tower  –  the  current  benchmark  of  CSP  plants  –  with  the  same
dispatch  strategy.  However,  CSP  has  probably  a  more  significant
advantage in developing countries. This comparison indeed applies to
the US whose local costs (labor, regulations) are among the highest in a
developing country. The CSP solution would benefit significantly more
from cheaper local labor costs: local construction and O&M costs of a
CSP plant proportionally are much higher than those of a PV + battery
power plant.

The future will be challenging for CSP: its LCOE must decrease to

remain competitive with that of PV farms equipped with batteries:

• CSP will most certainly remain competitive if the “high” battery cost

scenario prevails,

• With  the  “medium”  battery  cost  scenario,  which  is  also  the  most
likely,  CSP  will  remain  competitive  provided  significant  improve-
ments are performed: incremental ones and, if possible, technolog-
ical breakthroughs. In the light of the recent past, it seems perfectly
feasible.

• If the “low” battery cost scenario prevails, the competitiveness of CSP
will  be  an  uphill  battle:  significant  technological  breakthroughs
(such as using particle circulation loops for CSP) are the only option.

It is however important to stress that the techno-economic compar-
ison of the CSP versus PV with batteries concepts, with the same power
supply capacity and the same environmental footprint, is tentative and
open for further consideration. From an environmental point of view,
these  two  technologies  are  far  from  being  equivalent,  especially
regarding the impacts of their manufacturing processes.

Section 8 develops the use of alternative fuel-based resources as back
up fuel in the CSP plants for non-sun periods. Biomass and other alter-
native fuels are widely available in some countries. Biomass, its pyrol-
ysis/gasification or its bio-methanation derivates can be readily applied
in a hybrid CSP. Literature data are complemented by current operation
data of a 22.5 MWe hybrid CSP plant, called Thermo Borges (Spain).

Although the described examples illustrate the potential of hybrid-
izing CSP and alternative fuels, it is obvious that the solution is viable
only in geographic regions with high solar irradiance when the CSP can
provide a considerable share of the total power, and provided alterna-
tive fuels are available. If these conditions are not met, a hybrid concept
should not be envisaged.

Section 9 discussed the authors’  views concerning some important
and  required  future  research  and  development  topics.  Enhancing  the
particle-to-tube heat transfer coefficient in the particle-to working fluid
heat exchanger, so as to reduce the particle-related heat transfer resis-
tance is of primary importance. Finned tubes considerably increase the
heat transfer coefficient (>> 2 kW/m2K). The overall heat transfer is
determined by the wall-to-in-tube working fluid flow.

Considering  the  maximum  achievable  solids  flux  in  the  vertical
upflow  systems, operation of the upflow bubbling fluidized bed at G-
values  in  excess  of  150  kg/m2s,  requires  superficial  air  velocities  to
exceed 0.17 m/s. Particle attrition and equipment erosion by moving
particles must be avoided or limited.

Extended  surface  finned  receiver  tubes  should  be  investigated.
Although experimental evidence in short tubes provides a possible gain
of heat transfer coefficient, this needs to be confirmed in long tubes in
view of different gas/solid conveying modes.

In  general,  the  particle  conveying  within  the  CSP  loop  needs

additional R&D. Conveying particles at very high temperature and flow
rates in the hot part of the loop needs to be fully investigated, although
the  preliminary  selection  of  mechanical  conveying  systems  offers  po-
tential solutions. The application of dense-phase pneumatic conveying
of  the  hot particles  merits  an  in-depth  assessment in  view of  its  non-
mechanical and scalable nature, and of its expected operational flexi-
bility and investment economics.

Section 10 concluded the review with providing scale-up data, with a
preliminary  view  into  the  prospects  and  the  overall  economy  of  the
system and with recommendations for additional research. In particular,
a LCOE analysis is presented for a peaker CSP plant that identifies the
critical  elements  governing  the  cost  of  a  commercial  scale  fluidized
particle solar power plant by comparison with molten salt technology.
For the fluidized-particle CSP a multi-tower concept sharing the same
power block (with an innovative combined cycle) is selected. The par-
ticle  technology  has  a  much  cheaper  storage  cost  than  molten  salt
technology but is handicapped by the cost of particle handling (CAPEX
and OPEX). This drawback is reduced by a sH2O cycle that twice reduces
the particle mass flow rate and consequently, the conveying cost. All the
cost were estimated. The sum of the above-mentioned costs respective to
the medium-scale particle plant’s subsystems is US$ 75M. For the large-
scale  particle  plant  it  is  US$  343.4M.  Adding  the  indirect  EPC  costs
(engineering, management, contingencies, etc.) and the owner’s costs
(land, infrastructure, etc.), the Capex of each turnkey plant is US$ 90M
(medium scale) and US$ 412.1M (large scale). That corresponds to US$
3560/kWe and US$ 2750/kWe, respectively.

The O&M costs of the particle plants studied are US$ 14.64/MWh
(medium  scale)  and  US$  16.56/MWh  (large  scale).  For  a  benchmark
molten salt tower, they would be reduced to. US$ 12.5/MWh. Through
adding O&M costs and CAPEX amortization, the estimated LCOE of the
peaker  plant  concepts  is  calculated  at  US$  178.24/MWh  (medium
scale),  or  US$  143/MWh  (large  scale).  In  comparison,  it  will  be
approximately US$ 141.8/MWh for the benchmark large-scale molten
salt tower.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Gilles Flamant: Investigation, Data curation, Visualization, Writing
–  original  draft,  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Validation,  Supervision,
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Funding  acquisition.  Benjamin
Grange: Methodology, Data curation, Writing –  original draft, Project
administration. John Wheeldon: Methodology, Data curation, Writing
–  original draft, Project administration. Fr ́ed ́eric Siros: Methodology,
Data curation, Writing –  original draft, Project administration. Benoît
Valentin: Data curation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing
–  review  &  editing.  Françoise  Bataille:  Data  curation,  Visualization,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Huili Zhang: Data
curation,  Visualization,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Writing  –  review  &
editing.  Yimin  Deng:  Investigation,  Data  curation,  Visualization,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Validation, Super-
vision, Project administration. Jan Baeyens: Investigation, Data cura-
tion, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing,
Validation, Supervision, Project administration.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105646

G. Flamant et al.

Acknowledgements

This work has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon
2020  research  and  innovation  program  under  grant  agreement  No
727762,  Next-CSP  project.  It  was  moreover  supported  by  the  French
“Investments  for  the  future”  ("Investissements  d’Avenir")  program
managed  by  the  National  Agency  for  Research  (ANR)  under  contract
(labex  SOLSTICE)  and  ANR-10-EQPX-49-
ANR-10-LABX-22-01
SOCRATE.

Supplementary materials

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101056.

References

[1] IEA. Renewables 2021. Analysis and forecast to 2026. 2021.
[2] IRENA. Renewable capacity statistics 2020. 2021.
[3] SolarPACES. Potential for Solar Thermal Energy By Country 2008. https://www.

solarpaces.org/csp-technologies/csp-potential-solar-thermal-energy-by-member
-nation/.

[4] ESTELA. The value of thermal storage 2016. https://www.estelasolar.org/.
[5] Jorgenson J, Denholm P, Mehos M. Estimating the Value of utility-scale solar

technologies in California under a 40% renewable portfolio standard. 2014.
[6] Price H, Kearney D, Redell F, Charles R, Morse F. Dispatchable solar power plant.

2018, 040032. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5067068.

[7] Lovegrove K, James G, Leitch D, Ngo A, Milczarek A, Rutovitz J, et al.
Comparison of dispatchable renewable electricity options. 2018.

[8] Feldman D, Margolis R, Denholm P. Exploring the potential competitiveness of
utility-scale photovoltaics plus batteries with concentrating solar power,
2015–2030. 2016.

[9] Pamponet MC, Maranduba HL, Almeida Neto JA, Rodrigues LB. Energy balance
and carbon footprint of very large-scale photovoltaic power plant. Int J Energy
Res 2022;46:6901–18. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.7529.

[10] Ahmad Ludin N, Ahmad Affandi NA, Purvis-Roberts K, Ahmad A, Ibrahim MA,
Sopian K, et al. Environmental impact and levelised cost of energy analysis of
solar photovoltaic systems in selected asia pacific region: a cradle-to-grave
approach. Sustainability 2021;13:396. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13010396.

[11] Carvalho ML, Temporelli A, Girardi P. Life cycle assessment of stationary storage
systems within the italian electric network. Energies 2021;14:2047. https://doi.
org/10.3390/en14082047.

[12] Porzio J, Scown CD. Life-cycle assessment considerations for batteries and battery
materials. Adv Energy Mater 2021;11:2100771. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aenm.202100771.

[13] IRENA. Renewable power generation costs in 2019. 2019.
[14] Lilliestam J, Pitz-Paal R. Concentrating solar power for less than USD 0.07 per

kWh: finally the breakthrough? Renew Energy Focus 2018;26:17–21. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ref.2018.06.002.

[15] Hack H. Small-scale flexible advanced ultra-supercritical coal-fired power plant

with integrated carbon capture. 2020.

[16] Iverson BD, Conboy TM, Pasch JJ, Kruizenga AM. Supercritical CO2 Brayton

cycles for solar-thermal energy. Appl Energy 2013;111:957–70. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.06.020.

[17] Valentin B, Siros F, Brau J-F. Optimization of a decoupled combined cycle gas

turbine integrated in a particle receiver solar power plant. 2019, 140007. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.5117655.

[18] Mehos M, Turchi C, Vidal J, Wagner M, Ma Z, Ho C, et al. Concentrating solar

power – Gen3 demonstration roadmap. 2017.

[19] Benoit H, Spreafico L, Gauthier D, Flamant G. Review of heat transfer fluids in
tube-receivers used in concentrating solar thermal systems: Properties and heat
transfer coefficients. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;55:298–315. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.10.059.

[20] Torresol Energy. Gemasolar 2015. http://www.torresolenergy.com/TORRESOL

/gemasolar-plant/en.

[21] Ivanpah Solar Electric Generating Station 2015.
[22] International Energy Agency. Renewables 2020. OECD. 2020. https://doi.org/

10.1787/c74616c1-en.

[23] Zhang HL, Baeyens J, Degr`eve J, Cac`eres G. Concentrated solar power plants:
Review and design methodology. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2013;22:466–81.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.01.032.

[24] solarpaces n.d. www.solarpaces.org.
[25] NREL. Dhursar CSP Project. Inst Adv Sustain Stud Others 2021. https://solarpac

es.nrel.gov/project/dhursar.

[26] Zhang HL, Baeyens J, Degreve J. The potential of a hybrid power plant for the

Dubrovnik - Neretva County (Southern Croatia). J Sustain Dev Energy Water
Environ Syst 2015;3:174–82. https://doi.org/10.13044/j.sdewes.2015.03.0014.
[27] Zhang HL, Degr`eve J, Baeyens J, Lv YQ. Biomass as back-up fuel in hybrid solar
power plants. In: 2nd Sino-German Symp Biobased Chem Biorefinery; 2015.

[28] Flamant G. Theoretical and experimental study of radiant heat transfer in a solar
fluidized-bed receiver. AIChE J 1982;28:529–35. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aic.690280402.

[29] Mahmoudi S, Chan CW, Brems A, Seville J, Baeyens J. Solids flow diagram of a
CFB riser using Geldart B-type powders. Particuology 2012;10:51–61. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.partic.2011.09.002.

[30] Van de Velden M, Baeyens J, Seville JPK, Fan X. The solids flow in the riser of a

Circulating Fluidised Bed (CFB) viewed by Positron Emission Particle Tracking
(PEPT). Powder Technol 2008;183:290–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
powtec.2007.07.027.

[31] Rafique MM, Nathan G, Saw W. A mathematical model to assess the influence of
transients on a refractory-lined solar receiver. Renew Energy 2021;167:217–35.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020.11.077.

[32] Rafique MM. Start-up time and thermal losses of a particle solar receiver under
transient operating conditions. 2022, 110009. https://doi.org/10.1063/
5.0086798.

[33] Dunham MT, Iverson BD. High-efficiency thermodynamic power cycles for

concentrated solar power systems. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;30:758–70.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.11.010.

[34] Cziesla F, Kremer H, Much U, Riemschneider J-E, Quinkertz R. Advanced 800+
MW steam power plants and future CCS options. Siemens Ind Turbomach 2009:
1–21.

[35] Siemens. Steam turbines for CSP plants. 2010. Erlangen, Germany.
[36] Romero M, Gonz ́alez-Aguilar J. Solar thermal CSP technology. Wiley Interdiscip

Rev Energy Environ 2014;3:42–59. https://doi.org/10.1002/wene.79.
[37] Spelling J, Gallo A, Romero M, Gonzalez-Aguilar J. A high efficiency solar

thermal power plant using a dense particle suspension as heat transfer fluid. In:
Int Conf Conc Sol Power Chem Energy Syst; 2014.

[38] Reyes-Belmonte MA, Sebasti ́an A, Gonz ́alez-Aguilar J, Romero M. Performance
comparison of different thermodynamic cycles for an innovative central receiver
solar power plant. 2017, 160024. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4984558.
[39] Singer C, Buck R, Pitz-Paal R, Müller-Steinhagen H. Assessment of solar power
tower driven ultrasupercritical steam cycles applying tubular central receivers
with varied heat transfer media. J Sol Energy Eng 2010;132:041010. https://doi.
org/10.1115/1.4002137.

[40] Capossio JP, Fabani MP, Reyes-Urrutia A, Torres-Sciancalepore R, Deng Y,

Baeyens J, et al. Sustainable solar drying of Brewer’s spent grains: a comparison
with conventional electric convective drying. Processes 2022;10:339. https://doi.
org/10.3390/pr10020339.

[41] Deng Y, Webin K, Zhang H, Dewil R, Baeyens J. Solar tower continuous saturated
steam generation. 2022. p. 3–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-4360-7_1.
[42] Zhang H, Baeyens J, Dewil R, Li S, Deng Y, Reyes-Urrutia A, et al. Solar biomass
pyrolysis with latent heat ballast. In: 2021 5th Int Conf Power Energy Eng. IEEE;
2021. p. 85–90. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPEE54380.2021.9662469.

[43] Baeyens J, Zhang H, Kong W, Dumont P, Flamant G. Solar thermal treatment of
non-metallic minerals: the potential application of the SOLPART technology. AIP
Conf Proc 2019:180002. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117682.

[44] Deng Y, Liu J, Li S, Dewil R, Zhang H, Baeyens J, et al. The steam-assisted
calcination of limestone and dolomite for energy savings and to foster solar
calcination processes. J Clean Prod 2022:132640. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2022.132640.

[45] Volume WH. Shape, and roundness of quartz particles. J Geol 1935;43:250–80.

https://doi.org/10.1086/624298.

[46] Geldart D. Single particles, fixed and quiescent beds. Gas Fluid Technol 1986:

11–32.

[47] Kong W, Tan T, Baeyens J, Flamant G, Zhang H. Bubbling and slugging of Geldart
Group A powders in small diameter columns. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:
4136–44. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.6b04798.

[48] Ergun S. Fluid flow through packed columns. Chem Eng Prog 1952. citeulike-

article-id:7797897.
 ̈
O, Saatçı AM. A new look at filter backwash hydraulics. Water Sci

[49] Akgiray

Technol Water Supply 2001;1:65–72.

[50] Geldart D. Types of gas fluidization. Powder Technol 1973;7:285–92. https://doi.

org/10.1016/0032-5910(73)80037-3.

[51] Baeyens J, Geldart D. Predictive calculations of flow parameters in gas fluidized
beds and fluidization behaviour of various powders. In: Cepadues, editor.
Proceeding Int. Symp. Fluid. its Appl., Toulous, France; 1974. p. 263–73.

[52] Wu SY, Baeyens J. Effect of operating temperature on minimum fluidization

velocity. Powder Technol 1991;67:217–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-5910
(91)80158-F.

[53] Rabinovich E, Kalman H. Flow regime diagram for vertical pneumatic conveying

and fluidized bed systems. Powder Technol 2011;207:119–33. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.powtec.2010.10.017.

[54] Avidan AA, Yerushalmi J. Bed expansion in high velocity fluidization. Powder

Technol 1982;32:223–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-5910(82)85024-9.
[55] Yerushalmi J, Cankurt NT. Further studies of the regimes of fluidization. Powder
Technol 1979;24:187–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-5910(79)87036-9.
[56] Baeyens J, Geldart D. An investigation into slugging fluidized beds. Chem Eng Sci

1974;29:255–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2509(74)85051-7.

[57] Abrahamsen AR, Geldart D. Behaviour of gas-fluidized beds of fine powders Part

I. Homogeneous expansion. Powder Technol 1980;26:35–46. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0032-5910(80)85005-4.

[58] Deng Y, Sabatier F, Dewil R, Flamant G, Le Gal A, Gueguen R, et al. Dense upflow

fluidized bed (DUFB) solar receivers of high aspect ratio: different fluidization
modes through inserting bubble rupture promoters. Chem Eng J 2021;418:
129376. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.129376.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105647

G. Flamant et al.

[59] Zhang H, Degr`eve J, Baeyens J, Dewil R. The voidage in a CFB riser as function of

solids flux and gas velocity. Procedia Eng 2015;102:1112–22. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proeng.2015.01.234.

[60] Yagi S, Muchi I, Aochi T. On the conditions of fluidization of bed. Chem Mach

[90] Tomita Y, Yutani S, Jotaki T. Pressure drop in vertical pneumatic transport lines
of powdery material at high solids loading. Powder Technol 1980;25:101–7.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-5910(80)87015-X.

[91] Flamant G, Hemati M. Dispositif collecteur d’ ́energie solaire. 2010. French Patent

1952;16:307–12.

[61] Gutfinger C, Abuaf N. Advances in heat transfer Volume 10. Elsevier; 1974.

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2717(08)70111-4.

[62] Botterill JSM. Fluid bed heat transfer. New York: Academic Press; 1975.
[63] Saxena SC, Grewal NS, Gabor JD, Zabrodsky SS, Galershtein DM. Heat transfer

between a gas fluidized bed and immersed tubes. Adv Heat Transf 1978;14:
149–247.

[64] Grace JR. Fluidization. In: Hetsroni G, editor. Handb Multiph Syst. New York:

Hemisphere Pub. Corp.; 1982.

[65] Baeyens J, Geldart D. Modelling approach to the effect of equipment scale on
fluidised bed heat transfer data. J Powder Bulk Solids Technol 1980;4:1.
[66] Xavier AM, Davidson JF. Heat transfer in fluidized beds: Convective heat transfer
in fluidized beds. In: Davidson JF, Clift R, Harrison D, editors. Fluidization. 2nd
ed. Academic Press; 1984. p. 437.

[67] Mazza GD, Bressa SP, Barreto GF. On the validity of the addition of independent

contributions for evaluating heat transfer rates in gas fluidized beds. Powder
Technol 1997;90:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-5910(96)03189-0.
[68] Denloye AOO, Botterill JSM. Bed to surface heat transfer in a fluidized bed of

large particles. Powder Technol 1978;19:197–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0032-5910(78)80028-X.

[69] Xavier AM, Davidson JF. Heat transfer to surfaces immersed in fluidised beds,
particularly tube arrays. In: Davidson JF, Keairns DL, editors. Fluid Proceeding
Second Eng Found Conf. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press; 1978.
p. 333–8.

[70] Baskakov AP, Vitt OK, Kirakosyan VA, Maskayev VK, Filippovsky NF.

Investigation of heat transfer coefficient pulsations and of the mechanism of heat
transfer from a surface immersed into a fluidized bed. 1974. p. 293–302.
[71] Flamant G, Lu JD, Variot B. Towards a generalized model for vertical walls to
gas—solid fluidized beds heat transfer—II. Radiative transfer and temperature
effects. Chem Eng Sci 1993;48:2493–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2509
(93)81070-C.

[72] Zabrodsky SS, Antonishin NV, Parnas AL. On fluidized bed-to-surface heat
transfer. Can J Chem Eng 1976;54:52–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cjce.5450540107.

[73] H WR, T WJ. Bubble behavior around immersed tubes in a fluidized bed. AIChE

Symp Ser 1973;69:68–77.

No.1058565.

[92] Piti ́e F, Zhao CY, Baeyens J, Degr`eve J, Zhang HL. Circulating fluidized bed heat

recovery/storage and its potential to use coated phase-change-material (PCM)
particles. Appl Energy 2013;109:505–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2012.12.048.

[93] Zhang HL, Baeyens J, Degr`eve J, Brems A, Dewil R. The convection heat transfer
coefficient in a Circulating Fluidized Bed (CFB). Adv Powder Technol 2014;25:
710–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apt.2013.10.018.

[94] Kodama T, Bellan S, Gokon N, Cho HS. Particle reactors for solar thermochemical

processes. Sol Energy 2017;156:113–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2017.05.084.

[95] Liu J, Baeyens J, Deng Y, Wang X, Zhang H. High temperature Mn2O3/Mn3O4
and Co3O4/CoO systems for thermo-chemical energy storage. J Environ Manage
2020;267:110582. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110582.

[96] Deng Y, Dewil R, Appels L, Li S, Baeyens J, Degr`eve J, et al. Thermo-chemical

water splitting: selection of priority reversible redox reactions by multi-attribute
decision making. Renew Energy 2021;170:800–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2021.02.009.

[97] Alonso E, Romero M. Review of experimental investigation on directly irradiated
particles solar reactors. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2015;41:53–67. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.08.027.

[98] Flamant G, Hernandez D, Bonet C, Traverse J-P. Experimental aspects of the

thermochemical conversion of solar energy; Decarbonation of CaCO3. Sol Energy
1980;24:385–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(80)90301-1.

[99] Tregambi C, Chirone R, Montagnaro F, Salatino P, Solimene R. Heat transfer in
directly irradiated fluidized beds. Sol Energy 2016;129:85–100. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.solener.2016.01.057.

[100] Migliozzi S, Paulillo A, Chirone R, Salatino P, Solimene R. Hydrodynamics of
compartmented fluidized beds under uneven fluidization conditions. Powder
Technol 2017;316:476–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2016.12.052.
[101] Solimene R, Chirone R, Chirone R, Salatino P. Dynamic modeling of a solar

receiver/thermal energy storage system based on a compartmented dense gas
fluidized bed. 2017, 080026. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4984447.

[102] Tregambi C, Salatino P, Solimene R, Montagnaro F. An experimental

characterization of Calcium Looping integrated with concentrated solar power.
Chem Eng J 2018;331:794–802. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.08.068.

[74] Genetti WE, Schmall RA, Grimmett ES. The effect of tube orientation on heat

[103] Tregambi C, Bevilacqua C, Troiano M, Solimene R, Salatino P. A novel

transfer with bare and finned tubes in a fluidized bed. Chem Eng Progr Symp Ser
1971;67:90.

[75] Bartel WJ, Genetti WE. Heat transfer from a horizontal bundle of bare and finned

tubes in an air fluidized bed. AIChE Symp Ser 1973;69:85–93.

autothermal fluidized bed reactor for concentrated solar thermal applications.
Chem Eng J 2020;398:125702. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.125702.

[104] STEM®. Thermal energy storage. Magaldi. 2020. https://www.magaldi.

com/en/expertise/solar-energy.

[76] Priebe SJ, Genetti WE. Heat transfer from a horizontal bundle of extended surface

[105] Kodama T, Enomoto S, Hatamachi T, Gokon N. Application of an internally

tubes to an air fluidized bed. AIChE Symp Ser 1977;161:38.

[77] Staub PW, Canada GS. Effect of tube bank and gas density on flow behavior and
heat transfer in fluidized beds. In: Davidson JF, Keairns DL, editors. Fluid
Proceeding Second Eng Found Conf; 1978. p. 339–43.

[78] Zabrodsky SS, Tamarin AF, Dolidovich GI, Epanov YG. Heat Transfer of Single

horizontal finned tubes and their bundles in a fluidized bed of large particles. In:
Grace JR, Matsen JM, editors. Fluidization; 1980. p. 195–200.
[79] Bartel WH, Genetti WE, Grimmett ES. Heat transfer from a horizontal

discontinuous finned tube in a fluidized bed. Chem Eng Prog Symp Ser 1971;116:
85–9.

[80] Zhang H, Benoit H, Gauthier D, Degr`eve J, Baeyens J, L ́opez IP, et al. Particle
circulation loops in solar energy capture and storage: gas–solid flow and heat
transfer considerations. Appl Energy 2016;161:206–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2015.10.005.

[81] Berg Clyde HO. Conveyance of granular solids. 1954. Patent US2684867.
[82] Aoki R, Tsunakawa H, Nishizawa T, Koizumi M. High density and low velocity

pneumatic transportation of powders and granular materials. J Res Assoc Powder
Technol Japan 1973;10:616–21. https://doi.org/10.4164/sptj1964.10.616.
[83] Li H, Kwauk M. Vertical pneumatic moving-bed transport—II. Experimental

findings. Chem Eng Sci 1989;44:261–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2509
(89)85063-8.

[84] Hirama T, Takeuchi H, Chiba T. Regime classification of macroscopic gas—solid
flow in a circulating fluidized bed riser. Powder Technol 1992;70:215–22.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-5910(92)80056-3.

[85] Zhu H, Zhu J. Gas-solids flow structures in a novel circulating-turbulent fluidized

bed. AIChE J 2008;54:1213–23. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.11432.

[86] Watson RJ, Thorpe RB, Davidson JF. Vertical plug-flow pneumatic conveying
from a fluidised bed. Powder Technol 2012;224:155–61. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.powtec.2012.02.045.

[87] Flamant G, Gauthier D, Benoit H, Sans J-L, Garcia R, Boissi`ere B, et al. Dense
suspension of solid particles as a new heat transfer fluid for concentrated solar
thermal plants: On-sun proof of concept. Chem Eng Sci 2013;102:567–76.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2013.08.051.

[88] Turzo G. Transport par fluidisation en phase hyperdense : am ́elioration

technologique, mod ́elisation et dimensionnement. 2013. Toulouse, INPT.

[89] Boissiere B, Ansart R, Gauthier D, Flamant G, Hemati M. Experimental

hydrodynamic study of gas-particle dense suspension upward flow for application
as new heat transfer and storage fluid. Can J Chem Eng 2015;93:317–30. https://
doi.org/10.1002/cjce.22087.

circulating fluidized bed for windowed solar chemical reactor with direct
irradiation of reacting particles. J Sol Energy Eng 2008;130. https://doi.org/
10.1115/1.2807213.

[106] Gokon N, Takahashi S, Yamamoto H, Kodama T. Thermochemical two-step water-
splitting reactor with internally circulating fluidized bed for thermal reduction of
ferrite particles. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2008;33:2189–99. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2008.02.044.

[107] Gokon N, Ono R, Hatamachi T, Liuyun L, Kim H-J, Kodama T. CO2 gasification of
coal cokes using internally circulating fluidized bed reactor by concentrated Xe-
light irradiation for solar gasification. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37:12128–37.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.05.133.

[108] Bellan S, Kodama T, Matsubara K, Gokon N, Cho HS, Inoue K. Heat transfer and
particulate flow analysis of a 30kW directly irradiated solar fluidized bed reactor
for thermochemical cycling. Chem Eng Sci 2019;203:511–25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ces.2018.09.012.

[109] Kodama T, Gokon N, Cho HS, Matsubara K, Kaneko H, Senuma K, et al. Particles
fluidized bed receiver/reactor tests with quartz sand particles using a 100-kWth
beam-down solar concentrating system at Miyazaki. 2017, 100012. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.4984469.

[110] Boujjat H, Rodat S, Chuayboon S, Abanades S. Experimental and numerical study
of a directly irradiated hybrid solar/combustion spouted bed reactor for
continuous steam gasification of biomass. Energy 2019;189:116118. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116118.

[111] Zgraggen A, Haueter P, Maag G, Vidal A, Romero M, Steinfeld A. Hydrogen
production by steam-gasification of petroleum coke using concentrated solar
power—III. Reactor experimentation with slurry feeding. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2007;32:992–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2006.10.001.
[112] Ermanoski I. Cascading pressure thermal reduction for efficient solar fuel

production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39:13114–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2014.06.143.

[113] Moumin G, Tescari S, Sundarraj P, de Oliveira L, Roeb M, Sattler C. Solar

treatment of cohesive particles in a directly irradiated rotary kiln. Sol Energy
2019;182:480–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.01.093.

[114] Melchior T, Perkins C, Lichty P, Weimer AW, Steinfeld A. Solar-driven biochar

gasification in a particle-flow reactor. Chem Eng Process Process Intensif 2009;48:
1279–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2009.05.006.

[115] Müller F, Poˇzivil P, van Eyk PJ, Villarrazo A, Haueter P, Wieckert C, et al.

A pressurized high-flux solar reactor for the efficient thermochemical gasification
of carbonaceous feedstock. Fuel 2017;193:432–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2016.12.036.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105648

G. Flamant et al.

[116] Meier A, Bonaldi E, Cella GM, Lipinski W, Wuillemin D. Solar chemical reactor

technology for industrial production of lime. Sol Energy 2006;80:1355–62.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2005.05.017.

[117] Esence T, Guillot E, Tessonneaud M, Sans J-L, Flamant G. Solar calcination at pilot
scale in a continuous flow multistage horizontal fluidized bed. Sol Energy 2020;
207:367–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.06.098.

[118] Abdelrahman M, Fumeaux P, Suter P. Study of solid-gas-suspensions used for

direct absorption of concentrated solar radiation. Sol Energy 1979;22:45–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(79)90058-6.

[119] Miller F, Koenigsdorff R. Theoretical analysis of a high-temperature small-particle
solar receiver. Sol Energy Mater 1991;24:210–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-
1633(91)90061-O.

[120] Bertocchi R, Karni J, Kribus A. Experimental evaluation of a non-isothermal high

temperature solar particle receiver. Energy 2004;29:687–700. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2003.07.001.

[121] Fern ́andez P, Miller F. Assessment of the overall efficiency of gas turbine-driven
CSP plants using small particle solar receivers. Energy Procedia 2014;49:334–43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.036.

[122] Xiao G, Guo K, Luo Z, Ni M, Zhang Y, Wang C. Simulation and experimental study
on a spiral solid particle solar receiver. Appl Energy 2014;113:178–88. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.06.045.

[123] Xiao G, Guo K, Ni M, Luo Z, Cen K. Optical and thermal performance of a high-
temperature spiral solar particle receiver. Sol Energy 2014;109:200–13. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2014.08.037.

[124] Xie X, Xiao G, Ni M, Yan J, Dong H, Cen K. Optical and thermal performance of a
novel solar particle receiver. 2019, 030065. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117577.
[125] Wang T, Bai F, Chu S, Zhang X, Wang Z. Experiment study of a quartz tube falling
particle receiver. Front Energy 2017;11:472–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11708-
017-0502-6.

[126] Nie F, Bai F, Cui Z, Zhao Z, Wang Z. Cold-state experimental study on discharge
characteristics of solid particles in a single-tube gravity driven moving bed solar
receiver. 2020, 050003. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0028506.

[127] Nie F, Yu Y, Bai F, Wang Z. Experimental and numerical investigation on thermal
performance of a quartz tube solid particle solar receiver. Sol Energy 2020;207:
1055–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.07.013.

[128] Nie F, Bai F, Wang Z, Yang R. A CPFD simulation on the particle flow

characteristics in a packed moving bed solar receiver with an added insert. Sol
Energy 2021;224:1144–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2021.06.078.
[129] Flamant G. Thermochimie solaire `a hautes temp ́eratures, r ́esultats exp ́erimentaux.
Quelques perspectives d’application. Rev Phys Appliqu ́ee 1980;15:503–11.
https://doi.org/10.1051/rphysap:01980001503050300.

[130] Ho CK. A review of high-temperature particle receivers for concentrating solar
power. Appl Therm Eng 2016;109:958–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2016.04.103.

[131] Martin J, Jr V. ASCUAS: a solar central receiver utilizing a solid thermal carrier.
1982. https://doi.org/10.2172/5663779. Albuquerque, NM, and Livermore, CA
(United States).

[144] Ebert M, Amsbeck L, Rheinl ̈ander J, Schl ̈ogl-Knothe B, Schmitz S, Sibum M, et al.
Operational experience of a centrifugal particle receiver prototype. 2019,
030018. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117530.

[145] Flamant G, Hemati M. Dispositif collecteur d’ ́energie solaire (Device for collecting

solar energy). PCT extension WO/2012/052661. 2010.

[146] Benoit H, Ansart R, García-Tri ̃nanes P, Gauthier D, Flamant G, Simonin O. 3D

numerical simulation of upflow bubbling fluidized bed in opaque tube under high
flux solar heating. In: 9th Int Conf Multiph Flow (ICMF 2016); 2016. p. 1–6.

[147] Flamant G, Gauthier D, Benoit H, Sans J-L, Boissi`ere B, Ansart R, et al. A new heat
transfer fluid for concentrating solar systems: particle flow in tubes. Energy
Procedia 2014;49:617–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.067.
[148] Benoit H, P ́erez L ́opez I, Gauthier D, Sans J-L, Flamant G. On-sun demonstration

◦
C heat transfer fluid for concentrating solar systems: dense particle
of a 750
suspension in tube. Sol Energy 2015;118:622–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2015.06.007.

[149] Le Gal A, Grange B, Tessonneaud M, Perez A, Escape C, Sans J-L, et al. Thermal

analysis of fluidized particle flows in a finned tube solar receiver. Sol Energy
2019;191:19–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.08.062.

[150] L ́opez IP, Benoit H, Gauthier D, Sans J-L, Guillot E, Cavaill ́e R, et al. On-sun first
operation of a 150 kWth pilot solar receiver using dense particle suspension as
heat transfer fluid. 2016, 030028. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4949080.

[151] H2020 Next-CSP project n.d.
[152] Zhang H, Li S, Kong W, Flamant G, Baeyens J. Scale-up considerations of the

UBFB solar receiver. In: AIP Conf Proc; 2019, 030067. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.5117579.

[153] Zhang H, Benoit H, Perez-Lop`ez I, Flamant G, Tan T, Baeyens J. High-efficiency
solar power towers using particle suspensions as heat carrier in the receiver and in
the thermal energy storage. Renew Energy 2017;111:438–46. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.renene.2017.03.101.

[154] Perez Lopez I, Benoit H, Gauthier D, Sans JL, Guillot E, Mazza G, et al. On-sun
operation of a 150kW th pilot solar receiver using dense particle suspension as
heat transfer fluid. Sol Energy 2016;137:463–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2016.08.034.

[155] Kang Q, Flamant G, Dewil R, Baeyens J, Zhang HL, Deng YM. Particles in a
circulation loop for solar energy capture and storage. Particuology 2019;43:
149–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.partic.2018.01.009.
[156] MHC Engineering Fordertechnik GmbH. Chain Conveyors. n.d.
[157] GmbH H & E. HAZEMAG Minerals: chain conveyors HHC. 2020. http://minerals.

hazemag-group.com/en/products/screening-conveying/chain-conveyor%0As
-hhc/.

[158] Moln ́ar V, Fedorko G, Andrejiov ́a M, Grinˇcov ́a A, Tomaˇskov ́a M. Analysis of

influence of conveyor belt overhang and cranking on pipe conveyor operational
characteristics. Measurement 2015;63:168–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
measurement.2014.12.013.

[159] Beumer Group. Pipe conveyor. 2020. https://www.beumergroup.com/i/pipe-co

nveyor-15220/.

[160] Bombardier. Bombardier rail vehicles production site-bruges. 2021. http://www.

[132] Hruby J, Steeper R, Evans G, Crowe C. An Experimental and numerical study of

bombardier.com/en/country.belgium.htlm.

flow and convective heat transfer in a freely falling curtain of particles. 1986.
https://doi.org/10.2172/1616232. Albuquerque, NM, and Livermore, CA (United
States).

[161] Corporation SC. Catalog and engineering manual. 2010.
[162] Manufacturing CE&. Standard screw conveyors. 2019. https://www.conveyo

reng.com/standard-screw-conveyors/.

[133] Hruby JM. Technical feasibility study of a solid particle solar central receiver for

[163] Continental Conveyor & Machine Works Ltd. Screw conveyor catalogue and

high temperature applications. 1986. United States.

engineering manual. 2010.

[134] Christian J, Ho C. Alternative designs of a high efficiency, north-facing, solid

[164] Thomas Conveyor Company. High Temperature Screw Conveyors n.d. http://cmt

particle receiver. Energy Procedia 2014;49:314–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
egypro.2014.03.034.

[135] Mills B, Ho CK. Annualized thermal performance of intermediate-scale falling
particle receivers. 2018, 040026. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5067062.

[136] Ho CK, Christian JM, Romano D, Yellowhair J, Siegel N, Savoldi L, et al.

Characterization of particle flow in a free-falling solar particle receiver. J Sol
Energy Eng 2017;139. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4035258.

[137] Kim K, Moujaes SF, Kolb GJ. Experimental and simulation study on wind affecting

particle flow in a solar receiver. Sol Energy 2010;84:263–70. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.solener.2009.11.005.

[138] Siegel NP, Ho CK, Khalsa SS, Kolb GJ. Development and evaluation of a prototype

solid particle receiver: on-sun testing and model validation. J Sol Energy Eng
2010;132. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4001146.

[139] Ho CK, Christian JM, Yellowhair J, Armijo K, Kolb WJ, Jeter S, et al. Performance

evaluation of a high-temperature falling particle receiver. In: Vol 1 Biofuels,
Hydrog Syngas, Altern Fuels; CHP Hybrid Power Energy Syst Conc Sol Power;
Energy Storage; Environ Econ Policy Considerations Adv Energy Syst Geothermal,
Ocean Emerg E. American Society of Mechanical Engineers; 2016. https://doi.
org/10.1115/ES2016-59238.

[140] Ho CK, Peacock G, Christian JM, Albrecht K, Yellowhair JE, Ray D. On-sun testing
of a 1 MWt particle receiver with automated particle mass-flow and temperature
control. 2019, 030027. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117539.

[141] Wu W, Amsbeck L, Buck R, Uhlig R, Ritz-Paal R. Proof of concept test of a

centrifugal particle receiver. Energy Procedia 2014;49:560–8. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.060.

nc.com/html/screw-conveyor-systems.html.

[165] Gambarotta - Gschwendt. Bulk solids mechanical handling. 2016.
[166] S. Howes. Screw conveyors n.d. https://showes.com/equipment_category/sc

rew-conveyors/(accessed April 21, 2021).

[167] Bernd Munstermann GmbH & Co. KG. Conveying Technology, Material Handling

Systems and Special Machines. n.d.

[168] Perry. Perry’s chemical engineers’ handbook. Choice Rev Online 1998;35.

https://doi.org/10.5860/CHOICE.35-3079. 35-3079-35–3079.

[169] Beumer Technology. Beumer materials handling:economical transport of bulk

goods-Belt conveyor product range. Germany: n.d.

[170] AUMUND. Conveying and cooling in the iron and steel industry. 2019.
[171] Metso Minerals. Conveyor Belt Product Range n.d. https://www.mogroup.com

/products-and-services/parts/conveyor-parts/conveyor-belts/.

[172] Lauyans & Company. High Temperature Conveyor n.d.:1. http://www.lauyans.
com/custom-conveyors/custom-conveyor/high-temperature-conveyor/.

[173] Repole KKD, Jeter SM. Design and analysis of a high temperature particulate hoist
for proposed particle heating concentrator solar power systems. In: Vol 1 Biofuels,
Hydrog Syngas, Altern Fuels; CHP Hybrid Power Energy Syst Conc Sol Power;
Energy Storage; Environ Econ Policy Considerations Adv Energy Syst Geothermal,
Ocean. Emerg. E, American Society of Mechanical Engineers; 2016. https://doi.
org/10.1115/ES2016-59619.

[174] Koepe and Partners. Patentanwalte. 2005. http://innovopat.de/eng/index.php.
[175] Guo P, Ly QH, Saw WL, Lim K-S, Ashman PJ, Nathan GJ. A technical assessment
of pneumatic conveying of solids for a high temperature particle receiver. 2019,
030025. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117537.

[142] Wu W, Trebing D, Amsbeck L, Buck R, Pitz-Paal R. Prototype testing of a

[176] Cheng Z, Guo Z, Tan Z, Yang J, Wang Q. Waste heat recovery from high-

centrifugal particle receiver for high-temperature concentrating solar
applications. J Sol Energy Eng 2015;137. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4030657.

[143] Amsbeck L, Buck R, Ebert M, Gobereit B, Hertel J, Jensch A, et al. First tests of a
centrifugal particle receiver with a 1m2 aperture. 2018, 040004. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.5067040.

temperature solid granular materials: energy challenges and opportunities.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;116:109428. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2019.109428.

[177] Baumann T, Schmitz S, Dabrowski J, Zunft S, G ̈ottsche J, Hoffschmidt B, et al.
Properties of bulk materials for high-temperature air-sand heat exchangers. In:

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105649

G. Flamant et al.

Proc ISES Sol World Congr 2011. International Solar Energy Society; 2011. p. 1–9.
https://doi.org/10.18086/swc.2011.09.01.

[178] Baumann T, Zunft S. Theoretical and experimental investigation of a moving bed
heat exchanger for solar central receiver power plants. J Phys Conf Ser 2012;395:
012055. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/395/1/012055.

[179] Baumann T, Zunft S, Tamme R. Moving bed heat exchangers for use with heat

storage in concentrating solar plants: a multiphase model. Heat Transf Eng 2014;
35:224–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/01457632.2013.825154.

[180] Baumann T, Zunft S. Development and performance assessment of a moving bed
heat exchanger for solar central receiver power plants. Energy Procedia 2015;69:
748–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.03.085.

[181] Albrecht KJ, Ho CK. Heat transfer models of moving packed-bed particle-to-sCO2
heat exchangers. J Sol Energy Eng 2019;141. https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.4041546.

[182] Albrecht KJ, Ho CK. Design and operating considerations for a shell-and-plate,

moving packed-bed, particle-to-sCO2 heat exchanger. Sol Energy 2019;178:
331–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.11.065.

[183] Fern ́andez-Torrijos M, Albrecht KJ, Ho CK. Dynamic modeling of a particle/

supercritical CO2 heat exchanger for transient analysis and control. Appl Energy
2018;226:595–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.06.016.

[184] Ho CK, Carlson M, Albrecht KJ, Ma Z, Jeter S, Nguyen CM. Evaluation of

alternative designs for a high temperature particle-to-sCO2 heat exchanger. J Sol
Energy Eng 2019;141. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4042225.

[185] Albrecht KJ, Carlson MD, Ho CK. Integration, control, and testing of a high-

temperature particle-to-sCO2 heat exchanger. 2019, 030001. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.5117513.

[186] Moawed MA, Berbish NS, Allam AA, El-Shamy AR, El-Shazly KM. Heat transfer
between fluidized bed and horizontal bundle of tubes in a vertical channel. Int J
Chem React Eng 2010;8. https://doi.org/10.2202/1542-6580.2123.

[187] Botterill JSM, Teoman Y, Yüregir KR. Factors affecting heat transfer between gas-
fluidized beds and immersed surfaces. Powder Technol 1984;39:177–89. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0032-5910(84)85035-4.

[188] Martyushin IG, Varyagin IA. Fluid-bed heat transfer. London, UK: Academic Press;

1975.

[189] Stenberg V, Sk ̈oldberg V,

 ̈
Ohrby L, Ryd ́en M. Evaluation of bed-to-tube surface
heat transfer coefficient for a horizontal tube in bubbling fluidized bed at high
temperature. Powder Technol 2019;352:488–500. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
powtec.2019.04.073.

[208] Achter T, Quinkertz R, Baca M. Increased efficiency and flexibility of large coal-

fired power plants applied to 350-MW-class units. 2016. Germany.
[209] Pacheco J, Wolf T, Muley N. Incorporating supercritical steam turbines into

advanced molten-salt power tower plants: feasibility and performance. 2013.

[210] Spencer RC, Cotton KC, Cannon CN. A method for predicting the performance of
steam turbine-generators....: 16,500 kw and larger. J Eng Power 1963;85:249–98.
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3677341.

[211] Gonzalez-Salazar MA, Kirsten T, Prchlik L. Review of the operational flexibility

and emissions of gas- and coal-fired power plants in a future with growing
renewables. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;82:1497–513. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.278.

[212] Henderson C. Increasing the flexibility of coal-fired power plants. 2014.
[213] Stefano B. D1.2 – Report on flexibility constraints, load scenarios definition. 2018.
[214] Price H. The future of CSP: dispatchable solar power. 2018.
[215] Purgert R, Hack H. Materials for advanced ultrasupercritical steam turbines -

advanced ultra-supercritical component demonstration. 2019.

[216] Shibli A. Coal power plant materials and life assessment. Woodhead Publishing;

2014. https://doi.org/10.1016/C2013-0-16254-X.

[217] 2020 Performance Specs. Gas turbine world. 36th Ed. Fairfield, CT (USA): Pequot

Publishing; 2020.

[218] Siros F, Fern ́andez Campos G. Optimisation of a low-TIT combined cycle gas

turbine with application to new generation solar thermal power plants. In: Vol 3
Coal, Biomass Altern Fuels; Cycle Innov Electr Power; Ind Cogener Appl Org Rank
Cycle Power Syst. American Society of Mechanical Engineers; 2017. https://doi.
org/10.1115/GT2017-65227.

[219] Barigozzi G, Bonetti G, Franchini G, Perdichizzi A, Ravelli S. Thermal

performance prediction of a solar hybrid gas turbine. Sol Energy 2012;86:
2116–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2012.04.014.

[220] S ́anchez-Orgaz S, Medina A. Calvo Hern ́andez A. Recuperative solar-driven multi-

step gas turbine power plants. Energy Convers Manag 2013;67:171–8. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2012.11.006.

[221] Andreades C, Dempsey L, Peterson PF. Reheat air-brayton combined cycle power

conversion off-nominal and transient performance. J Eng Gas Turbines Power
2014;136. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4026612.

[222] Andreades C, Scarlat RO, Dempsey L, Peterson P. Reheat-air Brayton combined
cycle power conversion design and performance under nominal ambient
conditions. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2014;136. https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.4026506.

[190] Kim SW, Ahn JY, Kim SD, Hyun Lee D. Heat transfer and bubble characteristics in

[223] Al-attab KA, Zainal ZA. Externally fired gas turbine technology: a review. Appl

a fluidized bed with immersed horizontal tube bundle. Int J Heat Mass Transf
2003;46:399–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0017-9310(02)00296-X.
[191] Schwaiger K, Haider M, H ̈ammerle M, Wünsch D, Obermaier M, Beck M, et al.
sandTES – an active thermal energy storage system based on the fluidization of
powders. Energy Procedia 2014;49:983–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
egypro.2014.03.106.

[192] Ma Z, Mehos M, Glatzmaier G, Sakadjian BB. Development of a concentrating

solar power system using fluidized-bed technology for thermal energy conversion
and solid particles for thermal energy storage. Energy Procedia 2015;69:1349–59.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.03.136.

[193] Gomez-Garcia F, Gauthier D, Flamant G. Design and performance of a multistage
fluidised bed heat exchanger for particle-receiver solar power plants with storage.
Appl Energy 2017;190:510–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2016.12.140.

[194] Li S, Kong W, Zhang H, Sabatier F, Ansart R, Flamant G, et al. The fluidized bed

air heat exchanger in a hybrid Brayton-cycle solar power plant. 2019, 140002.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117650.

Energy 2015;138:474–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.10.049.
[224] Al-attab KA, Zainal ZA. Performance of high-temperature heat exchangers in

biomass fuel powered externally fired gas turbine systems. Renew Energy 2010;
35:913–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2009.11.038.

[225] Zaversky F, Les I, Sorbet P, S ́anchez M, Valentin B, Brau J-F, et al. The challenge

of solar powered combined cycles – providing dispatchability and increasing
efficiency by integrating the open volumetric air receiver technology. Energy
2020;194:116796. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116796.

[226] Zaversky F, Les I, S ́anchez M, Valentin B, Brau J-F, Siros F, et al. Techno-economic

optimization and benchmarking of a solar-only powered combined cycle with
high-temperature TES upstream the gas turbine. Green energy environ.
IntechOpen; 2020. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.90410.

[227] Alobaid F, Pfeiffer S, Epple B, Seon C-Y, Kim H-G. Fast start-up analyses for

Benson heat recovery steam generator. Energy 2012;46:295–309. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.energy.2012.08.020.
[228] ALSTOM. GT24/GT26 gas turbine. 2021.
[229] Angelino G. Carbon dioxide condensation cycles for power production. J Eng

[195] Kunii D, Levenspiel O. Fluidization engineering. Elsevier; 1991. https://doi.org/

Power 1968;90:287–95. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3609190.

10.1016/B978-0-08-050664-7.50003-2.

[230] Feher EG. The supercritical thermodynamic power cycle. Energy Convers 1968;8:

[196] Sakadjian B, Hu S, Maryamchik M, Flynn T, Santelmann K, Ma Z. Fluidized-bed

85–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/0013-7480(68)90105-8.

technology enabling the integration of high temperature solar receiver CSP
systems with steam and advanced power cycles. Energy Procedia 2015;69:
1404–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.03.126.

[197] Peters MS, Timmerhaus KD, West RE. Plant design and economics for chemical

engineers. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2003. vol. 4.

[198] Brun K, Friedman P. Fundamentals and applications of supercritical carbon
dioxide (sCO2) based power cycles. Fundam. appl. supercrit. carbon dioxide
based power cycles. Elsevier; 2017. p. 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-
100804-1.00001-3.

[199] Saravanamuttoo HIH, Rogers GFC, Cohen H. Gas turbine theory. Pearson

Education; 2001.

[231] Dostal V, Driscoll MJ, Hejzlar P. A super critical carbon dioxide cycle for next

generation nuclear reactors. Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 2004.
[232] Ahn Y, Bae SJ, Kim M, Cho SK, Baik S, Lee JI, et al. Review of supercritical CO2
power cycle technology and current status of research and development. Nucl Eng
Technol 2015;47:647–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2015.06.009.

[233] Crespi F, Gavagnin G, S ́anchez D, Martínez GS. Supercritical carbon dioxide cycles
for power generation: a review. Appl Energy 2017;195:152–83. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.02.048.

[234] Yin J, Zheng Q, Peng Z, Zhang X. Review of supercritical CO 2 power cycles

integrated with CSP. Int J Energy Res 2020;44:1337–69. https://doi.org/
10.1002/er.4909.

[200] Shackelford JF, Han Y-H, Kim S, Kwon S-H. CRC materials science and

[235] Neises T, Turchi C. A comparison of supercritical carbon dioxide power cycle

engineering handbook. CRC Press; 2016.

[201] Sloss L. Technology readiness of advanced coal-based power generation systems,

CCC/292. 2019. ISBN 978–92–9029–615-7.

[202] Zhang D. Ultra-supercritical coal power plants Materials, technologies and

optimization. 2013.

[203] Nicol K. Status of advanced ultra-supercritical pulverized coal technology, ISBN

978-92-9029-549-5. 2013.

[204] Tanuma T. Advances in steam turbines for modern power plants. Woodhead

Publishing; 2016.

[205] Weiland N, Shelton W. Systems analyses of direct power extraction (DPE) and
advanced ultra-supercritical (AUSC) power plants, crosscutting research & rare
earth elements portfolios review. 2016. Pittsburgh, PA.

[206] Nair A, Kumanan S. Newer materials for supercritical power plant components—a
manufacturability study. In: Proc Int Conf Adv Prod Ind Eng; 2015. p. 326.

[207] Keroulle M. GE Steam power product catalog. 2019. US.

configurations with an emphasis on CSP applications. Energy Procedia 2014;49:
1187–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.128.

[236] Neises T, Turchi C. Supercritical carbon dioxide power cycle design and

configuration optimization to minimize levelized cost of energy of molten salt
power towers operating at 650
10.1016/j.solener.2019.01.078.

C. Sol Energy 2019;181:27–36. https://doi.org/

◦

[237] Binotti M, Astolfi M, Campanari S, Manzolini G, Silva P. Preliminary assessment
of sCO2 cycles for power generation in CSP solar tower plants. Appl Energy 2017;
204:1007–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.0.

[238] Mecheri M, Le Moullec Y. Supercritical CO2 Brayton cycles for coal-fired power
plants. Energy 2016;103:758–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2016.02.111.

[239] Carlson MD. Progress toward commercial deployment of sCO2 Brayton power

cycles. 2019.

[240] Marion J, Kutin M, McClung A, Mortzheim J, Ames R. The step 10 MWe sCO2

pilot plant demonstration. vol. 9 oil gas appl. supercrit. CO2 Power Cycles; Wind

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105650

G. Flamant et al.

Energy, American Society of Mechanical Engineers; 2019. https://doi.org/
10.1115/GT2019-91917.

[241] White MT, Bianchi G, Chai L, Tassou SA, Sayma AI. Review of supercritical CO2

technologies and systems for power generation. Appl Therm Eng 2021;185:
116447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2020.116447.

[242] S ́anchez D, Prieto C, L ́opez-Rom ́an A, S ́anchez T, Aguilar FJJ-E, Blanco AM, et al.
Report on Best Available Technologies (BAT) for central receiver systems. 2019.

[243] Suzuki S, Iwai Y, Itoh M, Morisawa Y, Jain P, Kobayashi Y. High pressure

combustion test of gas turbine combustor for 50MWth supercritical CO2
demonstration power plant on Allam cycle. In: Proc Int Gas Turbine Congr; 2019.
[244] Held TJ. Initial test results of a megawatt-class supercritical CO2 heat engine. In:

4th Int Symp CO2 Power Cycles; 2014. p. 9–10.

[245] Allison TC, Jeffrey Moore J, Hofer D, Towler MD, Thorp J. Planning for successful
transients and trips in a 1 MWe-scale high-temperature sCO2 test loop. J Eng Gas
Turbines Power 2019;141. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4041921.

[246] Moore J, Cich S, Day M, Allison T, Wade J, Hofer D. Commissioning of a 1 MWe
supercritical CO2 test loop. In: 6th Int Supercrit CO2 Power Cycles Symp; 2018.

[269] Chen R, Romero M, Gonz ́alez-Aguilar J, Rovense F, Rao Z, Liao S. Optical and

thermal integration analysis of supercritical CO2 Brayton cycles with a particle-
based solar thermal plant based on annual performance. SSRN Electron J 2021.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3919711.

[270] Rovense F, Reyes-Belmonte M

 ́
A, Romero M, Gonz ́alez-Aguilar J. Thermo-

economic analysis of a particle-based multi-tower solar power plant using unfired
combined cycle for evening peak power generation. Energy 2022;240:122798.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.122798.

[271] Albrecht KJ, Bauer ML, Ho CK. Parametric analysis of particle CSP system

performance and cost to intrinsic particle properties and operating conditions. In:
ASME 2019 13th Int Conf Energy Sustain. American Society of Mechanical
Engineers; 2019. https://doi.org/10.1115/ES2019-3893.

[272] NREL. Annual technology baseline-atb electricity data overview 2020. https://at

b.nrel.gov/electricity/2020/index.php?t=in.

[273] California Independent System Operator. Fast facts - what the Duck curve tells us
about managing a green grid. 2016. 250 Outcropping Way, Folsom, CA 95630.
[274] Burtin A, Silva V. Technical and economic analysis of the European electricity

[247] Walker M, Fleming DD, Pasch JJ. Gas foil bearing coating behavior in

system with 60% RES. 2015. EDF.

environments relevant to S-CO2 power system turbomachinery. Albuquerque, NM
(United States): Sandia National Lab.(SNL-NM); 2018.

[248] Rapp LM. Experimental testing of a 1MW sCO2 turbocompressor. Albuquerque,

NM (United States): Sandia National Lab.(SNL-NM); 2019.

[249] Clementoni EM, Cox TL, King MA. Off-nominal component performance in a

supercritical carbon dioxide brayton cycle. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2016;138.
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4031182.

[275] U.S. Energy Information Administration. Capital cost and performance

characteristic estimates for utility scale electric power generating technologies.
2020. Washington, DC 20585.

[276] U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy.

Concentrating solar power could provide the flexibility and reliability the U.S.
electric grid needs. 2017.

[277] Brack D. The impacts of the demand for woody biomass for power and heat on

[250] Cha JE, Bae SW, Lee J, Cho SK, Lee JI, Park JH. Operation results of a closed

climate and forests. 2017.

supercritical CO2 simple Brayton cycle. In: Proc 5th Int Symp CO2 Power Cycles;
2016. p. 28–31.

[251] Luu MT, Milani D, McNaughton R, Abbas A. Analysis for flexible operation of
supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle integrated with solar thermal systems. Energy
2017;124:752–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.02.040.

[252] Alfani D, Astolfi M, Binotti M, Campanari S, Casella F, Silva P. Multi objective

optimization of flexible supercritical CO2 coal-fired power plants. In: Vol 3 Coal,
Biomass, Hydrog Altern Fuels; Cycle Innov Electr Power; Ind Cogener Org Rank
Cycle Power Syst. American Society of Mechanical Engineers; 2019. https://doi.
org/10.1115/GT2019-91789.

[253] Dyreby JJ, Klein SA, Nellis GF, Reindl DT. Modeling off-design and part-load

[278] Argyrou MC, Christodoulides P, Kalogirou SA. Energy storage for electricity
generation and related processes: technologies appraisal and grid scale
applications. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;94:804–21. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rser.2018.06.044.

[279] Morgan R, Nelmes S, Gibson E, Brett G. An analysis of a large-scale liquid air

energy storage system. Proc Inst Civ Eng 2015;168:135–44. https://doi.org/
10.1680/ener.14.00038.

[280] Smallbone A, Jülch V, Wardle R, Roskilly AP. Levelised Cost of Storage for

Pumped Heat Energy Storage in comparison with other energy storage
technologies. Energy Convers Manag 2017;152:221–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enconman.2017.09.047.

performance of supercritical carbon dioxide power cycles. In: ASME turbo expo
2013 turbine Tech Conf Expo. American Society of Mechanical Engineers Digital
Collection; 2013.

[281] Fan X, Liu B, Liu J, Ding J, Han X, Deng Y, et al. Battery technologies for grid-level
large-scale electrical energy storage. Trans Tianjin Univ 2020;26:92–103. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12209-019-00231-w.

[254] Marchionni M, Bianchi G, Tassou SA. Transient analysis and control of a heat to

power conversion unit based on a simple regenerative supercritical CO2 Joule-
Brayton cycle. Appl Therm Eng 2021;183:116214.

[255] Osorio JD, Hovsapian R, Ordonez JC. Dynamic analysis of concentrated solar
supercritical CO2-based power generation closed-loop cycle. Appl Therm Eng
2016;93:920–34.

[256] Singh R, Miller SA, Rowlands AS, Jacobs PA. Dynamic characteristics of a direct-
heated supercritical carbon-dioxide Brayton cycle in a solar thermal power plant.
Energy 2013;50:194–204.

[257] Luu MT, Milani D, McNaughton R, Abbas A. Dynamic modelling and start-up
operation of a solar-assisted recompression supercritical CO 2 Brayton power
cycle. Appl Energy 2017;199:247–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2017.04.073.

[258] European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program. sCO2-Flex,

[282] Cole W, Frazier AW. Cost projections for utility-scale battery storage. 2019.
[283] Fu R, Remo T, Margolis R. 2018 U.S. Utility-scale photovoltaics-plus-energy

storage system costs benchmark. 2018.

[284] Dieckmann S, Dersch J, Giuliano S, Puppe M, Lüpfert E, Hennecke K, et al. LCOE

reduction potential of parabolic trough and solar tower CSP technology until
2025. 2017, 160004. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4984538.

[285] Renewable IRENA. P ower generation costs in 2019. Abu Dhabi: International

Renewable Energy Agency; 2020.

[286] Nathan GJ, Jafarian M, Dally BB, Saw WL, Ashman PJ, Hu E, et al. Solar thermal
hybrids for combustion power plant: a growing opportunity. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2018;64:4–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2017.08.002.
[287] Baeyens J, Li S, Zhang H, Dewil R, Flamant G, Ansart R, et al. Bio-energy carriers

as back-up fuel in hybrid solar power plants. {IOP} Conf Ser Earth Environ Sci
2020;544:12012. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/544/1/012012.

◦
under grant agreement N

764690. 2021. https://www.sco2-flex.eu/.

[288] Peterseim JH, Hellwig U, Tadros A, White S. Hybridisation optimization of

[259] Cagnac A, Mecheri M, Bedogni S. Configuration of a flexible and efficient sCO2
cycle for fossil power plant. In: 3rd Eur Conf Supercrit CO2 Power Syst 2019 19th-
20th Sept 2019; 2019. p. 271–80.

[260] Ho CK, Carlson M, Garg P, Kumar P. Cost and performance tradeoffs of alternative

solar-driven S-CO2 Brayton cycle configurations. In: ASME 2015 9th Int Conf
Energy Sustain collocated with ASME 2015 Power Conf ASME 2015 13th Int Conf
Fuel Cell Sci Eng Technol ASME 2015 Nucl Forum. American Society of
Mechanical Engineers Digital Collection; 2015.

[261] Fleming D, Kruizenga A. Identified corrosion and erosion mechanisms in SCO2

Brayton cycles. 2014. SAND2014-15546.

concentrating solar thermal and biomass power generation facilities. Sol Energy
2014;99:203–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2013.10.041.

[289] Coelho B, Schwarzb ̈ozl P, Oliveira A, Mendes A. Biomass and central receiver
system (CRS) hybridization: Volumetric air CRS and integration of a biomass
waste direct burning boiler on steam cycle. Sol Energy 2012;86:2912–22. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2012.06.009.

[290] Coelho B, Oliveira A, Schwarzb ̈ozl P, Mendes A. Biomass and central receiver

system (CRS) hybridization: Integration of syngas/biogas on the atmospheric air
volumetric CRS heat recovery steam generator duct burner. Renew Energy 2015;
75:665–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.10.054.

[262] Wagner MJ, Wendelin T. SolarPILOT: a power tower solar field layout and

[291] Siemens. Siemens to supply solar field for hybrid CSP plant in Catalonia, Spain.

characterization tool. Sol Energy 2018;171:185–96.

[263] Kim J-S, Kumar A, Gardner W, Lipi ́nski W. Numerical and experimental

investigation of a novel multi-stage falling particle receiver. 2019, 030030.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117542.

[264] Gobereit B, Amsbeck L, Buck R, Pitz-Paal R, R ̈oger M, Müller-Steinhagen H.
Assessment of a falling solid particle receiver with numerical simulation. Sol
Energy 2015;115:505–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2015.03.013.
[265] Ho CK, Pattyn CA. Investigating environmental impacts of particle emissions from

a high-temperature falling particle receiver. 2020, 030019. https://doi.org/
10.1063/5.0029219.

[266] Buck R, Giuliano S. Solar tower system temperature range optimization for
reduced LCOE. 2019, 030010. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117522.

[267] Gueguen R, Grange B, Bataille F, Mer S, Flamant G. Shaping high efficiency, high
temperature cavity tubular solar central receivers. Energies 2020;13:4803.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en13184803.

2011. https://www.siemens.com/press/en/pressrelease/2011/renewable_ener
gy/ere201109107.htm (accessed December 31, 2021).

[292] Gobin A, Neau H, Simonin O, Llinas J-R, Reiling V, S ́elo J-L. Fluid dynamic

numerical simulation of a gas phase polymerization reactor. Int J Numer Methods
Fluids 2003;43:1199–220. https://doi.org/10.1002/fld.542.

[293] Zhang H, Degr`eve J, Baeyens J, Wu SY. Powder attrition in gas fluidized beds.
Powder Technol 2016. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2015.08.052.
[294] Fayed M, Otten L. CEMA factors. Handb. powder sci. technol. 2013:445–50.
[295] Vandewalle C, Baeyens J, Degreve J. Attrition and wear in powder circulation

loops. Powder Handl Process 2001;13:77–81.

[296] Keck T, Balz M, G ̈ocke V, von Reeken F, Gross F, Landman W, et al. Hami – the
first Stellio solar field. 2019, 030029. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117541.
[297] Turchi CS, Boyd M, Kesseli D, Kurup P, Mehos MS, Neises TW, et al. CSP Systems
analysis - final project report. 2019. https://doi.org/10.2172/1513197. Golden,
CO (United States).

[268] Behar O, Grange B, Flamant G. Design and performance of a modular combined

[298] Steel Tubes India n.d.

cycle solar power plant using the fluidized particle solar receiver technology.
Energy Convers Manag 2020;220:113108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2020.113108.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105651

G. Flamant et al.

[299] Benitez J. Process engineering and design for air pollution control. 1993. vol. 8.

Prentice Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

[300] Turchi CS, Heath GA. Molten salt power tower cost model for the system advisor

model (SAM) 2013.

[301] IRENE. Renewable power generation costs in 2014. 2015.

Gilles Flamant

Gilles  Flamant  graduated  as  Chemical  Engineer  (Paris)  and  PhD  in  Process  Engi-
neering (Toulouse). He has been working in the field of concentrated solar energy and high
temperature processes for about 45 years. He lectures at the University of Perpignan and
the  Mohammed  V  University,  Rabat  (Morocco)  on  concentrated solar  power,  radiation
heat  transfer,  fluidization  and  solar  fuels.  He  is  currently  Emeritus  Senior  Scientist  at
CNRS. He was Director of the PROMES-CNRS Laboratory (150 persons) between 2004 and
2016. He was Principal Investigator of the French Laboratory of Excellence in solar energy
“SOLSTICE” (2012–2019) and of the National Infrastructure of Excellence in concentrated
solar technologies “SOCRATE”  (2011–2021). He coordinated 3 research projects on the
application  of  fluidized  beds  in  concentrated  solar  energy  conversion  (CSP2-FP7,
SOLPART-H2020, Next-CSP-H2020). He is currently Chair of SolarPACES.

Benjamin Grange

Benjamin Grange studied Process and Chemical Engineering (ENSIC, Nancy, France).
He obtained his Ph.D. at the University of Perpignan via Domitia in 2012. After a 2-year
postdoc  in  PROMES-CNRS,  he  became  project  leader  in  the  Masdar  Institute  of  the
United Arab Emirates working on a new concept of a molten salt receiver. In January 2017,
he  rejoined  PROMES-CNRS  as  research  coordinator  for  the  European  Next-CSP  project
aiming at demonstrating the fluidized particle-in-tube solar receiver concept at pilot scale.

John Wheeldon

John Wheeldon obtained a B Tech. and M Sc. In chemical engineering from the Uni-
versity of Bradford (U.K) and has worked for the National Coal Board and the International
Energy Agency in the UK. During a carreer at the Electric Power Research Institute in Palo
Alto (USA). he has played a prominent role in several coal-based pilot and demonstration
projects, where he developed expertise in hot gas filtration, solids handling and conveying,
heat transfer, power plant technology, and steam cycles.

Fr ́ed ́eric Siros

Fr ́ed ́eric Siros graduated in 1983 from Ecole Nationale Sup ́erieure de l’A ́eronautique
et  de  l’Espace.  Since  then,  he  has  been  employed  by  EDF  in  the  Thermal  Engineering
Department  and  subsequently  in  the  R&D  Division.  After  a  supervisory  period  of
commissioning and acceptance tests on site for various combined cycle power plants, he
turned to power plant design, and focused mainly on plant optimization during the early
stages of their design. He then moved from engineering to R&D activities. Since 2009, he
has been working mainly on Concentrated Solar Power and innovative power cycles. His
main activities involve technological and due diligence tasks on CSP technology providers
for  upcoming  industrial  projects  as  well  as  participating  in  European  H2020  projects
including Next-CSP.

Benoît Valentin

Benoît Valentin graduated in 2013 from Mines ParisTech (energy and nuclear engi-
neering), and obtained a second master’s degree in oil processing from IFP School. He then
joined the department of Fluid Mechanics, Power Generation & Environment of EDF R&D
in  2015.  He  has  has  been  working  on  the  design  and  techno-economic  assessment  of
various processes, including carbon capture, effluent processing for the nuclear industry as
well as thermodynamic cycles for solar and fossil-fueled applications. He has supported the
technical  coordination  of  the  H2020  project  sCO2-Flex  (Supercritical  CO2  cycle  for

FLEXible and sustainable support to the electricity system) since 2019, and is a technical
contributor in the H2020 projects CAPTure and Next-CSP.

Françoise Bataille

Françoise  Bataille  graduated  as  Physical  and  Chemical  Engineer  (Ecole  Normale
Sup ́erieure of Lyon - France) and as PhD in Fluid Mechanics. After having worked for NASA
and different universities in the USA, she became Professor in fluid mechanics and heat
transfer (National Institute of Applied Sciences, then University of Perpignan - France),
where she also occupied positions as Vice-President for research and Chair of the graduate
college on science and technology. She is a former Deputy Director both of PROMES-CNRS
Laboratory and of the French Research Federation on Solar Energy (FEDESOL, 25 labo-
ratories). She was Vice-President of the French Thermal Society (SFT). She became Vice-
President of the French Mechanical Association (AFM), and is since 2020 Director of the
French Laboratory of Excellence in Solar Energy “SOLSTICE”. She has for 10 years been a
member of the French National Council of Universities (CNU) in charge of energetics and
process engineering, and is a science delegate to the French National Quality Assurance
Agency (HCERES) for engineering sciences.

Zhang Huili

Huili  Zhang  obtained  her  Bachelor  and  Master  degree  at  Beijing  University  of
Chemical Technology, and her Doctoral degree within the research team of Prof. Degr`eve
and Prof. Baeyens at University of Leuven (Belgium) in 2016. She is associated professor at
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing China. Her research interests are solar
thermal  applications,  including  solar  drying,  solar-driven  chemical  reactions,  fluidized
bed solar reactor design, and biomass conversions. Currently, she supervises research of 2
PhD students and 4 Master students working on solar gasification of biomass, solar thermal
water splitting, and the development of a horizontal fluidized bed solar receiver for solar
energy capture and applications under funding of the University and Ministry of Science
and Technology of China.

Yimin Deng

Yimin  Deng  studied  Chemical  En,gineering  at  the  Beijing  Ubiversity  of  Chemical
Technology (BUCT, China), where she also performed a one-year research assistance for
pilot-scale developments in the field of solar energy capture technology within the Beijing
Advanced Innovation center of Soft Matter Science and Engineering. She thereafter ob-
tained  her  Master  degree  Master  in  Fluids  Engineering  for  Industrial  Processes  at  the
Institut National des Sciences Appliqu ́ees Toulouse (INSA-Toulouse).

In 2020, she joined the PhD research group of Prof. Dewil and Prof. Baeyens at the KU
Leuven, for research on concentrated solar energy applications at lab- and pilot scale level.
She  participated  in  international  conferences  and  published  several  papers  in  peer-
reviewed journals of high impact factor.

Jan Baeyens

Jan Baeyens studied Nuclear (Brussels) and Chemical Engineering (Leuven). He ob-
tained his Ph.D. at the University of Bradford-U.K. After 13 years of employment in en-
gineering divisions of various Belgian companies, he became a part-time professor at the
Universities of Leuven and Antwerp (BE), and worked as a process and project consultant
in Europe and overseas as managing director of European Powder and Process Technology
(EPPT),  mostly  in  the  fields  of  powder  technology  and  renewable  energy.  EPPT  was  a
partner in European research projects (FP7, and H2020). After academic appointments at
the University of Birmingham, the University College London and the University of War-
wick,  he  was  appointed  Principal  Investigator  at  the  Beijing  University  of  Chemical
Technology and is actively involved in renewable energy research.

He was a 5 times successive nominee of the "Clarivate Top 1% cited researcher".

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10105652
