Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress  in  Energy  and  Combustion  Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Combustion  chemistry  in  the  twenty-first  century:  Developing
theory-informed  chemical  kinetics  models

James A. Miller a , ∗, Raghu Sivaramakrishnan a , Yujie Tao a , g , C. Franklin Goldsmith b ,
Michael P. Burke c , Ahren W. Jasper a , Nils Hansen d , Nicole J. Labbe e , Peter Glarborg f ,
Judit Zádor d
a
Chemical Sciences and Engineering Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
b
School of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
c
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering, Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, United
States
d
Combustion Research Facility, MS 9055, Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA 94551-0969, USA
e
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA
f
DTU Chemical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby DK-2800, Denmark
g
School of Energy and Environment, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210096, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 1 May 2020
Accepted 11 October 2020
Available online 12 January 2021

Keywords:
theoretical kinetics
master equation
transport
non-adiabatic chemistry
hot radicals

Contents

Over the last 20 to 25 years theoretical chemistry (particularly theoretical chemical kinetics) has played
an increasingly important role in developing chemical kinetics models for combustion. Theoretical meth-
ods of obtaining rate parameters are now competitive in accuracy with experiment, particularly for small
molecules. Moreover, theoretical methods can deal with conditions that experiments frequently cannot.
In addition to increased accuracy, theory has rejuvenated methods and discovered phenomena that were
completely unappreciated, or at least underappreciated, in the 20 th
century. Our primary interest here is
in molecular-level issues, i.e. in calculating rate and transport parameters. However, dealing with kinetics
models that involve thousands of reactions and hundreds of species is important for practical applications
and is relatively new to the 21 st
century. Theory, in a general sense, and theoretical methods development
have a role to play here too. We discuss in this review all these topics in some detail with an emphasis
on issues and methods that have emerged in the last 20 years or so. Even so, our review is selective,
rather than comprehensive, out of necessity.

© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1.
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
2.  Dealing with Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
3.  Phenomenological Rate Coefficients, Flux Coefficients, Steady States, and the Master Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
4.  Weakly-Bound Free Radicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
5.  Chemically termolecular reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
6.  The Two-Dimensional Master Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
7.  Collisional Energy and Angular Momentum Transfer in Highly Vibrational Excited Molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
8.  Transport Properties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
9.  Electronically non-adiabatic kinetics and dynamics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
10.  Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
Declaration of Competing Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: jamiller@anl.gov (J.A. Miller).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2020.100886
0360-1285/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

A.  The Multiple-Well Master Equation: Its Formulation, Solution, and Determination of Phenomenological Rate Coefficients . . .  43
B.  Product Distribution for “Prompt” Reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  45
References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46

1. Introduction

Combustion chemistry as a field of scientific research was born
and reared in the twentieth century. All the experimental tools for
measuring rate coefficients – shock tubes [1] , laser/flash photoly-
sis [2] , discharge-flow [3] – were conceived and initially developed
during the last century, although these methods continue to be im-
proved. Likewise, experimental methods for studying the chemistry
of  combustion  at  a  macroscopic  level  – low-pressure  premixed
flames  [4] ,  shock  tubes  (again)  [5] ,  rapid  compression  machines
[6,7] , opposed jets, co-flowing jets, and flow reactors – were all
conceived and developed in the twentieth century. The theoretical
methods currently in use in applying reaction rate theory to com-
bustion problems – transition-state theory, RRKM theory, classical
trajectory  methods,  quantum  scattering,  and  electronic-structure
theory – all had their origins in the 20 th century, although these
methods  are  also  continuing  to  be  improved  and  better  under-
stood.  With  the  advent  of  supercomputers  in  the  1970 (cid:3) s,  soft-
ware for doing chemical kinetics modeling in combustion, at least
for idealized environments, became readily available (most notably
CHEMKIN [8] ) and easy to use. Chemical-kinetic models (“mech-
anisms”)  could  be  exchanged  easily,  and  the  field  of  chemical-
kinetics modeling in combustion grew by leaps and bounds. A sim-
ilar growth took place in electronic-structure theory with the ap-
pearance of Gaussian [9] and other easy-to-use quantum-chemistry
codes, allowing greater and greater insight into the elementary re-
actions that go into the kinetics models. Statistical and dynamical
methods in reaction-rate theory (and our understanding of them)
also improved. In 1996, in his plenary paper at the Twenty-Sixth
International Combustion Symposium, one of us made the follow-
ing prediction [10] : “The power of theoretical chemistry and math-
ematical modeling is only beginning to be felt in combustion. The
first 10 years or so of the next century should see an explosion of
knowledge and predictive power that most of us never dreamed
would occur.” This explosion of knowledge and predictive power
has occurred, and the explosion is not over yet. The recent paper
by Klippenstein [11] is a good example of the power of twenty-first
century theoretical methods to enhance our knowledge of combus-
tion chemistry.

The  power  and  utility  of  a  priori  electronic-structure-theory-
based kinetics predictions were demonstrated in the combustion
community as early as in the 1980’s [12–16] by theoretical physi-
cal chemists. However, electronic structure theory and kinetics the-
ory methods and codes were in their early stages of development
at that time. With the limited computational resources available
then, the use of these in-house codes required expert theoretical
chemists applying them adequately to kinetics problems involving
small molecular systems. The situation has of course dramatically
changed, particularly in the past two decades. The availability of
numerous user-friendly electronic-structure-theory codes with pre-
dictive capabilities rivalling chemical accuracy and better (within
±1 kcal/mole) and the rapid expansion of computational tools and
capabilities have led to a meteoric increase in adoption and usage
of theory in combustion kinetics. More importantly though, legis-
lation  drafted  in  the  past  two  decades  [17,18]  has  mandated  in-
creasingly stringent emission criteria leading to increased empha-
sis  on  predictive  kinetics  in  practical  engine  and  combustor  de-
sign considerations. Practical engine design simulations in the past
used global kinetics to capture reactivity trends, but modern en-
gine simulations now use state-of-the-art, high performance com-
puters to provide unprecedented details concerning the chemistry

Fig. 1.  Ab-initio theoretical kinetics predictions in combustion symposia.

that determines engine performance and subsequent pollutant for-
mation [19,20] . Computational Fluid Dynamics codes such as CON-
VERGE [21] can now perform reactive flow simulations using real-
istic chemical mechanisms that have hundreds of chemical species
and thousands of reactions, therefore leading to increased fidelity
in emissions characteristics. The transportation sector is just begin-
ning to harness the predictive capability of such computationally
intensive reactive flow simulations for efficient and clean engine
designs. In the future such an approach may also be envisioned
to simulate chemical conversions for improving product yields and
energy efficiencies in large-scale industrial processes (petrochemi-
cals, carbon black, fumed silica, etc.).

The  user-friendliness  of  theory  software  has  enabled  not
just  expert  theoretical  chemists,  but  also  experimental  physical
chemists  and  engineers  in  the  combustion  community  to  rou-
tinely apply them to interpret and understand chemical reactivity
in complex gas-phase molecular systems. A brief survey of pub-
lished papers from the chemical kinetics colloquia in the Proceed-
ings of Combustion Institute from the beginning of the 21 st century
reveals a  progressive increase in  the  application of  ab-initio/DFT
theory-based predictions ( Fig. 1 ). At the recent combustion sym-
posium in Dublin (2018), more than one-third of the kinetics col-
loquia papers employed a priori theoretical kinetics to interpret ki-
netics studies and combustion observables. This listing of course
does not include the numerous experimental and modeling stud-
ies that utilized theoretical predictions from prior published work.
If such studies were to be included in the listing, theory-informed
work would constitute an even larger fraction of the chemical ki-
netics colloquia. It is evident that the theoretical prediction of rate
coefficients from first principles has now reached the point where
it is an indispensable tool in combustion kinetics modeling [11] , as
accurate as experiment in some instances. Even when such theo-
retical predictions are not as accurate as experiment, relatively mi-
nor adjustments to barrier heights (or some other parameter) can
correct the error and produce results that are accurate over wide
ranges of temperature and pressure.

20 th  century  combustion  chemistry  was  predominantly
experiment-driven and relied on empirical rules [22] to extrapo-

2

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

late  reactivity  and  kinetics  to  molecular  systems  and  conditions
of practical importance. Experiments over limited conditions were
used to guide transition state theory and RRKM theory predictions.
Achieving chemical accuracy, i.e. ±1 kcal/mole in thermochemical
properties  and  energetics  was  a  major  challenge  for  electronic
structure theory such that predictive theoretical kinetics seemed
a  pipe  dream  to  most  kinetics  practitioners  in  the  20 th  century.
However,  the  last  decade  of  the  20 th  century  saw  the  develop-
ment  of  numerous  ab-initio  model  chemistries  and  composite
approaches  [23–27]  that  met  the  chemical  accuracy  threshold.
With  accuracies  in  electronic  structure  theory  being  no  more  a
significant limiting factor, at least for small – mid-size (up to 7-8
heavy atoms) molecular systems, there is now a growing emphasis
on  developing  increasingly  accurate  theoretical-kinetics  methods
to treat traditional thermal kinetics problems and/or more novel
non-thermal/non-adiabatic  reactions.  The  predominant  goal  of
the  present  article  is  to  describe  theoretical  advancements  and
concepts  that  were  predominantly  developed  and  have  come  to
the fore for a quantitative description of 21 st century combustion
chemistry.  In  particular,  the  focus  of  the  present  article  is  re-
stricted to describing master equation approaches to treat complex
reactions,  the  fate  of  weakly  bound  free  radicals  at  high  tem-
peratures,  chemically  termolecular  reactions,  and  non-adiabatic
reactions.  Also  discussed  at  length  are  theoretical  methods  to
determine transport properties, methods for reaction mechanism
generation, and uncertainty quantification.

Combustion  chemistry  is  replete  with  numerous  examples  of
important  complex  multi-well,  multi-channel  reactions,  and  a
proper theoretical treatment of such reactions requires the solution
of a time-dependent, multiple-well master equation. The problem
of benzene formation from aliphatic fuels is a prime example that
involves reactions over multiple wells leading to multiple products.
The importance of a master equation approach was alluded to by
one of us in a review [10] as a means to obtain quantitative res-
olution of this problem. Flame modeling studies [28] at the turn
of the century indicated the importance of bimolecular reactions
3 (propargyl) and
of resonance-stabilized free radicals such as C
C
5 (allyl) for the formation of the first aromatic ring, e.g. ben-
zene, from aliphatic fuels. The results from this (and prior model-
ing studies) spurred the development of the multiple-well master
equation [29,30] and its application to resolve quantitatively the
role of propargyl recombination in benzene (or phenyl + H) forma-
tion. While prior reviews [29] have dwelt at length on the devel-
opment and application of master equation methods to combus-
tion chemistry problems, we would like to highlight here again the
theoretical precepts relevant to these methods, as well as the dis-
tinctions between phenomenological rate coefficients and flux co-
efficients and conditions under which they become equivalent.

3 H

3 H

In coupled kinetics simulations, it is usually assumed that the
species are thermalized (so that temperature and other thermody-
namic variables are well defined) as they evolve through compet-
ing networks of reactions. However, recent experimental and the-
oretical studies [31–33] involving reactions in atmospheric chem-
istry (isoprene, methacrolein, and acetylene oxidation) have ques-
tioned this long-held view that complete thermalization precedes
reaction.  It  might  be  anticipated  that  if  such  non-thermal  reac-
tion sequences are evident in reactions at room-temperature, they
might  be  even  more  prevalent  under  conditions  encountered  in
high-temperature combustion. Reactions of weakly-bound free rad-
icals represent one such example where non-thermal effects are
important  under  combustion  conditions.  Reactions  involving  free
radicals play a central role in driving reactivity in combustion, and
consequently the kinetics of radical decomposition assumes impor-
tance  in  understanding  and  predicting  this  reactivity.  The  kinet-
ics of radical decomposition is complicated by the fact that they
are weakly bound, and at combustion temperatures, these radicals

can dissociate on the same timescale as internal energy relaxation
[34,35] . In this instance, as usual, the kinetics of the decomposition
depends on the initial energy distribution of the radical (it is never
completely thermal except at the high-pressure limit). This depen-
dence leads to a coupling of the radical formation and decomposi-
tion processes. In recent studies, the role of this prompt dissocia-
tion for the weakly-bound HCO radical [36] was elucidated, and in
the present article prompt dissociation in other hydrocarbon free
radicals is characterized. The process as a general phenomenon is
discussed at some length.

2 + O

The prompt dissociation of HCO [36,37] and prompt dissocia-
tion  and  non-thermal  reactions  with  O
2  involving  intermediates
in low-temperature propane oxidation [36–39] have revealed that
specific sequences of reactions (typically exothermic) can lead to
the formation of energized and highly reactive intermediates that
can facilitate “non-thermal” reactions. The inclusion of these non-
thermal reactions in detailed kinetics models was shown to im-
pact simulations of global combustion observables such as flame
speeds and radical formation. In another example of non-thermal
reactivity,  Burke  and  Klippenstein  [39]  posit  the  importance  of
∗∗
chemically  termolecular  reactions  mediated  by  ephemeral  HO
2
formed  from  exothermic  H + O
2  association.  In  particular,  mas-
ter  equation  calculations  by  Burke  and  Klippenstein  [39]  predict
∗∗ rad-
that a substantial fraction of the ephemeral energized HO
2
ical undergoes reactive collisions with flame radicals (H-atoms, O-
atoms, OH-radicals). Inclusion of these chemically termolecular re-
∗∗ + H → H
2 + H → HO
actions  such  as  H + O
2  was  shown  to
2
impact  simulations  of  hydrogen  flames.  The  work  was  later  ex-
tended by Barbet et al. [40] who developed a new rapid screening
procedure to identify other ephemeral radical complexes (mostly
formed  in  radical-molecule  reactions)  that  potentially  facilitated
subsequent chemically termolecular reactions with impact in com-
bustion [40] and energetic materials decomposition [41] . Lei and
Burke [42] have since performed master equation calculations of
one of the reactions identified by the screening procedure [40] in-
volving H + C
2  to confirm their impact – revealing order-
of-magnitude differences in ignition delays. Radical-radical recom-
bination  reactions  are  barrierless  and  typically  more  exothermic
than radical-molecule reactions. Jasper et al. [43] used quasiclas-
sical trajectories and a simple thermalization model to study the
competition between collisional cooling and non-thermal reactivity
∗ (formed by H + CH
for CH
2 . It was found
4
∗ with reactive radicals are orders of mag-
that the reactions of CH
4
nitude  faster  than  the  corresponding  thermal  reactions.  Further-
more,  non-thermal  reactions  accounted  for  a  significant  fraction
∗ formed from exothermic H + CH
3  as-
of the reactive flux of CH
4
sociation. Similarly, termolecular chemistry was facilitated [44] in
2 O ∗ formed from exothermic H + OH recombination.
the case of H
In the present article, similarities and mechanistic differences be-
tween termolecular reactivity induced in radical ephemeral com-
plexes and the closed-shell ephemeral complexes is characterized.
Some general criteria and specific conditions where such termolec-
ular reactions come to prominence are also discussed.

3 ) with H, O, OH, and O

2 + O

2 H

We want to clarify what we mean by the term “non-thermal”
in the discussion above. For both prompt dissociation and chemi-
cally termolecular reactions, one ends up representing these phe-
nomena in a phenomenological description by rate coefficients that
are functions of temperature, pressure, and perhaps composition,
just  like  all  the  other  reactions.  In  this  sense  they  are  thermal.
However,  what  distinguishes  these  reactions  from  the  others  is
that the reaction of an intermediate (to form the final products)
while it is vibrationally-rotationally relaxing occurs differently in
these two cases. For prompt dissociation, reaction of the interme-
diate  occurs  on  energy-relaxation  time  scales  as  a  consequence
of relaxation/dissociation coupling. For chemically termolecular re-
actions,  the  intermediate  reacts  through  a  bimolecular  reaction

3

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

with  an  external  agent  on  a  different  potential  energy  surface.
That makes both types of reaction different from the others, even
though non-equilibrium populations are present in intermediates
in many (most) other reactions. Rigorously speaking, both types of
reaction really are thermal. However, we sometimes use the term
“non-thermal” to focus attention on these particular aspects of the
reactions. The situation is further complicated because the initial
observations of these phenomena were first done in a non-thermal
context.

2 H

Non-adiabatic  or  spin-forbidden  reactions  are  typically  those
that involve the formation of products that differ in electron spin
from those of the reactants. In combustion chemistry, the most im-
portant  examples  of  such  non-adiabatic  reactions  are  those  that
involve reactions of O( 3 P) with CO and unsaturated hydrocarbons
4 .  Jasper  [45]  studied  the  reaction  O( 3 P) + CO → CO
such  as  C
2
and  pointed  out  the  importance  of  multidimensional  effects  in
properly characterizing the kinetics of this important combustion
reaction. In recent work, Li et al. [46] theoretically characterized
the product distribution from the reaction of O( 3 P) with C
4 us-
ing an a priori treatment for the intersystem crossing (ISC) rate.
A detailed description of the methods that have been developed
to treat such non-adiabatic reactions is summarized in this review
below. The application of these methods is expected to greatly en-
hance our predictive capability of non-adiabatic reaction rates in
traditional combustion chemistry, as well as in other applications
such as ozone or plasma enhanced combustion [47] .

2 H

We are currently  on the verge of having theoretical methods
that are truly predictive broadly throughout gas phase combustion
chemistry, and this milestone has already been reached in many
cases, particularly for small molecules and simple elementary re-
actions. The Combustion Institute’s 50 th  anniversary plenary lec-
ture  on  combustion  chemistry  [48]  suggests  that  the  history  of
the  CI  and  its  symposia  reflect  the  evolution  of  gas-phase  reac-
tion kinetics with significant concert between experiment and the-
ory for simple elementary reactions. The future portends an evo-
lution of theoretical approaches and techniques to deal with more
complex reactions or entire sub-mechanisms of reactions. In fact,
the goal of the present article is to illustrate how theory can in-
form modeling to produce accurate chemical kinetics mechanisms.
In combustion, molecules are exposed to a dynamic range of phys-
ical and chemical environments, and therefore it affords opportu-
nities to probe and question underlying fundamental assumptions
commonly made (thermalization, binary-collision etc.) in simulat-
ing chemical reactivity for gas-phase systems. Consequently, a pri-
mary  goal of this article is  to highlight the  theoretical advance-
ments and research themes that have come to the fore as a result
of the concerted and natural interactions between modeling, the-
ory, and experiment. In particular, the focus of the present review
is on the development of the master equation method, relevance of
“non-thermal” reactions (prompt dissociations, termolecular chem-
istry), a-priori energy transfer, non-adiabatic reactions, and trans-
port properties. Although we do not want to minimize the contin-
ued importance of mitigating air pollution – NO x , SO x , soot, green-
house gases – perhaps the principal driving force of 21 st  century
combustion chemistry is the development of kinetics models for
large-molecule fuels, models that contain hundreds of species and
thousands of reactions. We call this “dealing with complexity”, and
we start with that.

2. Dealing with Complexity

The hydrogen oxidation mechanism published in 1937 by Kas-
sel [49] consists of 5 elementary reactions, while recent mecha-
nisms (see e.g. [50–52] ) consist of about 20. The number of reac-
tions considered to describe methane combustion has grown from
12–50 in the seventies [53] to more than 300 (see e.g. [50] ). To

4

describe the combustion of larger-molecule fuels, the number of
reactions that are included in detailed mechanisms has increased
even more dramatically, to a point that one of the biggest chal-
lenges of  chemical kinetics modeling in  the twenty-first century
is the size of the models. For instance, the mechanism of methyl
stearate lists 43,4 4 4 reactions and 6,203 species [54] .

The  accuracy  and  detail  expected  from  these  models  is  ever
growing,  because  practical  applications,  e.g.,  advanced  internal
combustion devices [55] and reducing pollutant formation [56] , re-
quire them to perform optimally in a large pressure and tempera-
ture range. This development is also supported by more sensitive
and  multiplexed  experimental  techniques  (e.g.  [57–64] ).  Luckily,
the available computational power is more than sufficient to inte-
grate thousands of kinetic equations in homogeneous ignition or 1-
D flame scenarios, enabling certain types of comparisons with ex-
periments. However, the concept of Brobdingnagian mechanisms is
undermined by the fact that only a small fraction of the rate coef-
ficients appearing in these models have ever been studied directly,
and an even smaller fraction were studied at conditions relevant
to  combustion  applications.  Consequently,  these  mechanisms  are
assembled based on a set of rate rules and estimates, decreasing
their predictive power significantly. Also, the traditional approach
of developing a mechanism “by hand” is infeasible, especially for
larger-molecule fuels. One solution to this problem is to generate
the mechanism automatically by computer. We first introduce this
approach briefly, and then we describe how automated theoretical
chemical calculations can impact such effort s on the large scale.
Another, entirely different approach is to create simplified mecha-
nisms directly in a way that they can be improved systematically
through theoretical chemical kinetics. Such a strategy is also de-
scribed in this section. Finally we discuss how theoretical chemical
kinetics changes the way we can calculate uncertainties and sensi-
tivities in complex combustion systems.

The  basic  idea  behind  automatic  mechanism-generating  soft-
ware is to develop a system of algorithms for the expansion of a
set of reactants into a larger set of products, along with the con-
comitant  set  of  rate  coefficients,  thermochemistry,  and  transport
parameters. A detailed description of automatic mechanism gen-
eration strategies can be found, for instance, in Refs. [65–71] . As
described by Van de Vijver et al. [65] , there are three key ingredi-
ents to mechanism generation. The first ingredient is the uniquely
represented  chemical  species,  which  have  to  be  associated  with
thermodynamic and transport properties. The second ingredient is
the ability of these models to identify reaction steps and associ-
ated rate coefficients. The third ingredient is the way the model
is generated, the principles that guide the expansion of the model
(i.e., the addition of new reactions and species) and the principles
that determine the termination of such a process. Note that most
mechanism generators include a core set of small-species reactions
(the seed mechanism) at the beginning of the generation process,
because it is understood that these reactions almost always play
some role during combustion.

Theoretical kinetics clearly impacts the first two ingredients of
mechanism  generation.  However,  we  would  like  to  mention  an
important  aspect  of  the  third  ingredient  first.  The  balance  be-
tween  expansion  and  termination  is  crucial,  because  including
too many reactions or eliminating too few can lead to extremely
large mechanisms. Mistakes in the opposite direction lead to in-
complete mechanisms. Interestingly, a mechanism-generating algo-
rithm can produce both problems at the same time, i.e., generat-
ing very large, yet in fundamental ways incomplete, mechanisms.
This  is  especially  problematic  for  conditions  where  the  macro-
scopic behavior is driven by complex feedback loops, such as in
low-temperature autoignition [72] . This is because the underlying
chemistry is very non-linear and is controlled largely by ephemeral
intermediates,  such  as  QOOH  radicals  [73] .  If  the  termination  is

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

based on rates, the slow formation of crucial intermediates might
be either discarded, or can only be kept at the expense of keep-
ing too many slow and also irrelevant reactions, leading to an ex-
plosion in the model size during the generation phase. Rule-based
termination criteria, i.e., when the user specifies rules to include
or exclude reactions, allow the inclusion of specific feedback loops,
but perhaps at the expense of excluding unrecognized ones. Note,
however, that the reason to use automated mechanism generators
is not necessarily that we do not in principle know which reactions
to include and which ones not to, but because keeping track of our
“wish” is too difficult without the aid of the computers.

Automatic mechanism-generating software typically represents
chemical species as graphs, which allows for facile decomposition
into  their  respective  functional  groups.  The  thermochemistry  for
most species is estimated, for instance by using group additivity.
Some codes offer on-the-fly improvements for these estimates via
quantum chemical calculations. For instance RMG [74] can spawn
quantum chemistry calculations on-the-fly to obtain more realistic
thermochemical parameters, which is particularly useful for poly-
cyclic species, where group-additivity is significantly less accurate
[75] . However, the advent of exascale computational resources of-
fers an unprecedented opportunity to invoke computational chem-
istry to improve these estimates.

Recently Keçeli et al. [76] introduced a set of procedures, and
a corresponding code called PACT (Predictive Automated Combus-
tion Thermochemistry), to calculate thermochemistry in a way that
is tailored for combustion chemistry. Importantly, they created a
framework that works in tandem with the automated mechanism
generator RMG [74] , which provides the list of species for which
thermochemistry  is  required.  The  RMG  structures  are  converted
to 3D structures using the Openbabel [77] chemoinformatics tool,
(an  alternative  would  be  RDKit  [78] ),  and  a  series  of  quantum
chemistry  calculations  of  increasing  accuracy  is  carried  out.  Par-
tition functions are calculated using an RRHO + 1D hindered rotor
approximation with the possibility of more advanced treatments
as well. The PACT code offers a high level of flexibility, but it is
instructive  to  mention  briefly  the  protocol  they  applied  to  their
demonstration  system,  butane  oxidation,  where  the  calculations
were  carried  out  for  160  important  species.  The  torsional  space
was sampled at the ωB97X-D/6-31G ∗ level using Monte Carlo sam-
pling;  the  M06-2X/cc-pVTZ  level  of  theory  was  used  for  the  1D
torsional potentials followed by the B2PLYP-D3/cc-pVTZ geometry
optimization  and  frequency  analysis.  Then  they  used  a  series  of
cc-pV n Z-F12 ( n = D,T,Q) basis sets in conjunction with CCSD(T)-F12
and MP2 methods to approach the complete basis set limit. Catas-
trophic errors arising from the quantum chemistry codes (e.g., SCF
non-convergence) or inconsistencies between various methods are
the Achilles heel of automated frameworks. Keçeli et al. [76] cre-
ated  a  complex  set  of  fallback  options  for  such  cases  in  their
code.

Chemical  reactions  in  automated  frameworks  are  typically
grouped into various classes, such as H-abstraction, beta-scission,
cyclization, etc. The rate parameters for these reaction classes are
based on rules, e.g. group additivities, tree structure averaging, etc.
These rate rules are applied to the reactant and determine what
the products and the corresponding rate coefficients are.

Recently,  we  and  other  research  teams  have  been  developing
methods to generate ab initio rate coefficients automatically. These
methods will enable filling the gaps in large chemical mechanisms
and likely will discover unknown reaction pathways and trends for
certain molecules or reaction classes. Coupled with automatic reac-
tion mechanism generators and with the automated thermochem-
istry packages such as PACT, these methods will become a power-
ful tool in the hands of modelers: with the emergence of exascale
computers, it will soon be possible to determine thermochemistry
directly and carry out master equation calculations for thousands

of reactions. The latter is especially crucial, because most mecha-
nism generation methodologies (RMG is one exception [79,80] ) do
not include the ability to estimate the pressure dependence of the
reactions.

The automation of theoretical kinetics calculations can be ap-
proached in various ways. Here we describe a few approaches that
are specifically created to treat combustion-relevant reactions in an
automated framework.

Often many reactions in a detailed mechanism have very simi-
lar saddle point structures, e.g., all hydrogen abstraction reactions
have similar geometrical motifs in the reactive region, and a denovo
unbiased pathway discovery tool is not required. Instead, a highly
efficient way of calculating up to thousands of reactions in a re-
action family is more helpful. This is the aim of AutoTST [81,82] .
Bhoorasingh et al. have shown that the interatomic distances be-
tween the reacting atoms at the optimized transition state (sad-
dle point) are highly predictable based on the chemical functional
groups adjacent to the reacting atoms. They used a simple linear
decomposition and regression, arranging the parameters in a de-
cision  tree,  and  found  that  most  estimated  distances  are  within
0.05  ̊A of the optimized ones. These interatomic distances are used
to modify a bounds matrix used to create 3D geometries via dis-
tance geometry (using the RDKit software [78] ) and then optimize
to a saddle point. High-pressure limit rate coefficients are calcu-
lated  following a  conformational search  and  confirming that  the
correct  saddle  point  was  found.  AutoTST  has  been  developed  in
conjunction with RMG.

Van de Vijver et al. [83] have implemented on-the-fly quantum
chemistry calculations to improve the kinetic data in their mecha-
nism generator called Genesys [84] . In this module, similar to Au-
toTST, the reactant and the product are known and the task is to
find a saddle point and the corresponding rate coefficient. Genesys
constructs 3D geometries of reactants and products using bounds
matrices; it refines these initial-guess structures with first a force
field and then with a cheap DFT method, followed by what consti-
tutes the final level of theory, e.g., CBS-QB3. The transition states
are constructed similarly with the additional information about the
atoms in the reacting center provided in the form of a template.
The code searches the conformational space and tests for the sad-
dle  point  connectivity  before  calculating  high-pressure-limit  rate
coefficients.

Cavallotti et al. developed the EStokTP [85] code to treat com-
monly  appearing  reaction  types  very  accurately:  abstraction,  ad-
dition, isomerization, and beta-decomposition. EStokTP, similar to
AutoTST and Genesys, characterizes one reaction at a time. Its dis-
tinguishing feature is the sophistication of the calculations, includ-
ing such features as multidimensional tunneling and anharmonic-
ity. Similar to PACT, it has many fallbacks when errors or inconsis-
tencies arise. EStokTP generates results in a way that they can be
stitched together into a complete master equation input to yield
pressure and temperature dependent rate coefficients.

There has been a recent explosion in methods to explore PESs,
summarized in several reviews, e.g., Refs. [86–88] . Several methods
have great potential in combustion chemistry, for instance GRRM
[89] or boxed molecular dymanics [90] . Van de Vijver and Zádor
developed KinBot [91–95] , which explores complete potential en-
ergy surfaces to find transition states and to identify products. Kin-
Bot  uses  finely  tuned  reaction  templates  to  find  reactive  saddle
points and cover a large set of reactions relevant in combustion
chemistry.  As  an  example,  in  Fig.  2 ,  we  show  the  unimolecular
decomposition  pathways  found  by  KinBot  for  a  potential  biofuel
molecule, γ -valerolactone  [91] .  Previous  studies  [96,97]  have  re-
ported 5 pathways, while KinBot found 28, including 9 new ones
that are below the lowest homolytic dissociation channel. A pre-
vious version of KinBot [98] also performed well in a comparative
study [92] (see also [99] ), where various methods [100–102] were

5

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Fig. 2.  Potential energy surface of γ -valerolactone decomposition as calculated by KinBot [91]. Reactions marked with dashed blue lines are reported in the literature [96,97] ,
reactions marked with solid green and the dotted gray lines are new reactions, not previously reported. The green pathways are below the lowest homolytic bond breaking
pathway.

tested on the decomposition pathways of a small ketohydroperox-
ide.

However, the exploration of the reactive PES is just the first step
in establishing rate coefficients and is not necessarily the most ex-
pensive one. In KinBot the stationary points are refined automati-
cally by finding the lowest energy conformers and by carrying out
a  set  of  geometry  optimization  and  energy  calculations  at  theo-
retical levels prescribed by the user. 1-D hindered-rotor potentials
are also calculated to account for some of the anharmonicities in
the kinetics calculations, and symmetry numbers are determined
automatically.  The  results  from  a  complete  PES  search  are  auto-
matically filtered to establish unique pathways and species and are
stitched together as inputs for the MESS [103,104] or the MESMER
[84,105] master equation solvers.

It is important to note that single-conformer treatments with
1-D hindered rotor approximations, routinely used in the frame-
works of for instance KinBot or AutoTST and in kinetics calculations
in general, can lead to non-negligible uncertainties in the calcu-
lated rate coefficients. An important goal and a current challenge
in the present century is the development of (automated) meth-
ods that can treat anharmonicity and conformational entropy rou-
tinely and are applicable to relatively large molecules as well. One
such approach is the Multistructural VTST and Multipath VTST de-
veloped  by  Truhlar  and  coworkers,  which  demonstrated  that  in-
cluding multiple conformers of the reactants and transition states
explicitly can have enormous effects on predicted reaction rates.
[106] This advance is covered in detail in a recent review [107] and
has been applied for instance to the reactions of an OOQOOH rad-
ical. [108] As mentioned above, EStokTP [85] also allows the in-
clusion  of  anharmonicities  by  using  the  advanced  capabilities  of
the multidimensional hinder rotor treatment implemented in the
MESS suite. This requires the calculation of Hessian along dihedral
scans, and the approach also includes quantum effects associated
with the torsional degrees of freedom.

Barrierless  reactions  pose  a  somewhat  different  difficulty  for
automated kinetics frameworks, because in the absence of a sad-
dle  point,  a  wider  region  of  the  PES  needs  to  be  characterized.
Moreover,  the  relevant  part  of  the  PES  often  has  a  large  multi-
reference  character  and  requires  CASPT2  or  similar  energy  eval-
uations. While for instance KinBot can enumerate the barrierless

channels  and  characterize  the  asymptotes,  it  does  not  provide  a
black-box method currently to calculate rate coefficients for these
channels. EStokTP [85] has a framework to approximate barrierless
channels via a combination of constrained scans and VTST. Chen
and  Goldsmith  [109]  recently  developed  a  method  to  accelerate
the calculation of rate coefficients for barrierless reactions by com-
bining  variable-reaction-coordinate  transition-state  theory  (VRC-
TST) [110–112] with atomistic machine learning [113] . They tested
2 + NH
2 + CH
the method on the CH
2 ,
2 + O
CH
2  reactions and found that they
2 , and CH
can  reduce  the  number  of  single-point  CASPT2  calculations  by
close to an order of magnitude and agree with the CASPT2 refer-
ence case within 20%. Further developments in this area will likely
enable the inclusion of barrierless calculations in automated work-
flows.

3 + CH
3 , NO
3 CHCH + O

2 CH + O

2 , NO

3 CCH

3 , CH

An alternative to generating a large mechanism for the combus-
tion of complex fuels (and assigning thousands of rate coefficients)
is to use an approximate method. A potentially viable method is
the rate-controlled, constrained-equilibrium approach (RCCE) orig-
inally introduced by Keck [114] . The RCCE method is based on the
observation that in many instances the time evolution of complex
chemical systems is governed by a relatively small number of rate-
controlling reactions that impose slowly changing constraints on
the state of the system. Mathematically one minimizes the Gibbs
free energy subject to a set of time-dependent constraints – a con-
straint is simply a linear combination of mole fractions. An advan-
tage of the method is that one needs to specify rate coefficients
only for reactions that convert molecules from one constraint (or
group)  to  another.  Another  advantage  is  that  one  can  continue
to deal only with elementary reactions without introducing global
steps. In the limit that the number of constraints equals the num-
ber of species in the problem, the RCCE model becomes equiva-
lent to a detailed mechanism. One might view the relationship be-
tween an RCCE model and a detailed comprehensive mechanism
as somewhat analogous to that between statistical mechanics and
molecular dynamics in applications to thermodynamics and reac-
tion  rate  theory.  Research  ultimately  should  be  focused  on  how
to define the constraints optimally. Perhaps a way to start might
be to include all the small molecules (perhaps the species ordinar-
3 mechanism) as their own constraints, with the only
ily in a C

0 -C

6

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

others  being  the  fuel  concentrations,  the  number  of  moles  (per
unit mass), the elements, and the total free valence. This model
would still be complicated, because rate coefficients for producing
the small molecules from the larger ones would still have to be
specified, but the approach may be worth further exploring.

Modelers  often  use  uncertainty  quantification  (UQ)  to  learn
about  the  total  model  uncertainty  and  the  contribution  of  each
reaction  or  reaction  parameter  to  it.  Bayesian-type  UQ  methods
(e.g., [115] ), moreover, can determine the necessary and sufficient
complexity of a model to describe the (also uncertain) experimen-
tal observables. This is a crucial question in chemical mechanism
development, because despite the advances in experimental tech-
niques,  there  are  always  more  parameters  in  the  kinetic  model
than  what  is  statistically  supported  by  the  data.  This  overfitting
can lead to fundamentally different reaction mechanisms describ-
ing the same physical system, as shown in the paper of Hansen
et al. [116] on the example of isobutanol oxidation. It remains a
largely unsolved problem, however, how to keep model complex-
ity at the right level while preserving the physical foundation of
these mechanisms.

The conceptually simplest way to assess the uncertainties of a
chemical kinetics model is to sample the probability density func-
tion (PDF) of all rate coefficients randomly and map out the re-
sulting PDF of the solution. However, this requires too many sam-
ples to be feasible for large models, especially if contributions of
individual  reactions  are  sought,  which  is  key  to  systematic  and
efficient  model  development.  One  way  to  overcome  this  prob-
lem is to apply quasi-random sampling techniques, such as Latin
hypercube  sampling  or  Fourier  Amplitude  Sensitivity  Test  (FAST)
and its variants. Another approach is to filter out the parameters
that have clearly negligible effect on the results prior to a more
rigorous  analysis  in  order  to  decrease  the  computational  cost  of
the latter. One popular method to do this is the Morris method
[117,118] . A third strategy is to create an expansion that approx-
imates the model output as a function of the parameters of the
model,  and  then  to  use  this  response  surface  for  further  analy-
sis. Such methods include High Dimensional Model Representation
(HDMR, see,  e.g.  [119,120] ) or  Polynomial  Chaos Expansion (PCE,
see, e.g. [115,121,122] ); the latter is implemented in CHEMKIN-PRO
[8] . And finally, the computationally cheapest way is to carry out
a local uncertainty analysis [123,124] , which is essentially equiv-
alent to the standard error propagation formula. It only requires
knowledge of  the  first-order  sensitivity coefficients  of the  calcu-
lated value Y with respect to all of the uncertain parameters p
j ,
dY / dp
j , and the variances of the parameters. Local uncertainty anal-
ysis captures most of the effects in a typical chemical mechanism
(see,  e.g.  [118] ),  but  for  models  with  large  parameter  uncertain-
ties  and  high  nonlinearity  it  can  be  misleading,  because  it  ne-
glects important parameter correlations (see, e.g. [125] ). The cal-
culation of the local sensitivities is also conveniently implemented
in CHEMKIN.

Uncertainty analysis techniques do not form the central topic
of this article, and the reader is referred to the recent review of
Tomlin  [126]  and  the  books  of  Saltelli  [127,128]  and  of Turányi
and  Tomlin  [129]  for  a  detailed  overview  of  popular  methods
and examples. A closely related topic, discussed briefly below, is
model optimization (for an early example see [130] ), which, inte-
grated together with experimental and other data enables the sys-
tematic evolution of kinetics models. Such integrated frameworks
are, for instance, the Process Informatics Model (PrIMe, [131,132] ),
the Chemical Kinetic Experiment Data (ChemKED, [133] ), the Re-
SpecTh  [134,135]  standards,  the  CloudFlame  [132,136]  database,
or  Multiscale  Informatics  [137,138] .  In  the  following  we  would
like  to  discuss  some  aspects  of  uncertainty  analysis  and
model  optimization  specific  to  twenty-first-century  combustion
modeling.

7

Chemical mechanisms typically contain rate coefficients in an
Arrhenius  form,  suggesting  that  both  the  pre-exponential  factor
( A ) and temperature-dependence (encoded in E and n ) can carry
uncertainty;  however,  chemical  data  evaluations  often  just  pro-
vide temperature-independent uncertainties for the total rate co-
efficient. It should also be recognized that the Arrhenius expres-
sion at this point is simply a convenient fitting formula, and the
physics behind its parameterization is long outworn; for instance,
many  rate  coefficients  can  only  be  represented  formally  as  the
sum  of  two  extended  Arrhenius  expressions.  This  is  especially
the  case  for  pressure-dependent  multiwell  reactions,  where  the
complex interplay of temperature and pressure can result in k ( T;
p = const) curves that have a minimum or maximum. Current best
practice  in  treating  rate  coefficient  parameter  uncertainties  is  to
establish temperature-dependent total uncertainty factors for the
rate coefficients (see the related papers of Turányi and co-workers
[139,140] ), although there is not always enough information to do
so.  Pressure-dependent  reactions  create  further  difficulties.  First,
one would need to parameterize the PDF as a function of both T
and p . The second complication is that the rate coefficients of re-
actions that take place on one multiwell potential energy surface
are strongly and non-linearly coupled with each other. Obtaining
these correlated uncertainty bounds with traditional methods (e.g.
analyzing experimental data) is almost impossible. Note that there
is also a great deal of correlation among experimentally measured
rate coefficients, because it is almost never possible to isolate a re-
action completely. Tracing back and mapping out the correlations
among these rate coefficients is a very difficult task, although it
could be tackled with an approach similar to that used in the Ac-
tive Thermochemical Tables (ATcT) of Ruscic [141] . LaGrotta et al.
[142] describe ongoing effort s toward such a goal using the Multi-
scale Informatics approach discussed below.

Theoretical kinetics provides a relatively straightforward solu-
tion for the evaluation of the potentially 2-D (pressure and tem-
perature) and correlated PDFs of the elementary rate coefficients.
Typical theoretical calculations of rate coefficients involve a range
of fundamental and, therefore, less strongly correlated errors in the
parameters,  such  as  barrier  heights,  vibrational  frequencies,  tun-
neling coefficient, collisional energy transfer parameters, etc. (Note,
however, that theoretical calculations are often fitted to some ex-
perimental  data,  resulting  in  strong  correlations  between  for  in-
stance barrier heights and collisional energy transfer parameters.)
Moreover, the extent  of the uncertainties of these parameters is
relatively  well  understood  (for  caveats,  see  Ref.  [143] )  as  it  is
the central question in electronic-structure method development.
Propagating the uncertainties of these parameters provides a way
to use ab initio uncertainties in the analysis of global mechanisms.
To date, only a few studies have been carried out that rigorously
explore  the  uncertainties  in  theoretical  rate-coefficient  calcula-
tions due to uncertainties in the quantum chemistry [138,144–149] .
Goldsmith  et  al.  [144]  studied  the  n -propyl + O
2  reaction  using
HDMR and found that the 3 σ variances can be as large a factor of
4–6. Most uncertainties decrease with temperature (anharmonic-
ity is the exception), while their pressure dependence varies: the
uncertainties of sequential reactions decrease, while those of well-
skipping reactions increase with pressure. Prager et al. [145] iden-
tified the parameters causing most of the uncertainty in the calcu-
3 + OH → CH
lations of the CH
2 O reaction
rate coefficient. Using Bayesian inference along with experimental
data they also inferred the joint PDFs of some key ab initio param-
eters. Xing et al. [146] studied the decomposition of ethanol. They
found that in the high-pressure limit, the uncertainties are con-
trolled by the uncertainties related to transition state theory (not
surprisingly), while in the fall-off regime collisional energy trans-
fer parameters matter more. A related and quite remarkable exam-
ple is the work of Som et al. [19] , where the effect of tunneling

3 CH(OH)CH

3 C(OH)CH

3 + H

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

on a full-scale engine model was investigated. Uncertainty analysis
can also directly motivate detailed calculations on elementary re-
actions, resulting in greatly improved and physically based model
predictions, as was demonstrated on a methanol oxidation mech-
anism  [150,151] .  Burke  and  co-workers  investigated  the  uncer-
tainties  and  most  influential  parameters  in  OH + HO
2 O + O
2
[149] and various multi-well reactions in low-temperature propane
oxidation  [148] – identifying uncertainties stemming  from  treat-
ment  of  barrier  heights,  partition  functions,  tunneling,  and  even
non-thermal effects. They also optimized and quantified uncertain-
ties imposed on the reaction parameters by rate constant measure-
ments and macroscopic experiments.

2 = H

Uncertainty analysis of chemical mechanisms should, however,
be extended beyond rate coefficients. An obvious first step is to
include  the  uncertainties  in  the  thermochemistry  (see,  e.g.  Refs.
[118,152,153] ), which ideally should be done in a way that auto-
matically satisfies detailed balance. Moreover, transport parameters
can also have a significant effect on calculated flame properties.
We can now calculate many of these parameters accurately ab ini-
tio (see Section 8 and Ref. [154] ). While it is in principle possible to
maintain their consistency with the collisional energy transfer pa-
rameters in the reaction system, no such coupled uncertainty cal-
culation has been carried out to date.

Uncertainty  analysis  of  phenomenological  rate  coefficients,
however, can only be carried out if the underlying ab initio model
exists. Although efforts are underway to generate large numbers
of rate coefficients automatically using the previously mentioned
automated kinetics codes, currently a more pragmatic question is
how to handle the vast number of rate coefficients based purely on
rate rules in these large mechanisms. One extreme is to vary the
related rate coefficients together, thus ignoring that the very exis-
tence of a rate rule is an approximation, while the other extreme
is to vary the related rate coefficients independently, which in turn
ignores the physical similarity among a group of reactions. The two
approaches can yield significantly different results. Clearly, the first
approach is computationally more tractable, and it was followed in
the recent work of Prager et al. [155] , Fridlyand et al. [156] or Gao
et al [157] .

Critical data evaluations will keep playing a very important role
in uncertainty analysis studies, and ultimately in mechanism devel-
opment. However, it remains to be seen how the traditional data
evaluation process can keep up with the pace of mechanism de-
velopment, and whether it can advise modelers on uncertainties
related to rate rules. Moreover, as pointed out above, there would
be a need to rethink the way rate coefficient uncertainties are rep-
resented in these evaluations.

An approach to kinetics modeling that has found a following
is mechanism “optimization”. As mentioned above, it is related to
global sensitivity and uncertainty analysis. To “optimize” a mech-
anism one starts with what ostensibly is a good mechanism and
then performs a weighted least-squares fit of the rate coefficients
to a set of “targets” (experimental results such as flame speeds, ig-
nition delay times, (peak) concentrations, etc.), thus determining
an optimum set of rate coefficients that best fits the target data.
In practice, only sensitive rate coefficients are included in the op-
timization,  and  rate  coefficients  are  only  allowed  to  vary  within
pre-defined, “feasible” limits. The weighting in the objective func-
tion allows the different targets to be weighted differently. Usually
the optimization is preceded by some sort of solution mapping or
construction of a response surface that gives in an algebraic form
the response of the model to changes in the rate coefficients. Of
course the motivation for this approach is the belief that the final
(optimized) rate coefficients will be closer to the true rate coef-
ficients than the ones in the original model. In other words, one
seeks to access kinetic information that is buried in the results of
the macroscopic experiments. Unfortunately this goal has proved

difficult to achieve, and optimization has met with limited success
when applied without including important features of the physical
system, such as the dependence of uncertainties as a function of
pressure and/or temperature. A common occurrence, even for rel-
atively simple fuels like ethylene and propane, is that a significant
fraction  of  the  rate  coefficients  included  in  the  optimization  are
driven to their uncertainty limits by the optimization process. Per-
haps the target experiments are not as accurate as presumed, or
maybe the uncertainties in the rate coefficients are larger than ex-
pected. It may be that one needs a larger number of targets for the
process to be effective. However, it is also possible that the original
model could be flawed, a result of incorrect pressure dependence
for some reactions, incorrect products, or incorrect T and p depen-
dence of the rate coefficients for complex multiple-well, multiple-
product reactions. Good examples of the latter where such compli-
3 + OH. Al-
3 + O
cations may arise include C
ternatively, the model may be missing something even more fun-
damental, such as prompt dissociation of weakly-bound free radi-
cals or chemically termolecular reactions, both discussed at some
length below.

4 + O, and CH

2 , C

2 H

2 H

A more recent optimization and uncertainty quantification ap-
proach  from  Burke  [137,142,148,149]  addresses  the above  men-
tioned difficulties related to rate coefficient uncertainties in tem-
perature  and  pressure  dependence  and  challenges  in  extracting
accurate  kinetic  information  from  macroscopic  experiments.  The
“Multiscale Informatics” approach directly embeds theoretical cal-
culations  into  the  kinetic  model  optimization  process  to  handle
temperature- and pressure-dependent uncertainties in rate coeffi-
cients. Multiscale Informatics combines physics-based models and
data spanning molecular to macroscopic scales. It uses theoretical
kinetics  calculations  to  relate  molecular-level  parameters  to  rate
coefficients for the reactions in the kinetic model and then uses
physical models to relate rate coefficients to macroscopic observ-
ables. This multiscale framework then allows simultaneous least-
squares optimization against ab initio electronic structure calcula-
tions, rate constant measurements, and measured observables in
macroscopic  multi-reaction  systems.  In  its  first  implementation,
MSI  helped  to  resolve  the  long-standing  debate  over  the  appar-
ently anomalous temperature dependence of OH + HO
2 O + O
2
– providing  a  consistent  interpretation  of  previous  experimental
and theoretical data that significantly differed from previous pro-
posed  rate  constant  expressions  [149] .  Independent  experiments
[158] and theoretical calculations [159] demonstrated the validity
of  the  optimized  molecular  parameters,  rate  constants,  and  pre-
dictions of the MSI model [137] – implying that MSI can extract
physically  meaningful  kinetics  information  from  macroscopic  ex-
periments.  In  that  vein,  LaGrotta  et  al.  propose  the  use  of  MSI
to reinterpret raw kinetic data to unravel the implicit connections
among derived kinetic data in a spirit similar to that of the Active
Thermochemical Tables [142] .

2 = H

Burke  also  envisions  a  “robotic  scientific  community” where
Multiscale-Informatics-driven  automated  calculations,  such  as
those discussed above, and automated experiments will improve
our  description  of  combustion  models  at  orders  of  magnitudes
faster than it is possible today [137] . This robotic scientific com-
munity would be designed to mimic the typical process by which
the scientific community makes accurate kinetic models – i.e. the
model, once created, would then be subjected to a repeated pro-
cess  of  selecting  what  data  are  useful,  generating  such  data  ex-
perimentally  or  computationally,  and  integrating  these  data  into
improved models [137] . While each of these tasks has tradition-
ally required time-intensive effort, there are, or may soon be, tech-
niques that automate these tasks. For example, in addition to exist-
ing tools for automated initial model creation (as discussed above),
Bayesian Design of Experiments can automate data selection, au-
tomated theoretical kinetics calculations (as discussed above) can

8

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

automate  computational  data  generation,  automated  experimen-
tal platforms (under development in the Burke group) can auto-
mate experimental data generation, and inverse uncertainty quan-
tification (UQ) (such as Multiscale Informatics discussed above) can
automate  integration  of  the  generated  data  into  improved  mod-
els. Linking these automated tools could be used to create an au-
tomated platform for rapid kinetic model development and vali-
dation [137] . Burke and his group have been creating such links
via Bayesian Design of Experiments and Calculations, inverse UQ
of theoretical and experimental data using Multiscale Informatics,
and an automated, high-throughput jet stirred reactor under devel-
opment as well as teaming with Richard West to link these to RMG
and AutoTST for full automation of model creation and selection,
generation, and integration of theoretical and experimental data.

3. Phenomenological Rate Coefficients, Flux Coefficients, Steady
States, and the Master Equation

The early years of the twenty-first century brought with them
an acute awareness of the importance in combustion of reactions
involving potential energy wells, particularly reactions (either bi-
molecular or  unimolecular) with multiple, interconnected  poten-
tial wells and multiple bimolecular product channels. The theoret-
ical treatment of such reactions requires the solution of a time-
dependent,  multiple-well  master  equation  (ME).  While  generat-
ing  the  solution  to  such  a  problem  is  straightforward,  obtaining
phenomenological rate coefficients from that solution (the quan-
tities  required  for  chemical  kinetics  models)  has  proven  to  be  a
confusing task. This confusion largely arises from trying to iden-
tify  rate  constants  (or  rate  coefficients)  as  flux  coefficients  un-
der steady-state conditions. This approach is understandable, be-
cause the problems most commonly treated in chemical kinetics
textbooks are simple abstractions and single-well, single-product-
channel dissociations. Both of these types of reactions are special
cases in which flux coefficients are exactly rate constants. In gen-
eral, however, they are not. The following paragraphs are intended
to highlight the differences between flux coefficients and rate con-
stants, and to illustrate when and how they can become equiva-
lent. However, first we want to describe the eigenvalue/eigenvector
spectrum  of  the  transition  matrix  of  the  ME  and,  in  qualitative
terms, how phenomenological rate constants arise from this spec-
trum. Except for the discussion in Section 9 all reactions/collisions
in this article are assumed to take place adiabatically on a single
potential energy surface.

The best method of obtaining the rate constants from the ME
(of which we are aware) is the CSE (chemically significant eigen-
value,  eigenvector,  or  eigenmode)  method.  Let  us  review  its  es-
sential features briefly; more detail can be found in a number of
places [18,29,160–166] . For completeness, nevertheless, we include
a discussion of the master equation, its solution, and some of its
physical properties in the Appendix. Although the results are quite
general, we restrict our attention here to a one-dimensional ME
with the total internal energy E as the independent variable. In the
CSE methodology one expands the solution of the master equation
in terms of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the transition ma-
trix. The “species” populations are given by

N−1 (cid:2)

X i (t) =

λ
a i j e

j t

i = 1 , ..., S

(1)

j=0

i ( t ) is the fractional population of species (or configura-
where X
tion) i , either a well or set of fragments; a
ij is a coefficient in the
expansion, which is a function of both the initial conditions and
the components of the j th eigenvector of the transition matrix; λ
j
is the eigenvalue corresponding to the j th eigenmode; S is the num-
ber of species; and N is the number of eigenmodes of the transi-

9

tion matrix. All the eigenvalues are negative or zero and are num-
ij = −(cid:6)X
bered in order of increasing absolute value. Note that a
ij
for j ≥ 1, where (cid:6)X
ij is the change in the population of species i
that accompanies eigenmode j . If the system is conservative, λ
0 = 0
and the corresponding eigenvector contains the equilibrium solu-
tion to the ME, i.e. the long-time ( t → ∞ ) solution. If the system
is not conservative, there is no λ
0 = 0 eigenvalue. In this case, all
the population ends up in the sinks as t → ∞ . In addition to the
long-time population distribution among the sinks, the other coef-
ficients in the eigenmode expansion for the sink populations are
also  not  directly  available  from  the  ME  solution.  However,  they
can be obtained “after the fact”, as discussed by Miller and Klip-
penstein [160] , so that the complete solution to the ME is always
available in the form of Eq. (1) whether the system is conservative
or not.

To get a feel for what underlies an eigenvalue spectrum let us
consider a simple example. Fig. 3 shows such a spectrum as a func-
tion of pressure with T = 10 0 0 K for a simple single-well problem.
Initially this problem was a single-well approximation to the C
2 H
5
+ O
2  reaction [167] . However, the parameters in the problem have
been modified substantially in order to highlight the points of in-
terest here, i.e. the types of eigenmodes that may be encountered,
their character, and their function, and to eliminate unnecessary
complication. Real research problems have multiple wells and in-
clude tunneling (eliminated in Fig. 3 ), but they essentially involve
the  same  types  of  eigenmodes.  The  problem  was  formulated  as
R  is the
a non-conservative, pseudo first-order system in which X
population of the “deficient” reactant (the one with a very small
concentration in a pseudo first-order experiment), and the single
bimolecular product channel (P) was taken to be an infinite sink.

It is convenient and instructive to start with the zero-collision-
rate, Z → 0 (or p → 0), case at fixed T in Fig. 3 . At Z = 0, states of dif-
ferent energies cannot engage in collective behavior. Each can only
cooperate with states of the same energy. As a result, each differ-
ent eigenmode of the system involves states of a different (fixed)
energy. The lowest energy states of the system typically have a dif-
ferential equation in the ME with no reactive terms, and at Z = 0,
the populations of these states alone become eigenvectors of the
system with λ = 0 (i.e. the other components of the eigenvector are
zero). This means that any population introduced into these states
at t = 0 will remain constant for all times ( t → ∞ ). These modes
correspond to states whose populations are bound to a single well.
As p is increased, these eigenmodes predominantly become IEREs
(internal  energy  relaxation  eigenmodes),  but  some  become  CSEs
(one in this case). The upper limit in energy of these states is the
reaction threshold, which corresponds to λ = Z in the eigenvalue
spectrum; the magnitudes of these eigenvalues are characteristic
collisional transition rates and cannot exceed the collision rate it-
self.  The  eigenvalues  are  proportional  to  Z ,  as  illustrated  by  the
property that they are all parallel to the λ = Z line on the log-log
plot of Fig. 3 . The IEREs act collectively to drive the molecule or
complex  toward  thermal  (vibrational/rotational)  equilibrium.  The
slowest-relaxing IERE typically correlates well with the vibrational
relaxation time observed experimentally [168] .

SZEs  ( super-Z  eigenmodes)  [169,170]  correspond  to  reactive
states at p = 0 (or Z = 0). Because the transition states connected
to the well in Fig. 3 are identical by construction, including the
same  barrier  height,  all  the  reactive  states  of  the  well  are  con-
nected to both R and P. The character of the SZEs reflect this con-
struction. The flat eigenvalue curve marked λ
R  CSE in Fig. 3 cor-
relates  with  the  reactant  R( + m)  at  p = 0  and  is  something  of  a
hybrid eigenmode (SZE and CSE). Its eigenvector reflects popula-
tion changes for the energies of every reactive state of the well
through  the  R + m  Boltzmann  distribution,  allowing  R  to  partici-
pate in "iso-energetic” reactions. (Note that true iso-energetic reac-
tions are not possible with this form of the ME, because R( + m) al-

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Fig. 3.  (a) A simple and symmetrical one-well system and (b) its eigenvalue spectrum at T = 10 0 0 K.

ways thermalizes the population distribution before returning flux
to the well(s)). Because the populations of these states in R( + m)
are always distributed in thermal equilibrium (by construction, see
the  Appendix),  R  can  also  participate  in  its  own  thermal  reac-
tions.  This  differs  from  the  ordinary  SZEs,  whose  corresponding
zero-pressure  state  populations  must  act  collectively  (with  each
other and the IERE states) to participate in thermal reactions. The
λ(cid:3) s of the SZEs are relatively constant at low pressure in the fig-
ure,  remaining  at  their  p = 0  value  until  Z  approaches  the  value
of λ for that eigenmode. At p = 0, the SZEs serve the same func-
tion for “iso-energetic” reactions as the CSEs do for the thermal
collision-dominated  case  [18,29,161] .  They  describe  the  sequence
of  “equilibrations” (mostly  microcanonical)  that  lead  to  the  final
long-time ( t → ∞ ) solution (complete chemical equilibrium in the
conservative collision-dominated case). This sequencing can occur
in one of two ways in the sample problem. Either R and W (the
well)  equilibrate  first  through  a  SZE,  followed  by  dissociation  of
the  equilibrated  pair  to  P  through  the  CSE  (R  mode),  or  R  and
W can react independently to form P (through the CSE and a SZE
respectively).

00 = n m k

00  is  the  value  of  λ

The lone CSE present at the collisionless ( p → 0) limit has some
unique  and  important  properties.  We  use  the  subscript  R  to  re-
fer to this specific eigenmode, i.e. the one that is introduced by
treating the population of R as a dependent variable in the ME.
The  eigenvalue  λ
R  at  p = 0.  This  eigenvalue
is  directly  related  to  k
00  (the  total  collisionless-limit  rate  con-
stant  for  removal  of  R  discussed  below)  through  the  relation-
ship, − λ
00 , where n m is the number density of the excess
reactant,  and  the  corresponding  eigenvector  is  closely  related  to
the steady-state distribution used to calculate k
00 in the derivation
given below. Changing n m changes the eigenvalue, but it does not
change the rate constant. This mingling of n m with the eigenvalue
persists at higher pressures, because it is always the pseudo first-
order rate constant n m k
R + m  that comes directly out of the rate-
constant  determination.  In  the  sample  problem  it  is  this  eigen-
mode  alone  that  determines  the  R + m → P  rate  constant,  which
00  all  the  way  from  p = 0  to  the  largest  pres-
has  a  value  of  k
sures shown in the figure. However, at higher pressures this be-
comes more complicated, with the eigenvalue and eigenvector of
this  eigenmode  changing  with  pressure.  For  the  problem  shown
in  Fig.  3 ,  λ
00  lies  above  Z  and  all  the  IEREs.  This  was  by  de-
sign, using the flexibility in choosing n m mentioned just above, to
make λ
00 more visible and to avoid numerical errors that can oc-
cur in small eigenvalues. For the condition considered in the sam-
ple problem, n m  > n
M  is the
number density of the diluent. This situation would not be very
useful experimentally, but it does not preclude calculating accu-

M  at the lowest pressures, where n

10

M  >  > n m  >  > n

rate  rate  constants,  even  at  such  low  pressures.  The  experimen-
tal conditions envisioned in the initial formulation of the ME are
satisfied  at  higher  pressures,  n
R ,  where  thermal
experiments  would  normally  be  performed.  The  computer  codes
VARIFLEX [171] and MESMER [105] use the formulation of the ME
discussed here. MESS [103] uses a formulation in which the n
R n m
term is taken as a constant source of flux into the wells instead of
incorporating n
R as a dependent variable with n m in great excess (a
constant). Both formulations yield accurate rate constants. A third
approach could incorporate all the sets of bimolecular fragments
as dependent variables. This would allow one to address (to an ex-
tent) the accuracy of the infinite sink approximation and the extent
to which thermal rate constants involving the P species (perhaps
multiple sets of fragments) satisfy detailed balance.

The purpose of the CSEs is to bring about the correct long-time
composition as t → ∞ [29,160] , chemical equilibrium in the con-
servative case. This happens sequentially. Each eigenmode equili-
brates  one  species  with  another,  both  of  which  may  already  be
equilibrated with one or more other species. In this context, for
the non-conservative case, reactions in which the sink configura-
tions (or species) are products must be viewed as having infinite
equilibrium constants. In any event, for the non-conservative case,
the limiting t → ∞ composition is not necessarily the one corre-
sponding to chemical equilibrium. It simply is what the irreversible
kinetics dictates.

P → 1, X

W → 0, and X

In  the  example  problem  shown  in  Fig.  3  there  are  2  chemi-
cally significant eigenmodes, which “equilibrate” the 3 species R,
R → 0 as t → ∞ . The 2
W, and P, resulting in X
CSEs are the R mode and one that evolves from the manifold of
λ = 0 eigenmodes at p = 0. The latter is another example of collec-
tive behavior of the bound-state populations driven by collisions.
The R mode equilibrates R with P, R (cid:2) P , and the other (collision-
driven) CSE equilibrates W with P. Another possibility (which did
not occur) could have been that a CSE would equilibrate R with W,
R (cid:2) W , and the R mode would equilibrate the R-W pair with P. It
frequently happens that there are side reactions, i.e. side products
and/or side reactants in addition to the species being equilibrated.
An interesting example occurs in our sample problem. At pressures
higher than the point of intersection between the 2 CSEs on the
plot, the dissociation eigenmode produces both R and P in approx-
imately equal quantities from W. The slower R mode then finishes
the “equilibration” process and converts the side product R into P,
producing the final equilibrium composition. However, at pressures
lower than the crossing point between the 2 CSEs the R mode is
faster than the dissociation mode and cannot “finish up” after the
latter. Thus in this case the dissociation mode converts all of the
W to P.

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

A  necessary  condition  for  a  rate  constant  description  of  the
chemical kinetics to exist is that the slowly-relaxing chemically-
significant  eigenmodes  have  eigenvalues  that  are  distinctly  sep-
arated  in  magnitude  from  those  of  the  faster-relaxing  internal-
energy relaxation eigenmodes. There are a large number of IEREs
and a relatively small number of CSEs. There is also the equilib-
rium eigenmode, λ
0 = 0, in the conservative case. This eigenvector
gives the solution to the ME as t → ∞ . For the non-conservative
case this long-time solution can be obtained by other means, as
mentioned above. The CSEs and the solution to the ME for t → ∞
determine the rate constants.

A phenomenological (rate-constant) description of the chemical
kinetics does not always exist (either theoretically or experimen-
tally). At sufficiently high temperatures, the CSEs merge with the
IEREs, and all chemical reaction occurs on the same time scales as
vibrational-rotational relaxation. However, in the nominal case the
temperature is low enough that the magnitudes of the IEREs sig-
nificantly exceed those of the CSEs. When one or more CSEs do
merge with the IEREs, a modification to the basic method of ob-
taining rate constants can be employed [18,161] .

A  little  more  explanation  is  in  order  concerning  the  T → ∞
behavior  of  the  eigenvalue  spectrum  of  the  ME  transition  ma-
trix.  In  the  formulation  of  the  master  equation  discussed  above
the R mode never merges with the IEREs (unless designed to do
so by making n m  unreasonably large). This is because, as T → ∞ ,
the R mode always describes the R (cid:2) P equilibration with all the
other CSEs having been absorbed by the IEREs; there is no direct
coupling  of  the  reaction  between  R  and  m  and  the  vibrational-
rotational relaxation of the wells. The eigenvalue λ
R always sepa-
rates from the other eigenvalues and the R + m → P (even for mul-
tiple  sets  of  products)  rate  constant  is  well  defined,  k = λR / n m ,
where here k is the total rate constant. However, if the assumption
of thermal equilibrium for the reactants were relaxed and finite-
rate collisional energy transfer were accounted for, λ
R could ulti-
mately merge with the IEREs (of the reactants) as T → ∞ , making
a rate-constant description for the R → P reaction problematic.

In  the  nominal  case  little  or  no  reaction  occurs  during  the
internal-energy  relaxation  period,  and  the  long-time  behavior  of
the species populations is given by

N
chem (cid:2)

X i (t) =

λ
a i j e

j t

i = 1 , ..., S

(2)

j=0
chem = S − 1 is the number of chemically significant eigen-
where N
modes. Equation (2) is recognizable as the solution to a system of
first-order (or pseudo first-order) rate equations,

(3)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

il X
k

l − X i

li  i = 1 , ..., S
k

d X i
dt

=

l(cid:7) = i

l(cid:7) = i
il is the l → i rate constant. One can easily invert Eq. (2) and
where k
obtain the rate constants that go into Eq. (3) . The result is given
elsewhere [18,29,160,161,164] , as well as in the Appendix. Expres-
sions for the rate constants can be derived in other ways [103,162–
165] ,  but  this  one  shows  clearly  how  the  phenomenological  de-
scription of the chemical kinetics arises from the solution to the
master  equation.  It  also  shows  that  this  description  is  exact  to
the extent that a rate-constant description exists, i.e. as long all S
species are kinetically independent. Two species are kinetically in-
dependent as long they do not equilibrate chemically on IERE time
scales. (If they do, one must employ species reduction, discussed
below and in the Appendix) The separation of the CSEs from the
IEREs is not a restriction of the method. It is a real physical con-
straint, either explicit or implicit, in any method of obtaining phe-
nomenological rate constants. The rate constants derived have the
important and required properties that they are explicitly indepen-
dent of time and initial conditions [162] and that they satisfy de-

tailed balance [163] . However, the rate constant k
il in Eq. (3) is not
the probability per unit time that an l → i transformation will oc-
cur, a point emphasized by Widom [172] . We discuss this issue at
some length below.

Issues with determining rate constants that arise from CSE-IERE
coupling can frequently be mitigated by redefining the species or
the reactions. The most important use of this idea is in the imple-
mentation of “species reduction” [18,161] when a CSE merges with
the IEREs at high temperature. When this happens there are too
few CSEs to invert Eq. (2) and obtain the rate constants. To rem-
edy this situation one can exploit the equilibration function of the
disappearing CSE. When this CSE merges with the IEREs, it means
that  the  2  (or  more)  equilibrating  species  do  so  on  vibrational-
rotational time scales, and thus they cease to be independent from
a chemical perspective. On the chemical time scale they act like
they are parts of the same species. Thus we treat them that way.
We add together the expressions given by Eq. (2) for the equili-
brating species and use the result to replace the original expan-
sions. At the same time we eliminate the term in all the expan-
sions ( Eq. (2) ) that corresponds to the disappearing CSE. One can
then use the same methods to obtain rate constants as one used
chem has been ef-
with the original species definitions except that N
fectively reduced by one. This process may be repeated as many
times as necessary to obtain the required (and available) rate con-
stants in the T and p range of interest.

The method just described is the simplest and easiest way to
implement species reduction. We want to emphasize that it is not
just a trick to make things work out right. There is another way of
doing exactly the same thing. One could reformulate the problem
treating  the  combined  species  as  a  single  multiple-well  species,
calculating the appropriate density of states. One then solves the
modified ME and calculates the rate constants. This latter approach
is often implemented without thinking about the problem in quite
this way. For example, in many problems there are rotamers that
are separated from each other by very small torsional barriers. It
is frequently judged that these barriers are so small that the ro-
tamers will always be equilibrated on chemical time scales even
at the lowest temperatures of interest. One then treats all of these
rotamers as a single species and models the torsional motion con-
necting them as a hindered rotor.

(cid:3) ∞

The parameter that has the property of being the probability
per unit time that l → i transformations will occur is the flux co-
efficient. The fundamental flux coefficient (one can generalize the
definition, but so doing is not useful here) can be defined and cal-
culated from the solution to the ME as
r i j (t) =

k i j (E ) x j (E , t) dE / X j (t)

0
ij ( E ) is the microcanonical j → i rate constant, x

where k
j ( E ) dE is the
population in well j with energy between E and E + dE at time t ,
and
X j (t) =

x j (E) dE

(cid:3) ∞

(5)

(4)

0

These  expressions  are  appropriate  if  species  j  corresponds  to  a
well.  Analogous  expressions  can  be  written  if  j  is  a  set  of  frag-
ments.  Rate  laws  similar  in  appearance  to  Eq.  (3)  can  be  writ-
ten  with  flux  coefficients  instead  of  rate  constants.  The  impor-
tant  property  that  flux  coefficients  share  with  rate  constants  is
(cid:3)
that  both  can  be  used  to  calculate  total  fluxes,  the  d X
i
s .  How-
dt
ever, unlike rate constants, flux coefficients depend intrinsically on
the time and initial conditions, although they do have the property
that they can be interpreted as probabilities per unit time that “re-
action” occurs. Flux coefficients also in general do not satisfy de-
tailed balance. Unlike rate constants, they are not readily transfer-
able to phenomenological chemical kinetics models. Another im-
portant difference between rate constants and flux coefficients is

11

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

that the latter are inherently local. They connect only adjacent con-
figurations, whereas rate constants are phenomenological and can
describe “well-skipping” (or well-mediated) reactions.

(cid:3) s , as discussed in the
(cid:3) s and k
The relationship between the r
ij
ij
last  paragraph,  suggests  that  one  might  be  able  to  calculate  the
latter  from  the  former.  The  flux  coefficients  are  trivially  calcu-
lated from the solution to the master equation, but they are not
very useful. The rate constants are useful but somewhat more elu-
sive. Even though the CSE method outlined above is the preferred
(cid:3) s , diagonalizing the transition matrix
method for obtaining the k
ij
may be inconvenient in some cases, e.g. if one is using a stochas-
tic ME code such as Multiwell [173] . In any event using a couple
of examples to demonstrate how one may calculate the rate con-
stants from the flux coefficients (and populations) should serve to
reinforce our understanding of the connections between the two -
how they are similar and how they are different.

Let us consider the simple example of a two-well isomerization

[172,174] ,
S 1 (cid:2) S 2

(6)

One can write the total rates (fluxes) in terms of the flux coeffi-
cients (formally this is done by integrating the ME over all ener-
gies, or over all E and J in the two-dimensional case),

= r 12 (t) X 2 (t) − r 21 (t) X 1 (t)

d X 1
dt
and
d X 2
dt
and in terms of the rate constants,

= r 21 (t) X 2 (t) − r 12 (t) X 1 (t)

d X 1
dt

d X 2
dt

= k 12 X 2 (t) − k 21 X 1 (t)

= k 21 X 1 (t) − k 12 X 2 (t)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

To paraphrase Widom[172], in the first case the net flux is writ-
ten as the difference between the individual one-way reactant-to-
product and product-to-reactant fluxes; in the latter case it is not.
The problem is to determine the k (cid:3) s from the r (cid:3) s and X (cid:3) s . To do
so one first picks a “point”, i.e. a (t, d X
) combination. The master
i
dt
equation solution allows us to evaluate d X
i
dt  at time t from Eq. (7) or
2 ( t ) into Eq. (9) or
(8). Inserting this result along with X
(10) produces a linear algebraic equation in the 2 unknowns, k
12
and k
21 . Repeating this process gives 2 equations in 2 unknowns,
which can be expressed in matrix form as
A k = f

1 ( t ) and X

(11)

(cid:4)

If we choose  d X
1
dt  at time t
(cid:5)
(cid:5)(cid:4)
k 12
k 21

X 2 ( t 1 )  −X 1 ( t 1 )
X 1 ( t 2 )
−X 2 ( t 2 )

=

(cid:5)
d X 1 ( t 1 )
dt
d X 2 ( t 2 )
dt

1 and  d X
2
dt  at time t
(cid:4)

2 , we have

(12)

12 and k

dt  and  d X

Thus only 2 points uniquely determine k
21 . However, one
must be careful about two issues. First, the times chosen must be
in the rate-constant regime, i.e. the IEREs must have died out. Sec-
ond, one cannot choose both  d X
1
2
dt  at the same time, t, as
the two points. This choice makes A singular and does not pro-
duce a unique solution. Also, it should be noted that one may add
as many points as desired to the calculation, producing an over-
determined set of equations. The latter can be solved in the least
squares sense to produce the correct rate constants. This approach
is particularly useful when one has only a stochastic solution to
the ME, which inherently comes with stochastic noise. In the ex-
2 . We
ample above we referred one point to S
1 or both
could equally well have referred both points to species S
to S

1 and the other to S

2 .

12

Fig. 4.  Schematic potential energy diagram for the isomerization and dissociation
of 2-butene.

12 ,  k

21 , and r

The example above is particularly simple – it was chosen for
that reason. Its simplicity allows the relationship between the rate
constants and the flux coefficients to be exhibited clearly without
extraneous  complexity.  To  illustrate  another  difference  between
rate  constants  and  flux  coefficients  it  is  necessary  to  make  the
example  slightly  more  complicated.  Fig.  4  is  a  potential  energy
diagram for the isomerization/dissociation of 2-butene. As in the
above example, there are two wells, corresponding to the cis and
trans  isomers,  and  there  are  dissociation  products  (treated  as  a
sink) available directly only from the cis well. However, that does
not mean that there is not a rate constant for trans dissociation.
In  fact  there  are  four  rate  constants  in  this  problem  ( k
21 ,
32 ), whereas there are only 3 fundamental flux coeffi-
31 , and k
k
31 ).The latter con-
cients as we defined them above ( r
12 , r
nect only adjacent configurations. The rate constant k
32 describes
a  well-skipping,  or  well-mediated,  reaction  as  viewed  from  the
phenomenological perspective [29,162] . This “well-skipping” phe-
nomenon  is  an  important  property  of  rate  constants  that  is  not
shared by ordinary flux coefficients. Of course the intervening well
is not actually skipped, it just appears that way in the phenomeno-
logical description. One can calculate the rate constants from the
flux  coefficients  in  much  the  same  way  as  described  above.  In
this case there are four rate constants and three species. Therefore
to  determine  the  rate  constants  uniquely,  one  must  choose  four
(t, d X
) points, not all three of which can correspond to the same
i
dt
time (to avoid a singular A matrix). One then proceeds as before,
being careful that all points are in the rate-constant time frame
(i.e. the IEREs have all died out). Again any number of points can
be added to the calculation with the over-determined set of equa-
tions solved in a least-squares sense. The calculation of the rate
constants from the flux coefficients for the three-species problem
is described at length in the Supporting Information of Ref [162] ,
(SI-IV). The main text and other parts of the SI for this comment
deal with different aspects of the problem. This reaction was the
subject of earlier work by Bedanov et al. [175] and Barker et al.
[176] .

The simplest unimolecular reaction there is, and the one that is
the sole subject of virtually all textbook treatments of unimolecu-
lar reactions, is the irreversible dissociation of a molecule or radi-
cal (single well)
S 1 → S 2

2 signifies the dissociation products, which are treated as an

Here S
infinite sink. In terms of rate constants,

= −k 21 X 1

d X 1
dt
and in terms of flux coefficients,

(13)

= −r 21 (t) X 1

d X 1
dt
Determining the rate constant from the flux coefficient in this case
21 . However, there is another con-
can be done by inspection, k

21 = r

(14)

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

dition: the flux coefficient r
21  must be constant (independent of
time), which means that the (relative) population distribution in
the well must be steady.

It is of interest to ask when and if steady-state population dis-
tributions exist in the general case of an arbitrary number of wells.
The master equation can be written in the general form,

dx
dt

= ˆ T x

(15)

where x is the vector of populations or population densities, and  ˆ T
is the matrix of transition probabilities. If the problem is not con-
servative, i.e. if there are sinks, the differential equations for the
sink  species  can  be  decoupled  from  the  others  and  solved  after
the main solution has been obtained. The coefficients of the pop-
ulations in these “sink” equations are not part of  ˆ T . In either the
conservative or non-conservative cases  ˆ T  is a square matrix; in the
conservative case it is singular, while in the non-conservative case
it is not. To find a steady-state solution one sets the left-hand-side
of the ME to zero, obtaining

ˆ T x ss = 0

(16)

Because this set of linear algebraic equations is homogeneous,
it  does  not  have  a  unique  solution  (it  is  underdetermined  with
an infinite number of solutions) for the conservative case. For the
non-conservative  case,  there  is  a  unique  solution,  but  that  solu-
tion is the null vector. Neither of these results is very useful to
us.  However,  one  can  obtain  a  unique  solution  for  the  popula-
tion ratios in both cases. Let us describe briefly how this is done.
First, label the components of x ss as x ss (1), x ss (2),..., x ss ( N ), where
N  is  the  number  of  components  of  the  vector.  Now  divide  ev-
erything in Eq. (16) by x ss (1). Remember that the labeling is re-
ally arbitrary so that any component can be labelled x ss (1). At the
same  time  remove  from  ˆ T  the  row  corresponding  to  the  differ-
ential equation for that component. In both the conservative and
non-conservative cases there results a set of N − 1 homogeneous,
algebraic equations with a non-singular square coefficient matrix.
Of course this problem has a unique solution for the population
ratios, r ss (i ) =  x ss (i )
, i = 2 , ..., N,  which  can  be  viewed  as  defining
x ss (1)
the (relative) distribution. Then the vector v ss = [ x ss (1), r ss (2) x ss (1),...,
r ss ( N ) x ss (1)] T maintains  the  steady-state  distribution  for  any  value
of x ss (1).  If  we  impose  the  additional  constraint  that  the  sum  of
the populations equals unity, we have a unique steady-state pop-
ulation distribution for every  ˆ T  (this is equivalent to substituting
an inhomogeneous equation for one of the homogeneous ones in
Eq. (16) ). In general we need to add one additional constraining
equation to Eq. 16 in order to produce unique, non-trivial solutions.
If  ˆ T  is conservative, the distribution corresponds to complete ther-
mal and chemical equilibrium. Note that there are no other steady
states for a conservative system. Even if  ˆ T  is non-conservative we
still have a unique steady-state distribution that is characteristic of
ˆ T . Note that the above analysis implicitly assumes that the compo-
nent equations of the ME are fully coupled. Moreover, the steady-
state distribution must be the slowest–relaxing eigenmode of the
system. Otherwise slower-relaxing eigenmodes would disrupt the
steady state.

For  the  irreversible,  unimolecular  dissociation  problem,  the
steady-state distribution corresponds to the one that occurs after
the IEREs have died out and exists during the course of reaction.
Thus the dissociation rate constant can be calculated as the flux
coefficient for this distribution function. Two other properties of
this type of reaction are worthy of note. First, from Eq. (1) , after
the IEREs have died out, and because there is no λ
0 = 0 eigenmode
for a non-conservative system, we have

X 1 (t) = a 11 e

λ1 t

(17)

13

Differentiating  Eq.  (17)  with  respect  to  time  and  substituting  it
back into the result, we get
d X 1 (t)
dt

= λ1 X 1 (t)

(18)

1  can  also  be  identified  as  the  rate  constant,
1 . We also have for the population density vector x

Therefore, − λ
21 = −λ
21 = r
k
during this time period,
x (t) = C 1 u 1 e

λ1 t

(19)

where u
1 is the eigenvector corresponding to the lone CSE and C
1
is  a  constant.  From  Eq.  (19)  it  is  clear  that  x ( t ) ∝ u
1 at  all  times,
1  is (to within a multiplicative constant) equal to
Consequently, u
x ss . The “accidental” equalities that are identified in this paragraph
are unique to the irreversible, single-well dissociation (or isomer-
ization) problem. Attempts to extend them to more complicated,
multiple-well problems is at least partly responsible for the con-
fusion  that  exists  about  determining  rate  constants  in  the  latter
case. Particularly problematic is the confusion between rate con-
stants and flux coefficients under steady-state conditions.

As noted above every irreversible (non-conservative) ME prob-
lem has exactly one steady-state population distribution (as long as
the sum of the populations is constrained to equal unity or we deal
only with population ratios). Flux coefficients calculated from this
population distribution will likely have some complicated relation-
ship to some of the rate constants. However, knowing what this
relationship is requires prior information. This knowledge is prob-
ably  best  obtained  through  a  CSE  analysis,  which  also  gives  the
rate constants, making everything else redundant. In addition to
the single “exactly-steady” population distribution, there may ex-
ist population distributions that are locally steady (not exactly, but
changing very slowly [162] ), i.e. the distribution is approximately
steady in one or more wells, but not all. Under some conditions,
these distributions may also be exploited to determine rate con-
stants.  However,  such  an  approach  is  awkward  and  error  prone.
There is no fundamental relationship between rate constants and
steady-state population distributions. The best way to determine
rate constants for a multiple-well problem is through a CSE anal-
ysis. If that is not an option, determining the rate constants from
the flux coefficients, as described above, is the next best option.

We mentioned above that abstraction reactions also have rate
constants that can be calculated as flux coefficients. In the present
context,  abstractions  are  mathematically  similar  to  the  single-
channel, irreversible dissociation problem. In fact, abstractions are
even simpler, because the steady-state distribution of the reactant
can generally be assumed to be the thermally-equilibrated one, i.e.
it does not have to be calculated as part of the problem.

4. Weakly-Bound Free Radicals

The simplest (except for diatomics) and probably the most im-
portant  case  for  which  the  CSEs  and  IEREs  couple  to  produce
macroscopic effects is in the dissociation of weakly-bound free rad-
icals. For the purpose of the present discussion, we can classify any
free radical as one of two types, weakly-bound or others. By defi-
nition we shall call any free radical with a bond energy less than
60 kcal/mole a “weakly-bound” free radical (WBFR). This number is
somewhat arbitrary, but it includes all the common WBFRs present
in  combustion  environments. We  are  particularly  interested  in  a
particular type of WBFR, i.e. radicals whose primary dissociation
products are a stable molecule and another radical (e.g., HCO −→
H + CO), as opposed to 2 radicals (CH
2 ). This latter
type of WBFR differs from the “others” (i.e. the non-WBFRs) in 2
important respects. First, they generally have intrinsic potential en-
ergy barriers to dissociation, i.e. barriers in the association direc-
2 is the
tion. An exception to this rule (there are others) is when O

3  −→ H + 1 CH

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

2 H

2 H

3 H

3 H

3 ), and ethyl (C

stable molecule. In this case there is no intrinsic barrier unless the
accompanying radical is resonance-stabilized. We discuss this first
point below. Second, they have bond energies (thresholds to dis-
sociation) much smaller than other radicals. For example, formyl
(HCO) has a C-H bond energy of only 14.5 kcal/mole, and those
5 ) are only 19.5,
for methoxy (CH
3 O), vinyl (C
35, and 35 kcal/mole respectively. Acetyl (CH
3 CO) and n -propyl ( n -
7 ) have weak C-C bonds of 9.3 and 21.9 kcal/mole respectively.
C
Of course all alkyl radicals fit into this category. One of the most
stable of the weakly-bound free radicals is the resonance-stabilized
allyl radical with a C-H bond energy of ∼55 kcal/mole. These bond
energies can be contrasted with those of other, more stable rad-
3 ),with a 97 kcal/mole C-H bond en-
icals such as propargyl (C
3 ),whose C-H bond is well over 100 kcal/mole.
ergy, and methyl (CH
Because of their low dissociation thresholds, weakly-bound free
radicals dissociate rapidly at high temperature. In fact, dissociation
can occur so rapidly that it interferes with collisional relaxation of
the internal energy (vibrational-rotational relaxation). Mathemati-
cally this means that the eigenvalue for the lone CSE describing
the dissociation is close enough in magnitude to the IEREs that it
has begun to interact with them, at least weakly. A consequence
is that some dissociation may occur as part of the internal-energy
relaxation. This affects chemical kinetics modeling in combustion,
because such models (e.g. CHEMKIN-based models) are inherently
phenomenological, one consequence of which is that they do not
resolve the IERE time scales. A phenomenological description of a
chemical  reaction  must  include  the  effects  of  the  collisional  re-
laxation  of  the  product.  Both  the  reactive  event  and  the  subse-
quent  vibrational-rotational  relaxation  of  the  products  are  “sub-
scale” processes. They are assumed to be instantaneous in a phe-
nomenological model. Therefore, to include early, or “prompt,” dis-
sociation of a weakly-bound free radical in a model, this prompt
dissociation must be taken to be an additional product channel of
the reaction forming the free radical [36] .

A convenient and useful measure of the degree to which dis-
sociation  interferes  with  internal-energy  relaxation  is  the  non-
equilibrium factor [29,34,177,178] ,
(cid:3) ∞

f ne (T , p) = 1 /

c(E)
(
F (E)

0

) c(E) dE ,

(20)

where c ( E ) is the steady-state population distribution in the dis-
sociating  molecule.  It  is  directly  proportional  to  the  eigenvector
of the lone CSE in the irreversible single-well, single-channel (or
multiple-channel) dissociation. The function F ( E ) is the equilibrium
distribution.  Note  that  if  c ( E ) = F ( E ),  f ne = 1.  For  stable  molecules
and weakly-bound radicals at low T ,  c(E)
F (E)  is substantially less than
unity only for states far out in the high-energy tail of F ( E ), where
c ( E )  is  a  small  number  (otherwise  c(E)
= 1  to  high  accuracy).
F (E)
In  this  latter  case,  even  though  c(E)
<< 1  for  these  high-energy
F (E)
states, the weighting factor, c ( E ), is so small that f ne is still unity to
many significant figures. It is only when dissociation disturbs the
population distribution to such an extent that c ( E ) deviates signif-
icantly from F ( E ) for states that are “highly” populated at equilib-
rium that f ne  becomes significantly less than unity. (Perhaps sur-
prisingly, the denominator in Eq. (20) increases in this situation.)
Generally speaking f ne  is related to the proximity of the peak in
the  equilibrium  distribution  to  the  threshold  energy  for  dissoci-
ation.  Consequently,  f ne  will  generally  have  its  largest  deviations
from  unity  for  large  radicals  (higher  state  densities)  with  small
bond energies; these deviations predominantly occur at high tem-
perature and low pressures. Examples of the temperature depen-
dence of  f ne for some common weakly-bound combustion radicals
at atmospheric pressure are shown in Fig. 5 . Fig. 6 shows the tem-
perature and pressure dependence of f ne for HCO, the most impor-
tant WBFR in combustion. Other examples are given in Ref [29] .

Fig. 5.  Examples of the temperature dependence of f ne for some common weakly-
bound combustion radicals at atmospheric pressure.

Fig. 6.  Temperature and pressure dependence of f ne for HCO, the most important
WBFR in combustion.

Having f ne < 1, as shown above, requires that there be a region
of  the  population  distribution  where  c ( E )  >  F ( E ),  i.e.  superequi-
librium  populations;  in  fact  this  becomes  the  dominant  feature
of  the  distribution.  Let  us  show  why  this  must  be  the  case.  Let
α(E) = c(E)
F (E) , and substitute this into the equation for f ne , Eq. (20) ,

f ne (T , p) = 1 / [

α(E ) c(E ) dE ] .

(cid:3) ∞

0

If α( E ) = 1 for all E , the integral in the denominator is unity, be-
(cid:6) ∞
0  c(E) dE = 1 by definition. If there is a region of E where
cause
α( E )  >  1,  it  drives  the  integral  toward  values  larger  than  unity.
Conversely, if there is a region where α( E ) < 1, it drives the inte-
gral toward values less than unity, In reality there are both types,
but for the cases we are discussing, f ne  < 1. Clearly this requires
that the integral be dominated by values of α( E ) that are greater
than one. Hence, we must have c ( E ) > F ( E ) for these energy levels.

14

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

time evolution of the system. In this context F ( E ) is only a special
limit of c ( E ), i.e. c ( E ) → F ( E ) as the reaction rate terms in the ME go
to zero.

Labbe et al. [36] derived a formula for the fraction of the radical
concentration that dissociates during its internal-energy relaxation
stage. The result is

diss (T , p) = 1 −
P

x 1 (E) d E

(cid:3) ∞

0

(cid:3) ∞

0

x 1 (ε ) x (ε , 0)
F (ε) Q

d ε

(21)

Fig. 7.  c(E)
ation asymptote, C 2 H 4 + H.

F (E) for ethyl at p = 1 atm.The zero of energy in the diagram is the dissoci-

2 H

Fig. 7 illustrates how  c(E)

F (E) changes as f ne begins to deviate from
5 ), a common WBFR, at p = 1 atm. Under all
unity for ethyl (C
dissociating conditions high-energy states have their populations
depleted below their equilibrium values(even some bound states),
because of interference from the dissociation, a well-known phe-
nomenon. At T = 10 0 0 K, c ( E ) ≈ F ( E ) until the high-energy, lightly-
populated  tail  of  F ( E )  is  reached.  Consequently,  f ne  is  very  close
to unity. However, for T ≥ 1500 K dissociation interferes dramati-
cally with the establishment of thermal equilibrium even for those
states that are highly populated at equilibrium. In these cases f ne
equals 0.96, 0.87, and 0.74 respectively for temperatures of 1500 K,
1750 K, and 20 0 0 K. If we had started at t = 0 with a thermal distri-
bution, negligible amounts of dissociation would have occurred as
a consequence of IERE relaxation at 10 0 0 K and 1250 K, whereas
4%, 13% and 26% of the population would have dissociated for 1500
K, 1750 K, and 20 0 0 K respectvely. At 20 0 0 K the peak of the ther-
mal distribution, F ( E ), lies only 1220 cm -1 (about 3.5 kcal/mole) be-
low the dissociation limit, with a significant fraction of the distri-
bution lying above this limit.

As shown just above, if f ne < 1, it is necessary that c ( E ) > F ( E ) for
a significant portion of the population distribution. This character-
istic is somewhat counterintuitive and, in fact, it is the dominant
effect of the interaction between the lone CSE and the IEREs. Con-
sequently, it is both interesting and instructive to examine its ori-
gins and implications. Consider 2 different cases: the case where
there is no dissociation (a closed system, conservative transition
matrix) and the case where dissociation does occur (an open sys-
tem, non-conservative transition matrix). In both cases, from the
point of view of the master equation, we solve what is formally the
same problem – we find the steady-state solution subject to the
constraint that the sum of the populations (or the integral of the
population densities) is equal to unity. In the first case we obtain
the equilibrium (Boltzmann) distribution, F ( E ). In the second case
we  obtain  a  steady-state  population  distribution,  c ( E ).  (  See  the
discussion of steady states in Section 3 ) In effect, the latter may
be  considered  to  be  the  “equilibrium” distribution  for  the  open
system.  If  very  little  dissociation  occurs  during  the  vibrational-
rotational relaxation period, c ( E ) will not be very much different
from F ( E ). But if a significant amount of dissociation occurs during
this period, c ( E ) may be vastly different from F ( E ). In the closed
system F ( E ) is the attractor in that, whatever the initial distribution
might be, the system evolves asymptotically toward that distribu-
tion. In the open system it is c ( E ) that is the attractor whether dis-
sociation during vibrational-rotational relaxation is large or small.
If it is large, Boltzmann equilibrium plays little or no role in the

In Eq. (21) x ( ε, 0) is the initial population distribution of the disso-
ciating radical, Q is its partition function, and x
1 ( E ) is (proportional
to)  the  eigenvector  of  the  lone  CSE  in  the  irreversible  dissocia-
1 ( E ) is also a “non-normalized”
tion problem. As discussed above x
steady-state population distribution for the CSE stage of the disso-
ciation (see Section 1 of the Supplementary Material of Labbe et al.
for details). For a multiple-channel problem, Eq. (21) gives the to-
tal probability of dissociation, but a slightly more complicated ap-
proach is needed to determine the product distribution. In princi-
ple x ( ε, 0) is different for every reaction that forms the WBFR at
every different temperature and pressure. It could be determined
as the incipient products of the reaction from a classical or quan-
tum scattering calculation. Note that Eq. (21) can also be written
in the more compact (operator) form,

diss (T , p) =
P

diss (ε ) x (ε , 0) dε ,
G

(22)

(cid:3) ∞

0

where

(cid:3) ∞

0

G

(23)

x 1 (E) dE

diss (ε) = 1 − x 1 (ε)
F (ε) Q
is the probability that a radical formed with energy between ε and
ε + d ε will dissociate as a consequence of its internal-energy re-
laxation in a bath gas at temperature T and pressure p - it can be
viewed as the “dissociation operator.”

Ideally one would calculate x ( ε, 0) independently for every re-
action that formed the radical. However this is not an easy task,
and it is very time consuming. Fortunately one can obtain an esti-
mate of the prompt-dissociation probability by assuming that the
WBFR is formed with a thermal (equilibrium) energy distribution
at the temperature of the bath, x ( ε, 0) = F ( ε). With this assumption,
after a little algebra [36] , one finds that P
diss takes the particularly
simple form
diss (T , p) = 1 − f ne (T , p)
P
One should regard Eq. (24) as being a very rough approximation,
and  it  could  be  grossly  inaccurate  in  some  instances.  Neverthe-
less it is useful in making estimates when nothing better is avail-
able. Interestingly, but perhaps not surprisingly, the probability of
dissociation during the vibrational-rotational relaxation period, at
least for this special (but important) case, is equal to the deviation
of the steady-state distribution from the equilibrium distribution
( f ne = 1), as measured by the non-equilibrium factor. Labbe et al.
[36,37] describe at some length how to incorporate prompt dis-
sociation, using P
diss , into existing CHEMKIN mechanism files. We
shall not repeat that discussion here.’

(24)

Labbe  et  al.  [36,37] ,  in  studying  the  effect  on  laminar  flame
speeds of the prompt dissociation of HCO, identified 2 reactions
for special treatment,

CH
CH

2 O + OH → HCO + H
2 O + H → HCO + H

2 O (cid:2)H 0 (0 K) = -30.0 kcal/mole
2 (cid:2)H 0 (0 K) = -16.6 kcal/mole

These two reactions are frequently the dominant sources of HCO
in flames, and they are both quite exothermic, which suggests that
the  incipient  energy  distribution  in  the  formyl  product  may  be
much hotter than F ( E ) based on the bath temperatures. The lat-
ter occurrence could possibly result in much larger probabilities of

15

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Fig. 8.  The prompt dissociation probabilities for the two reactions, CH 2 O + OH →
HCO + H 2 O and CH 2 O + H → HCO + H 2 compared with the approximation given by
Eq. (24) . Figure taken from Ref. [36] . Reprinted with permission from the American
Chemical Society

Fig. 9.  The effect of prompt HCO dissociation on methanol flame speeds using the
Aramco Mech 1.3 and USC Mech II mechanisms (from Labbe et al. [37] ).

2 O and H

dissociation, P
diss , than given by Eq. (24) . Labbe et al. used a clas-
sical trajectory approach to calculate the energy distribution in the
HCO product, as well as the relative translational energy and the
energy in the H
2 products. According to Hammond’s Pos-
tulate [179,180] , for simple three-atom reactions, A + BC → AB + C,
the transition state for exothermic reactions lies in the entrance
channel of the reaction, i.e. when A is still approaching B and be-
fore C has started to move away. From the Polanyi rules [181] one
may  conclude  that  this  results  in  most  of  the  energy  being  de-
posited into the newly formed A-B bond. If we draw an analogy
between this simple prototype reaction and the HCO-forming re-
actions above, where HCO is the spectator “C”, we would expect
that most of the energy would go into the H
2 products
in the two reactions (and not into HCO). In fact, the simple anal-
2 O + H (a
ogy holds for the CH
consequence of its having a “later” barrier and HCO not being an
2 O + H
atom). The trajectory calculations show that even though CH
2 O + OH does,
has considerably less energy to put into HCO than CH
it is more effective in doing so [36] . The prompt dissociation prob-
abilities for the two reactions are shown in Fig. 8 and compared
with the approximation given by Eq. (24) in the same plot.

2 O + OH reaction, but it fails for CH

2 O and H

In order for the prompt dissociation of any weakly-bound free
radical to have an effect on macroscopic combustion phenomena
three criteria must be satisfied:

1 Its  non-equilibrium  factor,  f ne ( T,p ),  must  deviate  significantly

from unity, as discussed above.

2 The radical must play a central role in the oxidation mecha-
nism, including having reactions that compete with its dissoci-
ation.

3 Its thermal dissociation rate coefficient must be relatively small.

The first two criteria are more or less obvious, and the third re-
quires only a little reflection. If the thermal dissociation rate co-
efficient is so large that dissociation is effectively “instantaneous,”
prompt dissociation does not matter at all. On the basis of these
criteria, it appears that it is formyl whose prompt dissociation is
most important for combustion purposes [36,37,182,183] . In Fig. 9
(from Labbe et al. [37] ), we show the effect of prompt HCO dis-
sociation on methanol flame speeds using the Aramco Mech 1.3
and USC Mech II mechanisms. In both cases prompt HCO disso-
ciation increases the flame speeds by ∼10-15% for flames at atmo-
spheric pressure and unburned gas temperature T u = 298 K. Flames
of other small-molecule fuels show similar effects. Labbe et al. also
discuss how these prompt-dissociation effects change with pres-
sure and temperature T u . Prompt HCO dissociation can also affect
ignition  delay  times  (although  this  effect  is  not  as  large  as  for

16

Fig. 10.  The effect of prompt dissociation of various free radicals on propane-air
flame speeds. The results of the trajectory calculations discussed in the text were
used for HCO. Equation 24 was used for the other radicals.

flame speeds) and species profiles (particularly those of radicals)
in low-pressure flames [37] .

3 H

2 H

3 H

5 , C

3 , i -C

7 , and n -C

A natural question to ask is whether the prompt dissociation of
other WBFRs might have similar effects, at least under restricted
sets  of  conditions.  Labbe  et  al.  [182,183]  have  attempted  to  an-
swer this question for C
7  in flames
2 H
of ethane, ethylene, and propane, which respectively can produce
these radicals by direct H-abstraction from the fuel. Such prompt
dissociations have a relatively small effect on flame speeds com-
pared to that of HCO. As an example to illustrate this point, we
show in Fig. 10 propane-air flame speeds at T u = 600 K and p = 1
atm  using  an  early  version  of  our  own  C
3  mechanism.  The
elevated temperature enhances prompt-dissociation effects some-
what.  One  caveat  to  these  results  is  that  the  prompt  dissocia-
tion of the hydrocarbon radicals was in all cases approximated by
Eq. (24) , whereas that for HCO included the trajectory results dis-
cussed above. It is certainly possible (even probable) that there are
reactions that produce these hydrocarbon radicals with more en-
ergy than we have supposed, thus possibly invalidating our con-
clusion.

0 -C

It should not go unnoticed that, except for n -C

7 , the prompt
dissociation  of  the  small  WBFRs  discussed  above  all  involve  C-
H  bond  fission,  producing  a  hydrogen  atom.  The  H  atom  pro-
2 → OH + O, to accelerate chain
2 , H + O
duced can then react with O
branching.  This  acceleration  is  the  cause  of  the  increased  flame

3 H

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

true even at very high pressures (at least in the practically inter-
esting temperature range, 10 0 0 K < T < 20 0 0 K). For dissociations
with intrinsic barriers, reaction is not so fast just above threshold,
and the low-pressure limit is not reached until very low pressures.
Then at ordinary pressures the reaction lies in the fall-off regime.
Fig. 12 a, from Miller and Klippenstein [187] , shows the general ef-
3  ( + He) at 300 K, calculated from
fect for C
the reverse dissociation through the equilibrium constant. The ef-
fect is qualitatively similar for HCO, i.e. the fall-off curve lies closer
to the Lindemann curve in the barrierless case, particularly at low
pressure.

2 + H ( + He) → C

2 H

2 H

Fig. 11.  Schematic potential energy diagram of HCO dissociation.

3 H

speed, reduced ignition delay times, etc. discussed above. Like n -
C
7 , many larger WBFRs undergo prompt C-C bond fission, which
does  not  produce  a  hydrogen  atom  directly.  This  difference  in
products is likely to be a mitigating factor in the significance of
their prompt dissociations. However, more subtle effects may still
be important. In any event, the effects of prompt dissociation of
WBFRs (large and small) merit further investigation. In more re-
cent  work,  Sivaramakrishnan  et  al.  [184]  have  investigated  the
prompt dissociation of propyl radicals formed from the abstraction
of a hydrogen atom from propane by OH using methods similar
to those described above. Also, Döntgen et al. [185,186] have dis-
cussed prompt dissociation from a somewhat different perspective.
We should note that one could extend the “prompt” concept to
include isomerizations, perhaps not in exactly the same way, but
similarly.  Then  species  reduction  and  prompt  reaction  would  go
a long way toward incorporating most IERE/CSE interactions into
phenomenological models.

Another  kinetically  important  property  of  weakly-bound  free
radicals is that they frequently have intrinsic potential energy bar-
riers to dissociation, as noted at the beginning of this section. The
existence of such a barrier means that quantum-mechanical tun-
neling can play a role in the reaction. Of course this factor is par-
ticularly significant if one of the dissociation products is a hydro-
gen atom. Our discussion of this point will focus primarily on HCO
dissociation, but it applies equally well to other small WBFRs that
produce an H atom as a primary dissociation product.

Consider  Fig.  11 ,  which  is  a  schematic  potential  energy  dia-
gram depicting HCO dissociation. Note that the threshold energy
for dissociation corresponds to the energy of the product asymp-
tote, not that of the top of the barrier (all energies are presumed
to include zero-point energies and are measured from the ground
state of the dissociating radical). In the low-pressure limit (LPL),
by  definition  (for  any  single-well  dissociation),  dissociation  from
the  states  above  threshold  is” infinitely  fast” compared to colli-
sional activation (and deactivation). In the case of an intrinsic bar-
rier, states just above threshold (those shaded in Fig. 11 ) must dis-
sociate strictly by tunneling. Thus dissociation is much slower for
such states in the WBFR than for those in the non-WFBR case with
the same threshold, where there is no resisting barrier. For a tri-
atomic radical that is not weakly bound (and thus possesses no
intrinsic barrier to dissociation) with a threshold energy of only
14.5  kcal/mole  (i.e.,  the  dissociation  limit  of  HCO),  the  dissocia-
tion rate coefficient lies well into the low-pressure limit. This is

17

The primary purpose of Fig. 12 a is to show the difference be-
tween the real vinyl case and the barrierless test case. The barri-
erless test case was constructed by making everything the same
in  the  test  case  as  for  real  vinyl  except  for  the  intrinsic  barrier
height, which was set to zero - everything else in the transition
state was the same. The rate-constant calculations for the test case,
as  well  as  those  marked  2D  in  the  figure,  were  done  using  the
2 D / φ model, discussed below, along with the equilibrium constant.
Because the threshold energies are the same in the 2 cases, the
low-pressure limit rate coefficients k
0 ( T ) are identical. However, as
one can easily observe, the LPL is approached as one reduces the
pressure much more slowly for real vinyl than for the test case, be-
cause of the effect discussed in the last paragraph, i.e. just above
threshold molecules do not have to tunnel to react in the test case,
whereas  they  do  in  the  vinyl  case.  As  noted  above  the  effect  is
qualitatively similar for HCO.

The  most  important  consequence  of  the  discussion  above  is
that the rate coefficient for HCO dissociation (or any other similar
WBFR for that matter) cannot be approximated by its low-pressure
limit (LPL) even at atmospheric pressure and certainly not at the
higher pressures currently of interest in combustion. For example,
in the analysis shone in Fig. 12 b , which contains the tunneling ef-
fect just described, the HCO dissociation rate coefficient at 10 0 0 K
and 1 atm is approximately a factor of 2 smaller than its LPL value;
the ratio increases to a factor of 4 at 40 atm. These differences can
have a large impact in combustion modeling. For example, at 298
K and 1 atm the CH
4 /air flame speed for an equivalence ratio of
(cid:10) = 1.1 increases from 35 cm/s to 37.5 cm/s when the real rate co-
efficient is replaced by its value at the low-pressure limit, an in-
crease of 7.1%. A comparison between the two cases for a range
of equivalence ratios is shown in Fig. 13 . At very high pressures,
the difference between these 2 cases is much smaller, because HCO
dissociation is no longer the dominant H-atom source at such pres-
sures, at least for methane. This may not be the case for other fuels
and/or other experimental configurations.

5. Chemically termolecular reactions

In the preceding sections, specific examples of non-thermal re-
activity  (with  an  emphasis  on  prompt  dissociations  of  weakly-
bound free radicals), theoretical methods to adequately treat them,
and procedures to explicitly include them in phenomenological ki-
netic models have been discussed in detail. This section deals with
another  aspect  of  nonequilibrium  kinetics,  viz.,  chemically  ter-
molecular  reactions  mediated  by  non-equilibrated  intermediates.
The  role  of  such  chemically  termolecular  reactions  is  described
within the  context  of  understanding chemical  reactivity  in  com-
bustion. Here the term “chemically termolecular reaction” refers to
any reaction involving three reactants all of which participate in
making or breaking chemical bonds. These reactions may or may
not explicitly adhere to a third order rate law; this point is dis-
cussed in detail later in this section.

As discussed above, phenomenological kinetic models describe
the evolution of vibrationally and rotationally equilibrated species
on timescales larger than the vibrational and rotational relaxation

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Fig. 12.  “top panel” Reduced fall-off plot for C 2 H 2 + H ( + He) → C 2 H 3 ( + He). Analogous plot for CO + H( + He) → HCO( + He) would have the same qualitative features. The
curve marked “barrierless case” is for a fictitious molecule identical to C 2 H 3 except that it has no intrinsic barrier to dissociation.” Figure drawn from Ref. [188] . “bottom
panel” Falloff curve for HCO dissociation at T = 10 0 0 K. The theoretical analysis is from unpublished work by Yang et al. as indicated in the figure. Our own analysis is very
similar. The experimental results are from Timonen et al [189] and Friedrichs et al [190] . Both sets of experiments are generally assumed to be in the low-pressure limit.
Careful analysis suggests that only the former lie close to this limit.

timescale. Therefore, such macroscopic kinetic models must con-
tain  phenomenological  reactions  representing  the  underlying  se-
quences of elementary reactive and energy-transferring steps that
proceed through non-equilibrium rovibrational distributions.

Kinetic  models  in  combustion  (and  other  applications)  have
traditionally included only three types of phenomenological reac-
tions: unimolecular reactions, bimolecular reactions, and termolec-
ular  association  reactions.  Implicit  in  the  presumption  of  only

those three reaction types is the assumption that rovibrationally
excited  molecules,  which  mediate  many  of  those  reactions,  un-
dergo collisions that only transfer energy. For example, termolec-
ular association reactions,
A + B ( +M ) → AB ( +M )
are  mediated  by  (ephemeral)  rovibrationally  excited  AB ∗∗
molecules,  which  are  formed  from  association  of  two  molecules
A + B,

(R1) A + B ↔ AB ∗∗

18

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

product distribution than for the thermal ensemble case [31] . Fur-
ther, the rovibrational excitation of the complex can result in a dif-
ferent rate constant for its reaction with X than that for thermal AB
[43] . Finally, the rovibrational excitation of the complex can yield
different products than for thermal AB, either by altering its rate
constants in competitive reactions with X or by carrying its excita-
tion into the next potential energy surface [38] .

From an implementation and simulation standpoint, one needs
to be aware that inclusion of such chemically termolecular reac-
tions can result in this being a duplicate or equivalent reaction to
other existing termolecular association reactions in macroscopic ki-
netics models. However, the distinction is evident when the excited
complex and the reactive collider are properly defined. For exam-
ple,  A + B + X → AX + B  from  the  multi-step  sequence  (R1) + (R3)
seems  equivalent  to  an  existing  reaction  A + X  ( + M) → AX  ( + M)
with M = B, but  the difference is that the  former represents the
non-thermal reaction AB ∗ + X with fall-off behavior closely follow-
ing that of A + B ( + M) → AB ( + M). The latter reaction alternately
represents the formation of the rovibrationally excited AX ∗ com-
plex  undergoing  either  stabilization  with  M  or  reaction  with  B.
For example, H + O
2 O + O
2 represents reactive collisions
∗ and  is  distinct  from  H + OH  ( +  O
2 O  ( +
of  OH  with  HO
2
2 O ∗.
O
2 ),  which  represents  thermalizing  collisions  of  O
Since this latter reaction is at its low-pressure limit for most prac-
tical  combustion  conditions,  it  is  commonly  represented  as  the
termolecular association reaction H + OH + O
2 in most
combustion kinetics models. This may lead to a situation where
the representation between the two phenomenologically different
2 O ∗, in such macroscopic
∗ and O
reactions, OH with HO
2
kinetics models is not unique. Of course, in widely used kinetics
codes like CHEMKIN [192] , the use of the duplicate (for duplicate
reactions) keyword option permits individual treatment and anal-
yses (such as sensitivity and/or rates of production) of these two
distinct reactions.

2 ) → H
2  with  H

2 + OH → H

2 with H

2 O + O

2 → H

While chemically termolecular reactions are kinetically and dy-
namically  distinct  from  the  equivalent  thermal  sequences,  they
also intrinsically couple with termolecular association reactions at
collision rates above the strictly collision-limited regime [43,191] .
Namely, in contrast to the low-pressure limit, where dissociation
of AB ∗∗ back to A + B controls the AB ∗∗ population, at higher pres-
sures and/or n X values, stabilization by M and/or reaction with X
can induce depletion of AB ∗∗ and, consequently, reduce both ter-
molecular rate constants by reducing the population of AB ∗∗ avail-
able to undergo stabilization by M or reaction with X [191] . Strik-
ingly,  though  understandably,  for  fixed  mole  fraction  of  reactive
colliders, the importance of chemically termolecular reactions even
persists into the high-pressure limit, where their coupling with ter-
molecular association reactions leads to pseudo-second-order rates
for association reactions lower than the bimolecular capture rate
(as shown by Lei & Burke [191,193] and discussed below). In the
high-pressure limit, the kinetic enhancement is no longer a factor,
though the potential for distinct products in reactive collisions of
AB ∗∗ with X dictate that chemically termolecular reactions remain
distinct even in this limit [191,193] .

Interestingly, chemically termolecular reactions were hypothe-
sized in the early studies of combustion mechanisms in the 1920s
and 1930s [194–196] . These reactions were then later thought to
be either unphysical or unimportant to reproducing experimental
measurements available at that time and, correspondingly, largely
discarded by the 1950s and 1960s [197] . This view essentially per-
sisted through the remainder of the 20 th  century and even early
21 st  century  even  though  predictions  of  experimental  measure-
ments that became available in the 1960s [198,199] were impacted
by  such  reactions  [39] .  However,  the  capabilities  of  modern  ab
initio theoretical analyses enabled the realization in recent years
that phenomenological reactions resulting from reactive collisions

19

Fig. 13.  The effect of assuming HCO dissociation is always in its low-pressure limit
on CH 4 -air flame speeds at one atmosphere.

and then stabilized by collisions that transfer energy to the bath
gas M,
(R2) AB ∗∗ + M → AB + M
(In  this  section  we  use  ∗∗ to  represent  molecules  excited  above
their  dissociation  limits,  i.e.  ephemeral  complexes,  whereas  ∗ is
used more generically to represent any excited molecule, above or
below its dissociation limit). However, in the highly reactive en-
vironments in combustion, such rovibrationally excited complexes
can also collide with species X that react instead of merely trans-
ferring energy, e.g.,
(R3) AB ∗∗ + X → products

By  complete  analogy  to  termolecular  association  reactions  pro-
ceeding via the multi-step sequence (R1) + (R2), the sequence of
(R1) + (R3) gives rise to chemically termolecular reactions,
A + B + X → products

Importantly,  while  chemically  termolecular  reactions  may  in-
volve  the  same  reactants  as  the  equivalent  sequential  pathways
(A + B → AB followed by AB + X), the finite lifetime of the mediat-
ing ephemeral complex and its rovibrational excitation dictate that
chemically termolecular reactions are kinetically and dynamically
distinct and, therefore, necessitate inclusion in phenomenological
kinetics schemes along with the three types historically included
[39] .

First, the finite lifetime of the mediating ephemeral complex re-
sults  in  different  rate  laws  for  chemically  termolecular  reactions
than for the equivalent sequential reactions proceeding via ther-
mal AB or even rovibrationally excited AB ∗ complexes (i.e. those
excited below the dissociation threshold [39] ). Namely, under con-
ditions where collisions of AB ∗∗ with M or X are rate-limiting (i.e.
at pressures below the high-pressure limit), reactive collisions of
AB ∗∗ with X can increase the overall conversion of A, B, and X to
products by removing AB ∗∗ complexes that might otherwise disso-
ciate back to reactants A + B [39,191] .

Second, the rovibrational excitation of the complex also yields
features for chemically termolecular reactions that differ from the
equivalent thermal sequences. To begin with, in multi-well reac-
tions, the initial rovibrational excitation can yield different relative
populations of isomers than a thermal ensemble ratio. If these iso-
mers have distinct reactivity through bimolecular reactions, subse-
quent collisions with reactive species may then lead to a different

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

of excited molecules, i.e. chemically termolecular reactions, can im-
pact macroscopic behavior [39] .

While previous studies had revealed potential for bimolecular
reactions of rovibrationally excited complexes formed via associa-
tion reactions, Burke et al. [38] and Burke and Klippenstein [39] in-
terpreted such sequences as yielding chemically termolecular re-
actions phenomenologically and presented a methodology for cal-
culating rate constants for chemically termolecular reactions. Im-
portantly, the ability to calculate rate constants enabled inclusion
of  the  multi-step  sequence  involving  reactive  collisions  of  rovi-
brationally excited complexes in phenomenological kinetics mod-
els, thus permitting inclusion and evaluation of their impacts on
macroscopic system-level observables.

The methodology takes advantage of the “sink” approach, previ-
ously used to study non-thermal reactions, mostly in atmospheric
chemistry [31,200,201] . In the irreversible sink approach, bimolec-
ular reactions of complexes are included in the master equation via
an irreversible sink, equivalent to a fictitious unimolecular decom-
position channel, with a pseudo-first order rate given by the rate
constant of AB with X times the concentration of X
sink ( E, n X ) = k AB +X ( E ) n X
k

(25)

which adds a term to the master equation (see the Appendix) of
the form − k AB + X ( E ) n X n AB ( E ) f or each X, where n
X is considered a
constant in the ME analysis.
(Note that, in general, k

AB + X may also depend on the

sink and k

local thermodynamic conditions.)

A + B → sink ( T, p, n

Burke  et  al.  [38]  recognized  that  incorporation  of  this  ap-
proach within the eigenvector formulation yielded rate constants
for A + B → sink, k
X ), corresponding to the pseudo-
second-order  rate  constant,  k
X ),  for  the
phenomenological reaction proceeding directly from A + B to prod-
ucts of the bimolecular reaction with X – i.e. the chemically ter-
molecular reaction A + B + X → products. Dividing by the concen-
tration of X then yields the rate constant for the chemically ter-
molecular reaction
A+B+X → products ( T , p, n X ) = k
k

A+B ( +X ) → products ( T , p, n X ) / n X

A + B( + X) → products ( T,  p,  n

(26)

with a reaction rate according to
ω

A+B+X → products = k

A+B+X → products ( T , p, n X ) n A n B n X

(27)

M  and n

X  [191] (or n

A + B + X → products ( T, p, n

This latter expression is still “exact” since the rate constant is
an arbitrary function of T, p , and n
X (and, while suppressed in the
notation, bath gas mixture composition). We factor it this way in
anticipation that the n
X dependence of the rate constant will drop
out under important sets of conditions. We address this issue be-
low for the simple Lindemann model. In general, the rate constant
X ),
for the chemically termolecular reaction, k
can be a complex function of p and n
X  are
multiple energy-transferring colliders and multiple reactive collid-
ers, respectively). Furthermore, as noted above, even the rate con-
stant for termolecular association reactions can be affected by re-
active colliders such that its rate constant also becomes a function
of n
M in a multi-component
bath  gas).  Such  a  complex  dependence  on  local  thermodynamic
conditions cannot yet be accommodated in current reaction codes,
though presently available rate laws in codes do allow inclusion of
X  depen-
chemically termolecular reactions with complex p and n
dence locally at conditions with nearly constant p and n
X , where
k
X ) can be expressed locally as a constant
A + B + X → products ( T, p, n
evaluated at the local thermodynamic conditions, as done in Burke
et al. [38] . A framework developed by Tao et al. [44] allows the
proper  implementation  in  existing  CHEMKIN  [192]  codes  of  the
chemically termolecular reaction as well as its effect on the ter-
X , T , p , and even
molecular association reaction rates with local n
M  compositions.  This  can  then  be  used  to  quantitatively
local  n

X in addition to T and p [191] (and n

probe the effects of inclusion of these chemically termolecular re-
actions (as well as the corrections induced by this on the associ-
ated stabilization reaction) on macroscopic observables.

A key realization by Burke and Klippenstein [39] that also elu-
cidated the kinetic effects of chemically termolecular reactions was
X  (where  the  A + B  reaction
that,  under  sufficiently  low  p  and  n
is nearly in the collision-rate-limited regime, i.e. the low-pressure
limit regime), the calculated chemically termolecular reaction rate
constant, k
X ), was found to be nearly inde-
pendent of p and n
X – suggestive of a third-order rate law with an
only temperature-dependent rate constant

A + B + X → products ( T, p, n

ω

A+B+X → products = k

A+B+X → products ( T ) n A n B n X

and the calculated termolecular association rate constant was also
found to be independent of n
X , such  that the coupling between
the two termolecular reactions can be neglected. From the stand-
point of physical understanding of chemically termolecular reac-
tions,  such  a  situation  clearly  indicates  the  potential  for  kinetic
effects  of  chemically  termolecular  reactions  in  that  they  can  in-
crease the overall conversion of A, B, and X to products under con-
ditions where A + B ↔ AB ∗∗ is a rate-limiting step – a trademark
feature of chemically termolecular reactions that makes them dis-
tinct from cases of mere rovibrational excitation. From the stand-
point of their potential for inclusion in current combustion codes,
the third-order rate law with a temperature-dependent rate con-
stant can be accommodated in current codes – enabling treatment
of chemically termolecular reactions over relatively broad (albeit
not all) p and n
X conditions for their inclusion in simulations with
variable local thermodynamic conditions. The master equation cal-
culations of Burke and Klippenstein [39] yielded rate constants of
∗∗
chemically  termolecular  reactions  mediated  by  ephemeral  HO
2
complexes that were nearly independent of p and n
X at the condi-
tions of many flames, thus enabling their realization that chem-
ically  termolecular  reactions  hypothesized  in  the  early  combus-
tion studies [194,195] impacted predictions of flame measurements
[198,199] performed shortly after chemically termolecular reactions
were thought to be unimportant (discussed in more detail below).
Now that the overall procedure to deriving rate constants for
chemically  termolecular  reactions  has  been  discussed,  there  are
two aspects of the irreversible sink approach that are worth de-
scribing further. First, most implementations of the sink approach
assume  that  the  reaction  with  X  is  irreversible.  While  this  may
be  an  appropriate  assumption  if  the  reaction  with  X  is  an  ab-
straction reaction or a complex-forming reaction with deeply sub-
merged  exit  channels  (and  small  product  concentrations),  there
are clearly situations, such as a complex-forming reaction without
deeply submerged exit channels, where reversibility cannot be ig-
nored. In those cases, reversibility can still be treated (albeit ap-
proximately) by reducing the sink rate to simulate the back reac-
tion [38] or (in a manner satisfying detailed balance) by using a
pseudo-isomerization approach [202,203] .

Second,  most  implementations  of  the  sink  approach  assume
AB + X ( E ) ≈ k
k
AB + X ( T ) at some T representative of the local thermo-
dynamic conditions [105] or the rovibrational distribution charac-
teristic of the reaction of AB with X [39] . Early attempts [52,202] to
account for the dependence of the bimolecular reaction rate with
the  rovibrational  energy  of  AB ∗ relied  on  statistical  estimates,
requiring  assumptions  regarding  how  the  rovibrationally  excited
modes of AB ∗ couple with the reaction coordinate. Recently, Jasper
et al. [43] performed dynamics calculations of AB ∗ collisions with
X with varied AB ∗ rovibrational energy to assess the energy depen-
dence of the bimolecular reaction rate. Their calculations showed
the  suitability  of  an  effective  temperature  model,  an  alternative
statistical model, in representing the energy dependence of AB ∗ + X
reactions [43] .

20

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

total rate constants is expected to be relatively more modest for
∗∗ reactions with X (due to the weak temperature dependence
HO
2
of the corresponding thermal rates), the effect of rovibrational ex-
∗∗ reactions with X. This sec-
citation is highly pronounced for CH
4
ond  distinction  can  be  rationalized  on  the  basis  of  the  general
features of the potential energy surface for ephemeral complexes
formed from radical-molecule association (e.g. H + O
2 , Fig. 14 ) or
radical-radical association (e.g. H + CH
3 , Fig. 15 ). Radical-molecule
association reactions generally can be expected to yield relatively
less  excited  complexes,  but  those  complexes  are  generally  radi-
cals  that  have  fast  thermal  reactions  with  X.  Radical-radical  as-
sociations generally produce closed-shell species with slow ther-
mal reactions with X, but the high levels of rovibrational excitation
may enable reactions with X that are still very fast. Based on the
wide spread of bond energies of different radicals and closed-shell
molecules, it should be recognized that there may be exceptions
to these general trends. Regardless of the nature of the origins of
the ephemeral complex, for complexes with deep wells (yielding
high levels of rovibrational energy) and pronounced energy barri-
ers to bimolecular reaction with X, the energy dependence of the
bimolecular reaction with X is an important consideration.

The  first  example  ( Fig.  14 ),  following  the  work  of  Burke  and
∗∗ complexes, formed by
Klippenstein [39] , involves ephemeral HO
2
H + O
2 association, and their subsequent reactions with other rad-
icals.  Here,  the  initial  association  to  form  the  ephemeral  radical
complex (H + O
2 → HO
2 ) is barrierless, and the subsequent reaction
2 + H → Products) is also a bar-
of this complex with a radical (HO
rierless or nearly barrierless process. In the typical picture, once
formed from association of H + O
2
∗∗
H + O 2 → H O 2
the ephemeral complexes, with initial excitation of ∼50 kcal/mole,
are  usually  presumed  either  to  dissociate  back  to  H + O
2  or  un-
dergo energy-transferring collisions with the bath gas M to stabi-
lize the complex to thermal HO
2

H O 2

∗∗ + M → H O 2 + M

altogether  yielding  the  familiar  phenomenological  representation
of that multi-step sequence as
H + O 2 + M → H O 2 + M

Once  formed,  HO

2  can  react  with  other  radicals  in  flames  in
reactions that have only submerged or very weak energy barriers,
if any, including [52,149,204,205]
H O 2 + H → H 2 + O 2

H O 2 + H → OH + OH

H O 2 + O → OH + O 2

H O 2 + OH → H 2 O + O 2

yielding  even  thermal  rate  constants  that  are  close  to  the  colli-
sion limit at combustion-relevant temperatures (though the differ-
ent energy dependencies of individual product channels can have
significant  implications  for  the  branching  ratio  [180]  [206,207] ).
Under many typical flame conditions, the mole fractions of H, O,
and OH can be on the order of a percent, which is large enough
to make bimolecular reaction rates competitive with stabilization
rates  (which  are  often  10-100  times  smaller  than  the  collision
rate).  This  introduces  potential  for  ephemeral  complexes  to  un-
dergo  reactive  collisions  in  addition  to  energy-transferring  colli-
sions, viz.

H O 2

∗∗ + H , O , OH → products

21

Fig. 14.  HO 2 ∗ + H Potential Energy Surface.

Fig. 15.  CH 4 ∗ + H Potential Energy Surface.

Below,  we  present  two  examples  of  chemically  termolecular
reactions proceeding via ephemeral complexes in single-channel,
single-well  association  reactions.  These  two  sets  of  chemically
∗∗ complexes
termolecular reactions, mediated by ephemeral HO
2
∗∗ com-
formed  from  H + O
2  [39]  ( Fig.  14 )  and  ephemeral  CH
4
plexes formed from H + CH
3 [43] ( Fig. 15 ) illustrate the key kinetic
and  dynamic  aspects  of  chemically  termolecular  reactions  while
∗∗ example,
also possessing two key distinctions. First, in the HO
2
the calculated rate constant for the termolecular association reac-
X for the conditions
tion was found to be nearly independent of n
considered [39] – such that chemically termolecular reactions in-
creased the overall conversion of H, O
2 , and X to products inde-
pendently (i.e. without a corresponding reduction in the termolec-
∗∗ ex-
ular association reaction rate constant); whereas in the CH
4
ample, calculated termolecular association reaction rates were re-
∗∗ [43]  – such  that  the
duced  by  the  reactive  collisions  of  CH
4
increase  in  the  overall  conversion  of  H,  CH
3 ,  and  X  to  products
caused  by  chemically  termolecular  reactions  was  partially  com-
pensated by a reduction in the termolecular association reaction
rate. Second, whereas the effect of rovibrational excitation on the

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

independent of n
X under these conditions, the flux due to chemi-
cally termolecular reactions can be directly interpreted as enhanc-
2 , and X to products – demon-
ing the overall conversion of H, O
strating the kinetic effects of chemically termolecular reactions.

Based on the impact of these pathways on the radical pool, in-
clusion of the chemically termolecular reactions resulted in ∼15%
differences in laminar flame speeds across a range of fuel/oxidizer
ratios and pressures, also shown in Fig. 16 . The reduction in the
flame speed can be rationalized on the basis that chemically ter-
molecular reactions increase the overall conversion of H, O
2 , and
X to products in reactions that are either chain-carrying or chain-
terminating  and,  in  this  case,  favor  chain-terminating  pathways
more so than their thermal equivalents [193,207] . Later modeling
by  Konnov  [208]  showed  that  inclusion  of  these  chemically  ter-
molecular reactions (and ab initio calculated transport [209] , cf. be-
low) not only impacted predictions but also were instrumental in
predicting experimental measurements that had previously posed
modeling difficulties.

The  second  example,  based  on  the  work  of  Jasper  et  al.
[43,211]  and  Tao  et  al.  [44] ,  involves  an  ephemeral  closed-shell
complex  formed  by  a  radical-radical  association  and  the  subse-
2  (cf.  Fig.  15 ).
quent  reaction  of  this  complex  with  radicals  or  O
While the first process is barrierless and leads to the formation of
a highly rovibrationally excited closed-shell molecule, the subse-
quent thermal reaction of the stabilized complex with radicals or
O
2  can have pronounced barriers leading to significant tempera-
ture (and energy) dependence for the rate constants of this second
process. A schematic of the potential energy surface for a prototyp-
ical radical-radical association reaction leading to the formation of
CH
4 is depicted in Fig. 15 . With Burke and Klippenstein [39] show-
ing that the finite lifetimes of ephemeral radical complexes such
∗∗ facilitate termolecular chemistry, it may be anticipated
as HO
2
that rovibrationally excited molecular complexes originating from
radical-radical reactions with potentially longer lifetimes can also
mediate similar reactions. For example, as depicted in Fig. 15 , the
reaction,

∗∗
H + C H 3 → C H 4

∗∗ adduct with an initial excess of ∼100 kcal/mole
produces a CH
4
of  internal  energy.  The  typical  assumption  is  that,  before  it  can
react, the energized adduct thermalizes via so-called “third body”
collisions with an inert species M,

C H 4

∗∗ + M → C H 4 + M ,

yielding the commonplace termolecular association reaction
H + C H 3 ( +M ) → C H 4 ( +M ) .

In hydrocarbon flames [212,213] , peak mole fractions of the re-
active radicals (H-atoms, O-atoms and OH radicals) can be as large
as 0.5–5%, depending on the physical conditions (pressure, temper-
ature, and fuel stoichiometry) and reactive-flow processes (includ-
ing both diffusion and chemistry). Under such conditions, as with
∗∗, it might be anticipated that these reactive radi-
ephemeral HO
2
∗∗ before it decomposes or
cals such as H-atoms can intercept CH
4
2 + CH
3 directly. The thermal reaction of CH
thermalizes to form H
4
with H proceeds as a direct hydrogen abstraction,

C H 4 + H → C H 3 + H 2 ,

with a noticeable barrier, ( ∼ 13.5 kcal/mole, ZPE corrected barrier)
and therefore, rate constants for this reaction lie in the range 10 –16
to 10 –11  molecules cm –3  s –1  [214] at conditions ( T = 50 0-20 0 0 K)
relevant to flames and combustion. Given the significant rovibra-
∗∗, rate constants for the analogous non-
tional excitation in CH
4
thermal reaction,

C H 4

∗∗ + H → C H 3 + H 2

22

Fig. 16.  Impact of chemically termolecular reactions on (a) H 2 /air flames at 1 atm
and 300 K and (b) H 2 /O 2 /He flames at 5 atm and 300 K (adapted from [39] with
measurements from [210] ). Model predictions of laminar flame speeds are plotted
on the left axis using a model without chemically termolecular reactions (dotted
blue lines) and a model with chemically termolecular reactions with rate constants
calculated via the master equation (red solid lines). The peak fraction of the to-
tal HO 2 + X flux proceeding via chemically termolecular reactions is plotted on the
right axis (gray dashed lines).

altogether yielding the typically neglected chemically termolecular
reactions

H + O 2 + H → H 2 + O 2

H + O 2 + H → OH + OH

H + O 2 + O → OH + O 2

H + O 2 + OH → H 2 O + O 2

Burke  and  Klippenstein  [39]  demonstrated  the  importance  of
these chemically termolecular reactions in H
2 flames by combining
detailed kinetics-transport simulations with master equation calcu-
lations that included reactive collisions of the HO
2 complexes (as
discussed above). Master equation simulations using a bimolecu-
2 + X (for X = H, O, and OH) based on the
lar reaction rate of HO
2 flames at the flame location with peak
n
X values calculated in H
radical concentrations indicated that roughly half of the HO
2 that
reacts with X has rovibrational energy in excess of its dissociation
2 + X reaction flux
threshold – indicating a large fraction of the HO
is attributable to bimolecular reactions of ephemeral complexes.

Furthermore, additional master equation simulations using the
methodology described above supported the use of a third-order
rate law with a temperature-dependent rate constant, which could
then be directly included in kinetics-transport simulations, under
the conditions considered. Inclusion of these chemically termolecu-
lar reactions in a kinetics model revealed that chemically termolec-
ular  reactions  were  responsible  for  up  to  ∼25-50%  of  the  total
2 + R reaction flux across wide ranges of equivalence ratios and
HO
pressures, as shown in Fig. 16 . Given that termolecular association
reaction rate constants from these calculations were found to be

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

may be expected to proceed at a much faster rate than the thermal
reaction. As per the discussion above, for representation in phe-
nomenological kinetics models, the alternative sequence involving
direct bimolecular reaction of the ephemeral complex gives rise to
the chemically termolecular reaction

H + C H 3 + H → C H 3 + H 2 ,

Jasper  et  al.  [43]  used  quasiclassical  trajectories  and  ab-initio
master  equation  analyses  and  calculated  that  the  kinetics  for
∗ with  X  ( = H,  O,  OH,  and  O
the  abstraction  reactions  of  CH
2 )
4
are  much  faster  than  the  kinetics  for  the  thermal  process  (i.e.
3 + HX) and compete effectively with the collisional
CH
cooling process, where the latter yields the termolecular associa-
tion reaction.

4 + X → CH

Jasper et al. [43] predict that due to the fast non-thermal rates
for  H,  O,  and  OH,  as  well  as  their  weak  dependence  on  colli-
sional  cooling,  non-thermal  reactions  can  account  for  anywhere
∗ formed via H + CH
from one-third to one-half of the fate of CH
3
4
when the abstracting radicals are at their peak mole fractions of
2 , although the non-thermal rates constants k ∗
∼0.5–2%. For X = O
are smaller for this system than for the other abstractors, the rela-
tive enhancement k ∗/ k is many orders of magnitude and the abun-
2 in flames is higher. In this case, Jasper et al. [43] pre-
dance of O
∗ will  be  diverted  to  CH
3 + HO
dict  that  around  10-15%  of  CH
2
4
instead of stabilized CH
4 , which could nonetheless be an impor-
tance  source  of  radicals  under  some  conditions.  Since  a  signifi-
∗ reacts through the non-thermal processes de-
cant fraction of CH
4
scribed above, an immediate consequence of this is the reduced
flux through the stabilization channel.

Preliminary  kinetics  simulations  by  Jasper  et  al.  [43]  indi-
cate  that  the  inclusion  of  the  chemically  termolecular  reactions
and  the  associated  correction  to  the  stabilization  reaction  rates
lead  to  noticeable  differences  in  predicted  flame  speeds  (from
the  nominal  model  predictions)  for  CH
4 -air  flames  (1  atm,  300
K). These preliminary studies have motivated more rigorous stud-
∗ + X,  and
ies  [44]  on  characterizing  non-thermal  effects  in  CH
4
2 O ∗)  and  accurately  representing  these  in
H
phenomenological kinetics models. These ongoing studies highlight
the  competition  between  non-thermal  reactivity  induced  by  the
2 ) in a soup of inert ther-
various reactive colliders (H, O, OH, and O
2 O) with varying
malizing colliders (fuel, fuel intermediates, CO
(and often unknown) efficiencies for energy transfer.

2 O ∗ + X  (H + OH → H

2 , H

For the purposes of elementary understanding, it is often useful
to perform a Lindemann-type analysis for a prototypical bimolecu-
lar reaction (as first performed by Barbet et al. [40] ) that is usually
represented as the multi-step sequence,

(R1) A + B
(R2) A B ∗∗ + M
(R3) A B ∗∗ + X

k
1 , −1
←→ A B ∗∗
k
2 → AB  + M
k
3 → products

to show that (R1) + (R3) can be treated as a termolecular reaction
with an only temperature-dependent rate constant under certain
conditions  or  to  be  used  for  rapid  estimation  of  chemically  ter-
molecular reaction rate constants based on available information
for other reactions as used by Barbet et al. [40] . With the above
steps we have,

d n A B ∗∗
dt

= k 1 n A n B − k −1 n A B ∗∗ − k 2 n A B ∗∗ n M − k 3 n A B ∗∗ n X

Applying  the  steady-state  approximation  to  n
A B ∗∗ /dt = 0 , and solving for n

A B ∗∗ gives

d n

A B ∗∗ ,  i.e.,

n A B ∗∗ =

k 1 n A n B
k −1 + k 2 n M + k 3 n X

23

Substituting this into the reaction rate for R3, we get

(cid:7)
ω 3 = k 3 n A B ∗∗ n X =

(cid:8)

k 1 k 3
k −1 + k 2 n M + k 3 n X

n A n B n X

The  expression  in  curly  brackets  corresponds  to  the  n
X -
dependent  rate  constant  mentioned  above  (see  Eq.  (27) )  for  the
Lindemann model [40] . This development is completely analogous
to  the  Lindemann  analysis  of  the  termolecular  association  reac-
tions proceeding via the multi-step sequence (R1) + (R2), but with
one additional term in the denominator. The expression would also
suggest  similar  fall-off because  k
X  are  often  of  the
same  order  of  magnitude  in  many  combustion  environments.  In
the low-pressure limit, i.e., k 2 n M  ∼ k 3 n X (cid:13) k −1 , the reaction rate
could be further simplified as
ω 3 ≈ k 1 k 3
k −1

M  and  k

n A n B n X

2 n

3 n

which suggests a third-order behavior. In the high-pressure limit
with a fixed mole fraction of X in M, a second-order behavior is
obtained:

ω 3 ≈

k 1 k 3
n M
n X

n A n B =

αesc k 1
1 + αesc

n A n B

+ k 3
k 2
where αesc = k
M is the reaction rate ratio between the two
channels,  i.e.  non-thermal  reaction  and  stabilization,  and  varies
with conditions.

X / k

3 n

2 n

Under  combustion-relevant  conditions  for  many  systems  of
small molecular size, it is usually the case that back dissociation
dominates, and the consumption rate of the rovibrationally excited
molecule through stabilization and reactive collisions are often or-
ders  of  magnitude  smaller  compared  to  the  total  capture  rate.
The above analysis would suggest that it is therefore appropriate
to express the multi-step sequence (R1) + (R3) as a termolecular
reaction, A + B + X → products, with a rate constant that depends
only on temperature. However, master equation calculations sug-
gest  that  additional  criteria  (beyond  k 2 n M  ∼ k 3 n X (cid:13) k −1  given
above) must be met for this to be true in many real systems [207] .
However,  the  above  limit  appears  to  be  reached  for  the  simpler
condition, k

2 n m + k −1

3 n X << k

Along the same lines, one can also derive the modified second-
order rate constant for the termolecular association reaction with
presence of X as

(cid:3)
A+B ( +M ) =
k

k 1 k 2 n M
k −1 + k 2 n M + k 3 n X

1

which will be impacted more with increasing pressure and mole
fraction of X. At the high-pressure limit, it shares the capture rate
k
1
with reactive collisions with X and the rate constant is
1+ αesc , a
1+ αesc  as large as that shown above.

factor of

We could further derive its fall-off expressions. Keep in mind
X = 0, the low- and high-pressure limit rate constants
1 , and the original
M / k ∞ , the modified reduced pressure in

that when n
of A + B ( + M) reaction are k 0 = k
1 k
2
k −1
reduced pressure P r = k
=  P (cid:3)
k ∞ can be expressed as, P (cid:3)
k (cid:3)
r
1+ P (cid:3)
A+B( +M )
r

P r
1+ αesc P r .

and k ∞ = k

r =

0 n

It should be noted that the Lindemann analysis shown here fails
to capture certain aspects that can yield inconsistencies in qual-
itative  behavior  compared  to  some  master  equation  calculations
[207] . In real cases, the situation could be more complex given the
different ener gy dependence of each reaction step. Fig. 17 below
∗ + H
represents the results from master equation analyses for HO
2
[191,193] [207] (who first demonstrated these trends) and new re-
∗ + H based on recent
2 O ∗ + H and CH
sults presented here for H
4
work [43,44] . These results clearly highlight that branching to non-
thermal reaction with H is in significant competition with stabi-
lization and persists even to the high-pressure limit. In the “hotter”

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Fig. 17.  The fraction of the rate of stabilization, non-thermal reaction with H, and their sum to the capture rate with 1% H in N 2 at 10 0 0 K. In the HO 2 plot, the total-k and
non-thermal reaction-with - H curves are virtually indistinguishable.

2 O ∗ system with lesser degrees of freedom, non-thermal reaction
H
∗ system it
dominates over stabilization whereas in the larger CH
4
is a significant fraction of thermalization.

In real cases, the coupling may be more profound and complex,
and  the  termolecular  associations  are  often  found  to  be  notably
impacted  even  at  low  pressures  (including  in  the  low-pressure
limit in some calculations for reasons outlined in [207] . To moti-
vate some of the complexities absent from the Lindemann analysis,
consider the complex energy dependence of the fate of the rovi-
brationally excited complex. For example, Fig. 18 , which was gen-
2 O ∗ + H reac-
erated from a master equation analysis [44] for the H
2 O ∗ as a function of
tion, depicts the population distributions of H
energy (from the bottom of the well) as it undergoes stabilization,
back-dissociation, or non-thermal reaction. It is useful to remem-
ber that the bond energy for H
2 O is 117.6 kcal/mole [215] , and at
energies just above this threshold, back-dissociation (green shaded
region in Fig. 18 ) dominates. At energies just below the threshold,
2 O ∗ as de-
all three processes compete effectively to depopulate H
picted in Fig. 18 for E = 115 kcal/mole. At pressures close to the
low-pressure limit, and at energies well below the entrance chan-
nel, where back dissociation is no longer controlling the population
2 O ∗ with H still intercept a notice-
of H
able fraction of the population, and thus effectively com pete with
stabilization.

2 O ∗, reactive collisions of H

The cases presented in detail above are just a few examples of
possibly many chemically termolecular reactions of potential sig-
nificance.  Indeed,  as  noted  by  Burke  and  Klippenstein  [39] ,  “in
principle,  almost  every  bimolecular  reaction  could  arise  as  a
chemically termolecular reaction, with one of the bimolecular re-
actants being an ephemeral complex of a preceding association
step rather than a thermally equilibrated complex. ” To aid in de-

Fig. 18.  Fate of H 2 O ∗ in 1% H in N 2 at 0.001 bar and 2000 K as a function of E.

ciphering among the sea of possibilities, we outline some general
criteria  for  the  mechanistic  features  of  the  potential  ephemeral
complexes and environmental conditions that we expect may con-
tribute to whether or not a particular chemically termolecular re-
action will be of relevance to macroscopic phenomena:

24

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

1 Bimolecular reaction rates need to be comparable to stabiliza-

tion rates.

For  context,  it  typically  requires  10-100  collisions  on  average  to
stabilize a rovibrationally excited complex formed via association
of two species, whereas bimolecular reaction rate coefficients (par-
ticularly  for  rovibrationally  excited  complexes  and/or  radicals  as
the collision partner) can often be comparable to the collision rate.
Chemically termolecular reactions can then be expected to be of
relevance when the mole fractions of reactive colliders are ∼1%. In
combustion, radicals generally reach this level under flame condi-
tions as do O
2  and fuel in fuel/air mixtures under more general
conditions.

2 The  ephemeral  complex,  formed  from  association  of  two

molecules, has to live long enough to undergo collisions.

Larger  complexes  (with  more  degrees  of  freedom)  and  more
strongly  bound complexes  tend  to  have longer lifetimes.  Related
to  the  latter  aspect,  the  presence  of  lower  energy  exit  channels
tends to lead to shorter lifetimes. Whereas the two examples de-
scribed above have no low-lying exit channels and therefore yield
ephemeral complexes with sufficiently long lifetimes compared to
collision rates (e.g. ∼10 -9 s at atmospheric pressure and flame tem-
∗∗ ephemeral complexes formed from O + OH have
peratures), HO
2
the  much  lower  energy  exit  channel  to  H + O
2  and,  correspond-
ingly, have lifetimes of less than 10 -12 s – making them unlikely to
undergo significant collisions at typical combustion-relevant pres-
sures  [52] .  In  this  case,  the  inherently  shorter  lifetime  for  such
complexes can therefore be expected to suppress chemically ter-
molecular reactions of O + OH + X.

3 Yet,  for  “kinetic” effects  of  chemically  termolecular  reactions
increasing the overall conversion of reactants to products, the
lifetime of the ephemeral complex should not be so long that
the reaction is in the high-pressure limit [191] .

4 For “dynamic” effects of the rovibrational excitation of the com-
plex  enhancing  reaction  rates  of  ephemeral  complexes  with
reactive  species,  the  well  depth  and  the  presence  of  a  bar-
rier  in  bimolecular  reactions  of  the  complex  are  two  major
factors (as discussed above within the context of Fig. 14 and
Fig. 15 ) – generally making excitation effects more pronounced
for ephemeral complexes formed from radical-radical associa-
tion. A third key factor is the size of the complex. For exam-
ple,  application  of  the  effective  temperature  model  of  Jasper
et al. [43] suggests that enhanced non-thermal rates are less
likely for larger molecules (with more degrees of freedom) in
addition to molecules with smaller bond strengths. With this
in consideration, the propensity for non-thermal enhancements
to the bimolecular reaction rate is limited to molecules contain-
ing at most 7-8 atoms, such as H + OH → H
3 ,
OH + OH → H
2  (apart  from  the  examples  characterized  in
Refs. [43] and [44] ).

2 O, H + NH

2 → NH

2 O

The examples of termolecular reactions discussed above were
all  found  through  chemical  intuition.  An  alternative  approach  is
a  systematic,  automated  method  for  identifying  chemically  ter-
molecular reactions of potential importance. Barbet et al. [40] have
devised  such  an  approach  that  identifies  and  estimates  chemi-
cally termolecular reaction rate constants based solely on informa-
tion  already  available  in  phenomenological  kinetic  models  with-
out chemically termolecular reactions. This approach identified a
potential  role  for  chemically  termolecular  reactions  mediated  by
∗∗ complexes formed from H + C
2 H
2 [40] . The importance of
C
3
∗∗-mediated chemically termolecular reactions has since been
C
2 H
3
confirmed by the detailed master equation calculations of Lei and
Burke [193] – altogether showing promise of the automated ap-
proach [40] for identifying yet still unidentified important chem-
ically termolecular reactions. While the original method had the

2 H

25

ability to estimate rate constants of the bimolecular reaction at a
separate user-specified temperature different from the local tem-
perature  [40] ,  incorporating  the  effective  temperature  model  of
Jasper et al. [43] , which has additional considerations such as the
number of degrees of freedom, may be worthwhile to provide a
more  accurate  way  to  estimate  the  effects  of  rovibrational  exci-
tation for the ephemeral species of interest. Altogether, this auto-
mated discovery tool, or an updated version of it, may continue to
be a useful complement to traditional chemical intuition in iden-
tifying  and  unraveling  hitherto  undiscovered  termolecular  chem-
istry. Indeed, a recent application of the approach by Cornell et al.
[41] to energetic materials revealed yet more chemically termolec-
ular reactions of potential significance.

In  addition  to  identifying  the  important  chemically  termolec-
ular  reactions  that  are  still  “missing” from  kinetic  models,  the
lack of available rate laws for termolecular reactions that can be
trusted across broad ranges of temperature, pressure, and compo-
sition is another major remaining challenge – a challenge that hin-
ders their accurate representation in general-purpose kinetic mod-
els.  With  regard  to  composition,  such  rate  laws  would  need  to
be able to represent both kinds of termolecular reactions (chem-
ically termolecular and termolecular association) even in the pres-
ence of multiple reactive species and multiple energy-transferring
species [216–220] , as is typical in combustion environments. Stud-
ies  like  that  of  Lei  and  Burke  [191,207]  (whose  results  are  de-
scribed above), which presents master equation results for H + O
2
2 + X → products over broad ranges of
( + M) → HO
pressure and reactive collider mole fraction, are helping to shape
the form of such rate laws to ensure they match the correct lim-
iting behavior and adequately interpolate between. However, fur-
ther  work  is  necessary  to  define representations of  termolecular
reactions that are reliable across the wide ranges of local thermo-
dynamic conditions relevant to combustion.

2 ( + M) and H + O

6. The Two-Dimensional Master Equation

To this point we have restricted our discussion of master equa-
tions to those that have only one independent variable (in addition
to the time), i.e. to the one-dimensional case in which E , the total
internal (vibrational-rotational) energy of the molecule or complex,
is the independent variable. Nevertheless, the conclusions reached
and the methods discussed above can easily be extended to the
two-dimensional case, where E and the total angular momentum
(quantum  number J )  of  the  molecules  are  the  independent  vari-
ables. Solutions to one-dimensional MEs are extremely useful for
gaining physical insight, and even for providing predictive repre-
sentations of rate constants if adjustable parameters are included
in the collisional model. However, accurate a priori prediction of
rate constants requires the solution of 2-D MEs. The difference be-
tween the 1-D ( E formulation) and 2-D ( E,J formulation) cases is
that the former assumes that J -states (rotational) exchange energy
freely  with  vibrations  through  intramolecular  energy  transfer,  i.e.
without collisions, thus producing microcanonical equilibrium on
collisional  timescales.  By  contrast,  the  E,J  formulation  recognizes
that changes in J can occur only through collisions. We consider
here  both  exact  solutions  to  the  2-D  problem  and  approximate
ones.  In  the  former  case  we  are  interested  not  only  in  the  so-
lutions themselves, but also in identifying when the approximate
treatments may be adequate.

Historically  unimolecular  reaction  rate  theory  was  developed
with  vibrational  and  rotational  energy  as  the  independent  vari-
ables (or, more correctly, energy in the active and inactive degrees
of freedom) [178,221–223] . However, vibrational and rotational en-
ergy are not good constants of the motion, particularly in highly
vibrationally excited molecules. Consequently, they are not really
good  choices  for  independent  variables  in  the  master  equation,

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

particularly for multiple-well problems at low pressure, where E
and  J  must  be  conserved  rigorously  in  all  chemical  (geometric)
transformations. E and J are the only good constants of the mo-
tion in the isolated molecule. With few exceptions we use them as
the independent variables in the discussion that follows.

The  simplest  case  for  which  we  can  obtain  exact  rate  coeffi-
cients (i.e. within the ME formulation of RRKM intramolecular dy-
namics) using a two-dimensional ME is the “collisionless limit of
a bimolecular reaction,” in which the collision rate in the ME goes
to zero (i.e. Z → 0). Such a reaction can have an arbitrary number of
wells and any number of sets of bimolecular products, all of which
are  treated  as  sinks.  For  this  case  the  master  equation  becomes
a vector equation for the well populations with source (the reac-
tants) and sink terms involving the bimolecular fragments:

dn (E, J)
dt

= −K(E, J) n (E, J) + n R n m b (E, J)(2 J + 1) ρRm (E, J) e −βE / Q Rm

(28)

In Eq. (28) n ( E, J ) is the vector of population densities (its com-
ponents correspond to the different wells with energy between E
and E + dE and with angular momentum quantum number J ); n
R
and n m are the total population densities of the 2 reactants R and
m; K(E, J) (notice the minus sign in front of it) is a matrix that
incorporates all the isomerization and dissociation rate coefficients
in the ME with appropriate signs; b ( E, J ) is the vector of associ-
ation rate coefficients from the reactants to the wells; ρRm ( E,J ) is
the reactant density of states with energy between E and E + dE
and with angular-momentum quantum number equal to J (it in-
cludes the relative translational degrees of freedom); Q Rm ( T ) is the
corresponding  partition  function; β = ( k B T ) −1 ,  where  k B  is  Boltz-
mann’s constant. Note the 2 J + 1 factor in the last term of Eq. (28) .
This factor appears because we have summed the ME over all M ,
the quantum number corresponding to the projection of J onto a
space-fixed axis, and have not included the 2 J + 1 factor that re-
sults from such a summation in ρRm ( E,J ).

Applying the steady-state approximation to Eq. (28) and solving

for n ( E, J ), we obtain
−βE / Q Rm (T )  (29)
−1 (E , J) b (E , J)(2 J + 1) ρRm (E , J) e
n (E, J) = n R n m K
where  K −1 (E, J)  is  the  inverse  of  K(E, J) .  We  can  compute  the
fluxes to the various product channels as D ( E, J ) n ( E, J ), where the
i,j element of D ( E, J ) is the dissociation rate coefficient from well j
to product i . Integrating this latter result over all E and summing
it over all J , we can identify the rate-coefficient vector as the coef-
ficient of n R n m ,

k 00 (T ) =

∞ (cid:3)

1
Q Rm (T )

(cid:2)

(2 J + 1)
0

J

D (E, J) K −1 (E, J) b (E, J) ρRm (E, J) e −βE

dE

(30)

For  a  number  of  reasons,  the  two-dimensional  density  of  states
ρRm ( E,J ) is difficult (but not impossible) to calculate. However, we
can  eliminate  it  by  substituting  the  RRKM  expression  k (E, J) =
N † (E,J)
hρ(E,J)  for all the rate coefficients in Eq. (30) , where h is Planck’s
constant and  N † (E,J)
is the flux  per unit energy through the ap-
propriate transition-state dividing surface.  Most  importantly, this
substitution  results  in  all  the  densities  of  states  cancelling  out,
including ρRm ( E,J ). Then the final result for the rate-coefficient vec-
tor is

h

k 00 (T ) =

1
h Q Rm (T )

∞ (cid:3)

(cid:2)

(2 J + 1)
0

J

N D (E, J ) N

−1
K  (E, J ) N

b ( E, J) e

−βE

dE

(31)

26

where the N (cid:3) s in Eq. (31) represent the matrices (vector) of N † s
formed by substituting  N † (E,J)

h  for k ( E, J ) everywhere in Eq. (30) .

The  result  given  in  Eq.  (31)  is  an  extremely  valuable  tool  in
estimating rate coefficients in high-temperature combustion envi-
ronments. Reactions of small molecules, particularly those involv-
ing  relatively  shallow  wells,  generally  have  rate  coefficients  that
are accurately represented by this “collisionless limit” at high tem-
perature and ordinary pressures. Also Eq. (31) is relatively easy to
evaluate – the collisional term in the master equation causes more
problems. By comparing results from Eq. (31) with those from its
one-dimensional equivalent, one can assess the effects of conserv-
ing  J .  Our  experience  is  that  these  effects  typically  are  not  very
large [224] , say 20% or less. However, we may not have encoun-
tered a case where “rotational channel switching” [225] is of criti-
cal importance.

Rotational channel switching occurs when two product chan-
nels are competing with each other for flux, one with a loose tran-
sition state (i.e. frequently one with no intrinsic potential energy
barrier) and one with a tight transition state (with a pronounced
barrier). If the tight transition state is lower in energy than the
loose one, its product channel will get most of the flux at low J and
consequently at lower temperatures. However, as J increases the
centrifugal barrier for the tight transition state grows faster than
that of the loose one resulting in the loose TS ultimately stealing
most of the flux. As a result the channel with the loose TS ulti-
mately dominates at high temperature. Of course this effect is au-
tomatically captured by Eq. (31) ; it may well have large effects on
rate coefficients and product distributions in some cases.

It is interesting and instructive to find the relationship between
the steady-state population distribution defined in Eq. (29) and the
eigenmodes of the ME transition matrix at p = 0. Based on our dis-
cussion of steady-state distributions in Section 3 , let us construct
the vector v ss = [ x ss (1), r ss (2) x ss (1),..., r ss ( N ) x ss (1)] T , where x ss (1) = n
R
and  n R r ss ( i )  is  given  by  Eq.  (29)  for  the  E,J ,well  combination  (or
E ,well combination in the one-dimensional case) corresponding to
the i th  component of the vector. Note that there are many com-
ponents  of  v ss  that  are  zero  because  of  the  bound  states.  The
v ss vector has the property that the well populations are always in
a steady state driven by R, regardless of the value of n
R ; this is the
property that we just exploited to calculate k
00 . Now let us show
that v ss is an eigenvector of  ˆ T 0 , the transition matrix (pseudo first
order in n
R ) at zero pressure (one- or two-dimensional). For this to
be true, we must have

d v ss
dt

= ˆ T 0 v ss = λv ss

(32)

The first equality in Eq. 32 is just the master equation; it expresses
the equivalence, for any vector in the state space, of taking its time
derivative and operating on it with the transition matrix. The sec-
ond equality is the definition of an eigenvector. Then

d v ss
dt

=

d n R
dt

T
[ 1 , r ss (2) , ..., r ss (N) ]

d v ss
dt

d v ss
dt

T
= −k 00 n m n R [ 1 , r ss (2) , ..., r ss (N) ]

(cid:13)
T 0 v ss = −k 00 n m v ss

=

(33)

(34)

(35)

Therefore  v ss  is  the  same  vector  as  that  corresponding  to  the  R
mode at the collisionless limit. It is an eigenvector of  ˆ T 0 with an
eigenvalue of − k
00 is the total rate constant
for R removal at p = 0, discussed in Section 3 . Of course this last
derivation assumes pseudo-first-order conditions for the bimolec-
ular reactants whereas the result given by Eq. 30 does not.

00 n m , where the scalar k

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

A case for which we can include many rotational effects (ap-
proximately)  without  requiring  any  information  about  the  rota-
tional part of P ( E, J; E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ), the probability of a collision transferring
a molecule from an E (cid:3) , J (cid:3)  state to an E, J state, is the irreversible
dissociation (or isomerization) of a molecule involving only a sin-
gle well (or species). Any number of products may be included as
long as they are all treated as sinks. The approximation we have
in mind is the “strong-collider-in- J ” approximation. It may be im-
plemented either microcanonically or canonically. We focus our at-
tention primarily on the former, because it appears to be the more
accurate of the two. We also restrict our attention to a single prod-
uct channel – the extension to more channels is trivial.

Smith and Gilbert [178,226] , in the late 1980 (cid:3) s, were the first
to  realize  that  the  2-D  master  equation  could  be  reduced  to  an
equivalent 1-D ME if P ( E, J; E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ), in the present formulation, could
be written in the form
(cid:3) ) = P (E, E
P (E, J; E

(cid:3) ) f (E, J)

(36)

(cid:3) , J

where f ( E, J ) is an arbitrary (suitably chosen) function of E and J -
there is no dependence whatsoever on the initial angular momen-
tum J (cid:3) . Substituting Eq. (36) into the 2-D master equation, assum-
ing that a rate-coefficient description of the dissociation is appli-
cable, applying the steady-state approximation to the result, and
simplifying, we arrive at a 1-D ME in the form [227]

(cid:3) ∞

−  ̄x (E) k (T , p) = Z
(cid:9)

where   ̄x (E) =

0

J

P (E, E

(cid:3) )  ̄x (E

(cid:3) ) dE

(cid:3) − Z  ̄x (E) −  ̄k (E)  ̄x (E)

(37)

x (E, J) .  The  basic  idea  is  that  one  can  solve

Eq. (37) as an eigenvalue problem for the steady-state population
distribution (the lone chemically significant eigenvector) and − k ( T,
p ), the corresponding eigenvalue. However, there is a minor flaw in
this approach. The effective microcanonical rate coefficient  ̄k (E) is
defined as
(cid:9)

 ̄k (E) =

J

k (E, J) y (E, J)
(cid:9)

y (E, J)

J

with

y (E, J) =

f (E, J)
Z + k (E, J) − k (T , p)

(38)

(39)

1 , where λ

i.e. it depends on k ( T, p ), the quantity we want to determine. How-
ever, it is virtually always the case that Z (cid:14) k ( T, p ), so that k ( T,
p ) can be neglected in Eq. (39) . This is best understood through
the eigenvalue spectrum of the transition matrix of the ME. In the
present case, k ( T, p ) = −λ
1  is the eigenvalue with the
smallest absolute value. Under “typical” conditions, where the rate
coefficient is well defined (i.e. well separated from the IERE’s), Z
is comparable in magnitude to that of the IEREs with the largest
absolute values. Under such conditions Z and k ( T, p ) are likely to
be separated by many orders of magnitude (see Fig. 3 ). Even in
cases where the rate-coefficient description of the reaction is being
stretched to the limit, such as that discussed by Wang et al [169] ,
Z is likely to exceed k ( T, p ) by at least 1 or 2 orders of magnitude.
We should also point out that k ( E, J ) = −λ( E, J ) for the single-well
dissociation problem, where λ( E, J ) is the eigenvalue for that par-
(cid:13)
ticular E, J state in the absence of collisions, i.e. of
T 0 . For bound
states λ( E, J ) is zero, but for reactive states it might add signifi-
cantly to the denominator under certain conditions.

Having implemented this approximation, we can calculate  ̄k (E)
and solve  the  one-dimensional eigenvalue problem posed  above.
The resulting two-dimensional steady-state population distribution
in the dissociating molecule is
Z f (E, J)
Z + k (E, J)

x (E, J) =

P (E, E

(cid:3) )  ̄x (E

(cid:3)
(cid:3) ) dE

(cid:3) ∞

(40)

0

For  bound  states  k ( E,  J ) = 0  and  x ( E,  J )  is  proportional  to  f ( E,
J ) for any E , although for unbound states this is not strictly true.
However,  in  the  next  section  we  pay  particular  attention  to  the
low-pressure limit, in which any molecule that is collisionally ex-
cited  to  an  unbound  state  goes  on  to  react  immediately.  In  this
limit, collisional excitation is rate limiting, and the populations of
bound states near the dissociation limit are particularly important.
The population distribution in this approximation is given by

x (E, J) = f (E, J)

P (E, E

(cid:3) )  ̄x (E

(cid:3)
(cid:3) ) dE

(41)

(cid:3) ∞

0

So far we have not specified f ( E, J ). We want to limit our atten-

tion here to the case where
f (E, J) = φ(E, J) = (2 J + 1) ρ(E, J) /ρ(E)

and
ρ(E) =

(cid:2)

(2 J + 1) ρ(E, J)

(42)

(43)

J

This  is  the  microcanonical  strong-collider-in- J  approximation.  In
this approximation, the result of every collision is to populate ev-
ery state with the same energy with equal probability; the 2 J + 1 is
the degeneracy associated with the M states. For the bound states
this results in microcanonical equilibrium during the reaction. In
the past we have referred to this approximation as the E, J model,
but a better name is the 2 D /φ model.

This model includes many two-dimensional effects and requires
no more input to the master equation than the 1-D ME does. It
also has the virtue that it satisfies detailed balance if P ( E, E (cid:3) ) is
constructed to do so. It is worthwhile to explain what we mean by
this statement. In equilibrium the rate of collisional formation of
molecules in any E, J state from any E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) state is exactly equal to
the rate of the reverse E, J → E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) process [228] , i.e.
(cid:3) ) = ZP (E
ZP (E, J; E

(cid:3) ; E, J) x eq (E, J)

(cid:3) ) x eq (E

(44)

(cid:3) , J

(cid:3) , J

(cid:3) , J

where

x eq (E, J) =

(2 J + 1) ρ(E, J) e −βE
Q

(45)

and  Q  is  the  vibrational-rotational  partition  function  of  the  dis-
sociating  molecule.  Substituting  Eqs.  (39) , (40) ,  and  (45)  into
Eq. (44) and simplifying we get
ρ(E (cid:3) ) e −βE (cid:3)
ρ(E ) e −βE
Q
Q

P (E , E

(cid:3) , E )

(cid:3) ) =

P (E

(46)

Equation (46) is just the one-dimensional detailed-balance condi-
tion for P ( E, E (cid:3) ). If this condition is satisfied, Eq. (44) is satisfied
automatically.

Fig.  19  illustrates  what  is  probably  the  most  important  dif-
ference  between  the  1D  and  2 D /φ  models.  It  shows   ̄x (E) / F (E)
(or x (E) / F (E) for the one-dimensional case) at high temperatures
for methane dissociation in the low-pressure limit. Clearly for the
2 D /φ solution there is non-zero steady-state population above the
threshold energy for dissociation (more correctly the J = 0 thresh-
old),  whereas  there  is  none  in  the  1-D  case.  The  2 D /φ  model
correctly  accounts  for  methane  molecules  that  are  centrifugally
bound. Also, this model correctly predicts higher threshold ener-
gies  for  larger  J’ s,  resulting  in  smaller  rate  coefficients  than  one
predicts using the 1-D solution, particularly at lower temperatures.
4 + He re-
This point is illustrated for the reverse CH
action in Fig. 20 . Here k
0 (the low-pressure limit) from the 1-D so-
lution is a factor of ∼2.2 larger than that from the 2 D /φ  model
at low T , a factor that becomes smaller as the temperature is in-
creased. Vinyl and ethyl radical dissociations (and the reverse re-
combination reactions) show that same effect [187] .

3 + H + He → CH

There is one other choice for f ( E, J ) that deserves mention, the
canonical strong-collider-in- J model (also referred to as the ε, J or

27

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

number J (or rotational energy εJ ). This model represents a “canon-
ical strong-collider- J ” approximation, i.e. it assumes that the post-
collision J distribution is thermally equilibrated, independent of ε(cid:3)
or J (cid:3) . Like the 2 D /φ model, the 2 D / (cid:10) model satisfies detailed bal-
ance automatically in the sense discussed above (apparently these
two choices for f ( E, J ) are the only ones that do). However, the en-
forcement of thermal equilibrium for bound states in this model,
particular for those near the dissociation threshold, is too severe
near  the  low-pressure  limit.  It  predicts  values  of  k
0 ( T )  that  are
much too large for reasonable input to P ( E, E (cid:3) ). Consequently, we
have largely discarded it in our work in favor of the 2 D /φ model.
Because of its simplicity, defining the limits of applicability of the
latter is a worthwhile endeavor.

There  have  been  a  number  of  attempts  to  solve  a  two-
dimensional master equation [228–236] , each with its own set of
approximations and objectives. However, the article by Jeffrey et al.
[232] appears to be pivotal to making further progress. These au-
thors were the first to describe in detail an algorithm for construct-
ing energy transfer functions that are simultaneously normalized
and satisfy detailed balance exactly ( Eq. (44) ) for the 2-D case. Let
us look at this in some detail.

−(E −E (cid:3) ) /α

(cid:3) , E) = e

It is instructive to look briefly at the one-dimensional case, first
treated successfully  by Gaynor et  al.  [237] . For  the sake of con-
creteness, let us assume that we want to use an exponential-down
model, i.e.
 ̄P (E
(51)
where   ̄P (E (cid:3) , E)  is  the  non-normalized  transition  probability,  and
α is a parameter that is approximately equal to (cid:15) (cid:6)E
d (cid:16) , the aver-
age energy transferred in a deactivating collision, as long as E is
well away from the ground state energy. The “activating” transi-
tion probabilities are to be obtained from detailed balance. Then
we have

(cid:3)
for E ≥ E

P (E

(cid:3) , E) =

 ̄P (E (cid:3) , E)
N(E)

(cid:3)
for E ≥ E

where

(cid:3)

N(E) =

E max

0

P (E

(cid:3)
(cid:3) , E ) dE

(52)

(53)

Fig. 19.  Steady-state population distributions for methane dissociation in the low
pressure limit at various temperatures from the 2 D /φ model (top panel) and the 1D
model (lower panel). Figure taken from Ref. [227] . Reprinted with permission from
the American Chemical Society

2 D / (cid:10) model), the model treated originally by Smith and Gilbert.
For  this  model  one  replaces  E  by  ε in  the  development  above,
where
ε = E − ε J

(47)

ε J = BJ(J + 1)
and B is an effective rotational constant. Then the 2 independent
variables in the ME are ε, the energy in the active degrees of free-
dom, and J (or equivalently the rotational energy εJ ). In this ap-
proximation
f (E, J) = (cid:10)(ε(E, J) , J)

(49)

(48)

where

(cid:10)(ε, J) =

(2 J + 1) ρ(ε, J) e −βε J
(cid:9)
(2 J + 1) ρ(ε, J) e −βε J

J

(50)

in  which ρ( ε,  J )  is  the  density  of  states  with  energy  in  the  ac-
tive degrees of freedom ε and total angular momentum quantum

28

and E max  is the upper limit on the energy domain, so that P ( E (cid:3) ,
E ) is normalized to unity. We can split this integral into 2 parts
at E = E (cid:3) , factor out N ( E ) from the high-energy part, and simplify to
obtain

N(E) =

(cid:6)
E
0   ̄P (E (cid:3) , E) dE (cid:3)
(cid:6)
E max
E

P (E (cid:3) , E) dE (cid:3)

1 −

(54)

The  result  is  sometimes  portrayed  as  being  an  exact  expres-
sion for N ( E ). However, rigorously speaking it is not, because the
integral in the denominator depends on N ( E ). Nevertheless, if one
evaluates the integrals in Eq. (54) numerically using the rectangle
rule (a low-order method) with backward differences, this depen-
dence disappears. This is the way that it is normally implemented.
The only exception appears to be Chandler and Miller [238] , who
used Simpson’s Rule to evaluate the integrals, and iterated using
Newton’s Method to obtain the equivalent of N ( E ). The simpler ap-
proach is probably sufficiently accurate for most applications.

To use Eq. (54) one starts with E = E max (the maximum energy
in the domain) and marches downward in energy E to E = 0; the
energies ahead of the current position (i.e. at lower energies) in the
march appear in the integral in the numerator, and those higher
in energy are in the denominator (with P ( E (cid:3) , E ) determined from
detailed balance). If one wants to give an explicit expression for
the activating wing of   ̄P (E (cid:3) , E) , one must factor N ( E ) out of the low
energy part of the integral, Eq. (53) , when it is split. The expression

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Fig. 20.  Comparison between the 1D and the 2 D /φ models for CH 3 + H + He → CH 4 + He in the low-pressure limit. Figure taken from Ref. [227] . Reprinted with permission
from the American Chemical Society

for N ( E ) analogous to Eq. (54) becomes
(cid:6)
E max
 ̄P (E (cid:3) , E) dE (cid:3)
E
(cid:6)
E
0 P (E (cid:3) , E) dE (cid:3)
1 −

N(E) =

(55)

Eq. (55) can then be used to start at E = 0 and march upward in
energy E to E = E max , and thus obtain the complete normalization
function.

Normalization  and  detailed  balance  are  enforced  for  the  2-
D  case  in  a  very  similar  way.  The  only  difference  is  that  a
two-dimensional  space  must  be  covered  instead  of  just  a  one-
dimensional line. Jeffrey et al. [232] propose the following algo-
rithm. Suppose we lay out a grid with E on the vertical axis and J
on the horizontal axis. Corresponding to their “top down, left-to-
right” scheme, we can write corresponding to Eq. (54) a general
expression for N ( E, J )

N (E, J ) =

(cid:6)
E
0 dE (cid:3)

J max (E (cid:3) ) (cid:9)

(cid:12)(cid:13)
(cid:11)
(cid:10)
1 − h (J (cid:3) , J)
1 − δ(E (cid:3) , E)
 ̄P (E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ; E, J )

J (cid:3) =0

{ 1 −

(cid:6)
E max
E  dE (cid:3)

J max (E (cid:3) ) (cid:9)

J (cid:3) =0

P (E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ; E , J) [ 1 − δ(E (cid:3) , E ) h (J (cid:3) , J) ] }

(56)
where δ( E (cid:3) , E ) is the Dirac delta function and h ( J (cid:3) , J ) is the Heavi-
side step function. The marching process entails starting in the up-
per left-hand corner of the grid, successively evaluating N ( E, J ) for
larger and larger J until the row is finished, then dropping to the
next smaller E in the grid and repeating, etc. Note that in this pro-
cess, if one is evaluating N ( E, J ) somewhere in the middle of the
grid, one needs   ̄P (E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ; E, J) for both J > J (cid:3) and J < J (cid:3) , although the
transition probability is needed explicitly only for E (cid:3) < E , as in the
analogous 1-D case ( Eq. (54) ). Note that the upper limits on the
sums over J (cid:3) depend on E (cid:3) , because E,J states no longer exist once
the energy manifold has been saturated with “rotational” energy.
One can imagine a number of variants of this procedure, but we
will not discuss those here.

4 ( + He) → CH

In  relatively  recent  work,  Jasper  et  al.  [233]  studied  the  dis-
2  + H ( + He)
sociation/recombination reactions, C
3 + H ( + He), using the methodology discussed
and CH
above for enforcing detailed balance (with normalization) and the
method for solving the 2-D ME outlined by Jeffrey et al. (Methods
for solving the 2-D ME are very similar to those for solving the 1-
D case.) More importantly, they determined k ( E, J ) and P ( E, J; E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) )

3  ( + He) → C

2 H

2 H

completely by theoretical methods. The microcanonical/ J -resolved
rate  coefficients  k ( E,  J )  were  calculated  using  ab  initio  transition
state theory (including anharmonic corrections), methodology that
is becoming highly developed and is discussed in detail elsewhere
[166] .  The  most  important  feature  of  this  work  is  that  the  au-
thors used classical trajectories (discussed in the next section) to
determine  P ( E,  J;  E (cid:3) ,  J (cid:3) ).  They  implemented  a  representation  for
 ̄P (E, J; E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) )  designed  to  incorporate  features  of  P ( E,  J;  E (cid:3) ,  J (cid:3) )that
were identified by trajectory studies,

 ̄P (E, J; E

(cid:3) , J

(cid:3) ) = g(E, J; E

(cid:3) , J

χα
−((cid:6)  ̄E /α)

(cid:11)
(cid:3) ) exp

(cid:12)

(cid:11)
exp

χγ
−((cid:6)  ̄J /γ )

(cid:12)

,

(57)
where g ( E, J; E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ) is a function of both the initial and final condi-
tions. In Eq. (57) , (cid:6)E = E (cid:3) − E , (cid:6)J = J − J (cid:3) , and (cid:6)  ̄E and (cid:6)  ̄J are given
by
(cid:6)  ̄E = | (cid:6)E cos θ − (cid:6)J sin θ|

(58)

and
(cid:6)  ̄J = | (cid:6)E sin θ + (cid:6)J cos θ|
(59)
The “rotation” of the (cid:6)E and (cid:6)J axes is introduced to account for
the fact that changes in E and J are not uncorrelated (rotational
energy), discussed by Barker and Weston [239] , as implied by the
usual factorization of the (cid:6)E  and (cid:6)J  components of  the energy
transfer function, i.e. θ is not necessarily equal to zero. Further, α,
γ , and θ were presumed to be linear in the initial angular momen-
tum
(cid:3)
α = α0 + α1 J

(60)

(cid:3)
γ = γ0 + γ1 J

(61)

(cid:3)
θ = θ0 + θ1 J
(62)
Finally, the collision rate Z was assumed to be of the form Z = ς Z LJ ,
where Z LJ is the Lennard-Jones (LJ) collision rate. There are nine ad-
1 , χ α, χ γ and
justable  parameters  in  the  analysis: α
ς . These parameters were determined from using classical trajec-
tories to calculate a number of low-order moments of the energy
transfer  function,  including  (cid:6)E , (cid:6)J  correlations  such  as  (cid:15) (cid:6)E (cid:6)J (cid:16) ,
then optimizing the values of the parameters to reproduce the mo-
ments.

0 , α

1 , γ

0 , γ

1 , θ

0 , θ

29

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

(e.g.  [154,236,239–270] ).  Are  quantum  effects  negligible?  Gilbert
[257] argues convincingly that they are. For the most part we ac-
cept his conclusion and will not belabor the point here. However,
if  the  collider  molecule  is  a  diatomic,  triatomic,  or  small  poly-
atomic molecule, energy transfer in low-energy states of the col-
lider can be important. Such collisions probably should be treated
with quantum mechanics, or at least semi-classically. Nevertheless,
the  quantities  of  interest  to  us  for  master-equation  analyses  are
“highly-averaged”, usually low-order moments of P ( E, J; E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ), or
P ( E, E (cid:3) ). Such averaging can completely wash out small quantum
effects. Another im portant (practical) reason for treating the prob-
lems of interest to us here classically is that they simply are too
complicated and time-consuming to do quantum-mechanically on
a routine basis. Only recently have accurate representations of the
intermolecular potential even been worked out [154,236,268] for
use  in  trajectory  (or  quantum  scattering)  calculations.  We  limit
ourselves here primarily to a discussion of trajectory analyses for
determining  P ( E,  E (cid:3) ),  i.e.  to  a  discussion  of  the  one-dimensional
problem. Extension of the methodology to 2 dimensions ( P ( E, J; E (cid:3) ,
J (cid:3) )) is not difficult in principle.

Fig. 21.  Fall-off curve for C 2 H 2 + H ( + He) → C 2 H 3 ( + He) at T = 300 K. Figure drawn
from Ref. [233]

2 H

2 + H ( + He) → C

Fig.  21  compares  the  rate-coefficient  predictions  with  experi-
mental results as a function of pressure for C
2 H
3
( + He) at T = 300 K. The agreement is remarkably good over 3 or-
ders of magnitude change in pressure. This level of agreement is
3 + H
sustained  at  higher  temperatures  and  is  similar  for  the  CH
( + He)  reaction  as  well.  Also  shown  on  the  plot  are  rate  coeffi-
cient calculated from the 1-D and 2 D /φ  models discussed above.
These  calculations  used  an  exponential-down  model  in  P ( E,  E (cid:3) )
with (cid:15) (cid:6)E
d (cid:16) determined from the trajectories. As shown in the fig-
ure the 2 D /φ prediction is about a factor of 2 larger than the full
2-D result at the lowest pressures. This difference is not surprising
since helium is expected to be a weak collider at low temperatures
d (cid:16) values), and the 2 D /φ
(at least as measured by (cid:15) (cid:6)E
formulation is a “strong-collider- in- J ” model. Note that the results
d (cid:16) s are only about 1 or 2 (cid:2) . The question
for γ indicate that (cid:15) (cid:6)J
then naturally arises as to if and when the 2 D /φ model can give
quantitatively  accurate  results,  a  question  that  can  be  addressed
with classical trajectories (see below).

d (cid:16) and (cid:15) (cid:6)J

The  results  of  Jasper  et  al.  (discussed  above)  are  encourag-
ing. However, the reactions considered are the simplest possible,
i.e.  they  have  only  a  single  well  and  a  single  product  channel.
More complicated problems involving multiple wells and/or multi-
ple product channels will likely require P ( E, J; E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ) to have explicit
dependence  on  E (cid:3)  and  a  longer  high-energy  tail  on  the  energy
transfer function than is possible to include with just the “stretch”
exponential function described above. It is difficult to say at this
point what else might be required. Also, Jasper et al. included nine
parameters in P ( E, J; E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ) for just the simple dissociation. Are that
many parameters required or can one live with considerably less
information from the trajectories and still get good agreement with
experiment? These issues are yet to be resolved.

7. Collisional Energy and Angular Momentum Transfer in
Highly Vibrational Excited Molecules

The  preceding  sections  dealt  with  chemistry  induced  by  vi-
brationally  excited  species  where  rates  of  collisional  energy  and
angular  momentum  transfer  may  ultimately  decide  the  fate  of
such species; the present section deals with theoretical approaches
to  treat  these  collisional  processes.  The  standard  theoretical  ap-
proach  to  studying  energy  and  angular  momentum  transfer  in
highly vibrationally excited molecules is to use classical trajectories

It  is  useful  to  understand  how  trajectory  analyses  are  per-
formed in order to understand how P ( E, E (cid:3) ) results from them. Let
R ( E, E (cid:3) ) dE ( = ZP ( E, E (cid:3) ) dE ) be the rate of transfer (by collision) of a
molecule  in  a  state  with  energy  between  E (cid:3)  and  E (cid:3) + dE (cid:3)  to  one
with an energy between E and E + dE; P ( E, E (cid:3) ) is the correspond-
ing probability density (per unit energy E ) for the collision rate Z.
R ( E, E (cid:3) ) can be determined from a trajectory analysis by evaluating
the following integral [257] :
(cid:4)
R (E , E (cid:3) ) = n M

(cid:3) ∞

b max

1 / 2

(cid:5)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

8 k B T
πμ

1
( k B T ) 2

C(E (cid:3) )

M(T )

0

0

E t exp (−E t / k B T ) B (E , E (cid:3) ; b, E t , φ C , φ M )2 π bd b d E t d φ M d φ C

(63)

where n m is the number density of the collider M , μ is the reduced
mass for the collision, and E t  is the relative translational energy.
B ( E, E (cid:3) ; b, E t , φ C , φ M ) dE is the probability that the target molecule
with energy between E (cid:3) and E (cid:3) + dE (cid:3) will be converted by collision
with the collider to one with energy between E and E + dE ; each
collision is to have impact parameter between b and b + db and
relative translational energy between E t and E t + dE t . The internal
states of the colliding molecules are taken from the regions of their
internal phase spaces that are occupied by a microcanonical en-
semble with energy E (cid:3) for the “target” molecule and for a canonical
ensemble with temperature T for the collider (as indicated by the
limits on the integral). Once the initial conditions are fully speci-
fied and the trajectory integrated B ( E, E (cid:3) ; b, E t , φ C , φ M ) is either 0 or
1. In principle one should take the limit b max → ∞ for the integra-
tion over the impact parameter b , but in practice it is sufficient to
take b max large enough that the integral has effectively converged.
There are some hazards in taking b max too large (as discussed be-
low), as well as in taking it too small.

The standard approach to integrating Eq. (63) is to convert the
b and E t integrations to ones involving exact differentials [257,271] ,
i.e.

(cid:4)
(cid:3) ) = n M

R (E , E

8 k B T
π μ
(cid:4)

(cid:5)

1 / 2

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

1

1

max

π b 2
(cid:5)

C(E (cid:3) )

M(T )

0
(cid:4)
2
, F 1 , φ C , φ M ) d F 1 d

0

(cid:5)

b
b max

2
d φ M d φ C

(64)

(65)

(cid:3) ;
B (E , E

b
b max

where

F 1 = e

−βE t (βE t + 1) .

30

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Since

(cid:4)
b max = n M
Z

(cid:5)

8 k B T
π μ

1 / 2

π b 2

max ,

(66)

we have for P ( E, E (cid:3) ) the integral
(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

1

1

P (E , E

(cid:3) ) =

C(E (cid:3) )

M(T )
(cid:4)

0

(cid:5)

(cid:3) ;
B (E , E

b
b max

0
(cid:4)
2
, F 1 , φ C , φ M ) d F 1 d

(cid:5)

b
b max

2
d φ M d φ C  (67)

1 and ξ

To evaluate P ( E, E (cid:3) ) one must specify the initial conditions for
the trajectories. First, generate 2 random numbers between 0 and
1, ξ
2 , plus whatever is needed to sample the internal phase
space of M and C . Then the impact parameter to be used in the
trajectory is b = b max ξ 1 / 2
1  , and E t (and thus the relative velocity) is
determined from solving the equation,
ln ξ2 = −βE t + ln (βE t + 1)
for E t . For N trajectories, P ( E, E (cid:3) ) can be written simply as

(68)

P (E , E

(cid:3) ) δE =

1
N

N (cid:2)

i =1

χi (E , E

(cid:3) ; δE )

(69)

i ( E,E (cid:3) ;  δE ) = 1  if
where  δE  is  the  bin  width  to  be  used,  and  χ
the trajectory has its final energy between E − 1
2 δE and E + 1
2 δE;
i ( E,E (cid:3) ;  δE ) = 0  otherwise.  The  simple  “averaging” formula  (un-
χ
weighted) of Eq. (69) results because of the use of exact differen-
tials in Eq. (67) .

Generally speaking, converting everything to exact differentials
is  not  the  most  efficient  way  of  doing  the  calculation.  If  one
is  conservative,  i.e.  very  careful  that  no  information  is  left  out,
b max  will  be  so  large  that  | (cid:6)E | = | E − E (cid:3) |  will  be  essentially  zero
at considerably smaller values of b than b max . Uniformly sampling
(  b
) 2 favors high values of b that contain little or no useful infor-
b max
mation, thus rendering the approach inefficient. Alternatively, one
can write d (  b
) 2 as 2  b
b max
randomly between 0 and 1 so the b = ξ
E (cid:3) ) δE as

) (the original form), choose  b
b max
1 b max , and calculate P ( E,

b max d(  b
b nax

P (E , E

(cid:3) ) δE =

1
N

N (cid:2)

i =1

2 b i
b max

χi (E , E

(cid:3) ; δE ) .

(70)

Both approaches yield the same result if enough trajectories are
calculated, but the latter approach gets to the converged answer
with fewer trajectories.

Although the point is discussed at some length elsewhere [241] ,
it is important to note that the trajectory results for R ( E, E (cid:3) ) are
independent of b max  except for (cid:6)E ≈ 0; R ( E, E (cid:3) ) for (cid:6)E ≈ 0 in-
creases  without  limit  as  b max → ∞ .  This  singularity  at (cid:6)E = 0  in
max P (E , E (cid:3) ) )
the collisional transfer rate (or transfer cross section π b 2
is related to the singularity at zero scattering angle in the classi-
cal, elastic, differential scattering cross section (it does not exist in
quantum mechanics). As the impact parameter in classical trajec-
tory calculations is increased, there is less and less energy trans-
ferred, and the scattering angle becomes smaller and smaller. Thus
there is a very large number of collisions with (cid:6)E ≈ 0 and nearly
zero scattering angle for large values of b max , even though R ( E, E (cid:3) ),
E (cid:7) = E (cid:3) , converges to a finite number as b max → ∞ .

This  situation  has  prompted  considerable  discussion  about
an  optimum  choice  for  Z  in  master  equation  calculations
[16 6,241,26 6,272] . The consensus appears to be that Z should be
somewhat  larger  than  Z LJ ,  the  Lennard-Jones  collision  rate,  but
probably not a lot larger. Of course, one could bypass this problem
simply by using R ( E, E (cid:3) ) directly, but it has become standard prac-
tice to do the factorization with Z = Z LJ and to think about energy

transfer rates on a per-collision basis. Then how do we convert the
trajectory results to a Z LJ -based scheme? The trajectory result that
we want to preserve is that R ( E, E (cid:3) ) does not change for E (cid:7) = E (cid:3) .
Thus, let
R (E , E
for all E , even E = E (cid:3) . Then

(cid:3) ) = Z LJ S LJ (E , E

b max P (E , E

(cid:3) ) = Z

(71)

(cid:3) )

S LJ (E , E

(cid:3) ) =

Z
b max
Z LJ

P (E , E

(cid:3) )

(72)

Note that S LJ ( E,E (cid:3) ) is not normalized to unity – it is not really a
probability; it is just an artifice to preserve the inelastic part of R ( E,
E (cid:3) ). In Eq. (72) we have also scaled the elastic peak of P ( E, E (cid:3) ) and
included it in S LJ ( E,E (cid:3) ), even though this peak does not converge to
a finite value as b max → ∞ . In fact it is a strong function of b max .
At first glance this approach sounds like a bad idea, but what saves
us is that if (cid:6)E ≈ 0, the master equation does not care whether a
collision occurred or not – the result is the same either way. This
gives us a high degree of flexibility in dealing with the (cid:6)E ≈ 0 col-
b max → Z LJ transformation
lisions. One could imagine making this Z
more physically appealing by constructing a P LJ ( E,E (cid:3) ) that has been
normalized by introducing a delta function at E = E (cid:3) , i.e.

P LJ (E , E

(cid:3) ) = S LJ (E , E

(cid:3) ) +

(cid:3) ∞

(cid:14)
1 −

0

(cid:15)
(cid:3) ) dE
δ(E , E

(cid:3) )

S LJ (E , E

(73)

P LJ ( E,E (cid:3) ) is thus normalized and conserves the inelastic part of
R ( E, E (cid:3) ). The change made by the Z
b max → Z LJ transformation in the
inelastic part of  the  probability density function  is  compensated
for by a change in the elastic part. Of course in practice nothing
precludes  the  possibility  of  having  P LJ ( E,E (cid:3) )  <  0  for  E = E (cid:3)  under
certain conditions, an unappealing but practically inconsequential
outcome.

Suppose we want moments (cid:15) ( (cid:6)E ) n (cid:16) or (cid:15) ( (cid:6)E

d ) n (cid:16) in the Lennard-

Jones basis. We have
(cid:16)

(cid:3) ∞

(cid:17)
((cid:6)E) n

=

LJ

(E − E

n
(cid:3) )
S LJ (E , E

(cid:3) ) dE

0
(cid:3) ∞

=

=

(cid:3) )

(E − E
0
(cid:16)
Z
b max
Z LJ

(cid:17)
((cid:6)E) n

b max

n Z

b max
Z LJ

P (E , E

(cid:3) ) dE

and
(cid:16)

((cid:6)E

(cid:17)
d ) n

LJ

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
d ) n

((cid:6)E

LJ

=

=

=

S LJ (E , E (cid:3) ) dE
(cid:6) ∞
0  S LJ (E , E (cid:3) ) dE

(cid:3)
for E ≤ E

(cid:6)
E (cid:3)
0  (E (cid:3) − E) n
(cid:6)
E (cid:3)
0  S LJ (E , E (cid:3) ) dE /
Z
b max
Z LJ

P (E , E (cid:3) ) dE

(cid:6)
E (cid:3)
0  (E (cid:3) − E) n
(cid:6)
E (cid:3)
Z
b max
0  P (E , E (cid:3) ) dE / (
Z LJ
(cid:17)
d ) n

((cid:6)E

(cid:6) ∞
0  P (E , E (cid:3) ) dE )
(cid:3)
for E ≤ E

b max

Z
b max
Z LJ

(cid:16)
Z
b max
Z LJ

(74)

(75)

Of course an expression analogous to Eq. (75) holds for activating
(up) collisions as well.

There is an important practical concern [236] that needs to be
addressed, particularly when using a very large value of b max (and
thus a very large nearly-elastic peak). In calculating moments, par-
ticularly one-sided moments such as (cid:15) (cid:6)E
d (cid:16) , numerical error in cal-
culating trajectories with (cid:6)E ≈ 0 can have significant impact on
the results [236] . In such cases it is best to approximate (cid:15) ( (cid:6)E ) n (cid:16)
and (cid:15) ( (cid:6)E
(cid:16)

d ) n (cid:16) as
(cid:3) ∞

E (cid:3) −ε

(cid:3)

(E − E

n
(cid:3) )
P (E , E

(cid:3) ) dE ≈

(E − E

n
(cid:3) )
P (E , E

(cid:3) ) dE

(cid:17)
((cid:6)E) n

=

0
(cid:3) ∞

E (cid:3) + ε

0

(E − E

n
(cid:3) )
P (E , E

(cid:3) ) dE

+

31

(76)

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Fig. 22.  Energy transfer parameters scaled to Z LJ as a function of b max (Z

bmax )

Fig. 24.  Histogram of S LJ , the scaled post-collision “population distribution.” The
b max / Z LJ for the value of b max used in the
different curves (with points) represent Z
calculation. The ordinate is S LJ (E , E (cid:3) ) = Z
b max
Z LJ  P(E , E (cid:3) ) .

Fig. 23.  Dependence of scaled energy transfer parameters on the impact parameter.

and
(cid:16)

((cid:6)E

(cid:17)
d ) n

(cid:3)

=

E (cid:3)

0

(E − E

n
(cid:3) )
P (E , E

(cid:3) ) dE ≈

(cid:3)

E (cid:3) −ε

0

(E − E

n
(cid:3) )
P (E , E

(cid:3) ) dE

(77)
Here ε must be sufficiently large to encompass the error, but small
enough that the trajectories omitted can safely be approximated as
having (cid:6)E = 0.

We  illustrate  some  of  the  points  discussed  above  concerning
trajectory calculations of energy transfer from highly vibrationally
excited  molecules  using  an  example.  The  case  considered  is  for
methane excited to an energy near its dissociation limit for a tem-
perature T = 1500 K and a pressure of one atmosphere with argon
as the  collider.  Fig.  22  shows the  convergence of (cid:15) (cid:6)E (cid:16) ,  −(cid:15) (cid:6)E
d (cid:16) ,
Z
b max
and (cid:15) (cid:6)E a (cid:16)  as  a  function  of
LJ  .  All  three  moments  have  con-
Z
b max = 1 . 5 Z LJ .  Similarly,
verged  to  relatively  constant  values  at  Z
Fig.  23  shows  the  three  moments  directly  as  a  function  of  b
,
b
LJ
where b LJ is defined from the equation
1 / 2

(cid:5)

π b 2
LJ

(78)

(cid:4)
Z LJ = n M

8 k B T
π μ

Consistent with Fig. 22 , Fig. 23 shows that little or no energy is
transferred for impact parameters larger than b = 1.23 b LJ , which ac-
tually corresponds to Z cap , the capture rate discussed below.

Perhaps most illuminating is Fig. 24 , which is a histogram of
S LJ ( E,E (cid:3) ) for the same E (cid:3)  as used in Fig. 23 and for a sequence of
b max ).  Consistent  with  the  results  of  Fig.  23 ,
values  of  b max  (or  Z
S LJ ( E,E (cid:3) ) has converged to good accuracy at Z
b max = 1 . 5 Z LJ  (except
perhaps  for  (cid:6)E  very  close  to  zero).  Beyond  this  point  (i.e.  for
b max > 1 . 5 Z LJ ) only the elastic peak increases significantly, as dis-
Z
b max =
cussed above. Clearly, one could take b max to correspond to Z

32

Fig. 25.  Capture rate for CH 4 -Ar as a function of temperature.

1 . 5 Z LJ  and capture  all  the  useful  information  from  the  calcula-
b max is  a  physically  significant  quan-
tion.  In  fact  this  value  of  Z
tity. It is the “capture rate”, Z cap , for CH
4  – Ar collisions. Fig. 25
is  a  plot  of  Z cap / Z LJ  as  a  function  of  temperature;  at  T = 1500
K,  Z cap = 1,  55 Z LJ .  The  implication  of  this  result  is  that,  in  or-
der  to  transfer  energy  to  or  from  the  target  molecule,  the  col-
lider must overcome the centrifugal barrier in the long-range, elec-
trostatic (induced-dipole/induced-dipole) potential. Otherwise, the
two molecules cannot get close enough to interact sufficiently for
energy transfer to take place. This simple interpretation coupled
with the results shown in Fig. 23 and Fig. 24 , as well as other rea-
sons [260,273] , suggest that Z cap would be a better reference colli-
sion rate than Z LJ .

It is clear from Fig. 24 that taking b max  in trajectory calcula-
tions to correspond to Z LJ misses considerable information, at least
at small values of | (cid:6)E |. However, using a b max  to correspond to
d (cid:16) LJ  of 358 cm -1
Z LJ  for this case shown leads to a value of (cid:15) (cid:6)E
whereas the converged (scaled) value is (cid:15) (cid:6)E
d (cid:16) LJ = 415 cm -1 , an er-
ror of only 14%. This relatively small difference occurs because any
moment of P ( E, E (cid:3) ) weights larger values of | (cid:6)E | more than smaller
ones. Higher-order moments (cid:15) ( (cid:6)E
d ) n (cid:16) LJ , n ≥ 2, using the Leonard-
Jones b max  are even closer to the converged results. We want to
emphasize that using Z LJ  in scaling the trajectory results is com-
pletely arbitrary – one could use almost anything. Using Z LJ  is for
convenience in comparing with previous results; Z LJ  has become
the de facto reference collision rate, and much of our intuition is
based on it.

Frequently the most important source of error in trajectory cal-
culations of collisional energy transfer is the intermolecular poten-
tial. The most general form of the overall potential can be written

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

as
V (R ) = V C ( R C ) + V M ( R M ) + V C−M (R )

(79)

where V C  is the intramolecular (bonding) potential of the target
molecule  and  R
C  is  the  multidimensional  position  vector  whose
components are the coordinates of the various atoms in C; V M and
R
M  are  the  same  quantities  for  the  collider  M;  V C − M is  the  in-
termolecular potential and R is position vector for all the atoms
of both molecules. Interatomic distances are calculated from these
vectors. Note that V M = 0 for an atomic collider. The intermolecular
potential is most commonly approximated as a sum of pair poten-
tials (separable pairwise)

V C−M (R ) ≈

N M (cid:2)

N C (cid:2)

V 2 ( R i j )

(80)

i =1

j=1

where R
ij is the distance between atoms i and j and the subscript
2 on V just indicates that only two-body interactions are included.
2 ( R
The two most common forms for V
ij ) are the Lennard-Jones po-
tential
(cid:15)
(cid:14)
6
12 − 2 ( R
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
a / R i j )
( R
V 2 ( R i j ) = D a
a / R i j )

(81)

(82)

and the exp/6 potential,
V 2 ( R i j ) = A a exp (−R i j / B a ) − ( C a / R i j ) 6
The subscript a indicates that the parameters depend (only) on the
chemical identity of the ij pair of atoms (e.g. C-He, H-Ar, etc.). In
studying  methane  dissociation  Jasper  and  Miller  [269]  were  the
first to identify and utilize low-level electronic-structure methods
(MP2/aug (cid:3) -cc-pVDZ and an empirically modified version of it called
SAC, “scaling all correlations”) in energy transfer calculations. They
found that these methods could reproduce the results of very high-
level electronic structure calculations (QCISD(T)/CBS) to good accu-
racy for the intermolecular potential, V C − M , although not necessar-
ily for V M and V C . Because the potential could be evaluated quickly
with the low-level method, this discovery opened up the possibil-
4 dissociation, i.e. where the
ity of doing “direct trajectories” for CH
potential is evaluated on-the-fly directly from the electronic struc-
ture  calculations  without  imposing  approximations  such  as  that
given by Eq. (80) . As illustrated below, collisional energy transfer
d (cid:16) )  are  very  sensitive  to  V C − M ,  but  surpris-
parameters  (e.g. (cid:15) (cid:6)E
4 + He, using direct
ingly insensitive to V C  and V M . In treating CH
trajectories with the MP2 potential and the 2D/ φ form of the ME,
Jasper and Miller obtained good agreement with experimental re-
sults for a number of thermal dissociation/recombination experi-
ments,  although  part  of  this  agreement  was  due  to  a  fortuitous
cancellation of errors from failing to include anharmonicity in the
ME state counts and an inadequate treatment of collisional angular
momentum transfer (corrected later).

In order to expedite the calculation of trajectories Jasper and
Miller [154,236,268] explored the use of simple pairwise-additive
(fitted) forms of V C − M Eqs. (81) and (82) . In this effort they also
simplified V C and V M (for diatomic colliders). V C was approximated
using  the  tight-binding  (or  extended  Hückel)  approach.  Specifi-
cally the tight-binding model for hydrocarbons of Wang and Mak
[274]  was  employed.  The  tight-binding  (TB)  model  is  a  semi-
empirical, low-level, electronic-structure method. It is several or-
ders of magnitude faster than the MP2/aug’-cc-pVDZ calculations
discussed above. For the intermolecular potential, V C − M , Jasper and
Miller tried both Lennard-Jones and exp/6 potentials obtained from
fits to high-level-electronic-structure calculations ( (cid:10)CISD(T)/CBS or
fp-CCSD(T)-CBS) for the atom-atom interactions. For the LJ poten-
tial  they  also  tried  the  tabulated  LJ  Parameters  given  by  Allen
and Tildesley [275] . The potentials for the diatomic colliders (H
2 ,
2 , CO) were approximated by extended Morse potentials (ex-
O
tended so as to give good fits to high-level electronic-structure cal-

2 , N

Fig. 26. (cid:15) (cid:6)E d (cid:16) for 5 different intermolecular potentials for CH 4 + He. Figure drawn
from Ref. [268]

4 )

2 O and CH

Fig. 26 shows (cid:15) (cid:6)E

culations or spectroscopic data). For larger colliders (H
only direct dynamics with the MP2 or SAC methods was used.
d (cid:16) ( from here on (cid:2)(cid:2)E

d (cid:3) refers to the values
LJ ) for 5 potential energy surfaces as a function of
after scaling to Z
temperature with methane the target and M = He. The label “A + B”
indicates that method A was used to calculated V C and B was used
to calculated V C − M ; the lone designation MP2 indicates direct dy-
namics. The designation LJA refers to the fitted Lennard-Jones po-
tential, and LJB indicates use of the tabulated parameters of Allen
and Tildesly. Fig. 26 illustrates 3 important points. First, the exp/6
model is a good approximation of the full V C − M . Second, the en-
ergy transfer, as represented by (cid:15) (cid:6)E
d (cid:16) , is relatively insensitive to
the intramolecular potential of the target molecule (MP2 versus TB
in this case). Third, energy transfer is very sensitive to the inter-
molecular  potential.  The  inverse-twelfth  power  repulsive  wall  of
the Lennard-Jones potential is too “hard”. It leads to collisions that
are too impulsive and transfer too much energy compared to the
more accurate exponential repulsion. The TB + exp/6 potential thus
gives us a fast, accurate intermolecular potential that can be ex-
tended to target molecules larger than methane.

It is of particular interest to know when we must solve a full
two-dimensional ( E and J ) master equation and when we can use
a simpler form of the ME to obtain accurate rate constants. This
requires looking at collisional angular momentum transfer in some
detail.  In  particular,  we  would  like  to  know  the  accuracy  of  the
2 D / φ (microcanonical strong-collider-in-J) model described in the
last section and when it might be substituted for the full 2-D ME
solution without much penalty. For any initial distribution, one can
write for (cid:15) (cid:6)J
(cid:3) ∞

d (cid:16) (as did Jasper et al. [154] ),

(cid:15) (cid:6)J

d (cid:16) =

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3) ) d J

(cid:3) (J
g

J (cid:3)

0

0

(J

(cid:3) − J) g(J) dJ

(83)

where g (cid:3) ( J (cid:3) ) is the initial angular momentum distribution and g ( J )
is the post-collision distribution. Note that here we take J and J (cid:3)
to  be  continuous  variables  (consistent  with  the  use  of  classical
trajectories), whereas above we took both to be discrete (consis-
tent with quantum-mechanical reality). Either approach is viable
in  practice.  Jasper  et  al.  used  two  different  distributions  for  g ( J )
to represent “strong collisions”: a thermal distribution, consistent
with the 2 D / (cid:10) approximation, and an approximate microcanonical
statistical one, consistent with the 2 D / φ model. The initial distri-
bution g (cid:3) ( J (cid:3) ) was taken to be thermal, as in the trajectory calcu-
d (cid:16)  from  trajectories  for  various
lations.  One  can  also  calculate (cid:15) (cid:6)J

33

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

about 10% at 1500 K. In all cases the error in using the 2 D / φ model
is smaller than the error in neglecting vibrational anharmonicity,
whereas this situation occurs for the 1-D ME only at temperatures
greater than ∼2500 K. All in all, one must conclude that the 2 D / φ
model overperforms, giving acceptable values of k
0 ( T ) even when
the (cid:15) (cid:6)J
d (cid:16) test indicates that it might not. However, one must be
very careful not to misinterpret these results. Remember that the
2-D case itself is approximate and has errors associated with it.
Nevertheless, the present comparisons give unambiguous illustra-
tions of the relative accuracies of the various approximations (re-
lated to J distributions) employed in the simpler models.

Fig. 27. (cid:15) (cid:6)J d (cid:16) as a function of temperature for different colliders. See text. Figure
drawn from Ref. [276]

colliders and compare them with the values determined from the
strong-collider- J  approximation.  This  comparison  provides  a  con-
venient  and  reasonable  test  of  when  the  2 D / φ model  (or  even
the 2 D / (cid:10) approximation) might be accurate. Fig. 27 shows such
4 dissociation/recombination. Only the results
a comparison for CH
2 , and He). The results for all
for three colliders are shown (H
the other colliders considered (Ne, Ar, Kr, H
4 ) are
4  is
very similar to those for He and O
an interesting case. It is a relatively strong collider in E (as mea-
d (cid:16) ), but it is a relatively weak collider in J (as mea-
sured by (cid:15) (cid:6)E
sured by (cid:15) (cid:6)J
d (cid:16) ). Conversely, H
2 O is a strong collider in both E and
J . In any event, the vast majority of the common colliders exhibit
d (cid:16) that are considerably smaller than those calculated
values of (cid:15) (cid:6)J
from the strong-collider models.

2 , and N
2 , even those for CH

2 , and CH

4 . CH

2 O, O

The (cid:15) (cid:6)J

d (cid:16)  and  (cid:15) (cid:6)J

are  determined  from  (cid:15) (cid:6)E

d (cid:16) values are only an indicator of when the 2 D / φ model
might be accurate. It is of interest to see how this plays out in
some simple cases. To this end, Jasper et al. [236] computed val-
0  (low-pressure limit) for a low-pressure-limit, explicitly
ues of k
2-D ME, i.e. one in which the adiabatic threshold energies ( E
0 ( J ))
were assumed to form a completely absorbing barrier. The energy
transfer function was taken to be
P ∝ exp (−| (cid:6)E | /  ̃ α) exp (−| (cid:6)J | /  ̃ γ )
(84)
where   ̃ α and   ̃ γ
d (cid:16)
[228,231,232] . Normal 1-D (where angular momentum effects are
ignored  completely)  and  2 D / φ values  of  k
0 ( T )were  also  com-
d (cid:16)  defining  the  energy  transfer  function  (single-
puted  with  (cid:15) (cid:6)E
exponential-down  model).  Again  CH
4  was  the  target  molecule.
These are shown in Fig. 28 (we added the results for the 2D/ (cid:10) case
for this review). The same energy transfer kernel was employed in
all the calculations, except that it had to be applied to ε rather
than E in the 2D/ (cid:10) model, making it difficult to place that model
in context. Except for the 2D/ (cid:10) case, the energy transfer function
was identical in all the cases except in how they handle the post-
collision J distribution. The main point to draw from Fig. 28 is that
the 2D/ φ model is a pretty good approximation to the explicitly
2-D ME; the errors in the rate constants obtained in using it are
smaller than the error due to vibrational anharmonicity and in the
opposite direction (thus producing a cancelling effect). Results are
shown in Fig. 28 only for helium M = He; results for M = O
2  and
H
2 O are also given in Fig. 4 of Ref. [236] . Another takeaway mes-
sage from Fig. 28 is that the 1-D model is not a very good predic-
tor of k
0 ( T ) even at fairly high temperatures for any of the colliders
– the error at 1500 K is about a factor of 2 for all three. In con-
trast,  the  2 D / φ model  is  an  excellent  predictor  of  k
0 ( T )  for  H
2 O
2  except at low
at all temperatures and a good one for He and O
T . The difference between the 2-D and 2 D / φ values of k
0 ( T ) is only

In a very recent paper, Jasper [277] has shown that neither the
explicitly 2-D nor the 2D/ φ models described above are adequate
to describe k
0 ( T ) over a wide range of conditions. “Robust a priori
approaches  ... require  flexible  descriptions  of  E/J  coupling  (non-
separability), explicit J dependence, and long-tail supercollisions.”
Of course these features are missing in the simple 2-D and 2 D / φ
models.  However,  as  a  compromise  between  accuracy  and  sim-
plicity, Jasper has proposed an empirical approach, which he calls
the 2 D / φ∗ model, in which one uses the 2 D / φ solution to the ME
(with a single-exponential-down energy transfer function) but di-
d (cid:16) ) from the trajectories by a factor of 2. This approach
vides α( (cid:15) (cid:6)E
is not very satisfying intellectually, but it is of enormous practical
utility. In fact, it provides support for the approach we have taken
frequently in the past of using the 2 D / φ model for analysis with α
taken as an adjustable parameter [188,227,268,278,279] . The values
of α deduced have generally been in line with Jasper’s proposal.

2 μE t ). Beyond C

Another  factor  that  affects  (cid:15) (cid:6)J

d (cid:16)  is  the  size  of  the  reactant
molecule (or target). This point is illustrated in Fig. 29 for 7 dif-
ferent colliders (from Jasper et al. [154] ). The figure shows (cid:15) (cid:6)J
d (cid:16)
as a function of temperature for a sequence of alkane targets from
methane to octane. For methane all the colliders have essentially
the same values of (cid:15) (cid:6)J
d (cid:16) over the entire temperature range, well
below the thermal limit (the microcanonical level is just slightly
lower),  and  one  would  not  expect  a  strong-collider-in-J  approxi-
mation to work very well in any of these cases. However, as the
size  of  the  target  increases,  the  results  for  the  heavier  colliders
(all but He and H
2 ) begin to approach the statistical limits – the
orbital angular momentum carried to or from a collision is larger
for heavier colliders than for lighter ones for a specified b and E t
d (cid:16) curves do not change very
8 the (cid:15) (cid:6)J
( L = b
much relative to the statistical limits. However, it seems reason-
able to conclude that a strong-collider-in-J approximation of some
sort might be a satisfactory substitute for the full 2-D ME in the
case of “large” target molecules and “heavy” colliders.
Fig.  30  shows  the  relative  collision  efficiencies  ( k

0 ( Ar ))
in  CH
4  dissociation/recombination at  300  K  and  2000  K.  The  2-
D,  2 D / φ,  and  1-D  results  are  shown  along  with  some  more  ap-
proximate  approaches  (the  names  shown  on  the  figure  are  self-
explanatory).  Interestingly,  H
2 O  is  the  most  efficient  collider  at
4  even though the lat-
both temperatures, more efficient than CH
ter has more internal degrees of freedom to absorb and dispatch
energy to the target. This result may well be a consequence H
2 O
being the only collider in the group with a permanent dipole mo-
ment. H
2 and He (at least at 20 0 0 K) are also somewhat more ef-
ficient than the other colliders. This is primarily because of their
higher collision rates (low molecular weights), but H
2 also has in-
ternal  degrees of  freedom  to  absorb  and  transmit  energy  to  the
target.

0 ( M )/ k

3 H

(cid:18)

8. Transport Properties

Once  we  have  established  accurate  intermolecular  potentials,
we can use them constructively to do things other than calculate
collisional energy transfer. The most important of these is the pre-
diction of transport properties, which have seen a resurgence of

34

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

use in practical applications) requires comparably accurate trans-
port  models.  We  limit  our  attention  here  to  a  discussion  of  bi-
nary diffusion coefficients, although conductivities and viscosities
are also important in many cases. Also, we do not discuss cases
where dipole-dipole interactions are involved.

Computer  software  used  in  combustion  modeling,  e.g.
CHEMKIN,  assumes  that  transport  properties  can  be  calculated
accurately  using  an  isotropic,  spherically-averaged,  intermolec-
ular  potential.  Thus  even  large  molecules  are  approximated  as
point  masses  in  treating  collisions.  Moreover,  the  intermolecular
potential is assumed to be of the Lennard-Jones form. Monchick
and  Green  [290]  and  Dagdigian  and  Alexander  [291,292]  have
performed quantum scattering calculations that suggest that this
approximation  is  accurate,  at  least  for  molecules  with  no  more
than 2 or 3 atoms. Jasper and Miller [209] have recently addressed
this  issue  systematically  for  n -alkane/inert-gas  mixtures.  Before
we discuss their work it is useful to review some important points
concerning diffusion coefficients and Lennard-Jones potentials.

The Lennard-Jones potential (more correctly the Lennard-Jones

12-6 potential) is given by

V (r) = 4 ε i j

(cid:19)(cid:20) σi j

(cid:21)

r

12

−

(cid:21)
(cid:20) σi j

(cid:22)
6

r

(85)

Fig.  28.  Comparisons  of  rate  constants  obtained  from  various  approximations
to  the  two-dimensional  master  equation  to  the  exact  result  for  the  reaction
anh is the multiplicative correction to the rate constant
CH 4 ( + He) (cid:2)CH 3 + H( + He). f
for vibrational anharmonicity. k 0 ( E,J ) is the 2 D / φ result and k 0 ( ε, J ) is the 2 D / (cid:10) re-
sult.

interest in the last few years [209,280–289] . The interest has oc-
curred because of the realization that validation of more and more
accurate chemical kinetics models by flame experiments (and for

Fig. 29. (cid:15) (cid:6)J d (cid:16) for various alkane target molecules and colliders as a function of temperature. Figure taken from Ref. [154]

35

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

single parameter ε
collisions,

(cid:23)

i j / k B T , and   ̄g

i j is the average relative speed of i,j

 ̄g i j =

8 k B T
π μi j

(89)

i j  ̄g i j (cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗

It is convenient to define a collision rate coefficient as
z i j = Z i j / n j = π σ 2
This rate coefficient is a function only of the temperature (and not
the pressure or number density). For an LJ or similar potential the
binary diffusion coefficient can be written as [209]

(90)

D i j =

3
16

(cid:24)

(cid:25)
B T 3 / μi j
2 π k 3
pπ σ 2
(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j

1 / 2

or

D i j =

(cid:24)
 ̄g i j

3
16

2 π k 3

(cid:25)
B T 3 / μi j
p z i j

1 / 2

(91)

(92)

Fig. 30.  Collision efficiencies for CH 4 dissociation/recombination for different col-
liders using a variety of methods. Figure taken from Ref. [276] . Reprinted with per-
mission from the American Chemical Society

Fig. 31.  The Lennard-Jones potential

for collisions between molecules of species i and species j , where
ij  is the point at which V ( r ) intersects the r axis, and ε
σ
i j  is the
well depth (see Fig. 31 ). Normally one has available (at best) only
the self-parameters σ
i j from
the empirical combining rules,
σi j = ( σii + σ j j ) / 2

ii . One then obtains σ

ij and ε

ii and ε

(86)

and
ε i j =

(cid:18)

ε ii ε j j

(87)

The collision rate of a molecule of species i with molecules of

species j is
Z i j = π σ 2

i j (cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗  ̄g i j n j
j  is  the  number  of  density  of  species  j,  (cid:20)(1,1) ∗ is  a  re-
where  n
duced collision integral (defined explicitly below in Eqs, 103 and
104) that depends only on the temperature and ε
i j , actually on the

(88)

ij on the intermolecular potential is con-
All the dependence of D
tained in z
ij . One can make similar deductions using the viscosity
or conductivity. However, in these cases it is (cid:20)(2,2) ∗ that appears in
ij ( Eq. (90) ); (cid:20)(1,1) ∗ and (cid:20)(2,2) ∗ are usually very similar in magni-
z
tude so that the LJ collision rate is normally relatively well defined
with either one.

There  is  an  important  ambiguity  that  arises  in  determining
the Lennard-Jones parameters σ and ε from the experimental de-
termination of transport properties. The σ and ε dependence in
Eq. (90) is factored; one can increase (decrease) σ and decrease
(increase) (cid:20)(1,1) ∗(or (cid:20)(2,2) ∗if conductivities or viscosities are under
consideration), by changing ε, without changing z
ij at all. The set
of all σ , ε combinations that produce the same z can be repre-
sented by a curve in the σ , ε plane for a given temperature. This
degeneracy can be removed, in principle, by considering multiple
temperatures,  in  which  case  all  the  curves  should  intersect  at  a
single  point,  thus  giving  the  “correct” values  of  σ and  ε.  How-
ever, the curves for different temperatures tend to lie close to each
other (almost parallel) in the σ , ε plane. This makes the intersec-
tion very difficult to determine accurately, particularly if the data
are obtained over a limited temperature range. As a result there
exists a “trough” in the σ , ε plane along which the values of the
associated transport coefficients are virtually indistinguishable, i.e.
there can exist substantially different σ , ε combinations that yield
the same transport properties. Because of this “near degeneracy,”
comparing experimental and theoretical values of σ and ε directly,
or  experimental  results  among  themselves,  is  not  very  useful.  It
is necessary then to compare the values of z predicted by differ-
ent σ , ε pairs to see if they lie in the same trough, and thus are
compatible in predicting similar transport properties. Bastien et al.
[286] discuss this point at length for viscosity data.

Using  the  analytic  potentials  they  had  developed  in  study-
ing  collisional  energy  transfer  (essentially  TB + exp/6)  for
He + hydrocarbons,  Jasper  and  Miller  [209]  tested  the  hypoth-
esis  that  diffusion  coefficients  could  be  determined  accurately
from  just  the  isotropic  (spherically-averaged)  part  of  the  poten-
tial,   ̄V (r) .  They  considered  helium  plus  a  sequence  of  n -alkanes
(methane,  ethane,  propane,  and  butane)  and  calculated  these  LJ
parameters as
ε = −min
 ̄V (r)

(93)

r

and
σ = 2

−1 / 6

r min

or
 ̄V (σ ) = 0

36

(94)

(95)

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

The relationship given by Eq. (94) is a property of the Lennard-
Jones function itself, Eq. (85) . The degree to which Eqs. (94) and
(95) yield the same value of σ is one measure of how well   ̄V (r)
is characterized by the Lennard-Jones function. Jasper and Miller
found  that  the  2  values  of  σ were  generally  very  close  for  the
He/ n -alkane  sequence  studied.  Most  importantly,  by  examining
properties of the potential itself and comparing predictions of z
ij
with  those  from  previously  tabulated  Lennard-Jones  parameters,
they concluded that the isotropic LJ approximation yielded accept-
able accuracy for the diffusion coefficients in the CH
6 , and
C
8 cases, but that anisotropy became a dominant factor in the
butane case.

4 , C

3 H

2 H

In a successful attempt to extend the isotropic LJ representation
to systems that are intrinsically anisotropic, and thus obtain “ef-
fective” LJ parameters for such cases, Jasper and Miller suggested
two methods for obtaining such parameters. One was a “trajectory-
based” method that is probably  too  expensive  and  too  compli-
cated for routine use in combustion modeling. However, the sec-
ond method is a straightforward extension of the method used to
obtain the isotropic LJ parameters. In this approach one chooses
orientations at random and computes εn as
ε n = −min

V n (r)

(96)

r

where V n ( r ) is the potential for the n th orientation, and σ n can be
computed either as
σn = 2

(97)

−1 / 6

r min ,n

where

γ 2
i j =

μi j g 2
2 k B T

= βE t = x

(102)

g is the relative speed of the colliders before the collision, and χ is
the deflection angle. Specializing to l = 1, s = 1 and using Eq. (102) ,
we can write Eq. (101) as

(cid:20)(1 , 1)
i j

= π

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

k B T
2 π μi j

1 / 2 (cid:3) ∞

(cid:3) ∞

−x
x 2
e

(1 − cos χ (b, x )) bdbdx .

0

0

The reduced collision integral is defined as

(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j

=

(cid:20)(1 , 1)
i j
(cid:20)(1 , 1)
i j,HS

where (cid:20)(1 , 1)

i j,HS is the hard-sphere collision integral
(cid:4)

(cid:5)

(cid:20)(1 , 1)
i j,HS

=

k B T
2 π μi j

1 / 2

π σ 2

(103)

(104)

(105)

in which σ is arbitrary. Above we took σ to be σ
ij , the Lennard-
Jones parameter, but it is not necessary to do so. We shall leave it
unspecified, so that

(cid:3) ∞

(cid:3) ∞

0

−x
x 2
e

(1 − cos χ (b, x )) bdbdx .

(106)

2 as

Utilizing exact differentials to help in evaluating this integral, we
define F
(cid:20)
F 2 =

(cid:21)
x 2 + x + 1

(107)

−x
e

1
2

or from
V n ( σn ) = 0

(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j

=

(98)

1
σ 2

0

Again Eqs. (97) and (98) gave similar results in the final analysis.
The final values of ε and σ are obtained from averaging over all
orientations,

N (cid:2)

ε =

ε n /N

n =1

and

N (cid:2)

σ =

σn /N

(99)

and write (cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗

i j

as

(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j

=

(100)

b 2
max
σ 2

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

1

0

0

(cid:4)
1
(1 − cos χ (b, F 2 )) d

(cid:5)

b 2
b 2
max

d F 2 ,

(108)

n =1

Jasper and Miller compared the predictions of z
ij using these pa-
rameters with those using tabulated (obtained primarily from vis-
cosity measurements) values of σ and ε. Depending on the partic-
ular species invoked they used either their analytical exp/6 model
or ab initio electronic structure calculations in obtaining the theo-
retical results. We should also note that evaluating z
ij using tabu-
lated values of pure-species σ and ε necessarily involves use of the
combining rules Eqs. (86) and ( (87) ), a potential source of error.
The agreement between the 2 sets of results was generally within
∼10-15% up to 30 0 0 K.

Of course, the best way to determine the effect of anisotropy on
transport coefficients is to evaluate the appropriate collision inte-
grals “exactly” for the polyatomic case using classical trajectories.
Jasper et al [209] have taken this approach. Let us review briefly
how this might be done. It is simplest to start with the case where
the colliders have no internal degrees of freedom and then indi-
cate what happens when polyatomic (or diatomic) molecules are
involved. The collision integral (cid:20)(l,s )
for colliding atoms is gener-
ally written as

i j

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

1 / 2 (cid:3) ∞

(cid:3) ∞

(cid:20)(l,s )

i j  = 2 π

k B T
2 πμi j

0

0

e −γ 2

(cid:25)
(cid:24)
1 − cos l χ (b, γi j )
i j γ 2 s +3
bdbd γi j
i j

where  again  b max  is  chosen  large  enough  that  the  integral  has
converged to acceptable accuracy. The collision energy E t is deter-
mined from F
1 in the last section.
The collision integral (cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
is then computed from the classical
trajectories as

2 in the same way it was from F

i j

(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j

=

b 2
max
σ 2

1
N

N (cid:2)

n =1

(1 − cos χn )

(109)

(analogous to Eq. (69) ). If one uses b / b max as the integration vari-
able instead of ( b / b max
) 2 (more efficient) Eq. (108) can be written
in the form

(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j

=

b 2
max
σ 2

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

1

(cid:4)

1

0

0

(cid:5)

2 b
b max

(cid:4)
(1 − cos χ (b, F 2 )) d

(cid:5)

b
b max

d F 2 .

Its Monte Carlo equivalent is
(cid:5)

(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j

=

b 2
max
σ 2

1
N

2 b n
b max

(1 − cos χn )

(cid:4)
N (cid:2)

n =1

(110)

(111)

(analogous  to  Eq.  (70) ).  F

1  could  be  used  instead  of  F

2  in  the

(101)

37

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

integration  if  one  wished;  of  course  Eqs.  (110)  and  (111)  would
need to be modified accordingly.

The polyatomic (including diatomic) form of Eq. (110) is [293]

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j

=

b 2
max
σ 2

(cid:4)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

1

1

(cid:5)

0

0

1 / 2

i (T )

j(T )
(cid:26)

×

1 −

(cid:4)

(cid:5)
x (cid:3)
x

2 b
b max

(cid:27)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

cos χ (b, F 2 )

d

b
b max

d F 2 d φ j d φ i

(112)

where the first 2 integrations average the internal coordinates and
momenta of the i and j reactants over a thermal distribution (as in
Eq. (67) ). The Monte Carlo equivalent of Eq. (112) is

(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j

=

b 2
max
σ 2

1
N

(cid:4)
N (cid:2)

n =1

(cid:5)(cid:26)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

1 / 2

2 b n
b max

1 −

x (cid:3)
n
x n

(cid:27)

cos χn

(113)

i j

8 , and C

2 H
2 + C

6 , C
3 H

where x (cid:3)
n  indicates the value of x n = βE tn  after the collision. The
value  of  ( x (cid:3)
x ) 1 / 2 is  generally  very  close  to  unity,  making  this  ex-
pression essentially the same as Eq. (111) . Of course that does not
mean that one can assume that collisions are elastic at the outset.
Jasper et al. used classical trajectories to calculate (cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
for
2 and each of the 4 smallest n -alkanes: CH
4 ,
collisions between N
3 H
10 . As an example, we show the results for
C
4 H
8  in Fig. 32 . Jasper et al. discuss all these results in de-
N
tail, but we want to point out only two features here. First, the
trajectory results are in remarkably good agreement with the ex-
periments of McGivern and Manion [289] ; the difference between
the two is generally less than the combined errors (which are very
small  to  begin  with).  Second,  in  all  four  cases  simple  isotropic
Lennard-Jones models, using both the parameters determined the-
oretically using the Jasper-Miller method discussed above and tab-
ulated values, agree well with the trajectory calculations. Due to
the anisotropy, the discrepancies are largest at low temperatures
(the  lowest  temperature  considered  was  300  K).  However,  even
these  differences  are  relatively  small. (cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
calculated  using  the
isotropic LJ parameters determined using the Jasper-Miller method
is larger than the trajectory results at 300 K by amounts ranging
from less than 10% for methane to about 17% for butane.

i j

It has been suggested that diffusion coefficients involving hy-
drogen atoms are not described well using the Lennard-Jones po-
tential. Jasper et al. [209] investigated this point for H atoms and
H
2 molecules, the 2 most important diffusers in flames. By looking
at the isotropic part of the potential for these two molecules col-
liding with N
2 , they concluded, as others have [282,283,295,296] ,
that the repulsive 1 / R 12 part of the Lennard-Jones potential is too
“hard” and that the Buckingham (exp/6) potential is a much better
representation of this potential. Fig. 33 shows a comparison for the
trajectory results for (cid:20)(1,1) ∗ and the pressure-independent part of
D H, N
2 using the full potential with various isotropic approximations
(the  semi-classical  theoretical  results  of  Stallcop  et  al.  [296]  are
also  shown).  Only  the  exp/6  approximation  agrees with  the  tra-
jectory results. However, it is possible simply to fit the trajectory
results with a Lennard-Jones function in which σ and ε are free
parameters. This result is also shown in the figure. The agreement
between the fit and the trajectories is generally within a few per-
cent. Although the σ and ε obtained in this way are not related
directly to the potential (an unappealing characteristic), they pro-
duce diffusion coefficients that are accurate enough for combustion
2 -N
modeling. Fig. 34 shows the same results for H
2 as Fig. 33 does
for H-N
2  case only in that
2 . This case is different from the H-N
the  Lennard  Jones  9-6  potential,  as  well  as  the  exp/6  potential,
is a good representation of the trajectory results. Again a “fitted”
Lennard-Jones 12-6 potential is adequate for combustion modeling.

38

σ 2
Fig.  32.  Reduced  collision  integrals  for  C 3 H 8 -N 2  collisions.   ̄(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
 ̄σ 2 (cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j
,
i j
where   ̄σ = 3 , 36 Ǻ is used in all cases to facilitate comparisons. See Ref. [294] for
details. The upper plot is the sphericallyl-averaged radial potential for the various
cases. Figure taken from Ref. [294]

i j  =

9. Electronically non-adiabatic kinetics and dynamics

The  role  of  electronically  non-adiabatic  reactions  in  combus-
tion has not been fully explored. Chemiluminescence from small
∗, CH ∗, OH ∗) in flame fronts provides visible ev-
molecules (e.g., C
2
idence  of  the  production  of  electronically  excited  species,  which
may  be  formed  or  removed,  and  their  facile  optical  observation
has led to effort s to use these species as diagnostics of their lo-
cal chemical environments [297–299] . In conventional combustion,
the chemistry of electronically excited species is almost certainly of
secondary importance due to their small concentrations, but effort s
are underway to enhance their abundance via plasmas to control
ignition and other combustion properties [47,300–303] .
Aside perhaps from isolated reactions such as CH + N

2 , the most
important class of non-adiabatic reactions in combustion are the
reactions  of  triplet  O  with  alkenes  and  alkynes  (except  acety-
lene) [304] . One can generalize this class of reactions to include
2  and other unsaturated
other abundant triplet species such as O
singlet  species  such  as  CO  and  N
2 .  These  reactions  start  on  a
triplet surface and can undergo intersystem crossing (ISC) to a sin-
glet  surface.  They  sometimes  require  a  spin-forbidden  transition
as in O + CO → CO
2 O [307,308] , or, al-
ternatively,  spin-forbidden  singlet  product  channels  can  compete

2  [305,306] and O + N

2 → N

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Fig. 33.  Reduced collision integrals for H-N 2 collisions.   ̄(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
, where
 ̄σ = 3 , 36 Ǻ is used in all cases to facilitate comparisons. See Ref. [294] for details.
The upper plot is the sphericall-averaged radial potential for the various cases. “Re-
fit” refers to the empirical determination discussed in the text.

i j  =

σ 2
 ̄σ 2 (cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j
i j

with triplet spin-allowed channels as in the O + alkene [304] and
CH + N
2 [309] reactions. In general, the different electronic states
feature different low-energy product channels, and treating these
reactions theoretically involves coupling non-adiabatic transitions
into multiple-well master equations for both sets of states [46,310–
313] .

Other classes of non-adiabatic processes, such as internal con-
version  via  conical  intersections  or  avoided  crossings,  which  are
most often shoulders of conical intersections [314,315] , are typi-
cally much faster than spin-forbidden processes, but their impor-
tance in combustion is likely small as these processes rarely arise
in thermally activated reactions.

As discussed throughout the rest of this manuscript, a variety of
theoretical methods and codes exist for studying electronically adi-
abatic (i.e., ground state) chemistry with well characterized uncer-
tainties. These methods are widely applied and their accuracies are
broadly understood. Relatively much less effort has been devoted
to applying and quantifying the accuracy of methods for studying
electronically non-adiabatic kinetics.

Here we consider two types of theoretical approaches for study-
ing  non-adiabatic  processes:  statistical  approaches  that  end  up
looking  like  transition  state  theory  (and  in  fact  are  sometimes
called “non-adiabatic transition state theory”) and are readily im-
plemented in chemical kinetics master equations, and dynamical
approaches that  incorporate  non-adiabatic transitions  into  other-
wise  classical-looking  trajectories.  More  rigorous  approaches,  in-
cluding fully quantum mechanical non-adiabatic dynamics (for ex-
ample [316–322] ) are not discussed here, as their significant com-

Fig. 34.  Reduced collision integrals for H 2 -N 2 collisions.   ̄(cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
, where
 ̄σ = 3 , 36 Ǻ is used in all cases to facilitate comparisons. See Ref. [209] for details.
The upper plot is the spherically-averaged radial potential for the various cases.
“Refit” refers to the empirical determination discussed in the text.

i j  =

σ 2
 ̄σ 2 (cid:20)(1 , 1) ∗
i j
i j

putational demands generally prohibit their application at temper-
atures relevant to combustion.

In  an  electronically  non-adiabatic  reaction,  the  usual  Born–
Oppenheimer  separation  of  the  timescales  of  nuclear  and  elec-
tronic  motion  breaks  down  [323–328] .  This  breakdown  results
in  electronic  and  nuclear  motions  that  are  coupled  to  one  an-
other, and chemical reactivity is no longer governed exclusively by
the ground-state adiabatic potential energy surface. Instead, when
modeling a non-adiabatic reaction, one has a choice of electronic
representation for the two or more electronic states involved and
their  couplings.  In  the  multistate  (or  generalized)  adiabatic  rep-
resentation, an adiabatic potential energy surface may be associ-
ated with each of the relevant electronic states, and the nuclear
dynamics in each state is coupled to motion in the other states
via the action of the nuclear gradient ∇  on the electronic wave-
functions φ
i . The more important of these couplings is often called
the  non-adiabatic  coupling  vector  and  is  sometimes  written  as
ij = <φ
j > . The magnitude of the non-adiabatic coupling vec-
d
tor is largest when the associated adiabatic gap is small and is sin-
gular (infinite) when adiabatic surfaces cross (at a conical intersec-
tion, for example).

i | ∇| φ

Diabatic  representations  [329,330]  include,  in  principle,  any
representation  that  is  not  the  adiabatic  one,  with  useful  di-

39

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

abatic  representations  the  result  of  unitary  transformations  of
the  adiabatic  electronic  wavefunctions  designed  to  non-uniquely
[331]  minimize  the  non-adiabatic  coupling  vector.  Nuclear  mo-
tion on the resulting diabatic potential energy surfaces is coupled
via scalar off-diagonal elements of the Hamiltonian H , which can
j >  (and  via  any  residual  vector  coupling,
be  written  V
which is almost always neglected). In principle, either representa-
tion may be used to obtain exact non-adiabatic dynamics (so long
as no coupling terms are neglected). In practice, convenience often
dictates which representation is used, and the results of practical
kinetics  and  semiclassical  trajectory  calculations  do  typically  de-
pend on the choice of electronic representation.

ij = <φ

i |H| φ

As noted above, spin-forbidden reactions are an important class
of reactions in combustion, and for these processes a particularly
convenient diabatic representation is available. The usual adiabatic
surfaces for the spin-free Hamiltonian may be taken as the dia-
batic surfaces for the relativistic Hamiltonian [332,333] . The scalar
diabatic couplings are then the matrix elements of the difference
between the two Hamiltonians, which is the spin-orbit operator,
i.e.,  <φ
j > .  These  matrix  elements  can  be  evaluated  accu-
rately (at least for the lighter elements) via the Breit-Pauli formal-
ism [334] .

SO | φ

i | H

Several statistical  methods  for  electronically  non-adiabatic ki-
netics have been proposed [45,307–309,335–337] , and Harvey pro-
vided an excellent review [338] . These methods differ from one an-
other in their details but generally assume: (1) non-adiabatic tran-
sitions are localized to some critical seam in configuration space,
(2) the nuclear states on this critical seam are statistically popu-
lated, and (3) the non-adiabatic transition probability can be eval-
uated from local properties of the critical seam and the local cou-
pling.  In  practical  applications,  further  approximations  are  often
made, including harmonic expansions of the critical seam and the
neglect of geometry dependence of the non-adiabatic couplings.

The choice of the critical seam is most straightforward for spin-
forbidden reactions, where the critical seam can be identified as
the N –1-dimensional intersection of the potential energy surfaces
for the two electronic states involved in the reaction, where N is
the number of internal degrees of freedom of the system. For other
types  of  non-adiabatic dynamics, the  choice of  the  critical  seam
is less clear. For systems with conical intersections, for example,
one might wish to use the conical intersection to define the seam.
Conical intersections are adiabatic surface crossings of dimension
N –2, however, and so cannot divide reactants from products. Fur-
thermore, many non-adiabatic reactions do not have energy acces-
sible  conical  intersections  and  instead  feature  avoided  crossings,
where  the  adiabatic  electronic  states  of  interest  do  not  cross  at
all. Both conical intersections and avoided crossings can be associ-
ated with N –1-dimensional diabatic surface crossing seams, which
can be used to define the critical surface [336] . For such reactions,
however,  it  is  not  always  a  good  approximation  to  assume  that
electronic transitions are localized to diabatic crossing seams; in-
stead, electronic transitions may occur over much broader regions
[339] . The non-uniqueness of the diabatic representation adds fur-
ther uncertainty to this choice for the critical seam.

For triatomic molecules (many of the early applications of non-
2 O), the statis-
adiabatic statistical methods [307,308] were for N
tical  state  count  associated  with  the  critical  seam,  N
SX ,  may  be
evaluated analytically or via Monte Carlo sampling. A useful ap-
proximation for larger systems is to approximate the crossing seam
via a harmonic expansion about the minimum energy point on the
crossing seam [340] (often labeled the MSX or MECP), and to eval-
uate N
SX  for a collection of harmonic oscillators with the associ-
ated frequencies. This is analogous to the usual harmonic oscilla-
tor approximation for state counts associated with saddle points in
transition state theory. Because the MSX is not a stationary point
on either of the intersecting surfaces, however, additional care is

needed to evaluate the harmonic frequencies associated with the
MSX [340,341] .

The electronically non-adiabatic flux through the crossing seam
SX  and,  typically,  a

can  be  evaluated  as  the  convolution  of  N
geometry-independent non-adiabatic transition probability, P

NA ,

(cid:3)

N NA (E) =

dε P NA (ε ) ρSX (E − ε ) ,

(114)

SX = dN

where the density of states is ρ
SX / dE , and the convolution
variable ε represents the kinetic energy perpendicular to the cross-
ing seam. More generally, the non-adiabatic transition probability
depends on the local properties of the seam, which do vary as a
function of geometry. It is particularly convenient (although rare)
to include this geometry-dependence when ρ
SX  is calculated via
Monte Carlo sampling [335] . More often, however, P
NA is evaluated
based on the properties of a single geometry, e.g., the MSX geom-
etry, which allows for the geometry-independent simplification in
Eq. (114) .

Several  formulas  for  P

NA  have  been  given.  Many  calculations
employ the Landau-Zener (LZ) approximation for P
NA [93,104,342] ,
which was derived in the 1930s by considering a one-dimensional
system. In 1973, Delos, again considering a one-dimensional sys-
tem,  pointed  out  that  both  forward  and  backward  passages
through the crossing seam can transfer population between elec-
tronic  states  and  proposed  a  so-called  “double  passage” formula
[343] given by
P 2LZ = P LZ + (1 − P LZ ) P LZ ,
where  the  LZ  probability  of  hopping  between  diabatic  states  is

(115)

P LZ ( E ⊥ ) = 1 − exp ( − 2 π H 2
SO
h | (cid:6)F | v ⊥

) ,

(cid:18)

E ⊥ is the energy in the hopping coordinate perpendicular to the
SO is the spin–orbit coupling strength, | (cid:6)F | is the
crossing seam, H
norm of the gradient of the diabatic gap at the crossing seam in
coordinates  mass-scaled  to  μ,  and  the  velocity  perpendicular  to
2 E ⊥ /μ. Note that Eq. (115) is written
the crossing seam is v ⊥ =
to describe the probability for switching diabatic states; the prob-
lem could be formulated using either representation, as discussed
above, and the “least coupled” representation is often most con-
venient. The first term of Eq. (115) is the usual LZ probability of
hopping between diabatic states at the first seam crossing. The 2 nd
term accounts for the LZ probability at the 2 nd  crossing, with its
probability reduced by (1–P
LZ ), due to depletion at the first cross-
ing.

In that same work, Delos noted that the LZ formula tends to-
NA → 1) at low energies, which is qual-
ward the adiabatic limit ( P
itatively incorrect for weakly-coupled systems [343] . Instead, P
NA
should tend toward a small number which itself tends to zero as
SO 2 . The so-called weak coupling (WC) formula shown by Delos
H
and discussed elsewhere [344,345] properly includes this behav-
ior, as well as other related quantum mechanical features of the
one-dimensional double-passage problem, such as phase interfer-
ence and tunneling.

Eq. (115) is appropriate for a one-dimensional system in which
the system is guaranteed to cross the seam exactly twice, but its
applicability to higher-dimensional systems is less clear. If we ne-
glect the effect of depletion (or if we consider the limit of small
P
LZ can be
LZ ), Eq. (115) reduces to P
interpreted  as  accounting  for  seam  crossings  in  both  directions,
which, unless P
LZ is close to unity, is an appropriate correction re-
gardless  of  the  dimensionality  of  the  seam.  The  effect  of  deple-
tion is more difficult to incorporate into statistical theories, as, in
many dimensions, the system may cross the seam once, twice, four
times, etc. The distribution of seam crossings is nonlocal and de-
pends on the full time-history of the system.

LZ . This doubling of P

2LZ = 2 P

Most  practical  calculations  employ  the  “double  passage  LZ”
formula.  We  note  that  some  authors  report  differences  in  spin-

40

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Fig.  36.  Thermal  branching  fractions  for  the  C 2 H 4 + O  reaction  calculated  in
[46] (solid lines) and for the theory of Nguyen et al. (dotted lines) compared with
two sets of experimental results (closed symbols at 298 and 608 K: Peeters et al.
[347] ; small green squares up to 770 K: Smalley et al. [346] ).

Fig. 35.  Potential energy diagram for the (A) triplet and (B) singlet channels. The
MSX promoting ISC is close to the triplet biradical 3
CH 2 CH 2 O, and the immediate
products formed after ISC are indicated by arrows in B.

forbidden rates of up to a factor of two when using the LZ and WC
formulas. This is most likely an error resulting from inaccurately
integrating Eq. (114) close to ε = 0 where the LZ expression varies
rapidly. In thermal kinetics applications involving light atoms, the
two approaches should generally give nearly identical results.

Once N

NA is computed, the bimolecular non-adiabatic rate coef-

ficient can be written in the familiar form
dE N NA (E)
Q R

exp(−V MSX / k B T ) ,

k NA (T ) =

k B T
h

(cid:6)

(116)

NA  and Q

SX  and the double passage LZ formula for P

R is the total partition function of the reactants, and V

where Q
MSX
is the threshold energy for the crossing seam. As mentioned above,
NA is often approximated using the harmonic oscillator approxi-
N
mation for N
NA . (We
have neglected angular momentum in Eq. (116) and in the above
R  via the
discussion, but it can be readily included in N
rigid rotor approximation.) The spin-forbidden rate coefficient in
Eq. (116) then includes all of the usual sources of uncertainty as-
sociated  with  conventional  single-electronic-state  transition  state
theory calculations: those arising from errors in the calculated fre-
quencies,  rotational  constants,  and  threshold  energy,  as  well  as
the neglect of vibrational anharmonicity. As emphasized above, the
approximate  treatment  of  P
NA  is  likely  an  even  more  significant
source of additional uncertainty in Eq. (116) . Few quantitative stud-
ies of the accuracy of Eq. (116) have appeared. In Harvey’s 2006 re-
view, [338] he summarizes the accuracy of this approach as “within
an order of magnitude of experiment.”

2 H

As an example, we summarize the results of a master equation
study of O + C
4 that included an application of a priori statisti-
cal theory for ISC [46] . The total rate constant for this reaction is
straightforward to calculate using conventional transition state the-
ory, as it is controlled entirely by the formation of the initial triplet
adduct 3 CH
2 O and a single transition state for each of the two
reactive triplet surfaces. Product branching, however, is controlled
by the fate of 3 CH
2 O, where, as shown in Fig. 35 , ISC to the sin-
gle surface competes with fragmentation and isomerization on the

2 CH

2 CH

triplet surface. The relevant crossing seams are close to the mini-
mum energy of the triplet biradical 3 CH
2 O, which has a similar
electronic structure as the singlet biradical 1 CH

2 CH

2 CH

2 O.

Both the singlet and triplet surfaces have multiple competing
channels,  and  a  master  equation  for  the  reactants,  wells,  prod-
ucts, and transition states in Fig. 35 was constructed that included
ISC rates connecting 3 CH
2 O to singlet species. The required ISC
rate constants were calculated using the “double passage” Landau-
Zener formula, consideration of the four lowest-energy electronic
states, and a direct classical trajectory study of “prompt” product
branching immediately after ISC.

2 CH

The resulting thermal branching fractions are shown in Fig. 36 ,
where they are compared with experimental results [346,347] and
the results of an earlier master equation study [348] . The two mas-
ter equation studies agree fairly well with one another at low tem-
peratures and are both in general agreement with experiment. The
two  predictions  differ  fairly  significantly  at  higher  temperatures,
however, where no experimental information is available. This dif-
ference  can  be  attributed  principally  to  differences  in  the  treat-
ment of ISC in the two calculations. ISC rates were not predicted
in the earlier study [348] , but instead the total singlet/total triplet
product ratio was adjusted to best reproduce experiment. The au-
thors  arrived  at  45:55  for  this  ratio,  which  they  then  assumed
did not vary with temperature. In the later study [46] , this ratio
was  predicted  using  a  priori  statistical  theory,  and,  again,  a  sin-
glet/triplet ratio of ∼50:50 was found around room temperature.
However, due to different underlying energy dependencies of the
singlet and triplet channels, this singlet/triplet ratio was predicted
to  decrease  significantly  at  higher  temperatures.  Related  a  priori
calculations have been given for larger alkanes and alkynes [311–
313] .

The a priori statistical methods considered so far are based on
one-dimensional descriptions of non-adiabatic transitions. An ob-
vious comparison with semiclassical treatments of tunneling can
be made, where in both cases a distinctly quantum effect (elec-
tronic transitions or tunneling) is being added to transition state
theory, which is fundamentally a classical (localized) theory. It has
been shown that multidimensional tunneling treatments of tunnel-
ing can differ significantly from one-dimensional ones [349–351] ,
and one may expect to see similar effects in P

NA [45] .

Such  a  multidimensional  non-adiabatic  statistical  theory
(MNST) was recently proposed and tested for O + CO [45] , where
the appropriateness of treating crossing seams of electronic states

41

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

of different spins as “non-adiabatic transition states” in statistical
calculations of spin-forbidden reaction rates was considered. Cou-
pling of the spin-forbidden reaction coordinate to the remaining
nuclear degrees of freedom was shown to give rise to a variety of
multidimensional effects, including: static multidimensional effects
due to the geometry-dependence of the local shape of the crossing
seam and of the spin-orbit coupling, dynamical multidimensional
effects due to energy exchange with the reaction coordinate during
the seam crossing, and nonlocal (history-dependent) multidimen-
sional effects due to interference of the electronic variables at 2 nd ,
3 rd ,  and  later  seam  crossings.  Nonlocal  multidimensional  effects
are intimately related to electronic decoherence [352,353] , where
electronic dephasing acts to erase the history of the system.

Next we consider methods for non-adiabatic dynamics, and we
focus on multistate semiclassical trajectory approaches [323,354–
361] . These methods require global potential energy surfaces and
couplings and are generally much more computationally demand-
ing than the statistical approaches discussed above. They can, how-
ever,  overcome  some  of  the  limitations  of  statistical  theories,  as
they explicitly include nonlocal effects, geometry-dependent mul-
tidimensional hopping probabilities, etc. Their principal shortcom-
ing is their reliance on classical mechanics for the nuclear motion.
These methods may be expected to suffer from all the problems
typically associated with conventional (single state) trajectories, in-
cluding threshold effects, zero-point energy violations, the neglect
of tunneling, etc.

Several  non-adiabatic  trajectory  methods  have  been  proposed
and  continue  to  be  proposed.  In  our  opinion  there  are  now
more methods than means of discriminating between them. New
methods  are  often  tested  using  one-dimensional  models,  which
as  noted  above  miss  important  physics.  We  limit  attention  here
to  three  classes  of  methods:  surface  hopping  [362,363] ,  mean-
field/Ehrenfest [364] , and the decay-of-mixing approach [365,366] ,
which combines elements of both. Notably, the development of the
decay-of-mixing approach included tests against full-dimensional
(3D) atom-diatom quantum-mechanical scattering calculations for
a varied set of test cases including conical intersections, avoided
crossings, and weak coupling interactions [326,339,354,367] .

Semiclassical  trajectory  methods  generally  treat  the  nuclear
variables (the nuclear coordinates and momenta) classically, while
treating  the  electronic  variables  (the  electronic  state  probability
amplitudes c α for each state α, which are related to the electronic
state  populations  n α = c αc ∗
β )  quantum  me-
chanically. The various semiclassical methods differ from one an-
other in how the propagation of the nuclear and electronic vari-
ables is coupled.

α and  coherences  c αc ∗

In the trajectory surface hopping approach, the nuclear motion
is governed by a single (adiabatic or diabatic) potential energy sur-
face, and this single-surface propagation is interrupted via instan-
taneous surface switches or hops. Although some surface hopping
methods restrict hops to crossing seams, there is no such restric-
tion  in  perhaps  the  most  widely-used  surface  hopping  method:
Tully’s fewest-switches method [362] . In this approach, the elec-
tronic variables are obtained by integrating the coupled electronic
Schrödinger equations for c α along each classical trajectory. These
coupled equations are functions of the adiabatic or diabatic poten-
tial energies and couplings. Changes in c α along the trajectory gov-
ern when surface hops occur. The fewest-switches hopping proba-
bility is so named because it allows trajectories to hop to another
electronic state only when there is net probability transfer away
from the currently occupied state.

When  a  hop  occurs,  the  potential  energy  changes  discontin-
uously  and  the  kinetic  energy  (typically  only  the  component  in
the direction of the non-adiabatic coupling vector) is adjusted to
conserve  total  energy.  This  method  is  designed  to  maintain  the
fraction  of  trajectories  in  each  electronic  state  according  to  the

ensemble-averaged electronic populations. This equivalence is not
maintained in practice [368] , however, due to the presence of so-
called “frustrated” hops, i.e., trajectories that attempt to hop into
an excited electronic state but do not have the appropriate inter-
nal energy distribution to do so.

Schemes  for  “un-frustrating” or  otherwise  dealing  with  frus-
trated hops have been proposed, many of which use models for
decoherence to collapse the electronic wave function and reduce
calls for transitions into forbidden states [363,369–372] . Frustrated
hops  are  the  multistate  analog  of  zero-point  violations  in  single
surface trajectory calculations and are just as ubiquitous. The re-
sults  of  surface  hopping  calculations  can  be  strongly  dependent
on the choice of electronic representation due in part to differing
numbers of frustrated hops in the different representations [368] .
In the semiclassical Ehrenfest (or mean-field) approach [364] ,
trajectories  are  propagated  on  an  effective  potential  energy  sur-
face that is a weighted average of the single-state potential energy
surfaces. The weights are associated with the quantum-mechanical
state  populations  and  coherences,  which  are  again  obtained  by
solving the time-dependent Schrödinger equation along each clas-
sical trajectory. The significant advantage of this approach is that it
is formally independent of the choice of electronic representation.
Unfortunately, it suffers from the significant drawback of propagat-
ing nuclear trajectories in mixed electronic states away from re-
gions of coupling. For example, an Ehrenfest trajectory can finish a
simulation in a mixed electronic state such that its internal energy
does not correlate meaningfully with either of the product states.
The decay-of-mixing approach [365] includes desirable aspects
from both the surface hopping and mean-field classes of methods.
In this approach, “de-mixing” terms are added to the equations of
motion for the electronic variables that cause the system to de-
cay to a quantized electronic state away from regions of coupling.
This method behaves similar to an Ehrenfest trajectory in strongly
coupled regions (and so is relatively independent of the choice of
electronic representation and does not suffer from frustrated hops)
and gradually “hops” to a quantized state outside of these regions
(and  so  predicts  physically  meaningful  internal  energy  distribu-
tions). The most accurate of the decay of mixing methods is the
coherent switches with decay of mixing (CSDM) method [365] . The
de-mixing terms may be motivated by considering decoherence of
the electronic variables due to the action of the external “bath” of
nuclear degrees of freedom.

10. Concluding Remarks

In this review we have discussed a number of advancements
in chemical kinetics theory and specialized topics related to gas-
phase combustion chemistry that have come about since the turn
of the century. None of them are very likely to be discussed in a
class in chemical kinetics or combustion. Nevertheless, they repre-
sent important knowledge for developing chemical kinetics models
in the 21 st century. For this reason, where feasible, we have tried to
be instructive as well as informative. The articles by Lendvay and
by Robertson in Ref. [373] are good complementary/supplementary
reading for the present review. Some topics (e.g. roaming radical
reactions) were omitted here, because we judged them to be less
important for high-temperature combustion than the ones we de-
scribed. Two important topics that are missing are transition state
theory  and  electronic  structure  theory.  The  centrality  of  these  2
topics has been realized since the 1930s, even though important
progress continues to be made. Good reviews of their current sta-
tus  as  applied  to  combustion  (and  atmospheric  chemistry)  exist
in other places [107,166,374–376] . It is interesting to imagine how
combustion  chemistry  might  change  over  the  next  20-25  years.
Certainly  two-dimensional  master-equation  analyses  will  become
routine  for  multiple-well  problems,  featuring  P ( E,  J;  E (cid:3) ,  J (cid:3) )  func-

42

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

tions that include all the bells and whistles, these having been ob-
tained from classical trajectories. Very likely these computer codes
will also include automatic species reduction and prompt reaction.
Potential  energy  surface  information  will  likely  be  obtained  us-
ing computer programs like KinBot. Complex non-adiabatic reac-
tions will also be studied routinely during this period, opening the
door to obtaining accurate rate constants and product distributions
for the O( 3 P) reactions with alkenes and alkynes. Chemically ter-
molecular reactions will be included routinely in models just like
other reactions. Classical trajectories will have become an impor-
tant tool in obtaining very accurate transport properties. Perhaps
other  new  phenomena  will  have  been  discovered.  Although  the
senior author of the present article has a strong affection for the
rate-controlled, constrained-equilibrium approach to the construc-
tion of large, complex mechanisms, it seems more likely that such
mechanisms will be detailed, having been constructed at least par-
tially by computer using programs like RMG. In any event, the next
20-25 years should be an exciting period for combustion chemistry,
just like the last 20-25.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgement

The authors wish to express their gratitude to Stephen Klippen-
stein and Yuri Georgievskii for the collaborations that form the ba-
sis of much of this review. JAM would also like to thank Josette
Bellan for inviting him to write this article many years ago now.
The material is based in large part on work at Argonne supported
by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Ba-
sic  Energy  Sciences,  Division  of  Chemical  Sciences,  Geosciences,
and  Biosciences  under  Contract  No.  DE-AC02-06CH11357  as  part
of the Argonne-Sandia Consortium on High-Pressure Combustion
Chemistry (FWP # 59044). JZ and NH were funded under DOE Ba-
sic Energy Sciences (BES), the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geo-
sciences, and Biosciences. Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-
mission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology
and  Engineering  Solutions  of  Sandia,  LLC.,  a  wholly  owned  sub-
sidiary of Honeywell International, Inc., for the U.S. DOE’s NNSA
under  contract  DE-NA0 0 03525.  The  views  expressed  in  the  arti-
cle do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. DOE or the
United States Government.

Appendix

A. The Multiple-Well Master Equation: Its Formulation, Solution, and
Determination of Phenomenological Rate Coefficients

To be concrete about the problem definition, we envision an ex-
perimental situation in which we are trying to measure the rate
coefficient and product distribution for the reaction,

R + m (cid:2) products ,

where the reactants m and R are heavily diluted in a bath of the
inert gas M. Moreover, as is commonly the case in such experi-
ments, we assume that one of the reactants m is maintained at a
concentration that is in great excess over that of the other, R, thus
rendering the reaction pseudo first-order in n
R , the number den-
sity (or concentration) of R. Thus the following inequality holds:

where n m  is the number density of the inert diluent, and n m  is
that for the “excess” reactant. Typically, R is a radical and m is a
molecule, but the analysis below applies regardless of the nature
of R and m. The master equation for such conditions is linear and
can be written as
(cid:2)
d n i (E, J)
dt

(cid:3) − Z i n i (E, J)

P i (E, J; E

(cid:3) ) n i ( E

(cid:3) ) dE

= Z i

(cid:3) ∞

(cid:3) , J

(cid:3) , J

J (cid:3)

E
0
i

M w (cid:2)

−

k ji (E, J) n i (E, J) +

k i j (E, J) n j (E, J)

M w (cid:2)

j(cid:7) = i

j(cid:7) = i

(E, J) n i (E, J) + k a
−k
d
i

i (E, J) n R n m ρRm (E, J) e

−βE / Q Rm

N p (cid:2)

k p

i (E, J) n i (E, J)  i = I, ..., M w .

−

(A.2a)

p=1

In Eq. (A.2a), n
i ( E,J ) dE is the concentration of isomer i of the com-
plex with energy between E and E + d E and with angular momen-
tum quantum number J; Z
i is the collision rate of complex i with
i  is the ground-state energy of isomer i;
the diluent molecules; E 0
i ( E,J; E (cid:3) , J (cid:3) ) is the probability (density) that a collision will trans-
P
fer a molecule in well i from a state with energy between E (cid:3) and
E (cid:3) + dE (cid:3)  and with an angular momentum quantum number J (cid:3)  to a
state with energy between E and E + dE and an angular momen-
ij ( E, J ) is the unimolecular rate coefficient
tum quantum number J;k
i  is the rate coefficient
for isomerization from well j to well i ; k
d
for dissociation of isomer i to the reactants m and R ; k p
i  ( E, J ) is
the analogous rate coefficient for dissociation from well i to a set
of bimolecular products p ; N p is the number of such sets of prod-
ucts; M w is the number of wells; k a
i  ( E, J ) is the association rate
coefficient for formation of isomer i from the reactants; Q Rm ( T ) is
the reactant partition function (including relative translational mo-
tion); ρRm ( E, J ) is the corresponding, J-resolved density of states;
and β= (k
B is Boltzmann’s constant. In principle, one
should also include terms in Eq. (A.2a) that describe re-association
of the bimolecular products. However, in practice we neglect these
terms, and consequently we do not include them in Eq. (A.2a) or
the equations that follow. Even though the problem is explicitly
posed  as  bimolecular  with  R + m  as  the  reactants,  all  rate  con-
stants, except those for which the sink species are reactants, re-
sult from the analysis, i.e. those for all subsequent isomerizations
and dissociations . Except for the discussion in Section 9 all reac-
tions/collisions are assumed to take place adiabatically on a single
potential energy surface.

B T) -1 , where k

i (E, J) ρRm (E, J) e −βE / Q Rm (T )  by  K e q

We  can  cast  Eq.  (A.2a)  in  a  more  usable  form  by  applying
microscopic  reversibility  to  the  R + m (cid:2) i  r eaction,  thus  r eplac-
i (E, J)  where
ing  k a
i (T ) is the equilibrium constant for the R + m (cid:2) i association re-
K e q
action, and F
i ( E,J ) is the equilibrium population distribution in well
i at temperature T ,
F i (E, J) = ρi (E, J) e

(E, J) F
i (T ) k
d
i

−βE / Q i (T ) .

(A.3)

i ( T ) is the vibrational-rotational partition function for
i ( E,J ) is the corresponding J-resolved density of

In Eq. (A.3) Q
the i th well, and ρ
states. The ME becomes
d n i (E, J)
dt

= Z i

(cid:3) ∞

(cid:2)

J (cid:3)

E
0
i

P i (E, J; E

(cid:3) , J

(cid:3) ) n i ( E

(cid:3) , J

(cid:3) ) dE

(cid:3) − Z n i (E, J)

M w (cid:2)

−

M w (cid:2)

k ji (E, J) n i (E, J) +

k i j (E, J) n j (E, J)

j(cid:7) = i

j(cid:7) = i

n M >> n m >> n R ,

(A.1)

(E, J) n i (E, J) + K e q
−k
d
i

i (E, J) F i (E, J) n R n m
i k
d

43

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

N p (cid:2)

k p

i (E, J) n i (E, J)  i = I, ..., M w

−

p=1

(A.2b)

After approximating the integrals that occur in this formulation
as discrete sums with bin width δE and converting to mole frac-
tions by dividing by the appropriate total number density, we can
express the master equation in the general form,

(A.2c)

G = ˆ S

−1 ˆ T ˆ S ,

Both forms of the association rate term in the master equation as-
sume that the reactants, m and R, are maintained in thermal equi-
librium with the bath gas throughout the course of the reaction.
The form shown in Eq. (A.2b) has the advantage that it does not
require the explicit calculation of ρRm ( E,J ), which is a complicated
convolution of the state densities of the 2 fragments R and m. Nev-
ertheless, we utilize both formulations, the one chosen dictated by
the situation. In chemical kinetics problems it is common to use
the one-dimensional form of Eq. (A.2b) in which E is the only in-
dependent variable, rather than the two-dimensional formulation
in terms of both E and J. This is an enormous simplification. It is
useful to write out the one-dimensional ME for clarity:
d n i (E)
dt

(cid:3) − Z n i (E)

P i (E , E

(cid:3) ) n i ( E

(cid:3) ) dE

= Z i

(cid:3) ∞

E 0
i

M w (cid:2)

−

M w (cid:2)

k ji (E) n i (E) +

i (E) n i (E)
k i j (E) n j (E) − k
d

j(cid:7) = i

j(cid:7) = i

+ K e q

i (E) F i (E) n R n m −
i k
d

N p (cid:2)

k p

i (E) n i (E)  i = I, ..., M w

p=1

The second of the inequalities (Eq. A.1) implies that n m = constant,
thus “linearizing” the master equation. Consequently, we need only
to  add  a  rate  equation  for  n
R ( t )  in  order  to  close  the  system.
Again, assuming that the reactants are always in thermal equilib-
rium with the bath gas, we can write such an equation in the fol-
lowing form:

d n R
dt

=

M w (cid:2)

(cid:3) ∞

E
0
i

i = I

i (E) n i (E) dE − n R n m
k
d

i (E) F i (E) dE.
k
d

M w (cid:2)

(cid:3) ∞
K e q
i

i = I

E
0
i

(A.4)

We should note that the assumption of thermal equilibrium for
the  reactants  is  not  very  restrictive  for  most  reactions  (e.g.  no-
tably excluding those that give rise to significant prompt dissocia-
tion). All combustion, atmospheric-chemistry, and chemical-vapor-
deposition modeling makes this assumption for the species they
contain, and the timescales for chemical reactions of most species
are sufficiently long to establish thermal (or nearly thermal) equi-
librium for them. Moreover, in the section on prompt dissociation,
we explained that "reaction" includes the reactive event PLUS re-
laxation of the products. This virtually ensures that everything will
be close to thermal equilibrium. The only exception that comes to
mind is a WBFR that has f ne significantly less than unity (as can oc-
cur at high temperature and low pressure, see Fig. 7 ). The steady
state that arises as a consequence of vibrational-rotational relax-
ation in this case is distinctly non-equilibrium. Of course we could
use the steady-state population distribution instead of the equilib-
rium one in the present analysis. However, pursuing this line of in-
quiry is beyond the scope of the present discussion. We only want
to say that we do not expect it to have much of an effect in the
overall scheme of things, and it does not affect the validity or gen-
erality of the analytical development that follows in the least.

The form of the rate equation for n

R ( t ) given in Eq. (A.4) is one-
dimensional; the extension to two dimensions should be straight-
forward.  Equations  (A.2c)  and  (A.4)  constitute  a  set  of  M w + 1
integro-differential  equations  for  the  unknown  populations,  n
i ( E )
and  n
R  in  the  one-dimensional  case.  Unless  noted  explicitly  we
limit the remainder of our discussion of multiple-well problems to
the one-dimensional case, although extension to two dimensions
is straightforward in principle.

= ˆ T y ,

dy
dt
where y is the vector of populations and  ˆ T  is the transition matrix.
i ( E
Each component of y is either of the form x
l ), the mole fraction
per unit energy in well i at an energy E
R , the mole fraction of
l , or X
the deficient component of the k th set of fragments. The transition
matrix  ˆ T , which is square, describes both collisional and reactive
processes and is constructed to satisfy detailed balance (at the mi-
crocanonical level),

(A.5)

ˆ T i j y j = ˆ T ji y i .

(A.6)

Our  objective  is  to  solve  Eq.  (A.5)  and  derive  phenomenological
rate constants k ( T, p ) from the solution.

One could solve Eq. (A.5) by finding the eigenvalues and eigen-
vectors of  ˆ T and expanding the solution in terms of them. However,
there is a better way. Because the elements of  ˆ T  are constructed to
satisfy detailed balance,  ˆ T  can be converted to a symmetric matrix
by a similarity transform,

(A.7a)

(A.7b)

⎤

⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎦

.

where  ˆ S is the diagonal matrix,

⎡

. . .

⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎣

.
.
.

ˆ S =

(cid:18)

F i ( E

l ) Q i

· · ·

0
.
.
.

. . .

(cid:31)

0

· · ·

Q Rm δE
n m
i (T ) ,  where  ρ

i ( E

l ) = ρ

i ( E

l ) e −βE

l / Q

Here  F
rotational density of states of the i th well at the energy E
l th energy bin; Q
of the i th well.

l )  is  the  vibrational-
l of the
i ( T ) is the vibrational-rotational partition function

i ( E

Suppose we diagonalize G and write

GV = V (cid:22),
(A.8)
where  the  columns  of  V  are  the  eigenvectors  of  G ,  and  (cid:22) is  a
diagonal matrix whose elements are its eigenvalues. Inserting Eq.
(A.7a) into Eq, (A.8) we obtain
−1 ˆ T ˆ S V = V (cid:22)
ˆ S

or
ˆ T ˆ S V = ˆ S V (cid:22),

(A.9)

so that  ˆ S V = U, the matrix whose columns are the eigenvectors of
ˆ T . Importantly, the eigenvalues of  ˆ T  are the same as those of G .
There are 2 advantages to using G instead of  ˆ T  in the solving the
ME: the symmetry of G facilitates diagonalization, and the eigen-
vectors of G are orthogonal, whereas those of  ˆ T  are not, although
they are linearly independent.

Let’s look at the master equation. Multiplying the ME by  ˆ S −1
and using Eq. (A.7a), we arrive at the symmetric form of the mas-
ter equation,

dw
dt

= G w ,

where

w = ˆ S

−1

y .

(A.10)

(A.11)

One can solve Eq. (A.10) by expanding w in terms of the normal-
ized,  orthogonal  eigenvectors  of  G  – the  mathematical  steps  are

44

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

identical to those used in determining the general solution of the
time-dependent Schrodinger equation. The result is

(cid:2)

w =

j v T
v

λ
j w (0 ) e

j

or
w =

(cid:2)

C j v

λ
j e

j t ,

j t ,

(A.12a)

(A.12b)

[164] call their long-time method. The method derived by Robert-
son, et al. [165] is completely equivalent to this result; The Bartis-
Widom [377] result is related, but it has an additional assumption
(near-Boltzmann  distribution)  that  may  not  be  applicable  under
many important conditions. Klippenstein and Miller also derived
rate constants from what they call their initial-rate method. The
results are
N
chem (cid:2)

j

where C

j = v T

j w (0 ) . Multiplying Eq. (A.12b) by  ˆ S gives the popula-

il = −
k

(l)
λ j (cid:6)X
i j

j=1

tion vector,
(cid:2)
y =

C j u

λ
j e

j

j t .

and

(A.13)

T l =
k

(l)
λ j (cid:6)X
.
l j

N
chem (cid:2)

j=1

(A.20a)

(A.20b)

The mole fraction of species A is given by X

i , where it
y
is assumed that a multiplication by δE (the width of the energy
bins) is included if A is a well, but not if A corresponds to a set of
i j , we have for the mole fractions, or
fragments. If we let Z

A j =

i ∈ A

(cid:9)

U

(cid:9)

A =

i ∈ A

macroscopic populations,

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

X i =

λ
Z i j C j e

j t =

λ
a i j e

j

j

where
a i j = Z i j C j

j t ,

(A.14)

(A.15)

and the subscript i refers either to R or one of the wells.

For a non-conservative system, with which we are dealing, Eq.
(A.13) (and thus Eq. (A.14)) is missing information about the sinks.
However, this information is easily recovered from the solution to
the ME after it is obtained [160]. Consequently, from here on we
assume that this information has been acquired and we can write

N−1 (cid:2)

X i (t) =

λ
a i j e

j=0

j t ,  i = 1 , ..., S

(A.16)

for all chemically active species, where N is the number of eigen-
modes and S is the number of species. As noted in the main text
(cid:3) s have the physically appealing interpretation
the a
ij
a i 0 = X i (∞ )
and
a i j = −(cid:6)X i j ,
where X
ij is
the  total  change  in  population  of  species  i  (0  ≤ t  ≤ ∞ )  due  to
eigenmode j . If the CSEs separate from the IEREs we can determine
phenomenological  rate  constants  from  the  CSEs.  Then  Eq.  (A.16)
becomes
N
chem (cid:2)

i ( ∞ ) is the long-time population of species i , and (cid:6)X

(A.17b)

(A.17a)

j (cid:7) = 0

X i (t) =

λ
a i j e

j t ,  i = 1 , ..., S

j=0

where N
chem is the number of chemically significant eigenmodes.
Eq. (A.18) has the same form as the solution to a system of first-
order rate equations. These can be inverted to give the rate con-
stants as
N
chem (cid:2)

il =
k

a i j λ j a
−1
jl

l (cid:7) = i

j=0

and

k T i ≡

(cid:2)

li = −
k

N
chem (cid:2)

l(cid:7) = i

j=0

a i j λ j a

−1
ji .

(A.18)

(A.19a)

(A.19b)

where a −1
jl  are the j, l elements of A −1 , the inverse of the coeffi-
cient matrix from Eq. (A.18). This is what Klippenstein and Miller

45

The  superscript  l  indicates  the  initial  condition.  Both  methods
have advantages under certain conditions, although the long-time
(cid:3) s depend on
method is generally more robust. Even though the a
ij
the initial conditions, it can be shown that the rate constants do
not [163] .

Each  chemically-significant  eigenmode  describes  the  chemical
equilibration of one species with another (although other changes
may occur simultaneously). When one of the CSEs merges with the
IEREs, the corresponding equilibration process is no longer “chemi-
cally significant”, i.e. it occurs on vibrational-rotational time scales.
A consequence of this merging is that some of the rate coefficients
cease to exist. Suppose species α and β are equilibrated through
chem .  One  then  combines  α and  β into  a  single
eigenmode  j = N
species. It is not necessary to solve the master equation again. All
that is necessary is to combine (cid:6)X αj and (cid:6)X βj as
(cid:6)X (α+ β ) j = (cid:6)X α j + (cid:6)X β j

j = 1 , ..., N

chem − 1

(A.21)

a (α+ β ) j = −(cid:6)X (α+ β ) j
with
X α+ β (∞ ) = a (α+ β )0 = X α(∞ ) + X β (∞ ) .

One can then re-do the rate-constant calculation with the size
of  the  system  reduced  by  one.  This  species  reduction  procedure
can be repeated as many times as necessary.

B. Product Distribution for “Prompt” Reactions

In the main text of this article we described how one would
calculate the prompt dissociation of a weakly-bound free radical in
the case where the dissociation can be described accurately as a
single-well irreversible reaction. This is most commonly the case
for the small radicals of interest to us here. However, it is not the
most general case, which we want to discuss now. Recall that the
chemical kinetics models used in combustion are phenomenologi-
cal – the reactions included in those models are assumed to occur
from vibrationally-rotationally relaxed reactants and produce simi-
larly relaxed products. Thus both the reactive event and the subse-
quent internal-energy relaxation of the products are phenomeno-
logically part of the “reaction.” From a theoretical perspective the
products that are determined from a master-equation analysis of
a reaction are not necessarily the products that go into the phe-
nomenological  model,  although  in  most  cases,  particularly  those
involving  small  molecules,  the  differences  are  probably  not  very
large.  We  want  to  consider  here  a  molecule  or  radical  that  has
been formed from a chemical reaction with a specific energy dis-
tribution and formulate the ME describing the subsequent isomer-
ization and dissociation. From the solution to this ME we can de-
termine the probabilities of other species being formed during the
internal-energy relaxation process of the newly formed molecule
or radical.

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

The solution of the master equation for the problem described

above can be written as
N−1 (cid:2)

X

(l)
i j

(t) =

(l)
λ
i j e
a

j t

j=0

i = 1 , ..., S

(B.1)

where the symbols have the same meaning as in the main text
except that we have added the superscript ( l )to signify a specific
initial condition localized in well l . The initial condition of interest
is the product molecule with the incipient internal-energy distri-
(l)
i j  for j = 1,.., N -1 can also be in-
bution. The expansion coefficients a
terpreted as the negative of the total change in the population of
configuration (or species) i (either a well or a set of bimolecular
fragments) due to eigenmode j with initial condition ( l ),

a i j

(l)
(l) = −(cid:6)X
i j

j = 1 , ..., N − 1 ; i = 1 , ..., S

(B.2)

( l ) is the population of the i th configuration as
The coefficient a
ij
t → ∞ for the initial condition( l ). Except for species that are approx-
imated as infinite sinks in the master equation, the expansion coef-
ficients come directly from the solution of the ME. For sink species
one can write [160]

(cid:6)X

(l)
α j

= − 1
λ j

M w (cid:2)

(cid:3) ∞

0

i =1

(l)
k αi (E) c
i j

(E ) dE ,

(B.3)

(l)
i j

where c

(E) is the expansion coefficient in the ME solution for
(l)
the population density for well i ( x
i

), k αi ( E )
is the microcanonical rate coefficient for the i → α dissociation, and
M w is the number of wells. Then the long-time populations of the
sinks are given by
(l)
(cid:6)X
α (∞ ) =
X

(E, t) =

λ
(E) e

(l)
c
i j

(B.4)

(cid:2)

(cid:9)

j t

j

(l)
α j

j

and those of the non-sink species of course are all equal to zero. If
there are no sinks in the problem all the expansion coefficients in
Eq. (B.1) come directly from the solution to the ME.

The  solution  to  the  master  equation  has  2  types  of  chemical
change, that due to the IEREs and that due to the CSEs. It is only
the IEREs that are responsible for the prompt reaction that we are
investigating, i.e.

P prompt (l → i ) =

N−1 (cid:2)

(l)
(cid:6)X
i j

j= N

chem +1

or

P prompt (l → i ) = −

N−1 (cid:2)

(l)
i j

a

j= N

chem +1

l (cid:7) = i,

l (cid:7) = i

(B.5)

(B.6)

Eq. (B.5) gives the probability of molecule l converting to molecule
(or set of bimolecular fragments) i while l is relaxing from initial
energy distribution ( l )(parentheses imply a specific energy distri-
bution localized in well l ). This result can be implemented in phe-
nomenological (CHEMKIN) models in the same way as described
by Labbe et al. [36] for prompt HCO dissociation.

References

[1] Michael JV , Lim KP . Shock tube techniques in chemical kinetics. Annu Rev

Phys Chem 1993; 44 :429–58 .

[2] Norrish RGW , Porter G . The application of flash techniques to the study of

fast reactions. Discussions of the Faraday Society 1954 40-6 .

[3] Sridharan  UC ,  Reimann  B ,  Kaufman  F .  Kinetics  of  the  reaction
OH + H 2 O 2 → HO 2 + H 2 O. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1980; 73 :1286–93 .
[4] Egolfopoulos FN , Hansen N , Ju Y , Kohse-Höinghaus K , Law CK , Qi F . Advances
and challenges in laminar flame experiments and implications for combus-
tion chemistry. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2014; 43 :36–67 .
[5] Hanson RK , Davidson DF . Recent advances in laser absorption and shock tube
methods for studies of combustion chemistry. Progress in Energy and Combus-
tion Science 2014; 44 :103–14 .

46

[6] Goldsborough SS , Hochgreb S , Vanhove G , Wooldridge MS , Curran HJ , Sung CJ .
Advances  in  rapid  compression  machine  studies  of  low-  and  intermedi-
ate-temperature autoignition phenomena. Progress in Energy and Combustion
Science 2017; 63 :1–78 .

[7] Sung CJ , Curran HJ . Using rapid compression machines for chemical kinetics

studies. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2014; 44 :1–18 .

[8] Kee RJ , Rupley RM , Miller JA , Coltrin ME , Grcar JF , Meeks E , et al. CHEMK-

IN-PRO 15101 . San Diego, CA: Reaction Design, Inc.; 2010 .

[9] Frisch MJ, Trucks GW, Schlegel HB, Scuseria GE, Robb MA, Cheeseman JR,

et al. Gaussian 16 rev. B.01. Wallingford, CT 2016.

[10] Miller JA . Theory and modeling in combustion chemistry. Proc Combust Inst

1996; 26 :461–80 .

[11] Klippenstein SJ . From theoretical reaction dynamics to chemical modeling of

combustion. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2017; 36 :77–111 .

[12] Melius CF , Binkley JS . Energetics of the reaction pathways for NH 2 + NO →
products  and  nh + NO → products.  Symposium  (International)  on  Combustion
1985; 20 :575–83 .

[13] Truhlar DG , Runge K , Garrett BC . Variational transition state theory and tun-
neling calculations of potential energy surface effects on the reaction of O( 3
P)
with H 2 . Symposium (International) on Combustion 1985; 20 :585–94 .

[14] Perry RA , Melius CF . The rate and mechanism of the reaction of HCN with
oxygen atoms over the temperature range 540–900 K. Symposium (Interna-
tional) on Combustion 1985; 20 :639–46 .

[15] Harding LB , Wagner AF . The reaction of atomic hydrogen with the formyl

radical. Symposium (International) on Combustion 1988; 21 :721–8 .

[16] Miller  JA ,  Melius  CF .  A  theoretical  analysis  of  the  reaction  between  hy-
droxyl and hydrogen cyanide at high temperature. Symposium (International)
on Combustion 1988; 21 :919–27 .

[17] 2017 and later model year light-duty vehicle greenhouse gas emissions and
corporate average fuel economy standards. Accessed january 2020. https://
www.Govinfo.Gov/content/pkg/fr- 2012- 10- 15/pdf/2012- 21972.Pdf .

[18] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . Comment on "automatic estimation of pressure-de-
pendent rate coefficients. (j. W. Allen, C. F. Goldsmith, and w. H. Green, phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 14, 1131-1155). Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
2012; 14 :8431–3 .

[19] Som S , Liu W , Zhou DDY , Magnotti GM , Sivaramakrishnan R , Longman DE ,
et  al.  Quantum  tunneling  affects  engine  performance.  Journal  of  Physical
Chemistry Letters 2013; 4 :2021–5 .

[20] Pei Y , Zhang Y , Kumar P , Traver M , Cleary D , Ameen M , et al. Cfd-guided
heavy duty mixing-controlled combustion system optimization with a gaso-
line-like fuel. SAE International Journal of Commercial Vehicles 2017; 10 :532–46 .
[21] Richards KJ , Senecal PK , Pomraning E . Converge. Middleton . WI: Convergenr

Science Inc.; 2013 .

[22] Benson SW . Thermochemical kinetics . 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley and Sons;

1976 .

[23] Curtiss LA , Raghavachari K , Redfern PC , Rassolov V , Pople JA . Gaussian-3 (G3)
theory for molecules containing first and second-row atoms. J Chem Phys
1998; 109 :7764–76 .

[24] Ochterski JW , Petersson GA , Montgomery JA . A complete basis set model
chemistry  .5.  Extensions  to  six  or  more  heavy  atoms.  J  Chem  Phys
1996; 104 :2598–619 .

[25] Martin JML , Oliveira Gd . Towards standard methods for benchmark quality ab
initio thermochemistry—w1 and w2 theory. The Journal of Chemical Physics
1999; 111 :1843–56 .

[26] Feller D , Dixon DA . Predicting the heats of formation of model hydrocarbons
up to benzene. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 20 0 0; 104 :3048–56 .
[27] Fast PL , Sanchez ML , Truhlar DG . Multi-coefficient gaussian-3 method for cal-
culating potential energy surfaces. Chemical Physics Letters 1999; 306 :407–10 .
[28] Pope  CJ ,  Miller  JA .  Exploring  old  and  new  benzene  formation  pathways
in  low-pressure  premixed  flames  of  aliphatic  fuels.  Proc  Combust  Inst
20 0 0; 28 :1519–27 .

[29] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . Master equation methods in gas phase chemical

kinetics. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2006; 110 :10528–44 .

[30] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . The recombination of propargyl radicals and other

reactions on a C 6 H 6 potential. J Phys Chem A 2003; 107 :7783–99 .

[31] Glowacki DR , Lockhart J , Blitz MA , Klippenstein SJ , Pilling MJ , Robertson SH ,
et al. Interception of excited vibrational quantum states by O 2 in atmospheric
association reactions. Science 2012; 337 :1066 .

[32] Pfeifle M , Olzmann M . Consecutive chemical activation steps in the OH-initi-
ated atmospheric degradation of isoprene: An analysis with coupled master
equations. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics 2014; 46 :231–44 .

[33] da Silva G . Reaction of methacrolein with the hydroxyl radical in air: Incor-
poration of secondary O2 addition into the macr + OH master equation. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2012; 116 :5317–24 .

[34] Miller  JA ,  Klippenstein  SJ .  Some  observations  concerning  detailed  bal-
ance  in  association/dissociation  reactions.  Journal  of  Physical  Chemistry  A
2004; 108 :8296–306 .

[35] Senosiain JP , Klippenstein SJ , Miller JA . Pathways and rate coefficients for the
decomposition of vinoxy and acetyl radicals. Journal of Physical Chemistry A
2006; 110 :5772–81 .

[36] Labbe NJ , Sivaramakrishnan R , Goldsmith CF , Georgievskii Y , Miller JA , Klip-
penstein SJ . Weakly bound free radicals in combustion: "Prompt" dissociation
of formyl radicals and its effect on laminar flame speeds. Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters 2016; 7 :85–9 .

[37] Labbe NJ , Sivaramakrishnan R , Goldsmith CF , Georgievskii Y , Miller JA , Klip-

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

penstein SJ . Ramifications of including non-equilibrium effects for hco in
flame chemistry. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2017; 36 :525–32 .
[38] Burke MP , Goldsmith CF , Georgievskii Y , Klippenstein SJ . Towards a quan-
titative  understanding  of  the  role  of  non-boltzmann  reactant  distribu-
tions in low temperature oxidation. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute
2015; 35 :205–13 .

[39] Burke MP , Klippenstein SJ . Ephemeral collision complexes mediate chemically
termolecular transformations that affect system chemistry. Nature Chemistry
2017; 9 :1078–82 .

[40] Barbet MC , McCullough K , Burke MP . A framework for automatic discovery
of chemically termolecular reactions. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute
2019; 37 :347–54 .

[41] Cornell RE, Barbet MC, Burke MP. Automated discovery of influential chem-
ically termolecular reactions in energetic material combustion: A case study
for rdx. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 2021;in press, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.354 .

[42] Lei L, Burke MP. An extended methodology for automated calculations of
non-boltzmann kinetic sequences: H + C 2 H 2 + X and combustion impact. Proc
Combust Inst 2020. in press https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.385 .
[43] Jasper AW , Sivaramakrishnan R , Klippenstein SJ . Nonthermal rate constants
for CH4 ∗ + X → CH3 + hx, X = H, O, OH, and O2. The Journal of Chemical Physics
2019; 150 :114112 .

[44] Tao Y, Jasper AW, Georgievskii Y, Klippenstein S, J, Sivaramakrishnan R. Ter-
molecular chemistry facilitated by radical-radical recombinations and their
impact on flame speed predictions. Proc Combust Inst 2020. in press https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.342 .

[45] Jasper AW . Multidimensional effects in nonadiabatic statistical theories of
spin-forbidden kinetics: A case study of 3o + CO → CO2. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry A 2015; 119 :7339–51 .

[46] Li X , Jasper AW , Zádor J , Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . Theoretical kinetics of

O + C 2 H 4 . Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2017; 36 :219–27 .

[47] Ju Y , Sun W . Plasma assisted combustion: Dynamics and chemistry.. Progress

in Energy and Combustion Science 2015; 48 :21–83 .

[48] Miller JA , Pilling MJ , Troe J . Unravelling combustion mechanisms through a
quantitative understanding of elementary reactions. Proceedings of the Com-
bustion Institute 2005; 30 :43–88 .

[49] Kassel LS . The mechanism of the combustion of hydrogen. Chemical Reviews

1937; 21 :331–45 .

[50] Hughes KJ , Turányi T , Clague AR , Pilling MJ . Development and testing of a
comprehensive chemical mechanism for the oxidation of methane. Interna-
tional Journal of Chemical Kinetics 2001; 33 :513–38 .

[51] Ó Conaire M , Curran HJ , Simmie JM , Pitz WJ , Westbrook CK . A comprehen-
sive modeling study of hydrogen oxidation. International Journal of Chemical
Kinetics 2004; 36 :603–22 .

[52] Burke Michael P , Chaos M , Ju Y , Dryer Frederick L , Klippenstein Stephen J .
Comprehensive H 2 /O 2 kinetic model for high-pressure combustion. Interna-
tional Journal of Chemical Kinetics 2011; 4 4 :4 4 4–74 .

[53] Olson  DB , Gardiner WC .  Evaluation of methane combustion mechanisms.

Journal of Physical Chemistry 1977; 81 :2514–19 .

[54] Herbinet O , Biet J , Hakka MH , Warth V , Glaude P-A , Nicolle A , et al. Modeling
study of the low-temperature oxidation of large methyl esters from c11 to
c19. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2011; 33 :391–8 .

[55] Manley DK , McIlroy A , Taatjes CA . Research needs for future internal combus-

tion engines. Phys Today 2008; 61 :47–52 .

[56] Battin-Leclerc F , Blurock E , Bounaceur R , Fournet R , Glaude PA , Herbinet O ,
et al. Towards cleaner combustion engines through groundbreaking detailed
chemical kinetic models. Chem Soc Rev 2011; 40 :4762–82 .

[57] Taatjes  CA ,  Hansen  N ,  Osborn  DL ,  Kohse-Höinghaus  K ,  Cool  TA ,  West-
moreland  PR .  "Imaging"  combustion  chemistry  via  multiplexed  syn-
chrotron-photoionization  mass  spectrometry.  Physical  Chemistry  Chemical
Physics 2008; 10 :20–34 .

[58] Kasper T , Lucassen A , Jasper AW , Li W , Westmoreland PR , Kohse-Hoeing-
haus K , et al. Identification of tetrahydrofuran reaction pathways in premixed
flames. Zeitschrift Fur Physikalische Chemie-International Journal of Research in
Physical Chemistry & Chemical Physics 2011; 225 :1237–70 .

[59] Cool TA , McIlroy A , Qi F , Westmoreland PR , Poisson L , Peterka DS , et al. A
photoionization mass spectrometer for studies of flame chemistry with a syn-
chrotron light source. Rev Sci Instrum 2005; 76 :094102 .

[60] Li  YY ,  Qi  F .  Recent  applications  of  synchrotron  VUV  photoionization
mass spectrometry: Insight into combustion chemistry. Accounts Chem Res
2010; 43 :68–78 .

[61] Hanson RK . Applications of quantitative laser sensors to kinetics, propul-
sion and practical energy systems. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute
2011; 33 :1–40 .

[62] Kohse-Hoinghaus K , Barlow RS , Alden M , Wolfrum E . Combustion at the fo-
cus: Laser diagnostics and control. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute
2005; 30 :89–123 .

[63] Karwat DMA , Wagnon SW , Wooldridge MS , Westbrook CK . On the combus-
tion chemistry of n-heptane and n-butanol blends. Journal of Physical Chem-
istry A 2012; 116 :12406–21 .

[64] Dooley S , Dryer FL , Yang B , Wang J , Cool TA , Kasper T , et al. An experimental
and kinetic modeling study of methyl formate low-pressure flames. Combus-
tion and Flame 2011; 158 :732–41 .

[65] Van de Vijver R , Vandewiele NM , Bhoorasingh PL , Slakman BL , Seyedzadeh
Khanshan F , Carstensen H-H , et al. Automatic mechanism and kinetic model
generation for gas- and solution-phase processes: A perspective on best prac-

tices, recent advances, and future challenges. International Journal of Chemical
Kinetics 2015; 47 :199–231 .

[66] Green  WH ,  Barton  PI ,  Bhattacharjee  B ,  Matheu  DM ,  Schwer  DA ,
Song  J ,  et  al.  Computer  construction  of  detailed  chemical  kinetic  mod-
els  for  gas-phase  reactors.  Industrial  &  Engineering  Chemistry  Research
2001; 40 :5362–70 .

[67] Ratkiewicz A , Truong TN . Automated mechanism generation: From symbolic
calculation to complex chemistry. International Journal of Quantum Chemistry
2006; 106 :244–55 .

[68] Broadbelt LJ , Pfaendtner J . Lexicography of kinetic modeling of complex reac-

tion networks. AIChE Journal 2005; 51 :2112–21 .

[69] Green WH Jr . Predictive kinetics: A new approach for the 21st century. In:
Marin GB, editor. Advances in chemical engineering: . Academic Press; 2007.
p. 1–313 .

[70] Blurock E , Battin-Leclerc F , Faravelli T , Green WH . Automatic generation of
detailed mechanisms. Cleaner combustion . Battin-Leclerc F, Blurock E, Sim-
mie JM, editors. 1 ed editors. London: Springer-Verlag; 2013 .

[71] Warth V , Battin-Leclerc F , Fournet R , Glaude PA , Come GM , Scacchi G . Com-
puter based generation of reaction mechanisms for gas-phase oxidation. Com-
puters & Chemistry 20 0 0; 24 :541–60 .

[72] Zádor J , Taatjes C , Fernandes R . Kinetics of elementary reactions in low-tem-
perature autoignition chemistry. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science
2011; 37 :371–421 .

[73] Savee JD , Papajak E , Rotavera B , Huang H , Eskola AJ , Welz O , et al. Di-
rect observation and kinetics of a hydroperoxyalkyl radical (QOOH). Science
2015; 347 :643 .

[74] Gao CW , Allen JW , Green WH , West RH . Reaction mechanism generator: Au-
tomatic construction of chemical kinetic mechanisms. Computer Physics Com-
munications 2016; 203 :212–25 .

[75] Magoon GR , Green WH . Design and implementation of a next-generation
software interface for on-the-fly quantum and force field calculations in au-
tomated reaction mechanism generation. Computers & Chemical Engineering
2013; 52 :35–45 .

[76] Keceli M , Elliott SN , Li Y-P , Johnson MS , Cavallotti C , Georgievskii Y , et al. Au-
tomated computational thermochemistry for butane oxidation: A prelude to
predictive automated combustion kinetics. Proceedings of the Combustion In-
stitute 2019; 37 :363–71 .

[77] O’Boyle NM , Banck M , James CA , Morley C , Vandermeersch T , Hutchison GR .
Open babel: An open chemical toolbox. Journal of Cheminformatics 2011:3 .

[78] RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics. http://www.rdkit.org2018 .
[79] Matheu DM , Green WH Jr , Grenda JM . Capturing pressure-dependence in au-
tomated mechanism generation: Reactions through cycloalkyl intermediates.
Int J Chem Kinet 2003; 35 :95–119 .

[80] Allen JW , Goldsmith CF , Green WH . Automatic estimation of pressure-depen-

dent rate coefficients. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2012; 14 :1131–55 .

[81] Bhoorasingh  PL ,  West RH .  Transition state  geometry prediction  us-
ing  molecular  group  contributions.  Physical  Chemistry  Chemical  Physics
2015; 17 :32173–82 .

[82] Bhoorasingh PL , Slakman BL , Seyedzadeh Khanshan F , Cain JY , West RH . Au-
tomated transition state theory calculations for high-throughput kinetics. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2017; 121 :6896–904 .

[83] Van de Vijver R , Van Geem KM , Marin GB . On-the-fly ab initio calcula-
tions toward accurate rate coefficients. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute
2019; 37 :283–90 .

[84] Vandewiele NM , Van Geem KM , Reyniers MF , Marin GB . Genesys: Kinetic
model construction using chemo-informatics. Chemical Engineering Journal
2012; 207-208 :526–38 .

[85] Cavallotti C , Pelucchi M , Georgievskii Y , Klippenstein SJ . Estoktp: Electronic
structure to temperature- and pressure-dependent rate constants—A code for
automatically predicting the thermal kinetics of reactions. Journal of Chemical
Theory and Computation 2019; 15 :1122–45 .

[86] Dewyer AL , Arguelles AJ , Zimmerman PM . Methods for exploring reaction

space in molecular systems. Wires Comput Mol Sci 2018:8 .

[87] Dewyer AL , Zimmerman PM . Finding reaction mechanisms, intuitive or oth-

erwise. Org Biomol Chem 2017; 15 :501–4 .

[88] Simm  GN ,  Vaucher  AC ,  Reiher  M .  Exploration  of  reaction  pathways  and
chemical  transformation  networks.  The  Journal  of  Physical  Chemistry  A
2019; 123 :385–99 .

[89] Maeda S , Ohno K , Morokuma K . Systematic exploration of the mechanism
of  chemical  reactions:  The  global  reaction  route  mapping  (GRRM)  strat-
egy using the ADDF and AFIR methods. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
2013; 15 :3683–701 .

[90] Jara-Toro RA , Pino GA , Glowacki DR , Shannon RJ , Martínez-Núñez E . Enhanc-
ing automated reaction discovery with boxed molecular dynamics in energy
space. ChemSystemsChem 2020; 2 :e190 0 024 .

[91] Van de Vijver R , Zádor J . Kinbot: Automated stationary point search on po-
tential energy surfaces. Computer Physics Communications 2019:106947 .
[92] Grambow CA , Jamal A , Li Y-P , Green WH , Zádor J , Suleimanov YV . Unimolec-
ular reaction pathways of a γ -ketohydroperoxide from combined application
of automated reaction discovery methods. Journal of the American Chemical
Society 2018; 140 :1035–48 .

[93] Zener C , Fowler RH . Non-adiabatic crossing of energy levels. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and
Physical Character 1932; 137 :696–702 .

[94] Van de Vijver R , Van Geem KM , Marin GB , Zádor J . Decomposition and iso-

47

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

merization of 1-pentanol radicals and the pyrolysis of 1-pentanol. Combustion
and Flame 2018; 196 :500–14 .

[95] Zádor  J ,  Miller  JA .  Adventures  on  the  C 3 H 5 O  potential  energy  surface:
OH + propyne, OH + allene and related reactions. Proceedings of the Combus-
tion Institute 2015; 35 :181–8 .

[96] De Bruycker R , Carstensen H-H , Simmie JM , Van Geem KM , Marin GB . Ex-
perimental and computational study of the initial decomposition of gamma–
valerolactone. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2015; 35 :515–23 .

[97] Ye  L ,  Li  W ,  Qi  F .  Pressure-dependent  branching  in  initial  decomposition
of  gamma-valerolactone:  A  quantum  chemical/RRKM  study.  RSC  Advances
2018; 8 :12975–83 .

[98] Zádor J , Najm HN . Automated exploration of the mechanism of elementary

reactions. Sandia Report: Sandia National Laboratories 2012 .

[99] Maeda S , Harabuchi Y . On benchmarking of automated methods for perform-
ing exhaustive reaction path search. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computa-
tion 2019; 15 :2111–15 .

[100] Suleimanov YV , Green WH . Automated discovery of elementary chemical re-
action steps using freezing string and Berny optimization methods. Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation 2015; 11 :4248–59 .

[101] Maeda S , Harabuchi Y , Takagi M , Taketsugu T , Morokuma K . Artificial force in-
duced reaction (AFIR) method for exploring quantum chemical potential en-
ergy surfaces. The Chemical Record 2016; 16 :2232–48 .

[102] Maeda S , Taketsugu T , Morokuma K . Exploring transition state structures for
intramolecular pathways by the artificial force induced reaction method. Jour-
nal of Computational Chemistry 2014; 35 :166–73 .

[103] Georgievskii Y , Miller JA , Burke MP , Klippenstein SJ . Reformulation and solu-
tion of the master equation for multiple-well chemical reactions. Journal of
Physical Chemistry A 2013; 117 :12146–54 .

[104] Landau LD . On the theory of transfer of energy at collisions II. Phys Z Sowje-

tunion 1932; 2 :46 .

[105] Glowacki DR , Liang C-H , Morley C , Pilling MJ , Robertson SH . Mesmer: An
open-source master equation solver for multi-energy well reactions. Journal
of Physical Chemistry A 2012; 116 :9545–60 .

[106] Zheng J , Seal P , Truhlar DG . Role of conformational structures and torsional
anharmonicity in controlling chemical reaction rates and relative yields: Bu-
tanal + HO2 reactions. Chemical Science 2013; 4 :200–12 .

[107] Bao JL , Truhlar DG . Variational transition state theory: Theoretical framework

and recent developments. Chem Soc Rev 2017; 46 :7548–96 .

[108] Xing L , Bao JL , Wang Z , Wang X , Truhlar DG . Hydrogen shift isomerizations in
the kinetics of the second oxidation mechanism of alkane combustion. Reac-
tions of the hydroperoxypentylperoxy ooqooh radical. Combustion and Flame.
2018; 197 :88–101 .

[109] Chen X , Goldsmith CF . Accelerating variational transition state theory via arti-
ficial neural networks. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2020; 124 :1038–46 .
[110] Klippenstein SJ . Variational optimizations in the Rice–Ramsperger–Kassel—
Marcus theory calculations for unimolecular dissociations with no reverse
barrier. J Chem Phys 1992; 96 :367–72 .

[111] Georgievskii Y , Klippenstein SJ . Variable reaction coordinate transition state
theory: Analytic results and application to the C 2 H 3 + H → C 2 H 4 reaction. J
Chem Phys 2003; 118 :5442–55 .

[112] Georgievskii  Y ,  Klippenstein  SJ .  Transition  state  theory  for  multichan-
nel  addition  reactions:  Multifaceted  dividing  surfaces.  J  Phys  Chem  A
2003; 107 :9776–81 .

[113] Khorshidi A , Peterson AAAmp . A modular approach to machine learning in

atomistic simulations. Computer Physics Communications 2016; 207 :310–24 .

[114] Keck  JC .  Rate-controlled  constrained-equilibrium  theory  of  chemical  re-
actions  in  complex  systems.  Progress  in  Energy  and  Combustion  Science
1990; 16 :125–54 .

[115] Najm  HN ,  Debusschere  BJ ,  Marzouk  YA ,  Widmer  S ,  Le  Maitre  OP .  Un-
certainty  quantification  in  chemical  systems.  Int  J  Numer  Methods  Eng
2009; 80 :789–814 .

[116] Hansen  N ,  Merchant  SS ,  Harper  MR ,  Green  WH .  The  predictive  capa-
bility  of  an  automatically  generated  combustion  chemistry  mechanism:
Chemical structures of premixed iso-butanol flames. Combustion and Flame
2013; 160 :2343–51 .

[117] Morris MD . Factorial sampling plans for preliminary computational experi-

ments. Technometrics 1991; 33 :161–74 .

[118] Zádor J , Zsély IG , Turányi T , Ratto M , Tarantola S , Saltelli A . Local and global
uncertainty analyses of a methane flame model. Journal of Physical Chemistry
A 2005; 109 :9795–807 .

[119] Tomlin AS , Ziehn T . The use of global sensitivity methods for the analysis,
evaluation and improvement of complex modelling systems. In: Gorban AN,
Roose D, editors. Coping with complexity: Model reduction and data analysis .
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2011. p. 9–36 .

[120] Ziehn T , Tomlin AS . Gui-HDMR - A software tool for global sensitivity analysis

of complex models. Environ Modell Softw 2009; 24 :775–85 .

[121] Reagan MT , Najm HN , Debusschere BJ , Le Maitre OP , Knio M , Ghanem RG .
Spectral stochastic uncertainty quantification in chemical systems. Combust
Theory Model 2004; 8 :607–32 .

[122] Sheen  DA ,  Wang  H .  The  method  of  uncertainty  quantification  and  min-
imization  using  polynomial  chaos  expansions.  Combustion  and  Flame
2011; 158 :2358–74 .

[123] Turányi T . Sensitivity analysis of complex kinetic systems - tools and applica-

tions. J Math Chem 1990; 5 :203–48 .

[124] Turányi T , Rabitz H . Local methods. In: Saltelli A, Chan K, Scott EM, editors.

Sensitivity analysis . Chichester: Wiley; 2009. p. 81–100 .

[125] Ziehn T , Tomlin AS . A global sensitivity study of sulfur chemistry in a pre-
mixed methane flame model using HDMR. International Journal of Chemical
Kinetics 2008; 40 :742–53 .

[126] Tomlin AS . The role of sensitivity and uncertainty analysis in combustion

modelling. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2013; 34 :159–76 .

[127] Saltelli A , Chan K , Scott EM . Sensitivity analysis . Chichester: John Wiley &

Sons, Ltd.; 2009 .

[128] Saltelli A , Tarantola S , Campolongo F , Ratto M . Sensitivity analysis in practice .

Chichester: Wiley; 2004 .

[129] Turányi T , Tomlin AS . Analysis of kinetic reaction mechanisms . Springer; 2014 .
[130] Frenklach M , Wang H , Rabinowitz MJ . Optimization and analysis of large
chemical kinetic mechanisms using the solution mapping method - combus-
tion of methane. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 1992; 18 :47–73 .

[131] Frenklach M . Transforming data into knowledge-process informatics for com-

bustion chemistry. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2007; 31 :125–40 .

[132] Roehl CM , Bauer D , Moortgat GK . Absorption spectrum and kinetics of the
acetylperoxy radical. Journal of Physical Chemistry 1996; 100 :4038–47 .
[133] Weber BW , Niemeyer KE . Chemked: A human- and machine-readable data
standard for chemical kinetics experiments. International Journal of Chemical
Kinetics 2018; 50 :135–48 .

[134] Varga T, Turányi T, Czinki E, Furtenbacher T, Császár AG. ReSpecTh: A joint re-
action kinetics, spectroscopy, and thermochemistry information system. 2015.
p. Paper P1-04.
[135] http://respecth.hu/ .
[136] Reyno-Chiasson Z , Nettyam N , Goteng GL , Speight M , Lee BJ , Baskaran S ,
et al. CloudFlame and prime: Accelerating combustion research in the cloud
9 th

International Conference on Chemical Kinetics Ghent, Belgium ; 2015 .
[137] Welz O , Burke MP , Antonov IO , Goldsmith CF , Savee JD , Osborn DL , et al. New
insights into low-temperature oxidation of propane from synchrotron pho-
toionization  mass  spectrometry  and  multiscale  informatics  modeling.  The
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2015; 119 :7116–29 .

[138] Burke MP . Harnessing the combined power of theoretical and experimental
data through multiscale informatics. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics
2016; 48 :212–35 .

[139] Nagy T , Turányi T . Determination of the uncertainty domain of the Arrhenius
parameters needed for the investigation of combustion kinetic models. Relia-
bility Engineering & System Safety 2012; 107 :29–34 .

[140] Nagy T , Turányi T . Uncertainty of Arrhenius parameters. International Journal

of Chemical Kinetics 2011; 43 :359–78 .

[141] Ruscic B , Pinzon RE , Morton ML , von Laszevski G , Bittner SJ , Nijsure SG ,
et al. Introduction to active thermochemical tables: Several “key” enthalpies
of formation revisited. The Journal Of Physical Chemistry A 2004; 108 :9979–97 .
[142] LaGrotta CE, Barbet MC, Lei L, Burke Michael P. Towards a high-accuracy ki-
netic database informed by theoretical and experimental data: CH 3 + HO 2 as
a case study. Proc Combust Inst 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.
324 .

[143] Ruscic B . Uncertainty quantification in thermochemistry, benchmarking elec-
tronic structure computations, and active thermochemical tables. Interna-
tional Journal of Quantum Chemistry 2014; 114 :1097–101 .

[144] Goldsmith  CF ,  Tomlin  AS ,  Klippenstein  SJ .  Uncertainty  propagation  in
the derivation of phenomenological rate coefficients from theory: A case
study  of  propyl  radical  oxidation.  Proceedings  of  the  Combustion  Institute
2013; 34 :177–85 .

[145] Prager J , Najm NH , Zádor J . Uncertainty quantification in the ab initio rate-co-
efficient calculation for the CH 3 CH(OH)CH 3 + OH → CH 3 C(OH)CH 3 + H 2 O reac-
tion. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2013; 34 :583–90 .

[146] Xing L , Li S , Wang Z , Yang B , Klippenstein SJ , Zhang F . Global uncertainty
analysis for RRKM/master equation based kinetic predictions: A case study of
ethanol decomposition. Combustion and Flame 2015; 162 :3427–36 .

[147] Huang C , Li S , Wang J , Yang B , Zhang F . Global uncertainty analysis for the
RRKM/master equation modeling of a typical multi-well and multi-channel
reaction system. Combustion and Flame 2020; 216 :62–71 .

[148] Burke MP , Goldsmith CF , Klippenstein SJ , Welz O , Huang H , Antonov IO ,
et al. Multiscale informatics for low-temperature propane oxidation: Further
complexities in studies of complex reactions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry
A 2015; 119 :7095–115 .

[149] Burke MP , Klippenstein SJ , Harding LB . A quantitative explanation for the ap-
parent anomalous temperature dependence of OH + HO 2 = H 2 O + O 2 through
multi-scale modeling. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2013; 34 :547–55 .
[150] Klippenstein SJ , Harding LB , Davis MJ , Tomlin AS , Skodje RT . Uncertainty
driven  theoretical  kinetics  studies  for  CH 3 OH  ignition:  HO 2 + CH 3 OH  and
O 2 + CH 3 OH. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2011; 33 :351–7 .

[151] Skodje RT , Tomlin AS , Klippenstein SJ , Harding LB , Davis MJ . Theoretical val-
idation of chemical kinetic mechanisms: Combustion of methanol. Journal of
Physical Chemistry A 2010; 114 :8286–301 .

[152] Hughes  KJ ,  Griffiths  JF ,  Fairweather  M ,  Tomlin  AS .  Evaluation  of  models
for the low temperature combustion of alkanes through interpretation of
pressure-temperature ignition diagrams. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
2006; 8 :3197–210 .

[153] Bugler J , Somers KP , Silke EJ , Curran HJ . Revisiting the kinetics and ther-
modynamics of the low-temperature oxidation pathways of alkanes: A case
study  of  the  three  pentane  isomers.  The  Journal  of  Physical  Chemistry  A
2015; 119 :7510–27 .

[154] Jasper AW , Oana CM , Miller JA . "Third-body" collision efficiencies for com-
bustion modeling: Hydrocarbons in atomic and diatomic baths. Proceedings
of the Combustion Institute 2015; 35 :197–204 .

48

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

[155] Prager J , Najm HN , Sargsyan K , Safta C , Pitz WJ . Uncertainty quantification of
reaction mechanisms accounting for correlations introduced by rate rules and
fitted Arrhenius parameters. Combustion and Flame 2013; 160 :1583–93 .
[156] Fridlyand A , Johnson MS , Goldsborough SS , West RH , McNenly MJ , Mehl M ,
et al. The role of correlations in uncertainty quantification of transportation
relevant fuel models. Combustion and Flame 2017; 180 :239–49 .

[157] Gao CW , Liu M , Green WH . Uncertainty analysis of correlated parameters in
automated reaction mechanism generation. International Journal of Chemical
Kinetics 2020; 52 :266–82 .

[158] Hong Z , Lam K-Y , Sur R , Wang S , Davidson DF , Hanson RK . On the rate con-
stants of OH + HO 2 and HO 2 + HO 2 : A comprehensive study of H 2 O 2 thermal
decomposition using multi-species laser absorption. Proceedings of the Com-
bustion Institute 2013; 34 :565–71 .

[159] Nguyen  TL ,  Stanton  JF .  Ab  initio  thermal  rate  calculations  of
P) + H 2 O  reaction  and  isotopologues.  The  Journal  of  Physical

ho + ho = O( 3
Chemistry A 2013; 117 :2678–86 .

[160] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . From the multiple-well master equation to phe-
nomenological rate coefficients: Reactions on a C3H4 potential energy sur-
face. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2003; 107 :2680–92 .

[161] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . Determining phenomenological rate coefficients
from a time-dependent, multiple-well master equation: "Species reduction"
at high temperatures. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2013; 15 :4744–53 .

[162] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ , Robertson  SH , Pilling MJ , Shannon  R , Zador  J ,
et al. Comment on "when rate constants are not enough". Journal of Physi-
cal Chemistry A 2016; 120 :306–12 .

[163] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ , Robertson SH , Pilling MJ , Green NJB . Detailed bal-
ance in multiple-well chemical reactions. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
2009; 11 :1128–37 .

[164] Klippenstein SJ , Miller JA . From the time-dependent, multiple-well master
equation to phenomenological rate coefficients. Journal of Physical Chemistry
A 2002; 106 :9267–77 .

[165] Robertson SH , Pilling MJ , Jitariu LC , Hillier IH . Master equation methods for
multiple well systems: Application to the 1-,2-pentyl system. Physical Chem-
istry Chemical Physics 2007; 9 :4085–97 .

[166] Fernandez-Ramos A , Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ , Truhlar DG . Modeling the ki-
netics of bimolecular reactions. Chemical Reviews 2006; 106 :4518–84 .
[167] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . The reaction between ethyl and molecular oxygen
II: Further analysis. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics 2001; 33 :654–68 .
[168] Matsugi A . Collisional energy transfer in polyatomic molecules at high tem-
peratures: Master equation analysis of vibrational relaxation of shock-heated
alkanes. Chemical Physics Letters 2015; 635 :295–300 .

[169] Wang  H ,  You  X ,  Blitz  MA ,  Pilling  MJ ,  Robertson  SH .  Obtaining  effective
rate  coefficients  to  describe  the  decomposition  kinetics  of  the  corannu-
lene  oxyradical  at  high  temperatures.  Physical  Chemistry  Chemical  Physics
2017; 19 :11064–74 .

[170] Pritchard HO . Alternative view of unimolecular reaction theory. Canadian

Journal of Chemistry-Revue Canadienne De Chimie 1977; 55 :284–92 .

[171] Klippenstein SJ , Wagner AF , Dunbar RC , Robertson SH , Miller JA . Variflex ver-

sion 1.14m . Argonne National Laboratory; 2005 .

[172] Widom  B .  Molecular  transitions  and  chemical  reaction  rates.  Science

1965; 148 :1555–60 .

[173] Barker  JR .  Multiple-well,  multiple-path  unimolecular  reaction  systems.  I.
Multiwell computer program suite. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics
2001; 33 :232–45 .

[174] Snider NS . Nonequilibrium effects in the kinetics of isomerization reactions
and in the kinetics of dissociation and recombination of diatomic molecules.
Journal of Chemical Physics 1965; 42 :548–55 .

[175] Bedanov  VM ,  Tsang  W ,  Zachariah  MR .  Master  equation  analysis  of  ther-
mal-activation reactions - reversible isomerization and decomposition. Jour-
nal of Physical Chemistry 1995; 99 :11452–7 .

[176] Barker JR , Frenklach M , Golden DM . When rate constants are not enough.

Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2015; 119 :7451–61 .

[177] Smith SC , McEwan MJ , Gilbert RG . The relationship between recombination,
chemical activation and unimolecular dissociation rate coefficients. Journal of
Chemical Physics 1989; 90 :4265–73 .

[178] Gilbert RG, Smith SC. Theory of unimolecular and recombination reactions;

blackwell scientific publications: Oxford, u.K. 1990.

[179] Hammond GS . A correlation of reaction rates. Journal of the American Chemical

Society 1955; 77 :334–8 .

[180] Parr CA, Truhlar DG. Potential energy surfaces for atom transfer reactions in-
volving hydrogens and halogens Journal of Physical Chemistry. 1971;73:1844-
59.

[181] Polanyi  JC .  Some  concepts  in  reaction  dynamics.  Accounts  Chem  Res

1972; 5 :161–8 .

[182] Labbe NJ , Sivaramakrishnan R , Klippenstein SJ , Miller JA . Prompt dissociations
of small hydrocarbon radicals. 2016 Spring Technical Meeting, Eastern States
Section of the Combustion Institute. March 13-16 ; 2016 .

[183] Labbe NJ , Sivaramakrishnan R , Klippenstein SJ , Miller JA . Prompt dissociations
of small combustion radicals impact flame speeds for gas turbine fuels. 2016
Spring Techical Meeting, Central Staes Section of the Combustion Institute. May
15-17 ; 2016 .

[184] Sivaramakrishnan R , Goldsmith CF , Peukert S , Michael JV . Direct measure-
ments of channel specific rate constants in OH + c3h8 illuminates prompt
dissociations  of  propyl  radicals.  Proceedings  of  the  Combustion  Institute
2019; 37 :231–8 .

[185] Doentgen M , Kroeger LC , Leonhard K . Hot beta-scission of radicals formed via
hydrogen abstraction. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2017; 36 :135–42 .
[186] Doentgen M , Leonhard K . Discussion of the separation of chemical and re-
laxational kinetics of chemically activated intermediates in master equation
simulations. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2017; 121 :1564–71 .

[187] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . The H + C 2 H 2 ( + M) ←→ C 2 H 3 ( + M) and H + C 2 H 2
( + M) ←→ C 2 H 5 ( + M) reactions: Electronic structure, variational transition-s-
tate theory, and solutions to a two-dimensional master equation. Physical
Chemistry Chemical Physics 2004; 6 :1192–202 .

[188] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . The H + C2H2 ( + M)reversible arrow C2H3 ( + M)
and H + C2H2 ( + M)reversible arrow C2H5 ( + M) reactions: Electronic struc-
ture, variational transition-state theory, and solutions to a two-dimensional
master equation. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2004; 6 :1192–202 .
[189] Timonen RS , Ratajczak E , Gutman D , Wagner AF . The addition and dissoci-
ation reaction H + CO reversible hco .2. Experimental studies and comparison
with theory. Journal of Physical Chemistry. 1987; 91 :5325–32 .

[190] Friedrichs G , Herbon JT , Davidson DF , Hanson RK . Quantitative detection of
hco behind shock waves: The thermal decomposition of hco. Physical Chem-
istry Chemical Physics 2002; 4 :5778–88 .

[191] Lei L , Burke MP . Reaction kinetics of chemically termolecular reactions: Pres-
sure dependence. 11th US National Combustion Meeting Pasadena, CA ; 2019.
Paper 2B11 .

[192] Kee RJ , Rupley RM , Miller JA . Chemkin-II: A Fortran chemical kinetics package
for the analysis of gas-phase chemical kinetics . Livemore, CA: Sandia National
Laboratories; 1989 .

[193] Lei L , Burke Michael P . Understanding the distinct kinetics of chemically ter-
molecular reactions across various pressures. Spring Technical Meeting of the
Eastern States Section of the Combustion Institute Columbia, South Carolina ;
2020 .

[194] Hinshelwood CN , Green TE . Cii.—the interaction of nitric oxide and hydrogen
and the molecular statistics of termolecular gaseous reactions. Journal of the
Chemical Society (Resumed) 1926; 129 :730–9 .

[195] Hinshelwood CN , Williamson AT . The reaction between hydrogen and oxygen .

Oxford University Press; 1934 .

[196] Semenov NN . Chemical kinetics and chain reactions . Oxford University Press;

1935 .

[197] Baldwin RR . The first limit of the hydrogen + oxygen reaction in potassium
chloride-coated vessels. Transactions of the Faraday Society 1956; 52 :1344–54 .
[198] Dixon-Lewis G-N , Hinshelwood CN . Flame structure and flame reaction ki-
netics I. Solution of conservation equations and application to rich hydro-
gen-oxygen flames. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A Mathe-
matical and Physical Sciences 1967; 298 :495–513 .

[199] Dixon-Lewis G , Williams DJ . Comprehensive chemical kinetics vol 1. Elsevier;

1977. p. 1–248 .

[200] Olzmann M , Gebhardt J , Scherzer K . An extended mechanism for chemical
activation systems. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics 1991; 23 :825–35 .
[201] Maranzana A , Barker JR , Tonachini G . Master equation simulations of com-
peting unimolecular and bimolecular reactions: Application to OH production
in the reaction of acetyl radical with O2. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
2007; 9 :4129–41 .

[202] Green NJB , Robertson SH . General master equation formulation of a reversible
dissociation/association reaction. Chemical Physics Letters 2014; 605-606 :44–6 .
[203] Shannon RJ , Robertson SH , Blitz MA , Seakins PW . Bimolecular reactions of
activated species: An analysis of problematic hc(O)C(O) chemistry. Chemical
Physics Letters 2016; 661 :58–64 .

[204] Fernández-Ramos A , Varandas AJC . A vtst study of the H + O 3 and O + HO 2
reactions using a six-dimensional dmbe potential energy surface for ground
state HO 3 . The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2002; 106 :4077–83 .

[205] Michael JV , Sutherland JW , Harding LB , Wagner AF . Initiation in H 2 /O 2 : Rate
constants for H 2 + O 2 → H + HO 2 at high temperature. Proceedings of the Com-
bustion Institute 20 0 0; 28 :1471–8 .

[206] Tao Y , Klippenstein SJ , Georgievskii Y , Miller JA , Lei L , Burke MP , et al. Non-
thermal reactions: The final frontier in understanding the kinetics of hydro-
gen oxidation Spring Technical Meeting of the Eastern States Section of the Com-
bustion Institute Columbia, South Carolina ; 2020 .

[207] Lei L , Burke MP . Understanding and representing the distinct kinetics induced
by reactive collisions of rovibrationally excited ephemeral complexes across
reactive collider mole fractions and pressures. Journal of Physical Chemistry A
2020 in review .

[208] Konnov AA . Yet another kinetic mechanism for hydrogen combustion. Com-

bustion and Flame 2019; 203 :14–22 .

[209] Jasper AW , Miller JA . Lennard-jones parameters for combustion and chemical
kinetics modeling from full-dimensional intermolecular potentials. Combus-
tion and Flame 2014; 161 :101–10 .

[210] Tse SD , Zhu DL , Law CK . Morphology and burning rates of expanding spher-
ical flames in H 2 /O 2 /inert mixtures up to 60 atmospheres. Proceedings of the
Combustion Institute 20 0 0; 28 :1793–800 .

[211] Jasper AW , Sivaramakrishnan R , Klippenstein SJ . Are termolecular reactions
facile in radical recombinations?. In: 11th US National Combustion Meeting ;
2019. p. 2B14 .

[212] Peeters J , Mahnen G . Reaction mechanisms and rate constants ofelementary
steps in methane-oxygen flames. Symposium (International) on Combustion
1973; 14 :133–46 .

[213] Lazzara CP , Biordi JC , Papp JF . Concentration profiles for radical species in a
methane-oxygen-argon flame. Combustion and Flame 1973; 21 :371–82 .
[214] Sutherland JW , Su M-C , Michael JV . Rate constants for H + CH 4 , CH 3 + H 2 , and

49

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

CH 4 dissociation at high temperature. International Journal of Chemical Kinet-
ics 2001; 33 :669–84 .
[215] https://ATcT.anl.gov .
[216] Burke MP , Song R . Evaluating mixture rules for multi-component pressure
dependence: H + O 2 ( + M) = HO 2 ( + M). Proceedings of the Combustion Institute
2017; 36 :245–53 .

[217] Lei L , Burke MP . Evaluating mixture rules and combustion implications for
multi-component pressure dependence of allyl + HO2 reactions. Proceedings
of the Combustion Institute 2019; 37 :355–62 .

[218] Lei L , Burke MP . Bath gas mixture effects on multichannel reactions: Insights
and representations for systems beyond single-channel reactions. The Journal
of Physical Chemistry A 2019; 123 :631–49 .

[219] Lei L , Burke MP . Mixture rules and falloff are now major uncertainties in ex-
perimentally derived rate parameters for H + O 2 ( + M) ↔ HO 2 ( + M). Combus-
tion and Flame 2020; 213 :467–74 .

[220] Lei L, Burke Michael P. Dynamically evaluating mixture effects on multi-
channel reactions in flames: A case study for the CH 3 + OH reaction. Proc
Combust Inst 2020. in press https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.187 .
[221] Forst W. Theory of unimolecular reactions. New York and London 1973.
[222] Forst W. Unimolecular reactions. A concise introduction. Cambridge 2003.
[223] Holbrook KA , Pilling MJ , Robertson SH . Unimolecular reactions . chichester: wi-

ley; 1996 .

[224] Senosiain JP , Klippenstein SJ , Miller JA . The reaction of acetylene with hy-

droxyl radicals. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2005; 109 :6045–55 .

[225] Troe  J .  The  polanyi  lecture  -  the  colorful  world  of  complex-forming  bi-
molecular  reactions.  Journal  of  the  Chemical  Society-Faraday  Transactions
1994; 90 :2303–17 .

[226] Smith  SC ,  Gilbert  RG .  Angular-momentum  conservation  in  unimolecu-
lar and recombination reactions. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics
1988; 20 :307–29 .

[227] Miller  JA ,  Klippenstein  SJ ,  Raffy  C .  Solution  of  some  one-  and  two-di-
mensional master equation models for thermal dissociation: The dissocia-
tion of methane in the low-pressure limit. Journal of Physical Chemistry A
2002; 106 :4904–13 .

[228] Robertson SH , Pilling MJ , Green NJB . Diffusion approximations of the two-di-

mensional master equation. Molecular Physics 1996; 89 :1531–51 .

[229] Venkatesh PK , Dean AM , Cohen MH , Carr RW . Master equation analysis of in-
termolecular energy transfer in multiple-well, multiple-channel unimolecular
reactions .1. Basic theory. Journal of Chemical Physics. 1997; 107 :8904–16 .
[230] Venkatesh PK , Dean AM , Cohen MH , Carr RW . Master equation analysis of
intermolecular energy transfer in multiple-well, multiple-channel unimolec-
ular reactions. II. Numerical methods and application to the mechanism of
the C2H5 + O2 reaction. Journal of Chemical Physics 1999; 111 :8313–29 .
[231] Troe J . Theory of thermal unimolecular reactions at low-pressures .1. Solu-
tions of master equation. Journal of Chemical Physics. 1977; 66 :4745–57 .
[232] Jeffrey SJ , Gates KE , Smith SC . Full iterative solution of the two-dimensional
master equation for thermal unimolecular reactions. Journal of Physical Chem-
istry 1996; 100 :7090–6 .

[233] Jasper AW , Pelzer KM , Miller JA , Kamarchik E , Harding LB , Klippenstein SJ .

Predictive a priori pressure-dependent kinetics. Science 2014; 346 :1212–15 .

[234] Robertson SH , Pilling MJ , Gates KE , Smith SC . Application of inverse itera-
tion to 2-dimensional master equations. Journal of Computational Chemistry
1997; 18 :1004–10 .

[235] Thanh Lam N , Stanton JF . A steady-state approximation to the two-dimen-
sional master equation for chemical kinetics calculations. Journal of Physical
Chemistry A 2015; 119 :7627–36 .

[236] Jasper AW , Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . Collision efficiency of water in the uni-
molecular reaction CH 4 ( + H 2 O) ←→ CH 3 + H ( + H 2 O): One-dimensional and
two-dimensional solutions of the low-pressure-limit master equation. Journal
of Physical Chemistry A 2013; 117 :12243–55 .

[237] Gaynor BJ , Gilbert RG , King KD . Solution of master equation for unimolecular

reactions. Chemical Physics Letters 1978; 55 :40–3 .

[238] Chandler DW , Miller JA . A theoretical-analysis of photoactivated unimolecular
dissociation – the overtone dissociation of tert-butyl hydroperoxide. Journal
of Chemical Physics 1984; 81 :455–64 .

[239] Barker JR , Weston RE Jr . Collisional energy transfer probability densities P(E,
J; E ’ J ’) for monatomics colliding with large molecules. Journal of Physical
Chemistry A 2010; 114 :10619–33 .

[240] Stace AJ , Murrell JN . Classical trajectory study of collisional energy-transfer in
thermal unimolecular reactions. Journal of Chemical Physics 1978; 68 :3028–39 .
[241] Brown NJ , Miller JA . Collisional energy-transfer in the low-pressure-limit uni-
molecular dissociation of HO2. Journal of Chemical Physics 1984; 80 :5568–80 .
[242] Date N , Hase WL , Gilbert RG . Collisional deactivation of highly vibrationally
excited molecules - dynamics of the collision event. Journal of Physical Chem-
istry 1984; 88 :5135–8 .

[243] Hase WL , Date N , Bhuiyan LB , Buckowski DG . Energy-transfer in collisions
of ar with highly excited water and methane. Journal of Physical Chemistry
1985; 89 :2502–7 .

[244] Hu XC , Hase WL . Effect of anharmonicity on intermolecular energy-trans-
fer from highly vibrationally excited molecules. Journal of Physical Chemistry
1988; 92 :4040–6 .

[245] Bernshtein V , Oref I . Collisional energy transfer between Ar and normal and
vibrationally and rotationally frozen internally excited benzene-trajectory cal-
culations. Journal of Chemical Physics 1997; 106 :7080–9 .

[246] Bernshtein  V ,  Oref  I .  Intermolecular  energy  transfer  probabilities  from

trajectory  calculations:  A  new  approach.  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics
1998; 108 :3543–53 .

[247] Bernshtein V , Oref I . Energy transfer between polyatomic molecules. 1. Gate-
way modes, energy transfer quantities and energy transfer probability density
functions in benzene-benzene and Ar-benzene collisions. Journal of Physical
Chemistry B 2005; 109 :8310–19 .

[248] Bernshtein V , Oref I . Energy transfer between azulene and krypton: Com-
parison between experiment and computation. Journal of Chemical Physics
2006:125 .

[249] Bernshtein V , Oref I . Collisional energy transfer in polyatomic molecules in

the gas phase. Israel Journal of Chemistry 2007; 47 :205–14 .

[250] Oref  I ,  Tardy  DC .  Energy-transfer  in  highly  excited  large  polyatomic–

molecules. Chemical Reviews 1990; 90 :1407–45 .

[251] Bruehl  M ,  Schatz  GC .  Theoretical-studies  of  collisional  energy-transfer  in
highly excited molecules - temperature and potential surface dependence of
relaxation in he, ne, ar + CS2. Journal of Physical Chemistry 1988; 92 :7223–9 .

[252] Bruehl  M ,  Schatz  GC .  Theoretical-studies  of  collisional  energy-transfer  in
highly excited molecules - the importance of intramolecular vibrational re-
distribution in successive collision modeling of He + CS 2 . Journal of Chemical
Physics 1988; 89 :770–9 .

[253] Bruehl M , Schatz GC . The evolution of vibrational phase-space during the col-
lisional relaxation of highly excited collinear CS2. Journal of Chemical Physics
1990; 92 :6561–73 .

[254] Hu W , Lendvay G , Maiti B , Schatz GC . Trajectory surface hopping study of
the O(p-3) plus ethylene reaction dynamics. Journal of Physical Chemistry A
2008; 112 :2093–103 .

[255] Lendvay G , Schatz GC . Observation of highly energetic collisions in classical
trajectory studies of collisional energy-transfer. Journal of Physical Chemistry
1990; 94 :8864–6 .

[256] Lendvay G , Schatz GC . Comparison of master equation and trajectory sim-
ulation  of  the  relaxation  of  an  ensemble  of  highly  vibrationally  excited
molecules. Journal of Physical Chemistry 1994; 98 :6530–6 .

[257] Gilbert RG . Theory of collisional energy-transfer of highly excited molecules.

International Reviews in Physical Chemistry 1991; 10 :319–47 .

[258] Lenzer T , Luther K , Troe J , Gilbert RG , Lim KF . Trajectory simulations of colli-
sional energy-transfer in highly excited benzene end hexafluorobenzene. Jour-
nal of Chemical Physics 1995; 103 :626–41 .

[259] Lim KF , Gilbert RG . Calculation of collisional-energy-transfer rates in highly

excited molecules. Journal of Physical Chemistry 1990; 94 :72–7 .

[260] Maergoiz AI , Nikitin EE , Troe J , Ushakov VG . Classical trajectory and adiabatic
channel study of the transition from adiabatic to sudden capture dynamics
.3. Dipole-dipole capture. Journal of Chemical Physics. 1996; 105 :6277–84 .
[261] Hippler H , Schranz HW , Troe J . Trajectory calculations of intermolecular ener-
gy-transfer in so2-ar collisions .1. Method and representative results. Journal
of Physical Chemistry. 1986; 90 :6158–67 .

[262] Gelb A . Classical trajectory study of energy-transfer between argon atoms and
vibrationally rotationally excited ozone molecules. Journal of Physical Chem-
istry 1985; 89 :4189–94 .

[263] Chapman S , Higgins C . Classical trajectory study: Pyrazine and carbon monox-
ide. Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society 2001; 221 :U168 .
[264] Higgins C , Ju Q , Seiser N , Flynn GW , Chapman S . Classical trajectory study
of energy transfer in pyrazine-CO collisions. Journal of Physical Chemistry A
2001; 105 :2858–66 .

[265] Higgins CJ . Collisional energy transfer between hot pyrazine and cold CO: A

classical trajectory study. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 20 04; 108 :80 09–18 .

[266] Matsugi A . Collision frequency for energy transfer in unimolecular reactions.

Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2018; 122 :1972–85 .

[267] Matsugi A . Origin of bath gas dependence in unimolecular reaction rates.

Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2019; 123 :764–70 .

[268] Jasper AW , Miller JA . Theoretical unimolecular kinetics for CH4 + M reversible
arrow CH3 + H + M in eight baths, M = He, Ne, Ar, kr, H-2, N-2, CO, and CH4.
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2011; 115 :6438–55 .

[269] Jasper AW , Miller JA . Collisional energy transfer in unimolecular reactions:
Direct classical trajectories for CH4 reversible arrow CH3 + H in helium. Jour-
nal of Physical Chemistry A 2009; 113 :5612–19 .

[270] Wang H , Wen K , You X , Mao Q , Luo KH , Pilling MJ , et al. Energy transfer in
intermolecular collisions of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons with bath gases
He and Ar. Journal of Chemical Physics 2019:151 .

[271] Porter RN , Raff LM . Classical trajectory methods in molecular collisions. In:
Miller WH, editor. Modern Theoretical Chemistry . New York: Plenum Press;
1976. p. 1–52 .

[272] Lendvay G , Schatz GC . Choice of gas kinetic rate coefficients in the vibra-
tional-relaxation of highly excited polyatomic-molecules. Journal of Physical
Chemistry 1992; 96 :3752–6 .

[273] Fernandes RX , Luther K , Troe J , Ushakov VG . Experimental and modelling
study of the recombination reaction H + O 2 ( + M) ->HO 2 ( + M) between 300
and 900 K, 1.5 and 950 bar, and in the bath gases M = He, Ar, and N 2 . Physical
Chemistry Chemical Physics 2008; 10 :4313–21 .

[274] Wang  Y ,  Mak  CH .  Transferable  tight-binding  potential  for  hydrocarbons.

Chemical Physics Letters 1995; 235 :37–46 .

[275] Allen M , Tildesley D . Computer simulation of liquids. New York: Oxford Uni-

versity Press; 1992. p. 21 .

[276] Jasper AW , Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . Collision efficiency of water in the uni-
molecular reaction CH4 ( + H2O) reversible arrow CH3 + H ( + H2O): One-di-
mensional and two-dimensional solutions of the low-pressure-limit master
equation. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2013; 117 :12243–55 .

50

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

[277] Jasper AW . Microcanonical rate constants for unimolecular reactions in the
low-pressure limit. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2020; 124 :1205–26 .
[278] Sellevag SR , Georgievskii Y , Miller JA . The temperature and pressure depen-
dence of the reactions H + O-2( + M)->HO2( + M) and H + OH( + M)->H2O( + M).
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2008; 112 :5085–95 .

[279] Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . Dissociation of propyl radicals and other reactions
on a c3h7 potential. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2013; 117 :2718–27 .
[280] Liu C , McGivern WS , Manion JA , Wang H . Theory and experiment of binary
diffusion coefficient of n-alkanes in dilute gases. Journal of Physical Chemistry
A 2016; 120 :8065–74 .

[281] Liu C , Zhao R , Xu R , Egolfopoulos FN , Wang H . Binary diffusion coefficients
and non-premixed flames extinction of long-chain alkanes. Proceedings of the
Combustion Institute 2017; 36 :1523–30 .

[282] Middha P , Wang H . First-principle calculation for the high-temperature dif-
fusion  coefficients  of  small  pairs:  The  H-Ar  case.  Combust  Theory  Model
2005; 9 :353–63 .

[283] Middha P , Yang BH , Wang H . A first-principle calculation of the binary dif-
fusion coefficients pertinent to kinetic modeling of hydrogen/oxygen/helium
flames. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2003; 29 :1361–9 .

[284] Chae K , Elvati P , Violi A . Effect of molecular configuration on binary diffusion
coefficients of linear alkanes. Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2011; 115 :500–6 .
[285] Chae K , Violi A . Mutual diffusion coefficients of heptane isomers in nitrogen:

A molecular dynamics study. Journal of Chemical Physics 2011:134 .

[286] Bastien LAJ , Price PN , Brown NJ . Intermolecular potential parameters and
combining  rules  determined  from  viscosity  data.  International  Journal  of
Chemical Kinetics 2010; 42 :713–23 .

[287] Brown NJ , Bastien LAJ , Price PN . Transport properties for combustion model-

ing. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2011; 37 :565–82 .

[288] Brown NJ , Revzan KL . Comparative sensitivity analysis of transport proper-
ties and reaction rate coefficients. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics
2005; 37 :538–53 .

[289] McGivern  WS ,  Manion  JA .  Hydrocarbon  binary  diffusion  coefficient  mea-
surements  for  use  in  combustion  modeling.  Combustion  and  Flame
2012; 159 :3021–6 .

[290] Monchick  L ,  Green  S .  Validity  of  central  field  approximations  in  molec-
ular  scattering  -  low-energy  CO-he  collisions.  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics
1975; 63 :20 0 0–9 .

[291] Dagdigian PJ . Accurate transport properties for H-CO and H-CO2. Journal of

Chemical Physics 2015:143 .

port properties: CH 2 ( X 3

[292] Dagdigian PJ , Alexander MH . Exact quantum scattering calculations of trans-
A 1 )-helium. Journal of Chemical Physics 2013:138 .
[293] Mason EA . Transport in neutral gases. In: Hochstim AR, editor. Kinetic Pro-
cesses in Gases and Plasmas . New York and London: Academic Press; 1969.
p. 57–100 .

B 1 , a 1

[294] Jasper AW , Kamarchik E , Miller JA , Klippenstein SJ . First-principles binary dif-
fusion coefficients for H, H-2, and four normal alkanes + N-2. Journal of Chem-
ical Physics 2014:141 .

[295] Paul P , Warnatz J . A re-evaluation of the means used to calculate trans-
port  properties  of  reacting  flows.  Proceedings  of  the  Combustion  Institute
1998; 27 :495–504 .

[296] Stallcop  JR ,  Partridge  H ,  Walch  SP ,  Levin  E .  H-N2  interaction  energies,
transport cross-sections, and collision integrals. Journal of Chemical Physics
1992; 97 :3431–6 .

[297] Gaydon AG . The spectroscopy of flames . 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons;

1974 .

[298] Smith GP , Luque J , Park C , Jeffries JB , Crosley DR . Low pressure flame deter-
minations of rate constants for OH(A) and CH(A) chemiluminescence. Com-
bustion and Flame 2002; 131 :59–69 .

[299] Hall JM , Petersen EL . An optimized kinetics model for OH chemilumines-
cence at high temperatures and atmospheric pressures. International Journal
of Chemical Kinetics 2006; 38 :714–24 .

[300] Popov NA . The effect of nonequilibrium excitation on the ignition of hydro-

gen-oxygen mixtures. High Temperature 2007; 45 :261–79 .

[301] Starikovskiy  A,  Aleksandrov  N.  Plasma-assisted  ignition  and  combustion.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science. 2013;39:61-110.

[302] Starikovskaia SM . Plasma-assisted ignition and combustion: Nanosecond dis-
charges and development of kinetic mechanisms. Journal of Physics D: Applied
Physics 2014; 47 :353001 .

[303] Adamovich  IV ,  Lempert  WR .  Challenges  in  understanding  and  predictive
model development of plasma-assisted combustion. Plasma Physics and Con-
trolled Fusion 2014; 57 :014001 .

[304] Singleton  DL ,  Cvetanovic  RJ .  Temperature  dependence  of  the  reaction
of  oxygen  atoms  with  olefins.  Journal  of  the  American  Chemical  Society
1976; 98 :6812–19 .

[305] Hwang D-Y , Mebel AM . Ab initio study of spin-forbidden unimolecular de-

composition of carbon dioxide. Chemical Physics 20 0 0; 256 :169–76 .

[306] Jasper  AW ,  Dawes  R .  Non-born–oppenheimer  molecular  dynamics  of  the
spin-forbidden  reaction  O(3P) + CO(X 1 σ + ) → CO2(X ̃σ g + 1).  The  Journal  of
Chemical Physics 2013; 139 :154313 .

[307] Tully JC . Collision complex model for spin forbidden reactions: Quenching of

O(1D) by N2. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1974; 61 :61–8 .

[308] Zahr  GE ,  Preston  RK ,  Miller  WH .  Theoretical  treatment  of  quenching  in
O(1D) + N2 collisions. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1975; 62 :1127–35 .
[309] Cui Q , Morokuma K , Bowman JM , Klippenstein SJ . The spin-forbidden reac-
tion CH(2 π ) + N2 → HCN + N(4S) revisited. II. Nonadiabatic transition state the-
ory and application. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1999; 110 :9469–82 .

51

[310] Plane  JMC ,  Whalley  CL ,  Frances-Soriano  L ,  Goddard  A ,  Harvey  JN ,
Glowacki DR , et al. O2(a1 δg) + mg, fe, and ca: Experimental kinetics and for-
mulation of a weak collision, multiwell master equation with spin-hopping.
The Journal of Chemical Physics 2012; 137 :014310 .

[311] Gimondi I , Cavallotti C , Vanuzzo G , Balucani N , Casavecchia P . Reaction dy-
namics of O(3P) + propyne: II. Primary products, branching ratios, and role
of intersystem crossing from ab initio coupled triplet/singlet potential en-
ergy surfaces and statistical calculations. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
2016; 120 :4619–33 .

[312] Caracciolo A , Vanuzzo G , Balucani N , Stranges D , Cavallotti C , Casavecchia P .
Observation of H displacement and H 2 elimination channels in the reaction
of O( 3
P) with 1-butene from crossed beams and theoretical studies. Chemical
Physics Letters 2017; 683 :105–11 .

[313] Caracciolo  A ,  Vanuzzo  G ,  Balucani  N ,  Stranges  D ,  Casavecchia  P ,  Pratali
Maffei  L ,  et  al.  Combined  experimental  and  theoretical  studies  of  the
O(3P) + 1-butene reaction dynamics: Primary products, branching fractions,
and  role  of  intersystem  crossing.  The  Journal  of  Physical  Chemistry  A
2019; 123 :9934–56 .

[314] Truhlar DG , Mead CA . Relative likelihood of encountering conical intersec-
tions and avoided intersections on the potential energy surfaces of poly-
atomic molecules. Physical Review A 2003; 68 :032501 .

[315] Zhou C , Gagliardi L , Truhlar DG . State-interaction pair density functional the-
ory for locally avoided crossings of potential energy surfaces in methylamine.
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2019; 21 :13486–93 .

[316] Hack MD , Jasper AW , Volobuev YL , Schwenke DW , Truhlar DG . Quantum me-
chanical and quasiclassical trajectory surface hopping studies of the electron-
ically nonadiabatic predissociation of the ã state of nah 2 . The Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry A 1999; 103 :6309–26 .

[317] Gray SK , Petrongolo C , Drukker K , Schatz GC . Quantum wave packet study of
D) + H 2 → OH + H. The Journal of Physical Chemistry

nonadiabatic effects in O( 1
A 1999; 103 :9448–59 .

[318] Kendrick  BK .  Non-adiabatic  quantum  reactive  scattering  calculations  for
the ultracold hydrogen exchange reaction: H + H 2 (v = 4-8,j = 0) → H + H 2 (v (cid:3)
,j (cid:3)
).
Chemical Physics 2018; 515 :387–99 .

[319] MacDonell RJ , Schuurman MS . Site-selective isomerization of cyano-substi-
tuted butadienes: Chemical control of nonadiabatic dynamics. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry A 2019; 123 :4693–701 .

[320] Scheit S , Goswami S , Meyer H-D , Köppel H . Fully quantal treatment of nona-
diabatic molecular photodynamics: General considerations and application to
the benzene cation. Computational and Theoretical Chemistry 2019; 1150 :71–84 .
[321] Chen L , Gelin MF , Domcke W . Multimode quantum dynamics with multiple
davydov d2 trial states: Application to a 24-dimensional conical intersection
model. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2019; 150 :024101 .

[322] Xie C , Zhao B , Malbon CL , Yarkony DR , Xie D , Guo H . Insights into the mech-
anism of nonadiabatic photodissociation from product vibrational distribu-
tions. The remarkable case of phenol. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters.
2020; 11 :191–8 .

[323] Tully JC . Nonadiabatic dynamics. In: Thompson DL, editor. Modern methods
for multidimensional dynamics computations in chemistry ; 1998. p. 34–72 .
[324] Nikitin EE . Nonadiabatic transitions: What we learned from old masters and
how much we owe them. Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 1999; 50 :1–21 .
[325] Jasper AW , Kendrick BK , Mead CA , Truhlar DG . Modern trends in chemical re-
action dynamics: Experiment and theory, part I. Singapore: World Scientific;
2004. p. 329–91 .

[326] Jasper AW , Zhu C , Nangia S , Truhlar DG . Introductory lecture: Nonadiabatic

effects in chemical dynamics. Faraday Discussions 2004; 127 :1–22 .

[327] Worth  GA ,  Cederbaum  LS .  Beyond  born-oppenheimer:  Molecular  dynam-
ics  through  a  conical  intersection.  Annual  Review  of  Physical  Chemistry
2004; 55 :127–58 .

[328] Yonehara T , Hanasaki K , Takatsuka K . Fundamental approaches to nonadia-
baticity: Toward a chemical theory beyond the born–oppenheimer paradigm.
Chemical Reviews 2012; 112 :499–542 .

[329] O’Malley TF . Diabatic states of molecules- quasistationary electronic states.
In: Bates DR, Esterman I, editors. Advances in atomic and molecular physics: .
Academic Press; 1971. p. 223–49 .

[330] intersections Köppel HConical . In: Domcke W, Yarkony DR, Köppel H, editors.

Singapore: World Scientific; 2011. p. 175–204 .

[331] Mead CA , Truhlar DG . Conditions for the definition of a strictly diabatic
electronic  basis  for  molecular  systems.  The  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics
1982; 77 :6090–8 .

[332] Valero R , Truhlar DG , Jasper AW . Adiabatic states derived from a spin-coupled
diabatic transformation: Semiclassical trajectory study of photodissociation of
hbr and the construction of potential curves for libr + . The Journal of Physical
Chemistry A 2008; 112 :5756–69 .

[333] Fedorov DA , Pruitt SR , Keipert K , Gordon MS , Varganov SA . Ab initio multiple
spawning method for intersystem crossing dynamics: Spin-forbidden transi-
tions between 3
a 1 states of geh 2 . The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
2016; 120 :2911–19 .

b 1 and 1

[334] Berning A , Schweizer M , Werner H-J , Knowles PJ , Palmieri P . Spin-orbit ma-
trix elements for internally contracted multireference configuration interac-
tion wavefunctions. Molecular Physics 20 0 0; 98 :1823–33 .

[335] Marks AJ , Thompson DL . A phase-space theory and Monte Carlo sampling
method  for  studying  nonadiabatic  unimolecular  reactions.  The  Journal  of
Chemical Physics 1992; 96 :1911–18 .

[336] Topaler MS , Truhlar DG . Statistical model for nonadiabatic decay of an ex-

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

ciplex strongly coupled to a dissociative continuum. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 1997; 107 :392–401 .

[337] N Harvey J , Aschi M . Spin-forbidden dehydrogenation of methoxy cation: A

statistical view. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 1999; 1 :5555–63 .

[338] Harvey JN . Understanding the kinetics of spin-forbidden chemical reactions.

Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2007; 9 :331–43 .

[339] Jasper AW , Truhlar DG . Conical intersections and semiclassical trajectories:
Comparison to accurate quantum dynamics and analyses of the trajectories.
The Journal of Chemical Physics 2005; 122 :044101 .

[340] Koga N , Morokuma K . Determination of the lowest energy point on the cross-
ing seam between two potential surfaces using the energy gradient. Chemical
Physics Letters 1985; 119 :371–4 .

[341] Harvey JN , Aschi M , Schwarz H , Koch W . The singlet and triplet states of
phenyl  cation.  A  hybrid  approach  for  locating  minimum  energy  crossing
points between non-interacting potential energy surfaces. Theoretical Chem-
istry Accounts. 1998; 99 :95–9 .

[342] Wittig  C .  The  landau −zener  formula.  The  Journal  of  Physical  Chemistry  B

2005; 109 :8428–30 .

[343] Delos JB . On the reactions of N2 with O. The Journal of Chemical Physics

1973; 59 :2365–9 .

[344] Nikitin EE. Opt Spectrosk 1961;11:452-6.
[345] Coveney PV , Child MS , Barany A . The two-state s matrix for the landau-zener
potential curve crossing model: Predissociation and resonant scattering. Jour-
nal of Physics B: Atomic and Molecular Physics 1985; 18 :4557–80 .

[346] Smalley JF , Nesbitt FL , Klemm RB . Branching ratio for the hydrogen atom
product channel in the reaction of ground-state atomic oxygen with ethylene.
J phys chem 1986; 90 :491–7 1952 .

[347] Peeters J , Maes D . Tenth International Symposium on Gas Kinetics. University

College of Swansea; 1988. p. A31 .

[348] Nguyen TL , Vereecken L , Hou XJ , Nguyen MT , Peeters J . Potential energy sur-
faces, product distributions and thermal rate coefficients of the reaction of
O(3P) with C2H4(xag):  A comprehensive theoretical study. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry A 2005; 109 :7489–99 .

[349] Miller WH . Quantum mechanical transition state theory and a new semi-
classical model for reaction rate constants. The Journal of Chemical Physics
1974; 61 :1823–34 .

[350] Marcus  RA ,  Coltrin  ME .  A  new  tunneling  path  for  reactions  such  as

H + H 2 → H 2 + H. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1977; 67 :2609–13 .

[351] Skodje RT , Truhlar DG , Garrett BC . A general small-curvature approximation
for transition-state-theory transmission coefficients. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry 1981; 85 :3019–23 .

[352] Jasper AW , Truhlar DG . Electronic decoherence time for non-born-oppen-
heimer trajectories. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2005; 123 :064103 .
[353] Truhlar DG . Decoherence in combined quantum mechanical and classical me-
chanical methods for dynamics as illustrated for non-born–oppenheimer tra-
jectories. In: Micha D, Burghardt I, editors. Quantum dynamics of complex
molecular simulations . Berlin: Springer; 2007. p. 227–43 .

[354] Jasper AW , Nangia S , Zhu C , Truhlar DG . Non-born −oppenheimer molecular

dynamics. Accounts Chem Res 2006; 39 :101–8 .

[355] Tully JC . Perspective: Nonadiabatic dynamics theory. The Journal of Chemical

Physics 2012; 137 :22A301 .

[356] Persico M , Granucci G . An overview of nonadiabatic dynamics simulations
methods, with focus on the direct approach versus the fitting of potential
energy surfaces. Theoretical Chemistry Accounts 2014; 133 :1526 .

[357] Tavernelli  I .  Nonadiabatic  molecular  dynamics  simulations:  Synergies  be-
tween theory and experiments. Accounts Chem Res 2015; 48 :792–800 .
[358] Akimov AV , Prezhdo OV . Large-scale computations in chemistry: A bird’s eye

view of a vibrant field. Chemical Reviews 2015; 115 :5797–890 .

[359] Wang  L ,  Akimov  A ,  Prezhdo  OV .  Recent  progress  in  surface  hopping:

2011–2015. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2016; 7 :2100–12 .

[360] Virshup AM , Punwong C , Pogorelov TV , Lindquist BA , Ko C , Martínez TJ . Pho-
todynamics in complex environments: Ab initio multiple spawning quantum
mechanical/molecular mechanical dynamics. The Journal of Physical Chemistry
B 2009; 113 :3280–91 .

[361] Crespo-Otero  R ,  Barbatti  M .  Recent  advances  and  perspectives  on
nonadiabatic  mixed  quantum–classical  dynamics.  Chemical  Reviews
2018; 118 :7026–68 .

[362] Tully JC . Molecular dynamics with electronic transitions. The Journal of Chem-

ical Physics 1990; 93 :1061–71 .

[363] Jasper AW , Stechmann SN , Truhlar DG . Fewest-switches with time uncer-
tainty: A modified trajectory surface-hopping algorithm with better accuracy
for classically forbidden electronic transitions. The Journal of Chemical Physics
2002; 116 :5424–31 .

[364] Meyer  HD ,  Miller  WH .  A  classical  analog  for  electronic  degrees  of  free-
dom  in  nonadiabatic  collision  processes.  The  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics
1979; 70 :3214–23 .

[365] Zhu C , Nangia S , Jasper AW , Truhlar DG . Coherent switching with decay of
mixing: An improved treatment of electronic coherence for non-born–oppen-
heimer trajectories. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2004; 121 :7658–70 .
[366] Zhu  C ,  Jasper  AW ,  Truhlar  DG .  Non-born–oppenheimer  trajectories
with  self-consistent  decay  of  mixing.  The  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics
2004; 120 :5543–57 .

[367] Jasper AW , Truhlar DG . In: Domcke W, Yarkony DR, Köppel H, editors. Singa-

pore: World Scientific; 2011. p. 375–412 .

[368] Jasper AW , Hack MD , Truhlar DG . The treatment of classically forbidden elec-
tronic transitions in semiclassical trajectory surface hopping calculations. The
Journal of Chemical Physics 2001; 115 :1804–16 .

[369] Jasper AW , Truhlar DG . Improved treatment of momentum at classically for-
bidden electronic transitions in trajectory surface hopping calculations. Chem-
ical Physics Letters 2003; 369 :60–7 .

[370] Granucci G , Persico M , Zoccante A . Including quantum decoherence in surface

hopping. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2010; 133 :134111 .

[371] Subotnik JE . Fewest-switches surface hopping and decoherence in multiple

dimensions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2011; 115 :12083–96 .

[372] Jaeger HM , Fischer S , Prezhdo OV . Decoherence-induced surface hopping. The

Journal of Chemical Physics 2012; 137 :22A545 .

[373] Robertson SH . Unilolecuar kinetic: Parts 2 and 3: Collisional energy and the

master equation Editor. Elsevier; 2019 .

[374] Harding LB , Klippenstein SJ , Jasper AW . Ab initio methods for reactive poten-

tial surfaces. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2007; 9 :4055–70 .

[375] Klippenstein SJ , Pande VS , Truhlar DG . Chemical kinetics and mechanisms of
complex systems: A perspective on recent theoretical advances. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 2014; 136 :528–46 .

[376] Vereecken  L ,  Glowacki  DR ,  Pilling  MJ .  Theoretical  chemical  kinetics  in
tropospheric chemistry: Methodologies and applications. Chemical Reviews
2015; 115 :4063–114 .

[377] Bartis JT , Widom B . Stochastic models of the interconversion of three or more

chemical species. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1974; 60 :3474–82 .

Jim Miller received his doctorate from Cornell University
in 1974 and worked at Sandia National Laboratories in
Livermore, CA from that time until his retirement in 2010.
He was part of the founding staff of the Combustion Re-
search Facility in 1980 and had the title “Distinguished
Member of the Technical Staff” from 1989 until his retire-
ment. He is currently an Argonne Associate at Argonne
National Laboratory. His research interests are principally
in combustion chemistry and theoretical chemical kinet-
ics. He is a Fellow of the American Physical Society, a Fel-
low of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, a Fellow of the Combustion Institute, and a mem-
ber of the American Chemical Society. He served 12 years
as Associate Editor of the journal Combustion and Flame. Jim has won a number of
national and international awards. Among them, from The Combustion Institute, he
received the Silver Medal in 1990 and the Lewis Gold Medal in 2006, as well as 2
recent Distinguished Paper awards. Jim was inducted into the National Academy of
Engineering in 2008. A special issue of The Journal of Physical Chemistry A (May
17, 2007) was devoted to a James A. Miller Festschrift in celebration of his 60th
birthday

Raghu Sivaramakrishnan is a Chemist in the Gas Phase
Chemical Dynamics group at Argonne National Labora-
tory.  He  received  a  B.  Tech.  in  Chemical  Engineering
(1999) from the University of Madras, and an MS (2002)
and PhD (2005) in Chemical Engineering from the Uni-
versity of Illinois at Chicago (Advisor - Kenneth Brezin-
sky), working on high pressure shock tube studies and
chemical kinetics modeling on the combustion of hydro-
carbon fuel components. He continued as a post-doc and
research  staff member  (20 05-20 07)  in  Ken  Brezinsky’s
group before moving to Argonne as a post-doc (2007)
to work with Joe V. Michael to characterize the kinetics
of elementary reactions. In 2010, he was hired as a staff
member at Argonne where his research interests involve applications of theoreti-
cal and experimental chemical kinetics to model chemical conversions of gas-phase
molecules relevant to combustion and atmospheric chemistry. He is a past awardee
(2006) of the Bernard Lewis Fellowship from the Combustion Institute. He has been
a chemical kinetics colloquium co-chair for the 37th (2018) and 38th (2020) Inter-
national Combustion Symposia and is an Associate Editor (2020 onwards) for the
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute.

Dr. Yujie Tao is an Associate Professor in the School of
Energy and Environment at Southeast University in China.
She received her Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from
Stanford  University  in  2018,  where  her  research  focus
was on the optimization and uncertainty quantification
in combustion model development for foundational fuels
and jet fuels. She then spent two years in the Gas-Phase
Chemical Dynamics Group at Argonne National Labora-
tory as a postdoctoral appointee and conducted research
on the theory and modeling of non-thermal reactions. She
is a recipient of a Distinguished Paper award in the 35th
International Symposium on Combustion.

52

J.A. Miller, R. Sivaramakrishnan, Y. Tao et al.

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 83 (2021) 100886

Franklin  Goldsmith  is  an  Assistant  Professor  in  the
School of Engineering at Brown University. His research
focuses on theoretical, computational, and experimental
methods in chemical kinetics, with applications in com-
bustion, heterogeneous catalysis, energetic materials, pro-
pellants, and atmospheric chemistry. Goldsmith received
a B.A. in Philosophy from the University of North Car-
olina, a B.S. in both Chemical Engineering and Applied
Mathematics from North Carolina State University, and
was a Fulbright Scholar in Mathematics in Freiburg, Ger-
many. Goldsmith obtained his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineer-
ing from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, fol-
lowed by two years at the Fritz-Haber Institute of the
Max Planck Society as an Alexander von Humboldt Scholar in Inorganic Chemistry,
and one year at Argonne National Laboratory as an Argonne Director’s Fellow in
Theoretical Chemistry.

Michael P. Burke is an Associate Professor of Mechan-
ical Engineering at Columbia University, where he also
holds affiliate appointments in Chemical Engineering and
the Data Science Institute. His research focuses on com-
bining physics and data across multiple scales to create
kinetic models trustable upon extrapolation – primarily
for combustion. To this end, his research group’s activ-
ities include theoretical studies of kinetics in mixtures
of reactive and energy-transferring colliders (and associ-
ated non-equilibrium phenomena), uncertainty quantifi-
cation  that  combines  ab  initio  and  experimental  data
across  multiple  scales,  and  high-throughput/automated
experimentation. Prior to joining Columbia in 2014, Burke
earned his Ph.D. in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering in 2011 at Princeton Uni-
versity, where he was a Wallace Memorial Honorific Fellow, and worked as a Di-
rector’s Postdoctoral Fellow in the Chemical Sciences and Engineering Division at
Argonne National Laboratory. Burke is a recipient of the Combustion Institute’s Re-
search Excellence Award, the National Science Foundation’s CAREER award, and the
American Chemical Society’s PRF Doctoral New Investigator Award. His publications
have been featured in the “News and Views” section of Nature Chemistry, selected
as the Feature Article in Combustion and Flame, and chosen for the Distinguished
Paper Award at the 31st International Symposium on Combustion.

Ahren Jasper is a theoretical chemist in the Gas Phase
Chemical Dynamics Group at Argonne National Labora-
tory. He received a B.A. in Chemistry from Gustavus Adol-
phus College in 1998 and a Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry
from the University of Minnesota in 2003. He worked as a
postdoc at Argonne, joined Sandia’s Combustion Research
Facility as staff in 2007, and then moved back to Argonne
in 2016. His research focuses on the development and ap-
plication of semiclassical methods for gas phase kinetics
and dynamics.

Nils Hansen received his PhD in Physical Chemistry at
the Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel, Germany, in 20 0 0
under the guidance of Prof. F. Temps. He then worked
with Prof. A. M. Wodtke as a postdoctoral researcher at
the University of California Santa Barbara, USA, and as
a staff member at the BASF AG, Ludwigshafen, Germany.
In 2004, he joined Sandia National Laboratories in Liver-
more, CA, USA as a Principal Investigator in the “Flame
Chemistry and Diagnostics” laboratory of the Combustion
Research Facility. He has been a visiting researcher in
the group of Kohse-Höinghaus in Bielefeld, Germany, in
2008 and 2012. Hansen’s research focuses on unraveling
the complexity of reaction networks by providing detailed

insights  into  the  fundamental  chemistry  of  low-temperature oxidation  and  the
formation of aromatic species in incomplete combustion processes. He has co-
authored more than 130 publications in peer-reviewed international journals and he
has been invited multiple times to provide his perspective in invited review articles
that appeared in “Progress in Energy and Combustion Science”. For his work, he has
received several awards, including a Feodor-Lynen-Fellowship of the Alexander von
Humboldt-Foundation, Sandia’s Adams Award for outstanding contributions to the
program of the Combustion Research Facility, and the Distinguished Paper Award at
the 37th International Symposium on Combustion. Nils Hansen served as a co-chair
for the “Diagnostics Colloquium” for the 36th International Symposium on Combus-
tion, Seoul, South Korea, is a member of the editorial board for the “Proceedings of
the Combustion Institute” and is the organizer of the biennial “International Work-
shop on Flame Chemistry” series. He was elected a “Fellow of the Combustion Insti-
tute” in 2019 and named Program Co-Chair for the 39th International Symposium
on Combustion that will be held in 2022 in Vancouver, Canada.

Nicole J. Labbe is an Assistant Professor of Mechanical
Engineering at the University of Colorado Boulder. She re-
ceived her Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from the Univer-
sity of Massachusetts Amherst in 2013. Before joining the
faculty at the University of Colorado in 2016, Professor
Labbe was a postdoctoral associate in the Chemical Sci-
ences and Engineering division of Argonne National Labo-
ratory. Professor Labbe’s research focuses on several areas
of gas phase chemical kinetics, especially in the areas of
theoretical chemistry and reaction rate theory, combus-
tion kinetic modeling and combustion dynamics, pollu-
tion control and renewable liquid fuel design.

Peter Glarborg is Professor of Chemical Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark, where he has taught
since 1996. Peter is an Associate Editor of Combustion
and Flame and he was Program Co-Chair for the 36th
International Combustion Symposium in Seoul in 2016.
Peter has published more than 200 research articles in
archival journals. He is working broadly in the field of
combustion and harmful emission control, with special
emphasis on developing detailed reaction mechanisms for
high-temperature gas-phase processes. Peter was recently
awarded the 2020 Lewis Gold Medal from the Combus-
tion Institute.

Judit Zádor received her PhD in Physical Chemistry at the
Eötvös University in 2006 in Budapest, Hungary, under
the guidance of Tamás Turányi. She spent a year at the
University of Leeds, UK, working on atmospheric chem-
istry problems with Michael J. Pilling, and was a post-
doctoral associate in the group of Sándor Dóbé at the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences doing experimental ki-
netics work. She joined the Combustion Research Facil-
ity of Sandia National Laboratories in 2007 as a postdoc-
toral associate working with Craig A. Taatjes and James A.
Miller, and is currently a Distinguished Member of Tech-
nical Staff. She works on the theoretical description of
chemical reactions that happen on complicated multiwell
potential energy surfaces and have relevance to combustion, atmospheric chemistry
or heterogeneous catalysis. She has won two Distinguished Paper Awards from The
Combustion Institute, one at the 32nd Symposium and one at the 35th. Her current
interests are the development of automated workflow codes and the application of
machine learning in these fields. She is the project director of the Exascale Catalytic
Chemistry project, serves as a co-chair for the Gas-Phase Reaction Kinetics Collo-
quium for the 38th International Symposium on Combustion, Adelaide, Australia,
and is an associate editor of Combustion and Flame.

53
